### Accession
PXD029637

### Title
Deficiency of the ER protein seipin results in generalised lipodystrophy by incompletely understood mechanisms. Here, we report mitochondrial abnormalities in seipin deficient patient cells.Seipin localizes at endoplasmic reticulum-mitochondria contact sites to control mitochondrial calcium import and metabolism in adipocytes

### Description
Deficiency of the ER protein seipin results in generalised lipodystrophy by incompletely understood mechanisms. Here, we report mitochondrial abnormalities in seipin deficient patient cells. A subset of seipin is enriched at ER-mitochondria contact sites (MAMs) in human and mouse cells and localizes in the vicinity of calcium regulators SERCA2, IP3R and VDAC. Seipin association with MAM calcium regulators is stimulated by fasting-like stimuli, while seipin association with lipid droplets is promoted by lipid loading. Acute seipin removal does not alter ER calcium stores but leads to defective mitochondrial calcium import accompanied by a widespread reduction in Krebs cycle metabolites and ATP levels. In mice, inducible seipin deletion leads to mitochondrial dysfunctions preceding the development of metabolic complications. Together, these data suggest that seipin controls mitochondrial energy metabolism by regulating mitochondrial calcium influx at MAMs. In seipin deficient adipose tissue, reduced ATP production compromises adipocyte properties, contributing to lipodystrophy pathogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics analyses were performed at the 3P5 proteomics facility. Briefly: pH 2.0-eluted proteins from immuno-precipitates were submitted to thiol-reduction and alkylation using 20mM TCEP and 50mM chloroacetamide (both from Sigma) for 5 min at 95 °C. Proteolysis for bottom-up proteomics experiments was performed with trypsin (sequencing-grade from Promega), by the FASP and stage-tips methods(Wisniewski et al., 2009). Peptides were cleaned and fractionated with C18 and SCX StageTips, respectively. Mass spectrometry (MS) analysis of the peptide mixtures was performed with an U3000-RSLC nano-liquid chromatographer (nLC) hyphenated to an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (both from Thermo Scientific). The data were acquired throughout the elution process and the MS operated in a data dependent scheme with full-MS scans acquired with the orbitrap analyzer, followed by as many HCD MS/MS as possible in 5 seconds time (top speed mode) and detection was performed in the linear trap analyzer. MS/MS spectra were measured on the most abundant ions detected in the MS scan. The following settings were used - for full-MS: AGC at 2.105, resolution: 60,000 full-widths at half maximum, m/z range 350-1500, within 60 ms Maximum Ion Injection Time (MIIT). –for fragmentation or MS/MS, precursors over 1.104 intensity, with a charge state from 2 to 7 were filtered in the quadrupole window within 1.6 Th window. A dynamic exclusion time was set at 30 s. HCD was performed with NCE at 30%, fragments were detected in the ion trap with AGC Target at 2.104 and within 100ms MIIT.

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed with Mascot version 2.5.1 (Perkins et al., 1999). The database used was a concatenation of Mus musculus sequences from the reviewed Uniprot-Swissprot database (UniprotKB, release 2018-03 (16,975 sequences from M. musculus) and the CRAP database(Mellacheruvu et al., 2013). Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a constant modification while methionine oxidation was set as variable modifications. The MyPROMS database software (Poullet et al., 2007) was used for sample comparison. The false discovery rate (FDR) was kept below 1% for peptides and protein identification required at least two such peptides matching the same protein in at least one sample of the compared sample set.

### Publication Abstract
Deficiency of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) protein seipin results in generalized lipodystrophy by incompletely understood mechanisms. Here, we report mitochondrial abnormalities in seipin-deficient patient cells. A subset of seipin is enriched at ER-mitochondria contact sites (MAMs) in human and mouse cells and localizes in the vicinity of calcium regulators SERCA2, IP3R, and VDAC. Seipin association with MAM calcium regulators is stimulated by fasting-like stimuli, while seipin association with lipid droplets is promoted by lipid loading. Acute seipin removal does not alter ER calcium stores but leads to defective mitochondrial calcium import accompanied by a widespread reduction in Krebs cycle metabolites and ATP levels. In mice, inducible seipin deletion leads to mitochondrial dysfunctions preceding the development of metabolic complications. Together, these data suggest that seipin controls mitochondrial energy metabolism by regulating mitochondrial calcium influx at MAMs. In seipin-deficient adipose tissue, reduced ATP production compromises adipocyte properties, contributing to lipodystrophy pathogenesis.

### Keywords
Adipocyte, Mus musculus, Ap-ms, Mitochondria dysfunction, Bottom-up, Calcium handling, Seipin, Mams, Orbitrap fusion

### Affiliations
Université de Nantes, CNRS, INSERM, l’institut du thorax, F-44000 Nantes, France.
ICO Angers

### Submitter
François GUILLONNEAU

### Lab Head
Dr Xvier Prieur
Université de Nantes, CNRS, INSERM, l’institut du thorax, F-44000 Nantes, France.


