### Accession
PXD007599

### Title
Pitcher fluid protein profiling from Nepenthes spp.

### Description
Pitcher fluids from 3 species of Nepenthes, namely N. ampullaria, N. rafflesiana and their hybrid H. x hookeriana were collected within 24h of opening, filtered, concentrated, processed and trypsin-digested for mass spectrometry analysis using Thermo Easy-nLC Orbitrap Fusion Tribid MS. Analysis was performed in 2 biological replicates of pools of 9 pitchers for each species and analysed in 3 technical replicates each.

### Sample Protocol
Collected pitcher fluids were filtered through a 25 mm Acrodisc syringe filter with 0.2 μm PVDF membrane (Pall, USA) pre-conditioned using 1 mL UHP water. Protein was concentrated using Microsep Advance Centrifugal Devices with Omega membrane (Pall, USA) at a molecular weight cut-off of 10 kDa rinsed with 1 mL of UHP water. Solid phase extraction (SPE) was done after the concentrator steps using the 1 cc Oasis HLB cartridges contain the Oasis HLB sorbent (OASIS, USA). Then, in-solution trypsin digestion was done followed by Zip-Tip protocol using Thermo Scientific Pierce C18 Tips (Thermo, USA) prior to MS analysis

### Data Protocol
All spectra (.raw files) generated from MS were searched against the against predicted peptide database from in-house reference transcriptome using MaxQuant v1.5.3.30 for protein and peptide identifications with default settings and match between runs option. Peptide detected was filtered by false discovery rate, FDR < 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
Tropical pitcher plants in the species-rich Nepenthaceae family of carnivorous plants possess unique pitcher organs. Hybridisation, natural or artificial, in this family is extensive resulting in pitchers with diverse features. The pitcher functions as a passive insect trap with digestive fluid for nutrient acquisition in nitrogen-poor habitats. This organ shows specialisation according to the dietary habit of different Nepenthes species. In this study, we performed the first single-molecule real-time isoform sequencing (Iso-Seq) analysis of full-length cDNA from <i>Nepenthes ampullaria</i> which can feed on leaf litter, compared to carnivorous <i>Nepenthes rafflesiana</i>, and their carnivorous hybrid <i>Nepenthes</i>&#xa0;&#xd7;&#xa0;<i>hookeriana</i>. This allows the comparison of pitcher transcriptomes from the parents and the hybrid to understand how hybridisation could shape the evolution of dietary habit in Nepenthes. Raw reads have been deposited to SRA database with the accession numbers SRX2692198 (<i>N. ampullaria</i>), SRX2692197 (<i>N. rafflesiana</i>), and SRX2692196 (<i>N.</i>&#xa0;&#xd7;&#xa0;<i>hookeriana</i>).

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Enzymes, Carnivorous, Pithcer fluid, Orbitrap, Nepenthes

### Affiliations
Institute of Systems Biology (INBIOSIS),  Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia,  Bangi 43600  Selangor Darul Ehsan,  MALAYSIA
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia

### Submitter
Hoe-Han Goh

### Lab Head
Dr HOE-HAN GOH
Institute of Systems Biology (INBIOSIS),  Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia,  Bangi 43600  Selangor Darul Ehsan,  MALAYSIA


