### Accession
PXD036882

### Title
Staphylococcal Nuclease and Tudor Domain Containing protein SND1 interacts with ERG and plays a critical role in prostate cancer in vivo

### Description
ERG is a transcriptional factor, which is recombined with promoter of TMPRSS2 and prominently overexpressed in half of human prostate cancers. The mechanisms of ERG-mediated oncogenesis are not completely understood. We performed an unbiased Mass Spectrometry screen for ERG-binding proteins and found that ERG binds to MTDH/SND1 protein complex in prostate cancer cells. We determined that ERG binds to the SND1/MTDH protein complex via SND1 and this interaction plays a critical role in ERG-mediated cancer.

### Sample Protocol
VCAP human prostate cancer cell lines stably expressing FLAG-tagged ERG or control proteins were used for affinity purification with anti-Flag M2 antibody bound to Protein G Dynabeads. Enriched proteins were digested on-bead. Resulting peptides were analysed by LC-MS on an Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
mzXML files were searched using MaxQuant with default settings

### Publication Abstract
Staphylococcal nuclease and tudor domain containing 1 (SND1) is overexpressed in multiple cancers, including hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), and functions as an oncogene. This study was carried out to identify novel SND1-interacting proteins to better understand its molecular mechanism of action. SND1-interacting proteins were identified by a modified yeast two-hybrid assay. Protein-protein interaction was confirmed by co-immunoprecipitation analysis. Monoglyceride lipase (MGLL) expression was analyzed by quantitative RT-PCR, Western blot, and immunohistochemistry. MGLL-overexpressing clones were analyzed for cell proliferation and cell cycle analysis and in vivo tumorigenesis in nude mice. MGLL was identified as an SND1-interacting protein. Interaction of SND1 with MGLL resulted in ubiquitination and proteosomal degradation of MGLL. MGLL expression was detected in normal human hepatocytes and mouse liver, although it was undetected in human HCC cell lines. An inverse correlation between SND1 and MGLL levels was identified in a human HCC tissue microarray as well as in the TCGA database. Forced overexpression of MGLL in human HCC cells resulted in marked inhibition in cell proliferation with a significant delay in cell cycle progression and a marked decrease in tumor growth in nude mouse xenograft assays. MGLL overexpression inhibited Akt activation that is independent of enzymatic activity of MGLL and overexpression of a constitutively active Akt rescued cells from inhibition of proliferation and restored normal cell cycle progression. This study unravels a novel mechanism of SND1 function and identifies MGLL as a unique tumor suppressor for HCC. MGLL might function as a homeostatic regulator of Akt restraining its activation.

### Keywords
Erg, Prostate cancer, Snd1, Mtdh

### Affiliations
1Donnelly Centre for Cellular and Biomolecular Research, University of Toronto, 160 College Street, Toronto, Ontario M5S 3E1, Canada  2Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto,  1 King's College Circle, Toronto, Ontario M5S 1A8, Canada  Departments of  Biochemistry and Biology, Boston University,  71 E. Concord St, Boston, MA 02118, USA
University of Toronto;
University of Regina

### Submitter
Sadhna Phanse

### Lab Head
Dr Andrew Emili
1Donnelly Centre for Cellular and Biomolecular Research, University of Toronto, 160 College Street, Toronto, Ontario M5S 3E1, Canada  2Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto,  1 King's College Circle, Toronto, Ontario M5S 1A8, Canada  Departments of  Biochemistry and Biology, Boston University,  71 E. Concord St, Boston, MA 02118, USA


