### Accession
PXD017755

### Title
High-throughput Proteomics fiber typing (ProFiT) for comprehensive characterization of single skeletal muscle fibers

### Description
Skeletal muscles are composed of a heterogeneous collection of fiber types with different physiological adaption in response to a stimulus and disease-related conditions. Each fiber has a specific molecular expression of myosin heavy chain molecules (MyHC). So far MyHCs are currently the best marker proteins for characterization of individual fiber types and several proteome profiling studies have helped to dissect the molecular signature of whole muscles and individual fibers. Herein, we describe a mass spectrometric workflow to measure skeletal muscle fiber type-specific proteomes. To bypass the limited quantities of protein in single fibers, we developed a Proteomics high-throughput Fiber Typing (ProFiT) approach enabling profiling of MyHC in single fibers. Aliquots of protein extracts from separated muscle fibers were subjected to capillary LC-MS gradients to profile MyHC isoforms in a 96-well format. Muscle fibers with the same MyHC protein expression were pooled and subjected to proteomic, pulsed-SILAC and phosphoproteomic analysis. Our fiber type-specific quantitative proteome analysis confirmed the distribution of fiber types in the soleus muscle, substantiates metabolic adaptions in oxidative and glycolytic fibers, and highlighted significant differences between the proteomes of type IIb fibers from different muscle groups, including a differential expression of desmin and actinin-3. A detailed map of the Lys-6 incorporation rates in muscle fibers showed an increased turnover of slow fibers compared to fast fibers. In addition, labeling of mitochondrial respiratory chain complexes revealed a broad range of Lys-6 incorporation rates, depending on the localization of the subunits within distinct complexes.

### Sample Protocol
In-gel protein digestion Proteomic samples of fiber types were processed using a modified version of the in-gel digestion protocol by Shevchenko et al. (2006). Briefly, lysates were precipitated, dissolved in Bolt LDS sample buffer (Invitrogen), and then reduced and alkylated by incubation with 10 mM DTT and 55 mM IAA, respectively. Proteins were separated using Bolt 4-12% Bis-Tris Plus gels (Invitrogen), Coomassie-stained, and each lane was cut into eight slices. Samples were incubated at 37 °C overnight with 12 ng/µL Lys-C and trypsin (1:10-ratio) and the digestion was stopped by acidifying the samples with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Tryptic peptides were extracted and desalted using Stop and Go extraction tips (StageTipping) In-solution protein digestion Pulsed SILAC-labeled samples were tryptically digested as described in Nolte et al. (2015). In short, proteins were extracted as described previously, dissolved in urea buffer (6 M urea, 2 M thiourea in Tris buffer), reduced with 10 mM DTT (30 min, RT) and alkylated with 55 mM IAA (20 min in the dark, RT) and pre-digested with Lys-C for 1 h. Afterward, the urea concentration was reduced to <2 M by adding ammonium bicarbonate buffer and the samples were digested with Lys-C overnight at room temperature. The digestion was stopped by the addition of TFA and the samples were desalted by StageTipping as described above. Phosphopeptide enrichment Phosphopeptide enrichment was performed using a modified version of the protocol described by Jersie-Christensen et al. (2016). In brief, single fibers were lysed in GuHCl lysis buffer and after ProFiT characterization, fibers were pooled according to the determined fiber type. Proteins were pre-digested with Lys-C for 2 h and digested overnight at RT with trypsin. The digestion was stopped with FA and desalted by solid-phase extraction (SPE). TiO2 beads were incubated in equilibration buffer (20 mg/mL dihydroxybenzoic acid [DHB] in 80% ACN, 6% TFA and washed with elution buffer A (5% ammonium hydroxide), elution buffer B (10% ammonium hydroxide, 25% ACN) and 70% ACN and finally resuspended in equilibration buffer. Dried peptides were resuspended in binding buffer (80% ACN, 12% TFA) and TiO2 beads were added (1:5 peptide-to-bead ratio), rotated for 15 min, pelleted by centrifugation, the supernatant was transferred into a new reaction tube and the washing step was repeated. The bead-phosphopeptide complexes were transferred onto a previously prepared C8-StageTip and alternately washed and centrifuged with buffer A (10% ACN, 6% TFA), buffer B (40% ACN, 6% TFA) and buffer C (60% ACN, 6% TFA). Phosphopeptides were extracted by two consecutive elution steps with first, elution buffer A, and second, elution buffer B. Samples were evaporated until ~5 µL of liquid remained and finally desalted by StageTipping. LC-MS/MS analysis In-gel digested proteomic samples were measured in data-dependent mode (DDA) using an Easy-nLC 1000 coupled to a Q Exactive Plus instrument (Thermo Scientific) via a nanoelectrospray ionization source. Peptides were separated based on hydrophobicity using a binary buffer system of buffer A (0.1% FA) and buffer B (80% ACN, 0.1% FA) on a 50 cm in-house-packed analytical column filled with 1.9 µm C18-AQ Reprosil Pur beads (Dr. Maisch). In a 150 min chromatographic gradient, the amount of buffer B was linearly increased from 5% to 29% over 125 min, followed by a steeper linear increase of buffer B over 10 min to 95%. After washing with 95% buffer B for 5 min, the system was equilibrated by decreasing buffer B to 5% for 10 min. Full MS spectra (300–1,750 m/z) were recorded at R = 70,000, max. IT = 20 ms and AGC target of 3e6. Top 10 ion peptides were selected for HCD fragmentation (NCE = 25). MS2 spectra were recorded at R = 17,500, max. IT = 60 ms and an AGC target of 5e5. In-solution digested samples and phosphopeptides were analyzed using an Easy-nLC 1200 coupled by a nanoelectrospray ionization source to a Q Exactive HF-X. Pulsed SILAC samples were separated using a 90 min gradient with a linear increase of buffer B from 4% to 23% over 65 min, then increased to 55% over 13 min, and finally increased to 95% over 3 min followed by a total of 9 min washing with 95% buffer B. Full scan resolution was 60,000 with 20 ms max. IT and an AGC target of 3e6. The top 22 peptide ions were selected for HCD fragmentation (NCE = 28) and measured at R = 15,000, max IT = 22 ms and AGC = 1e5. Phosphopeptide samples were analyzed using a 60 min chromatographic gradient (4–31% buffer B in 41 min, 31–58% buffer B in 9 min, 10 min washing in 95% buffer B). Full MS spectra were acquired at R = 60,000, max. IT = 20 ms and AGC = 3e6. The top 10 peptides were selected for HCD fragmentation (NCE = 28) and measured at R = 45,000, max IT = 89 ms and AGC = 5e5.

### Data Protocol
DDA data were analyzed using MaxQuant (1.5.3.8). Peptides were matched against the mouse Uniprot database using the Andromeda scoring algorithm}. Multiplicity was set to one for proteomic and phosphoproteomic analysis; multiplicity was set to two with Lys-6 as the labeled amino acid for pulsed SILAC samples. Trypsin/P was chosen as the digesting protein for proteomic and phosphoproteomic analysis and LysC/P was selected for pulsed SILAC samples, with a maximum of two missed cleavages for all samples. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification, oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N termini as variable modifications. Phospho(STY) was set as an additional variable modification for phosphopeptide analysis. Non-labeled samples were quantified using label-free quantification with the LFQ min. ratio count set to one. Peptide identification was set to a minimum of seven amino acids and an FDR < 0.01 and unique + razor peptides were used for quantification. The match between runs function was used. Statistical analysis was performed in Perseus and visualized using InstantClue. Missing values were imputed by randomly picking values from a 1.8 standard deviation-downshifted normal distribution. Principal component analyses (PCA) were performed to calculate differences between sample groups. Student’s t-tests were used for statistical testing and 1D annotation enrichments were used for the determination of enriched GO terms. Type IIb proteomes were analyzed by ANOVA multiple-sample testing; proteins identified as differentially regulated were hierarchically clustered using Euclidean distance. Fisher’s exact test was performed for every cluster to identify significantly enriched GO terms. Pulsed SILAC samples were statistically compared using a one-sample t-test. Absolute protein copy numbers were calculated by using the Proteomic ruler approach and via the Proteomics Dynamic Range Standard kit (UPS2, Sigma). The proteomic ruler plugin (v.0.1.6) for Perseus was used to calculate copy numbers. UPS2 proteins were mixed with the muscle fiber lysates with a ratio of 1:100. MaxQuant protein search was performed with a FASTA database containing the human UPS2 proteins. UPS2 intensities were correlated to the to the known UPS2 protein concentration to calculate a linear regression which enabled the calculation of absolute protein copy numbers in single muscle fibers. Since we counted the average number of nuclei per fiber, we adjusted the absolute protein copy numbers to protein copy number per nucleus.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Muscle fiber proteomics, Phosphoproteomics, Myhc profiling, Protein turnover

### Affiliations
CECAD Research Center University of Cologne
CECAD Research Center, Institute for Genetics, University of Cologne, 50931 Cologne, Germany

### Submitter
Sebastian Kallabis

### Lab Head
Dr Marcus Krüger
CECAD Research Center, Institute for Genetics, University of Cologne, 50931 Cologne, Germany


