### Accession
PXD041380

### Title
Identification of changes in the proteome of isolated lupin embryonic axes cultured in vitro caused by sugar starvation and asparagine

### Description
The research was conducted on embryonic axes which were isolated from imbibed seeds (24 h) and next were cultured for 96 h in the dark under in vitro conditions on a liquid mineral Heller medium with the following trophic variants: i) with 60 mM sucrose (+S), ii) without sucrose (-S), iii) with 60 mM sucrose and 35 mM asparagine (+S+Asn), and iv) without sucrose and with 35 mM asparagine (-S+Asn).

### Sample Protocol
Lupin embryonic axes (1 g) were homogenized in liquid nitrogen to get a fine powder, which was resuspended in homogenization buffer 0.1 M Tris-HCl pH 7.5 with 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail for plant cell and tissue extracts (Sigma-Aldrich), 0.1% Triton X-100 and 10% glycerol and incubated for 30 min at ice bath. After centrifugation for 10 min at 12,000 g the protein fraction was precipitated in 10% trichloroacetic acid (TCA) in acetone at -20°C overnight followed by three subsequent washing steps in cold acetone and centrifugation (Magni et al. 2007). The protein pellet was dried and dissolved in 100 μl 0.1 M Tris-HCl pH 7.5 buffer with 8 M urea and 4 % CHAPS by vortex mixing for 2 h at room temperature followed by centrifugation for 15 min at 15,000 g. Protein concentration was measured using the modified Bradford (1976) method. The modification was performed using the above-mentioned buffer for the quantification of protein and preparation of the standard curve to eliminate the interference effect (Wojtyla et al. 2013). The protein samples were sent to the Laboratory of Mass Spectrometry of the Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics Polish Academy of Science in Warsaw, Poland for further analysis. Protein samples (100 µg) were prepared according to the FASP protocol with minor modifications (Wisniewski 2019). Next, peptide concentration was measured and samples were vacuum-dried. Dried peptides were resuspended in 30 µl of 100 mM TEAB buffer and labeled with iTRAQ 8plex (SCIEX, Framingham, MA, USA) tags in 110 ml isopropanol for 2 h on vortex. The reaction was quenched by the addition of 8 µl 5% hydroxylamine. The labeling efficiency was checked and the combined iTRAQ sample was desalted using two 30 mg Oasis HLB columns (Waters). Aliquots were dried and resuspended in 500 µl 10 mM ammonium hydroxide. iTRAQ-labeled peptides were fractionated using high-pH reverse-phase chromatography on the XBridge Peptide BEH C18 column (4.6 x 250 mm, 130 Å, 5 µm, Waters). Separation was performed at a 1 ml/min flow rate for 27 minutes on the Waters Acquity UPLC H-class system. Mobile phases consisted of water (A), acetonitrile (B), and 100 mM ammonium hydroxide solution (C). The percentage of phase C was kept at a constant 10% through the entire gradient. The following gradient was applied: 3 to 5% solvent B for 0.5 min, 5 to 22% for 16.5 min, 22 to 28% for 2 min, 28 to 45% for 1.5 min, 45 to 90% for 0.5 min, 2.5 min isocratic hold at 90% and final column equilibration at 3% phase B for 3 min. 25 fractions were dried in Speedvac and reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid in water by 15 min sonication. Fractions were analyzed using an LC-MS system comprised of a UPLC chromatograph (nanoAcquity, Waters) and a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo). Peptides were trapped on a C18 pre-column (180 µm x 20 mm, Waters) using 0.1% water solution of FA as a mobile phase and then transferred to a BEH C18 column (75 µm x 250 mm, 1.7 µm, Waters) using ACN gradient (0-35% ACN in 160 minutes) in the presence of 0.1% FA at a flow rate of 250 nl per min. Data acquisition was carried out using a data-dependent method with the top 12 precursors selected for MS2 analysis after collisional-induced fragmentation (CID) with an NCE of 27.

### Data Protocol
The acquired MS/MS data were pre-processed with Mascot Distiller software (v. 2.6, MatrixScience, London, UK) and a search was performed with the Mascot Search Engine (MatrixScience, London, UK, Mascot Server 2.5) against the NCBInr Lupinus database (61,158 sequences; 33,890,079 residues). To reduce mass errors, the peptide and fragment mass tolerance settings were established separately for individual LC-MS/MS runs after a measured mass recalibration (Malinowska et al. 2012). The rest of the search parameters were as follows: enzyme, Trypsin; missed cleavages, 1; fixed modifications, Methylthio (C), iTRAQ8plex (N-term), iTRAQ8plex (K); variable modifications, Oxidation (M), iTRAQ8plex (Y); instrument, HCD. The statistical significance of peptide identifications was estimated using a joined target/decoy database search approach. This procedure provided q-value estimates for each peptide spectrum match (PSM) in the dataset. All PSMs with q-values above 0.01 were removed from further analysis. A protein was regarded as confidently identified if at least two of its peptides were found. Proteins identified by a subset of peptides from another protein were excluded from the analysis. The mass calibration and data filtering were carried out with MScan software, developed in-house (the Mass Spectrometry Laboratory at the Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics of Polish Academy of Sciences, https://mslab-ibb.pl/en/science/software). The lists of peptides and proteins, as well as reporter ion intensities, were exported for further analysis. Statistical significance was assessed with the Diffprot in-house software package for statistical significance assessment (Malinowska et al. 2012). Calculated p-values were adjusted for multiple testing using a procedure controlling for false discovery rate (FDR). Only proteins with q-value below 0.05 or those present in only one of two compared analytical groups were taken into consideration during further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Under nutrient deficiency or starvation conditions, the mobilization of storage compounds during seed germination is enhanced to primarily supply respiratory substrates and hence increase the potential of cell survival. Nevertheless, we found that, under sugar starvation conditions in isolated embryonic axes of white lupin (<i>Lupinus albus</i> L.) and Andean lupin (<i>Lupinus mutabilis</i> Sweet) cultured in vitro for 96 h, the disruption of lipid breakdown occurs, as was reflected in the higher lipid content in the sugar-starved (-S) than in the sucrose-fed (+S) axes. We postulate that pexophagy (autophagic degradation of the peroxisome-a key organelle in lipid catabolism) is one of the reasons for the disruption in lipid breakdown under starvation conditions. Evidence of pexophagy can be: (i) the higher transcript level of genes encoding proteins of pexophagy machinery, and (ii) the lower content of the peroxisome marker Pex14p and its increase caused by an autophagy inhibitor (concanamycin A) in -S axes in comparison to the +S axes. Additionally, based on ultrastructure observation, we documented that, under sugar starvation conditions lipophagy (autophagic degradation of whole lipid droplets) may also occur but this type of selective autophagy seems to be restricted under starvation conditions. Our results also show that autophagy occurs at the very early stages of plant growth and development, including the cells of embryonic seed organs, and allows cell survival under starvation conditions.

### Keywords
Embryo, Oleophagy, Oil body, Peroxisome, Asparagine, Itraq, Autophagy, Carbon and nitrogen starvation

### Affiliations
IBB PAS
Department of Plant Physiology, Faculty of Biology, Adam Mickiewicz University, Poznań, Poland

### Submitter
Agata Malinowska

### Lab Head
Dr Sławomir Borek
Department of Plant Physiology, Faculty of Biology, Adam Mickiewicz University, Poznań, Poland


