### Accession
PXD021584

### Title
Comparative analysis of systemic and tumor microenvironment proteomes of children with b-cell acute lymphocytic leukemia at diagnosis and after induction treatment.

### Description
Among the childhood diseases, B-cell acute lymphocytic leukemia (B-ALL) is the most frequent type of cancer. In spite of recent advances concerning disease treatment, cytotoxic chemotherapy remains as the first line of treatment in several countries, and the modifications induced by such drugs in the organism remains poorly understood. In this context, the present study provided a comparative high-throughput proteomic analysis of the cumulative changes induced by chemotherapeutic drugs used in the induction phase of B-LLA treatment in both peripheral blood (PB) and bone marrow compartment (BM) samples. To reach this goal, PB and BM plasma samples were comparatively analyzed by using label-free proteomics at two endpoints: at diagnosis (D0) and the end of the cumulative induction phase treatment (D28). The resulting differentially expressed proteins were explored by bioinformatics approaches aiming to identify the main gene ontology processes, pathways and transcription factors altered by chemotherapy, as well to understand B-LLA biology in each compartment at D0. At D0, PB was characterized as a pro-inflammatory environment, with the involvement of several downregulated coagulation proteins as KNG, plasmin and plasminogen. D28 was characterized predominantly by immune response-related processes, and the super expression of the transcription factor IRF3 and transthyretin. RUNX1 was pointed out as a common transcription factor found in both D0 and D28. Considering that most of these proteins were not described in B-ALL literature, these findings added to understanding disease biology at diagnosis, and highlighted some important proteins and processes that may contribute to our understanding about the mechanisms concerning the impact of chemotherapy in disease resolution.

### Sample Protocol
A total of 17 children diagnosed with B-ALL attended from September 2014 to January 2016 in the Londrina Cancer Hospital, Londrina-Paraná, Brazil, were enrolled. The Reporting Recommendations for Tumor Marker Prognostic Studies (REMARK) criteria were followed regarding patient selection, assay performance, and data analysis throughout the study. All samples were routinely screened in laboratory to determine the type of leukemia, and only those diagnosed as B-ALL were included in the study. All patients presented as high risk at diagnosis, and were submitted to the same drug schedule, as determined by the Brazilian Group for Treatment of Childhood Leukemia scheme (2009). Whole peripheral blood and bone marrow aspirate samples were collected in EDTA tubes from recently diagnosed patients, before starting any treatment (D0) and at the end of the chemotherapy induction phase (D28). Samples were centrifuged at 4000 rpm for 5 minutes at 40C to obtention of plasma, and kept frozen until analysis. The proteomic approach applied in this study was the nano-Ultra Performance Liquid Chromatography (nano-UPLC) tandem nano-ESI-HDMSE method for qualitative and quantitative experiments. A nanoACQUITY UPLC system (Waters, UK) was employed, as previously reported by our group.(12,13) Briefly, a strong cation exchange column (180 μm × 23 mm, Waters, England) packed with Polysulfoethyl aspartamide (5 μm, PolyLC, USA) was used for the first dimension. Nine salt gradient fractions were used to elute the samples from the strong cation exchange column, followed by an RP gradient. After the peptides were captured, the trap column was placed online with a different RP analytical column (100 μm × 100 mm, 1.8 μm C18, nanoACQUITY UPLC HSS T3, Waters, UK), and an RP gradient of 5–40% acetonitrile (containing 0.1% v/v formic acid) in 58 min was used as the second dimension, with a flow rate of 600 nL min−1. Analyses were performed using nano‐ESI in positive ion mode (nanoESI (+)) with a NanoLockSpray ionization source (Waters, UK). Multiplexed data-independent scanning with specificity and selectivity based on nonlinear “T-wave” ion mobility (HDMSE) experiments was performed with a Synapt HDMS mass spectrometer (Waters, UK), as previous described (14). Full scan orthogonal acceleration TOF (oa-TOF) MSE data were acquired from m/z 50 to 2000.

### Data Protocol
Protein identifications and quantitative data packaging were generated by the use of dedicated algorithms and searching against a human-specific database. The utilized databases were randomized “on-the fly” during the database queries and appended to the original database to access the false-positive rate of identification. For proper spectral processing and database searching conditions, a ProteinLynx Global Server v.3.0 (PLGS) with ExpressionE was used. UniProtKB (release 2017_07) with manually reviewed annotations was used, and search conditions were based on taxonomy (Homo sapiens[human]), maximum missed cleav-ages by trypsin allowed up to 1, variable modifications by car-bamidomethyl (C), acetyl N-terminal, and oxidation (M). The proteins obtained were organized by the PLGS ExpressionE tool algorithm into a statistically significant list corresponding to increased and decreased regulation ratios between the plasma from peripheral blood compared to plasma from bone marrow at D0 and the plasma from peripheral blood compared to plasma from bone marrow at D28. Normalization was performed with a protein that showed no significant difference in abundance in all injections. In silico analysis for biological processes, canonical pathways, network interactions and transcription factors was performed using Metacore™ software (Clarivate Analytics, https://portal.genego.com/).

### Publication Abstract
Among the childhood diseases, B-cell acute lymphocytic leukemia (B-ALL) is the most frequent type of cancer. Despite recent advances concerning disease treatment, cytotoxic chemotherapy remains the first line of treatment in several countries, and the modifications induced by such drugs in the organism are still poorly understood. In this context, the present study provided a comparative high-throughput proteomic analysis of the cumulative changes induced by chemotherapeutic drugs used in the induction phase of B-ALL treatment in both peripheral blood (PB) and bone marrow compartment (BM) samples. To reach this goal, PB and BM plasma samples were comparatively analyzed by using label-free proteomics at two endpoints: at diagnosis (D0) and the end of the cumulative induction phase treatment (D28). Proteomic data was available <i>via</i> ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD021584. The resulting differentially expressed proteins were explored by bioinformatics approaches aiming to identify the main gene ontology processes, pathways, and transcription factors altered by chemotherapy, as well as to understand B-ALL biology in each compartment at D0. At D0, PB was characterized as a pro-inflammatory environment, with the involvement of several downregulated coagulation proteins as KNG, plasmin, and plasminogen. D28 was characterized predominantly by immune response-related processes and the super expression of the transcription factor IRF3 and transthyretin. RUNX1 was pointed out as a common transcription factor found in both D0 and D28. We chose to validate the proteins transthyretin and interferon-gamma (IFN-&#x3b3;) by commercial kits and expressed the results as PB/BM ratios. Transthyretin ratio was augmented after induction chemotherapy, while IFN-&#x3b3; was reduced at the end of the treatment. Considering that most of these proteins were not yet described in B-ALL literature, these findings added to understanding disease biology at diagnosis and highlighted a possible role for transthyretin and IFN-&#x3b3; as mechanisms related to disease resolution.

### Keywords
Induction phase., Chemotherapy, B-acute lymphocytic leukemia, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Universidade Estadual do Oeste do Paraná, Reitoria, Campus Universitário de Francisco Beltrão. Rua Maringa 1200 - Centro de Ciências da Saúde centro 86010000 - Francisco Beltrão, PR - Brasil fone. +55 46 35204886
Pesquisador Senior
Divisão de Laboratórios
Centro de Transplante de Medula Óssea
Instituto Nacional de Câncer
Praça da Cruz Vermelha 23 6 andar ala C
Centro, Rio de Janeiro/RJ, Brasil

### Submitter
Eliana  Abdelhay

### Lab Head
Dr Carolina Panis
Universidade Estadual do Oeste do Paraná, Reitoria, Campus Universitário de Francisco Beltrão. Rua Maringa 1200 - Centro de Ciências da Saúde centro 86010000 - Francisco Beltrão, PR - Brasil fone. +55 46 35204886


