### Accession
PXD027187

### Title
ATR inhibition enables complete tumour regression in ALK-driven NB mouse models

### Description
High-risk neuroblastoma (NB) often involves amplification of the neural MYC (MYCN) oncogene as well as mutations in ALK. Currently, high-risk NB presents significant clinical challenges, and additional therapeutic options are needed. Oncogenes such as MYCN and ALK result in increased replication stress in cancer cells, offering one such therapeutically exploitable option. Here, we followed up on earlier phosphoproteomic analyses that identified ATR activity in ALK-driven NB cell lines. We tested several ATR inhibitors, identifying BAY 1895344 as the most potent inhibitor of NB cell growth and proliferation. Using RNA-Seq, proteomics and phosphoproteomics we characterized the response of NB cells and tumours to ATR inhibition, identifying key components of the DNA damage response (DDR) as well as ATRX, MYCN, E2F and DCK among other ATR targets in NB cells. ATR inhibition with BAY 1895344 also produced robust responses in mouse NB models. Remarkably, a 2 week protocol combining ATR and ALK inhibition led to complete regression of NB tumours in two independent NB genetically modified mouse tumour models. These results suggest that NB patients, particularly in high-risk groups with oncogene induced replication stress, may benefit from inhibition of ATR as therapeutic intervention.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were homogenized using lysis matrix D (1.4 mm ceramic spheres) on a FastPrep®-24 instrument (MP Biomedicals, OH, USA) for 5 repeated 40 second cycles at 6.5 m/s in 300 µl of the buffer containing 2% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), 50mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) and X1 Pierce Phosphatase inhibitor (A32957, Thermo Fischer Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Lysed samples were centrifuged at 21 100 xg for 10 min and the supernatants were transferred to clean tubes. The lysis tubes were washed with 200 µl of the lysis buffer, centrifuged at 21 100 xg for 10 min, the supernatants were combined with the corresponding lysates from the previous step. Protein concentrations in the lysates were determined using Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fischer Scientific) and the Benchmark™ Plus microplate reader (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA, USA) with bovine serum albumin (BSA) solutions as standards. Aliquots containing 200 µg of total protein from each sample were incubated at 37°C for 60 min in the lysis buffer with DL-dithiothreitol (DTT) at 100 mM final concentration. The reduced samples were processed using the modified filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method (Wisniewski JR et. al. Nat Methods. 2009 May;6(5):359-62). In short, the reduced samples were diluted to 1:4 by 8M urea solution, transferred onto Nanosep 30k Omega filters (Pall Corporation, Port Washington, NY, USA) and washed 4 times by adding 200 µl of 8M urea and subsequent centrifugation at 13 800 xg. Free cysteine residues were modified using 10 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS) solution in digestion buffer (0.5% sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 50 mM TEAB) for 30 min at room temperature and the filters were then repeatedly washed with 100 µl of digestion buffer. Pierce trypsin protease (MS Grade, Thermo Fisher Scientific) in digestion buffer was added at a ratio of 1:100 relative to total protein mass and the samples were incubated at 37°C for 3h; another portion of trypsin (1:100) was added and the mixture was incubated at 37°C overnight. The peptides were collected by centrifugation and labelled using Tandem Mass Tag (TMTpro 16plex) reagents (Thermo Fischer Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The labelled samples were combined into one pooled sample, concentrated using vacuum centrifugation, and SDC was removed by acidification with 10% TFA and subsequent centrifugation. The labelled pooled sample was treated with Pierce peptide desalting spin columns (Thermo Fischer Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Out of 2.80 mg of peptide material in the pooled labelled sample, an aliquot corresponding to 400 µg was withdrawn for the total proteome analysis, an aliquot of 1.20 mg was subjected to phosphopeptide enrichment using the High-Select Fe-NTA Enrichment Kit and another 1.20 mg aliquot was treated with the High-Select TiO2 Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit (both Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instruction. The eluted phosphopeptide samples were pooled. For the total proteome analysis, the corresponding aliquot was fractionated into 40 primary fractions by basic reversed-phase chromatography (bRP-LC) using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLC system (Thermo Fischer Scientific). Peptide separations were performed  on a reversed-phase XBridge BEH C18 column (3.5 μm, 3.0x150 mm, Waters Corporation) using a linear gradient from 3% to 40% solvent B over 18 min followed by an increase to 100% B over 5 min and hold at 100% B for min. Solvent A was 10 mM ammonium formate buffer at pH 10.00 and solvent B was 90% acetonitrile, 10% 10 mM ammonium formate at pH 10.00. The primary fractions were concatenated into final 20 fractions (1+21, 2+22, … 20+40), evaporated and reconstituted in 20 μl of 3% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid for nanoflow LC-MS analysis. The enriched phosphopeptide sample was fractionated into 20 primary fractions on the same LC setup with the gradient from 3% to 40% solvent B over 12 min, from 40% to 100% B over 4 min and 100% B for 6 min, the primary fractions were concatenated into final 20 fractions (1+11, 2+12, … 10+20), evaporated and reconstituted in 15μl of 3% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid for nanoflow LC-MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Identification and relative quantification was performed using Proteome Discoverer version 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The database search was performed using the Mascot search engine v. 2.5.1 (Matrix Science, London, UK) against the Swiss-Prot Homo sapiens database. Trypsin was used as a cleavage rule with no missed cleavages allowed; methylthiolation on cysteine residues, TMTpro at peptide N-termini and on lysine side chains were set as static modifications, and oxidation on methionine was set as a dynamic modification. For the total proteome analysis, precursor mass tolerance was set at 5 ppm and fragment ion tolerance at 0.6 Da. For the phosphopeptide analysis, precursor mass tolerance was set at 5 ppm and fragment ion tolerance at 30 mmu; phosphorylation on serine, threonine, and tyrosine and deamidation and acetylation was set as an additional dynamic modifications. Data matching was performed with up to 2 missed tryptic cleavages. Percolator was used for PSM validation with the strict FDR threshold of 1% in both cases. Quantification was performed in Proteome Discoverer 2.4. TMT reporter ions were identified with 3 mmu mass tolerance in the MS2 HCD spectra for the phosphopeptide experiment or in the MS3 HCD spectra for the total proteome experiment, and the TMT reporter S/N values for each sample were normalized within Proteome Discoverer 2.4 on the total peptide amount. Only the unique identified peptides were taken into account for the protein quantification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Alk, Phosphorylation, Neuroblastoma, Atr inhibitor

### Affiliations
Proteomics Core Facility / University of Gothenburg
Proteomics Core Facility, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg

### Submitter
Carina Sihlbom

### Lab Head
Dr Carina Sihlbom
Proteomics Core Facility, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg


