### Accession
PXD033588

### Title
Ochlerotatus triseriatus saliva proteome

### Description
Over the last 20 years, the advances in sequencing technologies highlighted the unique composition of the salivary glands of blood-feeding arthropods. Further biochemical and structural data demonstrated that salivary proteins can disrupt host hemostasis, inflammation and immune response in addition to favor pathogen transmission. Previously, a Sanger-based sialome of the adult Ochlerotatus. triseriatus female salivary glands was published based on 731 ESTs. Here we revisited O. triseriatus salivary glands contents using an Illumina-sequencing approach of both male and female tissues. In the current data set we report 10,317 coding DNA sequences classified into several functional classes. The translated transcripts also served as reference database for the proteomic analysis of O. triseriatus female saliva, in which unique peptides of 101 proteins were found. Finally, comparison of male and female libraries allowed the identification of female-enriched transcripts that are potentially related to blood acquisition and virus transmission.

### Sample Protocol
Briefly, 5- to 8-days old female O. triseriatus mosquitoes were starved for 12 h, transferred to Petri dishes, and sedated on ice for 10 min. Mosquitoes were secured to double-sided tape by sticking their dorsa and wings to the tape. To promote salivation, mosquitoes were intrathoracically injected with 200 nL of 10.8 mg/mL pilocarpine hydrochloride (Sigma P6503, St. Louis, MO, US) and were incubated at 27 °C for 1 h prior to saliva collection. Mosquito salivation was initiated by inserting mouthparts in P10 pipette tips containing 1 µL of mineral oil. The hypopharynx was carefully separated from the outer sheath of the proboscis using fine forceps to encourage a higher yield of saliva. Mouthparts were left partially inserted to avoid submersion of the maxillary palps. Mosquitoes were left to salivate for 1 h, and the resulting emulsion of saliva and mineral oil was expelled into a Protein Lo-Bind tube (Eppendorf, Enfield, CT, US) containing 10 µL of PBS. The sample was centrifuged at 20,000 x g for 5 min. The aqueous phase was recovered, and the concentration of the resulting protein solution was measured by spectrophotometry (DS-11, DeNovix). Two saliva samples were recovered from 50 mosquitoes each, containing 1.94 mg/mL and 1.03 mg/mL, respectively.   Saliva from females O. triseriatus were reduced in solution containing 50 mM HEPES, pH 8.0, 10% acetonitrile and 5 mM DTT at 37 °C for 40 min. After cooling to room temperature, the samples were added iodoac  etamide to give a final concentration of 15 mM. After 15 min of alkylation, 200 ng of trypsin were added, and the samples were incubated at 37 °C for 15 h in a final volume of 40 µl. The solution was evaporated to near dryness under vacuum at 50 °C. Twenty-five microliters of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid were added and the pH was adjusted to 2.5 with the addition of 10% trifluoroacetic acid. Samples with an estimated protein content of less than 2 µg were desalted and concentrated with C18 µZip Tips. Samples containing up to 10 µg of protein, were desalted with C18 OMIX 10 solid phase extraction tips. The digests were eluted with 0.1% TFA, 50% acetonitrile and dried under vacuum. The peptides were dissolved in 12 µl 0.1% formic acid, 3% acetonitrile which is used as the injection solvent. Digested peptides were subjected to the LC-MS analysis using Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, West Palm Beach, FL, US) connected with EASY nLC 1000 liquid chromatography system. Nano-LC was carried out with a 5 µL injection onto a PepMap 100 C18 3-µm trap column (2 cm, ID 75 µm) and a 2 µm PepMap RSLC C18 column from (25 cm, ID 75 µm), both from ThermoFisher Scientific. The LC was operated at a 300 µL/min flow rate with a 100-min linear gradient from 100% solvent A (0.1% formic acid, and 99.9 % water) to 40% solvent B (0.1% formic acid, 20% water, and 79.9% acetonitrile) followed by a column wash.

### Data Protocol
A standard data-dependent acquisition was performed with a full MS spectrum and obtained by the Orbitrap for m/z 400-2000 at the resolution of 120000 with EASY-IC calibration. The precursor ions, with charges from 2-8, were selected, isolated (1.6 m/z window), fragmented by CID, then scanned by the Ion Trap.  Survey scans were performed every 2 sec and the dynamic exclusion was enabled for 30 sec. Acquisitions were searched against the NCBInr (06/2020) proteome using PEAKS v10 (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc, Ontario, CA) using a semi-tryptic search strategy with tolerances of 6 ppm for MS and 0.5 Da for MS/MS and carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine as a dynamic modification allowing for 2 missed cleavages. Peptides were filtered with a 0.5% FDR using a decoy database approach and a 2 spectral matches/peptide requirement.

### Publication Abstract
Over the last 20 years, advancements in sequencing technologies have highlighted the unique composition of the salivary glands of blood-feeding arthropods. Further biochemical and structural data demonstrated that salivary proteins can disrupt host hemostasis, inflammation and immunity, which favors pathogen transmission. Previously, a Sanger-based sialome of adult Ochlerotatus triseriatus female salivary glands was published based on 731 expressed sequence tag (ESTs). Here, we revisited O. triseriatus salivary gland contents using an Illumina-based sequencing approach of both male and female tissues. In the current data set, we report 10,317 DNA coding sequences classified into several functional classes. The translated transcripts also served as a reference database for proteomic analysis of O. triseriatus female saliva, in which unique peptides from 101 proteins were found. Finally, comparison of male and female libraries allowed for the identification of female-enriched transcripts that are potentially related to blood acquisition and virus transmission.

### Keywords
Mosquito, Proteome, Saliva, Label-free quantification

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, Bethesda, MD, USA.
NIH/NIAID

### Submitter
Stephen Lu

### Lab Head
Dr Eric Calvo
Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, Bethesda, MD, USA.


