### Accession
PXD002760

### Title
Muscle biopsies from human neuromuscular diseases with dystrophic, inflammatory and myopathic pathology reveal common alterations in mitochondrial function

### Description
Neuromuscular disorders (NMDs) are clinically and genetically heterogenous and manifest as dystrophic, inflammatory and myopathic pathologies, among others. Our previous study on the cardiotoxin (CTX) mouse model of myodegeneration and inflammation linked muscle pathology with mitochondrial damage and oxidative stress. In this study, we investigated whether human NMDs display mitochondrial changes. Muscle biopsies from NMD patients, represented by dystrophic pathology [dysferlinopathy (dysfy); n=43], inflammatory pathology [inflammatory myopathy (IM); n=24] and myopathic pathology [distal myopathy with rimmer vacuoles (DMRV); n=31] were analysed. Mitochondrial damage was revealed in all NMDs by Enzyme histochemistry (SDH and SDH-COX deficiency), electron microscopy (vacuolation and abnormal ultrastructures) and biochemical assays (significantly increased ADP/ATP ratio). Proteomic analysis of muscle mitochondria from all three NMDs by Isobaric tag for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) labelling and liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis demonstrated down-regulation of electron transport chain (ETC) complex subunits, assembly factors and Krebs cycle enzymes. Most of the differentially expressed proteins were common among the three pathologies. Assay of ETC and Krebs cycle enzyme activities validated the MS data. Mitochondrial proteins from muscle pathologies also displayed higher trp oxidation and the same was corroborated in the CTX model. Molecular modelling predicted trp oxidation to alter the local structure of mitochondrial proteins. Our data highlight mitochondrial alterations in muscle pathologies, represented by structural changes, altered mitochondrial proteome and protein oxidation status, thereby establishing the importance of mitochondrial damage in human NMDs.

### Sample Protocol
The study included confirmed cases (based on histology/ immunohistochemistry/ molecular genetics/ western blot) of Dysferlinopathy (Dysfy), distal myopathy with rimmed vacuoles (DMRV), and inflammatory myopathy (IM). As control, paraspinal muscles from patients  undergoing spinal surgeries were procured from the neurosurgery department of NIMHANS. Ten samples from each disease group were considered for proteomics experiment. 100mg of muscle tissue from each case was taken for mitochondrial isolation. Mitochondrial proteins were extracted using 1X PBS containing 0.5% SDS. 100µg of proteins were taken from each group for proteomics experiment.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data obtained from all LC-MS analysis were searched against Human RefSeq50 database (containing 33,833 entries along with common contaminants) using Sequest and Mascot (version 2.2) search algorithms through Proteome Discoverer 1.3 (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Enzyme specificity was set as trypsin with maximum one missed cleavage allowed. The minimum peptide length was specified to be 6 amino acids. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine, acetylation of protein N-termini and cyclization of N-terminal glutamine were included as variable modifications. The mass error of parent ions was set to 10 ppm and 0.05 Da for fragment ions. The data was also searched against a decoy database and MS/MS identifications of < 1% false discovery rate (FDR) score threshold was considered for further analysis. To enable identification of novel peptides and correction of existing gene annotations in the human genome, six alternative databases namely- 1) six frame translated genome database 2) three frame translated RefSeq mRNA sequences from NCBI 3) three frame translated pseudogene database with sequences derived from sequences from NCBI and Gerstein’s pseudogenes 4) three frame translated non coding RNAs from NONCODE and 5) N-terminal UTR database of RefSeq mRNA sequences from NCBI were used. Unmatched MS/MS spectra peaklist files were extracted from the protein database search result and searched against these databases using X!Tandem search engine A decoy database was created for each database by reversing the sequences from a target database. Following parameters were common to all searches - 1) Precursor mass error set at 10 ppm, 2) Fragment mass error set at 0.05 Da, 3) carbamidomethylation of cysteine was defined as fixed modification, 4) Oxidation of methionine was defined as variable modification. 5) Only tryptic peptides with up to 2 missed cleavages were considered. The sequences of common contaminants including trypsin used as protease were appended to the database engine installed locally.

### Publication Abstract
Muscle diseases are clinically and genetically heterogeneous and manifest as dystrophic, inflammatory and myopathic pathologies, among others. Our previous study on the cardiotoxin mouse model of myodegeneration and inflammation linked muscle pathology with mitochondrial damage and oxidative stress. In this study, we investigated whether human muscle diseases display mitochondrial changes. Muscle biopsies from muscle disease patients, represented by dysferlinopathy (dysfy) (dystrophic pathology; n&#xa0;=&#xa0;43), polymyositis (PM) (inflammatory pathology; n&#xa0;=&#xa0;24), and distal myopathy with rimmed vacuoles (DMRV) (distal myopathy; n&#xa0;=&#xa0;31) were analyzed. Mitochondrial damage (ragged blue and COX-deficient fibers) was revealed in dysfy, PM, and DMRV cases by enzyme histochemistry (SDH and COX-SDH), electron microscopy (vacuolation and altered cristae) and biochemical assays (significantly increased ADP/ATP ratio). Proteomic analysis of muscle mitochondria from all three muscle diseases by isobaric tag for relative and absolute quantitation labeling and liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis demonstrated down-regulation of electron transport chain (ETC) complex subunits, assembly factors and Krebs cycle enzymes. Interestingly, 80 of the under-expressed proteins were common among the three pathologies. Assay of ETC and Krebs cycle enzyme activities validated the MS data. Mitochondrial proteins from muscle pathologies also displayed higher tryptophan (Trp) oxidation and the same was corroborated in the cardiotoxin model. Molecular modeling predicted Trp oxidation to alter the local structure of mitochondrial proteins. Our data highlight mitochondrial alterations in muscle pathologies, represented by morphological changes, altered mitochondrial proteome and protein oxidation, thereby establishing the role of mitochondrial damage in human muscle diseases. We investigated whether human muscle diseases display mitochondrial changes. Muscle biopsies from dysferlinopathy (Dysfy), polymyositis (PM), and distal myopathy with rimmed vacuoles (DMRV) displayed morphological and biochemical evidences of mitochondrial dysfunction. Proteomic analysis revealed down-regulation of electron transport chain (ETC) subunits, assembly factors, and tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle enzymes, with 80 proteins common among the three pathologies. Mitochondrial proteins from muscle pathologies also displayed higher Trp oxidation that could alter the local structure. Cover image for this issue: doi: 10.1111/jnc.13324.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Dystrophy, Orbitrap

### Affiliations
Department of Neurochemistry National Institute of Mental Health and Neurosciences (NIMHANS)
Department of Neurochemistry, NIMHANS, No. 2900, Hosur Road, Bangalore-560029, Karnataka, India

### Submitter
Srinivas Bharath

### Lab Head
Dr M. M. Srinivas Bharath
Department of Neurochemistry, NIMHANS, No. 2900, Hosur Road, Bangalore-560029, Karnataka, India


