### Accession
PXD017779

### Title
Analysis of IgG1 producing CHO cells

### Description
The effects of changes in bioprocessing parameters (temp, pH, DO) on anti-IL8 IgG1 producing Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells were studied on the level of host cell proteome expression using TMT-SPS-MS3.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were prepared using a FASP protocol followed by high pH fractionation. Fractions were then analysed using reversed-phase nano-LC-SPS-MS3 using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed using Thermo Scientific´s Proteome Discoverer 2.3. MS spectra were searched against a Cricetulus griseus database (Uniprot, 27-05-2019). A mass tolerance of 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.6 Da for fragment ions was allowed. Max. number of missed cleavages =2. Static modifications: Carbamidomethylation of cysteines and TMTsixplex (amino terminus and lysine residues). Dynamic modifications: oxidation and N-terminal acetylation. Normalization was done based on total peptide amounts.

### Publication Abstract
The biopharmaceutical market is dominated by monoclonal antibodies, the majority of which are produced in Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cell lines. Intense cell engineering, in combination with optimization of various process parameters results in increasing product titers. To enable further improvements in manufacturing processes, detailed information about how certain parameters affect cellular mechanisms in the production cells, and thereby also the expressed drug substance, is required. Therefore, in this study the effects of commonly applied changes in bioprocessing parameters on an anti-IL8 IgG1 producing CHO DP-12 cell line were investigated on the level of host cell proteome expression combined with product quality assessment of the expressed IgG1 monoclonal antibody. Applying shifts in temperature, pH and dissolved oxygen concentration, respectively, resulted in altered productivity and product quality. Furthermore, analysis of the cells using two-dimensional liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry employing tandem mass tag based isotopic quantitation and synchronous precursor selection-MS<sup>3</sup> detection revealed substantial changes in the protein expression profiles of CHO cells. Pathway analysis indicated that applied bioprocessing conditions resulted in differential activation of oxidative phosphorylation. Additionally, activation of ERK5 and TNFR1 signaling suggested an affected cell cycle. Moreover, in-depth product characterization by means of charge variant analysis, peptide mapping, as well as structural and functional analysis, revealed posttranslational and structural changes in the expressed drug substance. Taken together, the present study allows the conclusion that, in anti-IL8 IgG1 producing CHO DP-12 cells, an improved energy metabolism achieved by lowering the cell culture pH is favorable when aiming towards high antibody production rates while maintaining product quality.

### Keywords
Sps-ms3, Tmt, Cho

### Affiliations
National Institute for Bioprocessing Research and Training, NIBRT
Characterization and Comparability Lab, National Institute for Bioprocessing Research and Training - NIBRT, Dublin, Ireland

### Submitter
Lisa Strasser

### Lab Head
Dr Jonathan Bones
Characterization and Comparability Lab, National Institute for Bioprocessing Research and Training - NIBRT, Dublin, Ireland


