### Accession
PXD023995

### Title
Proteomic analysis of retinal tissue in an S100B autoimmune glaucoma model

### Description
Glaucoma is not only the second leading cause of blindness worldwide, but patient numbers will also increase significantly in the coming years due to aging societies. Glaucoma is a progressive optic neuropathy with changes at the optic nerve head, gradual retinal ganglion cell (RGC) death, and visual field loss [1]. Unfortunately, glaucoma can remain asymptomatic until it is rather far progressed, hence about 10-50 % of patients are unaware they suffer from this disease. High intraocular pressure (IOP) is the main risk factor; however, normal-tension glaucoma (NTG) occurs in patients with physiological IOP [2]. This form account for about 30 % of glaucoma patients [3]. Furthermore, sustained IOP lowering can slow down, but does not completely stop disease progression in patients. [4, 5]. Additionally, the administration of topical glaucoma medications can lead to side effects, such as ocular irritation, decreasing the compliance of patients. These facts emphasize the importance of discovering new treatment strategies. The exact pathogenesis for glaucoma is still unknown, but several factors are considered to be involved (fig.1). The most prominent factor is an elevated IOP, which can cause blockade of axonal protein transport at the lamina cribrosa, causing an initial axonal damage and RGC death by trophic insufficiency. In addition, ischemic/hypoxic damage [6], astrocyte and glia cell alterations, and excessive stimulation of the glutamatergic system [7] are discussed as possible pathomechanisms. Moreover, an involvement of the immune system is considered [8-10]. In glaucoma patients, up- and downregulations in the systemic and ocular antibody profile were detected [11-13]. Also, antibody deposits were observed in glaucomatous retinae [14]. It is likely that a combination of several pathogenic factors/mechanisms increases the possibility of developing glaucoma. For the investigation of pathomechanisms and novel therapies, it is necessary to have suitable models that allow such screening. To investigate whether antibodies detected in glaucoma patients are part of glaucoma pathogenesis or a result of disease progression, the experimental autoimmune glaucoma (EAG) animal model was established. This animal model is based on the fact that autoantibodies against S100B, a small calcium binding protein expressed in glia cells, were found to be increased in glaucoma patients [15]. In this model, an immunization with S100B led to a significant loss of RGCs after 28 days and a fast degeneration of optic nerves [20]. The IOP in this model was not altered. Therefore, we were able to mimic the effects seen in NTG patients, an IOP-independent glaucomatous degeneration, by immunizing rats with S100B. S100B is a calcium-binding protein. In the central nervous system (CNS), it is mainly expressed by glial cells such as oligodendrocytes, Schwann cells, ependymal cells, retinal Müller cells and astrocytes [16]. S100B regulates and maintains the homeostasis of the important second messenger calcium and is therefore involved in many cell activities, such as signal transduction, cell differentiation, regulation of cell motility, transcription and cell cycle processes [17, 18]. Extracellularly, S100B can act as a signal molecule and bind receptors such as the receptor for advanced glycation end products (RAGE). In high concentrations, S100B can have negative effects and lead to cell death. For example, the binding of RAGE can induce the activation of microglia cells leading to a release of proinflammatory cytokines to an excessive extent [19]. Furthermore, there seems to be a link between S100B and neuronal diseases. In glaucoma patients, high antibody titers against S100B were found [20]. To investigate the effect of S100B in glaucoma more precisely, the immunization with S100B leads to a loss of retinal ganglion cells (RGCs) without an elevation of the IOP after 28 days in the EAG model [21, 22].  The goal of the present study was to detect the retinal biomarkers in EAG animals 7 and 14 days after immunization with S100B. To detect these new markers in disease development, a label free quantitative mass spectrometry-based approach will be used.

### Sample Protocol
2.1. Animals All procedures concerning animals adhered to the ARVO statement for the use of animals in ophthalmic and vision research. All experiments involving animals were approved by the animal care committee of North Rhine-Westphalia, Germany, and were performed in accordance with relevant guidelines and regulations (approval code: 84-02-04.2013.A291). Male Lewis rats (Charles River), 6 weeks of age, were used for the experiments and kept under environmentally controlled conditions with free access to chow and water. Detailed observations and health checks, including eye exams, were performed regularly, as described previously [23].  2.2. Immunizations Rats received 1 mg/ml S100B (Sigma Aldrich, Munich, Germany) [22]. The antigen was mixed with incomplete Freund’s adjuvant (200 µl) plus 3 µg pertussis toxin (both Sigma Aldrich). The animals of the control group were injected with 0.9 % sodiumchlorid in Freund’s adjuvant and pertussis toxin. To obtain the retinas, animals were sacrificed 7 and 14 days after immunization by carbon dioxide inhalation.

### Data Protocol
2.3. Mass spectrometric analysis of retinae samples Preparation of retinae samples for creation of a retinae specific spectral library was described previously by xxx et al. (). Preparation of the actual study samples for DIA-based measurements was performed analogously with minor changes. In total, 20 µg of each retina lysate was loaded on a NuPAGE™ 10 % Bis-tris gel (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.). Gel electrophoresis was limited to 50 V for 15 min and 180 V. After stopping electrophoresis, gels were stained with Coomassie blue (SimpleBlue™ SafeStain, Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The resulting single protein band per lane was dissected and transferred into a new glass vial. The protein bands were destained, pH adjusted, disulphide bridges reduced as well as modified as described. After finishing the incubation cycle, gel pieces were dried, resuspended in 9.5 µL trypsin solution (0.033 µg/µL; SERVA Electrophoresis GmbH) plus 12 µL 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Trypsin digestion and elution of peptides were performed as described previously. The resulting peptide extract was completely dried in a vacuum concentrator and resuspended in 30 µL 0.1 % (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid. The peptide concentration was determined with amino acid analysis [24]. For mass spectrometric analysis 80 ng of this peptide extract were transferred to a new glass vial and filed up to a volume of 14.5 µL with 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid. Finally, 1 µL iRT peptides (Biognosys AG) were added to each retinae sample. The mass spectrometric analysis for the study samples was like for the spectral library samples performed with a Q Exactive™ HF mass spectrometer, but in DIA mode. The scan range for the full MS1 was set to 350 to 1100 m/z with a resolution of 120,000. Fragmentation was performed by HCD with a resolution of 30,000 and a stepwise NCE of 25.5%, 27% and 30%. The first fixed mass was set to 200 m/z (ACG 3e6, maximum injection time automatic/20 ms) and the default charge state set to ≥ +4. The thereby generated date set of the study samples has been uploaded to ProteomeXchange with the identifier xxx. Acquired mass spectrometric data were analyzed with the interface Spectronaut™ Pulsar with default settings. Briefly summarized, retinae sample data set described previously was taken to generate a retinae specific spectral library (reference data set). The false discovery rate (called Qvalue) was set to a threshold of 1%. For further statistical evaluation proteins had to be quantified in at least 80% of all samples of one study group. Further filter criteria, fold changes > 30% and adjusted p-values (< 5 %) were calculated manually.  2.4. Immunofluorescence staining in retina The immunofluorescence staining of specific cell types in the retina was performed as described previously [21]. First, all sections were blocked with a mixture of 10-20 % serum, 0.1 % -0.2 % TritonX-100 (Sigma-Aldrich) and PBS (Santa Cruz) for one hour. The specific first antibodies (Table 1) were diluted in the same mixture and incubated overnight at room temperature. After three washing steps, all sections were incubated with Cy3-, Alexa Fluor 555- or Alexa Fluor 488-labelled secondary antibodies (Table 1). To visualize cell nuclei, DAPI (SERVA Electrophoresis GmbH) diluted in distilled water was applied to the sections. Finally, the sections were covered with Shandon-Mount (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.). Negative controls were performed for all antibody stains using only secondary antibodies. Four images (two peripheral and two central) per retinal cross section were acquired at 400x magnification using the Axio Imager M1 microscope (Zeiss).

### Publication Abstract
Glaucoma is a neurodegenerative disease that leads to damage of retinal ganglion cells and the optic nerve. Patients display altered antibody profiles and increased antibody titer, e.g., against S100B. To identify the meaning of these antibodies, animals were immunized with S100B. Retinal ganglion cell loss, optic nerve degeneration, and increased glial cell activity were noted. Here, we aimed to gain more insights into the pathophysiology from a proteomic point of view. Hence, rats were immunized with S100B, while controls received sodium chloride. After 7 and 14 days, retinae were analyzed through mass spectrometry and immunohistology. Using data-independent acquisition-based mass spectrometry, we identified more than 1700 proteins on a high confidence level for both study groups, respectively. Of these 1700, 43 proteins were significantly altered in retinae after 7 days and 67 proteins revealed significant alterations at 14 days. For example, &#x3b1;2-macroglobulin was found significantly increased not only by mass spectrometry analysis, but also with immunohistological staining in S100B retinae at 7 and 14 days. All in all, the identified proteins are often associated with the immune system, such as heat shock protein 60. Once more, these data underline the important role of immunological factors in glaucoma pathogenesis.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Ls-ms/ms, S100b, Autoimmune glaucoma, Normal tension

### Affiliations
Medizinisches Proteom-Center
Department Functional Proteomics Medizinisches Proteom-Center Ruhr-University Bochum Building ProDi Gesundheitscampus 4 44780 Bochum Germany

### Submitter
Annika Guntermann

### Lab Head
Dr Caroline May
Department Functional Proteomics Medizinisches Proteom-Center Ruhr-University Bochum Building ProDi Gesundheitscampus 4 44780 Bochum Germany


