### Accession
PXD011704

### Title
QToF Cross-linking Optimisation

### Description
Optimising the parameters for cross-link analysis using a QToF mass spectrometer. We performed triplicate analysis of 6 different collision energy ramps to determine the optimal energy for cross-link fragmentation.

### Sample Protocol
BSA was cross-linked with BS3 d0/d12 at 100 times molar excess of cross-linker. The sample was digested in solution with Trypsin and enriched as per the protocol described in Leitner, Alexander, Thomas Walzthoeni, and Ruedi Aebersold. "Lysine-specific chemical cross-linking of protein complexes and identification of cross-linking sites using LC-MS/MS and the xQuest/xProphet software pipeline." Nature protocols 9.1 (2014): 120 Samples were analysed on a Synapt G2-Si using DDA with various collision energies

### Data Protocol
Data were analysed using PLGS with slow-slow deisotoping to achieve MGF files. These were processed in MSConvert with 32 bit encoding to mzXML format. These files were processed in xQuest

### Publication Abstract
Cross-linking mass spectrometry is an emerging structural biology technique. Almost exclusively, the analyzer of choice for such an experiment has been the Orbitrap. We present an optimized protocol for the use of a Synapt G2-Si for the analysis of cross-linked peptides. We first tested six different energy ramps and analyzed the fragmentation behavior of cross-linked peptides identified by xQuest. By combining the most successful energy ramps, cross-link yield can be increased by up to 40%. When compared to previously published Orbitrap data, the Synapt G2-Si also offers improved fragmentation of the &#x3b2; peptide. In order to improve cross-link quality control we have also developed ValidateXL, a programmatic solution that works with existing cross-linking software to improve cross-link quality control.

### Keywords
Bsa lc-ms/ms cross-linking

### Affiliations
University College London ISMB
UCL

### Submitter
Juliette James

### Lab Head
Dr Konstantinos Thalassinos
University College London ISMB


