### Accession
PXD004564

### Title
Quantitative Analysis of Global Proteome in  Wheat Germ

### Description
Using iTRAQ labeling and HPLC fractionation followed by high-resolution LC-MS/MS analysis, quantitative global proteome analysis was performed. In total, 6538 protein groups were identified from Triticum_aestivum, among which 2766 proteins were quantified.

### Sample Protocol
The aim of this project is to use integrated approach involving iTRAQ labeling, HPLC fractionation and mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteomics to quantify dynamic changes of the whole proteome of Triticum_aestivum. The general technical route is indicated:Protein Extraction,Trypsin Digestion,iTRAQ Labeling,HPLC Fractionation,LC-MS/MS Analysis,Database Search,Bioinformatic Analysis.    The aim of this project is to use integrated approach involving iTRAQ labeling, HPLC fractionation and mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteomics to quantify dynamic changes of the whole proteome of Triticum_aestivum. The general technical route is indicated:Protein Extraction,Trypsin Digestion,TMT Labeling,HPLC Fractionation,LC-MS/MS Analysis,Database Search,Bioinformatic Analysis.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Mascot search engine (v.2.3.0). Tandem mass spectra were searched against  Uniprot_Wheat database (100,981 sequences). Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. Mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethyl on Cys, TMT-6plex (N-term) and TMT-6plex (K) were specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met was specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and peptide ion score was set > 20.

### Publication Abstract
Wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) is an important crop worldwide. The physiological deterioration of seeds during storage and seed priming is closely associated with germination, and thus contributes to plant growth and subsequent grain yields. In this study, wheat seeds during different stages of artificial ageing (45&#xb0;C; 50% relative humidity; 98%, 50%, 20%, and 1% Germination rates) and priming (hydro-priming treatment) were subjected to proteomics analysis through a proteomic approach based on the isobaric tandem mass tag labeling. A total of 162 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) mainly involved in metabolism, energy supply, and defense/stress responses, were identified during artificial ageing and thus validated previous physiological and biochemical studies. These DEPs indicated that the inability to protect against ageing leads to the incremental decomposition of the stored substance, impairment of metabolism and energy supply, and ultimately resulted in seed deterioration. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) analysis revealed that the up-regulated proteins involved in seed ageing were mainly enriched in ribosome, whereas the down-regulated proteins were mainly accumulated in energy supply (starch and sucrose metabolism) and stress defense (ascorbate and aldarate metabolism). Proteins, including hemoglobin 1, oleosin, agglutinin, and non-specific lipid-transfer proteins, were first identified in aged seeds and might be regarded as new markers of seed deterioration. Of the identified proteins, 531 DEPs were recognized during seed priming compared with unprimed seeds. In contrast to the up-regulated DEPs in seed ageing, several up-regulated DEPs in priming were involved in energy supply (tricarboxylic acid cycle, glycolysis, and fatty acid oxidation), anabolism (amino acids, and fatty acid synthesis), and cell growth/division. KEGG and protein-protein interaction analysis indicated that the up-regulated proteins in seed priming were mainly enriched in amino acid synthesis, stress defense (plant-pathogen interactions, and ascorbate and aldarate metabolism), and energy supply (oxidative phosphorylation and carbon metabolism). Therefore, DEPs associated with seed ageing and priming can be used to characterize seed vigor and optimize germination enhancement treatments. This work reveals new proteomic insights into protein changes that occur during seed deterioration and priming.

### Keywords
Global proteome, Wheat germ

### Affiliations
College of Biological Engineering,Henan University of Technology,Zhengzhou,China
College of Biological Engineering, Henan University of Technology, Zhengzhou, China

### Submitter
Yuansen Hu

### Lab Head
Dr Yuansen Hu
College of Biological Engineering,Henan University of Technology,Zhengzhou,China


