### Accession
PXD011534

### Title
Deacetylation inhibition reverses PABPN1-dependent muscle wasting

### Description
Reduced PABPN1 levels cause aging-associated muscle wasting. PABPN1 is a multi-functional regulator of mRNA processing. To elucidate the molecular mechanisms causing PABPN1-mediated muscle wasting, we compared the transcriptome to the proteome in mouse muscles expressing shRNA to PABPN1 (shPab). We found greater variations in the proteome as compared to mRNA expression profiles. Protein accumulation in the shPab proteome was concomitant with reduced proteasomal activity. Notably, protein acetylation appeared to be enriched in shPab versus control proteomes (63%). An acetylome study in shPab muscles revealed prominent peptide deacetylation associated with elevated sirtuin-1 (SIRT1) deacetylase. We show that SIRT1 mRNA levels are controlled by PABPN1 via an alternative polyadenylation site utilization. SIRT1 inhibition reversed PABPN1 activity and muscle cell function. Moreover, deacetylation inhibition increased PABPN1 levels and reversed muscle wasting. We suggest that perturbation of a multifactorial regulatory loop involving PABPN1 and SIRT1 plays an imperative role in aging-associated muscle wasting.

### Sample Protocol
The acetylome peptides were pulled down using PTMScan Acetyl-Lysine [Ac-K] Immunoaffinity Beads (Cat. #14499; CST, Inc) according to the manufacturer protocol (CST, Inc). In brief, 17mg protein was reduced with DTT (4.5mM) at 55°C for 30 min and then alkylated IAA (100mM) in the dark at room temperature for 15 min. The samples were then diluted 4 times using 20mM HEPES pH 8.0. Protein digestion was carried out with 10ug/ml trypsin at RT overnight. Trypsin was deactivated with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Peptides were kept at -80°C and subsequently lyophilised for 48 hours to ensure complete removal of TFA. The peptide pellet was resuspended in Immunoaffinity Purification buffer (IAP) (50mM morpholinepropanesulfonic acid pH 7.2, 10mM sodium phosphate dibasic, 50mM sodium chloride). Resuspended peptides were directly loaded on the immunoaffinity Beads (Cat. #14499; CST, Inc) and were incubated at 4°C for 2 hours. The beads-peptide complexes were washed with 0.15% TFA after IAP and RODI water. The eluted peptides were subsequently purified using C18 tips, and then dried using miVac DUO concentrator from Genevac, UK. All peptide samples (proteome and acetylome) were resuspended in 20 µl solution A (98% MilliQ-H2O, 2% CH3CN and 0.1% FA), vortexed and sonicated before injection into the Q ExactiveTM HF Hybrid Quadrupole-OrbitrapTM Mass Spectrometer (Thermofisher Scientific). Mass spectrometry was run on a one-hour gradient in technical duplicates

### Data Protocol
The acetylome chromatograms were aligned using PEAKS Studio 8.0 software (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc. (BSI), Version 8, build 20160908). The peptides were identified using the Mascot (Matrix Science version 2.5.1) search engine and Uniprot mouse database. Carbamidomethylation (C) was set as a fixed, and deamidation (N) and oxidation (M) were set as variable modifications in the MS/MS Ions searches. In addition peptides acetylation (K) and carbamylation (K) were also set as variable modifications in the MS/MS Ions searches for the precipitated peptides. 1% FDR and a mass error tolerance of 10.0 ppm were set and a retention time shift tolerance of 5 minutes was allowed in the peptide quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Reduced poly(A)-binding protein nuclear 1 (PABPN1) levels cause aging-associated muscle wasting. PABPN1 is a multifunctional regulator of mRNA processing. To elucidate the molecular mechanisms causing PABPN1-mediated muscle wasting, we compared the transcriptome with the proteome in mouse muscles expressing short hairpin RNA to PABPN1 (shPab). We found greater variations in the proteome than in mRNA expression profiles. Protein accumulation in the shPab proteome was concomitant with reduced proteasomal activity. Notably, protein acetylation appeared to be decreased in shPab versus control proteomes (63%). Acetylome profiling in shPab muscles revealed prominent peptide deacetylation associated with elevated sirtuin-1 (SIRT1) deacetylase. We show that SIRT1 mRNA levels are controlled by PABPN1 via alternative polyadenylation site utilization. Most importantly, SIRT1 deacetylase inhibition by sirtinol increased PABPN1 levels and reversed muscle wasting. We suggest that perturbation of a multifactorial regulatory loop involving PABPN1 and SIRT1 plays an imperative role in aging-associated muscle wasting. VIDEO ABSTRACT.

### Keywords
Muscle transcriptome, Mrna processing, Muscle wasting, Deacetylation, Sirt1, Muscle proteome

### Affiliations
Target Discovery Institute, Nuffield department of medicine, The university of Oxford
LUMC

### Submitter
Cyriel Olie

### Lab Head
Dr Benedikt M. Kessler
Target Discovery Institute, Nuffield department of medicine, The university of Oxford


