### Accession
PXD007757

### Title
Lysine Acetylation in Mouse Testis

### Description
we employed quantitative proteomic techniques and bioinformatics tools to analyze the alterations of acetylome profile of mouse testis after heat shock and X-irradiation.

### Sample Protocol
Testes from seven mice per group were pooled and sonicated using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (8 M urea supplemented with 1% triton X-100, 65 mM DTT, 1% protease inhibitor cocktail, 30mM nicotinamide, 3 μM trichostatin A). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 4 °C for 10 min at 20,000g. After that, the proteins in the supernatant were precipitated by adding cold trichloroacetic acid (TCA) to the final concentration of 15% and stay at -20 °C for 2 h. After centrifugation at 5,000g for 10 min, the precipitate was washed with cold acetone and redissolved in 8 M urea supplemented with 100 mM TEAB, pH 8.0. Proteins were then reduced and alkylated with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAM), respectively. Then the digestion was performed by adding sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) at an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:50 at 37 °C overnight. After trypsin digestion, peptide was desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. Peptide was reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB (Tetramethylammonium bromide) and processed to TMT labeling according to the manufacturer’s protocol for 6-plex TMT kit (Thermo Scientific, Pierce Biotechnology, Rockford, IL). Specifically, the TMT reagents with the reporter ions of 126, 127 and 128 were selected for the labeling of the control, the heat-treated and the X-ray exposed testes samples, respectively.. To enrich Kac peptides, tryptic peptides were first dissolved in NETN buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0) followed by adding pre-washed anti-acetyl-lysine antibody beads (PTM Biolabs, Hangzhou, China) and then incubated at 4 °C overnight with gentle shaking. After that, the beads were washed four times with NETN buffer and twice with ddH2O to remove non-specific binding. Finally, the bound peptides were eluted by adding 0.1% TFA (Trifluoroacetic acid) and vacuum-dried using a SpeedVac. The resulting peptides were cleaned with C18 ZipTips (Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s instructions, followed by LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Proteome Discoverer (version 2.0) with the embedded Mascot engine (version 2.3). Tandem mass spectra were searched against UniProt_mouse database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 3 missing cleavages, 4 modifications per peptide and 5 charges. Mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethylation on Cys was specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met, acetylation on Lys, and acetylation on protein N-terminal were specified as variable modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) thresholds f were specified at 1%. Minimum peptide length was set at 7. For quantification, TMT-6plex was selected.

### Publication Abstract
Environmental stresses are important factors causing male infertility which attracts broad attention. Protein acetylation is a pivotal post-translational modification and modulates diverse physiological processes including spermatogenesis. In this study, we employed quantitative proteomic techniques and bioinformatics tools to analyze the alterations of acetylome profile of mouse testis after heat shock and X-irradiation. Overall, we identified 1139 lysine acetylation sites in 587 proteins in which 1020 lysine acetylation sites were quantified. The Gene Ontology analysis showed that the major acetylated protein groups were involved in generation of precursor metabolites and metabolic processes, and were localized predominantly in cytosolic and mitochondrial. Compared to the control group, 36 sites of 28 acetylated proteins have changed after heat shock, and 49 sites of 43 acetylated proteins for X-ray exposure. Some of the differentially acetylated proteins have been reported to be associated with the progression of spermatogenesis and male fertility. We observed the up-regulated acetylation level change on testis specific histone 2B and heat shock protein upon heat treatment and a sharp decline of acetylation level on histone H2AX under X-ray treatment, suggesting their roles in male germ cells. Notably, the acetylation level on K279 of histone acetyltransferase (Kat7) was down-regulated in both heat and X-ray treatments, indicating that K279 may be a key acetylated site and affect its functions in spermatogenesis. Our results reveal that protein acetylation might add another layer of complexity to the regulation for spermatogenesis, and further functional studies of these proteins will help us elucidate the mechanisms of abnormal spermatogenesis.

### Keywords
Lysine acetylation, Tmt, Mouse testis

### Affiliations
Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of sciences

CAS Key Laboratory of Genomics and Precision Medicine, Beijing Institute of Genomics, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China

### Submitter
Hongyan Shen

### Lab Head
Dr Caixia Guo
CAS Key Laboratory of Genomics and Precision Medicine, Beijing Institute of Genomics, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China


