### Accession
PXD041350

### Title
Count Dracula Resurrected: Proteomic Analysis of Vlad III the Impaler’s Documents by EVA Technology and Mass Spectrometry

### Description
The interest of scientists in analysing items of World Cultural Heritage, has been exponentially increasing since the beginning of the new millennium. These studies have grown considerably in tandem with the development and the use of sophisticated and sensitive technologies such as the high-resolution mass spectrometry (MS) and the non-invasive and non-damaging technique, known under the acronym EVA. Here, we report the results about the MS-characterization of the peptides and proteins harvested by the EVA technology applied to three letters written in 1457 and 1475 by the voivode of Wallachia, Vlad III, also known as Vlad the Impaler, or Vlad Dracula. The discrimination of the “original” endogenous peptides from contaminant ones was obtained monitoring their different level of deamidation and of other diagenetic chemical modifica-tions. The characterization of the ancient proteins extracted from these documents allowed to explore the environmental conditions, in the second half of the 15th-century, of the Wallachia, a region considered as a meeting point for soldiers, mi-grants and travellers that probably carried not only trade goods and cultural traditions, but also diseases and epidemics. In addition, the identification of many human peptides and proteins harvested from the letters allowed to uncover more about Vlad Dracula the Impaler. Particularly, the experimental data show that he probably suffered of inflammatory processes of the respiratory tract and/or of the skin, and, according to some stories, he also suffered from a pathological condition called haemolacria, that is he could shed tears admixed with blood. It is worth to note that it cannot deny that more medieval peo-ple may have touched these documents, but it is also presumable that the most prominent ancient proteins should be related to the Prince Vlad the Impaler, who written and signed these letters.

### Sample Protocol
EVA diskettes handling and protein extraction protocol were car-ried out in a dedicated laboratory “clean room” in compliance with protection guidance for ancient samples and adopting all precau-tions to minimize the effects of contamination from modern pro-teins, as previously reported.21 A section (2mm X 2mm) of each EVA diskette was cut with a scalpel and put in an Eppendorf® mi-crotube. Proteins harvested in EVA films were eluted sequentially with a total of 1.3 mL of volatile buffers (formate at pH 3, followed by ammonia at pH 10, and sequentially by bicarbonate buffer at pH 8 with Rapigest® 0.1%) and finally with volatile solvents (acetoni-trile). The eluates were dried under vacuum (Concentrator Plus, Eppendorf) and then resuspended in 300 µL of 50mM AMBIC. Proteins were quantified by a fluorimetric assay using the Qubit Protein Assay kit with the Qubit 1.0 Fluorometer. Then, about 50 µg of protein extracts (in 50mM AMBIC solution) were reduced by 38 μg of DTT (3 h, at room temperature) and alkylated by 79 μg of IAA (1h, in the dark at room temperature). Enzymatic protein digestion was carried out overnight at 37 °C, by 0.98 μg porcine trypsin. Tryptic peptide mixture solutions were dried under vacuum (Concentrator Plus, Eppendorf), re-dissolved in 100 µL of 5% aqueous FA, filtered by ultracentrifugation (750 µL, 0.2 µm Non-sterile Micro-Centrifugal Filters, Sepachrom, Rho, Milan), and ana-lyzed by nanoUHPLC/high resolution nanoESI–MS/MS in dupli-cate. An empty diskette of EVA film was used as control sample. It was processed and analyzed by proteomics on the same way of the EVA diskette of the letters. Mass spectrometry data were acquired via a Thermo Fisher Scien-tific Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid® (Q-OT-qIT) mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled online with a Thermo Scientific Dionex UltiMate 3000 nano-Liquid chromatog-raphy system (Sunnyvale, CA). Full Scan of peptide precursors were performed in high-resolution (i.e. 120 K resolution @ 200 m/z), whereas Tandem MS of those precursors with charge state 2÷4 was carried out in the ion trap (low-resolution acquisition). To avoid cross-contamination with other biological samples, all solvents were prepared freshly, and ancient samples were not processed or analyzed in one batch with modern references. In addition, to avoid carryover during nLC-MS/MS runs, from three to five blank runs were performed before each analysis using the same gradient program. Spectra acquired in the last blank run were searched by PEAKS software against the Swiss-Prot database without species origin restrictions and using the same parameters of the archaeological samples.

### Data Protocol
All MS data were merged and processed using two different search engines, the PEAKS X de novo sequencing software (v. 10.0, Bio-informatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, ON, Canada) and the MaxQuant (MQ) software 1.6.17.0 (https://www.maxquant.org/). Raw MS data were searched against Swiss-Prot database restricted to different taxonomies separately. Particularly, the following tax-onomies were investigated: i) “Human” (20386 entries, release July 2022); ii) “Bacteria” (340,707 entries, release January 2023); iii) “Viruses” (17,957 entries, release February 2023); iv) “Fungi” (36,956 entries, release January 2023); v) “Insecta” (10,986 entries, release February 2023); and vi) “Viridiplantae” (42,802 entries, release February 2023). The common Repository of Adventitious Proteins (c-RAP; https://www.thegpm.org/crap/) contaminant data-base was also enabled as background in all the database searches. The first step of database search was carried out using the follow-ing parameters: a) tryptic peptides with a maximum of 2 missed cleavage sites; b) cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modifi-cation; c) oxidation of methionine, the transformation of N-terminal glutamine and N-terminal glutamic acid residue to pyroglutamic acid form, the deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, and the N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications. Then, to im-prove peptides identifications databases were also searched investi-gating the following PTMs, as variable modifications: i) oxidation, di-oxidation, formation of kynurenine, and formation of oxo-lactone, for tryptophan residues; ii) oxidation, di-oxidation, and formation of dopaquinone, for tyrosine residues; iii) di-oxidation of methionine; iv) tri-oxidation of cysteine. The precursor mass toler-ance threshold was set to 10 ppm and the max fragment mass error to 0.6 Da. Peptide Spectral Matches (PSMs) were validated using a Target Decoy PSM Validator node based on q-values at a False Discovery Rate (FDR) ≤ 1%. PEAKS score thresholds for PSMs were set to achieve, for each database search, FDR values for PSMs, peptide sequences, and proteins identified below the 1% value. In the MaxQuant software, match type was “match from and to”, the decoy mode was “revert”, the PSM, Protein and Site decoy fraction FDR were set at 0.01 as threshold for peptide and protein identifications. Minimum score for modified and unmodified pep-tides was set at 40. All the other parameters were set as default. A protein was considered identified if a minimum of two peptides (in-cluding at least a unique peptides) were matched. Finally, to be sure of the species assigned by the software to each protein identified, all the identified peptides underwent both the BLASTp (Basic Local Alignment Search Tool for protein) searches through the NCBI database (http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi) and the “Tryptic Peptide Analysis” of the open source web application Unipept (https://unipept.ugent.be/) to check the taxon-specificity, validate species identifications and to rule out conserved peptides between species.

### Publication Abstract
The interest of scientists in analyzing items of World Cultural Heritage has been exponentially increasing since the beginning of the new millennium. These studies have grown considerably in tandem with the development and use of sophisticated and sensitive technologies such as high-resolution mass spectrometry (MS) and the non-invasive and non-damaging technique, known under the acronym EVA (ethylene-vinyl acetate). Here, we report the results of the MS characterization of the peptides and proteins harvested by the EVA technology applied to three letters written in 1457 and 1475 by the voivode of Wallachia, Vlad III, also known as Vlad the Impaler, or Vlad Dracula. The discrimination of the "original" endogenous peptides from contaminant ones was obtained by monitoring their different levels of deamidation and of other diagenetic chemical modifications. The characterization of the ancient proteins extracted from these documents allowed us to explore the environmental conditions, in the second half of the 15th century, of the Wallachia, a region considered as a meeting point for soldiers, migrants, and travelers that probably carried not only trade goods and cultural traditions but also diseases and epidemics. In addition, the identification of many human peptides and proteins harvested from the letters allowed us to uncover more about Vlad Dracula the Impaler. Particularly, the experimental data show that he probably suffered from inflammatory processes of the respiratory tract and/or of the skin. In addition, proteomics data, although not exhaustive, suggest that, according to some stories, he might also have suffered from a pathological condition called hemolacria, that is, he could shed tears admixed with blood. It is worth noting that more medieval people may have touched these documents, which cannot be denied, but it is also presumable that the most prominent ancient proteins should be related to Prince Vlad the Impaler, who wrote and signed these letters. The data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange with the identifier &#x27e8;PXD041350&#x27e9;.

### Keywords
Ancient proteins, Mass spectrometry, Eva diskettes, Vlad the impaler, Dracula

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Organic Mass Spectrometry, Department of Chemical Sciences, University of Catania
University of Catania

### Submitter
Vincenzo Cunsolo

### Lab Head
Dr Vincenzo Cunsolo
Laboratory of Organic Mass Spectrometry, Department of Chemical Sciences, University of Catania


