### Accession
PXD009696

### Title
Identificatioin of phosphoarginine proteins and sites in Jurkat cells by LC-MS/MS

### Description
Acid and heat lability greatly hindered the study of N-phosphorylation (pArg, pHis and pLys), and limited progresses were focus on prokaryotes since the O-phosphorylation is of high abundance in eukaryotes. To meet the challenge, this paper mainly described the identification of phosphoarginine (pArg) proteins and sites in human Jurkat cells by LC-MS/MS under an optimized proteomic experimental procedure. The optimization included cell stimulation conditions, protein extraction methods and MS/MS fragmentation modes. Under this best procedure， hundreds of pArg proteins and sites were unambiguously identified in Jurkat cells from two biological replicates. GO analysis revealed that the pArg proteins may play an important role in nucleic acid-related functions. Besides, this resource also contains the identification information of pHis and pLys.

### Sample Protocol
The stimulated Jurkat cells were lysed in 8 M urea and cold acetone was added to precipitate the proteins and remove the small molecules with washing steps, then the proteins were tryptically digested. Phosphopeptides were enriched with TiO2 under weakly acidic buffers and were separated by ultra-high performance liquid chromatography and then were measured in duplicate using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) approach in positive mode with CID or EThcD as the activation type.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were processed by Proteome Discoverer™ Software (version 2.1.08) and searched against a combined forward/reversed database of homo sapiens Uniprot Reference Proteome with common contaminants added. SEQUEST (version 27) algorithm was used with the following parameter settings: Precursor mass error tolerance: 10 ppm; Fragment mass error tolerance: 0.5 Da; Enzyme: trypsin; Max. missed cleavages: 3; Variable modifications: acetyl (protein N-terminus), oxidation (M), phosphorylation (S, T, Y, H, K and R); Max. variable PTM per peptide: 4; Fragment ion: b and y ions for CID and b, y, c and z ions for EThcD; Target FDR for proteins, peptides and PSMs: 0.01 (Strict), 0.05 (Relaxed). Phosphopeptide hits were analyzed using ptmRS in phosphoRS node.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteins, Lc-ms/ms, Jurkat, Phosphoarginine, Sites

### Affiliations
Department of Chemical Biology, Key Laboratory for Chemical Biology of Fujian Province, College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Xiamen University, Xiamen 361005, Fujian, China
Department of Chemical Biology, College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, and the Key Laboratory for Chemical Biology of Fujian Province, Xiamen University

### Submitter
Songsen Fu

### Lab Head
Dr Yufen Zhao
Department of Chemical Biology, Key Laboratory for Chemical Biology of Fujian Province, College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Xiamen University, Xiamen 361005, Fujian, China


