### Accession
PXD020157

### Title
Clinical proteomics workflow for high quality quantitative proteome and PTM analysis of biologically relevant FFPE tissue samples

### Description
In recent years, the use of formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissues has increased within cancer research and clinical proteomics. However, the use of FFPE tissues can be demanding due to paraffin embedding and cross-links introduced by the formaldehyde. Here, we developed a workflow implementing efficient paraffin removal and protein extraction from FFPE tissues, followed by optimized digestion using suspension trapping (S-trap), with different clinical proteomics strategies. To gain proteomic depth, the optimized sample preparation protocol was combined with isobaric labeling and applied to three lung adenocarcinoma patient samples. The peptides eluted from the S-trap were labeled with TMT without any desalting step in between. In total, 8,163 proteins were commonly quantified across all channels, and specific proteins related to clinical outcome and histopathological subtype were detected. In addition, we developed a protocol in the S-trap for studying endogenous lysine acetylation stoichiometry using FFPE tonsil tissue. Our method allows identification and localization of lysine acetylation and relative quantification comparison between samples. We could identify 1,839 acetylated peptides belonging to 1,339 protein groups. The results were compared to frozen tissue samples and no notable differences in acetylation pattern were observed. In summary, we present a reproducible sample preparation workflow optimized for FFPE tissues that is easy to scale up using the S-trap 96-well plate. Our results demonstrate compatibility of the S-trap with TMT labeling. And, for the first time, we showed that it is biologically relevant to study endogenous lysine acetylation in FFPE tissues, contributing to a better use of the existing FFPE collections around the world.

### Sample Protocol
The protein extraction was performed with 2 different methods that were later compared. The SDS method was performed by adding 50 µL of extraction buffer per section, 100mM TEAB containing 25mM DTT and 10w/v% SDS, (pH 8). The samples were then incubated at 99˚C for 1 hour with shaking (500 RPM) to induce antigen retrieval and to break the amino acids cross-links. The Urea method started by first incubating the samples with 1 mL of 500mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.6) at 99˚C for 1 hour with shaking (500 RPM) for the antigen retrieval. The samples were then centrifuged to remove the Tris-HCl buffer. Then, 50 µL of extraction buffer 100mM AmBic containing 8M Urea were added per section. The lysates from both methods were then sonicated to reduce viscosity and shear the DNA in the Bioruptor® Plus UCD-300 (Diagenode) for 40 cycles (15 seconds on and 15 seconds off) at 4˚C, followed by a centrifugation at 20,000g at 18˚C for 10 minutes for clarification of the lysate. Proteins extracted with the Urea method were then reduced with 25mM DTT at 37˚C for 1 hour incubation. After extraction and reduction, protein determination was performed using the Pierce 660nm Protein Assay (Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturers’ instructions.The samples were loaded onto the S-trap™ micro spin column, followed by a brief centrifugation at 4,000g for 1.5 minutes. The captured proteins were washed five times with 100 µL of the S-trap binding buffer and centrifuged at 4,000g for 1.5 minutes between each wash. After that, the S-trap column was moved into a new receiver tube. Digestion buffer (50mM TEAB) containing endoproteinase LysC in a 1:50 w/w ratio (enzyme/protein) was added onto the column and incubated at 37˚C for 2 hours. Then, digestion buffer (50mM TEAB) containing Trypsin in a 1:50µg w/w ratio (enzyme/protein) was added on top and the samples were incubated overnight (16 hours) at 37˚C. Next, the peptides were eluted firstly with 40µL of digestion buffer. The second elution was performed with 40µL 0.2% aqueous formic acid, and the final elution consisted of 40µL of 50% acetonitrile containing 0.2% formic acid. The eluted peptides were then acidified with 50% formic acid to a final pH of ~ 3 and dried down in a centrifugal evaporator.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed with Proteome Discoverer 2.2 software (Thermo Scientific) using SEQUEST HT against UniProtKB human database (downloaded 180702, canonical and isoforms). The search implemented the carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues as a static modification; oxidation of methionine and acetylation on protein N-terminus as dynamic modifications; 10 ppm precursor ion tolerance and 0.02 Da fragment ion tolerance. Two missed cleavages were acceptable for tryptic peptides and minimum peptide length was set to six amino acids. The filter High Confidence (FDR q value = 0.01) was applied on peptide and protein levels. The statistical analyses were performed in R (ggplot2), Perseus v1.6.10.43 32,33 and Graphpad Prism v8.3. Additional analyses were performed with the Protein isoelectric point calculator 34 and the GRAVY calculator (http://www.gravy-calculator.de/index.php). The GRAVY-index is a measure of hydrophobicity where proteins with GRAVY-index ≥0 are considered hydrophobic. The human proteome (downloaded 180905, 20,386 sequences excluding isoforms) that was used for comparison were downloaded from Swiss-Prot. PANTHER classification system (http://pantherdb.org/) and the Human Protein Atlas database (http://www.proteinatlas.org) were used for subcellular component analysis35. Group comparison and hierarchical clustering analyses were performed in Qlucore Omics Explorer v3.5. STRING v.11.0 was used for biological analysis of the differentially expressed proteins (https://string-db.org/).

### Publication Abstract
Well-characterized archival formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissues are of much value for prospective biomarker discovery studies, and protocols that offer high throughput and good reproducibility are essential in proteomics. Therefore, we implemented efficient paraffin removal and protein extraction from FFPE tissues followed by an optimized two-enzyme digestion using suspension trapping (S-Trap). The protocol was then combined with TMTpro 16plex labeling and applied to lung adenocarcinoma patient samples. In total, 9585 proteins were identified, and proteins related to the clinical outcome were detected. Because acetylation is known to play a major role in cancer development, a fast on-trap acetylation protocol was developed for studying endogenous lysine acetylation, which allows identification and localization of the lysine acetylation together with quantitative comparison between samples. We demonstrated that FFPE tissues are equivalent to frozen tissues to study the degree of acetylation between patients. In summary, we present a reproducible sample preparation workflow optimized for FFPE tissues that resolves known proteomic-related challenges. We demonstrate compatibility of the S-Trap with isobaric labeling and for the first time, we prove that it is feasible to study endogenous lysine acetylation stoichiometry in FFPE tissues, contributing to better utility of the existing global tissue archives. The MS proteomic data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the data set identifiers PXD020157, PXD021986, and PXD021964.

### Keywords
Lysine acetylation stoichiomtery, Throughput, Lung adenocarcinoma, Clinical proteomics, Tissue, Sample preparation, Ffpe, S-trap, Proteomics, Isobaric labeling, Tmt, Suspension trapping, Mass spectrometry, Cancer

### Affiliations
Div. Clinical Protein Science & Imaging, Dept. of Clinical Sciences (Lund) and Dept. of Biomedical Engineering, Lund University, Lund, Sweden
Lund University

### Submitter
Magdalena Kuras

### Lab Head
Dr Gyorgy Marko-Varga
Div. Clinical Protein Science & Imaging, Dept. of Clinical Sciences (Lund) and Dept. of Biomedical Engineering, Lund University, Lund, Sweden


