### Accession
PXD032796

### Title
A cell cycle kinase-phosphatase module restrains PI3K- Akt activity in an mTORC1-dependent manner

### Description
The AKT-mTOR pathway is a central regulator of cell growth and metabolism. Upon sustained mTOR activity, AKT activity is attenuated by a feedback loop that restrains upstream signaling. However, how cells control the signals that limit AKT activity is not fully understood. Here we show that MASTL/Greatwall, a cell-cycle kinase that supports mitosis by phosphorylating the PP2A/B55 inhibitors ENSA/ARPP19, inhibits PI3K-AKT activity by sustaining mTORC1- and S6K1-dependent phosphorylation of IRS1 and GRB10. Genetic depletion of MASTL results in an inefficient feedback loop and AKT hyperactivity. These defects are rescued by expression of phospho-mimetic ENSA/ARPP19 or inhibition of PP2A/B55 phosphatases. MASTL is directly phosphorylated by mTORC1, thereby limiting the PP2A/B55-dependent dephosphorylation of IRS1 and GRB10 downstream of mTORC1. Downregulation of MASTL results in increased glucose uptake in vitro and increased glucose tolerance in adult mice, suggesting the relevance of the MASTL-PP2A/B55 kinase-phosphatase module in controlling AKT and maintaining metabolic homeostasis.

### Sample Protocol
mTORC1 and S6K1 in vitro kinase assays were performed as detailed above but in the absence of radiolabeled ATP. Samples in 5 M urea were doubly digested using the FASP procedure with some modifications. The resulting peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using an Impact mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics).   To map phosphoresidues on Mastl, endogenous mouse Mastl was immunoprecipitated from mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) using a polyclonal antibody against Mastl (Abgent; AP14289c) crosslinked to Dynabeads Protein A. Cells were extracted in RIPA buffer as indicated above and samples were subjected to mass spectrometry analysis. Protein eluates were doubly digested using the FASP procedure with some modifications. The resulting peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). In addition, samples were subjected to TiO2 enrichment.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched against a Uniprot Homo sapiens database (20,187 sequences) using Andromeda as the search engine through the MaxQuant software. Peptide identifications were filtered by Percolator at 1% FDR using the target-decoy strategy. Label-free quantification was performed and extracted ion chromatograms for MASTL phosphopeptides were manually validated.  To map phosphoresidues on Mastl, Raw files were searched against a UniprotKB/TrEMBL Mus musculus database (UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot/TrEMBL 43,539 sequences) using Sequest-HT as the search engine through the Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific) software. Peptide identifications were filtered by Percolator at 1% FDR using the target-decoy strategy. Label-free quantification was performed with MaxQuant and extracted ion chromatograms for MASTL phosphopeptides were manually validated in Xcalibur 2.2 (Thermo Scientific).

### Publication Abstract
The AKT-mTOR pathway is a central regulator of cell growth and metabolism. Upon sustained mTOR activity, AKT activity is attenuated by a feedback loop that restrains upstream signaling. However, how cells control the signals that limit AKT activity is not fully understood. Here, we show that MASTL/Greatwall, a cell cycle kinase that supports mitosis by phosphorylating the PP2A/B55 inhibitors ENSA/ARPP19, inhibits PI3K-AKT activity by sustaining mTORC1- and S6K1-dependent phosphorylation of IRS1 and GRB10. Genetic depletion of MASTL results in an inefficient feedback loop and AKT hyperactivity. These defects are rescued by the expression of phosphomimetic ENSA/ARPP19 or inhibition of PP2A/B55 phosphatases. MASTL is directly phosphorylated by mTORC1, thereby limiting the PP2A/B55-dependent dephosphorylation of IRS1 and GRB10 downstream of mTORC1. Downregulation of MASTL results in increased glucose uptake in&#xa0;vitro and increased glucose tolerance in adult mice, suggesting the relevance of the MASTL-PP2A/B55 kinase-phosphatase module in controlling AKT and maintaining metabolic homeostasis.

### Keywords
Human, Mouse, Phosphosites, Mastl

### Affiliations
Proteomics Group
Head of Proteomics Unit Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO) Address: Melchor Férnandez Almagro, 3. 28029 Madrid. SPAIN

### Submitter
Pilar Ximenez-Embun

### Lab Head
Dr Javier Muñoz Peralta
Head of Proteomics Unit Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO) Address: Melchor Férnandez Almagro, 3. 28029 Madrid. SPAIN


