### Accession
PXD007977

### Title
Imipramine affects the expression of proteins involved in oxidative stress and immunity in rat primary glial cell culture

### Description
Glial cells (microglia and astrocytes) have recently became appreciated as an important target for antidepressant drugs. Here we report on the results of comprehensive proteomic analysis of the alteration in protein profile of rat primary mixed glial culture exposed to imipramine. Two-dimensional differential in gel electrophoresis method allowed to identify 62 proteins regulated by imipramine hydrochloride. Functional analysis revealed the impact of imipramine on the level of proteins involved in oxidative stress. Imipramine upregulated proteins related to glycolysis but downregulated many mitochondrial proteins also enzymes of oxidative phosphorylation. Moreover, imipramine influenced the proteins engaged in phagocytosis and cell migration. Alteration in the level of large number of structural and plasma membrane associated proteins evidenced a widespread cytoskeleton and membrane rearrangement. Imipramine triggered decrease of mitochondrial membrane potential, impairment of protein synthesis and downregulation of chaperon proteins, what could be related to increased apoptosis. Many imipramine regulated proteins, among them chaperons, cathepsins and annexins are evidenced to be engaged in immunity response. Overall these experimental findings suggest that in response to imipramine, glial cells (mainly microglia) undergo a transition toward more quiescent, metabolically less demanding phenotype.

### Sample Protocol
Spots from 2D DIGE gels were destained, dehydrated in 100% acetonitrile (ACN) and subjected to overnight trypsin digestion at 37oC. Tryptic peptides were extracted from gel plugs, dried by vacuum centrifugation and resuspended in 2% ACN with 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid. Identification of peptides was performed by tandem mass spectrometry using UltiMate 3000RS LCnano-System (Thermo-Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) coupled with micrOTOF-Q II (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany). MS data were acquired by online analysis of peptides eluted with a 30 min gradient from 2% to 40% ACN in 0.05% formic acid/water at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. MS/MS data were acquired in a data dependent manner by targeting 3 precursor ions with 30 s of dynamic exclusion.

### Data Protocol
Obtained raw data were internally recalibrated and analyzed by Data Analysis 4.1 software (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany). The peak lists were searched using an in-house MASCOT server v.2.3.0 (Matrix Science, London, UK) via ProteinScape 3.0 (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) against a non-redundant Swissprot protein database (released February 2015, Rodentia taxonomy restriction, 26301 sequences). The following search parameters were applied: digestion by trypsin with maximum one missed cleavage; precursor and product ions mass tolerance: 20 ppm and 0.05 Da, respectively; carbamidomethyl (C) as fixed modification and oxidation (M), deamidated (NQ), Gln→pyro-Glu (N-termQ), phospho (STY) as variable modifications. Protein identification based on at least two peptides and with score higher than 85 was accepted.

### Publication Abstract
Microglia and astrocytes, two types of glial cells are known to be important targets for antidepressant drugs. Here we used a comprehensive proteomic analysis to examine the effect of imipramine on rat primary mixed glial culture. The two-dimensional differential gel electrophoresis method allowed us to identify 62 proteins that were altered by imipramine. Functional analysis revealed that imipramine influenced the level of proteins involved in oxidative stress; in particular, it elevated the level of glutathione transferases. Imipramine upregulated proteins related to glycolysis but down-regulated many mitochondrial proteins including enzymes involved in oxidative phosphorylation. Mitochondrial dysfunction, especially decrease of mitochondrial membrane potential can be counted as a side effect triggered by imipramine. Imipramine induced lowering of chaperone level and alterations suggesting impaired protein synthesis could be associated with increased apoptosis. One of the most pronounced effect of imipramine is the reduction of vimentin level, this protein is engaged in majority of biological processes which were found to be affected by imipramine. Many imipramine regulated proteins, including chaperones, cathepsins and annexins are involved in immune responses. Additionally, imipramine influenced proteins associated with phagocytosis and cell migration. Overall these findings indicate that imipramine produces complex effect on glial cells, primarily on microglia and suggest their transition towards a more quiescent, metabolically less demanding phenotype.

### Keywords
Imipramine; mixed glial cell culture; microglia; proteome; 2d-dige

### Affiliations
1. Department of Physical Biochemistry, Faculty of Biochemistry, Biophysics and Biotechnology, Jagiellonian University, Krakow, Poland 2. Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, Malopolska Centre of Biotechnology, Jagiellonian University, Krakow, Poland
Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry Core Facility, Malopolska Centre of Biotechnology, Jagiellonian University

### Submitter
Urszula Jankowska

### Lab Head
Dr Sylwia Kędracka-Krok
1. Department of Physical Biochemistry, Faculty of Biochemistry, Biophysics and Biotechnology, Jagiellonian University, Krakow, Poland 2. Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, Malopolska Centre of Biotechnology, Jagiellonian University, Krakow, Poland


