### Accession
PXD003378

### Title
Changes in the Proteome of Xylem Sap in Brassica oleracea in Response to Fusarium oxysporum Stress

### Description
Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. conlutinans (Foc) is a serious root-invading and xylem-colonizing fungus that causes yellowing in Brassica oleracea. To comprehensively understand the interaction between F. oxysporum and B. oleracea, composition of the xylem sap proteome of the non-infected and Foc-infected plants was investigated in both resistant and susceptible cultivars using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) after in-solution digestion of xylem sap proteins. Whole genome sequencing of Foc was carried out and generated a predicted Foc protein database. The predicted Foc protein database was then combined with the public B. oleracea and B. rapa protein databases downloaded from Uniprot and used for protein identification. About 200 plant proteins were identified in the xylem sap of susceptible and resistant plants. Comparison between the non-infected and Foc-infected samples revealed that Foc infection causes changes to the protein composition in B. oleracea xylem sap where repressed proteins accounted for a greater proportion than those of induced in both the susceptible and resistant reactions. The analysis on the proteins with concentration change >=2 fold indicated a large portion of up- and down-regulated proteins were those acting on carbohydrates. Proteins with leucine-rich repeats and legume lectin domains were mainly induced in both resistant and susceptible system, so was the case of thaumatins. Twenty-five Foc proteins were identified in the infected xylem sap and ten of them were cysteine-containing secreted small proteins that are good candidates for virulence and/or avirulence effectors. The findings of differential response of protein contents in the xylem sap between the non-infected and Foc-infected samples as well as the Foc candidate effectors secreted in xylem provide valuable insights into B. oleracea-Foc interactions.

### Sample Protocol
Commercial cabbage F1 cultivars, YCR-Rinen (Nippon Norin Seed Co., Japan) and Delicious (Watanabe Seed Co., Japan) resistant and susceptible to Fusarium-wilt, respectively, were used in this study. YCR-Rinen contains the fusarium-wilt resistant gene (Foc-Bo1), while Delicious does not (Shimizu et al., 2015). Four-week old plants were transplanted into Foc-infected or non-infected soil. Xylem sap collection was carried out 12 dpi when the susceptible plants show disease symptoms. Xylem sap collection was carried out according to the method reported by Buhtz et al. (2004). In-gel digestion followed by MS analysis identified the protein for each selected band. Proteins of interest were excised from silver stained gel and de-staining. Gel pieces were soaked in trypsin solution and incubation at 37 °C for 16 hour to digest after dehydration with acetonitrile. The resulting peptides were desalted using C18 stage tips. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a QSTAR XL mass spectrometer (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA).

### Data Protocol
To identify the sequence of peptides, peak lists were created using Analyst QS software. The obtained MS and MS/MS data were used for database searches using MASCOT Version 2.4.1 (Matrix Science, London, UK). The search parameters were as follows: trypsin digestion with two missed cleavages permitted, variable modifications (oxidation of methionine, carbamidomethylation of cysteine and propionamidation of cysteine), peptide mass tolerance for MS data ± 0.5 Da, and fragment mass tolerance ± 0.5 Da.

### Publication Abstract
Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. conlutinans (Foc) is a serious root-invading and xylem-colonizing fungus that causes yellowing in Brassica oleracea. To comprehensively understand the interaction between F. oxysporum and B. oleracea, composition of the xylem sap proteome of the non-infected and Foc-infected plants was investigated in both resistant and susceptible cultivars using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) after in-solution digestion of xylem sap proteins. Whole genome sequencing of Foc was carried out and generated a predicted Foc protein database. The predicted Foc protein database was then combined with the public B. oleracea and B. rapa protein databases downloaded from Uniprot and used for protein identification. About 200 plant proteins were identified in the xylem sap of susceptible and resistant plants. Comparison between the non-infected and Foc-infected samples revealed that Foc infection causes changes to the protein composition in B. oleracea xylem sap where repressed proteins accounted for a greater proportion than those of induced in both the susceptible and resistant reactions. The analysis on the proteins with concentration change &gt; = 2-fold indicated a large portion of up- and down-regulated proteins were those acting on carbohydrates. Proteins with leucine-rich repeats and legume lectin domains were mainly induced in both resistant and susceptible system, so was the case of thaumatins. Twenty-five Foc proteins were identified in the infected xylem sap and 10 of them were cysteine-containing secreted small proteins that are good candidates for virulence and/or avirulence effectors. The findings of differential response of protein contents in the xylem sap between the non-infected and Foc-infected samples as well as the Foc candidate effectors secreted in xylem provide valuable insights into B. oleracea-Foc interactions.

### Keywords
Brassica oleracea, Proteomics, F. oxysporum f. sp. conglutinans, Xylem sap

### Affiliations
Professor, Niigata U. Faculty of Agriculture, Lab. of Plant Breeding 2-8050 Ikarashi, Nishi-ku, Niigata 950-2181, Japan Tel   +81-25-262-6615 Fax  +81-25-262-6854 E-mail :okazaki@agr.niigata-u.ac.jp　
Niigata University

### Submitter
Daniel Shea

### Lab Head
Dr Keiichi Okazaki
Professor, Niigata U. Faculty of Agriculture, Lab. of Plant Breeding 2-8050 Ikarashi, Nishi-ku, Niigata 950-2181, Japan Tel   +81-25-262-6615 Fax  +81-25-262-6854 E-mail :okazaki@agr.niigata-u.ac.jp　


