### Accession
PXD031408

### Title
Extracellular endosulfatase Sulf-2 harbors a chondroitin/dermatan sulfate chain that modulates its enzyme activity

### Description
Sulfs represent a class of unconventional sulfatases, which differ from all other members of the sulfatase family by their structures, catalytic features and biological functions. Through their specific endosulfatase activity in extracellular milieu, Sulfs provide an original post-synthetic regulatory mechanism for heparan sulfate complex polysaccharides and have been involved in multiple physiopathological processes, including cancer. However, Sulfs remain poorly characterized enzymes, with major discrepancies regarding their in vivo functions. Here we show that human Sulf-2 (HSulf-2) features a unique polysaccharide post-translational modification. We identified a chondroitin/dermatan sulfate glycosaminoglycan (GAG) chain, attached to the enzyme substrate binding domain. We found that this GAG chain affects enzyme/substrate recognition and tunes HSulf-2 activity in vitro and in vivo using a mouse model of tumorigenesis and metastasis. In addition, we showed that mammalian hyaluronidase acted as a promoter of HSulf-2 activity by digesting its GAG chain. In conclusion, our results highlight HSulf-2 as a unique proteoglycan enzyme and its newly-identified GAG chain as a critical non-catalytic modulator of the enzyme activity. These findings contribute in clarifying the conflicting data on the activities of the Sulfs and introduce a new paradigm into the study of these enzymes.

### Sample Protocol
The mass spectrometry was performed at The Proteomics Core Facility at Sahlgrenska Academy, Gothenburg University. LC-MS/MS identification of Hsulf-2 GAG chain and its attachment site The glycoproteomics protocol used for characterizing proteoglycans has been published earlier (Noborn et al., Mol. Cell. Proteomics, 2015, 41-49) and most recently summarized in detail for analyses of CS proteoglycans of human cerebrospinal fluid (Noborn et al Methods in Molecular Biology, in press). In the present work, the starting material was purified, recombinant HSulf-2 WT and HSulf-2ΔSG overexpressed in HEK293 cells. Additionally, we analyzed with the same technique in conditioned cell media, without fetal calf serum, obtained from SH-SY5Y cells kindly provided by Drs. Thomas Daugbjerg-Madsen and Katrine Schjoldager, University of Copenhagen, Denmark.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS identification of Hsulf-2 GAG chain and its attachment site. The glycoproteomics protocol used for characterizing proteoglycans has been published earlier (Noborn et al., Mol Cell Proteomics, 2015) and most recently summarized in detail for analyses of CS proteoglycans of human cerebrospinal fluid (Noborn et al Methods in Molecular Biology, in press).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteoglycan, Sulfatase, Post-translational modifications, Enzyme, Glycosaminoglycan

### Affiliations
SAMBIO Core Facilities, Sahgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, CEA, IBS, Grenoble, France

### Submitter
Proteomics Core Facility

### Lab Head
Dr Romain R. Vivès
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, CEA, IBS, Grenoble, France


