### Accession
PXD011555

### Title
A ¨omic¨ approach to Pyrocystis lunula

### Description
Pyrocystis lunula (Schutt) is a photoautotrophic unarmoured dinoflagellate, commonly found in marine environments. Today it exist several biotechnological applications derived from the bioluminescent system of this species. From a post-genomic perspective, and in order to study the whole proteome of P. lunula, a ¨omic¨ approach (transcriptomic-proteomic analysis) was initiated using fresh microalgae samples.  A total of 80.875.390 reads were generated (400.000 conting, XXX pb) and 17.461 peptides were detected, getting 3.182 protein identification hits. The identified proteins were categorized according to functional description and gene ontology classification.  In this study, it has been developed and described the first proteomic analysis of the microalgae P. lunula. In addition to shed light on a series of important factors involved with the processes of regulation of gene expression. The presence of the luciferin-binding protein (LBP), which had not been described so far in Pyrocystis, is highlighted.

### Sample Protocol
The mechanical lysis of the samples was made with a Minilys® homogenizer. The protein precipitation was carried out using a previously described phenol-based procedure by Liñero et al., 2016. All the assays were performed in triplicate. Once the protein extracts from P. lunula were obtained, the protein concentration was estimated by fluorometric measurement using Qubit System ® (Thermo Fisher, Inc.). Only those changes consistently present in the extracts of the three replicates were considered. Proteomic analysis was made by LC-MS. Firstly; a cleanup process was carried out to prevent the LC column collapse consequence of the high salt concentration present in the samples. Tryptic peptides were separated using HPLC in reverse phase C18 using a nano-LC linked to an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed in the mode “Data Dependent Acquisition” with resolution of 120K in Orbitrap and identifying Top30 precursor ions by Dual Pressure Linear Ion trap. The KEGG Automatic Annotation Server was employed to map KEGG pathways of assigned   orthologs. KEGG orthology (KO) assignments were performed based on the bi-directional best hit (BHH) of BLAST. Functional annotation of the gene ontology (GO) terms was done using the BLAST2GO program.

### Publication Abstract
Pyrocystis lunula (Schutt) is a photoautotrophic dinoflagellate without armored form, frequently found in marine environments. Today, there are several biotechnological applications derived from the bioluminescent system of this species. From a post-genomic perspective, in order to have a starting point for studying the proteome of P. lunula, an "omics" approach (transcriptomics-proteomics) was assessed using fresh microalgae samples. A total of 80,874,825 raw reads were generated (11,292,087,505&#x202f;bp; 55.82% GC) by mRNA sequencing. Very high-quality sequences were assembled into 414,295 contigs (219,203,407&#x202f;bp; 55.38% GC) using Trinity software, generating a comprehensive reference transcriptome for this species. Then, a P. lunula proteome was inferred and further employed for its analysis on this species. A total of 17,461 peptides were identified, yielding 3182 protein identification hits, including 175 novel proteins. The identified proteins were further categorized according to functional description and gene ontology classification. SIGNIFICANCE: The major contribution of the present work is making available a reference transcriptome and proteome of P. lunula, that is now accessible for the research community, and a functional description of the 3182 proteins inferred from the transcriptome, including 175 novel proteins, which have already been deposited in the ProteomeXchange and NCBI SRA databases, respectively. In addition to this, a series of important factors related to the bioluminescent system and the regulation of gene expression, were identified and described.

### Keywords
Pyrocystis lunula, Transcriptomics, Bioluminiscence, Proteomics, Lbp

### Affiliations
University of Cadiz
Microbiology department, IVAGRO, UCA

### Submitter
Francisco Fernández-Acero

### Lab Head
Dr Francisco Javier Fernández Acero
Microbiology department, IVAGRO, UCA


