### Accession
PXD041434

### Title
Unravelling the molecular mechanism underlying drought stress response in chickpea via integrated multi-omics analysis

### Description
This study was aimed to deal with a comparative proteome analysis of the two chickpea genotypes with contrasting response to drought stress, ICC 4958 (drought-tolerant, DT) and ICC 1882 (drought-sensitive, DS). Proteins were extracted from the root tissues collected from the control and drought stressed plants of both the genotypes. NanoLC-MS/MS analysis of the protein sample was performed using EASY-nLC 1000 system for the separation and identification of peptides/proteins. This study provided a mechanistic insight of drought stress tolerance in chickpea.

### Sample Protocol
Grounded root tissue (~1 g) for each sample (in three biological replicates) was suspended into 3 ml of extraction buffer (pH, 8.0) [Tris-HCl (500 mM), EDTA (50 mM), sucrose (700 mM), KCl (100 mM), β-mercaptoethanol (2 %) and phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (1 mM)], vortexed briefly and incubated in ice for 10 min. An equal volume of Tris-HCl saturated phenol (pH, 6.6¬¬–7.9) was added to the sample and kept at room temperature for 10 min. Samples were centrifuged at 12,000 g for 10 min at 4 °C and upper phenolic phase was recovered carefully into a new tube. The phenolic phase was once again extracted with 3 ml of extraction buffer as described above. Following centrifugation, the upper phase was carefully recovered and transferred into a new tube. Afterwards, 4 volumes of precipitation solution (0.1 M ammonium acetate in cold methanol) was added. The properly mixed solution was incubated overnight at -20 °C. Finally, total proteins were pelleted down by centrifugation at 5500 g for 10 min at 4 °C. The protein pellet was dissolved in solubilization buffer [Tris-HCl (1.5 M, pH 8.0) and urea (8 M)] and the solubilized protein sample was used for nanoLC-MS/MS analysis. Each protein sample (25 µl) was reduced using 5 mM tris (2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) followed by alkylation with iodoacetamide (50 mM) and digestion with trypsin (1:50 of trypsin/lysate ratio) for 16 h at 37 °C. Digested samples were cleaned using C18 silica cartridge to remove the salts and dried using speed vacuum. Dried protein pellet was resuspended in solubilization buffer A [acetonitrile (5%) and formic acid (0.1 %)]. NanoLC-MS/MS analysis of the solubilized protein sample was performed using EASY-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to Thermo Q-Exactive equipped with nanoelectrospray ion source by the commercial service provider (Valerian Chem Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi). About 1.0 µg of the digested protein (peptides) was resolved using 60 cm Viper column (360 µm outer diameter, 75 µm inner diameter, 10 µm tip) filled with 3.0 µm of C18-resin. Further, peptides were loaded with buffer A (5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) and eluted with 0 – 40 % gradient of buffer B [acetonitrile (95 %) and formic acid (0.1 %)] at a flow rate of 300 nl/min for 100 min.

### Data Protocol
The raw data was analyzed for qualitative and quantitative proteome using MaxQuant (MQ) (version 1.6.14.0) (Tyanova et al., 2016). The collected spectra of all peptides were searched against all the annotated protein sequences (28,269) in the reference chickpea genome (Varshney et al., 2013a) to identify its corresponding proteins using Andromeda, a peptide search engine (Cox et al., 2011). The protease used to generate peptides was set as enzyme specificity for trypsin/P. The estimated false discovery rate (FDR) of all peptide and protein identifications was set to 1 %. The mass tolerance was kept to 7 ppm for precursor and fragment ions. Two missed cleavage values were allowed and the minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids. The label-free method was used for protein quantification with classic type normalization and minimum ratio count of two. MQ provided the MS/MS spectrum details of all the identified peptides. Both unique and razor peptides were used for the identification of proteins, and protein quantification (abundance) was referred to their intensities. Differential abundance analysis of proteins was performed using edgeR for DT(D/C), DS(D/C) and DT(C)/DS(C) comparisons. Proteins with log2 fold change of ≥ 1 (up-regulated) and ≤ -1 (down-regulated) and p-value ≤ 0.05 were considered as differentially abundant.

### Publication Abstract
Drought stress affects growth and productivity significantly in chickpea. An integrated multi-omics analysis can provide a better molecular-level understanding of drought stress tolerance. In the present study, comparative transcriptome, proteome and metabolome analyses of two chickpea genotypes with contrasting responses to drought stress, ICC 4958 (drought-tolerant, DT) and ICC 1882 (drought-sensitive, DS), was performed to gain insights into the molecular mechanisms underlying drought stress response/tolerance. Pathway enrichment analysis of differentially abundant transcripts and proteins suggested the involvement of glycolysis/gluconeogenesis, galactose metabolism, and starch and sucrose metabolism in the DT genotype. An integrated multi-omics analysis of transcriptome, proteome and metabolome data revealed co-expressed genes, proteins and metabolites involved in phosphatidylinositol signaling, glutathione metabolism and glycolysis/gluconeogenesis pathways, specifically in the DT genotype under drought. These stress-responsive pathways were coordinately regulated by the differentially abundant transcripts, proteins and metabolites to circumvent the drought stress response/tolerance in the DT genotype. The <i>QTL-hotspot</i> associated genes, proteins and transcription factors may further contribute to improved drought tolerance in the DT genotype. Altogether, the multi-omics approach provided an in-depth understanding of stress-responsive pathways and candidate genes involved in drought tolerance in chickpea.

### Keywords
Chickpea; drought; proteome; nanolc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi, India
Jawaharlal Nehru University

### Submitter
Mukesh Jain

### Lab Head
Dr Mukesh Jain
Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi, India


