### Accession
PXD029318

### Title
Phosphoproteomic analysis of Hemin- and Erastin-induced neuronal death

### Description
Analysis of the differences in phosphorylation in two ferroptosis subtypes (Hemin vs classical erastin-induced ferroptosis) in neurons, and sensitivity of these changes in phosphorylation levels to treatment with ferroptosis suppressor and MEK inhibitor U0126.

### Sample Protocol
Primary cortical neurons (107 cells) were treated with 1) vehicle, 2) 5µM erastin for 7 hours, 3) 5µM erastin + 10µM U0126 for 7hours, 4) 100µM hemin for 5 hours, 5) 100µM hemin + 10 µM U0126 for 5hours. Three biological replicates with each two technical replicates for each group were used. After the treatment, the cells were washed with PBS, centrifuged at 150g, and stored at -80°C until use. For digestion, pellets were thawed and resuspended in 50 µl 8 M urea in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer with phosphatase inhibitors (2 µl of Sigma Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktails 2 and 3) at 4 C, and homogenized using a probe sonicator. Aliquots containing 230 µg of protein were treated with 8.8 mM dithiothreithol (DTT) at 56 C for 15 minutes, followed by a 30-minute incubation at room temperature in the dark with 15mM iodoacetamide. We then diluted the samples 4-fold with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate to reduce urea concentration to 2M, and then added 2% (W/W) modified trypsin and the samples were incubated 12hours at 37ºC. After that, another aliquot of trypsin was added (2% w/w) and digested for additional 6 hours. After this, we acidified the samples with formic acid to a final concentration of 5%. The digests were then desalted using a MAX-RP Sep Pak ® classic C18 cartridge (Waters) following the manufacturer’s protocol. Sep Pak eluates were dried-evaporated in preparation for labeling with TMTProTM-16 label plex reagents. For Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) labeling, we resuspended the samples in 40µl 0.5M triethylammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0. Dried samples were labeled according to TMTProTM-16 label plex kit instructions  TMT labeled tryptic digests were enriched in phophopeptides using a a TiO2 column at a flow rate of 2 ml/min. The column was then washed for 2 minutes with 35% MeCN, 200mM NaCl, 0.4 % TFA to remove non phosphorylated peptides. We eluted the phosphopeptides from the column using 1M potassium phosphate monobasic (KH2PO4) at a flow rate of 0.5ml/min for 30 minutes directly onto an on-line coupled C18 macrotrap peptide column (Michrom Bioresources, Auburn, CA). This column was washed with 5% MeCN, 0.1% TFA for 14 minutes and the adsorbed material was eluted in 400µl of 50% MeCN, 0.1% TFA at a flow rate of 0.25ml/min. The eluate was solvent evaporated and then resuspended in 240ul 20mM ammonium formiate pH 10.4 for fractionation of the peptide mixture by high pH reverse phase chromatography utilizing a Phenomenex Gemini 5u C18 110A 150 x 4.60 mm column, operating at a flow rate of 0.550 µl/min. Buffer A consisted of 20 mM ammonium formate (pH10.4) , and buffer B consisted of 20 mM ammonium formate in 90% acetonitrile (pH10.4). Gradient details were as follows: 1% to 9% B in 3.6 minutes, 9% B to 49% B in 36.3 minutes, 49% B to 70% B in 2.7minutes, 7 % B back down to 1 % B in 1.8 minutes. 50 peptide-containing fractions were collected, evaporated and resuspended in 0.1 % formic acid combining early and late chromatographic fractions into 28 samples. Samples from reverse phase fractionation were run onto a 2µm, 75mm ID x 50cm PepMap RSLC C18 EasySpray column (Thermo Scientific). 3-hour acetonitrile gradients (2–30 % in 0.1 % formic acid) were used to separate peptides, at a flow rate of 300 nl/min, for analysis in a Orbitrap Lumos Fusion (Thermo Scientific) in positive ion mode. We acquired MS spectra between 375 and 1500m/z with a resolution of 120000. For each MS spectrum, multiply charged ions over the selected threshold (2E4) were selected for MS/MS in cycles of 3seconds with an isolation window of 0.7m/z. Precursor ions were fragmented by HCD using stepped relative collision energies of 30, 35 and 40 in order to ensure efficient generation of sequence ions as well as TMT reporter ions. MS/MS spectra were acquired in centroid mode with resolution 50000 from m/z=110. A dynamic exclusion window was applied which prevented the same m/z from being selected for 30s after its acquisition.

### Data Protocol
Peak lists were generated using PAVA in-house software (Guan, S., Price, J.C., Prusiner, S.B., Ghaemmaghami, S., and Burlingame, A.L. (2011). Mol Cell Proteomics 10, M111 010728.). All generated peak lists were searched against the mouse subset of the SwissProt database (SwissProt.2019.07.31), using Protein Prospector (Clauser, K.R., Baker, P., and Burlingame, A.L. (1999). Analytical chemistry 71, 2871-2882) with the following parameters: Enzyme specificity was set as trypsin, and up to 2 missed cleavages per peptide were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues, and TMTPro16plex labeling of lysine residues and N-terminus of the protein were allowed as fixed modifications. N-acetylation of the N-terminus of the protein, loss of protein N-terminal methionine, pyroglutamate formation from of peptide N-terminal glutamines, oxidation of methionine and phosphorylation on serine, threonine and tyrosine were allowed as variable modifications. Mass tolerance was 10ppm in MS and 30ppm in MS/MS. We estimated the false positive rate by searching the data using a concatenated database which contains the original SwissProt database as well as a version of each original entry where the sequence has been randomized. A 1 % false discovery rate was permitted at the protein and peptide level. For quantitation, only unique peptides were considered; peptides common to several proteins were not used for quantitative analysis. Relative quantization of peptide abundance was performed via calculation of the intensity of reporter ions corresponding to the different TMT labels, present in MS/MS spectra. Intensities were determined by Protein Prospector.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Hemin, Erastin, Ferroptosis, Tmt, U0126

### Affiliations
UCSF
Professor of Chemistry and Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Director Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Resource Center and Editor-in-chief, Molecular and Cellular Proteomics

### Submitter
Juan Oses-Prieto

### Lab Head
Dr Alma L Burlingame
Professor of Chemistry and Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Director Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Resource Center and Editor-in-chief, Molecular and Cellular Proteomics


