### Accession
PXD009030

### Title
Proteome-based new insights into dimethyl sulfide metabolism of Hyphomicrobium denitrificans

### Description
To get further insights in the dimethyl sulfide metabolism of Hyphomicrobium denitrificans, a LC-MS proteomic approach was used. The total protein of three biological replicates of H. denitrificans grown on dimethyl sulfide was compared with three biological replicates grown on dimethylamine. This approach resulted in the identification of several new proteins with a potential involvement in dimethyl sulfide degradation.

### Sample Protocol
Peptide preparation Cleared lysates with were subjected to in solution preparation of peptides on centrifugal filter units. In brief, solutions containing 50 µg protein were loaded onto centrifugal filter units with a 10 kDa cutoff modified PES membrane (Pall Filtersystems, Crailsheim, Germany). The buffer was exchanged with 20 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB). Proteins were reduced with 20 mM dithiothreitol at 55°C for 20 min and thiol groups were alkylated with 40 mM acrylamide for 30 min at room temperature. After another buffer exchange 0.5 µg trypsin was added in 20 mM TEAB, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate (SDC) in a total volume of 50 µl. Digestion proceeded overnight at 37°C. Peptides were collected in the filtrate and SDC was precipitated with TFA (0.5% final). Remaining SDC was removed by phase transfer with equal volume of ethyl acetate. Peptides were vacuum concentrated, redissolved in 20 mM TEAB, and labeled with isobaric TMTsixplex reagents (Thermo Fisher Darmstadt, Germany). Peptides were pooled and desalted on Oasis HLB cartridges (Waters GmbH, Eschborn, Germany). Eluates containing 70% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid (FA) were dried and fractionated to 12 fractions by isoelectric point with an Offgel fractionator (Agilent Technologies, Waldbronn, Germany). Peptide fractions were dried and stored at -20°C. LC-MS measurements  Peptides were dissolved in 8 µl 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). 0.5 µl were injected onto a C18 trap column (20 mm length, 100 µm inner diameter, ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 5 µm, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) made in-house. Bound peptides were eluted onto a C18 analytical column (200 mm length, 75 µm inner diameter, ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm) equilibrated with 0.1% formic acid in water. Peptides were separated during a linear gradient from 4% to 35% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) within 120 min at 250 nl/min. The nanoHPLC was coupled online to an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Peptide ions between 330 and 1600 m/z were scanned in the Orbitrap detector with a resolution of 30,000 (maximum fill time 400 ms, AGC target 106). The 22 most intense precursor ions (threshold intensity 5000) were subjected to higher energy collision induced dissociation (stepped collision energy, 3 steps, width 10, normalized energy 42%) and fragments analyzed in Orbitrap. Fragmented peptide ions were excluded from repeat analysis for 17 s. Lock mass was 445.12002 Da.

### Data Protocol
Raw data processing and analysis of database searches were performed with Proteome Discoverer software 2.1.1.21 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide identification was done with an in house Mascot server version 2.5.1 (Matrix Science Ltd, London, UK). MS2 data were searched against Hyphomicrobium denitrificans strain ATCC 51888 sequences of Trembl (release 2016_10). Precursor Ion m/z tolerance was 10 ppm, fragment ion tolerance 0.02 Da. Tryptic peptides with up to two missed cleavages were searched. Propionamide on cysteines and TMT on N-terminus and lysine were set as static modifications. Oxidation was allowed as dynamic modification of methionine, acetylation as modification of the N-terminus. Mascot results were assigned posterior error probabilities (PEP) by the percolator algorithm version 2.05 as implemented in Proteome Discoverer. Spectra with identifications below 1% PEP were sent to a second round of database search with semitryptic enzyme specificity (one missed cleavage allowed) and dynamic propionamide modification. Other parameters were the same as the first round search. Proteins were included if at least two peptides were identified with <1% FDR. FDR’s were 1.6% (peptide spectrum matches, PSMs), 4.0% (peptides) and 0.9% (proteins). Only PSMs with co-isolation<30% and unique peptides were used for quantification. Statistical analyses were performed with packages in R on proteins that contained intensities in all three replicates per group. Intensities were log2 transformed and median normalized to ensure the applicability of the statistical test. Pearson correlation coefficients were calculated between all samples of one strain and showed high correlation within one group. Two different statistical tests were used to identify significant changes in protein abundance (limma and Rank Product [Schwämmle et al. 2013, doi:10.1021/pr400045). The resulting p-values were corrected for multipe testing using the method according to the same publication as above. Up- and downregulation of proteins were considered with a significance level of 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Dimethylsulfide (DMS) plays a globally significant role in carbon and sulfur cycling and impacts Earth's climate because its oxidation products serve as nuclei for cloud formation. While the initial steps of aerobic DMS degradation and the fate of its carbon atoms are reasonably well documented, oxidation of the contained sulfur is largely unexplored. Here, we identified a novel pathway of sulfur compound oxidation in the ubiquitously occurring DMS-degrader Hyphomicrobium denitrificans X<sup>T</sup> that links the oxidation of the volatile organosulfur compound with that of the inorganic sulfur compound thiosulfate. DMS is first transformed to methanethiol from which sulfide is released and fully oxidized to sulfate. Comparative proteomics indicated thiosulfate as an intermediate of this pathway and pointed at a heterodisulfide reductase (Hdr)-like system acting as a sulfur-oxidizing entity. Indeed, marker exchange mutagenesis of hdr-like genes disrupted the ability of H. denitrificans to metabolize DMS and also prevented formation of sulfate from thiosulfate provided as an additional electron source during chemoorganoheterotrophic growth. Complementation with the hdr-like genes under a constitutive promoter rescued the phenotype on thiosulfate as well as on DMS. The production of sulfate from an organosulfur precursor via the Hdr-like system is previously undocumented and provides a new shunt in the biogeochemical sulfur cycle. Furthermore, our findings fill a long-standing knowledge gap in microbial dissimilatory sulfur metabolism because the Hdr-like pathway is abundant not only in chemoheterotrophs, but also in a wide range of chemo- and photolithoautotrophic sulfur oxidizers acting as key players in global sulfur cycling.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Hyphomicrobium denitrificans, Dimethyl sulfide, Dissimilatory sulfur metabolism

### Affiliations
Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical Faculty, University of Bonn
Institute of Microbiology and Biotechnology, University of Bonn

### Submitter
Marc Sylvester

### Lab Head
Dr Christiane Dahl
Institute of Microbiology and Biotechnology, University of Bonn


