### Accession
PXD016835

### Title
The antimalarial natural product salinipostin A identifies essential alpha/beta serine hydrolases involved in lipid metabolism in P. falciparum parasites

### Description
Salinipostin A (Sal A) is a bicyclic phosphotriester natural product isolated from the marine bacterium Salinospora sp. that exhibits potent antimalarial activity. However, the direct targets and mechanisms by which it exerts its effects are poorly understood. Here, we use semi-synthesis to generate a Sal A-derived activity-based probe, enabling the identification of its targets in the human malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum. All of the identified proteins contain an / serine hydrolase domain and several have been reported as essential for growth of the parasite. One of the essential targets is an uncharacterized protein (PF3D7_1038900, referred to as PfMAGLLP) that displays a high degree of homology to human monoacylglycerol lipase (MAGL). Recombinant expression of this protein confirms that it processes lipid esters as well as a bona fide MAGL acylglyceride substrate. PfMAGLLP is potently inhibited by Sal A, as well as by human MAGL inhibitors and by the anti-obesity drug Orlistat that disrupts lipid metabolism and induces a similar death phenotype in parasites as Sal A. Resistance selection studies with Sal A yielded parasites that showed only a mild reduction in sensitivity. Multiple whole-genome sequenced Sal A-selected clones displayed nonsynonymous mutations in a gene coding for a putative PRELI domain-containing protein (PF3D7_1324400) related to a mitochondrial protein linked to multidrug resistance in Toxoplasma gondii. Together, these data suggest that the antimalarial activity of Sal A results from inhibition of multiple essential serine hydrolases, leading to disruption of lipid metabolism pathways. The combination of the non-essentiality of many of these serine hydrolases in humans and the lack of parasite resistance pathways to fully overcome inhibitor treatment suggest that this class of enzymes represent promising targets for development of next-generation antimalarial agents.

### Sample Protocol
P. falciparum W2 cultures (3 x 125 mL) were grown to 23% parasitemia at a ratio of 1:1 rings:trophozoites, and treated with either vehicle (DMSO), 1 M Sal alk, or 1 M Sal A, for 2 hours at 37°C with slow shaking. For the 1 M Sal A treatment, 1 M Sal alk was added after the initial 2 hour incubation and the flask was returned to the incubator for an additional 2 hours. Parasites were harvested by saponin lysis. Parasite pellets were lysed in 50 mM TEOA, 4% SDS, 150 mM NaCl, pH 7.4 and quantified. Two milligrams of total protein per technical replicate (n=3) was subjected to a click reaction in 500 L total volume by addition 20 L CuSO4, 60 L TBTA, 20 L 5 mM biotin azide, and 20 L TCEP and rotating at room temperature for 2.5 hours. amples were centrifuged (6500 g, 4 min, 4 °C) and the supernatant was discarded. The pellets were resuspended in cold methanol by sonication (2x) and then were solubilized in DPBS containing 1.2% SDS via sonication and heating (90 °C, 5 min). A final SDS concentration of 0.2% was achieved after addition of 5 mL of DPBS to the SDS-solubilized proteome samples. The solution was incubated overnight at 4 °C with 100 μL of streptavidin-agarose beads (ThermoFisher, washed 3X with DPBS to remove storage buffer). Samples were rotated at 22 °C for 2 hr before being washed by 5 mL 0.2 % SDS/DPBS, 3 X 5 mL DPBS, and 3 X 5 mL water. The beads were pelleted by centrifugation (1400 X g, 3 min) between washes. The washed beads were suspended in 500 µL of 6 M urea/DPBS and 10 mM DTT (from 20X stock in water) and heated for 20 min on a 65 °C heat block. Upon addition of iodoacetamide (20 mM from 50X stock in water), samples were allowed to react at 37 °C for 30 min while shaking. Following reduction and alkylation, the beads were pelleted by centrifugation and resuspended in 200 μL of 2 M urea/DPBS, 1 mM CaCl2 (100X stock in water), and sequencing-grade trypsin (2 μg). The bead digestion occured overnight at 37 °C while shaking. Next day, the beads were pelleted by centrifugation and washed with 2 X 50 μL water. The washes were combined with the supernatant from the trypsin digestion step, and after addition of formic acid (15 μL) to each sample, they were stored at -20 °C until mass spectrometry analysis.   LC/LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on an LTQ-Orbitrap Discovery mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher) coupled to an Agilent 1200 series HPLC. Peptide digests were pressure loaded onto a 250 μm fused silica desalting column packed with 4 cm of Aqua C18 reverse phase resin (Phenomenex). The peptides were eluted onto a biphasic column (100 μm fused silica with a 5 μ, tip, packed with 10 cm C18 and 4 cm Partisphere strong cation exchange resin (SCX, Whatman) using a gradient 5-100% Buffer B in Buffer A (Buffer A: 95% water, 5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid; Buffer B: 20% water, 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). The peptides were then eluted from the SCX onto the C18 resin and into the mass spectrometer using 4 salt steps previously described.4 The flow rate through the column was set to ~0.25 μL/min and the spray voltage was set to 2.75 kV. One full MS scan (FTMS) (400-1800 MW) was followed by 8 data dependent scans (ITMS) of the nth most intense ions.

### Data Protocol
The tandem MS data were searched using the SEQUEST algorithm using a concatenated target/decoy variant of the plasmodium falciparum database. A static modification of +57.02146 on cysteine was specified to account for alkylation by iodoacetamide. MS2 spectra matches were assembled into protein identifications and filtered using DTASelect2.0 to generate a list of protein hits with a peptide false-discovery rate of 5%.

### Publication Abstract
Salinipostin A (Sal A) is a potent antiplasmodial marine natural product with an undefined mechanism of action. Using a Sal A-derived activity-based probe, we identify its targets in the Plasmodium falciparum parasite. All of the identified proteins contain &#x3b1;/&#x3b2; serine hydrolase domains and several are essential for parasite growth. One of the essential targets displays a high degree of homology to human monoacylglycerol lipase (MAGL) and is able to process lipid esters including a MAGL acylglyceride substrate. This Sal A target is inhibited by the anti-obesity drug Orlistat, which disrupts lipid metabolism. Resistance selections yielded parasites that showed only minor reductions in sensitivity and that acquired mutations in a PRELI domain-containing protein linked to drug resistance in Toxoplasma gondii. This inability to evolve efficient resistance mechanisms combined with the non-essentiality of human homologs makes the serine hydrolases identified here promising antimalarial targets.

### Keywords
Salinipostin a, Serine hydrolase

### Affiliations
Boston College
Associate Professor

### Submitter
Eranthie Weerapana

### Lab Head
Dr Eranthie Weerapana
Associate Professor


