### Accession
PXD023034

### Title
An Unbiased Strategy for Selecting Effective Combinations of Therapeutic Targets Supports the Development of a Novel Bispecific Antibody with Tumor-Suppressing Properties

### Description
Recent progress in dissecting molecular mechanisms essential for the survival and propagation of cancer cells triggered rapid development of targeted therapies. Although many of these therapies produce impressive initial responses in tumor suppression, the onset of resistance is practically unavoidable. One of the main approaches for preventing this refractory condition relies on the development of effective combination therapies. Unfortunately, selection of optimal targets for combinatorial treatments is often confounded by limitations in our understanding of tumor biology. Here, we describe an unbiased comprehensive strategy that combines ex-vivo shRNA-based genome wide screening, proteomic profiling using BioID and patient tumor sequencing data analyses to overcome current challenges in identifying the best fit co-targeting agents. Integrating these strategies, we selected EGFR and EPHA2 receptors as molecules of choice for co-targeting in cancer cells, and generated a bispecific fully humanized anti-EGFR/EPHA2 antibody with druggable bioanalytical properties that very effectively suppresses tumor growth compared to its prototype therapeutic anti-EGFR antibody, cetuximab. Despite the overactivation of EGFR signaling in multiple malignancies, the therapeutic applicability of cetuximab is limited due to frequent resistance and could benefit from being used in a combination with another targeted compound. Our analysis indicates that EGFR and EPHA2 expression positively correlate in various cancer types and thus, are available for co-targeting in most tumors. Therefore, our work not only presents an efficient unbiased strategy for selecting optimal targets for combination therapies, but also describes a novel bispecific antibody, which has a high potential for being developed into a new clinically-relevant biologics effective in a broad variety of malignancies.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets from four 150 mm dishes were lysed in RIPA buffer (50 mM tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, 1% NP-40, 0.1% SDS, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate) supplemented with protease inhibitors (1 mM PMSF, 10 μg.ml-1 aprotinin, 10 μg.ml-1 leupeptin,10 μg.ml-1 pepstatin) and 250 U of benzonase. Following 1h incubation with agitation, lysates were sonicated on ice using three 10 s bursts with 2 s rest in between and centrifuged 30 min at 20 000 g. Cleared supernatants were further incubated with streptavidin agarose beads (Sigma-Aldrich) for 3h with agitation at 4°C. Beads were washed three times with lysis buffer, followed by two washes with 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4). Proteins were eluted with 50 mM phosphoric acid, three times for 10min and stored at -80°C. Eluted proteins were digested with Promega Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as described (PMID: 27581032). The resulting peptides were desalted using StageTips (PMID: 17703201) and dried down by vacuum centrifugation prior to LC-MS/MS analyses. Dried peptides were resuspended in 15 µl of loading solvent (2% acetonitrile, 0.05% TFA), and 5 µl was used for injection onto a 300 µm inner diameter x 5 mm C-18 Pepmap cartridge precolumn (Dionex / Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 20 µl/min in loading solvent. After 5 min of desalting, the precolumn was switched online with a 75 μm inner diameter x 50 cm separation column packed with 3 μm ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ resin (Dr. Maisch HPLC GmbH) equilibrated in 95% solvent A (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) and 5% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). Peptides were separated and eluted over a 90 min gradient of 5% to 40% solvent B at 300 nl/min flow rate generated by an UltiMate™ 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex / Thermo Fisher Scientific) and analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The Orbitrap Fusion was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode with the XCalibur software version 3.0.63 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Survey MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap on the 350 to 1800 m/z range using an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 4e5, a maximum injection time of 50 ms and a resolution of 120,000. The most intense ions per each survey scan were isolated using the quadrupole analyzer in a window of 1.6 m/z and selected for Higher energy Collision-induced Dissociation (HCD) fragmentation with 35% collision energy. The resulting fragments were detected by the linear ion trap at a rapid scan rate with an AGC target of 1e4 and a maximum injection time of 50ms. Dynamic exclusion was employed within a period of 20 s and a tolerance of 10 ppm to prevent selection of previously fragmented peptides. All MS/MS peak lists were generated using Thermo Proteome Discoverer version 2.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
MGF sample files were then analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.5.1). Mascot was set up to search UniProt Homo Sapiens database (April 2018 release, 93683 entries) supplemented with “common contaminants” from the Global Proteome Machine (GPM, thegpm.org, July 2017 release) and in house generated BissonN_flags dataset, assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin. Mascot was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.60 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10 ppm. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine and phospho of serine, threonine and tyrosine were specified in Mascot as variable modifications. Two miscleavages were allowed. Scaffold (version 4.11.0, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 91.0% probability to achieve an FDR less than 1.0% by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability to achieve an FDR less than 1.0% and contained at least 2 identified peptides.  Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (PMID: 14632076). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. To distinguish background contaminants and non-specific interactions from bona fide protein associations, MS data was analyzed with SAINTexpress, a simplified version of the Significance Analysis of INTeractome method (PMID: 24513533) via the CRAPome website. The SAINTexpress probability value of each potential protein-protein interaction compared to background contaminants was calculated using default parameters. The three control samples were used in uncompressed mode.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bispecific anti-egfr/epha2 antibody; epha2 receptor; bioid; proximity proteomics

### Affiliations
Centre de recherche du Centre Hospitalier Universitaire (CHU) de Quebec-Université Laval, Québec, QC, Canada Centre de recherche sur le cancer de l’Université Laval, Québec, QC, Canada PROTEO-Quebec Network for Research on Protein Function, Engineering, and Applications, Québec, QC, Canada Department of Molecular Biology, Medical Biochemistry and Pathology, Université Laval, Québec, QC, Canada
Institut de recherches cliniques de Montréal - McGill University

### Submitter
Sara Luiza Banerjee

### Lab Head
Dr Nicolas Bisson
Centre de recherche du Centre Hospitalier Universitaire (CHU) de Quebec-Université Laval, Québec, QC, Canada Centre de recherche sur le cancer de l’Université Laval, Québec, QC, Canada PROTEO-Quebec Network for Research on Protein Function, Engineering, and Applications, Québec, QC, Canada Department of Molecular Biology, Medical Biochemistry and Pathology, Université Laval, Québec, QC, Canada


