### Accession
PXD021089

### Title
greenCUT&RUN: a rapid and efficient genome profiling approach for transcription and chromatin regulatory proteins

### Description
Chromatin modifiers, transcription factors and cofactors regulate gene expression through engagement with chromatin and DNA, which can be detected by a variety of genomic techniques. Here, we describe a novel method ‘greenCUT&RUN’ for genome-wide profiling of transcription regulatory factors, which has higher sensitivity, resolution, accuracy and reproducibility than existing methods, whilst assuring specificity as assessed for the gene specific transcription factors NFY and c-FOS, and for the basal transcription factor TBP. Our strategy begins with tagging the protein of interest with GFP and utilizes a GFP-specific nanobody fused to MNase to profile genome-wide binding events. Since the nanobody targets GFP, the greenCUT&RUN approach eliminates dependency on protein-specific antibodies, which makes it widely applicable. To examine, if GFP-tagged proteins form complex with known interactors and GFP did not interfere in the formation of protein complex, mass spectrometry was performed.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa cells were seeded in 15-cm dishes (Greiner Cellstar) and grown to 70-80% confluence prior to induction with 1µg/ml doxycycline for 22 h. GFP-protein expression was verified using ZOE fluorescence microscopy (Biorad). Next, induced cells were harvested and nuclear and cytoplasmic extracts were obtained using a modified version of the Dignam procedure. Protein concentrations were determined by Bradford assay (BioRad). 1 mg of nuclear extract was used for GFP-affinity purification as described. In short, protein lysates were incubated in binding buffer (20 mM Hepes-KOH pH 7.9, 300 mM NaCl, 20% glycerol, 2 mM MgCl2, 0.2 mM EDTA, 0.1% NP-40, 0.5 mM DTT and 1x Roche protease inhibitor cocktail) on a rotating wheel for 1 h at 4oC in triplicates with GBP-coated agarose beads (Chromotek) or control agarose beads (Chromotek). The beads were washed two times with binding buffer containing 0.5% NP-40, two times with PBS containing 0.5% NP-40, and two times with PBS. On-bead digestion of bound proteins was performed overnight in elution buffer (100 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 2 M urea, 10 mM DTT) with 0.1 µg/ml of trypsin at RT and eluted tryptic peptides were bound to C18 stagetips (ThermoFischer, USA) prior to mass spectrometry analysis. Tryptic peptides were eluted from the C18 stage tips in H2O:acetonitril (35:65) and dried prior to resuspension in 10% formic acid. A third of this elution was analyzed by nanoflow-LC-MS/MS with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer coupled to an Easy nano-LC 1200 HPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The flow rate was 300 nl/min, buffer A was 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid and buffer B was 0.1 % formic acid in 80 % acetonitrile. A gradient of increasing organic proportion was used in combination with a reversed phase C18 separating column (2 µm particle size, 100 angstron pore size, 25 cm length, 50 µm i.d., Thermo Fisher Scienitific). Each MS can was followed by a maximum of 10 MS/MS scans in the data dependent mode with 90 min total analysis time. Blank samples consisting of 10% formic acid were run for 45 min between GFP and non-GFP samples, to avoid carry-over between runs.

### Data Protocol
The raw data files were analyzed with MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3.30) using Uniprot human FASTA database. Label-free quantification values (LFQ) and match between run options were selected. Intensity based absolute quantification (iBAQ) algorithm was also activated for subsequent relative protein abundance estimation. The obtained protein files were analyzed by Perseus software (MQ package, version 1.5.4.0 for NFYA, version 1.6.12 for FOS).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hela, Nanobody, Gfp-tagged proteins, Enhancer, Nfya, Fos, Affinity purification

### Affiliations
German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), partner site Freiburg
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ)
Foundation under Public Law
c/o Department of Urology
Zentrale Klinische Forschung (ZKF)
Medical Center-University of Freiburg
Breisacher Str. 66, 79106 Freiburg, Germany
1. German Cancer Consortium (DKTK) partner site Freiburg, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), 69120 Heidelberg, Germany 2. Department of Urology, Medical Center-University of Freiburg, 79106 Freiburg, Germany

### Submitter
Marc Timmers

### Lab Head
Dr H. Th. Marc Timmers
1. German Cancer Consortium (DKTK) partner site Freiburg, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), 69120 Heidelberg, Germany 2. Department of Urology, Medical Center-University of Freiburg, 79106 Freiburg, Germany


