### Accession
PXD008893

### Title
Filamin C domain 18-21 in vitro kinase assay

### Description
In vitro kinase assay with human filamin C domain 18-21 recombinantly expressed in E.coli, purified by Ni2+-NTA beads and incubated with PKC alpha, Akt or a combination of both to identify kinase specific phosphorylation sites.

### Sample Protocol
Recombinantly expressed and purified mouse and human FLNc d18-21 WT was dialyzed overnight at 4°C in dialysis buffer (1 mM DTT, 100 mM KCl, 20 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 10 mM MgCl2). For MS-coupled kinase assays, H2O was added to 100 g protein to a total volume of 200 l and mixed with 10 x kinase buffer (NEB, Frankfurt, Germany). The assay was started by adding 200 ng Akt (Proteinkinase, Kassel, Germany) and/or 200 ng PKC (Sigma-Aldrich) in the presence of 1x PKC lipid activator (Merck Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany). The reaction was carried out for 20 min at 30°C and 200 rpm. One tenth of each of the three independent replicates was used for gel-based analyses. The remaining sample was diluted 1:4 (v/v) with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and subjected to in-solution digestion using sequencing grade trypsin (1:50) (Promega) for 3.5 h at 42°C and 200 rpm on a thermoshaker. Single protein digests were acidified with TFA [final concentration 1% (v/v)], subjected to TiO2-based phosphopeptide enrichment, and analyzed by LC-MS/MS using MSA, HCD and ETD fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
For analysis of MS data from in vitro kinase assays, raw files were processed using Andromeda embedded in MaxQuant 1.5.5.1 and searched against the sequences of human FLNc d18-21 using the UniProt ProteomeSet E.coli database (release 01.2018, 4,326 protein entries) as background for FDR calculation. Precursor and fragment mass tolerances were set to 10 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. Search parameters were as follows: proteolytic enzyme: trypsin, max. number of missed cleavages: 2,  variable modifications: methionine oxidation and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine. MaxQuant msms.txt files, all raw files and the FLNc d18-21 sequence were imported into Skyline 2.6.0 (MacLean et al, 2010). MS1 intensities were calculated as described (Schilling et al, 2012) using the MS1 filtering tutorial provided by the software developers. Skyline peptide settings were as follows: tryptic peptides with 1 missed cleavage, a time window of 3 min, min. and max. peptide length 8 and 30 aa, respectively, exclusion of cysteine-containing peptides, phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine and oxidation of methionine as variable modifications, and max. number of variable modifications and neutral losses 3 and 1, respectively. Orbitrap default parameters were used for transition settings. Extracted ion chromatograms of  imported peptides were manually inspected for correct peak picking and peak integration was manually adjusted, if necessary. Total MS1 areas for all peptides with more than 6 MS/MS spectra, a mass error of ≤ 3 ppm were exported into a pivot table and processed using Excel2010 and Origin 9.1. Mean and standard error of the mean (SEM) were first calculated for the three biological replicates and subsequently for technical replicates. Intensities of all phosphopeptides were summed separately for human and mouse FLNc isoforms and phosphopeptides were normalized by the respective calculated summed intensity.

### Publication Abstract
The PI3K/Akt pathway promotes skeletal muscle growth and myogenic differentiation. Although its importance in skeletal muscle biology is well documented, many of its substrates remain to be identified. We here studied PI3K/Akt signaling in contracting skeletal muscle cells by quantitative phosphoproteomics. We identified the extended basophilic phosphosite motif RxRxxp[S/T]xxp[S/T] in various proteins including filamin-C (FLNc). Importantly, this extended motif, located in a unique insert in Ig-like domain 20 of FLNc, is doubly phosphorylated. The protein kinases responsible for this dual-site phosphorylation are Akt and PKC&#x3b1;. Proximity proteomics and interaction analysis identified filamin A-interacting protein 1 (FILIP1) as direct FLNc binding partner. FILIP1 binding induces filamin degradation, thereby negatively regulating its function. Here, dual-site phosphorylation of FLNc not only reduces FILIP1 binding, providing a mechanism to shield FLNc from FILIP1-mediated degradation, but also enables fast dynamics of FLNc necessary for its function as signaling adaptor in cross-striated muscle cells.

### Keywords
Pkcalpha, Pkb, Filamin c, Akt, In vitro kinase assay

### Affiliations
AG Warscheid
Biologie II
Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg
Schänzlestr. 1
79104 Freiburg
Germany

Department of Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Institute of Biology II, Faculty of Biology and BIOSS Centre for Biological Signalling Studies, University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany

### Submitter
Friedel Drepper

### Lab Head
Dr Bettina Warscheid
Department of Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Institute of Biology II, Faculty of Biology and BIOSS Centre for Biological Signalling Studies, University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany


