### Accession
PXD003158

### Title
Effects of the antibacterial compund Allicin from garlic on Escherichia coli

### Description
Allicin (diallyl thiosulfinate) from garlic is a highly potent natural antimicrobial substance. It inhibits growth of a variety of microorganisms, among them antibiotic resistant strains. Here, we show that upon exposure to allicin, growth of Escherichia coli is strongly inhibited. Growth inhibition coincides with a significant drop of total sulfhydryl concentrations and induction of the heat shock and oxidative stress response. In contrast to diamide, a potent inducer of disulfide stress, allicin does not induce cystine bond formation in proteins such as cytoplasmically expressed alkaline phosphatase PhoA. We identified and quantified the allicin-induced modification S-allylmercapto-cysteine for a set of cytoplasmic proteins by using a combination of label-free mass spectrometry and differential OxICAT labeling. Activity of isocitrate lyase AceA, an S-allylmercapto-modified candidate protein, is largely inhibited by allicin treatment in vivo. Our results indicate that the mode of action of allicin is a combination of disturbance of the redox balance and inactivation of crucial metabolic enzymes.

### Sample Protocol
Radioactive labeling of newly synthesized proteins and subsequent separation of the cytosolic proteome by two-dimensional polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (2D-PAGE) was performed as previously described. In short, 5 mL (radioactive gels) or 10 mL (non-radioactive gels) of an E. coli MG1655 culture in MOPS minimal medium were exposed to 0.79 mM of allicin in the early exponential growth phase. After 10 minutes, cells were pulse-labeled with [35S]-L-methionine for 5 min. Precursor incorporation was stopped by inhibition of protein biosynthesis by addition of 1 mg mL-1 chloramphenicol and an excess of non-radioactive methionine. Cells were harvested by centrifugation, washed three times with TE buffer (100 mM Tris/1mM EDTA, pH 7.5), and disrupted by ultrasonication. Protein (55 µg for analytical, 300 µg for preparative gels) was loaded onto 24 cm immobilized pH gradient strips (pH 4-7, GE Healthcare, Uppsala, Sweden) by passive rehydration for 18 hours. Proteins were separated in a first dimension by isoelectric focusing and in a second dimension by SDS-PAGE using 12.5 % acrylamide gels. Gels were stained with 0.003 % ruthenium(II) Tris(4,7-diphenyl-1,10-phenan- trolin disulfonate) (RuBPs) and imaged as described earlier. Analytical (radioactive) gels were dried and exposed to storage phosphor screens prior to scanning.

### Data Protocol
Analytical gels of controls and allicin-treated samples were merged using Decodon Delta 2D image analysis software (Decodon, Greifswald, Germany). The 25 spots with the highest expression level on gels with proteins after allicin treatment were selected for protein identification. 21 of them were found on non-radioactive gels and were excised for mass spectrometric identification. Protein spots were identified by nanoUPLC-ESI-MS/MS as previously reported using a Synapt G2-S HDMS mass spectrometer equipped with a lock spray source for electrospray ionization and a ToF detector.

### Publication Abstract
Allicin (diallyl thiosulfinate) from garlic is a highly potent natural antimicrobial substance. It inhibits growth of a variety of microorganisms, among them antibiotic-resistant strains. However, the precise mode of action of allicin is unknown. Here, we show that growth inhibition of Escherichia coli during allicin exposure coincides with a depletion of the glutathione pool and S-allylmercapto modification of proteins, resulting in overall decreased total sulfhydryl levels. This is accompanied by the induction of the oxidative and heat stress response. We identified and quantified the allicin-induced modification S-allylmercaptocysteine for a set of cytoplasmic proteins by using a combination of label-free mass spectrometry and differential isotope-coded affinity tag labeling of reduced and oxidized thiol residues. Activity of isocitrate lyase AceA, an S-allylmercapto-modified candidate protein, is largely inhibited by allicin treatment in vivo Allicin-induced protein modifications trigger protein aggregation, which largely stabilizes RpoH and thereby induces the heat stress response. At sublethal concentrations, the heat stress response is crucial to overcome allicin stress. Our results indicate that the mode of action of allicin is a combination of a decrease of glutathione levels, unfolding stress, and inactivation of crucial metabolic enzymes through S-allylmercapto modification of cysteines.

### Keywords
S-allylmercapto modification, Cysteine, Allicin, Escherichia coli

### Affiliations
Ruhr-Universität Bochum Institute for Biochemistry and Pathobiochemistry Microbial Biochemistry Universitätsstrasse 150 44780 Bochum, Germany
Ruhr-Universität Bochum

### Submitter
Lars Leichert

### Lab Head
Dr Lars I Leichert
Ruhr-Universität Bochum Institute for Biochemistry and Pathobiochemistry Microbial Biochemistry Universitätsstrasse 150 44780 Bochum, Germany


