### Accession
PXD028619

### Title
MacAB-TolC, a determinant of solid-liquid biofilms in Acinetobacter baumannii

### Description
Acinetobacter baumannii has emerged as one of the most problematic opportunist bacterial pathogen responsible for hospital-acquired and community infections worldwide. Besides its high capacities to acquire antibiotic resistance mechanisms, it also presents high adhesion abilities on inert and living surfaces leading to biofilm development, a lifestyle conferring an additional protection against various treatments, and allowing it to persist for long periods in various hospital niches. Due to their increasing resilience to antimicrobial treatments, A. baumannii biofilms are difficult to control and ultimately eradicate. Overcoming the significant challenges pose by A. baumannii require fundamental insights into mechanisms involved in the development of mature biofilm and thus, may help to develop novel strategies for biofilm prevention and control. To unravel critical determinants of this sessile lifestyle, we compared the proteome profiles of bacteria grown in planktonic stationary phase with those of two A. baumannii strains (ATCC 17978 and SDF), harboring specific features regarding biofilm formation, grown in mature solid-liquid (S-L) biofilm using a proteomic quantitative study. Of interest, among the 69 common proteins determinants accumulated in the two strains at the S-L interface, we sorted out the MacAB-TolC system. This tripartite efflux pump appears to play a role in A. baumannii biofilm formation as demonstrated by using ΔmacAB-tolC deletion mutant. Complementary approaches allowed us to get an overview of the impact of macAB-tolC deletion in A. baumannii physiology. Indeed, this efflux pump appeared to be involved in the envelope stress response occurring in mature biofilm and contributes to maintain WT membrane rigidity as well as tolerance to high osmolarity conditions. In addition, this system is probably involved in the maintenance of iron and sulfur homeostasis. MacAB-TolC might help this pathogen facing and adapting to biofilm architecture which is heterogeneous in space and time, especially in mature biofilm. Increasing our knowledge of A. baumannii biofilm formation will undoubtedly help us develop new therapeutic strategies to tackle this emerging threat to human health.

### Sample Protocol
1/ Planktonic (1-day) and biofilm growth (1-day and 4-day) of both strains Acinetobacter baumannii ATCC 17978 et  SDF 2/ Protein extraction in presence of inhibitors 3/ Tryptic digestion of protein extracts 4/ NanoLC-MS/MS Analyses

### Data Protocol
Protein quantification: Label free experiment was performed. Briefly, after MS analysis, raw data were imported and analysed in Progenesis LC-MS software.  For comparison, one sample was set as a reference and the retention times of all other samples within the experiment were aligned. After alignment and normalization, statistical analysis was performed for one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) calculations. For quantitation, peptide features presenting a p-value and a q-value less than 0.05, and a power greater than 0.8_were retained. MS/MS spectra from selected peptides were exported for peptide identification with Mascot (Matrix Science) against the database restricted to A. baumannii ATCC 17978 containing 4071 protein sequences (http://www.genoscope.cns.fr/). Database searches were performed with the following parameters: 1 missed trypsin cleavage site allowed; variable modifications: carbamidomethylation of cysteine and oxidation of methionine. Peptides with scores above identity threshold (score > 14) were considered and re-imported into Progenesis. For each growth condition, the total cumulative abundance of the protein was calculated by summing the abundances of peptides. Proteins identified with less than 2 peptides were discarded. Only the proteins which varied by 2-fold in these average normalized abundances between growth conditions were retained. In this study, protein expressions in one stain in 1-day and 4-day biofilm states were compared to planktonic state or protein expressions in ATCC 17978 WT were compared to mutant strain, both only in 4-day biofilm.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Acinetobacter baumannii</i> has emerged as one of the most problematic bacterial pathogens responsible for hospital-acquired and community infections worldwide. Besides its high capacity to acquire antibiotic resistance mechanisms, it also presents high adhesion abilities on inert and living surfaces leading to biofilm development. This lifestyle confers additional protection against various treatments and allows it to persist for long periods in various hospital niches. Due to their remarkable antimicrobial tolerance, <i>A. baumannii</i> biofilms are difficult to control and ultimately eradicate. Further insights into the mechanism of biofilm development will help to overcome this challenge and to develop novel antibiofilm strategies. To unravel critical determinants of this sessile lifestyle, the proteomic profiles of two <i>A. baumannii</i> strains (ATTC17978 and SDF) grown in planktonic stationary phase or in mature solid-liquid (S-L) biofilm were compared using a semiquantitative proteomic study. Of interest, among the 69 common proteins determinants accumulated in the two strains at the S-L interface, we sorted out the MacAB-TolC system. This tripartite efflux pump played a role in <i>A. baumannii</i> biofilm formation as demonstrated by using &#x394;<i>macAB-tolC</i> deletion mutant. Complementary approaches allowed us to get an overview of the impact of <i>macAB-tolC</i> deletion in <i>A. baumannii</i> physiology. Indeed, this efflux pump appeared to be involved in the envelope stress response occurring in mature biofilm. It contributes to maintain wild type (WT) membrane rigidity and provides tolerance to high osmolarity conditions. In addition, this system is probably involved in the maintenance of iron and sulfur homeostasis. MacAB-TolC might help this pathogen face and adapt to deleterious conditions occurring in mature biofilms. Increasing our knowledge of <i>A. baumannii</i> biofilm formation will undoubtedly help us develop new therapeutic strategies to tackle this emerging threat to human health.

### Keywords
Edna, Solid-liquid interface, Biofilm, Envelop stress response, Efflux pump

### Affiliations
Université de Rouen - laboratoire PBS
Equipe BRICS, Laboratoire PBS UMR 6270 CNRS, Université de Rouen

### Submitter
Julie Hardouin

### Lab Head
Dr Emmanuelle Dé
Equipe BRICS, Laboratoire PBS UMR 6270 CNRS, Université de Rouen


