### Accession
PXD029712

### Title
AMOXICILLIN HAPTENATION OF α-ENOLASE

### Description
Allergic reactions to antibiotics are a major concern in the clinic, with almost 15% of the patients presenting with adverse reactions against β-lactam antibiotics. One of the mechanisms involved in this outcome is the modification of proteins by covalent binding of the drug (haptenation). Hence, the interest in identifying the corresponding serum and cellular protein targets. Importantly, haptenation susceptibility and extent can be modulated by the context, including factors affecting protein conformation or the occurrence of other posttranslational modifications. We previously identified the glycolytic enzyme α-enolase as a target for haptenation by amoxicillin, both in cells and in the extracellular milieu. Here, we performed an in vitro study to analyze amoxicillin haptenation of α-enolase using gel-based and activity assays. Moreover, the possible interplay or interference of amoxicillin haptenation with acetylation was also studied in 1D- and 2D-gels that showed decreased haptenation and displacement of the haptenation signal to lower pI spots upon chemical acetylation, respectively. Mass spectrometry identified lysine 239 as the amoxicillin target residue on α enolase, thus suggesting a selective haptenation under our conditions. The amoxicillin binding site and the surrounding interactions were investigated using the α-enolase crystal structure and molecular docking. Altogether, the results obtained provide the basis for the design of novel diagnostic tools or approaches in the study of amoxicillin-induced allergic reactions.

### Sample Protocol
Analysis of the haptenated proteins by 1D-electrophoresis was carried out on 10% SDS-PAGE gels after denaturation for 5 min at95oC in Laemmli buffer.For identification of the modified amino acid(s), the protein was excised from SDS-PAGE gels and digested with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) and chymotrypsin (Roche ) as previously reported by Degani et al. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.redox.2016.12.017]. . The peptide sample was diluted with trifluoroacetic acid 0.1% (v/v) concentration and five microliter of the peptide solution was injected into a PicoFritTM column (Halo, C18, 2.7 m 100 Å, 75 m i.d. x 10 cm, New Objective) connected to an Ultimate 300 RSLCnano System (Dionex) and eluted at 300 nl/min. The chromatography system was connected to a LTQ Orbitrap mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Detection of modified peptides and modified residues was performed by means of Proteome Discoverer software (version 2.2.0.338, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA), implemented with the SEQUEST algorithm designed to match experimental full and tandem mass spectra with theoretical ones obtained from in silico digestion of the -enolase sequence (Uniprot P06733). Trypsin and chymotrypsin were selected as cleavage proteases, allowing a maximum of 2 missed cleavages; carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification (+57.02147), whereas oxidation of methionine was allowed as a variable modification, along with a potential mass shift due to adduction of the amoxicilloyl group mainly on lysine residues.

### Publication Abstract
Allergic reactions to antibiotics are a major concern in the clinic. <i>&#xdf;</i>-lactam antibiotics are the class most frequently reported to cause hypersensitivity reactions. One of the mechanisms involved in this outcome is the modification of proteins by covalent binding of the drug (haptenation). Hence, interest in identifying the corresponding serum and cellular protein targets arises. Importantly, haptenation susceptibility and extent can be modulated by the context, including factors affecting protein conformation or the occurrence of other posttranslational modifications. We previously identified the glycolytic enzyme <i>&#x3b1;</i>-enolase as a target for haptenation by amoxicillin, both in cells and in the extracellular milieu. Here, we performed an <i>in vitro</i> study to analyze amoxicillin haptenation of <i>&#x3b1;</i>-enolase using gel-based and activity assays. Moreover, the possible interplay or interference between amoxicillin haptenation and acetylation of <i>&#x3b1;</i>-enolase was studied in 1D- and 2D-gels that showed decreased haptenation and displacement of the haptenation signal to lower pI spots after chemical acetylation of the protein, respectively. In addition, the peptide containing lysine 239 was identified by mass spectrometry as the amoxicillin target sequence on <i>&#x3b1;</i>-enolase, thus suggesting a selective haptenation under our conditions. The putative amoxicillin binding site and the surrounding interactions were investigated using the <i>&#x3b1;</i>-enolase crystal structure and molecular docking. Altogether, the results obtained provide the basis for the design of novel diagnostic tools or approaches in the study of amoxicillin-induced allergic reactions.

### Keywords
Β-lactam antibiotics; protein modification by drugs; mass spectrometry;  posttranslational modifications; acetylation; allergic responses to drugs

### Affiliations
Bio-pharmaceutical Analysis Lab; Department of Pharmaceutical Science; University of Milan; Milan, Italy
University of Milan (DISFARM)

### Submitter
Alessandra Altomare

### Lab Head
Dr Alessandra Altomare
Bio-pharmaceutical Analysis Lab; Department of Pharmaceutical Science; University of Milan; Milan, Italy


