### Accession
PXD037129

### Title
Impact of mannosylation on structure and functionality of ER and Golgi

### Description
Many proteins undergo glycosylation in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and the Golgi apparatus. Altered glycosylation can manifest in serious, sometimes fatal malfunctions. We recently showed that mutations in the cytoplasmic protein GDP-mannose pyrophosphorylase A (GMPPA) cause a syndrome characterized by alacrima, achalasia, mental retardation and myopathic alterations. GMPPA acts as feedback inhibitor of GDP-mannose pyrophosphorylase B (GMPPB), which provides GDP-mannose as a substrate for protein glycosylation. Loss of GMPPA enhances incorporation of mannose into glycochains of various proteins, including α-dystroglycan (α-DG), a protein that links the extracellular matrix with the cytoskeleton. Here, we show that loss of GMPPA affects the functionality of the Golgi apparatus using different approaches. First, we show a fragmentation of the Golgi apparatus in skeletal muscle fibers and in neurons of GMPPA KO mice. A major reorganization is also evident by mass spectrometry of KO tissues with a regulation of several ER- and Golgi-resident proteins. We further show that loss of GMPPA increases the retention of α-DG in the ER. Notably, mannose supplementation can mimic changes in ER and Golgi structure and function in WT cells. In summary, our data underline the importance of a balanced mannose homeostasis for structure and function of the secretory pathway.

### Sample Protocol
For proteomics analysis, samples were sonicated (Bioruptor Plus, Diagenode, Belgium) for 10 cycles (30 sec ON/60 sec OFF) at high setting, at 20 °C, followed by boiling at 95°C for 5 min. Reduction was followed by alkylation with iodoacetamide (IAA, final concentration 15 mM) for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Protein amounts were estimated following an SDS-PAGE gel of 10 µL of each sample against an in-house cell lysate of known quantity. 30 µg of each sample was taken along for digestion. Proteins were precipitated overnight at -20 °C after addition of 8x volume of ice-cold acetone. The following day, the samples were centrifuged at 20800x g for 30 min at 4 °C and the supernatant carefully removed (Eppendorf 5810R, Eppendorf AG, Germany). Pellets were washed twice with 300 µL ice-cold 80% (v/v) acetone in water then centrifuged at 20800x g at 4 °C for 10 min. After removing the acetone, pellet were air-dried before addition of 25 µL of digestion buffer (1M Guanidine, 100 mM HEPES, pH 8). Samples were resuspended with sonication as explained above, then LysC (Wako) was added at 1:100 (w/w) enzyme:protein ratio and digestion proceeded for 4 h at 37 °C under shaking (1000 rpm for 1 h, then 650 rpm). Samples were then diluted 1:1 with MilliQ water and trypsin (Promega) added at at 1:100 (w/w) enzyme:protein ratio. Samples were further digested overnight at 37 °C under shaking (650 rpm). The day after, digests were acidified by the addition of TFA to a final concentration of 10% (v/v), heated at 37 °C and then desalted with Waters Oasis® HLB µElution Plate 30 µm (Waters Corporation, MA, USA) under a soft vacuum following the manufacturer instruction. Briefly, the columns were conditioned with 3x100 µL solvent B (80% (v/v) acetonitrile; 0.05% (v/v) formic acid) and equilibrated with 3x100 µL solvent A (0.05% (v/v) formic acid in Milli-Q water). The samples were loaded, washed 3 times with 100 µL solvent A, and then eluted into 0.2 mL PCR tubes with 50 µL solvent B. The eluates were dried down using a speed vacuum centrifuge (Eppendorf Concentrator Plus, Eppendorf AG, Germany) . Dried samples were stored at -20°C until analysis.

### Data Protocol
Approximatively 1μg of reconstituted were separated using a nanoAcquity UPLC (Waters, Milford, MA) was coupled online to the MS. Peptide mixtures were separated in trap/elute mode, using a trapping (nanoAcquity Symmetry C18, 5 μm, 180 μm × 20 mm) and an analytical column (nanoAcquity BEH C18, 1.7 μm, 75 μm x 250 mm). The outlet of the analytical column was coupled directly to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometers (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) using the Proxeon nanospray source. Solvent A was water, 0.1% formic acid and solvent B was acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. The samples were loaded with a constant flow of solvent A, at 5 μL/min onto the trapping column. Trapping time was 6 min. Peptides were eluted via the analytical column with a constant flow of 300 nL/min. During the elution step, the percentage of solvent B increased in a nonlinear fashion from 0% to 40% in 90 min. Total runtime was 120min, including cleanup and column re-equilibration. The peptides were introduced into the mass spectrometer via a Pico-Tip Emitter 360 µm OD x 20 µm ID; 10 µm tip (New Objective) and a spray voltage of 2.2 kV was applied. The capillary temperature was set at 300 °C. The RF lens was set to 30%. Full scan MS spectra with mass range 350-1650 m/z were acquired in profile mode in the Orbitrap with resolution of 120,000 FWHM. The filling time was set at maximum of 20 ms with an AGC target of 5 x 105 ions. DIA scans were acquired with 34 mass window segments of differing widths across the MS1 mass range. The HCD collision energy was set to 30%. MS/MS scan resolution in the Orbitrap was set to 30,000 FWHM with a fixed first mass of 200m/z after accumulation of 1x 106 ions or after filling time of 70ms (whichever occurred first). Data were acquired in profile mode. For data acquisition and processing Tune version 2.1 and Xcalibur 4.1 were employed.  Spectronaut (v. 13, Biognosys AG).  DIA data were then uploaded and searched against this spectral library in Spectronaut.  Relative quantification was perfomed in the software for each pairwise comparison using the replicates from each condition.  The data (candidate table) and data reports were then exported as tables and further data analysis and visualization were performed with R-studio (version 0.99.902) using in-house pipelines and scripts.

### Publication Abstract
Proteins of the secretory pathway undergo glycosylation in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and the Golgi apparatus. Altered protein glycosylation can manifest in serious, sometimes fatal malfunctions. We recently showed that mutations in GDP-mannose pyrophosphorylase A (GMPPA) can cause a syndrome characterized by alacrima, achalasia, mental retardation, and myopathic alterations (AAMR syndrome). GMPPA acts as a feedback inhibitor of GDP-mannose pyrophosphorylase B (GMPPB), which provides GDP-mannose as a substrate for protein glycosylation. Loss of GMPPA thus enhances the incorporation of mannose into glycochains of various proteins, including &#x3b1;-dystroglycan (&#x3b1;-DG), a protein that links the extracellular matrix with the cytoskeleton. Here, we further characterized the consequences of loss of GMPPA for the secretory pathway. This includes a fragmentation of the Golgi apparatus, which comes along with a regulation of the abundance of several ER- and Golgi-resident proteins. We further show that the activity of the Golgi-associated endoprotease furin is reduced. Moreover, the fraction of &#x3b1;-DG, which is retained in the ER, is increased. Notably, WT cells cultured at a high mannose concentration display similar changes with increased retention of &#x3b1;-DG, altered structure of the Golgi apparatus, and a decrease in furin activity. In summary, our data underline the importance of a balanced mannose homeostasis for the secretory pathway.

### Keywords
Golgi network; endoplasmic reticulum; mannosylation

### Affiliations
Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital Jena, Germany
Leibniz Institute on Ageing Fritz Lipmann Institute Jena

### Submitter
Emilio Cirri

### Lab Head
Dr Christian A. Hübner
Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital Jena, Germany


