### Accession
PXD030337

### Title
Migration of Acanthamoeba through Legionella biofilms is regulated by bacterial quorum sensing, effectors and the flagellum

### Description
Legionella pneumophila is a Gram-negative, environmental bacterium, which causes the life-threatening pneumonia Legionnaires’ disease. The facultative intracellular bacterium forms biofilms and employs the Icm/Dot type IV secretion system (T4SS) to replicate in amoebae and macrophages. The Legionella quorum sensing (Lqs) system and the transcription factor LvbR form a regulatory network controlling various traits, including bacterial motility, virulence and biofilm architecture. Here we show by comparative proteomics that in biofilms formed by L. pneumophila mutant strains lacking LvbR or the response regulator LqsR, proteins encoded by the 133 kb fitness island and components of the flagellum (FlaA) are downregulated. Confocal microscopy revealed that the ∆lqsR or ∆flaA mutant strains formed biofilms of the same patchy morphology as the parental strain JR32, while the ∆lvbR mutant forms a mat-like biofilm as previously shown. Acanthamoeba castellanii amoebae migrated more slowly through biofilms formed by the ∆lvbR, ∆lqsR or ∆flaA mutant strains, and amoebae migration was impaired in biofilms formed by L. pneumophila lacking a functional Icm/Dot T4SS (∆icmT) or the secreted effector proteins LegG1 and PpgA. Amoebae migrating through biofilms formed by JR32, ∆lvbR or ∆icmT were decorated by clusters of bacteria, while amoebae in ∆lqsR or ∆flaA biofilms were not. Taken together, the Lqs system, LvbR, FlaA and the Icm/Dot T4SS regulate migration of A. castellanii through L. pneumophila biofilms, and – with the exception of the T4SS – also regulate bacterial cluster formation on the amoeba. Hence, amoebae migration through L. pneumophila biofilms is regulated by bacterial quorum sensing, virulence and motility.

### Sample Protocol
Biofilms of L. pneumophila JR32, ΔlvbR and ΔlqsR were initiated as described above and incubated for 6 days at 25°C. The biofilms were harvested by resuspending the bacteria, followed by centrifugation (5 min, 12’850 × g, 4°C) and resulting supernatants (extracellular) and cell pellets (intracellular) were analyzed separately. For extracellular sample preparation, proteins in 1 ml of supernatant were enriched using StrataClean beads and eluted by the use of a 1D-SDS gel according to the established protocol for GeLC-MS samples (Bonn et al., 2014). Cell pellets (intracellular samples) were resuspended in TE-buffer pH 7.4 (50 mM Tris, 10 mM EDTA) und disrupted by bead beating. After centrifugation the protein concentration was determined using the Bradford assay and 20 µg protein were in solution digested (Maass et al., 2011) and purified using C18-Stage tips (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Extracellular proteins (with 3 biological replicates for every sample) and intracellular proteins (with 3 biological replicates and 3 technical replicates each for every sample) were analyzed with a QExactive- Mass spectrometer. Peptide samples were injected with exactly the same volume in order to allow label-free relative protein quantification between biological samples.

### Data Protocol
In order to process the data, *.raw files were searched against the database using MaxQuant (1.6.0.16). The database for L. pneumophila Philadelphia-1 was downloaded from Uniprot on March, 17th, 2017 and supplemented with the LvbR sequence and common laboratory contaminations resulting in 2973 entries. The results were filtered using 1% FDR in MaxQuant and at least 2 unique peptides were necessary for protein identification (filtered in Perseus vs 1.5.3.0). For quantification the protein had to be detected in at least two replicates of one sample. Log2-transformed LFQ-values as proxy for protein abundance were exported and used for statistical analysis in TMEV.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bacterial adherence, Sensor kinase, Acanthamoeba, Flagellum, Response regulator, Biofilm, Legionella, Quorum sensing, Transcription factor, Cell migration, Cell-cell communication, Amoeba

### Affiliations
University of Greifswald,
Department for Microbial Proteomics
Institute of Microbiology, University of Greifswald, Felix-Hausdorff-Strasse 8, 17489 Greifswald, Germany

### Submitter
Sandra Maass

### Lab Head
Dr Dörte Becher
Institute of Microbiology, University of Greifswald, Felix-Hausdorff-Strasse 8, 17489 Greifswald, Germany


