### Accession
PXD022133

### Title
Proteome profiling of PMJ2-R and primary peritoneal macrophages

### Description
In vitro models are often used to study the functions of macrophages, including the process of phagocytosis. The use of primary macrophages has limitations associated with the individual characteristics of animals, which can lead to insufficient standardization of the results obtained. This disadvantage is lacking in immortalized cell lines. The PMJ2-R cell line was derived from in vivo immortalization and retains many of the primary peritoneal macrophages functions, but little is known about its differences from normal cells. In this article, we carried out a comparative analysis of the proteomes of PMJ2-R cells and primary peritoneal macrophages isolated from the C57BL/J6 mice. Particular attention was paid to the analysis of proteins involved in the process of phagocytosis. A total of 4005 proteins were identified, of which 797 were quantified. Our results indicate that there are significant differences in the abundance of a large number of proteins, including important proteins associated with the process of phagocytosis, such as Elmo1, Gsn, Hspa8, Itgb1, Ncf2, Rac2, Rack1, Sirpa, Sod1, C3, Msr1. Thus, when using PMJ2R cells as model cells in the study of the peritoneal macrophages functions, features revealed in this study should be taken into account.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extracts (50 μg) were dissolved in 20 μL denaturation solution (5 M urea, 1% TCA, 15% acetonitrile, 50 mM phosphate buffer pH 6.3, 300 mM sodium chloride). Proteins were reduced by adding 5 μL of 25 mM TCEP in 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate. After incubation at room temperature for 45 min, 5 μL of 300 mM IAA in 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate was added. The reaction mixture was incubated in dark for 30 min. To quench the remaining IAA, 5 μL of 300 mM DTT in 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate was added. The sample was diluted up to 200 μL with 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate. Trypsin was added in enzyme:protein ratio 1:50. Digestion was performed at 37 °C overnight. After digestion, formic acid was added to the samples to the final concentration of 1%. Samples were centrifuged at 10 °C at 12.000×g for 10 minutes. The supernatant was purified using C18 ZipTip.

### Data Protocol
Peak lists obtained from MS/MS spectra were identified using in SearchGUI software v.3.3.20 [9]. Protein identification was conducted against a concatenated target/decoy version of the Mouse Complement of the UniProtKB. The decoy sequences were created by reversing the target sequences in SearchGUI v.3.3.20. The identification settings were as follows: Trypsin specific with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages; 5.0 ppm as MS1 and 0.01 Da as MS2 tolerances; fixed modification: carbamidomethylation (Cys); variable modifications: N-terminal proteins acetylation, and methionine oxidation (Met). Peptide Spectrum Matches (PSMs), peptides and proteins were validated at a 1.0% False Discovery Rate estimated using the decoy hit distribution.

### Publication Abstract
In vitro models are often used for studying macrophage functions, including the process of phagocytosis. The application of primary macrophages has limitations associated with the individual characteristics of animals, which can lead to insufficient standardization and higher variability of the obtained results. Immortalized cell lines do not have these disadvantages, but their responses to various signals can differ from those of the living organism. In the present study, a comparative proteomic analysis of immortalized PMJ2-R cell line and primary peritoneal macrophages isolated from C57BL/6 mice was performed. A total of 4005 proteins were identified, of which 797 were quantified. Obtained results indicate significant differences in the abundances of many proteins, including essential proteins associated with the process of phagocytosis, such as Elmo1, Gsn, Hspa8, Itgb1, Ncf2, Rac2, Rack1, Sirpa, Sod1, C3, and Msr1. These findings indicate that outcomes of studies utilizing PMJ2-R cells as a model of peritoneal macrophages should be carefully validated. All MS data are deposited in ProteomeXchange with the identifier PXD022133.

### Keywords
Peritoneal macrophages, Lc-ms/ms, Proteome, Phagocytosis, Pmj2-r

### Affiliations
The Precision Biosystems Laboratory, Institute of Biomedical Chemistry
Institute of Biomedical Chemistry

### Submitter
Olga Tikhonova

### Lab Head
Dr Natalia G. Luzgina
The Precision Biosystems Laboratory, Institute of Biomedical Chemistry


