### Accession
PXD033823

### Title
Sacsin, the ARSACS disease protein, controls lysosomal positioning and reformation by regulating microtubule dynamics

### Description
Autosomal recessive spastic ataxia of Charlevoix-Saguenay (ARSACS) is a fatal brain disorder featuring cerebellar neurodegeneration leading to spasticity and ataxia. ARSACS is caused by mutations in the SACS gene that encodes sacsin, a massive 4579 amino acid protein with multiple modular domains. Here we demonstrate that sacsin binds to microtubules and regulates microtubule dynamics. Loss of sacsin function in knockout cell lines, knockdown and knockout neurons, and patient fibroblasts leads to alterations in lysosomal transport, positioning, function and reformation following autophagy.

### Sample Protocol
Whole mice brain was homogenized and lysed in buffer containing ( 20 mM Tris-7.4, 150 mM NaCl with protease inhibitors). Brain lysate was spun at 45000 rpm the supernatant was incubated with sacsin antibody at 4oC for 5 hours. Beads were washed, eluted lysate was subjected to SDS-PAGE analysis followed by mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
To identify proteins which interact with sacsin we incubated whole brain lysate with sacsin antibody and protein A sepharose beads, beads with lysate was used as control. Interacting proteins were identified by tandem mass spectrometry facility at McGill University, Montreal, Canada

### Publication Abstract
Autosomal recessive spastic ataxia of Charlevoix-Saguenay is a fatal brain disorder featuring cerebellar neurodegeneration leading to spasticity and ataxia. This disease is caused by mutations in the SACS gene that encodes sacsin, a massive 4579-amino acid protein with multiple modular domains. However, molecular details of the function of sacsin are not clear. Here, using live cell imaging and biochemistry, we demonstrate that sacsin binds to microtubules and regulates microtubule dynamics. Loss of sacsin function in various cell types, including knockdown and KO primary neurons and patient fibroblasts, leads to alterations in lysosomal transport, positioning, function, and reformation following autophagy. Each of these phenotypic changes is consistent with altered microtubule dynamics. We further show the effects of sacsin are mediated at least in part through interactions with JIP3, an adapter for microtubule motors. These data reveal a new function for sacsin that explains its previously reported roles and phenotypes.

### Keywords
Alr, Lysosome, Microtubule

### Affiliations
McGill University
James McGill Professor, Montreal Neurological Institute, McGill University

### Submitter
Vincent Francis

### Lab Head
Dr Peter McPherson
James McGill Professor, Montreal Neurological Institute, McGill University


