### Accession
PXD034373

### Title
Identification of bile acid-interacting proteins in Salmonella Typhimurium (14028S) by chemoproteomics

### Description
The microbiota generates structurally diverse small molecules that can regulate host physiology and disease. Of these microbiota metabolites, bile acids have emerged as important modulators of host immunity and microbial pathogenesis. While the modes of action for different bile acids on host pathways are becoming more apparent, the mechanisms by which these prominent microbiota metabolites suppress microbial virulence pathways are less clear. To identify the direct protein targets of bile acids in Salmonella, we have generated three photoaffinity bile acid reporters (alk-X-CDCA, alk-X-UDCA, alk-X-LCA) and performed chemical proteomics. Using a combination of photocrosslinking with bile acid chemical reporters and label-free proteomics, we performed a quantitative analysis of bile acid interacting proteins in Salmonella with or without UV-mediated photocrosslinking. These studies revealed bile acid can interact with many Salmonella proteins, such as extracellular or secreted proteins, T3SS components and motility-related proteins, as predicted by Gene Ontology analysis. In addition, cytoplasmic and membrane proteins including metabolic enzymes are also identified. Notably, HilD, an important transcriptional regulator of S. Typhimurium virulence was also identified by the alk-X-CDCA reporter. This study highlights the utility of chemical proteomics to identify the direct protein targets and mechanisms of action for microbiota metabolites in bacterial pathogens.

### Sample Protocol
1:50 dilutions of overnight Miller LB cultures of Salmonella Typhimurium strain 14028s WT were grown in 20 mL SPI-1 inducing LB (300 mM NaCl) for 3 h at 37 °C with 220 rpm shaking. Cultures were incubated with 0.5 mM bile acid reporters in DMSO or DMSO as the negative control for another 1 h at 37 °C with 220 rpm shaking. The culture medium was centrifuged at 5000 g for 10 min. Bacteria pellets was re-suspended in 10 mL cold PBS. For in-cell photo-crosslinking experiments, bacteria in 10 mL cold PBS was transferred to petri dish (100 mm X 15 mm) and subjected to UV irradiation at 365 nm on ice for 5 min using a Spectrolinker XL-1000 UV crosslinker (Spectronics) at a distance of 3 cm. Bacteria were then harvested and centrifuged 5000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. After re-suspension in 1 mL lysis buffer, bacteria were sonicated for 15 sec with a Sonic Dismembrator Model 500 (Fisher Scientific) with 5 sec on and 10 sec off per cycle. Cell lysates were centrifuged at 16000 g for 20 min to remove cell debris and supernatants were collected. Each total cell lysates was added with 100 μL of click chemistry reagents as a 10X master mix (az-Biotin: 0.1 mM, 10 mM stock solution in DMSO; tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP): 1 mM, 50 mM freshly prepared stock solution in dH2O; tris[(1-benzyl-1H-1,2,3-triazol-4-yl)methyl]amine (TBTA): (0.1 mM, 2 mM stock in 4:1 t-butanol: DMSO); CuSO4 (1 mM, 50 mM freshly prepared stock in dH2O)). Samples were mixed well and incubated at room temperature for 1 h. After incubation, samples were mixed with 4 mL cold methanol and incubated at -20 °C overnight. Protein pellets were centrifuged at 5000 g for 30 min at 4°C, pellets were transferred to 2.0 mL centrifuge tube and were washed with 1 mL cold methanol 3 times. After last wash, pellets were let air dried before being re-solubilized in 250 μL 4% SDS PBS with bath sonication. Solutions were diluted with 750 μL PBS, and incubated with 60 μL PBS-T-washed High Capacity NeutrAvidin agarose (Pierce) (500 μL PBS-T-washed twice, 2500 g X 60 s) at room temperature for 1 h with end-to-end rotation. The agarose was washed with 500 μL 1% SDS PBS 3 times, 500 μL 1M Urea PBS 3 times, and 500 μL PBS 3 times and then reduced with 500 μL 10 mM DTT (Sigma) in PBS for 30 min at 37 °C, and alkylated with 500 μL 50 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) in PBS for 30 min in dark. 50 μL NH4HCO3 (10 mM) was added to the tube. Neutravidin-bound proteins were digested on bead with 400 ng Trypsin/Lys-C mix (Promega) at 37 °C overnight with shaking. Digested peptides were collected (2500 g for 60 s) and lyophilized before being desalted with custom-made stage-tip containing Empore SPE Extraction Disk (3M). Peptides were eluted with 2% acetonitrile, 2% formic acid in dH2O. Peptide LC-MS analysis was performed with a reversed phase C18 column coupled to an Orbitrap mass spectrometer (DMSO and UDCA reporter: Dionex Chromatography MS Link with Q Exactive Plus-Orbitrap MS; LCA reporter: Thermo-EASY-nLC with Orbitrap Fusion Lumos; CDCA reporter: Thermo Scientific SII for Xcalibur with Q Exactive HF-Orbitrap MS and Thermo-EASY-nLC with Orbitrap Fusion Lumos). MS spectra was measured at a resolution of 60,000.

### Data Protocol
The 28 samples data were pooled and processed with MaxQuant version 2.1.0.0. and the peptides were identified from the MS/MS spectra searched against the database (Salmonella Typhimurium 14028s, Proteome ID: UP000002695). Label free quantification experiments in MaxQuant were performed using the built-in label free quantification algorithm enabling the “Match between runs” option. Other parameters were used as preset in the software.  The search results from MaxQuant were analyzed by Perseus 2.0.5.0. Briefly, the DMSO replicates and bile acid reporters-labeled sample replicates were grouped correspondingly. The results were cleaned to filter off reverse hits and contaminants. Only proteins that were identified in 3 out of 4 sample replicates and with more than two unique peptides were subjected to subsequent statistical analysis. LFQ intensities were used for measuring protein abundance and logarithmized. Signals that were originally zero were imputed with random numbers from a normal distribution, whose mean and standard deviation were chosen to best simulate low abundance values below the noise level (Replace missing values by normal distribution – Width = 0.3; Shift = 1.8).

### Publication Abstract
Bile acids are prominent host and microbiota metabolites that modulate host immunity and microbial pathogenesis. However, the mechanisms by which bile acids suppress microbial virulence are not clear. To identify the direct protein targets of bile acids in bacterial pathogens, we performed activity-guided chemical proteomic studies. In Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium, chenodeoxycholic acid (CDCA) most effectively inhibited the expression of virulence genes and invasion of epithelial cells and interacted with many proteins. Notably, we discovered that CDCA can directly bind and inhibit the function of HilD, an important transcriptional regulator of S. Typhimurium virulence and pathogenesis. Our characterization of bile acid-resistant HilD mutants in vitro and in S. Typhimurium infection models suggests that HilD is one of the key protein targets of anti-infective bile acids. This study highlights the utility of chemical proteomics to identify the direct protein targets of microbiota metabolites for mechanistic studies in bacterial pathogens.

### Keywords
Chemoproteomics, Salmonella, Bile acids, Photoaffinity

### Affiliations
Departments of Immunology & Microbiology﻿ and Chemistry﻿  Scripps Research
Scripps Research

### Submitter
Xinglin Yang

### Lab Head
Dr Howard C. Hang
Departments of Immunology & Microbiology﻿ and Chemistry﻿  Scripps Research


