### Accession
PXD036267

### Title
Protein co-purifying with MLF2-MBP from Expi293 cells

### Description
MLF2-MBP was expressed as a fusion protein in Expi293 cells. This was purified and a protein around 70 kDa was found to stoichiometrically co-purify. To verify this protein's identity, the 70 kDa region was extracted from a gel in addition to submitting the entire elution for mass spectrometry analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Eluted protein were digested in gel via trypsin. Protein Digests are analyzed using LC MS/MS on a Thermo Scientific LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer. This system are equipped with Waters nanoACQUITY ultra high pressure liquid chromatographs (UPLC) for peptide separation.

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS spectra are searched in-house using the Mascot algorithm for un-interpreted MS/MS spectra after using the Mascot Distiller program to generate Mascot compatible files. The Mascot Distiller program combines sequential MS/MS scans from profile data that have the same precursor ion. A charge state of +2 and +3 are preferentially located with a signal to noise ratio of 1.2 or greater and a peak list is generated for database searching. Either the NCBInr, a species specific, or a custom database (in FASTA format) are used for searching.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hsp70, Hspa1a, Mlf2

### Affiliations
Yale University, Department of Molecular Biophysics & Biochemistry
Yale University

### Submitter
Sarah Prophet

### Lab Head
Dr Christian Schlieker
Yale University, Department of Molecular Biophysics & Biochemistry


