### Accession
PXD011244

### Title
Improved SILAC Method for Double Labeling of Bacterial Proteome

### Description
Stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) is a robust proteomics method with the advantages of reproducibility and easy handling. This method is popular for the analysis of mammalian cells. However, amino acid conversion in bacteria decreases the labeling efficiency and quantification accuracy, limiting the application of SILAC in bacterial proteomics to auxotrophic bacteria or single labeling with lysine. In this study, we found that adding high concentrations of isotope-labeled (heavy) and natural (light) amino acids into SILAC minimal medium can efficiently inhibit the complicated amino acid conversions between each other. This simple and straightforward strategy facilitated the full incorporation of amino acids into the bacterial proteome with good accuracy. The high labeling efficiency can be reached in different bacteria by slightly modifying the supplement of amino acids in culture media, promoting the widespread application of SILAC technique in bacterial proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction  Cells were collected, mixed, and suspended in lysis buffer (0.42 g/mL urea, 0.152 g/mL thiourea, 0.04 g/mL CHAPS, 5 mL H2O) containing 5 μg/μL protease inhibitor (Roche c complete tablets EASY pack) and then disrupted by sonication at 65% amplitude for 5 min. Cellular debris was removed by centrifugation at 17,000 g for 30 min at 4 °C. Protein concentrations were determined using the Lowry method or Bradford protein assay. Trypsin digestion  To analyze amino acid incorporation, S. aureus was cultured in HMM, and 100 μg of whole-cell protein extract was separated by 12% SDS-PAGE and stained with Coomassie blue R-250. After destaining the gel with a solution containing glacial acetic acid and ethanol, the protein lane was cut into five bands. Each band was cut into small pieces, rinsed with H2O, reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol at 57 °C for 1 h, and then alkylated in the dark with 20 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 1 h. In-gel digestion was carried out according to a previously published protocol [31].   In-solution digestion of the cell lysates was performed in parallel. In brief, proteins in the cell lysate were reduced and alkylated using the method described above. The proteins were then precipitated with four volumes of ice-cold acetone, collected by centrifugation at 17,000 g for 30 min, and then washed twice with ethanol. The resulting pellet was resuspended and digested in trypsin (1:25 w/w) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate at 37 °C overnight, as previously described [32]. The digested peptides were dried in a vacuum centrifuge and stored at -80 °C until further use. The peptide was dissolved in 100 μL high pH buffer A [20 mM NH4CHO2 containing 4% (v/v) acetonitrile; pH 10.0)] and separated by reverse-phase ultra-performance liquid chromatography with an Ultremex SC18X column (4.6 mm × 250 mm, 5 μm; Phenomenex, USA). In brief, the peptide was eluted with a gradient of 5%−60% acetonitrile in 20 mM ammonium formate (pH 10.0) for 65 min at a flow rate of 0.8 mL/min and monitored at 214 nm. After 5 min, the eluted peptides were collected every minute, every interval 3 minute pooled into one fraction so obtain three fractions, and thenfractions. Then desalt using the Mono Tip C18(200ul, GL Sciences Inc.) and lyophilized. For the correlation analysis of proteins identified in two SILAC experiments, 200 g protein containing equivalent amounts of heavy and light amino acids were digested in solution. For each experiment, two or three biological replicates were analyzed.

### Data Protocol
Quantitative proteomic data analysis In the SILAC module, double heavy labeling (Arg10 and Lys8) was chosen. Trypsin was chosen as the protease for protein digestion. The search included carbamidomethylation (C) as a fixed modification and Gln→pyro-Glu (N-terminus), oxidation (M), and acetylation (N-terminal) as variable modifications. The maximum false discovery rate was set at 0.01 for both peptide and protein. The precursor mass tolerance was set at 20 ppm, and the product ion tolerance was set at 0.5 Da. Peptide matches were filtered with a minimum length of seven amino acids and a maximum of two missed cleavages. In the “identify” module, the “re-quantify” and the “match between runs” options were selected; other settings were kept at their default values. Proteins identified by at least two unique peptide were used for further analysis. For the labeling check, the “Pro6” option was used to check arginine conversion to proline, but the “re-quantify” option was not chosen [36]. The following formula was used to calculate the incorporation rate with the peptide.txt output file: (H/L)/(H/L+1), where H/L is the ratio of heavy to light peptides [36]. The numbers of total prolines and heavy prolines (Pro6, 13C5/15N1) in the ms/ms.txt table were used to calculate the Pro6 conversion rate according to the following formula: Pro6/(Pro6 + Pro).

### Publication Abstract
Stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) is a robust proteomics method with advantages such as reproducibility and easy handling. This method is popular for the analysis of mammalian cells. However, amino acid conversion in bacteria decreases the labeling efficiency and quantification accuracy, limiting the application of SILAC in bacterial proteomics to auxotrophic bacteria or to single labeling with lysine. In this study, we found that adding high concentrations of isotope-labeled (heavy) and natural (light) amino acids into SILAC minimal medium can efficiently inhibit the complicated amino acid conversions. This simple and straightforward strategy facilitated complete incorporation of amino acids into the bacterial proteome with good accuracy. High labeling efficiency can be achieved in different bacteria by slightly modifying the supplementation of amino acids in culture media, promoting the widespread application of SILAC technique in bacterial proteomics. SIGNIFICANCE: Amino acid conversion in bacteria decreases labeling efficiency, limiting the application of Stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) in bacterial proteomics to auxotrophic bacteria or single labeling with lysine. In this study, we found that high concentrations of isotope-labeled (heavy) and natural (light) amino acids facilitate full incorporation of amino acids into the bacterial proteome with good reproducibility. This improved double labeling SILAC technique using medium supplemented with high concentrations of amino acids is suitable for quantitative proteomics research on both gram-positive and -negative bacteria, facilitating the broad application of quantitative proteomics in bacterial studies.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Bacteria, Silac, Double labeling

### Affiliations
Key laboratory of functional protein research of guangdong higher education institutes, institute of life and health engineering, college of life science and technology, Jinan University, guangzhou 510632, China
jinan university

### Submitter
zhao xinlu

### Lab Head
Dr Xuesong Sun
Key laboratory of functional protein research of guangdong higher education institutes, institute of life and health engineering, college of life science and technology, Jinan University, guangzhou 510632, China


