### Accession
PXD033905

### Title
Data from a proteomic comparative analysis highlight differential adaptation of Lactobacillus delbrueckii subsp. bulgaricus to cow milk versus to soy milk environments

### Description
Lactobacillus Bulgaricus (CIRM-BIA1592) adaptation to cow milk versus soymilk environments was studied thanks to proteomics. Bacteria were harvested at the begining of stationary phase. Protein trypsin digestion were performed in solution. The data set contains 22 files of NanoLC-MS/MS analysis, acquired on a Qexactive mass spectrometer. Design: 2 classes (cow milk, soymilk), 4 biological replicates for cow milk, 3 biological replicates for soymilk. All samples were injected at least 3 times.

### Sample Protocol
Tryptic digests of whole cell extracts were analysed on a NanoLC-MS/MS system (U3000 RLSC, Qexactive, Thermo Scientific) with Data dependent analysis.

### Data Protocol
MSconvert was used to convert raw files to mzML and MS/MS spectra were searched against the uniprot proteome UP000001259 of Lactobacillus delbrueckii bulgaricus with X!tandem algorithm. The 'X!tandem pipeline' sofware was used to facilitate database search, validation of identification, and export of the result to the quantification software 'MassChroQ'.

### Publication Abstract
The article presents a proteomic dataset generated by a comparative analysis, using gel-free nanoLC-MS/MS, of the cellular proteome of <i>Lactobacillus delbrueckii</i> subsp. <i>bulgaricus</i>, a yogurt starter, when cultivated in soy milk versus in cow milk. The CIRM-BIA1592 strain was cultivated in the aqueous phase of soy milk, or of cow milk. Whole-cell proteins were extracted, trypsinolyzed and analyzed by nano LC-MS/MS, prior to identification and to classification by function using the X!Tandem pipeline software and the proteomic data from NCBI.nlm.nigh.gov. Quantification of the proteins was moreover performed to evidence changes in their expression, depending on the culture medium. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with the identifier PXD033905 (http://www.proteomexchange.org/). This article is related to the research article entitled "The stressing life of <i>Lactobacillus delbrueckii</i> subsp. <i>bulgaricus</i> in soy milk", by G.Jan et&#xa0;al. in Food Microbiology, 2022. This proteomic differential analysis indeed revealed major modulation of the stress proteome, with many stress proteins upregulated in the soy environment.

### Keywords
Lactobacillus delbrueckii subsp. bulgaricus, Proteomic, Cow milk, Soy milk, Comparative analysis, Glycine max, Adaptation

### Affiliations
INRAE UMR1253 STLO
INRAE, UMR1253 STLO

### Submitter
Julien Jardin

### Lab Head
Dr Yves LE LOIR
INRAE, UMR1253 STLO


