### Accession
PXD011948

### Title
LC-MS/MS after anti-PUM1 and anti-PUM2 co-immunoprecipitation.

### Description
In order to identify the protein co-factors of PUMILIO1 and PUMILIO2 in TCam-2 cell line, co-IP of these proteins performed followed mass spectrometry analysis for protein identification. Six biological replicates of co-IP with anti-PUM1, anti-PUM2 antibodies and anti-IgG were performed. Three biological replicates were performed without RNase A treatment, and another three biological replicates of co-IPs with 100 mg/ml RNase A.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were directly digested on the beads and separated by liquid chromatography (LC) followed by MS measurement of peptides and their fragmentation spectra (LC-MS/MS) with a Q Exactive Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The bioinformatic protein identification analysis was performed as described: peak lists obtained from MS/MS spectra were identified using X! Tandem version X! Tandem Vengeance (2015.12.15.2) (Craig and Beavis 2004), Andromeda version 1.5.3.4 (Cox et al. 2011) and MS-GF+ version Beta (v10282) (Kim and Pevzner 2014). The search was conducted using SearchGUI version 3.2.23 (Barsnes and Vaudel 2018).

### Publication Abstract
Mammalian Pumilio (PUM) proteins are sequence-specific, RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) with wide-ranging roles. They are involved in germ cell development, which has functional implications in development and fertility. Although human PUM1 and PUM2 are closely related to each other and recognize the same RNA binding motif, there is some evidence for functional diversity. To address that problem, first we used RIP-Seq and RNA-Seq approaches, and identified mRNA pools regulated by PUM1 and PUM2 proteins in the TCam-2 cell line, a human male germ cell model. Second, applying global mass spectrometry-based profiling, we identified distinct PUM1- and PUM2-interacting putative protein cofactors, most of them involved in RNA processing. Third, combinatorial analysis of RIP and RNA-Seq, mass spectrometry, and RNA motif enrichment analysis revealed that PUM1 and PUM2 form partially varied RNP-regulatory networks (RNA regulons), which indicate different roles in human reproduction and testicular tumorigenesis. Altogether, this work proposes that protein paralogues with very similar and evolutionary highly conserved functional domains may play divergent roles in the cell by combining with different sets of protein cofactors. Our findings highlight the versatility of PUM paralogue-based post-transcriptional regulation, offering insight into the mechanisms underlying their diverse biological roles and diseases resulting from their dysfunction.

### Keywords
Human, Tcam-2, Co-ip, Pumilio

### Affiliations
Institute of Human Genetics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznan, Poland
Polish Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Erkut Ilaslan

### Lab Head
Dr Jadwiga Jaruzelska
Institute of Human Genetics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznan, Poland


