### Accession
PXD039645

### Title
Quantitative proteomic analysis of human serum using tandem mass tags to predict cardiovascular risks in patients with psoriasis

### Description
Although biomarker candidates associated with psoriasis have been suggested, those for predicting the risk of cardiovascular disease (CVD) early in patients with psoriasis are lacking. We aimed to identify candidate biomarkers that can predict the occurrence of CVD in psoriasis patients. We pursued quantitative proteomic analysis of serum samples composed of three groups: psoriasis patients with and those without CVD risk factors, and healthy controls. Age/Sex-matched serum samples were selected and labeled with 16-plex tandem mass tag (TMT) and analyzed using liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry and subsequent verification with ELISA. Of the 184 proteins that showed statistical significance (P-value <0.05) among the three groups according to TMT-based quantitative analysis, 98 proteins showed significant differences (>2.0-fold) between the psoriasis groups with and without CVD risk factors. Verification by ELISA revealed that caldesmon (CALD1), myeloid cell nuclear differentiation antigen (MNDA), and zyxin (ZYX) levels were significantly increased in the psoriasis group with CVD risk factors. Further network analysis identified pathways including integrin signaling, which could be related to platelet aggregation, and actin cytoskeleton signaling. Three novel candidates (MNDA, ZYX, and CALD1) could be potential biomarkers for predicting CVD risks in psoriasis patients. We expect these biomarker candidates can be used to predict CVD risk in psoriasis patients in clinical settings although further studies including large validation are needed.

### Sample Protocol
A protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche Diagnostics, Mannheim, Germany) was added to the 14 serum samples from the psoriasis with and without CVD risk factors (n = 7 and n = 4, respectively) and healthy control (n = 3) groups that were selected for proteomic analysis. The protein concentrations of each serum samples were determined using a bicinchoninic acid (BCA) protein assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Each serum sample was then depleted of the top 14 high-abundance proteins (albumin, alpha-1 acid glycoprotein, alpha-1 antitrypsin, alpha-2 macroglobulin, apolipoprotein A-I, apolipoprotein A-II, complement C3, fibrinogen, haptoglobin, immunoglobulin A, immunoglobulin G, immunoglobulin M, serotransferrin, and transthyretin) using a human multiple affinity removal system (MARS)-14 column (4.6 × 50 mm, Agilent, Santa Clara, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. 1100 HPLC system (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA, USA) with a fraction collector was used to collect the flow-through fraction. The flow-through fraction not bound to the MARS-14 column in each serum sample was concentrated using Amicon Ultracel-3 centrifugal filter devices (3 kDa cutoff, Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA) and the protein concentrations of serum samples after the removal of the top 14 high-abundance proteins were determined using the BCA protein assay kit. The concentrated samples were resuspended in 8 M urea buffer/25 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and subsequently reduced and alkylated using 5 mM tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride and 10 mM iodoacetamide, respectively. Afterwards, 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate was added to the serum samples to decrease the urea concentration to less than 1 M and digested with lysyl endopeptidaseR (Lys-C, Fujifilm Wako Pure Chemical Corporation, Osaka, Japan) in an enzyme/substrate ratio of 1 mAU Lys-C per 50 μg of total protein at 25 °C for 2 h. 11 Trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) was then added to the samples at a protease/substrate ratio of 1:50 (wt/wt) and incubated at 37 °C overnight. Digested peptide samples were acidified and desalted using a Sep-Pak tC18 cartridge (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, USA). The desalted peptide samples were then dried in a miVAC vacuum concentrator (Genevac Ltd., Ipswich, UK).

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were searched against the SwissProt human database (May 2020) with 20329 entries using Proteome Discoverer software (version 2.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The search criteria were set to a mass tolerance of 10 ppm for MS data and 0.6 Da for MS/MS data with fixed modifications of carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.021 Da) and TMT on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+304.207 Da) and variable modification of methionine oxidation (+15.995 Da). The false discovery rate (FDR) was set at 0.01 for the identification of peptides and proteins. All the proteins were identified by two or more unique peptides. Reporter ion quantification was performed with a mass tolerance of 20 ppm. While signal-to-noise ratio values of reporter ions were used for quantification of peptides, only spectra with an average reporter signal-to-noise ratio threshold of ≥10 across 16 TMTpro 16plex channels were considered for the quantification. The signal-to-noise ratio values of each reporter ion channel were summed across all quantified proteins and normalized so that the summed signal-to-noise ratio values of each channel could be equal across all 16 channels, which were called normalized abundance values. The normalized abundance values were first log-transformed and missing values were then replaced using values computed from the normal distribution with a width of 0.3 and a downshift of 1.8. Proteins exhibiting statistical significances among the psoriasis groups with and without CVD risk factors and a healthy control group were detected using one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) comparison of the log2(normalized abundance) values using Perseus software (1.6.14.0). 13 The proteins with a P-value <0.05, from ANOVA analysis, were then further subjected to a Scheffe’s post-hoc analysis to identify those proteins that exhibited statistically significant changes between the psoriasis group with CVD risk factors and the psoriasis group without CVD risk factors (P-value <0.05). For hierarchical clustering of the proteins with statistically significant changes (P-value <0.05, >2.0-fold) between psoriasis groups with and without CVD risk factors, log2(normalized abundance) values were first normalized using z-score and then clustering of both columns and rows was pursued based on Euclidean distance using the average linkage method using Perseus (1.6.14.0)

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Psoriasis, Cardiovascular risk, Lc-ms/ms, Tandem mass tags

### Affiliations
Korea Institute of Science and Technology
Korea Institue of Science and Technology

### Submitter
Ji Eun Lee

### Lab Head
Dr Ji Eun Lee
Korea Institute of Science and Technology


