### Accession
PXD024649

### Title
C21, human microglial cell proteome

### Description
This project describes the proteome of a microglial cell line generated by differentiation of human SC.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were prepared by lysis of three biological replicates of a differtiation to a microglial cell line. Proteins were digested by trypsin and further reduction of the complex peptide mixture was achieved by SCX prior to mass spec. MS was performed on a Orbitrap Velos Pro coupled to a Ultimate 3000 nanoHPLC. Peptide separation was achieved by a 25cm PepMap column and an ACN elution gradient over 130 min.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed with PEAKS Studio V.8 and further analysed by GO clustering and Gephi based visualisation.

### Publication Abstract
Microglia, the resident immune cells of the central nervous system (CNS), are derived from yolk-sac macrophages that populate the developing CNS during early embryonic development. Once established, the microglia population is self-maintained throughout life by local proliferation. As a scalable source of microglia-like cells (MGLs), we here present a forward programming protocol for their generation from human pluripotent stem cells (hPSCs). The transient overexpression of PU.1 and C/EBP&#x3b2; in hPSCs led to a homogenous population of mature microglia within 16 d. MGLs met microglia characteristics on a morphological, transcriptional, and functional level. MGLs facilitated the investigation of a human tauopathy model in cortical neuron-microglia cocultures, revealing a secondary dystrophic microglia phenotype. Single-cell RNA sequencing of microglia integrated into hPSC-derived cortical brain organoids demonstrated a shift of microglia signatures toward a more-developmental in&#xa0;vivo-like phenotype, inducing intercellular interactions promoting neurogenesis and arborization. Taken together, our microglia forward programming platform represents a tool for both reductionist studies in monocultures and complex coculture systems, including 3D brain organoids for the study of cellular interactions in healthy or diseased environments.

### Keywords
Human, Microglia

### Affiliations
University Magdeburg, Institut of Exptl. Internal Medicine, Leipzigerstr. 44, 39120 Magdeburg, Germany
University Magdeburg

### Submitter
Thilo Kaehne

### Lab Head
Dr Thilo Kaehne
University Magdeburg, Institut of Exptl. Internal Medicine, Leipzigerstr. 44, 39120 Magdeburg, Germany


