### Accession
PXD001799

### Title
Distinct Serum Proteome Profiles Associated with Collagen induced Arthritis, and Complete Freund’s Adjuvant-induced Inflammation in CD38-/- mice: the Discriminative Power of Protein Species or Proteoforms. Protein identification by Peptide Mass Fingerprinting (PMF)

### Description
Collagen-type-II-induced arthritis (CIA) is an autoimmune disease, which involves a complex host systemic response including inflammatory and autoimmune reactions. CIA in C57BL/6  mice resembles human rheumatoid arthritis (RA) in terms of its disease course, histological findings, and in its response to commonly used anti-arthritic drugs. In this study, the goal has been to identify proteins from serum that change in their abundance in CD38-KO versus WT mice which may reflect their distinct response to an antigen-challenge that induces the development of an autoimmune disease. CIA is milder in CD38-/- than in Wild-type (WT) mice. We analyzed the sera from CD38-/- versus WT mice either with arthritis (CIA+), with no arthritis (CIA-), or with inflammation (Complete Freund’s adjuvant (CFA)-treated mice). To decrease the dynamic concentration range of serum a combinatorial ligand library composed of hexapeptides was used (called ProteoMiner). ProteoMiner-equalized serum samples were then subjected to 2D-DiGE and MS-MALDI-TOF/TOF analyses to identify proteins that changed in their relative abundances. Multivariate analyses revealed that a multi-protein signature (n = 28) was able to discriminate CIA+ from CIA- mice, and WT from CD38-/- mice within each condition. Likewise, a distinct multi-protein signature (n = 16) was identified which differentiated CIA+ CD38-/- mice from CIA+ WT mice, and lastly, a third multi-protein signature (n = 18) indicated that CD38-/- and WT mice could be segregated in response to CFA treatment This approach allows the identification of multiple protein species, or proteoforms of a given protein in a single analysis, and therefore, to focus the interest in fully characterize just the protein species that differ in abundance.

### Sample Protocol
Serum samples (200 l) were loaded on ProteoMiner beads (20μl) (ProteoMiner Small-Capacity Kit), and the equalization steps were performed as described in the manufacturer’s protocol. Proteins retained by the beads were eluted using the elution buffer 8 M urea, 2% CHAPS and 5% acetic acid. The excess of salts were removed using the Bio-Rad's ReadyPrep 2-D cleanup kit. Samples were then resuspended in a DIGE-compatible buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 20 mM Tris, pH 8.5), quantified and kept at −20 °C. For DiGE experiments proteins were labeled with 400 pmol (in 1 μL of anhydrous DMF) of CyDye per 50 μg of protein. After labeling, the appropriate samples were combined for each gel. Each combined sample (~50 l) was made up to 200μl with Readyprep Rehydration/Sample buffer (8 M urea, 2% CHAPS, 50 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), 0.2% (w/v) Bio-Lyte 3/10 ampholytes, and Bromophenol Blue (trace)). 2-DE was carried out using the Protean IEF cell and Criterion electrophoresis cell systems. 1) First-dimension IPG strips (Bio-Rad: 11 cm, linear pH 3-10 gradient); 2)  Active in-gel rehydration at 50 V, 12 h at 20ºC; 3) The IPG strips were focused in a one-step procedure, at 8,000 V for a total of 35,000 Vh at 20ºC with a current limit of 50 A/strip. After electrophoresis, gels was scanned using the Typhoon 9400 variable mode imager at the appropriate CyDye excitation wavelengths (Cy3 (532 nm), Cy5 (633 nm), Cy2 (488 nm)), and at a resolution of 100 m. Gels were then fixed and stained with SYPRO Ruby (Bio-Rad) and re-scanned using the 488 nm laser. Scanned images were analyzed using the DeCyder 7.0 software using the Differential In-gel Analysis (DIA) module to detect and normalize the protein spots. Standard was used to normalize gels by calculating the standardized abundance of each spot, i.e., the ratio of either Cy3 or Cy5 signal to that of Cy2. Gel pieces containing the proteins of interest were subjected to in-gel digestion with trypsin using a Digest MSPro (Intavis, Koeln, Germany) following standard procedures. Gel slices were washed once with 50mM ammonium bicarbonate/50% ethanol followed by 100% ethanol, reduced with 10mM DTT, alkylated with 55mM iodoacetamide, washed twice with 50mM BCA, dehydrated with acetonitrile and then digested with trypsin for 6 h at 37 °C. Peptides were extracted with 0.2% TFA. Volume was reduced to 10 μl in a Speed-Vac and passed through a ZipTipμ-C18 Pipette Tip (Millipore). Peptides were eluted with 60% acetonitrile/0.1% TFA.

### Data Protocol
Gel pieces containing the proteins of interest were subjected to in-gel digestion with trypsin using a Digest MSPro (Intavis, Koeln, Germany) following standard procedures. Gel slices were washed once with 50mM ammonium bicarbonate/50% ethanol followed by 100% ethanol, reduced with 10mM DTT, alkylated with 55mM iodoacetamide, washed twice with 50mM BCA, dehydrated with acetonitrile and then digested with trypsin for 6 h at 37 °C. Peptides were extracted with 0.2% TFA. Volume was reduced to 10 μl in a Speed-Vac and passed through a ZipTipμ-C18 Pipette Tip (Millipore). Peptides were eluted with 60% acetonitrile/0.1% TFA. Proteins were identified by peptide mass fingerprinting (PMF) using a Voyager-DE PRO MALDI-TOF (AB SCIEX, CA) instrument in positive reflectron mode. For the analysis, 1 μL of the peptide extract and 1 μL of matrix (α-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid, 5mg/ml) were loaded in the MALDI plate and were let to dry. Spectra were internally calibrated using ions at 842.5 m/z and 2211.1 m/z derived from the trypsin autodigestion. Data Explorer 4.0 (Applied Biosystems) was used to create the “peak list”. The public MASCOT server (http://www.matrixscience.com/cgi,) Matrix Science, London, UK) was used for protein identification from the peptide-mass fingerprint. with the following parameters: peptide tolerance 50 ppm, enzyme set as trypsin and allowance up to one missed cleavages, fixed modification was cysteine carbamidomethylated (+57 Da) and variable modifications were methionine oxidation (+16 Da), N-terminal acetylation (+42 Da), and phosphorylation (+80 Da). The SwissProt database 2015_01 was used for the search. Spots were identified with a sequence coverage range from 8 to 70% (median 28%).

### Publication Abstract
Collagen-type-II-induced arthritis (CIA) is an autoimmune disease, which involves a complex host systemic response including inflammatory and autoimmune reactions. CIA is milder in CD38(-/-) than in wild-type (WT) mice. ProteoMiner-equalized serum samples were subjected to 2D-DiGE and MS-MALDI-TOF/TOF analyses to identify proteins that changed in their relative abundances in CD38(-/-) versus WT mice either with arthritis (CIA(+) ), with no arthritis (CIA(-) ), or with inflammation (complete Freund's adjuvant (CFA)-treated mice). Multivariate analyses revealed that a multiprotein signature (n = 28) was able to discriminate CIA(+) from CIA(-) mice, and WT from CD38(-/-) mice within each condition. Likewise, a distinct multiprotein signature (n = 16) was identified which differentiated CIA(+) CD38(-/-) mice from CIA(+) WT mice, and lastly, a third multiprotein signature (n = 18) indicated that CD38(-/-) and WT mice could be segregated in response to CFA treatment. Further analyses showed that the discriminative power to distinguish these groups was reached at protein species level and not at the protein level. Hence, the need to identify and quantify proteins at protein species level to better correlate proteome changes with disease processes. It is crucial for plasma proteomics at the low-abundance protein species level to apply the ProteoMiner enrichment. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifiers PXD001788, PXD001799 and PXD002071 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD001788, http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD001799 and http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD002071).

### Keywords
Inflammation, Arthritis, Protein species, Proteoforms, Low-abundance proteins

### Affiliations
Instituto de Parasitología y Biomedicina "López - Neyra", CSIC.  Departamento de Biología Celular e Inmunología Parque Tecnológico de Ciencias de la Salud, Avda. del Conocimiento, s/n.18016 Armilla (Granada).  Spain
PostDoc researcher

### Submitter
Antonio Rosal-Vela

### Lab Head
Dr Jaime Sancho Lopez
Instituto de Parasitología y Biomedicina "López - Neyra", CSIC.  Departamento de Biología Celular e Inmunología Parque Tecnológico de Ciencias de la Salud, Avda. del Conocimiento, s/n.18016 Armilla (Granada).  Spain


