### Accession
PXD006419

### Title
Quantitative proteomic characterization of lung-MSC and bone marrow-MSC using DIA-mass spectrometry

### Description
Mesenchymal stromal cells (MSC) are ideal candidates for cell therapies, due to their immune-regulatory and regenerative properties. We have previously reported that lung-derived MSC are tissue-resident cells with lung-specific properties compared to bone marrow-derived MSC. Assessing relevant molecular differences between lung-MSC and bone marrow-MSC is important, given that such differences may impact their behavior and potential therapeutic use. Here, we present an in-depth mass spectrometry (MS) based strategy to investigate the proteomes of lung-MSC and bone marrow-MSC. The MS-strategy relies on label free quantitative data-independent acquisition (DIA) analysis and targeted data analysis using a MSC specific spectral library. We identified several significantly differentially expressed proteins between lung-MSC and bone marrow-MSC within the cell layer (352 proteins) and in the conditioned medium (49 proteins). Bioinformatics analysis revealed differences in regulation of cell proliferation, which was functionally confirmed by decreasing proliferation rate through Cytochrome P450 stimulation. Our study reveals important tissue-specific differences within proteome and matrisome profiles between lung- and bone marrow-derived MSC that may influence their behavior and affect the clinical outcome when used for cell-therapy.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture for mass spectrometry analysis Cultured MSC (passage 3) from lung tissue and bone marrow aspirates were seeded into 6-well plates and cultured in StemMACS MSC expansion medium (MACS Miltenyi Biotec) supplemented with 1% antibiotic antimycotic solution (Sigma Aldrich) under standard culture conditions (37°C and 5% CO2). When 80-90% confluence was achieved cells were washed with Dulbecco´s phosphate buffered saline (DPBS) and 2 ml DMEM (without serum and phenol red, Sigma Aldrich, cat no. D5921), supplemented with 1% glutamine were added. After 24 hours, conditioned medium was collected and cell layer was washed with DPBS. Conditioned medium and cell layer samples were stored at -20°C.  Mass spectrometry sample preparation To analyze proteins in the cell layer, cell culture plates were thawed and scraped. Cell layer samples were diluted in SDS-PAGE sample buffer (0.5 M Tris-HCl, 0.5M glycerol, 10% SDS, 0.5% beta-mercaptoethanol, 0.5% bromphenol blue), boiled at 95°C for 5 minutes at 800 rpm, followed by centrifugation at 14.000 x g for 10 minutes. To analyze proteins released into the conditioned medium, two ml medium was dried in a vacuum centrifuge and prepared using the in-solution protein digestion protocol as described previously (Sjoholm, Karlsson et al., 2014). Protein amounts were determined using Pierce BSA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific, cat. no. 23225) according to manufacturer’s instructions. For construction of the spectral library 50 µg of each cell layer (n=2) respective conditioned medium (n=2) were separated on SDS-PAGE (4-15% Criterion TGX gels, BioRad laboratories Inc., Hercules, CA, USA) for 15 min at 60 V followed by 45 min at 200 V, and the gel was stained with GelCode Blue Safe Protein Stain (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA). Each lane was cut into 45 bands that were pooled into 10 total fractions and prepared for in-gel digestion as previouslydescribed (Malmstrom, Kilsgard et al., 2016).  Mass spectrometry analysis LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide separation was carried out by an EASY-nLC 1000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected to an RP-HPLC EasySpray column (ID 75 µm x 25 cm C18 2 µm 100 Å resin (Thermo Fisher Scientific)). Solvent A (0.1% formic acid) and solvent B (0.1% formic acid, 100% acetonitrile) was used to run a linear gradient from 5% to 30% of solvent B. For cell layer samples a 120 min gradient was used whereas for the conditioned medium samples a 60 min gradient was used, both at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The data acquisition mode was set to obtain one high resolution MS scan (70.000 at 200 m/z). The 15 most abundant ions from the preceding MS scan were fragmented by higher energy induced collision dissociation (HCD) and MS/MS fragment ion spectra were acquired at a resolution of 17.500 at 200 m/z. Charge state screening was enabled and unassigned or singly charged ions were rejected. The dynamic exclusion window was set to 40 for the 120 min gradient and to 20 for the 60 min gradient. Only MS precursors that exceeded a threshold of 1.7e4 were allowed to trigger MS/MS scans. The ion accumulation time was set to 100 ms (MS) and 60 ms (MS/MS) using an AGC target setting of 1e6 (MS and MS/MS).

### Data Protocol
Shotgun MS raw files were processed using the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (TPP, version 4.7) (Deutsch, Mendoza et al., 2010). All protein database searches were performed against the manually reviewed human UniProt FASTA database (version November 2015). Cysteine carbamidometylation was set as fixed peptide modification and methionine oxidation and hydroxylation of proline were set as variable peptide modifications. A precursor ion mass tolerance of 20 ppm and a fragment ion mass error tolerance of 50 ppm were used. A reversed database was used to determine the false discovery rate of 1% (Teleman J Improvements in MS assay library generation etc.).  Data for spectral library generation was acquired as described in the mass spectrometry analysis section. The MSC spectral library was built according to the Fraggle-Franklin workflow as previously described (Teleman J Improvements in MS assay library generation etc.).

### Publication Abstract
Mesenchymal stromal cells (MSC) are ideal candidates for cell therapies, due to their immune-regulatory and regenerative properties. We have previously reported that lung-derived MSC are tissue-resident cells with lung-specific properties compared to bone marrow-derived MSC. Assessing relevant molecular differences between lung-MSC and bone marrow-MSC is important, given that such differences may impact their behavior and potential therapeutic use. Here, we present an in-depth mass spectrometry (MS) based strategy to investigate the proteomes of lung-MSC and bone marrow-MSC. The MS-strategy relies on label free quantitative data-independent acquisition (DIA) analysis and targeted data analysis using a MSC specific spectral library. We identified several significantly differentially expressed proteins between lung-MSC and bone marrow-MSC within the cell layer (352 proteins) and in the conditioned medium (49 proteins). Bioinformatics analysis revealed differences in regulation of cell proliferation, which was functionally confirmed by decreasing proliferation rate through Cytochrome P450 stimulation. Our study reveals important differences within proteome and matrisome profiles between lung- and bone marrow-derived MSC that may influence their behavior and affect the clinical outcome when used for cell-therapy.

### Keywords
Human

### Affiliations
Department of Experimental Medical Science, Lung Biology Unit, Lund University, 22184, Lund, Sweden
Lund University

### Submitter
Sara Rolandsson Enes

### Lab Head
Dr Gunilla Westergren-Thorsson
Department of Experimental Medical Science, Lung Biology Unit, Lund University, 22184, Lund, Sweden


