### Accession
PXD002216

### Title
High-resolution mass spectrometry based proteomic analysis of the response to vancomycin-induced cell wall stress in Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2)

### Description
Understanding how bacteria survive periods of cell wall stress is of fundamental interest and can help generate ideas for improved antibacterial treatments. In this study we use tandem mass tagging to characterize the proteomic response of vancomycin resistant Streptomyces coelicolor to the exposure to sub-lethal levels of the antibiotic. A common set of 804 proteins were identified in triplicate experiments. Contrasting changes in the abundance of proteins closely associated with the cytoplasmic membrane with those taking place in the cytosol identified aspects of protein spatial localization that are associated with the response to vancomycin. Enzymes for peptidoglycan precursor, mycothiol, ectoine and menaquinone biosynthesis together with a multisubunit nitrate reductase were recruited to the membrane following vancomycin treatment. Many proteins with regulatory functions (including sensor protein kinases) also exhibited significant changes in abundance exclusively in the membrane associated protein fraction. Several enzymes predicted to be involved in extracellular peptidoglycan crossbridge formation became significantly depleted from the membrane. A comparison with data previously acquired on the changes in gene transcription following vancomycin treatment identified a common high-confidence set of changes in gene expression. Generalized changes in protein abundance indicate roles for proteolysis, the pentose phosphate pathway and a reorganization of amino acid biosynthesis in the stress response.

### Sample Protocol
S. coelicolor M600, a prototrophic plasmid-free derivative of S. coelicolor A3(2), was cultured and subjected to vancomycin stress using the method previously described in the transcriptome study 19. Briefly, spores were germinated and batch cultured in biological triplicate to mid-log phase (OD600nm ~ 0.5) in NMMP medium. Cells were then exposed to a sub-lethal concentration (10 microg/ml) of vancomycin (Sigma), and samples taken 0, 45 and 90 minutes after addition of the antibiotic. Harvested cell pellets were flash frozen in liquid nitrogen then stored at -800C until use for protein sample preparation. Typically, mycelium from 50 ml culture samples was collected, with a transfer time from culture flask to frozen sample of 1.5 min. Data from the transcriptome study indicated that a 90 min sampling period adequately captures the immediate response to the antibiotic. A transient slowing in growth of the cultures was observed immediately following vancomycin addition, but the dose used is well below the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC; ~80 microg/ml) and the cultures soon resumed a normal growth rate (doubling time ~4 h). Frozen cell pellets were resuspended in ice-cold wash buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6, 150 mM NaCl) then centrifuged at 4,000 rpm for 1.5 minutes at 4°C. Washed cells were transferred to 2 ml eppendorf tubes and resuspended on ice in a lysis buffer comprising 50 mM Tris pH 7.6, 5 mM DTT, 1 mM EDTA and complete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche 11836170001). Cells were then lysed by sonication (10 x 2 sec bursts) while cooling in an ethanol-ice bath, and cell debris removed by centrifugation (15 min, 10 000 g, 4°C). The supernatant was separated into soluble and membrane fractions by ultracentrifugation (45 min at 150 000 g) at 4°C. After ultracentrifugation, soluble proteins in the supernatant were precipitated by addition of 6-volumes of ice cold acetone and overnight incubation at -20°C. Membrane pellets were subjected to a salt wash to remove non-specifically associated proteins by resuspending them in wash buffer (above) containing 250 mM NaCl. Washed membranes were recovered by repeating the ultracentrifugation, and proteins extracted in lysis buffer (above) containing 1% SDS. Finally, the membrane-associated proteins were acetone precipitated as above. Precipitated protein samples (100 microg) were processed and subjected to tandem mass tag (TMT) labelling using the Thermo Scientific (Waltham, MA) 6-plex Isobaric Label Reagent Set according to the manufacturers’ instructions. In brief, proteins were first reduced and alkylated, then digested with trypsin and finally labelled with the 126, 127, 128, 129, 130 and 131 isobaric tags. Labelled samples, defined in Table 1, were then combined and lyophilized before being desalted using SepPak-C18 cartridges (Waters (Milford, MA)) and subjected to a preliminary fractionation using reverse-phase UPLC. Peptides, dissolved in 20 mM ammonium formate (pH 10.0) containing 4% (v/v) acetonitrile, were loaded onto an Acquity bridged ethyl hybrid C18 UPLC column (Waters (Milford, MA); 2.1 mm i.d. x 150 mm, 1.7 Km particle size), and separated using a linear gradient of 5-60% acetonitrile in 20 mM ammonium formate (pH10.0) over 60 minutes at a flow-rate of 0.25 ml/min. Fractions were collected over 1 minute intervals and reduced to dryness by vacuum centrifugation. Chromatographic performance was monitored in-line by sampling eluate with a diode array detector scanning between wavelengths of 200 and 400 nm. Dried fractions from the high pH reverse-phase separations were dissolved in 30 μl of 0.1% formic acid and 1 μl aliquots analysed by LC-MS/MS using a nanoAcquity UPLC (Waters (Milford, MA)) system and an LTQ Orbitrap Velos hybrid ion trap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific (Waltham, MA)). Reverse-phase separation of peptides was achieved by initially loading samples onto a UPLC Trap Symmetry C18 pre-column (Waters (Milford, MA), 80 μm i.d x 20 mm, 5 μm particle size) and eluting with 0.1% formic acid for 3 minutes at a flow rate of 10 μl/min. After this period, the column valve was switched to allow elution of peptides from the pre-column onto an analytical BEH C18 nano column (Waters (Milford, MA), 75 μm i.d. x 250 mm, 1.7 μm particle size) eluting with a linear gradient of 5-40% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid over 60 minutes at flow rate of 300 nl/min. The LC eluant was sprayed into the mass spectrometer by means of a nanospray source, and m/z values of eluting peptide ions were measured in the Orbitrap Velos mass analyzer, set at a resolution of 30000. To generate MS/MS spectra, Top-20 data dependent scanning was used to automatically isolate and generate fragment ions by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) in the HCD cell, and the fragment ions passed into the Orbitrap (7500 resolution), via the C-trap, for mass analysis. Ions wit charge states of 2+ and above were selected for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry data was processed to produce MS/MS peak lists in Mascot generic format using msconvert (ProteoWizard Project 24,25). Peptides were identified by querying peak lists with the Mascot search algorithm (v2.3.02, Matrix Science), using the S.coelicolor protein sequence database downloaded from StrepDB (http://strepdb.streptomyces.org.uk) July 2011 (8218 sequences). A contaminant database (cRAP, ftp://thegpm.org/fasta/cRAP, 115 sequences) was also searched and there was no overlap between contaminant ions (keratin and trypsin) and streptomyces peptide ions. TMT 6-plex (N-termini, K) and carbamidomethylation (C) were set as fixed modifications, and TMT 6-plex (Y) and oxidation (M) as variable modifications. Precursor and fragment ion mass tolerances were set to 25 ppm and 0.2 Da respectively. Up to two missed tryptic cleavages were permitted. Peak lists were also queried against a decoy database of scrambled peptide sequences to estimate false discovery rates. Mascot search results from the forward and decoy database searches were then processed with Mascot Percolator, a machine learning algorithm that re-scores peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) to yield a more robust false discovery rate 26. TMT reporter ions for PSMs with a posterior error probability of less than 0.01 were quantified using the i-Tracker algorithm 27, yielding a list of identified peptides and associated TMT 6-plex quantification. The median spectral intensity quantitation value per PSM for each reporter ion, which is a robust method to remove outliers, was used for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Understanding how bacteria survive periods of cell wall stress is of fundamental interest and can help generate ideas for improved antibacterial treatments. In this study we use tandem mass tagging to characterize the proteomic response of vancomycin resistant Streptomyces coelicolor to the exposure to sublethal levels of the antibiotic. A common set of 804 proteins were identified in triplicate experiments. Contrasting changes in the abundance of proteins closely associated with the cytoplasmic membrane with those taking place in the cytosol identified aspects of protein spatial localization that are associated with the response to vancomycin. Enzymes for peptidoglycan precursor, mycothiol, ectoine and menaquinone biosynthesis together with a multisubunit nitrate reductase were recruited to the membrane following vancomycin treatment. Many proteins with regulatory functions (including sensor protein kinases) also exhibited significant changes in abundance exclusively in the membrane-associated protein fraction. Several enzymes predicted to be involved in extracellular peptidoglycan crossbridge formation became significantly depleted from the membrane. A comparison with data previously acquired on the changes in gene transcription following vancomycin treatment identified a common high-confidence set of changes in gene expression. Generalized changes in protein abundance indicate roles for proteolysis, the pentose phosphate pathway and a reorganization of amino acid biosynthesis in the stress response.

### Keywords
Streptomyces coelicolor, Orbitrap velos, Lc-ms/ms, Tmt 6-plex

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge
Department of Biochemistry University of Cambridge

### Submitter
Laurent Gatto

### Lab Head
Dr Hee-Jeon Hong
Department of Biochemistry University of Cambridge


