### Accession
PXD040192

### Title
Mitochondrial outer membrane integrity regulates a ubiquitin-dependent NF-kB inflammatory response

### Description
Mitochondria are often essential for apoptosis through mitochondrial outer membrane permeabilization (MOMP). This central event enables cytochrome c release leading to caspase activation and rapid cell death. Recently, MOMP has been shown to be inherently pro-inflammatory, for instance, causing mitochondrial DNA-dependent activation of cGAS-STING signalling. Alongside having emerging functions in health and disease, MOMP associated inflammation can also elicit anti-tumour immunity. Nonetheless, how MOMP triggers inflammation and how the cell counteracts this remain poorly defined. Here, we find that upon MOMP, mitochondria are ubiquitylated in a promiscuous manner targeting proteins localised to both inner and outer mitochondrial membranes. Mitochondrial ubiquitylation serves to recruit the essential adaptor molecule, NEMO, leading to activation of pro-inflammatory NF-kB signalling. We find that disruption of mitochondrial outer membrane integrity through different means leads to engagement of a similar pro-inflammatory signalling platform. Thus, mitochondrial integrity directly controls inflammation, whereby permeabilised mitochondria initiate NF-?B signalling. This may be important for the various pathophysiological functions of MOMP-associated inflammation.

### Sample Protocol
Peptides containing ubiquitin remnant motifs were isolated using the PTMScan-Ubiquitin Remnant Motif (K--GG) Kit (CST #5562) according to manufacturers’ instructions. Isolation of ubiquitin remnants was performed on 4 independent repeats for both conditions (4.4 mg protein per sample).   Peptides were separated by nanoscale C18 reverse-phase liquid chromatography using an EASY-nLC II 1200 (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Elution was performed at a flow rate of 300 nL/min using a binary gradient, into a 50 cm fused silica emitter (New Objective) packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 1.9 µm resin (Dr Maisch GmbH), for a total duration of 135 minutes. Packed emitter was kept at 50 ?C by column oven (Sonation) integration into the nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Scientific). Eluting peptides were electrosprayed into the mass spectrometer using a nanoelectrospray ion source. To decrease air contaminants signal level an Active Background Ion Reduction Device (EDI Source Solutions) was used. Data acquisition was performed using Xcalibur software (Thermo Scientific). A full scan over mass range of 350-1400 m/z was acquired at 120,000 resolution at 200 m/z. Higher energy collision dissociation fragmentation was performed on the 15 most intense ions, and peptide fragments generated were analysed in the Orbitrap at 15,000 resolution.

### Data Protocol
The MS Raw data were processed using MaxQuant software (Cox & Mann, 2008) version 1.6.3.3 and searched with Andromeda search engine (Cox et al, 2011) querying SwissProt (Consortium 2019) Mus musculus (20/06/2016; 57,258 entries). First and main searched were performed with precursor mass tolerances of 20 ppm and 4.5 ppm, respectively, and MS/MS tolerance of 20 ppm. The minimum peptide length was set to six amino acids and specificity for trypsin cleavage was required. Methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation and di-Gly-lysine were specified as variable modifications, whereas cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification. The peptide, protein, and site false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1%. All MaxQuant outputs were analysed with Perseus software version 1.6.2.3 (Tyanova et al, 2016).   The MaxQuant output GlyGly (K)sites.txt file was use for quantification of Ubiquitylated peptides. From the GlyGly (K)Sites.txt file, Reverse and Potential Contaminant flagged peptides (defined as MaxQuant output) were removed. To determine significanly changing ubiquitylated peptides a Student t-test with a 1% FDR (permutation-based) was applied using the peptide intensities included in the GlyGly (K)Sites table. Missing values were imputed separately for each column (width 0.3, down shift 1.4). Only ubiquitylated peptides having: “score diff” greater than 5, a localisation probability higher than 0.75, and are robustly quantified in three out of four replicate experiments were included in the analysis.   Cellular localisation of proteins was determined using Uniprot and Proteinatlas. Mitochondrial localisation was determined using MitoCarta 3.0. GO enrichment analysis was performed using PANTHER classification system.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Mitochondria, Nf-?b signaling, Apoptosis

### Affiliations
Proteomics
CRUK - Beatson Institute for Cancer Research - Switchback Rd, Bearsden, Glasgow G61 1BD - United Kingdom

### Submitter
Sergio Lilla

### Lab Head
Dr Sara Rossana Zanivan
CRUK - Beatson Institute for Cancer Research - Switchback Rd, Bearsden, Glasgow G61 1BD - United Kingdom


