### Accession
PXD041535

### Title
Proteomics Study and Protein Biomarkers of Malignant Ventricular Arrhythmia in Acute Myocardial Infarction Patients

### Description
Acute myocardial infarction (AMI) is one of the leading causes of death. It is particularly important to predict malignant ventricular arrhythmia (MVA) timely and accurately in patients with AMI. This study aimed to explore biomarkers and to reveal possible mechanisms of MVA in AMI for clinical diagnosis. Blood samples from 190 human subjects were collected to reveal the differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) in three comparisons (AMI/control, AMI+MVA/control, and AMI+MVA/AMI) in proteomics with bioinformatics analysis and validated in new cohorts. The diagnostic value of candidate DEPs predicting AMI+MVA was also evaluated by the receiver operating characteristic curve (ROC). A total of 8,365 peptides and 460 proteins from the LC-MS/MS analysis were identified with 90 in AMI/control, 94 in AMI+MVA/control, and 43 in AMI+MVA/AMI identified as DEPs. TGFBI level had notable decreasing trend in AMI+MVA (161.9 ± 19.0 ng/ml) compared with AMI (P<0.0001) or control (P<0.0001). vWF level in AMI+MVA patients was significantly higher than that in AMI patients (P<0.01) and control (P<0.0001). ROC analysis showed that TGFBI and vWF had the strong and potential value of predicting MVA in AMI. By constructing proteomics profile to identify the protein characteristics this study found that decreased TGFBI and increased vWF are the characteristics of proteins in the MVA patients with AMI.  These findings provide new insight into the diagnosis and pathogenesis of the development of MVA.  Further, decreased TGFBI and increased vWF are potential predicting biomarkers for diagnosis of MVA in AMI patients.

### Sample Protocol
Blood samples were obtained by EDTA-containing vacutainer tube and centrifuged at 2500 rpm for 10 minutes. The upper plasma was separated and preserved in -80℃ until use.

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed using SPSS 20.0 software (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA) and GraphPad Prism (version 7, GraphPad Software Inc., San Diego, CA).  Data were represented as mean ± SEM.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Acute myocardial infarction; malignant ventricular arrhythmia; proteomics; data independent acquisition

### Affiliations
The Institute of Cardiovascualr Diseases &Department of Cardiovascular surgery, TEDA International Cardiovascular Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Graduate School of Peking Union Medical College &Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
Teda International Cardiovascular Hospital

### Submitter
Hai-Tao Hou

### Lab Head
Dr Hou Hai Tao
The Institute of Cardiovascualr Diseases &Department of Cardiovascular surgery, TEDA International Cardiovascular Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Graduate School of Peking Union Medical College &Tianjin University, Tianjin, China


