### Accession
PXD018694

### Title
MASS SPECTROMETRY ROADMAPS TO NAIVE PLURIPOTENCY

### Description
Pluripotency can be maintained in the naïve state through manipulation of ERK and WNT signalling (2i), shielding embryonic stem cells (ESCs) from inductive cues. Alternatively, inhibiting CDK8/19 (CDK8/19i), a repressor of the Mediator co-activator complex, directly stimulates super-enhancer activity, and was recently shown to stabilize cells in a functional state that resembles naïve pluripotency. Naïve ESCs exhibit important epigenetic, transcriptional and metabolic features. However, our understanding on how these regulatory layers are inter-connected to promote the naive state is in progress. To fill this gap, here we used mass spectrometry to describe the dynamic molecular events (i.e. phosphoproteome, proteome and metabolome) executed by 2i and CDK8/19i, as they transition cell identity into naïve pluripotency. We observed rapid proteomic reprogramming, revealing widespread commonalities, and some important differences, between these two approaches, suggesting a largely over-lapping mechanism. CDK8/19i acts directly on the control of the transcriptional machinery, which elicits a rapid and direct activation of key identity genes including those that maintain the naïve program. Additional molecular changes in 2i are achieved by phosphorylation of critical downstream effectors that reinforce the naïve transcriptional circuitry while repressing factors from the more-differentiated formative and primed states. Comparing transcriptomic and proteomic changes, we found that post-transcriptional de-repression is a major feature of naïve pluripotency conferred by both 2i and CDK8/19i, and this may support the enhanced mitochondrial capacity of naive cells. Furthermore, at the level of metabolome, while 2i- and CDK8/19i-treated cells share similar aspects in one-carbon metabolism and beta-oxidation, in other regards they are divergent, a feature which may explain their differences in DNA methylation. These datasets provide a valuable resource for exploring the molecular mechanisms underlying pluripotency and cell identity transitions.

### Sample Protocol
Time course proteome:  cells were lysed using 7M urea, 2M thiourea, 50mM Hepes, 1:1000 (v/v) of benzonase and 1:100 (v/v) of phosphatase and protease inhibitor cocktail 100x. Cell lysates were homogenized by sonication and cleared by centrifugation. Protein concentration was measured with Qubit® Protein Assay Kit. 110µg of each lysate were digested using the filter aided sample preparation (FASP) method.  A first digestion using Lys-C (1:50 w/w, Wako Pure Chemical Industries) for 4 hours was followed by a dilution 8-fold in 50mM TEAB and a subsequent digestion with trypsin (1:100 w/w, Promega) overnight at 37⁰C. Labelling was performed using the iTRAQ® Reagent 8plex kit (AB Sciex). Clean-up was performed with C18 Sep-Pack. Eluate was dried and dissolved in 10 mM of NH4OH for subsequent fractionation by high pH reversed phase chromatography. Each fraction was dried and dissolved in 50 µl of 1% FA for LC-MS/MS analysis. The Impact (Bruker Daltonics) was coupled online to a nanoLC Ultra system (Eksigent). Sample was loaded onto a reversed-phase C18, 5 µm, 0.1 x 20 mm trapping column (NanoSeparations) and washed for 15 min at 2.5 µl/min with 0.1% FA. The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 250 nl/min onto a home-made analytical column packed with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ beads, 1.9 μm, 75 μm x 50 cm, heated to 45 °C. Solvent A was 4% ACN in 0.1% FA and Solvent B CH3CN in 0.1% FA. The MS acquisition time used for each sample was 180 min. The Q-q-TOF Impact was operated in a data dependent mode. The 20 most abundant isotope patterns exceeding a threshold of 5000 counts and with charge ≥2 and m/z > 350 from the survey scan were sequentially isolated and fragmented in the collision cell by collision induced dissociation (CID).  Time course Phospho-proteome: cells were lysed using 5% SDS and digested following the S-trap protocol. 200 ug protein of each samples were labelled using TMT11plex reagent following manufacturer instructions. Clean-up was performed with C18 Sep-Pack. To perform phosphopeptide enrichment, peptides were dissolved in 80% CH3CN and 6% TFA. Titanium dioxide (TiO2) beads were prepared at 60µg beads/µl of DHB solution (20 mg/ml DHB in 80% CH3CN 6% TFA). TiO2 beads were added to the sample in a ratio 1:2 (Sample:TiO2). Sample was incubated for 15 minutes. Supernatant was used for a second binding with half the amount of beads. Beads from the first and second TiO2 binding were transfer to separate C8-tips and washed. Peptides were eluted with 25µl of 5% NH4OH and 25µl of 10% NH4OH 25% CH3CN. Eluate from the second TiO2 binding was resuspended in 22 µl 5% FA for LC-MS/MS analysis. Eluate from the first binding was fractionated with high pH reverse phase micro-columns. Sample was loaded into the tips thrice and the flow-through was collected to a vial. Next, 50 µl of phase A (20 mM NH4OH) was loaded and collected as the flow-through. Peptides were sequentially eluted increasing the percentage of Buffer B (20mM NH3 in CH3CN). Samples were dissolved in 22µl of 5% FA for subsequent LC-MS/MS analysis. One third of each fraction was separated by on-line reversed-phase nanoscale capillary LC and analyzed by electrospray MS/MS. Three replicates were run for each sample. The experiments were performed on an Ultimate 3000 RSL nano LC system (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) equipped with an EASY-spray ion source (Thermo Scientific). The peptides were eluted from an Easy-Spray Column (75 um i.d. x 50 cm) packed with PepMap RSLC C18 2 um by application of a binary gradient consisting of 0.1% FA (buffer A) and 100% ACN in 0.1% FA (buffer B), with a flow rate of 250 nL/min during 90 minutes. The column was operated at a constant temperature of 45ºC. The MS survey was performed in the Orbitrap for a m/z range between 350 and 1500 m/z. The resolution was set to 60,000 FWHM at m/z 200. The 15 most abundant isotope patterns with charge ≥2 and <6 from the survey scan were selected with an isolation window of 1 m/z and fragmented in the HCD collision cell. Normalized collision energy was set to 35. The resulting fragments were detected in the Orbitrap for a m/z range between 100 and 2000 m/z with a resolution of 45,000 FWHM at m/z 200. The maximum ion injection times for the survey scan and the MS/MS scans were 45 ms and 80 ms respectively and the ion target values were set to 3e6 and 5e4, respectively for each scan mode.

### Data Protocol
Complete proteome time course raw files were analyzed using MaxQuant 1.5.3.30 (Cox and Mann, 2008) with Andromeda (Cox et al., 2011) as the search engine against a Mus musculus database (UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot, 43,539 sequences). Sample quantification type was set to iTRAQ8plex. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was included as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-terminal were included as variable modifications. Precursor mass tolerance was 35 ppm for the first search, and 7 ppm for the main search. Fragment mass tolerance was set to 40 ppm. Minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and a maximum of two missed-cleavages were allowed. For protein assessment (FDR <1%) in MaxQuant, at least one unique peptide was required for identification. Only unique peptides were used for quantification. Other parameters were set as default. Reverse, only identified by site and proteins that did not have reporter intensity in all eight channels were discarded for further analysis. Time-course phosphoproteomics raw files were analyzed using MaxQuant 1.6.0.16 (Cox and Mann, 2008) with Andromeda (Cox et al., 2011) as the search engine against a Mus musculus database (UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot, 43,539 sequences). Sample quantification type was set to TMT11Plex. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was included as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine, acetylation of protein N-terminal and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine were included as variable modifications. Precursor mass tolerance was 20 ppm for the first search, and 4.5 ppm for the main search. Fragment mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm. 17 top peaks were selected per 100 Da intervals of the fragmentation spectra. Minimal peptide length was set to 8 amino acids, maximum peptide mass was set to 6500 Da and maximum of two missed-cleavages were allowed. Peptides and proteins were filtered at 1% FDR. Other parameters were set as default. Reverse, contaminants and identifications that did not have reporter intensity in all eleven channels were discarded for further analysis. Reporter intensities of the phosphorylation sites were extracted from ‘Phospho(STY)Sites.txt’ table. Data was further processed using R and Perseus.

### Publication Abstract
Embryonic stem cells (ESCs) can be maintained in the na&#xef;ve state through inhibition of Mek1/2 and Gsk3 (2i). A relevant effect of 2i is the inhibition of Cdk8/19, which are negative regulators of the Mediator complex, responsible for the activity of enhancers. Inhibition of Cdk8/19 (Cdk8/19i) stimulates enhancers and, similar to 2i, stabilizes ESCs in the na&#xef;ve state. Here, we use mass spectrometry to describe the molecular events (phosphoproteome, proteome, and metabolome) triggered by 2i and Cdk8/19i on ESCs. Our data reveal widespread commonalities between these two treatments, suggesting overlapping processes. We find that post-transcriptional de-repression by both 2i and Cdk8/19i might support the mitochondrial capacity of naive cells. However, proteome reprogramming in each treatment is achieved by different mechanisms. Cdk8/19i acts directly on the transcriptional machinery, activating key identity genes to promote the na&#xef;ve program. In contrast, 2i stabilizes the na&#xef;ve circuitry through, in part, de-phosphorylation of downstream transcriptional effectors.

### Keywords
Mouse stem cells, Phosphoproteomics, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Head of Proteomics Unit, CNIO, Madrid (Spain)
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research

### Submitter
Ana Martinez-Val

### Lab Head
Dr Javier Munoz
Head of Proteomics Unit, CNIO, Madrid (Spain)


