### Accession
PXD024211

### Title
USP32 regulates non-proteolytic LAMTOR1 ubiquitination and Ragulator function

### Description
Ubiquitination is among the most prevalent post-translational modifications regulating a great number of cellular functions, and defects in such processes contribute to many diseases. Deubiquitinating enzymes (DUBs) are essential to control the precise outcome of ubiquitin signals. The ubiquitin-specific protease 32 (USP32) differs from all other DUBs as it comprises in addition to its catalytic USP domain and the DUSP domain also multiple EF hands and a C-terminal prenylation site. This unique domain architecture offers various features for the regulation of specific signaling processes by USP32. To better understand the cellular function of USP32, we performed SILAC-based quantitative ubiquitinome analyses to determine potential USP32 substrates. We found proteins involved in endosomal trafficking as well as lysosomal proteins with regulated diGly sites in USP32 knockout (KO) cells.

### Sample Protocol
Ubiquitinome analysis was performed from SILAC labeled RPE1 NHT or USP32KO cells. In brief, proteins were precipitated from the lysate with acetone, denaturated and digested with LysC and trypsin in solution. Peptides were purified using SepPak columns. Enrichment of peptides harboring the ubiquitin remnant diGly motif was performed using specific antibodies conjugated to beads (PTMScan ubiquitin remnant motif, 5562, Cell Signaling). Finally, the peptides were fractionated by SCX and then purified and concentrated by C18 STAGE tipping. For full proteome analysis for later correction of ubiquitinome data, whole cell lysate was separated on a SDS-PAGE and in-gel protein digest was performed with trypsin. Peptides were concentrated and purified for LC-MS analysis by C18 STAGE tip enrichment. Peptides were loaded with an easy nLC1200 onto a self made 15 cm column filled with 1.7µm C18 particles.  For the analysis of peptides obtained by diGly enrichment, the peptides were separated with a 58 minutes gradient from 10 to 38% B (B being 0.1% formic acid in 95% acetonitrile and A being 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile in water.). The eluting peptides were directly injected into an Q Exactive HF operating in DDA mode. In brief after a survey scan 60,000 resolution the 10 most abundant precursor ions were fragmented by HCD and the resulting fragments analyzed with 30,000 resolution. Only precursors with charge states 3-7 were taken into account for fragmentation and afterwards dynamically excluded for 20 seconds.  After the gradient, the column was washed with 100% B and reequilibrated  for a total analysis time of 75 minutes. For analysis of peptides prepared by the gel-based approach, the analysis was the same, but the number of precursor ions chosen for fragmentation (15) and that also precursor ions with a charge of 2 were subjected to further analysis.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was done with MaxQuant 1.5.1 against the Uniprot Human Reference Proteome database with standard settings and activated SILAC quantification (K8). For analysis of the samples from the diGly approach diGly modification of Lysines were set as an additional variable modification. Ratios for peptides with diGly modification were adjusted to total protein level by correction with the data from the total protein experiment. Differentially abundant peptides harboring a diGly motif (p<0.05) were detected with a One-sided T-Test with Perseus.

### Publication Abstract
The endosomal-lysosomal system is a series of organelles in the endocytic pathway that executes trafficking and degradation of proteins and lipids and mediates the internalization of nutrients and growth factors to ensure cell survival, growth, and differentiation. Here, we reveal regulatory, non-proteolytic ubiquitin signals in this complex system that are controlled by the enigmatic deubiquitinase USP32. Knockout (KO) of USP32 in primary hTERT-RPE1 cells results among others in hyperubiquitination of the Ragulator complex subunit LAMTOR1. Accumulation of LAMTOR1 ubiquitination impairs its interaction with the vacuolar H<sup>+</sup>-ATPase, reduces Ragulator function, and ultimately limits mTORC1 recruitment. Consistently, in USP32 KO cells, less mTOR kinase localizes to lysosomes, mTORC1 activity is decreased, and autophagy is induced. Furthermore, we demonstrate that depletion of USP32 homolog CYK-3 in Caenorhabditis elegans results in mTOR inhibition and autophagy induction. In summary, we identify a control mechanism of the mTORC1 activation cascade at lysosomes via USP32-regulated LAMTOR1 ubiquitination.

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Digly, Lysosome

### Affiliations
University of Frankfurt
Institute of Biochemistry II, University Hospital, Goethe University, Frankfurt, Germany

### Submitter
Florian Bonn

### Lab Head
Dr Anja Bremm
Institute of Biochemistry II, University Hospital, Goethe University, Frankfurt, Germany


