### Accession
PXD042613

### Title
An organ-specific angiogenic control mechanism for endothelial tailoring.

### Description
Each organ of the human body requires locally-adapted blood vessels1–3. The gain of such organotypic vessel specializations is often deemed molecularly unrelated to the process of organ vascularization. Opposing this model, we reveal a molecular mechanism for brain-specific angiogenesis that operates under the control of Wnt7a/b ligands, well-known blood-brain barrier maturation signals4–6. The control mechanism relies on Wnt7a/b-dependent expression of Mmp25 in brain endothelial cells. This hitherto poorly characterized GPI-anchored matrix metalloproteinase is selectively required in endothelial tip cells to enable their initial migration across the pial basement membrane which lines the brain surface, and whose distinctive molecular composition is controlled by embryonic pial fibroblasts. Mechanistically, Mmp25 confers brain invasive competence by cleaving the pial basement membrane-enriched Col4a5/6 within a short non-collagenous region of the central helical part of the heterotrimer. Upon genetic interference with pial basement membrane composition, the Wnt/β-catenin-dependent organotypic control of brain angiogenesis is lost, resulting in a properly patterned, yet blood-brain barrier-defective cerebrovasculature. This work reveals an organ-specific angiogenesis mechanism, sheds light on tip cell mechanistic angiodiversity, and thereby illustrates how organs, by imposing local constraints on angiogenic tip cells, can select vessels matching their distinctive physiological requirements.

### Sample Protocol
Collagen IV. 20 µg of collagen IV purified from human placenta (Merck, C7521) was incubated with 2 µg rhMMP25 overnight at 37°C in Mmp25 cleavage buffer. Samples were concentrated by acetone precipitation before SDS-PAGE and Coomassie blue staining. Protein digestion. Each band was analysed by mass spectrometry after tryptic digestion. The peptides were analyzed using nano-LC-ESI-MS/MS tims-TOF Pro (Bruker, Bremen, Germany) coupled with a nanoElute (Bruker, Bremen, Germany). The bands were excised from SDS-PAGE gels, and the proteins were digested with trypsin by in-gel digestion. The gel pieces were washed twice with distilled water and then shrunk with 100% acetonitrile. Proteolytic digestion was performed by the addition of 4 µl of trypsin (Promega) suspended in 50 mM NH4HCO3  buffer. Proteolysis was performed overnight at 37°C. The supernatants were collected and transferred in an injection vial.  Mass spectrometry. The digested bands were analyzed using nano-LC-ESI-MS/MS tims-TOF Pro (Bruker, Billerica, MA, USA) coupled with an UHPLC nanoElute (Bruker). Peptides were resolved by nanoUHPLC (nanoElute, Bruker) on a 75 μm ID, 25 cm C18 column with an integrated CaptiveSpray insert (Aurora, ionopticks, Melbourne) at 200 nl.min-1 at 50°C. LC mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid (v/v) in H20, and mobile phase B was 0.1% formic acid (v/v) in acetonitrile. Samples were loaded directly on the analytical column at a constant pressure of 600 bar. Upon injection of the digest (1 µl) was injected, the mobile phases were linearly increased from 2% B to 13 % over 18 min, from 13 % B to 19% over 7 min, from 19% B to 22 % over 4 min, and from 22% B to 85% in 3 min. Data acquisition on the tims-TOF Pro was performed using Hystar 5.1 and timsControl 2.0. tims-TOF Pro data were acquired using 100 ms TIMS accumulation time, mobility (1/K0) range from 0.6 to 1.6 Vs.cm-². Mass-spectrometric analyses were carried out using the parallel accumulation serial fragmentation (PASEF) acquisition method84. One MS spectrum followed by ten PASEF MS/MS spectra per total cycle of 1.1 s.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were extracted, charge state deconvoluted and deisotoped by Data analysis (Bruker) version 5.3. All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.8.1). Mascot was set up to search the Human Proteome database (101673 entries) assuming semi-specific trypsin digestion. Three missed cleavages were tolerated. Mascot was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.050 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 15 PPM. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification in Mascot. Oxidation of methionine, hydroxylation of lysine and proline, deamination of asparagine and glutamine, and acetylation of the N-terminus were specified in Mascot as variable modifications.  Protein identification. Scaffold (version Scaffold_5.10.0, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 96.0% probability to achieve an FDR less than 1.0% by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 5.0% probability to achieve an FDR less than 1.0% and contained at least 2 identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm85. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Angiogenesis; tip cell angiodiversity; wnt/β-catenin signaling; blood-brain barrier; bbb; mmp25; col4a5; col4a6; pial fibroblast; gpr124; reck; wnt7a

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Neurovascular Signaling, Department of Molecular Biology, ULB Neuroscience Institute, Université libre de Bruxelles (ULB), Gosselies B-6041, Belgium
University of Namur - MaSUN

### Submitter
Marc Dieu

### Lab Head
Dr Benoit Vanhollebeke
Laboratory of Neurovascular Signaling, Department of Molecular Biology, ULB Neuroscience Institute, Université libre de Bruxelles (ULB), Gosselies B-6041, Belgium


