### Accession
PXD040285

### Title
Uptake of oomycete RXLR effectors into host cells by clathrin-mediated endocytosis

### Description
Filamentous (oomycete and fungal) plant pathogens can deliver cytoplasmic effector proteins into host cells to facilitate disease. How RXLR effectors from the potato late blight pathogen Phytophthora infestans enter host cells is unknown. One possible route involves clathrin-mediated endocytosis (CME). Transient silencing of NbCHC, encoding clathrin heavy chain, or endosome marker NbAra6 in the model host Nicotiana benthamiana, attenuated P. infestans infection and reduced translocation of RXLR effector fusions from transgenic pathogen lines into host cells. In contrast, silencing PP1c isoforms, susceptibility factors that are not required for endocytosis, reduced infection but did not attenuate RXLR effector uptake. Endosome enrichment by ultracentrifugation and sucrose gradient fractionation revealed co-localisation of RXLR effector Pi04314-RFP with clathrin-coated vesicles. Immunopurification of clathrin- and NbAra6-associated vesicles during infection revealed that RXLR effectors Pi04314-RFP and AvrBlb1-RFP, but not apoplastic effector PiSCR74-RFP, were co-immunoprecipitated during infection with pathogen lines secreting these effectors. MS/MS analyses of proteins co-immunoprecipitated with NbAra6-GFP during infection revealed enrichment of host proteins associated with endocytic vesicles alongside multiple pathogen RXLR effectors, but not apoplastic effectors, including PiSCR74, which do not enter host cells. Our data show that uptake of P. infestans RXLR effectors into plant cells occurs via CME.

### Sample Protocol
Plant endosome isolation Plant endosomes were isolated from 40 g N. benthamiana leaves with 40 mL isolation buffer (150 mM Na-HEPES pH7.5, 10 mM EDTA, 10 mM EGTA, 17.5% (w/w) sucrose, 7.5 mM KCl,10 mM dithiothreitol, 1× PIC-W and 1×PIC-D) (Reynolds et al 2014; Heard et al 2015). The cellular debris in the total input was removed by filtration through Nylon Filter Mesh 100 (Sigma) and a 50 μL aliquot was removed as a ‘Total input’ sample, the remaining lysate was centrifuged at 1000 × g and 4 °C for 10 min (Centrifuge: Eppendorf 5810/5810R). Supernatants were transferred into pre-chilled ultracentrifugation tubes and further purified by centrifugation for 40 min at 16,000 × g using a fixed-angle 50.2 Ti Rotor and polycarbonate thick wall centrifuge tubes (25 × 89 mm) with an Optima L-80XP Ultracentrifuge (all from Beckman Coulter). The supernatants were transferred to new ultracentrifuge tubes and centrifuged for 1 h at 30,000 × g to obtain the P30 pellets. The supernatants of P30 were centrifuged for 1 h at 100,000 × g to obtain the P100 pellets. Pellets were fully resuspended in 500 μL isolation buffer by constant rotation for 1 h at 4 °C. 45 μL resuspension of pellets were boiled with 45 μL 2× SDS-loading buffer at 95 °C for 10 min for preparation of the P30 and P100 samples for western blotting. Proteins in the 1.6 mL supernatants of P100 were precipitated with four times the sample volume of pre-chilled acetone overnight at -20 °C then centrifuged for 10 min at 16000 × g and 4 °C. These pellets were boiled with 45 μL 2× SDS-loading buffer at 95 °C for 10 min for preparation of the S100 samples for western blotting. Immuno-purification of endosomes For NbAra6-GFP labelled endosome immuno-isolation, 20 μL GFP magnetic protein A beads (Chromotek) or Binding control magnetic beads (Chromotek) were washed with isolation buffer three times. To pre-clear the suspensions, 20 μL of the Binding control beads were added into the 1 mL suspensions of P30 or P100, followed by 1 h constant rotation at 4 °C. These cleared suspensions of P30 or P100 were transferred into new tubes and 20 μL of the GFP beads were added, followed by overnight incubation at 4 °C with constant rotation. Bead-bound endosome material was collected and washed with isolation buffer five times for 2 min at 4 °C with constant rotation (without 1× PIC-W, 1× PIC-D and 1× E-64). The bead-bound endosomes were boiled with 45 μL 2× SDS-loading buffer and proteins were resolved in an SDS-PAGE gel. Liquid chromatography-coupled tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) identification of proteins of NbAra6-GFP-positive endosomes Three independent biological replicates were performed to generate ‘Total input’ and NbAra6-GFP positive endosome immuno-purification samples. Samples were resolved via 1D SDS-PAGE and gels were stained with Quick Coomassie Stain. Each gel lane was cut into 4 fragments of 1-2 cm each (corresponding to approximately 8-15 kDa, 15-25 kDa, 25-40 kDa, and 40-260 kDa) then subjected to in-gel digestion with 1 mg/ml Trypsin (Thermo) at a final concentration of 12.5 µg/mL. Digested peptides were run on a Q-Exactive Plus (Thermo Scientific) instrument coupled to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 HPLC system (Thermo Scientific). A 2-35% gradient comprised of eluent A (0.1% formic acid) and eluent B (80% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid) was used to run a 120-minute gradient with each fragment run consecutively and blanks used between samples. The top 10 most intense peaks from a mass range of 350-1600 m/z in each MS1 scan with a resolution of 70,000 were then taken for MS2 analysis at a resolution of 17,500. Spectra were fragmented using Higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD).

### Data Protocol
Proteomic data analysis MS/MS data were analyzed using Maxquant version 1.6.6.0 against the Nicotiana benthamiana database (Kourelis et al 2019). The MS/MS–flow-injection mass spectrometry (FIMS) tolerance was set to 20 ppm, and the ion trap mass spectrometer (ITMS) match tolerance was 0.15. Fixed modifications included carbamidomethyl (C), and variable modifications included oxidation (M); a maximum value of 2 missed cleavages was used. The protein false-discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01. The minimum peptide length was 7. Output data from Maxquant were analysed using Perseus_2.0.3.0, LFQ (Label free quantification). LFQ intensity data were transformed to log2(LFQ) and were filtered based on the following criteria (min valids =2, Mode = in at least one group). A two-way t-test was used for analyzing differentially expressed proteins in the two samples being compared.

### Publication Abstract
Filamentous (oomycete and fungal) plant pathogens deliver cytoplasmic effector proteins into host cells to facilitate disease. How RXLR effectors from the potato late blight pathogen Phytophthora infestans enter host cells is unknown. One possible route involves clathrin-mediated endocytosis (CME). Transient silencing of NbCHC, encoding clathrin heavy chain, or the endosome marker gene NbAra6 encoding a Rab GTPase in the model host Nicotiana benthamiana, attenuated P. infestans infection and reduced translocation of RXLR effector fusions from transgenic pathogen strains into host cells. By contrast, silencing PP1c isoforms, susceptibility factors not required for endocytosis, reduced infection but did not attenuate RXLR effector uptake. Endosome enrichment by ultracentrifugation and sucrose gradient fractionation revealed co-localization of RXLR effector Pi04314-RFP with clathrin-coated vesicles. Immunopurification of clathrin- and NbAra6-associated vesicles during infection showed that RXLR effectors Pi04314-RFP and AvrBlb1-RFP, but not apoplastic effector PiSCR74-RFP, were co-immunoprecipitated during infection with pathogen strains secreting these effectors. Tandem mass spectrometry analyses of proteins co-immunoprecipitated with NbAra6-GFP during infection revealed enrichment of host proteins associated with endocytic vesicles alongside multiple pathogen RXLR effectors, but not apoplastic effectors, including PiSCR74, which do not enter host cells. Our data show that the uptake of P. infestans RXLR effectors into plant cells occurs via CME.

### Keywords
Oomycete; rxlr effectors; clathrin mediated endocytosis

### Affiliations
University of Dundee

### Submitter
Haixia Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Paul Birch
University of Dundee


