### Accession
PXD004629

### Title
Cancer proteome and metabolite changes linked to SHMT2

### Description
To screen for proximate and interacting proteins of SHMT2 in HeLa cells, the BioID method was employed, which consists of biotinylation of proteins in the vicinity of FlagBirAR118G –SHMT2 followed by streptavidin-based affinity capture and mass spectrometry identification. Experimental procedures were carried out essentially as described previously.

### Sample Protocol
The SHMT2 open reading frame was subcloned into tetracycline (Tet) inducible pcDNA5/FRT/TO expression vector (Invitrogen) by gateway cloning. This pSHMT2-BirA-flag vector was stably transfected in HeLa cell. SHMT2-BirA protein expression was induced by Tet treatment for 24 h.  BirA control and sHMT2-BirA proteins were purified by streptavidin beads and associated proteins were analyzed by LC-MS/MS (see detail in Wei et al., MCR, 2015, 13:1119-29).  For MS analysis, peptides were separated by reverse-phase chromatography using a nanoflow UPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a linear gradient. Ultra high-performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) was coupled online to an Orbitrap Elite or QE mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were fragmented by collision-induced dissociation (CID).

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files acquired from the MS analyzer were processed by MaxQuant software (version 1.3.0.5) according to the standard workflow(Cox, 2008). MS/MS spectra were searched against the UniProt human proteome (release 2015) containing 87,656 entries (including common contaminants) by the Andromeda search engine{Cox, 2011 #53}.  For statistical evaluation of the data, a false discovery rate of 0.01 was set for peptide and protein identification. Protein LFQ intensity obtained from MaxQuant was chosen as the quantitative value representing protein abundance, and used for calculation of protein differential expression. For quantitative mass spectrometric analysis of immunoprecipitates from Flag-tagged SHMT2, protein LFQ intensities across different samples were first normalized by the intensities of bait SHMT2. Normalized LFQ intensities were then used for determination of specific protein-protein interactions by Perseus tools available in the MaxQuant environment.  For BioID assays, the logarithmic ratio of protein intensities between two samples and the negative logarithmic p-values of the Welch t test performed from biological triplicates between two samples were calculated for Volcano plot by Perseus and exported to Microsoft Excel for further analysis. Cytoscape version 3.2.0 was used for visualization of protein interaction networks.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bioid, Shmt2, Ms, Streptavidin

### Affiliations
Hospital for Sickkids
Program in Cell Biology, SPARC BioCentre, Hospital For Sick Children, Toronto;  Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

### Submitter
Jiefei Tong

### Lab Head
Dr Michael F Moran
Program in Cell Biology, SPARC BioCentre, Hospital For Sick Children, Toronto;  Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.


