### Accession
PXD041382

### Title
Dorsal root ganglia(DRG) proteomic analysis

### Description
Complete annotation mice dorsal root ganglia proteome

### Sample Protocol
DRG tissue was dissected from transgenic and control mice and homogenized and lysed with RIPA buffer. Then total protein was precipitated by TCA precipitation and resolubilized in RapiGestSF (Waters Inc.). Samples were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 30 min at 80oC, alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 mins at room temperature. And then 10l (20ng/l) of modified sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) was spiked into 300l PBS and the samples were placed in a 37ºC room overnight.  Samples were acidified by adding 20l 20% formic acid solution and then desalted by STAGE tip (1). On the day of analysis, the samples were reconstituted in 10 µl of HPLC solvent A (0.1% trifluoroacetic acid).).  A nano-scale reverse-phase HPLC capillary column was created by packing 2.6 µm C18 spherical silica beads into a fused silica capillary (100 µm inner diameter x ~30 cm length) with a flame-drawn tip.  After equilibrating the column each sample was loaded via a Famos auto sampler (LC Packings, San Francisco CA) onto the column. A gradient was generated, and peptides were eluted with increasing concentrations of solvent B (97.5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid).  After elution, the peptides were subjected to electrospray ionization into an LTQ Orbitrap Velos Elite ion-trap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) to get  detected, isolated, and fragmented to produce a tandem mass spectrum of specific fragment ions for each peptide.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified from raw data files using Proteome Discoverer (v 2.2) and searched against the SwissProt Mus musculus database using Sequest (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) with the following search parameters: fixed modification, Carbamidomethyl (C); variable modifications, deamidation (NQ), oxidation (M); peptide mass tolerance 5 ppm; fragment mass tolerance 0.8 Da; enzyme, trypsin; max 2 missed cleavages. Proteins were selected based on a threshold range of 0 (min) to 3 (max) unique peptides during comparison with other samples. All databases include a revised version of all the sequences, and the data were filtered to 1-2 % peptide false discovery rate.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dorsal root ganglia

### Affiliations
Professor, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School
Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 75 Francis Street, Boston, MA, 02115, USA

### Submitter
Thomas Michel

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Thomas Michel
Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 75 Francis Street, Boston, MA, 02115, USA


