### Accession
PXD010769

### Title
identification of the endogenous host targets of the Salmonella effectors SSeK1 and 3

### Description
Strains of Salmonella utilise two distinct type three secretion systems to deliver effector proteins directly into host cells. The Salmonella effectors SseK1 and SseK3 are arginine glycosyltransferases that modify mammalian death domain containing proteins with N-acetyl glucosamine (GlcNAc) when overexpressed ectopically or as recombinant protein fusions. Here, we combined Arg-GlcNAc glycopeptide immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry to identify host proteins GlcNAcylated by endogenous levels of SseK1 and SseK3 during Salmonella infection. We observed that SseK1 modified the mammalian signaling protein TRADD, but not FADD as previously reported. Overexpression of SseK1 greatly broadened substrate specificity, while ectopic co-expression of SseK1 and TRADD increased the range of modified arginine residues within the death domain of TRADD. In contrast, endogenous levels of SseK3 resulted in modification of the death domains of receptors of the mammalian TNF superfamily, TNFR1 and TRAILR, at residues Arg376 and Arg293 respectively. Structural studies on SseK3 showed that the enzyme displays a classic GT-A glycosyltransferase fold and binds UDP-GlcNAc in a narrow and deep cleft with the GlcNAc facing the surface. Together our data suggests that Salmonellae carrying sseK1 and sseK3 employ the glycosyltransferase effectors to antagonise different components of death receptor signaling.

### Sample Protocol
SSek1 and 3 host target characterisation: Infection samples expressing highten levels of SSek1 or endogenous level of SSeK1 and 3 were lysised in 6M guanidinium chloride buffer by boiling and preciated overnight with ice-cold acetone. Samples were reduction and alykation with TCEP and CAA then Digested with Trypsin. Samples were cleaned up with tC18 Seppak columns and dried. Arg-glycosylated glycopeptide were affinity purified and then subjected to MS analsysis. For in vitro or tranfection based samples purified proteins were subjected to in gel tryspin digestions.

### Data Protocol
Maxquant based identificiation and LFQ based quantification of Arginine-glycopeptides

### Publication Abstract
Strains of <i>Salmonella</i> utilize two distinct type three secretion systems to deliver effector proteins directly into host cells. The <i>Salmonella</i> effectors SseK1 and SseK3 are arginine glycosyltransferases that modify mammalian death domain containing proteins with <i>N</i>-acetyl glucosamine (GlcNAc) when overexpressed ectopically or as recombinant protein fusions. Here, we combined Arg-GlcNAc glycopeptide immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry to identify host proteins GlcNAcylated by endogenous levels of SseK1 and SseK3 during <i>Salmonella</i> infection. We observed that SseK1 modified the mammalian signaling protein TRADD, but not FADD as previously reported. Overexpression of SseK1 greatly broadened substrate specificity, whereas ectopic co-expression of SseK1 and TRADD increased the range of modified arginine residues within the death domain of TRADD. In contrast, endogenous levels of SseK3 resulted in modification of the death domains of receptors of the mammalian TNF superfamily, TNFR1 and TRAILR, at residues Arg<sup>376</sup> and Arg<sup>293</sup> respectively. Structural studies on SseK3 showed that the enzyme displays a classic GT-A glycosyltransferase fold and binds UDP-GlcNAc in a narrow and deep cleft with the GlcNAc facing the surface. Together our data suggest that salmonellae carrying <i>sseK1</i> and <i>sseK3</i> employ the glycosyltransferase effectors to antagonise different components of death receptor signaling.

### Keywords
Infection, Salmonella, Proteomics, Glycosylation, Glycopeptide enrichment

### Affiliations
Centre for Innate Immunity and Infectious Diseases, Hudson Institute of Medical Research, Clayton, Victoria, Australia
University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Nichollas Scott

### Lab Head
Dr Elizabeth L Hartland
Centre for Innate Immunity and Infectious Diseases, Hudson Institute of Medical Research, Clayton, Victoria, Australia


