### Accession
PXD027898

### Title
Effect of control siRNA knockdown on EndoC-bH1 cell lysate proteome (pilot TMT experiment)

### Description
EndoC-bH1 cells proteomics was assessed in untreated baseline condition and after treatment with control siRNA at 24, 48 and 72 hours. Unpowered exploratory experiment. Sample size: triplicate per condition.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were lysed using PreOmics iST NHS lysis buffer (PreOmics, Planegg, Germany) at 95*C for 10min. Lysate was normalized using BCA assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equivalent amounts of each condition was subjected to enzymatic cleavage for 3 hours by adding equal amounts of endoproteinase Lys-C and trypsin in a 1:50 (wt/wt) enzyme:protein ratio. Tandem Mass Tags™ (TMT™) reagents were reconstituted in anhydrous acetonitrile and added to peptides at a 1:4 reagent:peptide. De-salting and purification were performed according to the PreOmics iST-NHS protocol on a styrene divinylbenzene reversed-phase sulfonate (SDB-RPS) sorbent. Combined Labeled peptides were reconstituted in pH 10.0, 20mM ammonia hydroxide and combined evenly to create a single sample and fractionated on an Agilent 1100 system using a Phenomenex Gemini 5μm C18 250mm x 2mm column. The 96 fractions were combined orthogonally into a total of 12 concatenated analytical samples and injected on a Fusion Lumos Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded onto a ReproSil-Pur 120 C18AQ 1.9um in-house packed to a 5um tip 75u ID x 360u x 50 cm bed volume column using a Thermo EASY-nLC1200. Mobile Phase A was 0.1 vol% FA, 3 vol% ACN in water, while Mobile Phase B was 90 vol% ACN, 0.1 vol% FA. The gradient which had a flow of 250nl/min consisted of non-linear ramp of 3-5 vol% B in 5min, 5-20 vol% B for 80min, 20-32 vol% B in 30 min, 32-95 vol% B in 1min, and hold at 95 vol% B for 14 min. Mass Spectrometer was operated in Data Dependent Acquistion positive mode.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4 with parameters in PE167_2019_GP_PCSK9.pdStudy.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Endoc-bh1

### Affiliations
Université de Paris, Institut Cochin, INSERM U1016, CNRS UMR 8104, 75014 Paris, France.
AstraZeneca

### Submitter
Maria Ryaboshapkina

### Lab Head
Dr Raphael Scharfmann
Université de Paris, Institut Cochin, INSERM U1016, CNRS UMR 8104, 75014 Paris, France.


