### Accession
PXD018342

### Title
The leader peptide peTrpL forms antibiotic-containing ribonucleoprotein complexes for posttranscriptional regulation of multiresistance genes

### Description
Bacterial ribosome-dependent attenuators are widespread posttranscriptional regulators. They harbour small upstream ORFs (uORFs) encoding leader peptides, for which no functions in trans are known yet. In the soil-dwelling plant symbiont Sinorhizobium meliloti, the tryptophan biosynthesis gene trpE(G) is preceded by the uORF trpL and is regulated by transcription attenuation according to tryptophan availability. However, trpLE(G) transcription is initiated independently of the tryptophan level in S. meliloti, thereby ensuring a largely tryptophan-independent production of the leader peptide peTrpL. Here we provide evidence for a tryptophan-independent role of peTrpL in trans. We found that peTrpL increases the resistance towards tetracycline, erythromycin, chloramphenicol and the flavonoid genistein, which are substrates of the major multidrug efflux pump SmeAB. Coimmunoprecipitation with 3×FLAG-peTrpL suggested smeR mRNA, which encodes the transcription repressor of smeABR, as a peptide target. Indeed, upon antibiotic exposure, smeR mRNA was destabilized and smeA stabilized in a peTrpL-dependent manner, showing that peTrpL acts in the differential regulation of smeABR. Further, smeR mRNA was coimmunoprecipitated with 3×FLAG-peTrpL in antibiotic-dependent ribonucleoprotein (ARNP) complexes, which in addition contained an antibiotic-induced antisense RNA complementary to smeR. In vitro ARNP reconstitution revealed that the above antibiotics and genistein directly support complex formation. A specific region of the antisense RNA was identified as a seed region for ARNP assembly in vitro. Altogether, our data show that peTrpL is involved in a mechanism for direct utilization of antimicrobial compounds in posttranscriptional regulation of multiresistance genes. We also show that the role of peTrpL in resistance is conserved in other Alphaproteobacteria

### Sample Protocol
Cultivation of bacteria and antibiotic exposure S. meliloti 2011 was cultivated at 30°C in 30 ml rich TY medium containing 250 µg/ml streptomycin, in 50 ml Erlenmeyer flasks, with shaking at 140 r. p. m., to an OD600nm of 0.5 (Melior H, Li S, Madhugiri R, Stötzel M, Azarderakhsh S, Barth-Weber S, Baumgardt K, Ziebuhr J, Evguenieva-Hackenberg E (2019) Transcription attenuation-derived small RNA rnTrpL regulates tryptophan biosynthesis gene expression in trans. Nucleic Acids Res 47: 6396-6410). To analyze the level of the native peTrpL peptide in strain 2011 upon exposure to subinhibitory tetracycline (Tc) dosage, a culture was divided in two halves. To the one half Tc was added to a final concentration of 1.5 µg/ml, while to the other, control half, the same volume solvent (60 µl ethanol) was added. At the time points 0 min and 10 min, culture aliquots were withdrawn for mass spectrometry analysis.   For coimmunoprecipitation of RNA and native peTrpL with recombinant, IPTG-induced 3xFLAG-peTrpL, strain 2011 (pSRKGm-3xFLAG-peTrpL, pRK4352) was grown in TY medium which additionally contained 10 µg/ml gentamycin and 20 µg/ml Tc to the OD of 0.5. Then 1 mM IPTG was added to induce 3xFLAG-peTrpL. Ten min after addition of IPTG cells were harvested, lysed and CoIP was performed. Beads were washed with and without Tc in the washing buffer. Furthermore, strain 2011 (pSRKGm-3xFLAG-peTrpL, pRK-MS2-rnTrpL) was grown in medium with streptomycin, gentamycin und Tc as described above. Ten min after induction of the tagged peptide production with IPTG, the constitutively transcribed MS2-rnTrpL was isolated together with its interaction partners using MS2.MBP affinity chromatography.    Mass spectrometry For identification of proteins in a gel slice stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue the band was destained and digested with trypsin as reported elsewhere (Bonn, F, Bartel, J, Büttner, K, Hecker, M, Otto, A and Becher, D (2014). Picking vanished proteins from the void: how to collect and ship/share extremely dilute proteins in a reproducible and highly efficient manner. Anal. Chem. 86, 7421–7427.). To recover the peptides, gel pieces were covered with ultra-pure water and incubated 15 minutes in an ultrasonic water bath. Peptides derived from in-gel digestion were loaded on an EASY-nLC II system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with an in-house built 20 cm column (inner diameter 100 mm, outer diameter 360 mm) filled with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ reversed-phase material (3 mm particles, Dr. Maisch GmbH). Elution of peptides was executed with a nonlinear 80 min gradient from 1 to 99% (v/v) solvent B (0.1% (v/v) acetic acid in acetonitrile) with a flow rate of 300 nl/min and injected online into a LTQ Orbitrap XL (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The survey scan at a resolution of R = 30.000 and 1 x 106 automatic gain control target in the Orbitrap with activated lock mass correction was followed by selection of the five most abundant precursor ions for fragmentation. Singly charged ions as well as ions without detected charge states were excluded from MS/MS analysis.  For quantification of peTrpL abundance by targeted MS protein extracts were diluted in 50 mM TEAB-Buffer, pH 8.0 (Sigma-Aldrich) to a final concentration of 0.5 µg/µl. After protein reduction (2.5 mM TCEP, Tris-(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride, Invitrogen) at 65 °C for 45 min, thiols were alkylated in 5 mM iodacetamide (Sigma) for 15 min at 25 °C in the dark. For protein digestion trypsin (Promega) was added in an enzyme to substrate ratio of 1:100. After 14 h at 37 °C digestion was terminated by adding concentrated HCl to a final concentration of 600 mM and peptides were purified by C18 Zip tips (Pierce). Prior measurement samples were spiked with synthetic peptides containing an isotopically labeled amino acid (JPT Peptide Technologies and Thermo Fisher) to a final concentration of 50 fmol/µl (FLAG-peTrpL), 100 fmol/µl (peTrpL-M) and 1000 fmol/µl (WT –peTrpL9), respectively. For quantification of peTrpL abundance the heavy synthetic peptide was used to optimize MS-parameters to achieve the highest sensitivity. The peptides derived from in solution digests were loaded an EASY-nLC 1000 or an EASY-nLC II system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with an in-house built 20 cm column (see above). Elution of peptides was executed with a nonlinear gradient from 1 to 99% (v/v) solvent B (0.1% (v/v) acetic acid in acetonitrile) with a flow rate of 300 nl/min and injected online into a TSQ Vantage (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The selectivity for both Q1 and Q3 were set to 0.7 Da (FWHM). The instrument was operated in SRM mode applying a collision gas pressure of 1.2 mTorr in Q2. The collision energy was optimized before analysis. All monitored transitions and the optimized collision energy can be found in the Supplementary Material of the manuscript.

### Data Protocol
For identification of peptides from MS-spectra database search was performed with Sorcerer-SEQUEST (4.0.4 build, Sage-N Research) using the Sequest algorithm against a target-decoy database containing Sinorhizobium melilotii 2011 ORFs predicted from all 6 open reading frames with the sequences of common laboraty contaminations and FLAG-tagged peTrpL added (total entries: 320482). Database search was based on a strict trypsin digestion with two missed cleavages permitted. Oxidation of methionine and carbamidomethylation of cysteine were considered as variable modifications. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set to 10 ppm and the mass tolerance for fragment ions to 0.5 Da. Validation of MS/MS-based peptide and protein identification was performed with Scaffold V4.7.5 (Proteome Software, Portland, USA), and peptide identifications were accepted if they exceeded the following thresholds: deltaCn greater than 0.1 and XCorr scores greater than 2.2, 3.3 and 3.75 for doubly, triply and all higher charged peptides, respectively. Protein identifications were accepted if at least 2 identified peptides were detected for proteins with a molecular weight of 15 kDa and higher. For proteins smaller than 15 kDa the identification of one unique peptide fulfilling the above mentioned criteria was sufficient for an identification. Normalized spectrum abundance factors (Zybailov, B, Mosley, AL, Sardiu, ME, Coleman, MK, Florens, L and Washburn, MP (2006). Statistical analysis of membrane proteome expression changes in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Journal of proteome research 5, 2339–2347) were used as proxy for protein abundance in the sample. All raw files from targeted MS were processed using Skyline 4.2 MacLean, B, Tomazela, DM, Shulman, N, Chambers, M, Finney, GL, Frewen, B, et al. (2010). Skyline: an open source document editor for creating and analyzing targeted proteomics experiments. Bioinformatics 26, 966–968). A peptide ratio of native and heavy species was based on five transitions. Peptide ratios based on a Dot-Product > 0.7 were used to calculate the average over three biological replicates. The concentration of native peptides in the sample was calculated based on the peptide ratios and the added amount of heavy peptide.

### Publication Abstract
Bacterial ribosome-dependent attenuators are widespread posttranscriptional regulators. They harbor small upstream open reading frames (uORFs) encoding leader peptides, for which no functions in <i>trans</i> are known yet. In the plant symbiont <i>Sinorhizobium meliloti</i>, the tryptophan biosynthesis gene <i>trpE(G)</i> is preceded by the uORF <i>trpL</i> and is regulated by transcription attenuation according to tryptophan availability. However, <i>trpLE(G)</i> transcription is initiated independently of the tryptophan level in <i>S. meliloti</i>, thereby ensuring a largely tryptophan-independent production of the leader peptide peTrpL. Here, we provide evidence for a tryptophan-independent role of peTrpL in <i>trans</i> We found that peTrpL increases the resistance toward tetracycline, erythromycin, chloramphenicol, and the flavonoid genistein, which are substrates of the major multidrug efflux pump SmeAB. Coimmunoprecipitation with a FLAG-peTrpL suggested <i>smeR</i> mRNA, which encodes the transcription repressor of <i>smeABR</i>, as a peptide target. Indeed, upon antibiotic exposure, <i>smeR</i> mRNA was destabilized and <i>smeA</i> stabilized in a peTrpL-dependent manner, showing that peTrpL acts in the differential regulation of <i>smeABR</i> Furthermore, <i>smeR</i> mRNA was coimmunoprecipitated with peTrpL in antibiotic-dependent ribonucleoprotein (ARNP) complexes, which, in addition, contained an antibiotic-induced antisense RNA complementary to <i>smeR</i><i>In vitro</i> ARNP reconstitution revealed that the above-mentioned antibiotics and genistein directly support complex formation. A specific region of the antisense RNA was identified as a seed region for ARNP assembly <i>in vitro</i> Altogether, our data show that peTrpL is involved in a mechanism for direct utilization of antimicrobial compounds in posttranscriptional regulation of multiresistance genes. Importantly, this role of peTrpL in resistance is conserved in other <i>Alphaproteobacteria</i><b>IMPORTANCE</b> Leader peptides encoded by transcription attenuators are widespread small proteins that are considered nonfunctional in <i>trans</i> We found that the leader peptide peTrpL of the soil-dwelling plant symbiont <i>Sinorhizobium meliloti</i> is required for differential, posttranscriptional regulation of a multidrug resistance operon upon antibiotic exposure. Multiresistance achieved by efflux of different antimicrobial compounds ensures survival and competitiveness in nature and is important from both evolutionary and medical points of view. We show that the leader peptide forms antibiotic- and flavonoid-dependent ribonucleoprotein complexes (ARNPs) for destabilization of <i>smeR</i> mRNA encoding the transcription repressor of the major multidrug resistance operon. The seed region for ARNP assembly was localized in an antisense RNA, whose transcription is induced by antimicrobial compounds. The discovery of ARNP complexes as new players in multiresistance regulation opens new perspectives in understanding bacterial physiology and evolution and potentially provides new targets for antibacterial control.

### Keywords
Multiresistance, Quantification, Small proteins, Attenuator, Posttranscriptional regulation, Sinorhizobium meliloti

### Affiliations
University of Greifswald,
Department for Microbial Proteomics
University of Greifswald Institute of Microbiology Department of Microbial Proteomics Felix-Hausdorff-Str.8 17489 Greifswald

### Submitter
Sandra Maass

### Lab Head
Dr Dörte Becher
University of Greifswald Institute of Microbiology Department of Microbial Proteomics Felix-Hausdorff-Str.8 17489 Greifswald


