### Accession
PXD036569

### Title
SITE-SPECIFIC ACTIVITY-BASED PROTEIN PROFILING USING PHOSPHONATE HANDLES

### Description
Most drug molecules target proteins. Identification of the exact drug binding sites on these proteins is essential to understand and predict how drugs affect protein structure and function. To address this challenge, we developed a strategy that uses IMAC-enrichable phosphonate affinity tags, for efficient and selective enrichment of peptides bound to an activity-based probe (ABP), enabling the identification of the exact drug binding site. As a proof of concept, using this approach, termed PhosID–ABPP (Activity-based protein profiling), over 500 unique binding sites were reproducibly identified of an alkynylated Afatinib derivative (PF-06672131). As PhosID–ABPP is compatible with intact cell inhibitor treatment, we investigated the quantitative differences in approachable binding sites in intact cells and in lysates of the same cell line and observed and quantified substantial differences. Moreover, an alternative protease digestion approach was used to capture the previously reported binding site on the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), which turned out to remain elusive when using solely trypsin as protease. Overall, we find that PhosID–ABPP is highly complementary to biotin-based enrichment strategies in activity-based protein profiling studies, with PhosID–ABPP providing the advantage of direct ABP-interaction site identification.

### Sample Protocol
Building on the phosphonate handle designed for specific tagging of proteins of interest by copper-catalyzed alkyne-azide cycloaddition (CuAAC), we now adapt this for activity-based probes. Intact cells and lysates were treated with an alkynylated derivative of the anti-cancer drug Afatinib. CuAAC allows introduction of the handle on probe-labeled residues in complex lysates. After trypsin digestion, the peptides were enzymatically dephosphorylated circumventing co-enrichment of endogenously phosphorylated peptides. Efficient enrichment of phosphonate-probe-labeled peptides was achieved adapting automated IMAC, commonly used for the enrichment of phosphopeptides. Enriched fractions were analyzed with LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Data was processed using MaxQuant when trypsin digestion was performed. For Pepsin-digested samples, MSfragger was used. Search outputs were consecutively analyzed and visualized using Perseus, Excel, and Graphpad.

### Publication Abstract
Most drug molecules target proteins. Identification of the exact drug binding sites on these proteins is essential to understand and predict how drugs affect protein structure and function. To address this challenge, we developed a strategy that uses immobilized metal-affinity chromatography-enrichable phosphonate affinity tags, for efficient and selective enrichment of peptides bound to an activity-based probe, enabling the identification of the exact drug binding site. As a proof of concept, using this approach, termed PhosID-ABPP (activity-based protein profiling), over 500 unique binding sites were reproducibly identified of an alkynylated afatinib derivative (PF-06672131). As PhosID-ABPP is compatible with intact cell inhibitor treatment, we investigated the quantitative differences in approachable binding sites in intact cells and in lysates of the same cell line and observed and quantified substantial differences. Moreover, an alternative protease digestion approach was used to capture the previously reported binding site on the epidermal growth factor receptor, which turned out to remain elusive when using solely trypsin as protease. Overall, we find that PhosID-ABPP is highly complementary to biotin-based enrichment strategies in ABPP studies, with PhosID-ABPP providing the advantage of direct activity-based probe interaction site identification.

### Keywords
Chemical proteomics; activity-based protein profiling; site-specific; phosphonate affinity handles; fe(iii)-immobilized metal affinity chromatography.

### Affiliations
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, University Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Utrecht, Padualaan 8, Utrecht 3584 CH, The Netherlands

Netherlands Proteomics Center, Padualaan 8, Utrecht 3584 CH, The Netherlands


### Submitter
Wouter van Bergen

### Lab Head
Dr A.J.R. Heck
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, University Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands


