### Accession
PXD039625

### Title
SAPS3 is an AMPK inhibitor and controls metabolic homeostasis upon dietary challenge

### Description
Inhibition of AMPK is tightly associated with metabolic perturbations upon over nutrition, yet the molecular mechanism underneath that is not clear.  Here, we demonstrate serine/threonine-protein phosphatase 6 regulatory subunit 3, SAPS3, is a negative regulator of AMPK. SAPS3 is induced under high fat diet (HFD) and recruits the PP6 catalytic subunit to deactivate phosphorylated-AMPK, thereby inhibiting AMPK-controlled metabolic pathways. Either whole-body or liver-specific deletion of SAPS3 protects male mice against the HFD-induced detrimental consequences and reverses HFD-induced metabolic and transcriptional alterations while loss of SAPS3 has no effects on mice under balanced diets. Furthermore, genetic inhibition of AMPK is sufficient to block the protective phenotype in SAPS3 knockout male mice under HFD. Together, our results reveal that SAPS3 is a negative regulator of AMPK and suppression of SAPS3 functions as a guardian when metabolism is perturbed and represents a potential therapeutic strategy to treat metabolic syndromes.

### Sample Protocol
293T cells were transfected with plasmids encoding Flag-tagged AMPKα2 protein. Cells were deprived of glucose for 6 hours and glucose was added back for 1 hour, followed by lysis using RIPA buffer (150 mM KCl, 0.2% (v/v) NP-40, 10% (v/v) glycerol, 20 mM Tris at pH 7.5, 0.5 mM DTT) containing protease inhibitor complex (4693159001, Roche) and phosphatase inhibitor (1862495, Thermo fisher scientific). 20 μl anti-Flag beads (A2220, Sigma) were added to the cell lysates and rotated overnight. Beads were washed four times with cold lysis buffer and eluted with Flag peptide (F3290, Sigma) for 4 hours. The elutes were separated by SDS-PAGE and visualized by Coomassie Blue staining (LC6025, Invitrogen). The binding proteins were identified by mass spectrometry analysis, performed by the Taplin Mass Spectrometry Facility at Harvard Medical School.

### Data Protocol
The quantitative analysis was completed in Microsoft Excel.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human

### Affiliations
University of California, Irvine
Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry,School of Biological Sciences, University of California, Irvine, United States

### Submitter
Ying Yang

### Lab Head
Dr Mei Kong
Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry,School of Biological Sciences, University of California, Irvine, United States


