### Accession
PXD043787

### Title
PRISMA screen on pathogenic mutations that destroy phosphorylation sites within intrinsically disordered regions

### Description
Many of the disease-causing point mutations occur within structure-lacking intrinsically disordered regions (IDRs) of proteins. IDRs often contain short linear motifs (SLiMs) that are crucial for protein-protein interactions (PPIs) and are often subject to phosphorylation. Our approach involved immobilizing synthetic peptides representing mutated phosphorylation sites within the IDR regions onto cellulose membranes to capture interacting proteins from cellular extracts. This enabled simultaneous comparison of interaction partners between wild-type, phosphorylated, and mutated peptide forms, allowing functional assessment of individual mutations. We screened 36 disease-causing phosphorylation site mutations within IDRs, sourced from PTMVar database. The results revealed substantial differences between phosphorylated and mutated peptide interactomes, often due to disrupted phosphorylated SLiMs

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were reduced using 10 mM DTT, 50 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) Samples were digested with LysC followed by trypsin overnight. Finally, the samples were desalted using the standard StageTip method.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed with MaxQuant version 1.6.2.6a. With “match between run” and “requantify” options checked. Oxidation of methionines and acetylation of N-terminal residues were set as variable and carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification. As a reference database uniprot_human_20181012_canonical_isoform.fasta was used with trypsin/P used for in silico digestion. The data was analyzed in SILAC mode, with Lys 4 for medium and Lys8 and Arg10 for heavy labels, as well as in label-free quantification mode (LFQ). Peptide and protein FDR was set to 1%.  The experiment names can be mapped by using the peptide candidate table. 52-57 sample labels were mixed up therefore, need to be excluded from the analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Idr, Human-disease, Pull-down, Prisma, Peptide

### Affiliations
Max-Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine
Max Delbrueck Center for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Association

### Submitter
Trendelina Rrustemi

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Selbach
Max Delbrueck Center for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Association


