### Accession
PXD009678

### Title
Multi-omics metabolism analysis on irradiation-induced oxidative stress to Rhodotorula glutinis

### Description
Oxidative stress is induced by various natural abiotic factors including irradiation among many microorganisms and has been demonstrated that it significantly improved growth rate and lipid production of R. glutinis. However, the specific mechanisms of how irradiation influence the metabolism of R. glutinis remains still unavailable. To investigate and better understand the mechanisms involved in irradiation-induced stress resistance in R. glutinis, a multi-omics metabolism analysis was implemented. The results confirmed that irradiation indeed not only improve cell biomass but also accelerate carotenoids and lipid production, especially neutral lipid. Compared with the control, metabolome profiling in the group exposed to irradiation exhibited obvious difference in the activation of TCA cycle and transition of glucose utilization pattern from glycolysis to pentose phosphate pathway. The results of proteome showed that 423 proteins were changed significantly and proteins associated with protein folding and transport, the Hsp40 and Sec12, were obviously up-regulated, indicating that cells responded to irradiation by accelerating the protein folding and transport of correctly folded proteins as well as enhanced the degradation of misfolded proteins. A significant up-regulation of carotenoids biosynthetic pathway was observed which revealed that increased carotenoids is a cellular defense mechanism against oxidative stress generated by irradiation. Therefore, the results of comprehensive omics analysis provide new insights on the response and tolerance mechanism of R. glutinis to irradiation-induced oxidative stress resistance and could be helpful in the further investigation of R. glutinis as model microorganism for biofuel production.

### Sample Protocol
Strains and cultivation conditions Rhodotorula glutinis (CGMCC No.2258) used in this work was supplied by China National Research Institute of Food and Fermentation Industries and stored in agar slant medium with yeast extract, urea and glucose at 4°C. The components of basal medium for R. glutinis cultivation were as follows: 40 g/L glucose, 7 g/L KH2PO4, 2 g/L (NH4)2SO4, 2 g/L Na2SO4, 1.5 g/L MgSO4·7H2O, 1.5 g/L yeast extract powder. The initial pH value of medium was adjusted to 5.5 before sterilized at 116°C for 25 min. The inoculums were cultured at 30°C in a 180 rpm shaker for 72 h, and then, transferred into 500 mL Erlenmeyer flasks containing 200 mL medium with 10% inoculation size (v/v). Two experiment groups were designed, one was with continuous irradiation and the other without light by covering the tin foil paper on the flasks surface. The light intensity measured by digital luminometer (UT382, UNI-T, China) was 3400 lux. All groups were carried out in sextuplicate. Measurement of glucose, biomass and pH value The glucose concentration was measured by a glucose biosensor (SBA-40C, Shangdong Academy of Science, China). The determination method of biomass was by dry cell weight (Zhang et al. 2014). pH value of medium was measured by pH meter (FE20, Mettler Toledo, China). Total lipid, lipid content, carotenoid content and lipid classes measurement Total lipid and lipid content were quantified by sulfo-phospho-vanillin method (Izard and Limberger 2003). Total carotenoids were extracted by acetone and measured by the previous reported method (Aksu and Eren 2007). Three lipid classes including neutral lipid (NL), glycolipid (GL) and phospholipid (PL) were measured as the method described in He et al. 2015.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine. Tandem mass spectra were searched against Rhodotorula glutinis CGMCC database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met was specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to <1% and minimum score for peptides was set >40. Identified proteins were classified based on Gene Ontology annotation. Proteins with a 1.5-fold change and a p-value of statistical evaluation less than 0.05 were considered as differentially expressed proteins. The KEGG pathway analysis was performed according to the KEGG database.

### Publication Abstract
Oxidative stress is induced in many organisms by various natural abiotic factors including irradiation. It has been demonstrated that it significantly improves growth rate and lipid production of Rhodotorula glutinis. However, the specific mechanism of how irradiation influences the metabolism of R. glutinis remains still unavailable. To investigate and better understand the mechanisms involved in irradiation-induced stress resistance in R. glutinis, a multi-omics metabolism analysis was implemented. The results confirmed that irradiation indeed not only improved cell biomass but also accelerated the production of carotenoids and lipids, especially neutral lipid. Compared with the control, metabolome profiling in the group exposed to irradiation exhibited an obvious difference in the activation of the tricarboxylic acid cycle and triglyceride (TAG) production. The results of proteome analysis (data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD009678) showed that 423 proteins were changed significantly, and proteins associated with protein folding and transport, the Hsp40 and Sec12, were obviously upregulated, indicating that cells responded to irradiation by accelerating the protein folding and transport of correctly folded proteins as well as enhanced the degradation of misfolded proteins. A significant upregulation of the carotenoid biosynthetic pathway was observed which revealed that increased carotenoid content is a cellular defense mechanism against oxidative stress generated by irradiation. Therefore, the results of comprehensive omics analysis provide intensive insights on the response mechanism of R. glutinis to irradiation-induced oxidative stress which could be helpful for using irradiation as an effective strategy to enhance the joint production of the neutral lipid and carotene.

### Keywords
Rhodotorula glutinis; irradiation; stress response; multi-omics analysis

### Affiliations
Beijing University of Chemical Technology
Beijing Key Lab of Bioprocess, National Energy R&D Center for Biorefinery, College of Life Science and Technology, Beijing University of Chemical Technology, Beijing 100029, PR China

### Submitter
Guiping Gong

### Lab Head
Dr Guiping Gong
Beijing Key Lab of Bioprocess, National Energy R&D Center for Biorefinery, College of Life Science and Technology, Beijing University of Chemical Technology, Beijing 100029, PR China


