### Accession
PXD014801

### Title
Peptidomics of the Asian Citrus Psyllid

### Description
The aim of this study was to develop methods for the extraction of endogenous peptides from the Asian citrus psyllid, vector of the bacteria that cause the major citrus disease Huanglongbing. In addition, the native peptidome of the Asian citrus psyllid is described, with an emphasis on candidate neuropeptides.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were prepared using phenol, chloroform methanol, and TCA/acetone-based methods. Endogenous peptides were separated using centrifugal ultrafiltration, desalted, and subjected to high resolution mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
RAW files were converted to Mascot .dat format and searched against a database of psyllid, psyllid endosymbiont, and other associated bacteria, along with a database of common contaminants. Search parameters specified no enzyme, 2-4+ charge state, cysteine methylthio as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation and C-terminal amidation as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Huanglongbing (HLB), a deadly citrus disease, is primarily associated with <i>Candidatus</i> Liberibacter asiaticus (CLas) and spread by the hemipteran insect <i>Diaphorina citri</i>. Control strategies to combat HLB are urgently needed. In this work, we developed and compared workflows for the extraction of the <i>D. citri</i> peptidome, a dynamic set of polypeptides produced by proteolysis and other cellular processes. High-resolution mass spectrometry revealed bias among methods reflecting the physiochemical properties of the peptides: while TCA/acetone-based methods resulted in enrichment of C-terminally amidated peptides, a modification characteristic of bioactive peptides, larger peptides were overrepresented in the aqueous phase of chloroform/methanol extracts, possibly indicative of reduced co-analytical degradation during sample preparation. Parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) was used to validate the structure and upregulation of peptides derived from hemocyanin, a <i>D. citri</i> immune system protein, in insects reared on healthy and CLas-infected trees. Mining of the data sets also revealed 122 candidate neuropeptides, including PK/PBAN family neuropeptides and kinins, biostable analogs of which have known insecticidal properties. Taken together, this information yields new, in-depth insights into peptidomics methodology. Additionally, the putative neuropeptides identified may lead to psyllid mortality if applied to or expressed in citrus, consequently blocking the spread of HLB disease in citrus groves.

### Keywords
Neuropeptides, Psyllid, Peptidome

### Affiliations
USDA ARS Robert W. Holley Center Ithaca, NY 14853
USDA-ARS 

### Submitter
Laura Fleites

### Lab Head
Dr Michelle L. Heck
USDA ARS Robert W. Holley Center Ithaca, NY 14853


