### Accession
PXD010288

### Title
Global proteome rearrangement screen in interphasic and mitotic HeLa CCL2 cell line by SEC-SWATH-MS

### Description
It has become increasingly clear that biological functions depend not only on the identity and quantity, but also the correct interplay among the biomolecules that constitute the cell. Importantly, proteins as the key effectors in the cell dynamically organize into complexes. This study describes a workflow to interrogate the role of dynamic proteome organization in biological functions.  Specifically, we here characterize the proteome of the HeLa CCL2 cell line in interphase and mitosis, including the measurement of the protein complex assembly state with the goal to screen for functional proteome rearrangement. We employ an optimized SEC-SWATH-MS workflow to profile protein elution along size exclusion chromatographic fractionations of mild proteome extracts. Largely maintaining the integrity of protein association into complexes, the method captures the proteomes contextual state via the measure of protein appearance at distinct molecular weight. Quantitatively accurate readout of polypeptide elution profiles is achieved by bottom-up DIA/SWATH mass spectrometry, facilitating sensitive detection of quantitatively context-re-wiring proteins. The study quantitatively profiles 5044 proteins across 390 SWATH-MS maps. Statistical analysis pinpoints several hundred proteins with significantly altered cellular context indicated by altered quantitative elution behavior across distinct apparent molecular weight ranges measured in SEC. The results are validated by the reconciliation of established cell biology such as CDK1 recruitment by cyclin B1 and the mitotic disassembly of nuclear pore complexes as presented in the accompanying manuscript. The high quality chromatographic data further delineate distinct cellular assemblies such as a novel mitotic intermediate of nuclear pore complex disassembly that was validated by orthogonal methods. The study sheds light on altered proteome state in the pivotal process of cell division at systems scale. In contrast to typical quantitative approaches to study the proteome, SEC-SWATH-MS captures the biophysical context state of proteins that is often associated with protein function. Thus, the data may well support the discovery and validation of novel aspects and effectors of modular proteome function along cell cycle progression. Our workflow and study build the capacity to investigate biological systems including their higher order organization on the level of proteins and in a systems-wide fashion which will help to elucidate how biochemical functions, responses and phenotypes are generated within a cell.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture and mitotic arrest: HeLa CCL2 cells were grown in DMEM at 37 °C and 5 % CO2 to 60 % confluency. Cells were arrested in S phase by addition of 3 mM thymidine (Sigma) for 20 h, washed twice with warm PBS and left to recover in complete DMEM for 2 h prior to treatment with 3 mM thymidine (Sigma) for 13 h. Half the cells were harvested using EDTA and snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen. The remaining interphase-synchronized cells were then synchronized in mitosis (prometaphase) by release into 100 ng/ml nocodazole after a 2 h recovery in complete DMEM and harvested via mitotic shake-off to ensure recovery of only mitotic cells, followed by freezing in liquid nitrogen. Preparation of native proteomes and SEC fractionation for proteomics analysis: Ca. 5e7 HeLa CCL2 cells were mildly lysed by freeze-thawing into mild lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM NaF, 0.5 % NP-40 (Sigma IGEPAL CA-630), 200 µM Na3VO4, 1 mM PMSF, 1x Protease Inhibitors (Sigma)). Lysates were cleared by 15 minutes of ultracentrifugation (100,000×g, 4 °C) and buffer was exchanged to SEC buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl) over 30 kDa molecular weight cut-off membrane at a ratio of 1:25 and concentrated to 25-35 mg/ml. After 5 min of centrifugation at 16,900 ×g at 4 °C, the supernatant was directly subjected to fractionation on a SRT-C-SEC 500 column (dim. 300×21.2 mm, pore size 500 Å, particle size 5 µm, Sepax-Tech). Per SEC run, 7.25 mg of native proteome extract was fractionated at 2 ml/min flow rate on ice (0-4 °C), collecting 90 fractions at 0.4 min per fraction from 20 to 56 min post-injection, fractions 1-65 (20 – 46 min elution time, 40 – 92 ml elution volume) of which were considered for SWATH-MS analysis. To avoid time-dependent disassembly artifacts, each tissue culture sample was lysed and fractionated independently to achieve a fixed processing time-to-column of 1.5-2 h. Apparent molecular weight was calibrated based on a 5-protein standard’s elution fractions and molecular weights (Column Performance Check Standard, Phenomenex).  MS sample preparation: Mild proteome extracts and size exclusion chromatographic fractions thereof were denatured in 1 % sodium deoxy-cholate heated to 95 °C for 5 min. Proteins were reduced by 5 mM TCEP at 37 °C for 30 min and alkylated by 10 mM Iodoacetamide 30 min in the dark followed by tryptic digest (1.4 µg per sample, Promega) at 37 °C overnight. Digests were stopped and SDC precipitated by addition of TFA and ACN to 1 % and, as internal standard, 0.4 pmol of E. coli β-galactosidase tryptic digest. Precipitated SDC was spun out at 4,500 ×g for 15 min and samples desalted on C18 reversed phase (96-Well Plate, The Nest Group, MA, USA). Samples were vaccum-dried at RT and, for MS analysis, re-suspended in 20 µl LC solvent A (2 % ACN, 0.1 % FA) supplemented with internal retention time calibration peptides (iRT kit, Biognosys, 1:20). LC-MS measurements: LC-MS analysis was carried out on an Eksigent nanoLC Ultra 1D Plus  and expert 400 autosampler system (Eksigent, Dublin, CA) coupled to a TripleTOF 6600 (Sciex, Ontario, Canada) equipped with a NanoSpray III ion source. A 75 um inner diameter PicoFrit emitter (New Objective) was packed in-house with Magic C18 AQ 3 um, 200 Å particles (Bruker) to 40 cm. At a flow rate of 300 nl/min,  3 µl of re-suspended peptide sample were loaded onto the column and separated by a linear gradient from 5 to 35% B (98% acetonitrile, 2% ultra-high quality water and 0.1% formic acid) in A (98% ultra-high quality water, 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid ) in 60 min (or 120 min for library generation via DDA-MS, see below). SWATH-MS: One MS1 survey scan was followed by 64 SWATH scans in a looped fashion. The SWATH windows are listed in Supplementary Table 1, covering precursors in the range of 400-1200 m/z with their widths chosen to obtain similar precursor intensity densities within all SWATH windows, i.e. resulting in narrower windows for m/z regions with a high density of precursors. The monitored m/z range was 360-1460 in the MS1 scan and 300-2000 in the SWATH scans, the accumulation time was 200 ms and 50 ms, respectively, which resulted in a cycle time of around 3.4 s. More details are available in the methods section of the accompanying manuscript. DDA-MS: For the generation of a sample-specific peptide query parameter library of extended coverage, 83 of the 390 SEC fractions were analyzed by DDA-MS. Samples were separated by a 120 min linear gradient from 5 to 35 % LC solvent B. One MS1 scan was followed by 20 MS2 scans with an accumulation time of 250 ms for MS1 and 100 ms for MS2. The monitored m/z range was 360-1460 for MS1 and 50-2000 for MS2. The dynamic exclusion time was set to 20 s. For technical comparisons of MS acquisition modes, fractions 1-50 of experimental replicate 3 were also acquired in DDA mode but using the shorter, 60 min LC gradient as employed for the measurements in SWATH mode.

### Data Protocol
DDA-MS data processing: For generation of the peptide query parameter library the 2 h gradient DDA-MS data were analyzed spectrum-centric and identified spectra processed into a peptide query parameter library essentially as described(Schubert et al., 2015). MS spectra were searched against the human UniProt/SwissProt reference database (rev., can., 2017-06-19) suppl. with contaminant (cRAP, https://www.thegpm.org/crap/) and E. coli β-galactosidase sequences using trypsin specificity, 50 ppm precursor and 0.1 Da fragment ion mass tolerance, carbamidomethyl (C) as static and oxidation (M) as variable modification and allowing up to two missed cleavages. The results from independent searches (X!Tandem 2013.06.15.1, Ommsa 2.1.9, MyriMatch 2.1.138 and Comet 2015.02 rev. 3) were integrated using PP/iProphet (TPP v4.7 POLAR VORTEX rev 0, Build 201403121010), filtering the results at 1 % peptide FDR (0.978883 iprob) as determined using the tool Mayu (Reiter et al., 2009). Spectra were summarized using spectrast with iRT calibration and peptide query parameters were extracted as described(Schubert et al., 2015) and within the iPortal compute infrastructure(Kunszt et al., 2015). The final library contains query parameters for 111,267 precursors of 90,932 peptides mapping to 9603 protein groups. Given the strict rules employed for downstream quantification (quantifying only single, unique proteins with at least 2 unique, proteotypic peptides) the number of maximally detectable analytes as constrained by the query parameter library drops to 102,629 precursors of 83,863 peptides mapping to 5916 unique proteins (See data file SpectrumLibrary_20170802211356808-1323484.zip). 60 min DDA-MS data were processed equivalently to obtain spectral counts across chromatographic fractions (See DDA_SearchResult_60minRunsR3_SpectralCounts_20170627123611964-1309029.zip). SWATH-MS data processing: SWATH/DIA-MS data was analyzed by targeted, peptide-centric queries of the 111,267 precursors from the sample-specific peptide query parameter library (see above) via a modified OpenSWATH(Röst et al., 2014), PyProphet(Reiter et al., 2011; Teleman et al., 2015) and TRIC(Röst et al., 2016) workflow. First, one global classifier was trained on a subsampled set of SEC fractions (F3, F43, F44) across the experiment using pyProphet-cli(Rosenberger et al., 2017) (For results see pyProphet_scoreWeightTrainingAnalysisFiles.zip). Then, peptides from all fractions were scored and aligned using the pre-trained score weights and OpenSWATH, pyProphet and TRIC. Chromatographic retention times were aligned and IDs transferred using TRIC with settings to recover precursors at an experiment-wide assay-level (TRIC target) FDR of 5 % (See SWATH_QueryResultGlobalAlignment_20170906213658025-1332538.zip). Downstream SEC-SWATH data processing and FDR estimation: Precursor-level results from E1709051521_feature_alignment.tsv were imported and filtered/processed in SECprofiler as more deeply described in the manuscript. Cumulatively, 5044 proteins were quantified. The FDR on protein level was estimated based on the simple target-decoy method, with correction for the fraction false targets(Also see (Blattmann et al., 2016), equivalent to percentage of incorrect targets, PIT(Käll et al., 2008)) on protein level that was conservatively estimated as the fraction of library target proteins that were not confidently detected based on two well-correlated peptide chromatograms, i.e. (5916 – 5044) / 5916 = 0.147. Accordingly, 135 decoy entries passing the filters with the 5044 target proteins point to an estimated FDR among the global results of (135 * 0.147) / 5044 = 0.0039, i.e. below 0.4 % (See SWATH_ProteinQuantSummary_20170906213658025-1332538_filtered_top2pepMeanNSem.tsv). References Blattmann, P., Heusel, M., and Aebersold, R. (2016). PLoS One 11, e0153160. Käll, L., … Noble, W.S. (2008). J. Proteome Res. 7, 29–34. Kunszt, P., … C., Quandt, A., et al. (2015). Concurr. Comput. Pract. Exp. 27, 433–445. Reiter, L., Claassen, M., … Aebersold, R. (2009). Mol. Cell. Proteomics 8, 2405–2417. Reiter, L., Rinner, O.,… Aebersold, R. (2011). Nat. Methods 8, 430–435. Rosenberger, G., Bludau, I., … Aebersold, R. (2017). Nat. Methods 14, 921–927. Röst, H.L., Rosenberger, G., …, Aebersold, R. (2014). Nat. Biotechnol. 32, 219–223. Röst, H.L., Liu, Y., …, Aebersold, R. (2016). Nat. Methods 13, 777–783. Schubert, O.T., …, Aebersold, R. (2015). Nat. Protoc. 10, 426–441. Teleman, J., … Malmström, J., and Levander, F. (2015). Bioinformatics 31, 555–562.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Hela, Sec, Protein-protein complexes, Mitosis, Cell cycle, Swath-ms

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, Department of Biology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland and Faculty of Science, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
Lund University

### Submitter
Moritz Heusel

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Ruedi Aebersold
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, Department of Biology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland and Faculty of Science, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland


