### Accession
PXD000860

### Title
SILAC-Based Strategy for Proteome-Wide Analysis of Protein-Ligand Binding Interactions (Part 2/2)

### Description
A quantitative mass spectrometry-based proteomics method for the large-scale thermodynamic analysis of protein-ligand binding interactions.  The methodology utilizes a chemical modification strategy termed, Stability of Proteins from Rates of Oxidation (SPROX), in combination with a Stable Isotope Labeling with Amino Acids in Cell Culture (SILAC) approach to compare the equilibrium folding/unfolding properties of proteins in the absence and presence of target ligands.  The method, which is general with respect to ligand, measures the ligand-induced changes in protein stability associated with protein-ligand binding.  The methodology is demonstrated in a proof-of-principle study in which the well-characterized protein-drug interaction between cyclosporine A and cyclophilin A is analyzed in the context of a yeast cell lysate.  The method is also utilized for the global analysis of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) binding to proteins in the yeast proteome using the non-hydrolyzable ATP analogue, adenylyl imidodiphosphate (AMP-PNP), and the proteins in a yeast cell lysate.

### Sample Protocol
Light and heavy cell lysates were prepared according to established SILAC protocols and the test ligand was spiked into one of the cell lysates. Aliquots of each lysate were distributed into a series of denaturant-containing buffers, reacted with hydrogen peroxide under conditions that selectively oxidize exposed methionine residues, and quenched with the addition of excess methionine. The light and heavy samples generated at matching denaturant concentration were combined. Each combined protein sample was either directly submitted to a bottom-up, solution-phase, shotgun proteomics analysis using LC-MS/MS and/or further reacted with cyanogen bromide prior to a gel-based proteomics analysis.  Ultimately, L/H ratios were obtained for the peptides detected at each denaturant concentration, and the denaturant dependence of the L/H ratio’s was examined.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS analyses in Solution Experiment 1B, Solution Experiment 2, and Gel Experiment 1 were performed using an LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo-Scientific, Inc, San Jose, CA).Peak lists were extracted from the raw LC-MS/MS data files generated on the Orbitrap system and the data were searched against the 6651 Saccharomyces cerevisiae proteins in the 2013_09 release of the UniProt Knowledgebase downloaded at ftp://ftp.uniprot.org/pub/databases/uniprot/current_release/knowledgebase/proteomes/. using Maxquant 1.3.0.5. The following modifications were considered: methyl methanethiosulfonate at cysteine as a fixed modification for Solution Experiments 1B and 2 and carbamidomethylation at cysteines in Gel Experiment 1; SILAC labeling of lysine, and variable (0-1) oxidation of methionine and deamidation of Asparagine and Glutamine (N and Q). The enzyme was set as Lys-C, and up to 2 missed cleavages were permitted for Solution Experiment 1B and Gel Experiment 1 (up to 3 missed cleavages were allowed for Solution Experiment 2). The false discovery rate for peptide and protein identifications was set to 1%, and all other settings were set at the default parameters. As part of the default settings the mass tolerance for precursor ions was 10 ppm and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was 0.5 Da. The search results were exported to Excel for further data analysis as described below.The protein and peptide identifications and L/H (or H/L) ratios obtained from the LC-MS/MS data analyses were filtered to show only those that contained lysine residues.  In the ATP-binding study, identified peptides (and corresponding protein identifications) with L/H (or H/L) ratios ≥0 were used in subsequent data analysis steps. If multiple L/H ratio’s were calculated for a given peptide sequence and charge state at a specific denaturant concentration (e.g., both the light and heavy version of a peptide and charge state was identified in the LC-MS/MS analysis and/or a peptide and charge state was identified in multiple product ion scans) they were averaged to give a single L/H ratio for the peptide and charge state at that denaturant concentration. Ultimately, these averaged L/H ratios were used to generate SILAC-SPROX data sets. In the data analysis only peptides that were identified in multiple runs (i.e., in samples from multiple denaturant concentrations) were considered.  In ATP binding experiments, peptides that were present in 6 or more denaturant containing buffers were included in the assay except in the cases of Solution Experiment 1A and Solution Experiment 2, where peptides that were present in 4 and 8 (respectively) or more denaturant containing buffers were included in the assay. Using Microsoft Excel, peptides were filtered to identify those with significantly altered L/H ratios at 2 or more consecutive denaturant concentrations. Significantly altered L/H (or H/L) ratios in this work were taken to be those that changed by >1.7-fold from the baseline value observed for each peptide. The selection of this 1.7-fold cut-off value was based on a global analysis of the L/H (or in some experiments H/L) ratios recorded in the ATP binding experiments.

### Publication Abstract
Described here is a quantitative mass spectrometry-based proteomics method for the large-scale thermodynamic analysis of protein-ligand binding interactions. The methodology utilizes a chemical modification strategy termed, Stability of Proteins from Rates of Oxidation (SPROX), in combination with a Stable Isotope Labeling with Amino Acids in Cell Culture (SILAC) approach to compare the equilibrium folding/unfolding properties of proteins in the absence and presence of target ligands. The method, which is general with respect to ligand, measures the ligand-induced changes in protein stability associated with protein-ligand binding. The methodology is demonstrated in a proof-of-principle study in which the well-characterized protein-drug interaction between cyclosporine A (CsA) and cyclophilin A was successfully analyzed in the context of a yeast cell lysate. A control experiment was also performed to assess the method's false positive rate of ligand discovery, which was found to be on the order of 0.4 - 3.5%. The new method was utilized to characterize the adenosine triphosphate (ATP)-interactome in Saccharomyces cerevisiae using the nonhydrolyzable ATP analog, adenylyl imidodiphosphate (AMP-PNP), and the proteins in a yeast cell lysate. The new methodology enabled the interrogation of 526 yeast proteins for interactions with ATP using 2035 peptide probes. Ultimately, 325 peptide hits from 139 different proteins were identified. Approximately 70% of the hit proteins identified in this work were not previously annotated as ATP binding proteins. However, nearly two-thirds of the newly discovered ATP interacting proteins have known interactions with other nucleotides and co-factors (e.g. NAD and GTP), DNA, and RNA based on GO-term analyses. The current work is the first proteome-wide profile of the yeast ATP-interactome, and it is the largest proteome-wide profile of any ATP-interactome generated, to date, using an energetics-based method. The data is available via ProteomeXchange with identifiers PXD000858, DOI 10.6019/PXD000858, and PXD000860.

### Keywords
Yeast, Shot-gun proteomics, Cyclosporine a, Atp

### Affiliations
Duke University
Chemistry Department, Duke University

### Submitter
Jagat Adhikari

### Lab Head
Dr Michael C. Fitzgerald
Chemistry Department, Duke University


