### Accession
PXD028982

### Title
Installation of O-glycan sulfation capacities in human HEK293 cells

### Description
The human genome contains at least 35 genes that encode Golgi sulfotransferases functioning in the secretory pathway, where they are involved in decorating glycosaminoglycans, glycolipids, and glycoproteins with sulfate groups. Our insight into the sulfotransferases that serve glycoproteins and in particular GalNAc-type O-glycoproteins is limited, yet a number of important interactions with sulfated glycans by e.g. Selectins, Galectins, and Siglecs are thought to mainly rely on sulfated O-glycans. Moreover, sulfated mucins appear to be accumulated in respiratory diseases, arthritis and cancer. To explore further the genetic and biosynthetic regulation of sulfated O-glycans, we have started to expand a cell-based glycan array in the human HEK293 cell line with sulfation capacities. Here, we stably engineered O-glycan sulfation capacities in HEK293 cells by site-directed knock-in of sulfotransferase genes, in combination with knockout of endogenous core2 and/or sialylation capacities, to enable production of mucin reporters with sulfated O-glycans. Expression of GAL3ST2 in HEK293 cells resulted in sulfation of core1 and core2 O-glycans, whereas expression of GAL3ST4 resulted in sulfation of core1 only. We used the engineered cell library to dissect the binding specificity of galectin-4 and confirmed binding to the 3-O-sulfo-core1 O-glycan

### Sample Protocol
Expression and purification of human mucin reporter proteins  Secreted and transmembrane human mucin TR reporters for MUC1, MUC2, and MUC7 were designed and synthesized as previously reported (Fig. 1B) (37,39). HEK293 cells were transfected with the secreted mucin TR reporters and stable pools were established by G418 selection. After the enrichment of the GFP positive population by FACS sorting (SH800, SONY), cells were seeded at a cell density 5х105 cells/mL in 200 mL of serum-free F17 culture media (Thermo) supplemented with 0.1% Kolliphor P188 (SIGMA) and 4 mM GlutaMax and cultured at 37°C and 5% CO2 under constant agitation (120 rpm). After 4-5 days culture, the supernatant was harvested and purified by nickel affinity chromatography. Media was mixed 3:1 (v/v) in 4× binding buffer (100 mM sodium phosphate, pH 7.4, 2 M NaCl) and applied to self-packed nickel-nitrilotriacetic acid (Ni-NTA) affinity resin column (Qiagen), pre-equilibrated in washing buffer (25 mM sodium phosphate, pH 7.4, 500 mM NaCl, 20 mM imidazole). After washing, bound protein was eluted with 200 mM imidazole in washing buffer, analyzed by SDS-PAGE with Coomassie staining, and desalted by PD-10 column (GE healthcare). Purified mucins were quantified by BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo). Western blot analysis was performed using NuPAGE Bis-Tris 4–12% gels (Thermo) with transfer to nitrocellulose membranes (0.45 μm, Bio-Rad) for 60 min at 100 V constant. Membranes were blocked with 5% skimmed milk in TBS-T for 1h at RT, incubated at 4°C overnight with 0.2 μg/ml anti-Flag M2-Peroxidase-HRP conjugated mAb (Sigma) diluted in 5% skimmed milk in TBS-T, and developed with Pierce ECL substrate (Thermo) and visualized on BioSpectrum (UVP BioImaging Systems, Upland, California, USA).

### Data Protocol
MS Data Analysis Glycan and glycopeptide compositional analysis was performed from m/z features extracted from LC-MS data using in-house written SysBioWare software (70). For m/z feature recognition from full MS scans Minora Feature Detector Node of the Proteome discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Scientific) was used. The list of precursor ions (m/z, charge, peak area) was imported as ASCII data into SysBioWare and compositional assignment within 3 ppm mass tolerance was performed. The main building blocks used for the compositional analysis were: theoretical monoisotopic mass increment of NeuAc, Hex, HexNAc, dHex and the theoretical monoisotopic mass increment of the most prominent peptide corresponding to each potential glycosites. To generation the potential glycopeptide list, all the glycoforms with an abundance higher than 5% of the most abundant glycoform were used for glycan feature analysis. Raw spectra for intact mass analysis were deconvoluted to zero-charge by BioPharma Finder Software (Thermo Scientific, San Jose) using default settings. Glycoproteoforms were annotated by in-house written SysBioWare software (70) using average masses of Hexose, N-acetylhexosamine, and the known backbone mass of MUC1 TR reporter increment

### Publication Abstract
The human genome contains at least 35 genes that encode Golgi sulfotransferases that function in the secretory pathway, where they are involved in decorating glycosaminoglycans, glycolipids, and glycoproteins with sulfate groups. Although a number of important interactions by proteins such as selectins, galectins, and sialic acid-binding immunoglobulin-like lectins are thought to mainly rely on sulfated O-glycans, our insight into the sulfotransferases that modify these glycoproteins, and in particular GalNAc-type O-glycoproteins, is limited. Moreover, sulfated mucins appear to accumulate in respiratory diseases, arthritis, and cancer. To explore further the genetic and biosynthetic regulation of sulfated O-glycans, here we expanded a cell-based glycan array in the human embryonic kidney 293 (HEK293) cell line with sulfation capacities. We stably engineered O-glycan sulfation capacities in HEK293&#xa0;cells by site-directed knockin of sulfotransferase genes in combination with knockout of genes to eliminate endogenous O-glycan branching (core2 synthase gene GCNT1) and/or sialylation capacities in order to provide simplified substrates (core1 Gal&#x3b2;1-3GalNAc&#x3b1;1-O-Ser/Thr) for the introduced sulfotransferases. Expression of the galactose 3-O-sulfotransferase 2 in HEK293&#xa0;cells resulted in sulfation of core1 and core2 O-glycans, whereas expression of galactose 3-O-sulfotransferase 4 resulted in sulfation of core1 only. We used the engineered cell library to dissect the binding specificity of galectin-4 and confirmed binding to the 3-O-sulfo-core1 O-glycan. This is a first step toward expanding the emerging cell-based glycan arrays with the important sulfation modification for display and production of glycoconjugates with sulfated O-glycans.

### Keywords
Sulfated-tn, Muc1, Glycosylation, Sulfated-t, O-glycans, Sulfation

### Affiliations
Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen Center for Glycomics, Glyco MS Group

### Submitter
Sergey Vakhrushev

### Lab Head
Dr Sergey Vakhrushev
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen Center for Glycomics, Glyco MS Group


