### Accession
PXD032321

### Title
Oxygen level regulates protein N-terminal translation elongation through deoxyhypusine hydroxylation

### Description
Hypusine is a post-translational modification on eukaryotic translation initiation factor 5A (eIF5A). The last step in the biosynthesis of hypusine, deoxyhypusine hydroxylation, is an oxygen dependent reaction. Here we show that deletion of deoxyhypusine hydroxylase, Lia1, compromises yeast respiration through translation downregulation of proteins in respiration pathway. The translation suppression, due to the lack of deoxyhypusine hydroxylation, mainly affects the translation of the N-termini of the proteins, which is independent of the presence of proline residues, but likely dependent on the interaction between the N-terminal nascent peptide and the ribosomal peptidyl exiting tunnel. Proteomics and biochemical studies revealed that Lia1 deletion decreased the N-terminal translation of proteins involved in mitochondrial respiration, oxidative stress response, and heat shock response. Our work uncovers previously unknown functions of the hypusine modification by considering the substrate requirement of the post-translation modification, highlights the unique challenges of translating the N-termini of proteins and demonstrates a novel oxygen sensing mechanism in eukaryotic cells.

### Sample Protocol
In solution digestion was performed using an S-Trap micro spin column following a Strap protocol.The in-solution AspN digests were reconstituted in 50 μL of 0.5% FA for nanoLC- ESIMS/MS analysis, which was carried out using an Orbitrap FusionTM TribridTM (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) mass spectrometer equipped with a nanospray Flex Ion Source, and coupled with a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo, Sunnyvale, CA).

### Data Protocol
The raw files for EThcD-CID toggle MS/MS were subjected to database searches using Proteome Discoverer (PD) 2.4 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) with the Sequest HT algorithm (Lynch et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2018) against Saccharomyces cerevisiae database along with a common contaminants database. Two-missed cleavage sites by AspN were allowed for database search of raw files. The peptide precursor tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment ion tolerance was set to 0.6 Da. Variable modification of methionine oxidation, deamidation of asparagine/glutamine, hypusine/deoxyhypusine on lysine residue and fixed modification of cysteine carbamidomethylation, were set for the database search.  Only high confidence peptides defined by Sequest HT with a 1% FDR by Percolator were considered for the peptide identification.  All MS/MS spectra for identified relevant peptides from initial database searching were manually inspected and validated using Xcalibur 4.4. Confident identification of hypusine and deoxyhypusine modified peptides was achieved by manual confirmation of MS precursor ions and their associated EThcD MS/MS and CID MS/MS spectra. Relative quantitation of identified hypusine and deoxyhypusine peptides and their counterpart native peptides within single samples and between samples was determined by PD-assistant or manual extraction ion chromatograms (XICs). The XICs of each peptide (and its modified forms) with different charge states for each sample were obtained based on precursor ion m/z with mass tolerance of 5 ppm in Xcalibur software.

### Publication Abstract
Hypusine is a post-translational modification on eukaryotic translation initiation factor 5A (eIF5A). The last step of hypusine biosynthesis, deoxyhypusine hydroxylation, is an oxygen-dependent reaction. Here we show that deletion of the deoxyhypusine hydroxylase Lia1 compromises yeast respiration through translation downregulation of selected proteins in the respiration pathway. The translation suppression, because of the lack of deoxyhypusine hydroxylation, mainly affects translation of the N termini of the proteins, independent of the presence of proline residues but likely dependent on the interaction between the N-terminal nascent peptide and the ribosomal peptide exit tunnel. Proteomics and biochemical studies reveal that Lia1 deletion decreases N-terminal translation of proteins involved in mitochondrial respiration, oxidative stress response, and protein folding. Our work uncovers functions of the hypusine modification by considering the substrate requirement of the post-translational modification, highlights the unique challenges of translating the N termini of proteins, and reveals an oxygen-sensing mechanism in eukaryotic cells.

### Keywords
Oxygen, Deoxyhupusine, Silac, Hypusine

### Affiliations
Cornell University

### Submitter
Sheng Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Sheng Zhang
Cornell University


