### Accession
PXD018244

### Title
The IMiD receptor CRBN determines quality control of transmembrane proteins

### Description
The complex architecture of transmembrane proteins requires quality control (QC) for folding and membrane positioning, a prerequisite for cellular homoeostasis and intercellular communication. However, it has remained unclear whether transmembrane proteins-specific QC hubs exist. Here we specify Cereblon (CRBN), the target of immunomodulatory drugs (IMiDs), as a co-chaperone that specifically determines chaperone activity of HSP90 towards transmembrane proteins by means of counteracting AHA1. This function is abrogated by IMiDs, which disrupt the interaction of CRBN with the closed conformation of HSP90. Cell surface proteomics identifies different transmembrane protein clients of the CRBN-AHA1-HSP90 nexus. Among these, we characterize the amino acid transporters LAT1 and CD98hc as determinants of IMiD activity in multiple myeloma (MM) both in vitro and in vivo. These data establish the CRBN-AHA1-HSP90 axis in the biogenesis of transmembrane proteins, link IMiD activity to tumor metabolism, and specify CD98 as an attractive diagnostic and therapeutic target in multiple myeloma.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC labeled cells were treated 100 uM Lenalidomide for 72h. Treated and control cells were mixed and cell surface proteins were extracted using the Pierce Cell Surface Protein Isolation Kit (Thermo) according to manufacturer instructions. For mass spectrometry (MS) analysis, the cell surface enriched fraction (Surface), the flow through (FT), and the whole cell lysate (input) were reduced with dithiothreitol and alkylated with chloroacetamide. In-gel digestion of proteins was performed using trypsin. Tryptic peptides were reconstituted in 0.1 % formic acid (FA) and analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Peptide and protein identification and quantification were performed using MaxQuant (v1.6.0.16) and the SwissProt database supplemented with common contaminants. Lys0/Arg0 and Lys6/Arg10 were specified as metabolic labels. The match-between-runs algorithm was enabled. All other search parameters were left as default. Protein intensities were computed as the sum of the area-under-the-curve of chromatographic elution profiles of peptides assigned to the proteins. For mapping of potential interaction partners of CRBN to proteins identified in the surface enriched sample, raw data of CRBN interaction experiments published in Eichner et al. (Nat Med. 2016, 22(7)) were re-searched using MaxQuant as described above with following modifications: No metabolic labels were specified. Instead, the LFQ algorithm was enabled, but normalization was skipped.

### Publication Abstract
The complex architecture of transmembrane proteins requires quality control (QC) of folding, membrane positioning, and trafficking as prerequisites for cellular homeostasis and intercellular communication. However, it has remained unclear whether transmembrane protein-specific QC hubs exist. Here we identify cereblon (CRBN), the target of immunomodulatory drugs (IMiDs), as a co-chaperone that specifically determines chaperone activity of HSP90 toward transmembrane proteins by means of counteracting AHA1. This function is abrogated by IMiDs, which disrupt the interaction of CRBN with HSP90. Among the multiple transmembrane protein clients of CRBN-AHA1-HSP90 revealed by cell surface proteomics, we identify the amino acid transporter LAT1/CD98hc as a determinant of IMiD activity in multiple myeloma (MM) and present an Anticalin-based CD98hc radiopharmaceutical for MM radio-theranostics. These data establish the CRBN-AHA1-HSP90 axis in the biogenesis of transmembrane proteins, link IMiD activity to tumor metabolism, and nominate CD98hc and LAT1 as attractive diagnostic and therapeutic targets in MM.

### Keywords
Human, Imids, Multiple myeloma, Chaperones, Lumos, Membrane proteins

### Affiliations
Technical University of Munich, Freising, Germany
Chair of protomeics and bioanalytics, Technical University of Munich, Freising, Germany

### Submitter
Jana Zecha

### Lab Head
Dr Bernhard Kuster
Chair of protomeics and bioanalytics, Technical University of Munich, Freising, Germany


