### Accession
PXD004707

### Title
Quantitative Lipid Droplet Proteome Analysis Identifies Annexin A3 as a Cofactor for HCV Particle Production

### Description
Cytosolic lipid droplets (LDs) are vital to Hepatitis C Virus (HCV) infection as the putative sites of virion assembly. To identify novel regulators of HCV particle production, we performed quantitative LD proteome analysis. Huh7.5 cells were labeled by stable isotope labeling with heavy amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) and subsequently infected with an HCV Jc1 reporter virus. After selection for HCV-infected cells, equal amounts of HCV-infected and uninfected control cells were mixed, LDs were isolated and analyzed by LC-ESI-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
The SDS-PAGE lanes were cut into bands covering the entire mass range of the gel. The bands were subjected to tryptic in-gel digestion and peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS with a QTOF mass spectrometer (Q-TOF Premier, Micromass/Waters) or a LTQ orbitrap mass spectrometer (Orbitrap Fusion, Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS raw data of the Q-TOF runs were converted to mzXML using massWolf file converter. Identification and quantification were carried out with the OpenMS software framework (OpenMS 1.9) using the OpenMS Proteomic Pipeline (TOPPAS). For identification MS/MS spectra were searched against a human database using OMMSA and X!Tandem with a precursor mass tolerance of 30 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.1 Da. For SILAC quantification mzXML files were converted to mzML, filtered (only MS1 level, RT range [s]: 1800-5000), and smoothed (Savitzky-Golay filter, frame length: 13, polynomial order: 4). SILAC pairs were detected and quantified by the SILACAnalyzer with the following parameters: one missed cleavage, RT threshold 10 s, intensity cutoff 20 counts, intensity correlation 0.7 and a model deviation of 1.8. A peptide required at least three and maximum of seven isotopic peaks to be taken into account by the SILACAnalyzer. SILAC pairs were exported as consensusXML and matched with peptide identifications (idXML) by the IDMapper (RT tolerance 10 s, m/z tolerance 1 Da). Results were exported as CSV files and Mathematica was used for further statistical processing. Only unique peptides were taken into account for SILAC quantification. The LC-MS/MS data from orbitrap measurements were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8). For identification MS/MS spectra were searched against a human database with Andromeda using a mass tolerance of 6 ppm on MS and 0.6 Da on MS/MS level. SILAC quantification was carried out with MaxQuant, wherein only unique peptides were taken into account for SILAC quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Lipid droplets are vital to hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection as the putative sites of virion assembly, but morphogenesis and egress of virions remain ill defined. We performed quantitative lipid droplet proteome analysis of HCV-infected cells to identify co-factors of that process. Our results demonstrate that HCV disconnects lipid droplets from their metabolic function. Annexin A3 (ANXA3), a protein enriched in lipid droplet fractions, strongly impacted HCV replication and was characterized further: ANXA3 is recruited to lipid-rich fractions in HCV-infected cells by the viral core and NS5A proteins. ANXA3 knockdown does not affect HCV RNA replication but severely impairs virion production with lower specific infectivity and higher density of secreted virions. ANXA3 is essential for the interaction of viral envelope E2 with apolipoprotein E (ApoE) and for trafficking, but not lipidation, of ApoE in HCV-infected cells. Thus, we identified ANXA3 as a regulator of HCV maturation and egress.

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Lc-msms, Lipid droplets, Hcv, Silac

### Affiliations
Heinrich Pette Institute, Leibniz Institute for Experimental Virology, Hamburg, Germany
Mass Spectrometric Proteomics, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany

### Submitter
Marcus Wurlitzer

### Lab Head
Dr Eva Herker
Heinrich Pette Institute, Leibniz Institute for Experimental Virology, Hamburg, Germany


