### Accession
PXD033582

### Title
Targeting parvalbumin promotes M2 macrophage polarization energy expenditure in diet-induced mouse obesity models

### Description
Exercise benefits M2 macrophage polarization, energy homeostasis and protects against obesity partially through exercise-induced circulating factors. Here, by unbiased quantitative proteomics on serum samples from sedentary and exercised mice, we identify parvalbumin as a circulating factor suppressed by exercise. Parvalbumin functions as a non-competitive CSF1R antagonist to inhibit M2 macrophage activation and energy expenditure in adipose tissue. More importantly, serum concentrations of parvalbumin positively correlate with obesity in mouse and human, while treating mice with a recombinant parvalbumin blocker prevents its interaction with CSF1R and promotes M2 macrophage polarization and ameliorates diet-induced obesity. Thus, although further studies are required to assess the significance of parvalbumin in mediating the effects of exercise, our results implicate parvalbumin as a potential therapeutic strategy against obesity.

### Sample Protocol
For exercise model construction, C57BL/6N mice were subjected to running on a motorized, speed-controlled treadmill system (Columbus Instruments, Columbus, OH) for 36 days (12 m/min, 1 h/day for 6 days/week) and the running distance is about 720 m for 1 hour. TMT Quantitative proteomics Sample preparation: The albumin and IgG from 30 μL serum samples were removed using the ProteoExtract Kit according to the protocol. The ultrafiltration was performed using 10kDa molecular weight cutoff filter to a final volume of 100 μL for each sample depleted of both albumin and IgG. The protein concentration of the supernatant was determined using the BCA protein assay, and then 100 μg protein per condition was transferred into a new tube and adjusted to a final volume of 100 μL with 100 mM TEAB (triethylammonium bicarbonate). 5 μL of the 200 mM DTT was added at 55℃ for 1 h, then 5 μL of the 575 mM iodoacetamide was added to the sample for 1 h in the dark at room temperature.  Protein digestion and TMT labeling: Proteins were tryptically digested with sequence-grade modified trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI), and the resultant peptide mixture was labeled using chemicals from the TMT reagent kit. The labeled samples were combined, desalted using C18 SPE column (Sep-Pak C18, Waters, Milford, MA) and dried in vacuo.  High pH reverse phase separation: The peptide mixture was redissolved in the buffer A (buffer A: 10 mM ammonium formate in water, pH10.0, adjusted with ammonium hydroxide), and then fractionated by high pH separation using an Aquity UPLC system (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA) connected to a reverse phase column (BEH C18 column, 2.1 mm x 150 mm, 1.7 μm, 300 Å, Waters Corporation, Milford, MA). High pH separation was performed using a linear gradient. Starting from 0% B to 45% B in 35 min (B: 10 mM ammonium formate in 90% ACN, pH 10.0, adjusted with ammonium hydroxide). The column flow rate was maintained at 250 μL/min and column temperature was maintained at 45℃. Twelve fractions were collected, each fraction was dried in a vacuum concentrator for the next step. Low pH nano-HPLC-MS/MS analysis: The fractions were resuspended with 32 μl solvent C respectively (C: water with 0.1% formic acid; D: ACN with 0.1% formic acid), separated by nanoLC and analyzed by on-line electrospray tandem mass spectrometry. The experiments were performed on a Nano Aquity UPLC system (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA) connected to a quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q-Exactive) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) equipped with an online nano-electrospray ion source. 4 μl peptide sample was loaded onto the trap column (Thermo Scientific Acclaim PepMap C18, 100 μm x 2 cm), with a flow of 10 μl/min for 3 min and subsequently separated on the analytical column (Acclaim PepMap C18, 75 μm x 25 cm) with a linear gradient,  from 5% D to 30% D in 85 min. The column was re-equilibrated at initial conditions for 5 min. The column flow rate was maintained at 300 nL/min and column temperature was maintained at 45℃. The electrospray voltage of 2.0 kV versus the inlet of the mass spectrometer was used. The Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode to switch automatically between MS and MS/MS acquisition. Survey full-scan MS spectra (m/z 400-1600) were acquired in Orbitrap with a mass resolution of 60 000 at m/z 200. The AGC taget was set to 500 000, and the maximum injection time was 50 ms. MS/MS acquisition was performed in Orbitrap with 3 s cycle time, the resolution was 15 000 at m/z 200. The intensity threshold was 50 000, and the maximum injection time was 150 ms. The AGC target was set to 150 000, and the isolation window was 2 m/z. Ions with charge states 2+, 3+ and 4+ were sequentially fragmented by higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 37%. In all cases, one microscan was recorded using dynamic exclusion of 30 s. MS/MS fixed first mass was set at 110. Database Searching: Tandem mass spectra were extracted by Proteome Discoverer software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, version 1.4.0.288). Charge state deconvolution and deisotoping were not performed. All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.3). Mascot was set up to search the Uniprot-SwissProt database (Taxonomy: Mus musculus, 16957 entries) assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin. Mascot was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.050 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 PPM. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine and TMT 6plex of lysine and the n-terminus were specified in Mascot as fixed modifications. Oxidation of methionine was specified in Mascot as a variable modification.

### Data Protocol
Quantitative data analysis: Use the percolator algorithm to control peptide level false discovery rates (FDR) lower than 1%. Only unique peptides were used for protein quantification, and the method of normalization on protein median was used to correct experimental bias, the minimum number of proteins that must be observed to allow was set to 200. The differentially expressed proteins were illustrated by volcano plot, which was generated using R package ggpubr with log2 FC >1 or < -1 with p-value < 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse，serum，tmt，hplc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Department of Endocrinology, Tongji Hospital Affiliated to Tongji University, School of Medicine, Tongji University, 1239 Siping Road, Shanghai 200092, China.
Department of Neurosurgery, Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200025, China

### Submitter
Shaojian Lin

### Lab Head
Dr Bing Luan
Department of Endocrinology, Tongji Hospital Affiliated to Tongji University, School of Medicine, Tongji University, 1239 Siping Road, Shanghai 200092, China.


