### Accession
PXD041259

### Title
Antler stem cell-conditioned medium data independent acquisition

### Description
The process of chondrogenesis in deer antlers is very similar to that of mammalian cartilage formation. Antlers can regenerate at an alarming rate (up to 2 cm per day). To meet the rapid growth of antlers, paracrine factors play an important role. These paracrine factors promote the proliferation and growth of chondrocytes, regulate cartilage development and modulate cartilage phenotype. The application of stem cell paracrine factors for the treatment of cartilage defects avoids the problems of immunocompatibility, tumorigenicity, embolization, and infection. This study demonstrates that ASC-CM can effectively repair cartilage defects using in vitro and in vivo methods, providing a suitable cell source and pathway for cartilage repair and providing ideas for mechanisms to promote cartilage regeneration.

### Sample Protocol
Sample Preparation Appropriate urea was added to the samples to final concentration to 8M, and appropriate 1x protease inhibitor cocktail was also added to inhibit protease activity. The mixture was allowed to vortex to mix well, then settle at 4°C for 30min. After centrifugation at 12000g at 4°C for 20min, the supernatant was concentrated by ultrafiltration with 3K Ultrafiltration Spin Columns and replaced three times with 8M urea to 100μl. After centrifugation at 12000g at 4°C for 20min, the concentration of protein supernatant was determined by Bicinchoninic acid (BCA) method by BCA Protein Assay Kit. Protein quantification was performed according to the kit protocol. PRPTEIN DIGEST Sample preparation contains the process of protein denaturation, reduction, alkylation as well as the tryptic digestion and peptide cleanup. Commercially available iST Sample Preparation kit (PreOmics, Germany) was used according to protocols provided. Briefly, 50 µL of Lyse buffer was added and heated at 95 °C for 10 min at 1000 rpm with agitation. After cooling the sample to room temperature, trypsin digestion buffer was added,and the sample incubated at 37 °C for 2 h at 500 rpm with shaking. The digestion process was stopped with a stop buffer. Sample clean-up and desalting was carried out in the iST cartridge using the recommended wash buffers. Peptides were eluted with elution buffer (2 × 100 µl), and then lyophilized by SpeedVac.

### Data Protocol
nano-HPLC-MS/MS analysis  The UltiMate 3000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) liquid chromatography system was connected to the timsTOF Pro 2, an ion-mobility spectrometry quadrupole time of flight mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics). Samples were reconstituted in 0.1% FA and 200 ng peptide was separated by analytical column (25 cm × 75 μm i.d., Evosep) with a 90 min gradient starting at 4% buffer B (80% ACN with 0.1% FA) followed by a stepwise increase to 28% in 55 min, 44% in 10 min ,90% in 10min and stayed there for 7min，then equilibrates at 4% for 8 minutes. The column flow rate was maintained at 500 nL/min with the column temperature of 50°C.  DIA data was acquired in the diaPASEF mode.  We defined 22 × 40 Th precursor isolation windows from m/z 349 to 1229. To adapt the MS1 cycle time, we set the repetitions to variable steps (2-5) in the 13-scan diaPASEF scheme in our experiment. During PASEF MSMS scanning, the collision energy was ramped linearly as a function of the mobility from 59 eV at 1/K0 = 1.6 Vs/cm2 to 20 eV at 1/K0 = 0.6 Vs/cm2 .  Data Analysis Raw Data of DIA were processed and analyzed by Spectronaut 16.0 (Biognosys AG, Switzerland) with default settings. Spectronaut was set up to search the database of GDP22070521 assuming trypsin as the digestion enzyme.Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified as the fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine was specified as the variable modifications. Retention time prediction type was set to dynamic iRT. Data extraction was determined by Spectronaut based on the extensive mass calibration. Spectronaut will determine the ideal extraction window dynamically depending on iRT calibration and gradient stability.Qvalue (FDR) cutoff on precursor level was 1% and protein level was 1%. Decoy generation was set to mutated which similar to scrambled but will only apply a random number of AA position swamps (min=2, max=length/2). Normalization strategy was set to Local normalization. The average top 3 filtered peptides which passed the 1% Qvalue cutoff were used to calculate the major group quantities.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Data independent acquisition, Antler stem cell, Deer，antler stem cell-conditioned medium

### Affiliations
Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences

### Submitter
jue zhou

### Lab Head
Dr Hongmei Sun
Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences


