### Accession
PXD021867

### Title
Proteomics profiling of Lrpprc knockout mice liver mitochondria following resolution by hybrid CN/BN PAGE

### Description
Mouse models of genetic mitochondrial diseases are generally used to understand specific molecular defects and their biochemical consequences, but rarely to map compensatory changes allowing survival. Here we took advantage of the extraordinary mitochondrial resilience of hepatic Lrpprc knockout mice to explore this question using native proteomics profiling and lipidomics. In these mice, lack of the mtRNA binding protein LRPPRC induces a global mitochondrial translation defect and a severe reduction (>80%) in the assembly and activity of the electron transport chain (ETC) complex IV (CIV). Yet, animals show no signs of liver failure and capacity of the ETC is completely preserved. Beyond stimulation of mitochondrial biogenesis, results show that the abundance of mitoribosomes per unit of mitochondria is increased and proteostatic mechanisms are induced in absence of LRPPRC to preserve a balance in the availability of mitochondrial- vs nuclear-encoded ETC subunits. At the level of individual organelles, a strong preferential integration of residual CIV in supercomplexes (SCs) is observed, pointing to a role of these supramolecular arrangements in preserving ETC function. This can be mechanistically explained by the upregulation of the assembly factor COX7A2L and its stabilization into SCs. Furthermore, lipidomics and proteomics evidences indicate a shift in the phospholipids composition of mitochondrial membrane including an upregulation of SC stabilizing cardiolipin (CL) species, and several CL-binding protein complexes playing key roles in CL metabolism. Together these data reveal a complex in vivo network of molecular adjustments involved in preserving mitochondrial integrity in energy consuming organs facing OXPHOS defects, which could be therapeutically exploited.

### Sample Protocol
For proteomics profiling, replicate samples from 6 mice (3 H-Lrpprc-/- and 3 H-Lrpprc+/+) were resolved by Hybrid CN/BN PAGE. In gel activity assays for OXPHOS complexes were performed and the staining pattern obtained was aligned and used as guide to cut bands in the unstained replicate that was migrated in parallel. For each sample, a total of seven bands of equal size (5 mm height) were cut covering the following molecular weight ranges (in MD): 2.9 ± 0.253, 2.6 ± 0.22, 2.25 ± 0.20, 1.85 ± 0.16, 1.55 ± 0.14, 1.0 ± 0.083 and 0.65 ± 0.05. Proteins were digested in gel using trypsin (Promega) according to the method of Shevchenko 69. Peptide extracts were then concentrated by Vacufuge (Eppendorf), and diluted to 20 µl in 0.1% formic acid/water.   The tryptic peptides were analyzed by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) in an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Mass Spectrometry System (Thermo Scientific) with a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC Nano High Performance Liquid Chromatrography system (Thermo Scientific) at the front end and the Xcalibur 4.0.27.10 sofware package. Peptides were separated on a C18 PepMap100 precolumn, and a C18 2µ, Acclaim PepMap RSLC column (Thermo Scientific) using a 15 min gradient of 5% to 36% acetonitrile with 0.1 % formic acid at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Peptides were analyzed using Data Dependent Acquisition (DDA) mode. Full scan MS mode (400 to 1500 m/z) was operated at a resolution of 120 000 with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 4 × 105 ions, and a maximum ion transfer of 35 ms. Selected ions for MS/MS were analyzed using the following parameters: resolution 120 000; AGC target of 4 × 105; maximum ion transfer of 35 ms; 1.6 m/z isolation window; for CID a normalized collision energy 35% was used; and dynamic exclusion of 60.0 s. The Easy-IC was used for internal calibration.

### Data Protocol
The analysis of the RAW files was performed using the MaxQuant software package (version 1.6.5.0). The extracted spectra were matched against the mouse sequences from SwissProt (version 2019-04). Sequences of known contaminants were added to this database, and the reverse decoy was strictly set to FDR of 0.01. Database searches were done with 20 ppm and 0.5 Da mass tolerances for precursor ions and fragmented ions respectively. Trypsin (two missed cleavages allowed) was selected as the protease. Dynamic modifications included N-terminal acetylation and oxidation of methionine, while Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification.   Protein abundancies were determined by label-free quantitation using the composite iBAQ intensity values determined by MaxQuant and normalized within single or multiple migration profiles of individual proteins. Normalized protein quantification values were then imported in the Perseus 70 software platform for log transformation, data imputation, and statistical analysis. For proteins missing values for 1 of the 3 experimental replicates in a particular band and genotype, the mean iBAQ value of the two other replicates was imputed. All proteins missing more than one value in a particular band and genotype were considered undetected. For each protein, gel migration profiles were created and normalized to the maximum abundance across all samples analyzed. The migration profile of proteins belonging to known multi-protein complexes were then manually extracted and heatmaps of relative abundance where generated using GraphPad Prism 8 software package (version 8.4.2) to visualize co-migration. The absolute abundance of selected protein complexes was also estimated by summing iBAQ values of all detected protein components co-migrating in the same band. For statistical analysis, one sample Tt tests comparing the two genotypes were performed for each band. A P value of less than 0.05 was set as the arbitray threshold for statistical significance. For each P value obtained, a corresponding False Discovery Rate (FDR) was calculated according to the Benjamini and Hochberg method.

### Publication Abstract
Mouse models of genetic mitochondrial disorders are generally used to understand specific molecular defects and their biochemical consequences, but rarely to map compensatory changes allowing survival. Here we took advantage of the extraordinary mitochondrial resilience of hepatic Lrpprc knockout mice to explore this question using native proteomics profiling and lipidomics. In these mice, low levels of the mtRNA binding protein LRPPRC induce a global mitochondrial translation defect and a severe reduction (&gt;80%) in the assembly and activity of the electron transport chain (ETC) complex IV (CIV). Yet, animals show no signs of overt liver failure and capacity of the ETC is preserved. Beyond stimulation of mitochondrial biogenesis, results show that the abundance of mitoribosomes per unit of mitochondria is increased and proteostatic mechanisms are induced in presence of low LRPPRC levels to preserve a balance in the availability of mitochondrial- vs nuclear-encoded ETC subunits. At the level of individual organelles, a stabilization of residual CIV in supercomplexes (SCs) is observed, pointing to a role of these supramolecular arrangements in preserving ETC function. While the SC assembly factor COX7A2L could not contribute to the stabilization of CIV, important changes in membrane glycerophospholipid (GPL), most notably an increase in SC-stabilizing cardiolipins species (CLs), were observed along with an increased abundance of other supramolecular assemblies known to be stabilized by, and/or participate in CL metabolism. Together these data reveal a complex in vivo network of molecular adjustments involved in preserving mitochondrial integrity in energy consuming organs facing OXPHOS defects, which could be therapeutically exploited.

### Keywords
Mitochondrial proteomics, Genetic mitochondrial disease, Mitoribosomes, Mitochondrial lipidomics, Mitochondrial electron transport chain, Mitochondrial translation, Mitochondrial proteostasis, Liver mitochondria, Mitochondrial membrane lipids, Mitochondrial biogenesis, Mitochondrial supercomplexes, Cardiolipin, Lrpprc

### Affiliations
Postdoctoral Fellow
Professor, University Research Chair in Integrative Mitochondrial Biology, Interdisciplinary School of Health Sciences, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Ottawa, Canada

### Submitter
Goutham Vasam

### Lab Head
Dr Yan Burelle
Professor, University Research Chair in Integrative Mitochondrial Biology, Interdisciplinary School of Health Sciences, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Ottawa, Canada


