### Accession
PXD006361

### Title
Proteomics Reveal Global Regulation of Protein SUMOylation by ATM and ATR Kinases during Replication Stress

### Description
The mechanisms that protect eukaryotic DNA duringdepend on several post-translational modifications (PTMs)-based signaling pathways. Phosphorylation is a well-known regulator of the replication stress response  Here we investigate the global interplay between phosphorylation and SUMOylation in response to replication stress.

### Sample Protocol
SUMOylated protein and peptide enrichment using IP against FLAG or HIS on U-2-OS cells stably expression SUMO2 labeled with either tag. Phosphopeptide enrichment was done with TiO2 bead-based protocols, with or without pre-fractionation with reverse phase high pH chromatrography. Samples were analyzed on a Q-exactive plus or HF instruments

### Data Protocol
v1.4.1. and v1.5.11.. using the Andromeda Search engine. The searches were performed against the complete human UniProt database. Quantitation with SILAC.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sumo, Phosphoproteomics, Replication stress

### Affiliations
Copenhagen University
1Proteomics program, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Denmark.

### Submitter
Stephanie Munk

### Lab Head
Dr Jesper V. Olsen
1Proteomics program, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Denmark.


