### Accession
PXD017870

### Title
Membrane proteome of L. amazonensis PH8 and LV79 strains

### Description
Leishmaniasis is a serious disease caused by several species of protozoa from Leishmania genus. Parasite molecules that contribute to survival in the insect and vertebrate host are named virulence factors. We have recently shown that L. amazonensis PH8 and LV79 strains have different infectivity in mice and that lesion-derived amastigotes from these two strains differ in terms of proteome. In this project, we compared promastigotes of these two strains in terms of infectivity in vitro. Microsomal membrane fractions of PH8 and LV79 promastigotes were compared using a label-free proteomic approach in search of proteins that could be involved in the higher infectivity of PH8. Among the proteins upregulated in LV79 promastigotes, most of them participate in translation, amino acid metabolism and nucleotide metabolism. On the other hand, the majority of the proteins upregulated in PH8 are involved in carbohydrate metabolism, cytoskeleton composition and vesicle and membrane trafficking.

### Sample Protocol
For L. amazonensis promastigotes culture, medium 199 (Sigma) was supplemented with 0.005% hemin, 40 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 100 µM adenine, 4 mM sodium bicarbonate, 20 μg/mL gentamicin and 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS). Promastigotes of LV79 (MPRO/BR/72/M 1841) and PH8 (IFLA/BR/67/PH8) strains were obtained through cultivation of amastigotes derived from BALB/c micelesions in medium 199 at 24°C. For all experiments, parasites at fourth day of culture, early stationary phase, were employed. Membrane-enriched fractions were obtained through sodium carbonate extraction adapted from Kumar et al., 2015 and Pávková et al., 2006. Briefly, 1 x 109 promastigotes were washed three times with 4 mL of PBS and resuspended to a final density of 4 x 10e9 promastigotes/mL in a 100 mM sodium carbonate (pH 11) solution with protease inhibitor cocktail (Fermentas). Promastigotes were lysed by eight cycles of freeze and thaw (liquid nitrogen and 40°C) and ultrasonication (three times for five seconds at 40 Hz spaced with 30-second intervals on ice). Remaining whole parasites were removed by centrifugation at 2000 x g for 5 minutes at 4°C and the resulting supernatant was ultracentrifuged at 120000 x g for 1 hour at 4oC. Lastly, supernatant (cytoplasmic fraction) was transferred to a new microtube and pellet (membrane-enriched fraction) was resuspended in 8 M urea and 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 7.5). Protein concentration was determined by Bradford assay. 100 μg of protein were reduced by incubation with 10 mM DTT at 30°C for 30 minutes. Subsequently, proteins were alkylated by incubation with 40 mM iodoacetamide for 30 minutes in the dark at room temperature. To stop the alkylation reaction, DTT was added to a final concentration of 10 mM. Digestion buffer (50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 10% acetonitrile) was added to dilute the urea concentration to 1.4 M. Digestion was performed by incubation with trypsin 1:50 (w/w) for 16 hours at 30°C and stopped by the addition of 10% formic acid to a final concentration of 1%.  The resulting peptide mixtures were desalted with hydrophilic−lipophilic-balanced solid phase extraction (SPE) (Waters) and peptides eluted with 1 mL of 70% (v/v) acetonitrile and 1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Finally, the peptides were vacuum dried before mass spectrometric analysis.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and bioinformatics analysis were performed in the MaxQuant software version 1.5.2.8. RAW files containing the combined results of the two technical replicates were imported to the software and search engine Andromeda was used to search MS/MS spectra against Uniprot Leishmania mexicana database (2018/09/10, 8044 entries). For the search, the following parameters were adopted: (i) 4.5 ppm tolerance level for MS and 0.5 Da, for MS/MS; (ii) trypsin cleavage at both ends with maximum of two missed cleavages allowed per peptide; (iii) cysteine carbamidomethylation (57,021 Da) was defined as a fixed modification; (iv) oxidation of methionine (15,994 Da) and protein N-terminal acetylation (42,010 Da) were selected as variable modifications. The feature 'match between runs' feature was employed with a 0.7 minute match time and 20 minute alignment time window. All identifications were filtered to obtain a peptide and protein false discovery rate of less than 1%. For protein identification, at least one unique peptide was required. For label-free quantification using unique and razor peptides, a minimum of two ratio counts was established as necessary for valid protein quantification. Protein abundance was calculated based on its normalized spectral intensity (LFQ Intensity).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Leishmania amazonensis strains, Membrane proteome, Virulence, Gp63

### Affiliations
University of Sao Paulo
Department of Parasitology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, University of Sao Paulo

### Submitter
Giuseppe Palmisano

### Lab Head
Dr Beatriz S. Stolf
Department of Parasitology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, University of Sao Paulo


