### Accession
PXD031419

### Title
Distinct cell type-specific protein signatures in GRN and MAPT genetic subtypes of frontotemporal dementia

### Description
INTRODUCTION: Frontotemporal dementia (FTD) is characterized by progressive atrophy of frontal and/or temporal cortices and considerable clinical, pathological, and genetic heterogeneity. METHODS: Frontal and temporal cortex tissues from FTD-GRN (n=9), FTD-MAPT (n=13), and non-demented controls (n=11) were analysed with quantitative proteomics (DIA). Expression-weighted cell type enrichment deduced the role of major brain cell types and gene ontology analysis identified distinct biological processes. FTD-MAPT data was also compared to an AD (n=10) protein signature.  RESULTS: We identified brain region-specific FTD protein expression signatures. In frontal cortex of FTD-GRN, we observed immune processes in endothelial cells and mitochondrial dysregulation in neurons. In temporal cortex of FTD-MAPT, we observed dysregulated RNA processing, oligodendrocyte dysfunction, and axonal impairment. Comparison with AD indicated that alterations in RNA processing and oligodendrocyte function are distinct for FTD-MAPT. DISCUSSION: Our results indicate cell type-specific biological processes distinctive for genetic FTD subtypes. These findings may aid the development of FTD subtype-specific treatment strategies.

### Sample Protocol
Brain tissue preparation and LCM Sections (10µm) of fresh frozen tissue were mounted on polyethylene naphthalate-membrane slides (Leica, Herborn, DE), fixed in 100% ethanol for 1 minute and stained using 1% (wt/vol) Toluidine Blue in H2O (Fluka Analytical, Buchs, Switzerland) for 1 minute. Laser micro dissection (LMD) was performed using a Leica AS LMD system. A volume of 1.2 mm3 of grey matter tissue from the frontal and temporal cortical regions was collected in Eppendorf tubes containing 30-µL M-PER lysis buffer (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA) supplemented with reducing sodium dodecyl sulphate sample buffer (Thermo Scientific). Microdissected tissue was stored at -80°C until further use. Protein separation by electrophoresis and in-gel digestion Microdissected tissue lysates were incubated at 95°C for 5 minutes, followed by incubation with 50-mM iodoacetamide for 30 minutes at room temperature in the dark. Proteins were size separated on a NuPAGE 4-12% Bis-Tris acrylamide gel (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) using MOPS sodium dodecyl sulphate running buffer (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Gels were fixed and stained with colloidal Coomassie Blue G-250 overnight while shaking. After destaining in ultrapure H2O, each gel lane was sliced into four equal-sized parts and each part was cut into blocks of approximately 1 mm3 and collected in a 96-wells plate. Destaining, trypsin digestion, and peptide extraction were done as described previously. Micro LC and data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry for experimental samples Peptides were analysed by micro liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) using an Ultimate 3000 LC system (Dionex, Thermo Scientific) coupled to the TripleTOF 5600 mass spectrometer (Sciex). Peptides were trapped on a 5 mm Pepmap 100 C18 column (300 μm i.d., 5 μm particle size, Dionex) and fractionated on a 200 mm Alltima C18 column (300 μm i.d., 3 μm particle size). The acetonitrile concentration in the mobile phase was increased from 5 to 18% in 88 min, to 25% at 98 min, 40% at 108 min and to 90% in 2 min, at a flow rate of 5 μL/min. The eluted peptides were electro-sprayed into the TripleTOF MS with a micro-spray needle voltage of 5,500V. DIA experiments consisted of a parent ion scan of 150 msec followed by a window of 8 Da with scan time of 80 msec, and stepped through the mass range between 450–770 m/z. The total cycle time was about 3.2 sec, which yielded in general 9–10 measurement points across a typical peptide with an elution time of 30 sec. The collision energy for each window was determined based on the appropriate collision energy for a 2+ ion, centered upon the window with a spread of 15 eV.  Micro LC and data-dependent acquisition mass spectrometry of SCX fractions for library preparation  The conditions used for liquid chromatography in library preparation were the same as those of the DIA MS-based experiments. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode with a single MS full scan (m/z 350-1250, 150 msec) followed by a top 25 MS/MS (m/z 200–1800, 150 msec) at high sensitivity mode in UNIT resolution, precursor ion > 150 counts/s, charge state from +2 to +5, with an exclusion time of 16 sec once the peptide was fragmented. Ions were fragmented in the collision cell using rolling collision energy, and a spread energy of 5 eV.

### Data Protocol
DIA data extraction and analysis  We first performed DDA on tryptic peptides from pooled fractionated protein extracts from a mix of FTD-MAPT and NDC samples, and identified 3,422 protein groups by MaxQuant search (version 1.5.2.8) against the human proteome using the UniProt FASTA (release February 2015) and Biognosys iRT FASTA databases. The proteins and their corresponding fragment ions were then converted into a spectral library with Spectronaut, version 11. Analysis of DIA data from the experimental samples was done in Spectrounaut using the default settings. The Q-value threshold for peptides imported from the MaxQuant msms.txt output table was set to 0.01, all other settings were left to default. Across-run normalization based on total peak areas was performed by Spectronaut. Peptide abundances were exported as a Spectronaut report and further processed using the R language for statistical computation, version: 3.4.4. For a total overview of the studied samples, peptides were selected using a quality value cut-off condition of ≤10-3 in 50% of samples (this filter was applied per sample fraction). For further pairwise statistical comparison between conditions, peptides in each sample fraction were selected using a quality value cut-off condition of ≤10-3 in 50% of the samples of one condition. Peptide abundances were computed by summation of the peak area of the top two abundant fractions, preceded by peptide normalization using the normalizeCyclicLoess function from the limma R package, which was set to ‘fast’ and iterations were set to 3. Protein abundances were computed by summation of the normalized abundancies of the top five most abundant peptides for a respective protein.

### Publication Abstract
Frontotemporal dementia is characterized by progressive atrophy of frontal and/or temporal cortices at an early age of onset. The disorder shows considerable clinical, pathological, and genetic heterogeneity. Here we investigated the proteomic signatures of frontal and temporal cortex from brains with frontotemporal dementia due to GRN and MAPT mutations to identify the key cell types and molecular pathways in their pathophysiology. We compared patients with mutations in the GRN gene (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;9) or with mutations in the MAPT gene (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;13) with non-demented controls (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;11). Using quantitative proteomic analysis on laser-dissected tissues we identified brain region-specific protein signatures for both genetic subtypes. Using published single cell RNA expression data resources we deduced the involvement of major brain cell types in driving these different protein signatures. Subsequent gene ontology analysis identified distinct genetic subtype- and cell type-specific biological processes. For the GRN subtype, we observed a distinct role for immune processes related to endothelial cells and for mitochondrial dysregulation in neurons. For the MAPT subtype, we observed distinct involvement of dysregulated RNA processing, oligodendrocyte dysfunction, and axonal impairments. Comparison with an in-house protein signature of Alzheimer's disease brains indicated that the observed alterations in RNA processing and oligodendrocyte function are distinct for the frontotemporal dementia MAPT subtype. Taken together, our results indicate the involvement of different brain cell types and biological mechanisms in genetic subtypes of frontotemporal dementia. Furthermore, we demonstrate that comparison of proteomic profiles of different disease entities can separate general neurodegenerative processes from disease-specific pathways, which may aid the development of disease subtype-specific treatment strategies.

### Keywords
Frontotemporal dementia; grn; mapt; human brain proteomics; cell type enrichment

### Affiliations
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam
Department of Molecular and Cellular Neurobiology, Center for Neurogenomics and Cognitive Research, Amsterdam Neuroscience, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands (lab head)

### Submitter
Suzanne Miedema

### Lab Head
Dr August B. Smit
Department of Molecular and Cellular Neurobiology, Center for Neurogenomics and Cognitive Research, Amsterdam Neuroscience, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands (lab head)


