### Accession
PXD005065

### Title
FFPE LFQ proteomics of Human Cerebral Development and CMV Encephalitis Fetal Brains

### Description
We utilize a rapid shotgun FFPE LFQ MS method to profile four regions of developing human cerebrum.  Regions encompass neural precursor rich ventricular zones as well as intermediate and subplate and cortex regions accross human development from gestational weeks 16-36.  Proteome signatures of the four fetal brain regions were determined using statistical tests and CMV-infected fetal brain encephalitis was analyzed to determine the region-specific effects of this neurodevelopmental disorder.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were collected by macrodissection of FFPE sections and tissue lysis in 0.25% Rapigest (200 um Tris, 5mM DTT).  Following sonication and incubation at 95 degrees (45 minutes) and 80 degrees (90 minutes). Samples were alkylated in iodoacetamide and trypsin digested.

### Data Protocol
RAW Xcalibur MS spectra files were searched in MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8) against the Human SwissProt database (January 2015 release)

### Publication Abstract
Mass spectrometry (MS) analysis of human post-mortem central nervous system (CNS) tissue and induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)-based directed differentiations offer complementary avenues to define protein signatures of neurodevelopment. Methodological improvements of formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) protein isolation now enable widespread proteomic analysis of well-annotated archival tissue samples in the context of development and disease. Here, we utilize a shotgun label-free quantification (LFQ) MS method to profile magnetically enriched human cortical neurons and neural progenitor cells (NPCs) derived from iPSCs. We use these signatures to help define spatiotemporal protein dynamics of developing human FFPE cerebral regions. We show that the use of high resolution Q Exactive mass spectrometers now allow simultaneous quantification of &gt;2700 proteins in a single LFQ experiment and provide sufficient coverage to define novel biomarkers and signatures of NPC maintenance and differentiation. Importantly, we show that this abbreviated strategy allows efficient recovery of novel cytoplasmic, membrane-specific and synaptic proteins that are shared between both <i>in vivo</i> and <i>in vitro</i> neuronal differentiation. This study highlights the discovery potential of non-comprehensive high-throughput proteomic profiling of unfractionated clinically well-annotated FFPE human tissue from a diverse array of development and diseased states.

### Keywords
Encephalitis, Shotgun proteomics, Fetal brain

### Affiliations
Mount Sinai Hospital (Lab Head)
Mt. Sinai Hospital

### Submitter
Ugljesa Djuric

### Lab Head
Dr Eleftherios Diamandis
Mount Sinai Hospital (Lab Head)


