### Accession
PXD042919

### Title
Quantitative proteomic analysis of MCM3 in ThinPrep samples of patients with cervical preinvasive cancer

### Description
Triage methods for cervical cancer detection show moderate accuracy and present considerable false-negative and false-positive result rates. A complementary diagnostic parameter could help improve the accuracy of identifying patients who need treatment. A pilot study was performed using a targeted proteomics approach with opportunistic ThinPrep samples obtained from women collected at the hospital’s outpatient clinic to determine the concentration levels of minichromosome maintenance-3 (MCM3) and envoplakin (EVPL) proteins. Forty samples with ’’negative for intraepithelial lesion or malignancy’ (NILM), 21 samples with ’atypical squamous cells of undetermined significance’ (ASC-US), and 33 samples with ’low-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion and worse’ (≥LSIL) were analyzed, using cytology and the patients’ histology reports.

### Sample Protocol
In this study conducted in the Netherlands, ThinPrep samples from gynecological patients were collected and analyzed to assess the clinical discriminative power of MCM3 and EVPL proteins. The samples were obtained from patients during routine check-ups or when Pap-smear testing was indicated due to abnormal cytology or histology reports, surgical treatment, or specific symptoms. The samples were anonymized to maintain confidentiality. A total of 189 samples were collected and measured over a period of five months. Some patients were released with negative diagnosis reports, while others were diagnosed with low or high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesions or worse, and underwent further procedures for diagnosis and staging. HPV-negative samples were excluded from the analysis but were subjected to shotgun analysis. The samples were processed, and the protein concentration was determined using a BCA protein assay. Tryptic digestion was performed, and the resulting peptides were subjected to mass spectrometry analysis using data-dependent acquisition (DDA).

### Data Protocol
The proteins in the samples were identified by exporting features with recorded MS/MS spectra using ProteoWizard software (version 3.0.9248). The resulting .mgf files were then submitted to Mascot (version 2.3.01, Matrix Science) for protein identification against the human UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database (version 2013_07, Human Taxonomy, 20,265 entries) using trypsin digestion and fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.5 Da, parent ion mass tolerance of 10 ppm, and a maximum number of missed cleavages of two. Oxidation of methionine was specified as a variable modification, and carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification. The resulting peptide data from the Mascot search were processed using Scaffold (version 4.7.2, Proteome Software Inc.) for summarization and filtering. The number of proteins was determined based on the peptide data according to the criteria of the “Peptide Prophet” algorithm, with a probability of >95% and protein identification with a probability of >99%, and at least one peptide identification was allowed.

### Publication Abstract
Triage methods for cervical cancer detection show moderate accuracy and present considerable false-negative and false-positive result rates. A complementary diagnostic parameter could help improve the accuracy of identifying patients who need treatment. A pilot study was performed using a targeted proteomics approach with opportunistic ThinPrep samples obtained from women collected at the hospital's outpatient clinic to determine the concentration levels of minichromosome maintenance-3 (MCM3) and envoplakin (EVPL) proteins. Forty samples with 'negative for intraepithelial lesion or malignancy' (NILM), 21 samples with 'atypical squamous cells of undetermined significance' (ASC-US), and 33 samples with 'low-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion and worse' (&#x2265;LSIL) were analyzed, using cytology and the patients' histology reports. Highly accurate concordance was obtained for gold-standard-confirmed samples, demonstrating that the MCM3/EVPL ratio can discriminate between non-dysplastic and dysplastic samples. On that account, we propose that MCM3 and EVPL are promising candidate protein biomarkers for population-based cervical cancer screening.

### Keywords
Human, Dda, Mcm3, Cervical cancer

### Affiliations
Erasmus MC
Head of Laboratory Neuro-Oncology, Clinical and Cancer Proteomics, Neurology

### Submitter
Coskun Guzel

### Lab Head
Dr Theo Luider
Head of Laboratory Neuro-Oncology, Clinical and Cancer Proteomics, Neurology


