### Accession
PXD019778

### Title
Enrichment of microsomes from Chinese hamster ovary cells by subcellular fractionation for its use in proteomic analysis

### Description
Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells have been widely employed for production of recombinant proteins (RP) for research and therapeutic purposes. Indeed, this expression system was used for production of most of approved antibodies (84%) in 2015-2018 period. The success of this cell line for RP production relies on several advantages that comprise but are not limited to a safety viral profile, human compatible glycosylation, development of specific culture mediums and supplements, availability of sub-lines with different capabilities and the improvement in design of DNA vectors and selection strategies that allows to obtain higher producer clones in an easier way. Given the high importance of this cell line, a deeper knowledge of their biology through genomic, transcriptomic, proteomic and metabolomic studies has been gained in last years. These studies have aid in the exploration of molecular and cellular mechanisms that could explain cell behavior and to propose new targets for improved RP production and quality.  A special emphasis has been placed on proteomic characterization of subcellular compartments over cellular homogenates, due to some advantages that fractionation techniques offer over the classical approach, which include obtaining datasets that are easier to process and understand. Subcellular proteomics allows monitoring of proteins that shuttle between different compartments, quantification of lower abundance proteins, increase in number of identified proteins, elucidation of function and regulation of proteins, and unraveling of organelle dynamics.  The use of subcellular fractionation for proteomic characterization of organelles from CHO cells has been limited to the isolation of one or few organelles in an adherent phenotype, and only few fractionation protocols have been reported for these cells in their suspension format. The high cross-contamination of some isolated fractions due to insufficient fractionation steps, prevents adopting some of these protocols for applications such as proteomics. Thus, since this approach has not been addressed before for the proteomic characterization of  CHO cell organelles, subcellular proteomics was harnessed in the present study to provide identification and quantification of proteins from subcellular compartments obtained by differential and isopycnic centrifugation of this cell line.  Although several cellular processes and organelles play an important role during expression and secretion of RP, the classical secretion pathway has been recognized as a bottleneck for post-translational modifications, transport, modification and secretion of proteins in mammalian cells. In fact, over-expression of some proteins from endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi Apparatus has increased the specific productivity of HEK293 and CHO cells producing different RP. Thus, in line with the paramount importance of organelles from classical secretion pathway for RP production, a novel discontinuous sucrose gradient for improved separation and enrichment of microsomes has been designed in our laboratory, and incorporated to the proteomic characterization of CHO cell organelles.       CRL-12444, a DP-12 derived cell line producing a humanized monoclonal antibody against human IL-8, was used as a model of a recombinant CHO cell line during this study. Our goal is that the processing of raw proteomics data,  the classification and mapping of identified proteins will allow to construct proteomic maps for most subcellular compartments, describing the molecular functions, biological processes and pathways from enriched fractions.  The identification of proteins in each enriched compartment will improve the knowledge about their protein components, function and interaction, especially from those poorly represented like the proteins in the microsomes, allowing a subsequently expansion of the engineering strategies of CHO cells to increase the titer and quality of RPs.

### Sample Protocol
The present proteomic study employed a recombinant CHO cell line growing in suspension, sampled at exponential growth phase and subjected to subcellular fractionation. Proteins were recovered from each fraction after acetone precipitation, dried and subjected to proteomic processing. Cell line CHO DP-12 clone #1933 CRL-12444, which secretes a humanized monoclonal antibody against human interleukin 8, was used for this study and cultured in CDM4CHO medium supplemented with 6 mM stable glutamine, 0.002 mg/mL insulin and 200 nM methotrexate, at 37ºC in a 5% CO2 atmosphere in a humidified incubator, using 250 ml erlenmeyer flasks with a fill volume of 20%, and agitated at 60 rpm. Two biological replicates, consisting each of 9 individual flasks grouped, were employed for characterization. Cell density and viability were recorded every 24 h by cell counting in a Newbauer chamber using the trypan blue dye exclusion method.  Collected cells were centrifuged, washed twice in phosphate buffer at 4ºC, carefully suspended in 1 mM EDTA, 10 mM HEPES, pH 7.4 at a 3-6 x 107 cell/ml density, and incubated for 20 minutes in ice, with three inversions of tubes every 10 minutes. Before homogenization, 1 mM PMSF and 10% (v/v) SigmaFast Protease Inhibitor Cocktail final concentrations were added to cell suspension. Cells were transferred to a Dounce homogenizer and broken up with 25 strokes, in ice. Immediately, cold sucrose was added to restore osmolarity at a final concentration of 0.25 M. Homogenates were immediately subjected to differential and isopycnic subcellular fractionation.  Initial differential centrifugation was done by centrifugation of homogenates at different times and centrifugal forces, at 4ºC. Nuclear, mitochondrial and microsomal pellets were collected at 3,000 x g for 10 minutes, 9,000 x g for 15 minutes and 100,000 x g for one hour, respectively. Supernatant from last centrifugation step was named cytosol.  Subsequently, nuclear, mitochondrial and microsomal pellets, from previous differential centrifugation, were gently diluted in 0.25 M sucrose in HEPES buffer, deposited on top of discontinuous sucrose gradients for isopycnic separation and centrifuged at 154 693 x g for 3 hours, at 4ºC. A gradient for nuclear and mitochondrial suspensions was adapted from a previous report and consisted in a discontinuous 30-60% sucrose gradient. Microsomal preparations were separated in a sucrose gradient designed in house to increase separation efficiency and formed by a discontinuous 10-60% gradient. Visible bands were collected on each gradient for further protein recovery, comprising a total of 9 fractions coming from nuclear, mitochondrial and microsomal gradients (3 bands from each one). Thus, 10 subcellular fractions (9 bands from gradients plus cytosol) were obtained from two biological replicate, adding a total of 20 samples for proteomic processing.      Proteins from all subcellular fractions were recovered by acetone precipitation. In brief, NaCl was first added at a final concentration of 100 mM, followed by addition of 4 volumes of 80% [v/v] cold acetone, mixing and overnight incubation at -20ºC. After centrifugation, protein precipitate was washed twice with cold acetone and air dried.  Approximately, 200 µg of protein pellet were solubilized in 50 µl guanidinium buffer (6M guanididinium hydrochloride, 5 mM Tris [2-carboxyethyl] phosphine, 10 mM chloracetamide, 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5) and incubated at 99 °C for 10 min. After measure of protein concentration, 100 µg were digested overnight (12 hours) using trypsin as enzyme. TFA was added to a final concentration of 0.5% (v/v) and 20 µg of digested peptides were stage tipped. Liquid chromatography was performed on a capillary-flow UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (capLC, Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an 15 cm C18 easy spray column 50 µm x 150 mm, 2 µm Acclaim PepMap C18 column at flow rates of 1.2 µL/min (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Using a stepped gradient going from 3% acetonitrile in water to 45% over 120 minutes, the samples were sprayed into a Q-Exactiv HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The instrument was operated in Top 12 Data dependent acquisition mode. First of a fullscan was collected at 60,000 resolution; AGC Target 3.0e6; maximum injection time 50 ms, followed by up to 12 MS2 scans at 15,000 resolution, maximum injection time 30 ms, HCD collision energy set to 28% and dynamic exclusion set to 25 sec.

### Data Protocol
The data were analyzed using MaxQuant. Settings for MaxQuant analysis were chosen as following. Carbamidomethyl (C) and oxidation of methionine residues were set as fixed and variable modifications, respectively; trypsin as enzyme while allowing one missed cleavage, and FDR at 1%. Data were searched against the CHO proteome from Uniprot (UP000001075) while including a list of known contaminants. Tolerance of 20 ppm was settled for first search mass and MS/MS.

### Publication Abstract
Chinese hamster ovary cells have been the workhorse for the production of recombinant proteins in mammalian cells. Since biochemical, cellular and omics studies are usually affected by the lack of suitable fractionation procedures to isolate compartments from these cells, differential and isopycnic centrifugation based techniques were characterized and developed specially for them. Enriched fractions in intact nuclei, mitochondria, peroxisomes, cis-Golgi, trans-Golgi and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) were obtained in differential centrifugation steps and subsequently separated in discontinuous sucrose gradients. Nuclei, mitochondria, cis-Golgi, peroxisomes and smooth ER fractions were obtained as defined bands in 30-60% gradients. Despite the low percentage represented by the microsomes of the total cell homogenate (1.7%), their separation in a novel sucrose gradient (10-60%) showed enough resolution and efficiency to quantitatively separate their components into enriched fractions in trans-Golgi, cis-Golgi and ER. The identity of these organelles belonging to the classical secretion pathway that came from 10-60% gradients was confirmed by proteomics. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD019778. Components from ER and plasma membrane were the most frequent contaminants in almost all obtained fractions. The improved sucrose gradient for microsomal samples proved being successful in obtaining enriched fractions of low abundance organelles, such as Golgi apparatus and ER components, for biochemical and molecular studies, and suitable for proteomic research, which makes it a useful tool for future studies of this and other mammalian cell lines.

### Keywords
Subcellular fractionation, Subcellular proteomics, Organelles, Chinese hamster ovary cells

### Affiliations
Departamento de Biología Molecular y Biotecnología, Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México,  Cd. Universitaria, Coyoacán, Ciudad de México, México
Departamento de Biología Molecular y Biotecnología, Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México,  Cd. Universitaria, Coyoacán, Ciudad de México

### Submitter
Saumel Perez Rodriguez

### Lab Head
Dr Norma Adriana Valdez Cruz
Departamento de Biología Molecular y Biotecnología, Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México,  Cd. Universitaria, Coyoacán, Ciudad de México, México


