### Accession
PXD012098

### Title
CREBBP is a novel tumour suppressor in solid tumours

### Description
The contribution of the majority of frequently mutated genes to tumourigenesis is not fully defined. Many aggressive human cancers, such as triple negative breast cancers (TNBCs), have a poor prognosis and lack tractable biomarkers and targeted therapeutic options. Here, we systematically characterize loss-of-function mutations to generate a functional map of novel driver genes in a 3-dimensional model of breast cancer heterogeneity that more readily recapitulates the unfavourable tumour microenvironment in vivo. This identified the histone acetyltransferase CREBBP as a potent tumour suppressor gene whose silencing provided a 3D-specific growth advantage only under oxygen and nutrient deplete conditions. CREBBP protein expression was altered in a substantial proportion of TNBCs as well as several other solid tumours, including endometrial, bladder, ovarian and squamous lung cancers. In multiple primary tumours and cell models, loss of CREBBP activity resulted in upregulation of the FOXM1 transcriptional network. Strikingly, treatment with a range of CDK4/6 inhibitors (CDK4/6i), that indirectly target FOXM1 activity, selectively impaired growth in both CREBBP-altered spheroids and cell line xenografts and patient derived models from multiple tumour types. This study is the first to provide rationale for CREBBP as a biomarker for CDK4/6i response in cancer representing a new treatment paradigm for tumours that harbour CREBBP alterations that have limited therapeutic options.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were lysed in 5% SDS/ 100 mM TEAB buffer with probe sonication and heating at 95⁰C for 10min. Protein concentration was measured by Pierce 660 nm Protein Assay and 300 µg of protein were taken for each sample. Proteins were reduced with TCEP and alkylated by iodoacetamide followed by TCA (trichloroacetic acid) precipitation. Trypsin (Thermo) was added at 1:25 (trypsin:proteins) for overnight digestion at 37⁰C. 100 µg or 200 µg of peptides per sample were TMT labelled as instructed by the manufacturer. The TMT labelled peptide mixture was fractionated on a BEH XBridge C18 column (2.1 mm i.d. x 150 mm) with a 35 min gradient from 5 – 35% CH3CN/NH4OH at pH 10. A total of 36 fractions were collected and subjected to IMAC enrichment using the Phos-Select resin (Sigma).    The enriched phosphopeptides (from both sets) and the IMAC flow through (used for whole proteome analysis) were analysed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos coupled with an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano System. Samples were loaded on a nanotrap (100 µm id x 2 cm) (PepMap C18, 5 µ) at 10 µL/min with 0.1% formic acid (FA) and then separated on an analytical column (75 µm id x 50 cm) (PepMap C18, 2µ) over a 90 min gradient of 5 – 32% CH3CN/0.1% FA at 300 nL/min. The Orbitrap Fusion was operated in the Top Speed mode at 3 s per cycle. The survey scans (m/z 375-1500) were acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120K (AGC 4x105 and maximum injection time 50 ms). A lockmass at m/z 445.12003 was also set. The multiply charged ions (2-7) were subjected to HCD fragmentation with a collision energy at 38% and isolation width 0.7 Th. MS/MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap (AGC 1x105 and maximum injection time 105 ms) with 50K resolution. Dynamic exclusion width was set at ± 7 ppm for 40 s.

### Data Protocol
All raw files were processed in Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Fisher) using the SequestHT and Mascot (V2.3) search engines for phosphopeptide analysis, or SequestHT only for total proteome analysis. Spectra were searched against a fasta file containing reviewed Uniprot Homo sapiens entries (January 2018). Search parameters were: trypsin with 2 maximum miss-cleavage sites, mass tolerances at 25 ppm for Precursor, and 0.1 Da for fragment ions, dynamic modifications of Deamidated (N, Q), Oxidation (M) and Phospho (S, T, Y), and static modifications of Carbamidomethyl (C) and TMT6plex (peptide N-terminus and K). Peptides were validated by Percolator with q-value set at 0.01 for the decoy database search.  Protein FDR was set at 0.01. Phosphorylation site localization probabilities were computed by the ptmRS node. The TMT10plex reporter ion quantifier included 20 ppm integration tolerance on the most confident centroid peak at the MS3 level. Only unique peptides were used for quantification. The co-Isolation threshold was set at 50%.  Peptides with average reported S/N>3 were used for protein quantification. Only master proteins were reported.  For full proteome analysis TMT6plex (K) and acetylation (K) were set as dynamic modifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phospho, Lc-ms/ms, Cancer

### Affiliations
Functional Proteomics, Institute Cancer Research
&
Proteomic Mass Spectrometry, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute
The Institute of Cancer Research, London

### Submitter
James Wright

### Lab Head
Dr Jyoti Choudhary
The Institute of Cancer Research, London


