### Accession
PXD025408

### Title
Tear proteomics reveals the molecular basis of the efficacy of human recombinant nerve growth factor treatment for Neurotrophic Keratopathy

### Description
Neurotrophic Keratopathy (NK),classified as an orphan disease (ORPHA137596), is a rare degenerative corneal disease characterized by epithelial instability and decreased corneal sensitivity caused by the damage to the corneal nerves. The administration of human recombinant nerve growth factor (rhNGF) eye drops, as a licensed-in-Europe speciﬁc medication for treatment of moderate and severe NK, has added promising perspectives to the management of this disorder by providing a valid alternative to the neurotization surgery. However, few studies have been conducted to the molecular mechanism underlying the response to the treatment. Here, we carried out tears proteomics to highlight the protein expression during pharmacological treatment of NK. Our data emphasized a proteome modulation duringrhNGF treatment related to an increase in DNA synthesis, an activation ofboth BDNF signaland IL6 receptor.Furthermore, the amount of neuronal Extracellular Vesicles EVs (CD171+)correlated with the EVs carrying IL6R (CD126+) togetherassociated to the inflammatory EVs (CD45+) in tears. Such scenario determined drug response, confirmed by an in vivo confocal microscopy analysis, showing an increase in length, density and number of nerve fiber branches during treatment. In summary, rhNGF treatment seems to determine an inflammatory micro-environment, mediated by functionalized EVs, defining the drug response by stimulating protein synthesis and fiber regeneration.

### Sample Protocol
15 patients (7 males and 8 females) with documented moderate or severe NK were enrolled. Only 8 of 15 finished therapy by undergoing follow-up checks until the eighth week of starting treatment. All patients were treated with cenegermin 20 µg/mL in the affected eye 1 drop every 2 hours 6 times per day for 8 weeks. Slit lamp examination, Schirmer 1 test, and In Vivo Confocal Microscopy (ICVM) were performed at baseline and after 4 and 8 weeks of follow-up. IVCM was performed by using a confocal microscope diode-laser 670 nm (HRT II Rostock Cornea Module; Heidelberg Engineering, Heidelberg, Germany). IVCM scans were focused on the central cornea. At least 5 frames at the level of the epithelium and basal lamina were acquired. Corneal sub basal nerve density was traced using NeuronJ (National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA). The density of the nerve fibers was calculated in µm/mm2. The number of nerve branches and the nerve diameter was manually quantified in each frame and reported as µm and number/frame. At the level of basal epithelial layers, basal lamina, or sub-basal nerve plexus layer, the presence of DCs was investigated. DCs were identified as bright cellular images with a branching dendritic morphology. DCs density was calculated, using the analysis software provided by the microscope instrument, by averaging numbers of cells from five images acquired in central cornea, counted manually within a region of interest (ROI). DCs densities are given a cells/mm2. Tear Schirmer’s strip samples were extracted as described in our previous work16and used for proteomics investigation or for subsequent Flow Cytometry EVs phenotyping or/and WB analyses. Proteomics analyses were executed on whole lacrimal ﬂuid from 8subjects suffering from NK at baseline (T0) and after 4 (T4) and 8 weeks (T8) of treatment with rhNGF. Tear proteins were ﬁrst extracted, quantiﬁed by Bradford assay (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA), using Bovine Serum Albumin (BSA, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MI, USA) standards for the calibration curve. 30 µg of proteins underwent to a tryptic digestion carried out overnight at 37 °C using trypsin (Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany) by performing a filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol. Tryptic peptides from each sample were analyzed in triplicate by LC-MS/MS using a Proxeon EASY-nLCII (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, Milan, Italy) chromatographic system coupled to a Maxis HD UHR-TOF (Bruker Daltonics GmbH, Bremen, Germany) mass spectrometer, as already described in our previous works. After tears extraction and protein quantification by Bradford assay, tear proteins were separated by 10% SDS-PAGE, transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane, and then blocked for 1h at room temperature using blocking buffer (5% not-fat dry milk in PBS-Tween20 0.01%). Thus, membranes were incubated with primary anti-MMP9 (EP1255Y) antibody used 1:1000 (Novus Biologicals, Centennial, Colorado, USA) overnight at 4°C. Next, membranes were washed with PBS-Tween20 0.01% for three times and incubated with rabbit horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibody, diluted 1:20000,for 1 hour at room temperature. Visualization was achieved using the enhanced chemiluminescence method (SuperSignal West Dura Extended Duration Substrate, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). The optical density of WB bands was assessed through Image J software (National Institute of Mental Health, USA) by calculating % Mean of Pixel Intensity. Samples were then incubated for 45 minutes, at room temperature, in the dark. After adding 200 μLof PBS 1X to each tube, 1 x 106 events/sample were acquired by a FACSVerse flow cytometer (BD Biosciences). The trigger threshold was set on the allophycocyanin (APC) channel, which is the channel in which the LCD (a pan EV marker) emits (threshold placed at 200/262,144)20,35. For all used parameters the height (H) signals and the bi-exponential/logarithmic modes were selected. The Cytometer Setup & Tracking Module (BD Biosciences) was used for the daily quality check. Compensation was assessed using CompBeads (BD Biosciences) and single stained fluorescent samples. Data were analysed using FACSuite v 1.0.6.5230 (BD Biosciences) and FlowJo X v 10.0.7 (TreeStar, Ashland, OR, USA) software. EVs concentrations were obtained by the volumetric count function. With the used dilution no swarm effects occurred.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data were processed simultaneously using a free computational proteomics platform, MaxQuant version 1.6.6.0(Max-Planck Institute for Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany). Peak lists, generated in MaxQuant, were searched using Andromeda peptide search engine against the UniProt database (released 2018_04, taxonomy Homo Sapiens, 20,874 entries) supplemented with frequently observed contaminants and containing forward and reverse sequences. Multiplicity was set to one because a label-free quantification was performed. Trypsin digestion was specified as digestion mode. Non-specific cleavage to both ends of the peptides was allowed with maximum of two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines (C) was defined as fixed modification and used in protein quantification, while oxidation of methionines (M) and deamidation of asparagines and glutamines (NQ) were set as variable modifications. Minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids was set and the search space was limited to a maximum peptide mass of 4600 Da. MaxQuant uses individual mass tolerances for each peptide; the initial maximum precursor mass tolerances were set by default to 0.07 Da in the first search and 0.006 Da in the main search, and the fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.05 Da. Match-between-runs (MBR) algorithm was used to transfer the peptide identifications from one LC-MS/MS run to all others using its default settings (match window of 0.7 min and alignment time of 20 min). False discovery rate (FDR) at protein level was set at 2%, on the contrary at peptide level was set at 1%. Protein identification was performed with at least one unique peptide. Protein abundance of each samples was measured as intensity-based absolute quantiﬁcation (iBAQ) and used for functional enrichment analysis. Kruskal-Wallis test with Dunn’s Multiple Comparison post-test was performed for comparisons between the three different clinical groups, using GraphPad Prism (GraphPad software, Inc. USA). Rank correlation between variables were performed using MedCalc 19.4.1 (MedCalc software Ltd), by using a Spearman non-parametric correlation test. The values of p < 0.05 were considered signiﬁcant. The 95% of conﬁdence interval was assumed for each test. BoxPlot R was used to perform bean plots for clinical data distribution visualization.  4.4. Bioinformatics and functional analysis Bioinformatics analyses were performed using Perseus software, version 1.6.10.50, (Max-Planck Institute for Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany) uploading the identified protein groups generated by MaxQuant. First of all, data were log2 transformed in order to facilitate the calculation of the protein expression. Site only, reverse and contaminant peptides were removed from the dataset. Then, the missing and invalid values were removed. The minimum number of valid values accepted was set at 2 in at least one clinical group. In this way we have evaluated not only the different protein expression, but also the presence and absence of proteins between two different clinical conditions. Variability between different clinical groups is reported as Pearson correlation (R2) as log2 values in a density plot (Supplementary Figure S1). The Volcano plot function was used to identify the differentially regulated proteins by performing a T-test (p-value < 0.05) with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.1 and S0of 0.1 for T4/T0 comparison and a FDR of 0.2 and a S0of 0.1 for T8/T0. At last, obtained protein datasets were further uploaded for “Core Analysis” through Ingenuity Pathway Analysis tool (IPA, Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) to map the modulated proteins for their functional annotation, such as canonical pathway analysis, network discovery, upstream regulator analysis and downstream effects networks. Protein ratio was uploaded for each defined comparison, in which we considered molecules and/or relationships in all species and a confidence setting as high predicted or experimental observed (excluding medium predicted). IPA is able to identify relationships and pathways relevant to the uploaded dataset. In particular, it provides the principal diseases and function categories resulting from some of the modulated proteins of the uploaded dataset. Instead, upstream regulator analysis is based on prior knowledge of expected effects and relationships between transcriptional regulators and their target genes from published literature citations stored in the IPA system33. The predicted activation or inhibition of each transcriptional regulator or downstream is inferred by the z-score generated by IPA system (z-scores ≥ 2.0 indicate that a molecule is activated, whereas z-scores ≤-2.0 indicate the inhibition of target molecules).Instead, the p-value is a measurement of the statistical overlap between the protein dataset and the genes or function categories, and the significance is attributed to p-value < 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Neurotrophic Keratopathy (NK), classified as an orphan disease (ORPHA137596), is a rare degenerative corneal disease characterized by epithelial instability and decreased corneal sensitivity caused by the damage to the corneal nerves. The administration of human recombinant nerve growth factor (rhNGF) eye drops, as a licensed-in-Europe specific medication for treatment of moderate and severe NK, has added promising perspectives to the management of this disorder by providing a valid alternative to the neurotization surgery. However, few studies have been conducted to the molecular mechanism underlying the response to the treatment. Here, we carried out tears proteomics to highlight the protein expression during pharmacological treatment of NK (Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD025408).Our data emphasized a proteome modulation during rhNGF treatment related to an increase in DNA synthesis, an activation of both BDNF signal and IL6 receptor. Furthermore, the amount of neuronal Extracellular Vesicles EVs (CD171+) correlated with the EVs carrying IL6R (CD126+) together associated to the inflammatory EVs (CD45+) in tears. Such scenario determined drug response, confirmed by an in vivo confocal microscopy analysis, showing an increase in length, density and number of nerve fiber branches during treatment. In summary, rhNGF treatment seems to determine an inflammatory micro-environment, mediated by functionalized EVs, defining the drug response by stimulating protein synthesis and fiber regeneration.

### Keywords
Proteomics; tear; neurotrophic keratopathy; ngf; extracellular vesicles

### Affiliations
Department ogf Pharmacy, University "G. d'Annunzio", Chieti, Italy
University "G. d'Annunzio" of Chieti

### Submitter
Maria Concetta Cufaro

### Lab Head
Dr Piero Del Boccio
Department ogf Pharmacy, University "G. d'Annunzio", Chieti, Italy


