### Accession
PXD017734

### Title
Histoplasma capsulatum lipid map

### Description
Proteomic analysis of Histoplasma capsulatum yeast cells.

### Sample Protocol
Histoplasma capsulatum G217B strain was grown as yeasts in Ham's F12 medium at 37C. Cell pellets were extracted using the MPLEx protocol as previously described (DOI: 10.1128/mSystems.00043-16). Extracted proteins were reduced with dithiothreitol, alkylated with iodoacetamide and digested with trypsin (DOI: 10.1128/mSphere.00085-15. Digested peptides were suspended in water, quantified by BCA assay and had their concentrations adjusted to 0.1 μg/μL with water. A total of 500 ng of peptides were direct injected onto the analytical column. The analytical column used was prepared in-house by slurry packing 3-µm Jupiter C18 stationary phase (Phenomenex, Torrence, CA) into a 70-cm long, 360 µm OD x 75 µm ID fused silica capillary tubing (Polymicro Technologies Inc., Phoenix, AZ). The column was coupled to a Waters M-ClassTM UPLC system (Millford, MA) connected with a Q-Exactive Plus hybrid quadrupole/Orbitrap mass spectrometer from Thermo Fisher Scientific (San Jose, CA). Mobile phases consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water (MP-A) and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (MP-B). The gradient elution, and column regeneration profile was as follows (min:%MP-B); 0:0.1, 4.0:8, 36:12, 135:30, 175:45, 180:95, 190:95, 195:1. Data acquisition (180 min) was started at the end of the sample loading period (20 min). The analytical column was coupled to the Q-Exactive using a home-built nanospray adapter interface with 2.2 kV applied to achieve electrospray ionization. The MS inlet was maintained at a temperature of 275 °C. A precursor scan was performed from m/z 400 to 2000 at a resolution of 35k at m/z 400 and an automatic gain control (AGC) of 3e6. Operated in data dependent mode, the top 12 most intense ions from the precursor scan were selected for high energy collision dissociation (HCD) MS/MS at a resolution of 17.5k, AGC of 1e5, isolation window of 2 m/z, and a max ion time of 100 ms. Only ions identified as having a +2 charge or higher were subjected to HCD and subsequently excluded from further analysis for 30 sec thereby allowing for deeper coverage.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data were analyzed with MaxQuant software (v.1.5.5.1) by searching against the H. capsulatum G186AR sequences from Uniprot Knowlegdgebase(downloaded August 15, 2016), considering protein N-terminal acetylation and oxidation of methionine as variable modifications, and cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification. The parent ion mass tolerance was set at 20 and 4.5 ppm for the first and main peptide searches, whereas the fragment mass tolerance was set as 20 ppm for both searching rounds. Tryptic digestion was required for peptide termini and up to 2 missed cleavage sites were allowed per peptide.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Fungus, Proteomics, Histoplasma capsulatum, Lipidomics, Metabolic map, Lipid metabolism

### Affiliations
Biological Sciences Division, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory

### Submitter
Ernesto Nakayasu

### Lab Head
Dr Ernesto Nakayasu
Biological Sciences Division, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory


