### Accession
PXD028599

### Title
Quantitative proteomics analysis of affinity-puQuantitative proteomics analysis of affinity-purified Tribolium castaneum JHR complexesrified Tribolium castaneum JHR complexes

### Description
Juvenile hormone (JH) serves vital roles in insect reproduction, development, and many aspects of physiology. JH primarily acts at the gene-regulatory level through an intracellular receptor. The JH receptor (JHR) is a ligand-activated complex of transcription factors of the bHLH-PAS family, consisting of the JH-binding protein Methoprene-tolerant (MET) and its partner Taiman (TAI). Initial studies have indicated significance of post-transcriptional modification (phosphorylation), subunit assembly, and nucleocytoplasmic transport of JHR in JH signaling. However, our knowledge of JHR regulation at the protein level remains rudimentary, partly due to the difficulty of obtaining functional JHR proteins in a purified form. Here we present successful fermentation-level purification of JHR complexes of MET and TAI proteins from two insect species, the beetle Tribolium castaneum and the mosquito Aedes aegypti. The recombinant JHR subunits from each species were co-expressed using a baculovirus system in an insect cell line and purified through affinity steps, yielding soluble proteins, capable of binding both the hormonal ligand (JH III) and DNA bearing cognate JH-response elements.  The present quantitative phosphoproteomcis analysis uncovered multiple phosphorylation sites in the TcMET protein, some of which were induced by methoprene. A functional bipartite nuclear localization signal, straddled by phosphorylated residues, was found within the disordered C-terminal region of TcMET. Our present characterization of the recombinant JHR is a primary step towards understanding JHR regulation.

### Sample Protocol
For peptide sequencing, affinity mass spectrometry and quantitative phosphoproteomics analyses, purified recombinant JHR complexes or anti-FLAG pull-downs were digested using a single-pot solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation method (79). Protein samples (50-100 μg) were reduced with 5 mM TCEP (Sigma) for 15 min, alkylated for 30 min with 50 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) and digested with 1 μg trypsin gold (Promega) for 16 h at 37°C. For quantitative proteomics analyses the peptide solutions were desalted using C18 MacroSpin columns (Nest Group) prior to on-column stable isotope dimethyl labeling of differentially treated samples using light (CH2O) or heavy (CD2O) formaldehyde (Sigma), as previously described (80). Light (+28 Da) or heavy (+32 Da) labeled peptide samples were mixed 1:1 in 1% FA and subjected to phosphopeptide enrichment using TopTip TiO2 micro-spin columns according to the protocol provided by the manufacturer (Glygen). TiO2-bound or -unbound fractions were finally resuspended in 10 μl 0.1% FA and 3-μl aliquots separated in duplicate using a two-column chromatography setup comprising a PepMap100 C18 20 mm × 75 μm trap and a PepMap C18 500 mm × 75 μm analytical column (ThermoFisher). Samples were concentrated onto the trap column at 5 μl/min for 5 min and infused into an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher) at 300 nl/min running 120 minute gradients from 99% Buffer A (0.1% FA) to 40% Buffer B (99% acetonitrile, 0.1% FA) on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLC system (ThermoFisher). The Lumos mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between the acquisition of a single Orbitrap MS scan (resolution, 120,000) every 3 s and the top-20 multiply charged precursors selected for EThcD fragmentation (maximum fill time, 100 ms; AGC of 5 × 104 with a resolution of 30,000 for Orbitrap MS-MS scans).

### Data Protocol
Relative quantification of associated proteins and localized phosphorylation sites was accomplished using MaxQuant (v1.5.3.1) (81). Searches were performed against a custom protein database containing S. frugiperda Swiss-Prot and TrEMBL sequences, recombinant FLAG-TcMET, His6-TcTAI, FLAG-AaTAI, and His6-AaMET proteins, as well as common proteomics contaminants (28,148 entries). High-resolution MS/MS data were searched with trypsin cleavage specificity allowing two miscleavage events, carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57 Da) set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine (+16 Da), acetylation (+42 Da) of protein N termini, phosphorylation (+80 Da) of serine, threonine or tyrosine as variable modifications. Stable isotope labelled samples were searched allowing for additional variable light (L; +28 Da) or heavy (H; +32 Da) dimethyl labels on the peptide N termini and lysine residues with up to three variable modifications. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the first search and 10 ppm for the main search with a maximum false discovery rate of 1.0% set for protein and peptide identifications. A robust permutation test was used to analyze MaxQuant data and evaluate statistically significant differences in the relative abundance of TcJHR-associated proteins or phosphopeptides (82), and only sites with localization scores > 0.75 were considered.

### Publication Abstract
Juvenile hormone (JH) plays vital roles in insect reproduction, development, and in many aspects of physiology. JH primarily acts at the gene-regulatory level through interaction with an intracellular receptor (JH receptor [JHR]), a ligand-activated complex of transcription factors consisting of the JH-binding protein methoprene-tolerant (MET) and its partner taiman (TAI). Initial studies indicated significance of post-transcriptional phosphorylation, subunit assembly, and nucleocytoplasmic transport of JHR in JH signaling. However, our knowledge of JHR regulation at the protein level remains rudimentary, partly because of the difficulty of obtaining purified and functional JHR proteins. Here, we present a method for high-yield expression and purification of JHR complexes from two insect species, the beetle T. castaneum and the mosquito Aedes aegypti. Recombinant JHR subunits from each species were coexpressed in an insect cell line using a baculovirus system. MET-TAI complexes were purified through affinity chromatography and anion exchange columns to yield proteins capable of binding both the hormonal ligand (JH III) and DNA bearing cognate JH-response elements. We further examined the beetle JHR complex in greater detail. Biochemical analyses and MS confirmed that T. castaneum JHR was a 1:1 heterodimer consisting of MET and Taiman proteins, stabilized by the JHR agonist ligand methoprene. Phosphoproteomics uncovered multiple phosphorylation sites in the MET protein, some of which were induced by methoprene treatment. Finally, we report a functional bipartite nuclear localization signal, straddled by phosphorylated residues, within the disordered C-terminal region of MET. Our present characterization of the recombinant JHR is an initial step toward understanding JHR structure and function.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Tribolium castaneum, Quantitative ms, Juvenile hormone receptor, Dme labelling

### Affiliations
CSIRO
CSIRO Biomedical Manufacturing Biology R&D Group

### Submitter
Thomas Nebl

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Thomas Nebl
CSIRO Biomedical Manufacturing Biology R&D Group


