### Accession
PXD023417

### Title
Proteomic analysis of humoral immune components in bronchoalveolar lavage of patients infected or colonized by Aspergillus fumigatus

### Description
Humoral immune factors have been individually studied in the context of host-Aspergillus fumigatus interaction. However, a global view of the multitude and complex nature of humoral factors is needed to bring new insight into the pathobiology of aspergillosis. Therefore, we undertook proteomic analysis of A. fumigatus-infected or colonized bronchoalveolar lavage fluid versus controls, to identify alveolar humoral factors affected upon A. fumigatus infection. Complement proteins C1q, C8 beta chain, factor-H, surfactant protein-D, ficolin-1, ficolin-2, mannan binding lectin serine peptidase 2 and pentraxin-3 were identified as the major candidates. We hypothesize that crosstalk between these factors is essential during host-Aspergillus interaction.

### Sample Protocol
BALF samples digestion. Control BALF (35 µg) and Aspergillus+ BALF (130 µg) sample were diluted in 8 M urea, 100 mM Tris HCl pH 8.5 to obtain a final urea concentration up to 6 M. Sample was reduced with 5 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP) for 30 min and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Protein samples were then incubated with rLys-C Mass Spec Grade (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) for 5 h at 30°C for the first digestion (ratio 1:35). Then sample were diluted below 2 M urea with 100 mM Tris HCl pH 8.5 and Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) was added for the second digestion overnight at 37°C (ratio 1:70). A second incubation with the same amount of trypsin (5 h at 37°C) was performed to ensure a complete digestion. The digestion was stopped by adding 5 % formic acid (FA). Resulting peptides were desalted and concentrated on Sep-Pak C18 SPE cartridge (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) according to manufacturer instructions. Peptides were eluted using 50 % acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1 % FA. Purified peptides were lyophilized and kept at -80°C until further used. LC-MS analysis. Tryptic peptides were analyzed on a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen) coupled with an EASY-nLC 1200 chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide digests (1 µg) were loaded and separated at 250 nL.min-1 on a in house packed 50 cm nano-HPLC column (75 μm inner diameter) with C18 resin (1.9 μm particles, 100 Å pore size, Reprosil-Pur Basic C18-HD resin, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) equilibrated in 97 % solvent A (H2O, 0.1 % FA) and 3 % solvent B (ACN, 0.1 % FA). Peptides were eluted with a linear gradient from 3 to 22 % buffer B in 160 min, followed by a stepwise increase of buffer B to 50 % B in 70 min and finally to 90 % in 5 min. Mass spectra were acquired with a Top10 data-dependent acquisition mode, with a scan range set to 300 – 1,700 m/z and an AGC target value of 3x106. The fragmentation of precursor ions was performed by HCD (NCE 27) at 17.5 K resolving power (at m/z 200) with an AGC target value of 1×106 and a maximum injection time of 60 ms. Precursors with unknown charge state or a charge state of 1 and >7 were excluded. Dynamic exclusion was set to 35 s.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification. All raw files were searched with MaxQuant (v.1.5.3.8) against the Uniprot Homo sapiens reference proteome (20,416 entries) concatenated with the Uniprot Neosartorya fumigata reference proteome (9,647 entries), the usual contaminants and the reversed sequences of all entries, using trypsin as specific enzyme with a maximum of 3 missed cleavages. Possible modifications included carbamidomethylation (Cys, fixed), oxidation (Met, variable) and Nter acetylation (variable). The mass tolerance in MS was set to 20 ppm for the first search then 6 ppm for the main search and 10 ppm for the MS/MS. Maximum peptide charge was set to seven. Five amino acids were required as minimum peptide length. The “match between runs” feature was applied for samples having the same experimental condition with a maximal retention time window of 0.7 min. One unique peptide to the protein group was required for the protein identification. A false discovery rate cut-off of 1 % was applied at the peptide and protein levels. The statistical analysis of the proteomics data was performed as follows: Three biological replicates were acquired per condition. To highlight significantly differentially abundant proteins between two conditions, differential analyses were conducted through the following data analysis pipeline: (1) deleting the reverse and potential contaminant proteins; (2) keeping only proteins with at least two quantified values in one of the two compared conditions to limit misidentifications and ensure a minimum of replicability; (3) log2-transformation of the remaining intensities of proteins; (4) normalizing the intensities by median centering within conditions thanks to the normalizeD function of the R package DAPAR, (5) putting aside proteins without any value in one of both compared conditions: as they are quantitatively present in a condition and absent in another, they are considered as differentially abundant proteins; (6) imputing the missing values of the remaining proteins using the impute.slsa function of the R package imp4p; and (7) performing statistical differential analysis on them by requiring a minimum fold-change of 2.5 between conditions and by using a LIMMA t test combined with an adaptive Benjamini-Hochberg correction of the p values thanks to the adjust.p function of the R package cp4p. The robust method of Pounds and Cheng was used to estimate the proportion of true null hypotheses among the set of statistical tests. The proteins associated with an adjusted p value inferior to an FDR level of 1% have been considered as significantly differentially abundant proteins. Finally, the proteins of interest are therefore the proteins that emerge from this statistical analysis supplemented by those being quantitatively absent from one condition and present in another.  Functional annotation of BALF proteomes for controls and Aspergillus+ samples was conducted using database for annotation, visualization, and integrated discovery (DAVID) v6.8. Overrepresented functional categories among proteins enriched in each subject population were identified relative to total unique protein found in BALF from our study using a permutation-based false discovery rate analysis (FDR). Processes with at least three protein members and FDR < 5 % were deemed significant.

### Publication Abstract
Humoral immune components have been individually studied in the context of interaction of host with <i>Aspergillus fumigatus</i>, a major airborne fungal pathogen. However, a global view of the multitude and complex nature of humoral immune components is needed to bring new insight into host-<i>Aspergillus</i> interaction. Therefore, we undertook comparative proteomic analysis of the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid collected from individuals infected or colonized with <i>A. fumigatus</i> versus controls, to identify those alveolar humoral components affected upon <i>A. fumigatus</i> infection. Complement proteins C1q, C8 beta-chain, factor-H, ficolin-1, ficolin-2, mannan binding lectin serine peptidase 2, pentraxin-3 and the surfactant protein-D were identified as the major humoral immune components affected by <i>A. fumigatus</i> infection and colonization. Based on this observation, we hypothesize that crosstalk between these humoral components is essential during host-<i>Aspergillus</i> interaction giving new specific leads to study for better understanding the pathogenesis. Furthermore, the affected humoral components could be potential diagnostic markers of <i>A. fumigatus</i> infection or colonization.

### Keywords
Alveolar humoral factors, Bronchoalveolar lavage, Aspergillus fumigatus

### Affiliations
Institut Pasteur
Institut Pasteur Molecular Mycology Unit CNRS UMR2000 Paris, France

### Submitter
Magalie Duchateau

### Lab Head
Dr Vishukumar Aimanianda
Institut Pasteur Molecular Mycology Unit CNRS UMR2000 Paris, France


