### Accession
PXD004454

### Title
Asian citrus psyllid proteomics: CLas(-) whole adult ACP

### Description
‘Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus’ (CLas), the bacterial pathogen associated with citrus greening disease, is transmitted by Diaphorina citri, the Asian citrus psyllid (ACP). This dataset was obtained from analysis of CLas(-) whole adult ACP samples.

### Sample Protocol
ACP adults collected from CLas-infected citron (Citrus medica) plants were ground, homogenized, sonicated, and precipitated in trichloroacetic acid/acetone/beta mercaptoethanol. Precipitated proteins were resuspended in urea/ammonium bicarbonate and quantified by Bradford assay. Equimass protein samples were reduced (DDT), alkylated (MMTS) and digested (trypsin). Peptides were cleaned up using MCX Oasis cartridges (Waters) and MS/MS analysis was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data files were searched against a combined database of predicted D. citri, endosymbiont (Carsonella, Profftella, and Wolbachia), and CLas proteins using Mascot Daemon 2.3.2 (Matrix Science, Boston, MA). MS/MS search parameters included fixed modifications (cysteine: Methylthio), variable modifications (asparagine, glutamine: deamidated; methionine: oxidation), and maximum one missed cleavage. Thermo *.raw files were converted into Mascot Generic Format using MSConvert in Protewizard. Files with the *.dat extension were exported from Mascot and loaded into Scaffold Q+ 4.4.1.1 (Proteome Software, Portland, OR) and used to calculate normalized spectral count for each protein from each sample. Scaffold protein and peptide thresholds were set at 95%, with a minimum peptide number of two per protein – this resulted in a protein false discovery rate (FDR) of 2.2% and a peptide FDR of 0.1%.

### Publication Abstract
The Asian citrus psyllid (<i>Diaphorina citri)</i> is the insect vector responsible for the worldwide spread of '<i>Candidatus</i> Liberibacter asiaticus' (CLas), the bacterial pathogen associated with citrus greening disease. Developmental changes in the insect vector impact pathogen transmission, such that <i>D. citri</i> transmission of CLas is more efficient when bacteria are acquired by nymphs when compared with adults. We hypothesize that expression changes in the <i>D. citri</i> immune system and commensal microbiota occur during development and regulate vector competency. In support of this hypothesis, more proteins, with greater fold changes, were differentially expressed in response to CLas in adults when compared with nymphs, including insect proteins involved in bacterial adhesion and immunity. Compared with nymphs, adult insects had a higher titre of CLas and the bacterial endosymbionts Wolbachia, Profftella and Carsonella. All Wolbachia and Profftella proteins differentially expressed between nymphs and adults are upregulated in adults, while most differentially expressed Carsonella proteins are upregulated in nymphs. Discovery of protein interaction networks has broad applicability to the study of host-microbe relationships. Using protein interaction reporter technology, a <i>D. citri</i> haemocyanin protein highly upregulated in response to CLas was found to physically interact with the CLas coenzyme A (CoA) biosynthesis enzyme phosphopantothenoylcysteine synthetase/decarboxylase. CLas pantothenate kinase, which catalyses the rate-limiting step of CoA biosynthesis, was found to interact with a <i>D. citri</i> myosin protein. Two Carsonella enzymes involved in histidine and tryptophan biosynthesis were found to physically interact with <i>D. citri</i> proteins. These co-evolved protein interaction networks at the host-microbe interface are highly specific targets for controlling the insect vector responsible for the spread of citrus greening.

### Keywords
Asian citrus psyllid, Citrus greening, Insect vector, Huanglongbing, Candidatus liberibacter asiaticus, Diaphorina citri

### Affiliations
USDA-ARS, Cornell University, Boyce Thompson Institute; Ithaca, NY, USA
USDA-ARS

### Submitter
John Ramsey

### Lab Head
Dr Michelle Cilia
USDA-ARS, Cornell University, Boyce Thompson Institute; Ithaca, NY, USA


