### Accession
PXD016165

### Title
Glioma classification based on mass spectrometry imaging to spatially resolved proteomic and clinical data open a new stratification of patients for a more adaptated treatment

### Description
Gliomas represent 80% of all malignant cerebral tumors and are classified within different malignity grade. Glioblastoma, the most aggressive group, represent more than half of all gliomas but remain a heterogeneous group. Indeed, patient survival can reach from several months to a few years after surgery and chemotherapy. To study gliomas, MALDI mass spectrometry imaging is an interesting technique, allowing the analysis of tumor heterogeneity. In this study, MALDI-MSI is coupled with spatially-resolved microproteomic within the objective to identify subgroups of glioblastomas patients in order to help diagnosis and prognostic.  Molecular images are generated from thin tissue section in order to determine the spatial localization of digested peptides. Thanks to unsupervised statistical analysis, we then generated hierarchical clustering of homogeneous molecular regions. According to these regions, spatially resolved proteomic gave access to large scale protein identification and relative quantification.  Hierarchical clustering reveal three molecular region within all the tumors sample : region red which represent 33% of surface of all sample, region yellow (25.7%) and region blue (40.8%). Consequently, 3 groups of patient can be determined: group A composed mostly of region red (13/50 patients), group B composed mostly of region yellow (9/50 patients) and group C composed mostly of region blue (24/50 patients).  Spatially resolved proteomic was performed and the 147 extractions were analyzed by nano-LC MS/MS. Two-way ANOVA test reveal panel of proteins specifically overexpressed in each region. Protein overexpressed in region red are associated with neurogenesis; protein overexpressed in region yellow are associated with an activation of the immune system and protein overexpressed in region blue are involved with viral processes.  To conclude, the combination of MALDI-MSI and microproteomic provides new information on these tumors, allowing us to differentiate three group of patient. In the future, these data will permit to build a more precise classification, a better medical care for patients and the identification of potential new therapeutic targets.

### Sample Protocol
On-tissue LysC-Tryptic microdigestion on tissue.   Spatially-resolved microproteomics were realized on the ROIs according to the previously published protocol (Quanico et al., 2013). Briefly, 20-μm sections were cut and subjected to protein micro-digestion. These tissue sections were deposited on poly-lysine glass slides and dried for 15 min in a desiccator. Washes were performed to remove lipids. Then, the LysC-trypsin solution (40 μg/mL in Tris-HCl 50mM, pH 8.0) was deposited using the piezoelectric microspotter Chemikal Inkjet Printer (CHIP-1000, Shimadzu, CO, Kyoto, Japan). The digestion was performed on a total area of 1 mm2 made out of a 4 × 4 pitch of micro-spots. Each spot is 200 μm in diameter and corresponds to a droplet volume of 100 pL/cycle. Enzyme was spotted for a total of 2 h digestion. After enzyme deposition 0.1%TFA was spotted for 25 cycles with 100 pL on each spot/cycle.      Microextraction by liquid microjunction   After the microdigestion, the peptides within selected regions of tissue sections (ROIs) were extracted using the TriVersa Nanomate platform (Advion Biosciences Inc., Ithaca, NY, USA) with a Liquid Extraction Surface Analysis (LESA) option. Briefly, a volume of solvent was aspirated and deposited onto the digested region and then aspirated again to be dispensed into a low binding tube. Three steps per extraction were done: (1) 0.1% TFA, (2) ACN/0.1% TFA (8:2, v/v), and (3) MeOH: 0.1% TFA (7:3, v/v). Two extractions per point were performed to increase the quantity of material collected.

### Data Protocol
anoLC-MS & MS/MS analysis   After liquid microjunction extraction, collected samples were dried under vacuum, reconstituted with 20 μL of 0.1% TFA solution and subjected to desalting using C-18 Ziptip (Millipore, Saint-Quentin-en-Yvelines, France) eluted by 80% ACN and dried under vacuum. Dried samples were reconstituted in 0.1% FA aqueous/ACN (98:2, v/v). The analyze of digested proteins was performed by a nano Acquity UPLC system (Waters) coupled with a Q-Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) via a nano electrospray source. The samples were separated by online reversed-phase, using a pre-concentration column (nanoAcquity Symmetry C18, 5 µm, 180 µm x 20 mm) and an analytical column (nanoAcquity BEH C18, 1.7 µm, 75 µm x 250 mm). The peptides were separated by applying a linear gradient of acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid (5%-35%) for 2 hours, at the flow rate of 300 nl/min. The Q-Exactive was operated in data dependent mode defined to analyze the 10 most intense ions of MS analysis (Top 10). The MS analysis was performed with an m/z mass range between 300 to 1600, a resolution of 70,000 FWHM, an AGC of 3e6 ions and a maximum injection time of 120 ms. The MS/MS analysis was performed with an m/z mass range between 200 to 2000, an AGC of 5e4 ions, a maximum injection time of 60 ms and the resolution was set at 17,500 FWHM.      Data analysis   All MS data wereprocessed with MaxQuant (Cox & Mann, 2008; Tyanova et al., 2015) (Version 1.5.3.30) using the Andromeda (Cox et al., 2011) search engine. The proteins were identified by searching MS and MS/MS data against of the complete proteome for Homo sapiens in the UniProt database (The UniProt Consortium, 2015) (release July 2018, 20 412 entries). A second search was done combining the Human database with an AltORF database (HS_GRCh38_altorf_20170421). A third analysis was done using the Human virus proteome (release October 2019). Trypsin specificity was used for digestion mode, with N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation selected as variable. We allowed up to two missed cleavages. An initial mass accuracy of 6 ppm was selected for MS spectra, and the MS/MS tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the HCD data. FDR at the peptide spectrum matches (PSM) and protein level was estimated using a decoy version of the previously defined databases (reverse construction) and set to 1%. Relative, label-free quantification of the proteins was conducted into Max-Quant using the MaxLFQ algorithm (Cox et al., 2014) with default parameters. Analysis of the identified proteins was performed using Perseus software (http://www.perseus-framework.org/) (version 1.6.0.7). The file containing the information from the identification were used and hits from the reverse database, proteins with only modified peptides and potential contaminants were removed. The LFQ intensity was logarithmized (base 2 logarithm). Statistical multiple-sample tests were performed using ANOVA with a truncation value based on “permutation-based FDR” of 5%. Two categorical annotation rows that were used for ANOVA are (1) the color group based on the three color from Scils global segmentation of the 50 samples (Red; Yellow and Blue) and (2) the group of patient which is determined by the majoritary color present in each tumor sample (Group A, Group B, Group C). Normalization was achieved using a Z-score with matrix access by rows. In Z-score normalization, the mean of each row/column is subtracted from each value. The result is then divided by the standard deviation of the raw/column. Only proteins that were significant by ANOVA were used. Hierarchical clustering was first performed using the Euclidean parameter for the distance calculation, and the average option for linkage in the rows and columns of the trees with a maximum of 300 clusters. Functional annotation and characterization of the identified proteins were performed using PANTHER software (version 14.1, http://www.pantherdb.org) and STRING (version 11.0, www.string-db.org) (Szklarczyk et al., 2011) by uploading the protein list exported from Perseus and corresponding to the overexpressed proteins for each group. STRING is a database containing information about protein-protein interactions. It includes the known or predicted association through five main sources (Genomic Context Predictions, High-Throughput lab experiments, Co-expression, Automated text mining and previous knowledge in database). The algorithm will determine physical or functional associations between proteins of a list and a network of predicted associations could be visualized.

### Publication Abstract
Molecular heterogeneity is a key feature of glioblastoma that impedes patient stratification and leads to large discrepancies in mean patient survival. Here, we analyze a cohort of 96 glioblastoma patients with survival ranging from a few months to over 4 years. 46 tumors are analyzed by mass spectrometry-based spatially-resolved proteomics guided by mass spectrometry imaging. Integration of protein expression and clinical information highlights three molecular groups associated with immune, neurogenesis, and tumorigenesis signatures with high intra-tumoral heterogeneity. Furthermore, a set of proteins originating from reference and alternative ORFs is found to be statistically significant based on patient survival times. Among these proteins, a 5-protein signature is associated with survival. The expression of these 5 proteins is validated by immunofluorescence on an additional cohort of 50 patients. Overall, our work characterizes distinct molecular regions within glioblastoma tissues based on protein expression, which may help guide glioblastoma prognosis and improve current glioblastoma classification.

### Keywords
Glioma, Classification, Proteomic, Maldi

### Affiliations
PRISM Lab
PRISM - Unité Inserm 1192 Université de Lille France

### Submitter
Lauranne Drelich

### Lab Head
Dr Michel Salzet
PRISM - Unité Inserm 1192 Université de Lille France


