### Accession
PXD032794

### Title
Antimicrobial potential of a ponericin-like peptide isolated from Bombyx mori L. hemolymph in response to Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection

### Description
The main effectors in innate immune system of B. mori L. are antimicrobial peptides (AMPs). We imunizied B. mori with varied inoculum size of Pseudomonas aeruginosa ATCC 25668 cells to relate the importance of inoculum size towards AMP production. There is a sharp change in λmax from 278 nm to 285 nm (bathochromic shift) in the hemolymph of immunized silkworm incubated for 24 h. FTIR study of the hemolymph extracted from the immunized B. mori showed peak at 1550 cm-1 indicates the presence of α-helical peptides in the hemolymph.The peptide fraction was obtained through methanol, acetic acid and water mixture (90:1:9) extraction, followed by peptide purification using RP-HPLC. The fraction exhibiting antibacterial property was collected and characterized further using MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry. A linear -helical peptide with flexible termini (LLKELWTKMKGAGKAVLGKIKGLL -Bm-Frac6), corresponding to a previously described peptide from ant venom and denominated ponericin-L1. This peptide showed antibacterial activity against P. aeruginosa. Moreover, MTT assay and hemolytic study revealed that the Bm-Frac6 (B. mori ponericin-L1) is non-toxic toward mammalian healthy cells. Finally, our study shows that silkworm larvae challenged with P. aeruginosa also induced modification in physiological processes, leading to significant morpho-anatomical changes.

### Sample Protocol
We used the methods reported by Scoofs et al. (1990) to prepare an acidic methanolic extract from B. mori hemolymph.9 Briefly, hemocytes-free plasma was diluted ten times in methanol- acetic acid extract (methanol: glacial acetic acid: distilled water (90:1:9) (MGW), mixed, and kept at room temperature for 10 min and centrifuged at 10,000g for at least 30 min at 4°C. The supernatant was collected, and the methanol was evaporated using a rotary evaporator. The remaining solution was lyophilized and dissolved in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). To remove the lipid content, the same volume of n-hexane was added, mixed thoroughly, and centrifuged at 10,000g for 10 min at 4°C. The upper fraction containing the lipid was discarded, and the lower polar fraction containing peptides were collected, freeze-dried, and further dissolved in 0.1% TFA.

### Data Protocol
The data was uploaded into MASCOT (Matrix Science, London, UK) database to search the peptide identity. Before baseline correction, the spectra were normalized with dividing each spectrum by its mean value. Secondly, the spectra were subjected to baseline correction with correlation factor of 0.7 and Gaussian smoothing to reduce noise using 5-point filter width. Finally, the search parameters were defined as: database, SwissProt; no cleavage by enzyme; allowing no missed cleavage; peptide mass maximum variation of 0.5 Da.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ponericin, Bombyx mori, Antimicrobial peptide

### Affiliations
University of Health Sciences Turkey
University of Health Sciences

### Submitter
AHMET KATI

### Lab Head
Dr AHMET KATI
University of Health Sciences Turkey


