### Accession
PXD032230

### Title
Identification of AtCGL160 interacting partners

### Description
We performed co-immunoprecipitation experiments to identify interacting proteins of CGL160 using the N-terminal portion of the protein (AtCGL160N).

### Sample Protocol
Freshly extracted thylakoids corresponding to ~10 mg chlorophyll were resuspended in 500 μl extraction buffer (50 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM MgCl2, 5% [w/v] glycerol, 1% 679 [v/v] NP40, 0.2 mM PMSF) and solubilized on ice for 30 min. Cell debris was removed by centrifugation at 35,000g for 30 min and 4°C, the supernatant was added to 20 μl Dynabeads (Thermo Scientific), equilibrated with equilibration buffer (50 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 5% [w/v] glycerol, 0.05% [v/v] NP40) and labelled with AtCGL160 antibody according to the manufacturer's instructions. The suspension was incubated for 3 h at 4°C with rotation, washed three times with equilibration buffer, and twice with the same buffer but omitting NP40. Proteins were eluted with 100 μL 0.1 M glycine pH 2.0 for 10 min and neutralized with 100 μl 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate. Samples were reduced with 10 μl of 45 mM DTT (30 min, 37° C) and alkylated with 10 μl of 0.1 M iodoacetamide (30 min, RT, dark), followed by digestion with 1.5 μg of trypsin at 37°C overnight. Peptide mixtures were desalted using home-made C18 stage-tip. The peptide mixtures were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC (Thermo) coupled to a Bruker Impact II Q-TOF mass spectrometer. For each sample, estimated 1.0 µg of desalted peptides were separated on a 50 cm analytical column using a two-step gradient run at 250 µl/min: from 3 % to 30% Buffer B (acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) over 60 minutes, followed by a 15 from 30% to 45% Buffer B. Data was acquired with a mass range from m/z 200 to 2000 at 3 Hz, with the Top 18 most intense peaks selected for MS/MS analysis using an intensity-dependent spectra acquisition time between 4 and 16 Hz.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were processed using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.3.4) and peak lists were searched against the UniProt Arabidopsis reference proteome database (downloaded April 2019) using the built-in Andromeda search engine with the default settings. The label-free quantification (LFQ) algorithm was used to quantified proteins across samples.

### Publication Abstract
Chloroplast ATP synthases consist of a membrane-spanning coupling factor (CFO) and a soluble coupling factor (CF1). It was previously demonstrated that CONSERVED ONLY IN THE GREEN LINEAGE160 (CGL160) promotes the formation of plant CFO and performs a similar function in the assembly of its c-ring to that of the distantly related bacterial Atp1/UncI protein. Here, we show that in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) the N-terminal portion of CGL160 (AtCGL160N) is required for late steps in CF1-CFO assembly. In plants that lacked AtCGL160N, CF1-CFO content, photosynthesis, and chloroplast development were impaired. Loss of AtCGL160N did not perturb c-ring formation, but led to a 10-fold increase in the numbers of stromal CF1 subcomplexes relative to that in the wild type. Co-immunoprecipitation and protein crosslinking assays revealed an association of AtCGL160 with CF1 subunits. Yeast two-hybrid assays localized the interaction to a stretch of AtCGL160N that binds to the DELSEED-containing CF1-&#x3b2; subdomain. Since Atp1 of Synechocystis (Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803) could functionally replace the membrane domain of AtCGL160 in Arabidopsis, we propose that CGL160 evolved from a cyanobacterial ancestor and acquired an additional function in the recruitment of a soluble CF1 subcomplex, which is critical for the modulation of CF1-CFO activity and photosynthesis.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Atp synthase, Lfq, Impactii, Co-ip, Thylakoid, Bruker

### Affiliations
Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich (LMU)
Department Biology I
Plant Molecular Biology (Botany)
Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich (LMU), Department Biology I, Großhaderner Str. 2, D-82152 Planegg-Martinsried, Germany

### Submitter
Giada Marino

### Lab Head
Dr Thilo Ruehle
Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich (LMU), Department Biology I, Großhaderner Str. 2, D-82152 Planegg-Martinsried, Germany


