### Accession
PXD017226

### Title
Site-specific 5-hydroxy-tryptophan incorporation into apolipoprotein A-I impairs cholesterol efflux activity and high density lipoprotein biogenesis

### Description
We used genetic code expansion technology with an engineered Saccharomyces cerevisiae tryptophanyl tRNA- synthetase:suppressor tRNA pair in Escherichia coli, to directly insert the non- canonical amino acid 5-OH tryptophan (5-OHTrp) at position 72 in human apoA-I. Characterization of recombinant human apoA-I by mass spectrometry confirmed successful site-specific incorporation of Trp(5-OH) in apoA-I.

### Sample Protocol
Samples containing wild-type ApoA-I (control) and ApoA-I with oxidized Trp 72 were prepared in triplicate as follows: the sample (approx. 10 μg) was evaporated under vacuum and resuspended with 25 μL of 6 M urea and 100 mM Tris buffer, then flushed with argon and left 10 min at room temperature. Then 100 μL of 100 mM Tris buffer and 100 L of trypsin (0.5 μg diluted in 100 μL 100 mM Tris buffer) were added to a final concentration of 0.6 M urea. Next the sample was flushed with argon and incubated overnight at 37 oC. The reaction was stopped with acetic acid glacial (5 μL) and the sample was spun at 17,000 x g for 15 min. 30-40 μL of the sample was transferred into an MS vial and flushed with argon. The vials were loaded into the autoinjector of a Proxeon Easy-nLC coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) with a nano-LC electrospray ionization source on positive mode. The mass spectrometry analysis was performed with the Xcalibur data system. Samples were first loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap 100 sample trap (inner diameter 100 μm, length 2 cm, nanoViper, packing material: C18, 5 μm, 100 Å) and separated by an Acclaim PepMap 100 column (inner diameter 75 μm, length 15 cm, nanoViper, packing material: C18, 3 μm, 100 Å from Thermo). Mobile phase was as follows, buffer A: water with 0.1% formic acid, and buffer B: acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid. The HPLC gradient started with 5% B and increased to 35% B over 40 min, then increased to 70% B over 10 min, and was held at 70% B for another 5 min. For repeat injections, the column was re-equilibrated for the next sample by decreasing to 5% B over 1 min and held at this mobile phase composition for 12 min. The flow rate was 0.3 μL/min. The applied spray voltage of the nano-LC electrospray ionization source was 2.0 kV. For MS2 data collection, one high resolution full scan by Orbitrap was followed by 10 data-dependent scans of the most intense ions by ion trap. Dynamic exclusion was also applied so that any ions that had been repeatedly scanned two times in 10 seconds were excluded from scan for 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra of digested peptides were processed by the SEQUEST algorithm of Proteome Discoverer 1.1 (Thermo Scientific) and searched against a fasta file containing the sequence of His-tag apoA-I. Static modifications of +16 and +32 were introduced for single and double oxidation of tryptophan, and +4 for kynurenine. The SEQUEST output files were filtered by the cross-correlation coefficient (XCorr) with minimal thresholds of 2.5 for double charged and 3.5 for triple charged peptides. All spectra for targeted peptides were inspected manually. The percentage of tryptophan oxidation in the sample was calculated as follows: the chromatogram peaks corresponding to peptides containing native tryptophan or one of its oxidized forms were integrated with the Xcalibur program and their areas were summed up. Then the percentage of each species was calculated as the peak area fraction (peak area of peptides containing oxidized tryptophan / total peak area of peptides containing oxidized and native tryptophan) multiplied by one hundred.

### Publication Abstract
Apolipoprotein A-I (apoA-I) is the major protein constituent of high-density lipoprotein (HDL) and a target of myeloperoxidase-dependent oxidation in the artery wall. In atherosclerotic lesions, apoA-I exhibits marked oxidative modifications at multiple sites, including Trp<sup>72</sup> Site-specific mutagenesis studies have suggested, but have not conclusively shown, that oxidative modification of Trp<sup>72</sup> of apoA-I impairs many atheroprotective properties of this lipoprotein. Herein, we used genetic code expansion technology with an engineered <i>Saccharomyces cerevisiae</i> tryptophanyl tRNA-synthetase (Trp-RS):suppressor tRNA pair to insert the noncanonical amino acid 5-hydroxytryptophan (5-OHTrp) at position 72 in recombinant human apoA-I and confirmed site-specific incorporation utilizing MS. In functional characterization studies, 5-OHTrp<sup>72</sup> apoA-I (compared with WT apoA-I) exhibited reduced ABC subfamily A member 1 (ABCA1)-dependent cholesterol acceptor activity <i>in vitro</i> (41.73 &#xb1; 6.57% inhibition; <i>p</i> &lt; 0.01). Additionally, 5-OHTrp<sup>72</sup> apoA-I displayed increased activation and stabilization of paraoxonase 1 (PON1) activity (&#x3bc;mol/min/mg) when compared with WT apoA-I and comparable PON1 activation/stabilization compared with reconstituted HDL (WT apoA-I, 1.92 &#xb1; 0.04; 5-OHTrp<sup>72</sup> apoA-I, 2.35 &#xb1; 0.0; and HDL, 2.33 &#xb1; 0.1; <i>p</i> &lt; 0.001, <i>p</i> &lt; 0.001, and <i>p</i> &lt; 0.001, respectively). Following injection into apoA-I-deficient mice, 5-OHTrp<sup>72</sup> apoA-I reached plasma levels comparable with those of native apoA-I yet exhibited significantly reduced (48%; <i>p</i> &lt; 0.01) lipidation and evidence of HDL biogenesis. Collectively, these findings unequivocally reveal that site-specific oxidative modification of apoA-I via 5-OHTrp at Trp<sup>72</sup> impairs cholesterol efflux and the rate-limiting step of HDL biogenesis both <i>in vitro</i> and <i>in vivo</i>.

### Keywords
Apolipoprotein a-i, Human, Plasma, 5-oh-trp

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry
Cleveland State University
Departmet of Cardiovascular and Metabolic Sciences, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland ,US

### Submitter
Valentin Gogonea

### Lab Head
Dr Stanley L. Hazen
Departmet of Cardiovascular and Metabolic Sciences, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland ,US


