### Accession
PXD041185

### Title
Proteomic data and structure analysis combined reveal interplay of structural rigidity and flexibility on selectivity of cysteine cathepsins

### Description
Addressing the elusive specificity of cysteine cathepsins, which in contrast to caspases and trypsin-like proteases lack strict specificity determining P1 pocket, was calling for innovative approaches. Proteomic analysis of cell lysates with human cathepsins K, V, B, L, S, and F identified 30,000 cleavage sites, which were analyzed by software platform SAPS-ESI (Statistical Approach to Peptidyl Substrate-Enzyme Specific Interactions). SAPS-ESI was used to generate clusters and training sets for support vector machine learning. Cleavage site predictions on the SARS-CoV-2 S protein, confirmed experimentally, exposed the most probable first cut under physiological conditions and suggested furin-like behavior of cathepsins. Crystal structure analysis of representative peptides in complex with cathepsin V revealed rigid and flexible sites consistent with analysis of proteomics data by SAPS-ESI that correspond to positions with heterogeneous and homogeneous distribution of residues. Thereby support for design of selective cleavable linkers of drug conjugates and drug discovery studies is provided.

### Sample Protocol
Human SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cels were cultured in RPMI medium without arginine, lysine and glutamine (Silantes) supplemented with 10% dialyzed fetal bovine serum (Invitrogen), 2 mM GlutaMAX (Invitrogen), 25 units/ml penicillin (Invitrogen), 25 µg/ml streptomycin (Invitrogen), 146 mg/L L-Lysine.HCl (Sigma-Aldrich) and either natural L-Arginine.HCl (light, Sigma-Aldrich) or 13C6 L-Arginine.HCl (heavy, Silantes). The concentration of L-Arginine.HCl was reduced to 30 mg/L (15% of the normal concentration in RPMI) to prevent metabolic conversion of arginine to proline. Cells were cultured at 37°C and in 5% CO2 for at least six population doublings to ensure complete incorporation of the labeled arginine. Upon complete labeling, aliquots of 10 million SILAC-labeled cells were washed three times with PBS and cell pellets were frozen at -80˚C until further use.  SILAC-labeled cells were lysed in 50 mM MES, 50 mM sodium phosphate pH 8, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA and 1 mM DTT by three rounds of freeze-thawing. Lysates were cleared by centrifugation for 15 min at 16,000 x g, followed by acidification to pH 5.5 using 1 M HCl. For cathepsin treatment, we used a differential sample mixing strategy to allow highly automated, software-based quantification and annotation of protein processing events called iMixPro, as reported previously (Impens et al., Mol Cell Proteomics 2010). Here, the control sample, made from three parts of light-labeled cell lysate (each part contained approximately 400 µg of protein), was incubated with 10 µM E-64 (cathepsin K, V, L, S or F) or CA-074 (cathepsin B), whereas the treated sample, made from one part light-labeled and one part heavy-labeled cell lysate, was incubated with 200 nM recombinant cathepsin K, V, L, S, F or B for 20 min at 37°C. After incubation, the control and cathepsin-treated samples were mixed, 4 M guanidinium hydrochloride was added and the pH was raised to 7.4 to proceed with COFRADIC isolation of N-terminal peptides.  The N-terminal COFRADIC protocol was performed as described before (Staes et al., Nat Protoc 2011). Briefly, proteins were reduced and alkylated using 15 mM TCEP and 30 mM iodoacetamine. After desalting the protein mixtures on NAP-10 columns (GE Healthcare) in 2 M guanidinium hydrochloride and 50 mM sodium phosphate buffer at pH 8, free amino groups were acetylated by incubation with 20 mM of an N-hydroxysuccinimide (NHS) ester of trideutero-acetate (made in-house) for 1 h at 30°C followed by addition of 10 mM glycine to quench residual NHS esters and 120 mM hydroxylamine to reverse potential O-acetylation and incubation for 20 min at room temperature. The protein samples were again desalted on NAP-10 columns in 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate, boiled for 5 min, put on ice for 5 min and digested overnight with sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega) (enzyme/substrate of 1/100, w/w) at 37°C. The resulting peptide mixtures were incubated with 1,250 mU Q-cyclase (Qiagen) 625 mU activated pGAPase (Qiagen) to drive the formation of N-terminal pyroglutamate to completion and proteolytically remove this residue, respectively. N-terminal peptides were then pre-enriched by strong cation exchange (SCX) chromatography on disposable SCX cartridges (Agilent Technologies) in a buffer containing 50% acetonitrile in 10 mM sodium phosphate, pH 3.0. N-terminal peptides, which were not retained on the SCX resin under these conditions, were collected in the run-through fraction, concentrated by vacuum drying and re-suspended in 10 mM ammonium acetate pH 5.5 in 2% acetonitrile. Methionine residues were oxidized by incubating the peptides with 0.5% H2O2 for 30 min at 30°C, followed by immediate injection of the samples on a capillary RP-HPLC column (Zorbax 300SB-C18, 2.1 mm internal diameter, 150 mm length, Agilent Technologies) for the first COFRADIC separation. Peptides were separated by a linear gradient of acetonitrile (from 2% to 70% in 100 min) and peptides that eluted between 20 and 80 min were collected in 15 primary COFRADIC fractions of 4 min each. Each primary fraction was incubated four times with 15 nmol 2,4,6-trinitrobenzenesulfonic acid (TNBS) and each fraction was re-separated by RP-HPLC under the same conditions as during the primary separation. N-terminal peptides, which cannot get modified by TNBS, eluted from the column during the same time interval and were collected in 16 fractions of 0.5 min. Internal and C-terminal peptides, which were modified by TNBS, underwent a hydrophobic shift and were not collected. Secondary fractions with 12 min difference in retention time were pooled to a total of 36 or 48 samples for LC-MS/MS analysis. Samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS on a linear trap quadrupole (LTQ) Orbitrap Velos or a LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and peak list files were generated from the peptide fragmentation spectra as described before (Impens et al., Mol Cell Proteomics 2010 and Ghesquiere B et al., Mol Cell Proteomics 2009).

### Data Protocol
Spectra were searched with MASCOT (version 2.4.0, https://www.matrixscience.com/) in the Swiss-Prot database (release of November 11, 2011, January 25, 2012 and April 18, 2012) with restriction to human proteins and quantified by the MASCOT Distiller software as described before (Impens et al., Mol Cell Proteomics 2010). Briefly, semiArgC/P was used as enzyme setting with one missed cleavage allowed. Methionine oxidation, trideuteron-acetylation of lysine and alkylation of cysteine were set as fixed modifications, while variable modifications included acetylation and trideutero-acetylation of N-termini and pyroglutamate formation of N-terminal glutamine residues. Mass tolerance of precursor and fragment ions was set to respectively 10 ppm and 0.5 Da. To allow identification of peptides from both light and heavy labeled samples, a quantitation method with two different components were made defining 12C6 Arg and 13C6 Arg as exclusive modifications at any position. Only peptides that were ranked firs and scored above the threshold score set at 99% confidence were withheld. The FDR was calculated for every search as described previously (Elias et al., Nat Methods 2007). Potential false positive peptide identifications were selected and automatically removed by the Peptizer software application as described before (Helsens et al., Mol Cell Proteomics 2008). Only peptides that fulfilled the following three conditions were considered as neo-N-terminal peptides reporting true cathepsin cleavage sites: (1) the start position of the peptide in the protein sequence is >2, (2) the N-terminal alpha amino group of the peptide is modified by trideuteron-acetylation and (3) the light/heavy (L/H) ratio is > 2 (L/H ratios of neo-N-terminal peptides are distributed around 1, determination of the ratio cut-off value is based on the boundary of a one-sided 99% quantile of the ratio distribution) as described before (Impens et al., Mol Cell Proteomics 2010). Neo-N-terminal peptides were then loaded into the TOPPR database (Colaert et al. Nucleic Acids Res, 2013), and re-mapped onto the latest version of the Swiss-Prot database (release of January 22 , 2014) to generate final lists of total cleavage sites (Supplementary Table 1).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cofradic, N-terminomics, Cathepsins, Imixpro

### Affiliations
Medical Protein Chemistry
Jožef Stefan Institute, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular and Structural Biology, Jamova cesta 39, 1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia Centre of Excellence for Integrated Approaches in Chemistry and Biology of Proteins (CIPKeBiP), Jamova cesta 39, 1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia

### Submitter
An Staes

### Lab Head
Dr Dusan Turk
Jožef Stefan Institute, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular and Structural Biology, Jamova cesta 39, 1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia Centre of Excellence for Integrated Approaches in Chemistry and Biology of Proteins (CIPKeBiP), Jamova cesta 39, 1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia


