### Accession
PXD011151

### Title
Mitochondrial proteome analysis from LC-MS/MS glioblastoma cell lines

### Description
Proteomic Analysis of metabolic change in T98G and U87MG glioblastoma cell lines

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture Cell lines were maintained in 175 cm2 plastic flasks (37ºC, 5% CO2) in EMEM medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS). Cells were harvested with trypsin (80-90%) in confluence with trypsin. Washed twice in PBS and used for mitochondria extraction. Mitochondria isolation The mitochondria were isolated by differential centrifugation. Cells were disrupted separately in 250 mM sucrose, 1 mM EGTA, 10 mM HEPES, pH 7.4 at 4ºC and centrifuged for 10 min at 1500 x g and 4ºC to recover the supernatant. This step was repeated three times. Subsequently, all supernatants were pooled and centrifuged for 10 min at 12000 x g and 4ºC to obtain a mitochondrial pellet. The pellets were used immediately or kept at -80ºC until use. Mitochondrial proteome extraction T98G and U87MG mitochondrial-associated proteins were obtained following the Hurkman’s protocol. Each pellet was resuspended in 500 micro l of extraction buffer (0.7 M sucrose, 0.5 M Tris-Base, 0.1 M KCI, 0.03 M HCI, 0.05 M EDTA and 2% β-mercaptoethanol) and saturated phenol (500 micro l) and incubated for 20 min at −20ºC. Then, pellets were centrifuged 10 min at 400 x g, 4ºC and the phenolic phase was recovered by adding 0.1 M ammonium acetate and incubating 12 to 15h at −20ºC. Next, suspended pellets were washed twice with ammonium acetate 0.1 M and were centrifuged 10 min at 4000 g 4°C. Next, the pellets were washed with 1 ml of 80% acetone and centrifuged at 4000 x g for 10 min at 4°C. The supernatants were discarded, and the pellets were resuspended in 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea and 0.06 M DTT, 2% ampholytes (3–10 pH) and 4% CHAPS. Each sample was centrifuged 30 min at 8000 x g 4ºC. The supernatants were recovered and frozen at −80ºC. Six mitochondria pellets (3 T98G and 3U87MG) were lysed in 4% SDS, 0.1M DTT, 0.1M Tris pH 8.6. Mitochondria were incubated in lysis buffer for 1 minute and sonicated in cold 20 pulses. To reduce disulfide bridges samples were incubated at 40ºC, 30 minutes, cysteine residues were alkylated with 100mM IAA during 30 minutes in darkness. Protein content was estimated by 1D SDS-PAGE scanned in a GS-800 densitometer (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA), stained with colloidal Coomassie brilliant blue R-250 and quantified using the Quantity One software v4.6.9 (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA). Peptide separation and spectrometry Peptides mixture was subjected to reverse phase chromatography at high pH on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano UPLC system in-line coupled to a high-resolution mass spectrometer Q-Exactive Plus (Thermo Fischer Scientific). Samples were separated following a 250 minutes elution gradient using a capillary column (FALCÓN; EASY‐SPRAY PEPMAP RSLC C18 2um, 15cm x 50um). The mobile phases were: A) acetonitrile 2%, formic acid in water 0.1% and B) acetonitrile:water 90:10 (v:v), formic acid in water 0.1%. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode and full MS range from 300 to 1,800 m/z. Ten most intense ions were isolated in the quadrupole and fragmented under HCD with a Normalized Collision Energy (NCE) of 27%. Precursor ions were measured at a resolution of 70,000 (at 200m/z) and the fragments at 17,500. Only ions with charge states of 2 and higher were fragmented with an isolation window of 2Th. Protein identification and quantification Protein identification and label-free quantification were performed with MaxQuant v1.6.2.3. With next parameters: Trypsyn/P as digestion enzyme, carbamidomethyl-cysteine as fixed modification. N-terminal protein acetylation and Oxidation (M) as variable modifications. Proteins were identified with an FDR of 1%, based on the target-decoy strategy provided by MaxQuant. The human reference proteome UP000005640 from UniProt repository (03/08/2018), was used for protein identification. For label-free quantification we considered proteins with at least two razor-unique peptides identified by MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
The “proteinGroups.txt” file was exported from MaxQuant for statistical analysis of protein abundances. Only proteins with at least two intensity values in each cell line were taken for statistical analysis. The protein abundance was normalized and missing values imputed by Random Forest method with the R package missForest. The multivariate analysis of LC-MS/MS identified proteins was practically the same that of 2DE data. A PCA was carried out from the protein intensity correlation matrix with the R package FactoMiner, to get a protein abundance pattern for the cell lines. To know if any component could distinguish between the cell lines, the sample score for each component were plotted. Having found the component, with discriminatory capacity, we identified the significant proteins in that component using the square cosine of the correlation matrix between the components and the proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mitochondrial proteome, Glioblastoma cell lines, Lc-ms/ms, Label-free quantification

### Affiliations
Laboratorio de Proteómica, Centro de Ciencias Genómicas, UNAM.
Centro de Ciencias Genómicas, UNAM

### Submitter
Leopoldo Gómez Caudillo

### Lab Head
Dr Sergio Manuel Encarnación Guevara
Laboratorio de Proteómica, Centro de Ciencias Genómicas, UNAM.


