### Accession
PXD038050

### Title
Comparison of CX-4945 and SCG-CK2-1 as Inhibitors of CSNK2 using Quantitative Phosphoproteomics: Triple SILAC in combination with Inhibitor-Resistant CSNK2

### Description
Specificity is a limiting factor when using small-molecule inhibitors to study protein kinase signalling. Since inhibitor-resistant kinase mutants (i.e., drug-resistant alleles) remain active in the presence of inhibitor, they facilitate validation of on-target effects. By combining an inhibitor-resistant kinase mutant with mass spectrometry-based phosphoproteomics, we previously devised a systematic strategy for reliable identification and validation of CSNK2 substrates. In this study, we use the same strategy to evaluate the selectivity of CX-4945, a clinical stage CSNK2 inhibitor, and SGC-CK2-1, a chemical probe selectively targeting CSNK2. Human osteosarcoma (U2OS) cells expressing exogenous wild-type CSNK2A1 (WT) or an inhibitor-resistant triple mutant (TM, V66A/H160D/I174A) were treated with CX-4945 or SGC-CK2-1 prior to analysis using triple SILAC (phospho)proteomics. The minority of phosphosites, 15% at 4 hours and 5% at 24 hours, that were significantly downregulated in response to CX-4945 treatment were determined to be CSNK2A1-dependent. By comparison, the majority of phosphosites, >55% at both 4 and 24 hours, that were significantly downregulated in response to SGC-CK2-1 were identified as CSNK2A1-dependent. This indicates that SGC-CK2-1 exhibits dramatically greater selectivity towards CSNK2A1 than CX-4945. Notably, utilization of SGC-CK2-1 in cells expressing TM-CSNK2A1 enabled the identification of 330 CSNK2A1-dependent phosphosites. Overall, this study highlights the utility of exploiting highly selective chemical probes together with inhibitor-resistant kinase mutants to identify bona fide kinase substrates.

### Sample Protocol
Human osteosarcoma U2OS cells expressing the tetracycline responsible element of Flp-In™ T-REx system were cultured in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM, Wisent) supplemented with 10% dialyzed fetal bovine serum (FBS, Wisent), 15 μg/mL Blasticidine, 150 μg/mL Hygromycin B, 100 μg/ml streptomycin, and 100 units/mL penicillin at 37 °C with 5% CO2 in 10 cm dishes (TPP, FroggaBio). FT-U2OS cell lines stably expressing the wild type CSNK2A1-WT (C-terminal HA tag) or inhibitor resistant forms of triple mutant CSNK2A1-TM (V66A/H16D/I174A, C-terminal HA tag) with tight tetracycline regulation were used. Following Gyenis et al. (Front.Mol.Biosci. 2022 (9) 909711) SILAC-dropout DMEM (Wisent) lacking L-arginine and L-lysine was supplemented with isotope-encoded L-arginine (Arg-6) (13C6) and L-lysine (Lys-4) (4,4,5,5-D4) (Silantes) to create a “Medium” labelled cell medium (M) or with isotope encoded L-arginine (Arg-10) (13C6, 15N4) and L-lysine (Lys-8) (13C6, 15N2) to create a “Heavy” labelled cell medium (H). “Light” labelled medium (L) was created using the SILAC-dropout DMEM and supplementing it with unlabeled L-arginine (R0) and L-lysine (K0).  The WT (L, M) and TM (H) cell lines were treated with 1 µg/mL tetracycline for 48 hours (cells were 80% confluent) to induce expression of the appropriate form of CSNK2A1. “Medium” WT and “Heavy” TM cells were treated with 30 µM CX-4945 or 5 µM SGC-CK2-1 for 4 and 24 hours each. “Light” WT cells were treated with equal volume of DMSO vehicle. Phosphoproteome and proteome sample preparation was done following Gyenis et al. Briefly, phoshopeptides were enriched using titanium dioxide beads (Titansphere TiO Bulk 10μm, Canadian Life Science) and proteome samples were cleaned using Pierce C18 tips (Thermo Scientific). Experiments were carried out with six biological replicates of each treatment.  Phosphoproteome and proteome samples from CX-4945 treatments were analyzed using an Orbitrap Elite Hybrid Ion Trap-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) and the analogous samples from SGC-CK2-1 treatments were analyzed using Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Both mass spectrometers utilized a NanoFlex (Thermo Electron Corp., Waltham, MA) nanospray ionization source with fused silica emitters, and a source voltage of 2.4 kV. Samples were injected using a NanoAcquity UPLC (Waters) onto a Symmetry C18 Nano Acquity trapping column (20mm x 180μm inner diameter, 5μm, 100Å) followed by a Peptide BEH C18 Nano Acquity column (250mm x 75μm inner diameter, 1.7μm, 130Å) at a flow rate of 10 μL/min and 5 ul/min in 99% mobile phase A (0.1% FA (v/v), 1% mobile phase B (0.1% FA (v/v) in ACN) for 4 and 5 min, for experiments with CX-4945 and SGC-CK2-1 respectively. Proteome samples were then separated and eluted at a flow rate of 300 nL/min using a linear gradient of increasing mobile phase B from initial condition 5%–7.5% over 1 min, followed by 7.5%–25% over 179 min, 25%–32.5% over 40 min, and culminating at 60% at 240 min. Phosphoproteome samples from CX-4945 experiment were analyzed using the same chromatographic conditions. Phosphoproteome samples from SGC-CK2-1 experiment were separated using a linear gradient of increasing mobile phase B from initial condition 1%–4% over 1 min, followed by 4%–25% over 119 min, 25%–50% over 10 min, and culminating at 95% at 135 min. Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer was operated by Thermo XCalibur software (version 2.7.0) in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode using an FT/IT/CID Top 20 scheme. MS1 survey scans were performed from 400–1,450 m/z at 120,000 resolution with full Automatic Gain Control (AGC) set to 106 and an isolation window of 1.0 m/z. Peptide ions were fragmented using a CID (Collision-Induced Dissociation) with Normalized Collision Energy (NCE) set to 35%, an activation time of 10 ms, and a Q value of 0.25. Data-dependent MS2 scans were acquired in the linear ion trap using rapid scan type. The Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer was controlled by Thermo XCalibur software (version 4.0). Discovery data were acquired in the DDA mode using an FT/FT/HCD Top 10 scheme for phosphoproteome and Top 20 scheme for proteome samples. MS1 survey scans were performed from 400–1,500 m/z at 70,000 resolution with AGC set to 3e6 and a maximum injection time of 250 ms. Peptide ions were fragmented using an HCD (Higher-Energy Collision Dissociation) with NCE set to 25% and a resolution of 35,000 and 17,500 for phosphoproteome and proteome samples respectively. For phosphoproteome samples, AGC was 1e5, maximum injection time was 108 ms, and isolation window was set to 1.3 m/z. For proteome samples AGC was 2e5, maximum injection time was 64 ms, and isolation window was set to 1.2 m/z. Dynamic exclusion was 30 s and lock mass ion was enabled at 445.120025 m/z in both CX-4945 and SGC-CK2-1 experiments.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometric data of six biological replicates were analyzed using MaxQuant (version 2.0.3.0., Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Munich, and searched against the Human UniProtKB database (25 February 2022), which contained 26,507 entries. Default settings of MaxQuant were used with minor changes: multiplicity was set to 3; medium labels were selected as Arg6 and Lys4 and heavy labels were selected as Arg8 and Lys10; maximum number of 3 missed cleavages was allowed for trypsin/P; carbamidomethyl (C) was set as a fixed modification while oxidation (M), acetylation (protein N-terminal), deamidation (NQ), and phosphorylation (STY) were set as variable modifications for phosphopeptide enriched samples. The proteome data were searched using analogue modifications, without phosphorylation (STY) being specified. For protein quantification, unmodified peptides as well as those with fixed and variable modifications, excluding phosphorylation (STY), were included. “Re-quantify” and “Match Between Runs” were selected using default parameters. The maximum number of variable modifications was set to 5. The minimum score for modified peptides was set to 40, and the decoy-database setting was “Revert”. A False Discovery Rate (FDR) for protein, peptide-spectrum match (PSM), and site of 0.01 was used.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sgc-ck2-1, Csnk2, Protein kinase ck2, Phosphoproteomics, Cx-4945, Lc-ms/ms, Silac, U2os cells

### Affiliations
University of Western Ontario
Department of Biochemistry, Schulich School of Medicine & Dentistry, Western University Department of Oncology, Schulich School of Medicine & Dentistry, Western University, London, Ontario, Canada.  N6A 5C1

### Submitter
Kristina Jurcic

### Lab Head
Dr David Litchfield
Department of Biochemistry, Schulich School of Medicine & Dentistry, Western University Department of Oncology, Schulich School of Medicine & Dentistry, Western University, London, Ontario, Canada.  N6A 5C1


