### Accession
PXD034781

### Title
Mannose receptor (CD206) N-glycosylation

### Description
To explore the influence of glycosylation on mannose receptor (MR) binding to glycan ligands, we used the mouse CTLD4-7, fused to the Fc-portion of human IgG (MR-Fc) and human full-length MR. A detailed N- and O-glycopeptide analysis was performed using tryptic glycopeptides. In addition the samples were partially treated with different exoglycosidases to increase glycopeptide coverage.

### Sample Protocol
Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) was performed on an Ultimate 3000 nano LC coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (both Thermo Fisher) as described elsewhere (25).  MR-Fc samples were diluted in 0.1% formic acid (FA) in H2O and loaded onto a C18 precolumn (C18 PepMap 100, 300 µm x 5 mm, 5 µm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific) with 15 µL/min solvent A (0.1% FA in H2O) for 3 min and separated on a C18 analytical column (PicoFrit 75 µm ID x 150 mm, 3 µm, New Objective) using a linear gradient of 2% to 45% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% FA) over 29 min, followed by 45% to 90% B over 5 min at 400 nL/min. The mass spectrometer was operated under the following conditions: The ion source parameters were 1750-1850 V spray voltage and 200C ion transfer tube temperature. MS scans were performed in the orbitrap at a resolution of 60,000 within a scan range of m/z 400 – m/z 1600, a RF lens of 30%, AGC target of 1e5 for a maximum injection time of 50 ms. The top 5 precursors were selected for MS2 in a data dependent manner, within a mass range of m/z 400 – m/z 1600 and a minimum intensity threshold of 5e4 and an isolation width of 2 m/z. HCD is performed in stepped collision energy mode of 25% or 28% or 30% (+/- 5%) and detected in the orbitrap with a resolution of 30,000 with the first mass at m/z 120 an AGC target of 1e5 and a maximum injection of 200 ms. EThcD was performed in a product ion-dependent manner (m/z 204.0867) with 20% supplemental activation energy and detected in the orbitrap with a resolution of 30,000 with the first mass at m/z 120, an AGC target of 3e5, and a maximum injection of 250 ms.

### Data Protocol
Raw data is uploaded. Glycopeptide identification was performed using Byonic version 3.5 (Protein Metrics Inc.). Relative quantitation of all glycopeptides was performed in an automated manner using LACYtools.

### Publication Abstract
The macrophage mannose receptor (MR, CD206) is a transmembrane endocytic lectin receptor, expressed in selected immune and endothelial cells, and is involved in immunity and maintaining homeostasis. Eight of the ten extracellular domains of the MR are C-type lectin domains (CTLDs) which mediate the binding of mannose, fucose, and GlcNAc in a calcium-dependent manner. Previous studies indicated that self-glycosylation of MR regulates its glycan binding. To further explore this structure-function relationship, we studied herein a recombinant version of mouse MR CTLD4-7 fused to human Fc-portion of IgG (MR-Fc). The construct was expressed in different glycosylation-mutant cell lines to study the influence of differential glycosylation on receptor glycan-binding properties. We conducted site-specific N- and O-glycosylation analysis and glycosylation site characterization using mass spectrometry by which several novel O-glycosylation sites were identified in mouse MR and confirmed in human full-length MR. This information guided experiments evaluating the receptor functionality by glycan microarray analysis in combination with glycan-modifying enzymes. Treatment of active MR-Fc with combinations of exoglycosidases, including neuraminidase and galactosidases, resulted in the loss of trans-binding (binding of MR CTLDs to non-MR glycans), due to unmasking of terminal, nonreducing GlcNAc in N-glycans of the MR CTLDs. Regalactosylation of N-glycans rescues mannose binding by MR-Fc. Our results indicate that glycans within the MR CTLDs act as a regulatory switch by masking and unmasking self-ligands, including terminal, nonreducing GlcNAc in N-glycans, which could control MR activity in a tissue- and cell-specific manner or which potentially affect bacterial pathogenesis in an immunomodulatory fashion.

### Keywords
Glycan microarray, Lectin, Glycoproteomics, Glycobiology, O-linked glycosylation, Mannose receptor, Glycosylation, N-linked glycosylation, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School
Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA

### Submitter
Kathrin Stavenhagen

### Lab Head
Dr Richard D. Cummungs
Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA


