### Accession
PXD033587

### Title
TET1 interactome by SILAC IP-MS in mouse ESCs

### Description
TET1 maintains hypomethylation at bivalent promoters through its catalytic activity in embryonic stem cells (ESCs). However, whether and how TET1 exerts catalytic activity-independent functions in regulating bivalent genes is not well understood. Therefore, we mapped the TET1 interactome in mouse ESCs using a SILAC IP-MS proteomics approach.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC labeling protocol: bioR1, light of Tet1 FLAG IP versus heavy of empty vector IP (Lys+6); bioR2, light of empty vector IP versus heavy of Tet1 FLAG IP (Lys8+Arg10). Tet1 IPed proteins were eluted with the SDS loading buffer by boiling for 5 min at 95°C and separated by an SDS-PAGE gel. The gel lanes were horizontally cut into 5~7 pieces and each piece was subjected to digestion with porcine trypsin (Promega). The samples were reconstituted in 5-10 ul of HPLC solvent A (2.5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). A nano-scale reverse-phase HPLC capillary column was created by packing 5um C18 spherical silica beads into a fused silica capillary (100 um inner diameter x 12 cm length) with a flame-draw tip. After equilibrating the column each sample was loaded onto the column. A gradient of acetonitrile from 2.5% to 97.5% was used to elute the peptides. As peptides eluted, they were subjected to electrospray ionization and then they entered into an LTQ-Orbitrap-Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Finnigan) with collision-induced dissociation (CID). Eluting peptide were detected, isolated, and fragmented to produce a tandem mass spectrum of specific fragment ions for each peptide.

### Data Protocol
MS data were processed by Thermo Proteome Discoverer software with SEQUEST engine against mouse International Protein Index (IPI v3.68) protein sequence database. Carbamidomethylation (CAM) was set as the fixed modification, and methionine oxidation was set as the variable modification. Outputs of protein identification from Proteome Discoverer were imported into a local Microsoft Access database. Common contamination proteins (trypsin, keratins) were removed, and protein Heavy/Light quantification ratios were obtained.

### Publication Abstract
TET1 maintains hypomethylation at bivalent promoters through its catalytic activity in embryonic stem cells (ESCs). However, TET1 catalytic activity-independent function in regulating bivalent genes is not well understood. Using a proteomics approach, we map the TET1 interactome in ESCs and identify PSPC1 as a TET1 partner. Genome-wide location analysis reveals that PSPC1 functionally associates with TET1 and Polycomb repressive complex-2 (PRC2). We establish that PSPC1 and TET1 repress, and the lncRNA Neat1 activates, bivalent gene expression. In ESCs, Neat1 is preferentially bound to PSPC1 alongside its PRC2 association at bivalent promoters. During the ESC-to-epiblast-like stem cell (EpiLC) transition, PSPC1 and TET1 maintain PRC2 chromatin occupancy at bivalent gene promoters, while Neat1 facilitates the activation of certain bivalent genes by promoting PRC2 binding to their mRNAs. Our study demonstrates a TET1-PSPC1-Neat1 molecular axis that modulates PRC2-binding affinity to chromatin and bivalent gene transcripts in controlling stem cell bivalency.

### Keywords
Ip-ms, Tet1, Silac, Escs

### Affiliations
Department of Medicine, Columbia University Irving Medical Center

### Submitter
Xin Huang

### Lab Head
Dr Jianlong Wang
Department of Medicine, Columbia University Irving Medical Center


