### Accession
PXD038431

### Title
Assessing the dynamics and macromolecular interactions of the intrinsically disordered protein YY1

### Description
YY1 is a ubiquitously expressed, intrinsically disordered transcription factor involved in neural development. The oligomeric state of YY1 varies depending on the environment. These changes may alter its DNA binding ability and hence its transcriptional activity. In addition to its oligomeric state, the interaction of YY1 with proteins such as FOXP2 can impact its role in transcription. The aim of this work is to study the structure and dynamics of YY1 binding to DNA and to determine the influence of oligomerisation and associations with FOXP2 on its DNA binding mechanism. Size exclusion chromatography, fluorescence anisotropy and electrophoretic mobility shift assays were used to study YY1 oligomerisation and interaction with FOXP2. To better understand potential structural changes to YY1 upon DNA binding, hydrogen deuterium exchange mass spectrometry was used. The results indicate that YY1 consists of specific structured regions, while most of the sequence remains disordered. Furthermore, the oligomeric nature of the protein is dependent on ionic strength. DNA affects oligomerisation and the protein undergoes changes in structure and dynamics upon DNA binding. YY1 and FOXP2 were found to interact with each other both in isolation and in the presence of YY1-specific DNA. The heterogeneous, dynamic multimerisation of YY1 identified in this work is, therefore, likely to be important for its ability to make heterologous associations with other proteins such as FOXP2.  The interactions that YY1 forms with itself, FOXP2 and DNA form part of an intricate mechanism of transcriptional regulation by YY1, which is vital for appropriate neural development.

### Sample Protocol
Hydrogen deuterium exchange mass spectroscopy (HDX-MS) The dynamics of YY1’s structure in both the apo and the DNA bound (1:1 DNA:Protein)  forms was probed  with HDX-MS using an automated LEAP PAL HDX system (Leap Technologies) coupled to an Agilent 1100 HPLC system and Sciex 6600 TripleTOF mass spectrometer. Three labelling time points: 15, 600 and 3600 s were used. Five μg of protein in a 10 mM HEPES buffer, pH 7.5, with 100 mM NaCl was diluted in  D2O to a final concentration of 90% at 20 °C to initiate labelling. The exchange reaction was then quenched with a two-fold dilution of 3 M guanidinium chloride and 20 mM TCEP, pH 2.5 at 0 °C. Non deuterated and fully deuterated controls were utilised. For full deuteration, proteins were incubated overnight (18 hrs) in D2O at a 90% final concentration. Quenched samples were digested online by passing each through a 30 × 2.1 mm Poroszyme pepsin column (Applied Biosystems, USA) at 100 μl/min  for an incubation time of ~ 60 s, followed by desalting on a Acclaim PepMap (Thermo Scientific, USA) trap column (LC packing, ID:1.0 mm, phase C18) and then separated using an analytical column of 50 x 2.1 mm C18 (Aeris Peptide 3.6 μm particle size) directly coupled to a TurboIon ESI source of an AB Sciex 6600 TripleTOF mass spectrometer (AB Sciex, USA). Peptides were eluted using an acetonitrile gradient of 10-25% for 10 minutes at a flow rate of 200 μl/min All columns, pepsin, trap and analytical were kept at 4 oC in a temperature controlled column oven.   For peptide identification the 6600 TripleTOF was operated in Data Dependant Acquisition (DDA) mode while for deuterium labelling only a precursor scan was collected. In DDA mode precursor scans were acquired from m/z 360 - 1500 using an accumulation time of 250 ms followed by 30 product scans, acquired from m/z 100-1800 at 100 ms each, for a total scan time of 3.3 s. Charge ions (1- 5, that fall in the mass range 360e1500 m/z) were automatically fragmented in Q2 collision cells using nitrogen as the collision gas. Collision energies were chosen automatically as function of m/z and charge. Dynamic exclusion was set to 15 s. HDX-MS experiments were done in triplicate

### Data Protocol
PEAKS Studio version 6 was used to identify peptide peaks and their associated properties, including their sequences, retention times, charge information and peptide quality scores. The peptide pool produced was imported into the analysis program HD Examiner version 1.3 (Sierra Analytics, USA), which then calculated deuterium uptake for each peptide per time point measured.

### Publication Abstract
YY1 is a ubiquitously expressed, intrinsically disordered transcription factor involved in neural development. The oligomeric state of YY1 varies depending on the environment. These structural changes may alter its DNA binding ability and hence its transcriptional activity. Just as YY1's oligomeric state can impact its role in transcription, so does its interaction with other proteins such as FOXP2. The aim of this work is to study the structure and dynamics of YY1 so as to determine the influence of oligomerisation and associations with FOXP2 on its DNA binding mechanism. The results confirm that YY1 is primarily a disordered protein, but it does consist of certain specific structured regions. We observed that YY1 quaternary structure is a heterogenous mixture of oligomers, the overall size of which is dependent on ionic strength. Both YY1 oligomerisation and its dynamic behaviour are further subject to changes upon DNA binding, whereby increases in DNA concentration result in a decrease in the size of YY1 oligomers. YY1 and the FOXP2 forkhead domain were found to interact with each other both in isolation and in the presence of YY1-specific DNA. The heterogeneous, dynamic multimerisation of YY1 identified in this work is, therefore likely to be important for its ability to make heterologous associations with other proteins such as FOXP2. The interactions that YY1 makes with itself, FOXP2 and DNA form part of an intricate mechanism of transcriptional regulation by YY1, which is vital for appropriate neural development.

### Keywords
Yy1, Intrinsic disorder, Dna binding, Protein-protein interactions, Foxp2

### Affiliations
NextGen Health, CSIR, South Africa
Council for Scientific and Industrial Research

### Submitter
Previn Naicker

### Lab Head
Dr Stoyan Stoychev
NextGen Health, CSIR, South Africa


