### Accession
PXD023139

### Title
Full proteome analysis of WT and Ezh2-KO K562 cells

### Description
Chemotherapy resistance is the main impediment in the treatment of acute myeloid leukaemia (AML). Despite rapid advances, the various mechanisms that lead to resistance development remain to be defined in detail. Here we report that loss-of-function mutations (LOF) in the histone methyltransferase EZH2 have the potential to confer resistance against the chemotherapeutic agent cytarabine. We identify seven distinct EZH2 mutations leading to loss of H3K27 trimethylation via multiple mechanisms. Analysis of matched diagnosis and relapse samples reveal a heterogenous regulation of EZH2 and a loss of EZH2 in 50% of patients. We confirm that loss of EZH2 induces resistance against cytarabine in the cell lines HEK293T and K562 as well as in a patient-derived xenograft (PDX) model. Proteomics and transcriptomics analysis reveal that resistance is conferred by upregulation of multiple direct and indirect EZH2 target genes that are involved in apoptosis evasion, augmentation of proliferation and alteration of transmembrane transporter function. Our data indicates, that loss of EZH2 results in upregulation of its target genes, providing the cell with a selective growth advantage, which mediates chemotherapy resistance.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for full proteome measurements   Full proteome measurements were performed in technical triplicates for each of the six individual EZH2-KOs. In addition, 5 WT K562 cells were measured as a comparison. For each technical replicate 5 x 106 cells were lysed in Guanidinium Chloride-based lysis buffer (6 M Guanidinium Chloride, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5 and freshly supplemented 2 mM DTT). Cell pellets were homogenized by pipetting and boiled for 10 min at 99°C under constant shaking at 1,700 rpm. Quickly after boiling samples were addressed to sonication for 15 min (30 s on/off interval, Bioruptor Plus by Diagenode). To digest the same amounts of protein lysates, the protein concentrations were measured by a BCA assay. Meanwhile chloroacetamide was added to the samples to a final concentration of 40 mM. After at least 20 min of incubation at room temperature 30 µg of each lysate was diluted 1:10 in the digestion buffer (25 mM Tris–HCl pH 8.5 and 10% acetonitrile. Trypsin and LysC were added in a 1:100 protease to protein ratio. Samples were incubated overnight at 37°C and kept under constant shaking at 1000 rpm in a thermal shaker. The next day samples were acidified to stop the digestion with 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), peptide mixtures were subsequently cleaned up on three layers of SDB-RPS5. After elution of peptides, samples were dried in a speedvac and resuspended in 20 µL of  A* buffer (0.1% TFA and 2% acetonitrile). Prior to LC-MS/MS analysis peptide concentrations were estimated by nanodrop at 280 nm.    Full proteome measurements based on data-independent acquisition method 500 ng peptides of each replicate were separated by nanoflow high-pressure liquid chromatography on an Easy-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using in-house packed 50 cm C18 columns (ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 µm resin, Dr. Maisch GmbH) and subsequently injected via a nano-electrospray ion source. The peptides were eluted from the column in an acetonitrile gradient for 120 min while the flow rate was fixed to approximately 300 nL/min and the column oven temperature to 60°C. Mass spectrometric analysis of peptides was performed on an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Data acquisition was performed in data-independent mode (DIA). For this the MS1 resolution was set to 120,000 (mass range of 300 to 1,650 m/z, maximum injection time 60 ms and AGC target 3E6) whereas the MS2 resolution was set to 30k (mass range of 361 to 1,033 m/z, 1 Da window overlap, 30 DIA windows, 1,309 ms cycle time, 22 ms MS2 injection time).

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed by the Spectronaut Pulsar X software package (Biognosys,  version 14) applying the default Biognosys factory settings for directDIA analysis. As a  search basis a reference human proteome (2019) provided by Uniprot was used.

### Publication Abstract
Placentas can exhibit chromosomal aberrations that are absent from the fetus<sup>1</sup>. The basis of this genetic segregation, which is known as confined placental mosaicism, remains unknown. Here we investigated the phylogeny of human placental cells as reconstructed from somatic mutations, using whole-genome sequencing of 86&#xa0;bulk placental samples (with a median weight of 28&#xa0;mg) and of 106&#xa0;microdissections of placental tissue. We found that every bulk placental sample represents a clonal expansion that is genetically distinct, and exhibits a genomic landscape akin to that of childhood cancer in terms of mutation burden and mutational imprints. To our knowledge, unlike any other healthy human tissue studied so far, the placental genomes often contained changes in copy number. We reconstructed phylogenetic relationships between tissues from the same pregnancy, which revealed that developmental bottlenecks genetically isolate placental tissues by separating trophectodermal lineages from lineages derived from the inner cell mass. Notably, there were some cases with full segregation-within a few cell divisions of the zygote-of placental lineages and lineages derived from the inner cell mass. Such early embryonic bottlenecks may enable the normalization of zygotic aneuploidy. We observed direct evidence for this in a case of mosaic trisomic rescue. Our findings reveal extensive mutagenesis in placental tissues and suggest that mosaicism is a typical feature of placental development.

### Keywords
Human, Aml, Cytarabine, K562, Epigenetics, Ezh2

### Affiliations
Faculty of Biology and Center for Molecular Biosystems (BioSysM), Human Biology and BioImaging, LMU Munich & Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry
Department of Biology II and Center for Integrated Protein Science Munich (CIPSM), Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Planegg-Martinsried, Germany

### Submitter
Enes Ugur

### Lab Head
Dr Heinrich Leonhardt
Department of Biology II and Center for Integrated Protein Science Munich (CIPSM), Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Planegg-Martinsried, Germany


