### Accession
PXD015793

### Title
Structural analysis of the intrinsically disordered splicing factor Spp2 and its complex with the DEAH-box ATPase Prp2

### Description
Structural analysis of spp2 bound to prp2 with chemical crosslinking and mass spectrometry

### Sample Protocol
The optimal cross-linker to protein ratio was determined by using 2.5 µg aliquots of the ctPrp2/ctSpp2 complex and a series of cross-linker molar excesses of 5, 10, 25, 50, 100 and 200 as well as a control. Samples were allowed to react with freshly prepared BS3 for 30 minutes at room temperature. The chosen cross-linker to protein ratio was 75, which led to a high yield, yet to a homogeneous sharp band as visualized on SDS-PAGE. The cross-linked samples were analyzed by SDS page on a 4-12% Bis-Tris gel (Invitrogen) with MES as running buffer and stained with Coomassie blue. For MS analysis, both ctPrp2/ctSpp2 was cross-linked with freshly prepared BS3 and EDC (Pierce, Thermo Scientific) in a 75:1 cross-linker to protein ratio, allowed to react and separated as described above. Cross-linked bands were excised from the gel and combined in a single reaction cup according to cross-linking reagent. In gel digestion and extraction of peptides was achieved as described elsewhere (57). The solution of extracted peptides was concentrated on a vacuum evaporator to 5 µL and diluted to a final volume of 10 µl to reach a sample solvent composition of 5% (v/v) CAN, 1% (v/v) FA. Samples were submitted for immediate analysis to the mass spectrometer. Mass spectrometric analysis and cross-link identification were performed as described in detail in the main manuscript.

### Data Protocol
Data was processed with Massmatrix according to their publications and manuals. Data search parameters are included in html file results.

### Publication Abstract
The spliceosome consists of five small RNAs and more than 100 proteins. Almost 50% of the human spliceosomal proteins were predicted to be intrinsically disordered or to contain disordered regions, among them the G-patch protein Spp2. The G-patch region of Spp2 binds to the DEAH-box ATPase Prp2, and both proteins together are essential for promoting the transition from the B<sup>act</sup> to the catalytically active B* spliceosome. Here we show by circular dichroism and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy that Spp2 is intrinsically disordered in solution. Crystal structures of a complex consisting of Prp2-ADP and the G-patch domain of Spp2 demonstrate that the G-patch gains a defined fold when bound to Prp2. While the N-terminal region of the G-patch always folds into an &#x3b1;-helix in five different crystal structures, the C-terminal part is able to adopt two alternative conformations. NMR studies further revealed that the N-terminal part of the Spp2 G-patch, which is the most conserved region in different G-patch proteins, transiently samples helical conformations, possibly facilitating a conformational selection binding mechanism. The structural analysis unveils the role of conserved residues of the G-patch in the dynamic interaction mode of Spp2 with Prp2, which is vital to maintain the binding during the Prp2 domain movements needed for RNA translocation.

### Keywords
Prp2, Spp2

### Affiliations
Max-Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry
Max-Planck-Institute for Biophysical Chemistry Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Group  University Medical Center Goettingen Bioanalytics Institute for Clinical Chemistry

### Submitter
Romina Hofele

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Henning Urlaub
Max-Planck-Institute for Biophysical Chemistry Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Group  University Medical Center Goettingen Bioanalytics Institute for Clinical Chemistry


