### Accession
PXD029383

### Title
In situ proteomic data of E. flavus 21-3 and corresponding mutants

### Description
Zero-valent sulfur (ZVS) distributes widely in the deep-sea cold seep, which is important immediate in the active sulfur cycle of cold seep. In our preview work, a novel ZVS formation pathway discovered in the deep-sea cold weep bacterium Erythrobacter flavus 21-3 was described. However, whether this pathway worked and what function roles it played in the cold seep were unknown. In this study, E. flavus 21-3 was verified to produce zero-valent sulfur in the cold seep using genes soxB and tsdA as our preview report described. Based on proteomic data, stoichiometric methods and microscopic observation, this ZVS formation pathway benefited E. flavus 21-3 in the deep-sea cold seep. Notably, 30% metagenomes contained these two genes in the shallow sediments, which present the most abundant sulfur genes and active sulfur cycle in the cold seep sediments. It suggested that this sulfur formation pathway exist across many bacteria in the cold seep. This strongly indicates that this novel pathway might be frequently used by microbes and plays an important role in the biogeochemical sulfur cycle in cold seep.

### Sample Protocol
For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion. After trypsin digestion, peptide was desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. Peptide was reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for TMT kit. The tryptic peptides were fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Agilent 300Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated with a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0) over 60 min into 60 fractions. Then, the peptides were combined into 18 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging. The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 26 min, 23% to 35% in 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against NCBI database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met was specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for peptides was set > 40.

### Publication Abstract
Zero-valent sulfur (ZVS) distributes widely in the deep-sea cold seep, which is an important immediate in the sulfur cycle of cold seep. In our previous work, we described a novel thiosulfate oxidation pathway determined by thiosulfate dehydrogenase (TsdA) and thiosulfohydrolase (SoxB) mediating the conversion of thiosulfate to ZVS in the deep-sea cold seep bacterium Erythrobacter flavus 21-3. However, the occurrence and ecological role of this pathway in the deep-sea cold seep were obscure. Here, we cultured E. flavus 21-3 in the deep-sea cold seep for 10&#x2009;days and demonstrated its capability of forming ZVS in the <i>in situ</i> field. Based on proteomic, stoichiometric analyses and microscopic observation, we found that this thiosulfate oxidation pathway benefited E. flavus 21-3 to adapt the cold seep conditions. Notably, ~25% metagenomes assembled genomes derived from the shallow sediments of cold seeps contained both <i>tsdA</i> and <i>soxB</i>, where presented abundant sulfur metabolism-related genes and active sulfur cycle. Our results suggested that the thiosulfate oxidation pathway determined by TsdA and SoxB existed across many bacteria inhabiting in the cold seep and frequently used by microbes to take part in the active cold seep biogeochemical sulfur cycle. <b>IMPORTANCE</b> The contribution of microbes to the deep-sea cold seep sulfur cycle has received considerable attention in recent years. In the previous study, we isolated E. flavus 21-3 from deep-sea cold seep sediments and described a novel thiosulfate oxidation pathway in the laboratorial condition. It provided a new clue about the formation of ZVS in the cold seep. However, because of huge differences between laboratory and <i>in situ</i> environment, whether bacteria perform the same thiosulfate oxidation pathway in the deep-sea cold seep should be further confirmed. In this work, we verified that E. flavus 21-3 formed ZVS using this pathway in deep-sea cold seep through <i>in situ</i> cultivation, which confirmed the importance of this thiosulfate oxidation pathway and provided an <i>in situ</i> approach to study the real metabolism of deep-sea microorganisms.

### Keywords
Zero-valent sulfur;thiosulfate oxidation;cold seep

### Affiliations
Institute of Oceanology Chinese Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Ruining Cai

### Lab Head
Dr Ruining Cai
Institute of Oceanology Chinese Academy of Sciences


