### Accession
PXD005472

### Title
Na2CO3-responsive phosphoproteins in chloroplasts from Puccinellia tenuiflora leaves

### Description
Alkali-salinity exerts severe osmotic, ionic, and high-pH stresses to plants. Photosynthetic machinery is especially sensitive to saline-alkali stress. In addition, reversible protein phosphorylation also play crucial roles in plant salt resistance. While our knowledge on protein phosphorylation events in salt stress response is very limited. Few studies have been published involving photosynthetic protein phosphorylation modulation to improve salt resistance. In the present study, we investigated the Na2CO3-responsive characteristics in Puccinellia tenuiflora chloroplasts using stable isotope dimethyl labeled phosphoproteomic approach. A total of 161 unique phosphopeptides were identified, and 137 phosphopeptides were quantified by dimethyl labeling. Among them, 50 proteins were quantified as Na2CO3-responsive proteins with 57 phosphosites, including 33 increased and 14 decreased. Importantly, 26 phosphosites were newly identified as Na2CO3-responsive phosphoproteins in plants, which were supposed to be crucial for regulating photosynthesis, membrane and transporting, signaling, stress response, and protein synthesis and turnover. Among them, seven light harvesting proteins, six PSII proteins, five PSI proteins, three electron transfer chain proteins, and two Calvin cycle-related proteins were increased, but five ATP synthase subunits and sucrose-phosphate synthase were decreased at phosphorylation level. Besides, Na+/H+ antiporter, villin-2, and two thylakoid organization related proteins were increased at phosphorylation level. Two signaling related proteins and most protein species in charge of gene expression and protein turnover were enhanced at phosphorylation level at 24h after Na2CO3 treatment.

### Sample Protocol
Seeds of Puccinellia tenuiflora (Turcz.) scribn. et Merr. were sowed on vermiculite and grown in Hoagland solution in pots under fluorescent light (220 μmol m-2 s-1, 12 h : 12 h, light : dark) at 25 °C and 75% humidity for 50 d. Seedlings of 50-day old were treated with 0, 150, and 200 mM Na2CO3 (pH 11) for 24 h, respectively. After treatment, leaves were harvested, either used right away or immediately stored at -80 °C for experiments. Intact chloroplasts were isolated according to the modified methods as followed. Leaf tissue was homogenized on ice in MCBII buffer (containing 0.3M mannitol, 50mM HEPES, 2mM EDTA-Na2, 1mM β-mercaptoethanol, 0.6% polyvinylpyrrolidone, 0.1% (W/V) BSA, pH8.0) and was filtered through eight layers of muslin. The suspension containing chloroplasts was centrifuged at 200g for 3min at 4°C, and the supernatant was centrifuged again at 3000g for 10min. The precipitation containing chloroplast was re-suspended with MCBII buffer (containing 0.3M mannitol, 50mM HEPES, 2mM EDTA-Na2, pH8.0) and loaded on top of a 40% Percoll solution (40% Percoll and 60% MCBII buffer). The density gradient centrifugation was performed at 3000g for 10min at 4°C, and the bottle green layer was collected. The re-suspension and density gradient centrifugation steps were repeated once. The intact chloroplasts were washed twice with MCBII buffer, and then directly applied to protein experiment and or stored at -80°C. Chloroplast protein was extracted for phosphoproteomic analysis, and several phosphatase inhibitors (1mM NaF, 1mM Na4O7P2∙10H2O, 1mM Na3VO4, and 1mM C3H7Na2O6P) was added in the extraction buffer for the phosphoprotein extraction. Protein concentration was determined by the Bradford method with BSA as standard. The chloroplast protein (400ug) were reduced in 1M DTT buffer for 45 min at 37 °C and alkylated with 100 mM acrylamide for 45 min in dark at room temperature. Then followed trypsin digestion (1 ug trypsin for 50 ug protein) overnight at 37°C. The phosphopeptide was labeled by the stable isotope dimethyl labeling. Peptides from the three samples (0mM-24h, 150mM-24h, and 200mM-24h) are differentially isotope labeled in parallel in three different tubes. CH2O (0.7ul, 12M, “light”) or CD2O (1.4ul, 6M, “intermediate”) or 13CD2O (1.4ul, 6M, “heavy”) was added followed by NaBH3CN (8ul, 1M, “light and intermediate”) or NaBD3CN (8ul, 1M, “heavy”), respectively. The reaction suspension was mixed briefly and incubated on an Eppendorf Thermomixer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Pittsburgh, PA) 700rpm for 1 h at 21°C. This labeling procedure was repeat twice. After that, the samples were dried completely using a SpeedVac concentrator (Thermo, San Jose, CA) and stored at −80 °C. Phosphopeptides were enriched using TiO2 micro-column. The labeled peptide mixture (100ug) were resuspended with TiO2 loading solution (80% acetonitrile (ACN), 5% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), and 1 M glycolic acid) and applied onto the TiO2 micro-column. After washing six times with 20 ul loading solution and four times with 20 ul washing solution (80% ACN, 1% TFA), the bound peptides were eluted twice with 20 ul elution buffer (1.5% ammoniumhydroxide solution) and with 5 ul 30% ACN. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using a nanoAcquity ultraperformance LC (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) coupled with an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Watham, MA, USA). The peptides were eluted with a 90 min gradient (solvent A: 0.1% FA in H2O, solvent B: 0.1% FA in 100% ACN) at a flow rate of 200 nl/min. The peptide separation was accomplished by three-step elution: 5–28% solvent B in 70 min, 28–90% solvent B in 7 min, 90% solvent B for 2 min, 90–2% solvent B in 2 min, and 2% for 9 min. The peptide ions were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120000, full-scan MS spectra from m/z 350 to 1600. Up to 15 of the most intense peptides were selected from each MS scan for collision-induced fragmentation by MS/MS in the linear ion trap and the normalized collision energy was set at 35.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using MASCOT Server (version 2.3.0, Matrix Science, London, UK) and searched against the NCBInr protein sequence database (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/) (7,730,637,1 sequences) using an in-house Mascot Daemon (Version 2.4, Matrix Science, London, UK), the taxonomic category was green plants (3,394,765 sequences). Phosphopeptide identification was performed using the following parameters: restricted to tryptic peptides with up to two missed cleavage sites; 20 ppm mass error tolerance for MS and 0.8 Da for MS/MS fragment ions error tolerance; carbamidomethylcysteine was chosen for fixed modification; protein N-acetylation, oxidized methionine, and phospho_STY (serine, threonine, and tyrosine) were chosen for the variable modifications. Phosphorylation sites were considered by the presence of a 69 Da/167 Da distance between fragment ions for phosphoserine and an 83 Da/181 Da distance for phosphothreonine. While phosphotyrosine containing peptides were validated by the observation of a mass increase of 80 Da to unmodified peptide and the presence of the immonium ion at m/z 216 (singly charged). When several potential phosphorylation sites were present in a phosphopeptide, only the phosphorylated site showed complete neutral loss of the phosphoric acid, thus the phosphorylation site can be assigned. For phosphopeptide relative quantification, MASCOT Distiller (version 2.5.1.0, Matrix Science, London, UK) was used. The identified peptides from the MS/MS search were imported into Mascot Distiller to generate a quantification report of intermediate/light (M/L) and heavy/light (H/L) ratios, the output of M/L and H/L ratios were thus limited to those dimethylated peptides that were matched with the confident sequence identification and the identical charge state. Precursor ion protocol was used for peptide quantification and the ratios were calculated using the peak areas of extracted ion chromatograms (XICs) based on the trapezium integration method (She et al., 2012). The quantified phosphopeptides were further filtered with Std. Err. <1, Correlation Score>0.9. Reliable quantification of individual phosphopeptide was achieved by the mean ± SD value of triplicate experiments, the ratios of M/L and H/L more than a 1.5-fold change or less than 0.66-fold change in at least two replicates were considered to be increased or decreased phosphopeptides at the phosphorylation level.

### Publication Abstract
Alkali-salinity exerts severe osmotic, ionic, and high-pH stresses to plants. To understand the alkali-salinity responsive mechanisms underlying photosynthetic modulation and reactive oxygen species (ROS) homeostasis, physiological and diverse quantitative proteomics analyses of alkaligrass (Puccinellia tenuiflora) under Na<sub>2</sub>CO<sub>3</sub> stress were conducted. In addition, Western blot, real-time PCR, and transgenic techniques were applied to validate the proteomic results and test the functions of the Na<sub>2</sub>CO<sub>3</sub>-responsive proteins. A total of 104 and 102 Na<sub>2</sub>CO<sub>3</sub>-responsive proteins were identified in leaves and chloroplasts, respectively. In addition, 84 Na<sub>2</sub>CO<sub>3</sub>-responsive phosphoproteins were identified, including 56 new phosphorylation sites in 56 phosphoproteins from chloroplasts, which are crucial for the regulation of photosynthesis, ion transport, signal transduction, and energy homeostasis. A full-length PtFBA encoding an alkaligrass chloroplastic fructose-bisphosphate aldolase (FBA) was overexpressed in wild-type cells of cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp. Strain PCC 6803, leading to enhanced Na<sub>2</sub>CO<sub>3</sub> tolerance. All these results indicate that thermal dissipation, state transition, cyclic electron transport, photorespiration, repair of photosystem (PS) II, PSI activity, and ROS homeostasis were altered in response to Na<sub>2</sub>CO<sub>3</sub> stress, which help to improve our understanding of the Na<sub>2</sub>CO<sub>3</sub>-responsive mechanisms in halophytes.

### Keywords
Na2co3, Phosphoproteomics, Puccinellia tenuiflora, Chloroplast

### Affiliations
Alkali Soil Natural Environmental Science Center, Northeast Forestry University, Key Laboratory of Saline-alkali Vegetation Ecology Restoration in Oil Field, Ministry of Education, Harbin 150040, China
NEFU

### Submitter
Shaojun Dai

### Lab Head
Dr Shaojun Dai
Alkali Soil Natural Environmental Science Center, Northeast Forestry University, Key Laboratory of Saline-alkali Vegetation Ecology Restoration in Oil Field, Ministry of Education, Harbin 150040, China


