### Accession
PXD009184

### Title
Nicotiana tabacum pollen tube lipid droplet proteome

### Description
The number of known proteins associated with plant lipid droplets (LDs) is small compared to other organelles. Many questions of LD biosynthesis and degradation remain open, also due to lack of candidate LD proteins whose characterization could help to elucidate their function in those processes. We performed a proteomic screen on LDs isolated from Nicotiana tabacum pollen tubes. Proteins that were highly enriched in the LD fraction compared to the total or cytosolic fraction where verified for LD localization via transient expression in tobacco pollen tubes.

### Sample Protocol
2 g of pollen per replicate were resuspended in 40 ml of PT-medium {Read et al., 1993} and spread on a layer of 6 µm Nylon mesh in four 20 cm petri dishes. Pollen tubes were cultivated for 2 h. The tubes were collected by centrifugation at 1000 g for 1 min and the pellet manually ground with sand in 10 ml grinding buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 10 mM KCl, 200 µM PMSF [Merck]). An aliquot of the total extract was taken after a centrifugation at 1000 g for 1 min and the rest of the extract was centrifuged at 100,000 g for 30 min in a swing-out rotor. The floating pad including the LDs was taken off with a spatula and resuspended in 1 ml grinding buffer. From the phase between the fat pad and the pellet, an aliquot was taken as a cytosolic fraction. The LD fraction was washed three times with grinding buffer using centrifugations of 20,000 g for 5 min each in a table top centrifuge. All steps were performed on ice or at 4 °C. All protein fractions were precipitated and defatted with a final concentration of 80 % ethanol and washed with 96 % ethanol. The protein pellets were redissolved in 6 M urea and 5 % (w/v) SDS. Protein concentrations were determined with a Pierce BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific‎). 10 or 20 µg of protein was run on a 10 or 12% SDS-PAGE (for total extracts and LD samples, respectively) gel until they entered into the separation gel. A single gel piece per sample containing all proteins was excised, tryptic digested and derivatised as described {Shevchenko et al., 2006}. Peptides were desalted over a Supelco C18 column (Sigma-Aldrich) according to {Rappsilber et al., 2007} and then subjected to LC-MS/MS {Schmitt et al., 2017}.

### Data Protocol
Protein abundance was quantified using LFQ label-free quantification algorithm implemented in the MaxQuant software {Schaab et al., 2012} using the settings as described in the meta data files (tables S38-42). The values were calculated as permille of all values in one sample. The iBAQ algorithm rather than the LFQ algorithm was used to calculate enrichment of proteins in subcellular fractions, as it is better suited to pick up small abundance levels, and as the LFQ algorithm gave unrealistically high enrichment levels.

### Publication Abstract
The number of known proteins associated with plant lipid droplets (LDs) is small compared with other organelles. Many aspects of LD biosynthesis and degradation are unknown, and identifying and characterizing candidate LD proteins could help elucidate these processes. Here, we analyzed the proteome of LD-enriched fractions isolated from tobacco (<i>Nicotiana tabacum</i>) pollen tubes. Proteins that were highly enriched in comparison with the total or cytosolic fraction were further tested for LD localization via transient expression in pollen tubes. One of these proteins, PLANT UBX DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN10 (PUX10), is a member of the plant UBX domain-containing (PUX) protein family. This protein localizes to LDs via a unique hydrophobic polypeptide sequence and can recruit the AAA-type ATPase CELL DIVISION CYCLE48 (CDC48) protein via its UBX domain. PUX10 is conserved in <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i> and expressed in embryos, pollen tubes, and seedlings. In <i>pux10</i> knockout mutants in Arabidopsis, LD size is significantly increased. Proteomic analysis of <i>pux10</i> mutants revealed a delayed degradation of known LD proteins, some of which possessed ubiquitination sites. We propose that PUX10 is involved in a protein degradation pathway at LDs, mediating an interaction between polyubiquitinated proteins targeted for degradation and downstream effectors such as CDC48.

### Keywords
Tobacco, Lipid droplets, Pollen tubes

### Affiliations
Department of Plant Biochemistry Georg-August-Universität Göttingen Justus-von-Liebig Weg 11 37077 Göttingen Germany   Tel. +49-551-39-14430
University of Münster

### Submitter
Till Ischebeck

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Till Ischebeck
Department of Plant Biochemistry Georg-August-Universität Göttingen Justus-von-Liebig Weg 11 37077 Göttingen Germany   Tel. +49-551-39-14430


