### Accession
PXD003526

### Title
Proteotyping of microbial communities reveals the correlations between the microorganisms and the process parameters

### Description
Background: Methane yield and biogas productivity of biogas plants depend on microbial community structure and functionality, substrate supply, and general process parameters. Little is known, however, about the correlations between microbial community function and the process parameters. To close this knowledge gap the microbial community of 40 industrial biogas plants was evaluated by a metaproteomics approach in this study. Results: Liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (Elite Hybrid Ion Trap Orbitrap) enabled the identification of 3138 metaproteins belonging to 162 biological processes and 75 different taxonomic orders. Therefore, database searches were performed against UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot and several metagenome databases. Subsequent clustering and principal component analysis of these data allowed to identify four main clusters associated to mesophilic and thermophilic process conditions, upflow anaerobic sludge blanket reactors and sewage sludge as substrate. Observations confirm a previous phylogenetic study of the same biogas plant samples that was based on 16S-rRNA gene by De Vrieze et al. (2015) (De Vrieze, Saunders et al. 2015). Both studies described similar microbial key players of the biogas process, namely Bacillales, Enterobacteriales, Bacteriodales, Clostridiales, Rhizobiales and Thermoanaerobacteriales as well as Methanobacteriales, Methanosarcinales and Methanococcales. In addition, a correlation study and a Gephi graph network based on the correlations between the taxonomic orders and process parameters suggested the presence of various trophic interactions, e.g. syntrophic hydrogen transfer between Thermoanaerobacteriales and Methanomicrobiales. For the elucidation of the main biomass degradation pathways the most abundant 1% of metaproteins were assigned to the KEGG map 1200 representing the central carbon metabolism. Additionally, the effect of the process parameters (i) temperature, (ii) organic loading rate (OLR), (iii) total ammonia nitrogen (TAN) and (iv) sludge retention time (SRT) on these pathways was investigated. For example high TAN correlated with hydrogenotrophic methanogens and bacterial one-carbon metabolism, indicating syntrophic acetate oxidation. Conclusion: This study shows the benefit of large-scale proteotyping of biogas plants, enabling the identification of general correlations between the process parameters and the microbial community structure and function. Changes in the level of microbial key functions or even in the microbial community type represent a valuable hint for process problems and disturbances.

### Sample Protocol
With the exception of four samples (BIE2, Oss2, Oss3, BCI3) the same samples of the BGP used in the study of De Vrieze et al. (2015) (De Vrieze, Saunders et al. 2015) were analyzed. However, some further BGP were added to get at least 40 BGP. The pH values were measured directly after sampling. The TAN, volatile solids (VS) and total solids (TS) and conductivity were measured after storage at 4 °C, and VFA concentration after storage at -20 °C (De Vrieze, Saunders et al. 2015). The plant operators provided information concerning the OLR, SRT, biogas production, temperature, reactor type (CSTR/UASB) and volume, as well as the substrate composition [Additional files 1 Table S1+S2]. Metaproteomics Protein extraction from digestate stored at -20 °C was carried out by phenol extraction as described by Heyer et al. (2013) (Heyer, Kohrs et al. 2013). Proteins were dissolved in a solution containing 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea as well as 0,01 g/mL 1,4-dithiothreitol, and quantified with an amido black assay (Popov, Schmitt et al. 1975). For each sample, 200 µg of protein was precipitated by acetone, and separated by SDS-PAGE (Laemmli 1970). To pre-purify samples for MS/MS, 200 µg of proteins were loaded onto a SDS-PAGE but the separation was stopped after the proteins entered approximately 5 mm into the separation gel. The gel slices containing the entered proteins were digested with trypsin to obtain peptides (Kohrs, Heyer et al. 2014). Peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano splitless liquid chromatography system, coupled online to an Elite Hybrid Ion Trap Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (both from Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). After injection, peptides were loaded isocratically on a trap column (Dionex Acclaim, nano trap column, 100 μm i.d. x 2 cm, PepMap100 C18, 5 μm, 100 Å, nanoViper) with a flow rate of 7 μL/min chromatographic liquid phase A (98% LC-MS Water, 2% ACN, 0.05% TFA) for desalting and concentration.  Chromatographic separation was performed on a Dionex Acclaim PepMap C18 RSLC nano reversed phase column (2 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size, 75 μm inner diameter and 250 mm length) at 40 °C column temperature. A flow rate of 300 nL/min was applied using a binary A/B-solvent gradient (solvent A: 98% LC-MS Water, 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid; solvent B: 80% acetonitrile, 10% LC-MS Water, 10% trifluorethanol, 0.1% formic acid) starting with 4% B for 4 min, continuing with a linear increase to 55% B within 120 min, followed by a column wash with 90% B for 5 min and a re-adjusted with 4% B for 25 min. For MS acquisition a data-dependent MS/MS method was chosen. For the conducted measurements MS was operated in positive ion mode, and precursor ions were acquired in the orbital trap of the hybrid MS at a resolution of 30,000 and a m/z range of 350-2,000. Subsequently, the fragment ion scan was proceeded in the linear ion trap of the hybrid MS with a mass range and a scan rate with “normal” parameter settings for the top 20 most intense precursors selected for collision-induced dissociation.

### Data Protocol
The MS results were processed by the Proteome Discoverer Software 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany), and were exported as mascot generic format (.mgf). For data storing and database search with the MASCOT 2.5 software (Matrix Science, London, England) (Perkins, Pappin et al. 1999), the .mgf-files were imported into the ProteinScape software (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Deutschland, version 3.1.3.461). The following search parameters were applied: trypsin, one missed cleavage, monoisotopic mass, carbamidomethylation (cysteine) and oxidation (methionine) as variable modifications, ±10 ppm precursor and ±0.5 Da MS/MS fragment tolerance, 113C and +2/+3 charged peptide ions, 1% FDR (resp. Mascot Score of 40 for figure 2). As protein database UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot (version: 23.10.2014) (UniProt Consortium 2012) extended by several metagenomes (Schlüter, Bekel et al. 2008, Rademacher, Zakrzewski et al. 2012, Hanreich, Schimpf et al. 2013, Joint Genome Institut 2015), was used. The results of database search were submitted to PRIDE (Vizcaino, Cote et al. 2013) with the accession number   … . Mascot result files (.dat-files) were loaded onto an extended version of the MPA Software (Muth, Behne et al. 2015) (https://code.google.com/p/meta-proteome-analyzer/, version 1.0.9) to add meta-information from the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database concerning taxonomy and function (keywords: biological process, Enzyme Commission numbers (EC-number) (Bairoch 2000) and KEGG Orthology (KO) (Kanehisa and Goto 2000)). The extended version of the MPA implements a BLAST search (NCBI-Blast-version (Shevchenko, Sunyaev et al. 2001)) against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database for non-annotated sequences from metagenomes. The UniProtKB accession numbers of first hits (e-value better 10-4) were assigned to the hits from the metagenomes. Redundant protein identifications were grouped by the UniRef50 Clusters (Suzek, Huang et al. 2007) to so called “metaproteins”. The taxonomy of each metaprotein was redefined to the common ancestor taxonomy of all peptides grouped to this metaprotein. The metaproteins, taxonomy profiles on order-level and microbial biological process profiles (UniProtKB keywords) of each BGP and their spectral abundance were exported as comma separated files.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Complex microbial community, Biogas, Biogas plant, Anaerobic digestion

### Affiliations
OvGU
Otto von Guericke University Magdeburg

### Submitter
Robert Heyer

### Lab Head
Dr Dirk Benndorf
Otto von Guericke University Magdeburg


