### Accession
PXD040172

### Title
Mass spectrometry-based proteomic profile of a Silvaner Franken wine

### Description
The proteomic profile of a Silvaner Franken wine is described here for the first time.  Wine proteins were identified via mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics through in-solution and in-gel digestion methods to obtain a wide proteomic profile of proteins which survive the vinification processes. Proteins from a Silvaner Franken wine were submitted to size exclusion chromatography (SEC) and subsequently subjected to distinct methods of MS-basedproteomics approaches based on in- solution and in- gel digestion of the proteins.   154 characterized (with described functional information) or so far  uncharacterized proteins, mainly from Vitis vinifera and Saccharomyces cerevisiae, were found.   A high-score identification of proteins from low to high abundance was obtained.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were prepared by different digestion methods: in solution and in gel. For that the protein fractions were incubated in 50 μL of a 10 mM DTT solution (solved in 0.1 M ABC solution) for 45 min at 56 °C, 30 μL of a solution of 55 mM iodoacetamide (in 0.1 M ABC) for 30 min at 25 °C and 20 μL of a 0.1% RapiGest solution (solved in 50 mM ABC solution) for 30 min at 37 °C. For the in solution procedure, samples were directly incubated in trypsin solution (0.5 µg/µL solved in 50 mM ABC) overnight at 37 °C.  For the gel pieces, they were dried again and later a trypsin solution (0.5 µg/µL solved in 50 mM ABC) was added until the gel fragments were covered. Trypsin digestion was performed overnight at 37 °C.  A Kinetex C18 (2.1 × 100 mm, 2.6 µm 100 Å particle size) column (Phenomenex, CA, Torrance, USA) was applied (at 250 µL/min). Gradients were set as: solvent B [ACN/0.1% formic acid]: isocratic flow (2%) for 5 min, followed by a gradient of 2-40% for 70 min, 40-50% over 5 min and 50-98% for 2 min.  The HPLC system was coupled to a Q Exactive HF-X (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer. The MS device was operated in data-dependent acquisition (top-10 DDA) with full MS scans: mass range of m/z 350 to 1800, resolution of 120,000 (at m/z 200), AGC target of 3e6, IT of 50 ms; and MS/MS scans: mass range of m/z 200 to 2000, mass resolution of 30,000 (at m/z 200), AGC target of 1e5, IT of 120 ms, isolation window m/z 1.3 and dynamic exclusion of 60 s.

### Data Protocol
Protein sequences were obtained by shotgun searching performed by the software Proteome DiscovererTM (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The organisms Vitis vinifera and Saccharomyces cerevisiae were set for the search.

### Publication Abstract
The comprehensive identification of the proteome content from a white wine (cv. Silvaner) is described here for the first time. The wine protein composition isolated from a representative wine sample (250 L) was identified via mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics following <i>in-solution</i> and <i>in-gel</i> digestion methods after being submitted to size exclusion chromatographic (SEC) fractionation to gain a comprehensive insight into proteins that survive the vinification processes. In total, we identified 154 characterized (with described functional information) or so far uncharacterized proteins, mainly from <i>Vitis vinifera</i> L. and <i>Saccharomyces cerevisiae</i>. With the complementarity of the two-step purification, the digestion techniques and the high-resolution (HR)-MS analyses provided a high-score identification of proteins from low to high abundance. These proteins can be valuable for future authentication of wines by tracing proteins derived from a specific cultivar or winemaking process. The proteomics approach presented herein may also be generally helpful to understand which proteins are important for the organoleptic properties and stability of wines.

### Keywords
Wine, Proteins, Proteomics, Mass spectrometry, Vitis vinifera, Silvaner franken

### Affiliations
Department of Food Chemistry and Food Biotechnology ,Giessen, Germany
Justus Liebig University

### Submitter
Wendell Albuquerque

### Lab Head
Dr Wendell Albuquerque
Department of Food Chemistry and Food Biotechnology ,Giessen, Germany


