### Accession
PXD040891

### Title
MDM2 influences ACE2 stability and SARS-Cov2 uptake

### Description
The Angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) receptor is the central entry point for SARS-Cov2. Several SAR-Cov2 substrains have developed mutations in their spike protein to maximize their use of ACE2, e.g. to strengthen ACE2 binding for increased uptake or adapt to specific amino acid properties of ACE2 to cross the species barrier. But little is known about the effect of host regulators on ACE2 and subsequently their impact on SARS-Cov2 infection. Here we identify the E3 ligase MDM2 as a ACE2 modulator. The knockout of MDM2 induced a strong pro-viral effect specific for SARS-Cov2 and we could see the increase of ACE2 levels. This effect is likely dependent on the ubiquitination site Lysine 788, which MDM2 uses to induce proteasomal degradation of ACE2. Substituting this amino acid led to increased ACE2 levels and increased SARS-CoV2 infection facilitated by enhanced SARS-Cov2 uptake.

### Sample Protocol
Each of the replicates of A549-H2B-mRFP-ACE2 cells (MDM2 knockouts and NTCs) was infected with SARS-CoV-2 (MOI 3). The samples were harvested in SDC buffer (4% SDC, 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5), heat-inactivated (95 °C, 10 min), and sonicated (4 °C, 15 min, 30 s on/30 s off, high settings). In short, protein concentrations were measured by the BCA assay (Pierce, Appleton, WI, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. 50 µg of protein material were reduced and alkylated for 5 min at 45 °C with TCEP (10 mM) and CAA (40 mM). For each sample, 50 μg of protein material was digested overnight at 37 °C using trypsin (1:100 w/w, enzyme/protein, Promega, Madison, WI, USA) and LysC (1:100 w/w, enzyme/protein, Wako, Hiroshima-shi, Japan).
For proteome analysis, 20 μg of peptide material was desalted using SDB-RPS StageTips (Empore, Stellarton, NS, Canada). Samples were diluted with 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) in isopropanol to a final volume of 200 μL and loaded onto StageTips, subsequently washed with 1% TFA in isopropanol and 0.2% TFA/5% acetonitrile (ACN, Concord, CA, USA). Peptides were eluted with 1.25% ammonium hydroxide (NH4OH) in 60% ACN and dried using a SpeedVac centrifuge (Eppendorf, Concentrator Plus, Hamburg, Germany). They were resuspended in 0.1% FA prior to LC–MS/MS analysis. Peptide concentrations were measured optically at 280 nm (Nanodrop 2000, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) and subsequently equalized using 0.1% FA.
Full proteome samples were measured on an Eclipse mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) coupled on-line to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% FA and delivered to a trap column (ReproSil-pur C18-AQ, 5 μm; Dr. Maisch, 20 mm × 75 μm, self-packed) at a flow rate of 5 μL/min in 100% solvent A (0.1% FA in HPLC-grade water). After 10 min of loading, peptides were transferred to an analytical column (ReproSil Gold C18-AQ, 3 μm; Dr. Maisch, 400 mm × 75 μm, self-packed) at 50 °C and separated using an 80-min linear gradient from 4% to 32% of solvent B (0.1% FA, 5% DMSO in ACN) at a 300 nL/min flow rate.
The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition and positive ionization modes. MS1 full scans (360–1300 m/z) were acquired in the orbitrap with a resolution of 60,000, a normalized automatic gain control (AGC) value of 100%, and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Peptide precursor selection for fragmentation was carried out using a fixed cycle time of 2 s. Only precursors with charge states from 2 to 6 were selected, and dynamic exclusion of 35 s was enabled. Peptide fragmentation was performed using higher-energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) and a normalized collision energy of 30%. The precursor isolation window width of the quadrupole was set to 1.3 m/z. MS2 spectra were acquired in the orbitrap with a resolution of 15,000, a fixed first mass of 100 m/z, a normalized AGC target value of 200%, and a maximum injection time of 22 ms.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data files of the experiments conducted in DDA mode were processed with MaxQuant (version 2.0.3.1.) using the default settings and label-free quantification (LFQ) (LFQ min ratio count 2, normalization type classic) and intensity-Based Absolute Quantification (iBAQ) enabled. Spectra were searched against forward and reverse sequences of the reviewed human proteome, including isoforms (Uniprot, UP000005640), by the built-in Andromeda search engine.
The protein groups were further analyzed using Perseus (Version: 1.6.15.0). The LFQ values of 4941 proteins were imported from the proteinGroups.txt file, and the columns were filtered for the default settings of reverse, only identified by site and contaminants. The LFQ values were log2 transformed, and the protein groups were filtered for at least 2 valid values per grouping. The missing values were replaced by the normal distribution (1.8 downshift, 0.3 width, separately for each column). The two conditions, now including 3767 protein IDs, were analyzed with a two-sample t-test, leading to 267 significant changing proteins (two-sided, permutation-based FDR, 0.05 FDR, 0.1 S0, 250 randomizations)

### Publication Abstract
Angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) is the central entry receptor for SARS-CoV-2. However, surprisingly little is known about the effects of host regulators on ACE2 localization, expression, and the associated influence on SARS-CoV-2 infection. Here we identify that ACE2 expression levels are regulated by the E3 ligase MDM2 and that MDM2 levels indirectly influence infection with SARS-CoV-2. Genetic depletion of MDM2 elevated ACE2 expression levels, which strongly promoted infection with all SARS-CoV-2 isolates tested. SARS-CoV-2 spike-pseudotyped viruses and the uptake of non-replication-competent virus-like particles showed that MDM2 affects the viral uptake process. MDM2 ubiquitinates Lysine 788 of ACE2 to induce proteasomal degradation, and degradation of this residue led to higher ACE2 expression levels and superior virus particle uptake. Our study illustrates that cellular regulators of ACE2 stability, such as MDM2, play an important role in defining the infection capabilities of SARS-CoV-2.

### Keywords
Human, Ace2, Ubiquitination, Sars-cov2

### Affiliations
TUM
Technical University Munich, Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Virology - Viral Immunopathology, Schneckenburger Str. 8, D-81675 Munich, Germany

### Submitter
Quirin Emslander

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Pichlmair
Technical University Munich, Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Virology - Viral Immunopathology, Schneckenburger Str. 8, D-81675 Munich, Germany


