### Accession
PXD001345

### Title
Enterococcus Faecalis V583 secretome

### Description
Identification of proteins in the secretome of Enterococcus Faecalis V583 after growth on urine

### Sample Protocol
Collection of bacterial sectretomes after growth in 2xYT or in urine, protein precipitation, SDS-PAGE, in-gel trypsin digestion, nanoHPLC-MSMS on QExactive, label-free quantification using MaxQuant

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant version 1.4.1.2 were used for data processing, protein identification and label-free quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Enterococcus faecalis is a robust bacterium, which is able to survive in and adapt to hostile environments such as the urinary tract and bladder. In this label-free quantitative proteomic study based on MaxQuant LFQ algorithms, we identified 127 proteins present in the secretome of the clinical vancomycin-resistant isolate E. faecalis V583 and we compared proteins secreted in the initial phase of cultivation in urine with the secretome during cultivation in standard laboratory medium, 2xYT. Of the 54 identified proteins predicted to be secreted, six were exclusively found after cultivation in urine including the virulence factor EfaA ("endocarditis specific antigen") and its homologue EF0577 ("adhesion lipoprotein"). These two proteins are both involved in manganese transport, known to be an important determinant of colonization and infection, and may additionally function as adhesins. Other detected urine-specific proteins are involved in peptide transport (EF0063 and EF3106) and protease inhibition (EF3054). In addition, we found an uncharacterized protein (EF0764), which had not previously been linked to the adaptation of V583 to a urine environment, and which is unique to E. faecalis. Proteins found in both environments included a histone-like protein, EF1550, that was up-regulated during cultivation in urine and that has a homologue in streptococci (HlpA) known to be involved in bacterial adhesion to host cells. Up-regulated secreted proteins included autolysins. These results from secretome analyses are largely compatible with previously published data from transcriptomics studies. All in all, the present data indicate that transport, in particular metal transport, adhesion, cell wall remodelling and the unknown function carried out by the unique EF0764 are important for enterococcal adaptation to the urine environment. These results provide a basis for a more targeted exploration of novel proteins involved in the adaptability and pathogenicity of E. faecalis.

### Keywords
Secretomics, Secretome, V583

### Affiliations
Norwegian University of Life Sciences

### Submitter
Magnus Arntzen

### Lab Head
Dr Vincent G. H. Eijsink
Norwegian University of Life Sciences


