### Accession
PXD033715

### Title
Microtubule associated proteins MAP7 and MAP7D1 promote 53BP1-mediated DNA double strand break repair in G1 cell cycle phase

### Description
In this project we have been looking for proteins binding to phosphorylated sites in DNA repair proteins. Previously, we and others have used peptide-pull down assays as a direct means of attributing specific binding functions to known sites phosphorylated by CK2 in DDR proteins. We have now applied the approach to identify proteins binding to four in vivo phosphorylated sites from DDR proteins RAD50 (Thr690), BRCA1 (Ser1336), MLH1 (Ser477) and XPC (Ser883, 884). These sites are conserved, reside within consensus sites for CK2, share similar sequence features, are mutated in cancer and/or their phosphorylation is known to affect (or is affected) by the DDR. We designed biotinylated 20 amino acid (aa) peptides encompassing the specific phosphorylated amino acids of BRCA1, RAD50, MLH1 and XPC that were either non-phosphorylated or phosphorylated. The biotinylated peptides were coupled to streptavidin beads and used to pull down proteins from HeLa nuclear extracts. Proteomic analysis revealed that all four sites bind proteins in a phospho-dependent manner. Each of the phosphorylated sites were binding various proteins including those implicated in DDR and cell cycle regulation as well as proteins involved in other cellular processes; some of these proteins have already known phospho-binding domains, while others do not. Interestingly, microtubule associated protein MAP7 featured prominently in all of the phosphorylated RAD50, BRCA1, MLH1 and XPC peptide pull-downs and MAP7 paralogue MAP7D1 also featured in the phosphorylated BRCA1 peptide pull-down. In the rest of the project we study the interactions and their function in DNA repair.

### Sample Protocol
The peptide pull-down was carried out using the following biotinylated peptides (The Francis Crick protein chemistry facility): pBRCA1: Biotin-eahx-QSESQGVGLpSDKELVSDDEE-amide; BRCA1: Biotin-eahx-QSESQGVGLSDKELVSDDEE-amide; pMLH1: Biotin-eahx-NPRKRHREDpSDVEMVEDDSR-amide; MLH1: Biotin-eahx-NPRKRHREDSDVEMVEDDSR-amide; pRAD50: Biotin-eahx-CPVCQRVFQpTEAELQEVISD-amide; RAD50: Biotin-eahx-CPVCQRVFQTEAELQEVISD-amide; pXPC: Biotin-eahx-HTDAGGGLpSpSDEEEGTSSQA-amide; XPC: Biotin-eahx-HTDAGGGLSSDEEEGTSSQA-amide.  10 mg of each of the peptides was coupled to 40 ml of Streptavidin-coated magnetic beads (Invitrogen) and added to 4 mg of nuclear extract precleared by incubation for 30 min room temperature with uncoupled beads. The coupled beads and the lysates were incubated for 2 hr at 4oC. The beads were 4 times washed with TBST (Tris buffer saline, 0.1% Tween20).  Immunoprecipated (IP) protein complex beads were digested into peptides using 500ng sequencing grade trypsin (CatLog no: 13454189 Thermo Scientific) and incubated overnight at 37°C with shaking. Peptides were then desalted using C18+carbon top tips (Glygen Corporation, TT2MC18.96) and eluted with 70% acetonitrile (ACN) with 0.1% formic acid.  Dried peptides were dissolved in 0.1% TFA and analysed by nanoflow ultimate 3000 RSL nano instrument was coupled on-line to a Q Exactive plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Gradient elution was from 3% to 28% buffer B in 120 min at a flow rate 250nL/min with buffer A being used to balance the mobile phase (buffer A was 0.1% formic acid in water and B was 0.1% formic acid in ACN) . The mass spectrometer was controlled by Xcalibur software (version 4.0) and operated in the positive mode. The spray voltage was 1.9 kV and the capillary temperature was set to 255 ºC. The Q-Exactive plus was operated in data dependent mode with one survey MS scan followed by 15 MS/MS scans. The full scans were acquired in the mass analyser at 375- 1500m/z with the resolution of 70 000, and the MS/MS scans were obtained with a resolution of 17 500.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were converted into Mascot Generic Format using Mascot Distiller (version 2.5.1) and searched against the SwissProt database (release December 2015) restricted to human entries using the Mascot search daemon (version 2.5.0) with a FDR of ~1% and restricted to the human entries. Allowed mass windows were 10 ppm and 25 mmu for parent and fragment mass to charge values, respectively. Variable modifications included in searches were oxidation of methionine, pyro-glu (N-term) and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine. The mascot result (DAT) files were extracted into excel files for further normalisation and statistical analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
G1 cell cycle phase, Rad50, Brca1, 53bp1, Proteomics, Map7d1, Dna damage repair, Lc-ms/ms, Xpc, Mlh1, Map7

### Affiliations
Centre for Haemato Oncology
Pedro R. Cutillas Professor of Cell Signalling & Proteomics Centre for Genomics and Computational Biology   Barts Cancer Institute - a Cancer Research UK Centre of Excellence Queen Mary, University of London John Vane Science Centre, Charterhouse Square, London EC1M 6BQ

### Submitter
Vinothini Rajeeve

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Pedro R. Cutillas
Pedro R. Cutillas Professor of Cell Signalling & Proteomics Centre for Genomics and Computational Biology   Barts Cancer Institute - a Cancer Research UK Centre of Excellence Queen Mary, University of London John Vane Science Centre, Charterhouse Square, London EC1M 6BQ


