### Accession
PXD022507

### Title
Proteomic invetsigations of archaeological ceramics from Tell Khaiber

### Description
This project looks at archaeological ceramics from Tell Khaiber (Sealand Dynasty, mid-second millenium BCE, Southern Iraq) and analyses the proteins absorbed in them determining resource use.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from ground archaeological ceramics using 6M GuHCl, and the proteins were ultrafiltered into 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution (twice). The extracted proteins were reduced (dithiothreitol, 45 minutes), alkylated (iodoacetamide, 45 minutes in dark), and the alkylation was stopped using dithiothreitol. The resultant solution was digested using trypsin (37°C, 18 hours), and the resultant peptides desalted using C18 ZipTips with 50% acetonitrile + 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid as eluent. The peptides were then dried, resuspended in 5% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid and analysed using an UltiMate 3000 Rapid Separation LC coupled to an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
The resultant .mgf files were searched using Mascot against the TREMBL and SwissProt database, with Carbamidomethylation (C) as fixed modification, and Oxidation(P), Oxidation (M), and Deamidation (NQ) as variable modifications. The peptide tolerance was set at 10 ppm and the MS/MS ion tolerance at 0.5 Da, and a decoy search was performed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tell khaiber, Paleoproteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Ancient diet, Archaeological ceramics

### Affiliations
University of Manchester
Manchester Institute of Biotechnology, Department of Earth and Environmental Sciences, The University of Manchester

### Submitter
Manasij Pal Chowdhury

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Michael Buckley
Manchester Institute of Biotechnology, Department of Earth and Environmental Sciences, The University of Manchester


