### Accession
PXD036621

### Title
A methylotrophic bacterium growing with the antidiabetic drug metformin as its sole carbon, nitrogen and energy source

### Description
Metformin is one of the most prescribed antidiabetic agents worldwide, and also considered for other therapeutic applications including cancer and endocrine disorders. Metformin is largely unmetabolised by human enzymes, and its mechanisms of action, likely also involving the microbiome, are not yet well characterised. Increasing presence of metformin in the environment has raised concerns, with reported toxic effects on aquatic life and potentially also on humans. We report on the isolation and characterisation of strain MD1, an aerobic methylotrophic bacterium growing with metformin as its sole carbon, nitrogen and energy source. Sequence analysis of its fully assembled genome allows its affiliation to Aminobacter niigataensis. Strain MD1 degrades metformin into dimethylamine used for growth, leaving guanylurea as a side-product. Differential proteomics and transcriptomics, as well as minitransposon mutagenesis of the strain, point to genes and proteins potentially associated with hydrolytic C-N cleavage of metformin, transport of metformin and guanylurea, and associated regulatory processes. Our results will inform future research on the fate of metformin and its degradation products in the human gut and the environment, and to identify microbial players and enzymes involved in the transformation of pharmaceuticals.

### Sample Protocol
Bacteria were first lysed in a final volume of 100µL in an ice-water sonication bath with 1% Triton, 50mM Tris-HCl pH8.0, 50mM NaCl. After a clarification step (12000g, 4°C, 15min), the supernatants were quantified using the Bradford-based protein assay (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA), with bovine serum albumin (BSA) to establish the standard curve. Protein extracts were prepared as described in a previous study (Roche et al., 2021). Briefly, 10µg of each sample were precipitated with 0.1 M ammonium acetate in 100% methanol, and proteins were resuspended in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. After a reduction-alkylation step (dithiothreitol 5 mM – iodoacetamide 10 mM), proteins were digested overnight with 200ng of sequencing-grade porcine trypsin (Promega, Fitchburg, MA, USA). The resulting vacuum-dried peptides were resuspended in water containing 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (solvent A). The peptide mixtures were analyzed using an Easy-nanoLC-1000 system coupled to a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) operating in positive mode with a nanoelectrospray source. 750ng of each sample were loaded on a C-18 precolumn (75 μm ID × 20 mm nanoViper, 3µm Acclaim PepMap; Thermo-Fisher Scientific) at 800 bars in solvent A. After desalting and concentration, the pre-column was switched online with the analytical C18 analytical column (75 μm ID × 25 cm nanoViper, 3µm Acclaim PepMap; Thermo-Fisher Scientific) equilibrated in solvent A: solvent B (95:5; v/v). Peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 300 nL/min using a gradient from 5% B to 20% B in 120 min, from 20% B to 32% B in 15min, from 32% B to 95% B in 1min and 95% B to 95% B during 24min. The Q-Exactive Plus was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode (DDA) with Xcalibur software (Thermo-Fisher Scientific). Survey MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 70K at 200 m/z (mass range 350-1250), with a maximum injection time at 100ms and an automatic gain control (AGC) set at 3e6. Up to 10 of the most intense multiply charged ions (≥2) were selected for HCD fragmentation with a normalized collision energy set at 27, at 17.5K resolution, with a maximum injection time at 100ms and AGC set at 1e3. A dynamic exclusion time of 20 s was applied during the peak selection process.

### Data Protocol
MS datasets generated by the mass spectrometer were searched against a home-made Aminobacter sp. MD1 database with a decoy strategy (5502 protein forward sequences). We used the Mascot algorithm (version 2.5.1, Matrix Science) to perform the database search with a decoy strategy. The resulting .dat Mascot files were then imported into Proline v1.4 package (Bouyssié et al, 2020) for further post-processing. Proteins were validated on Mascot pretty rank equal to 1, 1% FDR on both peptide spectrum matches (PSM) and protein sets (based on Mascot score).  Raw Spectral Count values were then imported into R (R v3.2.5) in addition to the MSnbase and msmsTests libraries. The number of spectra were first transformed with the colSums{base} function: the result was a column-wise normalization of the data matrix using the sum of the spectral count values. After normalization, a multidimensional scaling plot (MDS), generated with the cmdscale() function, allowed to visualize the level of similarity between the replicates and the conditions. The spectral count values were then submitted to a negative-binomial test using an edgeR GLM regression. The EdgeR results, generated by the msms.edgeR() function, were exported into a table using the xlsx library. For each identified protein, an adjusted P-value (adjp) corrected by Benjamini–Hochberg was calculated, as well as a protein fold-change (FC). The R script used to process the dataset is published on Github (https://github.com/hzuber67/IPinquiry4).

### Publication Abstract
Metformin is one of the most prescribed antidiabetic agents worldwide and is also considered for other therapeutic applications including cancer and endocrine disorders. It is largely unmetabolized by human enzymes and its presence in the environment has raised concern, with reported toxic effects on aquatic life and potentially also on humans. We report on the isolation and characterisation of strain MD1, an aerobic methylotrophic bacterium growing with metformin as its sole carbon, nitrogen and energy source. Strain MD1 degrades metformin into dimethylamine used for growth, and guanylurea as a side-product. Sequence analysis of its fully assembled genome showed its affiliation to <i>Aminobacter niigataensis</i>. Differential proteomics and transcriptomics, as well as mini-transposon mutagenesis of the strain, point to genes and proteins essential for growth with metformin and potentially associated with hydrolytic C-N cleavage of metformin or with cellular transport of metformin and guanylurea. The obtained results suggest the recent evolution of the growth-supporting capacity of strain MD1 to degrade metformin. Our results identify candidate proteins of the enzymatic system for metformin transformation in strain MD1 and will inform future research on the fate of metformin and its degradation products in the environment and in humans.

### Keywords
Guanylurea, Biodegradation, Micropollutants, Genome analysis, Aminobacter, Minitransposon mutagenesis, Dimethylamine, Metformin, Functional genomics, Methylotrophy

### Affiliations
CNRS, IBMC, FRC1589
Génétique Moléculaire, Génomique, Microbiologie, Université de Strasbourg, UMR 7156 CNRS, 67000 Strasbourg, France.

### Submitter
Lauriane Kuhn

### Lab Head
Dr Stéphane Vuilleumier
Génétique Moléculaire, Génomique, Microbiologie, Université de Strasbourg, UMR 7156 CNRS, 67000 Strasbourg, France.


