### Accession
PXD045497

### Title
Methionine Alkylation as an Approach to Quantify Methionine Oxidation Using Mass Spectrometry

### Description
Post-translational oxidation of methionine residues can destabilize proteins or modify their functions. Although levels of methionine oxidation can provide important information regarding the structural integrity and regulation of proteins, their quantitation is often challenging as analytical procedures in and of themselves can artifactually oxidize methionines.  Here, we develop a mass spectrometry-based method called Methionine Oxidation by Blocking with Alkylation (MObBa) that accurately quantifies methionine oxidation by selectively alkylating and blocking unoxidized methionines. Thus, alkylated methionines can be used as a stable proxy for unoxidized methionines. Using proof of concept experiments, we demonstrate that MObBa can be used to accurately quantify methionine oxidation levels within individual synthetic peptides and on proteome-wide scales. MObBa may provide a straightforward experimental strategy for mass spectrometric quantitation of methionine oxidation.

### Sample Protocol
Synthetic peptides were diluted to 15 µg/mL in 50% ACN/H2O in 0.1% FA. 50 µl of the sample was run in a Q Exactive Plus Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) by direct injection with a Dionex Ultimate 3000 with a flow rate of 100 µL/min for 3 minutes. The solvent consisted of a 50% mixture of 0.1% FA in H2O and 0.1% FA in ACN.  Peptides were ionized by a HESI source set in positive mode. Data were collected over a range of 300-2000 m/z at a resolution of 70K at m/z 200 with a 240 ms maximum injection time and AGC target of 1e6.  E. coli peptide extracts were injected onto a homemade 30cm C18 column with 1.8 uM beads (Sepax), with an Easy nLC-1200 HPLC (Thermo Fisher), connected to a Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher).  Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid in water while solvent B was 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile. Ions were introduced to the mass spectrometer using a Nanospray Flex source operating at 2 kV. The gradient began at 3% B and held for 2 minutes, increased to 10% B over 5 minutes, increased to 38% B over 68 minutes, then ramped up to 90% over 3 minutes and held for 3 minutes, before returning to starting conditions over 2 minutes and re-equilibrating the column for 7 minutes, for a total run time of 90 minutes. For all experiments, the Fusion Lumos was operated in data-dependent mode with Advanced Peak Determination (ADP) set to “TRUE” and Monoisotopic Precursor Selection (MIPS) set to “Peptide”. The full MS1 scan was done over a range of 375-1400 m/z with a resolution of 120K at m/z of 200, an AGC target of 4e5, and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Peptides with a charge state between 2-5 were chosen for fragmentation. Dynamic exclusion was set to 20 seconds and to exclude after 1 time with low and high mass tolerances of 10 ppm. For the experiments shown in Figure 2A, MS1 and MS2 scans were acquired in the Orbitrap (OT) and ion trap (IT) respectively with a cycle time of 1.5 seconds. Precursor ions were fragmented by collision induced dissociation (CID) using a collision energy of 30%, an activation time of 10 ms, an activation Q of 0.25, and with an isolation window of 1.1 m/z. The IT scan rate was set to “Rapid” with a maximum ion injection time of 35 ms and an AGC target of 1e4. The minimum and maximum intensity thresholds were set to 2e4 and 1e20 respectively. For the experiments shown in Figures 2B and 4, MS1 and MS2 scans were performed in the OT with a cycle time of 2 seconds. Precursor ions were fragmented by higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) using a collision energy of 30% and isolation width of 1.1 m/z. MS2 scans were performed at 15K resolution at m/z of 200 with an AGC target of 5e4 and maximum injection time of 25 ms.

### Data Protocol
For synthetic peptide experiments, raw MS data were analyzed by the XCailbur software (Thermo Scientific). The total intensity of the peptides containing the alkylation modifications were summed and fractional alkylation was calculated in the experimental sample. For figures 1 and 3, MS1 spectra were exported using the MSConvert software and intensities of alkylated or oxidized peaks were measured using Mathematica (Wolfram).  Proteome-wide data obtained by the Fusion Lumos samples were searched in Proteome Discoverer (Thermo Fisher) against the E. coli reference proteome downloaded in April 2019. Precursor mass and fragment mass tolerances were set to 10 ppm and  0.6 Da respectively. For Figure 2A, cysteine carbamidomethylation was a fixed modification and N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were variable modifications. For Figure 2B and 4, cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57.021 Da) was a fixed modification and carbamidomethylation (+57.021 Da), dethiomethylation (-48.003 Da), oxidation (+15.995 Da), and methionine-loss (-131.040 Da) were variable modifications for methionine.

### Publication Abstract
Post-translational oxidation of methionine residues can destabilize proteins or modify their functions. Although levels of methionine oxidation can provide important information regarding the structural integrity and regulation of proteins, their quantitation is often challenging as analytical procedures in and of themselves can artifactually oxidize methionines. Here, we develop a mass-spectrometry-based method called Methionine Oxidation by Blocking with Alkylation (MObBa) that quantifies methionine oxidation by selectively alkylating and blocking unoxidized methionines. Thus, alkylated methionines can be used as a stable proxy for unoxidized methionines. Using proof of concept experiments, we demonstrate that MObBa can be used to measure methionine oxidation levels within individual synthetic peptides and on proteome-wide scales. MObBa may provide a straightforward experimental strategy for mass spectrometric quantitation of methionine oxidation.

### Keywords
Mass spectrometry (ms), Methionine oxidation; methionine alkylation; proteomics

### Affiliations
University of Rochester 
Department of Biology, University of Rochester, NY, 14627, USA  University of Rochester Mass Spectrometry Resource Laboratory, NY, 14627, USA

### Submitter
Margaret Hoare

### Lab Head
Dr Sina Ghaemmaghami
Department of Biology, University of Rochester, NY, 14627, USA  University of Rochester Mass Spectrometry Resource Laboratory, NY, 14627, USA


