### Accession
PXD009249

### Title
ATO and Gossypol for GSC treatment

### Description
Glioblastoma is one of the deadliest malignancies worldwide and is virtually incurable due to its highly infiltrative growth and limited sensitivity to conventional treatment by radiochemotherapy. It is hypothesized that a small population of cells with a stem-like phenotype is the major culprit of tumor recurrence. These cells are characterized by an enhanced DNA repair capacity and expression of stemness marker genes, and elimination of this population might delay or even stop tumor recurrence following radiochemotherapy. The aim of this study was to analyze whether interference with the Hedgehog signaling (Hh) pathway or combined Hh/Notch blockade can efficiently target these cancer stem cells and sensitize them to chemotherapeutic drugs. Using tumor sphere lines and primary glioma cells we demonstrate that the Hh pathway inhibitor GANT61 (GANT) and the Hh/Notch inhibitor arsenic trioxide (ATO) are capable to synergistically decrease proliferation and induce cell death in combination with the natural  cotton derived  anticancer agent (-)-Gossypol (Gos). In contrast to GANT in combination with Gos, the ATO/Gos combination also strongly prevented sphere formation and recovery. These synergistic effects were associated with major proteomic changes indicating decreased cell movement, distortion of cell cycle and DNA repair, as well as markedly reduced stemness. Collectively, our data show that ATO and Gos, two drugs that are safe for use in humans, represent a promising targeted therapy approach for the synergistic and specific elimination of glioma stem-like cells.

### Sample Protocol
Glioma stem-like cells were treated for 24 hours with the respective drugs and afterwards lysed in urea buffer. DNA was sheared by sonification. Cysteines reduced and alkylated with DTT and iodoacetamide. Proteins were digested with LysC for 3 hours and after dilution to less then 2 M urea trypsinized overnight. Peptides were concentrated and desalted by StageTip enrichment. LC-MS enrichment was performed with a Q Exactive HF, coupled to an Easy-nLC1200. Peptides were separated via a 2 hour non-linear gradient and injected online into the mass-spectrometer

### Data Protocol
Raw-Files were searched with MaxQuant against the Uniprot Human Reference Proteome database with a FDR of 1% on protein and PSM level. Changes in protein abundance were detected by MaxLFQ Quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Glioblastoma is one of the deadliest malignancies and is virtually incurable. Accumulating evidence indicates that a small population of cells with a stem-like phenotype is the major culprit of tumor recurrence. Enhanced DNA repair capacity and expression of stemness marker genes are the main characteristics of these cells. Elimination of this population might delay or prevent tumor recurrence following radiochemotherapy. The aim of this study was to analyze whether interference with the Hedgehog signaling (Hh) pathway or combined Hh/Notch blockade using small-molecule inhibitors can efficiently target these cancer stem cells and sensitize them to therapy. Using tumor sphere lines and primary patient-derived glioma cultures we demonstrate that the Hh pathway inhibitor GANT61 (GANT) and the arsenic trioxide (ATO)-mediated Hh/Notch inhibition are capable to synergistically induce cell death in combination with the natural anticancer agent (-)-Gossypol (Gos). Only ATO in combination with Gos also strongly decreased stemness marker expression and prevented sphere formation and recovery. These synergistic effects were associated with distinct proteomic changes indicating diminished DNA repair and markedly reduced stemness. Finally, using an organotypic brain slice transplantation model, we show that combined ATO/Gos treatment elicits strong growth inhibition or even complete elimination of tumors. Collectively, our data show for the first time that ATO and Gos, two drugs that can be used in the clinic, represent a promising targeted therapy approach for the synergistic elimination of glioma stem-like cells.

### Keywords
Chemotherapy, Gliablastoma

### Affiliations
University of Frankfurt
University Hospital, Experimental Neurosurgery

### Submitter
Florian Bonn

### Lab Head
Dr Donat Koegel
University Hospital, Experimental Neurosurgery


