### Accession
PXD015934

### Title
Effect of berberine analogues on functional profiles of human gut microbiomes

### Description
The understanding of the effects of compounds on the gut microbiome is limited and in particular we don’t know whether structurally similar compounds have similar or distinct effects on the gut microbiome.  Here we selected berberine (BBR), an isoquinoline quaternary alkaloid, and sixteen structural analogues, and evaluated their effects on in vitro cultured individual gut microbiomes. The responses of the individual microbiomes were evaluated by metaproteomic profiles and by assessing butyrate production. BBR and eight analogues led to changes in proteins involved in microbial defense and stress responses, and enrichment of proteins from Verrumicrobia, Proteobacteria and Bacteroides phyla. It also led to a decrease in proteins from the Firmicutes phylum and its Clostridiales order which correlated to decrease proteins involved in the butyrate production pathway and butyrate concentration. Three of the compounds, Sanguinarine, Chelerythrine and Ethoxysanguinarine activated bacterial protective mechanisms, enriched Proteobacteria, increased opacity proteins and markedly reduced butyrate production. Dihydroberberine had a similar function to BBR in enriching the Akkermansia genus. In addition, it showed less overall adverse impacts on the functionality of the gut microbiome, including a better maintenance of the butyrate level. Our study shows that ex vivo microbiome assay can assess differential regulating effects of compounds with subtle differences and reveals that compound analogues can have distinct effects on the microbiome.

### Sample Protocol
Metaproteomics sample processing was based on a 96 well plate-based workflow. Briefly, the bacterial cells were pelleted and washed three times with cold PBS in the 96 well deepwell plates. Then, samples were stored overnight at -80oC before bacterial cell lysis in 150 µl 100 mM Tris-HCl buffer (pH = 8.0) containing 8 M urea, Roche PhosSTOP™ and Roche cOmplete™ Mini tablets. Sonication was preformed using a sonicator (Q125 Qsonica, USA) with an 8-tip-horn probe. The lysed samples were reduced and alkylated with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA), and were digested using trypsin (Worthington Biochemical Corp., Lakewood, NJ) at 37°C for 18 hours. Digested samples were desalted using a house-made 96-channel filter tips packed with 10-μm C18 resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany).Tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid and 8 μg of protein was loaded for LC-MS/MS analysis with an Agilent 1100 Capillary LC system (Agilent Technologies, San Jose, CA) and an LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron, Waltham, MA). Peptides were separated with a tip column (75 μm i.d. × 15 cm) packed with 1.9 μm/120 Å ReproSil-Pur C18 resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany) with a 240 min gradient of 5 to 25% acetonitrile (v/v) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min, with 0.1% formic acid (FA) in water as solvent A, and 0.1% FA in acetonitrile as solvent B. All samples were run on LC-MS/MS in a randomized order.

### Data Protocol
protein/peptide identification and quantification, taxonomic assignment and functional annotations were performed using the MetaLab software (version 1.1.1). Spectra clustering strategy was applied to generate a sample-specific database form all raw files. The human gut microbiome gene catalog database comprising 9,878,647 sequences was obtained from the http://meta.genomics.cn/. The identified protein lists were generated with a target-decoy strategy at a FDR cutoff of 0.01, and quantitative information of proteins was obtained with the maxLFQ algorithm53 on MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30). Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as a fixed modification and oxidation (M) and N-terminal acetylation (Protein N-term) were set as variable modifications. Razor and unique peptides were included for protein quantification with the minimum ratio count of 1.

### Publication Abstract
The understanding of the effects of compounds on the gut microbiome is limited. In particular, it is unclear whether structurally similar compounds would have similar or distinct effects on the gut microbiome. Here, we selected berberine (BBR), an isoquinoline quaternary alkaloid, and 16 structural analogs and evaluated their effects on seven individual gut microbiomes cultured <i>in vitro</i>. The responses of the individual microbiomes were evaluated by metaproteomic profiles and by assessing butyrate production. We show that both interindividual differences and compound treatments significantly contributed to the variance of metaproteomic profiles. BBR and eight analogs led to changes in proteins involved in microbial defense and stress responses and enrichment of proteins from Verrucomicrobia, Proteobacteria, and Bacteroidetes phyla. It also led to a decrease in proteins from the Firmicutes phylum and its Clostridiales order which correlated to decrease proteins involved in the butyrate production pathway and butyrate concentration. Three of the compounds, sanguinarine, chelerythrine, and ethoxysanguinarine, activated bacterial protective mechanisms, enriched Proteobacteria, increased opacity proteins, and markedly reduced butyrate production. Dihydroberberine had a similar function to BBR in enriching the <i>Akkermansia</i> genus. In addition, it showed less overall adverse impacts on the functionality of the gut microbiome, including a better maintenance of the butyrate level. Our study shows that <i>ex vivo</i> microbiome assay can assess differential regulating effects of compounds with subtle differences and reveals that compound analogs can have distinct effects on the microbiome.

### Keywords
Berberine, Functionality, Metaproteomics, Akkermansia, Gut microbiome, Butyrate

### Affiliations
Faculty of Medicine, University of Ottawa
Universtiy of Ottawa

### Submitter
Leyuan Li

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Figeys
Faculty of Medicine, University of Ottawa


