### Accession
PXD032184

### Title
Pramel7-Cul2 axis establishes ground-state gene expression in embryonic stem cells

### Description
Pluripotency is established in E4.5 preimplantation epiblast, the founder populations of the adult embryo. The establishment of in vitro models that closely resemble ground-state pluripotency represents an important opportunity to study early embryo development. Pramel7, a protein highly expressed in the inner cell mass (ICM) but expressed at low levels in embryonic stem cells (ESCs), was implicated in the establishment of ground-state pluripotency. Increasing Pramel7 expression in developmentally advanced ESC+serum causes global DNA hypomethylation and induces a gene expression signature close to developmental ground-state. However, how Pramel7 affects gene expression remains elusive. Here we show that Pramel7 associates and recruits to chromatin Cullin2 (Cul2), a component of Cullin2-RING E3 ubiquitin ligase complex that is implicated in proteasomal degradation of target substrates. Pramel7-Cul2 interaction is required for the establishment of ground-state gene expression signature. We show that Pramel7/Cul2 directly target many components of repressive chromatin, including components of the Nucleosome Remodelling and Deacetylase (NuRD) complex, for degradation. We identified a set of Pramel7-regulated genes that depend on Cul2 and associate with the NuRD component Chd4. The majority of these genes are upregulated in ESCs expressing Pramel7 and linked to pluripotency pathways. Finally, we show that Chd4 binding to these genes is impaired by Pramel7 in a Cul2-dependent manner. Our data link proteasome pathway to the establishment of ground-state gene expression, offering insights that could facilitate the establishment of in vitro models to reproduce the in vivo ground-state pluripotency.

### Sample Protocol
Stable isotope labeling by amino acids (SILAC)-based mass-spectrometry: ESCs, ESC+H/F-Pramel7WT, and ESC+H/F-Pramel7ΔN were cultured for 4 passages in DMEM media for SILAC with 15% knockout serum replacement (substituted with 1× MEM NEAA, 100 μM β-mercaptoethanol, recombinant leukemia inhibitory factor, LIF) containing either 0.15 mg/ml of heavy Lys-8 HCl L-Lysine HCl 13C,15N and 0.09 mg/ml Arg-10 HCl L-Arginine HCl 13C,15N or 0.15 mg/ml of light L-Lysine monohydrochloride and 0.09 mg/ml L-arginine monohydrochloride. Cells were washed 2X in PBS, lysed in hot lysis buffer (6M Guanidine hydrochloride, 5mM TCEP, 10mM CAA, 100mM Tris HCl pH 8), sonicated, incubated at 95ºC for 10 min and cleared via centrifuged at 15000g for 10 minutes. 25µg of light or heavy label ESC+serum lysates (reference lysates for quantification) were mixed with 25µg of the opposing labelled ESC+serum, ESC+H/F-Pramel7WT and ESC+H/F-Pramel7DN lysates. The 50µg of proteins were sequencing grade trypsin (1:25; Promega) digested using filter aided sample preparation (FASP) methodology (Ostasiewicz et al., 2010) overnight at 37 °C. The samples were desalted using ZipTip C18 pipette tips and the dried peptides reconstituted in 20 µL MS sample buffer (3% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid).  SILAC LC-MS/MS analyses were performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer, coupled to a nanoAcquity UPLC (Waters Inc.) liquid chromatograph. Peptides were loaded on MZ Symmetry C18 Trap Column (100Å, 5 µm, 180 µm x 20 mm, Waters) followed by nanoEase MZ C18 HSS T3 Column (100Å, 1.8 µm, 75 µm x 250 mm, Waters). Peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 300 nL/min using the following elution gradient protocol: 2% to 25% B (0.1% formic acid, 99.9% acetonitrile) for 100 min, followed by two steps at 35% B for 5 min and at 95% B for 5 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode (DDA) acquiring a full-scan MS spectrum (300−1’800 m/z) at a resolution of 120’000 at 200 m/z after accumulation to a target value of 500’000. Data-dependent MS/MS were recorded in the linear ion trap using quadrupole isolation with a window of 0.8 Da and HCD fragmentation with 35% fragmentation energy. The ion trap was operated in rapid scan mode with a target value of 10’000 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Only precursors with intensities above 5’000 were selected for MS/MS and the maximum cycle time was set to 3 s. Charge state screening was enabled. Singly, unassigned, and charge states higher than seven were rejected. Precursor masses previously selected for MS/MS measurement were excluded from further selection for 20 s, and the exclusion window was set at 10 ppm. The samples were acquired using internal lock mass calibration on m/z 371.1012 and 445.1200.  Immunopurification and Chromatin-IP mass spectrometric analysis: Anti-HA ESC+serum, ESC+ H/F-Pramel7WT and ESC+H/F-Pramel7DN purified complexes and anti-Cullin2 chromatin purifications bound to the beads were re-suspended in 45 µl digestion buffer (Tris/2 mM CaCl2, pH 8.2), reduced with 5 mM TCEP and alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide. Proteins were on-bead digested using 5 µl of trypsin (100 ng/µl in 10 mM HCl). The digestion was carried out in a microwave instrument (Discover System, CEM) for 30 min at 5 W and 60 °C. The supernatants were collected, the beads washed 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA)-buffer and combined with the first supernatant. The samples were dried to completeness and re-solubilized in 20 µL of MS sample buffer.  IP and Chromatin-IP LC-MS/MS analyses were performed on an Q Exactive mass spectrometer and coupled to a nanoAcquity UPLC. Peptides were loaded on a Symmetry C18 trap column (5 µm, 180 µm x 20 mm, Waters Inc.) connected to a BEH300 C18 column (1.7 µm, 75 µm x 150 m, Waters Inc.). The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 300 nL/min with a gradient from 5 to 35% B (0.1% formic acid, 99.9% acetonitrile) in 90 min, 35 to 60% B in 5 min and 60 to 80% B in 10 min before equilibrating back to 5% B. The mass spectrometer was operated in DDA and funnel RF level at 60 %. Full-scan MS spectra (350−1500 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 70’000 at 200 m/z after accumulation to a target value of 3’000’000, followed by HCD fragmentation on the twelve most intense signals per cycle. Ions were isolated with a 1.2 m/z isolation window and fragmented by HCD using a normalized collision energy of 25 %. HCD spectra were acquired at a resolution of 35’000 and a maximum injection time of 120 ms. The automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 100’000 ions. Charge state screening was enabled and singly and unassigned charge states were rejected. Only precursors with intensity above 25’000 were selected for MS/MS. Precursor masses previously selected for MS/MS measurement were excluded from further selection for 40 s, and the exclusion window tolerance was set at 10 ppm. The samples were acquired using internal lock mass calibration on m/z 371.1010 and 445.1200.

### Data Protocol
Stable isotope labeling by amino acids (SILAC) data analyses: RAW data files were converted to the mzXML format (Pedrioli et al., 2004) and searched against the the Swiss-Prot mouse protein database version of 2019-08 using version 2018.01 rev. 3 of Comet (Eng et al., 2013). Search parameters used were carboxyamidomethylation (57.021464 Da) of Cys as static modification, 13C6,15N2-Lys (8.01419892 Da), and 13C6,15N4-Arg (10.008252778 Da) as variable modifications, semitryptic digestion with a maximum of two missed cleavages, and 20 ppm error tolerance for precursor ions. Peptide probabilities were evaluated with PeptideProphet (Keller et al., 2002), and ProteinProphet (Nesvizhskii et al., 2003) was used to estimate protein probabilities. Peptides and proteins were filtered for 1% false-discovery rate. Protein abundance ratios were computed as L/H (light/heavy) using XPRESS (Han et al., 2001) with a mass tolerance of 10 ppm and a custom script was used to remove proteins with inconsistent ratios across the SILAC label switch. Significance of differential abundance across conditions was calculated using t-test and adjusted for multiple-testing using Benjamini-Hochberg.  Immunopurification and Chromatin-IP mass-spectrometry data analyses: The mass spectrometry proteomics data were handled using the local laboratory information management system (LIMS) (Türker et al.). The acquired raw MS data were converted into Mascot Generic Format files (.mgf) using ProteoWizard (http://proteowizard.sourceforge.net/), and the proteins were identified using the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, version 2.6.2). Mascot was set up to search the SwissProt database assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin. Spectra were searched against a Uniprot Mus musculus proteome database (taxonomy 10090), concatenated to its reversed decoyed fasta database. Oxidation of methionine was specified in Mascot as a variable modification. Mascot was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.030 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 PPM. Scaffold (Proteome Software Inc., version 5) was used to validate MS/MS-based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they achieved a false discovery rate (FDR) of less than 0.1% by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they achieved an FDR of less than 1.0% and contained at least two identified peptides.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pramel7, Embryonic stem cells, Pluripotency, Proteasome, Cullin 2

### Affiliations
University of Zürich
Department of Molecular Mechanisms of Disease, DMMD University of Zurich 8057 Zurich Switzerland

### Submitter
Deena Leslie Pedrioli

### Lab Head
Dr Raffaella Santoro
Department of Molecular Mechanisms of Disease, DMMD University of Zurich 8057 Zurich Switzerland


