### Accession
PXD019776

### Title
Optimisation of sporosori purification and protein extraction techniques for the biotrophic protozoan plant pathogen Spongospora subterranea

### Description
Spongospora subterranea is a soil-borne plant pathogen responsible for economically significant root and powdery scab diseases of potato. However, Tthe obligate biotrophic nature of S. subterranea has made detailed study of the pathogen problematic. Here, we first compared the benefits of sporosori partial purification utilizing Ludox gradient centrifugation. We then undertook optimization efforts for protein isolation comparing the use of a urea buffer followed by Single-Pot Solid-Phase-enhanced Sample Preparation (SP3) and a sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) buffer followed by suspension-trapping (S-Trap). Label-free, quantitative proteomics was then used to evaluate the efficiency of sporosori purification and protein preparation methods. The purification protocol produced a highly purified suspension of S. subterranea sporosori without affecting the viability of the spores. Results indicated that the use of a combination of SDS and S-Trap for sample clean-up and digestion obtained a significantly higher number of identified proteins compare to using urea and SP3, with 218 and 652 proteins identified using SP3 and S-Trap methods, respectively. Analysis of proteins by mass spectrometry showed that the number of identified proteins increased by approximately 40% after the purification of spores by Ludox. These results suggested a potential use of the described spore purification and protein preparation methods for proteomics study of obligate biotrophic pathogens such as S. subterranea.

### Sample Protocol
Spongospora subterranea sporosori were scraped from powdery scab diseased potato tubers, spores purified using Ludox density gradient centrifugation, homogenised in lysis buffer containing 5% SDS, cleaned up by ethanol precipitation then digested using either SP3 or S-trap methods. Peptides were analysed using U3000 RSLCnano and Orbitrap MS (QE-HF)

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS raw data were investigated against the S. subterranea database in UniProt (https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/, containing 11,129 proteins) using the Andromeda search engine in MaxQuant software, v. 1.6.0.16 (www.maxquant.org).

### Publication Abstract
<i>Spongospora subterranea</i> is a soil-borne plant pathogen responsible for the economically significant root and powdery scab diseases of potato. However, the obligate biotrophic nature of <i>S. subterranea</i> has made the detailed study of the pathogen problematic. Here, we first compared the benefits of sporosori partial purification utilizing Ludox<sup>&#xae;</sup> gradient centrifugation. We then undertook optimization efforts for protein isolation comparing the use of a urea buffer followed by single-pot solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation (SP3) and a sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS) buffer followed by suspension-trapping (S-Trap). Label-free, quantitative proteomics was then used to evaluate the efficiency of the sporosori purification and the protein preparation methods. The purification protocol produced a highly purified suspension of <i>S. subterranea</i> sporosori without affecting the viability of the spores. The results indicated that the use of a combination of SDS and S-Trap for sample clean-up and digestion obtained a significantly higher number of identified proteins compared to using urea and SP3, with 218 and 652 proteins identified using the SP3 and S-Trap methods, respectively. The analysis of proteins by mass spectrometry showed that the number of identified proteins increased by approximately 40% after the purification of spores by Ludox<sup>&#xae;</sup>. These results suggested a potential use of the described spore purification and protein preparation methods for the proteomics study of obligate biotrophic pathogens such as <i>S. subterranea</i>.

### Keywords
Spongospora subterranea; sporosori; density gradient centrifugation; ludox; proteomics; s-trap.

### Affiliations
University of Tasmania
Proteomics facility, Central Science Laboratory, University of Tasmania

### Submitter
Richard Wilson

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Richard Wilson
Proteomics facility, Central Science Laboratory, University of Tasmania


