### Accession
PXD013803

### Title
Identification of potential chemical signals in the European water vole Arvicola terrestris

### Description
The water vole Arvicola terrestris (= Arvicola amphibious L.) is endemic in Europe where its outbreak generates severe economic losses for farmers. Our project aimed at deciphering the modalities of chemical communication in this species, to develop new sustainable methods for populations control. The water vole, as well as other rodents, uses specific urination sites as territorial and sex pheromone markers, the chemical and biochemical identification of which is still unknown. Lateral scent glands and urine samples were collected from wild males and females caught in the field, at different periods of the year. Volatile signals were searched in urine by SPME/GC-MS, and in lateral scent glands by solvent extraction followed by GC-MS. The volatile composition of urine was analysed for each individual and not on pooled samples, showing no significant difference between males and females. Lateral scent glands contained some volatile components (pyrazines, alcohols, terpenes), and mostly long chain fatty acid esters, again without quantitative and qualitative differences between sexes. Conversely, the urinary protein content, analysed by 1D- and 2D-electrophoresis is different, as only males secrete high levels of lipocalins, whatever the reproduction period. The proteins were identified by mass spectrometry and “de novo” analysis (Orbitrap), which provided specific information to design primers for PCR amplification of cDNA sequences. Thus, urinary proteins were characterized by direct amplification from liver RNA. The identified protein sequences are closed to those of Myodes glareolus, a closely related species of Cricetidae, and to hamster Aphrodisin.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from 100 L urine by phase partition with 300 L cold CH3CL/MeOH (2/1) on ice. After brief mixing in Vortex, samples were centrifuged (15,000 g for 15 min at 4 °C). The methanol phase was collected and evaporated in a Speed-Vac concentrator (Eppendorf). Dried proteins were stored at -20 °C. To correct for differences in urine dilution, creatinine concentration was determined by using the Creatinine Assay Kit (Sigma-Aldrich) on 100 L of urine for each animal, in triplicate. Normalised quantities of proteins were separated on 1-DE gels in conditions already described (Guiraudie et al. 2003), and 2-DE was performed as already published (Nagnan-Le Meillour et al., 2018). Spots were excised from 1-DE or 2-DE gels, destained and in-gel proteins were reduced, carbamidomethylated and digested by trypsin. Peptides were extracted and automatically fractionated onto an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a commercial C18 reverse phase column (75 µm × 150 mm, 2-µm particle, PepMap100 RSLC column, Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc) at 35 °C. Trapping was performed during 4 min at 5 μL/min, with solvent A (98% H2O, 2% acetonitrile-ACN and 0.1% formic acid-FA). Elution was performed using two solvents, A (0,1% FA in water) and B (0.1% FA in ACN) at a ﬂow rate of 300 nL/min. Gradient separation was 2 min from 2 % to 5 % B, 12 min from 5 % to 25 % B, 2 min from 25 % to 80 % B, 3 min 80 % B. The column was equilibrated for 8 min with 2% buﬀer B prior to the next sample analysis. The eluted peptides from the C18 column were analysed by a Q-Exactive device (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc). The electrospray voltage was 1.9 kV, and the capillary temperature was 275 °C. Full MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyser over m/z 300–1200 range with a resolution of 35000 (m/z 200). The target value was 5.00 E+ 05 and the maximum allowed ion accumulation times were 250 ms. Three most intense peaks with charge state between 2 and 4 were fragmented in the HCD collision cell with normalised collision energy of 35 %, and tandem mass spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyser with a resolution of 17500 at m/z 200. The target value was 5.00 E+04 and the maximum allowed ion accumulation times were 150 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set to 7 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw data collected during nano-LC-MS/MS analyses were processed and converted into *.mgf peak list format with Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc). MS/MS data were interpreted using search engine Mascot (version 2.4.0, Matrix Science, London, UK) installed on a local server. Searches were performed with a tolerance on mass measurement of 0.2 Da for precursor and 0.2 Da for fragment-ion, against a composite target decoy database built with Myodes glareolus UniProt database (taxon 447135, May 2018, 1311 entries) fused with the sequence of M. glareolus Glareosin protein (Loxley et al. 2017), recombinant trypsin and a list of classical contaminants (119 entries). Cysteine carbamidomethylation, methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation, and cysteine propionamidation were searched as variable modiﬁcations. Up to one trypsin missed cleavage was allowed. For each sample, peptides were ﬁltered out according to the cut-oﬀ set for proteins hits with one or more peptides taller than nine residues, ion score >10, identity score >4. No false positive protein was identified. All tandem mass spectra were also sequenced by de novo pipeline of MSDA platform (https://doi.org/10.1002/pmic.201300415). Same both search parameters and database than automated Mascot searches were applied for de novo sequencing and homology searches. All interesting spectra were manually annotated according de novo tag identification, precursor mass and M. glareolus protein sequences.

### Publication Abstract
The water vole Arvicola terrestris is endemic to Europe where its outbreak generates severe economic losses for farmers. Our project aimed at characterising putative chemical signals used by this species, to develop new sustainable methods for population control that could also be used for this species protection in Great Britain. The water vole, as well as other rodents, uses specific urination sites as territorial and sex pheromone markers, still unidentified. Lateral scent glands and urine samples were collected from wild males and females caught in the field, at different periods of the year. Their volatile composition was analysed for each individual and not on pooled samples, revealing a specific profile of flank glands in October and a specific profile of urinary volatiles in July. The urinary protein content appeared more contrasted as males secrete higher levels of a lipocalin than females, whenever the trapping period. We named this protein arvicolin. Male and female liver transcript sequencing did not identify any expression of other odorant-binding protein sequence. This work demonstrates that even in absence of genome, identification of chemical signals from wild animals is possible and could be helpful in strategies of species control and protection.

### Keywords
Gc-ms, Arvicola terrestris, De novo sequencing, Arvicolin, Water vole, Odorant binding proteins, Lateral scent glands, Urinary volatiles

### Affiliations
Institut Pasteur de Lille
CNRS, INSERM, CHU Lille, Institut Pasteur de Lille, U1019, UMR 8204, CIIL – Centre d’Infection et d’Immunité de Lille, Univ. Lille, 59000 Lille, France

### Submitter
SALIOU Jean-Michel

### Lab Head
Dr Jean-Michel Saliou
CNRS, INSERM, CHU Lille, Institut Pasteur de Lille, U1019, UMR 8204, CIIL – Centre d’Infection et d’Immunité de Lille, Univ. Lille, 59000 Lille, France


