### Accession
PXD025837

### Title
Bone marrow-selected antigen specific regulatory B cells

### Description
Autoimmunity is often regarded as pathogenic, but this view has gradually shifted over time. Based on insights from thymus selection, T cells are now known to be selected by self-antigens and positive selection in the thymus medulla leads to regulatory functions. B cells are selected in the bone marrow and the fundamental question is whether self-antigens in the bone marrow select antigen specific regulatory B cells. In this work, we show that B cells are indeed selected for proteins expressed in the bone marrow and develop into cells with regulatory function bearing distinct phenotypic fingerprint. Collagen type II specific regulatory B cells trigger the expansion of antigen specific regulatory T cells and protect against development of tissue specific autoimmune inflammation. These antigen specific regulatory B cells constitute a sizeable fraction of the normal B cell repertoire in both mice and humans.

### Sample Protocol
Fluorescent-activating cell sorted C1+ and C1- B cells were pelleted and lysed in 50mM Tris buffer pH 7.5 containing 8M Urea, 1% SDS, and protease inhibitor (cOmplete™ Protease Inhibitor, Roche). Samples were sonicated and proteins were reduced with 5 mM DTT at room temperature for 1 h followed by alkylation using 15 mM IAA at room temperature in the dark for 1 h. Chloroform/methanol precipitation of protein was performed as following; 3 volumes (compared to sample) of methanol were added, followed by 1 volume of chloroform and 3 volumes of water. Then samples were vortexed and centrifuged for 10 min at 20 000g at 4oC. The aqueous phase was carefully removed, and the protein pellet was washed with 1 volume of Methanol, vortex, and centrifuged again. The liquid was removed, and the protein pellet was air-dried. Air-dried pellets were resuspended in 50mM HEPES pH 8.5 containing 8M Urea. Urea concertation was diluted to 4M and proteins were digested overnight with LysC (1:100 w/w), followed by Trypsin (1:100 w/w) digestion for 6h in 1M Urea. TMT labeling was performed with a 4 times excess of labels compared to protein (w/w) in a final ACN concentration of 20% for 2h. Remaining labels were quenched with 0.5% triethylamine for 15min, and samples were pooled and dried in a speed-vac until about 50% of the sample volume was evaporated. Samples were then acidified using TFA (pH <3) and desalted using Sep Pack (Waters). Cleaned samples were dried in a speed-vac and stored at -80oC. Prior to mass-spectrometry analysis, the samples were resuspended in 2% ACN and 0.1% FA (solvent A) and injected into an UltiMate 3000 UPLC autosampler (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Luomos Tribrid mass-spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The peptides were loaded on a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, 100 μm × 2 cm) and separated on a 50 cm long C18 Easy spray column (Thermo Scientific). Chromatographic separation was achieved using the following gradient: 4-26% of solvent B (98% ACN and 0.1% FA) in 80 min, 26-32% in 5 min, 32-95% in 5 min, and 5 min of 95%, before equilibration for 9 min at 4% with a flow rate of 300 nlmin-1. For data collection, the mass-spectrometer operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. The cycle time was 3 s and consisted of one full scan with a resolution of 120,000 covering the range from 400 to 1600 Da with APD on. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 1*106 with a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Triggered MS/MS scans were recorded with a resolution of 60`000, AGC of 125`000, maximum injection time was set to dynamic, isolation window of 1.6 Da, and normalized collision energy 35%. Only peptide with a charge from 2+ to 6+ were selected, dynamic exclusion was set to 60 s. All spectra were acquired in profile mode using the orbitrap.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed by an in-house modified version of MaxQuant software (version 1.6.2.3) recognizing TMTpro. For peptides search, acetylation of N-terminal, oxidation of methionine, and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine were selected as variable modifications whereas carbamidomethylation of the cysteine was selected as fixed modification. Trypsin with up to 2 missed cleavages was set as protease and the spectrum was searched against the UniProt mus musculus database (55 220 entries). The FDR was set to 0.01 for both peptides and proteins. For all other parameters, the default settings were used. All downstream analyses of proteomics data were done in R (R project). Known contaminants, decoy proteins, or proteins identified by site as well as proteins with less than 2 peptides were excluded for further analysis. Protein intensities were normalized by VSN and statistical differences between groups were calculated by a t-test with equal or unequal variance depending on F-test.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse, Lc-ms/ms, Facs, Breg

### Affiliations
Division of Chemistry I
Department of Medical Biochemistry & Biophysics
Karolinska Institutet
Division of Medical Inflammation Research, Dept. Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institute, Sweden

### Submitter
Christian Beusch

### Lab Head
Dr Rikard Holmdahl
Division of Medical Inflammation Research, Dept. Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institute, Sweden


