### Accession
PXD023822

### Title
Impact of sulfamethoxazole on a riverine microbiome

### Description
Freshwater environments such as rivers receive effluent discharges from wastewater treatment plants, representing a potential hotspot for antibiotic resistance genes (ARGs). These effluents also contain low levels of different antimicrobials including biocides and antibiotics such as sulfonamides that can be frequently detected in rivers. The impact of such exposure on ARG prevalence and microbial diversity of riverine environment is unknown, so the aim of this study was to investigate the release of a sub-lethal concentration (<4 g L-1) of the sulfonamide compound sulfamethoxazole (SMX) on the river bacterial microbiome using a microflume system. This system was a semi-natural in-vitro microflume using river water (30 L) and sediment, with circulation to mimic river flow. A combination of ‘omics’ approaches were conducted to study the impact of SMX exposure on the microbiomes within the microflumes. Metaproteomics did not show differences in ARGs expression with SMX exposure in water.

### Sample Protocol
River water and sediment were collected form a river downstream of a WWTP and immediately used to set up microflumes which consisted of six individual flumes, each containing 6 kg of sediment (3 cm depth river bed) and 30 L of water (12 cm water column over the river bed) to replicate the river environment. Each flume was connected to a pump to mimic the river flow and a light cycle was set to 16h light and 8h dark. Amendment of microflumes was done as follows: 3 microflumes were amended with sulfamethoxazole (SMX) at 4 g L-1, while the other 3 microflumes were left untreated (controls). The experiment was run for a total of 24 days and water samples were taken from each individual microflume at selected time points (0, 7, 18 days). Metaproteomic extraction was performed using an optimized version of the protocol described by (Colatriano and Walsh, 2015). Cells from 0.5 L of water were collected on a 0.22 m PES filter which was incubated in SDS lysis buffer (Tris-HCl 0.1 M pH 7.5, glycerol 5%, EDTA 10mM pH 8, SDS 1 %) for 20 min with agitation. Samples were then boiled for 20 min and incubated for 1 h at room temperature before centrifugation at 4000 rpm 10 min. The supernatant was transferred to 10 KDa Amicon Ultra tubes (Merck) and the boiled filter was washed with fresh SDS lysis buffer, then added to the protein sample. The supernatants were concentrated using 10 KDa Amicon Ultra membrane and the retained samples were washed twice with fresh SDS lysis buffer. A solution of methanol:acetone (50:50) was added to the concentrated samples in a 4:1 (vol/vol) proportion and protein precipitation was performed ON at -20 C. The precipitated proteins were recovered by centrifugation at 17000 g for 30 min, dried by speedvac and resuspended in the SDS lysis buffer. Proteins were quantified using the BCA Pierce kit (ThermoFisher) and equal amount of proteins per sample (13 g) were loaded on a pre-casted RunBlueTM TEO-Tricine gel (Expedeon) in presence of LDS and DTT. The gel was run for 10 min 180 V and stained with InstantBlueTM (Expedeon). Gel bands were cut and in-gel digestion with Trypsin was performed following reduction and alkylation with TCEP and CAA. Peptides were eluted from the gel and resuspended in 2 % acetonitrile + 0.1 % formic acid. Peptide extracts were analysed by nanoLC-ESI-MS/MS using the Ultimate 3000/Orbitrap Fusion instrumentation (Thermo Scientific) with a 90 min LC separation on a 50 cm column.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were searched using MaxQuant version 1.6.5.0 engine (https://www.maxquant.org/) against the deposited .fasta and the MaxQuant common contaminants database. Peptides were generated from a tryptic digestion with up to two missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation of cysteines as fixed modifications. As variable modifications, were set Oxidation of Methionines, Acetyl peptide N-Terminal, Phosphorylation of Serine, Threonine and Tyrosine. Precursor mass tolerance was 10 ppm and product ions were searched at 0.8 Da tolerances. Scaffold (version 4.10.0, Proteome Software Inc.) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides.  Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Microflumes, Metagenomics, Sulfamethoxazole, Metaproteomics, Warwick-rtp, Antimicrobial resistance

### Affiliations
School of Life Sciences, University of Warwick, Gibbet Hill Road, Coventry, CV4 7AL, United Kingdom
University of Warwick

### Submitter
Andrew Bottrill

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Elizabeth Wellington
School of Life Sciences, University of Warwick, Gibbet Hill Road, Coventry, CV4 7AL, United Kingdom


