### Accession
PXD005899

### Title
Comparative Proteomic and Transcriptomic Analysis of Follistatin-induced Skeletal Muscle Hypertrophy

### Description
Skeletal muscle, the most abundant body’s tissue, plays vital roles in locomotion and metabolism. Myostatin is a negative regulator of skeletal muscle mass. In addition to increase muscle mass, Myostatin inhibition impacts on muscle contractility and energy metabolism. To decipher the mechanisms of action of the Myostatin inhibitors, we used proteomic and transcriptomic approaches to investigate the changes induced in skeletal muscles of transgenic mice overexpressing Follistatin, a physiological Myostatin inhibitor. Our proteomic workflow included a fractionation step to identify weakly expressed proteins and a comparison of fast versus slow muscles. Functional annotation of altered proteins supports the phenotypic changes induced by Myostatin inhibition, including modifications in energy metabolism, fiber type, insulin and calcium signaling, as well as membrane repair and regeneration. Less than 10% of the differentially expressed proteins were found to be also regulated at the mRNA level but the Biological Process annotation and the KEGG pathways analysis of transcriptomic results showed a great concordance with the proteomic data. Thus, this study describes the most extensive omics analysis of muscle overexpressing Follistatin, providing molecular-level insights to explain the observed muscle phenotypic changes

### Sample Protocol
Soluble and insoluble protein extracts were prepared from TA and SOL muscles of 3 mTrFS and 3 WT mice. Frozen muscles, previously pestled in liquid nitrogen, were homogenized (50 mg/ml) with Ultraturrax (IKA Labortechnik) in ice-cold buffer containing 40 mM Tris (pH 7.0), 2 mM EDTA and 10% protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche Applied Science), according to Sayd et al.17. After centrifugation at 4 °C for 10 min at 10,000 g, the supernatants, referred to as soluble fractions (SF), were immediately aliquoted and stored at –80 °C. The insoluble pellets were resuspended in solubilisation buffer containing 50 mM Tris (pH 7.0) and 8 M urea, regularly shaken for 90 min on ice and centrifuged at 4 °C for 5 min at 5,000 g. The supernatants, referred to as insoluble fractions (IF), were immediately aliquoted and stored at –80 °C. The quantity of proteins was measured with BCAssay method. Fifty micrograms of proteins from each fraction were processed in the 10 kDa filtration units (Millipore) using eFASP protocol (enhanced Filter Aided Samples Preparation) protocol19. Trypsin was used for digestion of proteins with a ratio 1/50. Peptides were extracted and evaporated before being dissolved in 10 µl of water milliQ. Samples were then diluted tenfold in buffer A of nano-HPLC and each sample was injected three times in HPLC instrument.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw files were analyzed with MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3.30) using the Andromeda search engine. Peptides and proteins were identified by using the mouse subset of the UniProt database (June 2016, 49.870 entries) supplemented with 245 frequently observed contaminants and forward/reverse sequences. The “target-decoy” search strategy was used for estimating the frequencies of incorrect protein identifications (FDR), based on a reverse database generated automatically in MaxQuant. The precursor mass and fragment mass were identified with an initial mass tolerance of 10 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively. The search included variable modifications of methionine and proline oxidation, asparagine and glutamine deamidation, tyrosine, serine and threonine phosphorylation and N-terminal acetylation and glutamine to pyroglutamate conversion, and fixed modifications of carbamidomethyl cysteine. Minimal peptide length was set to six amino acids and a maximum of three mis-cleavages was allowed. The FDR was set to 0.05 for peptide and protein identifications. To maximize the number of quantification events across samples, MS runs from skeletal muscle were analyzed with the “match between runs” option in the MaxQuant software, which allowed the quantification of high-resolution MS1 features that were not identified in each single measurement. This algorithm was enabled using a 120-sec retention time window for individual matching and a 30-min retention time window for complete alignement of the spectrum. In the case of identified peptides that are all shared between two proteins, these were combined and reported as one protein group. Moreover, proteins contaminants, proteins identified only based on variable modifications sites and proteins matching to the reverse decoy database were filtered out. For the proteins that were identified with single peptide and found as differentially expressed between mTrFS and WT mice, each single peptide was validated by BlastP interrogation provided in Supplemental Table S1. Moreover, for all these proteins, detailed information about the MS/MS spectrum, peptide sequence, precursor m/z is provided in Supplemental Figure S1. LFQ intensities for respective protein groups were uploaded in Perseus and analyzed.25 Raw LFQ intensities were logarithmized by Log2. At least three LFQ values per protein group needed to be present for the analysis. To replace non-quantified values with low intensities, data imputation was performed based on normal distribution of LFQ intensities. Significant interactors were determined using a two-sample analysis t-test and multiple sample test with Benjamini-Hochberg FDR at 0.05. Normalization with Z-score was determined and hierarchical clustering was constructed with Euclidean distance

### Publication Abstract
Skeletal muscle, the most abundant body tissue, plays vital roles in locomotion and metabolism. Myostatin is a negative regulator of skeletal muscle mass. In addition to increasing muscle mass, Myostatin inhibition impacts muscle contractility and energy metabolism. To decipher the mechanisms of action of the Myostatin inhibitors, we used proteomic and transcriptomic approaches to investigate the changes induced in skeletal muscles of transgenic mice overexpressing Follistatin, a physiological Myostatin inhibitor. Our proteomic workflow included a fractionation step to identify weakly expressed proteins and a comparison of fast versus slow muscles. Functional annotation of altered proteins supports the phenotypic changes induced by Myostatin inhibition, including modifications in energy metabolism, fiber type, insulin and calcium signaling, as well as membrane repair and regeneration. Less than 10% of the differentially expressed proteins were found to be also regulated at the mRNA level but the Biological Process annotation, and the KEGG pathways analysis of transcriptomic results shows a great concordance with the proteomic data. Thus this study describes the most extensive omics analysis of muscle overexpressing Follistatin, providing molecular-level insights to explain the observed muscle phenotypic changes.

### Keywords
Follistatin, Skeletal muscle hypertrophy, Myostatin, Microarray, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
MSAP3290
Miniaturisation pour la Synthèse, l'Analyse & la Protéomique (MSAP), CNRS, USR 3290, Université de Lille

### Submitter
Fabrice Bray

### Lab Head
Dr Caroline Tokarski
Miniaturisation pour la Synthèse, l'Analyse & la Protéomique (MSAP), CNRS, USR 3290, Université de Lille


