### Accession
PXD017661

### Title
Identification of the initial molecular changes in response to Circulating Angiogenic Cells-mediated therapy in Critical Limb Ischemia

### Description
Circulating angiogenic cells (CACs) constitute promising candidates for cell therapy in critical limb ischemia (CLI) due to their assigned vascular regenerative properties. A label free MS-based quantitative approach was performed to identify protein changes related. We analyzed the initial molecular mechanisms triggered by human CACs after being administered to a murine model of CLI, in order to understand how these cells promote angiogenesis within the ischemic tissue.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from ischemic limb muscles were reduced, alkylated and digested with LysC and trypsin. Peptides were purified with C18 columns and analyzed by nano-LC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Q-Exactive HF-X (ThermoFisher) coupled to an EASY-LC 1000 system (ThermoFisher).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification was performed using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 software (ThermoFisher)searching against the Uniprot mouse database using Mascot.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Angiogenesis, Mouse, Circulating endothelial cells, Cell movement, Critical limb ischemia

### Affiliations
University of Cádiz
Institute of Biomediccal Research of Cádiz
University of Cádiz and Institute of Biomedical Research of Cádiz. Biomedicine, Biotecnology and Public Health department. Spain.

### Submitter
Lucía Beltrán-Camacho

### Lab Head
Dr Mª Carmen Duran-Ruiz
University of Cádiz and Institute of Biomedical Research of Cádiz. Biomedicine, Biotecnology and Public Health department. Spain.


