### Accession
PXD035120

### Title
Plasma proteomics enable differentiation of lung adenocarcinoma from chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)

### Description
Background: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a major risk factor for the development of lung adenocarcinoma (AC). AC often develops on underlying COPD, thus the differentiation of both entities by biomarker is challenging. Although survival of AC patients strongly depends on early diagnosis, a biomarker panel for AC detection and differentiation from COPD is still missing. Methods: Plasma samples from 176 patients with AC with or without underlying COPD, COPD patients, and hospital controls were analyzed using mass spectrometry-based proteomics. We performed univariate statistics and additionally evaluated machine learning algorithms regarding the differentiation of AC vs. COPD and AC with COPD vs. COPD. Results: Univariate statistics revealed significantly regulated proteins that were significantly regulated between the patient groups. Furthermore, Random forest classification yielded the best performance for differentiation of AC vs. COPD (area under the curve (AUC) 0.935) and AC with COPD vs. COPD (AUC 0.916). The most influential proteins were identified by permutation feature importance and compared to those identified by univariate testing. Conclusion: We demonstrate the great potential of machine learning for differentiation of highly similar disease entities and present a panel of biomarker candidates that should be considered for the development of a future biomarker panel.

### Sample Protocol
Patient Plasma Samples Within 30 minutes after blood collection, samples were centrifuged at 2,000 x g for ten minutes at room temperature. Plasma was separated subsequently and frozen immediately at -80°C until analyses. Samples were measured separately in two batches (n = 63 and n = 133) which were subsequently combined for analysis. In total, plasma samples from 43 AC patients without COPD, 21 AC patients with COPD, 77 COPD patients, and 35 hospital controls (HC) were analyzed (n = 176, Table 1, Supplementary Table S1). Control subjects were patients with suspicious malignant disease which was not confirmed subsequently. Sample Preparation for LC-MS/MS Analysis Briefly, 1 µl of plasma per sample was mixed with 24 µl buffer (1 % sodium deoxycholate, 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine, 40 mM chloroacetamide, 100 mM Tris, pH 8.5) and incubated at 95 °C for 10 min. After cooling down to room temperature, 10 µL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 10 µl paramagnetic beads were added according to the SP3 protocol. For protein binding, 140 µl acetonitrile were added and samples were incubated at room temperature for 10 min. Afterwards, the beads were washed twice with 200 µl 70 % ethanol and once with 200 µl acetonitrile using a magnetic rack. After a short airdrying process, 70 µl 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate containing trypsin (1:50, w/w, SERVA Electrophoresis, Heidelberg, Germany) was added to digest the protein overnight at 37 °C. The supernatant was transferred to a glass vial and dried in a vacuum centrifuge. 100 µL 0.1 % TFA was used to dissolve the peptides and the resulting peptide concentration was about 1 µg/µl.  LC-MS/MS Analysis The LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano liquid chromatography system coupled online to a Q Exactive HF (batch 1) or Q Exactive (batch 2) mass spectrometer (all Thermo Fisher Scientific). 100 ng plasma peptides per sample were injected for analysis. The peptides were pre-concentrated for 7 min on a trap column (Acclaim® PepMap 100, 75 μm × 2 cm, C18, 5 μm, 100 Å) using 30 μl/min 0.1 % TFA as loading solvent. Subsequent separation on an analytical column (Acclaim® PepMap RSLC, 75 μm × 50 cm, nano Viper, C18, 5 μm, 100 Å) was carried out using a gradient from 5 to 40 % solvent B in solvent A over 98 min (batch 1) or 38 min (batch 2) (solvent A: 0.1 % formic acid; solvent B: 0.1 % formic acid, 84 % acetonitrile). A flow rate of 400 nl/min was used with a column oven temperature of 60 °C. Data-dependent acquisition mode was used. Full scans were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer (mass range: 350 – 1,400 m/z, resolution: 60,000). Fourier Transform Mass Spectrometry full scan Automatic Gain Control target was set to 3 x 106 with a maximum injection time of 80 ms. Number of micro scans was set to 1. The 10 most abundant ions of a spectrum acquired at MS1 level were fragmented using HCD (Higher-energy collisional dissociation) with a normalized collision energy of 30 % and an isolation width of 2 m/z. Fragment mass spectra were acquired in the orbitrap with a maximum injection time of 100 ms. Samples were measured in random sequence.

### Data Protocol
Protein Identification and Quantification Protein identification and label-free quantification were performed using MaxQuant (version 2.0.1.0; MPI of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany) separately for both analyzed batches. Unless specifically mentioned the MaxQuant default parameters were used. Spectra were searched against the Uniprot/Swissprot database version 2021_03 restricted to Homo sapiens (20.362 entries) and Biognosys iRT peptides (1 entry). Variable modifications of methionine (oxidation) and protein N-termini (acetylation) were considered as well as fixed modification of cysteine (carbamidomethyl). Modified peptides were considered for quantification and the match between runs function was enabled. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 for peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) and proteins. Protein groups were used for further processing and reverse hits, proteins identified by site, and identified iRT peptides were omitted. Potential contaminants were manually reviewed to avoid exclusion of typical plasma proteins.  Batch Normalization LFQ intensities were normalized to reduce technical variation and the batch effects between the two batches to allow analyzing them together. First, each batch was normalized separately using the LOESS normalization method using the R package limma (version 3.44.3) on the log-transformed protein intensities. For each protein, a linear regression model was calculated by using the batch number as a categorical independent variable. The obtained coefficients were an estimation of the underlying batch effect, which were subsequently subtracted from the protein intensities. This normalization procedure reduces the batch differences for better comparability of the samples. As the LC gradient was adapted for the second batch due to higher sample amount and a different instrument, 20 samples of the first batch were also measured in the second batch and taken as quality control for normalization.

### Publication Abstract
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a major risk factor for the development of lung adenocarcinoma (AC). AC often develops on underlying COPD; thus, the differentiation of both entities by biomarker is challenging. Although survival of AC patients strongly depends on early diagnosis, a biomarker panel for AC detection and differentiation from COPD is still missing. Plasma samples from 176 patients with AC with or without underlying COPD, COPD patients, and hospital controls were analyzed using mass-spectrometry-based proteomics. We performed univariate statistics and additionally evaluated machine learning algorithms regarding the differentiation of AC vs. COPD and AC with COPD vs. COPD. Univariate statistics revealed significantly regulated proteins that were significantly regulated between the patient groups. Furthermore, random forest classification yielded the best performance for differentiation of AC vs. COPD (area under the curve (AUC) 0.935) and AC with COPD vs. COPD (AUC 0.916). The most influential proteins were identified by permutation feature importance and compared to those identified by univariate testing. We demonstrate the great potential of machine learning for differentiation of highly similar disease entities and present a panel of biomarker candidates that should be considered for the development of a future biomarker panel.

### Keywords
Machine learning, Plasma proteomics, Saa1, Random forest, Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, Serpina3, Artificial intelligence, Adenocarcinoma of the lung

### Affiliations
Clinical Proteomics
Department of Anesthesia, Intensive Care Medicine and Pain Therapy, University Hospital Knappschaftskrankenhaus Bochum, Medizinisches Proteom-Center, Ruhr-University Bochum

### Submitter
Thilo Bracht

### Lab Head
Dr Thilo Bracht
Department of Anesthesia, Intensive Care Medicine and Pain Therapy, University Hospital Knappschaftskrankenhaus Bochum, Medizinisches Proteom-Center, Ruhr-University Bochum


