### Accession
PXD033612

### Title
Integrated omics analysis for characterization of the contribution of high fructose corn syrup to non-alcoholic fatty liver disease in obesity

### Description
High Fructose Corn Syrup (HFCS), a sweetener rich in glucose and fructose, is nowadays widely used in beverages and processed foods, and its consumption has been correlated to the emergence and progression of Non-Alcoholic Fatty Liver Disease (NAFLD). Nevertheless, the exact molecular mechanisms by which HFCS impacts hepatic metabolism are still unclear, especially in the context of obesity. In contrast, the vast majority of current studies in the field focus either on the detrimental role of fructose on NAFLD or compare the additive impact of fructose versus glucose in this process. Besides, studies elaborating on the role of fructose in NAFLD utilize molecular fructose, rather than HFCS, thus lacking simulation of human NAFLD in a more realistic way. Herein, by engaging combined omic approaches, we sought to characterize the additive impact of HFCS on NAFLD during obesity and recognize candidate pathways and molecules which could mediate the exaggeration of steatosis under these conditions. To achieve this goal, C57BL/6 male mice were fed a normal-fat (ND), a high-fat (HFD) or a HFD supplemented with HFCS (HFD-HFCS) and upon examination of their metabolic and NAFLD phenotype, proteomic and lipidomic analyses were conducted and utilized separately or in an integrated mode to identify HFCS-related molecular alterations of the hepatic metabolic landscape. Although HFD and HFD-HFCS mice displayed comparable obesity, HFD-HFCS mice showed greater aggravation of hepatic steatosis. Importantly, the HFD-HFCS hepatic proteome was characterized by an upregulation of the enzymes implicated in de novo lipogenesis (DNL), while palmitic-acid containing diglycerides were significantly increased in the HFD-HFCS hepatic lipidome, as compared to the HFD group. Integrated omic analysis further suggested that TCA cycle overstimulation, is likely contributing towards the intensification of steatosis in the HFD-HFCS dietary theme. Overall, our results imply that HFCS may significantly contribute to NAFLD aggravation during obesity, with its fructose-rich properties being the main suspect.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation: the snap-frozen liver tissues were homogenized and subjected to complete cell lysis using a buffer consisting of 4% SDS, 100 mm Tris/HCl, 100 mm DTT, pH 7.6 and incubated at 95 °C for 5 min. The lysed samples were further sonicated for 30 min in a water bath. The protein extracts were purified from debris by centrifugation for 20 minutes at 17Kxg. The supernatants were transferred to clean tubes and processed according to the Single-Pot SolidPhase-enhanced Sample Preparation (SP3) method of Hughes [1], without acidification and including a step of protein alkylation in 100 mM Iodoacetamide. Digestion was carried out for continuous shaking at 1400 rpm at 37 °C using 0.25 μg Trypsin/LysC mixture in a 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer. Next day, the magnetic beads were removed and the peptidic samples were further purified by Sp3 peptide cleanup (REF) and evaporated to dryness in a vacuum centrifuge. The dried samples were solubilized in Buffer A, sonicated for 5 minutes and the peptide concentration was determined by measuring the absorbance at 280 nm using a nanodrop. Ultrahigh pressure nanoLC: Each biological sample was analyzed three times (technical replicas). Approximately 0.5 μg peptides were pre-concentrated with a flow of 5 μL/min for 5 min using a C18 trap column (Acclaim PepMap100, 100 μm x 2 cm, Thermo Scientific) and then loaded onto a 50 cm long C18 column (75 μm ID, particle size 2 μm, 100Å, Acclaim PepMap100 RSLC, Thermo Scientific). The binary pumps of the HPLC (RSLCnano, Thermo Scientific) consisted of Solution A (2% (v/v) ACN in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid) and Solution B (80% (v/v) ACN in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid). The peptides were separated using a linear gradient starting with 5%B up to 27.5%B in 58 min stepped to 40% B in 2 min and finally reaching 99%B and remaining there for 5 min and then allowed to equilibrate for 20 minutes with a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The column was placed in an oven operating at 50°C. MS/MS: The eluted peptides were ionized by a nanospray source and detected by an Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) operating in a data dependent mode (DDA). The peptides were measured from 350-1500 m/z, using a resolving power of 120K for MS1, AGC at 3e6, maximum injection time of 100ms, followed by 12 MS/MS of the most abundant 2+-4+ charged ions using a resolving power of 15K, AGC at 1e5, maximum injection time of 22ms, and an isolation window of 1.2 m/z at 28 NCE and a dynamic exclusion of 30s. The software Xcalibur (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used to control the system and acquire the raw files and internal calibration was activated using a lock mass of m/z 445.12003.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were searched and the identified peptides and proteins were quantified using Label Free Quantitation (LFQ) in MaxQuant (version 1.6.14.0), using search against the Mouse uniprot protein database (downloaded 03/2020). Search parameters included a molecular weight ranging from 350 to 5,000 Da, a precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm, an MS/MS fragment tolerance of 0.5 Da, a maximum of two missed cleavages by trypsin, and methionine oxidation, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Carbamidomethyl was set as fixed cysteine modification. The protein and peptide false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1%. The matchbetween-run function was enabled. Proteins with at least two peptides were identified. The MaxQuant proteingroup text file was uploaded into the Perseus software (1.6.10.43 version) [3]. Proteins identified as “potential contaminants”, “reverse” and “only identified by site” were filtered out. The LFQ intensities were logarithmically transformed. Annotations from the GOBP, GOMF, GOCC, KEGG, Pfam, GSEA databases were added for Mus musculus. Zero intensity was imputed i.e. replaced by normal distribution, assuming that the corresponding protein is present in low amounts in the sample. Three biological replicas plus three corresponding technical replicas were grouped for each treatment.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease; high fructose corn syrup; obesity; de novo lipogenesis; mitochondrial dysfunction; integrated omics

### Affiliations
Department of Physiology, Medical School, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, 75 Mikras Asias Str., 11527, Athens, Greece.
Protein Analysis Laboratory
B.S.R.C. "Alexander Fleming",
Alexander Fleming Street 34
16672, Vari,
Greece

### Submitter
Martina Samiotaki

### Lab Head
Dr Antonios Chatzigeorgiou
Department of Physiology, Medical School, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, 75 Mikras Asias Str., 11527, Athens, Greece.


