### Accession
PXD023979

### Title
EGR4-dependent decrease of UTF1 is associated with failure to reserve spermatogonial stem cells in infertile men

### Description
Despite the high incidence of male infertility, about 70% of infertile men do not receive a causative diagnosis. To gain insights into the regulatory mechanisms governing human germ cell function in normal and impaired spermatogenesis (crypto group), we combined single cell RNA sequencing (>30.000 cells), proteome, and histomorphometric analyses of testicular tissues. We found major alterations in the crypto spermatogonial compartment with increased numbers of the most undifferentiated spermatogonia (PIWIL4+ State 0 cells). We also observed a transcriptional switch within the spermatogonial compartment driven by the increased and prolonged expression of the transcription factor EGR4. Intriguingly, EGR4-regulated genes included the chromatin-associated transcriptional repressor UTF1, which was downregulated. Histomorphometrical analyses showed that these transcriptional changes were mirrored at the protein level and accompanied by a change in the chromatin structure of spermatogonia. This resulted in a reduction of Adark spermatogonia - characterized by tightly compacted chromatin and serving as reserve stem cells. These findings suggest that crypto patients are at a disadvantage especially in cases of gonadotoxic damage as they have less cells to help repopulate the testis. We hypothesize that the more relaxed chromatin status of spermatogonia is dependent on decreased UTF1 expression caused by EGR4 activation. These identified regulators of the spermatogonial compartment will be highly interesting targets to uncover genetic causes of male infertility.

### Sample Protocol
Single cell suspensions obtained by digestion of a biopsy (see “Single cell suspension preparation” section) from either normal (n=5) or crypto patients (n=4) were prepared for bottom-up mass spectrometry analysis, combining a one-pot sample preparation method (iST-NHS; Preomics) with isobaric tandem mass tags (TMT) labeling and subsequent stepwise reversed-phase fractionation at high pH (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Pierce, Cat# 84868). This resulted in 8 fractions (plus desalted flowthrough and 2 wash fractions). All samples were measured twice as technical replicates. Samples were measured on an Easy nLC 1200 system coupled to a Q Exactive HF MS via a Nanospray Flex ion source (ThermoFisher Scientific). Peptides were dissolved in buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and separated on a 25 cm column, in-house packed with 1.9 µm C18 beads (Reprosil -Pur C18 AQ, Dr. Maisch) using a multi-linear gradient from 5%-18% buffer B (80% acetonitrile; 0.1% formic acid) and from 18%-40% B in 55 min each, followed by an increase to 60% B in 10 min, a final washout for 7 min at 90% B and re-equilibration at starting conditions (100% buffer A; flow rate 250 nl/min). The Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode (spray voltage 2.1 kV; column temperature maintained at 45°C using a PRSO-V1 column oven (Sonation, Biberach)). MS1 scan resolution was set to 120 000 at m/z 200 and the mass range to m/z 350-1 600. AGC target value was 3E6 with a maximum fill time of 50 ms. Fragmentation of peptides was achieved by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) using a top15 method (MS2 scan resolution 60 000 at 200 m/z; AGC Target value 1E5; maximum fill time 108 ms; isolation width 1.3 m/z; normalized collision energy 32). Dynamic exclusion of previously identified peptides was allowed and set to 30 s, singly charged peptides and peptides assigned with a charge > 8 were excluded from the analysis. Data were recorded using Xcalibur software (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were processed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.6.0).Identification of peptides and proteins was enabled by the built-in Andromeda search engine by querying the concatenated forward and reverse mouse Uniprot database (UP000005640_9606.fasta; version from 04/2019) including common lab contaminants. Allowed initial mass deviations were set to 7 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively, in the search for precursor and fragment ions. Trypsin with full enzyme specificity and only peptides with a minimum length of 7 amino acids was selected. A maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed; the ‘match between runs’ option was turned on. Carbamidomethylation (Cys) was set as fixed modification, while Oxidation (Met) and N - acetylation at the protein N-terminus were defined as variable modifications. For peptide and protein identifications, a minimum false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was required. First, the list of identified proteins was filtered and potential contaminants, reverse hits derived from the target-decoy search as well as proteins that were identified only by a single modified peptide were removed. Only proteins identified by at least one unique peptide were retained for further analysis. Next, a sample loading normalization step was performed using an R script (https://pwilmart.github.io/TMT_analysis_examples/CarbonSources_MQ.html), which was adapted to our own experimental setup. The list of proteins containing the normalized reporter ion intensities was imported into the Perseus bioinformatics tool. Proteins that did not show reporter ion intensities in all 10 TMT channels were removed, and reporter ion intensities were log2 transformed. To screen for differentially expressed proteins, a two-sided Student’s t-test was performed using permutation-based FDR calculation as truncation (FDR = 0.05), also taking into account the contribution of the difference of the means (s0 = 0.1).

### Publication Abstract
Despite the high incidence of male infertility, only 30% of infertile men receive a causative diagnosis. To explore the regulatory mechanisms governing human germ cell function in normal and impaired spermatogenesis (crypto), we performed single-cell RNA sequencing (&gt;30,000 cells). We find major alterations in the crypto spermatogonial compartment with increased numbers of the most undifferentiated spermatogonia (PIWIL4<sup>+</sup>). We also observe a transcriptional switch within the spermatogonial compartment driven by increased and prolonged expression of the transcription factor <i>EGR4.</i> Intriguingly, the EGR4-regulated chromatin-associated transcriptional repressor <i>UTF1</i> is downregulated at transcriptional and protein levels. This is associated with changes in spermatogonial chromatin structure and fewer A<sub>dark</sub> spermatogonia, characterized by tightly compacted chromatin and serving as reserve stem cells. These findings suggest that crypto patients are disadvantaged, as fewer cells safeguard their germline's genetic integrity. These identified spermatogonial regulators will be highly interesting targets to uncover genetic causes of male infertility.

### Keywords
Male germline stem cells, Testis, Single cell rna sequencing, Human spermatogenesis, Male infertility, Proteomics, Stem cell differentiation, Spermatogonial stem cells, Mass spectrometry, Impaired spermatogenesis

### Affiliations
Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry
Max Planck Institute for Molecular Biomedicine Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Röntgenstr. 20 48149 Münster Germany

### Submitter
Hannes Drexler

### Lab Head
Dr Hannes C. A. Drexler
Max Planck Institute for Molecular Biomedicine Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Röntgenstr. 20 48149 Münster Germany


