### Accession
PXD026513

### Title
Proteomic study of Desulfovibrio ferrophilus IS5 reveals overexpressed extracellular multi-heme cytochrome associated with severe microbiologically influenced corrosion

### Description
Microbiologically influenced corrosion (MIC) is recognized as a considerable threat to carbon steel asset integrity in the oil and gas industry. There is an immediate need for reliable and broadly applicable methods for detection and monitoring of MIC. Proteins associated with microbial metabolisms involved in MIC could serve as useful biomarkers for MIC diagnosis and monitoring. A proteomic study was conducted using a lithotrophically-grown bacteria Desulfovibrio ferrophilus strain IS5, which is known to cause severe electric MIC in seawater environments. Unique proteins, which are differentially and uniquely expressed during severe microbial corrosion by strain IS5, were identified. This includes the detection of a multi-heme cytochrome protein predicted to be involved in extracellular electron transfer in the presence of the carbon steel. Thus, we conclude that newly identified protein biomarker for MIC could be used to generate easy-to-implement immunoassays for reliable detection of microbiological corrosion in the field.

### Sample Protocol
An Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer interfaced with Easy nLC-1200 ultra-high-pressure liquid chromatography system was used for LC-MS/MS process. The Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer was set with a scan range of 375-1500 (m/z) at resolution of 120000.  Nano spray ionization in positive mode with capillary voltage of 1800 V and ion transfer tube temperature of 275oC was used. Data-dependent acquisition method (DDA) was performed. The parent MS1 data were collected as profile type.  AGC gain was set at 4.0e5 with 50 milliseconds maximum injection time. Multiple charge states from 2 to 7 are included for MS/MS fragmentation. HCD activation with 1.2 m/z isolation window and 35% HCD collision energy were also used. MS/MS daughter ions were detected in linear ion trap with 1.0e4 AGC target.  Maximum injection time was 45 milliseconds and data was collected in centroid mode. Rapid ion trap scan rate was used. Dynamic exclusion duration was set at 60 seconds and mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm. The cycle time between Master-scans is 3 seconds. The total run time was 130 minutes. Easy nLC-1200 UHPLC flow was set at 300 nL/min. Maximum pressure was set at 720 bar. Buffer A is 0.1% formic acid in water and buffer B is 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile/20% water. The 75 µm id x 50 cm long fused silica Nano column was packed with R119-AQ-003 C18 resin. Column temperature was 45 oC. Gradient from 2% B to 27% B was run in 123 minutes for peptide separation followed by 10 minute 95% B wash. Auto-sampler flush volume is 100 µL. To minimize carry over from previous sample, two one-hour blank runs were included between samples. The peptide amount of trypsin-digested sample was measured by Nano-Drop UV spectrometer. Appropriate volume of diluent (0.1% formic acid in water) was added to get a final concentration of 180 ng/µL. Injection volume was set at 2 µL.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer 2.2 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) was used for data analysis. Two separate databases of D. ferrophilus IS5 were downloaded. The first database UP000269883 (TrEMBL/unreviewed) was downloaded from UniProt (www.uniprot.org). The second set of databases, AP017378.1 and AP017379.1 were downloaded from Genbank (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore) and combined into one database. Raw LC-MS/MS results were searched against D. ferrophilus IS5 databases from Uniprot and Genbank separately using Sequest HT search engine (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). Parent (MS1) ion mass tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment (MS2) ion mass tolerance of 0.40 Da was used.  Trypsin enzyme was chosen.  Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine were set as dynamic modifications. Pyro glutamate formation from glutamic acid and glutamine was specified as dynamic modification at peptide N-terminus. Acetylation was set as dynamic modification at protein N-terminus. Scaffold version 4.8.8 (Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS2 based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides. Proteins were identified with the following parameters in Scaffold Viewer: protein threshold of 99%, number of minimal peptides at 2, and peptide threshold of 95%. Normalized spectral abundance factor (NSAF) based spectral count was adopted for quantification of the complex proteomics.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Desulfovibrio ferrophilus is5, Biomarker, Electron transfer protein, Biofilm, Microbiologically influenced corrosion; proteomics

### Affiliations
ExxonMobil Research and Engineering Company

### Submitter
Xiaozhou Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Xiaozhou Zhang
ExxonMobil Research and Engineering Company


