### Accession
PXD011150

### Title
characterisation of VDAC2 ligands

### Description
This study aimed to characterise the protein that a novel compound binds to, thus promoting its ability to inhibit BAK apoptotic activity.

### Sample Protocol
A compound was linked to NHS sepharose and added to cell lysates (mouse embryonic fibroblasts, MEFs) lysed in 1% Triton-X 100 or 1% digitonin along with sepharose beads. On bead tryptic digested was performed followed by Nano LC-MS/MS analysis on a Thermo QE Classic coupled with a Easy-nLC 1000 system.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were searched with MaxQuant (version 1.5.8.30) using a Mus Musculus Uniprot database (October 2016).

### Publication Abstract
Activating the intrinsic apoptosis pathway with small molecules is now a clinically validated approach to cancer therapy. In contrast, blocking apoptosis to prevent the death of healthy cells in disease settings has not been achieved. Caspases have been favored, but they act too late in apoptosis to provide long-term protection. The critical step in committing a cell to death is activation of BAK or BAX, pro-death BCL-2 proteins mediating mitochondrial damage. Apoptosis cannot proceed in their absence. Here we show that WEHI-9625, a novel tricyclic sulfone small molecule, binds to VDAC2 and promotes its ability to inhibit apoptosis driven by mouse BAK. In contrast to caspase inhibitors, WEHI-9625 blocks apoptosis before mitochondrial damage, preserving cellular function and long-term clonogenic potential. Our findings expand on the key role of VDAC2 in regulating apoptosis and demonstrate that blocking apoptosis at an early stage is both advantageous and pharmacologically tractable.

### Keywords
Vdac2, Bak, Apoptosis

### Affiliations
Laboratory Head and Chemical Biology Division Head, WEHI, Australia
WEHI

### Submitter
Laura Dagley

### Lab Head
Dr Guillaume Lessene
Laboratory Head and Chemical Biology Division Head, WEHI, Australia


