### Accession
PXD033608

### Title
Dnaaf4 and Dnaaf6 are required for assembly of ODAs and a subset of IDAs.

### Description
Axonemal dynein motors are large multisubunit complexes that drive ciliary movement. Cytoplasmic assembly of these motor complexes involves several co-chaperones, some of which are related to the R2TP co-chaperone complex. The different roles of these co-chaperones is not completely known. Two such dynein assembly factors (DNAAFs) that are thought to function together in an R2TP-like complex are DNAAF4 (DYX1C1) and DNAAF6 (PIH1D3). Here we investigate the Drosophila homologues, CG14921/Dnaaf4 and CG5048/Dnaaf6. Surprisingly, Drosophila Dnaaf4 is truncated such it lacks a TPR domain, which is proposed to recruit HSP90 in human DNAAF4. Despite this, we provide evidence that Dnaaf4 and Dnaaf6 proteins can associate in an R2TP-like complex, and show functional conservation. Both are specifically expressed and required in the development of the two Drosophila cell types with motile cilia: mechanosensory chordotonal neurons and sperm. Flies that lack either gene are viable but with impaired chordotonal neuron function and lack motile sperm. We provide evidence that Dnaaf4 and Dnaaf6 are required for assembly of ODAs and a subset of IDAs.

### Sample Protocol
Protein expression analysis of testes by MS  Knockdown males were made by crossing UAS-RNAi males from Dnaaf4 (KK111069), Spag1 (KK100470) and the KK control line (VDRC (#60100)) to Bam-Gal4 at 25oC. 1-3 days post-eclosion male progeny were dissected in cold PBS and 30 pairs of testes with four replicates per genotype were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen before being processed and analysed for label-free mass-spectrometry as described in zur Lage et al. (2018). For whole tissue proteome analysis, the Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) method was used (Wiśniewski et al., 2009). For Affinity purification, The testes were homogenized on ice for 2 min in lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 100 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol, 5 mM EDTA, 0.15% Triton X-100, and 0.5% sodium deoxycholate) in the presence of Complete Protease Inhibitor (Roche). Samples were rotated for 30 min at 4°C, before spinning for 10 min at 14,000 rpm at 4°C. The lysate supernatant was transferred to clearing beads, Sepharose beads IgG Fastflow (GE), and incubated for 30 min at 4°C before adding them to GFP-Trap_A beads (Chromotek) and rotating them for a further 3 h at 4°C. Subsequently, the beads were washed twice in lysis buffer, twice in lysis buffer containing 0.2% sodium deoxycholate, and twice more in lysis buffer. MS was performed on these samples as previously described (Turriziani et al., 2014). In brief, the samples were digested on-beads, and analyzed by liquid chromatography tandem MS on a Fusion Lumos (Thermo Fisher Scientific).    GFP trap affinity purification and mass spectrometry  150 pairs of testes in 3 replicates were dissected in cold PBS for Dnaaf4-mVenus and control line UAS-GAP43-mVenus x Bam-Gal4). The samples were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen. Lysis buffer (Tris-HCl pH7.5 50mM, NaCl 100mM, Glycerol 10%, EDTA 5mM, sodium deoxycholate 0.5%, Complete Mini protease inhibitor) was added to samples before they were homogenised on ice for 2 minutes. Samples were subsequently rotated, incubated in a lysis buffer for 30 minutes at 4°c, and then centrifuged - before being processed and analysed as described in zur Lage et al. (2018).

### Data Protocol
Raw data were searched with MaxQuant against the Drosophila reference proteome with M(ox) and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. Protein quantification was done by MaxLFQ (Wiśniewski and Mann, 2012). For imputation and statistical analysis, the Perseus software suite was used.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Drosphila, Cilia

### Affiliations
University of Edinburgh

### Submitter
Alex von kriegsheim

### Lab Head
Dr alex von kriegsheim
University of Edinburgh


