### Accession
PXD043635

### Title
Crosstalk between the glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid receptor boosts glucocorticoid-induced killing of multiple myeloma cells

### Description
The glucocorticoid receptor (GR) is a crucial drug target in multiple myeloma as its activation with glucocorticoids effectively triggers myeloma cell death. However, as high-dose glucocorticoids are also associated with deleterious side effects, novel approaches are urgently needed to improve GR’s action in myeloma. Here we reveal a functional crosstalk between GR and the mineralocorticoid receptor (MR) that culminates in improved myeloma cell killing. We show that the GR agonist Dexamethasone (Dex) downregulates MR levels in a GR-dependent way in myeloma cells. Co-treatment of Dex with the MR antagonist Spironolactone (Spi) enhances Dex-induced cell killing in primary, newly diagnosed GC-sensitive myeloma cells, while in a relapsed GC-resistant setting, Spi alone induces distinct myeloma cell killing. On a mechanistic level, we find that a GR-MR crosstalk is arising from an endogenous interaction between GR and MR in myeloma cells. Quantitative dimerization assays show that Spi reduces Dex-induced GR-MR heterodimerization and completely abolishes Dex-induced MR MR homodimerization but leaves GR-GR homodimerization intact. Unbiased transcriptomics further reveals that c-myc and many of its target genes are downregulated most by Dex and Spi combined, while proteomics analyses identify that several metabolic hallmarks are modulated most by this combination treatment. Finally, we identified a subset of Dex+Spi downregulated genes and proteins that may predict prognosis in the CoMMpass patient cohort. Our study demonstrates that GR-MR crosstalk is therapeutically relevant in myeloma as it provides novel strategies towards glucocorticoid-based dose-reduction.

### Sample Protocol
For protein digestion, frozen cell pellets were lysed in boiling Guanidine (GuHCl)  lysisbuffer as described by Jersie-Christensen et al. Protein concentration was determined with a Pierce Coomassie (Bradford) Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific), according to the manufacturer’s instructions. After dilution to 2M GuHCl, aliquots corresponding to 200 uG of protein were digested twice (overnight and 4h) with trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich) at 37°C, enzyme/substrate ratio 1:75. Digestion was quenched by the addition of FA (final concentration 5%), after which the peptides were desalted on a Sep-Pak C18 cartridge (Waters, Massachusetts, USA). Samples were dried in a vacuum centrifuge. Prior to mass spectrometry analysis, the peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid and loaded on the Evotip Pure™ (Evosep). Peptide mixtures were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Exploris 480 Mass Spectrometer equipped with an Evosep One LC system. Peptides were separated using the pre-programmed gradient (Extended method, 88 min gradient) on an EV1137 (Evosep) column with an EV1086 (Evosep) emitter. The Exploris 480 was run in data-independent acquisition (DIA) mode, with full MS resolution set to 120,000 at m/z 200, MS1 mass range was set from 350-1400, normalized AGC target was 300% and maximum IT was 45ms. DIA was performed on precursors from 400-1000 in 48 windows of 12.5 m/z with an overlap of 1 m/z. Resolution was set to 30,000 and normalized CE was 27.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analyzed by DIA-NN (version 1.8) without a spectral library and with “Deep learning” option enabled. The Swissprot  Human database (20,398 entries, release 2022_08)  was added for the library-free search. The Quantification strategy was set to Robust LC (high accuracy) and MBR option was enabled. The other settings were kept at the default values. The protein groups report from DIA-NN was used for downstream analysis in Perseus (version: 2.0.7.0). Values were Log2-transformed, after which proteins were filtered for at least 75% valid values in at least one sample group. Missing values were replaced by imputation based a normal distribution using a width of 0.3 and a minimal downshift of 2.4. Differentially expressed proteins were determined using a Student's t-test (minimal threshold: FDR = 0.05 and S0 = 0.1).

### Publication Abstract
The glucocorticoid receptor (GR) is a crucial drug target in multiple myeloma as its activation with glucocorticoids effectively triggers myeloma cell death. However, as high-dose glucocorticoids are also associated with deleterious side effects, novel approaches are urgently needed to improve GR action in myeloma. Here, we reveal a functional crosstalk between GR and the mineralocorticoid receptor (MR) that plays a role in improved myeloma cell killing. We show that the GR agonist dexamethasone (Dex) downregulates MR levels in a GR-dependent way in myeloma cells. Co-treatment of Dex with the MR antagonist spironolactone (Spi) enhances Dex-induced cell killing in primary, newly diagnosed GC-sensitive myeloma cells. In a relapsed GC-resistant setting, Spi alone induces distinct myeloma cell killing. On a mechanistic level, we find that a GR-MR crosstalk likely arises from an endogenous interaction between GR and MR in myeloma cells. Quantitative dimerization assays show that Spi reduces Dex-induced GR-MR heterodimerization and completely abolishes Dex-induced MR-MR homodimerization, while leaving GR-GR homodimerization intact. Unbiased transcriptomics analyses reveal that c-myc and many of its target genes are downregulated most by combined Dex-Spi treatment. Proteomics analyses further identify that several metabolic hallmarks are modulated most by this combination treatment. Finally, we identified a subset of Dex-Spi downregulated genes and proteins that may predict prognosis in the CoMMpass myeloma patient cohort. Our study demonstrates that GR-MR crosstalk is therapeutically relevant in myeloma as it provides novel strategies for glucocorticoid-based dose-reduction.

### Keywords
Glucocorticoid receptor; gr; lc-msms; mineralocorticoid receptor; mr; myeloma; dexamethasone; spironolacton; c-myc;

### Affiliations
The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
Proteomics Facility, Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, Netherlands.

### Submitter
Liesbeth Hoekman

### Lab Head
Dr Onno Bleijerveld
Proteomics Facility, Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, Netherlands.


