### Accession
PXD014629

### Title
Quantitative analysis of in vivo methionine oxidation of the human proteome

### Description
A novel stable isotope labelling strategy was developed to quantify methionine oxidation in an unstressed human proteome.  Cell extracts were oxidized with 18O labelled hydrogen peroxide following cell lysis in order to convert all unoxidized methionine residues to an oxidized version with a heavy label.  The heavy labelled peptides were used to generate a custom search and quantification of the relative ratios between heavy and light labelled methionine sulfoxide containing peptides.  Where the light labelled peptides were in vivo oxidized

### Sample Protocol
Wildtype human epidermal fibroblasts (MJT) cells were grown to confluency in DMEM supplemented with 15% FBS and 1% penicillin-streptomycin (Invitrogen) and harvested by trypsinization.  Cells were lysed in 50mM Triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB)  (Fischer Scientific) and 5% SDS by high energy sonication and clarified of cell debris by centrifugation at 16,000xg for 10 minutes.  Following lysis protein concentration was quantified by Bicinchoninic Acid (BCA) assay and immediately diluted (1:1) to a final protein concentration of 0.5 mg/mL with either heavy (18O) (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories) or light (16O) ( labelled 2.5% H2O2 to a final H2O2 concentration of 1.25%. The oxidation reaction was allowed to continue for 1 hr at room temperature. Disulfide bonds were reduced by adding 2mM Dithiothreitol (DTT) (Fisher) and protein alkylation was performed with 10 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) (Sigma). Samples were acidified by adding phosphoric acid to a final concentration of 1.2% and subsequently diluted 7-fold with 90% methanol in 100mM TEAB. The samples were added to an S-trap column (Protofi) and the column was washed twice with 90% methanol in 100mM TEAB. Trypsin (Pierce) was added to the S-trap column at a ratio of 1:25 (trypsin:protein) and the digest reaction was allowed to continue overnight at 37 oC. Peptides were eluted in 80 L of 50 mM TEAB followed by 80 L of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) (Pierce) in water and 80 L of 50/50 acetonitrile/water in 0.1% TFA.  Titration experiments were prepared by mixing light (16O) and heavy (18O) labelled proteomes in the specified ratio to a final protein amount of 50 g. To increase proteome coverage, high-pH fractionation was conducted on extracts prior to LC-MS/MS extracts were fractionated using homemade C18 spin columns. Eight different elution buffers were made in 100 mM ammonium formate (pH 10) with 5%, 7.5%, 10%, 12.5%, 15%, 17.5%, 20%, and 50% acetonitrile added. All fractions were then lyophilized and re-suspended in 25 l of 0.1% TFA.

### Data Protocol
for the quantification of total oxidative modifications in a sample LC-MS/MS data were collected from an unfractionated unoxidized cell extract and compared to fractioned extracts oxidized with H218O2 as described above. Maxquant searches were conducted for unmodified peptides (except for carbamidomethylation of cysteines as a constant modification). The total measured intensities of all unmodified peptide spectral matches (PSMs) containing specific residues were measured as fractions of total intensities of all PSMs.  Raw files for all samples were searched against the H. sapiens Uniprot database (downloaded 6/7/2017) using the integrated Andromeda search engine with MaxQuant software. Peptide and protein quantification were performed with MaxQuant using the default parameter settings. Methionine Sulfoxide (18O), Methionine Sulfoxide (16O), Methionine Sulfone (18O) and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications and IAA was set as a fixed modification.    For all other experiments raw files were converted to mzXML format with the msconverter software using the vendor supplied peak picking algorithm and the threshold peak filter set to the top 1500 peaks in each scan.  The MaxQuant supplied evidence file and the mzXML file were used as input into a custom algorithm described below.

### Publication Abstract
The oxidation of methionine is an important post-translational modification of proteins with numerous roles in physiology and pathology. However, the quantitative analysis of methionine oxidation on a proteome-wide scale has been hampered by technical limitations. Methionine is readily oxidized in vitro during sample preparation and analysis. In addition, there is a lack of enrichment protocols for peptides that contain an oxidized methionine residue, making the accurate quantification of methionine oxidation difficult to achieve on a global scale. Herein, we report a methodology to circumvent these issues by isotopically labeling unoxidized methionines with <sup>18</sup>O-labeled hydrogen peroxide and quantifying the relative ratios of <sup>18</sup>O- and <sup>16</sup>O-oxidized methionines. We validate our methodology using artificially oxidized proteomes made to mimic varying degrees of methionine oxidation. Using this method, we identify and quantify a number of novel sites of in vivo methionine oxidation in an unstressed human cell line.

### Keywords
Human cell line, Unstressed proteome, Methionine oxidation

### Affiliations
University of Rochester
University of Rochester Biology Department

### Submitter
John Bettinger

### Lab Head
Dr Sina Ghaemmaghami
University of Rochester Biology Department


