### Accession
PXD012804

### Title
HUNTER N-termini profiling of Arabidopsis thaliana wt and vpe0 mutants

### Description
Comparison of  protein termini in Arabidopsis thaliana vpe0 quadruple mutant and wildtype seedlings shortly after germination to identify differential processed proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Arabidopsis thaliana seeds were grown for 3d (vpe0-V) or 5d (vpe0-II) on plate after 3d stratification at 4 °C. vpe0 mutant and Col wt material were prepared with SP3 beads and differentially dimethyl-labelled with CH2O/13CD2O formaldehyde on protein level as described in detail in the accompanying manuscript (Weng et al 2019). Trypsin-generated peptide termini were modified with a hydrophobic undecanal tag and depleted by C18 solid-phase extraction, leaving enriched N-terminal peptides in the flow-through. Peptides were analyzed using a two-column nano-HPLC setup (ThermoFisher, Dreieich, Germany) with a binary gradient from 5-35% B (A: H2O + 0.1% FA, B: ACN + 0.1% FA) for 80 minutes coupled online to a high resolution Q-TOF mass spectrometer (Impact II, Bruker) as described (Rinschen et al., 2017).

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant was used for peptide identification from the acquired tandem mass spectra as described (Rinschen et al., 2017). Significantly altered protein N-terminal peptides were determined by the R limma package as previously published (Gomez-Auli et al., 2016) with a significance cut-off of p < 0.05 and log2FC >1 or <-1. Subsequent peptide evaluation and annotation was performed using an in-house Perl script (muda.pl , https://muda.sourceforge.io).

### Publication Abstract
Protein N termini unambiguously identify truncated, alternatively translated or modified proteoforms with distinct functions and reveal perturbations in disease. Selective enrichment of N-terminal peptides is necessary to achieve proteome-wide coverage for unbiased identification of site-specific regulatory proteolytic processing and protease substrates. However, many proteolytic processes are strictly confined in time and space and therefore can only be analyzed in minute samples that provide insufficient starting material for current enrichment protocols. Here we present High-efficiency Undecanal-based N Termini EnRichment (HUNTER), a robust, sensitive and scalable method for the analysis of previously inaccessible microscale samples. HUNTER achieved identification of &gt;1000 N termini from as little as 2 &#x3bc;g raw HeLa cell lysate. Broad applicability is demonstrated by the first N-terminome analysis of sorted human primary immune cells and enriched mitochondrial fractions from pediatric cancer patients, as well as protease substrate identification from individual <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i> wild type and Vacuolar Processing Enzyme-deficient mutant seedlings. We further implemented the workflow on a liquid handling system and demonstrate the feasibility of clinical degradomics by automated processing of liquid biopsies from pediatric cancer patients.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis vpe0 termini degradomics hunter

### Affiliations
Forschungszentrum Juelich GmbH ZEA-3 Analytics Wilhelm-Johnen-Str D-52425 Juelich Germany
Forschungszentrum Juelich
ZEA-3 Analytics
Wilhelm-Johnen-Str
D-52425 Juelich

### Submitter
Fatih Demir

### Lab Head
Dr Pitter Florian Huesgen
Forschungszentrum Juelich GmbH ZEA-3 Analytics Wilhelm-Johnen-Str D-52425 Juelich Germany


