### Accession
PXD011056

### Title
The response of Haloferax volcanii to salt and temperature stress: a proteome study by label-free mass spectrometry

### Description
We performed an in-depth proteome analysis of the haloarchaeal model organism Haloferax volcanii under standard, low and high salt and low and high temperature conditions using label-free mass spectrometry. Qualitative analysis of protein identification data from high pH/reversed phase fractionated samples indicated 61.1% proteome coverage (2,509 proteins), which is close to the maximum recorded values in archaea. Identified proteins matched to the predicted proteome in their physicochemical protein properties, with only a small bias against low molecular wright and membrane-associated proteins. Cells grown under low and high salt stress as well as low and high temperature stress were quantitatively compared to standard cultures by SWATH mass spectrometry. 2,244 proteins, or 54.7% of the predicted proteome, were quantified across all conditions at high reproducibility which allowed for global analysis of protein expression changes under these stresses. Pathway enrichment analysis by KEGG annotation showed that most major cellular pathways are part of H. volcanii’s universal stress response. In addition, specific pathways were found to be selectively affected by either salt or temperature stress.

### Sample Protocol
Haloferax volcanii strain H119 was used for all experiments. H119 was grown aerobically with shaking (200 rpm) in Hv-YPC medium (Allers_Lloyd_2004) to exponential phase (0.55 OD600) at 45oC with an optimal salt concentration of 18% (2.46 M NaCl, 88 mM MgCl2, 85 mM MgSO4, 56 mM KCl, 12 mM Tris-HCl ph 7.5). Cells were grown to exponential phase (OD600 of 0.55). For low and high salt stress, salt concentration was adjusted to 15% and 23%, respectively, without modifying the ion ratios. For low and high temperature stress, cells were grown at 30°C and 53°C, respectively. For each condition, three biological replicates were prepared. Haloferax cells were harvested by centrifugation, resuspended in 18% salt water and sonicated. Cells were subsequently incubated with sodium taurodeoxycholate (0.006% final concentration), and non-soluble parts were removed by centrifugation. The supernatant was incubated with DNaseI, exonuclease III and RNase A to digest nucleic acids. Aliquots of 0.5 ml were frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at -80°C. Aliquots were thawed and proteins were precipitated by adding 4.5 ml 100% cold acetone and incubation at -20°C over night. Proteins were pelleted by centrifugation at 6,000 x g for 60 min at 4°C. Pellets were washed four times with 80% acetone and in a final washing step with 5 ml 80% ethanol. Pellets were frozen in liquid nitrogen until further use. For LC/MS/MS analysis, equivalents of 50 µg of protein pellets were resuspended using 1% Rapigest (Waters) cleavable surfactant dissolved in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Ambic) (Yu et al., 2003). Reduction of disulfide bonds and alkylation of free cysteine residues was performed by incubation with 50 mM dithiothreitol in 25 mM Ambic (56°C, 1 h) and 100 mM iodoacetamide in 25 mM Ambic (37°C, 1 h), respectively. Protein digestion was carried out overnight at 37°C using sequencing grade porcine trypsin (Promega) at a 1:20 enzyme to substrate ratio (w:w) (Losensky et al., 2017). Cleavage of the surfactant was carried out by acidification with 5% TFA, and the resulting fatty acids removed by centrifugation (13,000 rpm, 30 min, RT). The supernatants containing tryptic peptides were transferred into new tubes, dried in a SpeedVac and stored at -20°C.  For generating a spectral library by data-dependent mass spectrometry acquisition (DDA), two pools were generated from peptide aliquots of a) cultures grown in standard conditions and b) cultures from the examined stress conditions. Samples were dried in a SpeedVac and redissolved in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. Pools a and b each were separated into eight fractions of increasing hydrophobicity using high pH reversed phase separation in a spin column format (Pierce High pH Peptide Fractionation Kit, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Separations were performed in duplicate, and the corresponding fraction duplicate pooled, dried in a SpeedVac and stored at -20°C until further analysis.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was performed using the Paragon search engine v5.0.0.0 implemented in ProteinPilot v5.0 build 4769 (Sciex) against an in-house H. volcanii protein sequence database (v16.03.09, 4105 entries, Suppl. File 1) (Hartman et al., 2010; Pfeiffer et al., 2008) complemented with 51 common lab contaminants. Replicate data from DDA analysis of the peptide fractions (1x ‘standard’ pool and 2x ‘stress’ pool) were combined in a single search using “thorough” settings. Protein and peptide identifications were trimmed to an estimated False Discovery Rate (FDR) of 1% using a forward/reverse decoy strategy. An MS/MS spectral library was generated using the SWATH 2.0 Microapp integrated in PeakView v2.1 build 11041 (Sciex). SWATH data for standard, salt stress and temperature stress conditions were processed together for subsequent analysis of differential protein expression (Gillet et al., 2012). Peak extraction used the following parameters: up to 10 peptides per protein; up to 6 transitions per peptide; exclusion of modified peptides; peptide confidence threshold 95%; 1% FDR threshold [Lambert et al., 2013]. Peptide retention times were aligned by linear regression using a set of evenly distributed endogenous peptides detected in all samples. After alignment retention time windows of 8 min were used for peak grouping. Extracted transition peak areas were summed up to the respective peptide and protein areas, which were exported for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
In-depth proteome analysis of the haloarchaeal model organism Haloferax volcanii has been performed under standard, low/high salt, and low/high temperature conditions using label-free mass spectrometry. Qualitative analysis of protein identification data from high-pH/reversed-phase fractionated samples indicates 61.1% proteome coverage (2509 proteins), which is close to the maximum recorded values in archaea. Identified proteins match to the predicted proteome in their physicochemical properties, with only a small bias against low-molecular-weight and membrane-associated proteins. Cells grown under low and high salt stress as well as low and high temperature stress are quantitatively compared to standard cultures by sequential window acquisition of all theoretical mass spectra (SWATH-MS). A total of 2244 proteins, or 54.7% of the predicted proteome, are quantified across all conditions at high reproducibility, which allowed for global analysis of protein expression changes under these stresses. Of these, 2034 are significantly regulated under at least one stress condition. KEGG pathway enrichment analysis shows that several major cellular pathways are part of H. volcanii's universal stress response. In addition, specific pathways (purine, cobalamin, and tryptophan) are affected by temperature stress. The most strongly downregulated proteins under all stress conditions, zinc finger protein HVO_2753 and ribosomal protein S14, are found oppositely regulated to their immediate genetic neighbors from the same operon.

### Keywords
Haloferax volcanii, Archaea, Swath, Proteome, Stress response, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry
Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry; University Medical Center Goettingen

### Submitter
Christof Lenz

### Lab Head
Dr Christof Lenz
Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry; University Medical Center Goettingen


