### Accession
PXD012810

### Title
Systematic Discovery of Deeply Conserved Plant Protein Complexes

### Description
The associated files are mass spec data from size exclusion chromoatography fractions.  The starting material was a native nuclear extract made from purified endosperm nuclei of young (5 month old) green coconut (cocos nucifera).

### Sample Protocol
Chromatography fractions were concentrated, and buffer exchanged into 50 mm Tris pH 8.0, 2 mM CaCl2 by ultrafiltration using a 3k MWCO 96-well plate (Pall#8061)and a vacuum manifold and adjusted to 50% TFE. Samples were reduced with 5 mM TCEP at 37C, followed by alkylation with 15 mM iodoacetamide. Alkylation was quenched by 7.5 mM DTT and TFE was diluted to 5%.  Trypsin digestion was overnight at 37C.  Peptides were recovered and desalted using C18 resin in a 96-well format (Glygen Corp # MFNSC18)and vacuum filtration.  Peptides were directly injected into an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos using nano-electrospray following elutionfrom a C18 column with a 3-45% acetonitrile gradient over 60 minutes.  Data acquisition was data dependent using a top speed method and HCD. Further details in publication.

### Data Protocol
Data from .RAW files was processed using an in-house pipeline to be reported.  Briefly output from 3 search engines (Comet, MS-GF+, and X!Tandem) was combined using the MSBlender software and peptide assignments to in-house assigned orthogroups to enable inter-species comparison of proteins identified.

### Publication Abstract
Plants are foundational for global ecological and economic systems, but most plant proteins remain uncharacterized. Protein interaction networks often suggest protein functions and open new avenues to characterize genes and proteins. We therefore systematically determined protein complexes from 13 plant species of scientific and agricultural importance, greatly expanding the known repertoire of stable protein complexes in plants. By using co-fractionation mass spectrometry, we recovered known complexes, confirmed complexes predicted to occur in plants, and identified previously unknown interactions conserved over 1.1 billion years of green plant evolution. Several novel complexes are involved in&#xa0;vernalization and pathogen defense, traits critical for agriculture. We also observed plant analogs of&#xa0;animal complexes with distinct molecular assemblies, including a megadalton-scale tRNA multi-synthetase&#xa0;complex. The resulting map offers a cross-species&#xa0;view of conserved, stable protein assemblies shared across plant cells and provides a mechanistic, biochemical framework for interpreting plant genetics and mutant phenotypes.

### Keywords
Nucleus, Cocos nucifera, Coconut

### Affiliations
Molecular Biosciences and Center for Systems and Synthetic Biology, University of Texas at Austin, USA
University of Texas at Austin

### Submitter
Ophelia Papoulas

### Lab Head
Dr Edward M. Marcotte
Molecular Biosciences and Center for Systems and Synthetic Biology, University of Texas at Austin, USA


