### Accession
PXD024368

### Title
Neural stem cells traffic functional mitochondria via extracellular vesicles to correct mitochondrial dysfunction in target cells.

### Description
Neural stem cell (NSC) transplantation induces recovery in animal models of central nervous system (CNS) diseases. Although the replacement of lost endogenous cells was originally proposed as the primary healing mechanism of NSC grafts, it is now clear that transplanted NSCs operate via multiple mechanisms, including the horizontal exchange of therapeutic cargoes to host cells via extracellular vesicles (EVs). EVs are membrane particles trafficking nucleic acids, proteins, metabolites and metabolic enzymes, lipids, and entire organelles. However, the function and the contribution of these cargoes to the broad therapeutic effects of NSCs is yet to be fully understood. Mitochondrial dysfunction is an established feature of several inflammatory and degenerative CNS disorders, most of which are potentially treatable with exogenous stem cell therapeutics. Herein we investigated the hypothesis that NSCs release and traffic functional mitochondria via EVs to restore mitochondrial function in target cells. Untargeted proteomics revealed a significant enrichment of mitochondrial proteins spontaneously released by NSCs in EVs. Morphological and functional analyses confirmed the presence of ultrastructurally intact mitochondria within EVs with conserved membrane potential and respiration. We found that the transfer of these mitochondria from EVs to mtDNA-deficient L929 Rho 0 cells rescued mitochondrial function and increased Rho 0 cell survival. Furthermore, the incorporation of mitochondria from EVs into inflammatory mononuclear phagocytes restored normal mitochondrial dynamics and cellular metabolism and reduced the expression of proinflammatory markers in target cells. When transplanted in an animal model of multiple sclerosis, exogenous NSCs actively transferred mitochondria to mononuclear phagocytes and induced a significant amelioration of clinical deficits. Our data provide the first evidence that NSCs deliver functional mitochondria to target cells via EVs, paving the way for the development of novel (a)cellular approaches aimed at restoring mitochondrial dysfunction not only in multiple sclerosis, but also in degenerative neurological diseases.

### Sample Protocol
Tryptic digests were made using an IST-NHS sample preparation kit (Preomics GmBH) according to the manufacturer’s instructions with minor modifications. Briefly, samples were solubilised in proprietary lysis buffer and sonicated 10 times (30s on/off) in a Bioruptor sonicator (Diagenode). Lysates were diluted 10-fold and quantified by BCA protein assay against a BSA standard curve in diluted lysis buffer. Digestion was performed at 37°C for 3 hrs. Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) labelling was performed on the digestion columns as per the manufacturer’s instructions. After elution, TMT labelling of at least 98% peptides was confirmed for each sample before pooling and subjecting to high pH reversed phase (HpRP) fractionation. This was conducted on an Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a 2.1 mm × 15 cm, 1.7 Acquity BEH C18 column (Waters, UK). Solvent A was 3% acetonitrile (ACN), solvent B was 100% ACN, solvent C was 200 mM ammonium formate (pH 10). Throughout the analysis solvent C was kept at a constant 10%. The flow rate was 400 l/min and UV were monitored at 280 nm. Samples were loaded in 90% A for 10 min before a gradient elution of 0–10% B over 10 min (curve 3), 10-34% B over 21 min (curve 5), 34-50% B over 5 min (curve 5) followed by a 10 min wash with 90% B. 15 s (100 l) fractions were collected from the start of the gradient elution. Fractions were pooled orthogonally to generate a final 24 fractions.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were searched by Mascot within Proteome Discoverer 2.2 in two rounds of searching. The first search was against the UniProt Mouse reference proteome and a compendium of common contaminants (GPM). The second search took all unmatched spectra from the first search and searched against the Mouse trEMBL database. Search parameters were as follows. MS1 Tol: 10 ppm, MS2 Tol: 0.6 Da, Fixed mods: Carbamidomethyl (C) and TMT (N term, K), Var mods: Oxidation (M), Enzyme: Trypsin (/P). For HCD-OT Experiments. MS1 Tol:  10 ppm, MS2 Tol: 0.05 Da, Fixed mods: Carbamidomethyl (C) and TMT (N-term, K), Var mods: Oxidation (M), Enzyme: Trypsin (/P). MS3 spectra were used for reporter ion-based quantitation with a most confident centroid tolerance of 20 ppm. PSM FDR was calculated using Mascot percolator and was controlled at 0.01% for ‘high’ confidence PSMs and 0.05% for ‘medium’ confidence PSMs. Normalisation was automated and based on total s/n in each channel. Proteins/peptides satisfying at least a ‘medium’ FDR confidence were taken forth for further analysis. To compare protein abundances in particles, exosomes, and NSCs, moderated t-tests were performed using the limma R/Bioconductor software package, with false discovery rate (FDR)-adjusted p values (q values) calculated according to the Benjamini Hochberg method. To analyse subcellular localisations of proteins identified or enriched in particles and/or exosomes, Gene Ontology Cellular Component (GOCC) terms were imported using the Perseus software platform. Further data manipulation and general statistical analysis were conducted using Excel and XLSTAT. The proteomic data described in this study have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange consortium via the PRIDE partner repository (accessible at http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org). The dataset identifier will be uploaded prior publication.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Exosomes

### Affiliations
Cambridge Institute of Therapeutic Immunology and Infectious Disease (CITIID), University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK
University of Cambridge

### Submitter
James Williamson

### Lab Head
Dr Paul Lehner
Cambridge Institute of Therapeutic Immunology and Infectious Disease (CITIID), University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK


