### Accession
PXD009135

### Title
Identification of adsorbing human plasma proteins on alginate gel beads

### Description
The biocompatibility of immunoisolation devices is a major challenge for their use in cellular therapies. Utilisation of alginate for the encapsulation of pancreatic islets as a potential cellular therapy for type 1 diabetes has shown to be limited in terms of long-term graft survival, due to pericapsular fibrotic overgrowth. Fibrotic overgrowth is a complex process that involves several factors, including protein adsorption. This work investigates the protein adsorption profiles of plasma incubated alginate beads for the identification of key proteins that may play a role in the biocompatibility of this biomaterial.

### Sample Protocol
Various Ba2+ and/or Ca2+ alginate microbeads were prepared under sterile conditions, using an electrostatic droplet generator. Human plasma incubated alginate beads were prepared for mass spectrometry analysis, which included several washing steps, protein elution, methanol/chloroform precipitation and protein digestion. In brief, sample treatments involved ammonium bicarbonate, DTT, iodoacetamide, tryptic digestion and desalting using a C18 stage tip column.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were analysed in data dependent acquisition mode. Raw files were analysed with MaxQuant v 1.5.8.3, FTMS MS and ITMS MS/MS tolerance of 20 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. Search was performed against the March 2017 version of Human proteome set with isoforms from Uniprot. Label free quantification values from replicates were transformed with log function using base 2 in order to have a better approximation to normal distribution.

### Publication Abstract
Protein adsorption to biomaterial surfaces is considered a determining factor for the host response. Here we detail the protein adsorption profiles of alginate hydrogel microspheres relevant for cell therapy using mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics. The investigated microspheres include sulfated alginate (SA), high G alginate (HiG), and poly-l-lysine coated alginate (AP), which previously have been shown to exhibit different inflammatory and fibrotic responses. The biological significance was assessed in lepirudin-anticoagulated human whole blood (hWB) by functional analysis of the acute-phase responses (complement and coagulation). Proteomic profiling revealed distinct signatures for the microspheres, wherein Ingenuity Pathway Analysis identified complement and coagulation as the top enriched canonical pathways. The levels of complement and coagulation activators and inhibitors were distinctly different, which was reflected in the functional hWB analyses: SA was highly enriched with inhibitory factors of complement and coagulation (e.g. C1 inhibitor, factor H, antithrombin-III, heparin cofactor 2), other heparin-binding proteins and factors promoting fibrinolysis (factor XII, plasma kallikrein), conforming to an anti-inflammatory and anti-fibrotic profile. HiG enriched moderate levels of complement inhibitors, conforming to a low-inflammatory and pro-fibrotic profile. AP showed the most prominent enrichment of complement activators (e.g. C3, properdin, C-reactive protein) and low levels of inhibitors, conforming to a pro-inflammatory and highly pro-fibrotic profile. In conclusion, the extensive enrichment of inhibitory acute-phase proteins on SA could be a determining factor for its reduced host response. The interactions between the plasma proteins and hydrogel surfaces shown herein point to proteomics as an important supplement to existing <i>in vitro</i> and <i>in vivo</i> methods for designing biocompatible alginate-based hydrogels.

### Keywords
Alginate gel beads, Proteomics, Biocompatibility, Protein adsorption

### Affiliations
Engineer at NTNU, Norway
Professor i molekylærbiologi og faglig leder av PROMEC Institutt for klinisk og molekylær medisin Fakultet for medisin og helsevitenskap  geir.slupphaug@ntnu.no  72573076  91825455 Laboratoriesenteret, 231.05.034, Øya, Erling Skjalgssons g 1

### Submitter
Animesh Sharma

### Lab Head
Dr Geir Slupphaug
Professor i molekylærbiologi og faglig leder av PROMEC Institutt for klinisk og molekylær medisin Fakultet for medisin og helsevitenskap  geir.slupphaug@ntnu.no  72573076  91825455 Laboratoriesenteret, 231.05.034, Øya, Erling Skjalgssons g 1


