### Accession
PXD009604

### Title
Toxoplasma GRA protein identification

### Description
Toxoplasma gondii is an opportunistic pathogen infecting humans and a variety of vertebrate animals. Secretory dense granule proteins (GRA) are important effectors that mediate host-parasite interactions and facilitate parasitism. Due to the wide host range, T. gondii needs diverse GRA proteins to accommodate parasite survival in different hosts. In this study, we used two proximity based protein labeling techniques to identify novel GRA proteins. Using GRA1 as bait, two transgenic strains expressing GRA1-BirA* or GRA1-APEX were used to biotinylate GRA candidate proteins. Using these methods, 90 proteins were identified by APEX based labeling and 56 by the BirA* approach. Twenty-three were identified by both techniques, among which 13 are known GRA proteins. In combination 98 novel GRA candidates were identified by these two approaches and 25 are known GRAs. The majority of them are only present in coccidian parasites and dispensable for parasite growth in vitro, they likely mediate interactions with hosts and play roles during animal infections.

### Sample Protocol
Protein biotinylation in vivo     The RH/GRA1-APEX strain was used to infect HFF monolayer for about 48 hours until the parasites were just about to egress. Then the culture medium was changed to DMEM containing 500 μM biotin-phenol (Adipogen Corp., San Diego, CA) and incubated at 37 ℃ for 30 minutes. Subsequently final concentration of 1 mM H2O2 was added and incubated for another 5 minutes 34. Thereafter, parasites were washed, collected and purified by filtration and lysed in RIPA buffer (50mM Tris, pH 7.4; 150mM NaCl; 1% Triton X-100; 1% sodium deoxycholate and 0.1% SDS; Beyotime Biotechnology, China) for affinity purification described below. Biotinylation in RH/GRA1-BirA* was performed as previously described by growing the parasites in biotin (150 μM) containing medium 33. In both cases, corresponding strains without biotin-phenol or biotin treatment were used as controls.  Affinity purification of biotinylated proteins After in vivo biotinylation and parasite lysis, the lysates were centrifuged at 12000×g for 15 min at 4℃. The supernatants were incubated with streptavidin magnetic beads (Roche, Mannheim, Germany) for 6 h at 4 ℃ with gentle shaking. The beads were then washed with RIPA lysis buffer for three times and then proteins bound to beads were eluted and solubilized in 1×SDS-loading buffer (50 mM Tris-Cl; 2% SDS; 0.1% bromophenol blue; 10% glycerinum) and 20 mM dithiothreitol. Samples were then boiled for 10 min for downstream applications. Control samples were processed in the same way. Protein identification by LC-MS/MS Affinity purified proteins were loaded to 12% SDS-PAGE gel and briefly separated by electrophoresis for about 10 min. The gels were cut to obtain the parts containing target proteins for LC-MS/MS analysis. Gel band from each sample was cut into small pieces and shrunk in 100% acetonitrile, washed with ammonium bicarbonate/acetonitrile to remove stain and SDS. Finally, the gel pieces were shrunk again with acetonitrile and allowed to air dry. Trypsin (700ng) was added and digestion was carried out overnight at 37°C. Peptides were extracted from the gel pieces following previously described methods 40 and the supernatant was dried down and re-dissolved in 20 μL of 2.5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. 5 μL of the digested products were run by nanoLC-MS/MS using a 2 h gradient on a 0.075mm x 250mm C18 Waters CSH column feeding into a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Waters Corp, Milford, MA, USA).

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS data were analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.6.1), which was set up to search the cRAP_20150130.fasta; T. gondii_GT1_20170914 database (8462 entries) assuming trypsin digestion. Mascot was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.060 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 PPM. Deamidated of asparagine and glutamine, oxidation of methionine and carbamidomethyl of cysteine were specified in Mascot as variable modifications. Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.8.4, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability by the Peptide Prophet algorithm (37) with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (38). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters.

### Publication Abstract
Toxoplasma gondii is an opportunistic pathogen infecting humans and a variety of vertebrate animals. Secretory dense-granule proteins (GRAs) play diverse roles in the mediation of host-parasite interactions and facilitate parasitism, but many of them still remain to be identified. Here, we used two proximity-based protein labeling techniques to identify novel GRA proteins. Taking GRA1 as bait, transgenic strains expressing GRA1-BirA* or GRA1-APEX were constructed to biotinylate GRAs. Using these methods, a total of 46 proteins were identified, 20 of which were known GRA proteins. Among these 46, 17 were identified by both strategies, and 14 out of the 17 were known GRAs. The other three were all confirmed to localize to dense granules. Nonetheless a significant portion of the proteins were only identified by either APEX or BirA*, indicating that there are differences between these methods. Of the 26 novel GRAs, 5 were validated as bona fide GRAs by localization studies. The majority of these novel GRAs are only present in coccidian parasites and are likely dispensable for parasite growth in vitro; they may play roles during animal infections. The identification of novel GRAs laid the foundation for further studies investigating the mechanisms underlying parasite-host interactions.

### Keywords
Toxoplasma, Gra, Bira, Apex

### Affiliations
State Key laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, College of Veterinary Medcine, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, Hubei, PR China
Huazhong Agricultural University

### Submitter
Bang Shen

### Lab Head
Dr Bang Shen
State Key laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, College of Veterinary Medcine, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, Hubei, PR China


