### Accession
PXD009159

### Title
Phosphoproteomics Identifies Dual-Site Phosphorylation in an Extended Basophilic Motif Regulating FILIP1-mediated Degradation of filamin-C FLNc d18-21 BioID experiment

### Description
FLNc, the muscle-specific isoform of the filamin family, is a multi-adaptor protein, comprising 1 amino-terminal actin-binding (ABD) domain followed by 24 immunoglobulin-like (Ig) domains. While FLNc can form homodimers via the last Ig-like domain and thus function as an actin-crosslinker like the other filamins, it features a unique insertion of 82 amino acids (aa) in domain 20. This insert was not only shown to mediate the interaction to several FLNc binding partners, but also to contain an Akt-mediated phosphorylation site at S2234 of mouse FLNc (mFLNc). To reveal novel proteins in the nano-environment of FLNc within myotubes under mild electrical pulse stimulation conditions, we applied a quantitative BioID appraoch.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC-encoded C2 cells transiently expressing BirA* or BirA* FLNc d18-21 were differentiated for 4 days. Differentiation was induced by reduction of the dialyzed FCS content to 2% in the absence of sodium pyruvate. Differentiation medium was changed every 48 h until day 4 and subjected to EPS (4 ms, 10 V, 0.05 Hz) for 4 h prior to cell lysis. To enhance biotinylation, 50 µM biotin (Amresco, Solon, USA) were added to the culture medium 24 h prior to cell lysis. One set of cells expressing BirA* FLNc d18-21 was cultured without adding biotin and served as an additional control. Cell lysis was performed as described by Roux et al. (2012), protein concentrations were equalized using the Bradford assay followed by mixing of samples in a 1:1:1 ratio to a final protein amount of 900 µg per replicate. Coupling of biotinylated proteins to streptavidin Dynabeads (Invitrogen, Karlsruhe, Germany) and subsequent washing steps were performed as described by Roux et al. For tryptic on-bead digestion, samples were washed twice with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution and incubated with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) in a 1:50 (w/w) ratio for 3.5 h at 42°C and 200 rpm on a thermoshaker. Supernatants were acidified to a final concentration of 1% TFA on ice, split in four equal parts and dried in vacuo.

### Data Protocol
Raw files from LC-MS/MS analyses of BioID assays were processed using Andromeda embedded in MaxQuant 1.5.5.1 and searched against the Uniprot Proteome Set mouse database (release 01.2016, 58,790 protein entries) supplemented with the fusion protein BirA*FlnC d18-21. Trypsin was set as proteolytic enzyme allowing up to two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed modification. N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation and phosphorylation at serine, threonine and tyrosine residues were allowed as variable modifications. The precursor mass tolerance for first search was set to 20 ppm and to 4.5 ppm for main search. The mass tolerance of fragment ions was set to 0.5 Da. A FDR of 1% was applied on both peptide (on modified peptides separately) and protein lists and a minimum of one unique peptide was enabled for protein identification.

### Publication Abstract
The PI3K/Akt pathway promotes skeletal muscle growth and myogenic differentiation. Although its importance in skeletal muscle biology is well documented, many of its substrates remain to be identified. We here studied PI3K/Akt signaling in contracting skeletal muscle cells by quantitative phosphoproteomics. We identified the extended basophilic phosphosite motif RxRxxp[S/T]xxp[S/T] in various proteins including filamin-C (FLNc). Importantly, this extended motif, located in a unique insert in Ig-like domain 20 of FLNc, is doubly phosphorylated. The protein kinases responsible for this dual-site phosphorylation are Akt and PKC&#x3b1;. Proximity proteomics and interaction analysis identified filamin A-interacting protein 1 (FILIP1) as direct FLNc binding partner. FILIP1 binding induces filamin degradation, thereby negatively regulating its function. Here, dual-site phosphorylation of FLNc not only reduces FILIP1 binding, providing a mechanism to shield FLNc from FILIP1-mediated degradation, but also enables fast dynamics of FLNc necessary for its function as signaling adaptor in cross-striated muscle cells.

### Keywords
Bioid, Bira, Flnc, Myotube

### Affiliations
AG Warscheid
Biologie II
Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg
Schänzlestr. 1
79104 Freiburg
Germany

Department of Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Institute of Biology II, Faculty of Biology and BIOSS Centre for Biological Signalling Studies, University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany

### Submitter
Friedel Drepper

### Lab Head
Dr Bettina Warscheid
Department of Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Institute of Biology II, Faculty of Biology and BIOSS Centre for Biological Signalling Studies, University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany


