### Accession
PXD009708

### Title
Using RT-qPCR, proteomics and microscopy to unravel the spatio-temporal expression and subcellular localization of hordoindolines across development in barley endosperm

### Description
Hordeum vulgare (barley) hordoindolines (HINs), HINa, HINb1 and HINb2, are orthologous proteins of wheat puroindolines (PINs) that are small, basic, cysteine-rich seed-specific proteins and responsible for grain hardness.  Grain hardness, is, next to its protein content, a major quality trait. In barley, HINb is most highly expressed in the mid-stage developed endosperm and is associated with both major endosperm texture and grain hardness. However, data required tounderstand the spatio-temporal dynamics of HIN transcripts and HIN protein regulation during grain filling processes are missing. Using reverse transcription quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR) and proteomics we analyzed HIN transcript and HIN protein abundance from whole seeds (WSs) at four ((6 days after pollination (dap), 10 dap, 12 dap and ≥ 20 dap)) as well as from aleurone, subaleurone and starchy endosperm at two (12 dap and ≥ 20 dap) developmental stages.  At the WS level, results from RT-qPCR, proteomics and western blot showed a continuous increase of HIN transcript and HIN protein abundance across these four developmental stages. Miroscopic studies revealed HIN localization mainly at the vacuolar membrane in the aleurone, at protein bodies (PBs) in subaleurone and at the periphery of starch granules in the starchy endosperm.   Laser microdissetion (LMD) proteomic analyses identified HINb2 as the most prominent HIN protein in starchy endosperm at ≥ 20 dap. Additionally, our quantification data revealed a poor correlation between transcript and protein levels of HINs in subaleurone during development. Here, we correlated data achieved by RT-qPCR, proteomics and microscopy that reveal different expression and localization pattern of HINs in each layer during barley endosperm development. This indicats a contribution of each tissue to the regulation of HINs during grain filling. The effect of the high protein abundance of HINs in the starchy endosperm and their localization at the periphery of starch granules at late development stages at the high end-product quality is discussed. Understanding the spatio-temporal regulated HINs is essential to improve barley quality traits for high end-product quality, as hard texture of the barley grain is regulated by the ratio between HINb/HINa.

### Sample Protocol
Total proteins were extracted from barley seeds harvested at 6 dap, 10dap, 12 dap and ≥ 20 dap  in three biological replicates, as well as of LMD sections from seeds harvested at 12 dap and ≥ 20 dap in three biological replicates (Figure S1) following an adapted protocol from (Roustan et al., 2017). A phenol-phase protocol extracted proteins. Samples were dissolved in an urea buffer and protein concentration was measured with a Bradford Assay prior to trypsin digestion. Following over-night digestion, peptides were desalted with C18 solid phase extraction (SPE) tips (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, USA). After SPE, the corresponding eluates were dried in a vacuum concentrator.  Peptide pellets were dissolved at a protein concentration equivalent to 0.1 µg/µl in 5 % (v/v) ACN and 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (FA). 0.5 µg of the mixture was separated on an EASY-Spray PepMap RSLC 75 μm × 50 cm column (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Waltham, USA). Peptides were eluted using a 240 min linear gradient from two to 40% of mobile phase B (mobile phase A: 0.1% [v/v] formic acid (FA) in water; mobile phase B: 0.1% [v/v] FA in 90% [v/v] ACN) with 300 nL/min flow rate generated with an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system. For the LMD samples, peptides were eluted with a 145 min linear gradient with the same mobile phase and percentage as for the WS proteomics. The peptides were measured with a LTQ-Orbitrap Elite (Thermo) using the following mass analyzer settings: ion transfer capillary temperature 275°C, full scan range 350-1800 m/z, FTMS resolution 120000. Each FTMS full scan was followed by up to ten data dependent (DDA) CID tandem mass spectra (MS/MS spectra) in the linear triple quadrupole (LTQ) mass analyzer. Dynamic exclusion was enabled using list size 500 m/z values with exclusion width ±10 ppm for 60 s. Charge state screening was enabled and unassigned and +1 charged ions were excluded from MS/MS acquisitions. For injection control, automatic gain control (AGC) for full scan acquisition in the Orbitrap was set to 5 x 105 ion population, the maximum injection time (max IT) was set to 200 ms. Orbitrap online calibration using internal lock mass calibration on m/z 371.10123 from polydimethylcyclosiloxane was used. Multistage activation was enabled with neural losses of 24.49, 32.66, 48.999, 97.97, 195.94, and 293.91 Da for the ten most intense precursor ions. Prediction of ion injection time was enabled and the trap was set to gather five x 103 ions for up to 50 ms.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed with MaxQuant 1.5 (http://www.maxquant.org) and Andromeda search algorithm (Cox and Mann, 2008; Cox et al., 2011) on the Hordeum vulgare sp. vulgare Uniprot database (124,660 protein entries). Peptides identification was performed using the following settings: Mass tolerance for precursor was set to 5 ppm and for fragment masses up to 0.8 Da. The maximum FDR was set to 0.01%. Three missed cleavages were allowed. The dynamic modifications allowed were: methionine oxidation (M) and protein N-terminal acetylation. Carbamidomethyl (C) was allowed as fixed modification. Label-free-Quantification (LFQ) was performed based on at least two peptides per proteins and internally normalized by Maxquant (Cox et al., 2014). Quantification was calculated at peptide level. Further data processing (including one-way ANOVA) was performed with the Perseus 1.5 software (Tyanova et al., 2016). Annotated MS/MS spectra were visualized with MaxQuant (Tyanova et al., 2015). For statistical analyses we performed a Student's t-Test ((two-tailed distribution, two-sample unequal variance (heteroscedastic)) by the software Microsoft Excel.

### Publication Abstract
Barley (<i>Hordeum vulgare</i>) is one of the major food sources for humans and forage sources for animal livestock. The average grain protein content (GPC) of barley ranges between 8 and 12%. Barley hordeins (i.e., prolamins) account for more than 50% of GPC in mature seeds and are important for both grain and flour quality. Barley endosperm is structured into three distinct cell layers: the starchy endosperm, which acts essentially as storage tissue for starch; the subaleurone, which is characterized by a high accumulation of seed storage proteins (SSPs); and the aleurone, which has a prominent role during seed germination. Prolamins accumulate in distinct, ER-derived protein bodies (PBs) and their trafficking route is spatio-temporally regulated. The protein disulfide isomerase (PDI) has been shown to be involved in PB formation. Here, we unravel the spatio-temporal proteome regulation in barley aleurone, subaleurone, and starchy endosperm for the optimization of end-product quality in barley. We used laser microdissection (LMD) for subsequent nanoLC-MS/MS proteomic analyses in two experiments: in Experiment One, we investigated the proteomes of dissected barley endosperm layers at 12 and at &#x2265;20 days after pollination (DAP). We found a set of 10 proteins that were present in all tissues at both time points. Among these proteins, the relative protein abundance of D-hordein, B3-hordein and HvPDIL1-1 significantly increased in starchy endosperm between 12 and &#x2265;20 DAP, identifying the starchy endosperm as putative major storage tissue. In Experiment Two, we specifically compared the starchy endosperm proteome at 6, 12, and &#x2265;20 DAP. Whereas the relative protein abundance of D-hordein and B3-hordein increased between 6 and &#x2265;20 DAP, HvPDIL1-1 increased between 6 and 12 DAP, but remained constant at &#x2265;20 DAP. Microscopic observations showed that these relative protein abundance alterations were accompanied by additional localization of hordeins at the periphery of starch granules and a partial re-localization of HvPDIL1-1 from PBs to the periphery of starch granules. Our data indicate a spatio-temporal regulation of hordeins and HvPDIL1-1. These results are discussed in relation to the putative role of HvPDIL1-1 in end-product quality in barley.

### Keywords
Spatio-temporal; laser microdissection; endosperm; label-free shotgun proteomics; rt-qpcr; reference genes; end-product quality, Golden promise; protein bodies; grain hardness, Barley caryopsis; hordoindoline

### Affiliations
Department of Ecogenomics and Systems Biology, University of Vienna, Althanstrasse 14, 1090 Vienna, Austria
University of Vienna

### Submitter
Valentin Roustan

### Lab Head
Dr Verena Ibl
Department of Ecogenomics and Systems Biology, University of Vienna, Althanstrasse 14, 1090 Vienna, Austria


