### Accession
PXD028014

### Title
Differential protein expression profiles of testes in Tmprss12-/- and wild-type mice

### Description
Serine protease is considered a relative upstream regulator in the physiological processes including male reproduction. Transmembrane serine protease 12 (TMPRSS12) has been shown to regulate sperm motility and uterotubal junction migration in mice, but its role in the testis remains unknown.In this study, we confirmed the important role of TMPRSS12 in spermatogenesis. To further investigate the mechanism of TMPRSS12 in male reproduction, we used 2-D electrophoresis combined with Matrix-assisted Laser Desorption/Ionization Time-of-Flight Mass Spectrometry(MALDI-TOF/TOF) to construct differential protein expression profiles of testes in Tmprss12-/- and WT mice. A total of 64 spots with 2-fold or more differential expression between two groups were identified using MALDI-TOF/TOF. As a result, 54 unique proteins were identified successfully, including 39 proteins with decreased expression and 15 proteins with increased expression in Tmprss12-/- mice.

### Sample Protocol
Testes proteins were extracted from WT and Tmprss12-/- mice in lysis buffer. The protein was loaded and separated by gel rehydration on 24-cm immobilized, PH3-10, nonlinear gradient strips for 2-DE. After isoelectric focusing carried out in an IPGphor apparatus (GE Healthcare, San Francisco, California), the samples for second-dimension were separated in 12% polyacrylamide gels by an Ettan-Dalt 6 system (GE Healthcare). Subsequently, the gels were stained with silver staining. The sliver-stained gels were scanned and analyzed using 2D Elite Image Master software (GE Healthcare). The protein spots, which were shown >2-fold difference (P<0.05, Student’s t-test) between WT and Tmprss12-/- testes, were excised, dehydrated in ACN, and dried at room temperature. Protein spots with 2-fold or more differential expression between two groups were picked out from the stained gels, subjected to in-gel tryptic digestion.

### Data Protocol
The target spots were subsequently subjected to identification by MALDI-TOF/TOF analysis. Combined mass spectrometry (MS) and tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) queries were performed using the MASCOT search engine 2.1 in the UniProt mouse proteome database.

### Publication Abstract
Serine proteases are involved in many physiological activities as initiators of proteolytic cascades, and some members have been reported to play roles in male reproduction. Transmembrane serine protease 12 (TMPRSS12) has been shown to regulate sperm motility and uterotubal junction migration in mice, but its role in the testis remains unknown. In this study, we verified that TMPRSS12 was expressed in the spermatocytes and spermatids of testis and the acrosome of sperm. Mice deficient in <i>Tmprss12</i> exhibited male sterility. In meiosis, TMPRSS12 was demonstrated to regulate synapsis and double-strand break repair; spermatocytes of <i>Tmprss12</i> <sup>-/-</sup> mice underwent impaired meiosis and subsequent apoptosis, resulting in reduced sperm counts. During spermiogenesis, TMPRSS12 was found to function in the development of mitochondria; abnormal mitochondrial structure in <i>Tmprss12</i> <sup>-/-</sup> sperm led to reduced availability of ATP, impacting sperm motility. The differential protein expression profiles of testes in <i>Tmprss12</i> <sup>-/-</sup> and wild-type mice and further molecule identification revealed potential targets of TMPRSS12 related to meiosis and mitochondrial function. Besides, TMPRSS12 was also found to be involved in a series of sperm functions, including capacitation, acrosome reaction and sperm-egg interaction. These data imply that TMPRSS12 plays a role in multiple aspects of male reproduction.

### Keywords
Testis, Serine protease, Tmprss12

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Department of Histology and Embryology,  Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China
Nanjing Medical University

### Submitter
Xinli Zhou

### Lab Head
Dr Hui Zhu
State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Department of Histology and Embryology,  Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China


