### Accession
PXD035936

### Title
MAF amplification licenses Estrogen Receptor Alpha to drive breast cancer metastasis

### Description
MAF-amplification increases the risk of breast cancer (BCa) metastasis through poorly understood mechanisms but with important clinical implications. Estrogen receptor-positive (ER+) BCa associated with estrogen (E2) dependency sustains growth of early of breast carcinomas, but ultimately, supports metastasis by unknown mechanisms. Here we integrate proteomics, (epi)genomics and functional assays derived from human and syngeneic BCa mouse models to show that MAF directly interacts with ERalpha, thereby promoting a unique chromatin state that favors the metastatic spread of ER+ BCa cells. Indeed, we identify a set of metastasis-promoting genes that are de novo licenced following EERa2-exposure in a MAF-dependent manner. Among these we found factors influence the establishment of cellular identity and with a known role in metastasis initiation (e.g. SOX9), as well as modulators of the bone stroma, which can ultimately aid in preparing the bone metastatic “soil” (e.g. FGF18, PTHLH and JAG1). Central to the epigenomic remodeling that facilitates the expression of the MAF/E2 gene set is the histone demethylase KDM1A. Indeed, loss of KDM1A activity prevents MAF/E2-mediated BCa metastasis. Collectively, here we disentangle the molecular framework that underlies MAF/E2-mediated metastasis and demonstrate that genetic, epigenetic and hormonal systemic cues are integrated in BCa cells to determine their metastatic success, and with it patient prognosis.

### Sample Protocol
Digestion on beads  Tryptic digestion was performed directly on beads by incubating them with 2 µg of trypsin dissolved in 300 µL of 50 mM NH4HCO3 at 37ºC overnight (200 µl were added to the delivered volume). The following morning, and additional 1 µg trypsin were added and incubated for 2 h at 37°C. Beads were pelleted by centrifugation at 2000g for 5 min. Complete separation of the beads is performed with a little magnet and the supernatant was transferred to a fresh Eppendorf tube. Beads were washed once with 100 µL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and these washes were pooled with the first supernatant. Formic acid was added to the eluates to a 1% final concentration. Samples were cleaned up through C18 tips (polyLC C18 tips) and peptides were eluted with 80% acetonitrile, 1% TFA. Take out an aliquot of 20% from the sample as a back-up. Next, samples were diluted to 20% acetonitrile, 0.25% TFA, loaded into strong cation exchange columns (SCX) and peptides were eluted in 5% NH4OH, 30% methanol. Finally, samples were evaporated to dry, reconstituted in 50 µL and diluted 1:8 with 3% acetonitrile, 1% formic acid aqueous solution and 5 µL injected for MS analysis.  LCMSMS analysis  The nano-LC-MS/MS set up was as follows. Digested peptides were diluted in 3% ACN/1% FA. Sample was loaded to a 300 µm × 5 mm PepMap100, 5 µm, 100 Å, C18 µ-precolumn (Thermo Scientific) at a flow rate of 15 µl/min using a Thermo Scientific Dionex Ultimate 3000 chromatographic system (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated using a C18 analytical column Acclaim PEPMAP 100 75µmx50cm nanoviper C18 3µm 100A (Thermo Scientific) with a 90 min run, comprising three consecutive steps with linear gradients from 3% to 35% B in 60 min, from 35 to 50% B in 5 min, and from 50% to 85% B in 2 min, followed by isocratic elution at 85% B in 5 min and stabilization to initial conditions (A=0.1% FA in water, B=0.1% FA in CH3CN). The column outlet was directly connected to an Advion TriVersa NanoMate (Advion) fitted on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos™ Tribrid (Thermo Scientific). The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. Survey MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap with the resolution (defined at 200 m/z) set to 120,000. The lock mass was user-defined at 445.12 m/z in each Orbitrap scan. The top speed (most intense) ions per scan were fragmented by CID and detected in the linear ion trap. The ion count target value was 400,000 and 10,000 for the survey scan and for the MS/MS scan respectively. Target ions already selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 15s. Spray voltage in the NanoMate source was set to 1.60 kV. RF Lens were tuned to 30%. Minimal signal required to trigger MS to MS/MS switch was set to 5,000. The spectrometer was working in positive polarity mode and singly charge state precursors were rejected for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis  We performed a twin database search with two separated softwares, Thermo Proteome Discoverer v2.4 (PD) and MaxQuant v1.6.14.0 (MQ). The search engine nodes used were Sequest HT for PD and Andromeda for MQ. The databases used in the search was SwissProt Human (release October 2020) including contaminants and BioID2, MAFS and MAFL protein sequences. We run the search against targeted and decoy databases to determine the false discovery rate (FDR). Search parameters included trypsin enzyme specificity, allowing for two missed cleavage sites, oxidation in M and acetylation in protein N-terminus as dynamic modifications. Peptide mass tolerance was 10 ppm and the MS/MS tolerance was 0.6 Da. Peptides with an FDR < 1% were considered as positive identifications with a high confidence level. For the quantitative analysis, contaminant identifications were removed and unique peptide spectrum matches of protein groups identified with Sequest HT and Andromeda were analyzed with SAINTexpress-spc v3.11 [Teo, G. et al. J Proteomics, 2013]. SAINTexpress compares the prey control spectral counts with the prey test spectral counts for all available replicates. For each available bait and for each available replicate, we took as prey count the maximum count result between PD and MQ. Once obtained this combined dataset, we ran the SAINTexpress algorithm. High confidence interactors were defined as those with Bayesian false discovery rate BFDR ≤ 0.02.

### Publication Abstract
MAF amplification increases the risk of breast cancer (BCa) metastasis through mechanisms that are still poorly understood yet have important clinical implications. Oestrogen-receptor-positive (ER<sup>+</sup>) BCa requires oestrogen for both growth and metastasis, albeit by ill-known mechanisms. Here we integrate proteomics, transcriptomics, epigenomics, chromatin accessibility and functional assays from human and syngeneic mouse BCa models to show that MAF directly interacts with oestrogen receptor alpha (ER&#x3b1;), thereby promoting a unique chromatin landscape that favours metastatic spread. We identify metastasis-promoting genes that are de novo licensed following oestrogen exposure in a MAF-dependent manner. The histone demethylase KDM1A is key to the epigenomic remodelling that facilitates the expression of the pro-metastatic MAF/oestrogen-driven gene expression program, and loss of KDM1A activity prevents this metastasis. We have thus determined that the molecular basis underlying MAF/oestrogen-mediated metastasis requires genetic, epigenetic and hormone signals from the systemic environment, which influence the ability of BCa cells to metastasize.

### Keywords
Maf, Estrogen signaling, Breast cancer, Metastasis

### Affiliations
Institute for Research in Biomedicine, Baldiri i Reixac 10, Barcelona 08028, Spain
Mass Spectrometry & Proteomics Core Facility (MSPCF)
Institute for Research in Biomedicine (IRB Barcelona)
Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology (BIST)
C/ Baldiri Reixac, 10-12
08028 Barcelona - Spain

### Submitter
Marta Vilaseca

### Lab Head
Dr Roger Gomis
Institute for Research in Biomedicine, Baldiri i Reixac 10, Barcelona 08028, Spain


