### Accession
PXD022739

### Title
The M-phase regulatory phosphatase PP2A-B55δ opposes protein kinase A on Arpp19 to initiate meiotic division

### Description
Oocytes are held in meiotic prophase for prolonged periods until hormonal signals trigger meiotic divisions. Key players of M-phase entry are the opposing Cdk1 kinase and PP2AB55δ phosphatase. In Xenopus, the protein Arpp19, phosphorylated at serine 67 by Greatwall, plays an essential role in inhibiting PP2A-B55δ, promoting Cdk1 activation. Furthermore Arpp19 has an earlier role in maintaining the prophase arrest through a second serine (S109) phosphorylated by PKA. Prophase release, induced by progesterone, relies on Arpp19 dephosphorylation at S109, owing to an unknown phosphatase. Here we identified this phosphatase as PP2A-B55δ. In prophase, PKA and PP2A-B55δ are simultaneously active, suggesting the presence of other important targets for both enzymes. The drop in PKA activity induced by progesterone decreases S109 phosphorylation, unlocking the prophase block. Hence, PP2A-B55δ acts critically on Arpp19 on two distinct sites, opposing PKA and Greatwall to orchestrate the prophase release and M-phase entry.

### Sample Protocol
Samples preparation prior to LC-MS/MS analysis  Proteins were digested overnight at 37°C with trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) in a 25-mM NH4HCO3 buffer (0.2 µg trypsin in 20 µL). The resulting peptides were desalted using ZipTip μ-C18 Pipette Tips (Pierce Biotechnology, Rockford, IL, USA). Samples preparation prior to LC-MS/MS analysis  The soluble form of pS67-pS109-GST-Arpp19 was obtained by eluting the protein from 20 µL of sepharose beads using 40 µL of EB supplemented with 10 mM reduced GSH. 5 µL of sepharose beads coupled to either WT-Arpp19 or pS67-pS109-GST-Arpp19 were subjected to 10% SDS gel electrophoresis {Laemmli, 1970 #8076}.  After Coomassie staining, the two bands corresponding to either the full-lengh or the truncated form of GST-Arpp19 were cutted out from the gel. Gel plugs were discolored using a solution of ACN/NH4HCO3 50mM (50/50) during 15 minutes with agitation. Plugs were reduced with a solution of 10 mM DL-Dithiothreitol (DTT, Sigma-Aldrich, Saint Louis, MO, USA) during 45 minutes at 56°C, then the plugs were alkylated using à 55mM solution of Iodoacetamide (IAA, Sigma-Aldrich, Saint Louis, MO, USA) during 45 minutes at ambient temperature. After a step of washing and dehydration, proteins in the plugs where digested overnight with Trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) at 37°C in a 25-mM NH4HCO3 buffer (0.2 µg trypsin in 20 µL). The resulting peptides were desalted using ZipTip μ-C18 Pipette Tips (Pierce Biotechnology, Rockford, IL, USA).Proteins were digested overnight at 37°C with trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) in a 25 mM NH4HCO3 buffer (0.2 µg trypsin in 20 µL). The resulting peptides were desalted using ZipTip μ-C18 Pipette Tips (Pierce Biotechnology, Rockford, IL, USA). LC-MS/MS data acquisition with Orbitrap Q-exactive Plus Samples were analyzed using an Orbitrap Q-Exactive Plus, coupled respectively to a Nano-LC Proxeon 1000 equipped with an easy spray ion source (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). On the Q-Exactive Plus instrument, peptides were loaded with an online preconcentration method and separated by chromatography using a Pepmap-RSLC C18 column (0.75 x 500 mm, 2 μm, 100 Å) from Thermo Scientific, equilibrated at 50°C and operated at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Peptides were eluted by a gradient of solvent A (H2O, 0.1 % FA) and solvent B (100 % ACN, 0.1% FA), the column was first equilibrated 5 min with 95 % of A, then B was raised to 35 % in 93 min and finally, the column was washed with 80% B during 10 min and re-equilibrated at 95% A during 10 min. Peptides masses were analyzed in the Orbitrap cell in full ion scan mode at a resolution of 70,000 with a mass range of m/z 375-1500 and an AGC target of 3.106. MS/MS were performed in a Top 20 DDA mode. Peptides were selected for fragmentation by Higher-energy C-trap Dissociation (HCD) with a Normalized Collisional Energy of 27%, and a dynamic exclusion of 30 seconds. Fragment masses were measured in the Orbitrap cell at a resolution of 17,500, with an AGC target of 2.105. Monocharged peptides and unassigned charge states were excluded from the MS/MS acquisition. The maximum ion accumulation times were set to 50 ms for MS and 45 ms for MS/MS acquisitions respectively. LC-MS/MS data acquisition with Orbitrap Fusion Samples were analyzed using an Orbitrap Fusion, coupled respectively to a Nano-LC Proxeon equipped with an easy spray ion source (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). On the Orbitrap Fusion instrument, peptides were loaded with an online preconcentration method and separated by chromatography using a Pepmap-RSLC C18 column (0.75 x 750 mm, 2 μm, 100 Å) from Thermo Scientific, equilibrated at 50°C and operated at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Peptides were eluted by a gradient of  solvent A (H2O, 0.1 % FA) and solvent B (ACN/H2O 80/20, 0.1% FA), the column was first equilibrated 5 min with 95 % of A, then B was raised to 28 % in 105 min and to 40% in 15 min. Finally, the column was washed with 95% B during 20 min and re-equilibrated at 95% A during 10 min. Peptides masses were analyzed in the Orbitrap cell in full ion scan mode, at a resolution of 120,000, a mass range of m/z 350-1550 and an AGC target of 4.105. MS/MS were performed in the top speed 3s mode. Peptides were selected for fragmentation by Higher-energy C-trap Dissociation (HCD) with a Normalized Collisional Energy of 27% and a dynamic exclusion of 60 seconds. Fragment masses were measured in an Ion trap in the rapid mode, with and an AGC target of 1.104. Monocharged peptides and unassigned charge states were excluded from the MS/MS acquisition. The maximum ion accumulation times were set to 100 ms for MS and 35 ms for MS/MS acquisitions respectively.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data processing  The raw data were processed on Proteome Discoverer 2.2 or 2.4 with the mascot node (Mascot version 2.5.1) with the non-redundant database protein database for Xenopus laevis taxonomy with a maximum of 2 missed cleavage sites. Precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set to 6 ppm and 0.02 Da respectively. The following Post-translational modifications were searched: Acetyl (Protein N-term), Oxidation (M), Phosphorylation (STY). The spectra were filtered using a 1% FDR with percolator node.

### Publication Abstract
Oocytes are held in meiotic prophase for prolonged periods until hormonal signals trigger meiotic divisions. Key players of M-phase entry are the opposing Cdk1 kinase and PP2A-B55&#x3b4; phosphatase. In Xenopus, the protein Arpp19, phosphorylated at serine 67 by Greatwall, plays an essential role in inhibiting PP2A-B55&#x3b4;, promoting Cdk1 activation. Furthermore, Arpp19 has an earlier role in maintaining the prophase arrest through a second serine (S109) phosphorylated by PKA. Prophase release, induced by progesterone, relies on Arpp19 dephosphorylation at S109, owing to an unknown phosphatase. Here, we identified this phosphatase as PP2A-B55&#x3b4;. In prophase, PKA and PP2A-B55&#x3b4; are simultaneously active, suggesting the presence of other important targets for both enzymes. The drop in PKA activity induced by progesterone enables PP2A-B55&#x3b4; to dephosphorylate S109, unlocking the prophase block. Hence, PP2A-B55&#x3b4; acts critically on Arpp19 on two distinct sites, opposing PKA and Greatwall to orchestrate the prophase release and M-phase entry.

### Keywords
Xenopus, Phosphorylation, B55, Meiotic, Pp2a, Phosphatase, Oocyte, M-phase, Arpp19

### Affiliations
Proteomic facility of Institut Jacques Monod (UMR7592) - CNRS & Université de Paris 
Proteomic facility of Institut Jacques Monod, UMR7592 (CNRS and Paris University), 75013 Paris, France (lab head)

### Submitter
Laurent Lignières

### Lab Head
Dr Guillaume Chevreux
Proteomic facility of Institut Jacques Monod, UMR7592 (CNRS and Paris University), 75013 Paris, France (lab head)


