### Accession
PXD022054

### Title
Medieval birth girdle stains LC-MSMS

### Description
This project applied a dry non-invasive method to detect palaeoproteomic evidence from stained manuscripts. The manuscript analysed in this study is a medieval parchment birth girdle (Wellcome Collection Western MS. 632) made in England and thought to be used by pregnant women while giving birth. Using a dry non-invasive sampling method we were able to extract both human and non-human peptides from the stains, including evidence for the use of honey, cereals, ovicaprine milk and legumes. In addition, a large number of human peptides were detected on the birth roll, many of which are found in cervico-vaginal fluid. This suggests that the birth roll was actively used during childbirth. This study is the first to extract and analyse non-collagenous peptides from a parchment document using a dry non-invasive sampling method and demonstrates the potential of this type of analysis for stained manuscripts, providing direct biomolecular evidence for active use.

### Sample Protocol
Eight non-invasive eraser samples were taken from Wellcome Library MS. 632, in both stained and unstained areas. At least one sample came from each of the four different pieces of parchment that make up the roll in order to determine the species of animal used to make the parchment in each of the cases. Samples were taken using PVC erasers as described in Fiddyment et al. 2015. Samples were extracted using conventional eZooMS methodology and initially analysed using MALDI-TOF MS. Eraser crumbs collected from rubbing the eraser on a blank sheet of paper acted as a blank, and rubbings taken from an 18th C Scottish legal document acted as a control. The remaining peptides left from the eZooMS analysis were dried down in an evaporator and sent for analysis to the University of Copenhagen (Globe Institute & Centre for Protein Research) where they were analysed via LC-MS/MS following the Copenhagen protocol from Demarchi et al 2016.

### Data Protocol
Data was analysed using the open source software MaxQuant (version 1.6.10.43) with tandem mass spectra searched against the Uniprot_SwissProt database (downloaded 23/01/2020) including in the search all common contaminants (cRAP). Mass tolerance was set to ±5 ppm on the precursor and 0.05 Da on the fragments. The thresholds for peptide and protein identification were set as follows: protein false discovery rate (FDR) = 0.01, protein score and peptides matches ≥ 1. Subsequent analysis was then carried out using the Proteus R package (https://github.com/bartongroup/Proteus). Only proteins with ≥ 2 peptides were considered during the results and analysis.

### Publication Abstract
In this paper, we describe palaeoproteomic evidence obtained from a stained medieval birth girdle using a previously developed dry non-invasive sampling technique. The parchment birth girdle studied (Wellcome Collection Western MS. 632) was made in England in the late fifteenth century and was thought to be used by pregnant women while giving birth. We were able to extract both human and non-human peptides from the manuscript, including evidence for the use of honey, cereals, ovicaprine milk and legumes. In addition, a large number of human peptides were detected on the birth roll, many of which are found in cervico-vaginal fluid. This suggests that the birth roll was actively used during childbirth. This study is, to our knowledge, the first to extract and analyse non-collagenous peptides from a birth girdle using this sampling method and demonstrates the potential of this type of analysis for stained manuscripts, providing direct biomolecular evidence for active use.

### Keywords
Medieval, Lc-msms, Birth

### Affiliations
University of Cambridge
McDonald Professor of Palaeoproteomics, McDonald Institute for Archaeological Research, University of Cambridge, UK

### Submitter
Sarah Fiddyment

### Lab Head
Dr Matthew James Collins
McDonald Professor of Palaeoproteomics, McDonald Institute for Archaeological Research, University of Cambridge, UK


