### Accession
PXD035494

### Title
PROTEOMIC ANALYSIS OF URINARY EXTRACELLULAR VESICLES OF KIDNEY TRANSPLANT RECIPIENTS WITH BKV VIRURIA AND VIREMIA.

### Description
Background: Although the clinical fingerprints of the BK virus (BKV) infection in kidney transplant recipients (KTRs) has been well documented, the systemic biological machinery involved in this complication is still poorly recognized. Proteomics analysis of urinary extracellular vesicles (EVs) can allow us to better address this knowledge gap. Methods: Twenty-nine adult KTRs with normal allograft function affected by BKV infection (15 with only viremia, 14 with viruria and viremia) and 15 controls (CTR) were enrolled and randomly divided in a training cohort (12 BKV and 6 CTR) used for the mass spectrometry analysis of the EVs protein content and a testing cohort(17 BKV and 9 CTR) used for the biological validation of the proteomic results by ELISA. Results: Mass spectrometry analysis revealed a large protein enrichment (more than 1500) in urinary EVs of BKV patients and controls. Pathway analysis by GSEA revealed that several biological gene ontologies (including immunity, complement activation, renal fibrosis, tubular diseases, epithelial to mesenchymal transition) were able to discriminate BKV versus CTR. Kinase was the only gene ontology annotation term negatively enriched in BKV (with SLK being the most down-regulated protein in BKV). Statistical analysis, then, identified a core panel of 70 proteins (including DNASE2, F12, AGT, CTSH, C4A, C7, FABP4 and BPNT1) able to discriminate the two study groups. Instead, although a set of proteins were able to differentiate patients with BKV viruria from those with both viremia-viruria, the urinary proteomic profile of these patients resulted quite similar between the two sub-groups. ELISA for SLK and ELISA for BPNT1 and DNASE2 validated proteomics results. Conclusions: Our study demonstrated that BK virus infection is able to significantly modify the urinary EVs proteomic profile of KTRs also in a very early stage of the disease (when patients still have normal allograft function and only BK viruria) suggesting, whether possible, to start an early preventive therapeutic approach to minimize the risk of the disease progression. Moreover, some  3 of our identified proteins could be employed in future as early urinary biomarkers and/or new therapeutic targets.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were lysed, reduced and alkylated in 50 ul of iST-LYSE buffer (PreOmics) for 10 min at 95°C,  sonicated with an Ultrasonic Processor UP200St (Hielscher), 3 cicles of 30 sec, and then digested over night at 37°C with 0,7 ug Trypsin and 0,3 ug LysC. Digested samples were processed by iST protocol [1]. Elution of the digested samples was performed with an EASY spray column (75 μm x 50 cm, 2 μm particle size, Thermo Scientific) at a flow rate of 250 nl/min using a non-linear gradient of 7-45 % solution B (80% CAN and 20% H2O, 5% DMSO, 0.1% FA) in 70 min. MS analysis was performed in DDA mode. Orbitrap detection was used for MS1 measurements at a resolving power of 120 K in a range between 375 and 1500 m/z, with an AGC target of 400000 and maximum injection time of 50 ms. Advanced Peack Determination was enabled for MS1 measurements. MS/MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolving power of 30 K, with an AGC target of 50000, maximum injection time of 54 ms, after HCD dissociation at a collision energy of 28%. 2 sec. cycle time was performed for data dependent MS/MS analysis, during which precursors with a charge range 2-5 were selected for activation in order of abundance. Quadrupole isolation with a 1.6 m/z isolation window was used, and dynamic exclusion was enabled for 30s.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant software version 1.6.17.0  was used to process data. A false discovery rate was set at 0.01 for the identification of proteins, peptides and peptide-spectrum match (PSM). A minimum of 6 amino acids was required for peptide identification. Andromeda engine, incorporated into MaxQuant software, was used to search MS/MS spectra against Uniprot human database (release UP000005640_9606 April 2020) and Uniprot BK virus database (release BK_Plyomavirus_000008166 November 2020). In the processing the variable modifications are Acetyl (Protein N-Term), Oxidation (M), Deamidation (NQ), on the contrary  the Carbamidomethyl (C) was selected as fixed modification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Kidney transplant recipients, Bk virus, Proteomics, Urinary extracellular vesicles, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
IRCCS Istituto Giannina Gaslini
IRCCS Gaslini

### Submitter
Martina Bartolucci

### Lab Head
Dr Andrea Petretto
IRCCS Istituto Giannina Gaslini


