### Accession
PXD003708

### Title
Phosphoproteome of a patient-matched cell line model of colon cancer metastasis

### Description
The contributions of phosphorylation-mediated signaling networks to colon cancer metastasis are poorly defined. To better understand the role of constitutive signaling alterations in cancer progression, the global phosphoproteomes of the SW480 and SW620 cell lines were compared by LC-MS/MS. These patient-matched cell lines were derived from a primary colon tumor and a lymph node metastasis, respectively. Network analysis of the significantly altered phosphosites revealed differential regulation in cellular adhesion, mitosis, and mRNA translational machinery. Among the latter group were sites on phosphoproteins with known roles in mRNA biogenesis and splicing, transport through the nuclear pores, initiating translation, as well as mRNA stability and degradation. Though alterations in these processes have been associated with oncogenic transformation, control of mRNA stability has typically not been associated with cancer progression. Notably, the single phosphosite with the greatest relative change in SW620 was Ser2 on eIF2S2, suggesting that SW620 cells translate faster or with greater efficiency than SW480 cells. These broad changes in the regulation of translation also occur without over-expression of eIF4E. Altogether, this work shows that metastatic cells exhibit constitutive changes to the phosphoproteome, and that mRNA stability and translational efficiency may be important targets of deregulation during cancer progression.

### Sample Protocol
Human colorectal cancer cell lines SW480 and SW620 were cultured in triplicate using stable isotope labeling of amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) to enable quantification. Culture media was supplemented with13C615N4-arginine and 13C615N2 -lysine (“Heavy”) or an equal concentration of the corresponding light isotopes (“Light”). Two replicates of the SW480 cell line were labeled with heavy amino acids and one was labeled light; the SW620 cell line had the labels reversed.  Cells were harvested at 60% confluency by scraping in ice-cold lysis buffer containing 8 M urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, plus phosphatase and protease inhibitors.  Lysates were sonicated and centrifuged to remove insoluble debris. Protein concentration was determined in the supernatants by BCA assay, then 2 mg of lysates from each cell line were mixed 1:1 for three replicate samples. Lysates were reduced with dithiothreitol, alkylated with iodoacetamide, and diluted with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) to 1.6 M urea.  Bovine TPCK-treated trypsin was added at 1:50 enzyme: substrate (mg/mg) along with 5% trifluoroethanol prior to overnight incubation at 37⁰C. The digests were desalted, and then we set aside 500 μg aliquots for analysis of the non-enriched proteome prior ot enriching phosphopeptides from the remaining 3.5 mg of peptides.   Phosphopeptides were enriched using both IMAC and TiO2 beads to enhance coverage. Digests were performed in triplicate on two occasions, once for each enrichment method. IMAC was performed three times sequentially, with the second and third enrichments mixed together, as described previously (Yue J. Prot Res, 2013). Briefly, peptides were incubated with Sigma PHOS-Select IMAC beads in a solution of 40% ACN, 25mM FA for 1hr with shaking. Beads with bound peptides were rinsed three times in loading buffer, and then phosphopeptides were eluted by shaking twice for 5 min in 50 mM K2HPO4, adjusted to pH10 with NH4OH.  TiO2 was performed in two sequential steps, similarly to our previous report (Yue Anal Chem 2015). Desalted peptides from 3.5 mg of lysate were resuspended in a solution of 65% ACN, 2% TFA, and saturated glutamic acid. Each replicate was mixed with 5.6 mg of 5 μm Titanosphere TiO2 beads (GL Sciences USA) and shaken for 20 min at room temperature.  Supernatants were removed and immediately added to fresh beads for the second enrichment. Beads with bound phosphopeptides were first washed in 65% ACN, 0.5% TFA for 20 min with shaking, then were washed twice in 65% ACN, 0.1% TFA for another 20 min with shaking. Phosphopeptides were eluted by shaking 20 min in 300 mM NH4OH/50% ACN, then twice with 500 mM NH4OH/60% ACN. The eluates from these three steps were combined and acidified with FA.   Hydrophilic-lipophilic balanced (HLB) reversed-phase solid-phase extraction cartridges were used for high-pH reverse-phase fractionation of peptides. All solvents used for HLB fractionation contained aqueous 10mM ABC at pH 10, with acetonitrile added as indicated.   Peptides were pH-adjusted then loaded onto cartridges with 1% ACN /99% 10 mM ABC and rinsed with the same buffer. Peptides were then eluted with 5%, 10%, 15%, 20%, 25%, 30%, 35%, and 80% ACN. For unmodified proteome analysis, a 500 μg aliquot of non-enriched peptides was prepared as eight fractions. The HLB fractions generated from each of the batches of IMAC and TiO2 enriched peptides (IMAC-1, IMAC-2&3, TiO2-1, and TiO2-2) were mixed to make four fractions (16 phosphopeptide fractions in total). HLB fraction #1 (5% ACN) was mixed with #5 (25% ACN), 10% ACN with 30% ACN, 15% ACN with 35% ACN, and 20% ACN with 80% ACN.  After acidification with FA and vacuum drying to remove ACN, all fractions were desalted by ZipTip prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.   LC-MS/MS analyses were performed with a 90 min analytical gradient on a 100 μm x 10 cm C18 column coupled to a Thermo Q-Exactive mass spectrometer.  IMAC-enriched fractions were separated on a 2% to 30% ACN gradient. TiO2-enriched fractions were separated using a gradient from 2% to 25% ACN. Gradients used for non-phosphopeptide-enriched HLB fractions varied by the fraction number. Fractions generated with 5%, 10%, 15%, and 20% ACN used a 2% to 30% ACN linear gradient; fractions generated with 25% ACN and 80% ran from 15% to 40% ACN in 85 min, and fractions generated with 30% and 35% ACN used a 2% to 40% ACN gradient. Unfractionated, non-enriched samples were analyzed with a 2-40% ACN gradient.   The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent MS/MS mode with a top-12 method. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s and charge 1+ ions were excluded as well. MS1 scans were collected from 400-2000 m/z with resolving power equal to 70,000 at 200 m/z.  The isolation width was 2.0 m/z, and the normalized collision energy was set to 28%. AGC was set to 2x104 with an intensity threshold of 8.3x103 and a maximum fill time of 120 ms. The resolving power of MS/MS scans was 17,500.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS results were searched in MaxQuant 1.4.1.2 against the UniProt human database (version downloaded 4/2013, 89601 sequences) and a list of common contaminants. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was a fixed modification, and oxidized methionine was a variable modification. Phosphorylation of S, T, and Y residues were allowed for enriched fractions. Two missed cleavages were allowed and Trypsin/P was selected as the enzyme. The “first search” precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm, “main search” tolerance was set to 10 ppm, and fragment mass tolerance was set to 50 ppm. The “first search” and “main search” precursor tolerances are parameters specialized to the MaxQuant software. SILAC ratios were calculated using the “highest change” setting. A 1% FDR was applied at the peptide and protein level.   “Heavy/Light” ratios were converted to SW620/SW480 ratios, then log2-transformed. Phosphosites were quantified at the peptide level, requiring at least two SILAC measurements per peptide. The phosphosite localization probability was calculated in MaxQuant. Only Class I phosphosites (those with 75% localization probability or better) were considered18. For non-enriched fractions, a minimum of two unique peptides were required for protein quantification. Phosphopeptide ratios were corrected for changes in protein abundance by subtracting the corresponding non-phosphorylated protein log2 -fold change. Altered regulation of phosphosites was determined using Bonferroni-corrected t-tests with α=0.05.   Network analysis was performed using the STRING database v.9.1 (string-db.org). Uniprot identifiers from 139 protein-abundance-corrected, significantly altered phosphoproteins were submitted for analysis, of which 124 contained a match in the database. Protein-protein interactions were mapped using the website’s “high confidence” setting, which represents 70% confidence or better in each interaction. For ease of visualization, disconnected protein nodes were excluded from the relevant figure. Gene Ontology (GO) term enrichment analysis was performed using STRING’s embedded tools. The human genome was set as the background dataset from which to measure enrichment. GO terms were considered significantly enriched against the background human genome with FDR-adjusted p-values >0.01.

### Publication Abstract
The contributions of phosphorylation-mediated signaling networks to colon cancer metastasis are poorly defined. To interrogate constitutive signaling alterations in cancer progression, the global phosphoproteomes of patient-matched SW480 (primary colon tumor origin) and SW620 (lymph node metastasis) cell lines were compared with TiO<sub>2</sub> and immobilized metal affinity chromatography phosphopeptide enrichment followed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. Network analysis of the significantly altered phosphosites revealed differential regulation in cellular adhesion, mitosis, and messenger RNA translational machinery. Messenger RNA biogenesis and splicing, transport through the nuclear pores, initiation of translation, and stability and degradation were also affected. Although alterations in these processes have been associated with oncogenic transformation, control of messenger RNA stability has typically not been associated with cancer progression. Notably, the single phosphosite with the greatest relative change in SW620 cells was Ser2 on eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2 subunit 2, suggesting that SW620 cells translate faster or with greater efficiency than SW480 cells. These broad changes in the regulation of translation also occur without overexpression of eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E. The findings suggest that metastatic cells exhibit constitutive changes to the phosphoproteome, and that messenger RNA stability and translational efficiency may be important targets of deregulation during cancer progression.

### Keywords
Lymph node metastasis, Sw480, Phosphorylation, Consitutive signaling, Sw620

### Affiliations
University of Notre Dame, Indiana, USA Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry Harper Cancer Research Institute
Northwestern University

### Submitter
Alissa Schunter

### Lab Head
Dr Amanda B. Hummon
University of Notre Dame, Indiana, USA Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry Harper Cancer Research Institute


