### Accession
PXD005196

### Title
Characterisation of urinary WFDC12 in nocturnal basal primates, mouse lemurs (Microcebus spp.), C4PR_LIV

### Description
Mouse lemurs are basal primates that rely on chemo- and acoustic signalling for social interactions in their dispersed social systems.  We examined the urinary protein content of two mouse lemurs species, within and outside the breeding season, to assess candidates used in species discrimination, reproductive or competitive communication. Urine from Microcebus murinus and Microcebus lehilahytsara contain a predominant 10kDa protein, expressed in both species by some, but not all, males during the breeding season, but at very low levels by females.  Mass spectrometry of the intact proteins confirmed the protein mass and revealed a 30 Da mass difference between proteins from the two species. Tandem mass spectrometry after digestion with three proteases and sequencing de novo defined the complete protein sequence and located an Ala/Thr difference between the two species that explained the 30 Da mass difference. The protein (mature form: 87 amino acids) is an atypical member of the whey acidic protein family (WFDC12). Seasonal excretion of this protein, species difference and male-specific expression during the breeding season suggest that it may have a function in intra- and/or intersexual chemical signalling in the context of reproduction, and could be a cue for sexual selection and species recognition.

### Sample Protocol
Animals: Urine samples were obtained from 24 (14 male, 10 female) M. murinus and from 13 (8 male, 5 female) M. lehilahytsara that belong to the captive mouse lemur colony at the Institute of Zoology, University of Veterinary Medicine Hannover. Samples were taken during the reproductive period (March - May 2011 or March - May 2012) and during the non-reproductive period (September 2011 – January 2012). Samples were obtained by direct sampling during weekly handling routines or with a urine collection box. During the handling routines, the urine was collected with a disposable 1 mL pipette whenever the animals urinated spontaneously. Alternatively, the animals were confined to a urine collection box (20.5 x 12 x 13 cm, length x depth x height) for 30-90 min at the beginning of their activity period. The urine passed through a mesh at the bottom of the box and was collected by a stainless steel funnel. The collection box and funnel were cleaned thoroughly after every use. All urine samples were frozen at -20 °C within 2 h of collection. For some lemurs, multiple samples were collected (see Supplementary Data) but have been treated as independent measures. Total protein concentration was measured using a Coomassie Plus protein assay kit (Pierce, Rockford, USA) using bovine serum albumin as standard. SDS-PAGE was conducted using standard protocols. Creatinine concentration was measured by the alkaline picrate assay kit from Sigma-Aldrich. Samples, diluted in 25 mM NH4HCO3 to 10 µg protein in a 50µl digest were incubated with RapiGest™ SF Surfactant (0.05% w/v final concentration, Waters, Manchester, UK) at 80 °C for 10 min. The samples were then reduced with dithiothreitol (3 mM final concentration) at 60 °C for 10 min followed by alkylation with iodoacetamide (9 mM final concentration) in the dark at room temperature for 30 min. The protease, either trypsin (0.2 µg/µl diluted in 25 mM NH4HCO3) or endoproteinase LysC (0.1 µg/µl diluted in 25mM Tris HCl pH 8.5), was added to the digests at a substrate:enzyme ratio of 50:1 and left to incubate for 16 hours. Following incubation, a small portion of the digested material was removed to run on an SDS-PAGE gel to check for complete digestion. The rest of the digest was treated with TFA (to a final concentration of 0.5% v/v) and incubated at 37 °C for 45 min to precipitate the RapiGest™ SF Surfactant prior to LC-MS analysis. The samples were then centrifuged at 10,000 rpm for 15 min and the supernatant transferred to a fresh 0.5 ml Eppendorf. Digests were analysed using an Ultimate 3000 nano system (Dionex/Thermo Fisher Scientific, Hemel Hempstead, UK) coupled to a QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Hemel Hempstead, UK). Peptides were loaded onto a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 2cm x 75 m inner diameter, C18, 3 µm particle size, 100Å pore) at 5 µL/min with an aqueous solution containing 0.1%(v/v) TFA and 2%(v/v) ACN. After 3 min, the trap column was set in-line with an analytical column (Easy-Spray PepMap® RSLC 15cm x 75 µm inner diameter, C18, 2 µm, 100Å) (Dionex/Thermo Fisher). Peptides were eluted by using an appropriate mixture of solvents A and B. Solvent A was 0.1%(v/v) formic acid in HPLC-grade water, and solvent B was 0.1%(v/v) formic acid  in HPLC grade acetonitrile 80%(v/v). Separations were performed by applying a linear gradient of 3.8% to 50% solvent B over 35 min at 300nL/min followed by a washing step (5 min at 99% solvent B) and an equilibration step (15 min at 3.8% solvent B).  The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent positive (ESI+) mode to automatically switch between full scan MS and MS/MS acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (300-2000 m/z) were acquired in the Orbitrap at 70,000 resolution (200 m/z) after accumulation of ions to 1x106 target value based on predictive automatic gain control (AGC) values from the previous full scan. Dynamic exclusion was set to 20s. The 10 most intense multiply charged ions (z ≥ 2) were sequentially isolated and fragmented in the octopole collision cell by high energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a fixed injection time of 120 ms and detected in the Orbitrap at 35,000 resolution. The mass spectrometer conditions were as follows: spray voltage, 1.9 kV, no sheath or auxillary gas flow; heated capillary temperature, 250 C; normalised HCD collision energy 30 %. The MS/MS ion selection threshold was set to 1 x 104 counts and a 2 m/z isolation width was set.

### Data Protocol
Peak lists were generated using Proteome Discoverer (Thermo Fisher) and MASCOT (Matrix Science, London) as search engine. The search parameters were set to accept 1 missed cleavage, a fixed modification of carbamidomethylation of cysteine and variable methionine oxidation. Precursor and fragment ion error tolerances were set to 10 ppm and 0.01Da respectively.  Fragmentation was set to HCD. The MS/MS data were first searched against a database of all mammalian protein sequences in the SwissProt database, prior to searching all primate protein sequences from UniProt. Once the sequence of the protein was determined, a database entry was created containing the protein sequence from both mouse lemur species to assist in peptide coverage analysis. Data analysis: Urinary protein output (µg protein / µg creatinine) was log transformed to meet assumptions of parametric analysis (Shapiro-Wilks, P > 0.05). To take into account the variable number of samples available from different individuals, linear mixed effects models examined the effects of donor sex and season on protein output, with individual donor and species included as random effects (insufficient breeding season samples were available from M. lehilahytsara to include species as a main effect in analysis). Sequencing analysis de novo of the mouse lemur protein was assisted by PEAKS  software 38 for proteomics (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc, Canada).  Precursor and fragment ion error tolerances were set to 10 ppm and 0.01 Da respectively.  Post translational modifications, carbamidomethylation (fixed modification) and oxidation of methionine (variable modification) residues were also included in the processing set-up.  Fragmentation type was set to higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD).  The average local confidence score – a score assigned by PEAKS which reflects the likelihood of a peptide sequence being correct – was set to a 55% cut off as recommended by the software vendor.  The de novo sequenced peptides were then analysed using BLAST, (http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov), and compared to annotated exon/intron structure of WFDC12 entries in Ensembl. The complete mature protein sequence was used to direct homology modelling using the Phyre2 server 39. To confirm the sequence, the LC-MS/MS data was then searched against the newly constructed protein sequence in PEAKS, using database search tools PEAKS DB, which matched the de novo sequences generated against a database of all primate protein sequences in UniProt with the addition of the constructed protein sequence, and SPIDER, to search for mutations and sequencing errors. Search parameters included precursor and fragment ion error tolerances of 10 ppm and 0.01 Da, respectively. For the PEAKS DB search, a fixed modification of carbamidomethylation was set, and a maximum of 3 variable modifications (restricted to oxidation of methionine) per peptide was allowed. No non-specific cleavage was allowed, and the maximum number of missed cleavages was set to 2. The same error tolerances were used for the PEAKS PTM search 40, which matched additional peptides from the de novo sequences to the database by searching for mass changes corresponding to a default list of 484 variable modifications, and the SPIDER search 41, which attempts to find mutations and sequencing errors based on combining the information gained from the de novo sequences generated and the database sequence. For both searches, a threshold peptide confidence score (-10logP) of 30 was used. PEAKS PTM also maintained the cleavage parameters set from the PEAKS DB search, whereas SPIDER automatically searched for non-specific cleavages. A false discovery rate of 1% was used for each search tool, and an ALC (average local confidence) cutoff score of 50% was used for de novo-only peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Mouse lemurs are basal primates that rely on chemo- and acoustic signalling for social interactions in their dispersed social systems. We examined the urinary protein content of two mouse lemurs species, within and outside the breeding season, to assess candidates used in species discrimination, reproductive or competitive communication. Urine from Microcebus murinus and Microcebus lehilahytsara contain a predominant 10&#x2009;kDa protein, expressed in both species by some, but not all, males during the breeding season, but at very low levels by females. Mass spectrometry of the intact proteins confirmed the protein mass and revealed a 30&#x2009;Da mass difference between proteins from the two species. Tandem mass spectrometry after digestion with three proteases and sequencing de novo defined the complete protein sequence and located an Ala/Thr difference between the two species that explained the 30&#x2009;Da mass difference. The protein (mature form: 87 amino acids) is an atypical member of the whey acidic protein family (WFDC12). Seasonal excretion of this protein, species difference and male-specific expression during the breeding season suggest that it may have a function in intra- and/or intersexual chemical signalling in the context of reproduction, and could be a cue for sexual selection and species recognition.

### Keywords
Urine, Whey acidic protein, Wfdc12 protein, Reproduction, Microcebus lehilahytsara, Microcebus murinus, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
University of Liverpool
Centre for Proteome Research, Institute of Integrative Biology, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, L69 7ZB, UK

### Submitter
Grace Loxley

### Lab Head
Dr Robert J Beynon
Centre for Proteome Research, Institute of Integrative Biology, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, L69 7ZB, UK


