### Accession
PXD022621

### Title
The UBA domain of Ubc1 (Ube2K) Facilitates the Assembly of K48/K63-Branched Ubiquitin Chains

### Description
The assembly of a specific polymeric ubiquitin (Ub) chain on a target protein is a key event in the regulation of numerous cellular processes. Yet, the mechanisms that govern the selective synthesis of particular polyubiquitin signals remain enigmatic. The ubiquitin-conjugating (E2) enzymes Ubc1 in yeast and Ube2K in mammals exclusively generate polyubiquitin linked through lysine 48 (K48). Uniquely among E2 enzymes, Ubc1 and Ube2K harbor a Ub binding UBA domain with unknown function. We found that this UBA domain preferentially interacts with Ub chains linked through lysine 63 (K63). Based on structural modeling, in vitro ubiquitination experiments and NMR studies, we propose that the UBA domain aligns Ubc1 with K63-linked polyubiquitin and facilitates the selective assembly of K48/K63-branched Ub molecules. Genetic experiments link the activity of the UBA domain and hence the formation of this unusual Ub chain topology to the maintenance of cellular proteostasis.

### Sample Protocol
To investigate the abundance of K48/K63‑branched chains in S. cerevisiae, yeasts strains were transformed with expression plasmids for 10xHis-Ub(R54A) and grown in either unlabeled or Lys8-labeled minimal media. For the proteomics experiments, arginine auxotroph (∆arg4::kanMX6) yeast cells were grown in either unlabeled or Lys8- and Arg10-labeled minimal media. Equal amounts of cells (400 ml at 0.6 OD600/ml) from different conditions and with different labels were combined, mixed and centrifuged. Pellets of the combined cells were flash frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C overnight. Pellets used for branched chain detection were resuspended in denaturing lysis buffer (6M GdmCl, 100mM HEPES pH 7.5, 300mM NaCl, 10mM chloroacetamide, 1mM PMSF) for mechanical lysis with glass beads. Additional lysis buffer containing Triton-X 100 was added to a final concentration of 0.2% TX‑100 for solubilization at 4 °C for 30 min. The lysate was cleared by centrifugation and incubated with Ni-NTA resin. After 2.5 h, the resin was washed twice with wash buffer 1 (8M urea, 100mM HEPES pH7.5, 300mM NaCl, 0.2% Triton-X-100, 10mM Chloroacetamide) and twice with wash buffer 2 (8M urea, 100mM HEPES pH7.5, 300mM NaCl, 0.2% Triton-X-100, 0.2% SDS, 10mM Chloroacetamide). Finally, protein was eluted using elution buffer (8M urea, 100mM HEPES pH7.5, 300mM NaCl, 350mM Imidazole, 0.2% Triton-X-100, 0.2% SDS, 10mM Chloroacetamide) and subjected to methanol/chloroform extraction as described elsewhere. (Wessel, et al., 1984) The protein pellet was resuspended in denaturation buffer (6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 10 mM HEPES pH 8.0). 0.5 µg LysC protease was added and incubated for 3h at RT while shaking. The sample was diluted with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer before adding 0.5 µg trypsin for digest at RT overnight. For the proteomic shotgun experiments, pellets were resuspended in 500 µl lysis buffer (50mM ABC, 10mM DTT, Protease inhibitor cocktail EDTA free, 1mM PMSF) for mechanical lysis with glass beads. After lysis, 1 ml solubilization buffer was added (25mM ABC, 10mM DTT, 4.5% SDS) and samples were boiled at 95°C for 5min. Lysates were cleared by centrifugation, alkylated with iodoacetamide and quenched with DTT. The samples were then further processed using solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation (Hughes et al, 2018). In short, hydrophilic paramagnetic beads were used to recover protein from the lysate and a peptide digest was performed on-bead using LysC and trypsin. Subsequently peptides were dried and resuspended in a high pH buffer A (5mM ammonium formate, 2% ACN) and subjected to offline High pH Reverse phase fractionation by HPLC (Thermo Fisher Dionex Ultimate 3000) (Bekker-Jensen et al.) on a XBridge Peptide BEH C18 (130Å, 3.5µm; 2.1mm x 250mm) column (Waters) with a multistep gradient from 0 to 60% high pH buffer B (5mM ammonium formate, 90% ACN) over 96 minutes. In total 96 fractions were collected (1 fraction / min) und automatically pooled into 24 fractions. Subsequently 24 fractions (Ubc1-EA samples) or 12 pooled fractions (heatshock and ΔUbc4 samples) were subjected for measurement by mass spectrometry. Shotgun proteomic measurements were separated by reverse phase chromatography on an effective 21 min (UBC-EA) or 35 min (Heatshock and ΔUbc4) gradient. UBC-EA samples were analyzed on a Thermo-Fisher Q-Exactive HFx instrument in positive polarity mode with the following additional settings: MS1: 60k resolution; AGC target 2e5; MaxIT 50 ms; MS2: Top20; 15k resolution; AGC target 2e5; nCE=26 ; MaxIT 40ms; Isolation window 1.3 m/z; Minimum AGC target 1e4; Dynamic exclusion 30s. Heatshock and ΔUbc4 samples were analyzed on Thermo-Fisher Exploris 480 instrument with the following settings: Faims with three cycle CVs (-40,-55,-70); MS1: 60k Resolution; Norm AGC target 300%; AGC target = Custom;  MS2: 15k Resolution; Normalised AGC target = 200%; MaxIT = Custom; nCE=28.

### Data Protocol
All Rawfiles were analyzed in MaxQuant v.1.6.17.0 with the following additional settings: multiplicity 2, Lys8 and Arg10 as heavy label; Trypsin/P; Carbamiomethylation (C) as fixed modification; Oxydation (M), Acetyl (protein n-terminal) and Deamidation (NQ) as variable modifications; match between runs enabled; Re-Quantify enabled; PSM and Protein FDR at 0.01.   ExperimentNames: HS0 fw: heavy = UBC1-EA  light = wt; HS0 rv: heavy = wt light = UBC1-EA;HS1 fw (intermediate timepoint): heavy = UBC1-EA  light = wt; HS2 fw: heavy = UBC1-EA 37°C  light = wt 37°C; HS2 rv: heavy = wt 37°C light = UBC1-EA 37°C; UBC4 fw: heavy = DeltaUBC4, UBC1-EA  light = DeltaUBC4, wt-Ubc1; UBC4 rv: heavy = DeltaUBC4, wt-Ubc1 light = DeltaUBC4, UBC1-EA; HS1 fw (intermediate timepoint): heavy = UBC1-EA  light = wt

### Publication Abstract
The assembly of a specific polymeric ubiquitin chain on a target protein is a key event in the regulation of numerous cellular processes. Yet, the mechanisms that govern the selective synthesis of particular polyubiquitin signals remain enigmatic. The homologous ubiquitin-conjugating (E2) enzymes Ubc1 (budding yeast) and Ube2K (mammals) exclusively generate polyubiquitin linked through lysine 48 (K48). Uniquely among E2 enzymes, Ubc1 and Ube2K harbor a ubiquitin-binding UBA domain with unknown function. We found that this UBA domain preferentially interacts with ubiquitin chains linked through lysine 63 (K63). Based on structural modeling, in vitro ubiquitination experiments, and NMR studies, we propose that the UBA domain aligns Ubc1 with K63-linked polyubiquitin and facilitates the selective assembly of K48/K63-branched ubiquitin conjugates. Genetic and proteomics experiments link the activity of the UBA domain, and hence the formation of this unusual ubiquitin chain topology, to the maintenance of cellular proteostasis.

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Ubc1, Yeast, Ubc4, Branched

### Affiliations
MDC Berlin-Buch
Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Association

### Submitter
Henrik Zauber

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Selbach
Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Association


