### Accession
PXD047335

### Title
ANDROGEN DRIVES MELANOMA INVASIVENESS AND METASTATIC SPREAD BY INDUCING TUMORIGENIC FUCOSYLATION: Phosphoproteomics

### Description
Melanoma incidence and mortality rates are historically higher for men than women. Although emerging studies have highlighted tumorigenic roles for the male sex hormone androgen and its receptor (AR) in melanoma, cellular and molecular mechanisms underlying these sex-associated discrepancies are poorly defined. Here, we delineate a previously undisclosed mechanism by which androgen-activated AR transcriptionally upregulates fucosyltransferase 4 (FUT4) expression, which drives melanoma invasiveness by interfering with adherens junctions (AJs). Global phosphoproteomic and fucoproteomic profiling, coupled with in vitro and in vivo functional validation, further reveals that AR-induced FUT4 fucosylates L1 cell adhesion molecule (L1CAM), which is required for FUT4-increased metastatic capacity. Tumor microarray and gene expression analyses demonstrate that AR-FUT4-L1CAM-AJs signaling correlates with pathological staging in melanoma patients. By delineating key androgen-triggered signaling that enhances metastatic aggressiveness, our findings help to explain sex-associated clinical outcome disparities and highlight AR/FUT4 and its effectors as potential prognostic biomarkers and therapeutic targets in melanoma.

### Sample Protocol
EV and FUT4-OE melanoma cells were treated with DMSO or ARi for 48hrs as indicated. The 48-hr period is a timepoint with maximal AR activation and downstream changes in FUT4-induced fucosylation, that also coincided with significant alterations in biological phenotypes. This long timepoint assessment also better reflects the physiological in vivo context, where the tumors would be constantly exposed to DHT. The cells were then lysed with urea lysis buffer, and protein concentrations were determined by DC Protein Assay (Bio-Rad). Next, 1mg of proteins was reduced with 4.5mM dithiothreitol (DTT), alkylated with 10mM iodoacetamide (IAA), and trypsin digested. The tryptic peptide solution was desalted using reverse-phase Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (Waters). Following lyophilization, phosphopeptides (pSTY) were enriched using PTMScan Phospho-Enrichment IMAC Fe-NTA Magnetic Beads (Cell Signaling Technology) on a KingFisher Flex Purification System (ThermoFisher Scientific). Subsequently, the enriched peptides were vacuum concentrated using a speed vac and resuspended in 15μL of solvent A (2 % acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.1% formic acid (FA)).     A nanoflow ultra-high-performance liquid chromatography (RSLC, Dionex) connected to a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) was used for tandem mass spectrometry peptide sequencing. The LC-MS/MS was performed by the Proteomics Core at Moffitt Cancer Center. Briefly, peptide mixtures were first loaded onto a pre-column (2cm x 100µm ID packed with C18 reversed-phase resin, 5µm, 100Å) and washed for 8min with aqueous solvent A. The trapped peptides were eluted onto the analytical column (C18, 75 µm ID x 25 cm, 2 µm, 100Å, Dionex).  The 120-minute gradient was programmed as follows: 95% solvent A for 8min, solvent B (90% ACN + 0.1% FA) from 5% to 38.5% in 90min, then solvent B from 50% to 90% in 7min and held at 90% for 5min, followed by solvent B from 90% to 5% in 1min and re-equilibrate for 10min. The flow rate on the analytical column was 300 nl/min. Twenty tandem mass spectra were collected using data-dependent acquisition (DDA) following each survey scan. The resolution settings were 60,000 and 17,500 for MS1 and MS/MS, respectively. The isolation window was 2.0Th with an offset of 0.5.

### Data Protocol
The data were processed and analyzed using MaxQuant software (version 1.5.2.8.)94. The fragment mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm. Peptides with a minimum of 7 amino acids and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages were considered. Methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation, and serine/threonine/tyrosine phosphorylation were selected as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was used as the fixed modification. The false discovery rate (FDR) was applied at 0.05. MaxQuant data was further normalized with IRON (Iterative Rank-Order Normalization) within each dataset. Pathway enrichment analyses were performed on DAVID (Functional Annotation Tool) and QIAGEN IPA platforms.  For this upload, similar parameters were used for Mascot searches

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Androgen, Phosphoproteomics, Melanoma, Fucosylation, Metastasis

### Affiliations
Tumor Biology Moffitt Cancer Center Tampa, FL, USA
Moffitt Cancer Center

### Submitter
John Koomen

### Lab Head
Dr Eric Lau, PhD
Tumor Biology Moffitt Cancer Center Tampa, FL, USA


