### Accession
PXD008550

### Title
An integrated workflow for cross-linking/mass spectrometry

### Description
We present a concise workflow to enhance the mass spectrometric detection of cross-linked peptides by introducing sequential digestion and the database search software Xi. We use sequential digestion to reduce the peptide size and increase identification rates. The methodology is independent of samples complexity, cross-linker choice, method acquisition and can be used with multiple digestion steps.

### Sample Protocol
The seven protein mixture (Catalase, Myoglobin, Cytochrome C, Lysozyme, Creatine Kinase, HSA and Conalbumin), C3b, the OCCM complex, the 26S proteasome, the protein fractions resulting from the lysate of human cells were all cross-linked with BS3. The cross-linker was added in the respective ratios: 1:1 (w/w), 1:3 (w/w), 1:8100 (molar ratio), 1:1 (w/w), 1:2 (w/w) and samples were incubated for 2 h on ice and and the cross-linking reaction was quenched with excess ABC for 1 h at RT. UGGT was cross-linked with SDA using eight different protein to cross-linker ratios (1:0.13, 1:0.19, 1:0.25, 1:0.38, 1:0.5, 1:0.75, 1:1 and 1:1.5 (w/w)). Cross-linking was added to the samples and left to react in the dark for 50 minutes at room temperature. The diazirine group was then photo-activated using UV irradiation, at 365 nm. The reaction mixtures from the eight conditions corresponding to each experiment were combined and quenched with saturated ABC. The seven protein mix was in gel digested with trypsin and all the other samples were in solution digested with trypsin. Each one of the samples for sequential digestion was resuspended in Ammonium Bicarbonate (ABC) 50 mM and sequential digested as follows. For the sequential digestion with GluC and chymotrypsin, the proteases were added at an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:50 and incubated ON at 37oC and RT, respectively. For the sequential digestion with AspN, the enzyme was added at an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:100 and incubated ON at 37oC. After sequential digestion samples were acidified using 10% TFA and the sample volume was reduced to 50 µl by evaporation using a vacuum concentrator. Samples were then fractionated by SEC. Approximately 50 µg of peptides were fractionated in a Shimadzu HPLC system using a Superdex Peptide 3.2/300 (GE Healthcare) at a flow rate of 50 µl/min using SEC buffer (30% (v/v) ACN, 0.1% (v/v) TFA) as mobile phase. Separation was monitored by UV absorption at 215 and 280 nm. Fractions were collected every two minutes over a period of 48 min (one column volume) and fractions the three fractions more abundant in cross-linked peptides were dried, resuspended in 0.1% (v/v) TFA and analysed by LC-MS/MS. Samples were analysed using a Thermo Scientific Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system coupled to a Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer equipped with an EASY-Spray source. Mobile phase A consisted in 0.1% (v/v) FA in water and mobile phase B consisted of 80% (v/v) ACN and 0.1% (v/v) FA in water. Peptides were loaded into a 50 cm EASY-Spray column operated at a temperature of 45oC at a flow rate of 300 nl/min and separated at 300 nl/min using the following gradient: 2% mobile phase B (0-11 min); 2-40% mobile phase B (11-150 min); 40-95% mobile phase B (150-161 min); 95% mobile phase B (161-166 min); 95-2% mobile phase B (166-185 min). MS data were acquired using a “high-high” acquisition method using the Orbitrap to detect both MS and MS/MS scans. The instrument was operated in a data dependent mode with a cycle time of 3 s. MS1 scans were acquired at a resolution of 120,000 using a scan range from 300 to 1700 m/z and AGC target of 2.5x105 with a maximum injection time of 50 ms. The Monoisotopic Peak Determination (MIPS) was activated and only precursors with charge states between 3 and 8 with an intensity threshold higher than 5.0x104, were selected for fragmentation. Selected precursors were fragmented by HCD using an HCD Collision Energy of 30%. MS2 spectra were acquired at a resolution of 15,000 and AGC of 1.0x104 with a maximum injection time of 35 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set to 60 s after 1 count.

### Data Protocol
Thermo raw data were pre-processed using MaxQuant (v 1.5.7.4) to extract the peak list files (APL format). Partial processing in MaxQuant was performed until step 5 with the parameters set to default with exception of the “FTMS top peaks per Da interval” which was set to 100 and no FTMS de-isotoping was allowed. The resulting apl files were then uploaded to Xi for identification of cross-linked peptides. For the cross-linking search the parameters used were as follows: MS accuracy, 6 ppm; MS/MS accuracy, 20 ppm; enzyme, trypsin, trypsin+AspN, trypsin+chymotrypsin or trypsin+Gluc depending on the sample digestion conditions; missed cleavages allowed, 4. For the BS3 or DSS cross-linked samples, carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionines and the cross-linker alone (mass modification: 109.0396 Da), hydrolyzed (BS3-OH: 156.0786 Da) or amidated (BS3-NH2: 155.0964 Da) were set as variable modifications. Reaction specificity for BS3 was assumed to be with Lysine, Serine, Threonine and Tyrosine or the protein N-terminus. For SDA cross-linked samples, carbamidomethylation of cysteines, oxidation of methionines and the cross-linker alone (mass modification: 109.0396 Da), hydrolyzed (SDA-OH: 100.0524 Da) or cross-linker loop (SDA-loop: SDA cross-link within a peptide that is also cross-linked to a separate peptide, 82.0419 Da) were set as variable modifications. Reaction specificity for SDA was assumed to be with Lysine, Serine, Threonine and Tyrosine or the protein N-terminus on one end of the spacer and with all residues on the other end. Apl files were searched against the following databases: for the Standard Protein Mix a database was built containing the sequences corresponding to the crystal structures of the standard proteins used in the mix (PDB accession: 3j7u, 5d5r, 3nbs, 1dpx, 2crk, 1ao6 and 1ova); for C3b the sequence of C3b was used; for the OCCM complex a database containing all the 14 OCCM subunits was used; for the 26S Proteasome a linear search of the sample was first performed using a complete S. cerevisiae database and the 1% most intense proteins accordingly to the iBAQ value were selected to build the database for the cross-linking search; for each one of the cytosolic SEC fractions the procedure was as for the 26S Proteasome, using as database for the linear searched the complete human database; for the UGGT, the uniprot sequence of the protein was used (G0SB58). FDR was estimated on a 5% residue level using xiFDR.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Xi, Cross-linking mass spectrometry, Sequential digestion

### Affiliations
Institute of Biotechnology Technische Universität Berlin Gustav-Meyer-Allee 25 13355 Berlin
Department of Bioanalytics, Institute of Biotechnology, Technische Universität Berlin, 13355 Berlin, Germany


### Submitter
Marta Mendes

### Lab Head
Dr Juri Rappsilber
Institute of Biotechnology Technische Universität Berlin Gustav-Meyer-Allee 25 13355 Berlin


