### Accession
PXD021359

### Title
Grad-seq in Pseudomonas aeruginosa PAO1

### Description
Protein complexome analysis of Pseudomonas aeruginosa PAO1 at OD 0.3 in LB media through 10-40% glycerol gradient fractionation in 21 samples.

### Sample Protocol
Mass spectrometry Protein samples diluted in 1.25× protein loading buffer were homogenized by ultrasound [five cycles of 30 s on followed by 30 s off, high power at 4 °C, Bioruptor Plus, Diagenode]. Insoluble material was removed by pelleting at full speed. 20 μl of the cleared protein sample was mixed with 10 μl of UPS2 spike-in (Sigma-Aldrich) and diluted in 250 μl 1.25× protein loading buffer. The samples were subsequently reduced in 50 mM DTT for 10 min at 70 °C and alkylated with 120 mM iodoacetamide for 20 min at room temperature in the dark. The proteins were precipitated in four volumes of acetone overnight at -20 °C. Pellets were washed four times with ice-cold acetone and dissolved in 50 μl 8 M urea, 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Digestion of the proteins was performed by 0.25 μg Lys-C (Wako) for 2 h at 30 °C, followed by dilution to 2 M urea by addition of 3 volumes 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8 and overnight digestion with 0.25 μg trypsin at 37 °C. Peptides were through C-18 Stage Tips. Each Stage Tip was prepared with three disks of C-18 Empore SPE Disks (3M) in a 200 μl pipette tip. Peptides were eluted with 60 % acetonitrile/0.3% formic acid, lyophilized in a laboratory freeze-dryer (Christ), and stored at -20°C. Prior to nanoLC-MS/MS, the peptides were dissolved in 2 % acetonitrile/0.1 % formic acid. NanoLC-MS/MS analysis NanoLC-MS/MS analysis was performed as previously described (Hör et al., 2020c) with an Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a PicoView Ion Source (New Objective) and coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded on capillary columns (PicoFrit, 30 cm × 150 μm ID, New Objective) self-packed with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 μm (Dr. Maisch) and separated with a 140-min linear gradient from 3 to 40% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 500 nl/min. Both MS and MS/MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with a resolution of 60,000 for MS scans and 15,000 for MS/MS scans. HCD fragmentation with 35 % normalized collision energy was applied. A Top Speed data-dependent MS/MS method with a fixed cycle time of 3 s was used. Dynamic exclusion was applied with a repeat count of 1 and an exclusion duration of 60 s. Precursors that were singly charged were excluded from selection. Minimum signal threshold for precursor selection was set to 50,000. Predictive AGC was used with a target value of 2 × 105 for MS scans and 5 × 104 for MS/MS scans. EASY-IC was used for internal calibration.

### Data Protocol
Grad-seq MS data analysis Raw MS data files were analysed with MaxQuant version 1.6.2.2 (Cox and Mann, 2008). Database search was performed with Andromeda, which is integrated in the utilized version of MaxQuant. The search was performed against the UniProt Pseudomonas aeruginosa UP000002438 (strain PAO1), the ΦKZ proteome UP000002098 (The UniProt Consortium, 2018) and a database containing the proteins of the UPS2 proteomic standard. Additionally, a database containing common contaminants was used. The search was performed with tryptic cleavage specificity with three allowed missed cleavages. Protein identification was under control of the false-discovery rate (FDR, 1% on protein and peptide level). In addition to MaxQuant default settings, the search was additionally performed for the following variable modifications: Protein N terminal acetylation, glutamine to pyro-glutamic acid formation (N-term. glutamine) and oxidation (methionine). Carbamidomethyl (cysteine) was set as fixed modification. For protein quantitation, the iBAQ intensities were used (Schwanhäusser et al., 2011). Proteins that could not be distinguished by peptides were listed individually.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pseudomonas grad-seq rna-binding proteome

### Affiliations
Helmholtz Institute for RNA-based Infection Research  Würzburg, Germany  Institute of Molecular Infection Biology Faculty of Medicine University of Würzburg, Germany
Institute for Molecular Infection Biology, University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany

### Submitter
Milan Gerovac

### Lab Head
Dr Jörg Vogel
Helmholtz Institute for RNA-based Infection Research  Würzburg, Germany  Institute of Molecular Infection Biology Faculty of Medicine University of Würzburg, Germany


