### Accession
PXD008842

### Title
Endoplasmic reticulum di-glycine modified proteome under p97/VCP inhibition

### Description
Endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-associated degradation (ERAD) mediates the proteasomal clearance of proteins from the early secretory pathway. In this process, ubiquitinated substrates are extracted from membrane-embedded dislocation complexes by the AAA ATPase VCP and targeted to the cytosolic 26S proteasome. In addition to its well-established role in the degradation of misfolded proteins, ERAD also regulates the abundance of key proteins such as enzymes involved in cholesterol synthesis. However, due to the lack of generalizable methods, our understanding of the scope of proteins regulated targeted by ERAD remains limited. To overcome this obstacle, we developed a VCP-inhibitor substrate trapping approach (VISTA) to identify endogenous ERAD substrates. VISTA exploits the small-molecule VCP inhibitor CB5083 to trap ERAD substrates in a membrane-associated, ubiquitinated form.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were cultured in SILAC DMEM lacking lysine and arginine, supplemented with 10% dialyzed FBS and the appropriate amino acids: light media – L-arginine (Arg0) and L-lysine (Lys0) (Sigma-Aldrich) or heavy media – L-arginine (Arg0) and 13C615N2-L-lysine (Lys8) (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories). Following a 6 hr treatment with DMSO (light) or 5 µM CB5083.  Cultured cells were collected, washed with ice-cold PBS, and incubated in hypotonic lysis medium (HLM: 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 1 mM EDTA) supplemented with 10 mM N-ethylmaleimide (NEM, Thermo Fisher Scientific) on ice for 10 min. Cells were then transferred to a 7-mL chilled glass dounce homogenizer and dounced using a tight pestle for 40 strokes. Samples were centrifuged (500 x g, 5 min, two times) to remove unbroken cells. The remaining supernatant was then centrifuged (20,000xg, 30 min at 4°C) to separate heavy membrane and cytosolic fractions.  Membrane fractions were solubilized in urea lysis buffer (8 M urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 50 mM NaCl), reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and alkylated with 25 mM iodoacetamide (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Equal amounts of protein totaling 5-10 mg from the membrane fractions were combined, diluted with 50mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0 to 4M urea, and digested overnight with 2 µg/mg LysC. Proteins were further diluted to 1.6M urea and digested for 24 hr with 10 µg/mg trypsin. Digested peptides were desalted via Sep-Pak C18 6-cc cartridges (Waters Corp.) and lyophilized. Samples were then immunoprecipitated using PTMScan Ubiquitin remnant Motif (K-ε-GG) Kit (Cell Signaling Technologies) according to manufacturer’s protocols. Briefly, lyophilized peptides were dissolved in IAP buffer (50mM MOPS/NaOH pH 7.2, 10mM Na2HPO4, and 50mM NaCl) and cleared by centrifugation at 10,000 x g for 5 minutes.  K-ε-GG antibody bead conjugates were washed four times with PBS, and clarified peptides were incubated with the beads for at least 2 hr with gentle agitation. Beads were washed two times with IAP buffer, and three times with MilliQ water, and eluted twice with 0.15% TFA. Eluted peptides were desalted using C18 StageTips (Thermo Fisher Scientific), dried by Speedvac, and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid (Sigma-Aldrich) for analysis by LC-MS/MS.  Digested peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS on a Q Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in conjunction with Proxeon Easy-nLC II HPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a Proxeon nanospray source at the University of California Davis Proteomics Core Facility. The resulting MS/MS raw spectral data was analyzed using the MaxQuant software platform (version 1.5.1.0), employing the full UniProt protein sequence database to obtain diGly peptide SILAC ratios. A reversed-protein decoy search strategy was also employed to minimize false discovery rate.

### Data Protocol
Peptides was analyzed by LC-MS/MS on a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive Orbitrap Mass spectrometer connected to a Proxeon Easy-nLC II HPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and Proxeon nanospray source at the University of California, Davis Proteomics Core Facility. Peptide identity and MS/MS counts were determined by analyzing RAW output files in MaxQuant (Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry) using the reviewed human protein database obtained from UniProt. Variable modifications were set to include, lysine diglycin, N-terminal acetylation, and methionine oxidation. The FDR was set to 1% and minimum peptide length was set to 6 amino acids.

### Publication Abstract
Endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-associated degradation (ERAD) mediates the proteasomal clearance of proteins from the early secretory pathway. In this process, ubiquitinated substrates are extracted from membrane-embedded dislocation complexes by the AAA ATPase VCP and targeted to the cytosolic 26S proteasome. In addition to its well-established role in the degradation of misfolded proteins, ERAD also regulates the abundance of key proteins such as enzymes involved in cholesterol synthesis. However, due to the lack of generalizable methods, our understanding of the scope of proteins targeted by ERAD remains limited. To overcome this obstacle, we developed a VCP inhibitor substrate trapping approach (VISTA) to identify endogenous ERAD substrates. VISTA exploits the small-molecule VCP inhibitor CB5083 to trap ERAD substrates in a membrane-associated, ubiquitinated form. This strategy, coupled with quantitative ubiquitin proteomics, identified previously validated (e.g., ApoB100, Insig2, and DHCR7) and novel (e.g., SCD1 and RNF5) ERAD substrates in cultured human hepatocellular carcinoma cells. Moreover, our results indicate that RNF5 autoubiquitination on multiple lysine residues targets it for ubiquitin and VCP--dependent clearance. Thus, VISTA provides a generalizable discovery method that expands the available toolbox of strategies to elucidate the ERAD substrate landscape.

### Keywords
Digly, Ubiquitin, Erad

### Affiliations
University of California, Berkeley
Department of Nutritional Sciences and Toxicology University of California, Berkeley Berkeley, CA

### Submitter
James Olzmann

### Lab Head
Dr James Olzmann
Department of Nutritional Sciences and Toxicology University of California, Berkeley Berkeley, CA


