### Accession
PXD015836

### Title
Deep intronic homozygous variation in PSMC3, a subunit of the 19S proteasome regulatory complex, causes a syndromic neurosensory disorder combining deafness and cataract

### Description
The association of congenital deafness and early-onset cataracts inherited as a recessive trait is a rare combination described in only a few syndromes with very few genes identified to date. Whole-genome sequencing was performed on 3 patients from independent sibships from a large consanguineous family presenting with severe deafness and early-onset cataracts as part of a variable neurological, sensorial and cutaneous syndrome. Medical assessments and imaging were used to define the phenotype. Genome sequencing was performed to unravel the altered genotype by subsequent bioinformatics analysis based on a specific physiopathological filtering approach. We identified a unique homozygous variant in intron 10 of the PSMC3 gene, encoding the 26S proteasome ATPase ring subunit 5 (Rpt5), with a predicted local splice effect as a new donor site (c.1127+337A>G, p.Ser376Argfs15*) confirmed by RT-PCR. Strikingly, fibroblasts derived from patients carrying the deep intronic homozygous PSMC3 pathogenic variant exhibited strong signs of perturbed protein homeostasis, as evidenced by increased accumulation of intracellular ubiquitin-modified proteins. Most interestingly and in contrast to control cells, patient fibroblasts failed to increase their amount of proteasomes following proteasome inhibition using the TCF11/Nrf1 pathway, indicating that these cells were unable to adapt to proteotoxic stress. By way of 2 different zebrafish assays we further show that loss of function of PSMC3 leads to inner ear development anomalies as well as cataracts alike the patient phenotype. We propose that the PSMC3 proteasome subunit dysfunction leads to a novel human syndrome that includes early onset cataracts and deafness and suggest that Rpt5 plays a major role in inner ear and lens development.

### Sample Protocol
PSMC3 protein and its partners were immunoprecipitated from patients’ fibroblasts using magnetic microparticles (MACS purification system, Miltenyi Biotech) according to the manufacturer’s instructions and as previously described 65. Briefly, PSMC3 complexes were captured with an anti-PSMC3 antibody (Abcam ab171969) and the target and its associated proteins were purified on the protein G microbeads (Miltenyi Biotech). Proteins were eluted out of the magnetic stand with 1x laemmli buffer (Biorad). To optimize reproducibility, co-immunoprecipitation experiments were carried out in affinity triplicates on exactly 1.1 mg of proteins for each sample. For negative controls, halves of each sample were pooled and immunoprecipitated with the protein G beads, omitting the antibody. Protein extracts were prepared as described in a previous study 66. Each sample was precipitated with 0.1 M ammonium acetate in 100% methanol, and proteins were resuspended in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. After a reduction-alkylation step (dithiothreitol 5 mM – iodoacetamide 10 mM), proteins were digested overnight with sequencing-grade porcine trypsin (1:25, w/w, Promega, Fitchburg, MA, USA). The resulting vacuum-dried peptides were resuspended in water containing 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (solvent A). One fifth of the peptide mixtures were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS an Easy-nanoLC-1000 system coupled to a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, USA) operating in positive mode. Five microliters of each sample were loaded on a C-18 precolumn (75 μm ID × 20 mm nanoViper, 3µm Acclaim PepMap; Thermo) coupled with the analytical C18 analytical column (75 μm ID × 25 cm nanoViper, 3 µm Acclaim PepMap; Thermo). Peptides were eluted with a 160 min gradient of 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile at 300 nL/min. The Q-Exactive Plus was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode (DDA) with Xcalibur software (Thermo-Fisher Scientific). Survey MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 70K at 200 m/z (mass range 350-1250), with a maximum injection time of 20 ms and an automatic gain control (AGC) set to 3e6. Up to 10 of the most intense multiply charged ions (≥2) were selected for fragmentation with a maximum injection time of 100 ms, an AGC set at 1e5 and a resolution of 17.5K. A dynamic exclusion time of 20 s was applied during the peak selection process.

### Data Protocol
MS data were searched against the Swissprot database (release 2019_05) with Human taxonomy. We used the Mascot algorithm (version 2.5, Matrix Science) to perform the database search with a decoy strategy and search parameters as follows: carbamidomethylation of cysteine, N-terminal protein acetylation and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications; tryptic specificity with up to three missed cleavages was used. The mass tolerances in MS and MS/MS were set to 10 ppm and 0.05 Da respectively, and the instrument configuration was specified as “ESI-Trap”. The resulting .dat Mascot files were then imported into Proline v1.4 package (http://proline.profiproteomics.fr/) for post-processing. Proteins were validated with Mascot pretty rank equal to 1, 1% FDR on both peptide spectrum matches (PSM) and protein sets (based on score). The total number of MS/MS fragmentation spectra was used to quantify each protein in the different samples. For the statistical analysis of the co-immunoprecipitation data, we compared the data collected from multiple experiments against the negative control IPs using a homebrewed R package as described previsously 67 except that that the size factor used to scale samples were calculated according to the DESeq normalisation method (i.e. median of ratios method 68). The package calculates the fold change and an adjusted P-value corrected by Benjamini–Hochberg for each identified protein (and visualizes the data in volcano plots).

### Publication Abstract
The ubiquitin-proteasome system degrades ubiquitin-modified proteins to maintain protein homeostasis and to control signalling. Whole-genome sequencing of patients with severe deafness and early-onset cataracts as part of a neurological, sensorial and cutaneous novel syndrome identified a unique deep intronic homozygous variant in the PSMC3 gene, encoding the proteasome ATPase subunit Rpt5, which lead to the transcription of a cryptic exon. The proteasome content and activity in patient's fibroblasts was however unaffected. Nevertheless, patient's cells exhibited impaired protein homeostasis characterized by accumulation of ubiquitinated proteins suggesting severe proteotoxic stress. Indeed, the TCF11/Nrf1 transcriptional pathway allowing proteasome recovery after proteasome inhibition is permanently activated in the patient's fibroblasts. Upon chemical proteasome inhibition, this pathway was however impaired in patient's cells, which were unable to compensate for proteotoxic stress although a higher proteasome content and activity. Zebrafish modelling for knockout in PSMC3 remarkably reproduced the human phenotype with inner ear development anomalies as well as cataracts, suggesting that Rpt5 plays a major role in inner ear, lens and central nervous system development.

### Keywords
Rare disease, Human whole genome, Proteasome

### Affiliations
CNRS, IBMC, FRC1589
Laboratoire de Génétique Médicale, INSERM, UMRS_1112, Institut de Génétique Médicale d'Alsace (IGMA), Université de Strasbourg Faculté de médecine de Strasbourg, 11 rue Humann, Strasbourg, France. Laboratoires de Diagnostic Génétique, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France.

### Submitter
Lauriane Kuhn

### Lab Head
Dr Jean Muller
Laboratoire de Génétique Médicale, INSERM, UMRS_1112, Institut de Génétique Médicale d'Alsace (IGMA), Université de Strasbourg Faculté de médecine de Strasbourg, 11 rue Humann, Strasbourg, France. Laboratoires de Diagnostic Génétique, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France.


