### Accession
PXD022167

### Title
Isolation of aphid-Potato leafroll virus (PLRV) proteins complexes from viruliferous insects using affinity purification-mass spectrometry

### Description
The control of insect borne disease is recognized as one of the major agricultural, animal and human health challenges of today. Viruses in the family Luteoviridae are phloem-limited, plant viruses that are vectored by aphids in a circulative manner. They are responsible for a wide-range of economically important disease in almost all staple food crops. In order to be transmitted, these viruses require species-specific passage of the pathogen across several membrane barriers within the insect. After the pathogen is ingested from the sap of an infected plant, the virus moves across and through the aphid gut into the hemoceol (insect blood) where it circulates until it reaches and enters the main or accessory salivary glands. From here, the pathogen is injected into a new plant host when the aphid feeds. The identification of insect proteins that interact with circulative plant viruses is technically challenging and a major goal for the plant vector biology field. Such information is critical to develop novel control strategies that block virus transmission by insects. In this study, we used affinity purification-high-resolution mass spectrometry (AP-MS) to rapidly capture and identify aphid proteins in complex with Potato leafroll virus (PLRV), a luteovirid transmitted by the green peach aphid (Myzus persicae), directly from viruliferous aphid tissue.

### Sample Protocol
Sample Processing Protocol:   Affinity Purification (AP): Physalis-reared Myzus persicae (red) were allowed a 48 h acquisition access period on Potato leafroll virus-infected (viruliferous) or healthy (non-viruliferous, negative control) hairy nightshade. Aphids were collected and stored at -80 °C until cryogenically milled using a MM 400 (Retsch, Hann, Germany). Approximately 2-4 g of pooled aphids were ground for 6 sets of 3 min grinds at a vibrational frequency of 30 Hz. Between each cycle, the cylinders were cooled in liquid nitrogen for 5 min. After cryo-lysis, resulting powder was stored at -80 C for affinity purification.  An in-house polyclonal antibody (a-PLRV raised) against gradient purified PLRV was cross-absorbed and protein A column purified as described in DeBlasio et al (2016) J Proteome Res 15:4601-4611. The resulting antibody was covalently coupled to M-270 epoxy magnetic Dynabeads (Invitrogen) following the protocol described in Cristea and Chait, Cold Spring Harb. Protoc, (2011) at a concentration of 10 μg/mg of beads. PLRV−aphid protein complexes were extracted from 1 g of cryolysed Myzus persicae tissue (viruliferous and non-viruliferous) in 5 mL of lysis buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.5; 150 mL NaCl, 0.4% TritonX-100, 0.5 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride  (PMSF, Sigma, St. Louis, MO) and a 1:100 dilution of Halt™ ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA)-free protease only or phosphatase supplemented inhibitor cocktail (PI, Pierce, Rockford, IL). Total protein was extracted following the lysis protocol outlined in Cristea and Chait, (2011) with a few exceptions. Samples were incubated at 4°C for ~20 minutes on ice with occasional vortexing. Tissue was then homogenized in buffer, on ice, with a Polytron (Brinkmann Instruments) for two, 10-second pulses at setting “2” separated by a 30-second incubation on ice. Lysates were then rotated at 4°C for 10 minutes. The resulting homogenate was moved to a glass Corex centrifuge tube and centrifuged for 10 min at 4°C in a Beckman Avanti J-25 I centrifuge in a JA-20 rotor to remove cell debris. The speed of centrifugation varied for each AP experiment. The April samples were centrifuged twice at 3500 rpm (1,480 x g) and once at 6000 rpm (4,355 x g). For the January dataset, biological replicates 1 (JMPH1 and JMPW1) was centrifuged once at 6000 rpm (4,355 x g). All other January biological replicates and APs from the Phosphatase Inhibitor dataset were centrifuged once at 8000 rpm (7,740 x g). Each independent dataset consisted of three biological replicate APs for viruliferous and non-viruliferous controls. Biological replicates were separate collections of pooled aphids fed on a group of PLRV infected (systemically) or healthy hairy nightshade plants.  After centrifugation, the aqueous layer was removed and diluted 1:2 in fresh TRIS extraction buffer on ice. Five milligrams of a-PLRV conjugated M-270 epoxy Dynabeads™ (Invitrogen) were rotated with 10 mL of the diluted aphid homogenate for 1 hour at 4°C and beads washed as described in DeBlasio et al (2016) J Proteome Res 15:4601-4611. Final wash buffer was completely removed from magnetic beads and captured proteins were subjected to on-bead reduction, alkylation and trypsin digestion following the protocol outlined in DeBlasio et al (2016) J Proteome Res 15:4601-4611.   Mass Spectrometry (MS):  Tryptic peptides were reconstituted and analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) following the parameters described in DeBlasio et al (2016) J Proteome Res 15:4601-461. Each biological replicate was analyzed a total of three times. For two of the analytical replicates, the fragment ions were analyzed in the linear trap using “rapid” scan rate. For the third analytical replicate, fragment ions were analyzed in the Orbitrap. Two analytical replicates for the April dataset were analyzed months prior to the January and Phosphatase Inhibitor datasets but a third analytical replicate from the April dataset (MS2 captured in the linear trap) was analyzed alongside all samples from the two other datasets.

### Data Protocol
MS Data Processing Protocol:   Mass spectrometry data were converted into Mascot generic format (mgf) files using tools in Proteowizard and were searched using Mascot with the following modifications considered: methylthio on cysteines (fixed), oxidation of methionine (variable), and  deamidation of glutamine/asparagine (variable). One missed tryptic cleavage was allowed. For analytical replicates where the MS2 was captured in the linear trap, mass measurement accuracy was set at 30 ppm for precursor ions and 0.5 Da fragment ions. Mass measurement accuracy was set at 0.02 Da for fragment ions for analytical replicates where MS2 spectra were collected in the Orbitrap. The protein database used for protein identification was created using amino acid sequences corresponding to all coding gene sequences from the Myzus persicae G006 genome assembly v1.0 obtained from AphidBase (https://bipaa.genouest.org/is/aphidbase/) on the Bioinformatics Platform for Agroecosystems Arthropods (BIPAA) website prior to its formal release as well as sequences from all known species of Luteoviridae and common mammalian AP contaminant proteins downloaded from NCBI. The decoy database tab in Mascot was employed.

### Publication Abstract
The vast majority of plant viruses are transmitted by insect vectors, with many crucial aspects of the transmission process being mediated by key protein-protein interactions. Still, very few vector proteins interacting with viruses have been identified and functionally characterized. <i>Potato leafroll virus</i> (PLRV) is transmitted most efficiently by <i>Myzus persicae</i>, the green peach aphid, in a circulative, non-propagative manner. Using affinity purification coupled to high-resolution mass spectrometry (AP-MS), we identified 11 proteins from <i>M. persicae</i>displaying a high probability of interaction with PLRV and an additional 23 vector proteins with medium confidence interaction scores. Three of these aphid proteins were confirmed to directly interact with the structural proteins of PLRV and other luteovirid species <i>via</i> yeast two-hybrid. Immunolocalization of one of these direct PLRV-interacting proteins, an orthologue of the human innate immunity protein complement component 1 Q subcomponent-binding protein (C1QBP), shows that MpC1QBP partially co-localizes with PLRV in cytoplasmic puncta and along the periphery of aphid gut epithelial cells. Artificial diet delivery to aphids of a chemical inhibitor of C1QBP leads to increased PLRV acquisition by aphids and subsequently increased titer in inoculated plants, supporting a role for C1QBP in the acquisition and transmission efficiency of PLRV by <i>M. persicae</i>. This study presents the first use of AP-MS for the <i>in vivo</i> isolation of a functionally relevant insect vector-virus protein complex. MS data are available from ProteomeXchange.org using the project identifier PXD022167.

### Keywords
Ap-ms., Phloem-limited plant virus, Plrv, Circulative transmission, Potato leafroll virus, Luteoviridae, Aphid, Myzus persicae, Polerovirus, Potato pathogen

### Affiliations
USDA-ARS, Cornell University, Boyce Thompson Institute
USDA-ARS

### Submitter
Kevin Howe

### Lab Head
Dr Michelle Heck
USDA-ARS, Cornell University, Boyce Thompson Institute


