### Accession
PXD005002

### Title
Towards a comprehensive targeted proteogenomic assay repository for the liquid fraction of sheep blood

### Description
This dataset presents the results of protein sample preparation strategies for enriching a novel encyclopaedic peptide spectral library using the liquid fraction of sheep blood. The method used showed the capability of simultaneously detecting hundreds of key proteins in the liquid fraction of blood (circulating acellular proteome) using sheep as a model by: a) Prototyping of the circulating acellular proteome of healthy sheep using serum b) A comprehensive analysis of fractions of acetone precipitated sheep serum and plasma; c) A comprehensive analysis of fractions of partial organic precipitation of sheep serum and plasma proteins using acetonitrile; d) Combinatorial peptide ligand library protein enrichment of sheep serum and plasma; e) Off-gel fractionation of serum proteins; f) Extraction of protein data from ex-diagnostic sheep serum; g) Derivation of peptide data from serum and plasma of endotoxin treated sheep.

### Sample Protocol
1.0 MATERIALS AND METHODS 1.1 Ethics statement The studies included in this dataset were conducted in accordance with the Australian Code of Practice for the Care and Use of Animals for Scientific Purposes [2]. Animal tissue samples for method development were acquired following approval from Queensland University of Technology (QUT) Confirmation number: 1400000591, QV reference number: 46375 and Ethics number TRIM 10/8428 issued to Serum Australis Pty Ltd (http://www.serumaustralis.com.au/blood/products/sheep_blood.asp), for bleeding live sheep and supply of blood products. Tissue from live animal experiments had animal ethics approval obtained from the University Animal Ethics Committee of QUT (reference 0800000555), which was ratified by The University of Queensland (UQ). 1.2 1D SDS-PAGE 1.3 Reduction and alkylation of in-gel proteins 1.4 Digestion of proteins in-gel 1.3 Generic in-solution digestion of proteins workflow 1.5 Desalting of tryptic peptide digests 1.6 A comprehensive analysis of fractions of acetone precipitated sheep serum and plasma; 1.8 A comprehensive analysis of fractions of partial organic precipitation of sheep serum and plasma proteins using acetonitrile; Samples (500 µL) of serum and plasma were centrifuged at 17,500 g at 4°C for 1 minute and then six aliquots (50 µL) each were made from the supernatants. The pH of the serum supernatant was determined to be 7.6 (Control), while that of two additional aliquots was adjusted to 3.3 by adding one drop of acetic acid, and 8.6 by adding 16 drops of 200 mM NH4HCO3 buffer to the sample aliquots. The pH of plasma was determined as 7.72 (Control), while that of two additional aliquots was adjusted to 3.01 by adding 1 drop of acetic acid, and 8.86 by adding 13 drops of 200mM NH4HCO3 buffer directly to the sample aliquots, respectively. Three other aliquots were diluted 1:10 (v:v %) with 100 mM ammonium acetate buffer with corresponding pH’s, to investigate the effect of protein concentration. For protein precipitation, ACN was mixed with the serum or plasma samples in 1:1 (v:v %) ratio. The samples were vortexed vigorously three times at 1,400 g for 5 s, and then incubated for 10 minutes on a vortexing platform at 400 g at RT. Vortexing and sonication steps were repeated twice, before the samples were centrifuged at 17,500 g at 4°C for 10 minutes. The supernatants after precipitation were collected in clean 1,500 µL Eppendorf tubes. The pellets and the supernatants were separated and vacuum dried at 37 oC in a SpeedVac Concentrator (Christ® cat. No. RVC 2-33 IR). The dried precipitates and supernatant fractions were vigorously vortexed and sonicated in 100 μL, and 30 μL of 6 M urea in 25 mM NH4HCO3 buffer, respectively. The protein concentration was then determined using the BCA protein assay method. 1.9 Combinatorial peptide ligand library protein enrichment of sheep serum and plasma; A protein enrichment kit (ProteoMiner™, Bio-Rad Laboratories) was used for preparing pooled samples of serum and plasma from healthy sheep according to the manufacturer’s instructions and an additional adapted step for elution. 1.10 Off-gel fractionation of serum proteins; Crude serum (SC449-SC472) and acetone precipitated serum (SC473-SC496) from the fractionator, 100 µL each was subjected to in-solution digestion. Five microlitres of solution from each well was recovered for in-gel digestion workflow that were subsequently merged into two samples SC665 (crude serum) and SC666 (acetone precipitated serum) prior analysis. 1.11 Extraction of protein data from ex-diagnostic sheep serum Ex-diagnostic frozen serum samples of nine sheep known to be ailing from different illnesses were obtained from UQ’s School of Veterinary Science clinical pathology laboratory (UQ.O). These samples (SC502-SC510), a pooled sample from them (SC511) and a pooled sample from healthy free-range sheep (SA) (SC512) as a control, were subjected to in-solution and in-gel digestion using generic methods as described above. 1.12 Derivation of peptide data from serum and plasma of endotoxin treated sheep; Serum and plasma samples of sheep that were treated with endotoxin were used for this experiment. The samples were categorised based on trait/strain or experimental group of the sheep model of intensive care based on earlier findings [10]. The samples were subjected to 1D SDS-PAGE and in-solution digestion as described in the generic methods.

### Data Protocol
The acquired MS/MS data from the TripleTOF® 5600+ (AB Sciex Pte. Ltd.) instrument were extracted and annotated with amino acid sequences from a custom built database using the Paragon™ Algorithm: 5.0.0.0, 4767 [10] (ProteinPilot™ Software 5.0, Revision Number: 4769, AB Sciex Pte. Ltd.). The custom database (55,108 sequences; 34,001,891 residues) used in Paragon™ with added common contaminants was assembled in FASTA format (15 April, 2015) from a repository of non-redundant and predicted protein sequences of Ovis aries, Bos taurus and Capra hircus sourced from NCBI (National Center for Biotechnology Information - http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/protein/). Another sheep (Ovis aries) only custom database (27,393 sequences, 13,114,569 residues) with added contaminants from The common Repository of Adventitious Proteins, cRAP (http://www.thegpm.org/crap/) was assembled in FASTA format (26 Jul, 2016) from UniProtKB (Universal Protein Resource Consortium - http://www.uniprot.org/). For ProteinPilot™ searches, the following settings were selected: Sample type: Identification; Cys Alkylation: Iodoacetamide; Digestion: Trypsin; Instrument: TripleTOF5600; Special Factors: Urea denaturation; Species: None; Search effort: Thorough ID; ID Focus: Amino acid substitution; Results Quality: Detected protein threshold [Unused ProtScore (Conf)] ≥ 0.05 with false discovery rate (FDR) selected. Annotations were only retrieved from UniProt during composite searches. The automatically generated Excel spreadsheet report (Microsoft® Excel 2010, Microsoft Corporation) in ProteinPilot™ output was manually inspected for FDR cut-off protein yields and then meticulously curated to filter out contaminants and protein identifications with 0 (zero) unused confidence scores. Only proteins identified at FDR ≤1% with ≥ 2 peptides were considered for protein lists and for visual comparative analysis in the first instance. The .group files derived from ProteinPilot™ searches were also used for a reference peptide spectral library construction for SWATH™ data extraction. The resulting library file contained the following information required for targeted data extraction: UniProt accessions, stripped peptide sequences, modified peptide sequences, Q1 and Q3 ion detection, retention times, relative intensities, precursor charges, fragment types, scores, confidence and decoy results. The .group file data in ProteinPilot™ were exported as calibrated Mascot generic format (.mgf) and mzIdentML (.mzid) format files. The .mgfs were further standardised by an in-house Perl script (www.perl.org) or mgf repair tool (AB Sciex) where appropriate to optimise spectral peak data prior to loading via a Daemon application to Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.5.1) [11]. Mascot was set up to search the same custom database that was used in ProteinPilot™ with the following search parameters: Type of search: MS/MS Ion Search; Enzyme: Trypsin; Fixed modifications: Carbamidomethyl (C); variable modifications: Deamidated (NQ), Oxidation (M); Mass values: Monoisotopic; Protein mass: Unrestricted; Peptide mass tolerance: ± 10 ppm; Fragment mass tolerance: ± 0.01 Da; Max missed cleavages: 1; Instrument type: ESI-QUAD-TOF, and the auto-decoy search option was selected. Peak list data from the search was exported .dat format for further processing. Protein lists were exported in csv format for immediate data evaluation and curation in Excel spreadsheet. Only proteins identified with 2 or more peptides were included for further evaluation. The .mgf and .dat or mzIdentML (from ProteinPilot™ after proprietary code editing) files were also loaded for protein identification using PeptideShaker [12]. Peak lists obtained from MS/MS spectra were identified using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.5.1) [11].The search was conducted using SearchGUI version 3.0.2 [15]. Protein identification was conducted against a concatenated target/decoy [16] version of the Ovis aries (27284, 99.5%) complement of the UniProtKB , 27411 (target) sequences. The decoy sequences were created by reversing the target sequences in SearchGUI. The identification settings were as follows: Trypsin with a maximum of 1 missed cleavages; 10.0 ppm as MS1 and 0.5 Da as MS2 tolerances; fixed modifications: Carbamidomethylation of C (+57.021464 Da), variable modifications: Deamidation of N (+0.984016 Da), Deamidation of Q (+0.984016 Da), Oxidation of M (+15.994915 Da), Pyrolidone from E (--18.010565 Da) and Pyrolidone from Q (--17.026549 Da), fixed modifications during refinement procedure: Carbamidomethylation of C (+57.021464 Da). All algorithms specific settings are listed in the Certificate of Analysis available in the data files. Protein identification reports were exported in .xlsx format for evaluation and curation in Excel spreadsheet. Only proteins identified with 2 or more verified peptides were included for further evaluation.

### Publication Abstract
Scientists have injected endotoxin into animals to investigate and understand various pathologies and novel therapies for several decades. Recent observations have shown that there is selective susceptibility to Escherichia coli lipopolysaccharide (LPS) endotoxin in sheep, despite having similar breed characteristics. The reason behind this difference is unknown, and has prompted studies aiming to explain the variation by proteogenomic characterisation of circulating acute phase biomarkers. It is hypothesised that genetic trait, biochemical, immunological and inflammation marker patterns contribute in defining and predicting mammalian response to LPS. This review discusses the effects of endotoxin and host responses, genetic basis of innate defences, activation of the acute phase response (APR) following experimental LPS challenge, and the current approaches employed in detecting novel biomarkers including acute phase proteins (APP) and micro-ribonucleic acids (miRNAs) in serum or plasma. miRNAs are novel targets for elucidating molecular mechanisms of disease because of their differential expression during pathological, and in healthy states. Changes in miRNA profiles during a disease challenge may be reflected in plasma. Studies show that gel-based two-dimensional electrophoresis (2-DE) coupled with either matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionisation time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS) or liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) are currently the most used methods for proteome characterisation. Further evidence suggests that proteomic investigations are preferentially shifting from 2-DE to non-gel based LC-MS/MS coupled with data extraction by sequential window acquisition of all theoretical fragment-ion spectra (SWATH) approaches that are able to identify a wider range of proteins. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR), and most recently proteomic methods have been used to quantify low abundance proteins such as cytokines. qRT-PCR and next generation sequencing (NGS) are used for the characterisation of miRNA. Proteogenomic approaches for detecting APP and novel miRNA profiling are essential in understanding the selective resistance to endotoxin in sheep. The results of these methods could help in understanding similar pathology in humans. It might also be helpful in the development of physiological and diagnostic screening assays for determining experimental inclusion and endpoints, and in clinical trials in future.

### Keywords
Circulating acellular proteome, Proteogenomics, Nanolc-nanoesi-ms/ms, Data dependent acquisition, Sheep, Tripletof 5600+, Peptide spectral library

### Affiliations
Research Officer|Proteomics and Small Molecule Mass Spectrometry Laboratory | Central Analytical Research Facility (CARF)| Queensland University of Technology | Address: Level 6, P Block, Gardens Point Campus, 2 George St Brisbane QLD 4000
School of Veterinary Science, The University of Queensland, Australia

### Submitter
Saul Chemonges

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Pawel Sadowski
Research Officer|Proteomics and Small Molecule Mass Spectrometry Laboratory | Central Analytical Research Facility (CARF)| Queensland University of Technology | Address: Level 6, P Block, Gardens Point Campus, 2 George St Brisbane QLD 4000


