### Accession
PXD004087

### Title
Protein expression in the prefrontal cortex of aged mice with progranulin deficiency or neuronal progranulin overexpression

### Description
Description: Progranulin deficiency is associated with neurodegeneration in humans and in mice. We performed a deep proteomic screen of the pre-frontal cortex in aged (13-15 months) female progranulin-deficient mice (GRN-/-) and mice with a neuron-specific inducible overexpression of progranulin (SLICK-GRN-OE with tamoxifen) versus the respective control mice (Grn+/+ and SLICK-Grn without Tamoxifen). The data set shows progranulin-dependent alterations of protein expression in the cortex of mice.

### Sample Protocol
Each 3 prefrontal cortices were rapidly excised and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80° until protein extraction. Frozen samples were quickly transferred into a glass-glass homogenizer filled with 300 µl ice-cold 20% trichloroacetic acid. Tissue was manually homogenized with 15 strokes and suspensions were transferred into centrifuge tubes. Residuals were resuspended, pooled and incubated on ice for 30 min. Proteins were precipitated by 22000xg in a table top centrifuge at 4°C. Protein pellets were washed once with ice-cold acetone and dried. The proteins were resolved in buffer EB (10% SDS, 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6). Sonification for 5s facilitated resolubilization of proteins. Samples were centrifuged at 22000xg. The protein content of the supernatant was measured by Lowry´s assay. Proteins were digested using the Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) (Wisniewski et al., 2009) and peptides were acidified with TFA and fractionated by C18/SCX stage tips (Kulak et al., 2014).  Liquid chromatography / mass spectrometry (LC/MS) was performed on Thermo Scientific™ Q Exactive Plus equipped with an ultra-high performance liquid chromatography unit (Thermo Scientific Dionex Ultimate 3000) and a Nanospray Flex Ion-Source (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded on a C18 reversed-phase pre-column (Thermo Scientific) followed by separation with 2.4 µm Reprosil C18 resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany) in-house packed picofrit emitter tip (diameter 100 µm, 30 cm long from New Objectives) using a gradient from 5% mobile phase A (4% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) to 30% mobile phase B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) for 110 min followed by a second gradient until 60% B for 45 min with a flow rate 300 nl/min. The LC run was finished by washout with 99% B for 5 min and re-equilibration in 1% B. MS data were recorded by data dependent acquisition Top10 method selecting the most abundant precursor ions in positive mode for HCD fragmentation. The full MS scan range was 300 to 2000 m/z with resolution of 70000, and an automatic gain control (AGC) value of 3x10 exp 6 total ion counts with a maximal ion injection time of 160 ms. Only higher charged ions (2+) were selected for MS/MS scans with a resolution of 17500, an isolation window of 2 m/z and an automatic gain control value set to 10 exp5 ions with a maximal ion injection time of 150 ms. Selected ions were excluded in a time frame of 30s following the fragmentation event. Full Scan MS-data were acquired in profile mode using Xcalibur software. The LC Unit was controlled by Chromeleon Xpress software. The performance of both units, LC and MS, was integrated by DCMSLink.

### Data Protocol
Xcalibur raw files were analyzed using the proteomics software MaxQuant (1.5.2.8). The enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, missed cleavages were limited to 2. The following variable modifications were selected: at N-terminus acetylation (+42.01), oxidation of methionine (+15.99), deamidation of asparagine and glutamine (-0.98) and as fixed modification carbamidomethylation (+57.02) on cysteines. The mouse reference proteome set from uniprot (Download June 2015, 76086 entries) was used to identify peptides and proteins. False discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1%. Minimal ratio count was 2 including the option to re-quantify unidentified peptides by MS/MS scans in a matching time window of 5 min.

### Publication Abstract
Peripheral or central nerve injury is a frequent cause of chronic pain and the mechanisms are not fully understood. Using newly generated transgenic mice we show that progranulin overexpression in sensory neurons attenuates neuropathic pain after sciatic nerve injury and accelerates nerve healing. A yeast-2-hybrid screen revealed putative interactions of progranulin with autophagy-related proteins, ATG12 and ATG4b. This was supported by colocalization and proteomic studies showing regulations of ATG13 and ATG4b and other members of the autophagy network, lysosomal proteins and proteins involved in endocytosis. The association of progranulin with the autophagic pathway was functionally confirmed in primary sensory neurons. Autophagy and survival were impaired in progranulin-deficient neurons and improved in progranulin overexpressing neurons. Nerve injury in vivo caused an accumulation of LC3b-EGFP positive bodies in neurons of the dorsal root ganglia and nerves suggesting an impairment of autophagic flux. Overexpression of progranulin in these neurons was associated with a reduction of the stress marker ATF3, fewer protein aggregates in the injured nerve and enhanced stump healing. At the behavioral level, further inhibition of the autophagic flux by hydroxychloroquine intensified cold and heat nociception after sciatic nerve injury and offset the pain protection provided by progranulin. We infer that progranulin may assist in removal of protein waste and thereby helps to resolve neuropathic pain after nerve injury.

### Keywords
Progranulin, Neurodegeneration, Cortex, Lc-ms/ms, Mice

### Affiliations
Functional Proteomics, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main , Germany
Institute of Clinical Pharmacology, Goethe-University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany

### Submitter
Ilka Wittig

### Lab Head
Dr Irmgard Tegeder
Institute of Clinical Pharmacology, Goethe-University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany


