### Accession
PXD017171

### Title
Comprehensive functional analysis of Escherichia coli ribosomal RNA methyltransferases

### Description
We analyzed total proteome of three methyltransferase gene knockouts strains of Escherichia coli: ΔrsmF (JW5301), ΔrlmC (JW2756), ΔrlmE (JW3146) from Keio collection and wild type (WT). Proteins were assessed using IDA approach (i.e. Information Dependent Acquisition) and SWATH (Data-Independent Acquisition) on Sciex TripleTof 5600+ mass‐spectrometer with a NanoSpray III ion source (ABSciex, Canada) coupled to a NanoLC Ultra 2D+ nano‐HPLC system (Eksigent). Dataset covers 16 samples.

### Sample Protocol
Shotgun comparative proteome analysis was performed in the following way. Briefly, cells resuspended in 0,75% w/w RapiGest SF (Waters) were lysed by sonication. After debris removal protein cysteine bonds were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol and alkylated with 30 mM iodoacetamide. Trypsin was added in a 1/50 w/w ratio trypsin/protein and incubated at 37°C overnight. To stop trypsinolysis, trifluoroacetic (TFA) acid was added to the final concentration of 0,5% v/v. Peptides were desalted and resuspended in 3% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% TFA to a final concentration of 2 μg/μL. Mass-spectrometry analysis was performed on a TripleTOF 5600+ mass‐spectrometer with a NanoSpray III ion source (ABSciex, Canada) coupled to a NanoLC Ultra 2D+ nano‐HPLC system (Eksigent).

### Data Protocol
For protein identification, .wiff data files were analyzed with ProteinPilot 4.5 revision 1656 (ABSciex) using the Paragon 4.5.0.0 revision 1654 (ABSciex)search algorithm and a standard set of identification settingsto search against SwissProt database,species Escherichia coli.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Escherichia coli, Ida

### Affiliations
Federal Research and Clinical Center of Physical-Chemical Medicine of Federal Medical Biological Agency
Lomonosov Moscow State University, Moscow, Russia

### Submitter
Olga Bukato

### Lab Head
Dr Petr Sergiev
Lomonosov Moscow State University, Moscow, Russia


