### Accession
PXD013010

### Title
LC-MSMS of HSV-1 infected HFFs

### Description
Herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) is the causative agent of the common cold sores and life-threatening disease. Here, we characterize the full complement of viral gene expression during lytic infection using an integrative Omics approach. This revealed hundreds of novel viral gene products arising from differential usage of transcription and translation start sites. We classify these into viral gene modules and provide a comprehensive state-of-the-art annotation of all HSV-1 gene products.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were harvested at the indicated time points, washed with ice-cold PBS, snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80 °C prior to filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) essentially as previously described 47,48. In brief, cell pellets were lysed in 4% SDS/100 mM Tris HCl pH 7.4 supplemented with cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche), and sonicated at 4 °C using a Diagenode Bioruptor. Protein concentrations were determined using the Pierce BCA Protein Assay kit (Thermo Scientific) and light, medium and heavy lysates combined 1:1:1 by protein mass (total 45 μg protein/replicate). Lysates were transferred to Microcon-30 kDa centrifugal filter units (Millipore), reduced (100 mM DTT) and alkylated (50 mM iodoacetamide) at room temperature, washed with a total of 5 column volumes of 8 M urea/100 mM Tris HCl pH 8.5, then digested with 1 μg modified sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) in 50 mM ammonimum bicarbonate at 37 °C for 12 hrs. Peptide eluates were collected by centrifugation and stored at -80 °C prior to fractionation.  HpRP was conducted using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 UHPLC system (Thermo Scientific) powered by an  ICS-3000 SP pump with an Agilent ZORBAX Extend-C18 column (4.6 mm x 250 mm, 5 µm particle size). Peptides were resolved using a linear 40 min 0.1 %-40 % MeCN gradient at pH 10.5 with eluting peptides collected in 15 s fractions. Peptide-rich fractions were concatenated across the gradient to give 10 pooled fractions/sample, dried using an Eppendorf Concentrator then re-suspended in 15 µL mass spectrometry solvent (3 % MeCN, 0.1 % TFA). Data were generated using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were fractionated using an RSLCnano 3000 (Thermo Scientific) with solvent A comprising 0.1% formic acid and solvent B comprising 80% MeCN, 20% H2O, 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were loaded onto a 50 cm Acclaim PepMap C18 column (Thermo Scientific) and eluted using a gradient rising from 3 to 40% solvent B by 73 min at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. MS data were acquired in the Orbitrap at 120,000 fwhm between 350–1500 m/z. Spectra were acquired in profile with AGC 5 × 105. Ions with a charge state between 2+ and 7+ were isolated for fragmentation in top speed mode using the quadrupole with a 1.6 m/z isolation window. HCD fragmentation was performed at 33% collision energy with fragments detected in the ion trap between 350–1400 m/z. AGC was set to 5 × 103 and MS2 spectra were acquired in centroid mode.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data was analyzed using MaxQuant version 1.5.2.8. Spectra were matched against a combined database of proteins from Ensembl (version 75), and all Ribo-seq identified ORFs. We used carbamidomethylation as fixed and acetylation (N-terminal) and oxidation at methionine as variable modifications. Peptides were filtered for 1% FDR using the target-decoy approach by MaxQuant.

### Publication Abstract
The predicted 80 open reading frames (ORFs) of herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) have been intensively studied for decades. Here, we unravel the complete viral transcriptome and translatome during lytic infection with base-pair resolution by computational integration of multi-omics data. We identify a total of 201 transcripts and 284 ORFs including all known and 46 novel large ORFs. This includes a so far unknown ORF in the locus deleted in the FDA-approved oncolytic virus Imlygic. Multiple transcript isoforms expressed from individual gene loci explain translation of the vast majority of ORFs as well as N-terminal extensions (NTEs) and truncations. We show that NTEs with non-canonical start codons govern the subcellular protein localization and packaging of key viral regulators and structural proteins. We extend the current nomenclature to include all viral gene products and provide a genome browser that visualizes all the obtained data from whole genome to single-nucleotide resolution.

### Keywords
Hsv-1, Lc-msms, Hff, Silac

### Affiliations
Institut für Virologie und Immunbiologie, Julius-Maximilians-Universität Würzburg
Institute for Virology and Immunobiology, Julius-Maximilians-University Würzburg, Versbacher Straße 7, 97078 Würzburg, Germany

### Submitter
Florian Erhard

### Lab Head
Dr Lars Dölken
Institute for Virology and Immunobiology, Julius-Maximilians-University Würzburg, Versbacher Straße 7, 97078 Würzburg, Germany


