### Accession
PXD033633

### Title
The modulation of CHD4 nucleosome remodelling activity by auxiliary domains suggests unifies mechanistic aspects of chromatin remodelling across enzyme families

### Description
We determine the impact of auxiliary domains on the nucleosome sliding activity of CHD4. This dataset comprises the crosslinking mass spectrometry data we reported.

### Sample Protocol
Purified CHD4 was crosslinked with the BS3 crosslinker and digested with trypsin. Crosslinked peptides were enriched using size exclusion chromatography and simple high-pH reverse phase fractionation before mass analysis.

### Data Protocol
Crosslinking mass spec data was analysed using pLINK2 v2.3.9 with BS3 as the crosslinker. The search database used was the Uniprot human reference proteome (UP000005640; May 2020; 20,286 entries). An FDR of 1% was used. Only peptides with a precursor mass error of ≤ ±10 ppm and with at least four fragment ions on both the alpha- and beta-chain each were retained for further analysis.  The final non-redundant list and unfiltered pLINK2 search outputs can be found here.

### Publication Abstract
CHD4 is an essential, widely conserved ATP-dependent translocase that is also a broad tumour dependency. In common with other SF2-family chromatin remodelling enzymes, it alters chromatin accessibility by repositioning histone octamers. Besides the helicase and adjacent tandem chromodomains and PHD domains, CHD4 features 1000 residues of N- and C-terminal sequence with unknown structure and function. We demonstrate that these regions regulate CHD4 activity through different mechanisms. An N-terminal intrinsically disordered region (IDR) promotes remodelling integrity in a manner that depends on the composition but not sequence of the IDR. The C-terminal region harbours an auto-inhibitory region that contacts the helicase domain. Auto-inhibition is relieved by a previously unrecognized C-terminal SANT-SLIDE domain split by ~150 residues of disordered sequence, most likely by binding of this domain to substrate DNA. Our data shed light on CHD4 regulation and reveal strong mechanistic commonality between CHD family members, as well as with ISWI-family remodellers.

### Keywords
Xlms, Chd4, Crosslinking, Nucleosome remodelling, Nurd

### Affiliations
The University of Sydney
School of Life and Environmental Sciences, The University of Sydney, Australia

### Submitter
Jason Low

### Lab Head
Dr Joel Mackay
School of Life and Environmental Sciences, The University of Sydney, Australia


