### Accession
PXD037091

### Title
Protein interaction partners of FRUITFULL in inflorescence meristems and pistils by IP-MS.

### Description
To study the possibility that the tissue-specific gene targets and regulation by FUL are due to a different composition in the FUL transcription factor (TF) protein complex/es in both tissues, we determined the protein-protein interactions of FUL in planta. Inflorescence meristems (IMs) of 35S:AP1-GR ap1 cal pFUL:FUL-GFP plants were collected to identify meristem-specific protein complexes of FUL, and stage 12 - 16 pistils of pFUL:FUL-GFP ful-1 plants were collected for the pistil-specific FUL protein complexes. Protein complexes were isolated by immunoprecipitation (IP) using anti-GFP antibodies and protein identification was performed using LC-MS/MS, followed by label-free protein quantification.

### Sample Protocol
Plants were grown under long day conditions (16 h of light/8 h of dark at 20-23 °C) on rockwool supplemented with Hyponex Plant Food (HYPONeX JAPAN CORP., LTD). IM tissue from un-induced 35S:AP1-GR pFUL:FUL-GFP ap1 cal plants and stage 12 till 16 pistils from pFUL:FUL-GFP ful-1 plants were collected and immediately frozen with liquid nitrogen. Protein immunoprecipitation and LC-MS/MS data analysis was essentially performed as described in (Smaczniak et al., 2012). Nuclei were isolated from 0.5 g plant matrial as described previously (Kaufmann et al., 2010) and resuspended in 1 ml of lysis buffer (μMACS GFP Isolation Kit; Miltenyi Biotec) with the Complete Protease Inhibitor Mixture (Roche) before sonication and preclearing by centrifugation. To the nuclear protein extract 50 μL of μMACS antiGFP MicroBeads (Miltenyi Biotec) was added and incubated for 1 h at 4 °C. Beads were captured and washed 6× with 200 μl of lysis buffer and 2× with 200 μl of wash buffer 2 (Miltenyi Biotec). Proteins were eluted from the beads with 50 μL of 8 M urea. Three biological replicates were used per one tissue type. The IP eluate was diluted 4× with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, followed by cysteines  reduction with 7.5 mM DTT and carbamidomethylation with 15 mM iodoacetamide. Proteins were digested with 0.75 μg of sequencing grade trypsin overnight at 37 °C. The digest was desalted. The resulting peptides were measured by EASY nLC II – LTQ-OrbitrapXL MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
The spectra acquired from the LTQ Orbitrap mass spectrometer were loaded to the MaxQuant protein identification and quantification software (version 1.3.0.5; Max Plank Institute, Cox and Mann, 2008). Parameters of the MaxQuant analysis are listed in the “parameters.txt” file.  After data processing, label-free quantification (LFQ) values from the “proteinGroups.txt” output file of the MaxQuant were taken for further analysis in Perseus (version 1.6.15.0, Max Plank Institute, Tyanova et al., 2016). Proteins identified as “Only identified by site”, “Reverse” and “Contaminants'' were filtered out. Proteins identified with at least 2 unique peptides were taken for further statistical analysis. Missing log2LFQ values were imputed with the numbers from the left arm of the log2LFQ values normal distribution, which simulated the background level of low abundant proteins that were not detected after LFQ processing. Protein abundance was tested using the Student’s t-test implemented in Perseus. Three comparisons were done: 1) IM vs pistil IPs; 2) IP vs control in pistil, and 3) IP vs control in IM. Control samples refer to IPs using GFP antibody in 35S:AP1-GR ap1-1 cal-1 in IM and ful-1 in pistils.

### Publication Abstract
How transcription factors attain their target gene specificity and how this specificity may be modulated, acquiring different regulatory functions through the development of plant tissues, is an open question. Here we characterized different regulatory roles of the MADS-domain transcription factor FRUITFULL (FUL) in flower development and mechanisms modulating its activity. We found that the dual role of FUL in regulating floral transition and pistil development is associated with its different in vivo patterns of DNA binding in both tissues. Characterization of FUL protein complexes by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry and SELEX-seq experiments shows that aspects of tissue-specific target site selection can be predicted by tissue-specific variation in the composition of FUL protein complexes with different DNA binding specificities, without considering the chromatin status of the target region. This suggests a role for dynamic changes in FUL TF complex composition in reshaping the regulatory functions of FUL during flower development.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Protein complex, Ip-ms, Fruitfull

### Affiliations
Biochemistry
Wageningen University

### Submitter
Sjef Boeren

### Lab Head
Dr Sjef Boeren
Wageningen University


