### Accession
PXD009506

### Title
Snake Venom Extracellular vesicles (SVEVs) reveal wide molecular and functional proteome diversity

### Description
This study aimed at characterizing the snake venom extracellular vesicles (SVEVs).Shotgun proteomics analysis of SVEVs was performed to identify the proteome content of these vesicles. TEM, DLS, biochemical activity and cellular assays were performed to characterize the morphology and functionality of these vesicles.

### Sample Protocol
SVEVs were isolated using size exclusion column (Superdex G75, GE Life Sciences) coupled to an ÄKTA chromatography system equipment (GE Healthcare life science). Fifty milligrams of the lyophilized venom was diluted in 1 mL of 1M ammonium bicarbonate (AMBIC), centrifuged for 5 minutes at 9000 rpm to remove contaminants such as epidermal cells and other cell debris. The supernatant was applied onto the column and eluted with a pump flow of 0.3 ml/min and 3mL fractions were collected for each tube in an automatic fraction collector. The unretained fractions from the four venoms were lyophilized and analyzed by Dynamic Light Scattering (DLS) and Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM). Two SVEVs isolation experiments were performed for each venom and further processed separately. Snake Venom extracellular vesicles obtained from unretained SEC fractions were dissolved in 8M Urea, 50mM ammonium bicarbonate (Ambic). Disulfide bonds were reduced by 10mM DTT at 30°C for 30 min and cysteines were alkylated by 40mM iodoacetamide (IAA). Proteins were quantified using Qubit fluorometric detection kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and they were digested with porcine trypsin (1:25, w/w) overnight at room temperature. Peptides were desalted using reversed-phase microcolumns packed with Oligo R3 (Applied Biosystem). The unretained fractions from the four venoms, obtained by size exclusion chromatography, along with whole venom from Agkistrodon contortrix contortrix (ACC), Crotalus atrox (CA), Crotalus viridis (CV) and Crotalus cerberus oreganus (CO) were characterized.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analyzed using MaxQuant with the embedded Andromeda search engine against the snake Uniprot protein database (41699 sequences, updated to January 2016) with the addition of 248 protein common contaminants. The following parameters were used: precursor mass tolerance 10 ppm, MS/MS mass tolerance 0.05 Da. Trypsin was selected as cleavage enzyme with strict cleavage specificity at C-terminal to K or R required. Up to two missed cleavages per peptide were allowed. Carbamidomethyl cysteine (+57.02 Da) was set as fixed modification. The variables modifications were methionine oxidation (+15.99 Da) and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine (+0.984 Da). Shared peptide sequences were grouped as grouped accessions proteins. Protein FDR was kept at less than 1% in both search engines.

### Publication Abstract
A correction to this article has been published and is linked from the HTML and PDF versions of this paper. The error has not been fixed in the paper.

### Keywords
Snake venom, Proteomics, Extracellular vesicles

### Affiliations
University of Sao Paulo
GlycoProteomics Laboratory, Department of Parasitology, ICB, University of Sao Paulo

### Submitter
Giuseppe Palmisano

### Lab Head
Dr Giuseppe Palmisano
GlycoProteomics Laboratory, Department of Parasitology, ICB, University of Sao Paulo


