### Accession
PXD008433

### Title
Differential quantitative proteome analysis of cerebellar flocculus on oculomotor behavior training mouse model

### Description
Oculomotor behavior model system is commonly employed to study the neural circuits and the cellular mechanisms underlying neural integration related to motor behavior. The flocculus is a small lobe at the posterior border of the middle cerebellar and involved in motor control to aid in the oculomotor system in the brain. However, only several studies have investigated the molecular mechanism of learning and memory in flocculus region using another approach than proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
We trained mice under optokinetic stimulation (OKR) or two different kinds of (in-phase, out-of-phase) visuomotor mismatch stimulation for 50 min to induce oculomotor adaptation. We successfully induced significant changes in oculomotor behavior after the training session in all training conditions. We also performed an advanced hyper-multiplexing quantification approach using high-resolution mass spectrometry to simultaneously quantify all trained condition groups and observe microscopic protein changes between samples. After dissecting flocculus of training mice at 1 or 24 hours of consideration time, 10-plex tandem mass tags (TMT) labeling was performed on the flocculus proteins.

### Data Protocol
The fractionated peptides based on high-pH reverse phase were analyzed using Q-Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometry. Over 6,000 proteins were identified and 5,000 proteins were quantified at single analysis. In addition, three sets of TMT batch experiments were performed to quantify thirty samples at the same time. In order to minimize the variation between batches, the batch effect was removed to observe more precise protein changes in the oculomotor behavior training model. The hundreds of proteins were defined as differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) in a pairwise comparison. We also investigated the difference molecular mechanism of flocculus among oculomotor behavior training group through bioinformatics analysis.

### Publication Abstract
The cerebellum improves motor performance by adjusting motor gain appropriately. As de novo protein synthesis is essential for the formation and retention of memories, we hypothesized that motor learning in the opposite direction would induce a distinct pattern of protein expression in the cerebellum. We conducted quantitative proteomic profiling to compare the level of protein expression in the cerebellum at 1 and 24 h after training from mice that underwent different paradigms of cerebellum-dependent oculomotor learning from specific directional changes in motor gain. We quantified a total of 43 proteins that were significantly regulated in each of the three learning paradigms in the cerebellum at 1 and 24 h after learning. In addition, functional enrichment analysis identified protein groups that were differentially enriched or depleted in the cerebellum at 24 h after the three oculomotor learnings, suggesting that distinct biological pathways may be engaged in the formation of three oculomotor memories. Weighted correlation network analysis discovered groups of proteins significantly correlated with oculomotor memory. Finally, four proteins (Snca, Sncb, Cttn, and Stmn1) from the protein group correlated with the learning amount after oculomotor training were validated by Western blot. This study provides a comprehensive and unbiased list of proteins related to three cerebellum-dependent motor learning paradigms, suggesting the distinct nature of protein expression in the cerebellum for each learning paradigm. The proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium with identifiers &lt;PXD008433&gt;.

### Keywords
Tmt labeling, Oculomotor behavior mouse model, Flocculus

### Affiliations
The University of North Carolina at Greensboro
Seoul National University, College of Medicine

### Submitter
Jongmin Woo

### Lab Head
Dr Youngsoo Kim
Seoul National University, College of Medicine


