### Accession
PXD013765

### Title
Multi omics evaluation of cutaneous melanoma cells and their cerebral metastasis from patient derived mouse xenografts suggest individually distinct adaptation strategies

### Description
Brain metastases of melanoma are associated with therapy resistance and poor prognosis. It is not fully understood whether and how the selection of cells capable of metastasizing into the brain is accompanied by the establishment of specific features. For the investigation of these questions, we made use of previously described xenograft mouse models for primary human melanoma cells distinguishing cutaneous from cerebellar metastases from the same genetic background. Previous experiments suggested that cultured cells derived from these xenografts still maintain properties characteristic for the microenvironment of the originating metastases. Such corresponding pairs of metastatic cells were obtained from four individual donors, resulting in eight cell-lines presently investigated with regard to molecular properties characteristic for metastasis. Label free proteome profiling revealed significant alterations when comparing corresponding pairs of cutaneous and cerebellar metastases from the same donor. Molecules previously associated with metastasis such as cell adhesion molecules, immune regulators, epithelial mesenchymal transition markers, stem cell markers, redox regulators and cytokines were found differently expressed. This was also observed with regard to eicosanoids considered relevant for metastasis such as PGE2 and 12-HETE. However, no commonalities in the molecular characteristics of cerebellar metastases were identified in all four donors. Multiparametric morphological analysis of cells also revealed alterations associated with the kind of metastases, while lacking uniformity. In conclusion, here we describe that xenografted melanoma cells derived from two different microenvironments, i.e. cutaneous and cerebellar metastases, display significant alterations in the expression of molecules associated with metastastic properties. The observed lack of uniformity suggests that metastatic cells may find individual strategies to adapt to their microenvironmental challenges accompanied by the establishment of individual cell characteristics.

### Sample Protocol
Cell Culture conditions and sample preparations  The cells were cultured in RPMI-1640 (Gibco, Thermo Fischer Scientific, Austria ) with 10 % FCS (Sigma-Aldrich, Austria) and 1 % Penicilline and Streptomyzine (Sigma-Aldrich, Austria) at 37°C and 5% CO2. Cells were grown in polystyrene cell culture flasks of different size with cell growth surface for adherent cells (Sarstedt, Austria). Proteomics of cytoplasmic and nuclear fraction For the proteomics analysis of the cytoplasmic and nuclear fraction the cells were seeded in a T25 cell culture flask. At ~80 % confluence the cells were lysed as previously described. In short, the medium was removed and the cells were carefully washed with PBS twice. The lysis buffer was added onto the cells and lysed by pushing the suspension through a needle, centrifuged and the supernatant was precipitated in ice cold ethanol (EtOH, abs. 99%; AustroAlco). The remaining nuclear pellet was lysed with a Tris-EDTA, NP-40 buffer and after centrifugation the supernatant was again precipitated and kept on -20°C over night.  Supernatant analysis of eicosanoids and proteomics The cells were seeded in a T25 cell culture flask at 80% confluence with the fully supplemented medium and kept in the incubator. After 24h the supernatant was removed. The cells were washed twice with PBS and 3 ml of RPMI without supplements was added. After 4 hours incubation the supernatant was removed, centrifuged and precipitated in ethanol overnight to obtain the secreted proteins.   Protein sample preparation The proteins were used for a filter-assisted protein digest as described previously. In short, the precipitated proteins were centrifuged at 4536xg for 30 min, the supernatant discarded and the protein pellet dried. After dissolving in sample buffer the protein concentration was determined and 20 µg of total protein was used for the digestion. After reduction with dithiothreitol and alkylation with iodacetamid (both Sigma-Aldrich, Austria) proteins were digested with Trypsin/Lys-C (MS grade; Promega Corporation, Madison, WI, USA) and dried via vacuum centrifugation.  HPLC-MS/MS for proteomics For the HPLC-MS/MS analysis the peptides were resolved in 5 µL 30% formic acid and diluted with 40 µL of mobile phase A (97.9% H2O, 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). 1 µL for the supernatant samples and 10 µL of cytoplasmic and nuclear samples were injected into the Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano LC system coupled to the QExactive Orbitrap MS (all Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria).  Peptides were trapped on a C18 2 cm × 100 μm precolumn and LC separation was performed on a 50 cm × 75 μm Pepmap100 analytical column (both Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria). For the supernatant samples 1 µL of sample was injected. The 85 min HPLC method included a 43 min gradient from 7% to 40% mobile phase B (79.9% acetonitrile, 20% H2O, 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. For the cytoplasmic and nuclear samples 10 µL were injected. The 135 min HPLC method included a 95 min gradient from 8% to 40% mobile phase B at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Mass spectrometric settings were the same for all fractions. The resolution on the MS1 level was set to 70,000 (at m/z = 200) with a scan range from 400 to 1,400 m/z. The top eight abundant peptide ions were chosen for fragmentation at 30% normalized collision energy and resulting fragments analysed in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500 (at m/z = 200).

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer 2.2.0.338 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria) running Mascot 2.5.1 (Matrix Science, UK) was used for protein identification searching against the SwissProt Database (version 01/2018 with 20 258 entries) allowing a mass tolerance of 50ppm for MS spectra and 100mmu for MS/MS spectra, a FDR < 0.01 and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Furthermore, search criteria included carbamidomethylation on cysteins as fixed modification and methionine oxidation as well as N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
The prediction of metastatic properties from molecular analyses still poses a major challenge. Here we aimed at the classification of metastasis-related cell properties by proteome profiling making use of cutaneous and brain-metastasizing variants from single melanomas sharing the same genetic ancestry. Previous experiments demonstrated that cultured cells derived from these xenografted variants maintain a stable phenotype associated with a differential metastatic behavior: The brain metastasizing variants produce more spontaneous micro-metastases than the corresponding cutaneous variants. Four corresponding pairs of cutaneous and metastatic cells were obtained from four individual patients, resulting in eight cell-lines presently investigated. Label free proteome profiling revealed significant differences between corresponding pairs of cutaneous and cerebellar metastases from the same patient. Indeed, each brain metastasizing variant expressed several apparently metastasis-associated proteomic alterations as compared with the corresponding cutaneous variant. Among the differentially expressed proteins we identified cell adhesion molecules, immune regulators, epithelial to mesenchymal transition markers, stem cell markers, redox regulators and cytokines. Similar results were observed regarding eicosanoids, considered relevant for metastasis, such as PGE2 and 12-HETE. Multiparametric morphological analysis of cells also revealed no characteristic alterations associated with the cutaneous and brain metastasis variants. However, no correct classification regarding metastatic potential was yet possible with the present data. We thus concluded that molecular profiling is able to classify cells according to known functional categories but is not yet able to predict relevant cell properties emerging from networks consisting of many interconnected molecules. The presently observed broad diversity of molecular patterns, irrespective of restricting to one tumor type and two main classes of metastasis, highlights the important need to develop meta-analysis strategies to predict cell properties from molecular profiling data. Such base knowledge will greatly support future individualized precision medicine approaches.

### Keywords
Brain metastasis, Melanoma, Eicosanoids, Proteome profiling, Xenograft model

### Affiliations
University of Vienna
University of Vienna, Faculty of Chemistry, Department of Analytical Chemistry

### Submitter
Christopher Gerner

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher Gerner
University of Vienna, Faculty of Chemistry, Department of Analytical Chemistry


### SDRF
- organism: Homo sapiens
- organism part: melanoma cerebral metastasis cells cytoplasm, melanoma cerebral metastasis cells nuclear extracts, cutaneous melanoma cells cytoplasm, cutaneous melanoma cells nuclear extracts, melanoma cerebral metastasis  cells cytoplasm, melanoma cerebral metastasis  cells nuclear extracts, melanoma cerebral metastasis cells supernatants, cutaneous melanoma cells supernatants, melanoma cerebral metastasis  cells supernatants
- cell type: cerebellar, cutaneous
- disease: Melanoma
- fractionation method: High-performance liquid chromatography
- instrument: Q Exactive
- modification parameters: Carbamidomethyl
- modification parameters: Oxidation
- modification parameters: Acetyl
- label: label free sample
- factor value[organism part: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 75, 76, 77, 78, 79, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 86, 87, 88, 89, 90, 91, 92, 93, 94, 95, 96, 97, 98, 99, 100, 101, 102, 103, 104, 105, 106, 107, 108, 109, 110, 111, 112, 113, 114, 115, 116, 117, 118, 119, 120, 121, 122, 123, 124, 125, 126, 127, 128, 129, 130, 131, 132, 133, 134, 135, 136, 137, 138, 139, 140, 141, 142, 143, 144

