### Accession
PXD008499

### Title
Proteomics characterization of the non-model microorganism: Nannochloropsis gaditana.

### Description
Nannochloropsis gaditana is a microalgae of the phylum eustigmatophyceae that has been reported from fresh and brackish waters. This  species has been widely cultured, mainly directed to biofuel production, due to its capacity to produce and accumulates high amounts of lipids under different culturing conditions.  Furthermore, nowadays  N. gaditana is being used as fish and mollusc food in aquaculture facilities.  Besides, microalgae are  recognized  protein producers,  thus, are posited as an alternative protein source that could be very valuable in areas such as agri-food or biomedicine. In this sense, seas and oceans had showed their great potential for innovation, being the main focus of the initiative Blue Growth from EU.  Thereby, marine biotechnology will provide of new pharmaceuticals or industrial products from marine biomass.  In order to study the whole proteome of Nannochloropsis gaditana, a proteomic approach was initiated using fresh and atomized microalgae samples, as the main commercial forms. Around 7500 peptides were detected, getting 1950 protein identification hits. Qualitative and quantitative differences were analysed. The identified proteins were categorized according to gene ontology classification. In this study, it has been developed and described the first proteomic analysis of the microalgae Nannochloropsis gaditana, containing an important number of identified proteins that may have a relevant role in different agri-food and biomedical processes.

### Sample Protocol
Nano-LC was performed in a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano UPLC (Thermo Scientific) with a C18 75 μm x 50cm Acclaim Pepmap column (Thermo Scientific). The peptide mix was previously loaded on a 300um x 5 mm Acclaim Pepmap precolumn (Thermo Scientific®) in 2% acetonitrile/0.05% TFA for 5 min at 5µl/min. Peptide separation was performed at 40°C for all runs. Mobile phase buffer A was composed of water, 0.1% formic acid. Mobile phase B was composed of 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. Samples were separated at 300 nl/min. Elution conditions were: 4-35%B for 60 min; 35-55% B for 6 min; 55-90% B for 3 min followed by 8 min wash at 90% B and a 15 minutes re-equilibration at 4%B. Total time of chromatography was 150 min. Eluting peptide cations were converted to gas-phase ions by nano electrospray ionization and analysed on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion (Q-OT-qIT, Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer operated in positive mode. Survey scans of peptide precursors from 400 to 1500 m/z were performed at 120K resolution (at 200 m/z) with a 4 × 105 ion count target. Tandem MS was performed by isolation at 1.2 Da with the quadrupole, CID fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 35, and rapid scan MS analysis in the ion trap. The AGC ion count target was set to 2 x 103 and the max injection time was 300 ms. Only those precursors with charge state 2–5 were sampled for MS2. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 15 s with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on. The instrument was run in top 30 mode with 3s cycles, meaning the instrument would continuously perform MS2 events until a maximum of top 30 non-excluded precursors or 3s, whichever is shorter.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were processed using MaxQuant software (version 1.5.5.1) [2]. MS2 spectra were searched with Andromeda engine against a database of Uniprot_Nannocloropsis_August2016 (www.uniprot.org). Peptides were generated by theoretical tryptic digestion allowing up to one missed cleavage, carbamidomethylation of cysteines as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine as variable modification. Precursor mass tolerance was 10 ppm and product ions were searched at 0.1 Da tolerance. In order to validate Peptide spectral matches (PSM) in Maxquant a target-decoy search strategy was applied, which integrates multiple peptide parameters such as length, charge, number of modifications and the identification score into a single quality that acts as the statistical evidence on the quality of each single peptide spectrum match. Protein quantification were carried out with MaxLFQ label-free quantification method [3]. In the MaxLFQ label-free quantification method a retention time alignment and identification transfer protocol (“match-between-runs” feature in MaxQuant) is applied. Differentially expressed proteins analysis was performed with the freely available software Perseus (version 1.5.6.0) (http://www.coxdocs.org/doku.php?id=perseus:start). The peak intensities across the whole set of quantitative data for all the peptides in the samples were imported from the LFQ intensities of proteins from the MaxQuant analysis. Putative contaminant, decoy identifications and proteins only identified by site were filtered out from the imported raw data. Protein intensity quantifications were transformed to logarithmic scale  in base two. Only those proteins quantified with high confidence (q-value < 0.01) in all analyzed samples were retained for further statistical analysis. Populations mean comparison by two-sample t-test, with permutation-based FDR, was employed to calculate statistical significance (threshold FDR < 0.05). Those proteins that showed a fold-change of at least 1.5 and satisfied an FDR < 0.05, were considered as differentially expressed. To identify proteins exclusively present in one population, those proteins quantified with high confidence (q-value < 0.01) in all replicates of a given sample, and not quantified in any replicate of the other sample, were considered as “exclusives” of the first sample. Differentially expressed proteins, overrepresented in one sample, together with the exclusive proteins quantified in such sample, were considered as proteins more abundant in that sample. In order to functionally describe the analysed samples, Blast2GO software was employed to evaluate enrichment in GO and KEGG terms associated to each group of proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nannochloropsis gaditana, Proteomics, Microalgae, Non-model organism

### Affiliations
University of Cadiz
Titular Professor Laboratory of Microbiology Andalusian Institute for Grape and Grapevine Research (CAIV) Marine and Environmental Sciences Faculty (CASEM) University of Cadiz

### Submitter
Francisco Fernández-Acero

### Lab Head
Dr Francisco Javier Fernández Acero
Titular Professor Laboratory of Microbiology Andalusian Institute for Grape and Grapevine Research (CAIV) Marine and Environmental Sciences Faculty (CASEM) University of Cadiz


