### Accession
PXD027295

### Title
De Novo Design of Tyrosine and Serine Kinase Driven Protein Switches

### Description
:   Kinases play central roles in signaling cascades, relaying information from the outside to the inside of mammalian cells1.  De novo designed protein switches capable of interfacing with tyrosine kinase signaling pathways would open new avenues for controlling cellular behavior, but to date no such systems have been described.  Here we describe the de novo design of two classes of protein switches which link phosphorylation by both tyrosine and serine kinases to protein-protein association.  In the first class, protein-protein association drives kinase phosphorylation; addition of a designed co-regulator induces the phosphorylation of the ITAM motif central to T-cell signaling2.  In the second class, kinase phosphorylation drives protein-protein association; we describe systems in which kinase action drives reconstitution of GFP fluorescence from fragments and the inhibition of the protease calpain.  The designed switches are reversible and function in vitro and in cells with up to 40-fold activation of switching by phosphorylation.

### Sample Protocol
pGFP_4Y samples (25 µl of 1 mg/ml or 50 µM) in 10 mM HEPES pH 7.5 containing 5 mM MgCl2 and 100 mM NaCl were mixed 1:1 with 0.2% PPS Silent Surfactant (Expedeon, UK) in 50 mM Tris pH 8.  Tryptic digestion was initiated by the addition of one µg trypsin overnight at 37 C.   Samples were diluted 100-fold to a final concentration of 0.25 pmol/µl in LC loading buffer (2% acetonitrile with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid), and three µl were injected onto the LCMS system. Dilutions of the synthetic peptides were solubilized in LC loading buffer where the non-phosphorylated peptide was kept at a constant 400 fmol/µl and the phosphopeptide was diluted 1-, 4-, 20-, and 40-fold in order to assess the quantitative change in mass spectrometric signal upon addition of a phosphate group.  Three µl of the peptide mixtures were injected onto the LCMS system. Using a Waters Nanoacquity HPLC system, samples were injected via the autosampler onto a 150-μm Kasil fritted trap packed with Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ (3-μm bead diameter, Dr. Maisch)  to a bed length of 2 cm at a flow rate of 2 µl/min.   After loading and desalting using a total volume of 8 µl of loading buffer, the trap was brought on-line with a pulled fused-silica capillary tip (75-μm i.d.) packed to a length of 30 cm with the same Dr. Maisch beads.  The column and trap were mounted to a homemade ion source that was operated at room temperature. Peptides were eluted off the column using a gradient of 2-32% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid over 60 minutes, followed by 32-60% acetonitrile over 5 minutes at a flow rate of 250 nl/min.

### Data Protocol
Data was imported into Skyline, and extracted peak areas were imported into Excel.

### Publication Abstract
Kinases play central roles in signaling cascades, relaying information from the outside to the inside of mammalian cells. De novo designed protein switches capable of interfacing with tyrosine kinase signaling pathways would open new avenues for controlling cellular behavior, but, so far, no such systems have been described. Here we describe the de novo design of two classes of protein switch that link phosphorylation by tyrosine and serine kinases to protein-protein association. In the first class, protein-protein association is required for phosphorylation by the kinase, while in the second class, kinase activity drives protein-protein association. We design systems that couple protein binding to kinase activity on the immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motif central to T-cell signaling, and kinase activity to reconstitution of green fluorescent protein fluorescence from fragments and the inhibition of the protease calpain. The designed switches are reversible and function in vitro and in cells with up to 40-fold activation of switching by phosphorylation.

### Keywords
Switch, Kinase, Designed proteins

### Affiliations
University of Washington
Department of Biochemistry, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.  Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA  Institute for Protein Design, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA

### Submitter
Richard Johnson

### Lab Head
Dr David Baker
Department of Biochemistry, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.  Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA  Institute for Protein Design, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA


