### Accession
PXD026547

### Title
Respiratory and C4-photosynthetic NAD-malic enzyme coexist in bundle sheath cells mitochondria and evolved via association of differentially adapted subunits

### Description
In Cleomaceae species, NAD-malic enzyme (NAD-ME) was independently co-opted to participate in C4 photosynthesis. In C4 Cleome species, all NAD-ME genes (NAD-MEα, -ß1 and -ß2) were affected by C4 evolution and are expressed at higher levels than their C3 orthologs in Tarenaya hassleriana. In C3 Cleome, the NAD-ME housekeeping function is performed by two heteromers, NAD-MEα/ß1 and NAD-MEα/ß2, with similar biochemical properties and tissue occurrence. In the C4 species, Gynandropsis gynandra and Cleome angustifolia, this role is performed only by the NAD-MEα/ß2 heteromer. In these C4 species NAD-MEα/ß1 is preferentially present in leaves of the C4 species where is the predominant isoform. GgNAD-MEα/ß1 exhibits high catalytic efficiency and is differentially activated by the C4 intermediate aspartate. In C4 Cleome NAD-MEα/ß1 represents thus the C4-decarboxylase. GgNAD-MEß1and CaNAD-MEß1 are non-catalytic subunits but impart a stabilizing effect on the associated α-subunit. We conclude that in C4 Cleome the functions of NAD-ME as a TCA cycle associated enzyme and as a C4 photosynthetic decarboxylase coexist in BSC mitochondria and are performed by isoforms originated through associations of differentially adapted subunits.

### Sample Protocol
Protein containing bands were cut out of a polyacrylamide gel and processed by in-gel digestion after reduction and alkylation as described in PMID 32202429 and cleaned up before mass spectrometric analysis using solid phase extraction (HLB µElution plate, Waters).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric raw data were processed within the Proteome Discoverer framework (version 2.4.1.15). MS Amanda 2.0 was used as search engine and peptides and proteins accepted at a false discovery rate of 1%. The fixed value validator note was used.

### Publication Abstract
In plant mitochondria, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide-malic enzyme (NAD-ME) has a housekeeping function in malate respiration. In different plant lineages, NAD-ME was independently co-opted in C4 photosynthesis. In the C4 Cleome species, Gynandropsis gynandra and Cleome angustifolia, all NAD-ME genes (NAD-ME&#x3b1;, NAD-ME&#x3b2;1, and NAD-ME&#x3b2;2) were affected by C4 evolution and are expressed at higher levels than their orthologs in the C3 species Tarenaya hassleriana. In T. hassleriana, the NAD-ME housekeeping function is performed by two heteromers, NAD-ME&#x3b1;/&#x3b2;1 and NAD-ME&#x3b1;/&#x3b2;2, with similar biochemical properties. In both C4 species, this role is restricted to NAD-ME&#x3b1;/&#x3b2;2. In the C4 species, NAD-ME&#x3b1;/&#x3b2;1 is exclusively present in the leaves, where it accounts for most of the enzymatic activity. Gynandropsis gynandra NAD-ME&#x3b1;/&#x3b2;1 (GgNAD-ME&#x3b1;/&#x3b2;1) exhibits high catalytic efficiency and is differentially activated by the C4 intermediate aspartate, confirming its role as the C4-decarboxylase. During C4 evolution, NAD-ME&#x3b2;1 lost its catalytic activity; its contribution to the enzymatic activity results from a stabilizing effect on the associated &#x3b1;-subunit and the acquisition of regulatory properties. We conclude that in bundle sheath cell mitochondria of C4 species, the functions of NAD-ME as C4 photosynthetic decarboxylase and as a housekeeping enzyme coexist and are performed by isoforms that combine the same &#x3b1;-subunit with differentially adapted &#x3b2;-subunits.

### Keywords
C4-photosynthesis, Plant, Cleomaceae, Photosynthesis, Respiration, Nad-malic enzyme

### Affiliations
Proteome Research (AG Stühler) Institute of Molecular Medicine I and  Molecular Proteomics Laboratory BMFZ Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf
Molecular Proteomics Laboratory

### Submitter
Gereon Poschmann

### Lab Head
Dr Gereon Poschmann
Proteome Research (AG Stühler) Institute of Molecular Medicine I and  Molecular Proteomics Laboratory BMFZ Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf


