### Accession
PXD044433

### Title
LC-MS/MS proteomic analysis of mouse brown adipose tissues

### Description
This project aims to identify the proteins present in RNA granules of brown adipose tissue upon exposure to cold challenge. Wild type C57BL/6J mice were born and raised at thermoneutrality and were then subjected to cold exposure for 90 minutes. Brown adipose tissues were collected, and the protein lysates of RNA granules isolated from the brown adipose tissues were separated using SDS-PAGE gels and visualized with Coomassie stain. The protein bands were subsequently excised for downstream sample processing.

### Sample Protocol
The gel slices were then subject to in-gel digestion by trypsin followed by LC-MS/MS analysis at Centre for PanorOmic Sciences, HKU. In brief, gel slices were subjected to reduction and alkylation by 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and 55 mM 2-chloroacetamide (CAA), respectively following by incubation with trypsin (1 ng/µl) overnight at 37 °C. Subsequent tryptic peptides were extracted from the gel with 50% acetonitrile (ACN)/5% formic acid (FA) and 100% ACN sequentially and desalted. The eluted peptide mixture was loaded onto an Aurora C18 UHPLC column (75 μm i.d. × 25 cm length × 1.6 μm particle size) (IonOpticks, Australia) and separated using a linear gradient of 2-30% of buffer B (0.1% FA in ACN) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min buffer A (0.1% FA and 2% ACN in H2O) for 27 or 100 min on nanoElute Nano-Flow UHPLC System coupled to timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer (Bruker, USA). MS data was collected over a m/z range of 100 to 1700, and MS/MS range of 100 to 1700. During MS/MS data collection, each TIMS cycle was 1.1 s and included 1 MS + an average of 10 PASEF MS/MS scans.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry data were processed using MaxQuant 2.0.1.0 (Max Planck Institute for Biochemistry, Germany). Raw data were searched against mouse UniProt FASTA database (Proteome ID #UP000000589; accessed on Jan 2022) using settings as below: oxidized methionine (M), acetylation (Protein N-term) were selected as dynamic modifications, and carbamidomethyl (C) as fixed modifications with minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids was enabled. Confident proteins were identified using a target-decoy approach with a reversed database, strict false discovery rate of 1% at peptide and peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) level with minimum ≥1 unique peptide.

### Publication Abstract
Adaptive thermogenesis is a vital physiological process for small endotherms. Female animals usually are more sensitive to cold temperature due to anatomical differences. Whether there is a sex difference at a molecular level is unclear. Stress granules (SGs) are dynamic organelles in which untranslated mRNAs reside during cellular stress. We hypothesize that the prompt response of SGs to cold stress can reveal the molecular difference between sexes. By analyzing the content in SGs of brown adipose tissue (BAT) at the early phase of cold stress for both sexes, we found more diverse mRNAs docked in the SGs in male mice and these mRNAs representing an extensive cellular reprogramming including apoptosis process and cold-induced thermogenesis. In female mice, the mRNAs in SGs dominantly were comprised of genes regulating ribonucleoprotein complex biogenesis. Conversely, the proteome in SGs was commonly characterized as structure molecules and RNA processing for both sexes. A spectrum of eukaryotic initiation factors (eIFs) was detected in the SGs of both female and male BAT, while those remained unchanged upon cold stress in male mice, various eIF3 and eIF4G isoforms were found reduced in female mice. Taken together, the unique features in SGs of male BAT reflected a prompt uncoupling protein-1 (UCP1) induction which was absent in female, and female, by contrast, were prepared for long-term transcriptional and translational adaptations.<b>NEW &amp; NOTEWORTHY</b> The proteome analysis reveals that stress granules are the predominant form of cytosolic messenger ribonucleoproteins of brown adipose tissue (BAT) at the early phase of cold exposure in mice for both sexes. The transcriptome of stress granules of BAT unveils a sex difference of molecular response in early phase of cold exposure in mice, and such difference prepares for a prompt response to cold stress in male mice while for long-term adaptation in female mice.

### Keywords
Mouse, Brown adipose tissue, Cold challenge, Rna granules

### Affiliations
The University of Hong Kong
Department of Pharmacology and Pharmacy, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong

### Submitter
Jensen Yiu

### Lab Head
Dr C. Woo
Department of Pharmacology and Pharmacy, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong


