### Accession
PXD011076

### Title
Spiked human substantia nigra proteome data set for use as a spectral library for protein modelling and protein mapping

### Description
This article describes a mass spectrometry data set generated from human substantia nigra tissue that was spiked with iRT peptides. The data set can be used as a spectral library for analysis of the human brain, especially human substantia nigra, for example, in the context of Parkinson’s disease. Obtaining a sufficient amount of high-quality substantia nigra tissue is the key limiting factor for establishing a brain region-specific spectral library. Hence, combining existing spectral libraries for data-independent acquisition analysis (DIA) can overcome this major limitation. Moreover, these data can be used to map brain region-specific proteins and to model brain region-specific pathways. Both can improve our understanding of the functioning of the brain in greater depth. In addition, these data can also be used to determine the optimal settings for measuring proteins and peptides of interest. To create the substantia nigra-specific spectral library, the tissue was first homogenized and then fractionated via different types of SDS gel electrophoresis, resulting in 18 fractions. These fractions were analysed in triplicate by nanoHPLC-ESI-MS/MS, resulting in 54 data files.

### Sample Protocol
Substantia nigra tissue was first homogenized, and the protein concentration in the resulting lysate was determined. For fractionation of the substantia nigra lysate, the lysate was completely fractionated (18 fractions) using two types of gradient SDS gels (3-8% Tris-acetate and 4-12% Bis-tris) to cover a width range of molecular weights. In total, 54 samples (3 replicates of each fraction) were generated for nanoHPLC-ESI-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Data processing was not performed. Only RAW data are provided.

### Publication Abstract
This article describes a mass spectrometric data set generated from human <i>substantia nigra</i> tissue that was spiked with iRT peptides. The data set can be used as a spectral library for analysis of the human brain; especially for analysis of human <i>substantia nigra</i>, for example, in the context of Parkinson's disease. Obtaining a sufficient amount of high-quality <i>substantia nigra</i> tissue is the key limiting factor for establishing a brain region-specific spectral library. Hence, combining existing spectral libraries for data-independent acquisition analysis (DIA) can overcome this major limitation. Moreover, these data can be used to map brain region-specific proteins and to model brain region-specific pathways. Both can improve our understanding of the functioning of the brain in greater depth. In addition, these data can also be used to determine the optimal settings for measuring proteins and peptides of interest. To create the <i>substantia nigra</i>-specific spectral library, the tissue was first homogenized and then fractionated <i>via</i> different types of SDS gel electrophoresis, resulting in 18 fractions. These fractions were analysed in triplicate by nanoHPLC-ESI-MS/MS, resulting in 54 data files. The data files generated from the described workflow are hosted in the public repository ProteomeXchange with the identifier PXD011076.

### Keywords
Dda, Protein modelling, Spectral library, Substantia nigra

### Affiliations
Medizinisches Proteom-Center
Medizinisches Proteom-Center, Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Bochum, Germany

### Submitter
Annika Guntermann

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Katrin Marcus
Medizinisches Proteom-Center, Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Bochum, Germany


