### Accession
PXD031560

### Title
Human follicular fluid neurotransmitters LC-MSMS

### Description
Pretreated human follicular fluid was prepared for targeted metabolomics experiments. For this purpose, 12-point standard calibration curves in the respective range with reference material were measured, and the limit of detection (LOD) and limit of quantification (LOQ) for each neurotransmitter under investigation were calculated. LC-MS/MS was conducted by an ultra-performance liquid chromatography method using a Waters ACQUITY UPLC BEH C18 column (2.1 mm×100 mm, 1.7 µm, Waters, USA). The Waters acquisition UPLC was coupled to an API 4000 triple quadrupole mass spectrometer (AB SCIEX, USA). The mobile phase A buffer was 10% methanol in water (containing 0.1% formic acid), and the mobile phase B buffer was 50% methanol in water (containing 0.1% formic acid). The LC gradient elution was at a flow rate of 0.3 mL/min at 0-8.0 min and 0.4 ml/min at 8.0-17.5 min, then 10%-30% B at 0-6.5 min; 30%-100% B at 6.5-7 min; 100% B at 7-14min; and 100%-10% B at 14-17.5min. The injection volume was 5 µl and the column temperature was set to 40 °C. Twenty-three metabolites (Ach: Acetylcholine chloride; Gln: Glutamine; Glu: Glutamate; His: L-Histidine; NE: norepinephrine; Tyr:Tyrosine; Trp:Tryptophan; Kyn: Kynurenine; GABA: 4-Aminobutyric acid;HisA:Histamine; PA:Picolinic acid;TyrA:Tyramine;DA:Hydroxytyramine hydrochloride; TrpA:Tryptamine;5-HT:Serotonin hydrochloride;E:Adrenaline hydrochloride;KynA:Kynurenic acid;5-HIAA:5-Hydroxyindole-3-acetic acid;DOPA:Levodopa;XA:Xanthurenic acid;VWA:Vanillymandelic Acid; 5-HTTP:5-Hydroxytryptophan;MT:Melatonine)were simultaneously reported in LC-MS/MS multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) mode. Data analysis was performed with Analyst 1.6 software.

### Sample Protocol
The concentrations of twenty kinds of hormones in the follicular fluid were detected by high-performance liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry (HPLC-MS/MS). An Agilent 1200 series high-performance liquidPretreated human follicular fluid was prepared for targeted metabolomics experiments. For this purpose, 12-point standard calibration curves in the respective range with reference material were measured, and the limit of detection (LOD) and limit of quantification (LOQ) for each neurotransmitter under investigation were calculated. LC-MS/MS was conducted by an ultra-performance liquid chromatography method using a Waters ACQUITY UPLC BEH C18 column (2.1 mm×100 mm, 1.7 µm, Waters, USA). The Waters acquisition UPLC was coupled to an API 4000 triple quadrupole mass spectrometer (AB SCIEX, USA). The mobile phase A buffer was 10% methanol in water (containing 0.1% formic acid), and the mobile phase B buffer was 50% methanol in water (containing 0.1% formic acid). The LC gradient elution was at a flow rate of 0.3 mL/min at 0-8.0 min and 0.4 ml/min at 8.0-17.5 min, then 10%-30% B at 0-6.5 min; 30%-100% B at 6.5-7 min; 100% B at 7-14min; and 100%-10% B at 14-17.5min. The injection volume was 5 µl and the column temperature was set to 40 °C. Twenty-three metabolites (Ach: Acetylcholine chloride; Gln: Glutamine; Glu: Glutamate; His: L-Histidine; NE: norepinephrine; Tyr:Tyrosine; Trp:Tryptophan; Kyn: Kynurenine; GABA: 4-Aminobutyric acid;HisA:Histamine; PA:Picolinic acid;TyrA:Tyramine;DA:Hydroxytyramine hydrochloride; TrpA:Tryptamine;5-HT:Serotonin hydrochloride;E:Adrenaline hydrochloride;KynA:Kynurenic acid;5-HIAA:5-Hydroxyindole-3-acetic acid;DOPA:Levodopa;XA:Xanthurenic acid;VWA:Vanillymandelic Acid; 5-HTTP:5-Hydroxytryptophan;MT:Melatonine)were simultaneously reported in LC-MS/MS multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) mode. Data analysis was performed with Analyst 1.6 software.

### Data Protocol
Pretreated human follicular fluid was prepared for targeted metabolomics experiments. For this purpose, 12-point standard calibration curves in the respective range with reference material were measured, and the limit of detection (LOD) and limit of quantification (LOQ) for each neurotransmitter under investigation were calculated. LC-MS/MS was conducted by an ultra-performance liquid chromatography method using a Waters ACQUITY UPLC BEH C18 column (2.1 mm×100 mm, 1.7 µm, Waters, USA). The Waters acquisition UPLC was coupled to an API 4000 triple quadrupole mass spectrometer (AB SCIEX, USA). The mobile phase A buffer was 10% methanol in water (containing 0.1% formic acid), and the mobile phase B buffer was 50% methanol in water (containing 0.1% formic acid). The LC gradient elution was at a flow rate of 0.3 mL/min at 0-8.0 min and 0.4 ml/min at 8.0-17.5 min, then 10%-30% B at 0-6.5 min; 30%-100% B at 6.5-7 min; 100% B at 7-14min; and 100%-10% B at 14-17.5min. The injection volume was 5 µl and the column temperature was set to 40 °C. Twenty-three metabolites (Ach: Acetylcholine chloride; Gln: Glutamine; Glu: Glutamate; His: L-Histidine; NE: norepinephrine; Tyr:Tyrosine; Trp:Tryptophan; Kyn: Kynurenine; GABA: 4-Aminobutyric acid;HisA:Histamine; PA:Picolinic acid;TyrA:Tyramine;DA:Hydroxytyramine hydrochloride; TrpA:Tryptamine;5-HT:Serotonin hydrochloride;E:Adrenaline hydrochloride;KynA:Kynurenic acid;5-HIAA:5-Hydroxyindole-3-acetic acid;DOPA:Levodopa;XA:Xanthurenic acid;VWA:Vanillymandelic Acid; 5-HTTP:5-Hydroxytryptophan;MT:Melatonine)were simultaneously reported in LC-MS/MS multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) mode. Data analysis was performed with Analyst 1.6 software.

### Publication Abstract
An increasing number of studies demonstrate that changes in neurotransmitters metabolic levels in follicular fluid are directly related to oocyte maturation, fertilization, the quality of embryo and pregnancy rates. However, the relationship between the intra-follicular neurotransmitters and the function of granulosa cells (GCs), and the outcome of in vitro fertilization-embryo transfer (IVF-ET) is not clear. Human follicular fluid and cumulus GCs were harvested from large follicles obtained from patients undergoing IVF. Neurotransmitters and steroid hormones in follicular fluid were measured through liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) and high-performance liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (HPLC-MS/MS). Based on the content of glutamine (Gln) in follicular fluid, the samples were divided into two groups: high Gln level group and low Gln level group. The expression of proliferation-, steroidogenesis- and antioxidant-related genes in GCs was detected by qRT-PCR. In vitro, KGN cells were used to further verify the effects of Gln and NE on GCs function. Primary and secondary outcomes were the number of mature and retrieved oocytes, and the ratio of high-quality embryos, respectively. Gln (46.75&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;7.74&#xa0;&#x3bc;g/mL) and norepinephrine (NE, 0.20&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;0.07&#xa0;&#x3bc;g/mL) were abundant neurotransmitters in follicular fluid, and exhibited a significantly positive correlation (R&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.5869, P&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.005). In high Gln level group, the expression of proliferation, steroidogenesis and antioxidant-related genes in GCs were higher than those in low Gln level group, and the contents of estriol and E2 in follicular fluid were more abundant. Moreover, the concentrations of Gln and NE in follicular fluid showed significantly positive correlation with IDH1 expression in GCs (R&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.3822, R&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.4009, P&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.05). Importantly, a significantly positive correlation was observed between IDH1 expression in GCs and the ratio of higher-quality/cleaved embryos (R&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.4480, P&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.05). In vitro studies further demonstrated that Gln and NE played synergistically function in improving GCs proliferation and E2 production by upregulating IDH1 expression. These data demonstrate that Gln and NE in follicular fluid might play significant positive roles in GCs function, and may be potential predictors for selecting optimal quality oocytes and evaluating the quality of embryonic development.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, Follicular fluid

### Affiliations
International Peace Maternity and Child Health Hospital
International Peace Maternity and Child Health hospital

### Submitter
lulu wang

### Lab Head
Dr lulu wang
International Peace Maternity and Child Health Hospital


