### Accession
PXD024605

### Title
Too Hot to Handle: Antibacterial Peptides Identified in Ghost Pepper

### Description
Capsicum spp. (hot peppers) demonstrate a range of interesting bioactive properties spanning anti-inflammatory, antioxidant, and antimicrobial activities. While several species within the genus are known to produce antimicrobial peptides (AMPs), AMP sequence mining of genomic data indicates this space remains largely unexplored. Herein, in silico AMP predictions are paired with peptidomics to identify novel AMPs from the interspecific hybrid ghost pepper (Capsicum chinense x frutescens). AMP prediction algorithms reveal 115 putative AMPs within the Capsicum chinense genome of which 14 were identified in the aerial tissue peptidome. PepSAVI-MS, de novo sequencing, and complementary approaches were used to fully molecularly characterize two novel AMPs, CC-AMP1 and CC-AMP2, including elucidation of post-translational modifications and disulfide bond connectivity. Both CC-AMP1 and CC-AMP2 have little homology with known AMPs and exhibit low µM antimicrobial activity against gram-negative bacteria including Escherichia coli and Klebsiella pneumoniae. These findings demonstrate the complementary nature of peptidomics, bioactivity-guided discovery, and bioinformatics-based investigations to more fully characterize plant AMP profiles.

### Sample Protocol
Capsicum chinense x frutescens seeds were purchased from Strictly Medicinal Seeds (Williams, OR) and planted in nutrient rich soil. Plants were grown under controlled temperature (17.5-20.3°C) and light cycle (14 hours) conditions. The plants were grown for approximately 12 weeks and aerial tissue was harvested in November 2019 with immediate flash freezing and storage at -80°C until extraction.  One hundred and sixty grams of plant aerial tissue was extracted in an acetic acid solution, with size exclusion steps to remove large proteins (>30 kDa) and small molecules concentrating to a final volume of 40 g starting material/mL to avoid precipitation. Neutral and negatively charged molecules were removed through SCX chromatography, desalted, and fractionated using reversed-phase chromatography. Fractions were collected, dried in a vacuum centrifuge, and resuspended in LC-MS grade water. Peptide sample aliquots of 10 µL were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (Millipore-Sigma) at 45°C at 850 rpm for 30 minutes, and alkylated with 100 mM iodoacetamide (Millipore-Sigma) at 25°C at 850 rpm for 15 minutes. 10 µL of reduced and alkylated fraction was digested with sequencing grade trypsin (Millipore-Sigma) with an enzyme/protein ratio of 1:50 (w/w) and incubated at 37°C at 850 rpm overnight. All samples were desalted with C18 ZipTips prior to further analysis. For confirmation of the pyroglutamic acid modification, an aliquot of 10 µL of CC-AMP1 sample was dried and resuspended in 40 µL of 50 mM sodium phosphate, 10 mM DTT, 1 mM EDTA, pH 7.0 buffer. Pyrococcus furiosus pyroglutamate aminopeptidase (Takara Bio) was resuspended in the same buffer and 1 mU of enzyme was added to the sample. The sample was incubated at 37°C for 3 hours with shaking at 850 rpm. The digested sample was dried and resuspended in 200 µL of water, followed by 3 subsequent spin filtration steps using a 3 kDa filter (Millipore Sigma), washing the sample with water each time to remove EDTA. The filtered sample was subjected to a C18 ZipTip cleanup, followed by LC-MS analysis. For disulfide bond connectivity determination, a 10 µL aliquot of CC-AMP1 sample, with no prior reduction or alkylation, was added to 51 µL of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 7.8, and the peptide was digested with trypsin gold (Promega) with an enzyme/protein ratio of 1:50 (w/w) and incubated at 37°C at 850 rpm overnight. For CC-AMP2, a 20 µL aliquot of sample was added to a glass vial with 40 µL of 3M HCl. The vial was then incubated at 85°C for a total of 80 minutes, with aliquots of sample removed every 15 minutes for analysis. The HCl was evaporated under nitrogen gas. Both CC-AMP1 and CC-AMP2 samples were desalted using C18 ZipTips and subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
For database searching, acquired LC-MS/MS data (.wiff) from trypsin digested samples were converted to Mascot Generic Format (.mgf) with Sciex Data Converter version 1.3. The converted files were searched against the proteome from the C. chinense reference proteome, containing 34,747 unique proteins (UniProt ID: UP000224522) appended  with sequences for common laboratory contaminants (http://thegpm.org/cRAP/; 116 entries) using Mascot (v2.5.1; Matrix Science). Fixed modifications of carbidomethyl and a methionine oxidation variable modifications were allowed. Maximum missed cleavages was set to 3, peptide charge was set to 1+, 2+, and 3+, and peptide tolerance was set to ±15 ppm. Significant peptide identifications above the identity or homology threshold were adjusted to near 1% peptide FDR using the embedded Percolator algorithm. Peptide ion files were exported using Progenesis QI for Proteomics software (Nonlinear Dynamics, v.2.0). Default peak picking settings were used with the exception that a minimum peak width of 0.05 min was required.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ghost pepper, Capsicum frutescens, Capsicum chinense, Peptidomics, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, United States
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill

### Submitter
Leslie Hicks

### Lab Head
Dr Leslie M. Hicks
Department of Chemistry, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, United States


