### Accession
PXD020740

### Title
Chemical proteomic profiling reveals protein interactors of the alarmones diadenosine triphosphate and tetraphosphate

### Description
The nucleotides diadenosine triphosphate (Ap3A) and diadenosine tetraphosphate (Ap4A) are formed in prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells. Since their concentrations increase significantly upon cellular stress, they are considered to be alarmones triggering stress adaptive processes. However, their cellular roles remain elusive. To elucidate the proteome-wide interactome of Ap3A and Ap4A and thereby gain insights into their cellular roles, we herein report the development of photoaffinity-labeling probes and their employment in chemical proteomics. We demonstrate that the ApnA interactors we identified are involved in many fundamental cellular processes including carboxylic acid and nucleotide metabolism, gene expression, various regulatory processes and cellular response mechanisms and only around half of them are known nucleotide interactors. Our results highlight common functions of these ApnAs across the domains of life, but also identify those that are different for Ap3A or Ap4A. This study provides a rich source for further functional studies of these nucleotides and depicts useful tools for characterization of their regulatory mechanisms in cells.

### Sample Protocol
In a total volume of 100 µL the photoaffinity-labeling probe (PALP-1, 2 or 3, 20 µM) was incubated with lysate (3.0 mg/mL) in HEPES buffer (50 mM, 5 mM MgCl2, pH 6.8) for 2 h on ice in a 96-well plate (Sarstedt) under protection from light. Afterwards, the well plate was positioned on ice under an UV lamp (365 nm, distance approx. 6 cm, 8 mW/cm2) for 5 min. The mixture was incubated with streptavidin SepharoseTM high performance (GE Healthcare) beads (35 µL, 300 nmol/mL) for 60 min at room temperature. The streptavidin beads were washed with 1 × PBS (3 × 200 µL) and centrifuged (room temperature, 272×g, 3 min) before use. After incubation, the samples were centrifuged (room temperature, 272×g, 3 min) and the supernatant was removed. The beads were washed with 1 × PBS containing 0.4% SDS (3 × 100 µL), aqueous urea solution (6 M, 2 × 100 µL) and 1 × PBS (3 × 100 µL) and centrifuged (room temperature, 272×g, 2 min). After removing the supernatant, elution was performed with an aqueous biotin solution (0.4 mM, 2 × 40 µL) and water (1 × 40 µL) at 37 °C for 10 min. Elution fractions were collected, freeze-dried, diluted in water loading dye (6 ×, 225 mM Tris∙HCl (pH 6.8), 50% glycerol, 12.5% β-mercaptoethanol, 4.5% SDS, 0.05% bromophenol blue), heated for 5 min to 95 °C and subjected to SDS-PAGE. The control samples were treated as described above. In case of the UV control, the sample was handled in a black Eppendorf tube to exclude UV irradiation. In the beads control water was added instead of the respective PALPs. The control substance (con-1) was applied in the same concentration as the PALPs (20 µM). For the competition experiment a 100-fold excess of the competitor (comp-1 or comp-2 respectively, 2 mM) derivative was incubated with cell lysate for 1 h on ice before adding the corresponding PALPs. For in-gel digestion each gel lane was cut into small pieces and destained repetitively in acetonitrile/water (3:2, v/v, 50 µL) for 30 min and NH4HCO3 (25 mM, 50 µL) for 15 min. Then, the gel pieces were incubated with NH4HCO3 (20 mM, 50 µL) for 15 min. After washing, proteins were reduced with DTT (10 mM in NH4HCO3, 20 mM, 100 µL) for 60 min at 56 °C, followed by alkylation with iodoacetamide (50 mM in NH4HCO3, 20 mM, 100 µL) at room temperature for 60 min under protection from UV light. After washing in NH4HCO3 (20 mM, 100 µL) for 15 min and in NH4HCO3/acetonitrile (20 mM, 1:1, v/v, 100 µL) for 10 min and dehydration in pure acetonitrile (100 µL) for 10 min, proteins were digested overnight at 37 °C with trypsin (1:50, w/w) (Promega V5111). Peptides were extracted twice from the gel with acetonitrile/TFA in water (0.1%, 1:1) for 60 min. After desalting using ZipTips (Merck Millipore) the peptides were subjected to mass spectrometric analysis with nano-LC-MS/MS. The digests were analysed on a QExactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) operated with Tune (version 2.9) and interfaced with an Easy-nLC 1200 nanoflow liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The peptide digests were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid and loaded onto the analytical column (50 μm × 15 cm). Peptides were resolved at a flow rate of 300 nL/min using a linear gradient of 6−40% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile) over 45 or 60 min. Data-dependent acquisition with full scans in a 350−1200 m/z range was carried out at a mass resolution of 120000. The 20 most intense precursor ions were selected for fragmentation. Peptides with charge states 2−7 were selected and dynamic exclusion was set to 30 seconds. MS2 scans were carried out at a mass resolution of 15000. Precursor ions were fragmented using higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) set to 28%. Each of the 3 independent biological replicates was measured as technical duplicates.

### Data Protocol
Raw files from LC-MS/MS measurements were analyzed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.6) with the andromeda search engine with default settings and match between runs and label-free quantification (LFQ) (minimum ratio count 2) enabled. For protein identification, the human and the E. coli reference proteome downloaded from the UniProt database [https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/] (download date: 02.04.2019 and 01.10.2019) and an integrated database of common contaminants were used. Oxidation, N-acetylation and carbamidomethylation were selected as modifications. Identified proteins were filtered for reverse hits, common contaminants and hits only identified by site at a false discovery rate (FDR) of equal or below 0.01. Further data processing was performed using Perseus software (version 1.6.14.0). LFQ intensities were log2 transformed. The proteins were filtered to be detected in at least 60 % of the replicate experiments (n = 6) and missing values were imputed from a normal distribution (width = 0.3 and shift = 1.8) in the total matrix mode, based on the assumption that these proteins were below the detection limit. Enriched proteins were identified by a one-way ANOVA-based multiple sample test with S0 adjusted to 0.2, the number of randomizations set to 250 and the permutation-based FDR accepted equal or below 0.01 with technical replicates grouped for randomization. A two-sided Tukey’s post hoc test with an accepted FDR value equal or below 0.05 was performed on all ANOVA significant hits. The Tukey’s Honest Significant Difference (THSD) performs a pairwise comparison of all conditions and calculates the mean difference between each condition pair. If the difference is greater than or equal to the corresponding THSD, which depends on the number of treatments, the degrees of freedom, the mean squared error and the number of data points in each group, the difference is considered significant. For further analysis only proteins enriched in a PAL experiment against all four corresponding controls were considered. Z-scoring of the median LFQ intensities was performed without grouping and used for unsupervised hierarchical clustering of all significant hits, the distance was set to Euclidian, the linkage to average, and the maximal numbers of clusters to 300.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics, Photo-affinity labeling, Apna

### Affiliations
University of Konstanz
1Department of Chemistry, University of Konstanz, Konstanz, Germany 2Konstanz Resea1Department of Chemistry, University of Konstanz, Konstanz, Germany 2Konstanz Research School-Chemical Biology, University of Konstanz, Konstanz, Germany

### Submitter
Lena Krüger

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Marx
1Department of Chemistry, University of Konstanz, Konstanz, Germany 2Konstanz Resea1Department of Chemistry, University of Konstanz, Konstanz, Germany 2Konstanz Research School-Chemical Biology, University of Konstanz, Konstanz, Germany


