### Accession
PXD033553

### Title
Role of the two-component system CiaRH in the regulation of efflux pump SatAB and its correlation with fluoroquinolones susceptibility

### Description
Streptococcus suis is a zoonotic pathogen with a high incidence and mortality rate in both swine and humans. Following antibiotic treatment, the organism has evolved many resistance mechanisms, among of which efflux pump overexpression can promote drug extrusion out of the cell. This study clarified the role of CiaRH in fluoroquinolone resistance. A deletion of the ciaRH genes showed decreased susceptibility to tested antibiotics, an invariant growth rate, and reduced intracellular substrates. This research also demonstrated that the overexpression of efflux pump, SatAB, was the main cause of ∆ciaRH resistance. In addition, CiaR could combine with the promoter region of satAB, to further directly suppress target gene transcription. Simultaneously, satAB was also directly regulated by SatR. Our findings may provide novel insight into the development of drug targets, and help exploit corresponding inhibitors to combat bacterial multidrug resistance.

### Sample Protocol
Overnight cultures of WT strain and ∆ciaRH were subcultured into fresh medium and grown to the exponential phase (OD600 0.6). The bacteria were harvested by centrifugation. WT and ∆ciaRH pellets were lysed in SDT (4%SDS，100mM Tris-HCl，1mM DTT，pH7.6) buffer and then used for protein extraction. Protein concentration was measured with the BCA Protein Assay Kit (Bio-Rad, USA). Protein digestion by trypsin was performed according to filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) procedure (73). The digest peptides of each sample were desalted on C18 Cartridges (Empore™ SPE Cartridges C18 (standard density), bed I.D. 7 mm, volume 3 ml, Sigma), concentrated by vacuum centrifugation and reconstituted in 40 µl of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. The peptide mixture obtained by trypsin digestion was labeled using TMT reagent according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Scientific). The labeled peptides from each group were mixed equally and next fractionated by High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Scientific). Firstly, acetonitrile and 0.1% TFA were used for column equilibration. Then the dried peptide mixture was loaded to spin column and bound to the hydrophobic resin, which was subsequently desalted by washing the column with water by low-speed centrifugation. Bound peptides were eluted into different fractions with a gradient of acetonitrile in a volatile high-pH elution solution. The collected fractions were desalted on C18 Cartridges (Empore™ SPE Cartridges C18 (standard density), bed I.D. 7 mm, volume 3 ml, Sigma) and concentrated by vacuum centrifugation.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis was conducted on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific), which was coupled to Easy nLC (Proxeon Biosystems, now Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 60/90 min. The peptides were loaded onto a reverse phase trap column (Thermo Scientific Acclaim PepMap100, 100 μm × 2 cm, nanoViper C18) connected to the C18-reversed phase analytical column (Thermo Scientific Easy Column, 10 cm long, 75 μm inner diameter, 3μm resin) in buffer A (0.1% Formic acid) and separated with a linear gradient of buffer B (84% acetonitrile and 0.1% Formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min controlled by IntelliFlow technology. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode. MS data was acquired using a data-dependent top10 method dynamically choosing the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (300–1800 m/z) for HCD fragmentation. Automatic gain control (AGC) target was set to 3e6, and maximum inject time to 10 ms. Dynamic exclusion duration was 40.0 s. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200 and resolution for HCD spectra was set to 17,500 at m/z 200, and isolation width was 2 m/z. Normalized collision energy was 30 eV and the underfill ratio, which specifies the minimum percentage of the target value likely to be reached at maximum fill time, was defined as 0.1%. The instrument was run with peptide recognition mode enabled.  The identification and quantitation analysis of MS raw data were performed using the MASCOT engine (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.2) and Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software. The NCBI BLAST+ client software (ncbi-blast-2.2.28+-win32.exe) and InterProScan were used to locally search the differentially expressed protein (DEP) sequences to find homologue sequences. Gene ontology (GO) terms were mapped and sequences were annotated using the software program Blast2GO. The protein subcellular localization and domain signatures were annotated by CELLO (http://cello.life.nctu.edu.tw/) and InterProScan software, respectively. The selected DEPs were blasted from the online Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database (http://geneontology.org/). KEGG analysis retrieved their KEGG orthology identifications and DEPs were subsequently mapped to pathways in KEGG. Go and KEGG pathway Enrichment analyses were applied based on the Fisher’ exact test, considering the whole quantified proteins as background dataset. Benjamini- Hochberg correction for multiple testing was further applied to adjust derived p-values.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Fluoroquinolones, Streptococcus suis, Repressor, Two-component systems, Efflux pump

### Affiliations
Huazhong Agricultural University

### Submitter
Wei Peng

### Lab Head
Dr Weicheng Bei
Huazhong Agricultural University


