### Accession
PXD002840

### Title
Fusarium graminearum in vitro cellular proteome

### Description
The plant pathogenic fungus Fusarium graminearum (Fgr) creates economic and health risks in cereals agriculture. Fgr causes head blight (or scab) of wheat and stalk rot of corn, reducing yield, degrading grain quality and polluting downstream food products with mycotoxins. Fungal plant pathogens must secrete proteases to access nutrition and to breakdown the structural protein component of the plant cell wall. Research into the proteolytic activity of Fgr is hindered by the complex nature of the suite of proteases secreted. We used a systems biology approach comprising genome analysis, transcriptomics and label-free quantitative proteomics to characterise the peptidases deployed by Fgr during growth. A combined analysis of published microarray transcriptome datasets revealed seven transcriptional groupings of peptidases based on in vitro growth, in planta growth, and sporulation behaviours. An orbitrap MS/MS proteomics technique defined the extracellular proteases secreted by Fusarium graminearum.  This dataset includes the cellular control sample that was analysed with shotgun mass-spec proteomics followed SearchGUI and Peptide shaker searches.

### Sample Protocol
Trichloroacetic acid (1 mL of 6.1 N) was added to 4 mL of crude secretome filtrate, mixed, and incubated at 4 °C overnight. It was then centrifuged at 13000 g for 20 min at 4 °C to pellet the proteins. The supernatant was removed and the pellet was washed with 800 µL of ice-cold acetone, by vortexing, centrifugation (13,000 g, 120 minutes) and removal of the acetone. The acetone wash was repeated twice. Each acetone-washed pellet was agitated in 100 µL resuspension buffer (8 M urea, 10 mM dithiothreitol) at 30 °C until fully dissolved, before protein levels were compared by image analysis after SDS-PAGE and SYPRO ruby staining.  The cellular proteome was processed with the same method as the secretome except acetone was used in the initial precipitation instead of trichloroacetic acid.  In solution trypsin digest for proteomics Protein was precipitated from extracts with 5 volumes of acetone, washed in acetone, and resuspended in digest buffer (8 M urea, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 10 mM DTT) before incubation at 37 °C for 30 min. Iodoacetamide was then added to 55 mM to alkylate thiol groups (45 min, dark, and 20 °C). The alkylated preparation was diluted to 1 M urea with 25 mM ammonium biocarbonate (pH 8.5) before sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) was added to 5 uM final concentration. Digests were performed overnight (37 °C) with shaking to produce tryptic peptides. Tryptic peptides were acidified with 1% formic acid (v/v).  Solid Phase Extraction clean-up of tryptic peptides  Tryptic peptides in 1% (v/v) formic acid were centrifuged at 14,000 rpm for 2 min before application to a solid phase extraction column (1cc Oasis HLB, Waters) that had been conditioned with 800 µL of buffer A (80 % (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1 % (w/v) trifluroacetic acid), followed by 1000 µL of buffer B (0.1 % trifluroacetic acid). After application of the tryptic peptides, the column was washedin buffer B, before the peptides were eluted in 800 µL of buffer A, and concentrated to 100 µL final volume for mass spectrometry analysis.  ESI–LC–MS/MS Peptides (2 µL) were diluted to 30 μL in 0.1% trifluroacetic acid and 2% acetonitrile (buffer A) were loaded onto a trap column (C18 PepMap 100 μm i.d. × 2 cm trapping column, Thermo-Fisher Scientific) at 5 μL/min for 6 min and washed for 6 min before switching the precolumn in line with the analytical column (Easy-Spray 75 μm i.d. × 50 cm, Thermo-Fisher Scientific). The separation of peptides was performed at 250 nL/min using a linear acetonitrile gradient of buffer A and buffer B (0.1% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile), starting from 5% buffer B to 60% over 300 min. Data were collected on an Orbitrap Elite (Thermo-Fisher Scientific) in Data Dependent Acquisition mode using m/z 300–1500 as MS scan range. CID MS/MS spectra were collected for the 20 most intense ions. Dynamic exclusion parameters were set as follows; repeat count 1, duration 90 s, the exclusion list size was set at 500 with early expiration disabled. Other instrument parameters for the Orbitrap were as follows: MS scan at 120 000 resolution, maximum injection time 150 ms, AGC target 1 × 106, CID at 35% energy for a maximum injection time of 150 ms with AGT target of 5000. The Orbitrap Elite was operated in dual analyser mode with the Orbitrap analyser being used for MS and the linear trap being used for MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
High sensitivity qualitative searches of the cellular control MS/MS spectra were performed using Search GUI and Peptide shaker (Vaudel et al., 2015) within the Galaxy environment (Boekel et al., 2015). Input mgf peak lists were processed by Comet, MS-GF+, and OMSSA. Searches were performed and combined with SearchGUI before being passed to Peptide shaker to process the output and produce a single combined analysis. Peptide shaker was run with a false discovery rate of 1% at the protein, peptide and PSM level.  MzidentML files were created and protein reports exported from Peptide Shaker with the final protein identifications.  All searches were made against the Fusarium graminearum PH-1 (FG3) predicted proteome annotation from the Broad institute (“Fusarium Comparative Sequencing Project, Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT”). Protein sequences from the cRAP database of common lab contaminants (www.thegpm.org/crap) were added to the database. Decoy sequences were included for all searches.

### Publication Abstract
The plant pathogenic fungus Fusarium graminearum (Fgr) creates economic and health risks in cereals agriculture. Fgr causes head blight (or scab) of wheat and stalk rot of corn, reducing yield, degrading grain quality, and polluting downstream food products with mycotoxins. Fungal plant pathogens must secrete proteases to access nutrition and to breakdown the structural protein component of the plant cell wall. Research into the proteolytic activity of Fgr is hindered by the complex nature of the suite of proteases secreted. We used a systems biology approach comprising genome analysis, transcriptomics and label-free quantitative proteomics to characterize the peptidases deployed by Fgr during growth. A combined analysis of published microarray transcriptome datasets revealed seven transcriptional groupings of peptidases based on in vitro growth, in planta growth, and sporulation behaviors. A high resolution mass spectrometry-based proteomics analysis defined the extracellular proteases secreted by F. graminearum. A meta-classification based on sequence characters and transcriptional/translational activity in planta and in vitro provides a platform to develop control strategies that target Fgr peptidases.

### Keywords
Peptidase, Fusarium graminearum, Protease, Cellular proteome, In vitro

### Affiliations
La Trobe University
Dept. of Biochemistry and Genetics, La Trobe Institute for Molecular Science, La Trobe University

### Submitter
Rohan Lowe

### Lab Head
Dr Marilyn Anderson
Dept. of Biochemistry and Genetics, La Trobe Institute for Molecular Science, La Trobe University


