### Accession
PXD030804

### Title
Precision structural interpretation of site-specific N-glycans in seminal plasma

### Description
This study is aimed to comprehensively and globally characterize seminal plasma glycoproteins in a site-specific manner with information of N-glycosites and corresponding glycan structures, as well as glycan isomers using mass spectrometry. Furthermore, the function of specific glycan structures is introduced during human reproduction. In addition, site-specific glycoproteins are compared precisely to explored the sub-glycan structure regulation of glycoprotein in human seminal plasma and spermatozoa.

### Sample Protocol
Seminal plasma proteins are extracted and digested by trypsin, then IGPs are harvested after C18 desalination and hydrophilic cotton columns enrichment. The IGPs are then fractionated, subjected to LC−MS/MS analysis and followed by IGP identiﬁcation using StrucGP

### Data Protocol
The “Raw” format LC−MS/MS data of IGPs were was first converted to “mzML” format by Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (TPP, v5.0.0) and analyzed by our recently developed software StrucGP. The built-in glycan branch structure database from StrucGP and the UniProtKB of human protein databases (downloaded from http://www.uniprot.org May 2020) were was used for the analysis. The protein enzymatic digestion was set as trypsin with max 2 missed cleavage sites and potential glycosite-containing peptides were screened with the N-X-S/T motif (X is any amino acid except Proline). The carbamidomethylation (C, +57.0215 Da) was as a fixed modification, and oxidization (M, +15.9949 Da) as a dynamic modification. The mass tolerances for MS1 and MS2 were set at 10 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively. For the Y ions determination, an optional mass shift of ±1 Da or ±2 Da was allowed in addition to the 20 ppm mass tolerance in MS2. Finally, FDR evaluation of peptides and glycans (FDR<1%) was determined by a decoy database and a decoy spectrum, respectively

### Publication Abstract
N-Linked glycoproteins are rich in seminal plasma, playing various essential roles in supporting sperm function and the fertilization process. However, the detailed information on these glycoproteins, particularly site-specific glycan structures, is still limited. In this study, a precision site-specific <i>N-</i>glycoproteome map of human seminal plasma was established by employing the site-specific glycoproteomic approach and a recently developed glycan structure interpretation software, StrucGP. A total of 9567 unique glycopeptides identified in human seminal plasma were composed of 773 N-linked glycan structures and 1019 <i>N</i>-glycosites from 620 glycoproteins. These glycans were comprised of four types of core structures and 13 branch structures. The majority of identified glycoproteins functioned in response to stimulus and immunity. As we reported in human spermatozoa, heavy fucosylation (fucose residues &#x2265;6 per glycan) was also detected on seminal plasma glycoproteins such as clusterin and galectin-3-binding protein, which were involved in the immune response of biological processes and reactome pathways. Comparison of site-specific glycans between seminal plasma and spermatozoa revealed more complicated glycan structures in seminal plasma than in spermatozoa, even on their shared glycoproteins. These present data will be greatly beneficial for the in-depth structural and functional study of glycosylation in the male reproduction system.

### Keywords
Glycoproteomics, Intact glycopeptides, Seminal plasma, Glycan structures, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
College of Life Science, Northwest University, Xi’an, Shaanxi Province 710069, P. R. China
Northwest University

### Submitter
Miaomiao Xin

### Lab Head
Dr Shisheng Sun
Northwest University


