### Accession
PXD046911

### Title
Candida auris proteomic profiling

### Description
In this study, we designed a novel antifungal agent, PQA-Az-13 that demonstrated antifungal activity against C. auris biofilms. Cellular proteomics indicated that PQA-Az-13 partially or completely inhibited numerous enzymatic proteins in C. auris biofilms, particularly those involved in both amino acid biosynthesis and metabolism processes, as well as in general energy-producing processes. Due to its hydrophobic nature and limited aqueous solubility, PQA-Az-13 was encapsulated in cationic liposomes and characterized by biophysical and spectral techniques. PQA-Az-13 liposomes demonstrated enhanced antifungal activity levels against both C. auris in in vitro biofilms and ex vivo skin colonization models.

### Sample Protocol
C. auris biofilms were grown in 6-well plates for 48 h and PQA-Az-13 was applied at a subinhibitory concentration of 0.5 g/mL after 24 h of incubation. Biofilms were then removed from wells with a sterile spatula and harvested in 1 mL sterile water per individual well. The aliquots were combined in a 15-mL Falcon tube and the biofilm biomass was sonicated in a water bath sonicator for 20 min, followed by centrifugation at 2880 × g at 4°C for 20 min. Then, the supernatant was decanted, and pelleted fungal biofilm cells were washed twice with PBS containing cOmplete™ Mini Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche) at the concentration recommended by the supplier. Such prepared fungal cells were transferred to 2-mL micro-tubes (Sarstedt) containing glass beads and broken open with in a bead beater (Mini-Beadbeater, Biospec Products) at full speed for 1-min increments for a total of 5 min, with 1-min incubations on ice in between bead-beating repeats. The tubes were then centrifuged at 4000 × g to pellet cell debris and the separated supernatant was filter-sterilized through a 0.2 m syringe filter and transferred to a fresh Eppendorf tube. Protein amounts in such prepared cell lysates were determined using a NanoDrop spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific). Sample preparation and the subsequent proteomics studies were performed as described elsewhere [28]. 200 μg of cellular proteins were extracted by precipitation with 15% TCA/60% acetone and then incubated at −20°C for 30 min. Pelleted proteins were resolubilized and denatured in 10 μL of 8 M urea in 100 mM NH4HCO3 for 10 min, then diluted to 60 μL for tryptic digestion “in liquid” with the following reagents: 3 μL of 25 mM DTT, 4.5 μL of acetonitrile, 36.2 μL of 25 mM NH4HCO3, 0.3 μL of 1M Tris-HCl, and 6 μL of 100 ng/μL Trypsin Gold solution in 25 mM NH4HCO3 (Promega). Digestion was conducted in two stages, first overnight at 37°C, then additional 4 μL volumes of trypsin solution were added and the mixtures were incubated at 42°C for an additional 2 h. The reaction was terminated by acidification with 2.5% TFA to a final concentration of 0.3% and then centrifuged at 16,000 × g for 10 min. Trypsin-generated peptides were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS using the Agilent 1100 nanoflow HPLC system (Agilent) connected to a hybrid linear ion trap-orbitrap mass spectrometer (LTQ-Orbitrap, Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source. Capillary HPLC was performed using an in-house fabricated column with an integrated electrospray emitter [29]. Sample loading and desalting were achieved using a trapping column in line with the autosampler (Zorbax 300SB-C18, 5 μm, 5 × 0.3 mm, Agilent). The LTQ-Orbitrap was set to acquire MS/MS spectra in a data-dependent mode as follows: MS survey scans from 300 to 2,000 m/z were collected in profile mode with a resolving power of 100,000. MS/MS spectra were collected on the five most abundant signals in each survey scan. Dynamic exclusion was employed to increase the dynamic range and maximize peptide identifications.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS/MS data were searched against a concatenated C. auris amino acid sequence database using an in-house MASCOT search engine [30]. Identified proteins were further annotated and filtered to 1.5% peptide and 0.1% protein false-discovery-rate with Scaffold Q+ version 4.11.1 (Proteome Software Inc.) using the protein prophet algorithm [31]. Mascot was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.60 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 ppm. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine and j+138 of leucine/isoleucine indecision were specified in Mascot as fixed modifications. The deamination of asparagine and glutamine and the oxidation of methionine were specified in Mascot as variable modifications.  The cellular proteomes of C. auris were analyzed using both KEGG pathway maps and the BRITE hierarchies databases deposited at the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG). BLASTP-based mapped protein orthologies between C. auris and C. albicans species were obtained from the Candida Genome Database (CGD) and, for each protein detected in this study, a KEGG Ontology ID (KOID) was assigned, while retaining related specific pathway and superpathway membership information, as determined by KEGG/BRITE assignments. The visualization of relative quantities of biofilm cellular proteins as ratios of  PQA-Az-13-treated vs. untreated controls was done using KEGG/BRITE protein functional categorization. Based on this hierarchical classification scheme, Voronoi treemaps were constructed using Paver (v. 2.1.9, DECODON Software UG). This approach divides screen space according to hierarchical levels in which the main functional categories determine screen sections on the first level, subsidiary categories on the second level, and so forth. The polygonic cells of the deepest level represent functionally classified proteins and are colored according to the relative abundance of each protein that was determined, based on total counts of corresponding trypsin-digested peptides.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Candida auris, Biofilm, Ex vivo skin colonization

### Affiliations
Medical Microbiology and Immunology, Division of Infectious Disease
University of Wisconsin

### Submitter
Greg Sabat

### Lab Head
Dr David Andes
Medical Microbiology and Immunology, Division of Infectious Disease


