### Accession
PXD005347

### Title
Alzheimer Disease model detergent insoluble proteomes

### Description
Characterizing the detergent insoluble brain proteome of sporadic late-onset Alzheimer’s disease (LOAD) has identified proteins and pathways associated with disease pathogenesis. Similar studies in early onset Alzheimer’s disease cases due to presenilin-1 mutations (PS1-EOAD), along with more detailed correlations with insoluble proteomes from LOAD and AD transgenic rodents, are limited. We therefore utilized quantitative proteomics to identify proteins that were significantly changing in the PS1-EOAD insoluble proteome versus controls. Comparison with the LOAD insoluble proteome identified common pathologic AD markers in addition to unique PS1-EOAD insoluble proteins. Similarly, weighted correlation network analysis (WGCNA) identified PS1-EOAD and LOAD co-expression modules with both like and disparate expression levels. Finally, we compared the human PS1-EOAD insoluble proteome to transgenic AD mouse and rat insoluble proteomes to understand how well these models mimic the human disease. Although many common AD pathologic findings were found in the rodents, there were multiple PS1-EOAD proteome changes not well recapitulated in the animal models. These proteomic studies highlight unique PS1-EOAD proteome changes as compared to LOAD and identify limitations to using AD transgenic rodents to study some aspects of AD. This submission exclusively provides the mouse and rat model data.

### Sample Protocol
Amyloid precursor protein/PS1 (APP/PS1; APPswe/PS1ݛE9 mutations) and wild type (WT) mice (12 months old) were obtained from Dr. Jeremy Herskowitz (Emory University, Atlanta, GA) and APP/PS1 (APPswe/PS1ݛE9 mutations) and WT rats (10 months old) were obtained from Robert Cohen (Emory University, Atlanta, GA) [8, 9]. Animal samples were collected under Emory IACUC approved protocols. Samples were prepared as previous described [4, 7]. Briefly, ~150 mg of fresh frozen tissue was homogenized on ice using a 2 ml dounce homogenizer in low salt buffer (50 mM HEPES, 25 mM NaCl, 250 mM sucrose, 1 mM EDTA, Sigma protease inhibitor cocktail). 10% N-lauryl sarcosine and 5 M NaCl was then used to bring samples to a final concentration of 1% N-lauryl sarcosine and 0.5 M NaCl. Samples were sonicated (Sonic Dismembrator System, Fisher Scienific) with a microtip probe using 3 x 5 second pulses (30% amplitude) with 15 seconds off time in between. Samples were transferred to an ultracentrifuge tube and centrifuged at 180,000xg for 30 minutes at 4°C. The supernatant was carefully removed and saved. The remaining detergent insoluble pellet was dissolved in 8 M urea and 2% sodium dodecyl sulfate. LC-MS/MS analysis and label free quantification were performed as previously described [11]. 50 µg of the detergent insoluble fraction from individual cases was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 15 minutes at room temperature followed by alkylation with 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 minutes at room temperature in the dark and run on a 10% SDS gel and stained with Coomassie blue.  Each gel lane was split into 5 molecular weight regions and subjected to subsequent in-gel trypsin digestion (12.5 µg/ml trypsin at 37°C overnight). Peptides were extracted with formic acid and acetonitrile followed by liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry. In the case of the rat model, 50 µg of total homogenate and detergent soluble fractions were likewise processed and run in the same gel as the insoluble fraction, which permitted borrowing of MS1 XIC peak identifications in the insoluble pellet fractions, and thereby providing deeper coverage of the insoluble fraction.

### Data Protocol
The SageN Sorcerer SEQUEST 3.5 algorithm matched MS/MS spectra to a semi-tryptic mouse proteome database (NCBI reference sequence revision 54, 57,732 proteins), or rat proteome database (NCBI reference sequence 62, 59,378 proteins). For rat database, human APP sequence was added. SEQUEST parameters were 20.0 ppm peptide mass tolerance, oxidation on Met residues as a differential modification, up to 3 instances per peptide, and an isotope check using a mass shift of 1.003355 Da. Extracted ion current (XIC) measurements of peptides were used to quantify protein levels using previously published in-house DQuan software with standard parameters.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Neurodegeneration, Dquan, In-gel digestion, In house xic quantitation

### Affiliations
Emory University
Departments of Biochemistry and Neurology Emory University School of Medicine

### Submitter
Eric Dammer

### Lab Head
Dr Nicholas T. Seyfried
Departments of Biochemistry and Neurology Emory University School of Medicine


