### Accession
PXD002515

### Title
Temporal analysis of phospho-proteome changes following Rho-kinase inhibition.

### Description
To define short and long-term changes in the phospho-proteome of the cells following Rho-kinase inhibition with H1152 inhibitor, in mouse embryonic fibroblast cells.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC heavy and light labelled MEFs were treated for 20 minutes or overnight with H1152 vs. vehicle in duplicate (heavy vs. light as well as light vs. heavy). Cells were then lysed by 2%SDS, Tris-HCl pH 7.5, and protein concentrations were measured and balanced by BCA assay. The reciprocal labels of drug and vehicle treated lysates were then mixed 1:1, resulting in two reciprocally labelled SILAC replicates (Heavy drug + light vehicle and vice versa). The mixed lysates were then reduced by addition of 100mM DTT and boiling for 5 min, followed by trypsin digestion using Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) protocol. For phospho-peptide analysis, the digests were subjected to phospho-peptide enrichment by TiO2 tips (GL sciences).

### Data Protocol
The raw data was searched and quantified using Maxquant. All subsequent statistical analysis was performed using Perseus software from the Maxquant package.

### Publication Abstract
Rho-associated kinases 1 and 2 (ROCK1/2) are Rho-GTPase effectors that control key aspects of the actin cytoskeleton, but their role in proliferation and cancer initiation or progression is not known. Here, we provide evidence that ROCK1 and ROCK2 act redundantly to maintain actomyosin contractility and cell proliferation and that their loss leads to cell-cycle arrest and cellular senescence. This phenotype arises from down-regulation of the essential cell-cycle proteins CyclinA, CKS1 and CDK1. Accordingly, while the loss of either Rock1 or Rock2 had no negative impact on tumorigenesis in mouse models of non-small cell lung cancer and melanoma, loss of both blocked tumor formation, as no tumors arise in which both Rock1 and Rock2 have been genetically deleted. Our results reveal an indispensable role for ROCK, yet redundant role for isoforms 1 and 2, in cell cycle progression and tumorigenesis, possibly through the maintenance of cellular contractility.

### Keywords
Mouse embryonic fibroblasts; rock1/2; phospho-myosin light chain; h1152

### Affiliations
Institute of Cancer Research, Division of Cancer Biology, 237 Fulham Road, London SW3 6JB, UK.
Institute of Cancer Research

### Submitter
Sandra Kuemper

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher J. Marshall
Institute of Cancer Research, Division of Cancer Biology, 237 Fulham Road, London SW3 6JB, UK.


