### Accession
PXD037956

### Title
Protein expression in isogenic cancer cell line models of 1q aneuploidy

### Description
Investigating differential protein expression between 1q trisomy and 1q disomy cancer cell lines in isogenic backgrounds

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were thawed and a VialTweeter device (Hielscher-Ultrasound Technology) was used to sonicate the samples (4 °C; 1 min; two cycles). The samples were centrifuged at 20,000 g for 1 hour to remove insoluble material. Protein concentration was measured using the Bio-Rad protein assay dye (Bio-Rad, #5000006). 800 µg of protein per sample were diluted (final concentration = 2 µg/ µl) using a 6 M urea/100 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer, reduced by 10 mM DTT (1 hour; 56 °C), and alkylated by 20 mM IAA (1 hour; RT). The proteins were subjected to a precipitation-based digestion as described previously (Collins et al., 2017). Briefly, five volumes of precooled precipitation solution (50% acetone, 50% ethanol, and 0.1% acetic acid) were added to the samples. After overnight incubation at -20 °C, the samples were centrifuged (20,000 x g; 4 °C; 40 min). The precipitate was washed with precooled 100% acetone,  centrifuged (20,000 x g; 4 °C; 40 min), and the remaining acetone was evaporated in a SpeedVac. For protein digestion, 300 µL of 100 mM NH4HCO3 with sequencing grade porcine trypsin (Promega) at a trypsin-to-protein ratio of 1: 20 were added and incubated overnight at 37 °C. The resulting peptide samples were acidified with formic acid and desalted using a C18 column (MarocoSpin Columns, NEST Group INC.) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  1 µg of the peptide mixture was used for the LC-MS analysis as described previously (Liu et al., 2019; Mehnert et al., 2019). The LC separation was performed using an EASY‐nLC 1200 system (Thermo Scientific) using a self-packed PicoFrit column (New Objective, Woburn, MA, USA; 75 µm × 50 cm length) with a ReproSil‐Pur 120A C18‐Q 1.9 µm resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany). A 120-min gradient length was used to elute peptides from the LC; with buffer B (80% acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid) from 5% to 37% and corresponding buffer A (0.1% formic acid in H2O). The flow rate was 300 nL/ min, and the temperature was controlled at 60 °C using a column oven (PRSO-V1, Sonation GmbH, Biberach, Germany). The Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled with a NanoFlex ion source (spray voltage of 2000 V,  275 °C) was used for the MS analysis. The method for DIA-MS consisted of a MS1 survey scan and 33 MS2 scans of variable windows (Bruderer et al., 2017; Bruderer et al., 2019). The MS1 scan parameters were set as follows: scan range 350–1650 m/z, resolution 120,000 at m/z 200, the AGC target 2.0E6, and the maximum injection time 100 ms. The normalized HCD collision energy was 28%. The MS2 scan parameters were the following: resolution 30,000 at m/z 200, the AGC target 1.5E6, and the maximum injection time 50 ms. The default peptide charge state was set to 2. Both of MS1 and MS2 spectra were recorded in a profile mode.

### Data Protocol
The DIA-MS data analysis was performed using Spectronaut v15 (Bruderer et al., 2015; Bruderer et al., 2017) using the library-free DirectDIA workflow (Bruderer et al., 2017; Tsou et al., 2015) and the Swiss-Prot protein database (September 2020, 20,375 entries). The analysis was performed using default Spectronaut settings. Methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications, where carbamidomethylation at cysteine was set as a fixed modification. Both peptide- and protein-FDR were controlled at 1%, and the resulting data matrix was filtered by “Qvalue”. The quantification was performed using the MS2 level peak areas. Protein intensities were exported, log2-transformed and normalized using LOESS normalization (Smyth, 2005) prior the subsequent analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Aneuploidy, Cancer

### Affiliations
Yale Cancer Biology Institute
Yale University, Department of Pharmacology

### Submitter
Barbora Salovska

### Lab Head
Dr Yansheng Liu
Yale University, Department of Pharmacology


