### Accession
PXD006467

### Title
Oxygen-dependent changes in protein expression in Campylobacter jejuni NCTC11168

### Description
Using strain NCTC 11168 in carbon (serine)-limited continuous cultures we report the first detailed examination of oxygen-dependent changes in gene and protein expression in Campylobacter jejuni under conditions where the growth rate is fixed. We show that in steady-states established at μ = 0.2 h-1 over a wide-range of oxygen inputs, a perceived aerobiosis scale can be calibrated by the acetate excretion flux, which becomes zero when metabolism is fully aerobic (100% aerobiosis = 5% v/v oxygen in the gas inflow). A label-free proteomic analysis compared protein abundance (reported as the emPAI ratio) at 40% aerobiosis (= 1.88% v/v oxygen in the gas inflow) and 150% aerobiosis (= 7.5% v/v oxygen in the gas inflow) aerobiosis. This identified 857 proteins. Of 223 proteins more abundant at 40% aerobiosis, those involved in host colonisation and alternative pathways of electron transport were prominent. At 150% aerobiosis, 129 proteins were more abundant, including those involved in oxidative stress protection, citric-acid cycle, lactate and proline oxidation.

### Sample Protocol
Cell-free extracts prepared from three independent steady-states at both 40% aerobiosis (coded LF_1, LF_2, LF_3) and 150% aerobiosis (coded LF_4, LF_5, LF_6) were separated on 1D SDS-PAGE gels which were stained with Coomassie blue. Three replicate gel lanes were run for each independent steady-state sample (coded LF_1A, LF_1B, LF_1C, LF_2A etc). The gel lanes were cut up into 1mm squares which were placed in Eppendorf tubes and immersed in miliQ water at 4 °C overnight, then equilibrated in 200 mM ammonium bicarbonate/50% v/v acetonitrile by three successive incubations in fresh solution for 15 min each at room temperature.  The final solution was removed and the gel slices washed twice with acetonitrile and air dried. To each tube, 1 ml of 10 mM DTT in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate was added and incubated for 30 min at 60 °C. The solution was then replaced with 1 ml 100 mM iodoacetamide in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and incubated for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. The solution was removed and the gel pieces were equilibrated again with two successive 15 min incubations in 200 mM ammonium bicarbonate/50% v/v acetonitrile, then washed twice with 1 ml acetonitrile and air-dried. To each tube of gel pieces, 40 μl of trysin solution containing 10 ng/μl of Trypsin Gold (Promega V528A) in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate was added, followed by a further 80 μl of 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate to ensure all gel pieces were immersed. After incubation overnight at 37 °C, an equal volume of 2% (v/v) formic acid was added, the digest was frozen on dry-ice for 30 min, then thawed and the solution removed to a fresh tube.  The remaining gel pieces were incubated for 10 min with 240 μl 50 % v/v acetonitrile to recover more digested peptides from the gel; this extract was then added to the first trypsin digest sample. The combined extracted digest samples were then dried down at the Low Drying setting (no heat) on a Speed Vac SC110 (Savant) fitted with a Refrigerated Condensation Trap and a Vac V-500 (Buchi).  The samples were then frozen on dry ice and stored at -80 °C until ready for Orbitrap MS analysis. Triplicate 10 μl injections for each gel lane sample (coded LF_1A_1, LF_1A_2, LF_1A_3 etc) were made on an LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoElectron) coupled to a nanoflow-HPLC system (nanoACQUITY; Waters).

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were analyzed using MASCOT (version 2.4.1), set up to search the Campy_jejuni_11168_20130304 database (1624 entries). Mascot was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.50 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 5.0 PPM. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified in Mascot as a fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine was specified in Mascot as a variable modification. Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.6.1, Proteome software Inc., Portland, USA) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.9% probability by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.9% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii, Al et al Anal. Chem. 2003;75(17):4646-58). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins were annotated with GO terms from NCBI. (Ashburner, M et al Nat. Genet. 2000;25(1):25-9). The normalised emPAI values calculated within the Scaffold programe were used for comparing relative abundance of proteins at 1.88% and 7.5% oxygen (40% and 150% aerobiosis respectively)

### Publication Abstract
Campylobacter jejuni, the most frequent cause of food-borne bacterial gastroenteritis worldwide, is a microaerophile that has to survive high environmental oxygen tensions, adapt to oxygen limitation in the intestine and resist host oxidative attack. Here, oxygen-dependent changes in C. jejuni physiology were studied at constant growth rate using carbon (serine)-limited continuous chemostat cultures. We show that a perceived aerobiosis scale can be calibrated by the acetate excretion flux, which becomes zero when metabolism is fully aerobic (100% aerobiosis). Transcriptome changes in a downshift experiment from 150% to 40% aerobiosis revealed many novel oxygen-regulated genes and highlighted re-modelling of the electron transport chains. A label-free proteomic analysis showed that at 40% aerobiosis, many proteins involved in host colonisation (e.g., PorA, CadF, FlpA, CjkT) became more abundant. PorA abundance increased steeply below 100% aerobiosis. In contrast, several citric-acid cycle enzymes, the peptide transporter CstA, PEB1 aspartate/glutamate transporter, LutABC lactate dehydrogenase and PutA proline dehydrogenase became more abundant with increasing aerobiosis. We also observed a co-ordinated response of oxidative stress protection enzymes and Fe-S cluster biogenesis proteins above 100% aerobiosis. Our approaches reveal key virulence factors that respond to restricted oxygen availability and specific transporters and catabolic pathways activated with increasing aerobiosis.

### Keywords
Oxidative stress, Oxygen, Electron transport, Label-free, Mass spectrometry, Campylobacter

### Affiliations
University of Sheffield 
Department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology The University of Sheffield Sheffield S10 2TN, UK

### Submitter
David Kelly

### Lab Head
Dr Professor David Jacob Kelly
Department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology The University of Sheffield Sheffield S10 2TN, UK


