### Accession
PXD044483

### Title
Plastic degrdation in Rhodococcus A34

### Description
The study aimed to explore the potential of bacterial biodegradation as a solution to the global problem of plastic pollution, specifically targeting polyethylene (PE), one of the most common types of plastic. The goals of the study were to isolate a bacterial strain capable of breaking down PE, identify the key enzymes responsible for the degradation process, and understand the metabolic pathways involved.

### Sample Protocol
The protein samples for proteomics were prepared using a modified protocol from a previous study. Cell pellets were re-suspended in lysis buffer, disrupted with a bead-beating method, and centrifuged to collect the supernatant. Proteins were precipitated overnight using trichloroacetic acid and collected by centrifugation. Protein pellets were washed with ice-cold acetone and resuspended in guanidine buffer. Protein concentrations were quantified using a BCA Protein Assay Kit. For proteomics assay preparation, 20 mg of protein was processed using the filter-aided sample preparation method and digested with a trypsin-LysC mixture. Peptide samples were purified using C18 Spin Columns and eluted in elution buffer. Tryptic peptides were separated using reverse phase XSelect CSH C18 2.5 um resin on an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system. Peptides were eluted using a 120 min gradient and ionized by electrospray, followed by mass spectrometric analysis on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry spectra were searched using Sipros Ensemble against a matched protein database constructed from the genome sequencing. Raw search results were filtered to achieve a 1% false-discovery rate (FDR) at the peptide level. Peptide identifications were assigned to proteins or protein groups following the parsimonious rule. A minimum of one unique peptide was required for each identified protein or protein group. Intensity-based label-free quantification of protein was performed using ProRata. The protein abundance was represented by the total peak height of all quantified unique peptides from one sample and was normalized by the mean across the entire dataset. Normalized proteomics data were further analyzed by protein function and corresponding pathways.

### Publication Abstract
Polyethylene (PE) is the most widely produced synthetic polymer and the most abundant plastic waste worldwide due to its recalcitrance to biodegradation and low recycle rate. Microbial degradation of PE has been reported, but the underlying mechanisms are poorly understood. Here, we isolated a <i>Rhodococcus</i> strain A34 from 609 day enriched cultures derived from naturally weathered plastic waste and identified the potential key PE degradation enzymes. After 30 days incubation with A34, 1% weight loss was achieved. Decreased PE molecular weight, appearance of C-O and C&#x2550;O on PE, palmitic acid in the culture supernatant, and pits on the PE surface were observed. Proteomics analysis identified multiple key PE oxidation and depolymerization enzymes including one multicopper oxidase, one lipase, six esterase, and a few lipid transporters. Network analysis of proteomics data demonstrated the close relationships between PE degradation and metabolisms of phenylacetate, amino acids, secondary metabolites, and tricarboxylic acid cycles. The metabolic roadmap generated here provides critical insights for optimization of plastic degradation condition and assembly of artificial microbial communities for efficient plastic degradation.

### Keywords
Rhodococcus, Isolation, Pe degradation

### Affiliations
Institute for Environmental Genomics, Department of Microbiology and Plant Biology, University of Oklahoma, Norman, OK, USA
University of Oklahoma

### Submitter
Xuanyu Tao

### Lab Head
Dr Aifen Zhou
Institute for Environmental Genomics, Department of Microbiology and Plant Biology, University of Oklahoma, Norman, OK, USA


