### Accession
PXD039510

### Title
Identifying secreted biomarkers of dopaminergic ventral midbrain progenitor cells

### Description
Ventral midbrain (VM) dopaminergic progenitor cells derived from human pluripotent stem cells have the potential to replace endogenously lost dopamine neurons and are currently in preclinical and clinical development for treatment of Parkinson’s Disease (PD). However, one main challenge in the quality control of the cells is that rostral and caudal VM progenitors are extremely similar transcriptionally though only the caudal VM cells give rise to dopaminergic neurons with functionality in PD. Therefore, it is critical to develop assays which can rapidly and reliably discriminate rostral from caudal VM cells during clinical manufacturing. Here, we applied shotgun proteomics to search for novel secreted biomarkers specific for caudal VM progenitors compared to rostral VM progenitors and validated key hits by ELISA. From this, we identified novel secreted markers (CPE, LGI1 and PDGFC) significantly enriched in caudal versus rostral VM progenitor cultures, whereas the markers CNTN2 and CORIN were significantly enriched in rostral VM cultures. With this data, we suggest and test in clinical grade samples a panel of coupled ELISA assays that can be applied as a quality control tool for assessing the correct patterning of cells during clinical manufacturing.

### Sample Protocol
Media samples from vM cultures harvested at D17 were prepared for mass spectrometry using in-solution digestion. Proteins were denatured with 8M Urea (50mM Ambic) and reduced with 10 mM (50mM AmBic) Dithiothreitol (DTT) at 56oC for 1h with 900 rpm shaking.  Subsequently, samples were alkylated with 20mM (50mM AmBic) Iodoacetamide (IAA) in darkness for 30 min at room temperature. Ethanol was added to all samples with a ratio 1:9 (v/v, sample:ethanol) for protein precipitation and incubated over night at -20oC. After precipitation, samples were centrifuged at 12000 rpm x 15 minutes at 4oC and ethanol was removed with a pipette. Protein pellets were dried in a concentrator to remove any remaining trace of ethanol, followed by pellet dissolution in 100 µl 50 mM AmBic. For protein digestion, 2 µg Trypsin with a ratio 1:50 (w/w, Trypsin:sample) was added to each sample followed by incubation at 37oC for 17h with shaking (350 rpm). Protein digestion was stopped by reducing pH to 4 with Formic acid (v/v 10% in AmBic). Biognosys iRT peptides were added to each sample in a ratio 1:10 (v/v iRT:sample). Samples were then dried in a concentrator and stored at -80oC.  To enrich for secreted vesicles, media samples harvested at D11, D14 and D16 were run in a differential centrifugation protocol in the following order: 300 g x 10 min at 4oC, 2000 g x 10 min at 4oC and 10 000 g x 30 min at 4oC. In between each centrifugation step, the supernatant was transferred to new tubes. Media samples from the same cultures were pooled and transferred to ultracentrifugation tubes. Samples were ultra-centrifuged at 100 000 g x 70 minutes at 4oC. The supernatant was discarded and 12 ml 50 mM AmBic was added to the top of each tube to wash the pellet, followed by another ultra-centrifugation step at 100 000 g x 70 minutes at 4oC. After centrifugation, the top 11 ml of media was discarded while the remaining 1 ml volume was mixed with a pipette to dissolve the vesicle pellet. The 1 ml sample was then transferred to new tubes for MS sample preparation. Sample volumes were reduced to 100 µl using a concentrator, followed by the addition of 50 µl RIPA buffer for vesicle lysis and protein denaturation.  To further improve lysis, samples were placed in a Bioruptor run for 50 cycles (High Power 15s/ OFF 15 s) at 4oC. After lysis, proteins in the samples were reduced, alkylated and precipitated according to the method for the whole supernatant samples as described above. After precipitation, samples were centrifuged at 14 000 rpm x 15 min at 4oC and the supernatant was discarded. Samples where further dried in a concentrator to remove any trace of ethanol. To dissolve the pellet, 50 µl AmBic (100 mM) was added to each sample. In order to remove glycosylations on Arginine residues, 1.5 µl PNGase F was added to each sample and incubated for 18h with little shaking. For protein digestion 1.4 µg Trypsin was added to each sample with a ratio 1:50 (w/w, Trypsin:sample) and incubated at 37oC for 22h with shaking (350 rpm). Protein digestion was stopped with 10 µl Formic acid (v/v 10% in AmBic). Samples were dried in a concentrator and stored in -80oC.

### Data Protocol
DIA analysis and spectral library building with DIA-NN v.1.8 DDA analysis with MaxQuant v.1.6.1.0

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cell replacement therapy, Dopaminergic progenitors, Biomarkers, Mass spectrometry, Parkinson’s disease

### Affiliations
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Stem Cell Medicine – reNEW, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark; Department of Neuroscience, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark; Department of Experimental Medical Science, Lund University, Sweden; Wallenberg Center for Molecular Medicine, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.
Lund University

### Submitter
Marc Isaksson

### Lab Head
Dr Agnete Kirkeby
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Stem Cell Medicine – reNEW, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark; Department of Neuroscience, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark; Department of Experimental Medical Science, Lund University, Sweden; Wallenberg Center for Molecular Medicine, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.


