### Accession
PXD037506

### Title
Proteomic Profile of Urinary Extracellular Vesicles Unravelled Biomarkers for Prostate Cancer Recognition

### Description
Proteomic profiling of extracellular vesicles (EVs) represents a promising approach for early detection and therapeutic monitoring of diseases such as cancer, which was aimed for identifying novel biomarkers for prostate cancer diagnosis in this study. The focus of this study was to develop a robust data independent acquisition (DIA) using mass spectrometry to analyse urinary EV proteomics for prostate cancer and prostate inflammation screening. We combined three library-based analysis (direct-DIA, GPF-DIA, and fractionated DDA) to improve the stability and comprehensiveness of biomarkers. By applying this innovative DIA strategy in conjunction with stable automatic EVs extraction technology, we assessed the levels of urinary EV-associated proteins based on 40 samples consisting of 20 cases and 20 controls, where 18 EV proteins were identified to be differentiated in prostate cancer outcome, of which 3 (i.e., SERPINA3, LRG1, SCGB3A1) were shown to be consistently up regulated. We also observed 6 out of the 18 (33%) EV proteins that had been developed as drug targets, while some of them showed interactions. Moreover, the potential mechanistic pathways of significantly different EV proteins, were enriched in metabolic, immune, and inflammatory activities. These results showed consistent in an independent cohort consist of 20 participants. Based on random forest algorithm, we found that SERPINA3, LRG1, SCGB3A1 add predictable value in addition to age, prostate size, body mass index (BMI) and prostate-specific antigen (PSA). In summary, the current study revealed the EV proteomic landscape and biomarkers for prostate cancer, which has shown to provide promising insights of urine EV proteome in clinical implication.

### Sample Protocol
The eluted EVs were added into 100 μL PTS lysate and then boiled in a 95 ℃ water bath for 10 min. Then, it was cooled to room temperature and diluted five-fold with 50 mM TEAB buffer. BCA assay to determine total protein content and then Lys-C enzyme (EVLiXiR) was added according to the remaining sample protein content: enzyme = 100:1 and incubated at 37 ℃ for 3 h. The trypsin was added according to the sample protein content: trypsin = 50:1 and incubated overnight in a 37 ℃ water bath to further digest the peptides. An amount of 50 μL of 10% TFA was added to acidify the sample to terminate the enzymatic digestion, and five times the volume of ethyl acetate was added and vortexed for 2 min and centrifuged at 15,000 × g for 3 min. The upper layer of ethyl acetate was removed, and the lower phase was lyophilized in a refrigerated vacuum centrifuge. After desalting by using an 8 mm Capture Disk (3 M Empore 2240-SDB-XC) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. All samples were freeze-dried in a refrigerated vacuum centrifuge and stored at −80 ℃.

### Data Protocol
For fractionated DDA sample preparation, 250 μL of 40 biological samples were mixed together to generate a pool urine sample. The EVs isolated from EVrich were lysed, enzymolized and desalted, then redissolved in 20 mM ammonium formate and separated by HPLC.  Phase A is 20 mM ammonium formate, phase B is ACN, 0-14 min is 3% phase B, 14-15 min is 8% phase B, 15-39 min is 29% phase B, 39-43 min is% 41 phase B, 43-60 min is 100% phase B. Collect 1 tube every 1 minute, respectively collect the distillates of the first 20 minutes, circulate for 3 times, and collect 20 distillates in total. After fractionation, the fractions were dried down using SpeedVac. Approximately 8 μL of each reconstituted sample was transferred to a sample vial. The fractionated DDA library was generated using SpectronautTM software 15 (Schlieren, Switzerland). During the generation of DDA library, the BGS fixed parameters of SpectronautTM software are used. The enzyme was set to trypsin/P with up to 2 missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation (C) was selected as a fixed modification, while oxidation (M) and acetylation (protein N-term) were selected as variable modifications. A cut-off of 1% FDR was set at both PSMs and peptides, and a cut-off of 5% FDR at the protein level. The GPF-DIA library was generated by SpectronautTM software 15 (Schlieren, Switzerland) according to Pino et.al. In brief, we obtained the GPF spectra library (n = 8) from narrow mass ranges of 400–500,500–600, 600–700, 700–800, 800–900,900–1000, 1000–1100, and 1100–1200 m/z at the MS1 level. For the MS2 level, 4 m/z DIA spectra were obtained for each MS1 range. The effective isolation window after deconvolution is only 2 m/z. All the DIA data were first searched against the 2021 Human FASTA file with default setting downloaded from UniProt website (https://www.uniprot.org, accessed on 2021). The library search for the GPF-DIA was established using the same parameters as the fractionated DDA spectral library described above.  The mass spectrometry data were analysed using the Direct-DIA analysis function of SpectronautTM software 15 (Schlieren, Switzerland), using the human source database downloaded from the Uniprot website (https://www.uniprot.org, accessed on 2021) as the database for Direct-DIA analysis, and the search library parameters were the default parameters of the BGS Factory Setting for the Direct-DIA analysis process. The library search for the Direct-DIA was established using the same parameters as the fractionated DDA spectral library described above as well.

### Publication Abstract
Proteomic profiling of extracellular vesicles (EVs) represents a promising approach for early detection and therapeutic monitoring of diseases such as cancer. The focus of this study was to apply robust EV isolation and subsequent data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry (DIA-MS) for urinary EV proteomics of prostate cancer and prostate inflammation patients. Urinary EVs were isolated by functionalized magnetic beads through chemical affinity on an automatic station, and EV proteins were analyzed by integrating three library-base analyses (Direct-DIA, GPF-DIA, and Fractionated DDA-base DIA) to improve the coverage and quantitation. We assessed the levels of urinary EV-associated proteins based on 40 samples consisting of 20 cases and 20 controls, where 18 EV proteins were identified to be differentiated in prostate cancer outcome, of which three (i.e., SERPINA3, LRG1, and SCGB3A1) were shown to be consistently upregulated. We also observed 6 out of the 18 (33%) EV proteins that had been developed as drug targets, while some of them showed protein-protein interactions. Moreover, the potential mechanistic pathways of 18 significantly different EV proteins were enriched in metabolic, immune, and inflammatory activities. These results showed consistency in an independent cohort with 20 participants. Using a random forest algorithm for classification assessment, including the identified EV proteins, we found that SERPINA3, LRG1, or SCGB3A1 add predictable value in addition to age, prostate size, body mass index (BMI), and prostate-specific antigen (PSA). In summary, the current study demonstrates a translational workflow to identify EV proteins as molecular markers to improve the clinical diagnosis of prostate cancer.

### Keywords
Extracellular vesicles, Biomarkers, Prostate cancer

### Affiliations
Southeast University
Departments of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana 47907, U.S.A.

### Submitter
Hao Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr W. Andy. Tao
Departments of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana 47907, U.S.A.


