### Accession
PXD042597

### Title
Benefits of FAIMS to improve the proteome coverage of hard-to-analyze TMT 10-plex FFPE tissue and plasma-derived exosomes samples

### Description
The analysis of complex protein mixtures, such as FFPE tissue or plasma exosomes samples, is a challenge nowadays due to the low proteome coverage achieved by mass spectrometers nowadays. We have here investigated the benefits of FAIMS technology coupled to the Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer for the TMT quantitative proteomics analyses of these complex samples, in comparison to easy-to-work cell protein extracts. A two-hours gradient LC-MS/MS without or with FAIMS and two compensation voltages (CV=-45 and CV=-60) was used for the analysis. Although a slightly increase in the number of identified and quantified proteins was associated to a decrease in the number of identified and quantified peptides with FAIMS in the cell protein extract TMT experiment, we observed a significant improvement (>100%) in the number of peptide and protein identifications and quantifications for the plasma exosomes and FFPE tissue samples TMT experiments with FAIMS in comparison to the LC-MS/MS analysis without FAIMS. Our results highlight the potential of mass spectrometry analyses with FAIMS to increase the depth into the proteome of complex samples as FFPE and plasma-derived exosomes, which might aid in the characterization of their proteome and proteoforms and in the identification of dysregulated proteins that could be used as biomarkers.

### Sample Protocol
FFPE tissue samples from CRC patients at stage III with or without mutations in KRAS gene were used. For the TMT analyses, 10 μg of each protein extract in 100 μl of RIPA were reduced with 10 μl 100 mM TCEP for 45 min at 37°C and 600 rpm and alkylated with 11 μL of 400 mM chloroacetamide for 30 min at RT, 600 rpm, and in darkness. Then, protein extracts were incubated with 100 µL of SeraMag magnetic beads mix (50% hydrophilic beads - 50% hydrophobic beads, GE Healthcare) and 200 μL of acetonitrile (ACN) for 35 min at RT and 600 rpm for protein binding to the beads. Then, supernatants were discarded, and magnetic beads washed twice with 70% ethanol and once with ACN. Finally, supernatants were discarded, and proteins were O/N digested at 37°C and 600 rpm with 0.5 μg of porcine trypsin (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in 100 μL of 200 mM HEPES, pH 8.0. The day after, samples were sonicated twice, supernatants collected, and separately labeled with the ten different Tandem Mass Tags reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc) in two incubation steps of 30 min at RT and 600 rpm and with 10 μL of reagent per incubation. Finally, samples were incubated with 10 μL of 1 M glycine, pH 2.7 for 30 minutes at RT and 600 rpm. Next, the content of the 10 tubes was pooled together and dried under vacuum prior to peptide separation using High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Briefly, desiccated peptides were reconstituted in 300 μl of 0.1% TFA in H2Omq and columns were equilibrated twice with 300 μl of ACN and twice with 300 μl of 0.1% TFA in H2Omq. Then, peptides were loaded to the columns, washed twice with 300 μl of 0.1% TFA in H2Omq, and separated in 12 fractions of 300 µL each in 0.1% triethylamine, 2.5-100% ACN. Fractions were then mixed in six fractions by pooling the latest fractions with the initial ones (2, 9, and 1; 7 and 3; 10 and 4; 8 and 5; 11 and 6; and 12), dried under vacuum, and stored at -80°C until analysis in six LC-MS/MS runs. Samples were reconstituted in 10 μL of 0.1% FA prior to their injection onto the Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped (or not) with FAIMS Pro Duo interface (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide separation was performed on the Vanquish Neo UHPLC System (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For each analysis, samples were loaded into a precolumn PepMap 100 C18 3 µm, 75 µm x 2 cm Nanoviper Trap 1200BA (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and eluted in an Easy-Spray PepMap RSLC C18 2 µm, 75 µm x 50 cm (Thermo Fisher Scientific) heated at 50°C. The mobile phase flow rate was 300 nL/min and 0.1% FA in H2Omq, and 0.1% FA in 80% ACN were used as buffers A and B, respectively. The 2 h gradient was: 0%-2% buffer B for 4 min, 2% buffer B for 2 min, 2%-42% buffer B for 100 min, 42%-72% buffer B for 14 min, 72%-95% buffer B for 5 min, and 95% buffer B for 10 min. Samples were re-suspended in 10 µL of buffer A, and 2-4 µL (800 ng) of each sample were injected per run. For ionization, 1900 V of liquid junction voltage and 280°C capillary temperature was used. The full scan method employed a m/z 350-1400 mass selection, an Orbitrap resolution of 60000 (at m/z 200), an automatic gain control (AGC) value of 300%, and maximum injection time (IT) of 25 ms. After the survey scan, the 12 most intense pre-cursor ions were selected for MS/MS fragmentation. Fragmentation was performed with a normalized collision energy of 34 and MS/MS scans were acquired with 100 m/z first mass, AGC target of 100%, resolution of 15000 (at m/z 200), intensity threshold of 2x104, isolation window of 0.7 m/z units, a maximum IT of 22 ms, and the TurboTMT enabled. Charge state screening was enabled to reject unassigned, singly charged, and greater than or equal to seven protonated ions. A dynamic exclusion time of 30 s was used to discriminate against previously selected ions. For FAIMS, a gas flow of 4.7 L/min, and CVs= -45V and -60V, or CVs= -30, -45, and -60 were used.

### Data Protocol
MS data were analyzed with MaxQuant (version 2.1.3) using standardized workflows. Mass spectra *.raw files were searched against Uniprot UP000005640_9606.fasta Homo sapiens (human) 2022 database (20577 protein entries) using reporter ion MS2 type for TMTs. Precursor and reporter mass tolerance were set to 4.5 ppm and 0.003 Da, respectively, allowing 2 missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation, acetylation N-terminal and Ser, Thr, and Tyr phosphorylation were set as variable modifications. Unique and razor peptides were considered for quantification. Minimal peptide length and maximal peptide mass were fixed to 7 amino acids and 4600 Da, respectively. Identified peptides were filtered by their precursor intensity fraction (PIF) with a false discovery rate (FDR) threshold of 0.01. Proteins identified with at least one unique peptide and an ion score above 99% were considered for evaluation, whereas proteins identified as potential contaminants were excluded from the analysis. The protein sequence coverage was estimated for specific proteins by the percentage of matching amino acids from the identified peptides having confidence greater than or equal to 95% divided by the total number of amino acids in the sequence. In addition, reporter ion intensities were bias corrected for the overlapping isotope contributions from the TMT tags according to manufacturer’s certificate.

### Publication Abstract
The proteome characterization of complex, deteriorated, or cross-linked protein mixtures as paired clinical FFPE or exosome samples isolated from low plasma volumes (250 &#xb5;L) might be a challenge. In this work, we aimed at investigating the benefits of FAIMS technology coupled to the Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer for the TMT quantitative proteomics analyses of these complex samples in comparison to the analysis of protein extracts from cells, frozen tissue, and exosomes isolated from large volume plasma samples (3 mL). TMT experiments were performed using a two-hour gradient LC-MS/MS with or without FAIMS and two compensation voltages (CV = -45 and CV = -60). In the TMT experiments of cells, frozen tissue, or exosomes isolated from large plasma volumes (3 mL) with FAIMS, a limited increase in the number of identified and quantified proteins accompanied by a decrease in the number of peptides identified and quantified was observed. However, we demonstrated here a noticeable improvement (&gt;100%) in the number of peptide and protein identifications and quantifications for the plasma exosomes isolated from low plasma volumes (250 &#xb5;L) and FFPE tissue samples in TMT experiments with FAIMS in comparison to the LC-MS/MS analysis without FAIMS. Our results highlight the potential of mass spectrometry analyses with FAIMS to increase the depth into the proteome of complex samples derived from deteriorated, cross-linked samples and/or those where the material was scarce, such as FFPE and plasma-derived exosomes from low plasma volumes (250 &#xb5;L), which might aid in the characterization of their proteome and proteoforms and in the identification of dysregulated proteins that could be used as biomarkers.

### Keywords
Orbitrap exploris 480, Proteomics, Ffpe tissue, Faims, Exosomes, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Chronic Disease Programme (UFIEC), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, 28220 Majadahonda, Madrid, Spain
Instituto de Salud Carlos III

### Submitter
Ana Montero Calle

### Lab Head
Dr Rodrigo Barderas
Chronic Disease Programme (UFIEC), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, 28220 Majadahonda, Madrid, Spain


