### Accession
PXD012759

### Title
Crosslinking Proteomics Indicates Effects of Simvastatin on the TLR2 interactome and Reveals ACTR1A as a Novel Regulator of the TLR2 Signal Cascade

### Description
Toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2) is a pattern recognition receptor that, upon ligation by microbial molecules, interacts with other proteins to initiate pro-inflammatory responses by the cell. Statins (hydroxymethylglutaryl coenzyme A reductase inhibitors), drugs widely prescribed to reduce hypercholesterolemia, are reported to have both pro- and anti-inflammatory effects upon cells. Some of these responses are presumed to be driven by effects on signaling proteins at the plasma membrane, but the underlying mechanisms remain obscure. We reasoned that profiling the effect of statins on the repertoire of TLR2-interacting proteins might provide novel insights into the mechanisms by which statins impact inflammation. In order to study the TLR2 interactome, we designed a co-immunoprecipitation (IP)-based cross-linking proteomics study. A hemagglutinin (HA)-tagged-TLR2 transfected HEK293 cell line was utilized to precipitate the TLR2 interactome upon cell exposure to the TLR2 agonist Pam3CSK4 and simvastatin, singly and in combination. To stabilize protein interactors, we utilized two different chemical cross-linkers with different spacer chain lengths. Proteomic analysis revealed important combinatorial effects of simvastatin and Pam3CSK4 on the TLR2 interactome. After stringent data filtering, we identified alpha-centractin (ACTR1A), an actin-related protein and subunit of the dynactin complex, as a potential interactor of TLR2. The interaction was validated using biochemical methods. RNA interference studies revealed an important role for ACTR1A in induction of pro-inflammatory cytokines. Taken together, we report that statins remodel the TLR2 interactome, and we identify ACTR1A, a part of the dynactin complex, as a novel regulator of TLR2-mediated immune signaling pathways.

### Sample Protocol
SDS-PAGE gel bands were excised, squeezed with acetonitrile, and dried at room temperature. Proteins were then reduced and alkylated and digested with trypsin (porcine) (MS Grade) at 37°C for overnight (30). Formic acid to pH < 3 was added to the resulting peptides, followed by drying by speed vacuum, and then dissolution in 0.1% formic acid. Finally, the peptides were centrifuged at 20,000 × g for 30 min at 4°C.  Digested peptides were analyzed by nano LC-MS/MS using a Velos Pro Dual-Pressure Linear Ion Trap Mass Spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, MA) coupled to an UltiMate 3000 UHPLC (ThermoFisher Scientific, MA). Peptides were loaded onto the analytical column and separated by reverse-phase chromatography using a 15-cm column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC) with an inner diameter of 75 μm and packed with 2 μm C18 particles (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA). The peptide samples were eluted from the nano column with multi-step gradients of 4-90% solvent B (A: 0.1% formic acid in water; B: 95% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in water) over 70 min with a flow rate of 300 nL/min with a total run time of 90 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ionization mode with nano spray voltage set at 2.50-3.00 kV and source temperature at 275°C. The three precursor ions with the most intense signal in a full MS scan were consecutively isolated and fragmented to acquire their corresponding MS2 scans. Full MS scans were performed with 1 micro scan at resolution of 3000, and a mass range of m/z 350-1500. Normalized collision energy (NCE) was set at 35%. Fragment ion spectra produced via high-energy collision-induced dissociation (CID) was acquired in the Linear Ion Trap with a resolution of 0.05 FWHM (full-width half maximum) with an Ultra Zoom-Scan between m/z 50-2000. A maximum injection volume of 5 µl was used during data acquisition with partial injection mode. The mass spectrometer was controlled in a data-dependent mode that toggled automatically between MS and MS/MS acquisition. MS/MS data acquisition and processing were performed by XcaliburTM software, ver. 2.2 (ThermoFisher Scientific, MA).

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified through Proteome Discoverer software (ver. 2.1, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using UniProt human (Homo sapiens) protein sequence database (120672 sequences, and 44548111 residues). The reviewed protein sequences of human were downloaded from UniProt protein database (www.uniprot.org) on August 12, 2016. The considerations in SEQUEST searches for normal peptides were used with carbamidomethylation of cysteine as the static modification and oxidation of methionine as the dynamic modification. Trypsin was indicated as the proteolytic enzyme with two missed cleavages. Peptide and fragment mass tolerance were set at ± 1.6 and 0.6 Da and precursor mass range of 350-3500 Da, and peptide charges were set excluding +1 charge state. SEQUEST results were filtered with the target PSM validator to improve the sensitivity and accuracy of the peptide identification. Using a decoy search strategy, target false discovery rates for peptide identification of all searches were ˂ 1% with at least two peptides per protein, a maximum of two missed cleavage, and the results were strictly filtered by ΔCn (˂ 0.01), Xcorr (≥ 1.5) for peptides, and peptide spectral matches (PSMs) with high confidence, that is, with q-value of ≤ 0.05. Proteins quantifications were conducted using the total spectrum count of identified proteins. Additional criteria were applied to increase confidence that PSMs must be present in all three biological replicates samples. Normalization of identified PSMs among LC-MS/MS runs was done by dividing individual PSMs of proteins with total PSMs and average of % PSM count was utilized for calculating fold changes for different treatment conditions (30, 31). For contrasting relative intensities of proteins between control, P3C, statin-P3C, and statin groups, samples were evaluated using cumulative confident normalized PSMs value.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cross-linkers, Dynactin, Immunoprecipitation, Alpha-centractin, Toll-like receptor 2, Simvastatin, Pam3csk4, Arp-1, Mass spectrometry, Affinity proteomics

### Affiliations
Associate Professor, Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Texas at Arlington
University of Texas at Arlington

### Submitter
Abu Hena Kamal

### Lab Head
Dr Saiful M Chowdhury, PhD
Associate Professor, Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Texas at Arlington


