### Accession
PXD000951

### Title
29RNP kinase idetification -  Identification and characterization of chloroplast casein kinase II from Oryza sativa (rice)

### Description
The 29-kDa RNA protein (29RNP), which was originally identified in rice etioplasts, has increased phosphorylation levels during de-etiolation. Here, using heparin-sepharose enriched fractions, we identified a chloroplast kinase that phosphorylated 29RNP. The chloroplast kinase phosphorylated the 29RNP and exhibited CKII biochemical characteristics in a kinase reaction test. Proteomic analysis of the chloroplast heparin-sepharose enriched fractions revealed the presence of 70 proteins, including both abundant proteins, such as plastid encoded polymerase subunits, and low-abundance proteins, such as APO2 and DAG. An inclusion list method using Fourier transform ion cyclotron resonance mass spectrometer ( FT-ICR LTQ MS ) was subsequently used to analyze the chloroplast heparin-sepharose enriched fractions. The 29RNP kinase was positively identified as a CKII alpha family protein by the presence of two unique peptides.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation and Characterization of Protein Fractions with Enriched 29RNP Kinase Activity.    The isolated chloroplasts were lysed in extraction buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, 1 mM DTT, 1X Protein Inhibitor cocktail (Roche Applied Science Indianapolis，USA), homogenized on ice, and centrifuged at 16,100 x g for 10 min at 4°C. The supernatant was loaded onto a heparin-sepharose affinity column (GE-Healthcare Bio-Sciences AB, Uppsala, Sweden, ). The column was washed with buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.3 M KCl, 1 mM DTT and 10% (v/v) glycerol), and the fractions that likely contained 29RNP kinase activity were eluted with Elution Buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, 1.8 M KCl, 1 mM DTT and 10% (v/v) glycerol). The eluted fractions were dialyzed overnight in 50 mM Tris-HCl, 1 mM DTT, 10% glycerol, and 1x Protease Inhibitor Cocktail. The RNP kinase activity was assayed at 30°C for 30 min in 20 mM Tris, pH 7.4, 5 mM MgCl2, 5 mM CaCl2 50M ATP, 1 Ci [32P] ATP, and 5 g of purified recombinant 28RNP-Strep tagged protein. SDS sample buffer (5X) (0.312 M Tris-HCl, pH6.8, 10% SDS, 25% glycerol, 5% mercaptoethanol, 0.05 Bromophenol) was added to each reaction, and the samples were heated at 70°C for 5 min to stop the reaction.  The reaction mixtures were loaded onto a 10% SDS-PAGE gel. The incorporation of radioactive phosphates was determined by autoradiography (Fuji X-ray film RX). The fractions containing 29RNP kinase activity were pooled and concentrated by centrifugation in Amicon Ultra-4 centrifugal filter units. The protein concentration was determined by the Bradford method.  SDS-polyacrylamide Gel Electrophoresis and In-gel Tryptic Digestion Approximately 50 g of heparin-sepharose enriched protein was loaded onto 10 cm homogeneous 12% polyacrylamide gels. After electrophoresis, the gel was cut into 5 segments along the lanes. Each segment was cut into small pieces (1 mm3) and subjected to in-gel tryptic digestion as previously described (Shevchenko et al., 1996) using sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega, USA) at a ratio of one part trypsin to ten parts protein. Proteins were digested overnight at 37°C. After desalting with a Sep-Pak C18 column (Waters, USA), the tryptic peptides were lyophilized and stored at -80°C until analysis.   Protein Identification by LTQ-FT-ICR-MS/MS  Tryptic peptides from each fraction were re-suspended in 20 l of 5% ACN/0.2% formic acid in water and loaded onto laboratory generated silica-capillary columns (inner diameter of 75 µm, length of 9 cm; BGB Analytik AG, Böckten, Switzerland) packed with C-18 reverse phase material (Magic C18 resins; 3 µm, 100 Å pore; Michrom BioResources, Auburn, CA, USA). The peptide mixture was separated and eluted by a gradient elution from 5 to 65% ACN over 1 h followed by an increase of up to 80% ACN during an additional 7 min period. The flow rate at the tip of the column was adjusted to approximately 200 nl/min. LC was coupled to an FT-ICR LTQ-MS (2D ion trap and Fourier transform ion cyclotron resonance mass spectrometer) (Thermo Finnigan, San Jose) equipped with a nanospray source. Mass spectrometry analysis was performed with a spray voltage of 1.7 kV and analyzed with one MS full scan followed by three data-dependent MS/MS scans of the three most intense parent-ions or by m/z list inclusion of the MS/MS scan.

### Data Protocol
The m/z list was generated with MS-Digest software (ProteinProspector 3.0, http://prospector.ucsf.edu/prospector/cgi-bin/msform. cgi?form=msdigest ). The dynamic exclusion function was enabled to allow two measurements of the same parent-ion for one minute followed by exclusion of measurements for one minute. MS/MS spectra were extracted with DeconMSn software (Mayampurath et al., 2008) .MS/MS spectra were searched with MASCOT v2.4 and PeptideProphet and ProteinProphet using the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (TPP v.4.7_SQUALL; http://tools.proteomecenter.org/TPP.php) against the Oryza sativa protein database (download from ftp://ftp.plantbiology.msu.edu/pub/data/Eukaryotic_Projects/o_sativa/ annotation_dbs/pseudomolecules/version_7.0/ Feburay 2014) supplemented with contaminants. The search parameters were as follows: requirement for tryptic ends, one missed cleavage allowed, and mass tolerance = ±10 PPM, and all the other parameters were similar to those used in a previous study (Baerenfaller et al., 2008).  Because large databases are prone to increase false positive identification rates, we chose a stringent PeptideProphet cutoff of 0.90 for Peptides that were used for the ProteinProphet analysis. To filter the ProteinProphet data, a 0.95 probability cutoff value was utilized to identify proteins of interest for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Plastid casein kinase II is an important regulator of transcription, posttranscriptional processes, and, most likely, different metabolic functions in dicotyledonous species. Here we report the identification and characterization of pCKII from the monocotyledonous species Oryza sativa. OspCKII activity was enriched from isolated rice chloroplasts using heparin-Sepharose chromatography, in which it co-elutes with the transcriptionally active chromosome (TAC) and several ribosomal proteins. Inclusion mass scanning of the kinase-active fraction identified the gene model for OspCKII. Transient expression of GFP fused to the 184 N-terminal amino acids of the OspCKII sequence in rice confirmed the chloroplastic localization of the kinase. OspCKII activity shows the characteristic features of casein kinase II, such as the utilization of GTP as phosphate donor, inhibition by low concentrations of heparin and poly-lysine, and utilization of the canonical pCKII motif E-S-E-G-E in the model substrate RNP29. Phosphoproteome analysis of a protein extract from rice leaves combined with a meta-analysis with published phosphoproteomics data revealed differences in the target protein spectrum between rice and Arabidopsis. Consistently, several pCKII phosphorylation sites in dicotyledonous plants are not conserved in monocots and algae, suggesting that details of pCKII regulation in plastids have changed during evolution.

### Keywords
29rnp, Kinase, M/z list inclusion method

### Affiliations
Lu Qingtao, Ph.D. Photosynthesis Research Center, Room 230 Institute of Botany, CAS Haidian Xiangshan Nanxincun 20# Beijing. 100093 Phone, +86-10-62836254 Email, lu_qingtao@ibcas.ac.cn
Ph.D

### Submitter
Qingtao Lu

### Lab Head
Dr Lu Qingtao
Lu Qingtao, Ph.D. Photosynthesis Research Center, Room 230 Institute of Botany, CAS Haidian Xiangshan Nanxincun 20# Beijing. 100093 Phone, +86-10-62836254 Email, lu_qingtao@ibcas.ac.cn


