### Accession
PXD027734

### Title
Proximity-biotinylation (BioID) to dissect cytoplasmic p53 signaling networks under nutrient stress

### Description
p53 signaling is a major response mechanism to cellular stresses through cytoplasmic or nuclear action. While p53 protein levels have been shown to increase upon nutrient stresses such as starvation, the exact signaling cascade in this context remains elusive. Here, we use proximity biotinylation (BioID), to derive the cytoplasmic p53 interaction network as immediate early starvation response.

### Sample Protocol
HepG2 p53KO cells were cultured in collagen-coated T75 flasks (approx. 1.5*108 cells) and transiently transfected (VIAfect transfection reagent, E4981, Promega) with either V5-p53-miniTurbo-NES or V5-EGFP-miniTurbo-NES. After 24h of transfection, intracellular biotinylation was induced by changing cell culture media to either growth medium (GM) or starvation medium (SM)(medium composition described in subsection cell culture) both containing 250µM biotin. Each group was analyzed in 3 biological replicates (GM_p53, SM_p53, GM_EGFP, SM_EGFP; 12 samples total). After 2h of biotin labeling, samples were harvested and processed as previously published (Roux, 2018). In brief, cells were lysed in lysis buffer (8M urea, 50mM Tris-HCl, pH7.4 containing protease inhibitor and 1mM dithiothreitol (DTT). After addition of 20% Triton X-100 to a final concentration of 1% and sonication for 10min (30 secs on/off) in a cooled water bath ultrasound sonicator (Bioruptor, Diagenode), samples were subjected to affinity purification with streptavidin beads (Invitrogen, Cat.#65001) on a rotator o/n at 4°C. Afterwards, beads with captured biotinylated proteins were thoroughly washed (10 times) with washing buffer (50mM Tris-HCl, pH7.4, 8M urea) and final washing steps with 50mM Tris-HCl- pH7.4 and 50mM AMBIC containing 1mM biotin to block remaining streptavidin on the beads. The beads including the captured proteins were reconstituted in 100mM Tris-HCl pH8.5, 2% sodium deoxycholate (SDC) and reduced/alkylated with 5mM TCEP/30mM chloroacetamide at 56°C for 10min. Next, the proteins were quantified (BCA) and digested with 1:100 Lys-C and 1:50 trypsin overnight at 37°C with continuous shaking. Digestion was stopped by adding 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final pH 2, where SDC precipitated completely. SDC and the beads were removed by centrifugation at 14000rpm for 10min and supernatant, containing peptides was desalted on Oasis HLB plate (Waters). Peptides were dried and dissolved in 2% formic acid before liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
All raw files were analyzed by MaxQuant v1.6.17 software using the integrated Andromeda Search engine and searched against the Human UniProt Reference Proteome (October 2020 release with 75,088 protein sequences). MaxQuant was used with the standard parameters (“Label-Free Quantification”, “iBAQ” and “Match between runs” were selected with automatic values) with only the addition of Deamidation (N) as variable modification. Data analysis was performed with Perseus v1.6.14: proteins reported in the file “proteinGroups.txt” were filtered for reverse, potential contaminants and identified by site.

### Publication Abstract
Signaling trough p53is a major cellular stress response mechanism and increases upon nutrient stresses such as starvation. Here, we show in a human hepatoma cell line that starvation leads to robust nuclear p53 stabilization. Using BioID, we determine the cytoplasmic p53 interaction network within the immediate-early starvation response and show that p53 is dissociated from several metabolic enzymes and the kinase PAK2 for which direct binding with the p53 DNA-binding domain was confirmed with NMR studies. Furthermore, proteomics after p53 immunoprecipitation (RIME) uncovered the nuclear interactome under prolonged starvation, where we confirmed the novel p53 interactors SORBS1 (insulin receptor signaling) and UGP2 (glycogen synthesis). Finally, transcriptomics after p53 re-expression revealed a distinct starvation-specific transcriptome response and suggested previously unknown nutrient-dependent p53 target genes. Together, our complementary approaches delineate several nodes of the p53 signaling cascade upon starvation, shedding new light on the mechanisms of p53 as nutrient stress sensor. Given the central role of p53 in cancer biology and the beneficial effects of fasting in cancer treatment, the identified interaction partners and networks could pinpoint novel pharmacologic targets to fine-tune p53 activity.

### Keywords
Bioid, Starvation, Interactome, Nutrient stress, P53 signaling

### Affiliations
Medical University of Graz
Gottfried Schatz Research Center for Cell Signaling, Metabolism & Aging Division of Cell Biology, Histology and Embryology Medical University of Graz

### Submitter
Markus Galhuber

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Prokesch
Gottfried Schatz Research Center for Cell Signaling, Metabolism & Aging Division of Cell Biology, Histology and Embryology Medical University of Graz


