### Accession
PXD034583

### Title
ADR-directly-interfering amino acids based on competitive isoTOP-ABPP in normoxia

### Description
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the most malignant tumors in the world with high morbidity and mortality rate. Many strategies have been tried to fight with HCC, yet effective treatment is still lacking. In this study, the in vitro and in vivo anti-HCC activity of andrographolide (ADR), an active ingredient of Andrographis Herba, has been demonstrated. We performed quantitative chemoproteomic profiling and identified heat shock protein HSP 90-alpha (HSP90AA1), an important molecular chaperone in endoplasmic reticulum protein processing, as the key target of ADR. The compound covalently bound to C597 and C598 therefore directly inhibited HSP90AA1 with isoform selectivity and reduced protein synthesis and triggered mitochondrial pathway-mediated apoptosis in HCC cancer cells collected in normoxia. Moreover, the inhibitory ability of ADR to HSP90AA1 was negatively correlated with the amount of this protein in cancer cells, and the mechanism was different from the existing inhibitors. Our study of ADR as a naturally derived and selective HSP90AA1 inhibitor provides new ideas for the treatment of HCC as well as other cancers.

### Sample Protocol
HepG2 cells collected in normoxia were solved in 0.1% FA and was analyzed by LC-MS/MS on Q Exactive series Orbitrap mass spectrometers (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled with EasyNano-LC. In positive-ion mode, full-scan mass spectra were acquired over the m/z ratio from 350 to 1800 using the Orbitrap mass analyzer with mass resolution of 7000. MS/MS fragmentation was performed in a data-dependent mode, of which the TOP 20 most intense ions were selected for MS/MS analysis with a resolution of 17500 using collision mode of HCD. Other important parameters: isolation window, 2.0 m/z units; default charge, 2+; normalized collision energy, 28%; maximum IT, 50ms; and dynamic exclusion, 20.0s. LC-MS/MS data was analyzed by ProLuCID with static modification of cysteine (+57.0215 Da). The RD modifications (+28.0313 and +34.0631 Da for Light and Heavy labeling, respectively) were set as static modifications on the N-terminal of a peptide and lysines. The isotopic modifications (+521.3075 Da and +527.3276 Da for Light and Heavy IA probe-TEV labeling, respectively) were set as variable modifications of cysteine.

### Data Protocol
The ratios were quantified by the CIMAGE software. The P values for KEGG pathways were determined by DAVID Bioinformatics Resource 6.8 (https://david.ncifcrf.gov/).The results are expressed as mean ± standard deviation. Student’s-test was used to compare the results of three independent cell cultures and subsequent treatments with the experimental data of the control group. The unpaired two-tailed t-test module in GraphPad Prism (GraphPad software) was used to analyze the data. When the p-value is less than 0.05, statistical significance is considered. *p< 0.05; **p <0.01; ***p <0.001.

### Publication Abstract
The Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic caused by the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) resulted in a major health crisis worldwide with its continuously emerging new strains, resulting in new viral variants that drive "waves" of infection. PCR or antigen detection assays have been routinely used to detect clinical infections; however, the emergence of these newer strains has presented challenges in detection. One of the alternatives has been to detect and characterize variant-specific peptide sequences from viral proteins using mass spectrometry (MS)-based methods. MS methods can potentially help in both diagnostics and vaccine development by understanding the dynamic changes in the viral proteome associated with specific strains and infection waves. In this study, we developed an accessible, flexible, and shareable bioinformatics workflow that was implemented in the Galaxy Platform to detect variant-specific peptide sequences from MS data derived from the clinical samples. We demonstrated the utility of the workflow by characterizing published clinical data from across the world during various pandemic waves. Our analysis identified six SARS-CoV-2 variant-specific peptides suitable for confident detection by MS in commonly collected clinical samples.

### Keywords
Andrographolide

### Affiliations
School of Pharmacy,Lanzhou University
Lanzhou University

### Submitter
wei zhou

### Lab Head
Dr Jianye Dai
School of Pharmacy,Lanzhou University


