### Accession
PXD032365

### Title
The diverse susceptibilities and responses of human and rodent cells to orthohantavirus infection reveal different levels of cellular restriction

### Description
Orthohantaviruses are rodent-borne emerging viruses known to cause severe diseases in humans but no apparent pathology in their small mammal reservoirs. However, the mechanisms leading to tolerance or pathogenicity in humans and persistence in rodent reservoirs are poorly understood, as is the manner in which they spread within and between organisms. Here, we used a range of cellular and molecular approaches to investigate the interactions of three different orthohantaviruses – Puumala virus (PUUV), responsible for a mild form of hemorrhagic fever in humans, Tula virus (TULV) with low pathogenicity, and nonpathogenic Prospect Hill virus (PHV) – with human and rodent host cell lines. We showed that the three orthohantaviruses were able to infect Vero E6 and HuH7 cells but only the former secreted infectious particles. In cells derived from the PUUV reservoir (Myodes glareolus), PUUV achieved complete viral cycling, while TULV did not enter the cells and PHV infected them but did not produce infectious particles, reflecting some differences in host specificity. A search for mature virions by electron microscopy revealed that TULV assembly occurred in part at the plasma membrane, whereas PHV particles were trapped in autophagic vacuoles in cells of the heterologous rodent host. The interaction of orthohantaviruses with cellular factors was investigated by studying the colocalization of viral nucleocapsids with markers of cell compartments, identifying interactors of viral proteins by mass spectrometry analysis, and measuring the regulation of gene expression by transcriptomic analysis in infected cells. Overall, our study highlighted the complexity of the host-virus relationship, demonstrated that orthohantaviruses were restricted at different levels of the viral cycle, and provided different levels of analysis to further investigate how these viruses differ in their interactions with cells to evade innate immunity and how this depends on the tissue and host species.

### Sample Protocol
Pull down of cellular proteins in complex with viral nucleocapsids for mass spectrometry analysis (LC/MS/MS). Sample preparation. Transfection, pull down and LC/MS/MS performed on triplicates were as previously described [30]. In brief, 106 HEK293T cells were transfected, using the JetPrime reagent, with 1 g of plasmid pCiNeo-streptag encoding PUUV-N, TULV-N or PHV-N or the pCiNeo-streptag empty plasmid as a control, and incubated for 24 h at 37 °C. Protein concentration, in 1% Triton-X100 cell lysates, was determined by micro-BCA and expression of N in the biological triplicates was controlled by western blot immunodetection with anti-streptag antibodies coupled to HRPO (IBA Lifesciences). For each condition, 1 mg of proteins was pulled down for 1 h, at 4 °C, on 25 µL of packed sepharose beads linked to Strep-TactinR (IBA). After washing in lysis buffer, the beads were suspended in 25 mM NH4HCO3, pelleted by centrifugation and kept on ice covered by a film of bicabonate ready to be processed for mass spectrometry analysis.  LC-MS/MS. Proteins on beads from 3 experimental conditions in association with viral N proteins of PUUV, TULV and PHV, or from the control empty plasmid, were incubated overnight at 37 °C with 20 μL of trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega) at 25 μg/mL in 25 mM NH4HCO3. Peptides were desalted using ZipTip µ-C18 Pipette Tips (Millipore). Peptides mixtures were analyzed by a Q-Exactive Plus coupled to a Nano-LC Proxeon 1000 both from ThermoFisher Scientific (Waltham, MA, USA). Peptides were separated by chromatography with the following settings: Acclaim PepMap100 C18 pre-column (0.075 x 20 mm, 3 μm, 100 Å), Pepmap-RSLC Proxeon C18 column (0.075 x 500 mm, 2 μm, 100 Å), 300 nl/min flow rate, a 98 min gradient from 95% solvent A (H2O/0.1% FA) to 35 % solvent B (100% ACN/0.1% FA) followed by column regeneration, giving a total acquisition time of 145 minutes. Peptides were analyzed in the Orbitrap cell in positive mode, at a resolution of 70,000, with a mass range of m/z 200-2000 and an AGC target of 3.106. MS/MS data were acquired in the Orbitrap cell in a Top20 mode. Peptides were selected for fragmentation by Higher-energy C-trap Dissociation (HCD) with a Normalized Collisional Energy of 27%, a dynamic exclusion of 60 seconds, a quadrupole isolation window of 1.4 Da and an AGC target of 2.105. Peptides with unassigned charge states or monocharged were excluded from the MS/MS acquisition. The maximum ion accumulation times were set to 50 msec for MS and 45 msec for MS/MS acquisitions.

### Data Protocol
Quantification of protein abundance variation. MS raw files were processed using PEAKS Online X (build 1.5, Bioinformatics Solutions Inc.). The data was searched against the Human Uniprot release 2021_03 database consisting of reviewed-only sequences including 20387 total entries. The sequences of hantaviral nucleocapsids were added for the search, as internal control. Parent mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm, with fragment mass tolerance of 0.05 Da. Specific tryptic cleavage was selected and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages was authorized. For identification, the following post-translational modifications were included: acetyl (Protein N-term), oxidation (M), deamidation (NQ) as variables and half of a disulfide bridge (C) as fixed. Identifications were filtered based on a 1% FDR (False Discovery Rate) threshold at both peptide and protein group levels. Label free quantification was performed using the PEAKS Online X quantification module, allowing a mass tolerance of 20 ppm for match between runs and auto-detection of retention time shift tolerance. Protein abundance was inferred using the top 3-peptide method and TIC was used for normalization. Multivariate statistics on protein measurements were performed using Qlucore Omics Explorer 3.7 (Qlucore AB, Lund, SWEDEN). A two-group comparison was used to compare sequentially proteins identified from each viral N proteins to the empty plasmid, a p-value better than 0.05 was used to filter differential candidates considered as potential nucleocapsid partners.

### Publication Abstract
Orthohantaviruses are rodent-borne emerging viruses that may cause severe diseases in humans but no apparent pathology in their small mammal reservoirs. However, the mechanisms leading to tolerance or pathogenicity in humans and persistence in rodent reservoirs are poorly understood, as is the manner in which they spread within and between organisms. Here, we used a range of cellular and molecular approaches to investigate the interactions of three different orthohantaviruses-Puumala virus (PUUV), responsible for a mild to moderate form of hemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome in humans, Tula virus (TULV) with low pathogenicity, and non-pathogenic Prospect Hill virus (PHV)-with human and rodent host cell lines. Besides the fact that cell susceptibility to virus infection was shown to depend on the cell type and virus strain, the three orthohantaviruses were able to infect Vero E6 and HuH7 human cells, but only the former secreted infectious particles. In cells derived from PUUV reservoir, the bank vole (Myodes glareolus), PUUV achieved a complete viral cycle, while TULV did not enter the cells and PHV infected them but did not produce infectious particles, reflecting differences in host specificity. A search for mature virions by electron microscopy (EM) revealed that TULV assembly occurred in part at the plasma membrane, whereas PHV particles were trapped in autophagic vacuoles in cells of the heterologous rodent host. We described differential interactions of orthohantaviruses with cellular factors, as supported by the cellular distribution of viral nucleocapsid protein with cell compartments, and proteomics identification of cellular partners. Our results also showed that interferon (IFN) dependent gene expression was regulated in a cell and virus species dependent manner. Overall, our study highlighted the complexity of the host-virus relationship and demonstrated that orthohantaviruses are restricted at different levels of the viral cycle. In addition, the study opens new avenues to further investigate how these viruses differ in their interactions with cells to evade innate immunity and how it depends on tissue type and host species.

### Keywords
Human, Infection, Restriction, Orthohantavirus, Rodent

### Affiliations
Proteomic facility of Institut Jacques Monod (UMR7592) - CNRS & Université de Paris 
Proteomic Facility, Institut Jacques Monod UMR7592 (CNRS and Université Paris Cité)

### Submitter
Laurent Lignières

### Lab Head
Dr Guillaume Chevreux
Proteomic Facility, Institut Jacques Monod UMR7592 (CNRS and Université Paris Cité)


