### Accession
PXD001787

### Title
Interclonal proteomic responses to predator exposure in Daphnia magna may depend on predator composition of habitats

### Description
Phenotypic plasticity, the ability of one genotype to express different phenotypes in response to changing environmental conditions, is one of the most common phenomena characterising the living world and is not only relevant for the ecology but also for the evolution of species. Daphnia, the waterflea, is a textbook example for predator induced phenotypic plastic defences including changes in life-history, behaviour and morphology. However, the analysis of molecular mechanisms underlying these inducible defences is still in its early stages.<br><br>We exposed Daphnia magna to chemical cues of the predator Triops cancriformis to identify key processes underlying plastic defensive trait formation. D. magna is known to develop an array of morphological changes in the presence of T. cancriformis including changes of carapace morphology and cuticle hardening. To get a more comprehensive idea of this phenomenon, we studied four different genotypes originating from habitats with different predation history, reaching from predator-free to temporary habitats containing T. cancriformis.<br><br>We analysed the morphologies as well as proteomes of predator-exposed and control animals. Three genotypes showed morphological changes when the predator was present. Using a high-throughput proteomics approach, we found 294 proteins which were significantly altered in their abundance after predator exposure in a general or genotype dependant manner. Proteins connected to genotype dependant responses were related to the cuticle, protein synthesis and calcium binding whereas the yolk protein vitellogenin increased in abundance in all genotypes, indicating their involvement in a more general response. Furthermore, genotype dependant responses at the proteome level correlated well with local adaptation to Triops predation.<br><br>Altogether, our study provides new insights concerning genotype dependant and general molecular processes involved in predator-induced phenotypic plasticity in D. magna.

### Sample Protocol
We used four clonal lines of D. magna (Bl22, K34J, Max4, FT44-2) originating from habitats across Europe with differing predation history. The experimental setup was installed in a climate chamber at a constant temperature of 20 ◦C ± 1 ◦C combined with fluorescent lighting at a constant photoperiod (15 h day : 9 h night). We studied five biological replicates per treatment per genotype. D. magna were exposed to the predator T. cancriformis for three generations using a flow-through system.<br><br>To generate samples for proteomic analysis, 50 frozen animals per biological replicates were pooled and homogenised in a mortar under liquid nitrogen thus preventing thawing. The resulting powder was solubilised in lysis buffer (2 mol L−1 Thiourea, 6 mol L−1 Urea, 4 % CHAPS, 1 cOmplete ULTRA Tablets Mini (Roche) per 5 mL buffer) using 10 μL buffer per animal. Afterwards, each sample was centrifuged using a QIA Shredder Mini Spin Column (Qiagen) for 3 min at 13,200 rpm to get rid of debris. Then, samples were precipitated using 30 % trichloroacetic acid for 20 min on ice to inhibit proteolytic activity (Zeis et al, 2009). Subsequently, samples were centrifuged for 10 min at 13,200 rpm, the supernatant was discarded and the resulting protein pellet was washed three times with cold acetone (LC-MS/MS grade). The pellet was dried and than resolved in the same amount of lysis buffer as before (see above). Protein concentration was analysed by Bradford Protein Assay (Coomassie Plus (Bradford) Assay Reagent, Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Resulting protein concentrations was between 5 and 7 mg mL−1.<br><br>Samples were pre-fractionated on a small SDS-PAGE gel (gel size 8 x 7 x 0.75 cm) using a 1 cm stacking gel (4 % acrylamide, 0.125 mol L−1 6.8 pH Tris-HCl, 0.1 % SDS, 0.05 % APS, 0.1 % TEMED) and a separation gel (12 % acrylamide, 0.375 mol L−1 1.5 pH 8.8 Tris-HCl, 0.1 % SDS,0.1 % APS, 0.5 % TEMED). From each replicate, 50 μg protein were used. Prior to gel-electrophoresis, 2 % SDS was added and then each sample was treated with 4.5 mmol L−1 DTT at 65 ◦C for 30 min and subsequently with 10 mmol L−1 for 15 min at room temperature. Glycerol was added to give a concentration of 10 % (v/v). Gels were run on a Mini-PROTEAN II device (Biorad) at 80 V for 15 min and afterwards at 150 V (Running Buffer: 25 mmol L−1 Tris, 0.2 % SDS, 192 mmol L−1 glycine). Gels were then stained by colloidal coomassie (Roti-Blue, Roth) according to the manufacturer’s protocol.<br><br>For in-gel tryptic digestion we first washed the gels two times with water and then cut each gel lane in 10 pieces (see figure 3), transferred each piece to a tube and minced it with a pipette tip. Gel pieces were washed for 30 min per step using the following solutions: 1 x 50 mmol L−1 ammoniumhydrogencarbonate (ABC), 2x 25 % acetonitrile (ACN) / 37.5 mmol L−1 ABC, 1 x 50 % acetonitrile (ACN) / 25 mmol L−1 ABC, 1 x 100 % acetonitrile (ACN). Gel pieces were dried, resolved in 200 μL 50 mmol L−1 ABC, and 280 ng trypsin (Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin, Promega) was added. Digestion was performed over night at 37 ◦C. After digestion, the supernatant was taken and peptides were further eluted stepwise using 0.1 % formic acid, 5 % formic acid 50 % acetonitrile and 100 % acetonitrile respectively. For each step, 200 μL eluent was added to the gel pieces followed by 30 min on a shaker. All corresponding supernatants were collected, merged, dried in a vacuum centrifuge (Vacuum Concentrator, Bachofer) and stored at −20 ◦C.<br><br>LC-MS/MS was performed with a nano LC ultra chromatographic device (Eksigent) coupled to a LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Samples were resolved in 30 μL 0.1 % formic acid. 10 μL were then injected and loaded on a C18 trap column (C18 PepMap100, particle size: 5 μm, 100 Å, column size: 300 μm x 50 mm, Dionex) for 10 min at a flow rate of 5 μL min−1 using mobile phase A (0.1 % formic acid). RP chromatography was performed at a flow-rate of 280 nL min−1 using a Reprosil-Pur C18 separation column (Reprosil-Pur C18 AQ, 3 μm, 150 mm x 75 μm (ID), Dr. Maisch) with a linear gradient from 6 % to 30 % mobile phase B (A: 0.1 % formic acid, B: 84 % acetonitrile and 0.1 % formic acid) in 105 min, a further gradient to 45 % in 25 min, followed by a 10 min step at 100 % B and a 10 min step at 10 % B. Overall gradient length was 150 min. For electrospray ionisation a distal coated Silica Tip (FS-360-50-15-D-20, New Objective) with a needle voltage of 1.7 kV was used. The MS method consisted of a cycle combining one full MS scan (Mass range: 300 – 2000 m/z) with five data dependant MS/MS events (35 % collision energy). The dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Spectral data (Thermo raw files) were further processed using the software MaxQuant (Cox & Mann, 2008) version 1.4.1.2 and the implemented label-free quantification (LFQ) option (Smaczniak et al, 2012). Beyond that option, the ‘match between runs option’ was enabled (match time window 1 min, alignment time window 20 min). For protein identification, unique and razor peptides and a protein FDR of 1 % were used. As database, pre-released gene-predictions of D. magna available at http://server7.wfleabase.org/genome/Daphnia_magna/ (V2.4 effective 05/2012) was used. Built-in contaminants database was included into the search. Carbamidomethyl was set as a fixed modification, whereas acetyl (protein N-term) and oxidation (M) were set as variable modifications. All other parameters were set according to MaxQuant default.<br><br>Further data analysis was conducted using R (R Development Core Team, 2011). Label-free intensity data of precursor ions were first log2 transformed and then LOESS normalised using the median values across biological replicates as a reference set (Papakostas et al, 2012). To find proteins differing significantly in abundance, a two-way ANOVA with treatment and genotype as explanatory variables was used. Furthermore, to get an FDR-based estimate for the set of significant proteins, the q-value was calculated (Storey & Tibshirani, 2003) using the R package qvalue and ’Tukey Honest Significant Differences’ method was applied on ANOVA results to look for detailed differences between all possible combinations. To get further information on similar proteins, all significant protein sequences were blastp searched against NCBI nr and swissprot databases using local standalone blast (Geer et al, 2010). Preliminary annotation data were received from http://server7.wfleabase.org/genome/Daphnia_magna/ (V2.4 effective 05/2012) and protein associated gene ontology (GO) terms were tested for enrichment using customised standalone EASE (Hosack et al, 2003) (Benjamini corrected p-value < 0.05). Enriched terms were tested for redundant terms and semantic similarities using the online-tool REViGO (Supek et al, 2011) and visualised as treemap graphs using R.<br><br>In addition, protein sequences were also processed using the software Blast2go (Conesa et al, 2005), which uses results of NCBI blast search to map sequences directly to GO terms. These GO terms were used as additional information.<br><br>Cluster analysis and heatmap were generated using annHeatmap2 function of R Heatplus package.

### Publication Abstract
Phenotypic plasticity, the ability of one genotype to express different phenotypes in response to changing environmental conditions, is one of the most common phenomena characterizing the living world and is not only relevant for the ecology but also for the evolution of species. Daphnia, the water flea, is a textbook example for predator-induced phenotypic plastic defences; however, the analysis of molecular mechanisms underlying these inducible defences is still in its early stages. We exposed Daphnia&#xa0;magna to chemical cues of the predator Triops&#xa0;cancriformis to identify key processes underlying plastic defensive trait formation. To get a more comprehensive idea of this phenomenon, we studied four genotypes with five biological replicates each, originating from habitats characterized by different predator composition, ranging from predator-free habitats to habitats containing T.&#xa0;cancriformis. We analysed the morphologies as well as proteomes of predator-exposed and control animals. Three genotypes showed morphological changes when the predator was present. Using a high-throughput proteomics approach, we found 294 proteins which were significantly altered in their abundance after predator exposure in a general or genotype-dependent manner. Proteins connected to genotype-dependent responses were related to the cuticle, protein synthesis and calcium binding, whereas the yolk protein vitellogenin increased in abundance in all genotypes, indicating their involvement in a more general response. Furthermore, genotype-dependent responses at the proteome level were most distinct for the only genotype that shares its habitat with Triops. Altogether, our study provides new insights concerning genotype-dependent and general molecular processes involved in predator-induced phenotypic plasticity in D.&#xa0;magna.

### Keywords
Interclonal differences, Inducible defence, Proteomics, Phenotypic plasticity, Daphnia, Label-free quantification

### Affiliations
A
Universität Bayreuth Gebäude NW I D-95440 Bayreuth

### Submitter
Kathrin Otte

### Lab Head
Dr Christian Laforsch
Universität Bayreuth Gebäude NW I D-95440 Bayreuth


