### Accession
PXD012670

### Title
Peanut (Arachis hypogaea L.)-root- LC-MS/MS

### Description
The root proteomics of two cultivars differing in seed Cd accumulation, Fenghua 1 (F, low Cd cultivar) and Silihong (S, high Cd cultivar), were investigated under 0 (CK) and 2 μM Cd (Cd) conditions. The eight root proteins from two biological replicates of both peanut cultivars under Cd-free and Cd treated were obtained from iTRAQ experiments.

### Sample Protocol
The eight samples including SCd_1, SCd_2, SCK_1, SCK_2, FCd_1, FCd_2, FCK_1 and FCK_2 were labeled with tags 113 and 114, 119, 121, 117, 118, 115 and 116, respectively.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS/MS data is converted into MGF format by the corresponding tool, and the exported MGF files are searched by the local Mascot server against the database described above. In addition, quality control (QC) is performed to determine if a reanalysis step is needed. An automated software, named IQuant [1], was applied to the quantification of proteins. All the proteins with a false discovery rate (FDR) less than 1% will proceed with downstream analysis including GO, COG and Pathway. Further, we also can perform deep analysis based on differentially expressed proteins, including Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment analysis, KEGG pathway enrichment analysis and cluster analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Root, Fenghua 1 and silihong, Lc-ms/ms, Itraq, Peanut (arachis hypogaea l.)

### Affiliations
College of Life Sciences, Huaibei Normal University, Huaibei, Anhui 235000, P.R. China
Huaibei Normal University

### Submitter
Gangrong Shi

### Lab Head
Dr Gangrong Shi
College of Life Sciences, Huaibei Normal University, Huaibei, Anhui 235000, P.R. China


