### Accession
PXD036335

### Title
A proteome-wide effect of PHF8 knockdown in neuronal activity-dependent synaptic plasticity shows downregulation of Parkinson's disease-associated protein Alpha-synuclein and its interactors

### Description
Synaptic dysfunction may underlie the pathophysiology of Parkinson’s disease (PD): a presently incurable condition characterized by motor and cognitive symptoms. Here we used quantitative proteomics to study the role of PHF8, a chromatin-modifying enzyme found to be mutated in intellectual disability, in regulating the expression of synaptic plasticity-related proteins, amongst which the Parkinson’s disease-associated alpha synuclein (SNCA) and its interactors including CamKIIa, CPLX1, RPH3A, CALB1, CHN1 were prominently featured. Depletion of PHF8 in cortical neurons affected the activity-induced expression of proteins involved in synaptic plasticity, synaptic structure, vesicular release and membrane trafficking, spanning the spectrum of pre-synaptic and post-synaptic transmission. By showing how the depletion of one chromatin-modifying enzyme can affect synaptic function in a concerted manner, we propose the possibility of targeting PHF8 as a potential disease-modifying therapeutic drug target in PD.

### Sample Protocol
Following reduction and alkylation, proteins collected from primary cortical neurons were trypsinized overnight at 37°C. Peptides were dried and resuspended in mass-spectrometry compatible buffer, and then labelled with the 8-plex iTRAQ labelling reagent (Applied Biosystems). Labelled samples were combined and analyzed with one-dimensional nanoLC-MS/MS (Dionex UltiMate 3000 nanoLC system coupled with AB Sciex TripleTOF 5600 system) for protein identification.

### Data Protocol
The IPI human protein database (version 3.77) was searched using ProteinPilot (version 4.5, AB Sciex) and the identified hits were analyzed using DAVID (http://david.abcc.ncifcrf.gov) for gene ontology annotation.

### Publication Abstract
Synaptic dysfunction may underlie the pathophysiology of Parkinson's disease (PD), a presently incurable condition characterized by motor and cognitive symptoms. Here, we used quantitative proteomics to study the role of PHD Finger Protein 8 (PHF8), a histone demethylating enzyme found to be mutated in X-linked intellectual disability and identified as a genetic marker of PD, in regulating the expression of PD-related synaptic plasticity proteins. Amongst the list of proteins found to be affected by PHF8 knockdown were Parkinson's-disease-associated SNCA (alpha synuclein) and PD-linked genes DNAJC6 (auxilin), SYNJ1 (synaptojanin 1), and the PD risk gene SH3GL2 (endophilin A1). Findings in this study show that depletion of PHF8 in cortical neurons affects the activity-induced expression of proteins involved in synaptic plasticity, synaptic structure, vesicular release and membrane trafficking, spanning the spectrum of pre-synaptic and post-synaptic transmission. Given that the depletion of even a single chromatin-modifying enzyme can affect synaptic protein expression in such a concerted manner, more in-depth studies will be needed to show whether such a mechanism can be exploited as a potential disease-modifying therapeutic drug target in PD.

### Keywords
Parkinson's disease, Neurodegeneration, Synaptic plasticity, Proteomics, Neurodegeneracy

### Affiliations
Singapore Eye Research Institute

### Submitter
Lei Zhou

### Lab Head
Dr Lei ZHOU
Singapore Eye Research Institute


