### Accession
PXD031272

### Title
Label free proteomics analysis of osteosarcoma cells differing with respect to expression of endocytic receptor uPARAP.

### Description
We have performed a proteomics comparison of endosomal fractions from cells positive and negative for the endocytic receptor uPARAP. Comparing the protein content of endosomes may reveal the identity of ligands taken up by uPARAP-mediated endocytosis.

### Sample Protocol
Cells and endosomal fractions. Parallel cultures of uPARAP-positive and uPARAP-negative cells were established by CRISPR/Cas9 technology. After cell culture, cells were harvested and homogenized under mild conditions for preservation of cell organelles. Lysates were then fractionated by ultracentrifugation and endosome-enriched fractions were isolated for analysis. Protein preparation. The organelles and membranes were pelleted by ultracentrifugation at 100,000 x g for 1 hour at 4 °C. The resulting pellets were resuspended in LDS sample buffer (ThermoFisher Scientific) and boiled for 5 min at 100 °C. The samples were then loaded onto a NuPAGETM 4-12% Bis-Tris Protein Gel. The gel was run at 200V for approximately 5 min until the samples has just entered the gel. The gel was then Coomassie stained (1 g/L Coomassie brilliant blue, 30% EtOH, 10% acetic acid) for 30 min at room temperature and destained for 3 x 20 min in 30% EtOH, 10% acetic acid. The gel was then washed twice in water for 10 min and the protein bands were excised, cut into 1 mm3 cubes and transferred to low-binding Eppendorf tubes. The gel pieces were washed with water for 10 min and then shrunk by incubation with 100% acetonitrile for 2 x 15 min with a wash step with water in-between. The protein disulphides were reduced by treating the gel pieces with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) (Apollo Scientific, LTD), 0.1 M NH4HCO3 (Sigma) for 20 min at 56 °C and then alkylated using 55 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma), 0.1 M NH4HCO3 for 30 min at RT in the dark. The gel pieces were washed in 0.1 M NH4HCO3 and shrunk with 100% acetonitrile. The reduced and alkylated proteins were then digested by addition of 6 ng/µl trypsin (Promega) in 50 mM NH4HCO3 for 30 min on ice, followed by incubation of the gel pieces ON at 37 °C. The peptide solution was recovered and desalted on a C18 (3 M Empore)/POROS Oligo R3 Reverse-Phase resin (Applied Biosystems) Stage Tip. After elution the samples were lyophilized and resuspended in 6 µl 0.1% formic acid.  Mass spectrometry. 1 µg of digested peptide solution was loaded onto an in-house packed 3 cm trap column (ID 100µm, ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 5 µm (Dr. Maisch GmbH)) followed by an 18 cm analytical column (ID 75 µm, ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 3 µm)  fitted to an EASY-nLC 1000 apparatus (Thermo Scientific).  Peptides were separated by a 113 minute gradient from 1-25%, 10 min from 25-45%, 3 min from 45-100% and 8 min at 100% of 95% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid at 250 nl/min. The peptides were analysed on a Q Exactive HF hybrid Quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) in a dd-MS2 manner. Full MS scans (400-1600 m/z range) were acquired at 120,000 resolution, with a 3*106 automatic gain control target, followed by Top20 MS/MS scans collected at 15,000 resolution, with a 1*105 automatic gain control target. For both full MS and MS/MS, the maximum ion injection time was set to 100 ms.

### Data Protocol
The resulting .raw files were analysed using MaxQuant version 1.6.0.16 using standard label free quantification (LFQ) settings. Variable modifications were set to Oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein N-term) and Deamidation (N). Contaminants were included, fixed modifications were set to Carbamidomethyl (C), match between runs and second peptides were enabled with an alignment time window of 20 min and match time window of 0.7 min. The .raw files were searched against the human, murine and bovine UniProt knowledgebase ((Swiss-Prot) [69], downloaded on 23rd November 2017). Perseus version 1.6.0.7 was used to filter the data. In total, 2,978 proteins were identified across all the samples. For the comparison of abundance of proteins between the wild type and uPARAP depleted samples, the data was filtered to only include proteins that were identified in all three biological replicates within the same genotype, reducing the list to 1,631 proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, +/-uparap, Label free, Osteosarcoma cells, Endosomes

### Affiliations
Finsen Laboratory, Rigshospitalet/BRIC, University of Copenhagen, Denmark
Professor, Section head Finsen Laboratory, Rigshospitalet/BRIC DK-2200 Copenhagen N Denmark

### Submitter
Niels Behrendt

### Lab Head
Dr Niels Behrendt
Professor, Section head Finsen Laboratory, Rigshospitalet/BRIC DK-2200 Copenhagen N Denmark


