### Accession
PXD043398

### Title
Verticilium dahliae VdEno SUMOylation sites identify

### Description
To identify the SUMOylation sites in VdEno, VdEno and SUMOylated VdEno were immunoprecipitated using anti-Flag agarose beads from VdEno/SUMO/Δulpb strain, and separated by SDS gel. The proteins above 55 kDa, which were indicated by marker, were excised and subjected to MS. One putative SUMOylation site (K313) in VdEno was given by MS .

### Sample Protocol
After conducting silver staining or dye testing on samples that meet the sample requirements, cut the adhesive into small pieces of approximately 1mm * 1mm, and then decolorize and clean until transparent; Wash with water three times, rinse with adhesive cleaning solution, and then dehydrate with acetonitrile.Add 10ng/ul Trypsin to completely swell the gel and hydrolyze at 37 º C for more than 16 hours. Suck out the enzymatic hydrolysate, transfer it to a new EP tube, use gel extract, repeatedly extract twice, finally dehydrate with acetonitrile, and finally mix all the above liquids before freeze-drying.

### Data Protocol
The original mass spectrometry data is in RAW format file, and the software Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo) is used for database identification and analysis.

### Publication Abstract
The soil-borne fungus Verticillium dahliae, the most notorious plant pathogen of the Verticillium genus, causes vascular wilts in a wide variety of economically important crops. The molecular mechanism of V. dahliae pathogenesis remains largely elusive. Here, we identify a small ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO)-specific protease (VdUlpB) from V. dahliae, and find that VdUlpB facilitates V. dahliae virulence by deconjugating SUMO from V. dahliae enolase (VdEno). We identify five lysine residues (K96, K254, K259, K313 and K434) that mediate VdEno SUMOylation, and SUMOylated VdEno preferentially localized in nucleus where it functions as a transcription repressor to inhibit the expression of an effector VdSCP8. Importantly, VdUlpB mediates deSUMOylation of VdEno facilitates its cytoplasmic distribution, which allows it to function as a glycolytic enzyme. Our study reveals a sophisticated pathogenic mechanism of VdUlpB-mediated enolase deSUMOylation, which fortifies glycolytic pathway for growth and contributes to V. dahliae virulence through derepressing the expression of an effector.

### Keywords
Sumoylation, Verticilium dahliae, Enolase

### Affiliations
Institute of Microbiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
bosen zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Huishan Guo
Institute of Microbiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences


