### Accession
PXD029140

### Title
Impacts of resistance gene knock-outs on the proteome

### Description
The spread of antibiotic resistance has developed to all known antibiotics. Extended spectrum β-lactamase-producing bacteria are particularly problematic, as they are resistant to a wide range of commonly used antibiotics. Resistance to β-lactams is known to be multifactorial, although the underlying mechanisms generally are poorly understood but critical factors for effective therapy against infections, especially for multi-resistant pathogenic bacteria. In the present study, a plasmid-based homologous recombination system was used to target and delete specific β-lactamase genes (i.e., the blaOXA-1, blaTEM-1 or the ESBL blaCTX-M15) of the clinical strain ESBL Escherichia coli CCUG 73778, generating three “knock-out” clone variants, each one lacking only one of the β-lactamases. The objective was to determine the genotypic impacts of each gene loss on the phenotypic antibiotic resistance and proteome of the bacterium. Quantitative proteomic analyses performed on the three clone variants and the original strain, using tandem mass tags (TMT) and bottom-up liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS), after exposure to different concentrations of cefadroxil. Variation of the proteome in each clone variant was determined, to establish the relative importance of each resistance gene and better understand the genetic and proteomic responses and mechanisms of the resistance phenotypes. The knockout of blaCTX-M-15 was observed to have the greatest impact in protein expression, with the knockout of blaOXA-1 also effecting a marked but lower degree of changes. Proteins known to be associated with antibiotic resistance, cell membrane integrity, cellular stress, gene expression and hypothetical/unknown function proteins, among others, demonstrated distinct differences in expression levels (Fold change >1-5 or <-1.5), that may be related to aspects of compensation for the mutant resistance phenotypes. The present study provides a framework to study the impacts of targeted loss of antibiotic resistance genes in clinically relevant strains for understanding the mechanisms of phenotypic antibiotic resistance.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of samples for proteomic analysis: The knock-out clone variants (E. coli-ΔOXA, E. coli-ΔCTX and E. coli-ΔTEM) and the E. coli-WT were cultured on Columbia agar medium supplemented with 5% of defibrinated horse blood, in aerobic conditions, at 37°C for 24h. Fresh biomass (1 to 2 colonies) was collected to prepare a 0.5 McF cell suspension in PBS, using a McFarland densitometer (DEN-1 BioSan, ProfilLab24 GmbH, Berlin, Germany). A volume of 100 µl from the 0.5 McF suspension was diluted in PBS to a final volume of 2,000 µl (dilution 1:20), obtaining the bacterial working solution (BWS). Afterwards, 400 µl of the BWS was transferred, in triplicate, to 4 ml Mueller-Hinton broth (MHB), according to the antibiotic conditions to be tested: i.e., “subMIC” (subminimum inhibitory concentration); “MID” (half of the subminimum inhibitory concentration); and “0” (no antibiotic), in triplicate, in each case. Cefadroxil (stock: 5 mg/ml) was used at concentrations of: 8 µg/ml (highest concentration of antibiotic, i.e., subMIC); 4 µg/ml (middle-level concentration of antibiotics, i.e., MID) and 0 added antibiotic (i.e., 0). Samples with and without antibiotic were mixed and incubated in aerobic conditions for 18 h at 37°C with shaking (200 rpm). Thereafter, 1 ml of sample was taken from each tube and centrifuged at 10,000 x g during 5 min. Precipitated cells were washed with 1 ml PBS and centrifuged at 10,000 x g for 5 min. Following three washing steps with PBS in the same conditions, the final pellet was resuspended in 1 ml PBS and OD was adjusted to 1.0. Samples were centrifuged in the same conditions and the final pellet was resuspended in 150 µl of PBS before being transferred to 0.2 µl tubes with acid-washed glass beads (150-212 µm, Sigma-Aldrich Inc., Darmstadt, Germany). Then, 15 µl of 20% SDS (Sodium Dodecyl Sulfate solution) was added, and samples were mixed by inverting the tubes. Samples were treated by bead-beating during 5 min. at 1/25 frequency by means of a bead-beater (TissueLyser II, QIAgen, Hilden, Germany) and centrifuged again at 100 x g for 1 min. Supernatant was transferred to new tubes (1.7 ml Axygen maximum recovery tubes) with 100 µl of 2% SDS. Samples were mixed by inverting and the supernatant, without glass beads, was transferred carefully to a new tube and stored at -20ºC until further analysis. Protein concentrations were determined, using Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fischer Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) and the Benchmark™ Plus microplate reader (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA, USA) with bovine serum albumin (BSA) solutions as standards. Protein digestion and TMT-labeling: Aliquots containing 30 μg of protein from each sample and references (prepared by mixing equal protein amounts of each sample) were digested with trypsin, using the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method (Wiśniewski et al., 2009). Briefly, samples were reduced with 100 mM dithiothreitol at 60°C for 30 min, transferred to 30 kDa MWCO Nanosep 30k Omega filters (Pall Corporation, Port Washington, NY, USA), washed repeatedly with 8 M urea and once with digestion buffer (1% sodium deoxycholate (SDC) in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) prior to alkylation, with 10 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate in digestion buffer, for 30 min. Digestion was performed in digestion buffer by addition of 0.3 µg Pierce MS grade Trypsin (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 37°C and incubated o/n. An additional portion of trypsin was added and incubated for another two hours. Peptides were collected by centrifugation. Digested peptides were labelled, using TMT 10-plex isobaric mass tagging reagents (Thermo Scientific), according to the instructions of the manufacturer. Samples and references were combined into four TMT-sets. Sodium deoxycholate was removed, by acidification with 10% TFA.  The combined sets were separated into 40 fractions with basic reversed-phase chromatography (bRP-LC), using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLC system (Thermo Fischer Scientific). Peptide separations were performed, using a reversed-phase XBridge BEH C18 column (3.5 μm, 3.0x150 mm, Waters Corporation) and a linear gradient was generated,  mixing solvent A (10 mM ammonium formate buffer at pH 10.00) and solvent B (90% acetonitrile, 10% 10 mM ammonium formate at pH 10.00), increasing solvent B from 3% to 40% over 18 min, followed by an increase to 100% solvent B over 5 min and finally staying at 100% solvent B for 5 min. All was performed at the flow-rate of 0.4 ml/min. The 40 fractions were concatenated into 10 fractions (1+11+21+31, 2+12+22+32, …10+20+30+40), dried and reconstituted in 3% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid.

### Data Protocol
The data files for each set were merged for identification and relative quantification, using Proteome Discoverer version 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The search was made against all protein sequences encoded by the genome sequence of Escherichia coli CCUG 73778 (Jaén-Luchoro et al., 2020), using Mascot version 2.5.1 (Matrix Science, London, United Kingdom) as a search engine. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 5 ppm and fragment mass tolerance to 0.6 Da. Tryptic peptides were accepted with zero missed cleavage, variable modifications of methionine oxidation and fixed cysteine alkylation, TMT-label modifications of N-terminal and lysine were selected. The reference samples were used as denominator and for calculation of the ratios. Percolator (The et al., 2016) was used for the validation of identified proteins. TMT reporter ions were identified in the MS3 HCD spectra with 3 mmu mass tolerance, and the TMT reporter intensity values for each sample were normalized on the total peptide amount. The quantified proteins were grouped by sharing the same sequences to minimize redundancy. Only the values for the unique peptides were used for quantification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Β-lactamase, Quantitative proteomics, Escherichia coli, Tandem mass tag, Antibiotic resistance, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
SAMBIO Core Facilities, Sahgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg
Professor,Department of Infectious Diseases, University of Gothenburg; Box 480, 40530 Göteborg, Sweden

### Submitter
Proteomics Core Facility

### Lab Head
Dr Edward Moore
Professor,Department of Infectious Diseases, University of Gothenburg; Box 480, 40530 Göteborg, Sweden


