### Accession
PXD001998

### Title
Cooperative target mRNA destabilization and translation inhibition by miR-58 microRNA family in C. elegans

### Description
Comparative proteomic study between C. elegans wild type, mir-58.1 single, mir-80; mir-58.1 double and mir-80; mir-58.1; mir-81-82 quadruple mutants.

### Sample Protocol
100 ug of L-(13C6, 15N4)-Arginine, L-(13C6, 15N2)-Lysine labeled protein extract from wild type, mir-58.1 single, mir-80; mir-58.1 double and mir-80; mir-58.1; mir-81-82 quadruple mutants was mixed and used as the heavy internal proteome standard. 100 µg of C.elegans protein extract from each sample was combined with  100 ug heavy internal standard proteome, and the mixture was precipitated with 6 volumes of ice-cooled acetone and kept 16 h at -20 ºC. Peptides were processed with or without HILIC fractionation. Raw files named ywu_C1309* are the fractionated samples, and files named ywu_O1303* are unfractionated samples. Proteins were digested using Trypsin and subjected to HILIC fractionation. The fractionated sample were measured on OrbitrapElite.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched again Uniprot Celegans database. Quantification were done using MaxQuant with default settings.

### Publication Abstract
In animals, microRNAs frequently form families with related sequences. The functional relevance of miRNA families and the relative contribution of family members to target repression have remained, however, largely unexplored. Here, we used the Caenorhabditis elegans miR-58 miRNA family, composed primarily of the four highly abundant members miR-58.1, miR-80, miR-81, and miR-82, as a model to investigate the redundancy of miRNA family members and their impact on target expression in an in vivo setting. We found that miR-58 family members repress largely overlapping sets of targets in a predominantly additive fashion. Progressive deletions of miR-58 family members lead to cumulative up-regulation of target protein and RNA levels. Phenotypic defects could only be observed in the family quadruple mutant, which also showed the strongest change in target protein levels. Interestingly, although the seed sequences of miR-80 and miR-58.1 differ in a single nucleotide, predicted canonical miR-80 targets were efficiently up-regulated in the mir-58.1 single mutant, indicating functional redundancy of distinct members of this miRNA family. At the aggregate level, target binding leads mainly to mRNA degradation, although we also observed some degree of translational inhibition, particularly in the single miR-58 family mutants. These results provide a framework for understanding how miRNA family members interact to regulate target mRNAs.

### Keywords
Silac_celegan

### Affiliations
ETH
Biology

### Submitter
Yibo Wu

### Lab Head
Dr Yibo Wu
ETH


