### Accession
PXD033832

### Title
Bunyaviruses affect growth and apoplastic effector production in Phytophthora cactorum

### Description
Phytophthora cactorum hosts mycoviruses, whose effects on the host have not been studied. In the present study, two viruses of the order Bunyavirales significantly reduced hyphal growth in the host isolate, and the virus colonization also increased the elicitin production as detected by RNA-seq and proteomic analyses.

### Sample Protocol
Total protein extracts were prepared as described previously (Saiz-Fernández et al., 2020), then portions of samples corresponding to 5 μg peptide were analysed by nanoflow reverse-phase liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry using a 15 cm C18 Zorbax column (Agilent), a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano-UPLC system and Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher).

### Data Protocol
Acquired spectra were recalibrated and searched against the P. cactorum protein database (BioProjects PRJNA383548). Only proteins represented by at least two unique peptides were considered for the quantitative analysis. The quantitative differences were determined by Minora, employing precursor ion quantification followed by normalization and calculation of relative protein abundances.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Phytophthora cactorum</i> is an important oomycetous plant pathogen with numerous host plant species, including garden strawberry (<i>Fragaria</i> &#xd7; <i>ananassa</i>) and silver birch (<i>Betula pendula</i>). <i>P. cactorum</i> also hosts mycoviruses, but their phenotypic effects on the host oomycete have not been studied earlier. In the present study, we tested polyethylene glycol (PEG)-induced water stress for virus curing and created an isogenic virus-free isolate for testing viral effects in pair with the original isolate. Phytophthora cactorum bunya-like viruses 1 and 2 (PcBV1 &amp; 2) significantly reduced hyphal growth of the <i>P. cactorum</i> host isolate, as well as sporangia production and size. Transcriptomic and proteomic analyses revealed an increase in the production of elicitins due to bunyavirus infection. However, the presence of bunyaviruses did not seem to alter the pathogenicity of <i>P. cactorum</i>. Virus transmission through anastomosis was unsuccessful in vitro.

### Keywords
Virus, Phytophthora

### Affiliations
Mendel University in Brno
Department of Molecular Biology and Radiobiology, Mendel University in Brno, CZ

### Submitter
Martin Cerny

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Cerny
Department of Molecular Biology and Radiobiology, Mendel University in Brno, CZ


