### Accession
PXD030823

### Title
The Okur-Chung Neurodevelopmental Syndrome (OCNDS) mutation CK2K198R leads to a rewiring of kinase specificity

### Description
Okur-Chung Neurodevelopmental Syndrome (OCNDS) is caused by heterozygous mutations to the CSNK2A1 gene, which encodes the alpha subunit of casein kinase II (CK2). The most frequently occurring mutation is lysine 198 to arginine (K198R). To investigate the impact of this mutation, we first generated a high-resolution phosphorylation motif of CK2WT, including the first characterization of specificity for tyrosine phosphorylation activity. A second high resolution motif representing CK2K198R substrate specificity was also generated. Here we report the impact of the OCNDS associated CK2K198R mutation. Contrary to prior speculation, the mutation does not result in a loss of function, but rather shifts the substrate specificity of the kinase. Broadly speaking the mutation leads to 1) a decreased preference for acidic residues in the +1 position, 2) a decreased preference for threonine phosphorylation, 3) an increased preference for tyrosine phosphorylation, and 4) an alteration of the tyrosine phosphorylation specificity motif. To further investigate the result of this mutation we have developed a probability-based scoring method, allowing us to predict shifts in phosphorylation in the K198R mutant relative to the wild type kinase. As an initial step we have applied the methodology to the set of axonally localized ion channels in an effort to uncover potential alterations of the phosphoproteome associated with the OCNDS disease condition.

### Sample Protocol
ProPeL Experiments for Motif Determination ProPeL experiments were carried out as previously described8 with the following conditions for in vivo proteome phosphorylation: all CK2 constructs were expressed in Escherichia coli OverExpress C43(DE3) cells (Lucigen) by IPTG induction. Optimal expression conditions were determined to be mid-log induction followed by expression for 24h at 37°C in TB media (data not shown).

### Data Protocol
Untargeted Protein Identification via Tandem Mass Spectrometry Peptide samples were subjected to mass analysis using a Thermo Scientific Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano ultra-high performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) system coupled to a highresolution Thermo Scientific Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer. An aliquot of each peptide preparation in Solvent A (0.1% formic acid in H2O) was injected onto a Waters nanoEase m/z Peptide BEH C18 analytical column (130A, 1.7 µm, 75 µm x 250 mm) and separated by reversephase UPLC using a gradient of 4-30% Solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) over a 100-min gradient at 300 nL/min flow. Peptides were eluted directly into the Q Exactive HF using positive mode nanoflow electrospray ionization and 1.5 kV capillary voltage. MS scan acquisition parameters included 60,000 resolution, 1e6 AGC target, maximum ion time of 60 ms, and a 300 to 1800 m/z mass range. Data-dependent MS/MS scan acquisition parameters included 15,000 resolution, 1e5 AGC target, maximum ion time of 40 ms, loop count of 15, isolation window of 2.0 m/z, dynamic exclusion window of 30 s, normalized collision energy of 27, and charge exclusion “on” for all unassigned, +1, and >+8 charged species. Peptides were identified using MaxQuant (v1.6.10.43) and the embedded Andromeda search engine. The raw data was searched against three databases: an in-house-generated protein database consisting of 6xHis-tagged CK2 wildtype and mutant sequences, the complete UniProt E. coli reference proteome (identifier UP0000068040, accessed 11Sept2020), and the MaxQuant contaminants database. Variable modifications were oxidation of Met, acetylation of protein Ntermini, deamidation of Asn/Gln, and for enriched samples, phosphorylation of Ser/Thr/Tyr. Carbamidomethylation of Cys was set as a fixed modification. Protease specificity was set to trypsin, allowing a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. LFQ quantification was enabled. All results were filtered to a 1% false discovery rate at the peptide spectrum match and protein levels; all other parameters were kept at default values. MaxQuant-derived output was further analyzed in accordance with the ProPeL method.

### Publication Abstract
Okur-Chung Neurodevelopmental Syndrome (OCNDS) is caused by heterozygous mutations to the <i>CSNK2A1</i> gene, which encodes the alpha subunit of protein kinase CK2. The most frequently occurring mutation is lysine 198 to arginine (K198R). To investigate the impact of this mutation, we first generated a high-resolution phosphorylation motif of CK2<sup>WT</sup>, including the first characterization of specificity for tyrosine phosphorylation activity. A second high resolution motif representing CK2<sup>K198R</sup> substrate specificity was also generated. Here we report the impact of the OCNDS associated CK2<sup>K198R</sup> mutation. Contrary to prior speculation, the mutation does not result in a complete loss of function, but rather shifts the substrate specificity of the kinase. Broadly speaking the mutation leads to 1) a decreased preference for acidic residues in the +1 position, 2) a decreased preference for threonine phosphorylation, 3) an increased preference for tyrosine phosphorylation, and 4) an alteration of the tyrosine phosphorylation specificity motif. To further investigate the result of this mutation we have developed a probability-based scoring method, allowing us to predict shifts in phosphorylation in the K198R mutant relative to the wild type kinase. As an initial step we have applied the methodology to the set of axonally localized ion channels in an effort to uncover potential alterations of the phosphoproteome associated with the OCNDS disease condition.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Phosphoproteomics, Propel, Kinase, Okur-chung, Ckii, Ck2, Mutation

### Affiliations
Proteomics & Metabolomics Facility, University of Connecticut
University of Connecticut

### Submitter
Jeremy Balsbaugh

### Lab Head
Dr Jeremy Balsbaugh
Proteomics & Metabolomics Facility, University of Connecticut


