### Accession
PXD018663

### Title
Fractionation of phosphopeptides using reversed phase microcolumn prior to LC-MS analysis

### Description
A protocol for an improved phosphopeptide identification in tryptically digested complex peptide samples is described. The common TiO2 based phoshopeptide enrichment is coupled to a simple peptide fractionation protocol with following LC-MS analysis of the obtained fractions and proteomic identification of phosphorylated peptides. The fractions are obtained by an optimized protocol for peptide fractionation using a home-made capillary column coupled to a microgradient elution using a gastight microsyringe. The protocol leads to a substantially increased number of phosphopeptides (more than twice).

### Sample Protocol
We obtained non-small cell lung carcinoma cells (H1299) from the American Type Culture Collections (Manassas, VA, USA). We cultured the cells at 37 °C in a humidified incubator under controlled 5% CO2 atmosphere and maintained them in RPMI medium 1640 (Gibco, Paisley, UK) supplemented with a 10% fetal bovine serum, 150 Ul/mL penicillin and 50 mg/mL streptomycin (all from Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA). The maintenance culture was divided twice per week by dilution to a concentration of 2x105 cells/10 mL. The cells, placed in a flask, were irradiated using a 60Co gamma-ray source with a dose rate of 0.44 Gy/min to increase the number of phosphorylated proteins. After irradiation, the cells were transferred back into an incubator and cultivated further for a one hour. After irradiation, we lysed H1299 cells using lysis buffer with the composition of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 1% sodium deoxycholate, and phosphatase inhibitor cocktails 2 and 3 (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA). We precipitated the obtained proteins using the chloroform/methanol precipitation, desalted them using C18 solid phase extraction cartridges (3M™ Empore™, St. Paul, MN, USA) and digested with trypsin (sequence grade modified trypsin, Promega Corporation, Madison, WI, USA). After proper digestion, we extracted redundant sodium deoxycholate by ethyl acetate (Rapid detergent removal from peptide samples with ethyl acetate for mass spectrometry analysis) and enriched phosphopeptides using titanium dioxide chromatography (Highly selective enrichment of phosphorylated peptides from peptide mixtures using titanium dioxide microcolumns). Enrichment of phosphopeptides was performed using Mobicol spin columns (MoBiTec GmbH, Goettingen, Germany). At first, we supplemented samples with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA; 2% v/v) and glutamic acid (100 mM). Then we added titanium dioxide microspheres (Titansphere® 5 μm particles, GL Sciences, Torrance, CA, USA) suspended in loading buffer (LB; 65% acetonitrile, 2% TFA, 100 mM glutamic acid) to the samples (peptide:TiO2 ratio, 1:10) and left mixing for 30 minutes. Afterward, we washed the microspheres with 200 μL of LB, 200 μL of washing buffer 1 (WB1; 65% acetonitrile with 0.5% TFA), 200 μL of washing buffer 2 (WB2; 65% acetonitrile with 0.1% TFA) and again with 100 μL of WB2. Then we eluted phosphopeptides by 150 μL of elution buffer (EB; NH4OH, pH 11.5). After elution, we acidified phosphopeptides with 10% TFA and continued with fractionation. Fractionation of phosphopeptides was done using custom-made reversed phase microcolumns (length: 10 mm, 250 µm ID) packed with 2.6 µm Kinetex EVO C18 resin (Phenomenex, USA) in FEP (fluorinated ethylene propylene) tubing (VICI AG, Switzerland) blocked with a small piece of Whatman® glass microfiber filter (GE Healthcare, USA). Samples eluted with non-linear gradient with gradually increasing ACN content (2–40% ACN/0.1% TFA) and pH value of the mobile phase (from pH 5 to 10) from the microcolumn. For the mass spectrometry analysis, we used the Dionex Ultimate™ 3000 RSLCnano system coupled through Nanospray Flex ion source with a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (both Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The TiO2-enriched peptide mixture (2% acetonitrile/0.05% TFA; 1 μL) was injected onto capillary trap column (C18 PepMap100, 3 µm, 100 A, 0.075 × 20 mm; Dionex) and then eluted and separated on capillary column (C18 PepMap RSLC, 2 µm, 100 A, 0.075 × 150 mm; Dionex) with a step linear gradient of mobile phase B (80% acetonitrile / 0.1% formic acid) over mobile phase A (0.1% formic acid) from 4 to 34% B in 68 minutes and from 34 to 55% B in 21 minutes at flow rate of 300 nL/min. We kept the column at 40 °C and monitored the eluent at 215 nm.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA, v. 2.4.0.305) with SequestHT searching engine was used for identification of MS/MS spectra. The parameters for SequestHT database searching were: protein database – UniProt human reference proteome UP000005640 (December 11, 2019), enzyme – trypsin, maximum missed cleavage sites – 2, minimum peptide length - 7, precursor mass tolerance – 20 ppm, fragment mass tolerance – 0.02 Da, static modification – Carbamidomethyl (C), dynamic modifications – Oxidation (M), Phospho (S,T,Y), Gln->pyro-Glu (peptide terminus Q), Acetyl (protein terminus), Met-loss (protein terminus M), Met-loss+Acetyl (protein terminus M).

### Publication Abstract
Mass spectrometry (MS) is a powerful and sensitive method often used for the identification of phosphoproteins. However, in phosphoproteomics, there is an identified need to compensate for the low abundance, insufficient ionization, and suppression effects of non-phosphorylated peptides. These may hamper the subsequent liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry/mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis, resulting in incomplete phosphoproteome characterization, even when using high-resolution instruments. To overcome these drawbacks, we present here an effective microgradient chromatographic technique that yields specific fractions of enriched phosphopeptides compatible with LC-MS/MS analysis. The purpose of our study was to increase the number of identified phosphopeptides, and thus, the coverage of the sample phosphoproteome using the reproducible and straightforward fractionation method. This protocol includes a phosphopeptide enrichment step followed by the optimized microgradient fractionation of enriched phosphopeptides and final LC-MS/MS analysis of the obtained fractions. The simple fractionation system consists of a gas-tight microsyringe delivering the optimized gradient mobile phase to reversed-phase microcolumn. Our data indicate that combining the phosphopeptide enrichment with the microgradient separation is a promising technique for in-depth phosphoproteomic analysis due to moderate input material requirements and more than 3-fold enhanced protein identification.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, H1299 cell line, Phosphopeptide fractionation

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Pathology and Biology Faculty of Military Health Sciences, University of Defence Trebesska 1575, 50001 Hradec Kralove, Czech Republic
Department of Molecular Pathology and Biology FMHS UD, Trebesska 1575, CZ-50001 Hradec Kralove, Czech Republic

### Submitter
Pavel Rehulka

### Lab Head
Dr Jiri Stulik
Department of Molecular Pathology and Biology Faculty of Military Health Sciences, University of Defence Trebesska 1575, 50001 Hradec Kralove, Czech Republic


