### Accession
PXD017898

### Title
ARID1A regulates transcription and the epigenetic landscape via POLE and DMAP1 while ARID1A deficiency or pharmacological inhibition sensitizes germ cell tumor cells to ATR inhibition

### Description
Germ cell tumors (GCTs) are the most common solid malignancies in young men. Although high cure rates can be achieved at early stages, metastases, resistance to cisplatin-based therapy, and late toxicities still represent a lethal threat, arguing for the need of new therapeutic options. In a previous study, we identified downregulation of the chromatin-remodeling SWI/SNF complex member ARID1A as a key event in the mode of action of the histone deacetylase inhibitor romidepsin, subsequently leading to induction of stress, apoptosis and cell cycle regulators. Additionally, ARID1A is mutated in many different tumor types, like bladder, breast or ovarial cancer. There, the loss-of-function mutations re-sensitize these tumor types to various drugs, like EZH2-, PARP-, HDAC-, HSP90- or ATR-inhibitors. Thus, ARID1A presents as a promising target for synthetic lethality and combination therapy. In this study, we deciphered the molecular function of ARID1A and screened for the potential of two pharmacological ARID1A inhibitors as a new therapeutic strategy to treat GCTs. By CRISPR/Cas9, we generated ARID1A-deficient GCT cells and demonstrate that ARID1A regulates transcription, DNA repair and the epigenetic landscape on DNA and histone level via DNA Polymerase POLE and the DNA methyltransferase 1-associated protein DMAP1. Additionally, ARID1A deficiency or pharmacological inhibition considerably sensitized (cisplatin-resistant) GCT cells towards ATR inhibition. Thus, ARID1A might be new combination partner for ATR inhibitors in the treatment of GCTs.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from frozen cell pellets as described elsewhere (Poschmann et al. [1]). Briefly, cells were lysed and homogenized in urea buffer with a TissueLyser (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) and supernatants were collected after centrifugation for 15 min at 14,000 xg and 4°C, supernatants were collected. Protein concentration was determined by means of Pierce 660 nm Protein Assay (Fischer Scientific, Schwerte, Germany) and 10 µg protein per sample were loaded on a SDS-PAGE for in-gel-digestion. The isolated gel pieces were reduced (50 µl, 10 mM DTT), alkylated (50 µl, 50 mM iodoacetamide) and underwent afterwards tryptic digestion (6 µl, 200 ng trypsin in 100 mM ammonium bicaonate). The peptides were resolved in 0.1 % trifluoracetic acid and subjected to liquid chromatography. For the LC-MS analysis a QExactive plus (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) connected with an Ultimate 3000 Rapid Separation liquid chromatography system (Dionex / Thermo Scientific, Idstein, Germany) equipped with an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 column (75 µm inner diameter, 25 cm length, 2 mm particle size from Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) was applied. The length of the LC gradient was 120 minutes. The mass spectrometer was operating in positive mode and coupled with a nano electrospray ionization source. Capillary temperature was set to 250°C and source voltage to 1.4 kV. In the QExactive plus mass spectrometer for the survey scans a mass range from 200 to 2000 m/z at a resolution of 140,000 was used. The automatic gain control was set to 3,000,000 and the maximum fill time was 50 ms. The 10 most intensive peptide ions were isolated and fragmented by high-energy collision dissociation (HCD).

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer (version 2.3.0.532, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) was applied for peptide/protein identification applying Mascot (version 2.4, Matrix Science, London, UK) as search engine employing the human database (Uniprot, Swissprot). A false discovery rate of 1% on peptide level was set as identification threshold. Proteins were quantified with Progenesis QI for Proteomics (Version 2.0, Nonlinear Dynamics, Waters Corporation, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK).  Only proteins containing at least two unique peptides were taken into consideration. For the calculation of enriched proteins in the groups a 5 % false discovery rate and a minimum fold change of two was used.

### Publication Abstract
Germ cell tumors (GCTs) are the most common solid malignancies found in young men. Although they generally have high cure rates, metastases, resistance to cisplatin-based therapy, and late toxicities still represent a lethal threat, arguing for the need of new therapeutic options. In a previous study, we identified downregulation of the chromatin-remodeling SWI/SNF complex member ARID1A as a key event in the mode of action of the histone deacetylase inhibitor romidepsin. Additionally, the loss-of-function mutations re-sensitize different tumor types to various drugs, like EZH2-, PARP-, HDAC-, HSP90- or ATR-inhibitors. Thus, ARID1A presents as a promising target for synthetic lethality and combination therapy. In this study, we deciphered the molecular function of ARID1A and screened for the potential of two pharmacological ARID1A inhibitors as a new therapeutic strategy to treat GCTs. By CRISPR/Cas9, we generated <i>ARID1A</i>-deficient GCT cells and demonstrate by mass spectrometry that <i>ARID1A</i> is putatively involved in regulating transcription, DNA repair and the epigenetic landscape via DNA Polymerase POLE and the DNA methyltransferase 1-associated protein DMAP1. Additionally, <i>ARID1A/ARID1A</i> deficiency or pharmacological inhibition increased the efficacy of romidepsin and considerably sensitized GCT cells, including cisplatin-resistant subclones, towards ATR inhibition. Thus, targeting ARID1A in combination with romidepsin and ATR inhibitors presents as a new putative option to treat GCTs.

### Keywords
Atr inhibitors, Swi/snf-complex, Germ cell tumors, Crispr/cas9, Molecular therapy, Hdac inhibitors, Mass spectrometry, Arid1a

### Affiliations
BMFZ/MPL
Institute for Molecular Medicine I Medical Faculty Heinrich-Heine-University Duesseldorf Universitaetsstrasse 1 40225 Duesseldorf Germany

### Submitter
Nina Overbeck

### Lab Head
Dr Kai Stühler
Institute for Molecular Medicine I Medical Faculty Heinrich-Heine-University Duesseldorf Universitaetsstrasse 1 40225 Duesseldorf Germany


