### Accession
PXD026935

### Title
CX-MS of Phospho-regulated Bim1/EB1 interactions trigger Dam1c ring assembly at the budding yeast outer kinetochore

### Description
Kinetochores form the link between chromosomes and microtubules of the mitotic spindle. The heterodecameric Dam1 complex (Dam1c) is a major component of the S. cerevisiae outer kinetochore, assembling into 3 MDa-sized microtubule-embracing rings, but how ring assembly is specifically initiated at kinetochores remains to be understood. Here, we describe a molecular pathway that provides local control of ring assembly during the establishment of sister kinetochore bi-orientation. We show that Dam1c and the general microtubule plus-end-associated protein (+TIP) Bim1/EB1 form a stable complex depending on a conserved motif in the Duo1 subunit of Dam1c. EM analyses reveal that Bim1 crosslinks protrusion domains of adjacent Dam1c heterodecamers and promotes the formation of oligomers with defined curvature. Disruption of the Dam1c-Bim1 interaction impairs kinetochore localization of Dam1c in metaphase and delays mitosis. Phosphorylation promotes Dam1c-Bim1 binding by relieving an intramolecular inhibition of the Dam1 C-terminus. In addition, Bim1 recruits Bik1/CLIP-170 to Dam1c and induces formation of full rings even in the absence of microtubules. Our data help to explain how new kinetochore end-on attachments are formed during the process of attachment error correction.

### Sample Protocol
For titration of the crosslinker, an equimolar mixture of isotopically light- and heavy-labelled BS3-H12/D12 (bis(sulfosuccinimidyl)suberate, Creative Molecules) was diluted to different concentrations ranging from 0 µM to 2500 µM. In a total reaction volume of 6 µl, 1 µg of Dam1c was mixed with BS3 of different concentration and incubated at 35 °C for 45 minutes. The reaction was stopped by addition of NH4HCO3 to a final concentration of 100 mM. The samples were subsequently analyzed by SDS-PAGE followed by silver staining. For mass spectrometric analysis of crosslinked Dam1c, 60 µg of Dam1c were crosslinked in the absence or presence of 7.4 µg Bim1 using a BS3 concentration of 600 µM. Cross-linked peptides were enriched on a Superdex Peptide PC 3.2/30 column using water/acetonitrile/TFA (75/25/0.1, v/v/v) as mobile phase at a flow rate of 50 μl/min and were analyzed by liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) using an Orbitrap Elite instrument (ThermoFisher).

### Data Protocol
Fragment ion spectra were searched and cross-links were identified by the dedicated software xQuest (Walzthoeni et al., 2012). The results were filtered according to the following parameters: Δscore ≤ 0.85, MS1 tolerance window of −4 to 4 ppm and score ≥ 22. The quality of all cross-link spectra passing the filter was manually validated and cross-links were visualized as network plots using the webserver xVis (Grimm et al., 2015).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Chemical cross-linking, Kinetochore, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Genzentrum, Department of Biochemistry, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München
Gene Center, LMU Munich

### Submitter
Franz Herzog

### Lab Head
Dr Franz Herzog
Gene Center, LMU Munich


