### Accession
PXD012490

### Title
Analysis of Erythroleukemia

### Description
Samples were subjected to LC–MS analysis using a dual pressure LTQ-Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected to an electrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as recently described (PMID: 23017020). Peptide separation was carried out on an EASY nLC-1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a RP-HPLC column (75 μm × 30 cm) packed in-house with C18 resin (ReproSil-Pur C18–AQ, 1.9 μm resin, Dr. Maisch GmbH). A step-wise gradient from 95% solvent A (0.1% formic acid) and 5% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) to 50% solvent B over 60 min at a flow rate of 0.2 μl/min was used. Data acquisition mode was set to obtain one high resolution MS scan in the FT part of the mass spectrometer at a resolution of 240,000 full width at half-maximum (at m/z 400) followed by 20 MS/MS scans (TOP20) in the linear ion trap of the most intense ions using rapid scan speed. Unassigned and singly charged ions were excluded from analysis. Dynamic exclusion duration was set to 30 seconds.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were subjected to on-bead digestion as previously described (PMID: ). Carbamidomethylation of cysteins was performed by addition of 10 mM TCEP and 15 mM Chloroacetamide in the dark at 37 C for 1 hour. Final digestion of proteins was performed by addition of 1 ug Trypsin (Promega) at 37 C overnight. The tryptic digest was acidified by addition of TFA (pH<3) and samples were desalted using C18 reversed phase spin columns (Harvard Apparatus) according to the protocol of the manufacturer. Dried peptides were stored at -20 C until further use. Peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid prior to injection into the mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
MS1-based label-free quantification of MS data was performed using Progenesis QI software (Nonlinear Dynamics (Waters), version 2.0). After MS raw file import the data was analyzed using default parameter settings. MS/MS-data were exported from Progenesis QI (MGF format) and searched with a target/decoy based strategy against a database containing forward and reverse sequences of the proteome from Homo sapiens (UniProt, 41170 entries) using MASCOT (version 2.4.1). Search criteria required stricttrypsin allowing for three missed cleavages. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified in Mascot as a fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine and acetyl of the n-terminus were specified in Mascot as variable modifications. Mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.6 Da for fragment ions. The peptide and protein false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1%. Results from the database search were imported into Progenesis QI and the resulting peptide measurement list containing peak area values of identified peptides was further used in quantitative analysis. Processing and statistical evaluation of peptide and protein quantities between samples was performed using SafeQuant (PMID: 23017020). Normalized peptide and protein intensities from SafeQuant analysis were used to calculate intensity ratios between experimental conditions for identified proteins.

### Publication Abstract
The nuclear receptor binding SET domain protein 1 (NSD1) is recurrently mutated in human cancers including acute leukemia. We show that NSD1 knockdown alters erythroid clonogenic growth of human CD34<sup>+</sup> hematopoietic cells. Ablation of Nsd1 in the hematopoietic system of mice induces a transplantable erythroleukemia. In vitro differentiation of Nsd1<sup>-/-</sup> erythroblasts is majorly impaired despite abundant expression of GATA1, the transcriptional master regulator of erythropoiesis, and associated with an impaired activation of GATA1-induced targets. Retroviral expression of wildtype NSD1, but not a catalytically-inactive NSD1<sup>N1918Q</sup> SET-domain mutant induces terminal maturation of Nsd1<sup>-/-</sup> erythroblasts. Despite similar GATA1 protein levels, exogenous NSD1 but not NSD<sup>N1918Q</sup> significantly increases the occupancy of GATA1 at target genes and their expression. Notably, exogenous NSD1 reduces the association of GATA1 with the co-repressor SKI, and knockdown of SKI induces differentiation of Nsd1<sup>-/-</sup> erythroblasts. Collectively, we identify the NSD1 methyltransferase as a regulator of GATA1-controlled erythroid differentiation and leukemogenesis.

### Keywords
Erythroleukemia, Mass spectroemtry

### Affiliations
Biozentrum, University of Basel, 4056 Basel, Switzerland
Proteomics Core Facility

### Submitter
Alexander Schmidt

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Schmidt
Biozentrum, University of Basel, 4056 Basel, Switzerland


