### Accession
PXD014191

### Title
Proteome profiling of the exhaled breath condensate after long-term spaceflights

### Description
Abstract: The aim of the study was to analyze exhaled breath condensate (EBC) proteome changes due to the effects of spaceflight factors. All the protocols were approved at the Institute of Biomedical Problems – Russian Federation State Scientific Research Center in the frame of «Protocon» experiment. EBC samples were collected by commercial devices RTube one month before flight (background) at the Yu. A. Gagarin Research and Test Cosmonaut Training Center, immediately after landing of the landing modules in the field (R0), and on the seventh day after landing as a part of medical examination (R+7). Semi-quantitative label-free proteomic analysis of 13 EBC samples collected from 5 Russian cosmonauts before and after long-term (169–199 days) spaceflights were performed and resulted in 164 different proteins. The highest number of proteins was detected in EBC after landing (R0). Pathways enrichment analysis via GO database large group of proteins that take part in keratinization processes (CASP14, DSG1, DSP, JUP, and etc). Nine proteins were KRT2, KRT9, KRT1, KRT10, KRT14, DCD, KRT6C, KRT6A, KRT5 were detected in all groups (background, R0, R+1).  A two-sample Welch’s t-test identified the significant changing of KRT2 and KRT9 levels after landing. Enrichment analysis via KEGG database revealed significant participation (2,07E-06) of detected proteins in pathogenic E. coli infection (ACTG1, TUBA1C, TUBA4A, TUBB, TUBB8, YWHAZ). Presumably, presents of this proteins can associated with changing of cosmonauts’ microbial composition. Thus EBC can be used for noninvasive monitoring of health status and respiratory tract pathologies during the spaceflight. The obtained data are important for the development of medicine in extreme situations.

### Sample Protocol
cosmonauts of 38—62 years of age (the average age was 45.5 years; four males and one female). The biological samples were collected one month before long-term (169—199) spaceflight (background) at the Yu. A. Gagarin Research and Test Cosmonaut Training Center, immediately after landing of the landing modules in the field (R0), and on the seventh day after landing as a part of medical examination (R+7). The EBC study was approved by the Ethics Committees of the N. M. Emanuel Institute of Biochemical Physics and the Institute of Biomedical Problems, Russian Academy of Sciences; all donors signed the informed consent for participation in the tests. The EBC was collected using a portable RTube device. During EBC collection cosmonaut breaths quietly for 10 – 15 minutes through a special mouthpiece with a salivary trap, the exhaled airflow divers through a Teflon or polypropylene tube inside a cooling container. The sample preparation for LC-MS analysis included freeze drying and selective tryptic hydrolysis at 37oC for 17 hours.  The tryptic peptide fraction (injection volume 1 µL) was analyzed in triplicate on a nano-HPLC Dionex Ultimate3000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA) coupled to a TiMS TOF mass spectrometry (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) using a captive spray ion source (positive ion mode, 1600 V) (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany). HPLC separation was performed on a C18 capillary column (25cm x 75µm 1.6µm) (Ion Optics, Parkville, Australia) at a flow rate of 0.4 µL/min by gradient elution. The mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid in water and mobile phase B was 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. The separation was carried out by a 40 min gradient from 3% to 90% of phase B.

### Data Protocol
MS data were analyzed using the MaxQuant (v 1.6.5) program against the SwissProt Human database with an initial precursor mass error of 70 ppm. The minimum peptide length for identification was set to 7 amino acids; the match between the runs option was activated. The cutoff false discovery rate (FDR) for proteins and peptides was set to 0.01 (1% FDR). Label-free quantitative analysis was performed in order to determine the significantly changed proteins. Quantification of peptides recognized on the basis of mass and retention time but identified in other LC-MS/MS runs. Proteins quantification was carried out using label-free quantification (LFQ) intensities of peptides across all samples, and represented by a normalized intensity profile that is generated according to the specific algorithms. Protein–protein interactions were analyzed using the STRING database (v 11.0). The minimum coefficient of interaction score was 0.4; the PPI enrichment p-value was < 1.0e-16. The interactions included physical and functional associations derived from computational prediction, automated text mining, co-expression databases and genomic context prediction aggregated from other databases.Protein categorical annotations were derived from GeneOntology via the SwissProt Human database.

### Publication Abstract
Comprehensive studies of the effects of prolonged exposure to space conditions and the overload experienced during landing on physiological and biochemical changes in the human body are extremely important in the context of planning long-distance space flights, which can be associated with constant overloads and various risk factors for significant physiological changes. Exhaled breath condensate (EBC) can be considered as a valuable subject for monitoring physiological changes and is more suitable for long-term storage than traditional monitoring subjects such as blood and urine. Herein, the EBC proteome changes due to the effects of spaceflight factors are analyzed. Thirteen EBC samples were collected from five Russian cosmonauts (i) one month before flight (background), (ii) immediately upon landing modules in the field (R0) after 169-199 days spaceflights, and (iii) on the seventh day after landing (R+7). Semi-quantitative label-free EBC proteomic analysis resulted in 164 proteins, the highest number of which was detected in EBC after landing (R0). Pathways enrichment analysis using the GO database reveals a large group of proteins which take part in keratinization processes (<i>CASP14</i>, <i>DSG1</i>, <i>DSP</i>, <i>JUP</i>, and so on). Nine proteins (including <i>KRT2</i>, <i>KRT9</i>, <i>KRT1</i>, <i>KRT10</i>, <i>KRT14</i>, <i>DCD</i>, <i>KRT6C</i>, <i>KRT6A</i>, and <i>KRT5</i>) were detected in all three groups. A two-sample Welch's <i>t</i>-test identified a significant change in KRT2 and KRT9 levels after landing. Enrichment analysis using the KEGG database revealed the significant participation of detected proteins in pathogenic <i>E. coli</i> infection (<i>ACTG1</i>, <i>TUBA1C</i>, <i>TUBA4A</i>, <i>TUBB</i>, <i>TUBB8</i>, and <i>YWHAZ</i>), which may indicate microbiota changes associated with being in space. This assumption is confirmed by microbial composition analysis. In general, the results suggest that EBC can be used for noninvasive monitoring of health status and respiratory tract pathologies during spaceflights, and that the obtained data are important for the development of medicine for use in extreme situations. Data are available from ProteomeXchange using the identifier PXD014191.

### Keywords
Ebc, Exhaled breath condensate

### Affiliations
IBP RAS
V.I. Kulakov National Medical Research Center for Obstetrics, Gynecology and Perinatology,
Ministry of Healthcare of the Russian Federation, Moscow, Russia

### Submitter
Alexander Brzhozovskiy

### Lab Head
Dr Irina Larina
IBP RAS


