### Accession
PXD041516

### Title
Excretory-secretory proteome of nematode Heligmosomoides polygyrus developed in colitic conditions

### Description
The aim of the study was to evaluate excretory-secretory protein set produced by nematode H. polygyrus L4 stage male and female developed in colitic milienu. Mass spectrometry was used to identify proteins. OmicsBox was used to investigate the functions of the discovered proteins.

### Sample Protocol
The mass spectrometry analysis was performed at the Mass Spectrometry Laboratory IBB PAS as described previously in Maruszewska-Cheruiyot M, Szewczak L, Krawczak-Wójcik K, Głaczyńska M, Donskow-Łysoniewska K, The production of excretory-secretory molecules from Heligmosomoides polygyrus bakeri fourth stage larvae varies between mixed and single sex cultures. Parasit Vectors, 14(1):106(2021). Two independent analyses of the ES samples were conducted.

### Data Protocol
The acquired MS/MS data were preprocessed with Mascot Distiller software (v. 2.6 or 2.7, MatrixScience, London, UK), and a search was performed with the Mascot Search Engine (MatrixScience, London, UK, Mascot Server 2.5) against the Nematoda proteins (1,283,514 sequences) deposited in NCBInr database (20190409, 198,058,131 sequenc-es; 72,054,367,693 residues). Protein functional annotation was prepared using Omicsbox v. 2.4.4software (Biobam). The initial Blast search was performed against the NCBI non-redundant (nr) database, with default parameters. Gene Ontology (GO) annotations were made with default parameters. GO annotation results were merged with the InterPro database scanning results and EggNOG v5.0 orthology and functional annotation data.

### Publication Abstract
Parasitic nematodes and their products are promising candidates for therapeutics against inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD). Two species of nematodes, the hookworm <i>Necator americanus</i> and the whipworm <i>Trichuis suis</i>, are being used in clinical treatment trials of IBD referred to as "helminth therapy". <i>Heligmosomoides polygyrus</i> is a well-known model for human hookworm infections. Excretory-secretory (ES) products of <i>H. polygyrus</i> L4 stage that developed during colitis show a different immunomodulatory effect compared to the ES of <i>H. polgyrus</i> from healthy mice. The aim of the study was to evaluate excretory-secretory proteins produced by <i>H. polygyrus</i> L4 stage males and females that developed in the colitic milieu. Mass spectrometry was used to identify proteins. Blast2GO was used to investigate the functions of the discovered proteins. A total of 387 proteins were identified in the ES of <i>H. polygyrus</i> L4 males (HpC males), and 330 proteins were identified in the ES of L4 females that developed in the colitic milieu (HpC females). In contrast, only 200 proteins were identified in the ES of L4 males (Hp males) and 218 in the ES of L4 females (Hp females) that developed in control conditions. Most of the proteins (123) were detected in all groups. Unique proteins identified in the ES of HpC females included annexin, lysozyme-2, apyrase, and galectin. Venom allergen/Ancylostoma-secreted protein-like, transthyretin-like family proteins, and galectins were found in the secretome of HpC males but not in the secretome of control males. These molecules may be responsible for the therapeutic effects of nematodes in DSS-induced colitis.

### Keywords
Heligmosomoides polygyrus bakeri, Lc-ms/ms, Nematode, Excretory-secretory products, Colitis

### Affiliations
Department of Parasitology, Institute of Functional Biology and Ecology, Faculty of Biology, University of Warsaw
Department of Experimental Immunotherapy, Faculty of Medicine, Lazarski University, Warsaw

### Submitter
Ludmiła Szewczak

### Lab Head
Dr Katarzyna Donskow-Łyskoniewska
Department of Experimental Immunotherapy, Faculty of Medicine, Lazarski University, Warsaw


