### Accession
PXD033697

### Title
Proteomics analysis of early stages of human osteoblasts osteogenic differentiation in vitro

### Description
Cellular mechanisms and signaling cascades underlying the early stages of osteoblast progenitors differentiation in adult bone are still not well understood. Therefore, we performed shotgun proteomics analysis of primary culture of isolated human osteoblasts from femur of adult donors in control and on the sixth day of osteogenic differentiation in vitro. This is an early timepoint in which we have observed no extracellular matrix mineralization yet. Nevertheless, for protein extraction we used acidic extraction method which is effective for bones and other mineralized tissues. 1785 proteins identified with at least two unique peptides were included in proteomics analysis. We revealed physiological shift associated with a decrease of cells proliferative activity and extracellular matrix secretion and organization. The obtained data can make a significant contribution to understanding processes of osteogenesis induction to enhance fracture healing.

### Sample Protocol
Cell cultures Osteoblast-like cells were isolated from fragments of the epiphysis of bone spongy tissue of femur bone, obtained during surgery in Russian Scientific Research Institute of Traumatology and Orthopedics named after R.R. Vreden. To induce osteogenic differentiation, we used classic osteogenic medium which seems to be universal for many cell types (Lobov and Malashicheva, 2022): DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS, 2 mM L-glutamine, 100 units/ml penicillin/streptomycin, 50 mg/ml ascorbic acid, 0.1 mM dexamethasone and 10 mM b–glycerophosphate. On the fifth day of differentiation cells were removed with trypsin, centrifuged (1500 g, 5 min), washed with PBS and centrifuged. The resulting dry pellet was frozen at -80°С. 100 ul of 0.2 N HCl was added to the cell pellet with subsequent incubation for 30 min at +4°С. Then samples were centrifuged (16,000 g, 10 min, 4 °C), supernatant was transferred to new tube and protein was precipitated with 4 volumes of ace cold acetone (LC-MS Grade; LiChrosolv) overnight at -20°С. Protein pellet was air-dried and resuspended in 8M Urea Protein concentration was measured by Qubit fluorimeter with QuDye Protein Quantification Kit. We used 20 ug of each sample preparation. Samples were incubated for 1 h at 37°C with 5 mM DTT with further incubation in 15 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark at room temperature , followed by quenching with additional 5 mM DTT. Then, the samples were diluted with seven volumes of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and incubated for 16 h at 37°C with proteomics grade trypsin in ratio 1:50. Tryptic peptides were desalted by solid-phase extraction using c18 Zip-Tips. Approximate 600 ng of peptides were used for shotgun proteomics analysis by LC-MS/MS with ion mobility in TimsToF Pro mass spectrometer with nanoElute UHPLC system . UHPLC was performed in two-column separation mode with Acclaim™ Pep-Map™ 5 mm Trap Cartridge and Bruker Fifteen separation column (C18 ReproSil AQ, 150 mm × 0.75 mm, 1.9 µm, 120 A) in gradient mode with 400 nL/min flow rate with column temperature at 40°C. Phase A was water/0.1% formic acid, phase B was acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid (LC-MS Grade). The gradient was from 2% to 30% phase B for 42 min, then to 95% of phase B for 6 min with subsequent wash with 95% phase B for 6 min. The column was equilibrated with 4 column volumes before each sample. CaptiveSpray ion source was used for electrospray ionization with 1600 V of capillary voltage, 3 l/min N2 flow, and 180°C source temperature. The mass spectrometry acquisition was performed in automatic DDA PASEF mode with 0.5 s cycle in positive polarity with the fragmentation of ions with at least two charges in m/z range from 100 to 1700 and ion mobility range from 0.85 to 1.30 1/K0.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was performed in Peaks Xpro software (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, ON, Canada) against human protein SwissProt database (https://www.uniprot.org/; accessed on 28 March 2021; uploaded on 2 March 2021; 20,394 sequences) with parent mass error tolerance 10 ppm and fragment mass error tolerance 0.05 ppm, protein and peptide FDR less than 1% and two possible missed cleavage sites. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification. Methionine oxidation, acetylation of protein N-term, asparagine, and glutamine deamidation were set as variable modifications. CRAP contaminants database was used for both searches (version of 4 March 2019).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dda, Timstof pro, Pasef, Shotgun proteomics, Osteogenic differentiation, Osteoblasts

### Affiliations
Institute of cytology of the Russian Academy of Science
Emmanuel Levy Lab, Dept. of Chemical and Structural Biology, Weizmann Institute of Science

### Submitter
Arseniy Lobov

### Lab Head
Dr Anna B. Malashicheva
Institute of cytology of the Russian Academy of Science


