### Accession
PXD015276

### Title
Multi-organ systems study reveals Igfbp7 as a suppressor of gluconeogenesis after gastric bypass surgery

### Description
Roux-en-Y gastric bypass (RYGB) surgery reduces weight in obese patients. A marked decrease in blood glucose levels occurs before weight loss; however, key molecules that improve glycemic profile remain largely unknown. We used the RYGB surgery model in diet-induced obese (DIO) mice to monitor the proteome (with tandem mass tagging) of the Roux and biliopancreatic limbs, the liver and the pancreas up to four weeks after surgery, a time window associated with the early beneficial metabolic effects of the RYGB surgery model. The resulting kinetics were analyzed using high-dimensional cluster analysis that we recently developed (XINA,PMID: 30370770) to infer co-regulated proteins and pathways based on common kinetic profiles. Our analysis revealed the organs exhibited unique and common changes to their proteomes reflecting their specialized physiological roles and potential coordinated inter-organ crosstalk and responses, respectively. Further exploration of the Roux limb proteome kinetics included the identification of relatively unknown proteins found with clusters comprising established protein-protein interaction networks. One such protein was insulin-like growth factor binding protein 7 (Igfbp7) whose subsequent in vitro and in vivo studies supported the role of this secreted protein in suppressing hepatic gluconeogenesis; which in turn, substantiates our systems approach to discover new mechanisms by which the RYGB surgery exerts beneficial effects.

### Sample Protocol
Excerpts from main manuscript. Sample preparation and tandem mass tagging (TMT). For proteomic analysis, the tissues were harvested at pre-surgery, and days 3, 7, 14 and 28 after each sham and RYGB surgery, and were homogenized (Precellys 24, Bertin instruments) with RIPA Lysis Buffer containing protease inhibitor cocktail and PhoSTOP. The tissue protein lysates were quantified using the Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit, and 80 g (liver and Roux limb) or 200 μg (biliopancreatic limb and pancreas) of protein input was used for proteolysis. Protein lysates were first precipitated using the methanol-chloroform method where the resulting protein disk was redissolved in 6 M urea/2 M thiourea for subsequent proteolysis using the Lys-C (WAKO Chemicals)/RapiGest protocol (Waters). Peptides were labeled with TMT 10-plex reagents (Supplementary Table 1, Thermo Fisher Scientific)19. The pooled TMT-labeled peptides were fractionated into 24 fractions depending on their isoelectric focusing point (pH range of 3-10) using the OFF-gel system (Agilent). The peptide fractions were desalted using the Oasis HLB cartridges (1 cc/10 mg, Waters), dried with a tabletop speed vacuum and re-suspended in 40 μl of 5% acetonitrile and 5% formic acid for subsequent analysis by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry. Proteolysis steps for recombinant Igfbp7 protein (see below) and mouse plasma samples. Albumin and IgG depletion from 15 l of plasma sample was performed using Proteome Purify 2 Mouse Serum Protein Immunodepletion Resin (R&D Systems). Proteolysis was conducted using the iST 96x Kit (PreOmics GmbH) with depleted plasma samples according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The peptide samples were dried with a tabletop speed vacuum and re-suspended in 40 μl of 5% acetonitrile and 5% formic acid for subsequent analysis by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry. Liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). TMT peptide samples were analyzed with Q Exactive mass spectrometer fronted with a Nanospray Flex ion source, and coupled to an Easy-nLC1000 HPLC pump (Thermo Scientific). The peptides were subjected to a dual column set-up: an Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 trap column, 75 µm x 20 mm; and an Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 analytical column 75 µm x 250 mm (Thermo Scientific). The analytical gradient was run at 300 nl min-1 from 5-18% Solvent B (acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid) for 105 minutes, followed by 18-30% for 15 minutes, and five minutes of 95% Solvent B. Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid. All reagents were LC/MS-grade. The instrument was set to 140 K resolution, and the top 10 precursor ions (within a scan range of 380-1,500 m/z) were subjected to higher energy collision induced dissociation (HCD, collision energy 32% (+/- 3.0%), isolation width 1.6 m/z, first fixed mass at 100.0 m/z, dynamic exclusion enabled (30 s), and resolution set to 35 K). Recombinant Igfbp7 and plasma peptide samples were analyzed using the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), fronted with an Easy-Spray ion source and coupled to an Easy-nLC1000 HPLC pump (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides were separated using a dual column set-up: an Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 trap column, 75 µm X 20 mm; and an EASY-Spray LC heated (45oC) column, 75 µm X 250 mm (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The gradient flow rate was 300 nL/min from 5 to 21% solvent B (acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid) for 50 minutes, 21 to 30% Solvent B for 10 minutes, followed by five minutes of 95% solvent B. Solvent A is 0.1% formic acid. For data-dependent acquisitions (DDA) of the recombinant protein, the instrument was set to 120 K resolution, and the top N precursor ions in 3 seconds cycle time (within a scan range of 350-1600 m/z) were subjected to collision induced dissociation (collision energy, CE, 30%) and scanned in the Orbitrap. Three Igfbp7 peptides (Supplementary Table 2 in manuscript; and linked Pride Result file) were chosen based on signal intensity to be monitored in plasma samples using a targeted MS2 strategy (parallel reaction monitoring, PRM) performed on the Lumos. The gradient conditions were similar to those in the DDA experiment. Precursor peptides were isolated using a 1.6 m/z window, and the CID-activated (CE, 30%) MS2 ions (scan range of 150-150 m/z) were scanned in the Orbitrap at 240 K.

### Data Protocol
Excerpts fromo main manuscript. Protein identification and quantification. The MS2 data were queried against the Mouse UniProt database (downloaded on August 1, 2014) using the HT-SEQUEST search algorithm, via the Proteome Discoverer (PD) Package (version 2.1, Thermo Scientific)20, using a 10 ppm tolerance window in the MS1 search space, and a 0.02 Da fragment tolerance window for HCD. Methionine oxidation and 10-plex TMT tags (Thermo Scientific) were set as variable modifications, and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification. The peptide false discovery rate (FDR) was calculated using Percolator provided by PD: the FDR was determined based on the number of MS/MS spectral hits when searched against the reverse, decoy Mouse database. Peptides were filtered based on a 1% FDR21,22. Peptides assigned to a given protein group, and not present in any other protein group, were considered as unique. Consequently, each protein group is represented by a single master protein (PD Grouping feature). TMT quantification was done for proteins with at least two unique peptides. The protein level scaled reporter ion intensities were exported for cluster analysis. Targeted Igfbp7 MS2 data (area under the curve) were quantified using Skyline (https://skyline.ms/project/home/software/Skyline/).

### Publication Abstract
Roux-en-Y gastric bypass (RYGB) surgery reduces weight in obese patients. A marked decrease in blood glucose levels occurs before weight loss; however, key molecules that improve the glycemic profile remain largely unknown. Using a murine RYGB surgery model, we performed multiorgan proteomics and bioinformatics to monitor the proteins and molecular pathways that change in this early glycemic response. Multiplexed proteomic kinetics data analysis revealed that the Roux limb, biliopancreatic limb, liver, and pancreas each exhibited unique temporal and molecular responses to the RYGB surgery. In addition, protein-protein network analysis indicated that the changes to the microbial environment in the intestine may play a crucial role in the beneficial effects of RYGB surgery. Furthermore, insulin-like growth factor binding protein 7 (Igfbp7) was identified as an early induced protein in the Roux limb. Known secretory properties of Igfbp7 prompted us to further investigate its role as a remote organ regulator of glucose metabolism. Igfbp7 overexpression decreased blood glucose levels in diet-induced obese mice and attenuated gluconeogenic gene expression in the liver. Secreted Igfbp7 appeared to mediate these beneficial effects. These results demonstrate that organs responded differentially to RYGB surgery and indicate that Igfbp7 may play an important role in improving blood glucose levels.

### Keywords
Insulin-like growth factor binding protein 7, Obesity, Tandem mass tagging, Bariatric surgery, Proteomics, Diabetes, Metabolic syndrome, Protein-protein interactions

### Affiliations
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Sasha  Singh

### Lab Head
Dr Sasha Singh
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School


