### Accession
PXD000205

### Title
ProteoRed Multicentric Experiment for Proteomics Quality Control

### Description
Proteomic technologies based on mass spectrometry (MS) have greatly evolved in the past years, and nowadays it is possible to routinely identify thousands of peptides from complex biological samples in a single LC-MS/MS experiment. Despite the advancements in proteomic technologies, the scientific community still faces important challenges in terms of depth and reproducibility of proteomics analyses. Here, we present a multicenter study designed to evaluate long-term performance of LC-MS/MS platforms within the Spanish Proteomics Facilities Network (ProteoRed-ISCIII). The study was performed under well-established standard operating procedures, and demonstrated that it is possible to attain high qualitative and quantitative reproducibility over time. Our study highlights the importance of deploying platform quality assessment metrics in multi-laboratory studies in early LC-MS/MS system troubleshooting.

### Sample Protocol
See the corresponding sections of the associated publication (PMID: 25982386)

### Data Protocol
See the corresponding sections of the associated publication (PMID: 25982386)

### Publication Abstract
Proteomic technologies based on mass spectrometry (MS) have greatly evolved in the past years, and nowadays it is possible to routinely identify thousands of peptides from complex biological samples in a single LC-MS/MS experiment. Despite the advancements in proteomic technologies, the scientific community still faces important challenges in terms of depth and reproducibility of proteomics analyses. Here, we present a multicenter study designed to evaluate long-term performance of LC-MS/MS platforms within the Spanish Proteomics Facilities Network (ProteoRed-ISCIII). The study was performed under well-established standard operating procedures, and demonstrated that it is possible to attain qualitative and quantitative reproducibility over time. Our study highlights the importance of deploying quality assessment metrics routinely in individual laboratories and in multi-laboratory studies. The mass spectrometry data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium with the data set identifier PXD000205.This article is part of a Special Issue entitled: HUPO 2014.

### Keywords
Qc, Reproducibility, Orbitrap, Multicentric

### Affiliations
Proteomics Unit
ProteoRed-ISCIII, Proteomics Platform, Barcelona Science Park, Barcelona, Spain.

### Submitter
Salvador Martínez-Bartolomé

### Lab Head
Dr Eliandre de Oliveira
ProteoRed-ISCIII, Proteomics Platform, Barcelona Science Park, Barcelona, Spain.


