### Accession
PXD015700

### Title
Hydrogen utilization by Methylocystis sp. strain SC2 expands the known metabolic versatility of type IIa methanotrophs

### Description
The objective of this study was to assess whether Methylocystis sp. strain SC2, as a representative for Methylocystis spp., can utilize hydrogen to optimize the biomass yield by mixed utilization of CH4 and H2, rather than CH4 as the sole source of energy. Thus, we aimed to show that, in the presence of H2, CH4 will primarily be used for synthesis of cell carbon and increased biomass/protein yield. In particular, we intended to explore those CH4/O2 ratios, which maximize the effect of hydrogen addition on the biomass yield and proteome reconstruction of strain SC2. To achieve our goals, we combined hydrogen-based growth experiments with our recently optimized proteomics workflow.

### Sample Protocol
In brief, the frozen cell pellets were resuspended and sonicated (Hielscher Ultrasound Technology) in 2 % sodium deoxycholate buffer (SDC, dissolved in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate) in the presence of 5 mM tris[2-carboxyethyl]phosphine and subsequently incubated at 95 °C for 60 min. The samples were subjected to additional 20 second rounds of sonication after 15 and 30 min of incubation. Upon the SDC treatment, all the protein samples were allowed to cool followed by an incubation with 10 mM iodoacetamide at 25 °C for 30 min. The resulting crude lysates were used for further digestion as described below. The concentration of proteins in each sample was measured with BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  For protein digestion step, 50 μg of total solubilized protein from crude lysate samples was used. For in-solution digestion, the samples were diluted to 0.5 % of solubilizing (SDC) agent in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer. LysC (0.5 µg, Wako Chemicals GmbH) was added directly to the protein extract and incubated for 4 h at 30 °C, followed by trypsin (1 μg, Promega) digestion overnight at 30 °C. Before LC-MS analysis, traces of SDC were precipitated using 2 % trifluoroacetic acid, and all protein digests were desalted using C18 microspin columns (Harvard Apparatus) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

### Data Protocol
The data acquisition mode for the initial LFQ study was set to obtain one high-resolution MS scan at a resolution of 60,000 (m/z 200) with a scanning range from 375 to 1500 m/z followed by MS/MS scans of the 10 most intense ions. To increase the efficiency of MS/MS shots, the charged state screening modus was adjusted to exclude unassigned and singly charged ions. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 30 sec. The ion accumulation time was set to 50 ms (both MS and MS/MS). The automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 3 × 106 for MS survey scans and 1 × 105 for MS/MS scans.  Discovery-LFQ was done using Progenesis QI software (Nonlinear Dynamics, version 2.0) as discussed before.  Next, the data obtained from Progenesis were evaluated using SafeQuant R package version 2.2.2. Hereby, 1% false discovery rate (FDR) of identification and quantification were calculated.

### Publication Abstract
Methane, a non-expensive natural substrate, is used by Methylocystis spp. as a sole source of carbon and energy. Here, we assessed whether Methylocystis sp. strain SC2 is able to also utilize hydrogen as an energy source. The addition of 2% H<sub>2</sub> to the culture headspace had the most significant positive effect on the growth yield under CH<sub>4</sub> (6%) and O<sub>2</sub> (3%) limited conditions. The SC2 biomass yield doubled from 6.41 (&#xb1;0.52) to 13.82 (&#xb1;0.69) mg cell dry weight per mmol CH<sub>4</sub>, while CH<sub>4</sub> consumption was significantly reduced. Regardless of H<sub>2</sub> addition, CH<sub>4</sub> utilization was increasingly redirected from respiration to fermentation-based pathways with decreasing O<sub>2</sub>/CH<sub>4</sub> mixing ratios. Theoretical thermodynamic calculations confirmed that hydrogen utilization under oxygen-limited conditions doubles the maximum biomass yield compared to fully aerobic conditions without H<sub>2</sub> addition. Hydrogen utilization was linked to significant changes in the SC2 proteome. In addition to hydrogenase accessory proteins, the production of Group 1d and Group 2b hydrogenases was significantly increased in both short- and long-term incubations. Both long-term incubation with H<sub>2</sub> (37&#xa0;d) and treatments with chemical inhibitors revealed that SC2 growth under hydrogen-utilizing conditions does not require the activity of complex I. Apparently, strain SC2 has the metabolic capacity to channel hydrogen-derived electrons into the quinone pool, which provides a link between hydrogen oxidation and energy production. In summary, H<sub>2</sub> may be a promising alternative energy source in biotechnologically oriented methanotroph projects that aim to maximize biomass yield from CH<sub>4,</sub> such as the production of high-quality feed protein.

### Keywords
Hydogenase, Knallgas bacteria, Methylocystis, Methanotrophs, Proteomics, Metabolic model

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Terrestrial Microbiology, Research Group Methanotrophic Bacteria and Environmental Genomics/Transcriptomics, Marburg, Germany
Max Planck Institute for Terrestrial Microbiology

### Submitter
Anna Hakobyan

### Lab Head
Dr PD Dr. Werner Liesack
Max Planck Institute for Terrestrial Microbiology, Research Group Methanotrophic Bacteria and Environmental Genomics/Transcriptomics, Marburg, Germany


