### Accession
PXD012655

### Title
Integrated proteomic and N-glycoproteomic analyses of doxorubicin sensitive and resistant ovarian cancer cells reveal glycoprotein alteration in protein abundance and glycosylation

### Description
Ovarian cancer is one of the most common cancer among women in the world, and chemotherapy remains the principal treatment for patients. However, drug resistance is a major obstacle to the effective treatment of ovarian cancers and the underlying mechanism is not clear. An increased understanding of the mechanisms that underline the pathogenesis of drug resistance is therefore needed to develop novel therapeutics and diagnostic. Herein, we report the comparative analysis of the doxorubicin sensitive OVCAR8 cells and its doxorubicin-resistant variant NCI/ADR-RES cells using integrated global proteomics and N-glycoproteomics. A total of 1525 unique N-glycosite-containing peptides from 740 N-glycoproteins were identified and quantified, of which 253 N-glycosite-containing peptides showed significant change in the NCI/ADR-RES cells. Meanwhile, stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) based comparative proteomic analysis of the two ovarian cancer cells led to the quantification of 5509 proteins. As about 50% of the identified N-glycoproteins are low-abundance membrane proteins, only 44% of quantified unique N-glycosite-containing peptides had corresponding protein expression ratios. The comparison and calibration of the N-glycoproteome versus the proteome classified 14 change patterns of N-glycosite-containing peptides, including 8 up-regulated N-glycosite-containing peptides with the increased glycosylation sites occupancy, 35 up-regulated N-glycosite-containing peptides with the unchanged glycosylation sites occupancy, 2 down-regulated N-glycosite-containing peptides with the decreased glycosylation sites occupancy, 46 down-regulated N-glycosite-containing peptides with the unchanged glycosylation sites occupancy. Integrated proteomic and N-glycoproteomic analyses provide new insights, which can help to unravel the relationship of N-glycosylation and multidrug resistance (MDR), understand the mechanism of MDR, and discover the new diagnostic and therapeutic targets.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were washed three times with cold PBS and then harvested using a cell scraper in lysis buffer (8M urea, 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.5) containing Protease Inhibitor Cocktail Tablets (Roche, Basel, Switzerland). The lysates were sonicated and the supernatant was carefully collected after centrifugation at 14,000 g at 4C for 10 min. The concentration of proteins was determined by Bradford assay. Extracted protein samples from heavy labeled NCI/ADR-RES cells and light labeled OVCAR8 cells in forward SILAC labeling, light labeled NCI/ADR-RES cells and heavy labeled OVCAR8 cells in reverse SILAC labeling were combined at a 1:1 ratio separately. In-solution digestion was performed with the following protocol. Protein mixtures were reduced with 10 mM 1,4-dithiothreitol (DTT) at 37C for one hour, subsequently alkylated in 40 mM iodoacetamide (IAM) for 30 min at room temperature in the dark and then Lys-C was added and digested at 37C for 6 hours. After diluting the concentration of urea to 1M with 25 mM NH4HCO3, sequence grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) was added at an enzyme/protein ratio of 1:50 and digested at 37C overnight. Digestion was stopped by adding formic acid to a final concentration of 1‰. The digested peptide mixtures were collected by centrifugation at 14, 000 g for 10 min. All digested products were desalted on Waters Oasis® HLB solid phase extraction columns.  Enrichment was performed on a RIGOL L-3000 Series HPLC system (including L-3120 solvent organizer, L-3220 binary pump, L-3320 autosampler with a 100 µL sample loop, L-3400 column oven, and L-3500 UV-VIS detector). The HILIC-based enrichment method for the N-linked glycopeptides was established, optimized and evaluated using mouse brain tissue sample, OVCAR8 and NCI/ADR-RES cells samples separately. About 200 μg FASP[60] based tryptic digested peptide mixture was dissolved in 100 µL 60% ACN and injected into Ultimate® HILIC Amphion column (4.6×100 mm, 5 μm, 120 Å, Welch Materials (Shanghai), Inc.). The column was eluted using mobile phase A (0.1% TFA in water) and mobile phase B (0.1% TFA in acetonitrile) with a gradient (80% B, 0-20 min; 80–2% B, 20-21 min; 2% B, 21-30 min; 2-80% B, 30-30.1 min; 80% B, 30.1-38 min) at a flow rate of 0.7 mL/min. The glycopeptides containing fractions were detected at 214 nm and collected from 20 to 30 min. The glycopeptides containing fractions were dried under vacuum, then resuspended in 50 µL 50 mM NH4HCO3 and deglycosylated with PNGase F at 37 °C for 2.5 h and dried again for LC-MS/MS analysis. The specificity of the enrichment for N-glycopeptides was calculated using the number of identified N-glycopeptides divided by the number of total peptides identified.  The SILAC labeled and combined peptide mixture from NCI/ADR-RES and OVCAR8 cells was performed the enrichment for N-glycopeptides using the above optimized method and deglycosylated with PNGase F at 37 °C for direct LC-MS/MS analysis without fractionation. To evaluate the chemical deamidation in sample processing, we incubated the same SILAC labeled peptide mixture enriched as above described at 37 °C without PNGase F in NH4HCO3 buffer. The samples were then analyzed by LC-MS/MS in parallel.

### Data Protocol
The N-glycoproteome and the proteome raw data were analyzed using MaxQuant software (version 1.5.2.8) against UniportKB human database (downloaded on October 15, 2015) with 92,013 entries. For N-glycoproteome analysis, the parameters were set as follows: Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification and N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation and asparagine deamidation were set as variable modifications. Leucines were replaced by isoleucines. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin allowing N-terminal cleavage to proline. False discovery rate, determined by using a reversed database, was set to 0.01 for peptide, modification site and protein identifications. The minimum required peptide length was set to seven amino acids per identified peptides and two missed cleavages were allowed. The precursor and fragment ion maximum mass tolerance were set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. Proteins with at least one unique peptide were considered as valid identifications. Deamidation at asparagine was applied as a variable modification to identify N-glycosites of formerly glycosylated peptides and N-linked glycosite-containing peptides were required to contain N-!P-S/T/C motifs. Quantification of SILAC pairs was performed by MaxQuant with standard settings with a minimum ratio count of two. For proteome analysis, variable modifications did not consist of asparagine deamidation and all the other parameters settings were identical with N-glycoproteome analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Ovarian cancer is one of the most common cancer among women in the world, and chemotherapy remains the principal treatment for patients. However, drug resistance is a major obstacle to the effective treatment of ovarian cancers and the underlying mechanism is not clear. An increased understanding of the mechanisms that underline the pathogenesis of drug resistance is therefore needed to develop novel therapeutics and diagnostic. Herein, we report the comparative analysis of the doxorubicin sensitive OVCAR8 cells and its doxorubicin-resistant variant NCI/ADR-RES cells using integrated global proteomics and N-glycoproteomics. A total of 1525 unique N-glycosite-containing peptides from 740 N-glycoproteins were identified and quantified, of which 253 N-glycosite-containing peptides showed significant change in the NCI/ADR-RES cells. Meanwhile, stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) based comparative proteomic analysis of the two ovarian cancer cells led to the quantification of 5509 proteins. As about 50% of the identified N-glycoproteins are low-abundance membrane proteins, only 44% of quantified unique N-glycosite-containing peptides had corresponding protein expression ratios. The comparison and calibration of the N-glycoproteome versus the proteome classified 14 change patterns of N-glycosite-containing peptides, including 8 up-regulated N-glycosite-containing peptides with the increased glycosylation sites occupancy, 35 up-regulated N-glycosite-containing peptides with the unchanged glycosylation sites occupancy, 2 down-regulated N-glycosite-containing peptides with the decreased glycosylation sites occupancy, 46 down-regulated N-glycosite-containing peptides with the unchanged glycosylation sites occupancy. Integrated proteomic and N-glycoproteomic analyses provide new insights, which can help to unravel the relationship of N-glycosylation and multidrug resistance (MDR), understand the mechanism of MDR, and discover the new diagnostic and therapeutic targets.

### Keywords
Global proteome, Multidrug resistance, Silac, N-glycoproteome, Ovarian cancer

### Affiliations
1. Laboratory of Protein and Peptide Pharmaceuticals & Laboratory of Proteomics, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China 2. University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
Max-Planck-Institute for Multidisciplinary Sciences

### Submitter
Yanlong Ji

### Lab Head
Dr Fuquan Yang
1. Laboratory of Protein and Peptide Pharmaceuticals & Laboratory of Proteomics, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China 2. University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China


