### Accession
PXD043817

### Title
Applying plexDIA analysis to newly synthesized proteome samples generated using a semi-automated enrichment protocol

### Description
Samples generated with a newly development semi-automated enrichment protocol for newly synthesized proteins, using different amounts of protein input, were analysed using data-independent acquisition (DIA) and processed with the plexDIA software features of DIA-NN (https://www.nature.com/articles/s41587-022-01389-w).

### Sample Protocol
Hela cells were pulse labelled with SILAC amino acids and L-azidohomoalanine (AHA) for, 4 h without additional perturbations, and automated newly synthesized protein enrichments were carried out with varying amounts of protein input were carried out. Measurements of the samples were performed using an EASY-nLC 1200 system coupled to an QExactive HF mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Data Processing Protocol: Raw files were analysed using DIA-NN version 1.8.1 (https://www.nature.com/articles/s41592-019-0638-x). A predicted spectral library was generated from the attached reviewed human fasta file (SwissProt database, version from February 2021 with 20934 entries). Additionally, a fasta file containing common protein contaminants was added for the spectral library prediction (https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.jproteome.2c00145). Default settings were used for the spectral library prediction, with the addition of Methionine oxidation as variable modification. For the processing of the raw files, the default settings of DIA-NN were used with additional functions from the plexDIA module enabled. Three SILAC channels with mass shifts corresponding to Lys, Lys4 (+4.025107 Da), Lys8 (+8.014199 Da), Arg, Arg6 (+6.020129 Da), Arg10 (+10.008269 Da) and an additional decoy channel with Lysine (+12.0033 Da) and Arginine (+13.9964 Da) were registered. Translation of retention times between peptides within the same elution group was enabled. The first 13C-isotopic peak and monoisotopic peak was included for the quantification and the MS1 deconvolution level was set to 2. Matrix output tables were filtered for FDR < 0.01, channel q-value < 0.01 and translated q-value < 0.01. The MBR function was enabled to increase data completeness. The output tables of DIA-NN specifically the “report.pr_matrix_channels_translated.tsv” was processed in the R software environment (version 4.0.3) using a custom script. Identified contaminants were removed and protein abundance was calculated using the MaxLFQ algorithm, applied to the individual SILAC channels, using the iq R-package function “process_long_format()” with median normalization enabled (https://academic.oup.com/bioinformatics/article/36/8/2611/5697917).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Quanpa, Plexdia, Silac

### Affiliations
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ)
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ) Heidelberg Universitz Clinic

### Submitter
Toman Bortecen

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Jeroen Krijgsveld
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ) Heidelberg Universitz Clinic


