### Accession
PXD014605

### Title
Anaerobic biogas plants via LC-MS/MS

### Description
Anaerobic degradation (AD) of heterogeneous agricultural substrates is a complex process involving a diverse microbial community. While microbial community composition of a variety of biogas plants (BPs) is well described, little is known about metabolic processes and microbial interaction patterns. Here, we analyzed 16 large-scale BPs using metaproteomics. All metabolic steps of AD were observed in the metaproteome, and multivariate analyses indicated that they were shaped by temperature, pH, volatile fatty acid content and substrate types. Biogas plants can be subdivided into hydrogenotrophic, acetoclastic or a mixture of both methanogenic pathways based on their process parameters, taxonomic and functional metaproteome. Network analyses showed large differences in metabolic and microbial interaction patterns. Both, number of interactions and interaction partners were highly dependent on the prevalent methanogenic pathway for most species. Nevertheless, we observed a highly conserved metabolism of different abundant Pseudomonas spp. for all BPs indicating a key role during AD in carbohydrate hydrolysis irrespectively of variabilities in substrate input and process parameters. Thus, Pseudomonas spp. are of high importance for robust and versatile AD food webs, which highlight a large variety of downstream metabolic processes for their respective methanogenic pathways.

### Sample Protocol
Primary digesters of 16 large-scale BPs were sampled in Northern Bavaria in August 2016 as described previously10. Briefly, digester content was mixed thoroughly and all pipelines were flushed prior to sampling. Finally, approximately 300 mL of digester sludge were obtained from each BP and subsequently shock-frozen in liquid nitrogen. Samples were thereafter transferred in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C for further investigations. Some process and plant parameters were collected from the plant operators, i.e. process temperature, pH, as well as types of main and additional substrates.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric analysis Peptide lysates were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid prior to liquid chromatography mass spectrometry analysis (nanoLC-MS/MS). Peptide lysates (5 µL) were first loaded on the pre-column (µ-precolumn, Acclaim PepMap, 75 µm inner diameter, 2 cm, C18, Thermo Scientific) for 5 minutes, at 4% mobile phase B (80% acetonitrile in nanopure water with 0.08% formic acid) and 96% mobile phase A (nanopure water with 0.1% formic acid), and then eluted from the analytical column (PepMap Acclaim C18 LC Column, 25 cm, 3 µm particle size, Thermo Scientific) over a 150-min linear gradient of mobile phase B (4-55% B). Mass spectrometric analysis was performed on a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) with a TriVersa NanoMate (Advion, Ltd., Harlow, UK) source in LC-chip coupling mode as described elsewhere47. Briefly, the mass spectrometer was set on loop count of 20 using for MS/MS scans with higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) at normalized collision energy of 30%. MS scans were measured at a resolution of 120,000 in the scan range of 350-1,600 m/z. MS ion count target was set to 3×106 at an injection time of 80 ms. Ions for MS/MS scans were isolated in the quadrupole with an isolation window of 1.6 Da and were measured with a resolution of 15,000 in the scan range of 200-2,000 m/z. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 30 s with a 10 ppm tolerance. Automatic gain control target was set to 2×105 with an injection time of 120 ms using the underfill ratio of 1%. Proteome Discoverer (v2.2, Thermo Scientific) was used for protein identification and the MS/MS spectra acquired were searched with Sequest HT against the protein-coding sequences of Bacteria and Archaea of the UniProt database (release 08/2018). Enzyme specificity was selected as trypsin with up to two missed cleavages allowed, using 10 ppm peptide ion tolerance and 0.05 Da MS/MS tolerances. Oxidation at methionines as the variable modifications and carbamidomethylation at cysteines as the static modification were selected. Only peptides with a false discovery rate (FDR) <1% calculated by Percolator48 were considered as identified. Identified proteins were grouped by applying the strict parsimony principle, in which protein hits were reported as the minimum set that accounts for all observable peptides. Protein abundances were calculated based on the top3 approach implemented in Proteome Discoverer v2.3.

### Publication Abstract
Anaerobic degradation (AD) of heterogeneous agricultural substrates is a complex process involving a diverse microbial community. While microbial community composition of a variety of biogas plants (BPs) is well described, little is known about metabolic processes and microbial interaction patterns. Here, we analyzed 16 large-scale BPs using metaproteomics. All metabolic steps of AD were observed in the metaproteome, and multivariate analyses indicated that they were shaped by temperature, pH, volatile fatty acid content and substrate types. Biogas plants could be subdivided into hydrogenotrophic, acetoclastic or a mixture of both methanogenic pathways based on their process parameters, taxonomic and functional metaproteome. Network analyses showed large differences in metabolic and microbial interaction patterns. Both, number of interactions and interaction partners were highly dependent on the prevalent methanogenic pathway for most species. Nevertheless, we observed a highly conserved metabolism of different abundant Pseudomonas spp. for all BPs indicating a key role during AD in carbohydrate hydrolysis irrespectively of variabilities in substrate input and process parameters. Thus, Pseudomonas spp. are of high importance for robust and versatile AD food webs, which highlight a large variety of downstream metabolic processes for their respective methanogenic pathways.

### Keywords
Biogas plants, Methanogenic pathway, Metaproteomics, Network analysis

### Affiliations
Department Molekulare Systembiologie Helmholtz-Zentrum für Umweltforschung GmbH - UFZ Permoserstraße 15 | 04318 Leipzig
Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ

### Submitter
Nico Jehmlich

### Lab Head
Dr Nico Jehmlich
Department Molekulare Systembiologie Helmholtz-Zentrum für Umweltforschung GmbH - UFZ Permoserstraße 15 | 04318 Leipzig


