### Accession
PXD011086

### Title
Analysis of the proteome of individual equine cumulus complexes after maturation in-vitro and in-vivo

### Description
Maturation of oocytes under in-vitro conditions (IVM) results in impaired developmental competence compared to oocytes matured in-vivo. Oocytes are closely coupled to their cumulus complex (COC) with a bidirectional exchange of metabolites. Therefore, elucidation of aberrations in cumulus metabolism in-vitro is crucial for a better mimicking of physiological maturation conditions. The aim of this study was the analysis of the equine cumulus cells proteome of single cumulus complexes of metaphase II oocytes matured either under in-vivo (n=8) or in-vitro (n=7) conditions. For in-vivo COC collection mares were slaughtered 30 hours after injection and cumulus complexes from the dominant follicle were harvested for analysis. For in-vitro maturation COCs were recovered from mares out of oestrous and matured for 30 hours in-vitro. COCs were separated in cumulus complexes and oocytes, and only cumulus of successfully matured oocytes was analyzed for this study. All cumulus samples were washed, snap frozen and stored in liquid nitrogen until preparation for analysis.

### Sample Protocol
After initial methanol extraction for a parallel metablomics analysis the pellet was immediately prepared for proteomic analysis. Therefore, a sonoreactor based cell lysis protocol (SR) was combined with filter-aided sample preparation (FASP).  The SR-FASP protocol was especially developed for the analysis of the proteome for single cumulus complexes. The pellet was solved in 30 μl SDS lysis buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM Tris/HCL ph 8.2, 0.1 M DTT – dithiotreitol) and incubated at 95°C for 5 min. In the next step samples were treated with High Intensity Focused Ultrasound (HIFU) for 10 min with amplitude of 65% in cycle 0.5 (Sonoreactor UTR200; Hielscher Ultrasonics GmbH). After cell lysis protein concentration was estimated with the Qubit® Protein Assay Kit (Life Technologies). A total of 10 μg of proteins was used for the adapted FASP protocol. Proteins were diluted in 200 μl UT buffer (Urea 8 M in 100nM Tris/HCL pH 8.2) and loaded on a Microcon-30kDa Centrifugal Filter Unit with Ultracel-30 membrane (Merck Millipore). The unit was centrifuged at 14,000 g for 25 min at room temperature. A wash with 200 μl UT buffer followed by a centrifugation at 14,000 g for 25 minutes was performed. Reduced proteins were alkylated with 100 μl iodoacetamide 0.05 M in UT buffer during an incubation of 5 min, followed by three washing steps with 199 μl UT and two steps with 100 μl NaCl 0.5 M. Protein digestion on the filter-unit was performed over night in a wet chamber at room temperature using 120 μl of 0.05 M triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (pH 8.5) with trypsin (Promega) in a ration of 1:50 (w/w). After elution at 14,000 g the peptide solution was acidified using trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 0.5%. Peptides were desalted using Finisterre solid phase extraction C18 columns (Teknokroma, Barcelona, Spain), dried in a vacuum concentration and resolubilized in LC-MS solution (3% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). Analysis of all biological samples (n=15) was performed in one analytical run in random order using reverse-phase LC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an nano HPCL sytem (EASY-nLC 1000, Thermo Scientific) in data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. A defined amount of 500 ng peptides per sample was loaded on a self-made frit-column (75 μm x 150 mm) packed with reverse phase material (ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 μm beads (Dr. Maisch GmbH). The column was coupled to a fused-silica emitter (20 μm x 8 cm, tip: 10 ± 1 μm; New Objective). For channel A solvent composition was 0.1% formic acid in water and for channel B 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. Elution of peptides was performed using a flow rate of 300 nl/min with a gradient of 1% to 35% acetonitrile over 120 min, followed by a cleaning period for 10 min with 98% acetonitrile. Full-scan mass spectra (300 – 1500 m/z) were acquired with a resolution of 60,000 at 200 m/z after accumulation to a target value of 5e5. Look mass correction (371,1010 and 445,12003 m/z) was used for internal calibration and maximum cycle time between precursor masses was set to 3 seconds. Data dependent MS/MS were recorded in a linear ion trap using quadrupole isolation in a window of 0.7 Da. Selected ions were fragmented with 30% fragmentation energy. The ion trap was run in rapid scan mode with 1e2 as target value and a maximum injection time of 35 ms. Precursor ions with charge state from +2 to +6 and a signal intensity of at least 1e4 were selected for fragmentation. For 25 seconds a dynamic exclusion list was applied with activation of maximum parallelizing ion injections. As reference a pool containing 5µl of each cumulus sample was analyzed in the same analytical run and used as reference for aligning in data analysis.

### Data Protocol
Label-free quantification was conducted with Progenesis QI for Proteomics Software (Nonlinear Dynamics, A Waters Company). Reference for automatic aligning was the raw-file of the sample pool. For peak picking the high sensitivity option was chosen and only peptides with charge 2, 3 and 4 were used for analysis. Exported for database search were the top five mass spectra using charge deconvolution and deisoptoping iptions with a minimum fragment count of 200 peaks per MS/MS. Spectra were searched against the NCBI data base for horses (NCBI Taxonomy ID 9796, release date 20170523). For functional downstream analysis of proteins the database was blasted to human homolog proteins from canonical Uniprot database (Tax ID: 9606, 20161209: file: fgcz_9606_reviewed_cnl_contaminantNoHumanCont_20161209.fasta). The database was concatenated with reversed sequence information for estimation of false discovery rate. The search was run on Mascot Server v.2.4.3. (Matrix Science, London, UK), with a tolerance of 10 ppm for precursor ion mass and 0.5 Da for fragment ion tolerance. Enzyme specificity was restricted to trypsin with allowed maximum of 2 missed cleavage sites. As fixed modification only carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified and for variable modifications deamidation of glutamine and asparagine as well as protein n-terminus acetylation were selected. Protein probabilities by the protein prophet algorithm were analyzed in Scaffold v4.1.1 (Proteome Software Inc., USA). Proteins containing similar peptides that could not be discriminated by the MS/MS analysis were grouped according to the principles of parsimony. To link the MS1 features in Progenesis QI for proteomics with peptide and protein information a Scaffold spectrum report filtered for false discovery rates on peptide (5%) and protein (10%) level was uploaded. The overall false discovery rate for quantifiable proteins with at least two peptides was estimated at 0.2% using the target-decoy strategy. Differentially expressed proteins were defined in Progenesis QI software for Proteomics with a fold change >2 along with p ≤ 0.05 (Anova). Enrichment analysis of overexpressed proteins in KEGG (Kyoto Enzyclopedia of Genes and Genomes) pathways was performed online using STRING-Database (http://string-db.org).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ivm, Lc-ms/ms, In-vivo, In-vitro, Cumulus cells

### Affiliations
Clinic of Reproductive Medicine; Vetsuisse Faculty; University of Zurich
Clinic of Reproductive Medicine, Vetsuisse Faculty, University of Zurich

### Submitter
Jasmin Walter

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Ulrich Bleul
Clinic of Reproductive Medicine; Vetsuisse Faculty; University of Zurich


