### Accession
PXD038152

### Title
Broad-spectrum kinome profiling identifies CDK6 upregulation as a driver of lenvatinib resistance in hepatocellular carcinoma

### Description
Lenvatinib is the FDA-approved targeted drug for advanced hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), but the efficacy is modest due to drug resistance. Tumor kinome re-wiring governs drug resistance in resistant cancer cells, which is an obstacle for efficient cancer therapy. Therefore, identification the kinases critical for this rewiring process in HCC is crucial.This study reveals the new role of CDK6 and its mechanistic insight in regulation of cancer stemness and drug resistance. These results support the combination treatment of lenvatinib with palbociclib for advanced HCC patients. Further studies will optimize patient target selection and identify the best treatment combinations.

### Sample Protocol
A lysine-targeted sulfonyl fluoride probe, named XO44, was employed to examine the kinase profiles enriched in lenvatinb-resistant HCC cells. Lentiviral-based overexpression and knockdown approaches were performed to characterize functional roles of CDK6 in regulation of cancer stemness and lenvatinib resistance. The role of CDK6/GSK3β mediated β-catenin signaling was assessed by immunoprecipitation, immunoblotting, immunofluorescence, luciferase assay and qRT-PCR analysis. The therapeutic value of targeting CDK6 with palbociclib alone or in combination with lenvatinib was investigated in vitro and lenvatinib-resistant HCC mouse models by scRNA sequencing.

### Data Protocol
The acquired label-free data were searched against the Homo sapiens UniProt database (Version June 2020, 20368 entries) using the SEQUEST algorithm (Proteome Discoverer 2.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The precursor ion mass tolerance and fragmentation tolerance were set as 10 ppm and 0.02 Da for the database search, respectively. The maximum number of modifications per peptide was three. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine was set as a fixed modification, and oxidation on methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. The enzyme was specified as trypsin with two missed cleavages allowed. The false discovery rate for peptide matches and proteins was set as 1%. PRM analyses used the same equipment and LC gradient. TMT data were searched using the same parameters described above. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine was set as a fixed modification, and oxidation on methionine, TMT (229.163) at N-terminal of peptides and lysine, phosphorylation of STY and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cdk6, Beta-catenin, Cancer stemness, Hcc, Lenvatinib

### Affiliations
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
Department of Applied Biology and Chemical Technology,The Hong Kong Polytechnic University

### Submitter
Yang Yang

### Lab Head
Dr Terence Kin Wah Lee
Department of Applied Biology and Chemical Technology,The Hong Kong Polytechnic University


