### Accession
PXD001561

### Title
Phosphoproteome characterization of Sendai-virus infection in human epithelial cells

### Description
We used phosphoproteomics combined with bioinformatics to characterize the global cellular protein phosphorylation events during Sendai virus infection in human lung epithelial cells.

### Sample Protocol
A549 cells were infected with Sendai virus (SeV) for 4 h of left untreated, after which the cells were lysed with HEPES lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 % NP-40, pH 7.4) including protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktails (Sigma-Aldrich). The cell lysates were centrifuged and the protein contents were measured using the Bio-Rad DC™ protein assay. The proteins in cell lysates (10 mg per sample) were precipitated with 10 % trichloroacetic acid (TCA) in acetone and resuspended in 1 ml of urea buffer (8M urea, 400 mM NH4CO3, 20 mM dithioreitol, 1 mM EDTA, pH 8.5). The samples were reduced, alkylated, and digested for 2 h with a lysyl endopeptidase (rLys-C Mass Spec Grad, Promega). After Lys-C digestion, the samples were diluted with Milli-Q water to a final volume of 8 ml, and samples were further digested with trypsin overnight (Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin, Promega). The undigested proteins and cell debris were removed by centrifugation and the samples were desalted with Sep-Pak Vac RP C18 cartridges (Waters). The peptides were fractionated by strong cation exchange (SCX) using an ÄKTApurifier™ instrument (Amersham Biosciences). The peptides were separated on a 200 x 4.6 mm, 5 μm, 200 Å PolySULFOETHYL A™ column (PolyLC) by applying a gradient run with increasing salt concentration. The A buffer contained 10 mM KH2PO4, 20 % ACN, with a pH < 3. The gradient was set to 0-50 % buffer B (buffer A + 0.4 M KCl) in 25 min, followed by 50-100 % buffer B in 15 min. The flow rate was 1 ml/min and 1 ml fractions were collected by an autosampler. The SCX-fractions containing the phosphopeptides were collected and desalted using Sep-Pak C18 Cartridges (Waters). The phosphopeptide enrichment was performed with IMAC using PHOS-Select Iron Affinity Gel (Sigma Aldrich) according to the manufacturer’s instruction. 40 µl of IMAC gel slurry was used per each sample. The phosphopeptides were eluted with 400 mM NH4OH, samples were dried and resuspended in 0.1 % trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, Fluka Chemika). The enriched phosphopeptides were analyzed with an Ultimate 3000 nano-LC (Dionex) coupled to a QSTAR Elite hybrid quadrupole TOF-MS (Applied Biosystems) with nano-ESI ionization. The samples were loaded on a ProteCol C18-Trap column (SGE) and separated on a PepMap C18 analytical column (15 cm x 75 μm, 5 μm, 100 Å) (LC Packings/Dionex) at 200 nl/min with a linear gradient of 0-40 % acetonitrile in 120 min. The MS data was acquired with Analyst QS 2.0 software. Information-dependent acquisition method consisted of a 0.5 s TOF-MS survey scan of m/z 400-1400. From every survey scan two most abundant ions with charge states +2 to +4 were selected for product ion scans, and each selected target ion was dynamically excluded for 60 s. Smart IDA was activated with automatic collision energy and automatic MS/MS accumulation. Two independent biological experiments with two technical replicates were performed.

### Data Protocol
The phosphopeptide identification was performed through ProteinPilot 4.0 interface (Applied Biosystems/MDS Sciex) using an in-house Mascot database search engine version 4.0 (Matrix Science) and the ProteinPilot 4.0 algorithm Paragon. The data were searched against human canonical sequences in the UniProt database (version 12/2013 with 20,274 human sequences for Mascot search and version 140203 for Paragon search). The criteria for Mascot search were: cysteine alkylation with iodoacetamide, trypsin digestion, methionine oxidation and serine/threonine/tyrosine phosphorylation allowed, identification threshold p < 0.05, 1 missed cleavage allowed, mass tolerance for precursor ions 50 ppm and for fragment ions 0.2 Da, and the criteria for Paragon search were: cysteine alkylation with iodoacetamide, trypsin digestion, biological modifications and phosphorylation emphasis allowed, thorough search and detected protein threshold of 95% confidence (Unused ProtScore > 1.3).

### Publication Abstract
Sendai virus (SeV) is a common respiratory pathogen in mice, rats, and hamsters. Host cell recognition of SeV is mediated by pathogen recognition receptors, which recognize viral components and induce intracellular signal transduction pathways that activate the antiviral innate immune response. Viruses use host proteins to control the activities of signaling proteins and their downstream targets, and one of the most important host protein modifications regulated by viral infection is phosphorylation. In this study, we used phosphoproteomics combined with bioinformatics to get a global view of the signaling pathways activated during SeV infection in human lung epithelial cells. We identified altogether 1347 phosphoproteins, and our data shows that SeV infection induces major changes in protein phosphorylation affecting the phosphorylation of almost one thousand host proteins. Bioinformatics analysis showed that SeV infection activates known pathways including MAPK signaling, as well as signaling pathways previously not linked to SeV infection including Rho family of GTPases, HIPPO signaling, and mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR)-signaling pathway. Further, we performed functional studies with mTOR inhibitors and siRNA approach, which revealed that mTOR signaling is needed for both the host IFN response as well as viral protein synthesis in SeV-infected human lung epithelial cells.

### Keywords
Human epithelial cells, Lc-ms/ms, Phosphoproteome

### Affiliations
Institute of Biotechnology University of Helsinki
University of Oslo

### Submitter
Tuula Nyman

### Lab Head
Dr Tuula Nyman
Institute of Biotechnology University of Helsinki


