### Accession
PXD023108

### Title
Temporal proteomic changes induced by nicotine in human cells: A quantitative proteomics approach

### Description
Nicotine is a prominent active compound in tobacco and many smoking cessation products. Some of the biological effects of nicotine are well documented in in vitro and in vivo systems; however, nominal data are available concerning the time-dependent changes on protein and phosphorylation events in response to nicotine. Here, we profiled the proteomes of SH-SY5Y and A549 cell lines subjected to acute (15min, 1h and 4h) or chronic (24h, 48h) nicotine exposures. We used sample multiplexing (TMTpro16) and quantified more than 9,000 proteins and over 7,000 phosphorylation events per cell line. Among our findings, we determined a decrease in mitochondrial protein abundance for SH-SY5Y, while we detected alterations in several immune pathways, such as the complement system, for A549. We also explored the proposed association between smoking and SARS-CoV2. Here, we found several host proteins known to interact with viral proteins that were affected by nicotine in a time dependent manner. This dataset can be mined further to investigate the potential role of nicotine in different biological contexts.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were prepared as described previously. Briefly, cell pellets were syringe-lysed in 8M urea complemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitors. Samples were reduced using 5mM TCEP for 30 min, alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min and the excess of iodoacetamide was quenched using 10 mM DTT for 15 min. Protein was quantified using the BCA protein assay. Approximately 30 micrograms of protein were chloroform-methanol precipitated and reconstituted in 100 µL of 200 mM EPPS (pH 8.5). Protein was digested using Lys-C overnight at room temperature followed by trypsin for 6h at 37°C, both at a 1:100 protease-to-protein ratio. After digestion, the samples were labeled using the TMTpro16 reagents for 60 mins, the reactions were quenched using hydroxylamine (final concentration of 0.3% v/v). The samples were combined equally and subsequently desalted. We enriched phosphopeptides from the pooled TMT-labeled mixtures (“mini-phos”) using the Pierce High-Select Fe-NTA Phosphopeptide Enrichment kit following manufacturer’s instructions. After column equilibration, sample binding, and washing, the phosphopeptides were eluted into a new microcentrifuge tube containing 100 µL of 10% formic acid and dried in a vacuum centrifuge. The unbound fraction was retained and fractionated using basic pH reversed-phase HPLC (BPRP). Ninety-six fractions were collected and then consolidated into 24, of which 12 non-adjacent fractions were analyzed by LC-MS3.

### Data Protocol
. Raw files were first converted to mzXML. Database searching included all human entries from UniProt (downloaded March 2020). The database was concatenated with one composed of all protein sequences in the reversed order. Sequences of common contaminant proteins were also included. Searches were performed using a 50ppm precursor ion tolerance and 0.9 Da (low-resolution MS2) or 0.03 Da (high-resolution MS2) product ion tolerance. TMTpro on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+304.2071 Da for TMTpro) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.0215 Da) were set as static modifications (except when testing for labeling efficiency, when the TMTpro modifications are set to variable), while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.9949 Da) was set as a variable modification. For phosphopeptide analysis, +79.9663 Da was set as a variable modification on serine, threonine, and tyrosine residues. PSMs (peptide spectrum matches) were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR). PSM filtering was performed using linear discriminant analysis (LDA) as described previously, while considering the following parameters: XCorr, ΔCn, missed cleavages, peptide length, charge state and precursor mass accuracy. Protein-level FDR was subsequently estimated. Phosphorylation site localization was determined using the AScore algorithm. A threshold of 13 corresponded to 95% confidence that a given phosphorylation site was localized. For reporter ion quantification, a 0.003 Da window around the theoretical m/z of each reporter ion was scanned, and the most intense m/z was used. Peptides were filtered to include only those with a summed signal-to-noise ratio ≥100 across all channels. An isolation purity of at least 70% in the MS1 isolation window was used for samples analyzed with FAIMS/hrMS2. For each protein, the filtered signal-to-noise values were summed to generate protein quantification values. To control for different total protein loading within an experiment, the summed protein quantities of each channel were adjusted to be equal in the experiment. For each protein in a TMTpro experiment, the signal-to-noise was scaled to sum to 100 to facilitate comparisons across experiments.

### Publication Abstract
Nicotine is a prominent active compound in tobacco and many smoking cessation products. Some of the biological effects of nicotine are well documented in in vitro and in vivo systems; however, data are scarce concerning the time-dependent changes on protein and phosphorylation events in response to nicotine. Here, we profiled the proteomes of SH-SY5Y and A549 cell lines subjected to acute (15&#xa0;min, 1&#xa0;h and 4&#xa0;h) or chronic (24&#xa0;h, 48&#xa0;h) nicotine exposures. We used sample multiplexing (TMTpro16) and quantified more than 9000 proteins and over 7000 phosphorylation events per cell line. Among our findings, we determined a decrease in mitochondrial protein abundance for SH-SY5Y, while we detected alterations in several immune pathways, such as the complement system, for A549 following nicotine treatment. We also explored the proposed association between smoking (specifically nicotine) and SARS-CoV2. Here, we found several host proteins known to interact with viral proteins that were affected by nicotine in a time dependent manner. This dataset can be mined further to investigate the potential role of nicotine in different biological contexts. SIGNIFICANCE: Smoking is a major public health issue that is associated with several serious chronic, yet preventable diseases, including stroke, heart disease, type 2 diabetes, cancer, and susceptibility to infection. Tobacco smoke is a complex mixture of thousands of different compounds, among which nicotine is the main addictive compound. The biological effects of nicotine have been reported in several models, however very little data are available concerning the temporal proteomic and phosphoproteomic changes in response to nicotine. Here, we provide a dataset exploring the potential role of nicotine on different biological processes over time, including implications in the study of SARS-CoV2.

### Keywords
Rts, Real time search, Covid19, Orbitrap lumos, Faims, Protein-protein interactions, Tmtpro

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Joao Paulo

### Lab Head
Dr Joao A. Paulo
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA


