### Accession
PXD009293

### Title
LC-MS/MS - NS-NE -  Zika Virus Impairs Neurogenesis and Synaptogenesis Pathways in Human Neural Stem Cells and Neurons

### Description
Growing evidences have associated Zika virus infection with congenital malformations, including microcephaly. Nonetheless, signaling mechanisms that promote the disease outcome are far from being understood, affecting the development of suitable therapeutics. In this study, we applied shotgun mass spectrometry-based proteomics combined with cell biology approaches to characterize altered molecular pathways on neurons and NPCs infected by ZIKV-BR, strain obtained from the 2015 Brazilian outbreak. Assessment of neurons differentiated from iPSC from different donors shows the importance of the host genetic background to the susceptibility of ZIKV infection, also confirmed by cytokine fingerprinting. Additionally, infected cells presented an impairment of neurogenesis and synaptogenesis processes. Moreover, ZIKV-BR infected NPCs showed unique alteration of pathways involved in neurological diseases, cell death and survival and embryonic development compared to ZIKV-AF, showing a human adaptation of the Brazilian viral strain. Taken together, these data explain CNS developmental arrest observed in Congenital Zika Virus syndrome is beyond neuronal cell death.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were resuspended in denaturating buffer containing 6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) and protease and phosphatase inhibitors. Extracted proteins were reduced at a final concentration of 10 mM DTT for 30 min at room temperature and subsequently alkylated in 40 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 min in the dark. The solution was further incubated at room temperature for 3 h after addition of Endoproteinase Lys-C (10 μg). Subsequently the urea concentration was diluted to less than 1M and protein digestion was completed with the addition of trypsin 2% (w/w) overnight at room temperature. Samples were acidified to 1% formic acid and centrifuged at 14,000g for 10 min to stop trypsin digestion and remove insoluble material (e.g.lipids). Supernatant was collected and dried prior to desalting on an POROS Oligo R3 reversed-phase microcolumn  as previously described (17). Protein and peptide quantification was performed using QubitTM fluorometric quantitation (ThermoFisher). A total of 50 μg of peptides from each urine sample were diluted to a final concentration of 100 mM of TEAB and labeled with TMT10plex labeling reagent (ThermoFisher) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. After the labelled peptides were combined, 50 μg aliquot was desalted on an POROS Oligo R3 reversed-phase microcolumn and eluted peptides were dried by vacuum centrifugation to produce the total peptide fraction. Each HILIC fraction was resuspended in 0.1% FA, and peptides were loaded on an in-house packed pre-column (2 cm × 100 μm inner diameter 5 μm) using an Easy-nanoLC system (ThermoFisher) and separated by gradient from 3 to 28% solvent B in 100 min, 28 to 45% in 20 min, 45 - 100% B in 5 min and 8 min at 100% B.  (A = 0.1% FA; B = 90% ACN, 0.1% FA) at a flow of 250 nL/min on analytical Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ column (17 cm x 100 μm 3 μm inner diameter). The Easy-nanoLC system was connected online to a QExactive HF Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) operating in positive ion mode and using data-dependent acquisition. The Orbitrap acquired the full MS scan with an AGC target value of 3x106 ions and a maximum fill time of 100 ms. Each MS scan was acquired at 120,000 resolution with a mass range of 400-1600 Da. The 10 most abundant peptide ions were selected for HCD fragmentation (collision energy: 29). Fragmentation was performed at 60,000 resolution for a target of 1x105 and a maximum injection time of 200 ms using an isolation window of 1.2 m/z, dynamic exclusion of 30 s and fixed first mass 110 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Raw data from large scale DDA proteomic experiments were processed using Proteome Discoverer v2.1 (Thermo Scientific) and searched against Uniprot human reference database (release April 2016, 20,201 sequences) including the genome polyprotein sequence from the MR766 zika virus and common contaminants using Mascot and Sequest search engines. Database searches were performed with the following parameters: precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, product ion mass tolerance of 0.02 Da, allowing two missed cleavages for trypsin. Cysteine carbamidomethylation and TMT10plex labeling for lysine and N-terminal as fixed modification. Variable modifications were set as follow: Methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation and asparagine deamidation. Percolator algorithm was used to select peptides with FDR < 1% and a q-value up to 0.01. Quantification was performed using the Proteome Discoverer workflow node “Reporter Ions quantifier” and performed on the log2-values of the measured normalized peptide abundances.

### Publication Abstract
Growing evidences have associated Zika virus (ZIKV) infection with congenital malformations, including microcephaly. Nonetheless, signaling mechanisms that promote the disease outcome are far from being understood, affecting the development of suitable therapeutics. In this study, we applied shotgun mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics combined with cell biology approaches to characterize altered molecular pathways on human neuroprogenitor cells (NPC) and neurons derived from induced pluripotent stem cells infected by ZIKV-BR strain, obtained from the 2015 Brazilian outbreak. Furthermore, ZIKV-BR infected NPCs showed unique alteration of pathways involved in neurological diseases, cell death, survival and embryonic development compared to ZIKV-AF, showing a human adaptation of the Brazilian viral strain. Besides, infected neurons differentiated from NPC presented an impairment of neurogenesis and synaptogenesis processes. Taken together, these data explain that CNS developmental arrest observed in Congenital Zika Syndrome is beyond neuronal cell death.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Glycoproteomics laboratory
SDU

### Submitter
Livia Rosa-Fernandes

### Lab Head
Dr Giuseppe Palmisano
Glycoproteomics laboratory


