### Accession
PXD016215

### Title
Profiling of a high mannose-type N-glycosylated lipase using hydrophilic interaction chromatography-mass spectrometry

### Description
We report the use of hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (HILIC-MS) to profile intact glycoform distributions of high mannose-type N-glycosylated proteins, using an industrially produced fungal lipase for the food industry as an example. We compared these results with conventional reversed phase LC-MS (RPLC-MS) and sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel-electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE). HILIC appeared superior in resolving lipase heterogeneity, facilitating mass assignment of N-glycoforms and sequence variants. Fractions representing the four main HILIC elution bands for lipase were subjected to SDS-PAGE confirming that HILIC retention increased with the number of glycosylation sites (0-3) occupied. Additional bottom-up proteomic analysis of the fractions enabled the identification of the most abundant glycosylation sites. Compared to RPLC-MS, HILIC-MS provided a stronger reduction of the sample complexity delivered to the mass spectrometer, facilitating the assignment of the masses of glycoforms and sequence variants as well as increasing the number of glycoforms detected (69 more proteoforms, 177% increase). The HILIC-MS method required relatively short analysis time (< 30 min), in which over 100 glycoforms were distinguished. We suggest that HILIC-MS can be used to characterize bioengineering processes aimed at steering protein glycoform expression as well as to check the consistency of product batches.

### Sample Protocol
Sample Preparation Lipase sample: 13.50 mg was weighed to which 1.35 mL Milli-Q water (deionized water at 18.2 MΩ cm) was added. The solution was shaken for 10 min at 1200 rpm in a thermomixer and centrifuged at room temperature (RT) for 10 min at 20817 rcf. The supernatant was removed and diluted 3x with Milli-Q water. To 65 μl of the diluted sample 65 μl 20% trichloroacetic acid (TCA) solution was added. This solution was put in the fridge at 4 °C for 1 hour. After precipitation of the proteins, the sample was centrifuged for 20 min at 20817 rcf and 4 °C. After centrifugation, the supernatant was removed and the pellet was washed once with 500 µl acetone (-20 °C) and stored at -20 °C until use. Prior to use, the samples were centrifuged for 10 min at 20817 rcf and 4 °C. The supernatant was removed. After drying for 5 min at room temperature, the pellet was resolved in Milli-Q water to the concentration required.  Liquid chromatography LC separations of intact proteins were performed on an Acquity I-class instrument (Waters), equipped with a binary pump, autosampler, column thermostated compartment, and multiple wavelength absorbance detector.  RPLC analysis was performed using a Waters Acquity UPLC Protein BEH300 C4 column (1.7 μm, 300 Å, 2.1×50 mm). Separations were done at 75 °C using gradient elution with mobile phase A being 0.1 % formic acid (FA) in LC-MS grade water and mobile phase B being 0.1 % FA in acetonitrile (ACN). The separations were performed at a flow rate of 0.2 mL min-1 using an injection volume of 5 μl. The gradient programming was as follows: 2% B for 2 min, 25% B at 2.2 min, 80% B at 8 min and 95% B at 8.2 min, 10% B at 9 min, 95% B at 10 min and 10% B at 11 min followed by 10% B for 5 min. The HILIC column used was a Waters Acquity UPLC glycoprotein BEH Amide column (1.7 μm, 300Å, 2.1×150 mm) equipped with a Waters Acquity UPLC glycoprotein BEH Amide guard column (1.7 μm 300Å pore size 2.1×5 mm). Separations were done at 75 °C using a gradient elution with mobile phase A being ACN/water 98/2 v/v  + 1% propionic acid and 0.025% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and mobile phase B being ACN/water 2/ 98 v/v  + 1% propionic acid and 0.025% TFA. The injection volume was 5 μl.  For the HILIC separation, simultaneous flow rate and gradient programming elution was used. The sample was injected at 0.2 mL min-1 using 10% B, and after 1.5 min the flow rate was increased to 0.4 mL min-1 keeping 10% B, followed by a linear gradient from 10 to 30% B from min 2 to 3. At min 3 the flow rate was reduced to 0.2 mL min-1. From min 3 to min 13 a linear gradient was applied from 30 to 45% B, then to 90% B at 14 min, keeping 90% till 15 min. The %B was then set to 10% B at min 15.5 and the flow rate was increased to 0.4 between min 18 and 18.2. The column was reequilibrated under these conditions for 7 min.  Acquisition parameters for the Q-Exactive Plus instrument for intact protein measurement: m/z range, 1100-2700 m/z; resolution, 17500; 7 microscans; max IT, 200 ms, AGC, 3e6, in source CID, 15 eV; intact protein mode activated (trapping gas 0.2); spray voltage, 3.50 kV; sheath gas flow, 60; auxiliary gas flow rate, 10; capillary temperature, 275 °C; S-lens RF, 70; aux gas temperature, 50 °C.

### Data Protocol
For the Q-Exactive Plus data, deconvoluted masses were obtained using ThermoFisher Biopharma Finder software. The deconvolution was applied on the protein elution window (RPLC-MS, 4.5 – 8 min; HILIC-MS, 7 – 14 min), using the sliding windows option of the software and the following settings: target average spectrum width, 0.4 min; 25% offset, merge tolerance, 30 ppm; max retention time gap, 1 min; ReSpect (Isotopically Unresolved) as deconvolution algorithm; output mass range, 27000 – 37000 (Isotopic Profile as display mode), deconvolution tolerance, 30 ppm; peak model.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Intact protein analysis, Hilic, High-resolution mass spectrometry, High mannose-type n-glycosylation

### Affiliations
University of Amsterdam

### Submitter
Andrea Gargano

### Lab Head
Dr Andrea Gargano
University of Amsterdam


