### Accession
PXD014472

### Title
Specialization of the Drosophila nuclear export family protein, Nxf3, for piRNA precursor export

### Description
The piRNA pathway is a conserved small RNA-based immune system that protects animal germ cell genomes from the harmful effects of transposon mobilisation. In Drosophila ovaries, most piRNAs originate from dual-strand clusters, which generate piRNAs from both genomic strands. Dual-strand clusters use non-canonical transcription mechanisms. Although transcribed by RNA polymerase II, cluster transcripts lack splicing signatures and polyA tails. mRNA processing is important for general mRNA export mediated by Nuclear export factor 1. Although UAP56, a component of the transcription and export complex, has been implicated in piRNA precursor export, it remains unknown how dual-strand cluster transcripts are specifically targeted for piRNA biogenesis by export from the nucleus to cytoplasmic processing centers. Here we report that dual-strand cluster transcript export requires CG13741/Bootlegger and the Drosophila Nuclear export factor family protein, Nxf3. Bootlegger is specifically recruited to piRNA clusters and in turn brings Nxf3. We find that Nxf3 specifically binds to piRNA precursors and is essential for their export to piRNA biogenesis sites, a process that is critical for germline transposon silencing. Our data shed light on how dual-strand clusters bypass canonical mRNA features to be specifically exported via Nxf3, ensuring proper piRNA production

### Sample Protocol
Ovaries from ~100 w1118 flies (3-5 days old) were dissected in ice-cold PBS and lysed in 400 μl of RIPA Buffer (supplemented with complete protease inhibitors) and homogenized using a motorized pestle. Lysates were incubated 20 min at 4 C on a tube rotator and sonicated with a Bioruptor. Pico (3 cycles of 30 sec on/30sec off). After lysis, lysates were spun at 4 °C max speed for 10 minutes. Lysates were pre-cleared using 40 μl of Pierce Protein A/G beads for 1 hr at 4 C and Nxf3 proteins were immunoprecipitated by incubation with 40 μl Nxf3 antibody overnight at 4 C. 80 µl of Pierce A/G magnetic beads were the added to the lysates and incubated for 3 hrs at 4 °C. Beads were washed 3x10 min with wash buffer (150 mM KCl, 25 mM Tris (pH 7.5), 5 mM EDTA, 0.5 % NP-40, 0.5 mM DTT supplemented with complete protease inhibitors). Beads were rinsed twice with 100 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate and submitted for Mass Spectrometry. Samples were analyzed on a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) after Trypsin digestion.

### Data Protocol
Spectral .raw files were processed with the SequestHT search engine on Thermo ScientificTM Proteome Discoverer™ 2.2. Data was searched first against a custom FlyBase database (“dmel-all-translation-r6.24”) at a 1% spectrum level FDR criteria using Percolator (University of Washington). Data was also searched against a custom database including only the N-terminal extended version of Nxf3 (aminoacidic sequence available as supplementary table in Kneuss et al. 2019). MS1 mass tolerance was constrained to 20 ppm and the fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. Oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) AND deamidation (+0.984) of asparagine and glutamine residues were included as dynamic modifications. The Precursor Ion Quantifier node (Minora Feature Detector) included a Minimum Trace Length of 5, Max. ΔRT of Isotope Pattern 0.2 minutes. For calculation of Precursor ion intensities, Feature mapper was set True for RT alignment (mass tolerance of 10ppm). Precursor abundance was quantified based on intensity and the level of confidence for peptide identifications was estimated using the Percolator node with a Strict FDR at q-value < 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
The PIWI-interacting RNA (piRNA) pathway is a conserved small RNA-based immune system that protects animal germ cell genomes from the harmful effects of transposon mobilization. In <i>Drosophila</i> ovaries, most piRNAs originate from dual-strand clusters, which generate piRNAs from both genomic strands. Dual-strand clusters use noncanonical transcription mechanisms. Although transcribed by RNA polymerase II, cluster transcripts lack splicing signatures and poly(A) tails. mRNA processing is important for general mRNA export mediated by nuclear export factor 1 (Nxf1). Although UAP56, a component of the transcription and export complex, has been implicated in piRNA precursor export, it remains unknown how dual-strand cluster transcripts are specifically targeted for piRNA biogenesis by export from the nucleus to cytoplasmic processing centers. Here we report that dual-strand cluster transcript export requires CG13741/Bootlegger and the <i>Drosophila</i> nuclear export factor family protein Nxf3. Bootlegger is specifically recruited to piRNA clusters and in turn brings Nxf3. We found that Nxf3 specifically binds to piRNA precursors and is essential for their export to piRNA biogenesis sites, a process that is critical for germline transposon silencing. Our data shed light on how dual-strand clusters compensate for a lack of canonical features of mature mRNAs to be specifically exported via Nxf3, ensuring proper piRNA production.

### Keywords
Pirna rna export piwi drosophila transposons

### Affiliations
Cambridge University
Cancer Research UK Cambridge Institute University of Cambridge Li Ka Shing Centre Cambridge CB2 0RE United Kingdom

### Submitter
Emma Kneuss

### Lab Head
Dr Gregory J. Hannon
Cancer Research UK Cambridge Institute University of Cambridge Li Ka Shing Centre Cambridge CB2 0RE United Kingdom


