### Accession
PXD002394

### Title
Proteomic and phosphoproteomic analysis of cisplatin resistance in patient derived serous ovarian cancer

### Description
Understanding the mechanism of resistance in platinum-based regimens for the treatment of high-grade serous ovarian cancer (HGSOC) is important for identifying new therapeutic targets to improve the clinical outcome of ovarian cancer patients. Mass spectrometry-based proteomic strategy was applied to spheroidal cisplatin sensitive and resistant HGSOC generated cell lines in the absence and presence of cisplatin drug. A complete expressed HGSOC proteome and phosphoproteome was characterized in cisplatin sensitive and resistant HGSOC cell lines providing insight into the mechanism of resistance development. PCA analysis showed that phosphorylation of a few proteins provides better classification than the whole proteome of the cellular subtypes. Specifically, a distinctive phosphoproteomic signature between cisplatin sensitive and resistant cell lines in the absence of drug was observed. This same phosphoproteomic signature was observed in our cisplatin sensitive cell line in the absence and presence of drug, indicating a vital role for phosphorylation of proteins in resistance development to cisplatin. The most phosphorylated protein was sequestosome (p62/SQSTM1). Differential expressions of apoptosis by the prognostic factor ratio of Bcl-2/Bax and autophagy, known to be regulated by p62/SQSTM1, was validated in the proteome data and by western blot analysis. A significant increase in apoptosis in the presence of cisplatin was observed in only the sensitive cell line while autophagy revealed increased expression in the resistant relative to sensitive cell line. Furthermore, site specific phosphorylation on 20 modified residues of sequestosome was characterized. Elevated expression of phosphorylation of sequestosome in resistant HGSOC cell lines was validated with western blot analysis. Here, we propose phosphorylation of sequestosome to be a marker and key in cisplatin resistance development in HGOSC ovarian cancers by shuttling ubiquitinated proteins to the autophagy pathway and influencing down-regulation of apoptosis.

### Sample Protocol
Primary cell line M019i originated from ascites of women after primary platinum-taxane chemotherapy. The patient had rapid progression of HGSOC with progression-free survival (PFS) of 2.4 months. However, M019i population responded well with the therapy after relapse (Overall survival >33 months). A cisplatin-resistant cell line M019iCis was generated using methods described previously. Briefly, the M019i cells were grown with increasing cisplatin concentration up to 2.0 g/ml. Both cell lines grow as loose spheroids in serum-free Dulbecco's Modified Eagle Medium: Nutrient Mixture F-12 culture media supplemented with B-27® supplement, 20 ng/ml EGF, and 10 ng/ml bFGF . M019iCis cells were treated with cisplatin in every third subculture and left to recover at least three days before plated for sample preparation. Cell lines responding to cisplatin was followed with regular assays. Cells were plated on 96 well plates 2500 cells/well and cisplatin was added on the following day in final concentrations of 0.01, 0.1, 1.0, 10 and 100 mol/L. Cell viability was measured 72h after the first treatment using the ATP assay in triplicate wells each. IC50 value for cisplatin increased from 0.6 mol/L of M019i to 7.0 mol/L of M019iCis. For proteomic and phosphoproteomic analysis three biological replicates were prepared for cisplatin-sensitive and resistant cell lines in the absence and presence of IC50 dose of cisplatin. Cells were suspended in 50mM Ammonium bicarbonate, 8M Urea (pH6-7), and protease inhibitor cocktail. The lysates were vortexed and sonicated in three cycles for five minutes. Proteins were precipitated overnight by ice cold acetone. Samples were centrifuged for 15 minutes at 3500RPM in 4C. Total protein measurements were determined using the Bicinchoninic acid protein assay. 100µg and 1mg of protein extracts were used for protein and phosphoprotein analysis, respectively. Ten micrograms of α-casein was added to 1 mg of protein extracts for phosphoproteomics. Both protein extracts were denatured with 8 M urea in 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH8.5) before reduction with 10 mM DTT at 37 °C for 1h and alkylation with 50 mM iodoacetamide in the dark for 1 h. Alkylation was stopped by addition of 50 mM DTT. The samples were digested with a .02ug/ul modified trypsin concentration in 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH8.5) at 37 °C for 20 h. Tryptic digests were slightly acidified with 10% TFA and desalted with an Empore C18 cartridge and eluted with 1 ml of 6% TFA/80% ACN. For phosphopeptide enrichment, following desalting the peptides were enriched on 5 mg of TiO2 placed in a pipet tip and positioned in a 1.5 ml Eppendorf tube. Phosphopeptides were eluted with 200ul of 5% NH4OH and desalted immediately with a C18 column prepared in house. Phosphopeptides were eluted manually with 50 u of 0.1% FA/80% ACN and evaporated to dryness in a SpeedVac. The dried peptides were reconstituted with 0.5% FA in 2% ACN.  Non-enriched TiO2 samples for protein identifications was analyzed on a Orbitrap Fusion™ Tribrid™ mass spectrometer coupled to a NanoAquity UPLC system. For each liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis, an estimated amount of 1 µg of peptides (0.2 µg/µL) was loaded on the precolumn at 4 µL/min in water/acetonitrile (95/5) with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. Peptides were eluted using an acetonitrile gradient flowing at 250 nL/min using mobile phase gradient of 5-35% acetonitrile over 60 min with a total gradient time of 95 min. MS2 precursors were selected for a 3 sec cycle. Precursors with an assigned monoisotopic m/z and a charge state of 2–7 were interrogated.  Enriched TiO2 samples for phosphoprotein identifications was analyzed in a similar manner using a Q Exactive quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometer. The Q Exactive was coupled to an EASY-nLC II nanoflow LC instrument. A 100 µm x 3 cm trap column and a 75 µm x 15 cm analytical column were packed with Magic C18AQ resin. After injecting about 45% of the sample onto the column, phosphopeptides were eluted using a 3-step linear gradient at a flow rate of 300 nl/ml using solvent A (0.2% FA in 2% ACN) and solvent B (0.2% FA in 95% ACN). The initial linear gradient was 2 to 20% B for 30 min, then 40% B until 40 min, and finally 100% B for 45-50 min. Data dependent acquisition was performed in positive ion mode. The 10 most abundant ions of charge states 2+ or higher were selected for subsequent fragmentation by HCD. The MS/MS spectra were acquired in the orbitrap with a resolution of 17 500, an AGC target value of 5e4 ions, maximal injection time of 250ms, lowest mass fixed at 100 m/z, and dynamic exclusion duration set to 20s.

### Data Protocol
Data was searched using Mascot (v2.4.0; Matrix Science, London, UK) against the UniProt database (v2014-04, H. sapien, 40 612 sequences), common contaminants, and reverse sequences for FDR determination, via Proteome Discoverer (v1.3.0.339, Thermo Fischer Scientific). Search parameters in analysis allowed modified residues (fixed cysteine carbamidomethylation and variable methionine oxidation, phosphorylation of serine/threonine/tyrosine, and acetylation on protein N-terminus) and one missed cleavage site. A protein was considered with a confidence threshold of >95% and the identification of more than one unique peptide. Mass tolerance of spectra acquired on the Orbitrap Fusion™ Tribrid™ mass spectrometer from the non-enriched TiO2 samples tolerance was set to 5 ppm and 0.6 Da in MS and MS/MS mode, respectively. For the enriched TiO2 samples analyzed with the Q Exactive quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometer, the mass tolerance was set to 5 ppm and 0.02 Da in MS and MS/MS mode, respectively. Expectation value of ≤0.05 indicated peptide sequence identifications. PhosphoRS was used to validate phosphorylation sites. Protein Quantification Non-labeled quantification was performed using Progenesis LC-MS (v4.1, Nonlinear). Here, extracted peptide intensity (MS1) features were generated for the evaluation of differential protein expressions. Selection of the best reference run was selected and an automatic alignment was performed for all data based on RP-HPLC retention times of each analysis. Detected features represent peptide ions. Proteins from the non-enriched TiO2 samples were normalized to the sum of ion abundances of unique peptides, while phosphopeptides from the TiO2 enriched samples were normalized to the abundance of phosphopeptides detected from the α-casein standard. All features that had no associated MS/MS spectra were deleted. Differentiation of proteins and phosphopeptides was determined using analysis of variance (ANOVA). Proteins and phosphopeptides with a p-value ≤0.05 were considered significant with a power ≥0.8. The total cumulative abundance was calculated by averaging the individual abundance across the triplicate samples.  Functional Analysis Functional annotation of the sensitive and resistance proteome and phosphoproteome was conducted using database for annotation, visualization, and integrated discovery (DAVID) software(18). Overrepresented functional categories among proteins enriched in each sample population was relative to a background of all identified proteins in study using a permutation-based p-value <1e-3. Experimentally verified and published protein-protein interactions from several resources including Ingenuity’s knowledgebase (www.Ingenuity.com) and STRING(19).

### Publication Abstract
Platinum-resistance is a major limitation to effective chemotherapy regimens in high-grade serous ovarian cancer (HGSOC). To better understand the mechanisms involved we characterized the proteome and phosphoproteome in cisplatin sensitive and resistant HGSOC primary cells using a mass spectrometry-based proteomic strategy. PCA analysis identified a distinctive phosphoproteomic signature between cisplatin sensitive and resistant cell lines. The most phosphorylated protein in cisplatin resistant cells was sequestosome-1 (p62/SQSTM1). Changes in expression of apoptosis and autophagy related proteins Caspase-3 and SQSTM1, respectively, were validated by Western blot analysis. A significant increase in apoptosis in the presence of cisplatin was observed in only the sensitive cell line while SQSTM1 revealed increased expression in the resistant cell line relative to sensitive cell line. Furthermore, site-specific phosphorylation on 20 amino acid residues of SQSTM1 was detected indicating a hyper-phosphorylation phenotype. This elevated hyper-phosphorylation of SQSTM1 in resistant HGSOC cell lines was validated with Western blot analysis. Immunofluoresence staining of s28-pSQSTM1 showed inducible localization to autophagosomes upon cisplatin treatment in the sensitive cell line while being constitutively expressed to autophagosomes in the resistant cell. Furthermore, SQSTM1 expression was localized in cancer cells of clinical high-grade serous tumors. Here, we propose hyper-phosphorylation of SQSTM1 as a marker and a key proteomic change in cisplatin resistance development in ovarian cancers by activating the autophagy pathway and influencing down-regulation of apoptosis.

### Keywords
Resistance, Phosphoproteomic, Ms/ms, Cisplatin, Ovarian cancer

### Affiliations
Post-doctoral scientist
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences University of Maryland Baltimore, Maryland USA

### Submitter
Elizabeth Nguyen

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. David Goodlett
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences University of Maryland Baltimore, Maryland USA


