### Accession
PXD013406

### Title
Photosystem II assembly No-reaction center (NRC) complex

### Description
LC-MS/MS identification of small subunit peptides of Photosystem II assembly intermediate (NRC) with/without trypsin digestion. Peptide sequence identification with HCD fragmentation using Q-Exactive plus mass spectrometer (Thermo-Fisher)

### Sample Protocol
See materials and methods, briefly, PSII sample were cleaned up by using 2D clean up kit and resuspended in 70% acetone, 19% water, 10% isopropanol, 1% formic acid (v/v). Trpsin digestion of in-solution protein or excised gel band followed lab routine.

### Data Protocol
PMI (Protein Metrics), Bionic, Xcalibre qual brower in combination with ProteinProspector and Proteomics Toolkit (http://db.systemsbiology.net:8080/proteomicsToolkit/FragIonServlet.html)

### Publication Abstract
In oxygenic photosynthetic organisms, photosystem II (PSII) is a unique membrane protein complex that catalyzes light-driven oxidation of water. PSII undergoes frequent damage due to its demanding photochemistry. It must undergo a repair and reassembly process following photodamage, many facets of which remain unknown. We have discovered a PSII subcomplex that lacks 5 key PSII core reaction center polypeptides: D1, D2, PsbE, PsbF, and PsbI. This pigment-protein complex does contain the PSII core antenna proteins CP47 and CP43, as well as most of their associated low molecular mass subunits, and the assembly factor Psb27. Immunoblotting, mass spectrometry, and ultrafast spectroscopic results support the absence of a functional reaction center in this complex, which we call the "no reaction center" complex (NRC). Analytical ultracentrifugation and clear native PAGE analysis show that NRC is a stable pigment-protein complex and not a mixture of free CP47 and CP43 proteins. NRC appears in higher abundance in cells exposed to high light and impaired protein synthesis, and genetic deletion of PsbO on the PSII luminal side results in an increased NRC population, indicative that NRC forms in response to photodamage as part of the PSII repair process. Our finding challenges the current model of the PSII repair cycle and implies an alternative PSII repair strategy. Formation of this complex may maximize PSII repair economy by preserving intact PSII core antennas in a single complex available for PSII reassembly, minimizing the risk of randomly diluting multiple recycling components in the thylakoid membrane following a photodamage event.

### Keywords
Membrane protein complex, Photosystem ii, Assembly

### Affiliations
Biology,Washington University in St. Louis
Washington University in St. Louis

### Submitter
Haijun Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Himadri B Pakrasi
Biology,Washington University in St. Louis


