### Accession
PXD029650

### Title
Involvement of low molecular weight tyrosine acid phosphatase in abscisic acid signaling in Arabidopsis

### Description
Low molecular weight protein tyrosine phosphatase (LWM-PTP) is highly conserved tyrosine phosphatase from plants to animals. The function and putative targets of plant LWM-PTP homolog is not reported yet. Here, we revealed that Arabidopsis LWM-PTP homolog APH is a functional tyrosine phosphatase. APH participates in ABA signaling and regulates the ABA-responsive genes by regulates the tyrosine phosphorylation of multiple splicing factors and other transcriptional regulators. APH may also target RAF9, a member of B2 and B3 RAF kinases that activates SnRK2s, the key components in ABA-receptor coupled core signaling pathway. We preformed genetic analysis and found the aph mutants are hyposensitive to ABA in post-germination growth. We also performed an anti-phosphotyrosine antibody-based phosphoproteomics and studied the global change of phosphotyrosine in response to the ABA and APH. Hundreds of proteins, include SR45 and RAF9, are identified putative targets of APH. Consistent with it, aph mutants showed an ABA hyposensitive phenotype and altered expression of ABA-highly-responsive genes. Our results reveal a crucial function of APH in regulating tyrosine phosphorylation and ABA signaling in model plant Arabidopsis.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction and digestion. Protein extraction and digestion was performed as previously described (Wang et al., 2018). Plants were lysed in lysis buffer (6 M guanidine hydrochloride in 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5)) with 10 mM NaF, EDTA-free protease, and phosphatase inhibitor cocktails (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO). Disulfide bonds in proteins were reduced and alkylated with 10 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride and 40 mM 2-chloroacetamide at 958óC for 5 min. Protein lysate was precipitated using the methanol-chloroform precipitation method. Precipitated protein pellets were suspended in digestion buffer (12 mM sodium deoxycholate and 12 mM sodium lauroyl sarcosinate in 100 mM Tris-HCL (pH 8.5)) and then were 5-fold diluted with 50 mM TEAB buffer. Protein amount was quantified using the BCA assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). One mg of protein was then digested with Lys-C (Wako, Japan) in a 1:100 (v/w) enzyme-to-protein ratio for 3 h at 378óC, and trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) was added to a final 1:100 (w/w) enzyme-to-protein ratio overnight. The detergents were separated from digested peptides by acidifying the solution using 10% TFA and then centrifuged at 16,000 g for 20 min. The digests were then desalted using a 100 mg SEP-PAK C18 cartridge (Waters, Milford, MA).

### Data Protocol
Proteomics data search. The raw files were searched directly against the Arabidopsis thaliana database (TAIR10 with 35,386 entries) with no redundant entries using MaxQuant software (version 1.5.4.1) with reporter ion MS2 type. Peptide precursor mass tolerance was set at 20 ppm, and MS/MS tolerance was set at 20 ppm. Search criteria included a static carbamidomethylation of cysteines (+57.0214 Da) and variable modifications of (1) oxidation (+15.9949 Da) on methionine residues, (2) acetylation (+42.011 Da) at N-terminus of protein, and (3) phosphorylation (+79.996 Da) on serine, threonine or tyrosine residues were searched. Search was performed with full tryptic digestion and allowed a maximum of two missed cleavages on the peptides analyzed from the sequence database. The false discovery rates of proteins, peptides and phosphosites were set at 1% FDR. The minimum peptide length was six amino acids, and a minimum Andromeda score was set at 40 for modified peptides. The phosphorylation sites induced by mannitol treatment in Col-0 and aph-1 mutant plants were selected using Perseus software (version 1.6.2.1). The intensities of phosphorylation sites were log2 transformed, and the quantifiable phosphorylation sites were selected from the identification of all triplicate replicates in at least one sample group. The significantly enriched phosphorylation sites were selected by the ANOVA test with a permutation-based FDR cut-off of 0.01 and S0 of 0.2. The principle component analysis (PCA) was performed using the phosphorylation sites identified across all Col-0 and aph-1 mutant plants with a cut-off of Benjamin-Hochberg FDR < 0.05. For hierarchical clustering, the intensities of the ANOVA significant phosphorylation sites were first z-scored and clustered using Euclidean as a distance measure for row clustering. The number of clusters was set at 250, with a maximum of 10 iterations and 1 restart. The protein annotation search was performed using PANTHER database, and enrichment of cellular component was performed using Fisher's exact test with a cut-off of p < 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Homolog, Tyrosine phosphorylation, Low molecular weight protein tyrosine phosphatase

### Affiliations
Key lab of systems biology
Shanghai Center for Plant Stress Biology, CAS Center for Excellence in Molecular Plant Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200032, China

### Submitter
Rongxia Li

### Lab Head
Dr Pengcheng Wang
Shanghai Center for Plant Stress Biology, CAS Center for Excellence in Molecular Plant Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200032, China


