### Accession
PXD010279

### Title
A metabolic labeling strategy for relative protein quantification in Clostridioides difficile

### Description
Clostridioides difficile (formerly Clostridium difficile) is a Gram-positive, spore-forming pathogen which cases drug-induced Clostridioides difficile-associated diseases in hospitals worldwide. A detailed analysis of the proteome may provide new targets for drug development or therapy strategies to combat this pathogen. So far, quantitative proteome analyses could only be carried out by label-free or chemical labeling methods.  However, the application of metabolic labeling would allow for accurate quantification of significant differences, even in the case of very small changes. Additionally, it would be possible to perform bias free studies of the membrane or surface proteome which require elaborated preparations and are therefore prone to higher standard deviations during the quantification. Up to now, the implementation of metabolic labeling strategies of C. difficile was hampered by the very specific metabolic requirements of this anaerobic pathogen. To solve this problem, media were evaluated and the cultivation procedure with 15N labeled media for the C. difficile 630Δerm strain was optimized to gain a high incorporation rate. In the following proof-of-principle experiment, the cytosolic sub-proteomes of C. difficile cells of three different cultivation media and two growth phases were analyzed resulting in reproducible data which are shown in detail.

### Sample Protocol
In late exponential growth phase (OD600 nm of 0.8 to 1.0) and early stationary growth phase (2 h after constant or maximal OD600 nm) 10 ml of each culture were harvested by centrifugation (5 min, 5.000 x g, 4 °C) and washed twice with 1x PBS. These samples were named ‘light sample’. Similarly, the labeled cells were washed with 1x PBS and scraped off with cell scraper, harvested by centrifugation (10 min, 5.000 x g, 4 °C) and washed twice with 1x PBS. These samples were named ‘heavy standard’. Cell pellets were suspended in 400 µl lysis buffer (50 mM Tris, 10 mM EDTA, 70 mM DTT, pH 7.4) and lysed by ultrasonication at 4 °C (Bandelin Sonoplus HD 3200 with MS73, 6 cycles of 1 min 70% amplitude). Cell debris was removed by centrifugation (45 min, 20.000 x g, 4 °C) and the supernatant was kept as cytosolic protein fraction. Protein concentrations of extracts were determined using the Bradford assay and bovine serum albumin as standard (Bradford, 1976).  Twenty µg of light sample protein (14N) was used for label free quantification whereas 10 µg of light sample protein spiked with 10 µg of heavy standard protein was used for quantification based on metabolic labeling. Protein samples were supplemented with 2x sample buffer (4% (w/v) SDS, 20 mM DTT, 20% (v/v) glycerol, 0.2% (w/v) bromophenol blue, 125 mM Tris HCl, pH 6.8) and heated for 5 min at 95 °C before separation via SDS-PAGE (Criterion TGX 4-20% Precast Midi Gel, BIO-RAD Laboratories, Inc., USA). As previously described (Bonn et al., 2014), after staining with Colloidal Coomassie Brilliant Blue G-250 (Laemmli, 1970), each gel lane was cut into ten pieces. Gel pieces were washed at least twice in destaining solution (200 mM NH4HCO3 in 30% (v/v) acetonitrile), desiccated and rehydrated in 2 µg/ml trypsin (Promega, USA) for 30 min at room temperature before excess liquid was removed and in gel-digest was incubated at 37 °C overnight. Peptides were eluted with water by sonication for 15 min and dried in vacuum centrifuge. Just before MS analysis, the indexed retention time standard kit (Biognosys, Switzerland) was prepared according to manufacturer’s instructions and was added to each sample in a 1:100 ratio. Peptides were dissolved in 0.1% (v/v) acetic acid and loaded on an EASY-nLC II (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) system equipped with an in-house built 20 cm column (inner diameter 100 µm, outer diameter 360 µm) filled with ReproSil-Pur® 120 C18-AQ reversed-phase material (3 µm particles, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany) as previously described (Otto et al., 2016). Elution of peptides was executed with a nonlinear 80 min gradient from 1 to 99% solvent B (0.1% (v/v) acetic acid in acetonitrile) with a flow rate of 300 nl/min and injected online into the mass spectrometer. MS and MS/MS data were acquired with a LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA). The survey scan at a resolution of R = 30.000 and 1 x 106 automatic gain control (AGC) target in the Orbitrap with activated lock mass correction was followed by selection of the 20 most abundant precursor ions for fragmentation. Singly charged ions as well as ions without detected charge states were excluded from MS/MS analysis. Collision-induced dissociation (CID) was performed with 35 eV normalized collision energy and fragment ions were recorded in the linear ion trap.

### Data Protocol
ANALYSIS OF METABOLIC LABELING DATA  The workflow for analysis of metabolic labeling data was adopted from Otto et al. (Otto et al., 2010). Briefly, *.raw files were searched with SorcererTM SEQUEST® version v. 27, rev. 11 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) against a C. difficile 630Δerm database (Dannheim et al., 2017) containing 3781 protein entries (common laboratory contaminations and all reversed sequences added). The search was performed in two iterations. The following parameters were used for the first iteration: full digest using trypsin (after KR/) with up to two missed cleavages; 10 ppm peptide mass tolerance; methionine oxidation (15.99 amu) as variable modification with a maximum of three modifications per peptide allowed. For the second iteration, an additional mass shift of all amino acids completely labeled with 15N-nitrogen was taken into account. Resulting *.dta and *.out files from both searches were assembled and filtered using DTASelect 2.0.25 with the following parameters: -y 2 -c 2 -C 4 --decoy REVERSE_ -p 2 -t 2 -u --MC 2 -i 0.3 --fp 0.05. MS1 tracks were extracted from the *.raw files with RawXtract 1.9.9.2. The processed search results and the MS1 files were analyzed using Census 1.72 (Park et al., 2008) to obtain quantitative data of 14N-peaks (light sample) and 15N-peaks (heavy standard). Proteins that failed to be relatively quantified were checked and, if reasonable, integration of extracted ion chromatograms was edited manually in the graphical user interface of Census. Relative quantification data for proteins with at least two quantified unique peptides were exported (R²>0.7) and used for subsequent analysis. Quantitative ratios were log2-transformed, normalized by central median tendency and used for statistical analysis.  ANALYSIS OF LABEL FREE DATA – NORMALIZED SPECTRAL ABUNDANCE FACTORS  For calculation of normalized spectral abundance factor (NSAF) (Zybailov et al., 2006), the *.raw files were searched with SorcererTM SEQUEST® version v. 27, rev. 11 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) against a C. difficile 630Δerm database (Dannheim et al., 2017) (common laboratory contaminations and all reversed sequences added) using the following parameters: full digest using trypsin (after KR/) with up to 2 missed cleavages; 10 ppm peptide mass tolerance; methionine oxidation (15.99 amu) as variable modification with a maximum of three modifications per peptide was allowed. Scaffold (version 4.7.5, Proteome Software Inc., USA) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Proteins were only considered as identified if at least two unique peptides matched solid quality criteria (deltaCn>0.1 and XCorr>2.2; 3.3; 3.75 for doubly, triply, or higher charged peptides, respectively). Protein quantification was based on NSAFs, which are calculated as the number of spectral counts (SpC) identifying a protein, divided by protein length (L), divided by the sum of SpC/L for all proteins in the experiment using Scaffold’s exclusive spectrum counts for each protein. NSAFs were log2-tranformated and used for statistical analysis.  ANALYSIS OF LABEL FREE DATA – LFQ INTENSITY  For label free quantification (LFQ) with MaxQuant software (version 1.6.0.16) (Cox et al., 2014), the *.raw files were searched against a C. difficile 630Δerm database (Dannheim et al., 2017) with MaxQuant’s generic contamination list included. Database search was performed using the Andromeda algorithm with following parameters: digestion mode, trypsin/P with up to 2 missed cleavages; variable modification, methionine oxidation and maximal number of 5 modifications per peptide; activated LFQ option with minimal ratio court of 2 and ‘match-between-runs’ feature. The false discovery rates (FDRs) of peptide spectrum match (PSM) and protein were set to 0.01. Only unique peptides were used for protein quantification. The data from MaxQuant output files were filtered for contaminants, only identified by site and reverse hits with the Perseus software (version 1.6.1.1), log2-tranformated and used for statistical analysis.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Clostridioides difficile</i> (formerly <i>Clostridium difficile</i>) is a Gram-positive, anaerobe, spore-forming pathogen, which causes drug-induced diseases in hospitals worldwide. A detailed analysis of the proteome may provide new targets for drug development or therapeutic strategies to combat this pathogen. The application of metabolic labeling (ML) would allow for accurate quantification of significant differences in protein abundance, even in the case of very small changes. Additionally, it would be possible to perform more accurate studies of the membrane or surface proteomes, which usually require elaborated sample preparation. Such studies are therefore prone to higher standard deviations during the quantification. The implementation of ML strategies for <i>C. difficile</i> is complicated due to the lack in arginine and lysine auxotrophy as well as the Stickland dominated metabolism of this anaerobic pathogen. Hence, quantitative proteome analyses could only be carried out by label free or chemical labeling methods so far. In this paper, a ML approach for <i>C. difficile</i> is described. A cultivation procedure with <sup>15</sup>N-labeled media for strain 630&#x394;<i>erm</i> was established achieving an incorporation rate higher than 97%. In a proof-of-principle experiment, the performance of the ML approach in <i>C. difficile</i> was tested. The proteome data of the cytosolic subproteome of <i>C. difficile</i> cells grown in complex medium as well as two minimal media in the late exponential and early stationary growth phase obtained via ML were compared with two label free relative quantification approaches (NSAF and LFQ). The numbers of identified proteins were comparable within the three approaches, whereas the number of quantified proteins were between 1,110 (ML) and 1,861 (LFQ) proteins. A hierarchical clustering showed clearly separated clusters for the different conditions and a small tree height with ML approach. Furthermore, it was shown that the quantification based on ML revealed significant altered proteins with small fold changes compared to the label free approaches. The quantification based on ML was accurate, reproducible, and even more sensitive compared to label free quantification strategies.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Clostridioides difficile, Relative protein quantification, Mass spectrometry, Metabolic labeling

### Affiliations
University of Greifswald
Department of Microbial Proteomics, Institute for Microbiology, University of Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany

### Submitter
Anke Trautwein-Schult

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Dörte Becher
Department of Microbial Proteomics, Institute for Microbiology, University of Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany


