### Accession
PXD036804

### Title
TMT-based proteomics analysis of proteome changes in Ck137956-/- mouse round spermatids

### Description
The proteome changes were quantified in Ck137956-/- mouse round spermatids using TMT 6-plex by LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Round spermatids were lysed by protein extraction buffer [8 M Urea, 75 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris, pH 8.2, 1% (vol/vol) EDTA-free protease inhibitor, 1 mM NaF, 1 mM β-glycerophosphate, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 10 mM sodium pyrophosphate] at 4 °C, reduced, trypsin digested, and desalted using Waters Co. (Milford, MA) Sep-Pak column. For TMT labelling, purified peptides were reconstituted in 200 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) and labelled with TMT-6plex (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. After incubation for 1 h at room temperature, the reaction was quenched for 15 min by 5% hydroxylamine (PMID:34047465). All six samples were combined and purified using an OASIS HLB 1-cc Vac cartridge (Waters) and then lyophilized for subsequent analysis. The TMT-labelled peptides were fractionated by high-pH reverse phase column as previously described (PMID:28630322) using a XbridgeTM BEH130 C18 column (2.1×150 mm, 3.5 μm, Waters) with the UltiMate® 3000 HPLC systems. Buffer A (10 Mm ammonium acetate, pH 10) and buffer B (90% ACN/10 mM  ammonium acetate, pH 10) were employed under a 60 min gradient (0%–7% buffer B for 3 min, 7%–42%B for 40 min, 42%–70% B for 12 min, followed by 5 min at 70% B). Fractions were collected and dried with a SpeedVac concentrator.  Thirty fractions of peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% FA and submitted to LC-MS/MS analysis using an Easy-Nlc 1000 system with trap column (75μm×2cm, Acclaim® PepMap100, Thermo) and analytical column (75μm×25cm, Acclaim® PepMap RSLC, Thermo) in flow rate of 300nl/min. Mass spectrometry (MS) acquisition was performed in a data-dependent mode using a 205-min gradient (3% to 8% buffer B for 3 min, 8% to 29% buffer B for 176min, 29% to 41% buffer B for 15 min, 41% to 90% buffer B for 1 min, 90% buffer B for 10min) on a LTQ Orbitrap Velos (PMID:33068521). An MS survey scan was obtained, and a low-energy MS/MS scan of every precursor in the linear ion trap (collision induced dissociation, CID) followed by a higher energy MS/MS scan in the octopole collision cell (higher energy collision dissociation, HCD) was acquired from the survey scan for the eight most intense ions.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched against mouse protein sequences obtained from the Universal Protein Resource database (UniProt, release 2022_01) using MaxQuant software (1.6.5.0). The FDR cut-off was set to 0.01 for proteins and peptides. Full cleavage by trypsin, and a maximum of two missed cleavage sites was used. Carbamidomethyl (C) on cysteine-fixed modifications, with TMT reagent adducts on lysine and peptide amino termini, was considered fixed modifications. Variable modifications included oxidation (M) and acetylation (protein N-term). The corrected TMT reporter intensities were used for TMT-based protein quantification. A protein with P value < 0.001 (Student’s t-test) was considered significantly differentially expressed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse, Tmt, Round spermatids, Ck137956-/-

### Affiliations
nanjing medical university
State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Nanjing Medical University

### Submitter
xiangzheng zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Xuejiang Guo
State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Nanjing Medical University


