### Accession
PXD013973

### Title
Cysteine alkylating methods in shotgun proteomics and their possible effects on methionine residues

### Description
Neatly every proteomic protocol has a Cysteine reduction and alkylation step in it preceding the trypsin digestion. It needs to be done in order to remove the s-s bonds and prevent proteins from folding, thus, provide better access for trypsin. Among various reagents used for alkylation, iodoacetamide (IAM) seems to be the most common. Although, it has been shown that IAM can cause some undesired side reactions [Chernobrovkin et al., 2015; Muller et al., 2017]. In this work, we have compared the effect of four alkylating agents: iodoacetamide (IAM), 4-vinylpyridine (4-VP), chloroacetamide (CAM) and S-Methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS). In addition, we tried to check whether post-treatment with DTT (p-red) is reasonable in the case of irreversible alkylation.

### Sample Protocol
All the procedure was repeated for three times resulting in three independent technical replicates. For each replicate, cell pellet containing 3.5 millions of HeLa cells were resuspended in 170 µl of 0.1% Protease MAX Surfactant (Promega, USA) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate mixed with acetonitrile (ACN) in the proportion of 9:1. The mixture was then subjected to sonication by Bandelin Sonopuls HD2070 ultrasonic homogenizer (Bandelin Electronic, Germany) at 45% amplitude using short pulses for 7 min. The supernatant was collected after centrifugation at 15.7 rcf for 20 min at 20°C (Centrifuge 5415R; Eppendorf, Germany). Total protein concentration was measured using bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA Kit; Sigma–Aldrich, USA). After that, the sample was diluted to a protein concentration of 1 mg/ml by 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and eight separate samples of 50 µl each have been created. One of the samples was left as a control. For other samples, each was incubated with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 30 minutes in 57°C. The alkylation protocols were as follows for each sample: #60, 68, 84: control, no reduction, no alkylation. #61, 69, 85: IAM 20mM RT 10 min, dark, room temperature (RT). #62, 70, 86: IAM 20mM RT 10 min, dark, RT, add DTT up to 30mM. #63, 71, 87: 4-VP 20mM RT 10 min, dark, RT. #64, 72, 88: 4-VP 20mM RT 10 min, dark, RT, up to DTT 30mM. #65, 73, 89: CAM 20mM RT 10 min, dark, RT. #66, 74, 90: CAM 20mM RT 10 min, dark, RT, up to DTT 30mM. #67, 75, 91: MMTS 20mM RT 10 min, dark, RT. Three samples alkylated with IAM, 4-VP and CAM were also subjected to “post-reduction” to check, whether the effect of quenching the excess of the alkylating agent improves the result for the agents other than IAM. Although, there were no sense in doing so with MMTS as the complex of MMTS with Cysteine has its own s-s bridge and, thus, the alkylation is reversible. After the alkylation step, trypsin was added to each sample in the proportion of 1:50 by mass of the enzyme respectful to the mass of the total protein. The samples were incubated overnight at 37°C. The reaction was stopped by adding acetic acid up to 5%. Then, the samples were shaken for 10 minutes at RT and for 30 minutes at 45°C. The supernatant was collected and applied onto 30 kDa filter units (Microcon, Germany) and spun at 13.4 rcf for 30 minutes at 20°C. After that, 50µl of 50% formic acid was added and the filters were spun again with the same conditions. Then, the samples were transported to glass vials and dried up in a SpeedVac (Eppendorf, Germany). Liquid Chromatography and Mass Spectrometry The peptides were separated with high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC, Ultimate 3000 Nano LC System, Thermo Scientific, Rockwell, IL, USA) in a 15-cm long C18, 2m, 100À easy-spray column with an inner diameter of 50 μm (PepMap™ RSLC, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockwell, IL, USA). The peptides were eluted with a gradient from 5–35% buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) over 75 min at a flow rate of 0.3 μL/min. Total run time including 5 min to reach 99% buffer B, flushing 5 min with 99% buffer B and 5 min re-equilibration to buffer A (0.1% formic acid) amounted 90 min. MS analysis was performed at least in triplicate with a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Q ExactiveTM HF Hybrid Quadrupole-OrbitrapTM Mass spectrometer, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockwell, IL, USA). Mass spectra were acquired at a resolution of 120,000 (MS) and 15,000 (MS/MS) in an m/z range of 310−1500 (MS) and 100–2000 (MS/MS). An isolation threshold of 100,000 counts was determined for precursor’s selection and up to top 15 precursors were chosen for fragmentation with high-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) at 28 NCE and 150 ms accumulation time. Precursors with a charged state of +1 were rejected and all measured precursors were excluded from measurement for 20 s.

### Data Protocol
The RAW files obtained from the mass spectrometer were converted to the mgf format with MSConvert 3.0.11781 from the ProteoWizard package. The resulting mgf files were searched against the SwissProt Homo sapiens fasta (version November 2018, 20409 entries) with IdentiPy search engine [Levitsky et al., 2018]. The parameter were set as follows: trypsin as a digestion enzyme, up to 1 missed cleavage allowed, precursor mass tolerance 10 ppm, product mass accuracy 0.01 Da, peptide length 5-50 aa, no fixed modifications, oxidation of Methionine as a potential modification and the appropriate Cysteine modification as a potential as well. The database was appended with the decoy sequences, generated as reversed. The respectful potential Cysteine modifications were as follows: For sample #60, 68, 84: none; #61, 62, 65, 66, 69, 70, 73, 74, 85, 86, 89, 90: carbamidomethylation (+58.005 Da); #63, 64, 71, 72, 87, 88: pyridilethylation (+105.058 Da), #67, 75, 91: sulphenilation (+45.988 Da).

### Publication Abstract
In order to optimize sample preparation for shotgun proteomics, we compared four cysteine alkylating agents: iodoacetamide, chloroacetamide, 4-vinylpyridine and methyl methanethiosulfonate, and estimated their effects on the results of proteome analysis. Because alkylation may result in methionine modification in vitro, proteomics data were searched for methionine to isothreonine conversions, which may mimic genomic methionine to threonine substitutions found in proteogenomic analyses. We found that chloroacetamide was superior to the other reagents in terms of the number of identified peptides and undesirable off-site reactions. Among the reagents evaluated, iodoacetamide increased the rate of methionine-to-isothreonine conversion, especially if the sample was prepared in gel. The presence of proline following methionine in a protein sequence increased the modification rate as well. Generally, the methionine-to-isothreonine conversion events were relatively rare, but should be taken into account in proteogenomic studies when searching for single nucleotide polymorphism events at the protein level. Additionally, we have evaluated other methionine modifications, such as oxidation and carbamidomethylation. We found that carbamidomethylation may affect up to 80% of peptides containing methionine under the condition of iodoacetamide alkylation. In this case, carbamidomethylation of methionine is more common than oxidation and should be accounted for as a variable modification during proteomic search. SIGNIFICANCE: One of the most trending questions in bottom-up proteomics is the depth of proteome profiling, in other words, the coverage of proteins by identified tryptic peptides. In proteogenomics, where the identification of a single peptide, e.g. bearing an amino acid substitution, may be of interest, high sequence coverage is especially important. Chemical modifications during sample preparation may mimic biologically significant coding mutations at the proteome level. A typical example of such modification is methionine to isothreonine conversion during alkylation, which mimics methionine to threonine substitution in protein sequences due to respective genomic mutations. Therefore, the studies on the proper selection of alkylating reagents which balance the cysteine alkylation efficiency and the extent of methionine conversion upon conventional proteomic sample preparation workflow are crucial for the outcome of proteogenomic analyses and should present a general interest for the proteomic community.

### Keywords
Cysteine, Proteomics, Methionine, Alkylation

### Affiliations
Lab. Med. Proteomics  Institute of Biomedical Chemistry Chair of Biochemistry, Medico-Biological Faculty Pirogov Russian National Research Medical University  Moscow, Russia
IBMC

### Submitter
Irina Ilina

### Lab Head
Dr Sergei A. Moshkovskii
Lab. Med. Proteomics  Institute of Biomedical Chemistry Chair of Biochemistry, Medico-Biological Faculty Pirogov Russian National Research Medical University  Moscow, Russia


