### Accession
PXD002922

### Title
cacao seed development -  System level analysis of cacao seed ripening reveals a sequential interplay of primary and secondary metabolism leading to polyphenol accumulation and preparation of stress resistance

### Description
integration of metabolomics and proteomics for understanding the molecular physiology of cacao seed development. Both the metabolomic and proteomic profiles of 4 developing stages' cacao seed were obtained from the mass spectrometry based platforms.

### Sample Protocol
Both metabolites and proteins were extracted from the same samples. Metabolites were measured with LC-Orbitrap-MS or GC-TOF-MS after derivatization. Proteins were digested with Lys-C and trypsin then measured with LC-Orbitrap-MS.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer 1.3 was used for peptide and protein identification and quantification. Only the candidates exist in all the 3 replicates of at least one stage were kept for multivariate statistic analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Theobroma cacao and its popular product, chocolate, are attracting attention due to potential health benefits including antioxidative effects by polyphenols, anti-depressant effects by high serotonin levels, inhibition of platelet aggregation and prevention of obesity-dependent insulin resistance. The development of cacao seeds during fruit ripening is the most crucial process for the accumulation of these compounds. In this study, we analyzed the primary and the secondary metabolome as well as the proteome during Theobroma cacao cv. Forastero seed development by applying an integrative extraction protocol. The combination of multivariate statistics and mathematical modelling revealed a complex consecutive coordination of primary and secondary metabolism and corresponding pathways. Tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle and aromatic amino acid metabolism dominated during the early developmental stages (stages 1 and 2; cell division and expansion phase). This was accompanied with a significant shift of proteins from phenylpropanoid metabolism to flavonoid biosynthesis. At stage 3 (reserve accumulation phase), metabolism of sucrose switched from hydrolysis into raffinose synthesis. Lipids as well as proteins involved in lipid metabolism increased whereas amino acids and N-phenylpropenoyl amino acids decreased. Purine alkaloids, polyphenols, and raffinose as well as proteins involved in abiotic and biotic stress accumulated at stage 4 (maturation phase) endowing cacao seeds the characteristic astringent taste and resistance to stress. In summary, metabolic key points of cacao seed development comprise the sequential coordination of primary metabolites, phenylpropanoid, N-phenylpropenoyl amino acid, serotonin, lipid and polyphenol metabolism thereby covering the major compound classes involved in cacao aroma and health benefits.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Cacao seed, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Molecular Systems Biology Department of Ecogenomics and Systems Biology University of Vienna Austria
MOSYS, University of Vienna

### Submitter
Lei Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Wolfram Weckwerth
Molecular Systems Biology Department of Ecogenomics and Systems Biology University of Vienna Austria


