### Accession
PXD024636

### Title
Inhibition of cathepsin B and SAPC secreted by HIV-infected macrophages reverse common and unique apoptosis pathways

### Description
Human immunodeficiency virus 1 (HIV-1) infects blood monocytes that cross the blood-brain barrier to the central nervous system inducing neuronal damage. This damage is prompted by the secretion of viral and neurotoxic factors by HIV-infected macrophages and can result in HIV associated neurocognitive disorders (HAND). One of these neurotoxic factors secreted by HIV-infected macrophages is cathepsin B (CATB), a lysosomal cysteine protease that plays an important role in neurodegeneration. CATB interacts with Serum Amyloid P component (SAPC) contributing to HIV-induced neurotoxicity. However, the neuronal apoptosis pathways triggered by CATB and SAPC remain unknown. We aimed to elucidate these pathways in neurons exposed to HIV-infected macrophage conditioned media (MCM) before and after inhibition of CATB or SAPC using Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) proteomics labeling. Based on significant fold change (FC) ≥ ǀ2ǀ and p-value < 0.05 criteria, a total of 10, 48 and 13 proteins were deregulated after inhibiting CATB, SAPC antibodies and the cathepsin B inhibitor CA-074, respectively. We found that antibodies against CATB and SAPC, as well as the CATB inhibitor CA-074 downregulated apoptosis related proteins. CATB, SAPC or apoptotic related proteins could become potential targets against HIV-induced neuronal degeneration.

### Sample Protocol
Total protein concentration from treated neuronal lysates was determined using the Bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay (DC, Protein Assay, Bio-Rad) TMT proteomics was performed for a total protein quantitation. After BCA analysis, 20µg of protein per sample were aliquoted for TMT studies.  A total 48 samples (neurons treated from 6 different donors and with 8 conditions) were briefly cleaned by performing acetone precipitation with 50µL of 10% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) incubated at 70°C for 15 min.  Samples were centrifuged, 1mL of cold acetone was added and incubated at -20°C overnight.  The next day, samples were micro-centrifuged at 10,000g for 10 min and supernatant was discarded. To isolate total protein, samples were briefly dried to remove remaining acetone and prepared for a short run on a fixed 12% SDS-PAGE gel (BioRad) for 15mins at 150V. This protocol was performed for neurons treated with MCM from all 6 donors. All gel lanes containing protein bands from each condition were cut out manually into 1mm cubes avoiding contamination. Gel pieces were properly de-stained with 50Mm ammonium bicarbonate and 50% acetonitrile during 30mins. This process was repeated until gel samples were clear and no longer contained blue color. Samples were reduced and alkylated by incubating with 25Mm dithiothreitol (DTT) at 55°C and 10mM iodoacetamide in the dark, both in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate respectively. Samples were dehydrated with 100% acetonitrile and hydrated with HPLC water. Protein digestion was achieved by resuspending the samples in trypsin solution (in a 1:100 ratio of trypsin/protein) followed by incubation at 37°C overnight for a maximum of 16hrs. Peptide extractions were prepared using 50% acetonitrile and 2.5% formic acid and then 100% acetonitrile. The extractions were dried, and gel pieces were stored at -80°C until TMT Labelling and LC- MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Bioinformatics analyses were performed on TMT data using Limma software, an R Bioconductor package23. Limma that inplements a lineal regression model to correlate variances and apply empirical Baesian methods to obtain variance estimators. Significant results were based on Fold change (FC)  ǀ2ǀ and p value <0.05.  Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) (QIAGEN Inc., https://www.qiagenbioinformatics.com/products/ingenuity-pathway-analysis) was used for protein network and pathway enrichment analysis. IPA is a web-based bioinformatics application that allows researchers to upload data analysis results from high-throughput experiments, such as proteomics, for functional analyze, integration and further understanding. It also allows interactive building of networks and pathways that represent biological systems.

### Publication Abstract
Human immunodeficiency virus 1 (HIV-1) infects blood monocytes that cross the blood-brain barrier to the central nervous system, inducing neuronal damage. This is prompted by the secretion of viral and neurotoxic factors by HIV-infected macrophages, resulting in HIV-associated neurocognitive disorders. One of these neurotoxic factors is cathepsin B (CATB), a lysosomal cysteine protease that plays an important role in neurodegeneration. CATB interacts with the serum amyloid P component (SAPC), contributing to HIV-induced neurotoxicity. However, the neuronal apoptosis pathways triggered by CATB and the SAPC remain unknown. We aimed to elucidate these pathways in neurons exposed to HIV-infected macrophage-conditioned media before and after the inhibition of CATB or the SAPC with antibodies using tandem mass tag proteomics labeling. Based on the significant fold change (FC) &#x2265; |2| and <i>p</i>-value &lt; 0.05 criteria, a total of 10, 48, and 13 proteins were deregulated after inhibiting CATB, SAPC antibodies, and the CATB inhibitor CA-074, respectively. We found that neurons exposed to the CATB antibody and SAPC antibody modulate similar proteins (TUBA1A and CYPA/PPIA) and unique proteins (LMNA and HSPH1 for the CATB antibody) or (CFL1 and PFN1 for the SAPC antibody). CATB, SAPC, or apoptosis-related proteins could become potential targets against HIV-induced neuronal degeneration.

### Keywords
Hiv-1, Sapc, Cathepsin b, Tmt, Hand, Apoptosis

### Affiliations
Universtity of Puerto Rico, Comprehensive Cancer Center
University of Puerto Rico, Medical Sciences Campus, Microbioly and Zoology Department, Translational Proteomics Center

### Submitter
Yadira Cantres

### Lab Head
Dr Loyda Melendez
University of Puerto Rico, Medical Sciences Campus, Microbioly and Zoology Department, Translational Proteomics Center


