### Accession
PXD010723

### Title
Data in support of Proteomic analysis of synovial fluid from rheumatic arthritis and spondyloarthritis patients

### Description
Objective. To analyse the pathogenesis of the diseases rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and spondyloarthritis (SpA) we investigated the protein composition in synovial fluid from the patients. Methods. Fifty-six synovial fluid (SF) were analysed with non-gel based proteomics from patients with RA (32) and SpA (24). Rheumatoid factor was measured in plasma, and cell-free DNA was measured in SF.  Results. Two hundred proteins were quantified in the samples. The inflammatory proteins were more abundant in the RA group, specially proteins from neutrophil granulocytes. Cell-free DNA (cfDNA) in the SF was statistically associated with proteins that are known to form neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs). Plasma C-reactive protein (CRP), was correlated to other acute phase proteins in the SF. Minimal correlation was seen between acute phase proteins and proteins in NETs. Conclusions. The results show that in the synovial cavity in vivo neutrophils form NETs. This result sustains that neutrophils from RA patients are activated and are likely to undergo NETosis resulting in  SF cfDNA specific of arthritis pathology with NETosis.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for proteomics. One hundred µg of protein was dissolved in 5% sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB). The samples were heated to 90°C for 5 minutes. For sample preparation “filter-aided sample preparation” (FASP) was used (Bennike et al., 2014, León et al., 2013). Ten kDa spinfilters (YM10; Millipore, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) was used for buffer exchange. The samples were reduced with 12 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride, alkylated with 40 mM iodoacetamide and digested with 0.4 μg sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega, Fitchburg, Wisconsin, USA). All reactions were performed in 0.5% SDC and 50 mM TEAB. After digestion the samples were acidified with trifluoroacetic acid and ethyl acetate extraction was performed. Samples were dried down and re-suspended in 2% acetonitrile and 0.1 % trifluoroacetic acid. Mass spectrometry (MS). MS was performed according to  Bennike et al. (8). The protein solution was analyzed on an automated LC-electrospray ionization (ESI) MS/MS system using an Ultimate 3000 UPLC system with a nanopump module. The system was coupled with an emitter for nanospray ionization to a Thermo-Electron QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, USA). Triplicate runs of 10 μg of each sample was loaded onto the C18 reversed phase column (Dionex; Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 5 μm precolumn and 50 cm Acclaim Pepmap RSLC, 75 μm ID main column, Thermo Scientific) and eluted with a linear gradient of 96% solvent A (1% formic acid) and 4% solvent B (acetonitrile)(Bennike et al., 2015), increasing solvent B to 35% on a 90 min ramp gradient. The MS was operated in data dependent acquisition, selecting the 12 precursor-ions with the highest intensity for higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Resulting raw files were analyzed using MaxQuant LFQ  and statistical analysis with Perseus v1.6.0.2. Default settings were selected for Maxquant including match-betewwn runs.  Raw data are provided and named according to patient number (pt01-66) and technical replicate01-03

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Synovial fluid, Rheumatoid arthritis, Proteomics, Ankylosing spondylitis

### Affiliations
laboratory for Medical Massspectrometry, Aalborg University, Denmark
Aalborg University

### Submitter
Allan Stensballe

### Lab Head
Dr Allan Stensballe
laboratory for Medical Massspectrometry, Aalborg University, Denmark


