### Accession
PXD045209

### Title
Characterisation of the forest cobra (Naja melanoleuca) venom using a multifaceted mass spectrometric-based approach

### Description
Comprehensive understanding of venom compositions and in-depth characterisation of the various proteoforms are necessary to aid the development of targeted antivenom strategies. This work utilises an integrated 'omics' and intact mass spectrometry-based approach to profile the diversity within the venom of the forest cobra.

### Sample Protocol
Venom samples underwent in-solution tryptic digestion and the resulting peptides were purified using C18 Biospin columns. Digested venom samples were analysed using an Ultimate 3000 nano-LC system coupled to a LTQ XL Orbitrap mass spectrometer. LC-MS/MS acquisitions were controlled by Xcalibur v2.1 and the mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode. Spectra were acquired in positive polarity over the mass range of 300 – 2000 m/z at a resolution of 60, 000 in FT mode. The 5 most intense precursor ions were further selected for CID fragmentation using a dynamic exclusion of 5 s where the dynamic exclusion criteria included a minimum relative signal intensity of 1000 and ≥2+ charge state. An isolation width of 3.0 m/z and a normalised collision energy of 35 were used.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS/MS data was submitted for qualitative protein identification using Proteome Discoverer (v2.5, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The data was searched against all entries in the custom N. melanoleuca venom gland transcriptome database using Sequest HT as the search engine. Search parameters were as follows: tryptic peptides with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages were allowed, peptide mass tolerance of 20 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 0.8 Da, cysteine carbamidomethylation set as a static modification and acetylation of the protein N-terminus, methionine oxidation and deamidation of glutamine and asparagine set as dynamic modifications. False positives were identified using a False Discovery Rate (FDR) of 0.05 %. False positives, contaminants and any proteins that did not contain a toxic function were eliminated from further analysis. The relative semi-quantitative values for a given toxin family were calculated from the sum of the peptide spectrum matches (PSM) generated by Proteome Discoverer.

### Publication Abstract
Snake venoms consist of highly biologically active proteins and peptides that are responsible for the lethal physiological effects of snakebite envenomation. In order to guide the development of targeted antivenom strategies, comprehensive understanding of venom compositions and in-depth characterisation of various proteoforms, often not captured by traditional bottom-up proteomic workflows, is necessary. Here, we employ an integrated 'omics' and intact mass spectrometry (MS)-based approach to profile the heterogeneity within the venom of the forest cobra (Naja melanoleuca), adopting different analytical strategies to accommodate for the dynamic molecular mass range of venom proteins present. The venom proteome of N. melanoleuca was catalogued using a venom gland transcriptome-guided bottom-up proteomics approach, revealing a venom consisting of six toxin superfamilies. The subtle diversity present in the venom components was further explored using reversed phase-ultra performance liquid chromatography (RP-UPLC) coupled to intact MS. This approach showed a significant increase in the number of venom proteoforms within various toxin families that were not captured in previous studies. Furthermore, we probed at the higher-order structures of the larger venom proteins using a combination of native MS and mass photometry and revealed significant structural heterogeneity along with extensive post-translational modifications in the form of glycosylation in these larger toxins. Here, we show the diverse structural heterogeneity of snake venom proteins in the venom of N. melanoleuca using an integrated workflow that incorporates analytical strategies that profile snake venom at the proteoform level, complementing traditional venom characterisation approaches.

### Keywords
Venom, Lc-ms/ms, Naja melanoleuca, Forest cobra

### Affiliations
The University of Adelaide
Discipline of Physics, Chemistry, and Earth Sciences. The University of Adelaide

### Submitter
Ruth Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Tara Louise Pukala
Discipline of Physics, Chemistry, and Earth Sciences. The University of Adelaide


