### Accession
PXD002543

### Title
RBDmap -  The Cardiomyocyte RNA-Binding Proteome: Links to Intermediary Metabolism and Heart Disease

### Description
RBDmap protein regions contacting RNA were crosslinked with UV and captured with oligodT beads

### Sample Protocol
samples were procesed with FASP with some minor modifications, reduced, alkylated and digested with Lys-C/Trypsin subsequently dimethyl labeled and prepared for LS-MS/MS analysis

### Data Protocol
raw files were analysed with MaxQuant version 1.3.0.5, subsequently data analysis was processed with R and limma

### Publication Abstract
RNA functions through the dynamic formation of complexes with RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) in all clades of life. We determined the RBP repertoire of beating cardiomyocytic HL-1 cells by jointly employing two in&#xa0;vivo proteomic methods, mRNA interactome capture and RBDmap. Together, these yielded 1,148 RBPs, 391 of which are shared with all other available mammalian RBP repertoires, while 393 are thus far unique to cardiomyocytes. RBDmap further identified 568 regions of RNA contact within 368 RBPs. The cardiomyocyte mRNA interactome composition reflects their unique biology. Proteins with roles in cardiovascular physiology or disease, mitochondrial function, and intermediary metabolism are all highly represented. Notably, we identified 73 metabolic enzymes as RBPs. RNA-enzyme contacts frequently involve Rossmann fold domains with examples in evidence of both, mutual exclusivity of, or compatibility between RNA binding and enzymatic function. Our findings raise the prospect of previously hidden RNA-mediated regulatory interactions among cardiomyocyte gene expression, physiology, and metabolism.

### Keywords
Rna-binding proteins

### Affiliations
EMBL
DKFZ

### Submitter
Sophia Foehr

### Lab Head
Dr Jeroen Krijgsveld
EMBL


