### Accession
PXD043426

### Title
Streptococcus agalactiae and Prototheca spp. infections induce changes in milk peptidome in Holstein cattle

### Description
Early detection of bovine subclinical mastitis may improve treatment strategies and reduce the use of antibiotics. Herein, individual milk samples from Holstein cows affected by subclinical mastitis induced by S. agalactiae and Prototheca spp. were analyzed by untargeted and targeted mass spectrometry approaches to assess changes in their peptidome profiles and identify new potential biomarkers of the pathological condition. Results showed a higher amount of peptides in milk positive at the bacteriological examination when compared with the negative control. However, the different pathogens seemed not to trigger specific effects on milk peptidome. The peptides that best distinguish positive from negative samples are mainly derived from the most abundant milk proteins, especially from β- and αs1-casein, but also include the antimicrobial peptide casecidin 17. These results provide new insights into the physiopathology of mastitis. Upon further validation, the panel of potential discriminant peptides could help to the development of new diagnostic and therapeutic tools.

### Sample Protocol
Sample collection: three groups of animals were identified: negative (Neg, n = 15), positive for S. agalactiae (Sa+, n = 12) and positive for Prototheca spp. (P+, n = 11). Fifteen days later (T1), the animals belonging to these groups were resampled to confirm the bacteriological results of T0. A 50 mL aliquot, supplemented with the antimicrobial Bronopol 2-Bromo-2-nitro-1,3-propanediol (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) was also collected for the analysis of milk composition and quality traits.  Samples preparation and extraction of milk endogenous peptides:  a solution containing 0.1 M BisTris buffer, 6 M GdnHCl, 5.37 mM sodium citrate and 19.5 mMDL-Dithiothreitol (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) was added to skimmed milk in a 1:1 ratio (v:v) to a total volume of 1 mL; samples were mixed by inversion six times, vortexed 10 s, incubated 1 h at room temperature and centrifuged at 13,000 g for 10 min. Avoiding the fat layer, 900 µL of this mixture were filtered through a 0.45 µM filter (GVS Filter Technologies, Bologna, Italy). Endogenous peptides were isolated using the Filter-Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) method. Briefly, 180 µL of the filtered mixture were mixed with 20 µL of a solution A (8 M urea, 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5). The final volume of 200 µL was added into a centrifugal unit with a molecular weight cut-off of 10 kDa (Vivacon 500, Sartorius, Geottingen, Germany) and centrifuged at 18,600 g for 15 min. The flow-through was collected in a new 2 mL tube. The centrifugal unit was washed with 200 µL of solution A, centrifuged at 18,600 g for 15 min and the flow-through was collected in the 2 mL tube. The washing steps were repeated twice, followed by another 10 min centrifugation performed to collect all the residual liquid. All flow-through fractions, containing the endogenous peptides with a MW < 10 kDa were pooled, diluted to a final volume of 1 mL with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) 0.1%, and pH was adjusted to 3 using TFA 10%. Peptides were desalted with C18 cartridges (Sep-Pak C18, Waters Corp, Milford, MA) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Finally, samples were dried under vacuum and stored at -20 °C until instrumental analysis.  Untargeted LC-MS/MS analysis: samples were mixed to create pools: two for negative (seven + seven samples), two for Sa+ (five + five samples), and two for P+ (five + six samples). Samples were analyzed with an LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA), interfaced to a nano-HPLC Ultimate 3000 (Dionex – Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). A volume of 3 µL of each sample were loaded into a 10 cm pico-frit capillary column (75 μm I.D., 15 μm tip, New Objective) packed in-house with C18 material (Aeris peptide 3.6 um XB-C18, Phenomenex, Torrance, CA.). Chromatographic separation of peptides was achieved at 250 nL/min using a linear gradient from 3% to 40% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid in 90 min. The instrument operated in a data-dependent mode, with a Top10 acquisition method: for each cycle, a full MS scan from 300 to 1700 m/z was acquired at high resolution (60,000) in the Orbitrap, followed by the acquisition of 10 MS/MS spectra of the most intense ions in the linear ion trap. Samples were acquired twice (technical replicates) in a random order and alternated with blanks to avoid column carry-over.   Targeted LC-QqQ-MS/MS analysis: selected peptides were validated with a MS-based targeted approach. Dry samples previously resuspended in 20 µL of TFA 0.1% were diluted in 3% acetonitrile with a 1:1 ratio, then 1 µL of each sample was taken to create a pool to use as quality control (QC). The analysis was carried out using a triple quadrupole (TSQ Quantiva, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) coupled to an UHPLC Ultimate 3000 (Dionex – Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). Peptides were separated by reverse-phase chromatography with a C18 column (Brownlee SPP Peptide ES C18, 100 mm × 2.1 mm i.d., 2.7 μm particle size, Perkin Elmer, Waltham, MA), maintained at 30 °C, with a 45 min gradient, using 0.1 % formic acid in aqueous solution (A) and 0.1 % formic acid in acetonitrile (B) as mobile phases. The gradient changed from 2.5 % to 15 % B in 5 min, then increased to 30% B in 25 min and finally up to 50% B in 4 min. Flow rate was set to 0.200 mL/min and the injection volume was 4 μL. The mass spectrometer operated in selected reaction monitoring (SRM) mode, with the following parameters: positive ionization mode, spray voltage at 3000 V, ion transfer tube and vaporizer temperature at 325 °C, sheath gas 25 (Arb), auxiliary gas 10 (Arb), sweep gas 0 (Arb), CID argon pressure at 1.5 mTorr, Q1 and Q3 resolution 0.7 (FWMH). A total of 35 individual samples were randomly analyzed in five days, alternated with two pool injections per day as QC.

### Data Protocol
Untargeted LC-MS/MS analysis: Raw data files were analyzed with the software Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) connected to a Mascot server (version 2.2.4, Matrix Science) and spectra were searched against the Bovine section of the Uniprot database (version September 2020) using the following parameters: precursor and fragment tolerance were set to 10 ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively; no enzyme and no fixed modifications were selected, while oxidation of methionine residues was set as variable modification. The precursor area node of Proteome Discoverer was used to integrate the area under the curve for each identified peptide. The algorithm Percolator was used to assess the false discovery rate (FDR) and results were filtered to take into considerations only proteins identified with at least two unique peptides and with a FDR < 0.01, both at the peptide and protein levels. Proteins were grouped into families according to the principle of maximum parsimony.  Targeted LC-QqQ-MS/MS analysis: Raw MS data were analyzed with Skyline MS software v. 21.2.0.425 and a relative quantification of each peptide was obtained by using the area of the most intense transition. To assess the repeatability of the analysis, the quantitative data obtained for each peptide in the QC samples were averaged within the day, and the coefficients of variation between the different dates were calculated.

### Publication Abstract
Early detection of bovine subclinical mastitis may improve treatment strategies and reduce the use of antibiotics. Herein, individual milk samples from Holstein cows affected by subclinical mastitis induced by <i>S. agalactiae</i> and <i>Prototheca</i> spp. were analyzed by untargeted and targeted mass spectrometry approaches to assess changes in their peptidome profiles and identify new potential biomarkers of the pathological condition. Results showed a higher amount of peptides in milk positive on the bacteriological examination when compared with the negative control. However, the different pathogens seemed not to trigger specific effects on the milk peptidome. The peptides that best distinguish positive from negative samples are mainly derived from the most abundant milk proteins, especially from &#x3b2;- and &#x3b1;<sub>s1</sub>-casein, but also include the antimicrobial peptide casecidin 17. These results provide new insights into the physiopathology of mastitis. Upon further validation, the panel of potential discriminant peptides could help the development of new diagnostic and therapeutic tools.

### Keywords
Milk endogenous peptides, Prototheca spp., Streptococcus agalactiae, Mass spectrometry, Udder health

### Affiliations
Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Padova, ITALY
University of Padova

### Submitter
Giorgio  Arrigoni

### Lab Head
Dr Giorgio Arrigoni
Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Padova, ITALY


