### Accession
PXD014401

### Title
Growth factor-mediated regulation of neuronal exosome release depends on VAMP3/cellubrevin

### Description
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are small membrane-derived vesicles that shuttle proteins or nucleic acids between glia and neurons, thereby promoting neuronal survival and plasticity in the CNS. Exosomes are small EVs (40-150 nm) that are derived from multi-vesicular bodies (MVBs) of the endo-lysosomal pathway, formed by inward budding of the limiting membrane into the MVB lumen and released into the extracellular space upon fusion of the MVB with the plasma membrane (PM). Previous research revealed certain effector molecules to be required for exosome release. For instance, RAB GTPases have been shown to control exosome release in a cell- and tissue-specific manner. In addition, exosome release appears to be evoked by membrane depolarization in conjunction with calcium influx and to depend on members of the SNARE family of proteins. However, the specific cellular and molecular factors that regulate neuronal exosome release and segregate it from the release of neurotransmitter vesicles are currently unknown. Here, we used a combination of molecular biology, patch-clamp electrophysiology and pH-sensitive dye imaging to examine the effect of the neuronal growth and differentiation factors basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF), nerve growth factor (NGF) and brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) on neuronal EV release. We found that bFGF-treatment of cultured hippocampal neurons increased the abundance of EVs in the culture medium as measured by Western blot and nanoparticle tracking analysis (NTA), without affecting the number or size of neuronal MVBs. The effect of bFGF depended on calcium and on receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) activity as the calcium chelating agent BAPTA and the tyrosine kinase inhibitor genistein both abolished the bFGF-induced increase in EV release. In accord with these results, untreated neurons had a low rate of spontaneous and stimulus-evoked MVB-PM fusion events as measured by pH-sensitive dye imaging in conjunction with patch-clamp electrophysiology, but treatment with bFGF significantly increased the number of neurons exhibiting MVB-PM fusion events in response to a high-frequency stimulus. Proteomic analysis of neuronal EVs by Liquid Chromatography Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS) demonstrated bFGF to increase the abundance of the v-SNARE vesicle-associated membrane protein 3 (VAMP3, cellubrevin) on EVs, whereas VAMP2 was decreased. Conversely, knocking-down VAMP3 in cultured neurons abolished the effect of bFGF on EV release. Similar to bFGF, the classical neurotrophins BDNF and NGF increased neuronal EV release in a VAMP3-dependent manner. In summary, our results thus reveal a new function for neurotrophic factor signalling in controlling neuronal exosome release and support the investigation of growth factor-mediated signal transduction via EVs in the healthy and diseased CNS.

### Sample Protocol
The exosome pellets were lysed in 80 µL of a modified RIPA lysis buffer (50 mM TrisHCl pH 8, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, 1% (v/v) Triton X-100, 0.5% (w/v) sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% (w/v)) with protease inhibitors (Sigma Aldrich, US) on ice with intermediate vortexing. 20 µL H2O, 10 µL 100 mM MgCl2, and 25 units Benzonase (Sigma Aldrich, US) were added followed by an incubation for 30 min at 37°C at 1400 rpm in a Thermomixer (Eppendorf, Germany). Undissolved material was removed by centrifugation for 5 min at 20,000 g and 4°C. The supernatants were transferred to 1.5 mL protein Lobind Tubes. Proteins were reduced by addition of 9 µL of 200 mM dithiothreitol (Biozol, Germany) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and incubation for 30 min at 37°C. Cysteine residues were alkylate by addition of 18 µL 400 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma Aldrich, US) and incubation for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Afterwards, the reaction was quenched by adding another 9 µL of 200 mM dithiothreitol. Proteolytic digestion was performed using a modified protocol for single-pot solid-phase enhanced sample preparation (SP3) (Sielaff et al., 2017). Briefly, after binding of proteins to 40 µg of a 1:1 mixture of hydrophilic and hydrophobic magnetic Sera-Mag SpeedBeads (GE Healthcare, US) with a final concentration of 70% acetonitrile for 30 min at room temperature, beads were washed twice with 200 µL 70% ethanol and twice with 180 µL acetonitrile. For proteolytic digestion, 125 ng LysC and 125 ng trypsin (Promega, Germany) were added in 20 µL 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate followed by an incubation for 16 h at room temperature. The supernatants were transferred to fresh 0.5 mL protein lobind tubes (Eppendorf, Germany). For improved peptide recovery, 20 µL 0.1% formic acid were added to the magnetic beads followed by sonication for 30 s in a sonication bath (Hielscher Ultrasonics GmbH, Germany). The supernatants were combined and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Peptides were redissolved in 20 µL 0.1% formic. The peptide concentration was estimated using Nanodrop at 280 nm (Thermofisher, US). Peptides were analysed on an Easy nLC 1000 nanoHPLC (Thermo Scientific) which was coupled online via a Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo Sientific, US) equipped with a PRSO-V1 column oven (Sonation, Germany) to a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, US). An amount of 1 µg of peptides per sample was separated on an in-house packed C18 column (30 cm x 75 µm ID, ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm, Dr. Maisch GmbH,Germany) using a binary gradient of water (A) and acetonitrile (B) supplemented with 0.1% formic acid (0 min., 2% B; 3:30 min., 5% B; 137:30 min., 25% B; 168:30 min., 35% B; 182:30 min., 60% B) at 50°C column temperature. A data-dependent acquisition method was used. Full MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 (m/z range: 300-1400, AGC target: 3E+6). The 10 most intense peptide ions per full MS scan were selected for peptide fragmentation (resolution: 17,000, isolation width: 2 m/z, AGC target: 1E+5, NCE: 25%). A dynamic exclusion of 120 s was used for peptide fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
The raw data was analysed with the software Maxquant (maxquant.org, Max-Planck Institute Munich) version 1.6.1.0 (Cox et al., 2014). The MS data was searched against a canonical fasta database of Rattus norvegicus from UniProt (download: March 5th 2018, 29975 entries). Trypsin was defined as protease. Two missed cleavages were allowed for the database search. The option first search was used to recalibrate the peptide masses within a window of 20 ppm. For the main search peptide and peptide fragment mass tolerances were set to 4.5 and 20 ppm, respectively. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was defined as static modification. Acetylation of the protein N-term as well as oxidation of methionine was set as variable modifications. The false discovery rate for both peptides and proteins was adjusted to less than 1%. Label free quantification (LFQ) of proteins required at least two ratio counts of razor peptides. Only razor and unique peptides were used for quantification. The protein LFQ intensities were log2 transformed and a two-sided Student’s t-Test was applied to evaluate the significance of proteins with changed abundance. Additionally, a permutation based false discovery rate estimation was used (Tusher et al., 2001).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rat, Neurons, Exosome, Vamp3

### Affiliations
DZNE Munich Neuroproteomics Feodor-Lynen-Str. 17 81377 Munich Germany
DZNE Munich Neuroproteomics

### Submitter
Stephan Mueller

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan Lichtenthaler
DZNE Munich Neuroproteomics Feodor-Lynen-Str. 17 81377 Munich Germany


