### Accession
PXD003503

### Title
H2B variants expression during iAs-mediated EMT

### Description
This work details the first global mass spectrometric analysis of histone H2B variants as cells undergo arsenic-mediated epithelial to mesenchymal transition.

### Sample Protocol
Nuclei were isolated from BEAS-2B and HeLa cells. Histones were extracted following standard acid extraction protocol from both cell lines. Histone H2B was purified from acid-extracted histones by C18 reversed-phase chromatography. The purified H2B was injected directly into a custom-built 9.4 Tesla FT-ICR mass spectrometer and the collected broadband and ECD spectra were used to identify and quantify H2B variants.

### Data Protocol
All raw ECD product ion mass spectra were phase-corrected and analyzed by our in-house software in a variant-specific manner to determine each proteoform. We use 10 ppm for assignments of all fragment ions of all variants. ProSight Lite and manual interpretations were conducted at the same time to validate our results and eliminate false positives.

### Publication Abstract
Exposure to inorganic arsenic, a ubiquitous environmental toxic metalloid, leads to carcinogenesis. However, the mechanism is unknown. Several studies have shown that inorganic arsenic exposure alters specific gene expression patterns, possibly through alterations in chromatin structure. While most studies on understanding the mechanism of chromatin-mediated gene regulation have focused on histone post-translational modifications, the role of histone variants remains largely unknown. Incorporation of histone variants alters the functional properties of chromatin. To understand the global dynamics of chromatin structure and function in arsenic-mediated carcinogenesis, analysis of the histone variants incorporated into the nucleosome and their covalent modifications is required. Here we report the first global mass spectrometric analysis of histone H2B variants as cells undergo arsenic-mediated epithelial to mesenchymal transition. We used electron capture dissociation-based top-down tandem mass spectrometry analysis validated with quantitative reverse transcription real-time polymerase chain reaction to identify changes in the expression levels of H2B variants in inorganic arsenic-mediated epithelial-mesenchymal transition. We identified changes in the expression levels of specific histone H2B variants in two cell types, which are dependent on dose and length of exposure of inorganic arsenic. In particular, we found increases in H2B variants H2B1H/1K/1C/1J/1O and H2B2E/2F, and significant decreases in H2B1N/1D/1B as cells undergo inorganic arsenic-mediated epithelial-mesenchymal transition. The analysis of these histone variants provides a first step toward an understanding of the functional significance of the diversity of histone structures, especially in inorganic arsenic-mediated gene expression and carcinogenesis.

### Keywords
Toxin, Proteoform, Transformation, Top-down, Proteomics, Histone variants, Epigenetics, Fourier transform, Ion cyclotron resonance, Mass spectrometry, Inorganic arsenic

### Affiliations
Florida State University
Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 40536, USA

### Submitter
Tingting Jiang

### Lab Head
Dr Yvonne N. Fondufe-Mittendorf
Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 40536, USA


