### Accession
PXD018587

### Title
Open database searching enables the identification and comparison of glycoproteomes without defining glycan compositions prior to searching

### Description
Mass spectrometry has become an indispensable tool for the characterisation of glycosylation across biological systems. Our ability to generate rich fragmentation data of glycopeptides has dramatically improved over the last decade yet our informatic approaches still lag be hide. This is especially true for the study of bacterial glycosylation where manual determination of glycopeptides is still heavily used. This dependence on manual assignment/identification is not scalable, extremely time consuming and limits accessibility of bacterial glycosylation studies to field specialists. As such computational approaches to examine bacterial glycosylation and determine glycan diversity within samples are desperately needed. Here we describe the use of wide-tolerance (up to 2000 Da) open searching as a means to rapidly examine bacterial glycoproteomes. We benchmarked this approach using N-linked glycopeptides of Campylobacter fetus subsp. fetus as well as O-linked glycopeptides of Acinetobacter baumannii and Burkholderia cenocepacia revealing glycopeptides modified with a range of glycans can be readily identified without defining the glycan masses prior to database searching. Utilising this approach, we demonstrate how wide tolerance searching can be used to compare glycan utilisation across bacterial species by examining the glycoproteomes of eight Burkholderia species (B. pseudomallei; B. multivorans; B. dolosa; B. humptydooensis; B. ubonensis, B. anthina; B. diffusa; B. pseudomultivorans). Finally, we also demonstrate how open searching enables the identification of low frequency glycoforms based on shared modified peptides sequences. Combined these results show that open searching is a robust computational approach for the determination of glycan diversity within novel microbial glycosylation systems.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial strains were grown to confluency on agar plates before being flooded with 5 mL of pre-chilled sterile phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and bacterial cells collected by scraping. Cells were washed 3 times in PBS and collected by centrifugation at 10,000 x g at 4˚C and then snap frozen. Frozen whole cell samples were resuspended in 4% SDS, 100mM Tris pH 8.0, 20mM DTT and boiled at 95˚C at 2000rpm for 10 min. Samples were clarified by centrifugation at 17,000 x g for 10 min, the supernatants collected, and protein concentration determined by bicinchoninic acid assay (Thermo Scientific) 1mg of protein from each sample was acetone precipitated by mixing one volume of sample with 4 volumes of ice-cold acetone. Samples were precipitated overnight at -20˚C and then spun down at 16,000G for 10 min at 0˚C. The precipitated protein pellets were resuspended in 80% ice-cold acetone and precipitated for an additional 4 hours at -20˚C. Samples were centrifuged at 17,000 x g for 10 min at 0˚C, the supernatant discarded, and excess acetone driven off at 65 ˚C for 5 min.   Digestion of protein lysates: Protein digestion was undertaken as previously described with minor alterations. Briefly, Dried protein pellets were resuspended in 6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 40 mM NH4HCO3 and reduced with 20mM Dithiothreitol / alkylated with 40mM chloroacetamide prior to digestion with Lys-C (1/200 w/w) and trypsin (1/50 w/w) overnight. Digested samples were acidified to a final concentration of 0.5% formic acid and desalted with 50 mg tC18 SEP-PAK (Waters corporation, Milford, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. tC18 SEP-PAKs columns were by conditioned with buffer B (80% ACN, 0.1% formic acid), then with 10 volumes of Buffer A* (0.1% TFA, 2% acetonitrile). Samples were loaded and columns washed with at least 10 volumes of Buffer A* before bound peptides being eluted with buffer B then dried at -20 ˚C  ZIC-HILIC enrichment of bacterial glycopeptides: ZIC-HILIC enrichment was performed according to Scott N E et al, 2011 with minor modifications. ZIC-HILIC Stage-tips were created by packing 0.5cm of 10 µm ZIC-HILIC resin (Sequant, Umeå, Sweden) into p200 tips containing C8 Empore™ disc (Sigma) frits. Prior to use, the columns were washed with ultra-pure water, followed by 95% acetonitrile (ACN) and then equilibrated with 80% ACN and 5% formic acid (FA). Digested proteome samples were resuspended in 80% ACN and 5% FA. Samples were adjusted to a concentration of 3 µg/µL (a total of 300 µg of peptide used for each enrichment) then loaded onto columns before the columns were washed with 20 bed volumes of 80% ACN, 5% FA to remove non-glycosylated peptides. ZIC-HILIC bound peptides were eluted with 10 bed volumes of ultra-pure water and concentrated using vacuum centrifugation.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were batched processed using Byonic v3.5.3 (Protein Metrics Inc) with the proteome databases denoted within Table 1. For all searches a semi-tryptic N-ragged specificity was set and a maximum of two miss cleavage events allowed. Carbamidomethyl was set as a fixed modification of cystine while oxidation of methionine was included as a variable modification. A maximum mass precursor tolerance of 5 ppm was allowed while a mass tolerance of up to 10 ppm was set for HCD fragments and 20 ppm for EThcD fragments. For open searching of C. fetus fetus samples (N-linked glycosylation) the wildcard parameter was enabled allowing a delta mass between 200 Da and 1600 Da on asparagine residues. For open searching of O-linked glycosylation samples the wildcard parameter was enabled allowing a delta mass between 200 Da and 2000 Da on serine and threonine residues. For targeted searches all parameters listed above remained constant except wildcard searching was disabled and specific glycoforms as identified from open searches included as variable modifications. To ensure high data quality separate datasets from the same biological samples were combined using R and only glycopeptides with a Byonic score >300 used for further analysis. This score cut-off is in line with previous reports highlighting that score thresholds greater than at least 150 are required for robust glycopeptide assignments with Byonic. It should be noted that a score threshold of above 300 resulted in false discovery rates of less than 1% for all combined datasets.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Wide tolerant database searching, Post-translational modifications, Bacterial glycosylation, Atypical glycosylation, Proteomics, Glycosylation, Glycopeptides, Open searching

### Affiliations
University of Melbourne
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Melbourne at the Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity, Melbourne 3000, Australia

### Submitter
Nichollas Scott

### Lab Head
Dr Nichollas E. Scott
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Melbourne at the Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity, Melbourne 3000, Australia


