### Accession
PXD006242

### Title
Dietary effect on the proteome of the common octopus (Octopus vulgaris) paralarvae, 2D-DIGE gel data

### Description
Nowadays, the common octopus (Octopus vulgaris) culture is hampered by massive mortalities occurring during early life-cycle stages (paralarvae). Despite the causes of the high paralarvae mortality are not yet well defined and understood, the nutritional stress caused by inadequate diets is pointed out as one of the main factors. In this study the effects of diet on paralarvae is analyzed through a proteomic approach, to search for novel biomarkers of nutritional stress. A total of 43 proteins showing differential expression in the different conditions studied have been identified. The analysis highlights proteins related with the carbohydrate metabolism: glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate-dedydrogenase (GAPDH), triosephosphate isomerase; other ways of energetic metabolism: NADP+-specific isocitrate dehydrogenase, arginine kinase; detoxification: glutathione-S-transferase (GST); stress: heat shock proteins (HSP70); structural constituent of eye lens: S-crystallin 3; and cytoskeleton: actin, actin-beta/gamma1, beta actin. These results allow defining characteristic proteomes of paralarvae depending on the diet; as well as the use of several of these proteins as novel biomarkers to evaluate their welfare linked to nutritional stress. Notably, the changes of proteins like S-crystallin 3, arginine kinase and NAD+ specific isocitrate dehydrogenase, may be related to fed versus starving paralarvae, particularly in the first 4 days of development.

### Sample Protocol
Gel electrophoresis (2D-DIGE gel): separation and image capture A total of 24 protein samples (6 experimental groups x 4 biological replicates) were combined in pairs as shown in supplementary Table 1, and analyzed on a total of twelve 2D gels following the experimental design given in supplementary Table 2. 24 cm- IPG strips (pH = 3-11NL) were rehydrated in 8 M urea, 4% CHAPS, DeStreak (12 µL mL-1), and 1% ampholytes (pH = 3-10 NL) overnight at room temperature. Cy-labelled samples were applied onto IPG rehydrated strips via anodic cup loading, and IEF (first dimension) was performed on a EttanIPGphor II horizontal electrophoresis system (GE Healthcare) at 20 °C using the following IEF protocol: step 1:300 V 4 h, gradient to 1000 V 6h, gradient to 8000 V 3 h; step 2: 8000 V until reached 32000 V h.   After IEF, the strips were reduced in equilibration buffer (Tris 50 mM, urea 6 M and glycerol 30% (v/v), 2% SDS (w/v)) containing 2% DTT (w/v), for 15 min at room temperature; followed by alkylation in equilibration buffer containing 2.5% (w/v) iodoacetamide, for 15 min at room temperature. The proteins were then separate (second dimension) on 12.5% acrylamide SDS-PAGE gels (25 cm x 21 cm x 1 mm) using an EttanDalt Six Unit (GE Healthcare) electrophoresis system at 2 W per gel for 1 h and 15 W per gel for 6 h.   After electrophoresis, the 2-D gels were scanned with a TyphoonTM 9400 Variable Mode Imager, at 100µm resolution to visualize the labelled proteins. Excitation/emission wavelengths were chosen specifically for Cy2, Cy3 and Cy5 according to manufacturer’s recommendations (GE Healthcare).  Protein spots showing significantly altered expression levels between groups were manually excised from analytical silver stained gels and digested with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) as described elsewhere (Shevchenko et al., 1996). The digestion was stopped with 0.1% TFA (trifluoroacetic acid, Sigma) and the digested peptides were concentrated to 7 µL. BSA plug was analyzed in the same way to control the digestion process. Digested samples were subjected to PMF-MS/MS (MALDI-TOF-TOF) and/or LC-MS/MS analyses.  PMF-MS/MS (MALDI-TOF-TOF) analysis Previously, MALDI plate and the acquisition methods were calibrated with 0.5 μL of the CM5 calibration mixture (ABSciex) in 13 positions. The resulting mixtures were analyzed in a 5800 MALDI TOFTOF (ABSciex) in positive reflection mode (3000 shots every position). Five of the most intense precursors (according to the threshold criteria: minimum signal-to-noise: 10, minimum cluster area: 500, maximum precursor gap: 200 ppm, maximum fraction gap: 4) were selected for every position for the MS/MS analysis. And, MS/MS data was acquired using the default 1 kV MS/MS method. The MS and MS/MS information was sent to MASCOT via the Protein Pilot (v 4.5 ABSciex) to be identified.

### Data Protocol
The PMF search was performed on NCBI databases. Searches were done with tryptic specificity allowing one missed cleavage and a tolerance on the mass measurement of 100 ppm in MS mode and 0.8 Da for MS/MS mode. Carbamidomethylation of Cys was used as a fixed modification and oxidation of Met and deamidation of Asn and Gln as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Nowadays, the common octopus (<i>Octopus vulgaris</i>) culture is hampered by massive mortalities occurring during early life-cycle stages (paralarvae). Despite the causes of the high paralarvae mortality are not yet well-defined and understood, the nutritional stress caused by inadequate diets is pointed out as one of the main factors. In this study, the effects of diet on paralarvae is analyzed through a proteomic approach, to search for novel biomarkers of nutritional stress. A total of 43 proteins showing differential expression in the different conditions studied have been identified. The analysis highlights proteins related with the carbohydrate metabolism: glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate-dedydrogenase (GAPDH), triosephosphate isomerase; other ways of energetic metabolism: NADP<sup>+</sup>-specific isocitrate dehydrogenase, arginine kinase; detoxification: glutathione-S-transferase (GST); stress: heat shock proteins (HSP70); structural constituent of eye lens: S-crystallin 3; and cytoskeleton: actin, actin-beta/gamma1, beta actin. These results allow defining characteristic proteomes of paralarvae depending on the diet; as well as the use of several of these proteins as novel biomarkers to evaluate their welfare linked to nutritional stress. Notably, the changes of proteins like S-crystallin 3, arginine kinase and NAD<sup>+</sup> specific isocitrate dehydrogenase, may be related to fed vs. starving paralarvae, particularly in the first 4 days of development.

### Keywords
Welfare, Novel biomarkers, Paralarvae, Octopus vulgaris, Nutritional stress, Proteome

### Affiliations
Universitat de Valencia
Instituto de Acuicultura Torre de la Sal (IATS-CSIC), 12595 Ribera de Cabanes, Castellón, Spain.

### Submitter
Luz Valero

### Lab Head
Dr Inmaculada Varo
Instituto de Acuicultura Torre de la Sal (IATS-CSIC), 12595 Ribera de Cabanes, Castellón, Spain.


