### Accession
PXD003094

### Title
Comprehensive proteomic comparison between native tendon and ligament and 3D tissue engineered tendon and ligament constructs

### Description
Tendons and ligaments are important biological structures in both humans and animals. They are part of dense connective tissue and are crucial to the functioning of the musculoskeletal system. However, they are commonly damaged due to age-related wear and tear, trauma or sports related incidents, which can lead to severe immobility for the individual and can lead to injury of other tissues and development of degenerative joint disease such as osteoarthritis. Tissue engineering can offer great potential in the treatment of tendon and ligament injury by seeking a biological replacement with fully regenerated autologenous tissue. This approach commonly involves an artificial ECM (scaffold) on which cell can proliferate and differentiate with subsequent new tissue generation. Fibrin is a natural scaffold with no expected toxic degradation or inflammatory reaction and can be used as an autologous scaffold for fibroblast from connective tissue to create a three dimensional structure. The purpose of this study was to compare the proteomic differences between native tendon, ligament and 3D tissue engineered tendon and ligament fibrin constructs.

### Sample Protocol
Anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) and lond digital extensor tendon were harvested from cadaveric canine knee joints. Cells from ACL and LDET (n=5) were harvested and used to create 3D tendon or ligament tissue engineered constructs. Protein from native tissues and constructs were extracted with 4M guanidine HCL and subjected to in-solution trypsin digestion followed by reduction and alkalytion. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using Ultimate nanosystem coupled on-line to Q-exactive. Aliqouts of tryptic peptides (equivalant to 93 protein per sample) were loaded onto a 180 umx x 20mm C18 trap column at 5 ul/min with an aqueos solution containing 0.1% (v/v) TFA. after 3 minutes, the trap column was set in-line with analytical column (C18, 75umx 15cm x 2um) using a linear gradient of  solvent B (80% ACN with 0.1% formic acid) of 3.8% to 50% at 300 nL/min. Data dependent aquisition consisted of 70,000 resolution (m/z 200) after accumulation of  ion to 1x106  target value based on AGC values from previous full scan. The dynamic exculsion was set to 20s. The 10 most intense multiply charged ions (> 2) were fragmented by HCD with fixed injection time of 100ms and 35,000 resolution. Typical mass spectromic conditions were as follows: spray voltage 1.9kV, no sheat or auxillary gas flow, heat temperature, 250 degree celsius normalised to HCD collision energy 30%. The MS/MS ion selection threshold was set to 1 x 104 counts and a 2 m/z isolation width was set.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data files were analysed with PEAK 7 to indentify protein composition using the following search parameters: parents mass error tolerance: 10.0 ppm, fragment mass error tolerance: 0.1 Da, precursor mass search type: monoisotypic, enzyme: trypsin, max missed cleavage :1, non specidic cleavage: 1, fixed modification: carbamidomethylation, variable PTMs per peptide: 3. The result were filtered on the basis of the following parameters: de novo average local confidence score threshold: 50. protein -10lgP >20, FDR: 1% and unique peptides > 2.  Label free quantification was also performed using ProgenesisQI LC-MS where the top 5 spectra were exported to PEAK 7 against canine database using the same parameters. The resulting peptide-spectrum matches were imported into ProgenesQI. Statistical analysis was performed on all detected features using transformed normalised abundances for one-way ANOVA. Identification of protein with two or peptides, greater 2 fold abundance and FDR adjusted p-value of <0.05 were considered significant.

### Publication Abstract
Tendons and ligaments (T/Ls) play key roles in the musculoskeletal system, but they are susceptible to traumatic or age-related rupture, leading to severe morbidity as well as increased susceptibility to degenerative joint diseases such as osteoarthritis. Tissue engineering represents an attractive therapeutic approach to treating T/L injury but it is hampered by our poor understanding of the defining characteristics of the two tissues. The present study aimed to determine differences in the proteomic profile between native T/Ls and tissue engineered (TE) T/L constructs. The canine long digital extensor tendon and anterior cruciate ligament were analyzed along with 3D TE fibrin-based constructs created from their cells. Native tendon and ligament differed in their content of key structural proteins, with the ligament being more abundant in fibrocartilaginous proteins. 3D T/L TE constructs contained less extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins and had a greater proportion of cellular-associated proteins than native tissue, corresponding to their low collagen and high DNA content. Constructs were able to recapitulate native T/L tissue characteristics particularly with regard to ECM proteins. However, 3D T/L TE constructs had similar ECM and cellular protein compositions indicating that cell source may not be an important factor for T/L tissue engineering.

### Keywords
Native tendon, Native ligament, 3d tissue engineered tendon, 3d tissue engineered ligament

### Affiliations
University of Liverpool
Head musculoskeletal skeletal biology department, institute of ageing and chronic disease, University of Liverpool, UK

### Submitter
Yalda  Ashraf Kharaz

### Lab Head
Dr EIthne Comerford
Head musculoskeletal skeletal biology department, institute of ageing and chronic disease, University of Liverpool, UK


