### Accession
PXD026733

### Title
The Cell Wall Proteome of Craterostigma plantagineum Cell Cultures Habituated to Dichlobenil and Isoxaben

### Description
The remarkable desiccation tolerance of the vegetative tissues in the resurrection species Craterostigma plantagineum (Hochst.) is favored by its unique cell wall folding mechanism that allows the ordered and reversible shrinking of the cells without damaging neither the cell wall nor the underlying plasma membrane. The ability to withstand extreme drought is also maintained in abscisic acid pre-treated calli, which can be cultured both on solid and in liquid culture media. Cell wall research has greatly advanced thanks to the use of inhibitors affecting the biosynthesis of e.g. cellulose, since they allowed the identification of the compensatory mechanisms underlying habituation. Considering the innate cell wall plasticity of C. plantagineum, the goal of this investigation was to understand whether habituation to the cellulose biosynthesis inhibitors dichlobenil and isoxaben entailed or not identical mechanisms as known for non-resurrection species and to decipher the cell wall proteome of habituated cells. The results showed that exposure of C. plantagineum calli/cells triggered abnormal phenotypes as reported in non-resurrection species. Additionally, the data demonstrated that it was possible to habituate Craterostigma cells to dichlobenil and isoxaben and that gene expression and proteomics did not follow the same trend. Shotgun and gel-based proteomics revealed a common set of proteins induced upon habituation, but also identified candidates solely induced by habituation to one of the two inhibitors. Finally, it is hypothesized that alterations in auxin levels are responsible for the increased abundance of cell wall-related proteins upon habituation.

### Sample Protocol
The study is focused on the cell wall response and the techniques used encompass proteomics, as well as optical microscopy, biochemical and gene expression analyses. The extraction of the cell wall proteins was performed. Proteins were quantified. For gel-free proteomics, 20ug of proteins were reduced, alkylated, digested. Peptides were separated by nanoLC-MS.

### Data Protocol
The data were imported into Progenesis QI for Proteomics The peptide identification was carried out by searching Craterostigma in-house database. Only the proteins identified with a significance Mascot-calculated confidence of 95% were kept for further analysis. The proteins identified with a fold change (FC)>1.5, a p-value<0.05 and minimum two significant sequences per protein and one unique sequence per protein were considered as differentially abundant proteins.

### Publication Abstract
The remarkable desiccation tolerance of the vegetative tissues in the resurrection species <i>Craterostigma plantagineum</i> (Hochst.) is favored by its unique cell wall folding mechanism that allows the ordered and reversible shrinking of the cells without damaging neither the cell wall nor the underlying plasma membrane. The ability to withstand extreme drought is also maintained in abscisic acid pre-treated calli, which can be cultured both on solid and in liquid culture media. Cell wall research has greatly advanced, thanks to the use of inhibitors affecting the biosynthesis of e.g., cellulose, since they allowed the identification of the compensatory mechanisms underlying habituation. Considering the innate cell wall plasticity of <i>C. plantagineum</i>, the goal of this investigation was to understand whether habituation to the cellulose biosynthesis inhibitors dichlobenil and isoxaben entailed or not identical mechanisms as known for non-resurrection species and to decipher the cell wall proteome of habituated cells. The results showed that exposure of <i>C. plantagineum</i> calli/cells triggered abnormal phenotypes, as reported in non-resurrection species. Additionally, the data demonstrated that it was possible to habituate <i>Craterostigma</i> cells to dichlobenil and isoxaben and that gene expression and protein abundance did not follow the same trend. Shotgun and gel-based proteomics revealed a common set of proteins induced upon habituation, but also identified candidates solely induced by habituation to one of the two inhibitors. Finally, it is hypothesized that alterations in auxin levels are responsible for the increased abundance of cell wall-related proteins upon habituation.

### Keywords
Craterostigma plantagineum; dichlobenil; isoxaben; habituation; cell wall; qpcr; proteomics.

### Affiliations
LIST-ERIN-ERTP-BEAP-HAU platform
LIST-ERIN-BEAP, Belvaux, LUXEMBOURG

### Submitter
Céline LECLERCQ

### Lab Head
Dr Celine LECLERCQ
LIST-ERIN-BEAP, Belvaux, LUXEMBOURG


