### Accession
PXD029062

### Title
Identifying the N-terminus of SLX4Nter in HeLa KO30 cells

### Description
The project was aimed at identifying the N-terminus of a truncated form of SLX4 (termed SLX4Nter) in HeLa KO30 cells. The HeLa KO30 cell line comes from a clone of HeLa Flp-In T-Rex cells (termed FITo) obtained through a CRISPR-Cas9 approach using commercially available plasmids from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (sc-404395 and sc-404395-HDR). This allows the integration of an exogenous plasmid conferring Puromycin resistance at the endogenous SLX4 locus. Unexpectedly, this strategy allowed us to retrieve several Puromycin-resistant clones (including KO30) displaying a shorter form of endogenous SLX4 that is N-terminally truncated (SLX4Nter). To identify the proximal peptide of SLX4Nter, FITo and KO30 nuclear extracts were immunoprecipitated with anti-SLX4 antibodies and N-terminus of SLX4Nter was further identified by LC-MSMS analysis.

### Sample Protocol
To identify the proximal peptide of SLX4Nter, FITo and KO30 nuclear extracts were immunoprecipitated overnight at 4°C with anti-SLX4 antibodies from Bethyl Laboratories (A302-270A and A302-269A) and dynabeads-protein G (Invitrogen). Beads were extensively washed before elution of proteins in LDS sample buffer (Invitrogen). Proteins were separated on NuPAGE 4-12% Bis-Tris acrylamide gels (Life Technologies) and following imperial blue staining,  the upper part of the gel corresponding to proteins between MW 150 and 300 kDa and containing the SLX4 protein was cut in 4 separated bands (respectively bands 1 to 4 for WT and 5 to 8 for KO30 extracts). Each band was digested as previously described with trypsin and analyzed by liquid chromatography (LC)-tandem MS (MS/MS) using a Q Exactive Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap online with a nanoLC Ultimate 3000 chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific™, San Jose, CA). 5 microliters corresponding to 33 % of digested protein were injected on the system. After pre-concentration and washing of the sample on a Acclaim PepMap 100 column (C18, 2 cm × 100 μm i.d. 100 A pore size, 5 μm particle size), peptides were separated on a LC EASY-Spray column (C18, 50 cm × 75 μm i.d., 100 A, 2 µm, 100A particle size) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min with a two steps linear gradient (2-20% acetonitrile/H20; 0.1 % formic acid for 40 min and 20-40% acetonitrile/H20; 0.1 % formic acid for 10 min). For peptides ionization in the EASYSpray source, spray voltage was set at 1.9 kV and the capillary temperature at 250 °C. All samples were measured in a data dependent acquisition mode. Each run was preceded by a blank MS run in order to monitor system background. The peptide masses were measured in a survey full scan (scan range 375-1500 m/z, with 70 K FWHM resolution at m/z=400, target AGC value of 3.00×106 and maximum injection time of 100 ms). Following the high-resolution full scan in the Orbitrap, the 10 most intense data-dependent precursor ions were successively fragmented in HCD cell and measured in Orbitrap (normalized collision energy of 27 %, activation time of 10 ms, target AGC value of 1.00×105, intensity threshold 1.00×104 maximum injection time 100 ms, isolation window 2 m/z, 17.5 K FWHM resolution, scan range 200 to 2000 m/z). Dynamic exclusion was implemented with a repeat count of 1 and exclusion duration of 10 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw files generated from mass spectrometry analysis were processed with Proteome Discoverer 1.4.1.14 (Thermo fisher Scientific) to search against the human protein proteome of the swissprot database (20,368 entries, extracted from Uniprot on november 2019) modified by the addition of 85 SLX4 sequences. The Q8IY92 uniprot entry corresponding to the entire sequence 1-1834 of the SLX4 protein was used to create and add artificial 85 different SLX4 sequences corresponding to amino-terminal truncated proteins deleted from 301 to 386 first amino-acids, each sequence differing by the incremental deletion of 1 amino-acid. First sequence named Q8IY92-302 corresponds for example to 302N-N1834 SLX4 sequence and Q8IY92-387 to 387F-N1834 SLX4 sequence. Database search with Mascot were done using the following settings: a maximum of two trypsin miss cleavage allowed, methionine oxidation and protein N-terminus acetylation as variable modifications and cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification. A peptide mass tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.8 Da were allowed for search analysis. Only peptides with high stringency Mascot scores were selected for protein identification. False discovery rate was set to 1% for protein identification. To compare SLX4 sequence coverage and identify N-terminal sequence for both WT and truncated form of SLX4, one search of raws corresponding to bands 1 to 4 (WT) was compared to corresponding search of raws 5 to 8 from N-terminally truncated SLX4 (KO30).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Slx4, N-terminal truncation, Crispr-cas9, N-terminus acetylation

### Affiliations
CRCM, Institut Paoli-Calmettes, Aix-Marseille Université, Inserm,  CNRS, 13009 Marseille, France
Marseille Proteomic, Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Marseille, Inserm UMR1068, CNRS UMR7258, Aix Marseille Université U105, Institut Paoli Calmettes, 27 Boulevard Leï Roure CS30059 13273 Marseille Cedex 09 France 

### Submitter
AUDEBERT Stephane

### Lab Head
Dr Pierre-Henri Gaillard
CRCM, Institut Paoli-Calmettes, Aix-Marseille Université, Inserm,  CNRS, 13009 Marseille, France


