### Accession
PXD026313

### Title
Adaptations in metabolism and protein translation give rise to the Crabtree effect in yeast

### Description
We have studied Schizosaccharomyces pombe, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Scheffersomyces (Pichia) stipites, and Kluyveromyces marxianus yeast using the modified IBAQ label-free method with the spiked universal protein standard (UPS2). Each species had been prepared in 3 culturing replicates, and the similarity of the replicates was assessed using the TMT relative quantification methodology.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were suspended in 300 ul of the lysis buffer containing 2% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) and 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), and homogenized using lysis matrix C (1.0 mm silica spheres) on a FastPrep(R)-24 instrument (MP Biomedicals, OH, USA) for 4 repeated 40 second cycles at 6.5 m/s. Lysed samples were centrifuged at 16,200xg for 10 min and the supernatants were transferred to clean tubes. The pellets were washed with 200 ul of the lysis buffer, centrifuged at 16,200xg for 10 min, and the supernatants were combined with the corresponding lysates from the previous step. Protein concentrations in the lysates were determined using Pierce(TM) BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fischer Scientific) and the Benchmark(TM) Plus microplate reader (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA, USA) with bovine serum albumin (BSA) solutions as standards. For each of the yeast species, aliquots containing equal protein amount from each replicate were mixed to yield the pooled reference samples. For the tandem mass tag (TMT) relative quantification experiment, aliquots containing 50 ug of total protein from each sample were incubated at 37deg. C for 60 min in the lysis buffer with DL-dithiothreitol (DTT) at 100 mM final concentration. The reduced samples were processed via the modified filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol (Wisniewski JR et. al. Nat Methods. 2009 May;6(5):359-62). In short, the reduced samples were diluted to 1:4 by 8M urea solution, transferred onto Nanosep 30k Omega filters (Pall Corporation, Port Washington, NY, USA) and washed repeatedly with 8 M urea and once with digestion buffer containing 0.5% sodium deoxycholate (SDC) and 50 mM TEAB. Free cysteine residues were modified using 10 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS) solution in digestion buffer for 20 min at room temperature and the filters were washed twice with 100 ul of digestion buffer. Pierce trypsin protease (MS Grade, Thermo Fisher Scientific) in digestion buffer was added at a ratio of 1:100 relative to total protein mass and the samples were incubated at 37deg. C overnight, then an additional 1:100 portion of trypsin was added and incubated for 2 more hours. Peptides were collected by centrifugation and labeled using Tandem Mass Tag (TMT 10plex) reagents (Thermo Fischer Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For each of the yeast specie, the labeled samples were combined into one pooled sample, concentrated using vacuum centrifugation, and SDC was removed by acidification with 10% TFA and subsequent centrifugation. The labeled pooled samples were treated with HiPPR detergent removal kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Pooled TMT-labeled samples were fractionated into 40 primary fractions via basic-pH reversed-phase chromatography (bRP-LC) on an XBridge BEH C18 column (3.5 μm, 3.0x150 mm, Waters Corporation) using Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLC system (Thermo Fischer Scientific), solvent A was 10 mM ammonium formate buffer at pH 10.00 and solvent B was 90% acetonitrile, 10% solvent A. Forty primary fractions were collected  linear gradient from 3% to 40% solvent B over 18 min followed by an increase to 100% B over 5 min and hold at 100% B for 5 min; the primary fractions were concatenated into 20 final fractions (1+21, 2+22 etc), dried and reconstituted in 15μl of 3% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid for LC-MS analysis. For the label-free quantification, aliquots containing 25 ug of total protein from each pooled reference sample were mixed with 5.3 ug of the UPS2 Proteomics Dynamic Range Standard (Sigma-Aldrich, Saint-Louis, MO), and the samples were digested with trypsin as described above. Digested peptide samples were treated with HiPPR detergent removal kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Each sample was subsequently separated into 8 fractions on Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase spin column kit (Thermo Fischer Scientific) using stepwise elution with 0.1% aqueous trimethylamine solution containing 7.5, 10.0, 12.25, 14.5, 16.75, 19.0, 21.25 and 50.0% of acetonitrile. The fractions were dried and reconstituted in 15μl of 3% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid for LC-MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer version 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used for protein identification and quantification. Reference databases for Kluyveromyces marxianus (strain DMKU3-1042 / BCC 29191 / NBRC 104275), Saccharomyces cerevisiae ATCC 204508 / S288c, Scheffersomyces (Pichia) stipitis (strain ATCC 58785 / CBS 6054 / NBRC 10063 / NRRL Y-11545) and Schizosaccharomyces pombe (strain 972 / ATCC 24843) were downloaded from Uniprot (November 2019) and supplemented with the common proteomic contaminant sequences; in the label-free workflow 2, the databases were additionally supplemented with 48 UPS protein sequences. The following parameters were common between the workflows: Mascot version 2.5.1 (Matrix Science, London, UK) was used as a database search engine; 5 ppm precursor tolerance and 0.6 Da fragment tolerance; trypsin with 1 allowed missed cleavage as an enzyme rule; oxidation on methionine as a variable modification; methylthiolation on cysteine as a fixed modification; Percolator for PSM validation with the strict FDR threshold of 1%. Additional parameters for the TMT workflow 1: TMT as a fixed modification on peptide N-termini and lysine; TMT 10plex Lot. No UF282325 as a quantification method with the reporters identified within 40 ppm in the MS3 spectra; quantification based on unique peptides and reporter S/N, with the correction for isotopic impurities, the average reporter S/N threshold of 10 and SPS match threshold of 0%; reporter normalization on total peptide amount. Additional parameters for the label-free workflow 2: precursor mass recalibration enabled with the initial precursor match tolerance of 20 ppm; Minora Feature detection was used for precursor ion quantification; intensities at peak maxima for all unique and shared peptides were used for protein quantification; chromatographic retention time (RT) alignment was enabled with the max RT shift of 10 min; feature linking and mapping was enabled with the minimal S/N of 5. Protein intensities from 3 injection replicates were averaged.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Intensity-based absolute quantification, Yeast, Systems biology, Lfq, Tandem mass tag, Tmt, Orbitrap fusion lumos, Ibaq, Label-free quantification, Orbitrap fusion

### Affiliations
SAMBIO Core Facilities, Sahgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg
Professor. Department of Biology and Biological Engineering, Chalmers University of Technology, SE-41296 Gothenburg, Sweden; Wallenberg Center for Protein Research, Chalmers University of Technology, SE-41296 Gothenburg, Sweden; Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability, Chalmers University of Technology, SE-41296 Gothenburg, Sweden; Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability, Technical University of Denmark, DK-2800 Lyngby, Denmark

### Submitter
Proteomics Core Facility

### Lab Head
Dr Jens B Nielsen
Professor. Department of Biology and Biological Engineering, Chalmers University of Technology, SE-41296 Gothenburg, Sweden; Wallenberg Center for Protein Research, Chalmers University of Technology, SE-41296 Gothenburg, Sweden; Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability, Chalmers University of Technology, SE-41296 Gothenburg, Sweden; Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability, Technical University of Denmark, DK-2800 Lyngby, Denmark


