### Accession
PXD017773

### Title
Identification of ECM3 interactors by affinity purification followed by mass spectrometry analysis.

### Description
Identification of ECM3 interactors by affinity purification followed by mass spectrometry analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Co-purified proteins were dissolved in 20 µL 50 mM NH4HCO3 containing 8 M urea and 5 mM dithiothreitol and incubated for 15 min at 37 ºC with shaking at 800 rpm. The free thiol groups were alkylated by adding 400 mM iodoacetamide to a final concentration of 10 mM and incubating the mixture for 30 min at the same conditions. Samples were 8-folds diluted with 50 mM NH4HCO3, and 1 M CaCl2 was added to a final concentration of 1 mM. The digestion was carried out overnight at 37 ºC using trypsin at 0.1 µg trypsin per sample. Digested peptides were desalted using C18 spin columns (Ultramicrospin columns, C18, 3-30 µg capacity, Nest Group) and dried in a vacuum centrifuge. Co-purified proteins were dissolved in 20 µL 50 mM NH4HCO3 containing 8 M urea and 5 mM dithiothreitol and incubated for 15 min at 37 ºC with shaking at 800 rpm. The free thiol groups were alkylated by adding 400 mM iodoacetamide to a final concentration of 10 mM and incubating the mixture for 30 min at the same conditions. Samples were 8-folds diluted with 50 mM NH4HCO3, and 1 M CaCl2 was added to a final concentration of 1 mM. The digestion was carried out overnight at 37 ºC using trypsin at 0.1 µg trypsin per sample. Digested peptides were desalted using C18 spin columns (Ultramicrospin columns, C18, 3-30 µg capacity, Nest Group) and dried in a vacuum centrifuge.  Peptides were analyzed liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry on a Waters NanoAquity UPLC system with a custom packed C18 column (70 cm × 75 μm i.d., Phenomenex Jupiter, 3 μm particle size, 300 Å pore size) coupled with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Elution was carried out using the following gradient of water (solvent A) and acetonitrile (solvent B) both containing 0.1% formic acid: 1-8% B in 2 min, 8-12% B in 18 min, 12-30% B in 55 min, 30-45% B in 22 min, 45-95% B in 3 min, hold for 5 min in 95% B and 99-1% B in 10 min. Eluting peptides were analyzed online by nanoelectrospray ionization and MS1 scans were collected over 300–1800 m/z at a resolution of 60,000 at 400 m/z. The MS2 scans were collected in data-dependent acquisition with 2 second cycles and high-energy collision induced dissociation (HCD) fragmentation (2.0 m/z isolation width; 30% normalized collision energy; 7,500 resolution at 400 m/z), before being dynamically excluded for 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched with MaxQuant software (v.1.5.5.1) against the mouse reference proteome databased from Uniprot Knowledge Base (downloaded August 14, 2018). Peptides were required to be cleaved by trypsin in both termini, but 2 undigested sites were allowed per peptide. The following variable modifications were considered: on acetylation and oxidation on protein N-terminal and methionine, respectively. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification. Mass shift tolerance was used as the default setting of the software.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lungs, Ecm3, Proteomics, Affinity purification, Interacting proteins

### Affiliations
Biological Sciences Division, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory

### Submitter
Ernesto Nakayasu

### Lab Head
Dr Ernesto Nakayasu
Biological Sciences Division, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory


