### Accession
PXD034434

### Title
FBL promotes cancer cell resistance to DNA damage by transcriptionally regulating BRCA1 via YBX1

### Description
In order to study the molecular mechanism of FBL in cells, this project constructed the full length of FBL into the SFB (S-Flag-SBP tag) vector, and constructed a stable cell line overexpressing FBL. Affinity chromatography combined with LC-MS/MS technology to screen FBL interacting proteins.

### Sample Protocol
HCT116 cells stably expressing SFB-tagged FBL from 50 10 cm2 culture dishes were collected and lysed with NETN300 buffers (50 mM Tris-HCl pH8.0, 300 mM NaCl, 0.5mM EDTA, 0.5% NP-40) for 20 min on ice. The supernatants were diluted with the same volume of NETN100 (50 mM Tris-HCl pH8.0, 100 mM NaCl, 0.5mM EDTA, 0.5% NP-40) and incubated with streptavidin-conjugated beads at 4 °C for 2 h. The beads were washed three times with NETN100 buffers and eluted with saturating 2 mg/ml biotin (Sigma) in NETN100 buffers for 30 min at 4 °C. The eluants were incubated with S-protein agarose beads (Millipore) for 1 h at 4 °C. The beads were washed three times with NETN100 buffers. Proteins bound to S-beads were eluted by SDS loading buffers and subject to SDS-PAGE. The entire protein band (less than 1 cm) was excised and analyzed by mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
The tryptic peptides were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS using the Q ExactiveTM HFX hybrid quadrupole-OrbitrapTM mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, USA). The methods were briefly described as follows, the peptides solutions were separated by Nano-liquid chromatography on a capillary column (150 μm id × 120 mm) packed with C18 (3 μm, 100 Å,) at a flow rate of 600 nL/min. The mobile phase was consisted of 0.1 % formic acid in water (A) and 0.1 % formic acid in 80 % ACN (B). The elution gradient used was 6 % to 95 % mobile phase B for 85 min. Data acquisition was performed using the data dependent mode. The Q-Exactive HF was run under positive mode. The MS1 was analyzed with a mass range of 300–2000 at a resolution of 120, 000 at 200 m/z. The automatic gain control (AGC) was set as 3e6 and the maximum injection time (MIT) was 80 ms. The MS2 was analyzed in data-dependent mode for the 25 most intense ions subjected to fragmentation in the Orbitrap. For each scan, the AGC was set at 5e4 and the MIT was set at 45 ms. The dynamic range was set at 15 s to suppress repeated detection of the same ion peaks.NCE was set 20,27.  The mass spectrometry data analyzed via Maxquant v 1.5.3.8 with the UniProt reviewed human proteome database (20192). Database search parameters of Maxquant were set as follows: a maximum of two missed cleavage sites permitted from trypsin digestion (RK), 15 ppm precursor mass tolerance, 10 ppm fragment mass tolerance, carbamidomethylation (C, +57. 022 Da) as a fixed modification, and oxidization (M, +15. 995 Da), Acetylation (Protein N-term, +42.011 Da) as dynamic modifications. FDR calculation was set to 1% at the peptide level.

### Publication Abstract
Fibrillarin (FBL) is a highly conserved nucleolar methyltransferase responsible for methylation of ribosomal RNA and proteins. Here, we reveal a role for FBL in DNA damage response and its impact on cancer proliferation and sensitivity to DNA-damaging agents. FBL is highly expressed in various cancers and correlates with poor survival outcomes in cancer patients. Knockdown of FBL sensitizes tumor cells and xenografts to DNA crosslinking agents, and leads to homologous recombination-mediated DNA repair defects. We identify Y-box-binding protein-1 (YBX1) as a key interacting partner of FBL, and FBL increases the nuclear accumulation of YBX1 in response to DNA damage. We show that FBL promotes the expression of BRCA1 by increasing the binding of YBX1 to the BRCA1 promoter. Our study sheds light on the regulatory mechanism of FBL in tumorigenesis and DNA damage response, providing potential therapeutic targets to overcome chemoresistance in cancer.

### Keywords
Human, Nonolc-ms/ms, Hct116 cells, Fbl

### Affiliations
Hebei university
Hebei University

### Submitter
Zhenzhen Yan

### Lab Head
Dr Chen Wu
Hebei university


