### Accession
PXD034596

### Title
Proteomic profiling of fibroblasts differentiates patients with severe, intermediate and mild spinal muscular atrophy

### Description
Most research to characterise the molecular consequences of spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) have focused on SMA I. Here, proteomic profiling of skin fibroblasts from severe (SMA I), intermediate (SMA II), or mild (SMA III) patients and age-matched controls was conducted using SWATH mass spectrometry analysis. Differentially expressed proteome profiles showed limited overlap across each SMA type, and variability was greatest within SMA II fibroblasts which was not explained by SMN2 copy number. Despite limited proteomic overlap, enriched canonical pathways common to all SMA types included mTOR signaling, regulation of eIF2 and eIF4 signaling, and protein ubiquitination. BioLayout expression clustering identified protein profiles that discriminate or correlate with SMA severity. From these clusters, the differential expression of PYGB (SMA I), RAB3B (SMA II), and IMP1 and STAT1 (both SMA III) was verified by western blot, and transfection of SMA II fibroblasts with SMN-enhanced constructs confirmed RAB3B expression is SMN-dependent. In combination, this four-protein panel may have potential utility for stratifying patients into clinical trials or for monitoring therapeutic effectiveness. In addition, the diverse proteome profiles and pathways identified here pave the way for further studies aimed at optimising therapeutic strategies for SMA patients of differing severities.

### Sample Protocol
Following passage, cell pellets were washed with PBS. Cell pellets for mass spectrometry (MS) analysis were lysed in 8 M urea dissolved in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate in sterile distilled water plus 2% sodium deoxycholate. Cell pellets for western blot (WB) analyses were lysed on ice for 15-20 min with an equivalent volume of RIPA buffer (1% tergitol-type NP-40 (NP40; 9016-45-9, ICN Biomedicals), 0.25% deoxycholic acid (D6750; Sigma), 1mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA; 104245S, BDH), 150 mM sodium chloride (NaCl; BP358-212, Fisher Scientific) and 50 mM Tris-HCl b, pH 7.4 (Tris; BP152-1, Fisher Scientific). All samples were sonicated for 10 sec, then centrifugated at 13,000 RPM (MSE, Heathfield, UK; MSB010.CX2.5 Micro Centaur) for 5 min at 4 °C to pellet any insoluble material and their protein concentrations determined via PierceTM BCA Protein Assay Kit (23227; ThermoScientific). Absorbance was measured at 562 nm with a FLUOstar Omega microplate reader (BMG LABTECH) and a standard curve generated from a plot of the average-blank corrected absorbance for each standard versus its concentration.  Preparation of samples for IDA and SWATH mass spectrometry A 30 μg aliquot of each sample in 8 M urea/100 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate/2% sodium deoxycholate was reduced with Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (5 mM) at 30oC for 1 h followed by alkylation with iodoacetamide (10 mM) at room temperature (RT) for 30 min in the dark. The reaction was quenched with 20mM DTT. Prior to trypsin digestion, each sample was diluted to 1.5 M urea and then digested with trypsin (1:50; protease:protein) overnight. Samples were acidified to 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA).  Peptides were desalted by reversed phase C-18 and then dried, then resuspended to a  concentration of 1 µg/µl in loading buffer (2% acetonitrile, 0.05% TFA). Sequential Window Acquisition of all Theoretical mass spectra (SWATH-MS) was performed on individual samples. In addition, a pool of all samples was prepared and subjected to nanoLC MS/MS analysis (Information dependent acquisition (IDA)-LC-MS/MS). Remaining peptides were pooled and fractionated on high pH Reverse Phase (XBridge C18 5µm 4.6x100mm column, Waters) into 12 fractions which were analysed individually in IDA mode.

### Data Protocol
For IDA, a combined sample (1 μg) or a high pH RP fraction was injected onto a reverse-phase trap (Acclaim Pepmap 100 μm × 2 cm, Thermo Fisher) for pre-concentration and desalted with loading buffer, at 5 μL/min for 10 min on a nanoLC-MS system (Eksigent nanoLC AS-2/2Dplus system coupled to a Triple TOF 5600+ mass spectrometer, both Sciex). The peptide trap was then switched into line with the analytical column (Acclaim Pepmap RSLC 75 μm × 15 cm, Thermo Fisher). Peptides were eluted from the column at a flow rate of 300 nl/min using a linear solvent gradient: linear 2–20% of buffer B (Mobile phase A: 2% acetonitrile, 98% water, 0.1% formic acid; Mobile phase B: 98% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) over 90 min, linear 20–40% of buffer B for 30 min, linear 40–98% of buffer B for 10 min, isocratic 98% of buffer B for 5 min, linear 98-2% of buffer B for 2.5 min and isocratic 2% solvent buffer B for 12.5 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in IDA top 20 positive ion mode, with 250 and 150 ms acquisition time for the MS1 (m/z 400–1250) and MS2 (m/z 230–1800) scans respectively, and 15 s dynamic exclusion. Rolling collision energy with a collision energy spread of 5 eV was used for fragmentation. The data files were searched using Mascot against the Swissprot database (January 2019), restricted only to proteins from humans, with trypsin as the cleavage enzyme and carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification of cysteines. Note that the iRT peptides were added to this database.  For SWATH, each sample (1 μg) was injected onto the same LCMS set up as above with the same gradient, except that data acquisition was done in SWATH mode. The method uses 100 variable windows width with a 1 Da overlap as developed and optimized by Sciex on plasma. Each window has a dwell time of 150 ms to cover the mass range of 400–1250 m/z in TOF-MS mode and MS/MS data is acquired over a range of 230–1800 m/z with high sensitivity setting and a dwell time of 35 ms, resulting in a cycle time of 3.7 s. The collision energy for each window was set using the collision energy of a 2+ ion centred in the middle of the window with a spread of 5 eV. All Mascot searches using the IDA data were exported as .dat file and assembled to a spectral library in Skyline by associating each peptide to its respective protein. After the SWATH spectra were imported, peaks were reintegrated using the mprophet peak scoring model. Sum total area [62] was then used to determine fold differences in the protein expression of proteins identified by ≥2 peptides between each SMA Type and their respective age-matched controls.   Bioinformatics analysis Only proteins with a fold-change ≥1.25 or ≤0.80 and a p-value ≤0.05 were included in further analyses. Venn diagrams were generated with InteractiVenn [63] and heat maps with Prism Version 8.4.3. Differentially expressed proteins that met the criteria specified above were analysed using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) software (Ingenuity Systems, Silicon Valley, CA; [64]) to explore the cellular and molecular pathways that may have been altered because of expression changes in SMA I-III fibroblasts versus their age-matched controls. A right-tailed Fisher’s Exact Test was used to calculate a p-value determining the probability that each cellular and molecular function or canonical pathway assigned to that data set is due to chance alone and the final list of functions and pathways were ranked accordingly to the resulting p-value.

### Publication Abstract
Most research to characterise the molecular consequences of spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) has focused on SMA I. Here, proteomic profiling of skin fibroblasts from severe (SMA I), intermediate (SMA II), and mild (SMA III) patients, alongside age-matched controls, was conducted using SWATH mass spectrometry analysis. Differentially expressed proteomic profiles showed limited overlap across each SMA type, and variability was greatest within SMA II fibroblasts, which was not explained by <i>SMN2</i> copy number. Despite limited proteomic overlap, enriched canonical pathways common to two of three SMA severities with at least one differentially expressed protein from the third included mTOR signalling, regulation of eIF2 and eIF4 signalling, and protein ubiquitination. Network expression clustering analysis identified protein profiles that may discriminate or correlate with SMA severity. From these clusters, the differential expression of PYGB (SMA I), RAB3B (SMA II), and IMP1 and STAT1 (SMA III) was verified by Western blot. All SMA fibroblasts were transfected with an SMN-enhanced construct, but only RAB3B expression in SMA II fibroblasts demonstrated an SMN-dependent response. The diverse proteomic profiles and pathways identified here pave the way for studies to determine their utility as biomarkers for patient stratification or monitoring treatment efficacy and for the identification of severity-specific treatments.

### Keywords
Proteomic profile, Spinal muscular atrophy

### Affiliations
Wolfson Centre for Inherited Neuromuscular Disease, TORCH Building, RJAH Orthopaedic Hospital, Oswestry, SY10 7AG, UK
University of St Andrews

### Submitter
Sally Shirran

### Lab Head
Dr Heidi Fuller
Wolfson Centre for Inherited Neuromuscular Disease, TORCH Building, RJAH Orthopaedic Hospital, Oswestry, SY10 7AG, UK


