### Accession
PXD003902

### Title
VEGF orchestration of the p130Cas Interactome

### Description
p130Cas is a polyvalent adapter protein essential for cardiovascular development, and with a key role in cell movement. In order to identify the pathways by which p130Cas exerts its biological functions in endothelial cells we mapped the p130Cas interactome and its dynamic changes in response to VEGF using high-resolution mass spectrometry and reconstruction of protein interaction (PPI) networks with the aid of multiple PPI databases. The work presented here was based on a collaboration between University College London and University College Dublin. Dr Ian Evans (first author) and  Prof. Ian Zachary (lab head), can be contacted at: Centre for Cardiovascular Biology and Medicine, Division of Medicine The Rayne Building, University College London, London WC1E 6JJ, United Kingdom. Contact details for University College Dublin collaborators can be found below.

### Sample Protocol
HUVECs were lysed with 10mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 50mM NaCl, 5mM EDTA, 1% Triton-X100, CompleteTM protease inhibitor cocktail EDTA free (Santa Cruz) and phosphatase inhibitors (SIGMA). Lysates were centrifuged at 20,000g for 10 minutes to remove insoluble debris, pre-cleared by mixing with A/G agarose beads in lysis buffer for 1 hour with constant mixing, and were then used for immunoprecipitation with p130Cas antibody (1:50 dilution) for 16 hours. Immunocomplexes were captured with Protein A/G PLUS agarose beads (Santa Cruz) for 1 hour. p130Cas immunoprecipitates that were used for mass spectrometry were washed three times with lysis buffer and twice with PBS to remove detergent. All above procedures were carried out on ice or at 4°C. Beads were stored on dry ice, and immunoprecipitated proteins were eluted in a 2-step process. Firstly, beads were incubated with 60μl eluting buffer 1 (50mM Tris-HCl; pH7, 2 M urea and 5 μg/mL trypsin (modified sequencing grade trypsin); Promega) at 27°C for 30 minutes under gentle agitation. Then, samples were centrifuged and the supernatants were placed in a fresh tube. For the second elution step 2 x 25μl elution buffer 2 (2 M urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH7.5, and 1mM DTT) was added to the beads. All supernatants were combined and allowed to digest overnight at room temperature. Then, samples were alkylated with 20μl iodoacetamide (5 mg/ml) for 30 minutes in the dark. This reaction was stopped with 1μl of 100% trifluoracetic acid (TFA), and the sample (~110μl) was immediately loaded onto equilibrated C18 StageTips. Samples were added to the activated tips, desalted using 2 X 50μl of 0.1% TFA solution, and eluted with 2 X 25μl of 50% ACN and 0.1% TFA solution. Final eluates were combined and concentrated using a CentriVap concentrator (Labconco), resuspended in 12μl 0.1% TFA and analysed by mass spectrometry. The samples were analysed on a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) connected to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 (RSLCnano) chromatography system (Thermo Scientific) incorporating an autosampler. A total of 5μl of tryptic peptides from each sample was loaded onto a homemade column (100mm length, 75 μm inside diameter), packed with 1.9 μm ReprosilAQ C18 (Dr. Maisch, Germany) and separated by an increasing acetonitrile gradient using a 40 min reverse-phase gradient (from 3%-32% Acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 250nL/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode with a capillary temperature of 220°C and a potential of 2000 V applied to the capillary. All data were acquired with the mass spectrometer operating in automatic data-dependent switching mode. A high-resolution MS scan (350-2,000 Da) was performed using the Orbitrap to select the 12 most intense ions for fragmentation and MS/MS analysis. The MaxQuant software suite (v 1.3.0.5) containing the in-built Andromeda search engine was used to identify the proteins from a human database (Uniprot HUMAN, release 2012_01) containing 20,242 entries, and determine their relative concentration by label-free quantification31. For database searches, the precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for first searches and 6 ppm for main Andromeda search. The MaxQuant parameters used were as previously described29. In brief, default parameters were used with the exception of minimum ratio count set to 1 and minimum peptide length was set at 6 amino acids. The search included a fixed modification of Carbamidomethyl (C) and variable modifications of Oxidation (M);Acetyl (Protein N-term). The maximum number of missed cleavages was set at 2. An FDR of 0.01 was set for peptide and protein identifications. The presence of reverse and contaminant identifications were removed from the dataset

### Data Protocol
We first compared log-transformed protein intensities of HUVECs infected with Ad expressing either p130Cas (Ad.p130Cas), or p130Cas15F (Ad. p130Cas15F, mutant) and VEGF treated (0, 10, 30 and 60 minutes) p130cas bait transfected (wild-type/ mutant 15F) and VEGF treated (for 0, 10, 30 and 60 minutes) samples were compared with the corresponding VEGF treated (for 0, 10, 30 and 60 minutes) isogenic controls. samples, i.e. bead transfected and VEGF treated (for 0, 10, 30 and 60 minutes) samples. The comparison was performed using BDiffProt algorithm [29], which identified differentially expressed proteins between the control (transfected with bead) (isogenic control) and non-control (transfected with wild-type or mutant p130cas baits) samples.

### Publication Abstract
p130Cas is a polyvalent adapter protein essential for cardiovascular development, and with a key role in cell movement. In order to identify the pathways by which p130Cas exerts its biological functions in endothelial cells we mapped the p130Cas interactome and its dynamic changes in response to VEGF using high-resolution mass spectrometry and reconstruction of protein interaction (PPI) networks with the aid of multiple PPI databases. VEGF enriched the p130Cas interactome in proteins involved in actin cytoskeletal dynamics and cell movement, including actin-binding proteins, small GTPases and regulators or binders of GTPases. Detailed studies showed that p130Cas association of the GTPase-binding scaffold protein, IQGAP1, plays a key role in VEGF chemotactic signaling, endothelial polarization, VEGF-induced cell migration, and endothelial tube formation. These findings indicate a cardinal role for assembly of the p130Cas interactome in mediating the cell migratory response to VEGF in angiogenesis, and provide a basis for further studies of p130Cas in cell movement.

### Keywords
Focal adhesion, Neuropilin, Iqgap1, Cell movement, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Systems Biology Ireland, University College Dublin.
Systems Biology Ireland, University College Dublin, Belfiedl, Dublin 4, Ireland

### Submitter
Susan Kennedy

### Lab Head
Dr Walter Kolch
Systems Biology Ireland, University College Dublin, Belfiedl, Dublin 4, Ireland


