### Accession
PXD003607

### Title
Ovarian Cancer Proteomics of FFPE Tissue

### Description
We have performed in-depth examination of single tissue sections from a collection of FFPE and Frozen treated tumors, as well as cell line material all originating from different subtypes of epithelial ovarian cancer (high-grade serous, clear cell, endometrioid). Data were prepared using a tandem mass tag 10plex protocol with MS3 analysis on an Orbitrap Fusion.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were prepared using a variation on the paramagnetic bead protocol, SP3, as described in the manuscript text. Samples were TMT labeled, fractionated with high-pH C18 RP chromatography, and the fractions analyzed using MS3 on an Orbitrap Fusion MS.

### Data Protocol
Data were initially processed using SEQUEST HT in the Proteome Discoverer software (v2.1). Results were processed further in the R programming language.

### Publication Abstract
Although re-sequencing of gene panels and mRNA expression profiling are now firmly established in clinical laboratories, in-depth proteome analysis has remained a niche technology, better suited for studying model systems rather than challenging materials such as clinical trial samples. To address this limitation, we have developed a novel and optimized platform called SP3-Clinical Tissue Proteomics (SP3-CTP) for in-depth proteome profiling of practical quantities of tumour tissues, including formalin fixed and paraffin embedded (FFPE). Using single 10&#x2009;&#x3bc;m scrolls of clinical tumour blocks, we performed in-depth quantitative analyses of individual sections from ovarian tumours covering the high-grade serous, clear cell, and endometrioid histotypes. This examination enabled the generation of a novel high-resolution proteome map of ovarian cancer histotypes from clinical tissues. Comparison of the obtained proteome data with large-scale genome and transcriptome analyses validated the observed proteome biology for previously validated hallmarks of this disease, and also identified novel protein features. A tissue microarray analysis validated cystathionine gamma-lyase (CTH) as a novel clear cell carcinoma feature with potential clinical relevance. In addition to providing a milestone in the understanding of ovarian cancer biology, these results show that in-depth proteomic analysis of clinically annotated FFPE materials can be effectively used as a biomarker discovery tool and perhaps ultimately as a diagnostic approach.

### Keywords
Ovary, Clear cell, Tandem mass tags, Endometrioid, Serous, Ovarian cancer, Orbitrap fusion

### Affiliations
Proteomics Head, British Columbia Cancer Research Centre
BC Cancer Agency

### Submitter
Christopher Hughes

### Lab Head
Dr Gregg Morin
Proteomics Head, British Columbia Cancer Research Centre


