### Accession
PXD003275

### Title
Differential proteomics of Lenisia limosa (Breviatea) and its epibiotic Arcobacter symbiont

### Description
The Breviatea form a lineage of free-living protists that emerged over 800 million years ago as a sister clade to opistokonta, comprising animals and fungi. Breviates conserved the ability to thrive in absence of oxygen which was an important adaptation to the low oceanic oxygen-levels that prevailed by that time. We previously found that the novel breviate, Lenisia limosa, gen. et sp. nov., was opportunistically colonized by relatives of animal-associated Arcobacter. Here we used differential proteomics to investigate how the presence/absence of symbiotic Arcobacter is manifested in Lenisia limosa's proteome. Vice versa, we also measured how symbiosis is reflected in Arcobacter's proteome. The results provide a resource to characterize the molecular underpinnings of a novel protist-prokaryote symbiosis.

### Sample Protocol
For each of the three treatments we prepared tryptic digests from three biological replicates following the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol described by Wisniewski et al.  (2009, Nat. Meth. 6(5)). In brief, SDT-lysis buffer (4% (w/v) SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6, 0.1 M DTT) was added in a 1:10 sample/buffer ratio to the sample pellets. Samples were heated for lysis to 95° C for 10 minutes followed by pelleting of debris for 5 min at 21,000 x g. 30 µl of the cleared lysate were mixed with 200 µl of UA solution (8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris/HCl pH 8.5) in a 10 kDa MWCO 500 µl centrifugal filter unit (VWR International) and centrifuged at 14,000 x g for 40 min. 200 µl of UA solution were added again and centrifugal filter spun at 14,000 x g for 40 min. 100 µl of IAA solution (0.05 M iodoacetamide in UA solution) were added to the filter and incubated at 22° C for 20 min. The IAA solution was removed by centrifugation and the filter was washed three times by adding 100 µl of UA solution and then centrifuging. The buffer on the filter was then changed to ABC (50 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate), by washing the filter three times with 100 µl of ABC. 2 µg of MS grade trypsin (Thermo Scientific Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA) in 40 µl of ABC were added to the filter and filters incubated over night in a wet chamber at 37° C. The next day, peptides were eluted by centrifugation at 14,000 x g for 20 min, followed by addition of 50 µl of 0.5 M NaCl and again centrifugation. Peptides were desalted using C18 spin columns (Thermo Scientific Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Approximate peptide concentrations were determined using the Pierce Micro BCA assay (Thermo Scientific Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA) following the manufacturer’s instructions.  1D-LC-MS/MS Samples were analyzed by 1D-LC-MS/MS using a block-randomized design as outlined by Oberg and Vitek (2009, J Proteome Res. 8(5)). 2 blank runs were done between samples to reduce carry over. For each sample a technical replicate was run. For each run 800 ng of peptide were loaded onto a 2 cm, 75 µm ID C18 Acclaim® PepMap 100 pre-column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using an EASY-nLC 1000 Liquid Chromatograph (Thermo Fisher Scientific) set up in 2-column mode. The pre-column was connected to a 50 cm x 75 µm analytical EASY-Spray column packed with PepMap RSLC C18, 2µm material (Thermo Fisher Scientific), which was heated to 35° C via the integrated heating module. The analytical column was connected via an Easy-Spray source to a Q Exactive Plus hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on the analytical column at a flow rate of 225 nl/min using a 260 min gradient going from buffer A (0.2% formic acid, 5% acetonitrile) to 20% buffer B (0.2% formic acid in acetonitrile) in 200 min, then from 20 to 35% B in 40 min and ending with 20 min at 100% B. Eluting peptides were ionized with electrospray ionization (ESI) and analyzed in the Q Exactive Plus. Full scans were acquired in the Orbitrap at 70,000 resolution. MS/MS scans of the 15 most abundant precursor ions were acquired in the Orbitrap at 17,500 resolution. Ions with charge state +1 were excluded from MS/MS analysis. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 sec. Roughly 160,000 MS/MS spectra were acquired per sample run.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification a custom protein sequence database containing 28966 sequences from the Lenisia transcriptome and several bacterial species that were binned from the metagenomes was used. For protein identification technical replicates were combined and MS/MS spectra were searched against the database using the Sequest HT node in Proteome Discoverer version 2.0.0.802 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with the following parameters: Trypsin (Full), max. 2 missed cleavages, 10 ppm precursor mass tolerance, 0.6 Da fragment mass tolerance and max. 3 equal dynamic modifications per peptide. The following three dynamic modifications were considered: oxidation on M (+15.995 Da), carbamidomethyl on C (+57.021 Da) and acetyl on protein N-terminus (+42.011 Da). False discovery rates (FDRs) for peptide spectral matches (PSMs) were calculated and filtered using the Percolator Node in Proteome Discoverer. The Percolator algorithm “uses semi-supervised learning and a decoy database search strategy to learn to distinguish between correct and incorrect PSMs” (Spivak et al. 2009 J Proteome Res. 8(7)). Percolator was run with the following settings: Maximum Delta Cn 0.05, a strict target FDR of 0.01, a relaxed target FDR of 0.05 and validation based on q-value.

### Publication Abstract
Breviatea form a lineage of free living, unicellular protists, distantly related to animals and fungi. This lineage emerged almost one billion years ago, when the oceanic oxygen content was low, and extant Breviatea have evolved or retained an anaerobic lifestyle. Here we report the cultivation of Lenisia limosa, gen. et sp. nov., a newly discovered breviate colonized by relatives of animal-associated Arcobacter. Physiological experiments show that the association of L. limosa with Arcobacter is driven by the transfer of hydrogen and is mutualistic, providing benefits to both partners. With whole-genome sequencing and differential proteomics, we show that an experimentally observed fitness gain of L. limosa could be explained by the activity of a so far unknown type of NAD(P)H-accepting hydrogenase, which is expressed in the presence, but not in the absence, of Arcobacter. Differential proteomics further reveal that the presence of Lenisia stimulates expression of known 'virulence' factors by Arcobacter. These proteins typically enable colonization of animal cells during infection, but may in the present case act for mutual benefit. Finally, re-investigation of two currently available transcriptomic data sets of other Breviatea reveals the presence and activity of related hydrogen-consuming Arcobacter, indicating that mutualistic interaction between these two groups of microbes might be pervasive. Our results support the notion that molecular mechanisms involved in virulence can also support mutualism, as shown here for Arcobacter and Breviatea.

### Keywords
Symbiosis, Metaproteomics, Easy nlc 1000, Lc-ms/ms, Q exactive plus, Lenisia limosa, Microbial community

### Affiliations
North Carolina State University
University of Calgary, Department of Geoscience

### Submitter
Manuel Kleiner

### Lab Head
Dr Marc Strous
University of Calgary, Department of Geoscience


