### Accession
PXD038019

### Title
The permanently chaperone-active small heat shock protein Hsp17 from C. elegans exhibits topological separation of its N-terminal regions

### Description
Small Heat shock proteins (sHsps) are a family of molecular chaperones that bind non-native proteins in an ATP-independent manner. C. elegans encodes 16 different sHsps, among them Hsp17, which is evolutionarily distinct from other sHsps in the nematode. The structure and mechanism of Hsp17 and how these may differ from other sHsps remain unclear. Here, we find that Hsp17 has a distinct expression pattern, structural organization, and chaperone function. Consistent with its presence under non-stress conditions, and in contrast to many other sHsps, we determined that Hsp17 is a mono-disperse, permanently active chaperone in vitro, which interacts with hundreds of different C. elegans proteins under physiological conditions. Additionally, our cryo-EM structure of Hsp17 reveals that in the 24-mer complex, 12 N-terminal regions are involved in its chaperone function. These flexible regions are located on the outside of the spherical oligomer, whereas the other 12 N-terminal regions are engaged in stabilizing interactions in its interior. This allows the same region in Hsp17 to perform different functions depending on the topological context. Taken together, our results reveal structural and functional features that further define the structural basis of permanently active sHsps.

### Sample Protocol
Tryptic digestion and desalting of the insoluble and soluble fraction 
For MS analysis, insoluble fractions were resuspended in 100 µL denaturation buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 7 M Urea), incubated for 30 min at 37 °C and thereafter centrifuged for 10 min at 16900 g. The supernatant was used for further sample preparation. Soluble fractions were not further pre-treated. Proteins were precipitated by the addition of 600 µL acetone and samples were incubated at -80 °C overnight. The next day, the samples were centrifuged for 15 min at 16900 g. Protein pellets were washed twice with 800 µL pre-cooled methanol and once sonicated for 10 sec. Samples were centrifuged again and the supernatant was completely removed. The pellets were dissolved in 198 μL denaturation buffer and 2 μL 500 mM TCEP were added, followed by an incubation step at 37 °C for 1 h. For alkylation, 4 μL 500 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) were added and the samples were incubated for 30 min at RT in the dark. The reaction was quenched by addition of 4µL 500 mM DTT to each sample and followed by another incubation step for 30 min at RT. Subsequently, 600 µL 50 mM Triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) were added as well as 2 μL 500 ng/μL Trypsin (Promega) and samples were incubated at 37 °C overnight. The tryptic digest was stopped by the addition of 10 μL formic acid (FA) on the next day. The samples were desalted with 50 mg SEP PAK (tC18) columns (Waters). In advance, the columns were equilibrated with 1 mL acetonitrile (ACN), 1 mL elution buffer (80% (v/v) ACN, 0.5% (v/v) FA) and three times with 1 mL 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Samples were loaded and the columns were washed three times with 1 mL 0.1% (v/v) TFA and 250 μL 0.5% (v/v) FA. The peptides were eluted three times with 250 μL elution buffer, the first two times by gravity flow and last time with vacuum applied. The collected samples were dried in a speed vacuum centrifuge (Eppendorf). Afterwards, samples were dissolved in 40 μL 1% FA and incubated for 5 min in an ultrasonic bath at RT. The samples were filtered through 0.22 μm centrifugal filters (Merck; 2 min at 16900 g). The solutions were transferred into Chromacol vials (Thermo Scientific) for the measurements.  

MS/MS measurement 
MS measurements were carried out on an Orbitrap Fusion that is coupled to an Ultimate3000 Nano-HPLC via an electrospray easy source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Data were acquired using Xcalibur software (version 3.0sp2, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded on a 2 cm PepMap RSLC C18 trap column (particles 3 µm, 100A, inner diameter 75 µm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. Next, for separation a 50 cm PepMap RSLC C18 column (particles 2 µm, 100A, inner diameter 75 µm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 40 °C was used. Each measurement was done with a flow rate of 400 nL/min and a gradient over 135 min, 5-90 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid (7 min 5 % acetonitrile, 105 min to 22 %, 10 min to 32 %, 10 min to 90 %, 10 min wash at 90 %, 10 min equilibration at 5 %). Survey scans (m/z 300-1,500) were acquired with a resolution of 120,000 and the maximum injection time set to 50 ms (AGC target 2.0e5). The HCD collision energy was set to 30 % and charge states 2-7 were selected. The maximum injection time in the ion trap was set to 100 ms with an AGC target of 1.0e4. At all available parallelization time injection of ions was allowed and dynamic exclusion of sequenced peptides was set to 1 min. Fluoroanthene ions (internally generated) were used for real-time mass calibration.

### Data Protocol
Obtained MS raw data were analyzed with MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.6) (Cox et al., 2014; Cox and Mann, 2008). Raw files were searched against the unreviewed C. elegans (taxon identifier: 6239) proteome dataset which was downloaded from UniprotDB (date: 20.01.2021). Basically, default settings were applied. All files were assigned to the same fraction and the tryptic cleavage sites before proline were included. For the peptides up to two missed cleavage sites were allowed as well as a peptide tolerance of 4.5 ppm. Carbamidomethylation were selected as fixed modification as well as N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were selected as variable modifications. Further up to 5 modifications per peptide were allowed and the min. ratio count for label free quantification (LFQ) was set to 1. Peptide length had to be in a range between 7 and 25 amino acids, borders are included. Match between runs was applied (match time window 0.7 min; align window 20 min) and all proteins were identified with a FDR of 1 %. Unique and razor peptides were included with a min. ratio count of 1. For the statistical validation of the results, the peptides a search against reverse decoy database had been performed. Evaluation of the processed MS was done with Perseus (version 1.6.2.1)(Tyanova et al., 2016). The generated datasets of protein groups were by potential contaminant hits, hits from the reverse database and hits only identified by site. LFQ intensities were log2 transformed, grouped into replicates and the rows filtered on 4 valid values in at least one replicate group. Missing values were calculated from the Gaussian distribution (width: 0.3; downshift: 1.8) and volcano plots with a two-sided t-test (FDR: 0.05; S0 = 0.1) were plotted (Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995). For detailed analysis, only hits with a log fold change ≥ 2 and a p value ≤ 0.05 were considered. Calculation of molecular weight and pI were done with the ‘compute pI/Mw’ tool on Expasy (Bjellqvist et al., 1993; Gasteiger, 2005). Hydropathy value were determined with the GRAVY calculator by Stephan Fuchs (http://www.gravy-calculator.de/). Analysis for statistical overrepresentation test of PANTHER Go Slim annotations was performed with the PANTHER online tool (Mi et al., 2019).

### Publication Abstract
Small Heat shock proteins (sHsps) are a family of molecular chaperones that bind nonnative proteins in an ATP-independent manner. Caenorhabditis elegans encodes 16 different sHsps, among them Hsp17, which is evolutionarily distinct from other sHsps in the nematode. The structure and mechanism of Hsp17 and how these may differ from other sHsps remain unclear. Here, we find that Hsp17 has a distinct expression pattern, structural organization, and chaperone function. Consistent with its presence under nonstress conditions, and in contrast to many other sHsps, we determined that Hsp17 is a mono-disperse, permanently active chaperone in&#xa0;vitro, which interacts with hundreds of different C.&#xa0;elegans proteins under physiological conditions. Additionally, our cryo-EM structure of Hsp17 reveals that in the 24-mer complex, 12 N-terminal regions are involved in its chaperone function. These flexible regions are located on the outside of the spherical oligomer, whereas the other 12 N-terminal regions are engaged in stabilizing interactions in its interior. This allows the same region in Hsp17 to perform different functions depending on the topological context. Taken together, our results reveal structural and functional features that further define the structural basis of permanently active sHsps.

### Keywords
Protein aggregation, Small heat shock protein, Protein structure, Molecular chaperone

### Affiliations
Center for Protein Assemblies and Department of Chemistry, Technische Universität München, Ernst-Otto-Fischer Strasse 8, 85748 Garching, Germany
Technical University Munich (TUM)

### Submitter
Annika Strauch

### Lab Head
Dr Johannes Buchner
Center for Protein Assemblies and Department of Chemistry, Technische Universität München, Ernst-Otto-Fischer Strasse 8, 85748 Garching, Germany


