### Accession
PXD014763

### Title
Proteome analysis of the gametophytes of western Himalayan fern Diplazium maximum reveals sucrose inducible proteins of stress tolerance: Insights into the adaptive competence of the fern

### Description
The proteome of the gametophytes of Diplazium maximum, a temperate Himalayan Polypoidale fern was studied in response to micro-environmental changes. The study was expected to reveal the key proteins associated with a gametophyte’s response to sucrose mediated changes in osmotic potential. A major aim of the study was to identify proteins that would express differentially under micro-environmental stress and also to gain an understanding of the adaptive responses/competence of D. maximum gametophytes. The genes/proteins identified in the study have potential utility in various crop improvement programs.

### Sample Protocol
Gametophytes incubated on Knops medium containing 0, 1, 3 and 6% sucrose (i.e., G0, G1, G3 and G6) were visually observed for identification of time points at which distinct morphological and morphogenetic changes were initiated. Based on these observations, three independent biological replicates of G0, G1 and G3 were harvested after 30 days for proteome.  DEPs were excised manually from CBB stained gels and trypsinized according to standard techniques. The gel slices were first de-stained with 100 mM NH4HCO3/50% acetonitrile (ACN). Next, these were dehydrated in vacuo followed by pre-incubation in 20 µl of trypsin solution (0.02 g/l Trypsin Gold-Promega) in 40 mM NH4HCO3/10% ACN for 1 h at room temperature. Next, the gel slices were completely immersed in digestion buffer (40 mM NH4HCO3/ 10% ACN) and incubated overnight at 37 °C. A MALDI TOF/TOF system (Bruker, Ultraflextrame, Germany) was used for MS analysis. A standard tryptic BSA digest (Bruker Daltonics Inc, Germany) and mass standard starter kit (Bruker Daltonics Inc, Germany) were used to caliberate the system. Strongest filtered precursor ions with a user-defined threshold (S/N ratio 50) were selected for the MS/MS scan in positive mode

### Data Protocol
MS and MS/MS data were uploaded on the Flex Analysis platform, with MASCOT server. Next, these were compared against NCBInr database for protein identification. Parameters used for database search comprised of mass tolerance of 0.5 Da, maximum missed cleavages >1, peptide charge state +1, monoisotopic mass, trypsin enzyme and also viridiplantae taxonomy. Oxidations of methionine and carbamidomethylation of cysteine were considered as modifications

### Publication Abstract
Ferns have survived changing habitats and environmental extremes of different eras, wherein, the exploratory haploid gametophytes are believed to have played a major role. Therefore, the proteome of <i>in vitro</i> grown gametophytes of a temperate Himalayan fern, <i>Diplazium maximum</i> in response to 0 (G0), 1 (G1), and 3% (G3) sucrose was studied. A total of 110 differentially abundant protein spots (DAPs) were obtained. Among these, only 67 could be functionally categorized as unique proteins involved in various metabolic processes. Calcium dependent proteins, receptor like kinases, G proteins, proteins related to hormonal signaling and their interaction with other pathways, and regulatory proteins were recorded indicating the involvement of five different signaling pathways. DAPs involved in the activation of genes and transcription factors of signaling and transduction pathways, transport and ion channels, cell-wall and structural proteins, defense, chaperons, energy metabolism, protein synthesis, modification, and turnover were identified. The gametophytes responded to changes in their micro-environment. There was also significant increase in prothallus biomass and conversion of two-dimensional prothalli into three-dimensional prothallus clumps at 3% sucrose. The three-D clumps had higher photosynthetic surface area and also closer proximity for sexual reproduction and sporophyte formation. Highest accumulation of proline, enhanced scavenging of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and DAPs of mostly, abiotic stress tolerance, secondary metabolite synthesis, and detoxification at 3% sucrose indicated an adaptive response of gametophytes. Protein Protein Interaction network and Principal Component analyses, and qRT-PCR validation of genes encoding 12 proteins of various metabolic processes indicated differential adjustment of gametophytes to different levels of sucrose in the culture medium. Therefore, a hypothetical mechanism was proposed to show that even slight changes in the micro-environment of <i>D. maximum</i> gametophytes triggered multiple mechanisms of adaptation. Many DAPs identified in the study have potential use in crop improvement and metabolic engineering programs, phytoremediation and environmental protection.

### Keywords
Diplazium maximum, Maldi  tof/tof ms/ms, Edible fern

### Affiliations
CSIR-Institute of Himalayan Bioresource Technology
Division of Biotechnology, CSIR-Institute of Himalayan Bioresource Technology, Palampur-176061, Himachal Pradesh, India

### Submitter
Amita Bhattacharya

### Lab Head
Dr Amita Bhattacharya
Division of Biotechnology, CSIR-Institute of Himalayan Bioresource Technology, Palampur-176061, Himachal Pradesh, India


