### Accession
PXD017989

### Title
K-562 GalNAc-T1/2 Bump-and-hole Whole cell lysate proteomics data

### Description
Engineered GalNAc-T glycosyltransferases were used to incorporate a chemically modified GalNAc analog into the glycoproteins on the cell surface of K-562 cells. The chemical modification included a bioorthogonal alkyne tag that allowed for introduction of a clickable, acid-cleavable biotin-picolyl-azide. Glycoproteins were enriched using Streptavidin, and on-bead digestion yielded a peptide fraction that was analysed by mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
K-562 cells stably transfected human AGX1 mutant F383A and either WT-T1, BH-T1 (I238A/L295A), WT-T2, or BH-T2 (I253A/L310A) were seeded into a T75 flask at 5,000,000 cells/15 mL in growth medium without hygromycin, and treated with 0.5 µg/mL doxycycline. Cells were treated with 10 mL growth medium and 0.5 µg/mL doxycycline after 24 h. After another 24 h, cells were counted, harvested and seeded at a density of 10,000,000 cells/25 mL in growth medium without hygromycin. Cells were treated with doxycycline again, and either caged GalNAc-1-phosphate analog 5 (50 µM) or DMSO vehicle. Cells were grown for another 20 h, harvested and washed with PBS (5 mL). Cell pellets were stored at -80 °C until use. Cell pellets were resuspended in 500 µL Lysis Buffer (PBS with 1% (v/v) RapiGest and 1x Calbiochem Protease Inhibitors, Set III) and homogenized using a finger tip sonicator (output 1.0, 6x10 s strokes with 10 s breaks) on ice. Five to six mg protein per sample were treated with PNGase F (Promega, 5 µL of a 1:10 (v/v) dilution in PBS) and incubated for 4 h at 37 °C. The sample was diluted with PBS to a protein content of 2 mg/mL. Beads (UltraLink PLUS Streptavidin, 150 µL slurry = 75 µL settled resin) were washed with PBS twice (harvest 30 s at 1000 g in table top) in low-bind tubes (Eppendorf) and added to the lysate. Samples were incubated for 16 h at room temperature under rotation. The beads were harvested and the supernatant was discarded. The beads were washed sequentially with 0.1% RapiGest in PBS (3x), 6 M urea in PBS (3x), and PBS (2x), and resuspended in PBS (200 µL). Beads were treated with 10 µL 100 mM DTT (Thermo Fisher) in PBS (10 µL), and incubated at r.t. while shaking (950 rpm) for 30 min. Then, 500 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma Aldrich) in PBS (4 µL) was added and samples were shaken for another 30 min in the dark. Beads were harvested and washed with PBS and 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate in LC/MS-grade water (3x, ABC buffer). Beads were resuspended in ABC buffer (200 µL), treated with RapiGest to a final concentration of 0.05% (v/v), and trypsin (1.5 µg in 3 µL ABC buffer). Samples were shaken at 37 °C for 2-3 h, and another 1.5 µg trypsin was added. The reactions were shaken overnight at 37 °C. The beads were harvested, washed with ABC (200 µL) and with LC-MS grade water (3x200 µL) Supernatants and washes were combined and centrifuged (18000 g, 5 min, room temperature). The supernatants were transferred to new tubes and concentrated by Speedvac. Samples were desalted by C18 Zip tips, using 0.1% aq. formic acid (FA) as washing solution and stepwise elution with 50% MeCN/water with 0.1% FA (v/v) and 100% MeCN with 0.1% (v/v) FA. Samples were analyzed by online nanoflow LC-MS/MS using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) coupled to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 HPLC (Thermo Fisher). A portion of the sample (2 µL out of 10 µL) was loaded via autosampler isocratically onto a C18 nano pre-column using 0.1% formic acid in water (“Solvent A”). For pre-concentration and desalting, the column was washed with 2% ACN and 0.1% formic acid in water (“loading pump solvent”). Subsequently, the C18 nano pre-column was switched in line with the C18 nano separation column (75 µm x 250 mm EASYSpray (Thermo Fisher) containing 2 µm C18 beads) for gradient elution. The column was held at 40 °C using a column heater in the EASY-Spray ionization source (Thermo Fisher). The samples were eluted at a constant flow rate of 0.3 µL/min using a 90 minute gradient and a 140 minute instrument method. The gradient profile was as follows (min:% solvent B, 2% formic acid in acetonitrile) 0:3, 3:3, 93:35, 103:42, 104:95, 109:95, 110:3, 140:3. The instrument method used an MS1 resolution of 60,000 at FWHM 400 m/z, an AGC target of 3e5, and a mass range from 300 to 1,500 m/z. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a repeat count of 3, repeat duration of 10 s, exclusion duration of 10 s. Only charge states 2-6 were selected for fragmentation. MS2s were generated at top speed for 3 s. HCD was performed on all selected precursor masses with the following parameters: isolation window of 2 m/z, 28-30% collision energy, orbitrap (resolution of 30,000) detection, and an AGC target of 1e4 ions. ETD was performed if (a) the precursor mass was between 300-1000 m/z and (b) 2 of 10 glyco and/or fingerprint ions (126.055, 138.055, 144.07, 168.065, 186.076, 204.086, 274.092, 292.103; 491.2241, 330.1554) were present at +/- 0.1 m/z and greater than 5% relative intensity. ETD parameters were as follows: calibrated charge-dependent ETD times, 2e5 reagent target, precursor AGC target 1e4.

### Data Protocol
Data evaluation was performed with ByonicTM (Protein Metrics, Cupertino, USA). For protein IDs, Uniprot human proteome (downloaded June 26, 2016) was used as a reference database. Search parameters included semi-specific cleavage specificity at the C-terminal site of R and K, with two missed cleavages allowed. Mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm for MS1s, 0.1 Da for HCD MS2s, and 0.35 Da for ETD MS2s. Methionine oxidation (common 2), asparagine deamidation (common 2), and N-terminal acetylation (rare 1) were set as variable modifications with a total common max of 3, rare max of 1. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification. Peptide hits were filtered using a 1% FDR. Additionally, a cut-off value of Log Prob = 5 was set for protein hits.

### Publication Abstract
Studying posttranslational modifications classically relies on experimental strategies that oversimplify the complex biosynthetic machineries of living cells. Protein glycosylation contributes to essential biological processes, but correlating glycan structure, underlying protein, and disease-relevant biosynthetic regulation is currently elusive. Here, we engineer living cells to tag glycans with editable chemical functionalities while providing information on biosynthesis, physiological context, and glycan fine structure. We introduce a non-natural substrate biosynthetic pathway and use engineered glycosyltransferases to incorporate chemically tagged sugars into the cell surface glycome of the living cell. We apply the strategy to a particularly redundant yet disease-relevant human glycosyltransferase family, the polypeptide N-acetylgalactosaminyl transferases. This approach bestows a gain-of-chemical-functionality modification on cells, where the products of individual glycosyltransferases can be selectively characterized or manipulated to understand glycan contribution to major physiological processes.

### Keywords
Human, Mucin, Galnac-t, Glycoprotein, Bioorthogonal, K-562, Click

### Affiliations
Imperial College London, The Francis Crick Institute
Department of Chemistry, Imperial College London, UK Chemical Glycobiology Laboratory, The Francis Crick Institute, London, UK

### Submitter
Benjamin Schumann

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin Schumann
Department of Chemistry, Imperial College London, UK Chemical Glycobiology Laboratory, The Francis Crick Institute, London, UK


