### Accession
PXD002266

### Title
Phosphoproteomics reveals malaria parasite Protein Kinase G as a signalling hub regulating egress and invasion

### Description
Our understanding of the key phosphorylation-dependent signalling pathways in the human malaria parasite, Plasmodium falciparum, remains rudimentary. Here we address this issue for the essential cGMP-dependent protein kinase, PfPKG. By employing chemical and genetic tools in combination with quantitative global phosphoproteomics, we identify the phosphorylation sites on 69 proteins that are direct or indirect cellular targets for PfPKG. These PfPKG targets include proteins involved in cell signalling, proteolysis, gene regulation, protein export and ion and protein transport, indicating that cGMP/PfPKG acts as a signalling hub that plays a central role in a number of core parasite processes. We also show that PfPKG activity is required for parasite invasion. This correlates with the finding that the calcium-dependent protein kinase, PfCDPK1, is phosphorylated by PfPKG, as are components of the actomyosin complex, providing mechanistic insight into the essential role of PfPKG in parasite egress and invasion.

### Sample Protocol
Tryptic digestion and TMT-labelling of parasite proteins: Protein pellets were sonicated in 50 mM TEAB buffer (triethylammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.5) and digested with trypsin (Promega) at a ratio of 1:20 (w/w) trypsin to protein content, overnight at 37 oC on a rotating platform. For tandem mass tag labelling (TMT labelling), completely digested samples were concentrated to about 250-300 µl in a Speedvac centrifuge and labelled with 6-plex TMT reagents (Thermo scientific) following the manufacturer's instructions. TMT-labelled samples were pooled and concentrated to a volume of 750 µl in a Speedvac centrifuge, and then mixed with 250 µl of 100% acetonitrile (ACN) and diluted with 10 mM TEAB, pH 8.0 to a final volume of 3 ml. The sample was loaded onto a Resource Q anion-exchange column (1 ml bed volume, GE Healthcare) equilibrated with 10 mM TEAB, pH 8.0. Peptides were eluted by a linear gradient of 0-1 M NaCl in 10 mM TEAB, pH 7.0, collecting 1 ml fractions. The fractions associated with the flow-through (fractions 2 to 4) were combined and separately the wash fractions (fractions 5 to 7) were combined. The flow-through and wash fractions were then concentrated on a speedvac to 1ml total volume. The combined flow-through and wash fractions together with each of the gradient eluate fractions (fractions 10 to 16) were prepared for immobilized metal affinity chromatography (IMAC) and titanium dioxide (TiO2) enrichment of phosphopeptides.   IMAC enrichment of phosphopeptides for mass spectrometry : Fractions from the anion exchange column step were adjusted to pH 2.5-3.0 by adding 50% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). PHOS-Select beads (Sigma) were equilibrated with loading/wash buffer (0.25 M acetic acid, 30% acetonitrile) and 50 l of 50% slurry was added to each fraction, followed by rotating at room temperature for 1-2 hours. After incubation with IMAC beads, the samples were transferred onto Mobicol “Classic” spin columns (2B Scientific Ltd), centrifuged for 30 seconds at 1,000 g, and the flow-through (filtrate) collected and used for further enrichment on TiO2 beads as described below. The  IMAC beads were washed twice with 200 l of loading/wash solution, once with 200 l of HPLC grade water and eluted twice with 100 l of eluting solution composed of 22 l ammonia solution (Fisher Chemical, 35% stock), 300 l acetonitrile to a total volume of 1ml with water. Eluates were concentrated to a small volume (15-20 l) on a Speedvac centrifuge and submitted for LC-MS/MS analysis.   TiO2 enrichment of phosphopeptides for mass spectrometry: The filtrates from the PHOS-Select treated samples were used for further phosphopeptide enrichment essentially as described in 58. Briefly, each sample was treated with 5 mg of TiO2 beads (GL Sciences Inc) in the presence of 30 mg 2,5-dihydroxybenzoic acid (DHB) for 1-2 hours on a rotating platform at room temperature. Following treatment the samples were filtered on Mobicol “Classic” spin columns, then the beads were washed once with 200 l of 30% ACN, 0.5% TFA and once with the same volume of 80% ACN, 0.1% TFA by centrifugation for 30 seconds at 1,000 g. Phosphopeptides bound to the TiO2 beads were eluted twice with 100 l of 15% ammonia solution. Eluates were concentrated to a small volume (15-20 l) and submitted for LC-MS/MS analysis.  Mass spectrometry: LC-MS/MS was carried out using an RSLCnano HPLC system (Dionex, UK) and an LTQ-Orbitrap-Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Samples were loaded at high flow rate onto a reverse-phase trap column (0.3 mm i.d. x 1 mm), containing 5 μm C18 300 Å Acclaim PepMap medium (Dionex) maintained at a temperature of 37 °C. The loading buffer was 0.1% formic acid/ 0.05% TFA/ 2% ACN. Peptides were eluted from the column at a flow rate of 0.3 µl/min and passed through a reverse-phase PicoFrit capillary column (75 μm i.d. x 400 mm) containing Symmetry C18 100 Å medium (Waters, UK) that was packed in-house using a high pressure device (Proxeon Biosystems, Denmark). Peptides were eluted over a period of four hours, with the output of the column sprayed directly into the nanospray ion source of the LTQ-Orbitrap-Velos mass spectrometer. The LTQ-Orbitrap-Velos mass spectrometer was set to acquire a 1 microscan FTMS scan event at 60000 resolution over the m/z range 300-2000 Da in positive ion mode. The maximum injection time for MS was 500 ms and the AGC target setting was 1e6. Accurate calibration of the FTMS scan was achieved using a background ion lock mass for C6H10O14S3 (401.922718 Da). Subsequently up to 10 data dependent HCD MS/MS were triggered from the FTMS scan. The isolation width was 2.0 Da, with normalized collision energy of 42.5. Dynamic exclusion was enabled. The maximum injection time for MS/MS was 250 ms and the AGC target setting was 5e4.

### Data Protocol
The .raw data file obtained from each LC-MS/MS acquisition was processed using Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4.0.288, Thermo Scientific), searching each file in turn using Mascot (version 2.2.04, Matrix Science Ltd.) against the UniProtKB-Swissprot database. The peptide tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the MS/MS tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. Fixed modifications were set as carboxyamidomethyl (C) and variable modifications set as oxidation (M) and phosphorylation (S/T/Y). A decoy database search was performed. The output from Proteome Discoverer was further processed using Scaffold Q+S 60 (version 4.0.5, Proteome Software). PeptideProphet and ProteinProphet (Institute for Systems Biology) probability thresholds of 95% were calculated from the decoy searches and Scaffold was used to calculate an improved 95% peptide and protein probability threshold  based on the data from the two different search algorithms.

### Publication Abstract
Our understanding of the key phosphorylation-dependent signalling pathways in the human malaria parasite, Plasmodium falciparum, remains rudimentary. Here we address this issue for the essential cGMP-dependent protein kinase, PfPKG. By employing chemical and genetic tools in combination with quantitative global phosphoproteomics, we identify the phosphorylation sites on 69 proteins that are direct or indirect cellular targets for PfPKG. These PfPKG targets include proteins involved in cell signalling, proteolysis, gene regulation, protein export and ion and protein transport, indicating that cGMP/PfPKG acts as a signalling hub that plays a central role in a number of core parasite processes. We also show that PfPKG activity is required for parasite invasion. This correlates with the finding that the calcium-dependent protein kinase, PfCDPK1, is phosphorylated by PfPKG, as are components of the actomyosin complex, providing mechanistic insight into the essential role of PfPKG in parasite egress and invasion.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Malaria, Protein kinase g, Parasite, Tandem mass tags, Quantitation, Signalling, Invasion

### Affiliations
MRC Toxicology Unit, University of Leicester, Hodgkin Building, Lancaster Road, Leicester, LE1 9HN, UK
University of Warwick

### Submitter
Andrew Bottrill

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Andrew B. Tobin
MRC Toxicology Unit, University of Leicester, Hodgkin Building, Lancaster Road, Leicester, LE1 9HN, UK


