### Accession
PXD006865

### Title
Human osteoblast-derived extracellular matrix with high homology to human bone proteome is osteopromotive for mesenchymal stromal cells

### Description
Efficient osteogenic differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) is crucial to accelerate bone formation. In this context, the use of extracellular matrix (ECM) as natural 3D-framework mimicking in vivo tissue architecture is of interest. The aim of this study was to generate a devitalized human osteogenic MSC-derived ECM and to investigate its impact on MSC osteogenic differentiation to improve MSC properties in bone regeneration. The devitalized ECM significantly enhanced MSC adhesion and proliferation. Osteogenic differentiation and mineralization of MSCs on the ECM was quicker than in standard conditions. The presence of ECM promoted in vivo bone formation by MSCs in a mouse model of ectopic-calcification. We analyzed the ECM composition by mass spectrometry, detecting 846 proteins. Of these, 473 proteins were shared with the human bone proteome we previously described, demonstrating high homology to an in vivo microenvironment. Bioinformatic analysis of the 846 proteins showed involvement in adhesion and osteogenic differentiation, confirming the ECM composition as key modulator of MSC behaviour. In addition to known ECM-components, proteomic analysis revealed novel ECM functions, which could improve culture conditions. In summary, this study provides a simplified method to obtain an in vitro MSC-derived ECM that enhances osteogenic differentiation, and could be applied as natural biomaterial to accelerate bone regeneration.

### Sample Protocol
SDS-PAGE, slicing, in-gel digestion with trypsin, LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometry

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed with MaxQuant (Andromeda) and the LFQ protocol was used for relative quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Osteoblast, Mesenchymal stromal cells, Differentiation

### Affiliations
Proteomics Center, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands
Erasmus MC, Rotterdam

### Submitter
Jeroen Demmers

### Lab Head
Dr Jeroen Demmers
Erasmus MC, Rotterdam


