### Accession
PXD025203

### Title
Structured elements drive circular RNA translation and expand the human proteome, part4

### Description
The human genome encodes tens of thousands circular RNAs (circRNAs) whose levels correlate with many disease states. While studies have focused on the non-coding functions of circRNAs, emerging evidence suggests that a handful of circRNAs encode proteins. Translation canonically starts by recognition of mRNA 5’cap and scanning to the start codon; how circRNA translation initiates remains unclear. Here, we developed a high-throughput screen to systematically identify and quantify RNA sequences that can direct circRNA translation. We identify and validate over 17,000 circRNA internal ribosome entry sites (IRES) and reveal that 18S rRNA complementarity and a structured RNA element on the IRES are important for facilitating circRNA cap-independent translation. With genomic and peptidomic analyses of the IRES, we identified nearly 1,000 putative endogenous protein-coding circRNAs and hundreds of translational units encoded by these circRNAs. We further characterized circFGFR1p, a protein encoded by circFGFR1, functions as a negative regulator of FGFR1 to suppress cell growth under stress conditions. The circRNA proteome may be important links among circRNA, biological control, and disease.

### Sample Protocol
Samples weCells were lysed using 8M urea, 50 mM HEPES pH 8.5, 75 mM NaCl, Pierce Protease Inhibitor Tablet (A32963 ThermoFischer Scientific). Lysate were then reduced and alkylated with 10 mM TCEP  and 10 mM CAA respectively, followed by 15 mM DTT quench. Proteins were precipitated using methanol chloroform precipitation and resuspended using 200 mM HEPES pH 8.5. Proteins were digested with Trypsin/Lys-C Mix (V5073, Promega) and 0.01% ProteaseMAX (V2072, Promega). Digestion was quenched using TFA and the peptides were cleaned up using C18 stage tips. Cleaned peptides were fractionated using Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (84868, Thermofischer Scientific) as manufacture instructions.re processed using Skyline software

### Data Protocol
PRM method creation – Spectral libraries for Skyline (MacCoss Lab Software) analysis was created using the fractionated DDA runs. In Peptide Settings, Synthetic peptides with heavy Lysine (13C615N2-lysine), Arginine (13C615N4-arginine), Leucine (13C615N1-leucine), Valine (13C515N1-valine), and Phenylalanine (13C915N1-phenylalanine) were used and selected as heavy isotope modification in the Modification tab and 2 minute Time Window was selected Prediction tab. In Transition Settings, precursor charges of 2,3 was selected under the Filter tab and ion mobility was created from the raw files with a resolving power of 40 under the Ion Mobility tab. Peptide list was imported from a list of peptide of interest, adjusting location of heavily modified peptide to appropriate locations, and fractionated DDA raw files were uploaded into Skyline. Retention time and ion mobility were manually curated per peptide basis. Using the Skyline export method, a scheduled inclusion list .prmsqlite file was created using a template exported from timsControl (Bruker Daltonics). Exported .prmsqlite file from Skyline was imported into timsControl to create PRM MS Method.PRM run analysis – Raw PRM runs from timsTOF Pro (Bruker Daltonics) were loaded into Skyline files used to create scheduled inclusion list. Top 3 product b,y-ions from m/z > precursor to 3 ions were analyzed. Retention time to intensity and ion mobility graphs were exported as image files.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Human, Circular rna

### Affiliations
Stanford University
Baxter Laboratory for Stem Cell Biology Department of Microbiology & Immunology Stanford University School of Medicine 269 Campus Drive CCSR 3205b Stanford, CA 94305, USA

### Submitter
Janos Demeter

### Lab Head
Dr Peter, K., Jackson
Baxter Laboratory for Stem Cell Biology Department of Microbiology & Immunology Stanford University School of Medicine 269 Campus Drive CCSR 3205b Stanford, CA 94305, USA


