### Accession
PXD012127

### Title
TEAD1-DBD-DNA interaction studied by structural MS

### Description
TEAD transcription factors mediate gene expression regulation through interactions with their DNA response M-CAT motif. They are active mainly during growth and development and induce gene expression of proteins involved in cell proliferation, differentiation or apoptosis prevention. TEADs and many of their target proteins are known to be upregulated in several types of cancers. To study the interaction of DNA binding domain of TEAD1 with M-CAT motifs of different orientations originating from regulatory regions of human genes (CTGF, SRF, C-MYC and GLUT1), dissociation constant of each complex was determined using fluorescence anisotropy assay. Structural mass spectrometry techniques (H/D exchange and quantitative chemical cross-linking) and molecular docking were utilized for structural characterization of the binding interface. In-vitro results were correlated with situation in living cells studied by ChIP and Q-PCR.

### Sample Protocol
Quantitative chemical protein-protein cross-linking Recombinantly prepared DNA binding domain of human TEAD1 (TEAD1-DBD) or TEAD1-DBD/M-CAT complex (1:1 molar ratio) in a 20mM HEPES, 150mM NaCl, 1 mM TCEP, pH 7.4 buffer solution were preincubated for an hour at 20 °C and mixed with the cross-linking reagent DSA. Free TEAD1-DBD samples were mixed with non-labelled cross-linker (DSA12C) and TEAD1-DBD/M-CAT complex samples were mixed with the 13C-labelled cross-linkers (DSA13C). Both cross-linkers were dissolved in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) to 14.6 mM concentration. Added amount of cross-linkers corresponded to the 15-fold molar excess over the protein and the addition resulted in 40µM protein concentration in final reaction mixture. After 45 minutes 5-fold molar excess (relating to cross-linker) of ethanolamine was added to quench the reagent and stop the reaction. Subsequently, corresponding non-labelled and 13C-labelled samples were mixed in 1:1 ratio to form quantitative samples. Control samples (DMSO added instead of cross-linker solution) and samples treated with 1:1 mixture of both cross-linkers were prepared at the same time and handled equally. Samples were mixed with 100mM ethylmorpholine buffer pH 8.5 containing 20% ACN in 1:1 ratio. AspN dissolved in water was added to reach the final weight ratio 1:100 (AspN:protein). Digestion was performed overnight at 40°C. Following the first digestion, trypsin was added in 1:20 (trypsin:protein) weight ratio and second digestion was performed for 8h at 45°C and quenched by lowering pH with 0,4% FA added in 1:1 volume ratio. Peptide samples were diluted in H2O to final peptide and FA concentration of 0.05 µg/µL and 0.1%, respectively. Afterwards, peptides were injected (0.15 µg per injection) onto a reversed phase trap column (Zorbax 300SB-C18 5 μm, 0.3 × 5 mm, Agilent), where the trapped peptides were desalted by 10 µL/min flow of 0.1% FA in water for 5 min (LC-20AD HPLC pump, Shimadzu). Desalted peptides were eluted from trap column at a constant flow rate of 10 µL/min (HPLC pump 1200, Agilent) by a two-step linear gradient, first from 5 to 40% of solution B (0.1% FA, 98% ACN in water) in 35 min, followed by fast step from 40 to 99% of solution B in 5 min. Solution A consisted of 0.1% FA and 2% ACN in water. Eluted peptides were then on-line separated on the analytical column (ZORBAX 300SB-C18, 0.3 x 150 mm, 3.5 µm, Agilent). The HPLC system was directly coupled with an electrospray ionization source of Fourier transform ion cyclotron resonance mass spectrometer (15T-SolariX XR FT-ICR, Bruker Daltonics). Mass spectral data were acquired in positive LC-MS mode over the m/z range 250 – 2500, where each MS scan isfollowed by MS/MS scan with fixed collision-induced fragmentation energy of 15eV and broad isolation window. Hydrogen-deuterium exchange (HDX) The HDX reaction was performed on TEAD1-DBD (20µM) or TEAD1-DBD/M-CAT complex (20µM, 1:1 molar ratio) in an H2O-based 20mM HEPES, 150mM NaCl, 1mM TCEP, pH 7.4 buffer solution. The samples were preincubated for an hour at 20 °C and deuterium exchange was initiated by 10-fold dilution of samples into a D2O-based buffer (10mM HEPES, 50mM NaCl, pD 7.4). HDX was allowed to proceed at 20 °C and samples containing 300 pmol of protein were taken from the reaction solution in several time points (10s, 1m, 10m, 1.5h). HDX in the taken samples was immediately quenched by mixing it 1:1 with quench buffer (4M Urea, 1M glycine/HCl, pH 2.3) and then rapidly frozen in liquid nitrogen. Samples were stored at -80 °C and before the LC-MS analysis melted and then injected into in-house build LC system completely maintained at 0°C. Digestion took place on column with immobilized Aspergillopepsin (protease type XIII) at a flow rate of 200 µL/min (LC-20AD HPLC pump, Shimadzu) of 0.4% formic acid (FA) in water. Produced peptides were then trapped and desalted on a peptide microtrap (C8 reversed-phase, Michrom BioResources, USA) for 3 min under the same flow rate and solvent composition. Trapped peptides were eluted at a constant flow rate of 20 µL/min (HPLC pump 1200, Agilent) first by a linear 5 min gradient from 5-35% of solution B (0.4% FA, 95% Acetonitrile (ACN) in water) followed by quick step to 99% B and separated on the reversed-phase analytical column (ZORBAX 300SB-C18, 0.5 x 35 mm, 3.5 µm, Agilent). Solution A consisted of 0.4% FA, 2% ACN in water. For a peptide mapping of non-deuterated samples, the same protocol was used, except of the H2O-based buffer was used instead of D2O-based. Separated peptides were introduced to an electrospray ionization source of Fourier transform ion cyclotron resonance mass spectrometer (15T-solariX XR FT-ICR, Bruker Daltonics). Peptide mapping was performed in a positive data-dependent MS/MS broadband mode, where each MS scan was followed by six MS/MS scans, where the six most abundant peptide ions in previous MS scan undergo collision-induced fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Quantitative chemical protein-protein cross-linking Obtained MS data were processed by DataAnalysis 4.4 (Bruker Daltonics, USA) with the use of SNAP 2.0 algorithm generating deconvoluted spectra and a list of monoisotopic masses. Data of control samples and samples treated with 1:1 mixture of cross-linkers were searched for a potential cross-links using StavroX and lab-made software Links. All scans containing the signal of a previously identified cross-link were summed and further processed by mMass 5.4.1. Ratio of light (12C) and heavy (13C) cross-linker incorporation for each cross-link was calculated using the envelope fit tool, based on the generation of theoretical profiles and fitting them on the experimental data with the use of linear combination and least-square fitting. Control samples were checked for the 1:1 ratio of light and heavy form. Hydrogen-deuterium exchange Obtained MS/MS data (300 – 1800 m/z) were processed by DataAnalysis 4.1 (Bruker Daltonics, USA) and then searched by ProteinScape 4 (Bruker Daltonics, USA) against possible digest products library based on TEAD1-DBD sequence. LC-MS data (300 – 1800 m/z) were processed by lab-made software DeutEx. Peptides with overlapping regions were used to recalculate the number of exchanged deuterium atoms to smaller regions or even to single aminoacids.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Chemical cross-linking, Tead1, M-cat, Dna, H/d exchange, Transcription factor, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Institute of Microbiology of the CAS
Laboratory of Structural Biology and Cell Signaling, Institute of Microbiology, The Czech Academy of Sciences, Prague, 14220, Czech Republic

### Submitter
Ruzena Filandrova

### Lab Head
Dr Petr Novak
Laboratory of Structural Biology and Cell Signaling, Institute of Microbiology, The Czech Academy of Sciences, Prague, 14220, Czech Republic


