### Accession
PXD034450

### Title
Cancer-associated fibroblasts produce matrix-bound vesicles that influence endothelial cell function (part 1: Proteins transferred from cancer-associated fibroblasts to endothelial cells : trans-SILAC)

### Description
Intercellular communication between different cell types in solid tumors contributes to tumor growth and metastatic dissemination. The secretome of cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) plays major roles in these processes. Using human mammary CAFs, we unveil a mechanism of cell-cell communication between CAFs with a myofibroblast phenotype and endothelial cells (ECs) based on intercellular protein transfer through extracellular vesicles (EVs). CAFs transfer proteins to ECs, including plasma membrane receptors, which we have identified by using mass spectrometry-based proteomics. Using THY1 as an example of transferred plasma membrane-bound protein, we show that CAF-derived proteins can influence how ECs interact with other cell types. Here, we show that CAFs produce high amounts of matrix-bound EVs that have a key role in protein transfer. Hence, our work paves the way for further studies to understand how CAF-derived matrix-bound EVs influence tumor pathology by regulating functions of neighboring cancer, stromal and immune cells.

### Sample Protocol
Part 1. For trans-SILAC experiments, heavy-labeled pCAFs were labeled with 2.5 μM CellTrackerTM Green CMFDA Dye (Life Technologies) in PBS for 25min at 37°C and 1.5x106 pCAFs were seeded in a gelatin coated 15 cm dish. After 16h, 7.5x105 HUVECs were seeded in monoculture and in co-culture with pCAFs. After 4h and 24h, cells were detached with Accutase®, resuspended in FACS buffer, sorted using a BD FACSAriaTM and lysed in 6 M urea/ 2 M thiourea supplemented with 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and 40 mM chloroacetamide (CAA) in 75 mM NaCl and 50 mM Tris-HCl and sonicated using a metal tip. 25-120 μg of proteins were digested with trypsin and were fractionated using high pH reverse phase fractionation. Briefly, dried peptides were resuspended in 200 mM ammonium formate adjusted to pH 10 with ammonium hydroxide solution. Then, peptides were loaded on pipette-tip columns of ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 5 μm, eluted in 7 fractions using an increasing amount of acetonitrile and analyzed by MS. Each of the 7 fractions was dried down and then re-suspended in 2% acetonitrile/0.1% TFA in water and separated by nanoscale C18 reverse-phase liquid chromatography performed on an EASY-nLC II 1200 (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Elution was carried out for a total run time duration of 65min (fraction 1), 105min (from fraction 2 to 5) and 135min (fraction 6 and 7), using an optimized gradient. Peptides were subsequently eluted into a 50 cm (trans-SILAC) or 20 cm (pCAF1 proteome) fused silica emitter (New Objective) packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 1.9μm resin (Dr Maisch GmbH). The emitter was kept at 50°C (trans-SILAC) or 35°C (pCAF1 proteome) by means of a column oven integrated into the nanoelectrospray ion source (Sonation). Eluting peptides were electrosprayed into the mass spectrometer using a nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Scientific). An Active Background Ion Reduction Device (ABIRD, ESI source solutions) was used to decrease air contaminants signal level. The Xcalibur software (Thermo Scientific) was used for data acquisition. Full scans over mass range of 375–1500 m/z were acquired at 60,000 resolution at 200 m/z. Multiply charged ions from two to five were selected through a 1.4 m/z window and fragmented. Higher energy collisional dissociation fragmentation was performed on the 15 most intense ions, using normalized collision energy of 27, and resulting fragments were analyzed in the Orbitrap at 15,000 resolution, using a maximum injection time of 25ms or a target value of 105 ions. Former target ions selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 20s.

### Data Protocol
The .RAW files were processed with MaxQuant software (version 1.6.3.3) (4) and searched with the Andromeda search engine. The following setting was used: minimal peptide length 7 amino acids, trypsin specific digestion mode with maximum 2 missed cleavages, carbamidomethyl (C) as fixed modification, and oxidation (M) and acetylation (Protein N-term) as variable modifications. For the analysis of EV proteome, TMTzeroTM was added as fixed modification and maximum 4 missed cleavages were allowed. Minimum peptide ratio count was set to 2, except that for the trans-SILAC experiments and the analysis of pCAF1 proteome where this parameter was set to 1. “Unique + razor” peptides were used for quantification in the analysis of THP-1 proteome; “unique” peptides were used for quantification in all the other experiments. For trans-SILAC experiments, multiplicity was set to 2: light labels were Arg0 and Lys0; heavy labels were Arg10 and Lys8. Label free quantification (LFQ) setting was enabled for all the other experiments. The false discovery rates at protein and peptide levels were set to 1%. 1. Rappsilber J, Ishihama Y, Mann M. Stop and go extraction tips for matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization, nanoelectrospray, and LC/MS sample pretreatment in proteomics. Anal Chem. 2003;75(3):663-70. 2. Wisniewski JR, Zougman A, Nagaraj N, Mann M. Universal sample preparation method for proteome analysis. Nat Methods. 2009;6(5):359-62. 3. Kugeratski FG, Atkinson SJ, Neilson LJ, Lilla S, Knight JRP, Serneels J, et al. Hypoxic cancer-associated fibroblasts increase NCBP2-AS2/HIAR to promote endothelial sprouting through enhanced VEGF signaling. Sci Signal. 2019;12(567). 4. Tyanova S, Temu T, Cox J. The MaxQuant computational platform for mass spectrometry-based shotgun proteomics. Nat Protoc. 2016;11(12):2301-19.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Matrix-bound vesicles, Cancer-associated fibroblasts, Extracellular vesicles, Breast cancer, Mycafs, Endothelial cells, Intercellular protein transfer.

### Affiliations
CRUK Beatson Institute, Switchback Road, Glasgow G61 1BD, UK.
Proteomics

### Submitter
Sergio Lilla

### Lab Head
Dr Sara Rossana Zanivan
CRUK Beatson Institute, Switchback Road, Glasgow G61 1BD, UK.


