### Accession
PXD002167

### Title
The Proteome of Mouse Vestibular Hair Bundles Over Development

### Description
Development of the vertebrate hair bundle is a precisely orchestrated event that culminates in production of a tightly ordered arrangement of actin-rich stereocilia and a single axonemal kinocilium. To understand how the protein composition of the bundle changes during development, we isolated bundles from young (postnatal days P4-P6) and mature (P21-P25) mouse utricles using the twist-off method, then characterized their constituent proteins using liquid-chromatography tandem mass spectrometry with data-dependent acquisition. Using label-free quantitation, we measured relative abundances of proteins in both bundles and in the whole utricular epithelium; comparison of protein abundance between the two fractions allows calculation of enrichment in bundles. These data will be useful for examining the proteins present in mammalian vestibular bundles and how they change over development.

### Sample Protocol
We collected four sets of samples, including purified mouse hair bundles from postnatal day 4-6 mice (referred to as "P5") and P21-P25 utricles ("P23"), as well as utricular epithelium sensory epithelium from the same ages. Four biological replicates were prepared for each of the four conditions. Proteins were partially separated by SDS-PAGE, then digested into peptides. LC-MS/MS was used to identify and quantify peptides from the four conditions.

### Data Protocol
We used MaxQuant, with its built-in Andromeda search engine, to match peptides to mouse protein database entries, to assemble peptides into proteins, and the quantify those proteins.

### Publication Abstract
The phospholipid- and Ca(2+)-binding protein annexin A5 (ANXA5) is the most abundant membrane-associated protein of ~P23 mouse vestibular hair bundles, the inner ear's sensory organelle. Using quantitative mass spectrometry, we estimated that ANXA5 accounts for ~15,000 copies per stereocilium, or ~2% of the total protein there. Although seven other annexin genes are expressed in mouse utricles, mass spectrometry showed that none were present at levels near ANXA5 in bundles and none were upregulated in stereocilia of Anxa5(-/-) mice. Annexins have been proposed to mediate Ca(2+)-dependent repair of membrane lesions, which could be part of the repair mechanism in hair cells after noise damage. Nevertheless, mature Anxa5(-/-) mice not only have normal hearing and balance function, but following noise exposure, they are identical to wild-type mice in their temporary or permanent changes in hearing sensitivity. We suggest that despite the unusually high levels of ANXA5 in bundles, it does not play a role in the bundle's key function, mechanotransduction, at least until after two months of age in the cochlea and six months of age in the vestibular system. These results reinforce the lack of correlation between abundance of a protein in a specific compartment or cellular structure and its functional significance.

### Keywords
Stereocilia, Hair bundles, Auditory, Hair cells, Kinocilia, Vestibular

### Affiliations
Oregon Hearing Research Center
Oregon Hearing Research Center Oregon Health & Science University Portland  OR  97239  USA

### Submitter
Peter Barr-Gillespie

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Barr-Gillespie
Oregon Hearing Research Center Oregon Health & Science University Portland  OR  97239  USA


