### Accession
PXD003298

### Title
Proteomic Analysis of Urinary Extracellular Vesicles

### Description
Novel therapies in autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) signal the need for markers of disease progression or response to therapy. This study aimed to identify disease-associated proteins in urinary extracellular vesicles (uEVs), which include exosomes, in patients with ADPKD. We performed quantitative proteomics on uEVs using a labeled approach (healthy vs. ADPKD) and then using a label-free approach in different subjects (healthy vs. ADPKD vs. non-ADPKD chronic kidney disease [CKD]). In both experiments, thirty proteins were consistently more abundant (≥ 2-fold) in ADPKD-uEVs compared with healthy and CKD uEVs. Of these proteins, periplakin, envoplakin, villin-1, complement C3 and C9 were selected for confirmation, because (1) they were also significantly overrepresented in pathway analysis, and (2) they have been previously implicated in the pathogenesis of ADPKD. Immunoblotting was used to validate the proteomics results, confirming higher abundances of the selected proteins in ADPKD-uEVs in three independent groups of ADPKD-patients. While villin-1, periplakin and envoplakin were more abundant in advanced stages of the disease, complement was already higher in uEVs of young ADPKD patients with preserved renal function. Furthermore, all five proteins correlated positively with height adjusted total kidney volume. The proteins of interest were also analyzed in kidney tissues from kidney-specific-tamoxifen-inducible Pkd1-deletion mice, demonstrating higher expression in more severe stages of the disease. In summary, proteomic analysis of uEVs identified plakins and complement as disease-associated proteins in ADPKD. These proteins are new candidates for evaluation as biomarkers or targets for therapy in ADPKD.

### Sample Protocol
Participants and isolation of uEVs. The Medical Ethics Committee of the Erasmus Medical Center approved this study (MEC-2012-313). Patients with ADPKD were recruited from the ongoing DIPAKstudy, which includes patients with non-ADPKD CKD stage 3 and age ≤ 60 years.46 Genetic analysis was performed for all patients. To increase homogeneity, we only included patients with a PKD1 mutation. Each individual patient was age- and gender-matched to a healthy control (identification group) or an age-, gender- and eGFR-matched patient with CKD (validation and confirmation groups). Additional inclusion criteria for the patients with CKD were the absence of ADPKD and minimal proteinuria (< 1 gram/10 mmol creatinine). Previously, we successfully used spot urines for uEV analysis (normalized by urinary creatinine) and prefer this over 24- hour urine to limit protein degradation and the risk of incomplete collections.8 Therefore, second morning spot urines were collected, a protease inhibitor (cOmplete, Roche diagnostics) was added and samples were immediately stored at -80°C until further processing. uEVs were isolated using high-speed centrifugation and ultracentrifugation, as described previously.8 Obtained pellets were processed for mass-spectrometry or solubilized in Laemmli buffer for immunoblot analysis.  Mass spectrometry. Samples were prepared for mass spectrometry as described previously. Briefly, uEVs and acetonone-precipiated whole urine were lysed and trypsinized. Tryptic peptides were fractionated by HILIC and each fraction was then analyzed by LC-MS. For quantitative dimethyl labeling of uEVs (identification group), desalting and reductive dimethylation was performed on the SPE cartridge (as described in47) before peptide fractionation by HILIC. All LC–MS/MS analyses were performed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA). Each Data collection cycle in the Q Exactive consisted of 1 full MS scan (300-1750 m/z) followed by 15 data dependent MS/MS scans.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were processed and analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) or MaxQuant.48 MS/MS spectra were searched against the Uniprot database (taxonomy: Homo sapiens) with the following search parameters: 15 ppm precursor ion tolerance and 0.02 Da fragment ion tolerance, fully tryptic digestion, up to two missed cleavages were allowed, posttranslational static modifications of 57.02146 Da on cysteine (carbamidomethyl), dynamic modifications of 15.99491 Da on methionine (oxidation). For dimethylation labeled uEV samples 28.031 Da on lysine and the peptide N-terminus (light) and 32.056 Da on lysine and the peptide Nterminus (heavy) were added to the search parameters. The resulting data were analyzed using the DAVID bioinformatics tool (Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery, NIAID, Bethesda, MD) to determine which Gene Ontology terms are over-represented relative to the complete set of identified proteins. For this analysis, we excluded those pathways that were similarly enriched in healthy controls or the CKD group. Gene Ontology terms were retrieved by the software tool for rapid annotation of proteins (STRAP version 1.5.0.0).

### Publication Abstract
Novel therapies in autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) signal the need for markers of disease progression or response to therapy. This study aimed to identify disease-associated proteins in urinary extracellular vesicles (uEVs), which include exosomes, in patients with ADPKD. We performed quantitative proteomics on uEVs from healthy controls and patients with ADPKD using a labeled approach and then used a label-free approach with uEVs of different subjects (healthy controls versus patients with ADPKD versus patients with non-ADPKD CKD). In both experiments, 30 proteins were consistently more abundant (by two-fold or greater) in ADPKD-uEVs than in healthy- and CKD-uEVs. Of these proteins, we selected periplakin, envoplakin, villin-1, and complement C3 and C9 for confirmation because they were also significantly overrepresented in pathway analysis and were previously implicated in ADPKD pathogenesis. Immunoblotting confirmed higher abundances of the selected proteins in uEVs from three independent groups of patients with ADPKD. Whereas uEVs of young patients with ADPKD and preserved kidney function already had higher levels of complement, only uEVs of patients with advanced stages of ADPKD had increased levels of villin-1, periplakin, and envoplakin. Furthermore, all five proteins correlated positively with total kidney volume. Analysis in kidney tissue from mice with kidney-specific, tamoxifen-inducible Pkd1 deletion demonstrated higher expression in more severe stages of the disease and correlation with kidney weight for each protein of interest. In summary, proteomic analysis of uEVs identified plakins and complement as disease-associated proteins in ADPKD. These proteins are new candidates for evaluation as biomarkers or targets for therapy in ADPKD.

### Keywords
Ad, Urinary exosomes, Adpkd, Dimethyl quantitation, Kidney

### Affiliations
Proteomics Center, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands
Proteomics Center Erasmus University Medical Center

### Submitter
Jeroen Demmers

### Lab Head
Dr Jeroen Demmers
Proteomics Center Erasmus University Medical Center


