### Accession
PXD017736

### Title
Tandem mass tag-based (TMT) quantitative proteomics analyses reveal the response of fine roots to drought stress in cotton (Gossypium hirsutum L.)

### Description
Cotton (Gossypium hirsutum L.) is one of the most important cash crops worldwide. In semi-arid/arid regions, drought stress causes growth limitation and decrease of yield. Of all the organs of a plant, fine root is the central part consisting of the root system to contribute to plant water and nutrient taken up. However, the research on the molecular mechanism underlying fine root response to soil drought has not been well understood in cotton. To better characterize the proteomic changes of cotton fine roots under drought stress, 70±5% and 40±5% soil relative water content were designed as control (CK) and drought stress (DS) groups, respectively. Tandem mass tags (TMT) technology was used to determine the proteome profiles in fine roots. The proteomic differences between CK and DS were pairwise compared at 0, 30, and 45 days after drought stress (DAD). A total of 11,628 proteins were identified, of which 10,344 proteins contained quantitative information. According to the morphological, physiological, and biochemical characteristics, 30 and 45 DAD were selected as critical stages for further analysis. Results showed that 118 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were up-regulated and 105 down-regulated in DS 30 versus CK 30; 662 DEPs were up-regulated, and 611 were down-regulated in DS 45 versus CK 45. The DEP functions were determined for their classified pathways, mainly associated with carbohydrate metabolism, energy metabolism, fatty acid metabolism, amino acid metabolism, and secondary metabolite biosynthesis. DEPs related to phytohormone and stress/defense response were also identified. To verify the accuracy of the TMT results, 20 DEPs were randomly selected for parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) verification. And results showed that the quantitative results of TMT are consistent with those of PRM, which proved that the TMT results of this study are reliable. In this article we describe changes in the protein profiles occurring in response to drought stress in cotton fine roots. Proteomic analyses of plant responses to stressors could lead to the introduction of cotton cultivars with high resistance to drought stress. Such plants would be valuable for high yielding under drought as well as other unfavorable environmental conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction, trypsin digestion and TMT labeling Extract the protein of cotton fine root samples by phenol extraction method: Take the sample from -80 ° C, weigh an appropriate amount into a mortar pre-cooled with liquid nitrogen, and add liquid nitrogen to fully grind to powder. Each group of samples was added with 4 times the volume of powdered phenol extraction buffer (containing 10 mM dithiothreitol, 1% protease inhibitor and 2 mM EDTA), and sonicated. Add an equal volume of Tris balanced phenol, centrifuge at 5500 g for 10 min at 4 ° C, take the supernatant and add 5 times the volume of 0.1 M ammonium acetate / methanol to precipitate overnight, and wash the protein precipitate with methanol and acetone, respectively. Finally, the pellet was reconstituted with 8 M urea, and the protein concentration was measured by BCA kit (Bio-Rad protein assay, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The protein solutions were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The samples were then diluted by urea with concentration less than 2M and 100 mM TEAB. Then trypsin was added in solutions using a 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion. After that, the trypsin-digested peptides were desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex,) and vacuum-dried. They were reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for TMT. Briefly, one unit of TMT reagent was thawed and reconstituted in 24 mL acetonitrile. The peptide mixtures were then incubated for 2 h at room temperature and pooled, desalted and dried by vacuum centrifugation.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis and database search Before mass spectrometry (MS) analysis, the tryptic peptides were fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC with Agilent 300Extend C18 (5 μm particles, 4.6mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, the peptides were first separated with a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0) over 60 min into 60 fractions. Then, the peptides were combined into nine fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging. After vacuum dried, the tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (FA, Fluka, solvent A), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The gradients were comprised of an increase from 9% to 25% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 30 min, 25% to 35% in 12 min and climbing to 80% in 4 min then holding at 80% for the last 4 min, all at a constant flow rate of 350 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1200 UPLC system. The peptides were then subjected to NSI source, and the tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) was performed on Orbitrap Fusion LUMOS coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV with the m/z scan range of 350 to 1550 and the intact peptides detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 60,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS under conditions that NCE was set as 28 and the fragments were detected at a resolution of 15,000 in the Orbitrap. A data-dependent procedure was alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control was set at 5E4 with the fixed first mass set as 100 m/z. The resulting MS/MS data were processed using the Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the Gossypium hirsutum_UniProt database (76175 sequences) concatenated with a reverse decoy database to calculate the false positive rate (FDR) due to random matches. Trypsin/P cleavages allow up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in the First search and 5 ppm in the Main search. For fragment ions, it was set as 0.02 Da. The quantitative method was set to TMT-6plex, and the FDR for protein identification and PSM identification was adjusted to < 1%. Protein functional classification Gene Ontology (GO) annotation analysis on the DEPs was carried out based on the UniProt-GOA database (www. http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/). The DEPs were classified by GO annotation based on three categories: biological process (BP), cellular component (CC), and molecular function (MF). The Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database (http://www.genome.jp/kegg/) was used for the pathway enrichment analysis. Fischer's exact two-terminal test was used to test the differentially expressed proteins against background of the identified proteins. A P-value < 0.05 for the pathway enrichment test was considered significant.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Prm; proteome; drought stress, Cotton; fine root; tmt

### Affiliations
Hebei Agricultural University

### Submitter
Liantao Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Liantao Liu
Hebei Agricultural University


