### Accession
PXD018299

### Title
Deep analysis of the USP18-dependent ISGylome and proteome unveils important roles for USP18 in tumour cell antigenicity and radiosensitivity

### Description
The deubiquitylating enzyme USP18 is a major negative regulator of the interferon (IFN) signalling cascade. IFN pathways contribute to resistance to conventional chemotherapy, radiotherapy, and immunotherapy and are often upregulated in certain tumours, including breast, lung, and colon tumours. USP18 is the predominant human protease that cleaves interferon-stimulated gene ISG15, a ubiquitin-like protein tightly regulated in the context of innate immunity, from its modified substrate proteins in vivo. In this study, using advanced proteomic techniques, we have expanded the USP18-dependent ISGylome and proteome in a chronic myeloid leukaemia (CML)-derived cell line (HAP1) treated with type I IFN. Novel ISGylation targets were characterised that modulate the sensing of innate ligands, antigen presentation and secretion of cytokines. Consequently, CML USP18-deficient cells are more antigenic, driving increased activation of cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) and are more susceptible to irradiation. Our results suggest USP18 as a pharmacological target in cancer immunotherapy and radiotherapy.

### Sample Protocol
Identification of ISGylated proteins using GlyGly peptidomics and matching proteomics HAP1 lysates were used for GlyGly immunoprecipitation using PTMScan Ubiquitin Remnant Motif Kit (Cell Signaling), according to manufacturer's protocol 45,46. Briefly, 20 mg of extracts were solubilized and denatured in 10 mL lysis buffer (20 mM HEPES, pH 8.0, 9 M urea, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM β-glycerophosphate), reduced using dithiothreitol (4.5 mM final) for 30 minutes at 55°C. This was followed by alkylation using iodoacetamide (100 mM final) for 15 minutes at room temperature in the dark. Samples were subsequently diluted fourfold in 20 mM HEPES, pH 8.0 (∼2 M urea final), followed by digestion with trypsin-TPCK (Worthington, LS003744, 10 mg/mL final) overnight at room temperature. Samples were then acidified using trifluoroacetic acid (1% final), and desalted using C-18 Sep-Pak (Waters) cartridges according to the manufacturer's protocol. At this point, 20 µg of digested protein were separated for matching proteome control analysis. Peptides were lyophilized and re-suspended in 1.4 mL immunoprecipitation IAP buffer (PTMScan), and the remaining insoluble material cleared by centrifugation and anti-GlyGly antibody beads added followed by rotation and kept 4°C for 2 hours. Beads were subsequently washed twice using 1 mL IAP buffer, followed by three water washes. Immunoprecipitated material was eluted twice in 55 and 50 μL 0.15% trifluoroacetic acid in water. Peptide material was desalted and concentrated using C-18 Sep-Pak (Waters) cartridges according to the manufacturer's protocol. Purified GlyGly-modified peptide eluates and matching proteome material were dried by vacuum centrifugation, and re-suspended in buffer A (98% MilliQ-H20, 2% CH3CN and 0.1% TFA). ISG15 interactome immunoprecipitation HAP1 cells were lysed with Co-IP lysis buffer (20 mM Hepes pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 0.2 % NP-40, 10 % Glycerol, 5 mM NEM, phosphor and protease inhibitor cocktails (25 x 106cells per condition) and subjected to immunoprecipitation using 5 µg ISG15 antibodies (Boston Biochem #A-380) plus 25 μL of protein G Sepharose slurry (Invitrogen; #15920-10) for 16 hours at 4C. Beads were washed 4 times with Co-IP lysis buffer and immunoclomplexes were eluted with 2X Laemmli. 10% of the eluates was used for immunoblotting with the indicated antibodies. The remaining eluate was prepared for MS analysis as previously described 68,69. Briefly: immunoprecipitated sample eluates were diluted to 175 μL with ultra-pure water and reduced with 5 μL of DTT (200 mM in 0.1 M Tris, pH 7.8) for 30 min at 37°C. Samples were alkylated with 20 μL of iodoacetamide (100 mM in 0.1 M Tris, pH 7.8) for 15 min at room temperature (protected from light), followed by protein precipitation using a double methanol/chloroform extraction method. Protein samples were treated with 600 μL of methanol, 150 μL of chloroform, and 450 μL of water, followed by vigorous vortexing. Samples were centrifuged at 17,000 g for 3 min, and the resultant upper aqueous phase was removed. Proteins were pelleted following the addition of 450 μL of methanol and centrifugation at 17,000 g for 6 min. The supernatant was removed, and the extraction process was repeated. Following the second extraction process, precipitated proteins were re-suspended in 50 μL of 6 M urea and diluted to <1 M urea with 250 μL of 20 mM HEPES (pH 8.0) buffer. Protein digestion was carried out by adding trypsin (from a 1 mg/ml stock in 1 mM HCl) to a ratio 1:100, rocking at 12 rpm and room temperature overnight. Following digestion, samples were acidified to 1% trifluoroacetic acid and desalted on C18 solid-phase extraction cartridges (SEP-PAK plus, Waters), dried, and re-suspended in 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid for analysis by LC-MS/MS as described below. Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry/mass spectrometry LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano-ultra high-pressure reverse-phase chromatography coupled on-line to a Q Exactive HF (GlyGly), Fusion Lumos (ISG15 interactome) or a Q Exactive (Matching proteome) mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) as described previously 68-70. In brief, samples were separated on an EASY-Spray PepMap RSLC C18 column (500 mm × 75 μm, 2 μm particle size, Thermo Scientific) over a 60 min (120 min in the case of the matching proteome) gradient of 2–35% acetonitrile in 5% dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), 0.1% formic acid at 250 nL/min. MS1 scans were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 at 200 m/z and the top 12 most abundant precursor ions were selected for high collision dissociation (HCD) fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis From raw MS files, searches against the UniProtKB human sequence data base (92,954 entries) and label-free quantitation were performed using MaxQuant Software (v1.5.5.1). Search parameters include carbamidomethyl (C) as a fixed modification, oxidation (M) and deamidation (NQ as variable modifications, maximum 2 missed cleavages (3 for the GlyGly peptidome analysis), matching between runs, and LFQ quantitation was performed using unique peptides. Label-free interaction data analysis was performed using Perseus (v1.6.0.2), and volcano and scatter plots were generated using a t-test with permutation FDR = 0.01 for multiple-test correction and s0 = 0.1 as cut-off parameters.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Immunotherapy, Proteomics, Usp18, Isg15, Deisgylating enzyme, Cancer

### Affiliations
TDI Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, Target Discovery Institute, Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, Roosevelt Drive, Oxford OX3 7FZ, UK
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Adan Pinto-Fernandez

### Lab Head
Dr Benedikt Kessler
TDI Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, Target Discovery Institute, Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, Roosevelt Drive, Oxford OX3 7FZ, UK


