### Accession
PXD030926

### Title
LC-MS/MS clams and cockle mantle data

### Description
Increased heavy rainfall cause important drops in salinity to values close to 0, which can persist for several days in estuaries. Lethal and sublethal physiological and behavioural effects of decreases in salinity below ten have already been found to occur in the commercially relevant clam species Venerupis corrugata, Ruditapes decussatus and R. philippinarum and the cockle Cerastoderma edule, which generate ~74 million euros annually in Galicia (NW Spain). However, studies of the molecular response to hyposaline stress in bivalves are scarce. This ‘shotgun’ proteomics study evaluates changes in mantle-edge proteins subjected to short-term hyposaline episodes in two different months (March and May) during the gametogenic cycle. We found evidence that the effects of the gametogenic cycle on the proteome are greater than those related to the salinity treatments. However, hyposalinity modulated proteome profiles for both months in V. corrugata and C. edule and on R. philippinarum in May, involving proteins implicated in ROS production, redox homeostasis, cytoskeleton modulation and the activation of apoptotic, autophagic and lipid degradation pathways. Nevertheless, essential proteins for an optimal osmotic stress response but high energy demandants, such as chaperones, osmoprotectants and DNA repair factors, were in both large and small abundance under hyposalinity for those species. In both time points for R. decussatus and R. philippinarum in March, almost no differences between treatments were detected. These exploratory results reinforce the interest in the specific study and conservation of native species C. edule and V. corrugata, particularly sensitive to hyposalinity.

### Sample Protocol
Two low salinity stress experiments were independently run in March and May 2016 in a mesocosm system located in a controlled temperature room at 18ºC at Estación de Ciencias Mariñas de Toralla (ECIMAT) of the Universidade de Vigo (Galicia, NW Spain). This mesocosm system allowed to simulate natural tides and salinity variations automatically. Adult R. decussatus, R. philippinarum and V. corrugata of standardized length (ca. 40 mm) to minimize bias from size were manually collected in the shellfish beds of Cambados (42°30′55″N; 08°48′53″W); cockles C. edule (standardized length ca. 30 mm) were also manually collected in the beds of Noia (42°47′0″N; 8°53′0″W). They were transported to the laboratory in refrigerated coolers and immersed in acclimatization tanks for 24 h. A total of 28 individuals of each species were marked and placed each species in a different 16 L tank, at approximately the densities found in shellfish beds. Treatment consisted of a slow decrease of salinity from 20 to 5 (treatment S5) during the 4.5 h of flood tide followed by a 1.5 h of the low tide after which salinity increased from 5 to 20 during the ebb tide. The control consisted of constant salinity of 30 (control S30) during all tidal cycles. After the six days of stress, five individuals of each species from treatment and control tanks were dug up, cleaned from sands with seawater, and immediately opened separating both valves. For proteomic analysis, a piece of approximately 2 cm length of mantle border of each animal, a tissue less affected by reproductive changes than the gonad or the foot, was cut, individually placed in 4 mL cryovials previously cooled in dry ice and immersed in liquid nitrogen. After 6 hours cryovials were stored in a -80ºC freezer until processing. For proteomic analysis, a total of 80 individuals (20 for each bivalve species) were selected including almost equal proportions of sexes and fairly homogeneous gonadal stage developments from the two experiments carried out either in March and May of 2016 under the two different salinity treatments assayed (S5, S30). From each individual, the mantle border was extracted and homogenised by ultrasonication in lysis buffer (7 M Urea, 2 M Thiourea and 4 % CHAPS). Total protein concentration was quantified using the Bradford method adapted to microplate (Sánchez-Marín et al. 2021) and adjusted to 0.5µg/µl in LC-MS/MS water. Proteins were purified by acetone precipitation method, reduced by tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP), alkylated by iodoacetamide (IAA) and digested with trypsin following the protocol described in Diz and Sánchez-Marín (2021). Tryptic peptides from each sample were tagged with the different isobaric tandem mass tags (TMT) available in the TMT10plexTM kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) following manufacturer instructions and the tag distribution among samples detailed in the GitHub repository: https://github.com/sofblancoglez/LC-MS-MS-clams-cockle-mantle-data. After peptide labelling, each set of ten labelled samples (hereafter TMT10plex experiment) was multiplexed by combining equal volumes (peptide amount) of each sample in the same microtube (see further details in Diz and Sánchez-Marín, 2021). Desalting and pre-fractionation of multiplexed peptide samples to increase the resolution of quantitative proteomic analysis was performed with the Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) following manufacturer instructions yielding eight peptide fractions. Dried peptides from each fraction were resuspended in 0.5% formic acid for tandem mass spectrometry analysis (MS/MS) carried out in a Thermo LTQ-Orbitrap Elite device coupled to a Proxeon EASY-nLC II liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using the higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) mode and high resolution for precursor (MS) and fragment (MS/MS) ion mass analysis.The analysis was performed using the parameters described in Mateos et al. (2019).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification were performed with PEAKS® X Pro software (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, Canada). All MS and MS/MS spectra were compared to a consensus protein database constructed after combining all available RNA sequences (TSA database, March 22) translated into the six reading frames for R. philippinarum (Bioprojects PRJNA137531, PRJNA426752, PRJNA298283 and PRJNA672267 including 5,129,558 sequences from all tissues) and R. decussatus (236,989 sequences from the project PRJNA170474, which includes gonadal tissues from 12 females and 12 males), the translated proteins (14,134 sequences) from gene predictions of the C. edule genome (Bruzos et al., unpublished) and 27 protein sequences available in NCBI for V. corrugata. Sequence redundancy was removed using the CD-HIT software with a similarity threshold of 0.9. This customised database also included a list of sequences from contaminants commonly found in proteomic analysis (cRAP) and decoy sequences to calculate the false discovery rate (FDR). The mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions was set at 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively, allowing a maximum of two missed cleavages for the identification. Carbamidomethylation at cysteine residues and TMT10plex were marked as fixed modifications, while oxidation at methionine and N-terminal acetylation were considered variable modifications. More than two matching peptide sequences and at least one unique peptide were required parameters for protein identification. For Reporter Ion-based quantification, unique peptides with a score higher than FDR ≤ 5% and a quality ≤ 8 were considered.

### Publication Abstract
Increased heavy rainfall can reduce salinity to values close to 0 in estuaries. Lethal and sublethal physiological and behavioural effects of decreases in salinity below ten have already been found to occur in the commercially important clam species Venerupis corrugata, Ruditapes decussatus and R. philippinarum and the cockle Cerastoderma edule, which generate an income of &#x223c;74 million euros annually in Galicia (NW Spain). However, studies of the molecular response to hyposaline stress in bivalves are scarce. This 'shotgun' proteomics study evaluates changes in mantle-edge proteins subjected to short-term hyposaline episodes in two different months (March and May) during the gametogenic cycle. We found evidence that the mantle-edge proteome was more responsive to sampling time than to hyposalinity, strongly suggesting that reproductive stages condition the stress response. However, hyposalinity modulated proteome profiles in V. corrugata and C. edule in both months and R. philippinarum in May, involving proteins implicated in protein folding, redox homeostasis, detoxification, cytoskeleton modulation and the regulation of apoptotic, autophagic and lipid degradation pathways. However, proteins that are essential for an optimal osmotic stress response but which are highly energy demanding, such as chaperones, osmoprotectants and DNA repair factors, were found in small relative abundances. In both months in R. decussatus and in March in R. philippinarum, almost no differences between treatments were detected. Concordant trends in the relative abundance of stress response candidate proteins were also obtained in V. corrugata and C. edule in the different months, but not in Ruditapes spp., strongly suggesting that the osmotic stress response in bivalves is complex and possibly influenced by a combination of controlled (sampling time) and uncontrolled variables. In this paper, we report potential molecular targets for studying the response to osmotic stress, especially in the most osmosensitive native species C. edule and V. corrugata, and suggest factors to consider when searching for biomarkers of hyposaline stress in bivalves.

### Keywords
Cockle, Clam, Proteome, Stress, Salinity

### Affiliations
University of Vigo
Universidade de Vigo

### Submitter
Sofía Blanco

### Lab Head
Dr Ángel E. Pérez Diz
Universidade de Vigo


