### Accession
PXD001640

### Title
Pervasive cis-antisense transcription negatively regulates gene expression in E. coli K12 in response to environmental changes

### Description
cis-antisense RNAs (cis-asRNAs) in prokaryotes are more pervasive than originally thought. However, little is known about their expression patterns and functions. Here we determined transcriptomes and proteomes of E. coli at multiple time points in five culture conditions using directional RNA-seq and tandem mass spectrometry. We found that a highly varying portion (27.2%~90.8%) of transcribed genes had cis-asRNAs dependent on growth phases and culture conditions, and that almost all transcribed genes changed their cis-asRNA levels relative to the mRNA level at different growth phases and culture conditions. Intriguingly, the correlation between the protein and mRNA levels of genes is abolished the increasing cis-asRNA levels relative to the mRNA levels, suggesting that cis-asRNAs might directly or indirectly inhibit translation by forming duplexes with mRNAs. All data sets are available for data mining from a unified resource to support further biological discoveries and insights into cis-asRNA-mediated gene expressional regulation.

### Sample Protocol
Fifty μg of total protein from each sample were separated on 10% Bis-Tris NuPAGE gels (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) with 6X sample buffer containing 300 mM Tris-HCl, 0.01% (w/v) bromophenol blue, 15% (v/v) glycerol, 6% (w/v) SDS and 1% (v/v) β-mercaptoethanol after denaturation at 95 ℃ for 5 min. Gels were stained with GelCode® Blue stain reagent (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA) after fixation using 50% methanol (v/v) with 7% acetic acid (v/v) for 5 min. After destaining with water, each gel lane was excised into twenty slices which were put into in-gel tryptic digestion and peptide extraction according to the method reported previously (Lee et al., 2013) The dried residues were resuspended in 25 µL of 10% ACN (v/v) with 3% formic acid (v/v) for LC-MS/MS analysis

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS system used consisted of an LTQ/Orbitrap-XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA) equipped with Nanoacquity UPLC system (Waters, Milford, MA, USA). Peptides were separated on a reversed phase analytical column (Nanoacquity BEH C18, 1.7μm, 150mm, Waters, Milford, MA, USA) combined with trap column (Nanoacquity, Waters, Milford, MA, USA). Good chromatographic separation was observed with a 80 min linear gradient consisting of mobile phases solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) and solvent B (0.1 % formic acid in ACN) where the gradient was from 5% B at 0 min to 40% B at 65 min at 0.35 µL/min of flow rate. MS spectra were acquired by data dependent scans consisting of MS/MS scans of the eight most intense ions from the full MS scan with dynamic exclusion of 30 seconds.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rna, Escherichia coli, Proteomics, Antisense

### Affiliations
Department of Bioinformatics and Genomics, College of Computing and Informatics, The University of North Carolina at Charlotte, 9201 University City Blvd., Charlotte, NC 28223, USA
UNC Charlotte

### Submitter
Ehsan Tabari

### Lab Head
Dr Zhengchang Su
Department of Bioinformatics and Genomics, College of Computing and Informatics, The University of North Carolina at Charlotte, 9201 University City Blvd., Charlotte, NC 28223, USA


