### Accession
PXD022322

### Title
Proteomic changes associated with sperm fertilizing ability in meat type roosters

### Description
The molecular basis of male infertility is still not well understood. Furthermore, in vitro sperm quality tests are poorly correlated to in vivo fertility. In order to better understand sperm biology and determine potential fertility biomarkers, we used a quantitative bottom-up proteomic approach to identify proteins relative to sperm fertilizing ability in meat roosters, suffering from fertility reduction due to genetic selection side effects.

### Sample Protocol
Two groups of roosters were defined by their fertility rate obtained by artificial insemination: >70%, fertile (F), and <40%, subfertile (SF). Proteomic content (50 µg) of F (N=4) and SF (N=4) sperm was explored by a GeLC-MS/MS strategy after fractionation by SDS-PAGE (4–20%, minigel 8.3 × 6 cm × 0.75 mm) stained using Coomassie blue. For each spermatozoa sample, a total of 5 protein bands were excised from lane. Gel pieces were washed in water, acetonitrile (1:1). Cysteine reduction and alkylation were performed by successive incubations with 10 mM dithiothreitol in 50 mM NH4HCO3 (30 min, at 56°C) and 55 mM iodoacetamide in 50 mM NH4HCO3 (20 min, at room temperature, in the dark). Gel pieces were incubated with 50 mM NH4HCO3 and acetonitrile. Digestion was carried out overnight using 25 mM NH4HCO3 with Trypsin (Sequencing grade, Roche diagnostics, Paris, France) at 12.5 ng/µl. Peptides were extracted and dried using a SPD1010 speedvac system (ThermoSavant, Thermofisher Scientific). For each protein band, the resultant peptide mixture was reconstituted with 30 µl of 0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile, sonicated for 10 min, and analysed by nanoLC-MS/MS in triplicate using a LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer coupled to an Ultimate® 3000 RSLC Ultra High Pressure Liquid Chromatographer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Samples were loaded on a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, 100 mm i.d. x 2 cm long, 3 mm particles) and desalted. Separation was conducted using a nano-column (Acclaim PepMap C18, 75 mm i.d x 50 cm long, 3 mm particles). Mobile phases consisted of (A) 0.1% formic acid, 97.9% water, 2% acetonitrile (v/v/v) and (B) 0.1% formic acid, 19.9% water, 80% acetonitrile (v/v/v). The gradient consisted of 4-55% B for 90 min at 300 nl/min flow rate. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive data-dependent mode using Xcalibur software (version 2.1; Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). In the scan range of m/z 300-1800 with a targeted resolution at 60,000, the 20 most intense ions with charge states ≥2 were sequentially isolated (2 m/z isolation width ; 1 micro scan) and fragmented using CID (collision-induced dissociation) mode (normalized collision energy of 35% and wideband-activation enabled). A lock mass corresponding to polydimethylcyclosiloxane ions (m/z, 445.1200025, (Si(CH3)2O)6) was enabled for accurate mass measurements.

### Data Protocol
Protein data identification was performed using Mascot search engine version 2.6.2 (Matrix Science, London, UK) combined to Proteome Discoverer 2.1 software (ThermoFisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany), against a local copy of NCBInr for the chordata taxonomy. The search parameters included trypsin as a protease with two allowed missed cleavages and carbamidomethylcysteine, methionine oxidation and acetylation of N-term protein as variable modifications. The tolerance of the ions was set to 5 ppm for parent and 0.8 Da for fragment ion matches. Identified proteins were subjected to Scaffold v4.11.1 software (Proteome Software Inc., Portland, USA) for validation using protein cluster analysis and quantification. Protein identification was validated when at least two peptides were identified and when the probability was at least 95% and 95%, as specified by the PeptideProphet and ProteinProphet algorithms, respectively (FDR < 0.01% for proteins). A comparative analysis was performed using two independent label free quantitative methods based on Spectral Counting (SC, Weighed Spectra option) and on Average Precursor Intensity (API) method. Differences were considered statistically significant for t-test with a p-value < 0.05, a fold change/ratio of  ≥ 1.4 and a limit on average normalized weighted spectra (NWS) of ≥ 5 were included.

### Publication Abstract
The molecular basis of male fertility remains unclear, especially in chickens, where decades of genetic selection increased male fertility variability as a side effect. As transcription and translation are highly limited in sperm, proteins are key molecules defining their functionality, making proteomic approaches one of the most adequate methods to investigate sperm capacity. In this context, it is interesting to combine complementary proteomic approaches to maximize the identification of proteins related to sperm-fertilizing ability. In the present study, we aimed at identifying proteins related to fertility in meat-type roosters, showing fertility variability. Fertile roosters (fertility rates higher than 70% after artificial insemination) differed from subfertile roosters (fertility rates lower than 40%) in their sperm mass motility. Fertile and subfertile sperm protein contents were compared using two complementary label-free quantitative proteomic methods: Intact Cell MALDI-TOF-Mass Spectrometry and GeLC-MS/MS. Combining the two strategies, 57 proteins were identified as differentially abundant. Most of them were described for the first time as differentially abundant according to fertility in this species. These proteins were involved in various molecular pathways including flagellum integrity and movement, mitochondrial functions, sperm maturation, and storage in female tract as well as oocyte-sperm interaction. Collectively, our data improved our understanding of chicken sperm biology by revealing new actors involved in the complexity of male fertility that depends on multiple cell functions to reach optimal rates. This explains the inability of reductionist <i>in vitro</i> fertility testing in predicting male fertility and suggests that the use of a combination of markers is a promising approach.

### Keywords
Spermatozoa, Fertility, Chicken

### Affiliations
INRAE
INRAE Centre Val de Loire, France

### Submitter
Valerie LABAS

### Lab Head
Dr Anaïs Vitorino Carvalho
INRAE Centre Val de Loire, France


