### Accession
PXD017891

### Title
Optimization of skeletal protein preparation for LC-MS/MS sequencing yields additional coral skeletal proteins in Stylophora pistillata

### Description
Stony corals generate their calcium carbonate exoskeleton in a highly controlled biomineralization process mediated by a variety of macromolecules including proteins. Fully identifying and classifying these proteins is crucial to understanding their role in exoskeleton formation, yet no optimal method to extract and isolate and characterize coral skeletal proteins has been established and their complete composition remains obscure. Here, we tested four skeletal protein extraction protocols using acetone precipitation and ultrafiltration dialysis filters to present a comprehensive scleractinian coral skeletal proteome. We identified a total of 60 proteins in the coral skeleton, 44 of which were not present in previously published stony coral skeletal proteomes. Extracted protein treatment protocols carried out in this study revealed that there is no “one optimal method” and each protocol revealed a unique set of method-exclusive proteins. To better understand the general mechanism of skeletal protein transportation, we further examined the proteins’ gene ontology, transmembrane domains, and signal peptides. We found that transmembrane domain proteins and signal peptide secretion pathways, by themselves, could not explain the transportation of proteins to the skeleton . We therefore propose that proteins are transported to the skeletal via vesicles and possibly non-traditional secretion pathways.

### Sample Protocol
The hermatypic coral Stylophora pistillata (Esper, 1797) was collected in front of the H. Steinitz Marine Biology Laboratory, Eilat, Israel, Red Sea (29°30_N, 34°56_E.We fragmented one S. pistillata colony into small pieces, approximately 2x2 cm, with a diamond band saw. Coral fragments were transferred to 50-ml Falcon brand conical vials (Falcon tubes) and oxidized with 20 mL 1:1 of 30% H2O2: 3% NaClO solution for 1 hour, during which 1.5 mL of 3% NaClO solution were gently added to the tubes every 20 minutes and continued the incubation overnight at room temperature following modified methods of Stoll et al. (2003). Fragments were washed with double distilled water five times for one minute each time and dried at 60 C˚ overnight. We crushed the cleaned fragments to 63 µm diameter with a mortar and pestle. Skeleton powder was then oxidized in sterile Falcon tubes and washed as above three more times (i.e., four complete rounds of oxidative cleaning) to ensure that no organic residue remained on the skeletal grains. In each cycle, the removal of the oxidizing or washes solution was performed by centrifugation at 5,000 x g for 3 min at 4 C˚. Cleaned skeletal powder was then dried overnight at 60 C˚. We decalcified approximately 1.3 g cleaned skeleton powder per protein extraction protocol in 0.5 M acetic acid (30 ml acid/g cleaned skeleton powder) in Falcon tubes while rotating the tubes at room temperature for 3 hours. Samples were then centrifuged at 5,000 x g for 5 min at 4oC and supernatant was transferred to a new tube and stored at 4oC. We continued the decalcification of the undissolved pellets with a second volume of 0.5 M acetic acid and allowed decalcification to proceed to completion. We then combined both liquid fractions (70 ml total) for each sample, froze the total volumes at -80˚C, and dried them by overnight lyophilization. The dried pellets were stored in -80°C until further processing. The lyophilized pellets were re-suspended in 12 ml MilliQ water and the proteins were concentrated on 3 kD cutoff Amicon® Ultra 15 centrifugal filter units (Merk-Millipore) 5,000 x g at 4˚C to reach a  final volume of 0.5 ml. To continue desalting the samples we diluted them again to 12 ml in MilliQ  water and repeated the concentration procedure as above. At this stage, we observed an insoluble pellet in all samples. Two filter-concentrated samples containing both soluble and insoluble fractions were examined for the effects of centrifugal filtration.  Sample CF2  was centrifuged at 5,000 x g for 5 min at 4°C to pellet the insoluble fraction (AIM).  Both the ASM and AIM of CF2 were divided into separate sterile 1.5 ml microcentrifuge tubes, lyophilized, and stored at -80°C until further use.  Sample CF4 was desalted as described above for a third time before separating ASM and AIM fractions.  Both ACT samples were centrifuged as above for CF2 to separate ASM and AIM fractions.  To sample ACT1 ASM (concentrated to 0.5 ml by centrifugal filtration as described above) was added 2 ml 100% ice cold acetone. The sample was vortexed for 10 seconds, incubated at -20°C for 30 minutes, and centrifuged at 4,300 x g for 30 min at 4°C. Finally, the pellet was washed three more times with 2 mL of 80% ice cold acetone and stored then at -80°C until further use. The AIM fraction was similarly washed four times with 80% acetone. Both fractions of sample ACT3 were treated as in ACT1 but with one less washing step of each fraction. S. pistillata skeletal protein samples were dissolved in 5% SDS and digested with trypsin using the S-trap method overnight at room temperature. We analyzed the resulting peptides with nanoflow ultra-performance liquid chromatograph (nanoAcquity) coupled to a high resolution, high mass accuracy mass spectrometer (Fusion Lumos). The sample was trapped on a Symmetry C18 0.18*20mm trap column (Waters) and separated on a HSS T3 0.075*250 mm column (Waters Inc.) using a gradient of 4-28% (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% Formic acid) for 150 minutes. Spray voltage was set to +2kV. The data were acquired in the Fusion Lumos using a Top Speed Data-Dependent Acquisition method using a cycle time of 3 s. An MS1 scan was performed in the Orbitrap at 120,000 resolution with a maximum injection time of 60 ms. The data were scanned between 300-1800 m/z. MS2 was selected using a monoisotopic precursor selection (MIPS) set to peptides, peptide charge states set to +2-+8 and dynamic exclusion set to 30 s. MS2 was performed using HCD fragmentation scanned in the Orbitrap, with the first mass set to 130 m/z at a resolution of 15,000. Maximum injection time was set to 60 ms with automatic gain control of 5x10-4 ions as a fill target.

### Data Protocol
The resulting data were searched against the NCBI Stylophora pistallata protein database using the Byonic search engine (Protein Metrics Inc.) – the first search was carried out without any false discovery rate (FDR) filtering, to generate a focused database for a second search. The second search was set to 1% FDR, allowing fixed carbamidomethylation on C and variable oxidation on MW, deamidation on NQ and protein N-terminal acetylation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cnidaria, Acetone precipitation, Highly acidic proteins, Scleractinia, Centrifugal filtration

### Affiliations
Weizmann institute
Department of Marine Biology, University of Haifa, Israel

### Submitter
David Morgenstern

### Lab Head
Dr Tali Mass
Department of Marine Biology, University of Haifa, Israel


