### Accession
PXD017618

### Title
ProteoCombiner: integrating bottom-up with top-down proteomics data for improved proteoform assessment

### Description
Here we present a high-performance software for proteome analysis that combines different mass spectrometric approaches, such as, top-down for intact protein analyses and both bottom-up and middle-down, for proteolytic fragment characterization.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation Escherichia coli K12 bacteria growing in LB medium were harvested at late exponential growth phase. After cycles of wash in PBS and centrifugation (10 min., 5,000 rpm, 4°C), cell pellets were recovered in 80% H2O, 10% ACN, 10% FA. Cell lysis was performed by mechanical disruption using a high-speed homogenizer (FastPrep - MP Biomedicals). After cell debris removal by centrifugation (10 min., 14,000 rpm, 4°C), bacterial lysate samples were transferred into a fresh tube and stored at -80°C.  1) Top-down approach LC-MS/MS A Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLC Nano System coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ mass spectrometer fitted with a nano-electrospray ionization source (Thermo-Scientific) was used. Five µL of protein sample in solvent A (98% H2O, 2% ACN, 0.1% FA) were loaded at a flow rate of 10 µL.min-1 onto an in-house packed C4 (5µm, Reprosil) trap column (0.150 mm i.d. x 30 mm) and separated at a flow rate of 0.5 µL.min-1 using a C4 (5 µm, Reprosil) column (0.075 mm i.d. x 600 mm). The following gradient was used: 2.5% solvent B (20% H2O, 80% ACN, 0.1% FA) from 0–5 min; 15% B at 6.6 min.; 60% B at 124 min.; 99% B from 126–131 min.; and 2.5% B from 132–150 min. MS scans were acquired at 60,000 resolving power (at m/z 400) with a scan range set to 550–1,750 m/z, two microscans (µscans) per MS scan, an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 5x105 and maximum injection time of 50 ms. MS/MS scans were acquired using the DDA mode (Data-Dependent Acquisition) (Top 4) at 60,000 resolving power (at m/z 400) with an isolation width of 1.5 m/z, two µscans, an AGC target value of 5x105 and maximum injection time of 250 ms. For fragmentation, electron transfer dissociation with 10 ms of reaction time and a supplemental higher-energy collisional dissociation with normalized collision energy (NCE) of 10% (EThcD) was used.  2) Bottom-up approach In solution protein digestion Escherichia coli K12 samples were re-suspended in 100 µL 8 M urea/ 100 mM Tris HCl pH 8.5. Briefly, samples were reduced with 5 mM TCEP for 30 minutes at room temperature and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 minutes at room temperature in the dark. Then, proteins were firstly digested for 5 hours at 30°C with 500 ng rLys-C Mass Spec Grade (Promega, Madison, WI, USA). Samples were then diluted 4 folds with 100 mM Tris HCl pH 8.5 to reach a concentration of 2 M urea and then re-incubated overnight at 37°C with 1 µg Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA). A second incubation with the same amount of trypsin (5 hours at 37°C) was performed to ensure a complete digestion. Digestion was stopped by adding formic acid to 5 % final concentration and peptides were desalted and concentrated on Sep-Pak C18 SPE cartridge (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) according to manufactures instructions.  LC-MS/MS Tryptic peptides were analyzed on a Q Exactive™ Plus instrument coupled with an EASY nLC 1000 chromatography system (Thermo-Scientific). Sample was loaded on an in-house packed nano-HPLC column (0.075 mm i.d. x 500 mm) with C18 resin (1.9 μm particles, 100 Å pore size, Reprosil-Pur Basic C18-HD resin) and equilibrated in 98% solvent A and 2% solvent B (same as for top-down experiments). The following gradient was used at 250 nL.min-1 flow rate to elute peptides: 2 to 18% solvent B from 0–112 min; 30% B at 147 min.; 45% B at 162 min.; and 60% B at 167 min. The instrument method was set up in DDA mode. After a survey scan in the Orbitrap (resolution 70,000), the 10 most intense precursor ions (Top10) were selected for HCD fragmentation with a normalized collision energy set up to 27. Charge state screening was enabled, and precursors with unknown charge state or a charge state of 1 and >7 were excluded. Dynamic exclusion was enabled for 45 s.

### Data Protocol
1) Bottom-up data analysis All data were processed with ProSightPC v3.0 (Thermo-Scientific) and Proteome Discoverer v2.1 (Thermo-Scientific) using the ProSightPD 1.1 node. Spectral data were first deconvoluted and deisotoped using the cRAWler algorithm. Spectra were then searched using a Three Tier Search tree with searches against an E. coli (strain K12, taxon identifier 83333) protein database (Uniprot release 2017-11, XML version, 6,174 protein entries). The Uniprot database was created using the database manager application within ProSightPC v3.0. Potential initial methionine cleavage and N-terminal acetylation, as well as known modifications, were included, resulting in a database in a ProSight Warehouse File (*.pwf) format containing 69,838 proteoforms. The first search consisted of a ProSight Absolute Mass search with MS1 tolerance of 2 Da and MS2 tolerance of 5 ppm. The second search was a ProSight Biomarker search with MS1 tolerance of 2 Da and MS2 tolerance of 5 ppm. The third search was a ProSight Absolute Mass search performed with MS1 tolerance of 10,000 Da and MS2 tolerance of 5 ppm. Identifications with e-values better than 1e-10 (–log (e-value) =10) were considered.  2) Top-down data analysis All data were searched using Andromeda with MaxQuant software version 1.5.3.8 and PatternLab for proteomics software version 4.1.1.13 against Escherichia coli K12 reference proteome from Uniprot (6,082 entries) concatenated with usual known mass spectrometry contaminants and reversed sequences of all entries. Both searches were performed choosing trypsin as specific enzyme with a maximum number of 2 missed cleavages. Possible modifications included carbamidomethylation (Cys, fixed), oxidation (Met, variable) and N-Term acetylation (variable). The mass tolerance in MS was set to 20 ppm for the first search then 6 ppm for the main search and 10 ppm for the MS/MS. Maximum peptide charge was set to seven and five amino acids were required as minimum peptide length. The “match between runs” feature was applied between replicates with a maximal retention time window of 2 minutes. One unique peptide to the protein group was required for the protein identification. A false discovery rate (FDR) cutoff of 1 % was applied at the peptide and protein levels.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Top-down, Bottom-up, Bioinformatics

### Affiliations
Mass Spectrometry for Biology Unit, Institut Pasteur, CNRS USR 2000, Paris, France
CeMM - Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Diogo Borges Lima

### Lab Head
Dr Julia Chamot-Rooke
Mass Spectrometry for Biology Unit, Institut Pasteur, CNRS USR 2000, Paris, France


