### Accession
PXD007907

### Title
Tef (Eragrostis tef) iTRAQ-labelled protein fractions

### Description
The orphan crop, Eragrostis tef, was subjected to controlled drought conditions to observe the physiological parameters and proteins changing in response to dehydration stress. Physiological measurements involving electrolyte leakage, chlorophyll fluorescence and ultra-structural analysis showed tef plants to tolerate water loss to 50% RWC before adverse effects in leaf tissues were observed. Proteomic analysis using iTRAQ mass spectrometry and appropriate database searching enabled the detection of 5727 proteins, of which 211 proteins, including a number of spliced variants, were found to be differentially regulated with imposed stress conditions. Validation of the stress-related proteins, fructose-bisphosphate aldolase (FBA), glutamine synthetase (GLN) and the protective antioxidant proteins, monodehydroascorbate reductase (MDHAR) and peroxidase (POX), using immunodetection and enzymatic assay confirmed protein presence according to iTRAQ findings and showed increased protein abundance levels and enzymatic activity in response to water-deficit. GO-term enrichment and analysis revealed terms involved in biotic and abiotic stress response, signaling, transport, cellular homeostasis and pentose metabolic processes, to be enriched in tef up-regulated proteins, while terms linked to ROS-producing processes under water-deficit, such as photosynthesis and associated light harvesting reactions, manganese transport and homeostasis, the synthesis of sugars and cell wall catabolism and modification, to be enriched in tef down-regulated proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Total proteins were extracted from hydrated and dehydrated tef tissues using a phenol-based protein extraction method and subjected to protein diegstion to peptides with trypsin enzyme by utilising the filter-assisted sample preparation procedure (FASP). Tryptic digests were labelled with the iTRAQ tags (113, 114, 115, 116, 117, 118, 119 and 121) according to experimental design, followed by peptide purification on C18 de-salting spin columns and seperation of peptides according to their isoelectric points using OFFGEL fractionation. Subsequent to fractionation, peptides were subjected to an additional purification step with C18 spin columns before analysis by ESI-Q-tof-MS/MS mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
The raw mass spectra data files were firstly converted to .mzML format followed by conversion to .mgf file formats, using the open source software, MSConvert available from the ProteoWizard (version 1.6.0). Files were imported into PEAKS Studio (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., version 6.0) and database searching with the Tef Extended transcriptome database (converted to protein sequences in FASTA format and referred to as the TE database)was employed with the following search parameters (parent mass error tolerance of 20.0 ppm, fragment mass error tolerance of 0.1 Da, pre-cursor mass search type set as monoisotopic, selection of trypsin as enzyme used, maximum missed cleavages per peptide set at 2, fixed modifications set at iTRAQ 8-plex (K, N-term) and beta-methylthiolation, variable modifications set at iTRAQ 8-plex (Y) and Oxidation (M) with max variable PTM per peptide set at 3). A concatenated decoy database was automatically generated by PEAKS Studio 6.0 when searches were implemented and further used to determine false discovery rates. Quantification results were filtered to false discovery rate (FDR < 0.01; peptide and protein -10logP score > 20) and only considering proteins with more than 2 unique peptides.  iTRAQ data processing (protein quantitation and statistical analysis) was conducted subsequent to manual editing and refinement of iTRAQ data (peptide output from PEAKS 6.0) using strict and rigorous filtering methods: peptides with only 1 or 2 expression values present (of the 3 for each treatment) in the labelled channels (115 to 121) were removed. Peptides with a zero value were kept if the zero values were found consecutively in the hydrated (115-117) or dehydrated (118-121) labelled channels, respectively. Values of zero in the labelled channels 113 and 114, used as internal controls to observe technical variance between samples, were also retained. In order to avoid problems with numerical computations in the downstream analysis, the remaining zeros were changed to 1 (excluding labelled channels 113 and 114). For normalisation of peptide quantitative expression data, quantile normalisation was employed using the R-Bioconductor program followed by arcsinh (inverse hyperbolic sine) transformation and statistical analysis with the protViz package (version 0.1.48). Statistical testing was performed through an independent samples t-test (unpaired) that assigns a p-value to each individual peptide identity and tests for a significant difference (p-value ≤ 0.05) through the two-group comparison test between hydrated (control) and dehydrated (experimental) quantitative expression values. While the analysis was performed on each individual peptide identity, the output was given in such a manner that statistical significance for change in quantitative expression is observed in protein form. Thus, the peptides corresponding to the designated proteins were then stacked together through a ‘weighted sum’ approach to provide the overall change in quantitative expression between individual proteins.

### Publication Abstract
The orphan crop, <i>Eragrostis tef</i>, was subjected to controlled drought conditions to observe the physiological parameters and proteins changing in response to dehydration stress. Physiological measurements involving electrolyte leakage, chlorophyll fluorescence and ultra-structural analysis showed tef plants tolerated water loss to 50% relative water content (RWC) before adverse effects in leaf tissues were observed. Proteomic analysis using isobaric tag for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ) mass spectrometry and appropriate database searching enabled the detection of 5727 proteins, of which 211 proteins, including a number of spliced variants, were found to be differentially regulated with the imposed stress conditions. Validation of the iTRAQ dataset was done with selected stress-related proteins, fructose-bisphosphate aldolase (FBA) and the protective antioxidant proteins, monodehydroascorbate reductase (MDHAR) and peroxidase (POX). Western blot analyses confirmed protein presence and showed increased protein abundance levels during water deficit while enzymatic activity for FBA, MDHAR and POX increased at selected RWC points. Gene ontology (GO)-term enrichment and analysis revealed terms involved in biotic and abiotic stress response, signaling, transport, cellular homeostasis and pentose metabolic processes, to be enriched in tef upregulated proteins, while terms linked to reactive oxygen species (ROS)-producing processes under water-deficit, such as photosynthesis and associated light harvesting reactions, manganese transport and homeostasis, the synthesis of sugars and cell wall catabolism and modification, to be enriched in tef downregulated proteins.

### Keywords
Total proteins, Quantitative proteomics, Tef, Offgel fractionation, Itraq, Dehydration stress

### Affiliations
Plant Stress Lab, Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Cape Town
University of Cape Town

### Submitter
Rizqah  Kamies

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Suhail Rafudeen
Plant Stress Lab, Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Cape Town


