### Accession
PXD008748

### Title
Nucleolar-nucleoplasmic shuttling of the RNA-binding macrodomain-containing TARG1 is controlled by DNA damage-induced poly-ADP-ribose and implies functions in ribosome biogenesis

### Description
In this project we employed affinity purification mass spectrometry to determine the interactome of the macrodomain containing protein TARG1/OARD1. TARG1 functions as a hydrolase towards mono-ADP-ribosylation (MARylation). TARG1 sowed strong binding to ribosomes and proteins associated with rRNA processing. However, when poly-ADP- ribosylation (PARylation) was present in the cellular lysate, TARG1 was found to interacts with DNA repair and chromatin-associated proteins, including ARTD1, in a PARylation-dependent manner. PARylation events also lead to a change in the subcellular localization of TARG1, which was found to reside in the nucleolus in resting cells, and shuttle to the nucleoplasm upon PARylation

### Sample Protocol
Tandem affinity purification (TAP) of TAP-TARG1 vs control (absence and presence of the PARylation inhibitor olaparib) was performed using a standard TAP protocol. As a final step of the purification the beads were washed three times with calmodulin wash buffer, dried and stored at -80°C. The interacting proteins were digested on-bead using trypsin as the sole protease for one hour (2 M urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5 and 5 μg/mL Trypsin), followed by two washes (2 M urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5 and 1 mM DTT). All supernatants were combined and left to digest o/n at room temperature. After iodoacetamide modification and acidification of the samples, the peptides were desalted using homemade C18-tips and analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS (Q Exactive (minus olaparib) and Orbitrap Elite (plus olaparib)).

### Data Protocol
The resulting raw data was analyzed using MaxQuant (1.5.1.2) with the built-in Andromeda search engine. The spectra were searched against the human SwissProt database version 06/2015 (canonical and isoforms). Ratios of TAP-TARG1 vs control were calculated using the LFQ intensities provided by MaxQuant

### Publication Abstract
Macrodomains are conserved protein folds associated with ADP-ribose binding and turnover. ADP-ribosylation is a posttranslational modification catalyzed primarily by ARTD (aka PARP) enzymes in cells. ARTDs transfer either single or multiple ADP-ribose units to substrates, resulting in mono- or poly-ADP-ribosylation. TARG1/C6orf130 is a macrodomain protein that hydrolyzes mono-ADP-ribosylation and interacts with poly-ADP-ribose chains. Interactome analyses revealed that TARG1 binds strongly to ribosomes and proteins associated with rRNA processing and ribosomal assembly factors. TARG1 localized to transcriptionally active nucleoli, which occurred independently of ADP-ribose&#xa0;binding. TARG1 shuttled continuously between nucleoli and nucleoplasm. In response to DNA damage, which activates ARTD1/2 (PARP1/2) and promotes synthesis of poly-ADP-ribose chains, TARG1 re-localized to the nucleoplasm. This was dependent on the ability of TARG1 to bind to poly-ADP-ribose. These findings are consistent with the observed ability of TARG1 to competitively interact with RNA and PAR chains. We propose a nucleolar role of TARG1 in ribosome assembly or quality control that is stalled when TARG1 is re-located to sites of DNA damage.

### Keywords
Human, Adp-ribosylation, Ap-ms

### Affiliations
Proteomics Facility, IZKF Aachen, University Clinic RWTH Aachen

### Submitter
Christian Preisinger

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Christian Preisinger
Proteomics Facility, IZKF Aachen, University Clinic RWTH Aachen


