### Accession
PXD011776

### Title
Proteomic profiling of Serratia marcescens (ATCC13880) by high-resolution mass spectrometry

### Description
Serratia marcescens (S. marcescens), an opportunistic human pathogen, has been identified as a major cause of nosocomial infection and outbreaks. The purpose of this analysis is to examine the S. marcescens (ATCC 13880) protein profile using a high resolution mass spectrometry (MS). S. marcescens ATCC 13880 strain was grown in Luria-Bertani broth and the protein extracted underwent trypsin digestion followed by simple reverse phase liquid chromatography fractionation. Peptide fractions were then analyzed using Orbitrap Fusion Mass Spectrometry and raw MS data was processed using Proteome Discoverer software. The proteomic study identified 2,541 unique protein groups, corresponding to approximately 54% of the measured protein-coding genes. Bioinformatics analysis of these identified proteins demonstrated their involvement in biological processes such as cell wall organization, caperone-mediated protein folding and ATP binding. To our knowledge, this is the first high-performance S.marcescens proteomics analysis (ATCC 13880). These novel observations provide a key baseline molecular profile of the S. marcescens proteome which will prove to be helpful for the future research in understanding the host-pathogen interactions during infection, elucidating the mechanism of multidrug resistance and for developing novel diagnostic markers or vaccine for the disease.

### Sample Protocol
The cell pellets with buffer containing 4% SDS were subjected to sonication (30 seconds and 20% amplitude with an interval of 5 seconds each) in Branson 450 Digital Sonifier (Marshall Scientific, Hampton, NH, USA). The lysates were centrifuged (14,000 RPM for 10 minutes) and the clear supernatant was collected and aliquoted. One aliquot was used for protein estimation using BCA assay and the other aliquot was stored at –80 ºC till further analysis. In-solution digestion and fractionation was performed. Around 500 µg of protein was subjected to reduction using 100 mM DTT and alkylation using 10 mM iodoacetamide, followed by buffer exchange with 8 M urea to reduce the SDS concentration, using a 30 kDa MWCO spin filters (EMD Millipore, Billerica, MA). The buffer exchanged sample was diluted and then digested using sequencing grade modified trypsin (16 hours at 37 ºC). The peptide digest was cleaned using Sep-Pak C18 columns and vacuum-dried. The vacuum-dried samples were reconstituted in basic reverse phase liquid chromatography (bRPLC) solvent A containing 10 mM TEABC in water at, pH 8.5 and loaded on XBridge C18, 5 µm 250 x 4.6 mm column connected to Agilent 1100 series HPLC system. The peptide digest was resolved using a gradient of 0 to 40% solvent B containing 10 mM TEABC in ACN at pH 8.5 in 50 minutes. A total of 96 fractions were collected and concatenated to 6 fractions based on the hydrophobicity. These fractions were then vacuum dried and stored at -20 ºC until further LC-MS/MS analysis was performed.  MS analysis was performed using the Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled to an Easy-nLC-1200 nanoflow LC system (Thermo Scientific). The peptide digests from each fraction were reconstituted in 20 µl of solvent A and around 10 µl of this sample having 2 µg of peptide was loaded onto trap column (75 µm x 2 cm) packed in-house with Magic C18 AQ (Michrom Bioresources, Inc., Auburn, CA, USA, 5 µm particle size, pore size 100 Å) at a flow rate of 5 µl/min with solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water). The separation of peptides were performed on an analytical column (75 µm x 15 cm) using a gradient of solvent A (0.1% formic acid) and solvent B (90% ACN with 0.1% formic acid) over 90 minutes at a flow rate of 300 nl/min.  6 LC-MS/MS runs were performed. Data-dependent MS acquisition in positive mode was achieved. For MS/MS, top intense precursor ions from a 3 second duty cycle were preferred and subjected to HCD with 32% normalized collision energy. The fragment ions were detected at a mass resolution of 15,000 at m/z of 200 as explained previously.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS searches were carried using SEQUEST (V 2.4.1) search algorithm through Proteome Discoverer (Version 2.2) software (Thermo Scientific) against S. marcescens (ATCC 13880) NCBI protein list (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/). The search workflow included SEQUEST (version 2.4.1), spectrum selector, search nodes, spectrum files, Sequest HT and Percolator. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification, acetylation of protein N-termini, oxidation of methionine and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine were set as variable modifications. MS and MS/MS mass tolerances were set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. The data was searched against the decoy database, and 1% FDR at both peptide and PSM levels was applied for the analysis.

### Publication Abstract
<i><b>Introduction:</b> Serratia marcescens,</i> an opportunistic human pathogen, is reported as an important cause of nosocomial infection and outbreaks. Although the genome of <i>S. marcescens</i> (ATCC 13880) was completely sequenced by 2014, there are no studies on the proteomic profile of the organism. The objective of the present study is to analyze the protein profile of <i>S. marcescens</i> (ATCC 13880) using a high resolution mass spectrometry (MS). <i><b>Methods:</b> Serratia marcescens</i> ATCC 13880 strain was grown in Luria-Bertani broth and the protein extracted was subjected to trypsin digestion, followed by basic reverse phase liquid chromatography fractionation. The peptide fractions were then analysed using Orbitrap Fusion Mass Spectrometry and the raw MS data were processed in Proteome Discoverer software. <i><b>Results:</b></i> The proteomic analysis identified 15&#x2003;009 unique peptides mapping to 2541 unique protein groups, which corresponds to approximately 54% of the computationally predicted protein-coding genes. Bioinformatic analysis of these identified proteins showed their involvement in biological processes such as cell wall organization, chaperone-mediated protein folding and ATP binding. Pathway analysis revealed that some of these proteins are associated with bacterial chemotaxis and beta-lactam resistance pathway. <i><b>Conclusion:</b></i> To the best of our knowledge, this is the first high-throughput proteomics study of S. marcescens (ATCC 13880). These novel observations provide a crucial baseline molecular profile of the <i>S. marcescens</i> proteome which will prove to be helpful for the future research in understanding the host-pathogen interactions during infection, elucidating the mechanism of multidrug resistance, and developing novel diagnostic markers or vaccine for the disease.

### Keywords
Antibiotic resistance, Lc-ms/ms, Serratia, Gram negative bacteria, Orbitrap fusion

### Affiliations
Dr. Sharath R Associate Professor  Department of Food Technology, Davangere University Shivagangotri, Davanagere - 577007, Karnataka, India.
Associate Professor, Department of Food Technology, Shivagangotri, Davangere University, Davangere-577007

### Submitter
Sharath  R

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Sharath R
Dr. Sharath R Associate Professor  Department of Food Technology, Davangere University Shivagangotri, Davanagere - 577007, Karnataka, India.


