### Accession
PXD015986

### Title
LC-MS/MS analysis of immunoprecipitation samples of Tetrahymena meiotic proteins Mcmd1 and Pamd1

### Description
Recombinational repair of meiotic DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) uses the homologous chromosome as a template, although the sister chromatid offers itself as a spatially more convenient substrate. In many organisms, this choice of the homolog rather than the sister is reinforced by the recombination protein Dmc1. We found that, in Tetrahymena, in the absence of two novel proteins, Mcmd1 and Pamd1, Dmc1 is misregulated. Hence, to find out potential interactions, we did LC-MS/MS analysis for Mcmd1 and Pamd1 immunoprecipitation samples.

### Sample Protocol
For co-immunoprecipitation, 400 ml of conjugating cells (∼5105 cells/ml) expressing C-terminally HA-tagged Mcmd1 or Pamd1 protein were harvested 3.5 h after mixing, resuspended in 10 ml ice-cold lysis buffer (30 mM Tris-Base, 20 mM KCl, 2 mM MgCl2, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% Triton X-100, 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonylfluoride (PMSF), and cOmplete EDTA-free protease inhibitor (Roche, Indianapolis, IN), pH 7.5), and lysed with a 15 ml Dounce tissue grinder (Kimber Chase, Vineland, NJ). The cell lysate was filtered and incubated with 100 μl EZview Red Anti-HA Affinity Gel (Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO) for 2 h at 4°C. After washing four times with 1 ml wash buffer (30 mM Tris-Base, 20 mM KCl, 2 mM MgCl2, 1 mM PMSF, cOmplete protease inhibitor, pH 7.5; three times in the presence of 0.1% Triton X-100 and once without), proteins associated with the anti-HA antibody were eluted by incubating the gel beads in 400 μl wash buffer containing 0.1% Triton X-100 and 250 μg/ml HA peptide at room temperature for 20 min. Eluates were precipitated with 10% trichloroacetic acid (TCA) and boiled in 1 SDS-loading buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH6.8, 2% sodium dodecyl sulfate, 10% glycerol, 1% β-mercaptoethanol, 0.02% bromophenol blue). TCA-precipitated samples were run into an SDS-PAGE gel for 2 cm and separated protein bands were stained with Coomassie-Blue and excised for tryptic digestion. Gel bands were excised and after reduction and alkylation of thiols using dithiothreitol and iodoacetamide, the proteins were digested with trypsin as described by Shevchenko et al (2006, Nat Protoc., 1(6), 2856-60)., with slight modifications. After digestion, the peptide solutions were desalted on custom-made C18 stagetips. Tryptic digests were separated on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano-flow chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA), using a pre-column for sample loading (PepMapAcclaim C18, 2 cm × 0.1 mm, 5 μm) and a C18 analytical column (PepMapAcclaim C18, 50 cm × 0.75 mm, 2 μm, Dionex-Thermo-Fisher Scientific), applying a linear gradient from 2 to 35% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid; solvent A 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 230 nl min−1 over 120 minutes. Eluted peptides were analyzed on a Q Exactive HF-X Orbitrap mass spectrometer, equipped with a customized nano-spray EASY-Spray ion-source (Thermo-Fisher) using coated emitter tips (New Objective). For the data-dependent mode survey, scans were obtained in a mass range of 375–1500 m/z, at a resolution of 120,000 at 200 m/z and an AGC target value of 3E6. The 8 most intense ions were selected with an isolation width of 1.6 Da, fragmented in the HCD cell at 28% collision energy and the spectra recorded at a target value of 1E5 and a resolution of 30,000. Peptides with unassigned, +1 or > +6 charge state were excluded from fragmentation, the peptide match was set to preferred, the exclude isotope features was enabled and selected precursors were dynamically excluded from repeated sampling for 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed with MaxQuant software 1.6.0.16 (http://www.maxquant.org/) searching against a Tetrahymena database (www.ciliate.org, version 2014 supplemented with sequences from www.jcvi.org build 2014; the FASTA files used are uploaded with the raw data) and a custom contamination database, with tryptic specificity allowing two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications — all other parameters were set to default. Results were filtered at a protein and peptide false discovery rate of 1%. For data analysis reverse, potential contaminant and only id by site protein hits were removed, LFQ intensity values were log2 transformed and missing LFQ values were replaced by a value close to the detection limit (19). For label free quantitative comparison of bait vs. control samples log2 fold-changes were calculated and plotted against the log2 mean intensities to create MA-plots. Only high confidence protein hits with a minimum log2 fold change of 3 and at least 2 razor+unique peptides and 5 MS/MS counts per protein in the bait sample were considered for quantitative comparison.

### Publication Abstract
Recombinational repair of meiotic DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) uses the homologous chromosome as a template, although the sister chromatid offers itself as a spatially more convenient substrate. In many organisms, this choice is reinforced by the recombination protein Dmc1. In Tetrahymena, the repair of DSBs, which are formed early in prophase, is postponed to late prophase when homologous chromosomes and sister chromatids become juxtaposed owing to tight parallel packing in the thread-shaped nucleus, and thus become equally suitable for use as repair templates. The delay in DSB repair is achieved by rejection of the invading strand by the Sgs1 helicase in early meiotic prophase. In the absence of Mcmd1, a meiosis-specific minichromosome maintenance (MCM)-like protein (and its partner Pamd1), Dmc1 is prematurely lost from chromatin and DNA synthesis (as monitored by BrdU incorporation) takes place in early prophase. In mcmd1&#x394; and pamd1&#x394; mutants, only a few crossovers are formed. In a mcmd1&#x394; hop2&#x394; double mutant, normal timing of Dmc1 loss and DNA synthesis is restored. Because Tetrahymena Hop2 is believed to enable homologous strand invasion, we conclude that Dmc1 loss in the absence of Mcmd1 affects only post-invasion recombination intermediates. Therefore, we propose that the Dmc1 nucleofilament becomes dismantled immediately after forming a heteroduplex with a template strand. As a consequence, repair synthesis and D-loop extension starts in early prophase intermediates and prevents strand rejection before the completion of homologous pairing. In this case, DSB repair may primarily use the sister chromatid. We conclude that Mcmd1&#x2012;Pamd1 protects the Dmc1 nucleofilament from premature dismantling, thereby suppressing precocious repair synthesis and excessive intersister strand exchange at the cost of homologous recombination.

### Keywords
Tetrahymena thermophila, Immunoprecipitation, Lc-ms/ms, Meiosis

### Affiliations
Department of Chromosome Biology, Max Perutz Labs, University of Vienna, 1030 Vienna, Austria
Mass Spectrometry Facility, Max Perutz Labs, Vienna Biocenter (VBC), Dr. Bohr-Gasse 3, 1030 Vienna, Austria

### Submitter
Thomas Gossenreiter

### Lab Head
Dr Josef Loidl
Department of Chromosome Biology, Max Perutz Labs, University of Vienna, 1030 Vienna, Austria


