### Accession
PXD014664

### Title
Proteomic analysis of septic renal acute phase response

### Description
Sepsis-induced acute kidney injury (AKI) is the most common form of AKI with poor outcomes. Renal proteomic analysis after bacterial lipopolysaccharide (LPS) administration revealed that the local renal acute phase reaction (APR) is one of the strongest responses of the kidney during septic AKI in mice. Evaluation of mRNA expression confirmed that most acute phase proteins were produced in the kidney. Our study also provides missing information on the time course of septic renal APR. Proteomic analysis of LPS-induced AKI demonstrated a marked upregulation of local renal acute phase response (APR) that commenced a few hours post injection and peaked at 24 h. Much more APPs were involved in the renal APR than previously identified.

### Sample Protocol
Four kidney samples selected as most representative from each treatment group and four control kidney samples were processed for mass spectrometry analysis as described before29 with some modifications. Frozen tissues were cut into pieces of about 30 mg on dry ice to prevent thawing. Next, 8 µl lysis buffer / mg of tissue was added to each piece. The lysis buffer contained 50 mM Tris pH 8.0 (SERVA Electrophoresis GmbH, Heidelberg, Germany), 150 mM NaCl (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA), 1 mM EDTA (SERVA), 1% NP-40 lysis buffer (Roche, Basel, Switzerland), 0.5% Na-deoxycholate (Sigma-Aldrich), 0.1% sodium dodecyl sulfate (Pierce Chemical, Dallas, TX) and 1% protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich). The tissue was homogenized by Dounce homogenizer, and then repeatedly passed through a 0.7 X 38 mm syringe needle for 20 times for further homogenization. The samples were then gently shaken for 30 minutes on ice (Rotamax 120, Heidolph Instruments GmbH, Schwabach, Germany). After centrifugation (16000 g, 10 min) the supernatant was transferred to a new tube. Protein concentration was determined with Bradford assay (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Inc., Hercules, California, USA). 150 µg of total protein from each sample were incubated with loading buffer (10mM Tris pH 6.8 (SERVA); 7.8% glycerol (CARLO ERBA Reagents, Val de Reuil, France); 0.2% SDS (Pierce Chemical); 0.01% Bromphenol blue (Sigma-Aldrich)) containing 10mM dithiothreitol (DTT) (Fluka Biochemica, Steinheim, Germany) at 95°C for 5 minutes. The samples were stored at -20°C until further procedures. 150 µg of total protein from each sample were separated by 12.5 % precast SDS-PAGE (Lonza, Switzerland). The gel was stained with Comassie brilliant blue and each of the protein lanes was cut into six bands and destained with 25 mM NH4HCO3 in 50 % acetonitrile. Samples were reduced with 10 mM DTT (56 °C, 45 min) and alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide in the dark at room temperature for 30 min. Gel pieces were dehydrated with acetonitrile before overnight in-gel digestion with trypsin (1µg trypsin/slice; Promega, USA). Next day the peptides were extracted with 50 % acetonitrile/5% formic acid, bound to C18 stage-tip and stored at -20 °C until further analysis.  LC-MS/MS analysis was performed with an EASY-nanoLC II HPLC unit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap LTQ Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples containing 0.1% FA were loaded onto a C18 trapping column (Proxeon Easy-column, Thermo Fischer Scientific) and separated on a C18 PicoFrit Aquasil analytical column (New Objective). The peptides were eluted using a 5–40% (v/v) 90 min linear gradient of acetonitrile with 0.1% FA at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min. The full MS mass spectra were acquired with the Orbitrap mass analyzer in the mass range of 300 to 2,000 m/z at resolution of 30,000. The MS/MS spectra were obtained by HCD fragmentation of the nine most intense MS precursor ions and recorded at a resolution of 7,500. Only the precursor ions with assigned charge states (> 1) were chosen for MS/MS fragmentation. The dynamic exclusion was set to repeat count of 1, repeat duration of 30 s, and exclusion duration of 20 s.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant proteomics software (version 1.6.0.13) was used for database search and quantification. Search was performed against Mus musculus Uniprot database (date 15.10.2017, 16923 entries). For the database searches methionine oxidation (+15.995 Da) and protein N-terminal acetylation (+45.011 Da) were set as variable modifications, while Carbamidomethylation of cysteines (+57.021 Da) was set as a fixed modification. Trypsin cleavage after arginine and lysine was used as the enzyme specificity. For database searches  one missed cleavage was allowed. In addition, precursor ion and fragment ion mass tolerances were set to 20 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. A reversed database search was performed and the false discovery rate (FDR) was set at 1% for peptide and protein identifications.. Relative quantification of identified proteins was performed by label-free quantification (LFQ) algorithm in MaxQuant.

### Publication Abstract
(1) Background: Sepsis-induced acute kidney injury (AKI) is the most common form of acute kidney injury (AKI). We studied the temporal profile of the sepsis-induced renal proteome changes. (2) Methods: Male mice were injected intraperitoneally with bacterial lipopolysaccharide (LPS) or saline (control). Renal proteome was studied by LC-MS/MS (ProteomeXchange: PXD014664) at the early phase (EP, 1.5 and 6 h after 40 mg/kg LPS) and the late phase (LP, 24 and 48 h after 10 mg/kg LPS) of LPS-induced AKI. Renal mRNA expression of acute phase proteins (APP) was assessed by qPCR. (3) Results: Renal proteome change was milder in EP vs. LP. APPs dominated the proteome in LP (proteins upregulated at least 4-fold (APPs/all): EP, 1.5 h: 0/10, 6 h: 1/10; LP, 24 h: 22/47, 48 h: 17/44). Lipocalin-2, complement C3, fibrinogen, haptoglobin and hemopexin were the most upregulated APPs. Renal mRNA expression preceded the APP changes with peak effects at 24 h, and indicated renal production of the majority of APPs. (4) Conclusions: Gene expression analysis revealed local production of APPs that commenced a few hours post injection and peaked at 24 h. This is the first demonstration of a massive, complex and coordinated acute phase response of the kidney involving several proteins not identified previously.

### Keywords
Mouse, Lipopolysaccharide, Lc-ms/ms, Sepsis, Kidney

### Affiliations
Jozef Stefan Institute
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular and Structural Biology, Jozef Stefan Institute, Ljubljana, Slovenia

### Submitter
Marko Fonovic

### Lab Head
Dr Marko Fonovic
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular and Structural Biology, Jozef Stefan Institute, Ljubljana, Slovenia


