### Accession
PXD033240

### Title
The membrane-intrinsic Zn-metalloproteinase FtsH4 does not associate with FtsH1, FtsH2 or FtsH3 but does interact with the uncharacterized protein Sll1106

### Description
FtsH Zn-metalloproteinases are multimeric, membrane-intrinsic and universally conserved in bacteria, chloroplasts and mitochondria. FtsHs function in protein turnover and processing: activities that are essential in maintaining cellular homeostasis. In phototrophic organisms, FtsHs are additionally involved in the biogenesis and repair of the photosystem complexes. The cyanobacterium Synechocystis synthesizes 4 homologous FtsHs: FtsH1, 2, 3, and 4. While the first 3 are known to function as hetero-oligomers FtsH1/3 and FtsH2/3, interactions involving FtsH4 are not fully characterized. Here, we determined the relative amounts of the 4 FtsHs in wild-type Synechocystis thylakoid membranes using the iBAQ method. In conjunction with FLAG-affinity pulldown experiments, FtsH4 was found not to associate with the other FtsHs. However, the uncharacterized protein Sll1106 was identified as an FtsH interaction partner.

### Sample Protocol
Wild-type thylakoid membranes: 100 mL of cells A750nm ~ 0.8 were harvested by centrifugation at 6000 x g for 10 min and resuspended in 25mM MES pH 6.5, 20 mM CaCl2, 2mM MgCl2 ,25% glycerol. Cells were mixed with 100-200 μm diameter glass beads in 1:1 ratio (v/v) and lysed by bead-beating (6 x 20 s). To separate soluble and membrane fractions, lysates were centrifuged at 30,000 x g for 20 min at 4 °C. Pelleted membranes were washed once with an excess of buffer and resuspended in 150 μL MES buffer. FLAG affinity pulldown: Membranes were diluted with MES buffer containing 1% 4-trans-propylcyclohexyl α-maltoside (TPCC) at ~0.5 mg chlorophyll/mL and solubilized by gentle stirring for 60 min at 10°C. Insoluble material was removed by centrifugation at 47,000 × g for 20 min. FLAG-tagged FtsH4 with interaction partners were isolated according to Koskela et al. (2020) Bio-Protocol 10: e3616, using TPCC instead of DDM. In-solution digestion: Membranes (100 µg protein, Bio-Rad-DC assay) were solubilized in 2% (w/v) SDS, 60 mM dithiothreitol with brief vortexing at room temperature. Eluates from FLAG pulldown preparations were diluted with 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate pH 8.5 (Sigma-Aldrich) to reduce the TPCC concentration to below its CMC at 0.036 mM then concentrated to <100 µL using an Amicon 10 kDa centrifugal ultrafilter. Proteins were extracted by precipitation from the membrane and FLAG eluate samples using a 2-D clean-up kit (Cytiva) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Digestion with premixed endoproteinase Lys-C/trypsin (Promega) was carried out according to Hitchcock et al. (2016) ACS Synthetic Biology 5: 948-954. For analysis by nanoLC-MS/MS the peptides were dissolved in 0.1% TFA, 3% ACN and 400 ng injected onto a Q Exactive HF quadrupole-Orbitrap system coupled to a Dionex RSLCnano LC (Thermo Scientific) delivering the following gradient profile: 97% solvent A ((0.1% FA) to 10% solvent B (0.08% FA, 80% ACN) over 5 min, 10% to 50% solvent B over 3 h (membranes) or 75 min (FLAG eluates) at 300 nL/min. The MS was programmed for data-dependent acquisition with profile full-scan MS (120,000 resolution) and up to 10 centroid product ion scans (30,000 resolution) per cycle. In-gel digestion:  Protein bands were excised from the SDS- and CN-PAGE gels, destained with 50 mM ABC/acetonitrile, treated with 10 mM DTT and 55 mM iodoacetamide and digested with trypsin. Tryptic peptides were extracted with 25 mM ABC/acetonitrile and dried in a vacuum concentrator. Peptides extracted from the SDS-PAGE gel were analysed by nanoLC-MS/MS as above except that separation was achieved using a 20-min gradient and the MS was an Amazon ion-trap mass spectrometer (Bruker). Peptides derived from the CN-PAGE gel bands were analysed using a 75 min gradient and a Q Exactive HF as above.

### Data Protocol
Amazon ion-trap data-files were converted to MGF format using a script provided in DataAnalysis v. 4.1 software (Bruker Daltonics) then submitted for searching using Byonic v. 2.9.38 (Protein Metrics) against the Synechocystis PCC 6803 reference proteome database downloaded on 14 May 2021 (https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000001425). Search parameters were as per default for trypsin except that carbamidomethylation was selected as a fixed modification for Cys and oxidation (variable, common, maximum of 2 per peptide) for Met. Both precursor and fragment mass tolerances were set at 0.5 Da, fragmentation type was CID low energy and precursor and charge assignments set as originally assigned. Q Exactive HF data-files were submitted for database searching with fixed and variable modifications as above but without prior format conversion. All other Byonic search parameters, including mass tolerances, were as per default. Selected proteins were quantified by the intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) method (Schwanhäusser et al. (2011) Nature 473: 337-342), with abundance score derived by normalizing the total ion intensity displayed in the Byonic database search results to the number of theoretical tryptic peptides with 6-30 residues.

### Publication Abstract
FtsH proteases are membrane-embedded proteolytic complexes important for protein quality control and regulation of various physiological processes in bacteria, mitochondria, and chloroplasts. Like most cyanobacteria, the model species Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 contains four FtsH homologs, FtsH1-FtsH4. FtsH1-FtsH3 form two hetero-oligomeric complexes, FtsH1/3 and FtsH2/3, which play a pivotal role in acclimation to nutrient deficiency and photosystem II quality control, respectively. FtsH4 differs from the other three homologs by the formation of a homo-oligomeric complex, and together with Arabidopsis thaliana AtFtsH7/9 orthologs, it has been assigned to another phylogenetic group of unknown function. Our results exclude the possibility that Synechocystis FtsH4 structurally or functionally substitutes for the missing or non-functional FtsH2 subunit in the FtsH2/3 complex. Instead, we demonstrate that FtsH4 is involved in the biogenesis of photosystem II by dual regulation of high light-inducible proteins (Hlips). FtsH4 positively regulates expression of Hlips shortly after high light exposure but is also responsible for Hlip removal under conditions when their elevated levels are no longer needed. We provide experimental support for Hlips as proteolytic substrates of FtsH4. Fluorescent labeling of FtsH4 enabled us to assess its localization using advanced microscopic techniques. Results show that FtsH4 complexes are concentrated in well-defined membrane regions at the inner and outer periphery of the thylakoid system. Based on the identification of proteins that co-purified with the tagged FtsH4, we speculate that FtsH4 concentrates in special compartments in which the biogenesis of photosynthetic complexes takes place.

### Keywords
Sll1106, Ftsh, Flag-tag, Photosystem, Cyanobacteria, Synechocystis, Biogenesis, Repair

### Affiliations
School of Biosciences, University of Sheffield
Institute of Microbiology, The Czech Academy of Sciences, Třeboň, Czech Republic

### Submitter
Philip Jackson

### Lab Head
Dr Josef Komenda
Institute of Microbiology, The Czech Academy of Sciences, Třeboň, Czech Republic


