### Accession
PXD025873

### Title
Phosphorylation of Hsp90 on serine residues in the charged linker modulates binding to interacting proteins and has implications for overall Hsp90β conformation

### Description
Serine residues in the charged linker region of human Hsp90beta are highly phoshporylated in vivo. Mutation of these residues to alanines resulted in altered binding of many Hsp90beta interactors. This project contains the data and searches related to co-immunoprecipitation experiments with wild-type and mutant Hsp90beta, as well as input.

### Sample Protocol
HEK 293T-Hsp90β-KO19 cells from Didier Picard’s lab were grown in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS, 100units/mL penicillin and 100mg/mL streptomycin, at 37°C under 5% CO2.  For SILAC, HEK 293T-Hsp90β -KO19 cells were labelled with light and heavy isotopes of lysine and arginine. Base growth medium was prepared with DMEM for SILAC supplemented with 10% dialyzed FBS, 100 units/mL penicillin and 100 ug/mL streptomycin. Lysine and arginine isotopes were added as follows: 150mg/L 12C614N2-L-lysine and 50mg/L 12C614N4-L-arginine to light medium, 150mg/L 13C615N2-L-lysine and 50mg/L 13C615N4-L-arginine to heavy medium. 200mg/L unlabelled proline was added as excess in all SILAC media to limit the arginine to proline metabolic conversion. A labelling efficiency greater than 95% was confirmed by mass spectrometry. Cells were not tested for mycoplasma contamination before experiments. Cells were transfected using the calcium phosphate method (Chen et al. 1987). Plasmids were added to one volume of 250mM CaCl2, the solution was then added drop by drop to another volume of HBS 2x buffer (50mM HEPES, 280mM NaCl, 1.5mM Na2HPO4) while gently shaking. The mixture is incubated at room temperature 1 minute and is added drop by drop to the cells. 0.1ug plasmid DNA was used per square centimetre of cell culture. After 12 hours, cells are washed once with warm PBS and put into fresh medium at 37°C under 5% CO2 for 24 more hours. SILAC and non-SILAC cells transfected with pCMV3-HA-Hsp90βWT, pCMV3-HA-Hsp90βS226A/S255A, or pCMV3-no tag-Hsp90β were harvested 36 hours post-transfection using trypsin-EDTA, washed twice with cold PBS, and frozen in liquid nitrogen. The obtained cell pellets are lyzed in 2.5 volumes NP40 lysis buffer (1% NP40, 20mM HEPES pH7.5, 50mM MgCl2 with protease and phosphatase inhibitors added) with 30 minutes incubation on ice with periodic vortexing. Extracts are centrifuged at 16’000g for 10 minutes at 4°C. Supernatants are collected, total protein content quantified by Pierce protein assay. For input analysis, 50ug of protein extract was diluted 10x in miST lysis buffer (1% sodium deoxycholate, 30mM Tris pH 8.6, 10 mM DTT) and digested with a protocol adapted from Kulak et al.⁠ (for SILAC samples: WT and AA were mixed in the dilution). Briefly, samples are boiled at 95°C for 5 minutes, reduction and alkylation of cysteines is done by adding 32 mM chloroacetamide and incubating for 45 minutes at room temperature in the dark. Samples are each digested during 2 hours at 37°C with a first addition of trypsin/LysC mix at the beginning and a second addition of trypsin/LysC mix after one hour of digestion. After digestion, 2 volumes of 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) in isopropanol are added and the mixture is vortexed 10 seconds before centrifugation at 2’300g for 30 seconds. The peptides are washed on MCX Oasis columns thrice with 1% TFA in isopropanol and once with solvent A (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). Peptides are eluted in three steps with first SCX125 buffer (125 mM ammonium acetate, 0.5% formic acid, 20% acetonitrile), second with SCX500 buffer (500 mM ammonium acetate, 0.5% formic acid, 20% acetonitrile), and third with 0.25% NH3 in 80% acetonitrile. Peptides are dried in a speedvac and finally resuspended in HPLC loading buffer (2% acetonitrile, 0.05% TFA) before injection. For non-SILAC cells, 500 ug of total protein extract was mixed with 10 ug anti-HA antibody and diluted to 150ul total with NP40 lysis buffer and incubated at 4°C overnight. Antibody-protein complexes are purified next morning by adding of a 50% ProteinG coupled agarose beads slurry formely washed thrice with cold PBS. Beads are washed five times with NP40 wash buffer (0.01% NP40, 20 mM HEPES pH7.5, 50 mM MgCl2 with protease and phosphatase inhibitors added) and immunopurified proteins are eluted with three consecutive incubations in 0.25% NH3 for 15 minutes at 4°C. The three elutions are then pooled, dried in a speedvac, and resuspended in miST lysis buffer for subsequent miST digestion protocol but with only one final elution from the MCX Oasis columns with 0.25% NH3 in 80% acetonitrile. For SILAC cells, the procedure is the same except that the heavy samples are pooled with the light samples into heavy/light replicates after eluting immunopurified proteins off the ProteinG beads. No specific mixing ratio was used. Also, SILAC samples were eluted sequentially in two steps from the MCX Oasis columns using first SCX125 buffer and second with 0.25% NH3 in 80% acetonitrile. The peptides were dried in a speedvac and resuspended in “HPLC loading buffer” before injection. For LC-MS analysis, samples were injected on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode, controlled by Xcalibur software. Masses are isolated with a window of 1.6m/z, fragmentation done in HCD mode with 32% energy, and fragments analyzed in an orbitrap with 30’000 resolution.

### Data Protocol
MS data were processed by the MaxQuant software⁠ (version 1.6.3.4) incorporating the Andromeda search engine⁠. The UNIPROT human reference proteome database of October 2017 was used (71’803 sequences), supplemented with sequences of common contaminants. FDR filtering of both peptide and protein identifications was 1% with default MaxQuant parameters. For label-free protein quantification, either the iBAQ values (for co-IP data) or the LFQ label-free parameter⁠ were used. Values were log2-transformed and normalized when needed. The MaxQuant output file proteinGroups.txt was further analyzed with the R software and figures were produced with the ggplot2 package. Protein groups labeled as reverse hits, only identified by site, and potential contaminants were removed. Protein groups with less than 2 unique peptides, 4 peptides, or 6 MS/MS counts in total were also removed. For the co-IP samples, we excluded from further analysis the proteins that were not identified by MS/MS in all 6 replicates in at least one condition. The co-IP data was then analyzed using log2 transformed and bait normalized iBAQ values. We imputed missing iBAQ values for co-IP control samples only with our own method, in order to carry out a Student’s t-test with Benjamini-Hochberg correction between the wild type or double mutant samples and the control samples. Our criteria for interactor validation were an adjusted p-value under 0.05 and a minimal average fold-change of 3 in log2 scale between the WT or AA mutant samples and the (negative) control samples.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hsp90, Phosphorylation, Interactome

### Affiliations
University of Lausanne
Protein Analysis Facility, Université de Lausanne, Switzerland

### Submitter
Manfredo Quadroni

### Lab Head
Dr Manfredo Quadroni
Protein Analysis Facility, Université de Lausanne, Switzerland


