### Accession
PXD032227

### Title
TMT-labeled mass spectrometry-based proteomics analysis in NCI-H1581 lung cancer cells upon AZD4547 treatment

### Description
FGFR1-amplified lung cancer cell line NCI-H1581 was treated with FGFR inhibitor AZD4547 (0.1μM) or DMSO vehicle for 24 hours. Then TMT-labeled mass spectrometry-based proteomics was carried out in cell lysates to analyze the differentially expressed proteins between two groups.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction and filter-aided sample preparation The H1581 cells were washed three times with cold PBS and the cells were lysed in SDT lysis buffer (2% SDS (m/v), 100 mM DTT, 100 mM Tris, pH=7.6). The lysates were incubated for 10 min at 95℃ and centrifuged at 15,000 ×g for 30 min. The supernatants were collected, and protein concentration was determined by tryptophan fluorescence emission assay as described previously(3). FASP was performed as described previously with slight modifications (1, 4), using 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) instead of ammonium bicarbonate buffer for compatibility with TMT labeling.  TMT labeling Peptides were reconstituted in 100 mM TEAB and their concentration determined by the BCA assay. 3 H1581 control samples, 3 H1581 AZD treatment samples and 2 mixture samples were labelled by eight of TMT 10-plex reagents (0.8 mg, each) (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with reporters at m/z = 126, 127N, 127C, 128N, 128C, 129N, 129C, 130N, respectively. Each sample containing 50 μg of peptide in 50 μL volume of TEAB buffer was combined with 41 μL of its respective 10-plex TMT reagent and incubated for 1 h at room temperature. Then, 8 μL of 5% hydroxylamine was added to the sample and incubated for 15 min to quench the reaction. Equal amounts of each TMT-labelled sample were combined in new microcentrifuge tubes and dried down using a SpeedVac.  High pH reversed-phase liquid chromatography peptides fractionation Half of the TMT-labeled peptides mixture was fractionated using a Waters XBridge BEH130 C18 3.5 μm 2.1 × 150 mm column on an Agilent 1290 HPLC operating at 0.2 mL/min. Buffer A consisted of 10 mM ammonium formate and buffer B consisted of 10 mM ammonium formate with 90% acetonitrile; both buffers were adjusted to pH 10 with ammonium hydroxide as described previously(5). A CBS-B programed multifunction automatic fraction-collecting instrument (Huxi instrument, Shanghai, China) was coupled to the HPLC and used to collect eluted peptides. The total number of fractions collected was 28 and concatenated to 14 (pooling equal interval RPLC fractions). Ammonium hydroxide and ammonium formate were evaporated in a SpeedVac.  Nanoflow liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry All experiments were performed on an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer with a nanoLC easy1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded on a self-packed column (75 μm × 150 mm, 3 μm ReproSil-Pur C18 beads, 120 Å, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany) and separated with a 90 min gradient at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Solvent A was 100% H2O, and 0.08% formic acid; solvent B was 80% acetonitrile, and 0.08% formic acid. The Orbitrap Fusion was programmed in the data-dependent acquisition mode. An MS1 survey scan of 375–1500 m/z in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000 was collected with an AGC target of 400,000 and maximum injection time of 50 ms. Precursor ions were filtered according to monoisotopic precursor selection, charge state (+ 2 to + 7), and dynamic exclusion (45 s with a ±10 ppm window). Then, the most intense precursors were subjected to HCD fragmentation with a duty cycle of 3 s. The instrument parameters were set as follows: 38% normalized collision energy with 5% stepped collision energy, 50,000 resolution, 100,000 AGC target, 105 ms maximum injection time, 105 Da first mass, 1 m/z isolation width.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed by search against the UniProt/SwissProt Huamn database containing 75074 sequence entries using Maxquant (1.6.7.0)(2), with default settings for 10-plex TMT quantification. Trypsin/P was selected as the digestive enzyme with allowance of one missed cleavage. Minimum 7 amino acids for peptide, >2 peptides were required per protein. For peptide and protein identification, false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1%. TMT reporter ion intensity was used for quantification.

### Publication Abstract
<b>Rationale:</b> The overall clinical response to FGFR inhibitor (FGFRi) is far from satisfactory in cancer patients stratified by FGFR aberration, the current biomarker in clinical practice. A novel biomarker to evaluate the therapeutic response to FGFRi in a non-invasive and dynamic manner is thus greatly desired. <b>Methods:</b> Six FGFR-aberrant cancer cell lines were used, including four FGFRi-sensitive ones (NCI-H1581, NCI-H716, RT112 and Hep3B) and two FGFRi-resistant ones (primary for NCI-H2444 and acquired for NCI-H1581/AR). Cell viability and tumor xenograft growth analyses were performed to evaluate FGFRi sensitivities, accompanied by corresponding <sup>18</sup>F-fluorodeoxyglucose (<sup>18</sup>F-FDG) uptake assay. mTOR/PLC&#x3b3;/MEK-ERK signaling blockade by specific inhibitors or siRNAs was applied to determine the regulation mechanism. <b>Results:</b> FGFR inhibition decreased the <i>in vitro</i> accumulation of <sup>18</sup>F-FDG only in four FGFRi-sensitive cell lines, but in neither of FGFRi-resistant ones. We then demonstrated that FGFRi-induced transcriptional downregulation of hexokinase 2 (HK2), a key factor of glucose metabolism and FDG trapping, via mTOR pathway leading to this decrease. Moreover, <sup>18</sup>F-FDG PET imaging successfully differentiated the FGFRi-sensitive tumor xenografts from primary or acquired resistant ones by the tumor <sup>18</sup>F-FDG accumulation change upon FGFRi treatment. Of note, both <sup>18</sup>F-FDG tumor accumulation and HK2 expression could respond the administration/withdrawal of FGFRi in NCI-H1581 xenografts correspondingly. <b>Conclusion:</b> The novel association between the molecular mechanism (FGFR/mTOR/HK2 axis) and radiological phenotype (<sup>18</sup>F-FDG PET uptake) of FGFR-targeted therapy was demonstrated in multiple preclinical models. The adoption of <sup>18</sup>F-FDG PET biomarker-based imaging strategy to assess response/resistance to FGFR inhibition may benefit treatment selection for cancer patients.

### Keywords
Tmt-labeled mass spectrometry, Azd4547, Nci-h1581

### Affiliations
Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Science
Analytical Research Center for Organic and Biological Molecules, Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 555 Zu Chong Zhi Road, Shanghai 201203, China

### Submitter
Jing Gao

### Lab Head
Dr Zhou Hu
Analytical Research Center for Organic and Biological Molecules, Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 555 Zu Chong Zhi Road, Shanghai 201203, China


