### Accession
PXD005462

### Title
Histone ADP Ribosylation -  Serine is a new target residue for endogenous ADP-ribosylation on histones

### Description
ADPr sites on histones obtained from cells were directly identified. We have identified 12 unique ADPr sites in human osteosarcoma cells and report serine ADPr as a new type of histone mark that responds to DNA damage.

### Sample Protocol
Histone purified from cells treated/untreated with H2O2 were subject to controled partial tryptic digestion via partial FASP. Peptides were analyzed by LC- MS/MS using HCD and ETD fragmentation

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched with MaxQuant version 1.5 against a database of Histones. Variable modifications included oxidation (M), acetylation (protein N-term and K), phosphorylation (STY), methylation (KR), dimethylation (K), ADPr (DEKRSTYCMNQHM) and phosphoribose (DEKRSYTCMNQHM). The variable modification ADPr allowed for neutral losses of adenine (m/z 136.0618), adenosine with loss of water (m/z 250.0935), AMP (m/z 348.0704), ADP (m/z 428.0367) and ADP-ribose (m/z 542.0684)

### Publication Abstract
ADP-ribosylation (ADPr) is a biologically and clinically important post-translational modification, but little is known about the amino acids it targets on cellular proteins. Here we present a proteomic approach for direct in vivo identification and quantification of ADPr sites on histones. We have identified 12 unique ADPr sites in human osteosarcoma cells and report serine ADPr as a new type of histone mark that responds to DNA damage.

### Keywords
Serine, Histones, Adpr, Adp ribosylation

### Affiliations
CECAD group leader
MPI for Biology of Ageing

### Submitter
Thomas Colby

### Lab Head
Dr Ivan Matic
CECAD group leader


