### Accession
PXD012146

### Title
Functions of the 12 different isoforms of the hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha (HNF4α)

### Description
HNF4α is a nuclear receptor regulating the transcription of genes involved mainly in development, cell differentiation and metabolism. Opposite functions for the two classes of P1 and P2 isoforms of HNF4α have recently been highlighted. These classes include 12 variants of HNF4α that can be expressed by the use of two promoters and by alternative splicing. Until now, the characterization of this transcription factor has ignored this diversity and has remained confined to the study of a fraction of the isoforms. We therefore wanted to clarify the situation by specifically characterizing the transcriptional functions of the 12 isoforms of HNF4α. We have generated for this purpose stable lines expressing each isoform of HNF4α in HCT 116 cells. We analyzed the whole transcriptome associated with each isoform by sequencing RNA, as well as their proteome by a BioID approach coupled to quantitative mass spectrometry. We noted major differences in the transcriptional function of the 12 isoforms. The α4, α5 and α6 isoforms have been characterized for the first time, and show a greatly reduced transcriptional potential. We have shown that these isoforms are unable to recognize the consensus response element of HNF4α. The α1 and α2 isoforms are the most potent regulators of gene expression, while the α3 isoform exhibits significantly reduced activity. Several transcription factors and coregulators have been identified as potential specific partners for certain HFH4α isoforms. The IRF-2BP2 co-repressor interacts specifically with isoforms which include the long form of the F domain of HNF4α. This specific interaction could explain the large number of genes modulated negatively by α1 and α2 compared to α3. The analysis integrating the vast amount of transcriptomic and proteomic data allows the identification of transcriptional regulatory mechanisms specific to certain isoforms, demonstrating the importance of considering all isoforms which can have diverse functions.

### Sample Protocol
Reduction, alkylation and digestion of proteins All buffers used from this stage were prepared with MS grade water. The protein reduction step was carried out by incubating the beads in 100 μl of 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer containing 10 mM DTT (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA) with stirring (1250 rpm) for 30 minutes at 60 °C. The alkylation of the proteins was carried out by adding another volume of 100 μl of 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer, and then supplementing to 15 mM IAA (Sigma-Aldrich, Saint-Louis, United States) final before stirring for 1 hour at room temperature away from light. The IAA was then neutralized by completing 15mM DTT and stirring for 10 minutes at 37 ° C. The proteins were digested by adding 1 μg Pierce MS-grade trypsin (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA) and incubated overnight at 37 ° C with shaking. Purification and desalting of the peptides on C18 columns Digestion was stopped by adding 1% formic acid (FA) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA) to a total volume of 200 μl, followed by stirring for 5 minutes at room temperature. The beads were spun at 6000 x g for 3 minutes before harvesting the supernatant and transferring to a new low binding microtube. The beads were resuspended in 200 .mu.l of buffer containing 60% acetonitrile (ACN) (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, USA) and 0.1% FA, and then stirred for 5 minutes at room temperature. The supernatant was harvested and combined with that obtained previously. These samples were concentrated by a centrifugal evaporator at 65 ° C until complete drying (approximately 2 hours), and resuspended in 30 μl of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) buffer (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, USA). United). The peptides were purified with ZipTip micropipette tips of 10 μl format containing a C18 column (EMD Millipore, Burlington, USA). The ZipTip was first moistened by suctioning 10 μl of 100% ACN solution three times, then equilibrated by suctioning 10 μl of 0.1% TFA buffer three times. Each sample of peptides was passed on the balanced ZipTip by succeeding up-and-downs of 10 μl of the sample 10 times. This step was performed three times in order to pass the entire sample on the column. The ZipTip was then washed with 10 μl of 0.1% TFA buffer three times. The elution of the peptides was made in a new low-binding microtube, 10 times with a volume of 10 μl of buffer 50% ACN and 0.1% FA. This step was carried out three times to obtain a final volume of 30 μl. The peptides were concentrated by centrifugal evaporator at 65 ° C. until complete drying (approximately 30 minutes) and then resuspended in 25 μl of 1% FA buffer. Peptides were assayed using a NanoDrop spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA) reading the absorbance at 205 nm. The peptides were then transferred to a glass vial (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA) and stored at -20 ° C until analyzed by mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis Trypsin digested peptides were separated using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nanoHPLC system. 10 μl of sample (a total of 2 μg) in 1% (vol/vol) formic acid was loaded with a constant flow of 4 μl/min onto an Acclaim PepMap100 C18 column (0.3 mm id x 5 mm, Dionex Corporation). After trap enrichment peptides were eluted off onto an EasySpray PepMap C18 nano column (75 μm x 50 cm, Dionex Corporation) with a linear gradient of 5-35% solvent B (90% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid) over 240 minutes with a constant flow of 200 nl/min. The HPLC system was coupled to an OrbiTrap QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc) via an EasySpray source. The spray voltage was set to 2.0 kV and the temperature of the column was set to 40 oC. Full scan MS survey spectra (m/z 350-1600) in profile mode were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 70,000 after accumulation of 1,000,000 ions. The ten most intense peptide ions from the preview scan in the Orbitrap were fragmented by collision induced dissociation (normalised collision energy 35% and resolution of 17,500) after the accumulation of 50,000 ions. Maximal filling times were 250 ms for the full scans and 60 ms for the MS/MS scans. Precursor ion charge state screening was enabled and all unassigned charge states as well as singly, 7 and 8 charged species were rejected. The dynamic exclusion list was restricted to a maximum of 500 entries with a maximum retention period of 40 seconds and a relative mass window of 10 ppm. The lock mass option was enabled for survey scans to improve mass accuracy. Data were acquired using the Xcalibur software. Protein identification by MaxQuant analysis The raw files were analyzed using the MaxQuant version 1.6.2.2 software (Cox and Mann, 2008) and the Uniprot human database (16/07/2013). Analyzes were initially performed separately for each isoform to obtain enrichment ratios for the complete sequence of each. A common analysis was then performed to integrate all raw MS / MS analysis files. The MaxQuant software default settings were used, except for the following parameters: multiplicity of 3 SILAC media (R0K0, R6K4 and R10K8), identification values "PSM FDR", "Protein FDR" and "Site decoy fraction" 0.05, minimum ratio count of 1 and selection of the "Re-quantify" option. Following the analysis, the results were sorted according to several parameters. Proteins positive for at least one of the Reverse, Only identified by site and Potential contaminants categories were eliminated, as well as proteins identified from a single peptide. The ratios identified in only one of the three replicas for each experiment were eliminated. The ratios identified in two of the three replicas were eliminated when they were considered to be too divergent, ie when the standard deviation was greater than the average of the two enrichment ratios. Outliers for the ratios measured in the three replicas were detected using the Grubbs test at a value of α = 0.05 and then eliminated. Following this sorting, proteins for which no ratio was calculated in at least one experiment were removed. Gene ontology enrichment analyzes were performed using the Panther 13.1 tool (Mi, Dong, Muruganujan, Gaudet, Lewis, and Thomas, 2010). Heatmap visualizations were created using the Morpheus software (Gould, 2018).

### Publication Abstract
HNF4&#x3b1; is a nuclear receptor produced as 12 isoforms from two promoters by alternative splicing. To characterize the transcriptional capacities of all 12 HNF4&#x3b1; isoforms, stable lines expressing each isoform were generated. The entire transcriptome associated with each isoform was analyzed as well as their respective interacting proteome. Major differences were noted in the transcriptional function of these isoforms. The &#x3b1;1 and &#x3b1;2 isoforms were the strongest regulators of gene expression whereas the &#x3b1;3 isoform exhibited significantly reduced activity. The &#x3b1;4, &#x3b1;5, and &#x3b1;6 isoforms, which use an alternative first exon, were characterized for the first time, and showed a greatly reduced transcriptional potential with an inability to recognize the consensus response element of HNF4&#x3b1;. Several transcription factors and coregulators were identified as potential specific partners for certain HNF4&#x3b1; isoforms. An analysis integrating the vast amount of omics data enabled the identification of transcriptional regulatory mechanisms specific to certain HNF4&#x3b1; isoforms, hence demonstrating the importance of considering all isoforms given their seemingly diverse functions.

### Keywords
Transcription, Proteomics, Hnf4α, Isoforms, Colorectal cancer, Silac, Nuclear receptors

### Affiliations
Université de Sherbrooke
Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Université de Sherbrooke, Canada

### Submitter
Francois-Michel Boisvert

### Lab Head
Dr Francois-Michel Boisvert
Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Université de Sherbrooke, Canada


