### Accession
PXD007996

### Title
Noncanonical pathway for regulation of CCL2 expression by an mTORC1-FOXK1 axis promotes recruitment of tumor-associated macrophages

### Description
C-C chemokine ligand 2 (CCL2) plays pivotal roles in tumor formation, progression, and metastasis. Although CCL2 expression has been found to be dependent on the nuclear factor (NF)–κB signaling pathway, the regulation of CCL2 production in tumor cells has remained unclear. Mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) is a protein kinase that is activated in various tumor cell types. We have now identified a noncanonical pathway for regulation of CCL2 production that is mediated by mTORC1 but independent of NF-κB. Multiple phosphoproteomics approaches identified the transcription factor forkhead box K1 (FOXK1) as a downstream target of mTORC1, with dephosphorylation of FOXK1 in response to mTORC1 activation resulting in transactivation of the CCL2 gene. Inhibition of the mTORC1-FOXK1 axis attenuated insulin-induced CCL2 production as well as the accumulation of tumor-associated monocytes-macrophages and tumor progression in mice. Our results suggest that FOXK1 directly links mTORC1 signaling and CCL2 expression in a manner independent of NF-κB, and that CCL2 produced by this pathway contributes to tumor progression. Specific inhibition of FOXK1 may thus be a potential therapeutic strategy for cancer.

### Sample Protocol
Protein was purified from HeLa cells with the use of the TRIzol reagent (Life Technologies). The protein concentration was determined with the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and adjusted to 3 mg/ml. Samples (3 mg of protein) were subjected to sequential digestion at 37°C with LysC for 3 h and with trypsin for 16 h in a final volume of 6 ml. Reduced cysteine/cystine residues of the resulting peptides were blocked by treatment with 5 mM tris-(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine for 30 min at 37C followed by alkylation with 12.5 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature. The digests were applied to a C18 Sep-Pak (500 mg) cartridge (Waters), which was then washed with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) in 2% acetonitrile before initiation of elution with 0.1% TFA in 60% acetonitrile. Immobilized metal ion affinity chromatography (IMAC) was performed with Probond resin (Life Technologies). The resin was stripped of Ni3+ by washing with 10 volumes each of 50 mM EDTA (pH 8.0), water, and 0.1% acetic acid. It was then recharged with 100 mM FeCl3 in 0.1% acetic acid and washed extensively first with 0.1% acetic acid and then with 0.1% TFA in 60% acetonitrile. The HeLa cell digests prepared as described above were mixed with the Fe3+-charged Probond resin by rotation for 60 min at room temperature. Each suspension was then transferred to a disposable column and rapidly centrifuged for 1 min at 800 × g. The column was washed twice with three volumes of 0.1% TFA in 60% acetonitrile and then once with three volumes of 0.1% TFA in 2% acetonitrile. Phosphopeptides were eluted with three volumes of 1% inorganic phosphate and were then desalted with the use of a Sep-Pak C18 (100 mg) cartridge. The peptides were dried and then dissolved in iTRAQ labeling buffer. One vial of iTRAQ reagents (Applied Biosystems) was used to label a single sample by incubation for 2 h at room temperature, after which the labeling reaction was terminated by the addition of three volumes of water and incubation for 1 h at room temperature. Peptides in the four differently labeled samples were mixed and fractionated on a cation exchange chromatography column (Mini S and SMART system, GE Healthcare Life Sciences). Elution was performed at a flow rate of 50 l/min with a linear salt gradient of 0% to 10% B for 15 min, 10% to 40% B for 9 min, and 40% to 100% B for 5 min (where A is 5 mM potassium phosphate buffer in 25% acetonitrile at pH 3.3 and B is 5 mM potassium phosphate buffer in 25% acetonitrile containing 1 M KCl at pH 3.3).

### Data Protocol
All samples were analyzed with a QSTAR Elite (AB Sciex) instrument equipped with a Paradigm MS4 HPLC pump and HTC-PAL autosampler (CTC Analytics AG). L-column C18 material (3 m, CERI) was packed into a self-pulled fused silica capillary (inner diameter, 100 m; length, 200 mm) at a constant pressure of 230 bar with the use of a high-pressure chamber equipped with a high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) pump. All samples were dissolved in 0.1% TFA in 2% acetonitrile and were injected into a pre-column (L-column micro, CERI; inner diameter of 0.3 mm and length of 5 mm), which was then washed with the same buffer before elution at a flow rate of 200 nl/min with a linear gradient of 5% to 30% B for 90 min, 30% to 60% B for 30 min, and 60% to 100% B for 10 min (where A is 0.1% formic acid in 2% acetonitrile and B is 0.1% formic acid in 90% acetonitrile). Data were acquired in the information-dependent acquisition (IDA) mode with the iTRAQ option (enhanced low mass range and +5 intersection of collision energy). Survey MS spectra were acquired for 0.5 s, and the three most intense ions were isolated and fragmented with an automatically optimized collision energy for a variable MS/MS acquisition time. The peak list was obtained with the script in Analyst QS 2.0. A MASCOT search was performed against International Protein Index (IPI) human version 3.16 (European Bioinformatics Institute) with the following parameter settings: trypsin as the enzyme used; the allowed number of missed cleavages as 2; iTRAQ label at the NH2-terminus or on Lys and carbamidomethylation of Cys as fixed modifications; oxidized Met, iTRAQ label on Tyr, pyroglutamination of NH2-terminal Glu or Gln, and phosphorylation on Ser, Thr, and Tyr as variable modifications; precursor mass tolerance as 100 ppm; and tolerance of MS/MS ions as 0.2 Da.

### Publication Abstract
C-C chemokine ligand 2 (CCL2) plays pivotal roles in&#xa0;tumor formation, progression, and metastasis. Although CCL2 expression has been found to be dependent on the nuclear factor (NF)-&#x3ba;B signaling pathway, the regulation of CCL2 production in tumor cells has remained unclear. We have identified a noncanonical pathway for regulation of CCL2 production that is mediated by mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) but independent of NF-&#x3ba;B. Multiple phosphoproteomics approaches identified the transcription factor forkhead box K1 (FOXK1) as a downstream target of mTORC1. Activation of mTORC1 induces dephosphorylation of FOXK1, resulting in transactivation of the CCL2 gene. Inhibition of the mTORC1-FOXK1 axis attenuated insulin-induced CCL2 production as well as the accumulation of tumor-associated monocytes-macrophages and tumor progression in mice. Our results suggest that FOXK1 directly links mTORC1 signaling and CCL2 expression in a manner independent of NF-&#x3ba;B and that CCL2 produced by this pathway contributes to tumor progression.

### Keywords
Hela lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Kyushu University
Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Medical Institute of Bioregulation, Kyushu University, Japan

### Submitter
Hirokazu Nakatsumi

### Lab Head
Dr Keiichi I. Nakayama
Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Medical Institute of Bioregulation, Kyushu University, Japan


