### Accession
PXD010783

### Title
C16-ceramide is a natural regulatory ligand of p53 in cellular stress response

### Description
Ceramides are important participants of signal transduction, regulating fundamental cellular processes. Here we report the mechanism for activation of p53 tumor suppressor by C16-ceramide.  C16-ceramide tightly binds within the p53 DNA binding domain (Kd ~ 60 nM), in close vicinity to the Box V motif. This interaction is highly selective towards the ceramide acyl chain length with its C10 atom being proximal to Ser240 and Ser241. Ceramide binding stabilizes p53 and disrupts its complex with E3 ligase MDM2 leading to the p53 accumulation, nuclear translocation and activation of the downstream targets. This is a novel physiological mechanism of p53 activation, which is fundamentally different from the canonical p53 regulation through protein-protein interactions or post-translational modifications. The discovered mechanism is triggered by serum or folate deprivation implicating it in the cellular response to nutrient/metabolic stress.  Our study establishes C16-ceramide as the first natural small molecule activating p53 through the direct binding.

### Sample Protocol
Initially, unmodified control and PAC-modified p53 (100-300 aa residue construct) were precipitated by methanol/chloroform. Samples were denatured, reduced, and alkylated using 8 M urea in 100 mM Tris-HCl buffer, pH 7.8 containing 40 mM dithiolthreitol and 40 mM iodoacetamide. The denatured, reduced, and alkylated samples were digested with endoproteinase AspN (Roche), 1:50 dilution, at 37 °C for 18 h. Trifluoroacetic acid (Sigma Aldrich) was added to the samples to 0.1%, and samples were purified and concentrated using C18 ZipTip columns (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Purified samples were dried and reconstituted in 60% acetonitrile for injection on the LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer. On-line reversed phase C18 sample trapping, cleanup, and focusing was employed for the first 10 min of each analysis followed by 33-minute elution gradient for analytical C18 separation of the digested sample. The full scan profile MS at 60,000 resolution, 350 - 1800 m/z was used for data collection. For fragmentation analysis, data collection used a top 3 in abundance selection for centroided tandem CID MS and a decision tree-based ETD activation fragmentation option.

### Data Protocol
The .raw data files were analyzed by PEAKS Studio 7.5 proteomics database search engine to identify modifications present in peptides, using the following mass-differences for: carbamidomethylation – 57.02 Da, oxidation – 15.99 Da, photoactivated ceramide - 518.46 Da.

### Publication Abstract
Ceramides are important participants of signal transduction, regulating fundamental cellular processes. Here we report the mechanism for activation of p53 tumor suppressor by C<sub>16</sub>-ceramide. C<sub>16</sub>-ceramide tightly binds within the p53 DNA-binding domain (K<sub>d</sub>&#x2009;~&#x2009;60&#x2009;nM), in close vicinity to the Box V motif. This interaction is highly selective toward the ceramide acyl chain length with its C10 atom being proximal to Ser240 and Ser241. Ceramide binding stabilizes p53 and disrupts its complex with E3 ligase MDM2 leading to the p53 accumulation, nuclear translocation and activation of the downstream targets. This mechanism of p53 activation is fundamentally different from the canonical p53 regulation through protein-protein interactions or posttranslational modifications. The discovered mechanism is triggered by serum or folate deprivation implicating it in the cellular response to nutrient/metabolic stress. Our study establishes C<sub>16</sub>-ceramide as a natural small molecule activating p53 through the direct binding.

### Keywords
Ceramide, Regulatory ligand, P52

### Affiliations
UNC Chapel Hill Nutrition Department
University of North Carolina Chapel Hill

### Submitter
Natalia Krupenko

### Lab Head
Dr Natalia Krupenko
UNC Chapel Hill Nutrition Department


