### Accession
PXD015931

### Title
Comparative quantitative proteomic analysis of HCMV infected cells highlights pUL138 as a multiple functional protein

### Description
Human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) is a widespread virus and can establish life-long latent infection in large populations. In order to establish persistent and latent infection in healthy individuals, HCMV encodes a large array of proteins that can modulate different components and pathways of host cells. It has been reported that pUL138 encoded by UL133-UL138 polycistronic locus promotes a latent infection in primary CD34+ HPCs infected in vitro. In this study, a recombinant HCMV, namely HanUL138del, was constructed by deleting the UL138 locus of Han, a clinic HCMV strain. Then a comparative quantitative proteomic analysis of Han and HanUL138del infected MRC5 cells was performed, aiming to study the effect of pUL138 on host cell in the context of HCMV infection. Our result indicated that at the early phase of HCMV infection, innate immune response was differentially activated, while at late phase of HCMV infection, multiple host proteins were differentially expressed, between Han or HanUL138del infected cells.

### Sample Protocol
HCMV infected or mock treated MRC5 were collected and washed with pre-chilled PBS three times. Cell pellets were re-suspended in lysis buffer (8M urea/0.2M Tris, pH 8.0) and subjected to sonication. After centrifugation, supernatant containing extracted proteins were collected and proteins abundance was measured with bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay. Extracted proteins were reduced with 10 mM DTT at 56℃ for 30 min, alkylated with 40 mM iodoacetomide in the dark for 30 min, and left in light at room temperature for 2 h. Proteins were digested with trypsin (Promega) at a ratio of 1:50 (trypsin/protein w/w) overnight at 37℃, and digested peptides were desalted with SepPak C18 cartridge (Waters) and dried by SpeedVac (Thermo).

### Data Protocol
MS spectra were submitted to ProteinPilot v5.0.1 (SCIEX) to perform peptide identification and quantification. UniProt_Human database was used. Search parameters were as follows: Sample Type: iTRAQ 8plex (Peptide labeled); Cysteine Alkylation: Iodoacetamide; Digestion: Trypsin; Miss cleavages tolerance: 2; Fixed modification: carbamidomethyl Cys; Variable modification: none; MS1 initial mass error tolerance value: 0.05 Dalton; MS2 initial mass error tolerance value: 0.1 Dalton; Instrument: TripleTOF 5600. The false discovery rates (FDR) analysis in ProteinPilot uses “decoy database searching” strategy, and FDR of ProteinPilot search results were all set as lower than 1% at the protein level here.

### Publication Abstract
Human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) is a widespread virus that can establish life-long latent infection in large populations. The establishment of latent infection prevents HCMV from being cleared by host cells, and HCMV reactivation from latency can cause severe disease and death in people with immature or compromised immune systems. To establish persistent and latent infection in healthy individuals, HCMV encodes a large array of proteins that can modulate different components and pathways of host cells. It has been reported that pUL138 encoded by the <i>UL133-UL138</i> polycistronic locus promotes latent infection in primary CD34+ hematopoietic progenitor cells (HPCs) infected in vitro. In this study, recombinant HCMV Han<sub>UL138del</sub> was constructed by deleting the <i>UL138</i> locus of Han, a clinical HCMV strain. Then, a comparative quantitative proteomic analysis of Han- and Han<sub>UL138del</sub>-infected MRC5 cells was performed to study the effect of pUL138 on host cells in the context of HCMV infection. Our results indicated that, during the early phase of HCMV infection, the innate immune response was differentially activated, while during the late phase of HCMV infection, multiple host proteins were differentially expressed between Han- and Han<sub>UL138del</sub>-infected cells, and these proteins are involved in the oxidation-reduction process, ER to Golgi vesicle-mediated transport, and extracellular matrix organization. Among these proteins, STEAP3, BORCS7, FAM172A, RELL1, and WDR48 were further demonstrated to affect HCMV infection. Our study provides a systematic view of the effect of pUL138 on the host cell proteome and highlights the proposition that multiple biological processes or host factors may be involved in the overall role of the <i>UL133-UL138</i> polycistronic locus in HCMV persistence.

### Keywords
Ul138, Quantitative proteomics, Hcmv, Persistent infection

### Affiliations
IOV
State Key Laboratory of Virology, Wuhan Institute of Virology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan, P. R. China

### Submitter
Leike Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Leike Zhang
State Key Laboratory of Virology, Wuhan Institute of Virology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan, P. R. China


