### Accession
PXD022765

### Title
Identifying a GSK3-TRARG1 signaling axis reveals BCL9L as a novel regulator of GLUT4 trafficking

### Description
The trafficking regulator of GLUT4-1 (TRARG1) protein positively regulates insulin-stimulated GLUT4 trafficking. Here we identify post-translational modifications on TRARG1 and identify that GSK3 is the upstream kinase responsible for TRARG1 phosphorylation at Serines 72, 76, and 80. We employ affinity enrichment mass spectrometry to identify protein interactions regulated by TRARG1 phosphorylation.

### Sample Protocol
Detailed protocols provided in the associated manuscript.

### Data Protocol
Detailed protocols provided in the associated manuscript.

### Publication Abstract
Trafficking regulator of GLUT4-1, TRARG1, positively regulates insulin-stimulated GLUT4 trafficking and insulin sensitivity. However, the mechanism(s) by which this occurs remain(s) unclear. Using biochemical and mass spectrometry analyses we found that TRARG1 is dephosphorylated in response to insulin in a PI3K/Akt-dependent manner and is a novel substrate for GSK3. Priming phosphorylation of murine TRARG1 at serine 84 allows for GSK3-directed phosphorylation at serines 72, 76 and 80. A similar pattern of phosphorylation was observed in human TRARG1, suggesting that our findings are translatable to human TRARG1. Pharmacological inhibition of GSK3 increased cell surface GLUT4 in cells stimulated with a submaximal insulin dose, and this was impaired following Trarg1 knockdown, suggesting that TRARG1 acts as a GSK3-mediated regulator in GLUT4 trafficking. These data place TRARG1 within the insulin signaling network and provide insights into how GSK3 regulates GLUT4 trafficking in adipocytes.

### Keywords
Trarg1, Phosphorylation, Trafficking, Glut4, Bcl9l

### Affiliations
Chair in Metabolic Systems Biology, Charles Perkins Centre, The University of Sydney, Australia
Murdoch Children's Research Institute

### Submitter
Sean Humphrey

### Lab Head
Dr David E James
Chair in Metabolic Systems Biology, Charles Perkins Centre, The University of Sydney, Australia


