### Accession
PXD030184

### Title
Post-harvest strawberry fruit LC-MSMS

### Description
To determine the effect of different temperature on strawberry after harvest, physiological indicator analysis and proteomics analysis were conducted on ripened strawberry (‘Sweet Charlie’) fruit stored at 4 °C, 23 °C, and 37 °C (±2) for 10 or 20 days. Results showed that 4 °C maintained a better visual quality of strawberry, and the weight loss and firmness remained stable within 3 days. Low temperature negatively affected anthocyanin but positively affected soluble sugars. Though anthocyanin content was higher with increasing temperature, anthocyanin synthesis related proteins were downregulated. Higher indole-acetic acid (IAA) content in seeds and lower abscisic acid (ABA) content were found in berry at 4 °C. Antioxidant related proteins were upregulated during storage, showing a significant up-regulation of POD at 4 °C, and AsA-GSH cycle related proteins and heat shock proteins (HSPs) at 37 °C. In addition, overexpressed sugar phosphate/phosphate translocator, 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylate oxidase and aquaporin PIP2-2 had a positive effect in response to low temperature stress for containing higher protopectin content and POD activity.

### Sample Protocol
Octoploid strawberry (Fragaria × ananassa ‘Sweet Charlie’) were grown in a greenhouse under standard cultivation conditions (20 °C–25 °C, relative humidity of 70 %–85 %, 14 h/10 h light/dark cycles) during spring seasons from 2018 to 2020. The FR (full red, 28 days after anthesis) fruit were collected and kept in a 4 °C cold room (low temperature, LT) or 37 °C incubator (high temperature, HT) for 10 and/or 20 d. The control check (CK) was kept in a 23 °C greenhouse (room temperature, RT) at a relative humidity of 70 %–85 %.There are three repetitions for each treatment, and twenty-eight fruits for each repetition. Ten fruits were collected on day 3, 7, 10 and/or 20, respectively, and then the seeds and berries were separated with tweezers. Some were used for physical evaluation, and some were frozen in liquid nitrogen for subsequent experiments. Twenty fruits with seeds removed on day 5 were collected for protein expression determination.

### Data Protocol
The peptides were subjected to an NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in a Q Exactive™ Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the ultra-performance liquid chromatograph (UPLC). The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. Peptide precursor ions and their secondary fragments were detected and analyzed using a high-resolution Orbitrap. The scanning range of the primary mass spectrum was set to 400–1500 m/z (mass-to-charge ratio), and the scanning resolution was set to 70,000; the scanning range of the secondary mass spectrum was set to a fixed starting point of 100 m/z, and the secondary scanning resolution was set to 35,000. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4. The signal threshold was set to 38000 ions/s, the maximum injection time was set to 130 ms, and the dynamic rejection time of the tandem mass spectrometry scan was set to 30 s. Gene Ontology (GO) annotation proteome was derived from the UniProt-GOA database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/). Firstly, converting identified protein ID to UniProt ID and then mapping to GO IDs by protein ID. If some identified proteins were not annotated by UniProt-GOA database, the InterProScan soft would be used to annotated protein’s GO functional based on protein sequence alignment method. Then proteins were classified by Gene Ontology annotation based on three categories: biological process, cellular component and molecular function. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database was used to annotate protein pathway. Firstly, using KEGG online service tools KAAS to annotated protein’s KEGG database description. Then mapping the annotation result on the KEGG pathway database using KEGG online service tools KEGG mapper. All differentially expressed protein database accession or sequence were searched against the STRING database version 10.1 for protein-protein interactions. Only interactions between the proteins belonging to the searched data set were selected, thereby excluding external candidates. STRING defines a metric called “confidence score” to define interaction confidence; we fetched all interactions that had a confidence score ≥ 0.7 (high confidence).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Strawberry

### Affiliations
Zhejiang Academy of Agricultural Sciences

### Submitter
Ting Zheng

### Lab Head
Dr Ting Zheng
Zhejiang Academy of Agricultural Sciences


