### Accession
PXD027138

### Title
Quantitative RNA interactome capture (qRIC) identifies phosphorylation sites with regulatory potential - RBM20 BioID

### Description
RNA binding proteins (RBPs) are major regulators of gene expression at the post-transcriptional level. While many posttranslational modification sites in RBPs have been identified, less is known about how these modifications regulate RBP function. Here, we develop quantitative RNA-interactome capture (qRIC) to quantify the fraction of cellular RBPs pulled down with polyadenylated mRNAs. Applying qRIC to HEK293T cells quantified pulldown efficiencies of over 300 mRBPs. Combining qRIC with phosphoproteomics allowed us to systematically compare pulldown efficiencies of phosphorylated and non-phosphorylated forms of mRBPs. Over hundred phosphorylation sites show increased or decreased pull-down efficiency compared to their host RBPs and thus have regulatory potential. Our data  captures known regulatory phosphorylation sites in ELAVL1, SF3B1 and UPF1 and identifies new potentially regulatory sites. Follow-up experiments on the cardiac splicing regulator RBM20 revealed that multiple phosphorylation sites in the C-terminal disordered region affect nucleo-cytoplasmic shuttling, association with cytosolic RNA granules and alternative splicing. Together, we show that qRIC is a scalable method to identify the function of posttranslational modifications in RBPs.

### Sample Protocol
Mixture of SILAC labeled cell lysates were ethanol precipitated (MS raw files are tagged with “Input”), resuspended in 2 M Urea, 6 M Thiourea solution with freshly added 10 mM of DTT, alkylated in 55 mM iodoacetamide, digested with LysC for 3h at 25°C, diluted four times with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer and digested overnight with Trypsin at 25°C. Alternatively, remaining input lysate was used for enrichment of biotinylated with streptavidin-sepharose beads (MS raw files are tagged with “BioID”). Beads were eluted in ammonium bicarbonate and proteins were digested with trypsin. Peptides from both input and BioID samples were acidified with 1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid and desalted with C18 Stage Tips. Label swap experiment is indicated in the name of the respective MS raw files (tagged with “Forward” or “Reverse”). Experiment 1 containing the mixture of SILAC labeled uninduced WT, S635A mutant and induced WT cells is indicated with the tag “RBM20ctl” in the MS raw file, while experiment 2 containing WT, A10 and D10 cells is tagged with “RBM20mut”. For LC-MS/MS analysis, desalted peptides were eluted from Stage Tips with 50 % acetonitrile 0.1 % formic acid solution, dried and resuspended in 3 % acetonitrile 0.1% formic acid. Peptide concentration was determined based on 280 nm UV light absorbance. Reversed-phase liquid chromatography was performed employing an EASY nLC II 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using self-made 15 cm long C18 microcolumns (75 μm ID, packed with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9-μm resin, Dr. Maisch) connected on-line to the electrospray ion source (Proxeon) of an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in Peptide mode and with an associated FAIMS device installed for pseudo ion mobility peptide separation. The mobile phases consisted of 0.1 % formic acid 5 % acetonitrile solution (Buffer A) and 0.1 % formic acid 80 % acetonitrile solution (Buffer B). Peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 250 nL/min over 110 min of increasing Buffer B concentration. Settings for data dependent mass spectrometry analysis were as follow: positive polarity, one full scan (resolution, 120000; m/z range, 350-1800; normalized AGC target, 300 %; max injection time, 30 ms) followed by top 20 MS/MS scans using higher-energy collisional dissociation (resolution, 7500; m/z range, 200-2000; normalized AGC target, 100 %; max injection time, 25 ms; isolation width, 1.3 m/z; normalized collision energy, 28). Ions with an unassigned charge state, singly charged ions, and ions with charge state higher than six were rejected. Former target ions selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded within 20 s. Three successive rounds of a full scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans were constantly performed throughout the scanning phase with rotating correction voltages of -40, -60 or -80 V.

### Data Protocol
Scans from single correction voltages in FAIMS were collected into MzXML files using the FAIMS MzXML Generator tool provided by the Coon lab: https://github.com/coongroup/FAIMS-MzXML-Generator. All MzXML files from the same experiment were analyzed together with MaxQuant software (v1.6.0.1) (Cox and Mann, 2008) using default parameters. For increasing transparency and reproducibility of data analysis the “mqpar.xml” file generated by MaxQuant was deposited together with the raw data. Briefly, search parameters used for identification and quantification included two missed cleavage sites, cysteine carbamidomethyl as fixed modification, and the following variable modifications: methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation, and asparagine or glutamine deamidation. Up to three variable modifications per peptide were allowed. Lys0 and Arg0, Lys4 and Arg6, or Lys8 and Arg10 were set as multiplicity labels. Peptide mass tolerance was 20 and 4.5 ppm for first and main search, respectively. Database search was performed with Andromeda embedded in MaxQuant against the UniProt/Swiss-Prot Human proteome (downloaded in January 2019) with common contaminant sequences provided by MaxQuant. False discovery rate was set to 1% at peptide spectrum match and protein levels. Minimum peptide count required for protein quantification was set to two. The “Requantify” option was turned on. An identical MaxQuant search but with the “Requantify” option off was performed by partial reprocessing of search post peptide searches (starting from step “Re-quantification”). The second run (with Requantify off) was used for identification and exclusion of unscrupulous ratios (defined as ratios between two requantified values). Results from both searches with and without Requantify are provided.

### Publication Abstract
Cellular mRNA-binding proteins (mRBPs) are major posttranscriptional regulators of gene expression. Although many posttranslational modification sites in mRBPs have been identified, little is known about how these modifications regulate mRBP function. Here, we developed quantitative RNA-interactome capture (qRIC) to quantify the fraction of mRBPs pulled down with polyadenylated mRNAs. Combining qRIC with phosphoproteomics allowed us to systematically compare pull-down efficiencies of phosphorylated and nonphosphorylated forms of mRBPs. Almost 200 phosphorylation events affected pull-down efficiency compared with the unmodified mRBPs and thus have regulatory potential. Our data capture known regulatory phosphorylation sites in ELAVL1, SF3B1, and UPF1 and identify potential regulatory sites. Follow-up experiments on the splicing regulator RBM20 revealed multiple phosphorylation sites in the C-terminal disordered region affecting nucleocytoplasmic localization, association with cytoplasmic ribonucleoprotein granules, and alternative splicing. Together, we show that qRIC in conjunction with phosphoproteomics is a scalable method to identify functional posttranslational modification sites in mRBPs.

### Keywords
Bioid, Lc-msms, Rbm20, Silac

### Affiliations
Max Delbruck Center for Molecular Medicine, Robert-Rössle-Str. 10, D-13092 Berlin, Germany
Max-Delbrück-Centrum für Molekulare Medizin in der Helmholtz-Gemeinschaft

### Submitter
Carlos Henrique Vieira e Vieira

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Selbach
Max Delbruck Center for Molecular Medicine, Robert-Rössle-Str. 10, D-13092 Berlin, Germany


