### Accession
PXD002603

### Title
Proteomics Analyses of Mycelium and Cysts of Phytophthora capsici

### Description
In this project, we have performed a comparative analysis of the proteomes of the mycelium and cysts of P. capsici. The identified proteins were functionally classified, which provides the basis for future research on these developmental stages of P. capsici and closely related species. Many of the proteins enriched in either the mycelium or cysts were found to contribute specific functions in these two life stages. Proteins enriched in mycelium were essentially associated with vegetative growth, whereas those enriched in cysts were primarily related to development-specific processes associated with the initiation of infection. The data provide a better understanding of the metabolic pathways underlying the mycelial and cyst developmental stages of P. capsici and point to potential targets of anti-oomycete compounds at each of these stages.

### Sample Protocol
Total protein was extracted from the mycelial and cyst cells of P. capsici. Proteins were separated by SDS-gel, followed by in-gel digestion and mass spectrometry. For quantitative analysis, peptides originated from mycelium and cyst samples were iTRAQ labelled and analyzed by mass spectromtry.

### Data Protocol
Our in-house Automated Proteomics Pipeline, which automates the processing of proteomics tasks such as peptide identification, validation and quantitation from LC-MS/MS data and allows easy integration of many separate proteomic tools , was used to analyze the MS data.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cyst, Phytophthora, Itraq, Mycelium, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Biotechnology
Division of Glycoscience, Royal Institute of Technology (KTH), AlbaNova University Centre, Stockholm, SE-10691, Sweden

### Submitter
Vaibhav Srivastava

### Lab Head
Dr Vincent Bulone
Division of Glycoscience, Royal Institute of Technology (KTH), AlbaNova University Centre, Stockholm, SE-10691, Sweden


