### Accession
PXD038550

### Title
A unique mRNA decapping complex in trypanosomes

### Description
Removal of mRNA 5’ caps primes transcripts for degradation and is central for regulating gene expression in eukaryotes. The canonical decapping enzyme DCP2 is stringently controlled by assembly into a dynamic multi-protein complex together with the 5´-3´exoribonuclease Xrn1. Kinetoplastida lack DCP2 orthologues but instead rely on the ApaH-like phosphatase ALPH1 for decapping. The enzyme is composed of a catalytic domain flanked by C-terminal and N-terminal extensions. Here we analyse the ALPH1 interactome by BioID proximity labelling for the full length protein and truncated versions in order to assign domain specific interactions. We show that Trypanosoma brucei ALPH1 acts in a complex composed of the trypanosome XRN1 ortholog XRNA and four proteins that are unique to Kinetoplastida.The interactome is validated by reverse experiments targeting T. brucei and T. cruzi XRNA by affinity capture and, additionally, the ALPH1 interacting CMGC-family kinase by BioID.

### Sample Protocol
(1)BioID:The expression of TurboID fusion proteins was induced for 24 hours with tetracyclin, unless expression was from the endogenous locus. Cells were harvested at 1,400 g, washed once with serum-free medium and pellets were rapidly frozen in liquid nitrogen.  Each cell pellet was resuspended in 1 ml lysis buffer (0.5% IGEPAL, 0.1 PIPES-NaOH pH 6.9, 2 mM ethylene glycol-bis(β-aminoethyl ether)-N,N,N′,N′-tetraacetic acid, 1 mM MgSO4, 0.1 mM EDTA), complete EDTA-free protease inhibitor) and incubated for 15 min at room temperature in an orbital mixer. Soluble and non-soluble fractions were separated by centrifugation (14,000 g, 5 min, 4°C) and the soluble fraction incubated with 100 μl streptavidin-linked Dynabeads (MyOne Streptavidin C1, Thermo) for 1 hour at 4°C under gentle mixing.  Beads were washed twice in 1 ml buffer 1 (2% (w/v) SDS in water) once in 1 ml buffer 2 (0.1% (w/v) deoxycholate, 1% Triton X-100, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM HEPES pH7.5, 500 mM NaCl), once in 1ml buffer 3 (250 mM LiCl, 0.5% IGEPAL, 0.5% (w/v) deoxycholate, 1 mM EDTA, 10 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.1) and once in 1 ml buffer 4 (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 50 mM NaCl); each washing step was eight minutes at RT under orbital shaking. Beads were then prepared for tryptic digestion by washing three times in 500 µl ice-cold 50 mM NH4HCO3, resuspension in 40 µl of the same buffer supplemented with 10 mM DTT and incubationat RT for 1h. Iodoacetamide was added to 20 mM, followed by incubation at RT for 30 min. Finally, 5 μg/ml trypsin was added to the beads. The digest was done overnight at 30°C. After removal of the first eluate, beads were resuspended in 50 μl 50 mM NH4HCO3 supplemented with 10 mM DTTl and 5 μg/ml trypsin and incubated in a thermomixer at 37°C for 1h. The eluate was combined with the first eluate, and both were lyophilised. Peptides were resuspended in 50 mM NH4HCO3 and passed over C18 stage tip columns (PMID: 17703201), then, after removal of polymers by the HiPPR procedure (Thermo Fisher Scientific), analysed by LC-MSMS on an Ultimate3000 nano rapid separation LC system (Dionex) coupled to an LTQ Q-exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo). (2)Cryomill affinity capture T. brucei XRNA : XRNA was expressed as C-terminal mNeonGreen fusion from the endogenous locus in procyclic T. brucei cells. Cells were harvested, subjected to cryomilling and affinity capture essentially as described previously, except that mNeonGreen magnetic agarose was used instead of GFP nanobody beads (PMID: 30040867; PMID: 32221947). In brief, 2 litre cultures of PCF trypanosomes were harvested at 1500*g and washed once with serum free SDM-79. Cell pellets were processed by cryomilling at 77 K into a fine powder in a modified planetary ball mill (Retsch) (PMID: 26891179). Six smidgen spoons of cell powder were suspended in 6 ml ice-cold buffer A (20 mM HEPES pH7.4, 250 mM NaCl, 0.5% CHAPS, complete EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail), sonicated with a microtip sonicator at ~20 W output for 5 x 1 second, transferred into six LoBind tubes and insoluble material was removed by centrifugation (20,000 g). The clear lysate was incubated with 3 μl mNeonGreen Trap magnetic Agarose (Chromotek) for 30 min on a rotator, then washed three times with buffer A. After pooling the 6 samples, captured protein was eluted by incubation in 30 μl 4 x NuPAGE LDS sample buffer (ThermoFisher), supplemented with 2 mM DTT, at 72°C for 15 minutes and then run 1.5 cm into a NuPAGE Bis-Tris 4–12% gradient polyacrylamide gel (ThermoFisher). The respective gel region was sliced out and subjected to tryptic digest and reductive alkylation using standard procedures. Eluted proteins were analysed by LC-MSMS on an Ultimate3000 nano rapid separation LC system (Dionex) coupled to a Q-exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  (3) Cryomill affinity capture T. cruzi XRNA: Cytoplasmic lysates from T. cruzi Dm28c expressing TcXRNA-GFP protein were generated after cell disruption through cavitation as (PMID: 19648909) with modifications. Logarithmically growing culture cells were harvested by centrifugation at 3.000g at RT, washed once with ice cold PBS, followed by resuspension in lysis buffer (20 mM HEPES-KOH, pH 7.4, 75 mM potassium acetate, 4 mM magnesium acetate, 2 mM DTT, supplemented with cOmplete™ Protease Inhibitor Cocktail) to a concentration of 1 × 109 cells/ml. The resuspended cells were transferred into the Cell Disruption Vessel 4639 (Parr) and incubated at 4ºC under 70 bar pressure for 40 min, followed by rapid decompression. The lysates were centrifuged at 17,000g for 10 min to remove cellular debris.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were processed using the intensity-based label-free quantification (LFQ) in MaxQuant version 1.6.16 (PMID: 19029910; PMID: 24942700) searching the T. brucei brucei 927 annotated protein database (release 42 or 50) and the T. cruzi Dm28c2018 database (release 59) from TriTrypDB (PMID:19843604). False discovery rates (FDR) of 0.01 were calculated at the levels of peptides, proteins and modification sites based on the number o hits against the reversed sequence database. Sample layout: (1) BioID ALPH1 (1.1) wt control (triplicate): BioID_wt_control_1, BioID_wt_control_2, BioID_wt_control_3 (1.2) ALPH1 endogenous tagging (triplicate): BioID_ALPH1_end_1, BioID_ALPH1_end_2, BioID_ALPH1_end_3 (1.3) ALPH1 overexpression (triplicate): BioID_ALPH1_end_1, BioID_ALPH1_end_2, BioID_ALPH1_end_3 (1.4) ALPH1deltaN (triplicate): BioID_ALPH1_deltaN_1, BioID_ALPH1_ deltaN _2, BioID_ALPH1_ deltaN _3 (1.5) ALPH1deltaC (triplicate): BioID_ALPH1_ deltaC_1, BioID_ALPH1_ deltaC _2, BioID_ALPH1_ deltaC _3 (1.6) ALPH1cat (triplicate): BioID_ALPH1_cat_1, BioID_ALPH1_ cat _2, BioID_ALPH1_ cat_3  (2) BioID CMGC kinase (2.1) wt control (triplicate): BioID_wt_control_1, BioID_wt_control_2, BioID_wt_control_3 (2.2) CMGC kinase (triplicate): BioID_Kinase _1.raw, BioID_Kinase _2, BioID_Kinase _3 (3) Affinity capture T. brucei XRNA (result file: pulldown_TcXRNA.txt.rar) (3.1) wt control (quadruplicate): (wt 1.raw, wt2.raw, wt3.raw, wt3.raw) (3.2) XRNA (quadruplicate): (Pulldown_TbXRNA_1.raw, Pulldown_TbXRNA _2.raw, Pulldown_TbXRNA _3.raw) (4) Affinity capture T. cruzi XRNA (result file: pulldown_TcXRNA.txt.rar) (4.1) GFP control: (Pulldown_Tc_GFPcontrol_1.raw, Pulldown_Tc_GFPcontrol_2.raw, Pulldown_Tc_GFPcontrol__3.raw) (4.2) XRNA: (Pulldown_TcXRNA_1.raw, Pulldown_TcXRNA _2.raw, Pulldown_TcXRNA _3.raw) (4.3) GFP control in heat shocked cells: (Pulldown_Tc_GFPcontrol_stressed_1.raw, Pulldown_Tc_GFPcontrol_stressed _2.raw, Pulldown_Tc_GFPcontrol_stressed _3.raw) (4.4) XRNA in heat shocked cells: (Pulldown_TcXRNA_stressed_1.raw, Pulldown_TcXRNA_stressed _2.raw, Pulldown_TcXRNA_stressed _3.raw)

### Publication Abstract
Removal of the mRNA 5' cap primes transcripts for degradation and is central for regulating gene expression in eukaryotes. The canonical decapping enzyme Dcp2 is stringently controlled by assembly into a dynamic multi-protein complex together with the 5'-3'exoribonuclease Xrn1. Kinetoplastida lack Dcp2 orthologues but instead rely on the ApaH-like phosphatase ALPH1 for decapping. ALPH1 is composed of a catalytic domain flanked by C- and N-terminal extensions. We show that T. brucei ALPH1 is dimeric in vitro and functions within a complex composed of the trypanosome Xrn1 ortholog XRNA and four proteins unique to Kinetoplastida, including two RNA-binding proteins and a CMGC-family protein kinase. All ALPH1-associated proteins share a unique and dynamic localization to a structure at the posterior pole of the cell, anterior to the microtubule plus ends. XRNA affinity capture in T. cruzi recapitulates this interaction network. The ALPH1 N-terminus is not required for viability in culture, but essential for posterior pole localization. The C-terminus, in contrast, is required for localization to all RNA granule types, as well as for dimerization and interactions with XRNA and the CMGC kinase, suggesting possible regulatory mechanisms. Most significantly, the trypanosome decapping complex has a unique composition, differentiating the process from opisthokonts.

### Keywords
Apah-like phosphatase, Mrna decapping, Trypanosoma, Xrna, Alph1, Exoribonuclease, Mrna decay

### Affiliations
Head of Drug Discovery and Evaluation Center for Research of Pathogenicity and Virulence of Parasites Charles University in Prague, BIOCEV Průmyslová 595 252 50 Vestec Czech Republic
Division of Biological Chemistry & Drug Discovery
School of Life Sciences
University of Dundee
Dundee DD1 5EH

### Submitter
Martin Zoltner

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Zoltner
Head of Drug Discovery and Evaluation Center for Research of Pathogenicity and Virulence of Parasites Charles University in Prague, BIOCEV Průmyslová 595 252 50 Vestec Czech Republic


