### Accession
PXD039883

### Title
Combination of digital microfluidics and magnetic bead-based intact proteoform elution for top-down nanoproteomics of single C. elegans

### Description
While most nanoproteomics approaches for the analysis of low-input samples are based on bottom-up LC-MS workflows, top-down approaches enabling proteoform characterization are still underrepresented. Using mammalian cell proteomes, we here established a facile one-pot sample preparation protocol based on protein aggregation on magnetic beads and intact proteoform elution using 40% v/v formic acid. Performed on a digital microfluidics device, the workflow enabled sensitive analysis of single Caenorhabditis elegans nematodes, increasing the number of proteoform identifications compared to in-tube sample preparation by 46%. Label-free quantification of single nematodes grown under different conditions allowed to identify changes in abundance of proteoforms not distinguishable by bottom-up proteomics. The workflow presented here will help to elucidate cellular changes on the proteoform level in other samples of limited availability.

### Sample Protocol
Single nematodes were thawed and prepared in-tube or on digital microfluidics (DMF) devices using comparable workflows.  For the in-tube workflow, urea lysis buffer (5 mol/L urea, 1% w/v NP-40 substitute, 0.1% w/v Tetronic 90R4, 5 mmol/L DTT, Benzonase Nuclease 1:5000, cOmplete Mini EDTA-free, 5mM borate, 2mM MgCl2) or SDS lysis buffer (0.1% w/v SDS, 5 mM DTT, Benzonase Nuclease 1:5000, cOmplete Mini EDTA free, 5mM borate, 2mM MgCl2) were added to a single nematode. Samples were shortly centrifuged and incubated at room temperature for 45 min. SP3 bead mixture (10 µg/µL in ddH2O) was added and SP3 initiated with ACN. After incubation at room temperature for 30 min, rinsing steps with 70% v/v EtOH and ACN were performed. Formic acid (FA; 40% v/v, -20 °C) was added to the beads, the samples then incubated at -20 °C for 15 min. and diluted with cold ddH2O. The supernatant was transferred to appropriate vessels for LC-MS analysis. For the DMF workflow, individual nematodes were loaded onto DMF chip devices and merged with urea lysis buffer. Incubation was performed for 50 min at room temperature. SP3 bead suspension (10 µg/µL in 0.08% w/v Pluronic F127) was loaded onto the chip, the beads immobilized and separated from the supernatant. Nematode lysates were merged with the bead pellets and the droplets moved to induce mixing. Protein binding was induced with ACN for 30 min at room temperature. Beads were washed consecutively with 70% v/v ethanol and ACN. ACN was removed and the bead pellets were carefully pulled onto the transfer electrodes by means of a loose magnet. For elution, FA (40% v/v) pre-chilled to -20 °C was added to each bead pellet, followed by incubation at -20 °C for 15 min. The eluates were merged with MNA-C12 detergent droplets, separated from the beads and transferred to appropriate vessels for LC-MS/MS. The in-tube workflow was employed almost identically for the preparation of Jurkat T cell low-input standard. LC-MS: Top-down analyses of Jurkat T cell standard and single C. elegans specimens (processed in-tube or on-chip) were performed on an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) having an Acclaim PepMap trap cartridge (5 µm, 0.3 mm x 5 mm, 100 Å), and an Accucore C4 analytical column (50 cm × 75 μm, 2.6 μm, 150 Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific) installed, coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos tribrid mass spectrometer equipped with a FAIMSpro interface (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San José, CA, USA). Injection volumes were 10 µL for Jurkat T cell top-down standard, whereas C. elegans samples were injected completely. Samples were desalted for 5 min and separated across a 180 min linear gradient. Eluents used for LC were eluent A: 0.05% v/v FA, eluent B: 80% v/v ACN + 0.04% v/v FA; flow rate was 300 nL/min.  FAIMS with internal CV stepping was employed using the CVs -20, -30, -40 and -50 V. To provide a comparison, our Jurkat T-cell top-down standard was also measured under omission of FAIMS. MS acquisition in the mass range of m/z 400 – m/z 1800 was performed in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 120,000, normalized AGC target of 200%, and a maximum injection time of 246 ms. In the case of CV -50, Orbitrap resolution was 60,000 and maximum injection time 118 ms. Of the most intense ions (charge states +4 to +50), MS/MS scans utilizing CID fragmentation at a collision energy of 25% and subsequent Orbitrap detection were acquired over a maximum cycle time of 3 s per CV, with an Orbitrap resolution of 60,000, normalized AGC target of 400%, and maximum injection time of 250 ms. For MS/MS at CV -50, Orbitrap resolution was adjusted to 50,000 and maximum injection time to 125 ms.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed and proteoforms identified using Proteome Discoverer (v. 2.5.0.400) with ProSightPD (v. 4.0, Proteinaceous, IL, USA). Processing was performed with the ProSight high/high cRAWler node using Xtract deconvolution algorithm. For the Jurkat T cell top-down standard, searches were run against a database of human reviewed proteins containing all known modifications using both the ProSightPD Annotated Proteoform Search with the Delta M Mode set to false, and a ProSightPD Subsequence Search with the precursor mass and fragment mass tolerances set to 10 ppm. For analyses of C. elegans lysates, a database of reviewed and unreviewed proteins was used. Consensus steps were performed, filtering proteoform spectrum matches and proteoforms at 1% false discovery rate cutoff.  Label-free quantification: Prior to the database search, MS- and MS/MS spectra of raw data from multi-CV measurements were filtered per FAIMS CV using Freestyle v. 1.5. The filtered data was then saved as separate .raw files, thereby effectively slicing each multi-CV run into four fractions. The files separated by CV were grouped as “Control” and “Heat” in Proteome Discoverer v. 2.5. Four searches (one per CV) were then performed against a C. elegans database using the ProSightPD High Resolution Feature Detector node, and annotated sequence and subsequence searches were carried out. Default settings were applied for the majority of parameters save the minimum number of charge states and sliding windows, which was set to 2 for both. Additionally, mass features were required to be present in a minimum of 10% of total data files.

### Publication Abstract
While most nanoproteomics approaches for the analysis of low-input samples are based on bottom-up proteomics workflows, top-down approaches enabling proteoform characterization are still underrepresented. Using mammalian cell proteomes, we established a facile one-pot sample preparation protocol based on protein aggregation on magnetic beads and intact proteoform elution using 40&#x2009;% formic acid. Performed on a digital microfluidics device, the workflow enabled sensitive analyses of single Caenorhabditis elegans nematodes, thereby increasing the number of proteoform identifications compared to in-tube sample preparation by 46&#x2009;%. Label-free quantification of single nematodes grown under different conditions allowed to identify changes in the abundance of proteoforms not distinguishable by bottom-up proteomics. The presented workflow will facilitate proteoform-directed analysis on samples of limited availability.

### Keywords
Top-down proteomics; nanoproteomics; caenorhabditis elegans; digital microfluidics

### Affiliations
Systematic Proteome Research & Bioanalytics, University of Kiel
Systematic Proteome Research & Bioanalytics, Institute for Experimental Medicine, Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel, Kiel, Germany

### Submitter
Andreas Tholey

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Tholey
Systematic Proteome Research & Bioanalytics, Institute for Experimental Medicine, Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel, Kiel, Germany


