### Accession
PXD037343

### Title
transgenerational cross-tolerance drought x heat in pinus radiata

### Description
Heat exposure began each day of the stress treatment with an increasing temperature gradient from 15 °C to 45 °C over a period of 5 h, and this was then maintained at 45 °C for 6 h. During the following 5 h, the temperature was returned to 15 ºC and maintained for 8 h, thus mimicking a day-night scenario. Control plants (C) were sampled, and the following day the stress exposure began. Plant material was sampled at the end of the 6 h heat exposure on day 1 (T1), day 3 (T3), and day 5 (T5). To characterize the molecular mechanisms driving cross tolerance and maternal inheritance in seedlings belonging to two isogenic populations.

### Sample Protocol
Chloroplast fractions for proteomics analyses were purified as described in (Lamelas, García, et al., 2020). In brief, samples were homogenized, incubated in lysis buffers, and then filtrated. Organelle enrichment was achieved with sucrose and sucrose-Percoll discontinuous gradients for intact chloroplast isolation. Protein extraction was performed following phenol-SDS protocol (Valledor and Weckwerth, 2014). As protein samples were dissolved with the detergent SDS, an in-gel digestion was performed using trypsin (Roche, cat. no. 03 708 969 001) according to the manufacturer’s indications. Peptides were extracted and desalted as previously described (Valledor and Weckwerth, 2014). The peptides were analyzed using a 1D nano-flow LC coupled to an MS/MS Orbitrap Fusion spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific), using a 60 min gradient starting with 0.1% formic acid and with 80% acetonitrile as the mobile phase.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was performed with Proteome Discoverer v2.2 (ThermoFischer). A combined database was compiled with three protein databases  and used for protein identification, including the Pinus taeda genome v.1.01 (https://bioinformatics.psb.ugent.be/plaza/versions/gymno-plaza/), UniProt/SwissProt Viridiplantae, and an in-house P. radiata transcriptome.

### Publication Abstract
How different stressors impact plant health and memory when they are imposed in different generations in wild ecosystems is still scarce. Here, we address how different environments shape heritable memory for the next generation in seeds and seedlings of Pinus radiata, a long-lived species with economic interest. The performance of the seedlings belonging to two wild clonal subpopulations (optimal fertirrigation vs. slightly stressful conditions) was tested under heat stress through physiological profiling and comparative time-series chloroplast proteomics. In addition, we explored the seeds conducting a physiological characterization and targeted transcriptomic profiling in both subpopulations. Our results showed differential responses between them, evidencing a cross-stress transgenerational memory. Seedlings belonging to the stressed subpopulation retained key proteins related to Photosystem II, chloroplast-to-nucleus signalling and osmoprotection which helped to overcome the applied heat stress. The seeds also showed a differential gene expression profile for targeted genes and microRNAs, as well as an increased content of starch and secondary metabolites, molecules which showed potential interest as biomarkers for early selection of primed plants. Thus, these finds not only delve into transgenerational cross-stress memory in trees, but also provide a new biotechnological tool for forest design.

### Keywords
Chloroplast, Label-free proteomics

### Affiliations
Universidad de Oviedo
Plant Physiology. Organisms and systems biology. University of Oviedo

### Submitter
Laura Lamelas

### Lab Head
Dr Mónica Meijón
Plant Physiology. Organisms and systems biology. University of Oviedo


