### Accession
PXD011612

### Title
Comparative proteomic analysis of okra (Abelmoschus esculentusL.) seedlings under salt stress

### Description
Background Salinization seriously threatens land use efficiency and crop yields across the world. Understanding the mechanisms plants use to protect against salt stress will help breeders develop salt-tolerant vegetable crops. Okra (Abelmoschus esculentus L) is an important vegetable crop of the mallow family, which is now cultivated in warm regions worldwide. To understand the effects of salt stress on the protein level of okra, a comparative proteomic analysis of okra seedlings grown in the presence of 0 or 300 mmol L-1 NaCl treatment was performed using an integrated approach of Tandem Mass Tag labeling and LC-MS/MS integrated approach. Results A total of 7179 proteins was identified in this study, for which quantitative information was available for 5,774 proteins. In the NaCl/control comparison group, there were 317 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs), of which 165 proteins were upregulated and 152 proteins downregulatedin the presence of NaCl. Based on the above data, we carried out a systematic bioinformatics analysis of proteins with information, including protein annotation, domain characteristics,functional classification,and pathway enrichment. Enriched gene ontology and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes pathway analysis showed that the DEPs were most strongly associated with“response to stress” and “protein processing in endoplasmic reticulum”. Furthermore, several heat shock proteins were identified as DEPs. Conclusions This informationprovides a reference direction for further research on the okraproteome in the downstreamof the salt stress response, with our data revealing that the responses of okra to salt stress involves by various pathways.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Extraction Appropriate amount of sample was grinded by liquid nitrogen, then the powder was transferred to 5 mL centrifuge tube. Four-fold volume lysis buffer (containing 10 mM dithiothreitol, 1% protease inhibitor and 2 mM EDTA) was added to each sample and sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz). An equal volume of Tris-saturated phenol (pH 8.0) was added; then, the mixture was further vortexed for 5 min. After centrifugation (4 °C, 10 min, 5 000g), the upper phenol phase was transferred to a new centrifuge tube. Proteins were precipitated by adding five volumes of 0.1 M ammonium sulfate-saturated methanol and incubated at -20 °C for overnight. After centrifugation at 4 °C for 10 min, the supernatant was discarded. The remaining precipitate was washed with ice-cold methanol once, followed by ice-cold acetone for three times. The protein was redissolved in 8 M urea and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit (P0012, Beyotime, shanghai, China) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For trypsin digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB(Three ethyl ammonium bicarbonate) to urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 (trypsin:protein) mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 (trypsin:protein)  mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion.  Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) labeling, HPLC fractionation and LC-MS/MS Analysis After trypsin digestion, peptide was desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex, Torrance, US) and vacuum-dried. Peptide was reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the operating instruction for TMT kit (ThermoFisher, Shanghai, China). Briefly, one unit of TMT reagent were thawed and reconstituted in acetonitrile. The peptide mixtures were then incubated for 2 h at room temperature and pooled, desalted and dried by vacuum centrifugation. The tryptic peptides were fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Agilent 300Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm internal diameter, 250 mm length) (Agilent, Shanghai, China). Briefly, peptides were first separated with a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0) over 60 min into 60 fractions. Then, the peptides were combined into 18 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging. The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acidbuffer (solvent A), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm internal diameter). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 26 min, 23% to 35% in 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus ((Thermo-Fisher Scientific, Shanghai, China) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Database Search The resulting MS/MS data were searched against a published transcriptome data up-loaded by our lab (NCBI Sequence Read Archive database accession: SRX2576694) using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8) concatenated with reverse decoy database. The enzyme digestion mode was set to Trypsin/P and allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in first search and 5 ppm in main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met was specified as variable modifications. False discovery rate was adjusted to low than 1% and minimum score for peptides was set more than 40.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Differential expression protein, Salt stress, Tmt labeling, Proteomics, Heat shock proteins, Okra

### Affiliations
zhejiang scientific technology universitiy
Institute of Agricultural Equipment, Zhejiang Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Hangzhou 310021, China

### Submitter
xiaonan fu

### Lab Head
Dr Chenliang Yu
Institute of Agricultural Equipment, Zhejiang Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Hangzhou 310021, China


