### Accession
PXD008833

### Title
Zc3h10 is a novel mitochondrial regulator

### Description
Mitochondria are the energy-generating hubs of the cell. In spite of considerable advances, our understanding of the factors that regulate the molecular circuits that govern mitochondrial function remains incomplete. Using a genome-wide functional screen, we have identified the poorly characterized protein Zinc finger CCCH-type containing 10 (Zc3h10) as regulator of mitochondrial physiology. We show that Zc3h10 is upregulated during physiological mitochondriogenesis such as myoblasts differentiation into myotubes. Zc3h10 overexpression boosts mitochondrial function and promotes myoblasts differentiation. On the other hand, depletion of Zc3h10 results in impaired myoblasts differentiation, mitochondrial dysfunction, reduced expression of electron transport chain (ETC) subunits and blunted TCA cycle flux. Notably, we have identified a loss-of-function mutation of Zc3h10 in humans (Tyr105 to Cys105) that is associated with increased body mass index, fat mass, fasting glucose and triglycerides. Isolated peripheral blood mononuclear cells from Cys105 homozygotes display reduced oxygen consumption rate, some ETC subunit expression and decreased levels of some TCA cycle metabolites that derive in mitochondrial dysfunction. Finally, our study identifies Zc3h10 as a novel mitochondrial regulator.

### Sample Protocol
Light cells were infected with scramble while heavy cells were infected with Zc3h10 shRNA and exposed to adenoviral vectors for 48 hr. Proteins from both conditions were extracted in RIPA buffer (15 mM NaCl, 0.1% NP-40, 0.05% Na-deoxycholate, 5 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0), quantified using Bradford assay and mixed in 1:1 ratio.  Protein lysate were by SDS-Page on a gradient gel (4–12% Tris–HCl Precast Gel, Invitrogen) and stained with Colloidal Coomassie. Enzymatic in-gel digestion was performed essentially as previously described (Shevchenko et al., 2007). Briefly, samples were subjected to reduction in DTT 10mM for 1hr at 56°C, followed by alkylation with iodoacetamide 55mM for 45 min at RT, in the dark. Digestion was carried out saturating the gel with sequencing grade-modified trypsin 12.5 ng/ml (Promega) in ammonium bicarbonate 50mM, O/N. Peptide mixtures were acidified with tri-fluoro acetic acid (TFA, final concentration 3%), extracted from gel slices with two rounds of washes (in 30% acetonitrile (ACN)/ 3% TFA and then in 100% ACN, respectively) and concentrated to ~5μl in a vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf). Samples were loaded onto home-made C18-Stage Tips, for concentration and desalting prior LC-MS/MS analysis (Rappsilber et al., 2007). Liquid Chromatography and Tandem Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Peptide mixtures were analyzed by online nano-flow LC-MS/MS using an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientic) connected to a QExactive (Thermo Fisher Scientific) through a nanoelectrospray ion source. The nano-LC system was operated in one column set-up with a 25-cm analytical column (75 µm inner diameter, 350 µm outer diameter) packed with C18 resin (ReproSil, Pur C18AQ 1.9 m, Dr. Maisch, Germany) configuration. Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid (FA) in ddH2O and solvent B was 80% ACN with 0.1% FA. Samples were injected in an aqueous 1% FA solution at a flow rate of 500 nl/min. Peptides were separated with a gradient of 5–30% solvent B for 90 min, followed by a gradient of 30–60 % in 5 min, and 60–95% over 5 min at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. The Q-Exactive instrument was operated in the data-dependent acquisition (DDA) to automatically switch between full scan MS and MS/MS acquisition. The MS spectra (from m/z 375–1650) were analyzed in the Orbitrap detector at resolution of 60 000 (200 m/z). The fifteen most intense peptide ions were sequentially isolated to a target value of 3 × 106 and fragmented by HCD with a normalized collision energy setting of 27%. The maximum allowed ion accumulation times were 20 ms for full scans and 80 ms for MS/MS and the target value for MS/MS was set to 1 × 105 for an 15,000 of resolution at m/z 200. Standard mass spectrometric conditions for all experiments were as follows: spray voltage, 2.1 kV; no sheath and auxiliary gas flow. Peptide Assignment by MaxQuant software and Data Analysis. The mass spectrometric raw data were analyzed with the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.2.8). A false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% for proteins and peptides, and a minimum peptide length of 6 amino acids, were required. In order to improve mass accuracy of the precursor ions, the time-dependent recalibration algorithm of MaxQuant was used. The MS/MS spectra were searched by Andromeda engine against the UniProt human database (70,941 entries). Enzyme specificity was set to Trypsin and maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Peptide identification was based on a search with an initial mass deviation of the precursor ion of up to 7 ppm. The fragment mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm. Cysteine carbamidomethylation (Cys +57.021464 Da) was searched as fixed modification, whereas N-acetylation of protein (N-term, +42.010565 Da), oxidized Methionine (+15.994915 Da) were searched as variable modifications.  SILAC peptide and protein quantification was performed automatically with MaxQuant using default settings for parameters (Tyanova et al., 2016). Briefly, for each SILAC pair the ratio is determined by regression model fitted to all isotopic peaks and all pair for each scan during the peptides elution. SILAC protein ratios are determined as the median of all peptide ratios assigned to the protein.

### Data Protocol
The MS spectra (from m/z 375–1650) were analyzed in the Orbitrap detector at resolution of 60 000 (200 m/z). The fifteen most intense peptide ions were sequentially isolated to a target value of 3 × 106 and fragmented by HCD with a normalized collision energy setting of 27%. The maximum allowed ion accumulation times were 20 ms for full scans and 80 ms for MS/MS and the target value for MS/MS was set to 1 × 105 for an 15,000 of resolution at m/z 200. Standard mass spectrometric conditions for all experiments were as follows: spray voltage, 2.1 kV; no sheath and auxiliary gas flow. Peptide Assignment by MaxQuant software and Data Analysis. The mass spectrometric raw data were analyzed with the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.2.8). A false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% for proteins and peptides, and a minimum peptide length of 6 amino acids, were required. In order to improve mass accuracy of the precursor ions, the time-dependent recalibration algorithm of MaxQuant was used. The MS/MS spectra were searched by Andromeda engine against the UniProt human database (70,941 entries). Enzyme specificity was set to Trypsin and maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Peptide identification was based on a search with an initial mass deviation of the precursor ion of up to 7 ppm. The fragment mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm. Cysteine carbamidomethylation (Cys +57.021464 Da) was searched as fixed modification, whereas N-acetylation of protein (N-term, +42.010565 Da), oxidized Methionine (+15.994915 Da) were searched as variable modifications.  SILAC peptide and protein quantification was performed automatically with MaxQuant using default settings for parameters (Tyanova et al., 2016). Briefly, for each SILAC pair the ratio is determined by regression model fitted to all isotopic peaks and all pair for each scan during the peptides elution. SILAC protein ratios are determined as the median of all peptide ratios assigned to the protein.

### Publication Abstract
Mitochondria are the energy-generating hubs of the cell. In spite of considerable advances, our understanding of the factors that regulate the molecular circuits that govern mitochondrial function remains incomplete. Using a genome-wide functional screen, we identify the poorly characterized protein Zinc finger CCCH-type containing 10 (Zc3h10) as regulator of mitochondrial physiology. We show that Zc3h10 is upregulated during physiological mitochondriogenesis as it occurs during the differentiation of myoblasts into myotubes. Zc3h10 overexpression boosts mitochondrial function and promotes myoblast differentiation, while the depletion of Zc3h10 results in impaired myoblast differentiation, mitochondrial dysfunction, reduced expression of electron transport chain (ETC) subunits, and blunted TCA cycle flux. Notably, we have identified a loss-of-function mutation of Zc3h10 in humans (Tyr105 to Cys105) that is associated with increased body mass index, fat mass, fasting glucose, and triglycerides. Isolated peripheral blood mononuclear cells from individuals homozygotic for Cys105 display reduced oxygen consumption rate, diminished expression of some ETC subunits, and decreased levels of some TCA cycle metabolites, which all together derive in mitochondrial dysfunction. Taken together, our study identifies Zc3h10 as a novel mitochondrial regulator.

### Keywords
Zc3h10, Mitochondria, Energy metabolism, Oxidative phosphorylation.

### Affiliations
IEO
DiSFeB, Dipartimento di Scienze Farmacologiche e Biomolecolari, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milano, 20133, Italy,

### Submitter
alessandro cuomo

### Lab Head
Dr Nico Mitro
DiSFeB, Dipartimento di Scienze Farmacologiche e Biomolecolari, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milano, 20133, Italy,


