### Accession
PXD036663

### Title
Proteome2virus: Shotgun mass spectrometry data analysis pipeline for virus identification

### Description
To increase the number of virus species that can be detected we developed a shotgun proteomics based approach, which was applied to viral samples, after which the identified peptides were searched for in a database equipped with proteomic data of 46 viruses, known to be infectious to humans, using a web application (‘proteome2virus.com’).  To validate proteome2virus application (proteome2virus.com) data of cultured and clinical samples was generated. The method has been successfully tested against cultured viruses and 8 clinical fecales   samples of 10 different viral species from 7 different virus families, including SARS-CoV-2, Betacoronavirus OC43, human coronavirus 229E, human orthopneumovirus (RSV A and RSV B), human metapneumovirus, Influenza A (H1N1 and H3N2), mamastrovirus 1, Norwalk virus, Rotavirus A and human mastadenovirus F, representing 7 different virus families. The samples were prepared with two different sample preparation methods and were measured on two different mass spectrometers. Results demonstrated that the developed data analysis pipeline is applicable to different MS data sets generated on 2 different instruments and that it this approach identifies a high variety of clinically relevant viral species. This emphasizes the potential and feasibility for the diagnosis of a wide range of viruses in clinical samples with a single shotgun proteomics analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Sample set 1 (Table 1 in the paper) Sample preparation was executed with the modified SP3 protocol as described by Hayoun et al. [Front Microbiol. 2019]. In short, supernatant of virus cultures were diluted in lysis buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM DTT in 100 mM Tris/HCl pH8). A sample volume of 500 µl was incubated 30 min at 95oC. Subsequently, the sample was sonicated in a ultrasonic bath (Crest Ultrasonics) for 5 minutes, followed by adding 40 µl solution of Sera-Magnetic beads (25 µg/µl of hydrophilic beads and 25 µg/µl of hydrophobic beads). After gently mixing, 500 µl 100% ethanol was added and thereafter incubated for 5 min at 900 rpm on a thermomixer (Thermomixer, Eppendorf). Sera-Magnetic beads were retained in solution by a neodymium magnet (MagRack 6 Cytiva product no. 28-9489-64), while the liquid was removed by pipetting. Next, Sera-Magnetic beads were washed 3 times with 180 µl 80% ethanol whereby the beads were kept in the reaction tube using the neodymium magnet. After removal of the 80% ethanol after the third wash 100 ul digestion buffer (1 µg/µl Trypsin Gold (Promega) in 50 mM ABC-buffer) was added, sonicated 30 s and mixed gently to disperse the beads homogenous in the solution and incubated for 15 minutes at 50oC. Digestion reaction was stopped by adding 5 µl 10% TFA.  Sample set 2 (Table 2 in the paper) contains MS data generated from fecal samples of patients with a known gastrointestinal virus infection. Each fecal sample was diluted in an approximal 1:1 ratio with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8), resulting in a total volume of 100 µl per sample. The samples were thoroughly mixed and then spun for 5 min at 10,000 rpm. Subsequently, the supernatant was used all continued steps of the sample preparation. To 100 ul supernatant, 100 µl 0.2% RapiGest (Waters Corporation, Milford, CT, USA) in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8) was added (final concentration of RapiGest as advised by manufacturer is 0.1%). Subsequently, the sample was sonicated ultrasonic bath (Branson 2510). After heating of the sample for 5 minutes at 95 oC, the sample was cooled and spun for 5 minutes at 10,000 rpm (Eppendorf minispin). Five µl 200 mM DTT (DL-dithiothreitol, Sigma-Aldrich) was added to a final concentration of 5 mM. After 30 minutes at 60°C incubation, the sample was cooled and spun for 5 minutes at 10,000 rpm. Next, 5 µl 600 nM iodoacetamide (IAM) was added (final concentration of IAM 17.5 mM). After 30 minutes incubation at 60°C. Next, 5 µl trypsin (20 ng/µl in 50 mM acetic acid) was added (+/- a 1:50 (protein:trypsin) ratio (~ pH8). Digestion was incubated overnight at 37°C. Subsequently, 5 µl 20% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was added to the sample and the sample was incubated for 30 minutes at 37°C to stop the trypsin enzymatic reaction and to break down RapiGest int components. The sample was spun for 5 minutes at 10,000 rpm. The supernatant was cleaned and concentrated using a C18 column (Thermo Fisher).

### Data Protocol
Samples from sample set 1 were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a nanoliquid chromatography (nanoLC Ultimate 3000; Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA) coupled to a linear ion trap Orbitrap (EclipseOrbitrap) mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) with a FAIMS device. Samples from sample set 2 were carried out on a RSLC nano-LC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) online coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  The obtained MS spectra were assigned to peptides using PEAKS X (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, Canada) and a custom database (46Virus_db). A database that contains proteomes of 46 virus species. Database searches were set; precursor ion mass tolerance was set at 10 p.p.m and the product ion mass tolerance at 0.5 Da.Only peptides with a false discovery rate (FDR) of ≤ 0.1% were included in further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Virus, Diagnsoe, Proteomics, Proteome2virus, Identification, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
TNO
Research Manager, TNO, Department CBRN protection, The Netherlands (lab head) (lab head)

### Submitter
Armand Paauw

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. ir. A.M.J. (Annette) Kliphuis
Research Manager, TNO, Department CBRN protection, The Netherlands (lab head) (lab head)


