### Accession
PXD017650

### Title
A systematic, label-free method for identifying RNA-associated proteins in vivo provides insights into vertebrate ciliary beating - RNA DIF-FRAC Xenopus laevis Animal Cap explants Replicate 2

### Description
The associated files are mass spec data from size exclusion chromatographic separations of Xenopus laevis animal cap explants with and without RNAse A treatment.

### Sample Protocol
Xenopus were housed and handled as described (Sive et al., 2000). Animal caps were dissected using forceps and cultured in 1X Steinberg’s solution + gentimycin until sibling embryos reached stage 23 (Nieuwkoop and Faber, 1967) . Explants were then lysed for 5 minutes on ice using 500ul PierceIP Lysis Buffer (0.8 mL; 25 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% NP-40 and 5% glycerol; Thermo Fisher) containing 1x protease inhibitor cocktail III (Calbiochem) and dounced using pestle B. Lysate was then clarified 2x (13,000 g, 10 min, 4 C). Control lysate was left at room temperature for 30 minutes. RNAse lysate was treated with RNAse A (10uL, 100ug, Thermo Fisher, catalog #EN0531) at room temperature for 30 minutes. Lysates were re-clarified. Lysates were separated into 5 aliquots and filtered (Ultrafree-MC filter unit (Millipore);12,000 g, 2 min, 4 C) to remove insoluble aggregates.

Chromatography: Both control and RNAse lysates were subjected to size exclusion chromatography (SEC) independently using a Thermo Scientific UltiMate 3000 HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). Soluble protein (200 μL) was applied to a BioSep-SEC-s4000 600 x 7.8 mm ID, particle diameter 5 μm, pore diameter 500 Å (Phenomenex, Torrance, CA) and equilibrated in PBS, pH 7.2 at a flow rate of 0.5 mL min-1. Fractions were collected every 0.375 mL.

Mass Spectrometry: Fractions were filter concentrated to 50uL, denatured and reduced in 50% 2,2,2-trifluoroethanol (TFE) and 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) at 55C for 45 minutes, and alkylated in the dark with iodoacetamide (55 mM, 30 min, RT). Samples were diluted to 5% TFE in 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 2 mM CaCl2, and digested with trypsin (1:50; proteomics grade; 5 h; 37°C). Digestion was quenched (1% formic acid), and the sample volume reduced to 100uL by speed vacuum centrifugation. The sample was desalted on a C18 filter plate (Part No. MFNSC18.10 Glygen Corp, Columbia, MD), eluted, reduced to near dryness by speed vacuum centrifugation, and resuspended in 5% acetonitrile/ 0.1% formic acid for analysis by LC-MS/MS. Peptides were separated on a 75uM x 25 cm Acclaim PepMap100 C-18 column (Thermo) using a 3%–45% acetonitrile gradient over 60 min and analyzed online by nanoelectrospray-ionization tandem mass spectrometry on an Orbitrap Fusion (replicate 1) or Orbitrap FusionLumos Tribrid (replicate 2) (Thermo Scientific). Data-dependent acquisition was activated, with parent ion (MS1) scans collected at high resolution (120,000). Ions with +2 or higher charge were selected for HCD fragmentation spectrum acquisition (MS2) in the ion trap, using a Top Speed acquisition time of 3 s. Dynamic exclusion was activated, with a 60 sec exclusion time for ions selected more than once. MS was acquired in the UT Austin Proteomics Facility.

### Data Protocol
RAW files were searched against an orthology collapsed (EggNOG) Xenopus laevis proteome. Output from 3 search engines (Comet, MS-GF+ and X!Tandem) were combined using MSBlender. Proteome can be found at https://github.com/marcottelab/pivo (commit: 972793a). 

### Publication Abstract
Cell-type specific RNA-associated proteins are essential for development and homeostasis in animals. Despite a massive recent effort to systematically identify RNA-associated proteins, we currently have few comprehensive rosters of cell-type specific RNA-associated proteins in vertebrate tissues. Here, we demonstrate the feasibility of determining the RNA-associated proteome of a defined vertebrate embryonic tissue using DIF-FRAC, a systematic and universal (i.e., label-free) method. Application of DIF-FRAC to cultured tissue explants of Xenopus mucociliary epithelium identified dozens of known RNA-associated proteins as expected, but also several novel RNA-associated proteins, including proteins related to assembly of the mitotic spindle and regulation of ciliary beating. In particular, we show that the inner dynein arm tether Cfap44 is an RNA-associated protein that localizes not only to axonemes, but also to liquid-like organelles in the cytoplasm called DynAPs. This result led us to discover that DynAPs are generally enriched for RNA. Together, these data provide a useful resource for a deeper understanding of mucociliary epithelia and demonstrate that DIF-FRAC will be broadly applicable for systematic identification of RNA-associated proteins from embryonic tissues.

### Keywords
Ribonucleoprotein complex, Xenopus laevis, Animal cap explant, Rna dif-frac, Differential fractionation

### Affiliations
University of Texas at Austin
Molecular Biosciences and the Center for Systems and Synthetic Biology, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX USA

### Submitter
Kevin Drew

### Lab Head
Dr Edward Marcotte
Molecular Biosciences and the Center for Systems and Synthetic Biology, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX USA


