### Accession
PXD008918

### Title
Proteomics analysis of monocyte-derived hepatocyte-like cells identifies integrin beta 3 as a specific biomarker for drug-induced liver injury by diclofenac

### Description
Idiosyncratic drug-induced liver injury (iDILI) is a major cause of acute liver failure resulting in liver transplantation or death. Prediction and diagnosis of iDILI remain a great challenge, as current models provide unsatisfying results in terms of sensitivity, specificity and prognostic value. The absence of appropriate tools for iDILI detection also impairs the development of reliable biomarkers. Here, we report on a new method for identification of drug-specific biomarkers. We combined the advantages of monocyte-derived hepatocyte-like (MH) cells, able to mimic individual characteristics, with those of a novel mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics technology to assess potential biomarkers for Diclofenac-induced DILI. We found over 2700 proteins differentially regulated in MH cells derived from individual patients. Herefrom, we identified integrin beta 3 (ITGB3) to be specifically upregulated in Diclofenac-treated MH cells from Diclofenac-DILI patients compared to control groups. Finally, we validated ITGB3 by flow cytometry analysis of whole blood and histological staining of liver biopsies derived from patients diagnosed with Diclofenac-DILI. In summary, our results show that biomarker candidates can be identified by proteomics analysis of MH cells. Application of this method to a broader range of drugs in the future will exploit its full potential for the development of drug-specific biomarkers.

### Sample Protocol
Cryoconserved MH-cells were thawed and treated with 100 μM Diclofenac or vehicle (dimethylsulfoxide - DMSO) for 48 hours, followed by sample preparation for proteomics analysis. Sample preparation was performed as described previously [15]. Briefly, 50.000 MH cells were lysed, denatured, reduced and alkylated in SDC buffer for 10 minutes at 95°C. Proteins were digested with Trypsin and LysC (1:100 w/w) at 37°C for 3 hours. Acidified peptides were purified using SDB-RPS StageTips. Eluted Peptides were completely dried using a SpeedVac centrifuge and suspended in LC loading buffer. 2 μg of peptides were loaded for 100 minute gradients separated on a 50 cm column with 75μm inner diameter in-house packed with 1.9 μm C18 beads (Dr. Maisch GmbH).  

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analysed by MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3.2) [21] and peak lists were searched against the H. sapiens Uniprot FASTA database (Version 2014/4) and a common contaminants database (247 entries) by the Andromeda search engine [22]. Label-free quantification was done using the MaxLFQ algorithm [23] integrated into MaxQuant. Data was analyzed by using the Perseus software [24]. Positions containing non-valid values were filtered out in order to obtain a protein data set present in all samples.  

### Publication Abstract
Idiosyncratic drug-induced liver injury (iDILI) is a major cause of acute liver failure resulting in liver transplantation or death. Prediction and diagnosis of iDILI remain a great challenge, as current models provide unsatisfying results in terms of sensitivity, specificity, and prognostic value. The absence of appropriate tools for iDILI detection also impairs the development of reliable biomarkers. Here, we report on a new method for identification of drug-specific biomarkers. We combined the advantages of monocyte-derived hepatocyte-like (MH) cells, able to mimic individual characteristics, with those of a novel mass spectrometry-based proteomics technology to assess potential biomarkers for Diclofenac-induced DILI. We found over 2,700 proteins differentially regulated in MH cells derived from individual patients. Herefrom, we identified integrin beta 3 (ITGB3) to be specifically upregulated in Diclofenac-treated MH cells from Diclofenac-DILI patients compared to control groups. Finally, we validated ITGB3 by flow cytometry analysis of whole blood and histological staining of liver biopsies derived from patients diagnosed with Diclofenac-DILI. In summary, our results show that biomarker candidates can be identified by proteomics analysis of MH cells. Application of this method to a broader range of drugs in the future will exploit its full potential for the development of drug-specific biomarkers. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD008918.

### Keywords
Dili, Monocyte.derived hepatocyte-like cells, Drug-development, Biomarker, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Metaheps GmbH, Germany Department of Medicine 2, Liver Centre Munich®, University Hospital Munich (KUM) Campus Grosshadern, Munich, Germany, Germany
PreOmics

### Submitter
Garwin Pichler

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Benesic
Metaheps GmbH, Germany Department of Medicine 2, Liver Centre Munich®, University Hospital Munich (KUM) Campus Grosshadern, Munich, Germany, Germany


