### Accession
PXD030106

### Title
Rbp95 binds 25S rRNA helix H95 and cooperates with the Npa1 complex during early pre-60S particle maturation

### Description
Eukaryotic ribosome synthesis involves more than 200 assembly factors, which promote ribosomal RNA (rRNA) processing, modification and folding, and assembly of ribosomal proteins. The formation and maturation of the earliest pre-60S particles requires structural remodeling by the Npa1 complex, but is otherwise still poorly understood. Here we introduce Rbp95, a constituent of early pre-60S particles, as a novel ribosome assembly factor that likely already binds before the 90S to pre-60S transition. We show that Rbp95 is both genetically and physically linked to most Npa1 complex members, and to ribosomal protein Rpl3. Notably, the RNA-binding protein Rbp95 associates with helix H95 in the 3’ region of the 25S rRNA, in close proximity to the binding sites of Npa1 and Rpl3. Additionally, Rbp95 interacts with several snoRNAs. In the absence of Rbp95, proteins binding in proximity to helix H95 are less efficiently recruited to early pre-60S particles. Moreover, combined mutation of Rbp95 and Npa1 complex members leads to a delay in the formation of early pre-60S particles. We propose that Rbp95 acts together with the Npa1 complex in the 90S to pre-60S transition and in promoting pre-rRNA folding events within pre-60S particles that facilitate the recruitment of subsequent assembly factors.

### Sample Protocol
Label-free semi-quantitative LC-MS/MS analysis Eluates from TAP purifications were dissolved in 25% 2,2,2-trifluoroethanol (TFE) in 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5), reduced with 10 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and alkylated with 40 mM chloroacetamide by shaking at 550 rpm at 95 °C for 10 min. After dilution to <10% TFE with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, proteins were digested by adding 1 µg of Promega modified trypsin and shaking overnight at 550 rpm at 37 °C. The resulting peptide solution was acidified by adding 5% formic acid to a final concentration of 0.1% and analyzed by nano-HPLC coupled to either an Orbitrap Velos Pro (Thermo Fisher Scientific) or a maXis II ETD (Bruker) mass spectrometer. For Orbitrap measurements a Dionex Ultimate 3000 was equipped with a C18 (5 µm, 100 Å, 5 x 0.3 mm) enrichment column and an Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 nanocolumn (2 µm, 100 Å, 500 x 0.075 mm) (all Thermo Fisher Scientific).  Samples were concentrated on the enrichment column for 6 min using 0.1% formic acid as isocratic solvent at 5 μl/min flow rate. The column was then switched in the nanoflow circuit, and the sample was loaded on the nanocolumn, at a flow rate of 250 nl/min at 60 °C and separated using the following gradient: solvent A: water, 0.1% formic acid; solvent B: acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid; 0-6 min: 4% B; 6-264 min: 4-25% B; 264-274 min: 25-95% B, 274-289 min: 95% B; 289-304 min: 4% B. The sample was ionized in the nanospray source equipped with stainless steel emitters (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and analyzed in the Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer in positive ion mode by alternating full scan MS (m/z 300 to 2,000, 60,000 resolution) in the ICR cell and MS/MS by CID of the 10 most intense peaks in the ion trap with dynamic exclusion enabled. For maXis II ETD measurements peptide solutions were acidified to a final concentration of 1 % Trifluoroacetic acid and desalted before measurement using in-house made stage-tips with SDB-RPS (Styrene Divinylbenzene - Reversed Phase Sulfonate) as material. The Dionex Ultimate 3000 was equipped with an Aurora Series Emitter nanocolumn with CSI fitting (C18, 1.6 µm, 120 Å, 250 x 0.075 mm) (IonOpticks, Melbourne, Australia). Separation was carried out at 50 °C at a flow rate of 300 nl/min using the following gradient (same solvent A and B as described above): 0-18 min: 2% B; 18-100 min: 2-25% B; 100-107 min: 25-35% B, 107-108 min: 35-95% B; 108-118 min: 95% B, 118-118 min: 95-2% B; 118-133 min: 2% B. The Bruker maXis II ETD mass spectrometer was operated with the captive source in positive mode with following settings: mass range: 150 – 2,200 m/z, 4 Hz, precursor acquisition control top20 (CID), capillary 1,600V, dry gas flow 3 L/min with 150 °C, nanoBooster 0.2 bar.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data were analyzed by MaxQuant by searching the public Swissprot database with taxonomy Saccharomyces cerevisiae and common contaminants. Carbamidomethylation on cystein was entered as fixed modification, oxidation on methionine as variable modification. Detailed search criteria were used as follows: trypsin, max. missed cleavage sites: 2; search mode: MS/MS ion search with decoy database search included; precursor mass tolerance +/- 0.006 Da for Bruker data and +/- 4.5 ppm for Thermo data; product mass tolerance +/- 840 ppm for Bruker data and +/- 0.5 Da for Thermo data; acceptance parameters for identification: 1% PSM FDR; 1% protein FDR. In addition, a label free quantitation of each protein calculated from the areas under the curve of precursor ion intensity chromatograms was performed using MaxQuant requiring a minimum of 2 ratio counts of quantified razor and unique peptides.  For a rough categorization, each detected protein was manually assigned to one of the following groups: 60S AFs, 90S AFs, 40S AFs, Npa1 complex members, H/ACA snoRNP components, C/D snoRNP components, 40S r-proteins, 60S r-proteins, others. For the comparison of Rbp95-TAP with Prp43-TAP the additional groups of G-patch proteins and mRNA splicing proteins were used. The determined label-free quantification (LFQ) intensity values were normalized so that the sum of intensities was 100% in each purification. All 0-values were replaced by 0.0001 to allow conversion into logarithmic values used for the graphical representation of the data. Then, the values of purifications to be compared were plotted against each other in Statgraphics 18 using logarithmic scaling.

### Publication Abstract
Eukaryotic ribosome synthesis involves more than 200 assembly factors, which promote ribosomal RNA (rRNA) processing, modification and folding, and assembly of ribosomal proteins. The formation and maturation of the earliest pre-60S particles requires structural remodeling by the Npa1 complex, but is otherwise still poorly understood. Here, we introduce Rbp95 (Ycr016w), a constituent of early pre-60S particles, as a novel ribosome assembly factor. We show that Rbp95 is both genetically and physically linked to most Npa1 complex members and to ribosomal protein Rpl3. We demonstrate that Rbp95 is an RNA-binding protein containing two independent RNA-interacting domains. In vivo, Rbp95 associates with helix H95 in the 3' region of the 25S rRNA, in close proximity to the binding sites of Npa1 and Rpl3. Additionally, Rbp95 interacts with several snoRNAs. The absence of Rbp95 results in alterations in the protein composition of early pre-60S particles. Moreover, combined mutation of Rbp95 and Npa1 complex members leads to a delay in the maturation of early pre-60S particles. We propose that Rbp95 acts together with the Npa1 complex during early pre-60S maturation, potentially by promoting pre-rRNA folding events within pre-60S particles.

### Keywords
Tandem-affinity purification (tap), Yeast, Npa1, Ribosome assembly factor, Pre-60s particles, Rbp95, S. cerevisiae

### Affiliations
Omics Center Graz
Research and Diagnostic Institute of Pathology, Medical University of Graz, Stiftingtalstrasse 6, 8010 Graz, Austria; BioTechMed-Graz, Graz, Austria;  Institute of Chemical Technologies and Analytics, Technische Universität Wien, Getreidemarkt 9/164, 1060 Vienna, Austria;

### Submitter
Barbara Darnhofer

### Lab Head
Dr Ruth Birner-Gruenberger
Research and Diagnostic Institute of Pathology, Medical University of Graz, Stiftingtalstrasse 6, 8010 Graz, Austria; BioTechMed-Graz, Graz, Austria;  Institute of Chemical Technologies and Analytics, Technische Universität Wien, Getreidemarkt 9/164, 1060 Vienna, Austria;


