### Accession
PXD026877

### Title
LC-MS proteomics quantitative analysis of pancreatic cancer cells overexpressing NEK2

### Description
The NEK2 overexpression  in pancreactic cancer cell (SW1990), and we performed LC-MS to further investigate the manner in which NEK2 regulates PD-L1.

### Sample Protocol
NEK2 was overexpressed in human pancreatic cancer cell (SW1990). Sample was sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail). (Note: For PTM experiments, inhibitors were also added to the lysis buffer, e.g. 3 μM TSA and 50 mM NAM for acetylation.) The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry analysis was performed by PTM-Biolabs Co., Ltd. (Hangzhou, China). MS/MS data were processed using a Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the human uniprot database concatenated with a reverse decoy database.Proteins were classified using GO annotation into three categories: biological process, cellular compartment, and molecular function. For each category, a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test was used to test for enrichment of differentially expressed proteins against all identified proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms, Pancreatic cancer cell

### Affiliations
Department of Hepatobiliary and Pancreatic Surgery, the First Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University

### Submitter
Xiaozhen Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Xing Huang
Department of Hepatobiliary and Pancreatic Surgery, the First Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University


