### Accession
PXD023352

### Title
Gas plasma combined with antibiotics for the eradication of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus biofilm

### Description
Gas plasma treatment caused polymerization of the SaClpP proteins and loss of protein function due to the oxidative modifications induced by reactive oxygen species of the gas plasma.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma-treated and untreated SaClpP (5 μg) were subjected to SDS-PAGE (15%) and visualized by staining with Coomassie brilliant blue R-250. The protein bands were excised, and the protein was digested in-gel with trypsin as described previously (Beranova-Giorgianni and Desiderio, 2000). The digested products were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid and purified with ZipTipC18 pipette tips (Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s procedure. The tryptic peptides were identified on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system (ThermoFisher).

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data was processed using Mascot Daemon (v.2.5.1, 2014, Matrix Science, Boston, USA). Tandem mass spectra were searched against sequence database. Trypsin was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. For precursor ions, the mass error was set to 10 ppm, and for fragment ions, the mass error is set to 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethylation on Cys was specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met was specified as variable modifications. False discovery rate thresholds for protein, peptide and modification site were specified at 1%. All the other parameters in Mascot were set to default values.

### Publication Abstract
Biofilms formed by multidrug-resistant bacteria are a major cause of hospital-acquired infections. Cold atmospheric-pressure plasma (CAP) is attractive for sterilization, especially to disrupt biofilms formed by multidrug-resistant bacteria. However, the underlying molecular mechanism is not clear. In this study, CAP effectively reduced the living cells in the biofilms formed by methicillin-resistant <i>Staphylococcus aureus</i>, and 6 min treatment with CAP reduced the <i>S. aureus</i> cells in biofilms by 3.5 log<sub>10</sub>. The treatment with CAP caused the polymerization of SaFtsZ and SaClpP proteins in the <i>S. aureus</i> cells of the biofilms. In vitro analysis demonstrated that recombinant SaFtsZ lost its self-assembly capability, and recombinant SaClpP lost its peptidase activity after 2 min of treatment with CAP. Mass spectrometry showed oxidative modifications of a cluster of peaks differing by 16 Da, 31 Da, 32 Da, 47 Da, 48 Da, 62 Da, and 78 Da, induced by reactive species of CAP. It is speculated that the oxidative damage to proteins in <i>S. aureus</i> cells was induced by CAP, which contributed to the reduction of biofilms. This study elucidates the biological effect of CAP on the proteins in bacterial cells of biofilms and provides a basis for the application of CAP in the disinfection of biofilms.

### Keywords
Gas plasma; biofilm; antibiotic; oxidative damage; methicillin-resistant staphylococcus aureus

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Electrical Insulation and Power Equipment, Center for Plasma Biomedicine, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an 710049, P. R. China
Xi'an Jiaotong University

### Submitter
Li Guo

### Lab Head
Dr Dingxin Liu
State Key Laboratory of Electrical Insulation and Power Equipment, Center for Plasma Biomedicine, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an 710049, P. R. China


