### Accession
PXD004328

### Title
Degradation of C30 -  Reduced TCA cycle rates at high hydrostatic pressure hinder hydrocarbon degradation and obligate oil degraders in natural, deep-sea microbial communities

### Description
A significant part of the heavier petroleum fraction resulting from offshore oil-spills sinks to the deep-sea. Its fate and biodegradation by microbial communities is unclear. In particular, the physiological and metabolic features of hydrostatic pressure (HP) adapted oil-degraders have been neglected. In this study, hydrocarbon-free sediment from 1km below surface water (bsl) was incubated at 0.1, 10 and 20MPa (equivalent to surface waters, 1 and 2km bsl) using triacontane (C30) as sole carbon source for a 3-month enrichment period. HP strongly impacted biodegration, as it selected for microbial communities with small cells, high O2 respiration and nutrients requirements, but low biomass and C30-degradation yields. The alkane-degrading metaproteome linked to β-oxidation was detected but its expression was reduced under HP contrary to several housekeeping genes. This was reflected in the enriched communities, as atmospheric pressure was dominated by hydrocarbonoclastic bacteria while non-specialized or previously unrecognized oil-degrading genera were enriched under HP.

### Sample Protocol
Cells from 100mL cell suspension were centrifuged, pellets dissolved in 400µL 50 mM Tris/HCl (pH 6.8) and protein extraction carried out with liquid phenol in a ball mill65. After protein quantification with amido black assay, 7µg proteins were entered into a 12% SDS-PAGE and electrophoresis was stopped after proteins entered approximately 5mm into the separation gel. Afterwards, the complete protein fraction was digested triptically and peptides measured by LC-MS/MS using an Elite Hybrid Ion Trap Orbitrap MS with a 120min gradient.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification, a database search with Mascot was carried out, using a false discovery rate of 1%. Thereby, the protein database contained all UniProt/Swiss-Prot resp. UniProtKB/TrEMBL entries67, which belonged to the orders already identified by Illumina sequencing. For the final taxonomic and functional data evaluation, the Mascot result files (.dat-files) were imported to the MetaProteomeAnalyzer68 and grouping of redundant protein identifications to so-called metaproteins was carried out based on at least one shared peptide. The detailed description of the metaproteome workflow is documented in the Supplementary Note S1 and all MS results were submitted to PRIDE69, accession number XXX.

### Publication Abstract
Petroleum hydrocarbons reach the deep-sea following natural and anthropogenic factors. The process by which they enter deep-sea microbial food webs and impact the biogeochemical cycling of carbon and other elements is unclear. Hydrostatic pressure (HP) is a distinctive parameter of the deep sea, although rarely investigated. Whether HP alone affects the assembly and activity of oil-degrading communities remains to be resolved. Here we have demonstrated that hydrocarbon degradation in deep-sea microbial communities is lower at native HP (10&#x2009;MPa, about 1000&#x2009;m below sea surface level) than at ambient pressure. In long-term enrichments, increased HP selectively inhibited obligate hydrocarbon-degraders and downregulated the expression of beta-oxidation-related proteins (i.e., the main hydrocarbon-degradation pathway) resulting in low cell growth and CO<sub>2</sub> production. Short-term experiments with HP-adapted synthetic communities confirmed this data, revealing a HP-dependent accumulation of citrate and dihydroxyacetone. Citrate accumulation suggests rates of aerobic oxidation of fatty acids in the TCA cycle were reduced. Dihydroxyacetone is connected to citrate through glycerol metabolism and glycolysis, both upregulated with increased HP. High degradation rates by obligate hydrocarbon-degraders may thus be unfavourable at increased HP, explaining their selective suppression. Through lab-scale cultivation, the present study is the first to highlight a link between impaired cell metabolism and microbial community assembly in hydrocarbon degradation at high HP. Overall, this data indicate that hydrocarbons fate differs substantially in surface waters as compared to deep-sea environments, with in situ low temperature and limited nutrients availability expected to further prolong hydrocarbons persistence at deep sea.

### Keywords
Deep-sea, Oil, Hydrostatic pressure, Alkane, Metaproteome, Bioremediation, Petroleum

### Affiliations
OvGU
Otto von Guericke University of Magdeburg, University, Bioprocess Engineering, Universitätsplatz 2 G25, 39106 Magdeburg, Germany

### Submitter
Robert Heyer

### Lab Head
Dr DIrk Benndorf
Otto von Guericke University of Magdeburg, University, Bioprocess Engineering, Universitätsplatz 2 G25, 39106 Magdeburg, Germany


