### Accession
PXD011204

### Title
Human Platelets PRM -  A high glucose level is associated with decreased aspirin-mediated acetylation of platelet cyclooxygenase (COX)-1 at serine 529: A pilot study

### Description
The main aim of this study is to decipher the mutual impact that high glucose levels and diabetes have on aspirin-mediated acetylation of COX-1 through a targeted parallel reaction monitoring MS approach.

### Sample Protocol
Platelet proteins extracts were incubated with 30 mM glucose and 0.5 mM aspirin, for the in vitro study and only with 0.5 mM aspirin for the ex vivo study. Then, protein samples were digested with trypsin and subjected to LC-PRM-MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
For PRM analysis, a comprhensive spectral library was generated from a DDA dataset of platelet proteins from healthy controls and diabetic patients using the plug-in SpectraST of TPP. Main search parameters were a precursor and fragment mass tolerance of 10 and 6 ppm, respectively and the selection of acetyl group modification at K, S, T and Y residues, as variable modifications. Skyline was used to extract the fragment ion chromatograms of the PRM data.

### Publication Abstract
Diabetes is a major risk factor for cardiovascular diseases. Although aspirin is considered a cornerstone of the prevention and treatment of atherothrombotic-related ischemic events, this antiplatelet drug appears to be less effective in patients with poorly controlled diabetes. It has been suggested that the glycation of platelet proteins plays a pivotal role in poor responsiveness to aspirin. However, a direct effect on the critical residue (serine 529, or Ser 529) of the catalytic pocket of cyclooxygenase 1 (COX-1) has never been demonstrated. This pilot study aimed to elucidate the impact of hyperglycaemia on aspirin acetylation of COX-1 using a targeted mass spectrometry approach. We observed that high glucose concentration had a direct impact on the level of acetylation of the COX-1 Ser 529 residue, whereas it's overall acetylation level remained unchanged. Moreover, the functional aspirin-induced inhibition of COX-1 was dose-dependently impaired as glucose concentrations increased. These in vitro findings were in line with data obtained using platelets from diabetic patients. These data provide new insights into the interplay between glucose and aspirin on platelet proteins and their effects on platelet COX-1. They also suggest a potential mechanistic explanation for the phenomenon of poor response to aspirin in diabetic patients. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD011204. SIGNIFICANCE: Deciphering the mutual interplay between glucose and aspirin-mediated acetylation on platelet COX-1, might be of great interest as there is still a lack of information of the mechanism underlying this process that may contribute to the less-than expected response of platelets to aspirin, often observed in diabetes.

### Keywords
Human, Aspirin-acetylation, Prm, Diabetes, Platelets

### Affiliations
Translational Biomarker Group, Faculty of Medicine, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland.
University of Geneva

### Submitter
Francesco Finamore

### Lab Head
Dr Jean-Charles Sanchez
Translational Biomarker Group, Faculty of Medicine, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland.


