### Accession
PXD004107

### Title
A model dataset for quantitative cross-linking/mass spectrometry using isotope-labeled cross-linkers

### Description
Dynamic proteins and multi-protein complexes govern most biological processes. Cross-linking/mass spectrometry (CLMS) is increasingly successful in providing residue-resolution data on static proteinaceous structures. In order to investigate the technical feasibility of recording dynamic processes using isotope-labelling for quantitation, we generated a model dataset by cross-linking human serum albumin (HSA) with the readily available cross-linker BS3-d0/d4 in different heavy/light ratios.

### Sample Protocol
Fifteen microgram aliquots of 0.75 M human serum albumin (HSA) (Sigma) in cross-linking buffer (20 mM HEPES-KOH, 20 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2, pH 7.8) were each cross-linked with mixtures of bis[sulfosuccinimidyl] suberate-d0 (BS3-d0) (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and its deuterated form bis[sulfosuccinimidyl] 2,2,7,7-suberate-d4 (BS3-d4) (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For the purpose of quantitation, BS3-d0 and BS3-d4 were mixed with three molar ratios, 1:1, 1:2 and 1:4. The ratio of BS3-d4: HSA was 4:1 (by mass) in all three mixing ratios. Three replicas were prepared for each ratio. The cross-linking reaction was incubated at room temperature (~ 23 °C) for 1 hour, and quenched by addition of ammonium bicarbonate and incubation for 30 minutes at room temperature. Cross-linked protein samples were isolated on SDS–PAGE gel, and in-gel digested using trypsin following a standard protocol [7]. After digestion, peptide solutions were desalted using self-made C18-StageTips [28], following the published protocol [28] for subsequent mass spectrometric analysis. We used as analytical column a spray emitter (75-μm inner diameter, 8-μm opening, 250-mm length; New Objectives) that was packed with C18 material (ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 3 μm; Dr Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) by help of an an air pressure pump (Proxeon Biosystems) [29]. Mobile phase A consisted of water and 0.1% formic acid. Mobile phase B consisted of acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were loaded onto the column with 1% B at 700 nl/min flow rate and eluted at 300 nl/min flow rate with a gradient: 1 minute linear increase from 1% B to 9% B; linear increase to 35% B in 169 minutes; 5 minute increase to 85% B. The eluted peptides were directly sprayed into an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Mass spectrometric analyses were carried out using a “high-high” acquisition strategy [7] and [9]. The survey scan (MS) spectra were recorded in the Orbitrap at 100,000 resolution. In each acquisition cycle, the eight most intense signals in the survey scan were isolated with an m/z window of 2 Th and fragmented with collision-induced dissociation (CID) in the ion trap. 1 + and 2 + ions were excluded from fragmentation. Fragmentation (MS2) spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap at 7500 resolution. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with 90 seconds exclusion time and repeat count equal to 1.

### Data Protocol
The raw mass spectrometric data files were processed into peak lists using MaxQuant version 1.2.2.5 with default parameters, except “Top MS/MS Peaks per 100 Da” was set to 200. The peak lists were searched against the sequences of HSA using Xi software (ERI, Edinburgh) for identification of cross-linked peptides. Search parameters were as follows: MS accuracy, 6 ppm; MS/MS accuracy, 20 ppm; enzyme, trypsin; specificity, fully tryptic; allowed number of missed cleavages, four; cross-linker, BS3-d0/d4; fixed modifications, carbamidomethylation on cysteine; variable modifications, oxidation on methionine. The linkage specificity for BS3 was assumed to be at lysine, serine, threonine, tyrosine and protein N-termini. Identified candidates of cross-linked peptides were validated by Xi, and only auto-validated cross-linked peptides were used for subsequent quantitation. Distribution of these cross-links was visualised in the crystal structure of HSA (PDB|1AO6) [30] using PyMOL [31]. Distances between alpha-carbons (C-α distances) of cross-linked residues were measured and compared to the maximum cross-linker length, which allowed for further validation of these identified cross-links.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hsa, Model dataset, Isotope-labeled cross-linkers, Quantitative cross-linking/mass spectromentry

### Affiliations
Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell Biology, Institute of Cell Biology, School of Biological Sciences, University of Edinburgh, UK Department of Bioanalytics, Institute of Biotechnology, Technische Universität Berlin, Germany
Technischen Universität Berlin

### Submitter
Zhuo Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Juri Rappsilber
Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell Biology, Institute of Cell Biology, School of Biological Sciences, University of Edinburgh, UK Department of Bioanalytics, Institute of Biotechnology, Technische Universität Berlin, Germany


