### Accession
PXD029949

### Title
Valvular interstitial cells and mesenchymal stem cell proteomes

### Description
Proteome profiling of valvular disease driver cell populations and mesenchymal stem cells undergoing osteogenic differentiation.

### Sample Protocol
3. Proteolysis. The cell lysates in RIPA buffer were thawed and slowly passed through a pre-chilled gauge 27 needle using a 1 mL-syringe over ice 20x to facilitate and complete cell lysis. Each of the resulting homogenate-lysates was first processed by sonicating on ice, as described above. The protein disk precipitate from the sonicated homogenate was extracted using a 2:1 chloroform: methanol solution through vigorous vortex mixing for 30 seconds followed by high-speed centrifugation at 18,000g for 30 minutes at 4°C. Upper and lower liquid phases were discarded, and each protein disk was solubilized in lysis buffer of the iST 96x Kit (iST - 2x LYSE Buffer 10 mL, PreOmics GmbH, Cat# P.O.00027) using 50 μg protein input. Mass spectrometry. For data-dependent acquisition (DDA, unbiased peptide sampling), we analyzed peptides using the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), fronted with an Easy-Spray ion source and coupled to an Easy-nLC1000 HPLC pump (Thermo Scientific). The peptides were separated using a dual column setup: an Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 trap column, 75 µm X 20 mm; and an EASY-Spray LC heated (45oC) column, 75 µm X 250 mm (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The gradient flow rate was 300 nL/min from 5 to 21 % solvent B (acetonitrile/0.1 % formic acid) for 120 minutes, 21 to 30 % Solvent B for 10 minutes, followed by five minutes 95% solvent B. Solvent A is 0.1% formic acid. The instrument was set to 120 K resolution, and the top N precursor ions in 3 seconds cycle time (within a scan range of 375-1500 m/z) are subjected to collision-induced dissociation (CID, collision energy 30%) for peptide sequencing (or MS/MS).

### Data Protocol
4. The MS/MS spectra were queried against the human UniProt database (downloaded on August 01, 2014; with 88,944 sequences) using the HT-SEQUEST search algorithm via the Proteome Discoverer (PD) Package (version 2.2, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm, and the fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da. Methionine oxidation and n-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications, and carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. Peptides were filtered based on a 1% FDR based on the reverse database (decoy) results. We enabled the ' Feature Mapper ' node to quantify peptide precursors detected in the MS1 but not sequenced from sample to sample. The chromatographic alignment was done with a maximum retention time (RT) shift of 10 minutes and a mass tolerance of 10 ppm. Feature linking and mapping settings were RT tolerance minimum of 0 minutes, a mass tolerance of 10 ppm, and a signal-to-noise minimum of five. Peptides assigned to a given protein group and not present in any other protein group were considered unique. Consequently, each protein group is represented by a single master protein (PD Grouping Feature). Precursor peptide abundances were based on their chromatographic intensities, and the total peptide amount was used for normalization. We used unique and razor peptides per protein for quantification. Proteins with two or more unique peptides were considered for further analysis. The proteins from each Proteome Discoverer exported dataset were normalized by the protein median intensity.

### Publication Abstract
Cellular heterogeneity of aortic valves complicates the mechanistic evaluation of the calcification processes in calcific aortic valve disease (CAVD), and animal disease models are lacking. In this study, we identify a disease-driver population (DDP) within valvular interstitial cells (VICs). Through stepwise single-cell analysis, phenotype-guided omic profiling, and network-based analysis, we characterize the DDP fingerprint as CD44<sup>high</sup>CD29<sup>+</sup>CD59<sup>+</sup>CD73<sup>+</sup>CD45<sup>low</sup> and discover potential key regulators of human CAVD. These DDP-VICs demonstrate multi-lineage differentiation and osteogenic properties. Temporal proteomic profiling of DDP-VICs identifies potential targets for therapy, including MAOA and CTHRC1. In&#xa0;vitro loss-of-function experiments confirm our targets. Such a stepwise strategy may be advantageous for therapeutic target discovery in other disease contexts.

### Keywords
Calcific aortic valve disease, Human vics

### Affiliations
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Sasha  Singh

### Lab Head
Dr Elena Aikawa
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School


