### Accession
PXD006657

### Title
Defining the hydrogen peroxide-dependent redoxome in human cells

### Description
Protein cysteinyl residues are the mediators of hydrogen peroxide (H2O2)-dependent redox signaling. However, site-specific mapping of the selectivity and dynamics of these redox reactions in cells poses a major analytical challenge. Here we describe a chemoproteomic platform to systematically and quantitatively analyze the reactivity of thousands of cysteines toward H2O2 in human cells. We identified >900 H2O2-sensitive cysteines, which are defined as the H2O2-dependent redoxome. Although redox sites associated with antioxidative and metabolic functions are consistent, most of the H2O2-dependent redoxome varies dramatically between different cells. Structural analyses reveal that H2O2-sensitive cysteines are less conserved than their redox-insensitive counterparts and display distinct sequence motifs, structural features, and potential for crosstalk with lysine modifications. Notably, our chemoproteomic platform also provides an opportunity to predict oxidation-triggered protein conformational changes. The data are freely accessible as a resource at http://redox.ncpsb.org/OXID/.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were lysed on ice for 20 min in four volumes of NETN buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, and 1% Igepal) supplemented with 10 L/mL of HALT protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Life Technologies, 78444) containing 200 unit/mL catalase (Sigma-Aldrich, C9322) and 100 M IPM probe. The labeling reactions were incubated at RT for 1h with light protection and stopped by adding DTT (Final concentration=10 mM) and incubated at 75°C for another 15 min. The lysate was further incubated with 40 mM iodoacetamide at RT for 30 min in the dark. The reactions were quenched by protein precipitation, which was performed with a methanol-chloroform system (aqueous phase/methanol/chloroform, 4:4:1, v/v/v) as described previously(Yang et al., 2015a). In brief, proteins were collected at the aqueous/organic phase interface as a solid disk after centrifugation at 1,400 x g for 20 min at 4°C. Liquid layers were discarded and the protein was washed twice in methanol/chloroform (1:1, v/v), followed by centrifugation at 16,000 x g for 10 min at 4 °C to repellet the protein. The protein pellets were resuspended with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate containing 0.2 M urea. Protein concentrations in the resuspended solution were measured with the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) protein assay (Life Technologies, 23225) and adjusted to 2 mg/mL. For a typical CTRP experiment, each of the control and H2O2-treated proteome samples (2 mg protein/mL in 1-mL volume) were first digested with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega, V5113) at a 1:50 (enzyme/substrate) ratio overnight at 37°C. A secondary digestion was performed by adding additional trypsin to a 1:100 (enzyme/substrate) ratio, followed by incubation at 37°C for additional 4 h. The tryptic digests were desalted with HLB extraction cartridges (Waters, WAT094225) as previously described(Yang et al., 2015a).  The desalted tryptic digests were reconstituted in a solution containing 30% acetonitrile (ACN). CuAAC reaction was performed by the addition of 0.8 mM either light Az-UV-biotin or heavy Az-UV-biotin, 8 mM sodium ascorbate (Sigma-Aldrich, A7631), 1 mM tris[(1-benzyl-1H-1,2,3-triazol-4-yl)methyl]amine (TBTA, Sigma-Aldrich, 678937), and 8 mM CuSO4 (Fisher Scientific, C493-500). Samples were allowed to react at room temperature for 2 h in the dark with rotation. The light- and heavy Az-UV-biotin labeled samples then were mixed equally together. The excess biotin reagents were removed by strong cation exchange (SCX), as previously described(Yang et al., 2015a). In brief, the sample was diluted into SCX loading buffer (5 mM KH2PO4, 25% acetonitrile, pH 3.0), passed through the SCX spin columns (The Nest Group, SMM HIL-SCX), and washed with several column volumes of loading buffer. The retained peptides were eluted with SCX loading buffer containing 400 mM NaCl. Eluent was diluted 10X with 50 mM sodium acetate buffer (NaAc, pH 4.5) and then allowed to interact with pre-washed streptavidin sepharose (GE, 17-5113-01) for 2 h at room temperature. Streptavidin sepharose then was washed with 50 mM NaAc, 50 mM NaAc containing 2 M NaCl, and water twice each with votexing and/or rotation to remove non-specific binding peptides, and resuspended in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate. The suspension of streptavidin sepharose was transferred to several thin-walled borosilicate glass tubes (VWR International, 66011-020), irradiated with 365 nm UV light for 2h at room temperature with stirring. The supernatant was collected, concentrated under vacuum, and desalted with HLB extraction cartridges (Waters, 186000383) as previously described(Yang et al., 2015a). The desalting peptides were evaporated to dryness and stored at −20°C until analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw datafiles from 72 LC-MS/MS runs were converted to mzML format using Proteowizard (3.0.5211)(Chambers et al., 2012). The mzML files were searched against a decoy protein database consisting of forward and reversed human RefSeq version 54 database (Sep 25, 2012; 34,590 entries) using MS-GF+ (version 9979)(Kim and Pevzner, 2014). Precursor ion mass tolerance and fragmentation tolerance were both set as 10 ppm for the database search. The maximum number of modiﬁcations and missed cleavages allowed per peptide was three and two, respectively. Different modifications of + 15.9949 Da (methionine oxidation), + 57.0214 Da (iodoacetamide alkylation), +252.1222 (light and heavy IPM-triazohexanoic acid), and + 258.1424 (heavy IPM-triazohexanoic acid) were searched as variable modifications. Spectral identification mzID files generated from the MS-GF+ search were converted to idpXML files for protein assembly using IDPicker 3 (version 3.1.10199.0)(Holman et al., 2012). The maximum Q value of peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) was set as 0.5% and each peptide should be identified by at least three spectra in CTRP experiments for each cell line. These stringent filters result in a final false-positive rate below 1% for peptides and their corresponding proteins groups.    Peptide quantifications were performed with Skyline software as previously described(Schilling et al., 2012; Yang et al., 2015a). Spectral libraries were imported from the mzID files. A subset FASTA database containing all the identifications (with and/or without IPM modification) exported from the IDPicker files was then imported into Skyline (version 3.1).  The peptide list was refined in Skyline by removing all unmodified peptides. To further reduce the final false-positive rate of identification and enable reliable quantification of the remaining IPM-modified peptides in the list, all the automatically annotated spectra in the Skyline libraries were manually evaluated as previously described(Tabb et al., 2006). Moreover, the modified peptides whose matched spectra did not contain the major diagnostic fragment ions (m/z 311.12 and 317.14 for light and heavy peptides, respectively, which are generated by fragmentations analogous to those reported for cysteine conjugates(Levsen et al., 2005)) were excluded. After refining the peptide list, Raw files were directly imported into Skyline for automatic peak picking and MS1 filtering using the following criteria. First, the retention time of the PSM-identified peptide was used to position a retention time window (± 2.0 min) across the run lacking the same peptide identification. Second, the resolution for extracting the MS1 filtering chromatogram of the target precursor ions with both light and heavy labeled peptides was set to 60,000 at 400 Th.  Following data extraction, graphical displays of chromatographic traces for the top three isotopic peaks were manually inspected for proper peak picking of MS1 filtered peptides and those with isotopic dot product scores lower than 0.8 were rejected. Several additional criteria were used to further ensure the high accuracy and precision of quantification: (1) signal to noise threshold of all the detected peptides was set to 3.0; (2) baseline separation was required between the isotopic peaks of a quantifiable peptide and unknown isobaric interference; (3) manual integration was applied if necessary. The ratios of peptide areas of light peptides to their heavy isotopes (RL:H) were calculated automatically. Quantitation results were obtained from three biological replicates.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Chemoproteomics

### Affiliations
National Center for Protein Science Beijing
National Center for Protein Sciences, Beijing

### Submitter
Jing Yang

### Lab Head
Dr Jing Yang
National Center for Protein Science Beijing


