### Accession
PXD041876

### Title
Proteomic characterisation of wheat protein fractions taken at different baking conditions

### Description
Food processing conditions affect the structure, solubility and therefore accurate detection of gluten proteins. We investigated the influence of dough, bread and pretzel making on the composition of different wheat protein fractions obtained by Osborne fractionation, which is based on solubility. The albumin/globulin (ALGL), gliadin and glutenin fractions from flour, dough, crispbread, bread and pretzel were analysed using RP-HPLC, SDS-PAGE and untargeted nanoLC-MS/MS. This approach enabled an in-depth profiling of the fractionated proteomes and related compositional changes to processing conditions including mixing, heat and alkali treatment. The ALGL fractions contained 71 protein groups, the gliadin fractions 27 and the glutenin fractions 47, of which 16 were common in all fractions. Label-free quantitation revealed that the relative abundances of 78 proteins were significantly affected by baking in the fractions of bread crumb and bread crust in comparison to flour.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of flour-based products The flour-based products were prepared as described previously (Schirmer & Scherf, 2023). Flour, 3% yeast and 2% NaCl were mixed in a kitchen aid (1 min at level 1). The dough was prepared by adding water (AACC method 54-50.01) and kneading (3 min at level 1 and 3 min at level 3). A dough piece was instantly frozen and freeze-dried for analysis. For the preparation of the baked goods, the dough was rested in a water-saturated proofer (20 min at 30 °C). For crispbread preparation, a part of the dough was rolled as thin as possible and pricked all over with a fork before baking (9 min at 230 °C). For bread making, about 300 g of the dough was shaped, proofed (40 min at 30°C, 90% relative humidity) and baked in a tin pan (25 min at 230 °C with initial steam injection). The pretzels were made of about 55 g dough pieces, which were shaped into balls, proofed (40 min at 30 °C, 90% relative humidity) and refrigerated (15 min, 5 °C). The dough balls were shortly dipped in a 1.25 mol/L sodium hydroxide (NaOH) solution and baked (17 min at 230 °C with initial steam injection).  After baking, all baked products were cooled for 2 h at RT. Bread and pretzels were separated into crumb and crust. All baked products were freeze-dried and milled (6000 rpm, 200 µm ring sieve) using an Ultra Centrifugal Mill ZM 200 (Retsch, Haan, Germany). The resulting sample material was stored airtight at RT.  Preparation of Osborne fractions Flour and freeze-dried flour-based products (30 g) were defatted three times with 75 mL of pentane/ethanol (95/5, v/v) and once with 75 mL of n-pentane under continuous stirring (30 min, 22 °C) (Pflaum et al., 2013). The suspensions were centrifuged (3750 × g, 15 min, 22 °C) and the solvent discarded. The defatted material was air-dried overnight.  The extraction procedure was carried out according to (Schalk et al., 2017). Defatted flour and flour-based products (15 g) were extracted three times with 60 mL of 0.067 mol/L Na2HPO4/KH2PO4 buffer (pH 7.6) and 0.4 mol/L NaCl (ALGL). Then, residues were extracted three times with 60 mL 60% (v/v) ethanol (gliadins). Last, residues were extracted twice with 60 mL of 50% (v/v) propan-1-ol, 0.05 mol/L Na2HPO4/KH2PO4 (pH 7.5) and 1% (w/v) DTT under nitrogen atmosphere (glutenins). Samples were extracted by mixing at 12,400 rpm for 5 min at 22 °C using an Ultra-Turrax blender (IKA-Werke, Staufen, Germany). The extraction of the glutenins was continued with magnetic stirring for 30 min at 60 °C and cooling prior to centrifugation. The suspensions were centrifuged (25 min, 3750 × g 22°C). The supernatants were combined, dialyzed (Mr cut-off: 12,000–14,000 Da, Medicell Membranes, London, UK) for three days against acetic acid (0.01 mol/L) and for one day against deionized water, and freeze-dried. The extraction residues after the third extraction step were freeze-dried immediately. Both, extraction residues and isolated protein fractions, were stored in a freezer until use.   Sample preparation for untargeted nanoLC−MS/MS Protein fractions (three technical replicates) corresponding to 1 ± 0.03 mg of protein (protein content determined by RP-HPLC) were hydrolyzed with 1 mL of chymotrypsin solution (0.02 mg/mL α-chymotrypsin in 0.04 mol/L urea, 0.1 mol/L Tris-HCl, pH 7.8) for 24 h at 37 °C. Proteolysis was stopped by adding 3 µL of TFA (Rombouts et al., 2013). Protein digests were cleaned-up by solid phase extraction (SPE) using Discovery DSC-18 SPE tubes (Sigma-Aldrich Inc., Steinheim). SPE cartridges were conditioned with methanol (1.0 mL) and equilibrated with 1.0 mL of 0.1% TFA (v/v). The digests (1.0 mL) were loaded, allowed to interact for 5 min and washed with 0.1% TFA (v/v) (3 x 1.0 mL). Peptides were eluted with 1 x 1.0 mL of 40% ACN + 0.1% TFA (v/v). The eluates were dried in a vacuum concentrator centrifuge. For LC-MS/MS analysis, the samples were dissolved in 1.0 mL of 0.1% formic acid (FA) (v/v) by sonication (5 min). The peptide concentrations were determined by NanoDrop One (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Madison, U.S.A.) at 205 nm.

### Data Protocol
Untargeted nanoLC-MS/MS A NanoLC-Ultra 1D+ system (Eksigent Technologies, Dublin, CA, U.S.A.) was coupled online to a LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides (1 µg) were loaded onto a trap column (ReproSil-Pur 120 ODS-3, 5 μm, 2 cm × 75 μm, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) using loading solvent (0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 5 μL/min. Then, the peptides were transferred to an analytical column (ReproSil-Gold 120 C18, 3 μm, 40 cm × 75 μm, Dr. Maisch) and separated using a 53 minutes gradient from 4–32% solvent B at a flow rate of 300 nL/min (solvent A: 0.1% FA and 5% dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) in water, solvent B: 0.1% FA and 5% DMSO in ACN). The eluate was sprayed via a stainless steel emitter (Thermo Fisher Scientific) into the mass spectrometer at a source voltage of 2.2 kV. The transfer capillary was heated to 275 °C. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition and positive ion mode. MS1 spectra (360 – 1300 m/z) were acquired in the Orbitrap using a resolution of 60,000 and MS2 spectra were acquired in the ion trap. The 20 most intense precursor ions were automatically selected from the proceeding MS1 spectrum with an isolation window width of 2.0 m/z. Peptide fragmentation was carried out by collision-induced dissociation (CID) with a normalized collision energy of 35%. Dynamic exclusion was set to 45 s and only precursor ions with charge states > 1 were selected.    Proteomic data analysis MS raw files were analyzed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30) by searching MS data against a Triticum aestivum (4565) database (downloaded from UniProt February 2023, protein entries 143,674) using Andromeda (Cox et al., 2011; Cox & Mann, 2008). Chymotrypsin+ was specified as proteolytic enzyme and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation were selected as variable modifications. Instrument parameters and match tolerances were left as Orbitrap defaults. A minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids was considered. Identifications were made at 1% false discovery rate (FDR) at peptide spectrum match (PSM) and protein level. Label-free quantitation (LFQ) was performed (Cox et al., 2014) with a minimum peptide ratio count of “2” for protein quantification (default setting). The protein-level LFQ results were loaded for further processing and statistics into Perseus version 1.5.6.0 (Tyanova et al., 2016b). Protein groups designated as reverse, contaminant, or only identified through a post-translational modification site were removed from further processing. To be considered valid, a protein group required nonzero intensity values for all 3 technical replicates from at least 1 sample. Intensity values were log base 2 transformed. The coefficient of variation was calculated for technical replicate measurements.  The relative quantitative distribution of protein classes was calculated by the addition of summed up intensity values for all protein groups over all samples belonging to a protein class relative to the sum of the intensity values of all protein groups per fraction. For hierarchical clustering (HC) of protein groups and samples, as well as for heatmap representations, data were z-scored (rows) and replicates averaged. For principal component analysis (PCA) missing values were imputed using the functionality “replace missing values from normal distribution” (width 0.3, downshift 1.8) and replicates averaged. HC and PCA were performed using default settings. Differential protein abundances in the protein fractions of bread crumb and bread crust in comparison to the control (flour sample) were calculated by two-sided t-tests with permutation-based FDR of 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Food processing conditions affect the structure, solubility, and therefore accurate detection of gluten proteins. We investigated the influence of dough, bread, and pretzel making on the composition of different wheat protein fractions obtained by Osborne fractionation. The albumin/globulin, gliadin, and glutenin fractions from flour, dough, crispbread, bread, and pretzel were analyzed using RP-HPLC, SDS-PAGE, and untargeted nanoLC-MS/MS. This approach enabled an in-depth profiling of the fractionated proteomes and related compositional changes to processing conditions (mixing, heat, and alkali treatment). Overall, heat treatment demonstrated the most pronounced effect. Label-free quantitation revealed significant changes in the relative abundances of 82 proteins within the fractions of bread crumb and crust in comparison to flour. Certain gluten proteins showed shifts or reductions in particular fractions, indicating their incorporation into the gluten network through SS and non-SS cross-links. Other gluten proteins were enriched, suggesting their limited involvement in the gluten network formation.

### Keywords
Baking; foodomics; gluten; label-free quantitation (lfq); mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Bavarian Center for Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry (BayBioMS) Technical University of Munich (TUM) Gregor-Mendel-Straße 4 85354 Freising GERMANY
TU Munich

### Submitter
Christina Ludwig

### Lab Head
Dr Christina Ludwig
Bavarian Center for Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry (BayBioMS) Technical University of Munich (TUM) Gregor-Mendel-Straße 4 85354 Freising GERMANY


