### Accession
PXD000939

### Title
Dynamic phosphoprotemics yeast nitrogen down-shift

### Description
To resolve the temporal sequence of phosphorylation events responding to nutritional and chemically induced up and downshifts of TORC1 signaling in S. cerevisiae wildtype, we performed quantitative MS phosphoproteomics upon nitrogen-quality up and downshifts and rapamycin treatment. We generated a high quality dataset byapplying a high resolution sampling, parallel sample processing and a dedicated data analysis pipeline that allowed us to select significant transient dynamics. By exploiting the temporal resolution of our data and the complementary of the shift experiments, we identified early phosphorylation changes regulated directly by TORC1 or by its proximal substrate kinases, and found both established and novel candidate TORC1 targets. Among the candidateTORC1 targets were the metabolic enzymes Amd1, Hom3, Nth1 and Tsl1, involved in nucleotide, amino acid and storage carbohydrate metabolism. Functional assessment of the role of phosphorylation for these and other enzymes was achieved by correlating phosphopeptide with the corresponding enzyme-associated metabolite dynamics. Candidate kinases regulating these enzymes were identified by establishing TORC1-proximity and differential kinase activity criteria. Our work provides first evidence of TORC1-dependent regulation of the metabolic enzymes Amd1and Hom3 by the kinases Sch9 and Atg1, respectively, providing mechanistic insights into on how TORC1 controls nucleotide and amino acid metabolism in response to the quality of the nitrogen source.

### Sample Protocol
Experiment setup  We grew the wildtype Saccharomyces cerevisiae strain YSBN6 in well-controlled bioreactors to exponential growth at thereafter induced a nitrogen shift or rapamycin treatment. Exponential cultures were grown in yeast minimal defined media supplemented with 20 g/L glucose and a specified nitrogen composition: 200 mg/L of L-proline (for the N-upshift), 500 mg/L of L-glutamine and 250 mg/L of L-proline (for the N-downshift), or 1 g/L of L-glutamine (for the rapamycin-induced downshift). Dynamic shifts were induced as follow. The proline to glutamine N-upshift was induced by instantaneously adding 400 mg/L glutamine (final concentration) to the culture growing exponentially on proline. The glutamine to proline N-downshift was induced upon complete depletion of glutamine from the broth. The rapamycin-induced downshift was induced by instantaneously adding 400 µg/L of rapamycin (final concentration) to the culture growing exponentially on glutamine. Samples for phosphoproteome were taken 5, 9, 15, 25, 44 and 79 minutes after the nutritional shifts or rapamycin treatment and compared to a steady state sample taken 10 minutes before the shifts (referred as “time point 0”, since the cultures were at a steady-state exponential growth until the instant of the shift). In the case of the nutritional downshift, one additional steady state sample was taken 5 minutes before the shift.  Protein sampling and digestion At each time point 50 ml of yeast culture were taken and immediately 100% (w/v) trichloroacetic acid (TCA) was added to a final concentration of 6.25%. Subsequently the culture was placed on ice for 10 minutes. Cells were pelleted at 1500 g and washed twice with 10 ml of ice-cold acetone. Final cell pellet was shock-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C until further usage.The yeast cells were lyzed by glass beads beating in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM NH4HCO3, 5 mM EDTA, 1 mM TCEP pH 8.0). Debris was removed by centrifugation at 16,000 g. The protein content was determined by the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) protein assay (Pierce) for each sample. 1.9 mg of total protein were reduced (5 mM tris 2-carboxyethyl phosphine), alkylated (40 mM 2-iodoacetamide), digested with trypsin (Promega, protein extract : trypsin = 100 : 1) and further enriched for phosphopeptides.  Phosphopeptide enrichment The phosphopeptide enrichment procedure was carried out using titanium dioxide (TiO2, GL Sience). Briefly, 1.9 mg of peptides were dissolved in 280 µl of saturated phthalic acid solution, containing 80% acetonitrile and 3.5 % trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). This peptide solution was added to 1.25 mg of TiO2 in a Mobical spin column (MoBiTec) and incubated 30 minutes at room temperature. Washing steps were performed twice with 280 µl phtahlic acid, twice with 280 µl 80% acetonitrile 0.1% TFA and twice with 280 µl of 0.1% TFA. Phosphopeptides were eluted twice with 150 µl of 0.3 M NH4OH (pH 10.5). After elution the pH was immediately adjusted to pH 2.5 using 10 % TFA and peptides were purified using C18 cartridges (C18 Micro Spin columns, 5 – 60 µg capacity, The Nest Group Inc.). After purification all samples were dried in a Speedvac, stored at -80°C and re-suspended in 0.1% formic acid (FA) just before the mass spectrometric measurement.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric data acquisition  All phosphoenriched samples were analyzed on a hybrid LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFischer Scientific) interfaced with a nano-electrospray ion source. Chromatographic separation was performed on an Eksigent nano-LC system (Eksigent Technologies), equipped with a 10-cm column with an inner diameter of 75 µm packed in-house with MAGIC C18 AQ beads (3 µM diameter, 200 Å pore size). The applied chromatographic gradient went from 3 to 23% buffer B over 90 minutes (buffer A = 98% H2O, 2% ACN, 0.1% FA; buffer B = 98% ACN, 2% H2O, 0.1% FA) at a flow-rate of 300 nl/min. For MS/MS data acquisition 4 data-dependent MS/MS scans were acquired in the linear ion trap for each MS1 scan, the latter acquired at 60,000 full width at half maximum (FWHM) nominal resolution. To maximize the number of peptide identifications, three different charge state screens were applied for the three investigated biological replicate samples (no technical measurements were carried out). For the first triplicate only 2+ precursor ions were selected for fragmentation, for the second triplicate only 3+ and higher charge states were selected, while for the last replicate all ion charge states (except 1+) were accepted. Multistage activation was not employed.  Phosphopeptide identification  The generated MS/MS data was searched separately for the three different shift experiments (21, 23 and 21 files respectively) against a non-redundant Saccharomyces genome database (SGD, orf_trans_all.fasta version 03.02.2011) containing 6752 forward and 6752 reverse protein entries (total 13504). For the target-decoy strategy the software tool SORCERER-SEQUEST™ (Sorcerer Software 4.0.4 build, Sorcerer Web Interface 2.2.5 r562, TPP 4.0.2) was used, which was run on the SageN Sorcerer2 (Thermo Electron, San, Jose, CA, USA). For in-silico digestion trypsin was defined as protease, cleaving after lysine and arginine, if followed by a proline cleavage was allowed. Up to two missed cleavages and no non-tryptic terminus were defined for peptides from 400 to 4500 Da. Precursor ion tolerance was set to 20 ppm. The data was searched allowing phosphorylation (+79.9663) of serine, threonine and tyrosine as variable modifications and carboxyamidomethylation of cysteines (+57.0214) was defined as a fixed modification. Search results obtained by SEQUEST were subjected to statistical filtering using the trans proteomic pipeline (TPP v4.5 RAPTURE rev 1, Build 201201161611). A cutoff of 1% false discovery rate (FDR) on peptide level was applied (pepP probability = 0.91 to 0.95). The TPP was executed using the command –OAdpl –dDECOY. The achieved specificity of the phosphopeptide enrichment was between 60% and 85% (phosphopeptide count divided by all-peptide count), depending on the shift-experiment.   Label-free phosphopeptide quantification  For quantification of all identified phosphopeptides an automated label-free analysis pipeline within the OpenMS 1.9 framework was established. This workflow comprised the following modules: FileConverter (conversion from mzXML into mzML format) PeakPickerHRes (centroiding of high-resolution data), FeatureFinder  (feature detection of centroided data), IDMapper (annotation of features), IDConflictResolver (resolves ambiguous annotations of features with peptide identifications), FeatureLinker (feature grouping by quality-threshold clustering) and ProteinQuantifier (calculation of peptide and protein abundances). As input all mzXML-files (profile mode) and the TPP result (interact.pepXML) were used.

### Publication Abstract
Phosphoproteomics studies have unraveled the extent of protein phosphorylation as a key cellular regulation mechanism, but assigning functionality to specific phosphorylation events remains a major challenge. TORC1 (target of rapamycin complex 1) is a kinase-containing protein complex that transduces changes in nutrient availability into phosphorylation signaling events that alter cell growth and proliferation. To resolve the temporal sequence of phosphorylation responses to nutritionally and chemically induced changes in TORC1 signaling and to identify previously unknown kinase-substrate relationships in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, we performed quantitative mass spectrometry-based phosphoproteomic analyses after shifts in nitrogen sources and rapamycin treatment. From early phosphorylation events that were consistent over at least two experimental perturbations, we identified 51 candidate and 10 known proximal targets of TORC1 that were direct substrates of TORC1 or of one of its kinase or phosphatase substrates. By correlating these phosphoproteomics data with dynamic metabolomics data, we inferred the functional role of phosphorylation on the metabolic activity of 12 enzymes, including three candidate TORC1-proximal targets: Amd1, which is involved in nucleotide metabolism; Hom3, which is involved in amino acid metabolism; and Tsl1, which mediates carbohydrate storage. Finally, we identified the TORC1 substrates Sch9 and Atg1 as candidate kinases that phosphorylate Amd1 and Hom3, respectively.

### Keywords
Dynamic phosphoproteomics, Nitrogen shift, Yeast, Proline, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Glutamine

### Affiliations
ETH Zürich
Institute of Molecular Systems Biologie, ETH Zürich, Switzerland

### Submitter
Christina Ludwig

### Lab Head
Dr Ruedi Aebersold
Institute of Molecular Systems Biologie, ETH Zürich, Switzerland


