### Accession
PXD006333

### Title
iTRAQ-MRM approach identify plasma biomarkers of atherosclerosis and myocardial injury

### Description
Current methods of stratifying patient risk of myocardial injury and stable angina rely on complex combinations of risk factors that exhibit only limited prognostic power, hence there remains a need to identify biomarkers that can be sampled non-invasively and more accurately predict patient outcomes in the clinic. In the current study, we performed comparative quantitative proteomics on whole plasma sampled from patients with stable angina (NMI), acute myocardial infarction (MI), and healthy control subjects without angina (Ctrl). We detected a total of 371 proteins with high confidence (FDR < 1%, p < 0.05), including 53 candidate biomarkers that displayed ≥ 2-fold modulated expression in patients with cardiovascular diseases (27 associated with atherosclerotic stable angina, 26 with myocardial injury). In the verification phase, we used label-free LC-MRM-MS-based targeted proteomic method to quantify and to verify the candidate biomarkers in pooled plasma, excluded peptides that were poorly distinguished from background, and then performed further validation of the remaining candidates in 49 individual plasma samples. Using this approach, we identified a final panel of 8 proteins that were both reliably and significantly modulated in disease (p < 0.05), including novel biomarkers of atherosclerotic stable angina that have been implicated in endothelial dysfunction (F10 and MST1), and previously unknown biomarkers of myocardial injury reportedly involved in either plaque destabilization (SERPINA3, CPN2, LUM) or tissue protection/repair mechanisms (ORM2, ACTG1, NAGLU). Taken together, our data showed that prognostic markers can be successfully detected in non-depleted human plasma using an iTRAQ/MRM-based discovery-validation approach, and also demonstrate that a novel panel 8 biomarkers can discriminate between the complex pathophysiologies of atherosclerotic stable angina and myocardial injury.

### Sample Protocol
Extracted proteins were solubilized in lysis buffer (8M urea in 50mM triethylammonium bicarbonate [TEAB] pH 8.0), supplemented with protease inhibitors (1:50, v/v) and phosphatase inhibitors (1:10, v/v) (Roche Diagnostics, Mannheim, DE). For each study group, approximately 200μg plasma proteins were reduced with 5mM tris 2-carboxyethyl phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP) for 3h at 30°C, followed by alkylation with 10mM methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS) for 1h in the dark at room temperature. The urea concentration was then diluted to <1M by addition of 50mM TEAB prior to overnight digestion at 37oC in sequencing-grade modified trypsin (trypsin 1:100 protein w/w ratio; Promega, Madison, WI). Trypsin digestion was stopped by acidification with 10% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 0.1% TFA (v/v). The tryptic peptides were next desalted using a Sep-Pak C18 cartridge (Waters, Milford, MA) and the eluted peptides were dried in a vacuum concentrator. The dried peptides were then reconstituted in 50mM TEAB and labeled with 8-plex iTRAQ isobaric tags according to manufacturer’s protocol (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) using the following designations; 113Ctrl, 114MI and 115NMI. The labeled plasma peptides were combined and dried using a vacuum concentrator, then desalted using Sep-Pak C18 cartridge (Waters, Milford, MA), and re-dried in a vacuum concentrator. The dried iTRAQ-labeled peptides were reconstituted in 200μL mobile phase A (85% ACN, 0.1% acetic acid [HAc]) and fractionated using a PolyWAX LP anion exchange column (4.6 × 200mm, 5μm, 300Å, PolyLC, Columbia, MD) on a Shimadzu Prominence UFLC system (Kyoto, JP). The UV spectra of the peptides were collected at 280nm. Mobile phase A and Mobile phase B (30% ACN, 0.2% formic acid [FA]) were used to perform a 60min gradient elution as follows; 0-36% B for 30min, then 36−100% B for 20min, and finally 100% B for 10min (flow rate 1mL/min throughout). Thirty separate fractions were collected, vacuum dried, and reconstituted in 3% ACN, 0.1% FA for analysis by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS).  The dried iTRAQ-labeled peptides were dissolved in 40μL solvent A (2% ACN, 0.1% FA) before loading 1μL sample per fraction into a trap column (0.5mm x 200μm) at a flow rate of 3μL/min over a total of 10min. The samples were resolved on an analytical column (15cm x 75μm) with a linear gradient of solvent B (98% ACN, 0.1% FA) which was increased from 5-12% over 2min, 12 30% over 57min, and 30-90% for the final 2min on a Nanoflex cHiPLC system (flow rate 300nL/min throughout). The nanoLC column was then rinsed with 90% solvent B for 7min and equilibrated with 95% solvent A for 13min. Next, information-dependent acquisition (IDA) was performed on an AB SCIEX TripleTOF® 5600 system using a 250-ms survey scan (TOF-MS) and 100-ms automated MS/MS product ion scan for the top-20 ions with the highest intensity (cycle time 2.3s). The MS/MS triggering criteria for parent ions were as follows; precursor intensity >125 cps, 2-5 charge states, dynamic exclusion time 8s, and collision energy (CE) set as a rolling script based on m/z and charge state of the precursors. Triplicate LC-MS/MS runs were performed for each sample fraction and the peak areas of the iTRAQ reporter ions were used to determine the relative abundance of the corresponding proteins in each sample.  Before sample pooling for the iTRAQ experiment, the individual patient plasma samples were separately digested, desalted and vacuum-dried as described earlier, without peptide labelling or fractionation. The targeted peptides were assayed in triplicate in a TSQ Vantage triple quadrupole mass spectrometer coupled to an EASY-nLC™ 1000 nanoflow UHPLC system (Thermo Scientific Inc., Bremen, Germany). The retention time (RT) for each peptide was determined by full acquisition (unscheduled) MS/MS analysis. The predicted RT (±5min error) for each transition was then used to determine a 10min isolation window for dynamic exclusion (scheduled) analyses. For each run, a total of 1μg tryptic peptides was loaded onto an Acclaim® 9 PepMap100 trap column (75μm x 2cm; nanoViper C18, 3μm, 100Å) and resolved on an Acclaim® PepMap RSLC C18 column (75μm x 15cm; nanoViper C18, 2μm, 100Å) (Thermo Scientific, USA), at a flow rate of 300nL/min. Mobile phase A (0.1% FA in HPLC water), and mobile phase B (0.1% FA in ACN) were used to establish a 60min gradient as follows; 3-30% B for 45min, 30-50% B for 9min, 50-60% B for 1min, 60% B for 2min, and finally re-equilibration at 3% B for 3min. The TSQ Vantage was set to perform data acquisition in positive ion mode. An electrospray potential of 1.5kV and capillary temperature of 250°C were used for ionization. The selectivity for both Q1 and Q3 were set to 0.7 Da (full-width at half-maximum). A collision gas pressure of 1mTorr of argon was used for Q2. Transition scan times were 10ms for full MRM and 50ms for the isolation window MRM.

### Data Protocol
iTRAQ data analysis Protein/peptide identification and iTRAQ quantification were performed by searching all spectra generated from the IDA acquisitions in Triple-TOF® against the UniProt database (version Aug 2011, 446597 sequences, 188463640 residues) using ProteinPilot™ V4.1 (AB SCIEX, Framingham, MA). User-defined parameters were configured as follows; (i) Sample Type, iTRAQ 8-plex (Peptide Labeled); (ii) Cysteine alkylation, MMTS; (iii) Digestion, Trypsin; (iv) Instrument, TripleTOF 5600; (v) Species, Human; (vi) ID Focus, Biological modifications; (vii) Search effort, Thorough; (viii) Specific Processing, Quantitate, Bias correction, Background correction; (ix) Results quality, Detected protein threshold [Unused Protscore (Conf)] >: 0.05 (10.0%). Peptides were automatically selected for quantification by the Pro Group algorithm in ProteinPilot™ software, which then calculated the reporter peak area, error factor (EF), and corresponding p value. Data were normalized by bias correction and background correction to eliminate variations due to loading error or co-elution of non-target peptides. Search results were exported into Microsoft Excel for further comparison of replicate runs. A 2-fold change cutoff was set such that up-regulated proteins were identified by expression ratios ≥2 and downregulated proteins by ratios ≤0.5. The false discovery rate (FDR) for each search was generated by ProteinPilot™ and the numbers of proteins reported in this study were based on global protein FDR<1%. Differentially expressed proteins were extracted for further analyses.  MRM data analysis All MRM raw data files generated by the TSQ Vantage were processed using Pinpoint™ V1.3, which automatically detected the integrated peak areas of all targeted transitions and aligned these for data visualization, as well as performing relative quantification at the levels of transition, peptide and protein. Global normalization of the peak intensities from the triplicate measurements were also computed by the software. The extracted ion chromatogram of all transitions for each targeted peptide were examined manually to confirm accurate peak integration. The peptide ion peak areas of all transitions were then used to determine the relative abundance of the corresponding proteins.   Bioinformatic analyses and data annotation The open access tool FunRich V2.1.2 (25) was used for gene ontology (GO) annotation and analyses of functional enrichment and network interactions. Scatter dot plots were generated and statistically analyzed using GraphPad Prism V6.0 (Graphpad Software, San Diego, CA). The proteolytic peptide sequences selected for MRM analyses were submitted to NCBI BLASTP (26, 27) for searching using default settings against non-redundant protein sequences (nr). Parametric analyses and unpaired student's t-test were used to evaluate differences between numerical variables and p<0.05 was considered statistically significant. Data are presented as mean ± standard deviation (SD) of triplicate measurements.

### Publication Abstract
The lack of precise biomarkers that identify patients at risk for myocardial injury and stable angina delays administration of optimal therapy. Hence, the search for noninvasive biomarkers that could accurately stratify patients with impending heart attack, from patients with stable coronary artery disease (CAD), is urgently needed in the clinic. Herein, we performed comparative quantitative proteomics on whole plasma sampled from patients with stable angina (NMI), acute myocardial infarction (MI), and healthy control subjects (Ctrl). We detected a total of 371 proteins with high confidence (FDR &lt; 1%, p &lt; 0.05) including 53 preliminary biomarkers that displayed &#x2265;2-fold modulated expression in patients with CAD (27 associated with atherosclerotic stable angina, 26 with myocardial injury). In the verification phase, we used label-free LC-MRM-MS-based targeted method to verify the preliminary biomarkers in pooled plasma, excluded peptides that were poorly distinguished from background, and performed further validation of the remaining candidates in 49 individual plasma samples. Using this approach, we identified a final panel of eight novel candidate biomarkers that were significantly modulated in CAD (p &lt; 0.05) including proteins associated with atherosclerotic stable angina that were implicated in endothelial dysfunction (F10 and MST1), proteins associated with myocardial injury reportedly involved in plaque destabilization (SERPINA3, CPN2, LUM), and in tissue protection/repair mechanisms (ORM2, ACTG1, NAGLU). Taken together, our data showed that candidate biomarkers with potential diagnostic values can be successfully detected in nondepleted human plasma using an iTRAQ/MRM-based discovery-validation approach and demonstrated the plausible clinical utility of the proposed panel in discriminating atherosclerotic stable angina from myocardial injury in the studied cohort.

### Keywords
Plasma biomarker, Atherosclerosis, Mrm, Cardiovascular disease, Angina, Itraq, Myocardial injury

### Affiliations
Proteomics Core of Bioscience Research Centre, School of Biological Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
School of Biological Sciences, Nanyang Technological University

### Submitter
Terence Yap

### Lab Head
Dr Siu Kwan Sze
Proteomics Core of Bioscience Research Centre, School of Biological Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore


