### Accession
PXD010326

### Title
Npr2-mediated cGMP signalling modulates S-palmitoylation and controls growth cone morphology of DRG neurons

### Description
A cGMP signalling cascade composed of the ligand C-type natriuretic peptide (CNP), the natriuretic peptide receptor 2 (Npr2) and the cGMP-dependent kinase Iα (cGKI) is implicated by growth cone splitting in the bifurcation of afferents from dorsal root ganglia (DRG), cranial sensory ganglia (CSG) and mesencephalic trigeminal neurons (MTN). To get further mechanistic insights into the process of axon bifurcation we applied different cell culture approaches to decipher downstream activities of cGKI in somatosensory growth cones. We demonstrate that CNP induces an enlargement of DRG growth cones via cGKI which can be blocked or stimulated by pharmacological reagents that interfere with S-palmitoylation. cGKI colocalizes primarily in the central domain of the growth cone with the palmitoylome and vesicular structures including the endoplasmic reticulum, early endosomes, lysosomes and in the soma in the Golgi apparatus. Consistently, an acyl-biotin-exchange chemistry-based screen indicated that cGMP signalling regulates S-palmitoylation of a restricted pool of proteins in the DRG-derived cell line F11.

### Sample Protocol
Acyl-biotin exchange chemistry and mass spectrometry   To identify palmitoylated proteins F11 cells were stimulated with 1 mM of 8 pCPT-cGMP for 10 minutes followed by subcellular fractionation. F11 cells were prepared by homogenization in 0.34 M sucrose supplemented with protease blockers [aprotinin (20 U/μl), leupeptin (5 mM), pepstatin (5mM), PMSF (1mM)]. Nuclei were pelleted at 200xg for 10 minutes and the resulting supernatant was centrifuged at 100 000xg for 10 minutes to obtain a crude membrane pellet and the cytoplasmic fraction in the supernatant. The membrane fraction was solubilized in 1% CHAPS in PBS supplemented with protease blockers. Un-solubilized material was removed by centrifugation at 100,000xg for 10 minutes. Palmitoylated proteins were then labelled by the acyl-biotin exchange (ABE) chemistry protocol essentially as described by (Wan et al., 2007). Free thiols were blocked by NEM. Then thioester bounds between cysteines and palmitate were specifically cleaved by hydroxylamine treatment and finally newly free thiols were labelled by HPDP-biotin. (See scheme Figure 6D). Palmitoylated proteins were purified by streptavidin agarose (Thermo Sceintific).  Mass spectrometric analysis Proteins were eluted from the beads using SDS-loading buffer. The eluted proteins were concentrated into one band and excised from the gel. The gel pieces were digested using an automated digestion setup (Kanashova et al., 2015). The eluted peptides from the in-gel digestion were resuspended in ammoniumbicarbonate buffer. The peptide mixtures were separated by reverse-phase chromatography using an Proxeon nLC2 (Thermo, Dreieich, Germany) on in-house-manufactured 20 cm fritless silica microcolumns with an inner diameter of 75 µm. Columns were packed with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 3 µm resin (Dr Maisch GmbH). Peptides were separated using an 860% acetonitrile gradient (60 min) at a nanoflow rate of 250 nl/min. Eluting peptides were directly ionised by electrospray ionisation and analysed on a Q-Exactive plus mass spectrometer (Thermo). The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent acquisition mode with dynamic exclusion enabled (30 s). MS1 (mass range 300-1700 Th) was acquired at a resolution of 70,000 with the ten most abundant multiply charged (z ≥ 2), ions selected with a 2 Th isolation window for HCD (Higher-energy collisional dissociation) fragmentation with a normalized collision energy of 30. MS2 scans were acquired at a resolution of 17,500 and injection time of 60 ms. The MS2 ion count target was set to 2×103 and the max injection time was 300 ms. Only precursors with a charge state of 2–7 were sampled for MS2.

### Data Protocol
Data were analysed by MaxQuant software version 1.5.1.2. The internal Andromeda search engine was used to search MS2 spectra against a decoy mouse UniProt database containing forward and reverse sequences. The search included variable modifications of methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation, deamidation (N and Q) and fixed modification of carbamidomethyl cysteine. The minimal peptide length was set to seven amino acids, and a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. The FDR was set to 0.01 for peptide and protein identifications. Unique and razor peptides with a minimum ratio count of 1 were considered for quantification. Retention times were recalibrated based on the built-in nonlinear time-rescaling algorithm. Statistical analysis was performed using the R software package (www.r-project.org). Significant changes between the samples were determined using a two-sample t-test after imputation of missing values.

### Publication Abstract
Genetic investigations have demonstrated that a specific form of axonal branching - the bifurcation of afferents from dorsal root ganglia (DRG), cranial sensory ganglia (CSG) and mesencephalic trigeminal neurons (MTN) - is regulated by a cGMP-dependent signaling pathway. This cascade is composed of the ligand C-type natriuretic peptide (CNP), the receptor guanylyl cyclase Npr2, and the cGMP-dependent protein kinase I&#x3b1; (cGKI&#x3b1;). In the absence of any one of these components, axons no longer bifurcate, instead they turn in either an ascending or a descending direction. To gain further mechanistic insights into the process of axon bifurcation we applied different cell culture approaches to decipher downstream activities of cGKI in somatosensory growth cones. We demonstrate that CNP induces an enlargement of DRG growth cones via cGKI which is considered as the priming step of axon bifurcation in the spinal cord. This growth cone remodeling was both blocked by pharmacological inhibitors of S-palmitoylation and potentiated by blocking de-palmitoylation. cGKI colocalizes with the palmitoylome and vesicular structures including the endoplasmic reticulum, early endosomes, lysosomes primarily in the central domain of the growth cone as well as with the Golgi apparatus at the level of the soma. Interestingly, an acyl-biotin-exchange chemistry-based screen indicated that 8pCPT-cGMP-induced signaling induces S-palmitoylation of a restricted pool of proteins in the DRG-derived cell line F11. Overall, our data indicate that CNP-induced cGMP signaling via cGKI affects growth cone morphology of somatosensory afferents. Moreover, it also suggests that S-palmitoylation might play a role in this process.

### Keywords
Ap-ms, Cgmp signalling, Shotgun

### Affiliations
Max-Delbrück Center
LIH

### Submitter
Gunnar Dittmar

### Lab Head
Dr Gunnar Dittmar
Max-Delbrück Center


