### Accession
PXD032277

### Title
CHD2 maintains spermatogonial self-renewal by promoting chromatin activity and mRNA stability

### Description
Chromodomain Helicase DNA-binding Domain 2 (CHD2), as a chromatin remodeling factor, was shown to be involved in the regulation of gene expression in embryonic development, neurodevelopment and myelopoiesis. However, its role in male germ cell development has not been elucidated. Here, we confirmed that CHD2 is abundantly expressed throughout the male germ cells with the highest expression in the spermatocytes of meiosis I. By constructing a heterozygous gene knockout mouse model of Chd2 (Chd2+/-), we demonstrated that CHD2 haploinsufficiency resulted in testicular developmental delay and increased rate of abnormal sperm in mice. DNA damage repair, synapsis and cell proliferation during spermatogenesis are impaired in Chd2+/- mice. In vitro experiments in C18-4 and GC-1 spg cells showed that CHD2 knockdown inhibits spermatogonial self-renewal. Mechanically, CHD2 maintained the enrichment of H3K4me3 in Ccnb1 and Ccnd2 promoter consequently promoting the transcription of Ccnb1 and Ccnd2. In addition, by interacting with cleavage stimulation factor CSTF3, CHD2 binds Oct4, Plzf mRNA and upregulates the expression of OCT4 and PLZF by improving mRNA stability. This is the first time to reveal the role and mechanism of CHD2 in maintaining spermatogonial self-renewal by promoting chromatin activity and mRNA stability in spermatogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
CHD2 or IgG antibody was used to perform immunoprecipitation asssay in GC-1 spg cells. The proteins interacted with CHD2 were identified by LC-MS mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
The lyophilized polypeptide samples were re-dissolved in Nano-HPLC Buffer A. Nano-HPLC liquid system EASY-nLC1000 was used for separation.The hydrolysates were separated by capillary high performance liquid chromatography and analyzed by LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer.(Thermo Finnigan). Mascot 2.3 software (Matrix Science) was used for data processing.The database was Uniprot-Mus Musculus database.The enzyme was trypsin.The maximum allowable missing site was 2.The fixed modifier was: Carbamidomethyl (C). Variable modification:Acetyl (Protein N-term),Deamidated (NQ),Dioxidation (W),Oxidation (M).MS tolerance was ±10ppm, MSMS tolerance was ±0.6Da.Protein score C.I.% greater than 95% was considered successful.

### Publication Abstract
Chromodomain helicase DNA-binding domain 2 (CHD2) is a chromatin remodeling factor involved in many developmental processes. However, its role in male germ cell development has not been elucidated. Here, we confirm that CHD2 expression is enriched in the male germline. In a heterozygous knockout mouse model of <i>Chd2</i> (<i>Chd2</i> <sup>+/-</sup>), we demonstrated that <i>Chd2</i> haploinsufficiency resulted in testicular developmental delay, an increased rate of abnormal sperm, and impaired fertility in mice. <i>In&#xa0;vitro</i> experiments in mouse spermatogonia showed that CHD2 knockdown inhibits spermatogonial self-renewal. Mechanistically, CHD2 maintains the enrichment of H3K4me3 in the <i>Ccnb1</i> and <i>Ccnd2</i> promotors, consequently promoting the transcription of <i>Ccnb1</i> and <i>Ccnd2</i>. In addition, CHD2 interacts with the cleavage stimulation factor CSTF3 and upregulates the expression of OCT4 and PLZF by improving mRNA stability. This is the first study to reveal the role and mechanism of CHD2 in maintaining spermatogonial self-renewal.

### Keywords
Mrna stability, Chd2, Spermatogenesis, Cstf3, Chromatin remodeling

### Affiliations
Hunan university
College of Biology, hunan University, China

### Submitter
Ziqian Min

### Lab Head
Dr Dan Li
College of Biology, hunan University, China


