### Accession
PXD004078

### Title
ELAV proteomics after brain ischemia and reperfusion in the rat

### Description
We investigated mRNA regulatory proteins of the ELAV family following 10 min global brain ischemia and 8 hrs reperfusion (8R) or non-ischemic controls (NIC) in rat hippocampal CA1 and CA3. There were three main experiments: (1) Shot-gun proteomics of polysome pellets from NIC and 8R CA1 and CA3, (2) Shot-gun proteomics of  ELAV immunoprecipitate eluents from NIC and 8R CA1 and CA3, and (3) Proteomics of ELAV antisera-reactive bands excised from nitrocellulose following ELAV Western blot.

### Sample Protocol
(1) Polysome proteomics. Polysome pellets were isolated by sucrose pad from post-mitochondrial supernatants (PMS) of  NIC and 8R CA1 and CA3, where each replicate pooled 4-5 hippocampi. Polysome pellets were resuspended, trypsin-digested, then subject to LC-MS/MS.  (2) PMS of NIC and 8R CA1 and CA3 (n = 3 replicates, each replicate from 5 pooled rats) were immunoprecipitated using ELAV antisera. Eluted proteins were subjected to trypsin digestion then analyzed by LC-MS/MS.  (3) PMS from NIC and 8R CA1 and CA3 were IPd with ELAV antisera, then eluents run on 10% SDS-PAGE, transferred to nitocellulose, then Western blotted with the same anti-ELAV antisera. ELAV-reactive bands were excised and eluted from the nitrocellulose, then subjected to LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were processed in MASCOT. Results files used parameters: 150 ppm error on peaks; trypsin digestion; detected modification: oxidation.

### Publication Abstract
Prolonged translation arrest correlates with delayed neuronal death of hippocampal CA1 neurons following global cerebral ischemia and reperfusion. Many previous studies investigated ribosome molecular biology, but mRNA regulatory mechanisms after brain ischemia have been less studied. Here we investigated the embryonic lethal abnormal vision/Hu isoforms HuR, HuB, HuC, and HuD, as well as expression of mRNAs containing adenine and rich uridine elements following global ischemia in rat brain. Proteomics of embryonic lethal abnormal vision immunoprecipitations or polysomes isolated from rat hippocampal CA1 and CA3 from controls or following 10&#x2009;min ischemia plus 8&#x2009;h of reperfusion showed distinct sets of mRNA-binding proteins, suggesting differential mRNA regulation in each condition. Notably, HuB, HuC, and HuD were undetectable in NIC CA1. At 8&#x2009;h reperfusion, polysome-associated mRNAs contained 46.1% of ischemia-upregulated mRNAs containing adenine and rich uridine elements in CA3, but only 18.7% in CA1. Since mRNAs containing adenine and rich uridine elements regulation are important to several cellular stress responses, our results suggest CA1 is disadvantaged compared to CA3 in coping with ischemic stress, and this is expected to be an important contributing factor to CA1 selective vulnerability. (Data are available via ProteomeXchange identifier PXD004078 and GEO Series accession number GSE82146).

### Keywords
Hur, Hub, Hud, Brain ischemia and reperfusion, Huc, Elav

### Affiliations
Wayne State University School of Medicine Department of Physiology
Wayne State University

### Submitter
Donald DeGracia

### Lab Head
Dr Donald J. DeGracia
Wayne State University School of Medicine Department of Physiology


