### Accession
PXD022554

### Title
Enforced dimerization between XBP1s and ATF6f enhances the protective effects of the unfolded protein response (UPR) in models of neurodegeneration

### Description
Alteration to endoplasmic reticulum (ER) proteostasis is observed on a variety of neurodegenerative diseases associated with abnormal protein aggregation. Activation of the unfolded protein response (UPR) enables an adaptive reaction to recover ER proteostasis and cell function. The UPR is initiated by specialized stress sensors that engage gene expression programs through the concerted action of the transcription factors ATF4, ATF6f, and XBP1s. Although UPR signaling is generally studied as unique linear signaling branches, correlative evidence suggests that ATF6f and XBP1s may physically interact to regulate a subset of UPR-target genes. Here, we designed an ATF6f-XBP1s fusion protein termed UPRplus that behaves as a heterodimer in terms of its selective transcriptional activity. Cell-based studies demonstrated that UPRplus has stronger effects in reducing the abnormal aggregation of mutant huntingtin and alpha-synuclein when compared to XBP1s or ATF6 alone. We developed a gene transfer approach to deliver UPRplus into the brain using adeno-associated viruses (AAVs) and demonstrated potent neuroprotection in vivo in preclinical models of Parkinson´s and Huntington´s disease. These results support the concept where directing UPR-mediated gene expression toward specific adaptive programs may serve as a possible strategy to optimize the beneficial effects of the pathway in different disease conditions.

### Sample Protocol
HEK cells in 6-well plates were infected with AAV-UPRplus, AAV-XBP1s, AAV-ATF6f, or AAV-empty for 48 h. Lysates were prepared in RIPA buffer (150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 1% Triton X-100, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, and 0.1% SDS) containing proteases and phosphatases inhibitors cocktail (Roche). After extract sonication, protein concentration was determined by BCA (Thermo Fisher). For each sample, 20 μg of lysate was washed by chloroform/methanol precipitation. Air-dried pellets were resuspended in 1% RapiGest SF (Waters) and brought up in 100 mM HEPES (pH 8.0). Proteins were reduced with 5 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride (Thermo Fisher) for 30 min and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma Aldrich) for 30 min at ambient temperature and protected from light. Proteins were digested for 18 h at 37°C with 0.5 μg trypsin (Promega). After digestion, the peptides from each sample were reacted for 1 h with the appropriate TMT-NHS isobaric reagent (Thermo Fisher) in 40% (v/v) anhydrous acetonitrile and quenched with 0.4% ammonium bicarbonate for 1 h. Samples with different TMT labels were pooled and acidified with 5% formic acid. Acetonitrile was evaporated on a SpeedVac and debris was removed by centrifugation for 30 min at 18,000 x g. Triphasic MuDPIT microcolumns were prepared, samples loaded directly onto the column and washed for 30 min with buffer A. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using a Q Exactive mass spectrometer equipped with an EASY nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher). MuDPIT experiments were performed by sequential injections of 0, 10, 20, 30, …, 100% buffer C (500 mM ammonium acetate in buffer A) and a final step of 90% buffer C / 10% buffer B (20% water, 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid, v/v/v) and each step followed by a gradient from buffer A (95% water, 5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) to buffer B. Electrospray was performed directly from the analytical column by applying a voltage of 2.5 kV with an inlet capillary temperature of 275°C. Data-dependent acquisition of MS/MS spectra was performed with the following settings: eluted peptides were scanned from 400 to 1800 m/z with a resolution of 30000 and the mass spectrometer in a data-dependent acquisition mode. The top ten peaks for each full scan were fragmented by HCD using a normalized collision energy of 30%, 100 ms injection time,  resolution of 7500, and scanned from 100 to 1800 m/z. Dynamic exclusion parameters were 1 repeat count, 30 ms repeat duration.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification and protein quantification were performed using the Integrated Proteomics Pipeline Suite (IP2, Integrated Proteomics Applications, Inc., San Diego, CA). TMT intensities were normalized to global peptide levels, summed for proteins and log2 transformed. Differences in protein expression were expressed as log2 fold changes between conditions and averaged across biological and technical replicates (Vehicle: n = 5, ATF6: n = 3, XBP1s: n = 3, UPRplus: n = 6). The vehicle and UPRplus samples contained 3 technical replicates that were distributed across 3 independent MuDPIT runs. Significance of expression changes and q values were evaluated in Graphpad Prism using multiple t-tests and false discovery rate (FDR) correction with two-stage step-up method of Benjamini, Krieger and Yekutieli.

### Publication Abstract
Alteration to endoplasmic reticulum (ER) proteostasis is observed in a variety of neurodegenerative diseases associated with abnormal protein aggregation. Activation of the unfolded protein response (UPR) enables an adaptive reaction to recover ER proteostasis and cell function. The UPR is initiated by specialized stress sensors that engage gene expression programs through the concerted action of the transcription factors ATF4, ATF6f, and XBP1s. Although UPR signaling is generally studied as unique linear signaling branches, correlative evidence suggests that ATF6f and XBP1s may physically interact to regulate a subset of UPR target genes. In this study, we designed an ATF6f/XBP1s fusion protein termed UPRplus that behaves as a heterodimer in terms of its selective transcriptional activity. Cell-based studies demonstrated that UPRplus has a stronger effect in reducing the abnormal aggregation of mutant huntingtin and &#x3b1;-synuclein when compared to XBP1s or ATF6 alone. We developed a gene transfer approach to deliver UPRplus into the brain using adeno-associated viruses (AAVs) and demonstrated potent neuroprotection in&#xa0;vivo in preclinical models of Parkinson's disease and Huntington's disease. These results support the concept in which directing UPR-mediated gene expression toward specific adaptive programs may serve as a possible strategy to optimize the beneficial effects of the pathway in different disease conditions.

### Keywords
Parkinson`s disease, Xbp1, Protein aggregation, Er stress, Upr, Huntington`s disease, Atf6

### Affiliations
Vanderbilt University
Department of Molecular Medicine, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA, USA

### Submitter
Jonathan Davies

### Lab Head
Dr R. Luke Wiseman
Department of Molecular Medicine, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA, USA


