### Accession
PXD023548

### Title
A phase separation mechanism underlies development of cancer and aberrant organization of three-dimensional chromatin structure

### Description
Development of cancer is intimately associated with genetic abnormalities that target proteins with intrinsically disordered regions (IDRs). In human hematological malignancies, recurrent chromosomal translocation of nucleoporin (NUP98 or NUP214) generates an aberrant chimera that invariably retains nucleoporin’s IDR, tandemly dispersed phenylalanine-andglycine (FG) repeats1-3. However, it remains largely elusive how unstructured IDRs contribute to oncogenesis. We here show that IDR or FG repeats harbored within NUP98-HOXA9, a homeodomain-containing transcription factor (TF) chimera recurrently detected in acute leukemia patients1,4,5, is essential for establishing nuclear liquid-liquid phase separation (LLPS) puncta and for inducing leukemic transformation of primary hematopoietic cells in vitro and in vivo. Strikingly, LLPS of NUP98-HOXA9 not only promotes chromatin occupancy of chimera TF oncoproteins but is also required for formation of a broad, ‘super-enhancer’-like binding pattern, typically seen at a battery of leukemia-related loci exemplified by HOX, MEIS and PBX genes, potentiating their transcriptional activation. An artificial HOX chimera, created by replacing NUP98’s FG repeats with an unrelated LLPSforming IDR of FUS6,7, had similar enhancement effects on chimera’s chromatin binding and target gene activation. Via Hi-C mapping, we further demonstrated that the phase-separated NUP98-HOXA9 protein assembly is able to induce formation of CTCF-independent chromatin looping enriched at leukemic oncogenes. Together, this report describes a proof-of-principle example wherein cancer acquires mutation to establish condensates of oncogenic TFs via a phase separation mechanism, which simultaneously enhances their chromatin targeting and induces organization of aberrant three-dimensional chromatin structure during tumorous transformation. As a range of LLPS-competent molecules are implicated in various human cancers, this mechanism can potentially be generalized to many malignant and diseased settings.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lines and Tissue Culture. HEK293T (ATCC #CRL-3216) and HeLa (ATCC #CCL-2) cells were obtained from ATCC and maintained using recommended culture conditions. Authentication of cell identities, including those parental and derived lines, was ensured by the Tissue Culture Facility affiliated to UNC Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center with genetic signature profiling and fingerprinting analyses2. A routine examination for any possible mycoplasma contamination was performed every month with kits (Lonza). Cells in a passage of less than of 10 times were used in this study. Retroviral Expression and Stable Cell Line Generation. Retrovirus or lentivirus was packaged and produced in 293 cells, and the stable cell lines were generated by viral infection followed by drug selection as performed before3-5. BioID A BirA cDNA sequence (a kind gift from B Strahl) was inserted into N-terminus of target protein in the MSCV based retroviral vector, followed by viral production and establishment of 293 stable expression cells. For proximity-dependent labeling of interacting proteins or BioID12,13, 293 stable cells were harvested from five of 15cm plates post-treatment with 50uM of biotin for 24hrs, and then washed twice with PBS. The cell pellets were resuspended in 1mL of RIPA lysis buffer (10% glycerol, 25mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 150mM NaCl, 2mM EDTA, 0.1% SDS, 1% NP-40, 0.2% Sodium Deoxycholate), and lysates were added with 1ul of Benzonase (Sigma-Aldrich, #E1014) followed by incubation on ice for one hour. After centrifugation at max speed for 30 min at 4 ºC, the supernatant was collected and incubated with Neutravidin beads (Thermo Fisher #29204) overnight at 4 ºC. The Neutravidin beads were washed twice with the RIPA buffer and TAP lysis buffer (10% glycerol, 350mM NaCl, 2mM EDTA, 0.1% NP-40, 50mM HEPES pH 8) sequentially. Lastly, the beads were washed three times with the ABC buffer (50mM Ammonium bicarbonate pH 8) and subjected to mass spectrometry-based analysis.  Mass Spectrometry-based Protein Identification Proteins were eluted from beads by adding 50μL 2× Laemmli buffer (Boston Bioproducts) and heating at 95oC for 5 minutes. A total of 50μL of each sample was resolved by SDSPAGE using a 4-20% Tris-Glycine Wedge Well gel (Invitrogen) and visualized by Coomassie staining. Each SDS-PAGE gel lane was sectioned into 12 segments of equal volume. Each segment was subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion as follows. Gel slices were destained in 50% methanol (Fisher), 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma- Aldrich), followed by reduction in 10 mM Tris [2-carboxyethyl] phosphine (Pierce) and alkylation in 50 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich). Gel slices were then dehydrated in acetonitrile (Fisher), followed by addition of 100 ng porcine sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma-Aldrich) and incubation at 37oC for 12-16 hours. Peptide products were then acidified in 0.1% formic acid (Pierce). Tryptic peptides were separated by reverse phase XSelect CSH C18 2.5 um resin (Waters) on an in-line 150 x 0.075 mm column using a nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters). Peptides were eluted using a 30 min gradient from 97:3 to 67:33 buffer A:B ratio (Buffer A = 0.1% formic acid, 0.5% acetonitrile; buffer B = 0.1% formic acid, 99.9% acetonitrile). Eluted peptides were ionized by electrospray (2.15 kV) followed by MS/MS analysis using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo) in top-speed data-dependent mode. MS data were acquired using the FTMS analyzer in profile mode at a resolution of 240,000 over a range of 375 to 1500 m/z. Following HCD activation, MS/MS data were acquired using the ion trap analyzer in centroid mode and normal mass range with precursor mass-dependent normalized collision energy between 28.0 and 31.0.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified by searching the UniProtKB database restricted to Homo Sapiens using Mascot (Matrix Science) with a parent ion tolerance of 3 ppm and a fragment ion tolerance of 0.5 Da, fixed modifications for carbamidomethyl of cysteine, and variable modifications for oxidation on methionine and acetyl on N-terminus. Scaffold (Proteome Software) was used to verify MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established with less than 1.0% false discovery by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established with less than 1.0% false discovery and contained at least 2 identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm14. Proteins were filtered out if they had a spectral count < 8 in all sample groups and the counts were normalized to log2 normalized spectral abundance factor (NSAF) values. Significant interacting proteins were defined with a cut-off of a log2 fold change over 2 in the experimental versus control samples.

### Publication Abstract
The development of cancer is intimately associated with genetic abnormalities that target proteins with intrinsically disordered regions (IDRs). In human haematological malignancies, recurrent chromosomal translocation of nucleoporin (NUP98 or NUP214) generates an aberrant chimera that invariably retains the nucleoporin IDR-tandemly dispersed repeats of phenylalanine and glycine residues<sup>1,2</sup>. However, how unstructured IDRs contribute to oncogenesis remains unclear. Here we show that IDRs contained within NUP98-HOXA9, a homeodomain-containing transcription factor chimera recurrently detected in leukaemias<sup>1,2</sup>, are essential for establishing liquid-liquid phase separation (LLPS) puncta of chimera and for inducing leukaemic transformation. Notably, LLPS of NUP98-HOXA9 not only promotes chromatin occupancy of chimera transcription factors, but also is required for the formation of a broad 'super-enhancer'-like binding pattern typically seen at leukaemogenic genes, which potentiates transcriptional activation. An artificial HOX chimera, created by replacing the phenylalanine and glycine repeats of NUP98 with an unrelated LLPS-forming IDR of the FUS protein<sup>3,4</sup>, had similar enhancing effects on the genome-wide binding and target gene activation of the chimera. Deeply sequenced Hi-C revealed that phase-separated NUP98-HOXA9 induces CTCF-independent chromatin loops that are enriched at proto-oncogenes. Together, this report describes a proof-of-principle example in which cancer acquires mutation to establish oncogenic transcription factor condensates via phase separation, which simultaneously enhances their genomic targeting and induces organization of aberrant three-dimensional chromatin structure during tumourous transformation. As LLPS-competent molecules are frequently implicated in diseases<sup>1,2,4-7</sup>, this mechanism can potentially be generalized to many malignant and pathological settings.

### Keywords
Intrinsically disordered regions (idrs), Bioid, Oncogenesis, Homeodomain-containing transcription factor

### Affiliations
UAMS
1Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA. 2Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA. 3Biological and Biomedical Sciences Program, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA.

### Submitter
Stephanie Byrum

### Lab Head
Dr Gang Greg Wang
1Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA. 2Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA. 3Biological and Biomedical Sciences Program, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA.


