### Accession
PXD028114

### Title
RNA-binding proteins associating with the 3’UTR of the ATP6V1A transcript in SIRT1 knock-down cells

### Description
Insulin-like growth factor 2 mRNA binding protein 2 (IGF2BP2) binds various RNA transcripts and functions as a tumor promoter, although little is known regarding the mechanisms that regulate its roles in RNA metabolism (1-3).  Here we find that IGF2BP2 binds to the 3’ untranslated region of the transcript encoding ATP6V1A, a major catalytic subunit of the vacuolar ATPase (v-ATPase), and regulates its degradation in a lysine acetylation and SIRT1-dependent manner.  We show that the regulation of IGF2BP2 is significantly compromised in breast cancer cells where SIRT1 expression is low or knocked-down.  Reduced SIRT1 expression leads to an increase in acetylated IGF2BP2, which enables IGF2BP2 to recruit the XRN2 nuclease to the ATP6V1A transcript, resulting in its degradation and a reduction in the expression of functional v-ATPase complexes.  This impairs lysosomal activity and produces a cellular secretome consisting of increased numbers of exosomes enriched in ubiquitinated protein cargo and soluble hydrolases including cathepsins, which combine to promote tumor progression and invasiveness.  Collectively, these findings describe a previously unrecognized role for IGF2BP2 in mediating the degradation of an mRNA transcript essential for lysosomal function and highlight how its sirtuin-regulated acetylation state can have significant biological and disease consequences.

### Sample Protocol
The biotinylated RNA transcripts representing different portions of the ATP6V1A 3’UTR, i.e. the T1-T3 constructs, (100 pmol), were incubated for 1 h at room temperature with magnetic streptavidin-conjugated beads (New England Bioenzymes, 100 uL per sample) that had been prepared according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The beads were then collected using a magnetic rack, washed twice with 400 µL of binding and wash buffer (5 mM Tris-HCl (pH7.4), and 1 M NaCl), and resuspended in 50 µL of buffer C (25 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4), 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM MgCl2, 1 mM DTT, 1 mM PMSF, 1X protease inhibitor cocktail, and 0.4 U/μl RNase inhibitor).  WCLs (750 µg of each) were then incubated with the RNA-conjugated beads for 3 h at 4 °C with rotation.  The beads were then precipitated using a magnetic rack, washed six times with 1.0 mL of buffer C containing 40 U RNase inhibitor and 0.25% IGEPAL, resuspended in 75 µL of buffer C and SDS-PAGE sample buffer, and boiled for 5 min. The samples were centrifuged at 12,000 x g for 1 min and the supernatant was resolved by SDS-PAGE and silver-stained. Bands of interest were excised and proteins were digested with Trypsin. Peptides were desalted and dried prior to analysis using nanoflow LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Raw spectra were searched using Proteome Discoverer version 2.2. HCD spectra were matched using SequestHT and Percolator using a target-decoy strategy. The reference database was a human protein subset of the Uniprot database, release 2017-05-10. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da. Peptide spectral matches (PSMs) allowed for up to two missed trypsin cleavages Static modifications were set to carbamidomethylation of cysteines. Dynamic modifications were set to: oxidation of methionine and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine. Quantification was based on the number of PSMs.

### Publication Abstract
IGF2BP2 binds to a number of RNA transcripts and has been suggested to function as a tumor promoter, although little is known regarding the mechanisms that regulate its roles in RNA metabolism. Here we demonstrate that IGF2BP2 binds to the 3' untranslated region of the transcript encoding ATP6V1A, a catalytic subunit of the vacuolar ATPase (v-ATPase), and serves as a substrate for the NAD<sup>+</sup>-dependent deacetylase SIRT1, which regulates how IGF2BP2 affects the stability of the ATP6V1A transcript. When sufficient levels of SIRT1 are expressed, it catalyzes the deacetylation of IGF2BP2, which can bind to the ATP6V1A transcript but does not mediate its degradation. However, when SIRT1 expression is low, the acetylated form of IGF2BP2 accumulates, and upon binding to the ATP6V1A transcript recruits the XRN2 nuclease, which catalyzes transcript degradation. Thus, the stability of the ATP6V1A transcript is significantly compromised in breast cancer cells when SIRT1 expression is low or knocked-down. This leads to a reduction in the expression of functional v-ATPase complexes in cancer cells and to an impairment in their lysosomal activity, resulting in the production of a cellular secretome consisting of increased numbers of exosomes enriched in ubiquitinated protein cargo and soluble hydrolases, including cathepsins, that together combine to promote tumor cell survival and invasiveness. These findings describe a previously unrecognized role for IGF2BP2 in mediating the degradation of a messenger RNA transcript essential for lysosomal function and highlight how its sirtuin-regulated acetylation state can have significant biological and disease consequences.

### Keywords
Human, Rna-binding proteins, Atp6v1a, Breast cancer, Sirt1

### Affiliations
Cornell University
Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853, USA Department of Molecular Medicine, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853, USA

### Submitter
Elena Panizza

### Lab Head
Dr Richard A. Cerione
Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853, USA Department of Molecular Medicine, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853, USA


