### Accession
PXD034509

### Title
Quantification of ATIs in Wheat by LC-MS/MS – LFQ DIA QTOF

### Description
A selection of ATIs was silenced in the common wheat cultivar Bobwhite and durum wheat cultivar Svevo by RNAi and gene editing, respectively, in order to reduce the amounts of ATIs. The controls and silenced lines were analyzed after digestion to peptides by LC-MS/MS with different approaches to evaluate changes in composition of ATIs. First, a targeted method with stable isotope dilution assay (SIDA) using labeled peptides as internal standards was applied. Additionally, four different approaches for relative quantitation were conducted, in detail, iTRAQ labeled and label free quantitation (LFQ) combined with data dependent acquisition (DDA) and data independent acquisition (DIA). Quantitation was performed manually (Skyline and MASCOT) and with different proteomics software tools (PLGS, MaxQuant, and PEAKS X Pro).

### Sample Protocol
Samples Durum wheat cultivar Svevo wild type - Sample 1 (a,b,c - 3 replicates) Durum wheat CRISPR-Cas9 edited lines in the ATI subunits CM3 and CM16 - R5P8 - Sample 3 (a,b,c - 3 replicates) Bread Wheat cultivar Bobwhite wild type - - Sample 4 (a,b,c - 3 replicates) Bread Wheat cultivar Bobwhite silenced by RNAi in the three ATI genes CM3, CM16 and 0.28 - Sample 5 (a,b,c - 3 replicates) Extraction Wholemeal flour (25 mg) of each sample was extracted two times with 1 mL 50% 1-propanol in Tris-HCl (0.5 mol/L, pH 8.8) (v/v) containing 1% dithiothreitol (DTT) (w/v) (Svevo: 2 × 1.3 mL and R5P8b: 2 × 2.1 mL; Bobwhite and 22-2, 2 × 2.8 mL). For each extraction step, the samples were vortexed for 2 min and then stirred at 60 °C for 30 min. After centrifugation at 3,550 rcf and 22 °C for 25 min, the supernatants were collected in 15 mL tubes. The solutions were homogenized by shaking. Aliquots (150 µL containing 150 µg protein) were transferred in 1.5 mL tubes. Proteins were precipitated with ice-cold acetone (600 µL) overnight at -20 °C. After centrifugation at 3,550 rcf and 22 °C for 25 min, the supernatant was removed and the pellet was washed with ice-cold acetone (200 µL).  Digestion The protein pellets were suspended with Rapigest solution (0.05%, 150 µL) and the proteins reduced by addition of DTT (50 µL, 50 mmol/L) for 20 min at 60 °C. After cooling to room temperature, alkylation was conducted with iodoacetamide (50 µl, 100 mmol/L) in the dark for 30 min. Remaining iodoacetamide was removed by a second addition of DTT (20 µl, 50 mmol/L). For digestion an aliquot (100 µL) was mixed with trypsin solution (20 µL, containing 1.25 µg trypsin in 50 mmol/L Abic at pH 8.0) and incubated at 37 °C overnight. All these steps, except alkylation were conducted with a ThermoMixer shaking. Digestion was stopped with TFA (10 µL, 5% in water) and SPE clean-up of tryptic peptides was performed with stage-tips (5 layers of SDB-XC reversed-phase Empore extraktions diks, 3M Deutschland GmbH, Neuss, Germany, were filled in 200 µL pipette tips. After equilibration with methanol, loading and washing (twice with 2.5% ACN in water containing 0.1% TFA) peptides were eluted with 60% ACN in water and 0.1% TFA (v/v). The eluate was evaporated to dryness and dissolved in 10% ACN in water containing 0.1% FA (v/v).

### Data Protocol
Digested peptides were separated on a Waters H-class UPLC system using a gradient with water (A) and 98% ACN in water (B) containing 0.1% FA (gradient with 8% B to 40 % B in 40 min.) at a flow rate of 0.1 mL/min and 60 °C with a CSH C18 column (1.7 µm, 150 × 1 mm, Waters). Detection was performed with a Xevo G2 XS QTOF mass spectrometer from Waters. DIA was performed in SONAR™ mode and a 10 Da window for quadrupole scanning (from 400 to 1200 m/z) was used. Fragmentation was performed by ramping collision energy from 20 to 40 V in the range of 350-1850 m/z. Every 180 s lockmass calibration was achieved with leucine enkephalin (Waters SKU: 186006013). Recorded SONAR-spectra were processed with ProteinLynx Global Server (PLGS, Waters) with minimum three respectively seven product ions for peptides and proteins and proteins were identified with an imported Triticum aestivum database from UniProtKB containing 472 entries (all reviewed entries plus one unreviewed for CM17) using 4% FDR as recommended by the manufacterer. Carbamidomethyl was set as fixed and oxidation as variable modification; max. one missed cleavages was allowed, peptide and MS/MS tolerance was calculated automatically by the software. By applying the expression workflow, EMRT and protein tables with normalized intensities for identified peptides (PLGS score above 5) assigned to ATIs were generated. Peptides of each ATI were checked manually for concordant ones and these peptides were removed afterwards to ensure that relative quantitation was based exclusively on unique peptides. Additionally, only peptides found in at least in two of three replicates were used for quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
Quantitation of wheat proteins is still a challenge, especially regarding amylase/trypsin-inhibitors (ATIs). A selection of ATIs was silenced in the common wheat cultivar Bobwhite and durum wheat cultivar Svevo by RNAi and gene editing, respectively, in order to reduce the amounts of ATIs. The controls and silenced lines were analyzed after digestion to peptides by LC-MS/MS with different approaches to evaluate changes in composition of ATIs. First, a targeted method with stable isotope dilution assay (SIDA) using labeled peptides as internal standards was applied. Additionally, four different approaches for relative quantitation were conducted, in detail, iTRAQ labeled and label free quantitation (LFQ) combined with data dependent acquisition (DDA) and data independent acquisition (DIA). Quantitation was performed manually (Skyline and MASCOT) and with different proteomics software tools (PLGS, MaxQuant, and PEAKS X Pro). To characterize the wheat proteins on protein level, complementary techniques as high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) and gel electrophoresis were performed. The targeted approach with SIDA was able to quantitate all ATIs, even at low levels, but an optimized extraction is necessary. The labeled iTRAQ approach revealed an indistinct performance. LFQ with low resolution equipment (IonTrap) showed similar results for major ATIs, but low abundance ATIs as CM1, were not detectable. DDA measurements with an Orbitrap system and evaluation using MaxQuant showed that the relative quantitation was dependent on the wheat species. The combination of manual curation of the MaxQuant search with Skyline revealed a very good performance. The DIA approach with analytical flow found similar results compared to absolute quantitation except for some minor ATIs, which were not detected. Comparison of applied methods revealed that peptide selection is a crucial step for protein quantitation. Wheat proteomics faces challenges due to the high genetic complexity, the close relationship to other cereals and the incomplete, redundant protein database requiring sensitive, precise and accurate LC-MS/MS methods.

### Keywords
Amylase/trypsin inhibitor; wheat; crsipr-cas9; rnai;

### Affiliations
AGES - Austrian Agency for Health and Food Safety, Institute for Animal Nutrition and Feed, Vienna, Austria
AGES - Austrian Agency for Health and Food Safety
Institute for Animal Nutrition and Feed
Spargelfeldstraße 191 | 1220 Vienna 

### Submitter
Stefano D'Amico

### Lab Head
Dr Stefano D'Amico
AGES - Austrian Agency for Health and Food Safety, Institute for Animal Nutrition and Feed, Vienna, Austria


