### Accession
PXD039149

### Title
2-month-old mouse Testis total protein LC MS/MS

### Description
Comparison of testicular protein profile of WT and KO mice at the age of 2 months

### Sample Protocol
Total testicular protein was extracted using a lysis buffer (20 mM Tris/HCl (pH=8), 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 0.5% Triton-X 100, 10% glycerol, and a protease inhibitor cocktail), and the testicular proteome was analyzed using nano LC-MS/MS on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as previously described. The protein samples were processed as follows: reduction with dithiothreitol, S-alkylation with iodoacetamide, and digestion with Lys-C and trypsin. After digestion, the peptides were desalted using the SDB-XC StageTip (3M Company, St. Paul, MN, USA) and SCX StageTip (3M Company).

### Data Protocol
proteomic characterization was performed using three independent batches with duplicate nano LC-MS/MS analyses. Protein identification and label-free quantification were performed using MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3.8) against the SWISS-PROT sequence database (version 2016_05, with 20,207 human canonical protein sequences). A fixed false discovery rate of 1% was adjusted for peptide and protein levels.

### Publication Abstract
Oxidative stress is the etiology for 30-80% of male patients affected by infertility, which is a major health problem worldwide. Klotho protein is an aging suppressor that functions as a humoral factor modulating various cellular processes including antioxidation and anti-inflammation, and its dysregulation leads to human pathologies. Male mice lacking Klotho are sterile, and decreased Klotho levels in the serum are observed in men suffering from infertility with lower sperm counts. However, the mechanism by which Klotho maintains healthy male fertility remains unclear. Klotho haplodeficiency (<i>Kl</i><sup>+<i>/</i>-</sup>) accelerates fertility reduction by impairing sperm quality and spermatogenesis in <i>Kl</i><sup>+/-</sup> mice. Testicular proteomic analysis revealed that loss of Klotho predominantly disturbed oxidation and the glutathione-related pathway. We further focused on the glutathione-S-transferase (GST) family which counteracts oxidative stress in most cell types and closely relates with fertility. Several GST proteins, including GSTP1, GSTO2, and GSTK1, were significantly downregulated, which subsequently resulted in increased levels of the lipid peroxidation product 4-hydroxynonenal and apoptosis in murine testis with low or no expression of Klotho. Taken together, the loss of one <i>Kl</i> allele accelerates male fecundity loss because diminished antioxidant capability induces oxidative injury in mice. This is the first study that highlights a connection between Klotho and GST proteins.

### Keywords
Testis, Mouse, Total protein

### Affiliations
Graduate Institute of Biomedical and Pharmaceutical Science, Fu Jen Catholic University
Institute of Biomedical and Pharmaceutical Science, Fu Jen Catholic University, New Taipei City, Taiwan

### Submitter
Ying-Hung  Lin 

### Lab Head
Dr Ying-Hung Lin
Graduate Institute of Biomedical and Pharmaceutical Science, Fu Jen Catholic University


