### Accession
PXD041315

### Title
Cronobacter sakazakii infection implicates multifaceted neuro-immune regulatory pathways of Caenorhabditis elegans

### Description
Background: The nervous and immune systems are inextricably interlinked. Protein therapy strategies are the most advanced methods for treating neurodegenerative diseases. Albeit the technologies and facilities have developed in modern medicine, still there are no proper treatments to pathogen specific neurodegenerative diseases. It is crucial to understand how host proteins regulate neuron-immune communication during pathogenesis. The emerging opportunistic foodborne pathogen Cronobacter sakazakii causes life-threatening infections such as meningitis, necrotizing enterocolitis, sepsis, and meningo-encephalitis most predominantly in neonates, infants, and immunocompromised patients, with a relatively high mortality rate. In our study, C. elegans infected with the above pathogen have been analyzed primarily at the translational level, especially profiling the differentially regulated proteins involved in neuro-immune signaling pathways. Results: The protein profiling of both control and infected worms using LC-MS/MS analysis revealed a total of 174 proteins in control, 206 in C. sakazakii infected at 24 h, and 172 proteins in control and 226 in C. sakazakii infected at 48 h samples. We observed 69 differentially regulated proteins from both control and infected samples. Protein-protein interaction networks constructed using STRING tool suggested that molecular players were involved in mTOR, axon regeneration, calcium signaling, and longevity regulating pathways. Conclusions: This study identified distinct protein regulations in C. elegans associated to neuro-immune communication in response to C. sakazakii infection.

### Sample Protocol
100 µg of proteins from both E. coli OP50 and C. sakazakii exposed samples at 24 and 48 h were taken for in-solution digestion.  The lysates were reduced with 100mM DTT at 55 °C for 30 min in dark and alkylated with 200 mM Iodoacetamide at 37 °C for 30 min. Next, the samples were diluted in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer and digested using MS grade trypsin (Sigma) with a protein: trypsin ratio of 100:1 at 37 °C for overnight. The digested peptides mixtures were desalted using PierceTM C18 Spin Tips (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Finally, Protein profiling analysis has been outsourced at LC-MS/MS instrumentation facility from NIPER, Kolkata.

### Data Protocol
Label-free relative quantification was performed using Agilent 6545 ESI-LC/qToF-MS/MS, and processed by Mass Hunter Workstation software (version B.08.00) and the post processing of data was performed using Spectrum Mill software (version B.06.00). The parameter settings were selected from C. elegans database for taxonomy identification and precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm and the product mass tolerance was set to 600 mDa, with one missed cleavage. Trypsin was selected as the enzyme specificity. In addition, carbamidomethylation (C) of cysteine was selected as a fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine (M) was selected as the variable modification for database searching. The post-processing of LC-MS/MS raw data is planned to ensure that the protein resulting from the LC-MS/MS is at least one fragment ion and one peptide match are accounted for relative quantification. The C. elegans proteins details using identified accession ID were retrieved from UniProtKB for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
The neural pathways of <i>Caenorhabditis elegans</i> play a crucial role in regulating host immunity and inflammation during pathogenic infections. To understand the major neuro-immune signaling pathways, this study aimed to identify the key regulatory proteins in the host <i>C. elegans</i> during <i>C. sakazakii</i> infection. We used high-throughput label-free quantitative proteomics and identified 69 differentially expressed proteins. KEGG analysis revealed that <i>C. sakazakii</i> elicited host immune signaling cascades primarily including mTOR signaling, axon regeneration, metabolic pathways (<i>let-363</i> and <i>acox-1.4</i>), calcium signaling <i>(mlck-1)</i>, and longevity regulating pathways (<i>ddl-2</i>), respectively. The abrogation in functional loss of mTOR-associated players deciphered that <i>C. sakazakii</i> infection negatively regulated the lifespan of mutant worms (<i>akt-1</i>, <i>let-363</i> and <i>dlk-1</i>), including physiological aberrations, such as reduced pharyngeal pumping and egg production. Additionally, the candidate pathway proteins were validated by transcriptional profiling of their corresponding genes. Furthermore, immunoblotting showed the downregulation of mTORC2/SGK-1 during the later hours of pathogen exposure. Overall, our findings profoundly provide an understanding of the specificity of proteome imbalance in affecting neuro-immune regulations during <i>C. sakazakii</i> infection.

### Keywords
Caenorhabditis elegans; cronobacter sakazakii; mtor pathway; protein aggregation; lc-ms/ms; western blotting; apoptosis.

### Affiliations
Dr. KB Lab (Host Pathogen Interaction Lab), Senior Professor and Head, Department of Biotechnology, Alagappa University, Karaikudi (lab head)
SENIOR PROFESSOR AND HEAD, DEPARTMENT OF BIOTECHNOLOGY, ALAGAPPA UNIVERSITY, KARAIKUDI 630 003

### Submitter
BALAMURUGAN KRISHNASWAMY

### Lab Head
Dr Krishnaswamy Balamurugan
Dr. KB Lab (Host Pathogen Interaction Lab), Senior Professor and Head, Department of Biotechnology, Alagappa University, Karaikudi (lab head)


