### Accession
PXD015848

### Title
Upstream ORF-encoded ASDURF is a novel prefoldin-like subunit of the PAQosome

### Description
The PAQosome is an eleven-subunit chaperone involved in the biogenesis of several human protein complexes. We show that ASDURF, a recently discovered upstream open reading frame (uORF) in the 5’ UTR of ASNSD1 mRNA, encodes the twelfth subunit of the PAQosome. ASDURF, displays significant structural homology to beta-prefoldins and assembles with the five known subunits of the prefoldin-like module of the PAQosome to form a heterohexameric prefoldin-like complex. A model of the PAQosome prefoldin-like module is presented. The data presented here provides an example of ana eukaryotic uORF-encoded polypeptide whose function is not limited to cis-acting translational regulation of downstream coding sequence and highlights the importance of including alternative ORF products in proteomic studies.

### Sample Protocol
Proximity-dependent biotinylation (BioID): Expression vectors (cDNAs cloned into pDEST-pcDNA5-BirA-FLAG_C-term vector provided by Dr. Gingras) were transfected in a 1:10 ratio with pOG44 in a single well of a 6-well plate containing Flp-In T-Rex 293 cells at 80% confluency using jetPRIME according to manufacturer’s instructions. The pDEST-pcDNA5-BirA-FLAG-GFP was likewise transfected as control. The following day, cells were transferred to a 100 mm dish with complete DMEM media (10% fetal bovine serum, 2 mM glutamine, 100 U/mL penicillin and 100 µg/mL streptomycin). Stable cell line selection was initiated 24 h later by adding 200 μg/ml hygromycin and cells populations were expanded until 80% confluency on a 150 mm dish. Fusion protein expression and biotinylation was induced with 1 µg/mL tetracycline and 75 µM D-biotin and cells were harvested 24 h later. Cells were disrupted by sonication in 1.5 mL RIPA buffer (150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris–HCl pH 7.4, 1 mM EDTA, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 1% NP-40, 0.1% SDS, 1 mM DTT, 1 mM PMSF, cOmplete EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (MilliporeSigma) and 250 U of benzonase). The protein extracts were cleared by centrifugation (12,000 g, 30 min, 4 °C). Fifty microliters of streptavidin sepharose high performance beads (GE Healthcare) were washed twice 1 mL of RIPA buffer and then incubated for three hours with 5 mg of total proteins at 4 °C on a tube rotator. The beads were washed three times in 1 mL RIPA buffer and three more times in 1 mL wash buffer (50 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.5) and resuspended in 100 μl of wash buffer. On-beads trypsin digestion was performed by adding 0.5 μg of trypsin and incubating at 37 °C on a ThermoMixer at 600 rpm for 18 h. Following centrifugation (500 g, 1 min), peptides were collected. To increase yield, two additional cycles of resuspension/centrifugation with 100 μl of HPLC-grade water were carried out. All fractions were pooled and 9 mM of DTT was added and incubated for 30 min at 37 °C. The solution was then supplemented with 17 mM iodoacetamide and incubated for 20 min at room temperature in the dark. Trifluoroacetic acid was added to the samples and residual salts and detergents were removed using an Oasis MCX 96-well μElution Plate (Waters). Samples were dried in a speed-vac and then reconstituted in 15 µL of a 5% acetonitrile solution, of which about 1 µL was used for LC-MS/MS.  FLAG affinity purification: Expression vectors (cDNAs cloned into p3XFLAG-CMV-14 vector) were transiently transfected in two wells of a 6-well plate containing HEK 293T cells at 60% confluency using jetPRIME. The empty vector was likewise transfected as control. Cells were incubated in complete DMEM media (10% fetal bovine serum, 2 mM glutamine, 100 U/mL penicillin and 100 µg/mL streptomycin) and harvested 48 h later. In the case of PPP1CA purifications, cells were grown to a confluence of 20% and transfected with SMARTpool siGenome siRNA targeting human URI1 (Dharmacon) or non-targeting siRNA at a concentration of 100 nM. The following day, cells were cotransfected again with siRNAs and PPP1CA-FLAG expression vector and harvested 48 h later. Membranes were disrupted by two liquid nitrogen freeze-thaw cycles in 1 mL lysis buffer (100 mM KCl, 50 mM HEPES-KOH pH 8.0, 2 mM EDTA, 0.1% NP-40, 10% glycerol, 1 mM DTT and cOmplete EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail). The protein extracts were cleared by centrifugation (12,000 g, 30 min, 4 °C). Twenty microliters of anti-FLAG M2 magnetic bead slurry (MilliporeSigma) were washed twice 1 mL of lysis buffer, then incubated for three hours with 2 mg of total proteins at 4 °C on a tube rotator. The beads were then washed three times in 1 mL lysis buffer and three more times in 1 mL wash buffer (75 mM KCl, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0). The bound proteins were eluted by three successive 30 min incubations in 300 µl of ammonium hydroxide solution pH 11-12 (roughly 10%) in HPLC-grade water. The combined fractions were dried in a speed-vac and then resuspended in 10 µL of 6M urea. Reduction buffer was added at a volume of 2.5 µL (45 mM DTT, 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate) and the samples were incubated for 30 min at 37 °C. An additional 2.5 µL of alkylation buffer (100 mM iodoacetamide, 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate) were included to the mix followed by 20 min incubation at 24 °C and in absence on light. Twenty microliters of HPLC-grade water were added to reduce urea concentration and trypsin digestion was performed using a 1:20 (enzyme:protein) ratio of sequencing grade modified trypsin and 18 h incubation at 37 °C on a ThermoMixer. Following a quick centrifugation (500 g, 1 min) the peptides were collected. Trifluoroacetic acid was added to the samples and residual salts and detergents were removed using an Oasis MCX 96-well μElution Plate. Samples were dried in a speed-vac and then reconstituted in 12 µL of 2% acetonitrile, 1% formic acid, of which 5 µL were used for LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry and Data analysis: High performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) was performed using C18 resin (5 µm particles, 300 Å pores) extracted from a Jupiter LC Column (00B-4053-E0) and packed in a PicoFrit Column (NEW OBJECTIVE, PF360-75-15-N-5), the latter of which was loaded into a Easy-nLC II instrument (ThermoFisher). Employed buffers were: 0.2% formic acid (buffer A) and 100% acetonitrile/0.2% formic acid (buffer B). Elution was performed with a two-slope gradient at a flowrate of 250 nL/min. Solvent B gradually increased from 2 to 37% over the course of 90 min and then from 37 to 80% B in 10 min. The HPLC system was coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, IQLAAEGAAPFADBMBCX) through a nano-ESI source (ThermoFisher, ES071). Nanospray and S-lens voltages were set to 1.3–1.8 kV and 50 V, respectively. Capillary temperature was set to 225 °C. Full scan MS survey spectra (m/z 360-1560) in profile mode were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 120,000 with a target value at 1e6. The 25 most intense peptide ions were fragmented in the HCD collision cell and analyzed in the linear ion trap with a target value at 2e4 and normalized collision energy at 28. Target ions selected for fragmentation were dynamically excluded for 25 sec. The peak list files were generated with Proteome Discoverer v2.3 (ThermoFisher, OPTON-30812) using the following parameters: minimum mass set to 500 Da, maximum mass set to 6 kDa, no grouping of MS/MS spectra, precursor charge set to auto, and minimum number of fragment ions set to 5.   Label-Free Quantification (LFQ) and normalization was performed using MaxQuant v1.6.2.10 16 and Human UniProtKB database (release 2018_06). Trypsin was chosen as digestion enzyme allowing a maximum of 2 miscleavages. Methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation where selected as variable modifications while cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification. Fast LFQ was enabled and results were refined through the re-quantify option. Orbitrap was selected as instrument type with default parameters (First search peptide tolerance of 20 ppm; Main search tolerance of 4.5 ppm; Isotope match tolerance of 2 ppm; Centroid match tolerance of 8 ppm; Centroid half width of 35 ppm; Time valley factor: 1.4; isotope valley factor: 1.2; Isotope time correlation: 0.6; Theoretical isotope correlation: 0.6; Minimum peak length: 2; Maximum charge: 7; Minimum score for recalibration: 70; Gap scan of 1). Peptide identification was transferred across LC-MS runs based on similar m/z ratios and retention time using the “Match between runs” feature. Further statistical analysis was carried out with Perseus v1.6.1.3 17. All purifications were done in triplicate and proteins detected in two out of three experiments were kept for further analysis. Missing values were replaced by randomly generated intensities normally distributed with a width of 0.3 times and a downshift of 1.8 times the standard deviation of non-zero intensities. Significant differences between protein intensities from bait purifications and corresponding controls groups were then determined using a two-tailed T-test subsequently adjusted for multiple hypothesis testing with a permutation-based false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.05 and a fudge factor (s0) of 0.1 with 10,000 iterations. In the case of PPP1CA-FLAG purifications, proteins that did not show enrichment either in cells treated with non-targeting or URI1-specific siRNAs compared to the empty vector control (i.e. p-values over 0.05 and/or protein intensity ratio under 2) were discarded. Differential co-purification of the resulting subset of proteins in either condition was then carried out as detailed for bait versus control experiments.

### Publication Abstract
The PAQosome is an 11-subunit chaperone involved in the biogenesis of several human protein complexes. We show that ASDURF, a recently discovered upstream open reading frame (uORF) in the 5' UTR of ASNSD1 mRNA, encodes the 12th subunit of the PAQosome. ASDURF displays significant structural homology to &#x3b2;-prefoldins and assembles with the five known subunits of the prefoldin-like module of the PAQosome to form a heterohexameric prefoldin-like complex. A model of the PAQosome prefoldin-like module is presented. The data presented here provide an example of a eukaryotic uORF-encoded polypeptide whose function is not limited to cis-acting translational regulation of downstream coding sequence and highlights the importance of including alternative ORF products in proteomic studies.

### Keywords
Bioid, Prefoldin, Ap-ms, Paqosome, R2tp/pfdl, Protein complex assembly, Uorf, Chaperone, Small orf encoded peptide, Asdurf

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Gene Transcription and Proteomics Discovery Platform, Institut de recherches cliniques de Montréal, 110 avenue des Pins Ouest, Montréal, QC H2W 1R7, Canada
Translational Proteomics Laboratory, Institut de recherches cliniques de Montréal (IRCM), Québec, Montréal, Canada. Département de biochimie et médecine moléculaire, Université de Montréal, Québec, Montréal, Canada.

### Submitter
Christian Poitras

### Lab Head
Dr Benoit Coulombe
Translational Proteomics Laboratory, Institut de recherches cliniques de Montréal (IRCM), Québec, Montréal, Canada. Département de biochimie et médecine moléculaire, Université de Montréal, Québec, Montréal, Canada.


