### Accession
PXD008602

### Title
Altered extracellular matrix protein dynamics distinguishes canine ligament-derived stem cells from fibroblasts

### Description
Ligaments are prone to injury and degeneration in humans and animals, however the healing potential of ligament is poor and current treatment options lack effectiveness. Stem cell-based therapies hold potential for treatment of ligament injuries. This study aimed to characterise ligament-derived stem cell (LDSC) and ligament fibroblast populations as well as to identify specific niche components which could be used to promote the survival and function of LDSCs. LDSCs and ligament fibroblasts were isolated from canine cranial cruciate ligament and characterised for clonogenicity, multipotency and marker expression. The extracellular matrix (ECM) composition was characterised using a novel metabolic labelling and mass spectrometry approach. Both cell types demonstrated clonogenicity, with significant differences seen in colony size. Stem cell and tenogenic marker expression was increased in LDSCs compared with ligament fibroblasts, although this was only significant for the MSC marker CD73. Both cell types demonstrated multipotency, however this was more marked in LDSCs. A number of collagens, glycoproteins, proteoglycans and ECM regulators were identified in both the LDSC and ligament fibroblast niche using proteomics, with some differences between cell types, including collagens, decorin and fibronectin. Metabolic labelling of cells demonstrated unique turnover profiles for distinct ECM protein groups, with significant differences in new synthesis seen between cell types for a number of proteins, including collagen, decorin and elastin. In conclusion, different cell populations were observed in canine ligament with differences in niche composition and dynamics seen between the two cell types. These differences could be exploited to aid identification of LDSCs and to promote survival and function of LDSCs for potential therapeutic strategies.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were randomised and run on a 1 hour gradient with a 30 minute blank between samples. For instrument performance evaluation, E.coli digest standards spiked with RePLiCal were included before and after the run. Data-dependent LC-MS/MS analyses were conducted on a QExactive quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) coupled to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano-liquid chromatograph (ThermoFisher Scientific). Sample digest (8 µl) was loaded onto a trapping column (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, 75 µm x 2 cm, 3 µm packing material, 100 Å) using a loading buffer of 0.1% (v/v) TFA, 2% (v/v) acetonitrile in water for 7 minutes at a flow rate of 9 µl min-1.  The trapping column was then set in-line with an analytical column (EASY-Spray PepMap RSLC C18, 75 µm x 50 cm, 2 µm packing material, 100 Å) and the peptides eluted using a linear gradient of 96.2% A (0.1% [v/v] formic acid):3.8% B (0.1% [v/v[ formic acid in water:acetonitrile [80:20] [v/v]) to 50% A:50% B over 30 minutes at a flow rate of 300 nL min-1. This was followed by washing at 1% A:99% B for 5 minutes and re-equilibration of the column to starting conditions.  The column was maintained at 40oC and the effluent introduced directly into the integrated nano-electrospray ionisation source operating in positive ion mode.  The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent acquisition mode with survey scans between m/z 300-2000 acquired at a mass resolution of 70,000 (FWHM) at m/z 200.  The maximum injection time was 250 ms and the automatic gain control was set to 1e6.  The 10 most intense precursor ions with charge states of between 2+ and 5+ were selected for MS/MS with an isolation window of 2 m/z units.  The maximum injection time was 100 ms and the automatic gain control was set to 1e5. Fragmentation of the peptides was by higher energy collisional dissociation using a normalised collision energy of 30%.  Dynamic exclusion of m/z values to prevent repeated fragmentation of the same peptide was used with an exclusion time of 20 seconds.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification and label-free quantification raw data files were imported into PEAKS v.8 (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc, Waterloo, Canada) and de novo and database PEAKS searches were carried out using the UniProtKB canine protein database (EMBL-EBI, Hinxton, UK). The instrument configuration was set to Q Exactive, and the following parameters were used for each search: Enzyme: trypsin; Fragment mass error tolerance: 0.01 Da; Parent mass error tolerance: 10 ppm; Precursor mass search type: monoisotopic; Non-specific cleavage: none; Maximum missed cleavages: 1; Fixed modifications: carbamidomethyl 57.02; Variable modifications: oxidation (M) 15.99, oxidation or hydroxylation 15.99; Maximum variable PTM per peptide: 3. Search results were filtered using the following parameters: False discovery rate: 1%; Proteins -10lgP ≥ 15; Unique peptides ≥ 2; De novo only ALC (%) ≥ 50. For label-free quantification the following parameters were also used: RT range: 0-90; Fold change ≥ 2; Quality ≥ 0.2; Charge: 2-5; Confident in 3 samples. LDSC and ligament fibroblast groups were compared using the PEAKS compare function. Protein identifications and gene ontology were analysed using the UniProtKB canine protein database and the Matrisome Project database v.2 (Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts) and protein interaction network analysis was performed using STRING software v.10.5 (STRING Consortium 2017). Differential protein expression was compared between groups and protein identification and gene ontology were analysed using the UniProtKB canine protein database. For analysis of heavy isotope metabolic labelling, peptides for ECM proteins labelled with 13C lysine were initially identified using MASCOT v.2.6 (Matrix Science, London, UK). The following parameters were applied for all MASCOT searches: Enzyme: trypsin; Maximum missed cleavages: 1; Fixed modifications: carbamidomethyl; Variable modifications: oxidation (M), Label:13C(6) (K); Mass values: monoisotopic; Fragment mass tolerance: 0.01 Da; Peptide mass tolerance: 10 ppm; Unique peptides ≥ 2; Peptides -10lgP ≥ 15. Raw data files were imported into Xcalibur v.3.0.63 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts) for analysis of extracted ion chromatograms and raw mass spectra. Heavy (H) and light (L) peaks were identified for each labelled peptide based on the observed m/z ratio and the scan number obtained from MASCOT. The area under each peak was recorded and relative isotope abundance (RIA) was calculated as H/(L+H) and the total protein pool was calculated as H+L.

### Publication Abstract
Ligaments are prone to injury and degeneration in humans and animals, however the healing potential of ligament is poor and current treatment options ineffective. Stem cell-based therapies hold potential for treatment of ligament injuries. This study aimed to characterize a ligament progenitor cell (LPC) population and to identify specific niche components which could promote the survival and function of LPCs. LPCs were isolated from canine cranial cruciate ligament and characterized for clonogenicity, multipotency and marker expression. The extracellular matrix (ECM) composition was characterized by the novel application of a metabolic labeling and mass spectrometry technique. LPCs demonstrated clonogenicity, multipotency, and stem cell marker expression. A number of different collagens, glycoproteins, and proteoglycans were identified in the LPC niche using proteomics. Metabolic labeling of cells demonstrated unique turnover profiles for distinct ECM protein groups, indicating the importance of certain niche components for LPC survival and function. The newly synthesized niche components identified in this study could be exploited to aid identification of LPCs and to promote their survival and function for potential ligament repair strategies.

### Keywords
Ligament, Matrix, Metabolic labelling, Proteomics, Stem cells, Canine

### Affiliations
University of Liverpool
Department of Musculoskeletal Biology Institute of Ageing and Chronic Disease University of Liverpool

### Submitter
Katie Lee

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Elizabeth Canty-Laird
Department of Musculoskeletal Biology Institute of Ageing and Chronic Disease University of Liverpool


