### Accession
PXD035451

### Title
SARS-CoV-2 hijacks p38β/MAPK11 to promote virus replication

### Description
SARS-CoV-2, the causative agent of the COVID-19 pandemic, drastically modifies infected cells in an effort to optimize virus replication. Included in this process is the activation of the host p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway, which plays a major role in inflammation and is a central driver of COVID-19 clinical presentations. Inhibition of p38/MAPK activity in SARS-CoV-2-infected cells reduces both cytokine production and viral replication. Here, we combined genetic screening with quantitative phosphoproteomics to better understand interactions between the p38/MAPK pathway and SARS-CoV-2. We found several components of the p38/MAPK pathway impact SARS-CoV-2 replication and that p38β is a critical host factor that promotes viral replication and prevents activation of the interferon pathway. Quantitative phosphoproteomics uncovered several SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid (N) protein phosphorylation sites near the N-terminus that were sensitive to p38 inhibition. Similar to p38β depletion, mutation of these N residues was associated with reduced viral replication and increased activation of Type I interferon signaling. Taken together, this study reveals a unique proviral function for p38β that is not shared with p38α, and supports efforts to develop p38β inhibitors as a strategy towards developing a new class of COVID-19 therapies. methods

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysis and digestion for mass spectrometry Cells were washed twice in PBS. Cells were lysed in urea lysis buffer containing 8M urea, 100mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC), 150mM NaCl, protease inhibitor and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Lysates were probe-sonicated on ice 3×1s at 50% power, with 5s of rest in between pulses. Protein content of the lysates was quantified using a micro BCA assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific). 1mg of protein per sample was treated with (Tris-(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) to a final concentration of 4mM and incubated at room temperature (RT) for 30 minutes. Iodoacetamide (IAA) was added to each sample to a final concentration of 10mM, and samples were incubated in the dark at RT for 30 minutes. IAA was quenched by dithiothreitol (DTT) to a concentration of 10mM and incubated in the dark at RT for 30 minutes. Samples were then diluted with 5 sample volumes of 100mM ABC. Trypsin Gold (Promega) was added at a 1:100 (enzyme:protein w/w) ratio and lysates were rotated for 16 hours at RT. 10% v/v trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was added to each sample to a final concentration of 0.1% TFA. Samples were desalted under vacuum using Sep Pak tC18 cartridges (Waters). Each cartridge was first washed with 1mL 80% acetonitrile (ACN)/0.1% TFA, then with 3×1mL of 0.1% TFA in H2O. Samples were then loaded onto cartridges. Cartridges were washed with 3×1mL of 0.1% TFA in H2O. Samples were then eluted with 1mL 40% ACN/0.1% TFA. 20μg of each sample was kept for protein abundance measurements, and the remainder was used for phosphopeptide enrichment. Samples were dried by vacuum centrifugation. Protein abundance samples were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid (FA) for mass spectrometry analysis.   Phosphopeptide enrichment for mass spectrometry For each sample batch and under vacuum, 500μL (30μL per sample) of 50% Ni-NTA Superflow bead slurry (QIAGEN) was added to a 2mL bio-spin column. Beads were washed with 3×1mL HPLC H2O, incubated with 4×1mL 100mM EDTA for 30s, washed with 3× 1mL HPLC H2O, incubated 4×1mL with 15mM FeCl3 for 1 minute, washed 3×1mL HPLC H2O, and washed once with 1mL of 0.5% v/v FA to remove residual iron. Beads were resuspended in 750μL of 80% ACN/0.1% TFA. 1mg of digested peptides were resuspended in 83.33μL 40% ACN/0.1% TFA and 166.67μL 100% ACN/0.1% TFA and 60μL of the bead slurry were added to each sample and incubated for 30 minutes while rotating at RT. A C18 BioSPN column (Nest Group), centrifuged at 110xg for 1 minute each step, was equilibrated with 2×200μL 80% ACN/0.1% TFA. Beads were loaded onto the column and washed with 4×200μL 80% ACN/0.1% TFA, then washed 3×200μL 0.5% FA. Then, 2×200μL 500mM potassium phosphate buffer pH 7 was added to the column and incubated for one minute. Then, 3×200μL 0.5% FA were added to the column. Phosphopeptides were eluted with 2×100μL of 40% ACN/0.1% FA and vacuum centrifuged to dryness. Phosphopeptides were resuspended in 25μL 4% FA/3% ACN for mass spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data acquisition All samples were analyzed on an Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometry system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with an Easy nLC 1200 ultra-high pressure liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) interfaced via a Nanospray Flex nanoelectrospray source. For all analyses, samples were injected on a C18 reverse phase column (30cm × 75μm (ID)) packed with ReprosilPur 1.9μm particles). Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% FA, and mobile phase B consisted of 0.1% FA/80% ACN. Peptides were separated by an organic gradient from 5% to 35% mobile phase B over 120 minutes followed by an increase to 100% B over 10 minutes at a flow rate of 300nL/minute. Analytical columns were equilibrated with 6μL of mobile phase A. To build a spectral library, samples from each set of biological replicates were pooled and acquired in data dependent manner. Protein abundance samples were fractionated with Field Assymetric Ion Mobility Spectrometry (FAIMS) fractionation with a FAIMS Pro device (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Each pooled sample was analyzed four times with four FAIMS compensation voltages (CV) (-40V,-55V,-65V,-75V). Data dependent analysis (DDA) was performed by acquiring a full scan over a m/z range of 375-1025 in the Orbitrap at 120,000 resolving power (@200 m/z) with a normalized AGC target of 100%, an RF lens setting of 30%, and an instrument controlled ion injection time. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 seconds, with a 10ppm exclusion width setting. Peptides with charge states 2-6 were selected for MS/MS interrogation using higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a normalized HCD collision energy of 28%, with three seconds of MS/MS scans per cycle. Similar settings were used for data dependent analysis of phosphopeptide-enriched pooled samples, with a Dynamic Exclusion of 45 seconds and no FAIMS fractionation. Data-independent analysis (DIA) was performed on all individual samples. An MS scan at 60,000 resolving power over a scan range of 390-1010 m/z, an instrument controlled AGC target, an RF lens setting of 30%, and an instrument controlled maximum injection time, followed by DIA scans using 8 m/z isolation windows over 400-1000 m/z at a normalized HCD collision energy of 28%.  Mass spectrometry data analysis All raw mass spectrometry data generated in this study were analyzed by the Spectronaut software suite (Biognosys) (Bruderer et al., 2017). DDA-MS data were analyzed to build a spectral library by searching against a protein sequence database comprised of SwissProt human sequences (downloaded on October 10, 2019) and SARS-CoV-2 strain USA/WA1/2020 sequences using Biognosys factory settings, which considered a static modification for cysteine carbamidomethylation and variable modifications for methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation. We added variable modifications for serine/threonine/tyrosine phosphorylation for phospho-enriched samples. All DDA-MS runs generated in this study were combined to make one spectral library against which all DIA-MS data were analyzed. DIA-MS data were also analyzed by Spectronaut to extract fragment ion intensity information based on the spectral library described above using Biognosys factory settings. The data were exported as a tab-delimited, MSstats-formatted report. Spectronaut reports were analyzed by the MSstats package in the Rstudio statistical programming environment (Bruderer et al., 2017). Before MSstats analysis, protein group accessions were converted to phosphosite group accessions with a Perl script. Data were processed by MSstats to equalize medians, summarize features using Tukey’s median polish, and impute missing values by accelerated failure model. Intensities below the 0.999 quantile were considered missing values. Principal component analysis was performed on MSstats estimated intensities using the prcomp function in R and the first two principal components plotted for all data sets. Sample correlation analysis was performed by pairwise Pearson correlation coefficient calculation in R.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Covid-19, Nucleocapsid, Mapk, N, Sars-cov-2, Coronavirus, P38, Proteomics, Betacoronavirus, P38β, P38beta, Mapk11

### Affiliations
Department of Microbiology Icahn School of Medicine Mount Sinai
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai

### Submitter
Jeffrey Johnson

### Lab Head
Dr Jeffrey R. Johnson
Department of Microbiology Icahn School of Medicine Mount Sinai


