### Accession
PXD017523

### Title
Rab28 is localised to photoreceptor outer segments, regulates outer segment shedding but is not linked to retinal degeneration in zebrafish

### Description
The photoreceptor outer segment is the canonical example of a modified and highly specialised cilium, with an expanded membrane surface area in the form of discs or lamellae for efficient light detection. Many ciliary proteins are essential for normal photoreceptor function and cilium dysfunction often results in retinal degeneration leading to impaired vision. Herein, we investigate the function and localisation of the ciliary G-protein RAB28 in zebrafish cone photoreceptors. CRISPR-Cas9 generated rab28 mutant zebrafish display a reduction in shed outer segment material in the RPE at 1 month post fertilisation (mpf), but otherwise normal retinal structure and visual function up to 12 mpf. Cone photoreceptorspecific transgenic reporter lines show Rab28 localises almost exclusively to outer segments, independently of nucleotide binding. Co-immunoprecipitation analysis demonstrates tagged Rab28 interacts with components of the phototransduction cascade, including opsins, Phosphodiesterase 6C and Guanylate Cyclase 2D. Our data shed light on RAB28 function in cones and provide a model for RAB28-associated cone-rod dystrophy

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction and Immunoblotting 5 dpf zebrafish larvae were killed on ice and eyes dissected in a solution of 5 mM NaCl with protease inhibitor cocktail tablets (Roche). Eyes were either snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C or immediately lysed. Protein concentration was estimated by Bradford assay to ensure equivalence between samples. Proteins were separated on a 0.75 mm 12% Bis/Tris acrylamide SDS-PAGE resolving gel and transferred to nitrocellulose membranes. Membranes were blocked in 5% skim milk-PBST for 1 hour at room temperature and subsequently probed with primary antibodies at 4°C overnight, followed by secondary antibodies. Primary antibodies used in this study were anti-GFP (1:500, Santa Cruz Biotechnology) and anti-PDE6D (1:500, Abcam). Secondary antibodies were HRPconjugated anti-rabbit or HRP-conjugated anti-mouse (both 1:2000, Cell Signalling Technology).  Immunoprecipitation Immunoprecipitations were performed on 5 dpf larval eyes (100 per replicate) lysed in IP lysis buffer (50 mM Tris HCl, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 10 mM MgCl2, 1% NP-40, 1 mM DTT, 1 mM PMSF, 2 mM Na3VO4 and protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche), 1 tablet per 10 ml). Tissue was disrupted by aspiration through a needle and syringe, followed by a 20 min incubation on a tube rotator (Stuart) at 4°C. Lysates were centrifuged at 20,000 x g for 15 min, the supernatant was loaded onto GFP-Trap beads (Chromotek) and incubated on a rotor at 4°C for 2 hrs or overnight. Following this the beads were pelleted by centrifugation at 2500g and washed three times with lysis buffer. For immunoblotting, proteins were eluted from the beads with SDS sample buffer followed by boiling at 95°C for 5 min. For mass spectrometry, a previously described protocol was followed (Turriziani et al. 2014). Briefly, proteins were trypsinised on the beads in 60 μl of Buffer I (2 M urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 5 μg/ml Trypsin [modified sequencing-grade trypsin; Promega]) for 30 min at 37°C in a thermomixer, shaking at 700 rpm. Samples were briefly centrifuged and supernatants transferred to clean Eppendorf tubes. The beads were then incubated in 50 μl Buffer II (2 M urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 1mM DTT) for 1 h at 37°C, shaking at 700 rpm in a author/funder. It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license. bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/720029. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the thermomixer. Samples were again briefly centrifuged, and the supernatants from Buffers I and II pooled and left to continue trypsin digestion overnight at room temperature.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry Samples from the overnight digest were alkylated by addition of 20 μl iodoacetamide (5mg/ml) and incubation for 30 min in the dark. 1 μl 100% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was added to the samples to stop the reaction and samples were then loaded onto equilibrated C18 StageTips containing octadecyl C18 disks (Sigma) (Turriziani et al. 2014). Briefly, a small disc of Empore material 3M was inserted into a pipette tip, preparing a single tip for each sample. Tips were activated and equilibrated by washing through 50 μl of 50% acetonitrile (AcN) – 0.1% TFA solution followed by 50 μl of 1% TFA solution, using a syringe to pass liquid through the pipette tips. Once added to StageTips, samples were desalted by washing twice with 50 μl of 1% TFA solution. Peptides were then eluted into clean Eppendorf tubes using 2 x 25 μl 50% AcN – 0.1% TFA solution. The final eluates were concentrated in a CentriVap concentrator (Labconco, USA) and re-suspended in 12 μl 0.1% TFA solution, ready for analysis by mass spectrometry (Turriziani et al. 2014). Peptides were analysed on a quadrupole Orbitrap (Q-Exactive, Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer equipped with a reversed-phase NanoLC UltiMate 3000 HPLC system (Thermo Scientific). To identify peptides and proteins, MS/MS spectra were matched to the UniProt Danio rerio database. LFQ intensities were subsequently analysed using Perseus (v1.6.1.3) (Tyanova et al. 2016). Protein identifications were filtered to eliminate the identifications from the reverse database and common contaminants. Data was log2 transformed and t-test comparison of fractions carried out. Gene ontology terms were identified and visualised by submitting identified gene lists to the PANTHER database (Thomas et al. 2003).

### Publication Abstract
The photoreceptor outer segment is the canonical example of a modified and highly specialized cilium, with an expanded membrane surface area in the form of disks or lamellae for efficient light detection. Many ciliary proteins are essential for normal photoreceptor function and cilium dysfunction often results in retinal degeneration leading to impaired vision. Herein, we investigate the function and localization of the ciliary G-protein RAB28 in zebrafish cone photoreceptors. CRISPR-Cas9 generated <i>rab28</i> mutant zebrafish display significantly reduced shed outer segment material/phagosomes in the RPE at 1 month post fertilization (mpf), but otherwise normal visual function up to 21 dpf and retinal structure up to 12 mpf. Cone photoreceptor-specific transgenic reporter lines show Rab28 localizes almost exclusively to outer segments, independently of GTP/GDP nucleotide binding. Co-immunoprecipitation analysis demonstrates tagged Rab28 interacts with components of the phototransduction cascade, including opsins, phosphodiesterase 6C and guanylate cyclase 2D. Our data shed light on RAB28 function in cones and provide a model for RAB28-associated cone-rod dystrophy.

### Keywords
Phototransduction cascade, Rpe, Retinal degeneration, Rab28, Zebrafish, Cone-rod dystrophy

### Affiliations
Systems Biology Ireland, University College Dublin
UCD School of Biomolecular and Biomedical Science, University College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin 4, D04 V1W8, Ireland.

### Submitter
David Matallanas

### Lab Head
Dr Brendan Kennedy
UCD School of Biomolecular and Biomedical Science, University College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin 4, D04 V1W8, Ireland.


