### Accession
PXD020292

### Title
Influenza-derived peptide presentation by HLA-A*24:02

### Description
Identification of influenza virus-derived peptides presented by Human Leukocyte Antigen (HLA) molecules of the C1R (Class I reduced) B-lymphoblastoid cell line, transfected with the HLA class I allele HLA-A*24:02, after influenza infection.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were infected with HKx31 or B/Malaysia/2506/04 viruses and snap frozen. Cells were lysed and the HLA isolated using solid phase bound antibodies against the HLA of interest. HLA-bound peptides were eluted with 10 % acetic acid and fractionated by RP-HPLC. Peptide containing fractions were vacuum concentrated, reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid and analysed using a data dependent acquisition strategy on a SCIEX 5600+ TripleTOF mass spectrometer equipped with a Nanospray III ion source.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were assigned using Protein PilotTM Software 5.0 (SCIEX), searching against the reviewed human proteome (UniProt/Swiss-Prot downloaded April 2016) and either the HKx31 or the B/Malaysia proteome plus a 6 reading frame translation of the viral genome.  Sample Type - Identification, Cysteine Alkylation - None, Digestion - None, Instrument - TripleTOF 5600, ID Focus - Biological modifications, Search Effort – Thorough, FDR Analysis – Yes.

### Publication Abstract
Indigenous people worldwide are at high&#xa0;risk of developing severe influenza disease. HLA-A*24:02 allele, highly prevalent in Indigenous populations, is associated with influenza-induced mortality, although the basis for this association is unclear. Here, we define CD8<sup>+</sup> T-cell immune landscapes against influenza A (IAV) and B (IBV) viruses in HLA-A*24:02-expressing Indigenous and non-Indigenous individuals, human tissues, influenza-infected patients and HLA-A*24:02-transgenic mice. We identify immunodominant protective CD8<sup>+</sup> T-cell epitopes, one towards IAV and six towards IBV, with A24/PB2<sub>550-558</sub>-specific CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells being cross-reactive between IAV and IBV. Memory CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells towards these specificities are present in blood (CD27<sup>+</sup>CD45RA<sup>-</sup> phenotype) and tissues (CD103<sup>+</sup>CD69<sup>+</sup> phenotype) of healthy individuals, and effector CD27<sup>-</sup>CD45RA<sup>-</sup>PD-1<sup>+</sup>CD38<sup>+</sup>CD8<sup>+</sup> T&#xa0;cells in IAV/IBV patients. Our data show influenza-specific CD8<sup>+</sup> T-cell responses in Indigenous Australians, and advocate for T-cell-mediated vaccines that target and boost the breadth of IAV/IBV-specific CD8<sup>+</sup> T&#xa0;cells to protect high-risk HLA-A*24:02-expressing Indigenous and non-Indigenous populations from severe influenza disease.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Influenza, Immunopeptidome, Hla

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology & Infection and Immunity Program, Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria 3800, Australia

### Submitter
Patricia Illing

### Lab Head
Dr Anthony W Purcell
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology & Infection and Immunity Program, Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria 3800, Australia


