### Accession
PXD015517

### Title
Evaluation by re-derivation of a paternal line after 18th generations on seminal traits, proteome and fertility: SWATH quantitation of Seminal Plasma proteins

### Description
Breeding schemes for meat production in rabbits involved a three-way cross of specialized lines in which a paternal line inseminates maternal crossbred females. Paternal line or terminal sire are selected for growth traits, being the males used for the production of fertile dose at the insemination centres and farms. So high growth rate males must produce, in addition, semen in sufficient quantity and quality to meet the demand of insemination and, nevertheless, several studies have been showed that selection for growth have effects on reproduction performance in female and males. In rabbits, negative effects has been observed in ovulation induction, prenatal survival and genetic correlation to fertility. Many factors influence the production and quality of rabbit semen, management as collection frequency, environment (season or photoperiod, nutrition and genetic. Most of the previous studies have been focused in the effects of selection on the seminal and sperm parameters but, little attention has been paid to the protein seminal plasma or sperm composition and if these changes could be affect the fertility of seminal doses obtained from the paternal males.   The aim of this study was to evaluate if selection program by daily gain in fattening period has changed seminal traits, plasma and sperm proteoma and, the fertility of semen when it is used in artificial insemination. To do this we uses two re-derived groups of paternal males obtained from vitrified embryos with a difference of 18 generations between both groups.

### Sample Protocol
Animals A total of 39 males of the genetic line ‘‘R’’ from the Polytechnic University of Valencia were used. Line R is a paternal line selected during 36 generations for daily gain between 28 and 63 day old. Selection is based on phenotypic values of daily gain (DG) and is conducted in non-overlapping generations. Environmental conditions were maintained using a control system for light (16:8 light/dark photoperiod), with free access to water and commercial pelleted diets (minimum of 15 g of crude protein per kg of dry matter, 15 g of crude fiber per kg of DM, and 10.2 MJ of digestible energy per kg of dry matter). A total of 311 commercial crossbreed females were used to perform to study of fertility and prolificacy. Females were keep in similar environmental conditions. Semen collection At 5 months of age, males started a four-weeks training period with artificial vaginas, one ejaculate was collected per male weekly. At the 6th month of age males have been subjected to experimental evaluation. Collections were performed on the same day for 10 weeks; one ejaculate was collected per male and per week to exam seminal parameters. Semen was collected early in the morning. Only ejaculates exhibiting a white color were used in the experiment, if the first ejaculate was not available (with urine, sediment, contaminated or cell debris) a second one was collected 20 minutes later, if gel was present, it was removed. Plasma and Sperm protein extraction samples Ejaculates from 20 mature males were collected and pooled (10 for each experimental group (G21V and G39V). Six pooled ejaculates were obtained in three different weeks and used to insemination, before to elaborate sperm doses, a sample of 500µl from ejaculate pools was centrifuged at 7,400 x g for 10 min at 22 ºC. The supernatants were collected, supplemented with a 1% v/v protease inhibitor cocktail (P2714, Sigma) and stored at -80ºC until use. The resulting pellets were washed twice by centrifugation at 900 x g for 10 min in PBS.  Sperm proteins were extracted according to Casares et al. (2019) protocol. Briefly, sperm pellets were resuspended in 1% SDS (w/v) in TCG (Tris-citrate-glucose supplemented with a 1% v/v protease inhibitor cocktail, P2714) and sonicated on ice 6 times for 5 s at 30% amplitude using an Ultrasonic Lab Homogenizer UP 100 H (Hielscher Ultrasonics GmbH). After sonication, the solution was kept in ice for 15 min and centrifuged for 10 min at 15,000 x g at 4ºC. Protein lysates were stored at -80ºC until use.  Oryctolagus cuniculus Sperm  Sample preparation 25 g of every sample were loaded in a 1D PAGE without resolve it. Every gel slice was in gel digested as described elsewhere (Shevchenko A, Jensen ON, Podtelejnikov AV, Sagliocco F, Wilm M, Vorm O, Mortensen P, Boucherie H, Mann M. Linking genome and proteome by mass spectrometry: large-scale identification of yeast proteins from two dimensional gels. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 1996; 93:14440-14445). 500 ng of trypsin were used for each sample, and digestion was set to 37 ºC on. The trypsin digestion was stopped with 10% TFA and the SN was removed, then the library gel slides were dehydrated with pure ACN. The new peptide solutions were combined with the corresponding SN. The peptide mixtures were dried in a speed vacuum and re suspended in 2 % ACN; 0.1% TFA. The volume was adjusted to a final concentration of 0.5 g/L. Data independent acquisition (DIA): SWATH LCMSMS 5 µl of each sample were loaded onto a trap column (NanoLC Column, 3µ C18-CL, 75 mx15cm; Eksigent) and desalted with 0.1% TFA at 3µl/min during  5 min. The peptides were loaded onto an analytical column (LC Column, 3 µ  C18-CL, 75umx12cm, Nikkyo) equilibrated in 5% acetonitrile  0.1% FA (formic acid). Peptide elution was carried out with a linear gradient of 5 to 35% B in 120 min (A: 0.1% FA; B: ACN, 0.1% FA) for  at a flow rate of 300nl/min. Peptides were analysed in a mass spectrometer nanoESI qQTOF (5600 TripleTOF, ABSCIEX). The tripleTOF was operated in swath mode, in which a 0.050-s TOF MS scan from 350–1250 m/z was performed, followed by 0.080-s product ion scans from 350–1250 m/z on the 32 defined windows (3.05 sec/cycle).  The used Swath windows used were: 15 Da window widths from 450 to 1000 Da, 37 windows.

### Data Protocol
The wiff files obtained from Swath experiment were analysed by MS/MS (ALL) with SWATH Acquisition MicroApp v 2.0.0.2003 by  Peak View 2.2 using a Spectral Library built for this study. The mass spectrometry proteomics data for the Library have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD015510".  The processing settings were: Peptide Filter Number of peptides per protein: 20 Number of transitions per peptide: 6  Peptide Confidence Threshold: 95% False Discovery Rate Threshold: 1% Excluded modified peptides: Yes XIC Options XIC Extraction Window (min): 60  XIC width (ppm): 25  After peptide detection the retention times of the detected peptides were aligned among the different samples using high confidence detected peptides. And the peptides re analyzed with 15 minutes of XIC Extraction Window. With the acquisition parameters each peptide area was quantitate with more than 11 points.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Fertility, Swath, Plasma seminal protein, Dia-lc/msms

### Affiliations
Universitat de Valencia
Instituto de Ciencia y Tecnologia Animal Universitat Politècnica de València Valencia, Spain

### Submitter
Luz Valero

### Lab Head
Dr Francisco Marco Jimenez
Instituto de Ciencia y Tecnologia Animal Universitat Politècnica de València Valencia, Spain


