### Accession
PXD045589

### Title
Enrichment of sweat-derived extracellular vesicles of human and bacterial origin for biomarker identification

### Description
In the present study, we investigated whether sweat-derived extracellular vesicles (EVs) can be used as a source of potential protein biomarkers of human and bacterial origin. We compared protein composition of total sweat, EV-enriched sweat (after ExoEasy) and sweat samples collected with the use of alginate skin patches. We identified 1209 unique human proteins in EV-enriched sweat, of which approximately 20% were present in every individual sample investigated. Besides human proteins, sweat EV samples contained 1594 proteins of bacterial origin. Bacterial protein profiles in EV-enriched sweat were characterized by high interindividual variability, that reflected differences in total sweat composition. Alginate-based sweat patch accumulated about 30% of human proteins from those identified in sweat-derived EVs, but only 5% proteins of bacterial origin. In conclusion, we showed that sweat-derived EVs provide a rich source of potential biomarkers of human and bacterial origin and that commercially available alginate skin patches could be used for collection of human sweat EVs with very little impact of bacterial vesicles.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from individual sweat EV samples by using methanol/chloroform precipitation. Dried protein pellets were diluted in 4× Laemmli buffer containing 10% β-mercaptoethanol, loaded into 12% SDS polyacrylamide gel (PAAG) (12% Mini-PROTEAN TGX Precast Protein Gel, Bio-Rad) and run for maximum 15 min at 100–110 V. SDS gel pieces stained with Sypro Ruby (Sigma, S4942) were cut out and processed as follows: 3 × 5 min washing steps with 50 mM ammonium-bicarbonate in 40% acetonitrile/60% water to destain the gel, reduction with 20 mM DTT for 30 min at room temperature, alkylation with 45 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature, washing and tryptic digestion with 5 μl of trypsin solution (20 ng/μl proteomics grade trypsin (Sigma) in trypsin buffer (40 mM ammonium-bicarbonate in 9% acetonitrile/91% water)) overnight at 37ºC. The supernatant was transferred to a sample vial before the gel piece was extracted a second time with 15 μl of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) in water. The combined extracts were centrifuged and 25 μl of the supernatant were transferred to a sample vial to allow LC–MS (Liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry) analysis using an Easy-nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific) system coupled to a Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).  Peptides were trapped on an AcclaimPepmap 100 C18 3 µm, 0.075 × 2 mm (Thermo Scientific) trap column and separated on a Thermo AcclaimPepmap RSLC C18 2 µm, 0.075 × 150 mm analytical column, using a gradient from 97% A (0.1% formic acid) to 35% B (0.1% formic acid in CAN) over 90 min, flow 0.3 µl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in 3 s cycles where the MS spectra were recorded with the orbitrap analyzer at resolution 120,000 allowing the collection of up to 4e5 ions for maximal 50 ms before switching to MSMS mode. Multicharged ions (threshold 5e4) were fragmentated with equal priority by HCD (30% collision energy) and CID (35% collision energy, 10 ms activation, Q 0.25) using quadrupole isolation with 1.6 Da width and 21 s dynamic exclusion. HCD ions (up to 5e4 ions) were collected for max 200 ms in the orbitrap analyzer at a resolution of 15,000. Collision-induced dissociation (CID) ions were recorded in the ion trap (rapid mode) aiming at higher sensitivity (threshold 1e4).

### Data Protocol
To identify proteins tandem mass spectra data was analyzed with PEAKS software (version 10.6) against human and bacterial proteins in UniProt Swissprot and UniProt trEMBL databases (version v2022_03). Database search parameters were set as follows: precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da and a maximum of two missed trypsin cleavages. FDR for both peptide and protein identifications was set to 1.0 %. Static modification was set to carbamidomethyl of cysteine, and variable modification to oxidation of methionine. Protein was considered identified if it was presented with at least one unique peptide and the total protein coverage of the supporting peptides was ≥ 1 %. Negative controls (PBS washes of unused disposable gloves) were analyzed in parallel with EV-derived proteins, excluding all proteins identified in controls samples from the EV protein identification results. Protein identifications were processed in RStudio (version 2022.07.2, R version 4.2.2) and with package ggplot2 (version 3.4.0).

### Publication Abstract
Sweat contains biomarkers for real-time non-invasive health monitoring, but only a few relevant analytes are currently used in clinical practice. In the present study, we investigated whether sweat-derived extracellular vesicles (EVs) can be used as a source of potential protein biomarkers of human and bacterial origin. <b>Methods:</b> By using ExoView platform, electron microscopy, nanoparticle tracking analysis and Western blotting we characterized EVs in the sweat of eight volunteers performing rigorous exercise. We compared the presence of EV markers as well as general protein composition of total sweat, EV-enriched sweat and sweat samples collected in alginate skin patches. <b>Results:</b> We identified 1209 unique human proteins in EV-enriched sweat, of which approximately 20% were present in every individual sample investigated. Sweat derived EVs shared 846 human proteins (70%) with total sweat, while 368 proteins (30%) were captured by medical grade alginate skin patch and such EVs contained the typical exosome marker CD63. The majority of identified proteins are known to be carried by EVs found in other biofluids, mostly urine. Besides human proteins, EV-enriched sweat samples contained 1594 proteins of bacterial origin. Bacterial protein profiles in EV-enriched sweat were characterized by high interindividual variability, that reflected differences in total sweat composition. Alginate-based sweat patch accumulated only 5% proteins of bacterial origin. <b>Conclusion:</b> We showed that sweat-derived EVs provide a rich source of potential biomarkers of human and bacterial origin. Use of commercially available alginate skin patches selectively enrich for human derived material with very little microbial material collected.

### Keywords
Human, Extracellular vesicles, Bacteria, Alginate, Sweat

### Affiliations
 University of Oulu
Faculty of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine FIN-90014 Oulu University  FINLAND

### Submitter
Anatoliy Samoylenko

### Lab Head
Dr Seppo Vainio
Faculty of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine FIN-90014 Oulu University  FINLAND


