### Accession
PXD022000

### Title
Global Proteomic Analysis of lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation in The Plant Pathogen Fusarium oxysporum

### Description
Lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation, a recently discovered post-translational modification, plays a key role in the regulation of diverse cellular processes. Fusarium oxysporum is a destructive necrotrophic fungal pathogen distributed worldwide with broad ranging hosts.

### Sample Protocol
The  Fusarium oxysporum strain B05.10 was cultured on PDA plates (2% dextrose, 20% potato, and 1.5% agar) at 25℃ for 10 days, and then the conidia was collected and transferred into YEPD medium (2% glucose, 1% yeast extract, and 2% peptone) with shaking at 180 rpm for 14 h. The protein extraction was performed as previously described (Zhou et al., 2016). Briefly, the harvested mycelia were ground into powder in liquid nitrogen. Then the powder sample was suspended by lysis buffer (50 mM nicotinamide, 8 M urea, 65 mM dithiothreitol, 1% Triton-100, 0.1% protease inhibitor cocktail, 2 mM EDTA, and 3 μM Trichostatin A) and then sonicated. After centrifugation at 15,000 x g in 4℃ for 15 min, 15% cold TCA was used to precipitate the proteins at -20℃ for 2 h. The precipitates were washed three times with cold acetone after centrifugation at 4℃for 15 min. Finally, the target protein was redissolved in 8 M urea supplemented with 100 mM NH4CO3 (PH 8.0) and 2-D Quant kit (GE Healthcare) was used to determine protein concentration according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant and Andromeda search engine (v.1.5.1.8) were used to analyze the raw data of MS/MS (Cox and Mann, 2008;Cox et al., 2009). The tandem mass spectra collected were searched against B. cinerea B05.10 database from UniProt. Mass errors of fragment ions and precursor were set as 0.02 Da and 10 ppm, respectively. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 4 missing cleavage, 5 charges and 5 modifications per peptide. Carbamidomethylation on Cysteine was specified as fixed modification and lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation on lysine was fixed as variable modification. The minimal peptide was set to seven, and the false discovery rate (FDR) threshold for modification sites and peptides were set as 1%. The Kcr site localization probability of <0.75 was exclude (Zhou et al., 2016;Yang et al., 2018).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Fusarium oxysporum, Lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation ，proteomics

### Affiliations
Key Lab of Integrated Crop Pest Management of Shandong, College of Plant Health and Medicine, Qingdao Agricultural University, Qingdao, China
Micrometer Biotech

### Submitter
Xianliang Ma

### Lab Head
Dr Wenxing Liang
Key Lab of Integrated Crop Pest Management of Shandong, College of Plant Health and Medicine, Qingdao Agricultural University, Qingdao, China


