### Accession
PXD007193

### Title
Plasma Mouse LC-MSMS -  Bortezomib administered prior to temozolomide depletes MGMT, chemosensitizes glioblastoma with unmethylated MGMT promoter and prolongs animal survival

### Description
Patients diagnosed with glioblastoma (GBM) with sustained synthesis of the DNA repair enzyme, O6-methyl guanine DNA methytransferase (MGMT), are rendered resistant to Temozolomide (TMZ) chemotherapy. Here, we hypothesized that pretreatment with the proteasome inhibitor Bortezomib (BTZ, Velcade) might sensitize these GBM to TMZ by depleting MGMT.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma samples were denatured by adding urea solution (8M urea/20 mM methylamine) before digestion in a solution with modified porcine trypsin. The tryptic peptide mixture was desalted and concentrated using an Oasis HLB Elution Plate 30 µm. Tryptic peptides (1 µg) were injected into an Ultimate 3000 RSLC system connected online with positive electrospray ionization on a LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer. The tryptic plasma peptides were eluted with a 180 min biphasic acetonitrile gradient from a 50 cm analytical column.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS data were analyzed with MaxQuant module version 1.5.2.8 using the search engine Andromeda for identification and label-free protein quantification (LFQ). MaxQuant’s default settings for LFQ analysis. Briefly, methionine oxidation and acetylation of the protein N-terminal were set as variable modifications, and cysteine carbamidomethylation as the fixed modification. The match-between-runs option was permitted, and the LFQ minimum ratio count was set to one. Searches were conducted in SwissProt against the Mus musculus database (downloaded 06.01.2016, containing 24808 canonical and isoform sequences) using MaxQuant with Andromeda. Perseus (version 1.5.2.6) were used for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Plasma, Mouse, Glioblastoma, Autophagy

### Affiliations
University
Department of Biomedicine, University of Bergen, Norway

### Submitter
Frode Selheim

### Lab Head
Dr Martha Chekenya
Department of Biomedicine, University of Bergen, Norway


