### Accession
PXD028394

### Title
LC-MSMS analyses of purified, recombinant TcJHR complexes

### Description
Juvenile hormone (JH) serves vital roles in insect reproduction, development, and many aspects of physiology. JH primarily acts at the gene-regulatory level through an intracellular receptor. The JH receptor (JHR) is a ligand-activated complex of transcription factors of the bHLH-PAS family, consisting of the JH-binding protein Methoprene-tolerant (MET) and its partner Taiman (TAI). Initial studies have indicated significance of post-transcriptional modification (phosphorylation), subunit assembly, and nucleocytoplasmic transport of JHR in JH signaling. However, our knowledge of JHR regulation at the protein level remains rudimentary, partly due to the difficulty of obtaining functional JHR proteins in a purified form. Here we present successful fermentation-level purification of JHR complexes of MET and TAI proteins from two insect species, the beetle Tribolium castaneum and the mosquito Aedes aegypti. The recombinant JHR subunits from each species were co-expressed using a baculovirus system in an insect cell line and purified through affinity steps, yielding soluble proteins, capable of binding both the hormonal ligand (JH III) and DNA bearing cognate JH-response elements.  The present shotgun LC-MSMS analyses identified at least ten potential phosphoserine and phosphothreonine residues located in the C-terminal disordered region of TcMET. A functional bipartite nuclear localization signal, straddled by some of these phosphorylated residues, was subsequently identified within the disordered C-terminal region of TcMET.

### Sample Protocol
For peptide sequencing and phosphoproteomics analyses, purified recombinant JHR complexes were digested using a single-pot solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation method (SP3). Protein samples (50-100 μg) were reduced with 5 mM TCEP (Sigma) for 15 min, alkylated for 30 min with 50 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) and digested with 1 μg trypsin gold (Promega) for 16 h at 37°C. Phosphopeptide enrichment was achieved using TopTip TiO2 micro-spin columns according to the protocol provided by the manufacturer (Glygen). TiO2-bound or -unbound fractions were finally resuspended in 10 μl 0.1% FA and 3-μl aliquots analysed using a two-column chromatography setup comprising a PepMap100 C18 20 mm × 75 μm trap and a PepMap C18 500 mm × 75 μm analytical column (ThermoFisher). Samples were concentrated onto the trap column at 5 μl/min for 5 min and infused into an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher) at 300 nl/min running 120-minute gradients from 99% Buffer A (0.1% FA) to 40% Buffer B (99% acetonitrile, 0.1% FA) on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLC system (ThermoFisher). The Lumos mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between the acquisition of a single Orbitrap MS scan (resolution, 120,000) every 3 s and the top-20 multiply charged precursors selected for EThcD fragmentation (maximum fill time, 100 ms; AGC of 5 × 104 with a resolution of 30,000 for Orbitrap MS-MS scans).

### Data Protocol
LC-MSMS database searches for the characterization of purified JHR complexes and identification of phosphopeptide sequences were carried out using Mascot version 2.3 (Matrix Science). Mascot was set up to search a TcJHR construct database containing Flag-TcMET and His6-TcTAI sequences plus common proteomics contaminants (174 entries) with trypsin cleavage specificity allowing two miscleavage events, carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57 Da) set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine (+16 Da), acetylation (+42 Da) of protein N termini, phosphorylation (+80 Da) of serine, threonine or tyrosine as variable modifications. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm aand fragment tolerance to 20 ppm. Scaffold (version Scaffold_5.0.1, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability. Peptide Probabilities from Mascot were assigned by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability and contained at least 5 identified peptides.  Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii, Al et al Anal. Chem. 2003;75(17):4646-58). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.

### Publication Abstract
Juvenile hormone (JH) plays vital roles in insect reproduction, development, and in many aspects of physiology. JH primarily acts at the gene-regulatory level through interaction with an intracellular receptor (JH receptor [JHR]), a ligand-activated complex of transcription factors consisting of the JH-binding protein methoprene-tolerant (MET) and its partner taiman (TAI). Initial studies indicated significance of post-transcriptional phosphorylation, subunit assembly, and nucleocytoplasmic transport of JHR in JH signaling. However, our knowledge of JHR regulation at the protein level remains rudimentary, partly because of the difficulty of obtaining purified and functional JHR proteins. Here, we present a method for high-yield expression and purification of JHR complexes from two insect species, the beetle T. castaneum and the mosquito Aedes aegypti. Recombinant JHR subunits from each species were coexpressed in an insect cell line using a baculovirus system. MET-TAI complexes were purified through affinity chromatography and anion exchange columns to yield proteins capable of binding both the hormonal ligand (JH III) and DNA bearing cognate JH-response elements. We further examined the beetle JHR complex in greater detail. Biochemical analyses and MS confirmed that T. castaneum JHR was a 1:1 heterodimer consisting of MET and Taiman proteins, stabilized by the JHR agonist ligand methoprene. Phosphoproteomics uncovered multiple phosphorylation sites in the MET protein, some of which were induced by methoprene treatment. Finally, we report a functional bipartite nuclear localization signal, straddled by phosphorylated residues, within the disordered C-terminal region of MET. Our present characterization of the recombinant JHR is an initial step toward understanding JHR structure and function.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Tribolium castaneum, Juvenile hormone receptor

### Affiliations
CSIRO
CSIRO Biomedical Manufacturing Protein Mass Spectrometry Lab Parkville, VIC 3052, Australia

### Submitter
Thomas Nebl

### Lab Head
Dr Tom Nebl
CSIRO Biomedical Manufacturing Protein Mass Spectrometry Lab Parkville, VIC 3052, Australia


