### Accession
PXD016836

### Title
Regulation of lipid homeostasis in treatment-resistant prostate cancer

### Description
Despite the clinical success of Androgen Receptor (AR)-targeted therapies, reactivation of AR signalling remains the main driver of castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) progression. In this study, we performed a comprehensive unbiased characterisation of LNCaP cells chronically exposed to multiple AR inhibitors (ARI). Combined proteomics and metabolomics analyses implicated an acquired metabolic phenotype common in ARI-resistant cells and associated with perturbed glucose and lipid metabolism. To exploit this phenotype, we delineated a subset of proteins consistently associated with ARI resistance.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation. 6-8x105 cells were seeded in 6-well plates and allowed to attach overnight. The next day, culture medium was replaced with fresh RPMI and cells were allowed to grow for another 48 h. Cells were then washed with PBS and lysed in 8 M Urea. Reduced proteins were alkylated using 55 mM Iodoacetamide for one hour at room temperature. Alkylated proteins were then submitted to a two-step digestion at 35°C with endoproteinase Lys-C (Alpha Laboratories, Eastleigh, UK) for 1 hour, followed by trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) digestion overnight. Mass spectrometry analysis and data acquisition Digested peptides were desalted using StageTip55 and separated by nanoscale C18 reverse-phase liquid chromatography performed on an EASY-nLC II (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) coupled to an Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Elution was carried out using a binary gradient with water (buffer A) and 80% acetonitrile (buffer B), both containing 0.1% of formic acid. Peptide mixtures were separated at 200 nl/min flow, using a 20 cm fused silica emitter (New Objective) packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 1.9 μm resin (Dr Maisch GmbH). Packed emitter was kept at 35°C by means of a column oven integrated into the nanoelectrospray ion source (Sonation, Biberach, Germany). The gradient used started at 2% of buffer B, kept at same percentage for 5 minutes, then increased to 30% over 90 minutes and then to 60% over 15 minutes. Finally, a column wash was performed ramping to 80% of B in 5 minutes and then to 95% of B in one minute followed by a 13 minutes re-equilibration at 2% B for a total duration of 129 minutes. The eluting peptide solutions were automatically (online) electrosprayed into the mass spectrometer via a nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo 20 Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). An Active Background Ion Reduction Device (ABIRD, ESI Source Solutions, Woburn, MA, USA) was used to decrease ambient contaminant signal level. Samples were acquired on a Linear Trap Quadrupole - Orbitrap Velos Mass spectrometer using a spray voltage, 2.4 kV, and an ion transfer tube temperature of 200°C. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode and used in data-dependent acquisition mode (DDA). A full scan (FT-MS) was acquired at a target value of 1,000,000 ions with resolution R = 60,000 over mass range of 350-1600 amu. The top ten most intense ions were selected for fragmentation in the linear ion trap using Collision Induced Dissociation (CID) using a maximum injection time of 25 ms or a target value of 5000 ions. Multiply charged ions from two to five charges having intensity greater than 5000 counts were selected through a 2 amu window and fragmented using normalised collision energy of 36 for 10 ms. Former target ions selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 25 s.

### Data Protocol
The MS Raw files were processed with MaxQuant software56 version 1.5.5.1 and searched with Andromeda search engine57, querying UniProt58 Homo sapiens (09/07/2016; 92,939 entries). The database was searched requiring specificity for trypsin cleavage and allowing maximum two missed cleavages. Methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were specified as variable modifications, and cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification. The peptide, protein and site false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1%. Proteins were quantified according to the label-free quantification algorithm available in MaxQuant59. MaxQuant output was further processed and analysed using Perseus software version 1.5.5.360. The common reverse and contaminant hits (as defined in MaxQuant output) were removed. Only protein groups identified with at least one uniquely assigned peptide were used for the analysis. Significantly enriched proteins were selected using a two -sided t-test analysis with a 5% FDR.

### Publication Abstract
Despite the clinical success of Androgen Receptor (AR)-targeted therapies, reactivation of AR signalling remains the main driver of castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) progression. In this study, we perform a comprehensive unbiased characterisation of LNCaP cells chronically exposed to multiple AR inhibitors (ARI). Combined proteomics and metabolomics analyses implicate an acquired metabolic phenotype common in ARI-resistant cells and associated with perturbed glucose and lipid metabolism. To exploit this phenotype, we delineate a subset of proteins consistently associated with ARI resistance and highlight mitochondrial 2,4-dienoyl-CoA reductase (DECR1), an auxiliary enzyme of beta-oxidation, as a clinically relevant biomarker for CRPC. Mechanistically, DECR1 participates in redox homeostasis by controlling the balance between saturated and unsaturated phospholipids. DECR1 knockout induces ER stress and sensitises CRPC cells to ferroptosis. In vivo, DECR1 deletion impairs lipid metabolism and reduces CRPC tumour growth, emphasizing the importance of DECR1 in the development of treatment resistance.

### Keywords
Crpc, Lncap, Organoids, Lipid metabolism, Enzalutamide, Prostate cancer

### Affiliations
CRUK Beatson Institute, Switchback Road, Glasgow G61 1BD, UK.
Proteomics

### Submitter
Sergio Lilla

### Lab Head
Dr Sara Rossana Zanivan
CRUK Beatson Institute, Switchback Road, Glasgow G61 1BD, UK.


