### Accession
PXD005160

### Title
Seminal fluid proteome of the polyandrous Red junglefowl

### Description
We characterized the SF proteome of the polyandrous Red junglefowl, Gallus gallus, the wild species that gave rise to the domestic chicken. We identify 1,141 SFPs, including proteins involved in immunity and antimicrobial defences, sperm maturation, and fertilisation, revealing a functionally complex SF proteome. This includes a predominant contribution of blood plasma proteins that is conserved with human SF. By comparing the proteome of young and old males with fast or slow sperm velocity in a balanced design, we identify proteins associated with ageing and sperm velocity, and show that old males that retain high sperm velocity have distinct proteome characteristics. SFP comparisons with domestic chickens revealed both qualitative and quantitative differences likely associated with domestication and artificial selection. Collectively, these results shed light onto the functional complexity of avian SF, and provide a platform for molecular studies of fertility, reproductive ageing, and domestication.

### Sample Protocol
Immediately following collection, semen samples from 12 individuals were placed in a water bath at RJF physiological temperature (41C). We separated sperm from SF by centrifugation at 3,500 g for 1 minute at 4C. The SF supernatant was transferred to a sterile tube for storage at - 20C. Solubilization buffer (4% Chaps, 7 M Urea, and 2 M Thiourea) was added to each SF sample and protein concentrations were quantified using the Quick Start Bradford assay and a spectraMax M2 microplate reader. Bovine Serum Albumin (BSA) was used as a standard (scale from 0–2 mg/ml) and samples were sonicated using a bioruptor to disrupt residual protein interactions. To account for variation between ejaculates, 15 µ g of protein were combined from each of three ejaculates per male and diluted appropriately to obtain equal protein concentrations across samples from each of the 12 samples. 45 ug of total protein from each sample was separated for the maximum duration possible (without running small proteins off the gel) on 4–12% Nupage Bis-Tris gels running on an XCell SureLock Mini-Cell PowerEase 200 system (Life-Technologies). Gels were then fixed in 45% methanol and 1.0% acetic acid for 1 h and immediately stained with Coomassie (0.1%w/v Coomassie, 34% methanol, 17%w/v ammonium sulfate, and 0.5% acetic acid). Gels were transferred to a gel slicer where each lane was cut horizontally into 12 slices, resulting in total of 144 samples for MS/MS analysis. To reduce spectra derived from the highly abundant SFP serum albumin and increase proteomic coverage, a narrow region centered on the predominant serum albumin band was not included amongst the fractionated gel slices. Gel slices were subjected to proteolytic digestion using an Automated Preparation Station (Perkin Elmer). Proteins were first reduced (1 hr at 37 °C in 15.4 mg dithiothreitol in 10 ml 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution) and alkylated (1 hr at room temperature in 102 mg iodoacetamide in 10 ml 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution) followed by digestion with trypsin (500 ng/µ  l, Promega) at 37C for 16 h.  Tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) experiments were per-formed using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanoUPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc, Waltham, MA, USA) sys-tem and a QExactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc, Waltham, MA, USA). Separation of peptides was performed by reverse-phase chromatography at a flow rate of 300 nL/min and a Thermo Scientific reverse-phase nano Easy-spray column (Thermo Scientific PepMap C18, 2 µm particle size, 100A pore size, 75 µm i.d. × 50 cm length). Peptides were loaded onto a pre-column (Thermo Scientific PepMap 100 C18, 5 µm article size, 100A pore size, 300 µm i.d. × 5 mm length) from the Ultimate 3000 autosampler with 0.1% formic acid for 3 minutes at a flow rate of 10 µ L/min. After this period, the column valve was switched to allow elution of pep-tides from the pre-column onto the analytical column. Solvent A was water + 0.1% formic acid and solvent B was 80% acetonitrile, 20% water + 0.1% formic acid. The linear gradient employed was 2–40% B in 30 minutes. The LC eluant was sprayed into the mass spectrometer by means of an Easy-spray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.). All m/z values of eluting ions were measured in an Orbitrap mass analyzer, set at a resolution of 70000. Data dependent scans (Top 20) were employed to automatically isolate and generate fragment ions by higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) in the quadrupole mass analyser and measurement of the resulting fragment ions was performed in the Orbitrap analyser, set at a resolution of 17500. Peptide ions with charge states of 2+ and above were selected for fragmentation. Post-run, the data was processed and peak-lists generated using Protein Discoverer (version 1.3, ThermoFisher).

### Data Protocol
Raw data from each tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) run was analyzed by X! Tandem and Comet against the complete Gallus gallus refseq protein database (June 2013 release, 32134 proteins), supplemented with characterized, but yet to be annotated, immunoglob-ulin sequences. A fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.40 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 PPM were used. Iodoacetamide derivative of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification, whereas oxidation of methionine was specified as a variable modification. Peptides were allowed up to two missed trypsin cleavage sites. All downstream analyses were conducted using the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (TPP v4.7 POLAR VORTEX rev 1). False Discovery Rates (FDRs) were estimated with a randomized decoy database using PeptideProphet, employing accurate mass binning model and the nonparametric negative distribution model. X!Tandem and Comet PeptideProphet results were combined using iProphet, to provide more accurate and conservative peptide identification probabilities. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% iProphet probability and protein assignations were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability. Proteins that contained identical peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.

### Publication Abstract
Seminal fluid proteins (SFPs) are emerging as fundamental contributors to sexual selection given their role in post-mating reproductive events, particularly in polyandrous species where the ejaculates of different males compete for fertilisation. SFP identification however remains taxonomically limited and little is known about avian SFPs, despite extensive work on sexual selection in birds. We characterize the SF proteome of the polyandrous Red junglefowl, Gallus gallus, the wild species that gave rise to the domestic chicken. We identify 1,141 SFPs, including proteins involved in immunity and antimicrobial defences, sperm maturation, and fertilisation, revealing a functionally complex SF proteome. This includes a predominant contribution of blood plasma proteins that is conserved with human SF. By comparing the proteome of young and old males with fast or slow sperm velocity in a balanced design, we identify proteins associated with ageing and sperm velocity, and show that old males that retain high sperm velocity have distinct proteome characteristics. SFP comparisons with domestic chickens revealed both qualitative and quantitative differences likely associated with domestication and artificial selection. Collectively, these results shed light onto the functional complexity of avian SF, and provide a platform for molecular studies of fertility, reproductive ageing, and domestication.

### Keywords
Seminal fluid, Fertility, Proteomics, Domestication, Reproductive ageing, Red junglefowl

### Affiliations
Syracuse University
Syracuse Univeristy

### Submitter
Emma Whittington

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Steve Dorus
Syracuse University


