### Accession
PXD017588

### Title
Global proteomic analysis deciphers the mechanism of action of plant derived oleic acid against Candida albicans virulence and biofilm formation

### Description
Candida albicans is a commensal fungus in humans, mostly found on the mucosal surfaces of the mouth, gut, vagina and skin. Incidence of ever increasing invasive candidiasis in immunocompromised patients, alarming occurrence of antifungal resistance and insufficient diagnostic methods demand more focused research into C. albicans pathogenicity. Consequently, in the present study, oleic acid from Murraya koenigii was shown to have the efficacy to inhibit biofilm formation and virulence of Candida spp. Results of in vitro virulence assays and gene expression analysis, impelled to study the protein targets which are involved in the molecular pathways of C. albicans pathogenicity. Proteomic studies of differentially expressed proteins reveals that oleic acid induces oxidative stress responses and mainly targets the proteins involved in glucose metabolism, ergosterol biosynthesis, lipase production, iron homeostasis and amino acid biosynthesis. The current study emphasizes anti-virulent potential of oleic acid which can be used as a therapeutic agent to treat Candida infections.

### Sample Protocol
Differentially regulated proteins upon oleic acid treatment were analyzed using MALDI- TOF/TOF analysis.13 Briefly, equal volume (1 μL) of peptides were mixed with 1 μL of matrix solution [alpha-cyano-4-hydroxy cinnamic acid matrix (10 mg mL-1), acetonitrile (50 %) and trifluroacetic acid (0.1 %)] and spotted on MALDI target plate. The MALDI- TOF/TOF mass spectrometer (AXIMA Performance, SHIMADZU BIOTECH) with laser wavelength of 337 nm was calibrated using TOF- Mix™ (LaserBio Labs, France). Peptide mass spectra were acquired from a MALDI- TOF/TOF mass spectrometer in positive reflector mode and analysed by Shimadzu launch pad- MALDI MS software (Version- 2.9.3.20110624, Kratos Analytical Ltd, U.K.). For single spot, 45 subspectra resulted after 50 laser shots at randomized positions with total of 2250 laser shots. The laser intensity for MS spectrum acquisition was 4500.

### Data Protocol
Mono isotopic peak list (m/z range of 700-4000 Da with S/N ratio over 10) generated by MALDI MS software was analyzed using online software tool MS-Fit from Protein Prospector (v 5.24.0). (http://prospector.ucsf.edu/prospector/cgi-bin/msform.cgi?form=msfitstandard) with the standard protein identification parameters. Briefly, a mass tolerance of 1.50 Da per peptide, maximum of 2 missed cleavages per peptide, carbamidomethylation of cysteine was given as fixed modification whereas N-terminal acetylation and phosphorylation (S, T, Y) and methionine oxidation, as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Candida albicans is a commensal fungus in humans, mostly found on the mucosal surfaces of the mouth, gut, vagina and skin. Incidence of ever increasing invasive candidiasis in immunocompromised patients, alarming occurrence of antifungal resistance and insufficient diagnostic methods demand more focused research into C. albicans pathogenicity. Consequently, in the present study, oleic acid from Murraya koenigii was shown to have the efficacy to inhibit biofilm formation and virulence of Candida spp. Results of in vitro virulence assays and gene expression analysis, impelled to study the protein targets which are involved in the molecular pathways of C. albicans pathogenicity. Proteomic studies of differentially expressed proteins reveals that oleic acid induces oxidative stress responses and mainly targets the proteins involved in glucose metabolism, ergosterol biosynthesis, lipase production, iron homeostasis and amino acid biosynthesis. The current study emphasizes anti-virulent potential of oleic acid which can be used as a therapeutic agent to treat Candida infections.

### Keywords
Candida albicans, Maldi-tof-tof, Oleic acid, 2d electrophoresis

### Affiliations
Department of Biotechnology, Alagappa University, Tamil Nadu-630003, India
Senior Professor anD Head Department of Biotechnology Alagappa University Karaikudi-630003 Tamil Nadu India

### Submitter
Shunmugiah Karutha Pandian

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Shunmugiah Karutha Pandian
Senior Professor anD Head Department of Biotechnology Alagappa University Karaikudi-630003 Tamil Nadu India


