### Accession
PXD044743

### Title
Vittrup Man – the life-history of a genetic foreigner in Neolithic Denmark

### Description
The deadly maltreated body of Vittrup Man was deposited in a Danish bog, probably as part of a ritualised sacrifice. It happened between c. 3300 and 3100 cal years BC, i.e., during the period of the local farming-based Funnel Beaker Culture. In terms of skull morphological features he differs from the majority of the contemporaneous farmers found in Denmark, and associates with hunter-gatherers, who inhabited Scandinavia during the previous millennia. His skeletal remains were selected for transdisciplinary analysis to reveal his life-history in terms of a population historical perspective. We report the combined results of an integrated set of genetic, isotopic, physical anthropological and archaeological analytical approaches. Strontium signature suggests a foreign birthplace that could be in Norway or Sweden. In addition, enamel oxygen isotope values indicate that as a child he lived in a colder climate, i.e., to the north of the regions inhabited by farmers. Genomic data in fact demonstrates that he is closely related to Mesolithic humans known from Norway and Sweden. Moreover, dietary stable isotope analyses on enamel and bone collagen demonstrate a fisher-hunter way of life in his childhood and a diet typical of farmers later on. Such a volatile life-history is also reflected by proteomic analysis of hardened organic deposits on his teeth, indicating the consumption of forager food (seal, whale and marine fish) as well as farmer food (sheep/goat). From a dietary isotopic transect of one of his teeth it is shown that his transfer between societies of foragers and farmers took place near to the end of his late teenage years.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction was performed on around 7 mg of dental calculus following the method proposed by Jersie-Christensen et al. (2018). The powder was demineralized overnight with 1 ml 15–20% acetic acid. Via centrifugation for 10 min at 2000 g the acetic acid was removed. Subsequently a lysis buffer (6M guanidine hydrochloride, 10mM chloroacetamide, 20mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine Hydrochloride in 100mM TRIS pH 8.5) was added to the powder and the pH was adjusted to 7–9. The pellet was then crushed and incubated at 99 °C for 10 mins at 500 rpm. The sample was digested with rLysC (0.2 µg, Promega, Sweden) incubating under agitation at 37 °C for 2–4 hours. Subsequently, 25 mM Tris in 10% acetonitrile were used to dilute the sample to a final concentration of 0.6 M GuHCl. Another digestion was performed by trypsin (0.8 µg, Promega, Sweden) and incubation overnight at 37 °C under agitation. The digestion was stopped by acidifying the sample (pH <2) by 10% trifluoroacetic acid, then the proteins were collected in home-made C18 StageTips and stored in the freezer until mass spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
The data analysis was performed on the sample and on the extraction blank using MaxQuant version 1.6.2a (2015) with oxidation (M), Acetyl (protein N-term), deamidation (NQ), and hydroxyproline set as a variable modifications and carbamidomethyl (C) as a fixed modification. Trypsin was set as a ‘digestion enzyme’ with a maximum of two missed cleavages allowed. For the identification, a minimum score of modified and unmodified peptides of 40 was used and a Peptide Spectral Match (PSM) and Protein false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 cutoff was set. All other parameters were left for the default for orbitrap mass spectrometers.

### Publication Abstract
The lethally maltreated body of Vittrup Man was deposited in a Danish bog, probably as part of a ritualised sacrifice. It happened between c. 3300 and 3100 cal years BC, i.e., during the period of the local farming-based Funnel Beaker Culture. In terms of skull morphological features, he differs from the majority of the contemporaneous farmers found in Denmark, and associates with hunter-gatherers, who inhabited Scandinavia during the previous millennia. His skeletal remains were selected for transdisciplinary analysis to reveal his life-history in terms of a population historical perspective. We report the combined results of an integrated set of genetic, isotopic, physical anthropological and archaeological analytical approaches. Strontium signature suggests a foreign birthplace that could be in Norway or Sweden. In addition, enamel oxygen isotope values indicate that as a child he lived in a colder climate, i.e., to the north of the regions inhabited by farmers. Genomic data in fact demonstrates that he is closely related to Mesolithic humans known from Norway and Sweden. Moreover, dietary stable isotope analyses on enamel and bone collagen demonstrate a fisher-hunter way of life in his childhood and a diet typical of farmers later on. Such a variable life-history is also reflected by proteomic analysis of hardened organic deposits on his teeth, indicating the consumption of forager food (seal, whale and marine fish) as well as farmer food (sheep/goat). From a dietary isotopic transect of one of his teeth it is shown that his transfer between societies of foragers and farmers took place near to the end of his teenage years.

### Keywords
Human dental calculus, Funnel beaker culture, Denmark, Ancient dental calculus

### Affiliations
GLOBE Institute, University of Copenhagen (Denmark)
Lundbeck Foundation GeoGenetics Centre Globe Institute University of Copenhagen

### Submitter
Gabriele Scorrano

### Lab Head
Dr Enrico Cappellini
GLOBE Institute, University of Copenhagen (Denmark)


