### Accession
PXD016669

### Title
Beyond target-decoy competition: stable validation of peptide and protein identifications in mass spectrometry-based discovery proteomics

### Description
Target-decoy competition (TDC) is the most popular method for false discovery rate (FDR) control in bottom-up discovery proteomics. Despite unquestionable statistical foundations, we unveil a so far unknown weakness of TDC: its intrinsic lack of stability vis-à-vis practical conditions of application. Although some consequences of this instability have already been empirically described, they may have been misinterpreted. This work pinpoints evidence that TDC will become less reliable along with improved accuracies of modern mass spectrometers. We therefore propose to replace TDC by a totally different method to control the FDR at spectrum, peptide and protein levels, while benefiting from the theoretical guarantees of Benjamini-Hochberg framework. This method being simpler to use, faster to compute and more stable than TDC, we argue that it is more adapted to the standardization and throughput constraints of nowadays proteomic platforms.

### Sample Protocol
Competent E. coli DH5 alpha cells transformed with pUC19 plasmid were grown at 37 degree Celsius in LB medium containing carbenicillin before harvesting during exponential phase (OD600 of 0:6). After centrifugation at 30000 x g during 10 min, the pellet was washed 3 times with cold PBS before lysis of cells using Bugbuster Protein Extraction Reagent (Novagen) containing cOmpleteTM, EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche) and benzonase (Merck Millipore). After centrifugation at 30000 x g during 30 min and at 4 degree Celsius, the supernatant was recovered and the protein amount was measured, before protein solubilisation in Laemmli buffer. Proteins were stacked in a single band in the top of a SDS-PAGE gel (4-12% NuPAGE, Life Technologies) and stained with Coomassie blue R-250 before in-gel digestion using modified trypsin (Promega, sequencing grade) as described in Salvetti et al. (2016, J Proteome Res). Resulting peptides were analyzed by online nanoliquid chromatography coupled to tandem MS (UltiMate 3000 and LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro, or UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano and Q-Exactive Plus, Thermo Scientific). The equivalent of 100 ng of starting protein material was used for each injection. Peptides were sampled on 300 micrometers x 5 mm PepMap C18 precolumns (Thermo Scientific) and separated on 75 micrometers x 250 mm C18 columns (Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, Dr. Maisch HPLC GmBH, 3 micrometers and 1.9 micrometers porous spherical silica for respectively UltiMate 3000 and UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano). The nanoLC method consisted of a linear 60-min gradient ranging from 5.1% to 41% of acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid.  For LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro analyses, the spray voltage was set at 1.5 kV and the heated capillary was adjusted to 200 degrees Celsius. Survey full-scan MS spectra (m/z = 400-1600) were acquired with a resolution of 60'000 at m/z 400 after the accumulation of 10e6 ions (maximum filling time 500 ms). The twenty most intense ions from the preview survey scan delivered by the Orbitrap were fragmented by collision induced dissociation (collision energy 35%) in the LTQ after accumulation of 10e4 ions (maximum filling time 100 ms). MS and MS/MS data were acquired using the software Xcalibur (Thermo Scientific). For Q-Exactive Plus analyses, the spray voltage was set at 1.5 kV and the heated capillary was adjusted to 250 degress Celsius. Survey full-scan MS spectra (m/z = 400-1600) were acquired with a resolution of 60'000 at m/z 400 after the accumulation of 10e6 ions (maximum filling time 200 ms). The ten most intense ions were fragmented by higher-energy collisional dissociation (normalized collision energy 30%) after accumulation of 10e5 ions (maximum filling time 50 ms) and spectra were acquired with a resolution of 15'000 at m/z 400. MS and MS/MS data were acquired using the software Xcalibur (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Data were processed automatically using Mascot Distiller software (version 2.6, Matrix Science). Peptides and proteins were identified using Mascot (version 2.6) through concomitant searches against Escherichia coli K12 reference proteome (20180727 version downloaded from Uniprot), and/or custom made decoy databases (reversed or shuffled sequences). Trypsin/P was chosen as the enzyme and 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Precursor and fragment mass error tolerance has been variably adjusted. Peptide modifications allowed during the search were: carbamidomethylation (C, fixed), acetyl (Protein N-ter, variable) and oxidation (M, variable).

### Publication Abstract
In bottom-up discovery proteomics, target-decoy competition (TDC) is the most popular method for false discovery rate (FDR) control. Despite unquestionable statistical foundations, this method has drawbacks, including its hitherto unknown intrinsic lack of stability vis-&#xe0;-vis practical conditions of application. Although some consequences of this instability have already been empirically described, they may have been misinterpreted. This article provides evidence that TDC has become less reliable as the accuracy of modern mass spectrometers improved. We therefore propose to replace TDC by a totally different method to control the FDR at the spectrum, peptide, and protein levels, while benefiting from the theoretical guarantees of the Benjamini-Hochberg framework. As this method is simpler to use, faster to compute, and more stable than TDC, we argue that it is better adapted to the standardization and throughput constraints of current proteomic platforms.

### Keywords
False discovery rate, Target decoy competition, Peptide-spectrum match, Benjamini-hochberg procedure, Bottom-up discovery proteomics

### Affiliations
EDyP

### Submitter
Yohann Couté

### Lab Head
Dr Virginie Brun
EDyP


