### Accession
PXD009488

### Title
Protein profiling of stress-activated breast cancer cell models

### Description
This study provides insights into the efficacy of beta-blockers as breast cancer therapeutics.Cell line models of basal-type and estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer were profiled for basal levels of adrenoceptor gene/protein expression, and ADRβ2-mediated cell behaviour including migration, invasion, adhesion, and proliferation in response to adrenoceptor agonist/antagonist treatment.  Protein profiling and histology identified response biomarkers and drug targets. Protein profiling revealed the upregulation of the pro-metastatic gene LYPD3 in norepinephrine treated MDA MB 468 cells. Histology confirmed selective LYPD3 expression in clinical primary and metastatic breast tumours. These findings demonstrate that basal-type cancer models show a more aggressive ADRβ2-activated phenotype in the resting and stimulated state, which is attenuated by ADRβ2 inhibition, and explain some of the previous studies that have cast doubt on the value of beta-blocker therapy in breast cancer. These findings suggest that propranolol should be clinically evaluated in patients with basal-type tumours expressing high levels of ADRβ2 and LYPD3.

### Sample Protocol
For the extraction of cell lysates a cell lysis buffer was prepared using nanopure water, 9.5M of Urea (Melford), 2% Dithiothreitol (Melford) and 1% N-Octyl-Beta-Glycopyranoside (Apollo scientific limited). On the day of extraction, protease inhibitor (Sigma) was added to each lysis buffer aliquot at a concentration of 1:100. After media was removed from flasks, cells were washed three times with cold PBS, which was subsequently replaced with 200 µl of lysis buffer. After the buffer was spread across the cell surface and the flasks were left to rest for two min lysed cells were collected into the corner of each flask using a cell scraper. Lysed cells were then transferred into Eppendorf collection tubes, transferred to an ice containing water bath and sonicated at max power for 5 min. After this time had elapsed samples were stored on ice for 5 min, and this process was repeated twice more. Next lysate samples were centrifuged for 10 min at 12,000g, once again at 4oC. The supernatant (cell lysate) was then carefully removed without disturbing the pellet, and stored in a separate tube. All samples were then stored at -80oC. Cell lysate (100 µg) and secretome (100 µg) were diluted in 50 mM tri-ethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) before reduction (5 mM DTT at 56°C for 20 min) and alkylation (15 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 15 min) and then digested for 16 hours using Trypsin/Lys-C (Promega, UK)  at 37°C at a 20:1 protein:protease ratio (w/w) in a thermomixer (650 rpm). Next, samples were cleaned up using HyperSep C18 cartridges (Thermo Scientific) for solid phase extraction. A vacuum concentrator was then used to concentrate the samples before resuspension in 5 % acetonitrile + 0.1 % formic acid and subsequent analysis of the peptides on an AB SCIEX TripleTOF 5600+ MS/MS instrument in both SWATH™ and IDA (information dependent acquisition) acquisition modes. Each sample was analysed on a Sciex TripleTof 5600+ mass spectrometer coupled in line with a Eksigent ekspert nano LC 425 system running in micro flow. In brief, 8 µg of sample was injected and trapped onto a YMC Triart C18 pre-column (dimensions needed) at a flow rate of 6 µl min for 2 min. The sample was then eluted off the pre-column and onto a YMC Triart C18 analytical column (15 cm, 2 µm, 300 µm ID) that was in line with the electrospray ionisation source of the 5600+ MS. The following linear gradients were used: solvent B (2 % acetonitrile + 0.1 % formic acid) over solvent A (0.1 % formic acid), increasing from 2 % to 40 % over a 60 min time course (SWATH) or 120 min time course (IDA). Electrospray ionisation was performed by applying +2400V to an uncoated PicoTip® nanospray emitter (New Objectives Inc, USA). Data independent detection was performed using 40 variable SWATH windows and IDA with a top 30 ion fragmentation followed by 15 sec exclusion using rolling collision energy. Column re-equilibration was performed by loading 90 % solvent B for 10 min followed by 10 min with 5 % solvent B.

### Data Protocol
IDA mass spectrometry files were searched using ProteinPilot 5 (Sciex) with the following stringent search criteria: exclude biological modifications, thorough ID, searching the UniProt Swiss-Prot database (January 2015 release) for human species. The resulting library file was aligned to the SWATH files using PeakView 2.0 software (Sciex), after filtering for false discovery rate (FDR) of 1 % and excluding shared peptides. SWATH data were processed with an extraction window of 5 min and application of the following parameters: 30 peptides/protein, 6 transitions, peptide confidence of >99%, exclude shared peptides, and XIC width set at 75 ppm. Quantitation and fold change analysis was carried out on the differentially expressed proteins between the different treatments using SCIEX OneOmics cloud processing software (Sciex). Data were regarded as differentially expressed with a Log2 fold change ≥ 1.0 and a confidence of 0.6 (60 %).

### Publication Abstract
Metastasis is associated with poor prognosis in breast cancer. Although some studies suggest beta-blockers increase survival by delaying metastasis, others have been discordant. This study provides both insights into the anomalous findings and identifies potential biomarkers that may be treatment targets. Cell line models of basal-type and oestrogen receptor-positive breast cancer were profiled for basal levels of adrenoceptor gene/protein expression, and &#x3b2;2-adrenoceptor mediated cell behaviour including migration, invasion, adhesion, and survival in response to adrenoceptor agonist/antagonist treatment. Protein profiling and histology identified biomarkers and drug targets. Baseline levels of adrenoceptor gene expression are higher in basal-type rather than oestrogen receptor-positive cancer cells. Norepinephrine (NE) treatment increased invasive capacity in all cell lines but did not increase proliferation/survival. Protein profiling revealed the upregulation of the pro-metastatic gene Ly6/PLAUR Domain-Containing Protein 3 (LYPD3) in norepinephrine-treated MDA-MB-468 cells. Histology confirmed selective LYPD3 expression in primary and metastatic breast tumour samples. These findings demonstrate that basal-type cancer cells show a more aggressive adrenoceptor-&#x3b2;2-activated phenotype in the resting and stimulated state, which is attenuated by adrenoceptor-&#x3b2;2 inhibition. This study also highlights the first association between ADR&#x3b2;2 signalling and LYPD3; its knockdown significantly reduced the basal and norepinephrine-induced activity of MCF-7 cells in vitro. The regulation of ADR&#x3b2;2 signalling by LYPD3 and its metastasis promoting activities, reveal LYPD3 as a promising therapeutic target in the treatment of breast and other cancers.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, Swath, Breast cancer

### Affiliations
Nottingham Trent University
Nottingham Trent University, John van Geest Cancer Research Centre.

### Submitter
Amanda Miles

### Lab Head
Dr David J Boocock
Nottingham Trent University, John van Geest Cancer Research Centre.


