### Accession
PXD042995

### Title
Co-administration of angiotensin II and simvastatin triggers kidney injury upon heme oxygenase-1 deficiency

### Description
Kidneys are pivotal organ in iron redistribution and can be severely damaged in the course of hemolysis. In our previous studies, we observed that induction of hyper- tension with angiotensin II (Ang II) combined with simvastatin administration results in a high mortality rate or the appearance of signs of kidney failure in heme oxy- genase-1 knockout (HO-1 KO) mice. Here, we aimed to address the mechanisms underlying this effect, focusing on heme and iron metabolism. We show that HO-1 deficiency leads to iron accumulation in the renal cortex. Higher mortality of Ang II and simvastatin-treated HO-1 KO mice coincides with in- creased iron accumulation and the upregulation of mucin-1 in the proximal convoluted tubules. In vitro studies showed that mucin-1 hampers heme- and iron-related oxidative stress through the sialic acid residues. In parallel, knock-down of HO-1 induces the glutathione pathway in an NRF2-depedent manner, which likely protects against heme-induced toxicity. To sum up, we showed that heme degradation during heme overload is not solely dependent on HO-1 enzymatic activity, but can be modulated by the glutathione pathway. We also identified mucin-1 as a novel redox regulator. The results suggest that hypertensive patients with less active HMOX1 alleles may be at higher risk of kidney injury after statin treatment.

### Sample Protocol
Mass spectrometry. LC-MS measurements were performed at the at the Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics PAS according to a modified protocol [85]. The kidneys were mechanically disrupted and with sonication (Bioruptor, set: high 30 cycles 30 s on/30 s off, 8 °C) in 500 μl of 6 M guanidine chloride, 100 mM TRIS, 10 mM TCEP, 50 mM CAA and MS-Safe Sigma protease inhibitors (MSSAFE-1VL). After centrifugation (20 min at 16,000 g), the supernatant was col- lected and the pellet was discarded. 100 μl of each sample was taken and subjected to cold acetone precipitation. Pellet was resuspended in a digestion buffer: 50 μl of 6 M urea, 100 mM ABC, 1 μg of LycC/ Trypsin mix (Promega V5071), vortexed at 800 rpm at 37 °C for 4 h, then 300 μl of 25 mM ABC was added, samples were vortexed at 800 rpm at 37 °C overnight. The samples were acidified with 10 μl of 5% TFA. The resulting peptide mixture was purified at Oasis HLB 10 mg sorbent (Waters), 96-well plates, vacuum-dried, and suspended in 40 μl of 2% MeCN, 0.1% TFA. The samples were measured in an on- line LC-MS setup of EvosepOne (Evosep Biosystems) coupled to an Or- bitrap Exploris 480 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer. Pep- tide mixtures were loaded on Evotips C18 trap columns, according to the vendor’s protocol: activation of sorbent with 0.1% FA in MeCN, 2- mine-incubation in 1-propanol, chromatographic sorbent equilibration with 0.1% FA in water; samples were loaded in 30 μl of 0.1% FA, after each step, EvoTips were centrifuged at 600 g for 1 min. Chromato- graphic separation was carried out at a flow rate of 500 nl/min using the 88 min (30 samples per day) performed gradient on an EV1106 an- alytical column (Dr. Maisch C18 AQ, 1.9 μm beads, 150 μm ID, 15 cm long, EvosepBiosystems, Odense, Denmark). Data were acquired in positive mode with a data-dependent method using the following para- meters. The MS1 resolution was set to 60 000 with a normalized AGC target of 300%,auto maximum inject time, and a scan range of 350 to 1400 m/z. For MS2, the resolution was set to 15000 with a standard normalized AGC target, auto maximum inject time, and the top 40 pre- cursors with an isolation window of 1.6 m/z considered for MS/MS analysis. Dynamic exclusion was set at 20 s with an allowed mass tol- erance of ±10 ppm, with a precursor intensity threshold of 5 × 103. The precursors were fragmented in HCD mode with a normalized colli- sion energy of 30%. The spray voltage was set to 2.1 kV, with a funnel RF level of 40 and heated capillary temperature of 275 °C.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analyzed with PEAKS X Studio [86] (build 10.6) and searched against mouse reference proteome (Uniprot proteome IDUP000000589, 55315 protein entries), digestion: trypsin semi spe- cific, 2 max missed cleavages, 0.1 Da MS and 0.2 Da MSMS error toler- ance, fixed modification: carbamidomethylation, variable modification: PTM_PEAKS open mode, FDR 1%, common contamination databases were included. The oxidative modifications included: arginine oxida- tion to glutamic semialdehyde; cysteine oxidation to cysteic acid; lysine oxidation to aminoadipic semialdehyde, proline oxidation to pyroglu- tamic acid, tryptophan oxidation (to hydroxykynurenine, oxolactone, 2-aminotyrosine), pyroglutamate formation, tyrosine nitration, oxida- tion of methionine, hydroxylation, and protein carbonylation. Proteins identified as differing groups have been analyzed in terms of belonging to individual pathways with the Reactome platform [87]. Every six groups were compared semi-quantitatively (PEAKS quant, FDR 1%) and plotted in a heatmap. Significantly changed proteins are included in Table 1.

### Publication Abstract
Kidneys are pivotal organ in iron redistribution and can be severely damaged in the course of hemolysis. In our previous studies, we observed that induction of hypertension with angiotensin II (Ang II) combined with simvastatin administration results in a high mortality rate or the appearance of signs of kidney failure in heme oxygenase-1 knockout (HO-1 KO) mice. Here, we aimed to address the mechanisms underlying this effect, focusing on heme and iron metabolism. We show that HO-1 deficiency leads to iron accumulation in the renal cortex. Higher mortality of Ang II and simvastatin-treated HO-1 KO mice coincides with increased iron accumulation and the upregulation of mucin-1 in the proximal convoluted tubules. In vitro studies showed that mucin-1 hampers heme- and iron-related oxidative stress through the sialic acid residues. In parallel, knock-down of HO-1 induces the glutathione pathway in an NRF2-depedent manner, which likely protects against heme-induced toxicity. To sum up, we showed that heme degradation during heme overload is not solely dependent on HO-1 enzymatic activity, but can be modulated by the glutathione pathway. We also identified mucin-1 as a novel redox regulator. The results suggest that hypertensive patients with less active HMOX1 alleles may be at higher risk of kidney injury after statin treatment.

### Keywords
Angiotensin ii, Kidney

### Affiliations
Department of Medical Biotechnology, Faculty of Biochemistry, Biophysics and Biotechnology, Jagiellonian University, Kraków, Poland
Medical University of Bialystok

### Submitter
Dominik Cysewski

### Lab Head
Dr Aleksandra Piechota-Polanczyk
Department of Medical Biotechnology, Faculty of Biochemistry, Biophysics and Biotechnology, Jagiellonian University, Kraków, Poland


