### Accession
PXD024259

### Title
SOX6 interacting proteins' identification in K562 cells for the regulation of γ-globin gene expression research

### Description
Human fetal γ-globin gene is developmentally silenced around the birth, and reactivation of γ-globin gene in adulthood sheds new light on ameliorating symptoms of hemoglobin disorders, such as sickle cell disease (SCD) and β-thalassemias. However, the precise regulation process of γ-globin remains incompletely understood. Here, we found that a new protein directly interacted with SOX6 and exerted a significant repression effect on the expression of γ-globin gene in erythroid cells. Further studies have demonstrated that it bound directly to γ-globin gene promoter via octamer binding motif, which in turn suppressed the transcriptional activity of γ-globin gene promoter.  Thus, these data indicate that this new protein acts as a novel transcriptional repressor in the regulation of γ-globin gene expression through direct promoter binding, implying a potential alternative therapeutic target for the treatment of SCD and β-thalassemias.

### Sample Protocol
Coomassie brilliant blue (CBB) stained gel of proteins separated on SDS-PAGE after anti-FLAG M2 affinity gel or IgG (as control) immunoprecipitates from K562 cells stably overexpressing FLAG epitope-tagged SOX6. The bands of interest were excised from the gel and subjected to mass spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
*LC-MS Analysis (TMT10plex Only) LC- MS analysis were performed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer that was coupled to Easy nLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide from each fraction was loaded onto a the C18-reversed phase column (12cm long, 75μm ID, 3μm) in buffer A (2% acetonitrile and 0.1% Formic acid) and separated with a linear gradient of buffer B (90% acetonitrile and 0.1% Formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min over 90 min. The linear gradient was set as follows: 0–2 min, linear gradient from 2% to 5% buffer B; 2–62 min, linear gradient from 5% to 20% buffer B; 62–80 min, linear gradient from 20% to 35% buffer B; 80–83 min, linear gradient from 35% to 90% buffer B; 83–90 min, buffer B maintained at 90%. MS data was acquired using a data-dependent top15 method dynamically choosing the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (300–1800 m/z) for HCD fragmentation. Determination of the target value is based on predictive Automatic Gain Control (pAGC). The AGC target values of 1e6, and maximum injection time 50 ms were for full MS, and a target AGC value of 1e5, maximum injection time 100 ms for MS2. Dynamic exclusion duration was 30s. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200 and resolution for HCD spectra was set to 35,000 at m/z 200. Normalized collision energy was 30. The instrument was run with peptide recognition mode enabled.  Database Searching and Analysis The resulting LC-MS/MS raw files were imported into MaxQuant software (version 1.6.0.16) for data interpretation and protein identification against the database Uniprot_Hordeum-vulgare_201747-20180125 (downloaded on 25/01/2018, and including 201747 protein sequences), which is sourced from the protein database at https://www.uniprot.org/uniprot/?query=Hordeum-vulgare&sort=score. An initial search was set at a precursor mass window of 6 ppm. The search followed an enzymatic cleavage rule of Trypsin/P and allowed maximal two missed cleavage sites and a mass tolerance of 20ppm for fragment ions. The modification set was as following: fixed modification: Carbamidomethyl (C), TMT10plex(K), TMT10plex(N-term), Variable modification：Oxidation(M) and Acetyl (Protein N-term). The minimum 6 amino acids for peptide, ≥1 unique peptides were required per protein. For peptide and protein identification, false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1%. TMT reporter ion intensity were used for quantification.  Bioinformatics analysis Analyses of bioinformatics data were carried out with Perseus software, Microsoft Excel and R statistical computing software. Differentially significant expressed proteins were screened with the cutoff of a ratio fold-change of >1.20 or <0.83 and P-values < 0.05. Expression data were grouped together by hierarchical clustering according to the protein level. To annotate the sequences, information was extracted from UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot , Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG), and Gene Ontology (GO). GO and KEGG enrichment analyses were carried out with the Fisher’s exact test, and FDR correction for multiple testing was also performed. GO terms were grouped into three categories: biological process (BP), molecular function (MF), and cellular component (CC). Construction of protein–protein interaction (PPI) networks were also conducted by using the STRING database with the cytoscape software.

### Publication Abstract
Human fetal globin (&#x3b3;-globin) genes are developmentally silenced after birth, and reactivation of &#x3b3;-globin expression in adulthood ameliorates symptoms of hemoglobin disorders, such as sickle cell disease (SCD) and &#x3b2;-thalassemia. However, the mechanisms by which &#x3b3;-globin expression is precisely regulated are still incompletely understood. Here, we found that NonO (non-POU domain-containing octamer-binding protein) interacted directly with SOX6, and repressed the expression of &#x3b3;-globin gene in human erythroid cells. We showed that NonO bound to the octamer binding motif, ATGCAAAT, of the &#x3b3;-globin proximal promoter, resulting in inhibition of &#x3b3;-globin transcription. Depletion of NonO resulted in significant activation of &#x3b3;-globin expression in K562, HUDEP-2, and primary human erythroid progenitor cells. To confirm the role of NonO in vivo, we further generated a conditional knockout of NonO by using IFN-inducible Mx1-Cre transgenic mice. We found that induced NonO deletion reactivated murine embryonic globin and human &#x3b3;-globin gene expression in adult &#x3b2;-YAC mice, suggesting a conserved role for NonO during mammalian evolution. Thus, our data indicate that NonO acts as a novel transcriptional repressor of &#x3b3;-globin gene expression through direct promoter binding, and is essential for &#x3b3;-globin gene silencing.

### Keywords
Globin, K562, Gene expression, Sox6

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, School of Life Sciences, Nanjing University, Nanjing, 210000, China.
Nanjing University

### Submitter
li xinyu

### Lab Head
Dr Quan Zhao
State Key Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, School of Life Sciences, Nanjing University, Nanjing, 210000, China.


