### Accession
PXD009971

### Title
Identification of hypoxia-induced proteins using SILAC-based proteomics

### Description
A hallmark of solid tumours is the development of hypoxic regions where rapidly growing transformed cells outstrip their blood supply. Tumour cells in these starved regions sense reduced levels of oxygen and switch on genes that help them to adapt, survive and continue growing. Since hypoxia is a key physiological difference between normal and cancer tissue, an opportunity exists to selectively kill tumour cells by exploiting the differences in protein expression between normal and hypoxic tumour tissue. However, a major challenge is to identify druggable hypoxia-induced proteins critical for tumour cell survival. This is especially important in cancers of unmet need where hypoxia gene signatures correlate with poor prognosis (for example, colorectal cancers). To identify new hypoxia-induced proteins, we performed SILAC-based proteomics on colorectal cancer cells exposed to normoxia and hypoxia. In this study, we identify a new hypoxia-activated GPCR signalling axis that enables colorectal tumour cells to survive the microenvironmental stress of hypoxia. Our findings uncover a previously unappreciated role for this GPCR-axis as a key regulator of the adaptive response to hypoxia and highlght an opportunity to exploit tumour-associated hypoxia for therapy.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC-labelled samples were pooled and ran on a 10% SDS-PAGE gel and the gel lane cut into 10 equal slices. Each slice was subjected to in-gel tryptic digestion using a DigestPro automated digestion unit (Intavis) and the resulting peptides were fractionated using an Ultimate 3000 nanoHPLC system in line with an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Briefly, peptides in 1% (vol/vol) formic acid were injected onto an Acclaim PepMap C18 nano-trap column (Thermo). After washing with 0.5% (vol/vol) acetonitrile 0.1% (vol/vol) formic acid peptides were resolved on a 250 mm × 75 μm Acclaim PepMap C18 reverse phase analytical column (Thermo) over a 150 min organic gradient, using 7 gradient segments (1-6% solvent B over 1min., 6-15% B over 58min., 15-32% B over 58min., 32-40% B over 5min., 40-90% B over 1min., held at 90% B for 6min and then reduced to 1% B over 1min) with a flow rate of 300 nl min−1.  Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid and Solvent B was aqueous 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid.  Peptides were ionized by nano-electrospray ionization at 2.1 kV using a stainless-steel emitter with an internal diameter of 30 μm (Thermo) and a capillary temperature of 250°C. Tandem mass spectra were acquired using an LTQ- Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer controlled by Xcalibur 2.0 software (Thermo) and operated in data-dependent acquisition mode.  The Orbitrap was set to analyze the survey scans at 60,000 resolution (at m/z 400) in the mass range m/z 300 to 2000 and the top ten multiply charged ions in each duty cycle selected for MS/MS in the LTQ linear ion trap.  Charge state filtering, where unassigned precursor ions were not selected for fragmentation, and dynamic exclusion (repeat count, 1; repeat duration, 30s; exclusion list size, 500) were used.  Fragmentation conditions in the LTQ were as follows: normalized collision energy, 40%; activation q, 0.25; activation time 10ms; and minimum ion selection intensity, 500 counts.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were processed and quantified using Proteome Discoverer software v1.4 (Thermo) and searched against the UniProt Human database (122604 entries) using the SEQUEST algorithm.  Peptide precursor mass tolerance was set at 10ppm, and MS/MS tolerance was set at 0.8Da.  Search criteria included carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.0214) as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine (+15.9949) and appropriate SILAC labels (2H4-Lys, 13C6-Arg for duplex and 13C615N2-Lys and 13C615N4-Arg for triplex) as variable modifications.  Searches were performed with full tryptic digestion and a maximum of 1 missed cleavage was allowed.  The reverse database search option was enabled, and all peptide data was filtered to satisfy false discovery rate (FDR) of 5%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Colorectal cancer, Hypoxia, Silac

### Affiliations
University of Bristol
Biomedical Sciences, University of Bristol

### Submitter
Alexander Greenhough

### Lab Head
Dr Ann C. Williams
Biomedical Sciences, University of Bristol


