### Accession
PXD016790

### Title
MALAT1 (metastasis-associated lung adenocarcinoma transcript 1) Human HCC proteomics

### Description
The long noncoding RNA MALAT1 (metastasis-associated lung adenocarcinoma transcript 1), also known as MALAT-1 or NEAT2 (nuclear-enriched abundant transcript 2), is a highly conserved nuclear noncoding RNA (ncRNA). Two molecular functions of MALAT1 have been proposed, one is the control of alternative splicing and the other is the transcriptional regulation. To uncover its function in HCC, we knock down it in human HCC LM3 cell lines, and profiling the sample with LC/MS/MS and RNA sequencing.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were disrupted using 8 M urea solution in 50 mM  ammonium bicarbonate supplemented with 1 mM NaF, 1 mM Na3VO4, and proteasevinhibitor cocktail, and the cell debris was removed byvcentrifugation at 16,000 rcf for 30 min. Cellular proteinsvwere quantified using BCA assay. The proteins were reducedvby 10 mM DTT for 30 min at 37 ° and alkylated by 40 mMvIAA for 45 min at room temperature in the dark, then the proteins were diluted with 50 m  ammonium bicarbonate and digested with trypsin by a protease:protein ratio of 1:50 at 37 °C overnight.Then the pepitides resuspended in water and fractionated into eight fractions by a high pH reversed-phase peptide fractionation kit (Thermo-Fisher Scientific) following the manufacturer’s instructions.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data were processed by MaxQuant (1.4.1.4) with FDR < 0.01 at the level of both proteins and peptides. Peak lists were searched against the Human UniProt Swiss FASTA database (201808). Proteins and peptides (minimum seven amino acids) were identified using a target-decoy approach with a reversed database. Quantification of peptides and proteins was performed by MaxQuant with default settings. Bioinformatics analysis was performed with Perseus,and R statistical computing software.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Liver cancer, Malat1, Lc/ms/ms

### Affiliations
School of Pharmaceutical Science and Technology, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300072, China
Tianjin medical university

### Submitter
Hao Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Ruibing Chen
School of Pharmaceutical Science and Technology, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300072, China


