### Accession
PXD033100

### Title
Salmonella antibacterial Rhs polymorphic toxin inhibits translation through ADP-ribosylation of EF-Tu P-loop

### Description
Rearrangement hot spots (Rhs) proteins are members of the broad family of polymorphic toxins. Polymorphic toxins are modular proteins composed of an N-terminal region that specifies their mode of secretion into the medium or into the target cell, a central delivery module and a C-terminal domain that has toxic activity. Here, we structurally and functionally characterize the C-terminal toxic domain of the antibacterial Rhsmain protein, which is delivered by the Type VI secretion system of Salmonella enterica Typhimurium. We show that this domain adopts an ADP-ribosyltransferase fold and inhibits protein synthesis by transferring an ADP-ribose group from NAD+ to the elongation factor EFTu. This modification is specifically placed on the sidechain of the conserved D21 residue located on the P-loop of the EF-Tu G-domain. Finally, we demonstrate that its cognate immunity protein neutralizes Rhsmain C-terminal toxin activity by acting like a lid that closes the catalytic site and traps the NAD+.

### Sample Protocol
Intact mass analysis: Samples were nanoelectrosprayed using a TriVersa NanoMate (Advion Biosciences) coupled to an Eclipse mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). Data were recorded at 15 K resolution with 10 microscan between 700 and 2,000 m/z in protein mode under normal pressure condition. Top-down analysis: The ADP-ribosylated EF-Tu protein bound to GTP was nanoelectrosprayed using a TriVersa NanoMate (Advion Biosciences) coupled to an Eclipse mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). Data were recorded at 120 K resolution with 50 microscan in protein mode under normal pressure condition. Charge state 45+ (1016 m/z) was selected and submitted to HCD (NCE 20 to 40) or EThcD (ETD 1 to 5; HCD 1 to 10)fragmentations. For PTCR experiments, all ions generated upon activation were selected and charge-reduced for 25 to 100 ms with a reagent intensity of 7E5. Bottom-up analysis: 100 μg of the different EF-Tu preparations were digested at 37°C for 10 min in acid condition (0.1 % formic acid (FA)) by 1 μl of Nepenthes digestive fluid as described (Dupré et al., 2021). Digests (1 μg) were analyzed by nanoLC−MS/MS on a QExactive HF mass spectrometer. Generated peptides were separated on a homemade 30-cm C18 column (Kinetex 1.7 μm, XB-C18, Phenomenex) at a 250 nL.min-1 flow using a water/acetonitrile (ACN) gradient. After 5 min at 2% solvent B (80% ACN, 0.1% FA), a 60-min linear gradient of solvent B from 8% to 40% was applied followed by a quick ramp to 60% in 5 min. The column was rinsed with a 12-min plate of 95% solvent B followed by an equilibration step of 15 min at 2% solvent B. The scan range of the MS experiment was set between 300 and 1,800 m/z. Resolutions were set at 60 K for both MS and MS/MS, AGC at 3E6 for MS, and 1E6 for MS/MS. The 10 most intense ions with a charge state of 2 or plus and with a minimum intensity of 9.1E5 were selected with an isolation windows of 1.4 m/z for MS/MS experiment with HCD fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 29 and then excluded from selection for 8 s.

### Data Protocol
Intact mass analysis: Spectrum were summed and noise thresholded using PeakbyPeak (SpectroSwiss), then deconvoluted with Unidec (Marty et al., 2015). Top-down analysis: Spectrum with same activation were summed and deconvoluted using Qualbrowser (Extract algorithm). Peaks were assigned with ProSite Lite using 2 ppm error tolerance considering the cysteines free. The modification site was manually assessed by addition of a custom modification of +541.06, corresponding to the monoisotopic mass of an ADP-ribose addition, on different amino-acid. Bottom-up analysis: raw data were searched using PEAKS Studio v7 (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc) with a tolerance of 5 ppm for the precursor and 0.01 Da for the fragments. No enzyme rule was used since the Nepethens digestive fluid is not sequence-specific. Two modifications were taken into account: methionine oxidation (+15.99 on M) and ADP-ribose addition (+541.06 Da) with a maximum number of modifications per peptide set to 2. De novo data were then searched against E. coli EF-Tu sequence. The most comprehensive fragmentation spectra of the EF-Tu peptides identified with an ADP-ribose were selected and manually checked to localize precisely the amino-acid residue bearing the modification. Ions with a ribose-phosphate addition (+ 193.998) were specifically tracked as they remain stable after HCD activation.

### Publication Abstract
Rearrangement hot spot (Rhs) proteins are members of the broad family of polymorphic toxins. Polymorphic toxins are modular proteins composed of an N-terminal region that specifies their mode of secretion into the medium or into the target cell, a central delivery module, and a C-terminal domain that has toxic activity. Here, we structurally and functionally characterize the C-terminal toxic domain of the antibacterial Rhsmain protein, TreTu, which is delivered by the type VI secretion system of Salmonella enterica Typhimurium. We show that this domain adopts an ADP-ribosyltransferase fold and inhibits protein synthesis by transferring an ADP-ribose group from NAD+ to the elongation factor Tu (EF-Tu). This modification is specifically placed on the side chain of the conserved D21 residue located on the P-loop of the EF-Tu G-domain. Finally, we demonstrate that the TriTu immunity protein neutralizes TreTu activity by acting like a lid that closes the catalytic site and traps the NAD+.

### Keywords
Toxin, P-loop, Modification, Translation, T6ss, Elongation factor, Rearrangement hot spots, Adpribosylation

### Affiliations
Mass Spectrometry for Biology Unit,  CNRS USR2000, Institut Pasteur,  CNRS,  28 rue du Dr Roux, Paris 75015, France.
CNRS, Pasteur

### Submitter
Martial Rey

### Lab Head
Dr Julia Chamot-Rooke
Mass Spectrometry for Biology Unit,  CNRS USR2000, Institut Pasteur,  CNRS,  28 rue du Dr Roux, Paris 75015, France.


