### Accession
PXD035751

### Title
Quantitative Phosphoproteomics Analyses Reveal the Regulatiory Mechanisms Related to Frozen-thawed Sperm Capacitation and Acrosome Reaction in Yak (Bos grunniens)

### Description
Mammalian spermatozoa are not utterly mature after ejaculation and must undergo additional functional and structural changes within female reproductive tracts to achieve subsequent fertilization, including both capacitation and acrosome reaction (AR), which are dominated by post-translational modifications (PTMs), especially phosphorylation. However, the mechanisms of protein phosphorylation during frozen-thawed sperm capacitation and AR has  not yet been well studied. We employed phosphoproteomic approach based on TMT labeling combined with LC-MS/MS strategy to analyze frozen-thawed sperm in Ashidan yak under three sequential conditions (density gradient centrifugation-based purification, incubation in the capacitation medium and induction of AR processes by the calcium ionophore A23187 treatment).

### Sample Protocol
Protein Extraction and Trypsin Treatment First, FTH, CAP, and AR sperm samples were rinsed two times in PBS, followed by resuspension in a lysis buffer composed of 1% SDS supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitors. Second, these homogenates were subjected to three rounds of sonication by a high-intensity ultrasonic processor (Ningbo Scientz Biotechnology Co., Ltd., China). Third, samples were centrifuged at 12,000 xg at 4ºC for 10 min, followed by the collection of supernatants, and the protein levels in them were quantified by BCA kit (Beyotime Biotechnology, Wuhan, China) according to the provided instructions.  The protein sample was added with 1 volume of pre-cooled acetone, vortexed to mix, and added with 4 volumes of pre-cooled acetone, precipitated at -20 ℃ for 2 h. The protein sample was redissolved in 200 mM TEAB and ultrasonically dispersed, followed by the addition of Trypsin at a 1:50 mass ratio of trypsin-to-protein for the first digestion overnight. After that, the samples were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol at 37 °C for 60 min and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 45 min at room temperature in the dark. Finally, the peptides were desalted by the Strata X SPE column.  TMT Labeling and HPLC Fractionation Digested peptides were desalted by a Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenes, USA), and then vacuum-dried, dissolved with 0.5M TEAB and labeled with a TMT kit (Thermo, USA) according to provided instructions. Next, proteins were divided into fractions via high pH reverse-phase HPLC by using a Thermo Betasil C18 column (5 μm particles, 10 mm ID, 250 mm length). After that, peptides were initially separated into 60 fractions in 60 min by an 8-32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0; Fisher Chemical, USA) gradient. And they were combined into 6 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Affinity Enrichment of Phosphopeptides First, the peptide mixture was incubated along with IMAC microsphere suspension by vibration in loading buffer (50% acetonitrile/6% trifluoroacetic acid). Then, the IMAC microspheres containing enriched phosphopeptides were collected by centrifugation, with the removal of the supernatant. Next, in order to remove nonspecifically adsorbed peptides, the IMAC microspheres were washed sequentially with 50% acetonitrile/0.5% trifluoroacetic acid and 30% acetonitrile/0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. After that, the elution buffer containing 10% NH4OH was added to elute the enriched phosphopeptides from the IMAC microspheres by vibration. Finally, the eluted fractions were combined and vacuum-dried. The resulting peptides were desalted with C18 ZipTips (Millipore) for LC-MS/MS analyses according to the manufacturer’s instructions. LC-MS/MS Analyses First, after tryptic peptides were all dissolved with 0.1% formic acid, they were directly loaded on a homemade reversed-phase analytical column. Second, the gradient elution was performed by increasing solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) concentrations from 4 to20% in 40 min, from 20 to 32% in 12 min, and from 32 to 80% in 4 min, respectively. Third, the samples were kept in 80% solvent B for 4 min. The flow rate was maintained at 450 nL/min by an EASY-nLC 1200 UPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, CA, USA). Then, peptides were introduced into an NSI source, followed by MS/MS in a Q ExactiveTM HF-X (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled online to the UPLC apparatus. Next, the electrospray voltage was set to 2.2 kV, and peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 60000, with a full scan range of 350 - 1400 m/z. After that, a normalized collision energy (NCE) setting of 28 was used to detect selected MS/MS peptides at 30000 resolution in the Orbitrap. A data-dependent procedure was alternated between one MS and 20 MS/MS scans with a 15.0 s dynamic exclusion. Finally, the automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 5E4, and the fixed first mass was set to 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Database Search The Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8) was used to analyze the resulting data by comparing MS/MS spectra with the Uniprot bovine database[45], concatenated with a reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as the utilized cleavage enzyme with up to 2 missing cleavages allowed. The mass ion tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the initial search, and limited to 5 ppm for the main search (Fragment ions: 0.02 Da). Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as a fixed modification, and Acetylation on the N-terminus of the protein, oxidation on Met, deamidation (NQ) and phosphorylation on Ser, Thr, Tyr as a variable modification. TMT-10plex quantification was performed. The FDR was set to < 1%, and the minimum peptide score was > 40.

### Publication Abstract
Mammalian spermatozoa are not mature after ejaculation and must undergo additional functional and structural changes within female reproductive tracts to achieve subsequent fertilization, including both capacitation and acrosome reaction (AR), which are dominated by post-translational modifications (PTMs), especially phosphorylation. However, the mechanism of protein phosphorylation during frozen-thawed sperm capacitation and AR has not been well studied. In this study, the phosphoproteomics approach was employed based on tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling combined with liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) strategy to analyze frozen-thawed sperm in Ashidan yak under three sequential conditions (density gradient centrifugation-based purification, incubation in the capacitation medium and induction of AR processes by the calcium ionophore A23187 treatment). The identification of 1,377 proteins with 5,509 phosphorylation sites revealed changes in phosphorylation levels of sperm-specific proteins involved in regulation of spermatogenesis, sperm motility, energy metabolism, cilium movement, capacitation and AR. Some phosphorylated proteins, such as AKAP3, AKAP4, SPA17, PDMD11, CABYR, PRKAR1A, and PRKAR2A were found to regulate yak sperm capacitation and AR though the cAMP/PKA signaling pathway cascades. Notably, the phosphorylation level of SPA17 at Y156 increased in capacitated sperm, suggesting that it is also a novel functional protein besides AKAPs during sperm capacitation. Furthermore, the results of this study suggested that the phosphorylation of PRKAR1A and PRKAR2A, and the dephosphorylation of CABYR both play key regulatory role in yak sperm AR process. Protein-protein interaction analysis revealed that differentially phosphorylated proteins (AKAP3, AKAP4, FSIP2, PSMD11, CABYR, and TPPP2) related to capacitation and AR process played a key role in protein kinase A binding, sperm motility, reproductive process, cytoskeleton and sperm flagella function. Taken together, these data provide not only a solid foundation for further exploring phosphoproteome of sperm in yak, but an efficient way to identify sperm fertility-related marker phosphorylated proteins.

### Keywords
Yak sperm phosphoproteomics tmt lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
PTM Biolabs Inc.
Key Laboratory of Animal Genetics and Breeding on Tibetan Plateau, Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, Key Laboratory of Yak Breeding Engineering of Gansu Province, Lanzhou Institute of Husbandry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Lanzhou 730050, China

### Submitter
zhang renzheng

### Lab Head
Dr Zhang Renzheng
Key Laboratory of Animal Genetics and Breeding on Tibetan Plateau, Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, Key Laboratory of Yak Breeding Engineering of Gansu Province, Lanzhou Institute of Husbandry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Lanzhou 730050, China


