### Accession
PXD024639

### Title
Human urinary protein and glycopeotein LC-MSMS

### Description
N-glycosylation is one of the most common and important post-translational modifications, and plays a vital role in the control of many biological processes. The increasing discovery of abnormal alterations of N-linked glycans associated with many diseases leads to greater demands for rapid and efficient N-glycosylation profiling in large-scale clinical samples. In the workflow of global N-glycosylation analysis, enzymatic digestion is the main rate-limiting step, including both protease digestion and PNGase F deglycosylation.

### Sample Protocol
The urinary protein was precipitated by ice cooled acetone and dissolved in lysis buffer to a concentration of 1 mg/mL. Each sample above was heated for 10 min at 95 °C to denature followed by TCEP (10mM) reduction and CAA (40mM) alkylation. For TMF-trypsin digestion, 1mL of the above protein solution was mixed with TMF-trypsin and incubated for 3 minutes at room temperature, respectively. After digestion, the immobilized trypsin was retained by a heating-magnet process and the supernatant was collected for mass spectrometry analysis. The TMF-trypsin materials can be reused after washing three times with 50mM ABC. For free trypsin digestion, firstly, the protein solution was diluted to reduce the urea concentration to 1 M. Then, free trypsin was introduced into the denatured protein solution at substrate to enzyme ratios (w/w) of 50:1 and incubated at 37 °C for 16 h. After digestion, 2μL of formic acid was added to terminate the reaction, and the supernatant was collected for mass spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS raw data were analyzed by MaxQuant software searching against the UniPort Human database (updated on July 21, 2015). The main parameters were set as follows: (1) The digestion mode was set as trypsin up to two missed cleavages allowed, (2) mass tolerances were 20 ppm and 4.5 ppm for the first search and main search, respectively,  (3) fixed modification, carbamidomethyl (C), (4) variable modification, deamidation 18O (N), acetyl (protein N-term), oxidation (M), (5) the false discovery rate (FDR) was set as ≤0.01 at the spectra, protein and modification levels, and (6) the minimum score and delta score for the modified peptides were set as ≥40 and ≥6, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
<i>N-</i>Glycosylation is one of the most common and important post-translational modification methods, and it plays a vital role in controlling many biological processes. Increasing discovery of abnormal alterations in <i>N-</i>linked glycans associated with many diseases leads to greater demands for rapid and efficient <i>N-</i>glycosylation profiling in large-scale clinical samples. In the workflow of global <i>N-</i>glycosylation analysis, enzymatic digestion is the main rate-limiting step, and it includes both protease digestion and peptide-<i>N</i>4-(<i>N</i>-acetyl-beta-glucosaminyl) asparagine amidase (PNGase) F deglycosylation. Prolonged incubation time is generally required because of the limited digestion efficiency of the conventional in-solution digestion method. Here, we propose novel thermoresponsive magnetic fluid (TMF)-immobilized enzymes (trypsin or PNGase F) for ultrafast and highly efficient proteome digestion and deglycosylation. Unlike other magnetic material-immobilized enzymes, TMF-immobilized enzymes display a unique temperature-triggered magnetic response behavior. At room temperature, a TMF-immobilized enzyme completely dissolves in an aqueous solution and forms a homogeneous system with a protein/peptide sample for efficient digestion but cannot be separated by magnetic force because of its excellent water dispersity. Above its lower critical solution temperature (LCST), thermoflocculation of a TMF-immobilized enzyme allows it to be easily recovered by increasing the temperature and magnetic force. Taking advantage of the unique homogeneous reaction of a TMF-immobilized enzyme, both protein digestion and glycopeptide deglycosylation can be finished within 3 min, and the whole sample processing time can be reduced by more than 20 times. The application of a TMF-immobilized enzyme in large-scale profiling of protein <i>N-</i>glycosylation in urine samples led to the successful identification of 2,197 <i>N</i>-glycopeptides and further demonstrated the potential of this strategy for fast and high-throughput analysis of <i>N-</i>glycoproteome in clinical samples.

### Keywords
Urinary proteins, Lc-msms

### Affiliations
National Center for Protein Sciences (Beijing)

### Submitter
Zhiya Fan

### Lab Head
Dr Weijie Qin
National Center for Protein Sciences (Beijing)


