### Accession
PXD020287

### Title
Extensive protein group SUMO modification of repressive chromatin factors distinguishes pluripotent from somatic cells (total proteome)

### Description
Post-translational modification by SUMO is a key regulator of cell identity. In mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs), SUMO impedes reprogramming to pluripotency, while in embryonic stem cells (ESCs), it represses the emergence of totipotent-like cells, suggesting that SUMO targets distinct substrates to preserve somatic and pluripotent states. Using MS-based proteomics, we show that the composition of endogenous SUMOylomes differs dramatically between MEFs and ESCs. In MEFs, SUMO2/3 targets proteins associated with canonical SUMO functions, such as splicing, and transcriptional regulators driving somatic enhancer selection. In contrast, in ESCs, SUMO2/3 primarily modifies highly interconnected repressive chromatin complexes, thereby preventing chromatin opening and transitioning to totipotent-like states. We also characterize several SUMO-modified pluripotency factors and show that SUMOylation of Dppa2 and Dppa4 impedes the conversion to 2-cell-embryo-like states. Altogether, we propose that rewiring the repertoire of SUMO target networks is a major driver of cell fate decision during embryonic development.

### Sample Protocol
Primary MEFs were isolated at 13.5 days post coitum. Pregnant females were sacrificed by cervical dislocation, male and female embryos were removed, and the fetal liver and head were excised. The remainder of the embryonic tissue was minced and incubated with 0.25% trypsin-EDTA (Sigma-Aldrich) for 15 min at 37 °C. MEFs were expanded and frozen at passage 1 for subsequent experiments. MEFs were grown in complete medium: DMEM + GlutaMAX (GIBCO) medium supplemented with 10% FBS and penicillin/streptomycin. MEFs and ESCs were amplified to reach approximatively 250 million cells per replicate. In the case of MEFs, primary cells had a maximum number of passages of 5. Cells were washed twice with ice-cold PBS and collected on ice by gentle scraping. Cells were vigorously lysed using 10 pellet volumes of 6 M guanidine, 50 mM TRIS, buffered at pH 8.5, after which they were immediately snap frozen and stored at −80°C until further processing.  For the purpose of native and endogenous SUMO-IP for mass spectrometry, lysates were digested with Lys-C, peptides were purified on C8 SepPak and lyophilized, after which they were dissolved in IAP buffer for SUMO2/3 immunoprecipitation (see PXD017697). For the total proteome analysis as described here, a small portion (1% of total sample, ~15 μg peptide) was used for determination of the total proteome, representing a Lys-C digest eluted off C8 Sep-Paks in the 25-45% ACN range. The peptides were further digested using modified sequencing grade Trypsin (1:100 w/w; Sigma Aldrich), overnight at 37°C. Tryptic peptides were fractionated on-StageTip at high-pH, with quad-layer StageTips prepared using four punch-outs of C18 material (Sigma-Aldrich, Empore™ SPE Disks, C18, 47 mm). StageTips were equilibrated using 100 μL of methanol, 100 μL of 80% acetonitrile (ACN) in 200 mM ammonium, and two times 75 μL 50 mM ammonium. Samples were supplemented with 1/10th volume of 200 mM ammonium, just prior to loading on StageTip. Peptides were eluted as eight fractions (F1-8) using 80 μL of 2, 4, 7, 10, 13, 17, 22, and 30% ACN in 50 mM ammonium. All fractions were dried to completion in LoBind tubes (Eppendorf), using a SpeedVac for 3 h at 60°C, after which the dried peptides were dissolved using 10 μL of 0.1% formic acid. 1.5 μL of each fraction (~0.02% of original total sample, ~250 ng peptide per injection) was used for total proteome analysis on the MS.  Total proteome samples were analyzed using an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo), coupled to an Orbitrap Exploris™ 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo). Separation of peptides was performed using 15-cm columns (75 μm internal diameter) packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 1.9 µm beads (Dr. Maisch). Elution of peptides from the column was achieved using a gradient ranging from buffer A (0.1% formic acid) to buffer B (80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid), at a flow of 250 nL/min. Gradient length was 80 min per sample, including ramp-up and wash-out, and an analytical gradient of 50 min. The buffer B ramp for the analytical gradient was as follows: F1: 5-38%, F2: 6-39%, F3: 7-40%, F4: 8-41%, F5: 9-42%, F6: 10-43%, F7: 12-45%, F8: 14-47%. The columns were heated to 40°C using a column oven, and ionization was achieved using a NanoSpray Flex™ NG ion source (Thermo). Spray voltage was set at 2 kV, ion transfer tube temperature was set to 275°C, and an RF funnel level of 40% was used. Full scan range was set to 300-1,750 m/z, MS1 resolution to 120,000, MS1 AGC target to “200” (2,000,000 charges), and MS1 maximum injection time to “Auto”. Precursors with charges 2-6 were selected for fragmentation using an isolation width of 1.3 m/z, and fragmented using higher-energy collision disassociation (HCD) with normalized collision energy of 25. Monoisotopic Precursor Selection (MIPS) was enabled in “Peptide” mode. Precursors were excluded from re-sequencing by setting a dynamic exclusion of 80 s, with an exclusion mass tolerance of 20 ppm, exclusion of isotopes, and exclusion of alternate charge states for the same precursor. MS2 resolution was set to 15,000, MS2 AGC target to “200” (200,000 charges), MS2 intensity threshold to 430,000, MS2 maximum injection time to “Auto”, and TopN to 18.

### Data Protocol
All total proteome data was processed in a single computational run using MaxQuant 1.5.3.30 and default settings, with exceptions specified below. For generation of the theoretical spectral library, the mouse FASTA database was downloaded from Uniprot on the 23rd of July, 2018. In silico digestion of theoretical peptides was performed with trypsin, allowing up to 3 missed cleavages. Variable modifications used were protein N-terminal acetylation (default), methionine oxidation (default), and Ser/Thr/Tyr phosphorylation (STY), with a maximum of 3 modifications per peptide. Second peptide search was enabled. Label-free quantification was enabled, with “Fast LFQ” disabled, “LFQ min. ratio count” set to 3, and “Skip normalization” enabled. iBAQ was enabled. Stringent MaxQuant 1% FDR filtering was applied at all levels (default). Matching between runs was enabled only within the same (and not neighboring) fractions, with a match time window of 1 min and an alignment window of 20 min. For protein quantification, the same variable modifications were included as for the peptide search.

### Publication Abstract
Post-translational modification by SUMO is a key regulator of cell identity. In mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs), SUMO impedes reprogramming to pluripotency, while in embryonic stem cells (ESCs), it represses the emergence of totipotent-like cells, suggesting that SUMO targets distinct substrates to preserve somatic and pluripotent states. Using MS-based proteomics, we show that the composition of endogenous SUMOylomes differs dramatically between MEFs and ESCs. In MEFs, SUMO2/3 targets proteins associated with canonical SUMO functions, such as splicing, and transcriptional regulators driving somatic enhancer selection. In contrast, in ESCs, SUMO2/3 primarily modifies highly interconnected repressive chromatin complexes, thereby preventing chromatin opening and transitioning to totipotent-like states. We also characterize several SUMO-modified pluripotency factors and show that SUMOylation of Dppa2 and Dppa4 impedes the conversion to 2-cell-embryo-like states. Altogether, we propose that rewiring the repertoire of SUMO target networks is a major driver of cell fate decision during embryonic development.

### Keywords
Somatic, Chromatin, Sumo, Esc, Total, Stem cells, Pluripotent, Proteome, Mef

### Affiliations
Proteomics program, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark

### Submitter
Ivo Hendriks

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Lund Nielsen
Proteomics program, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark


