### Accession
PXD003937

### Title
Gamma ray irradiation of epithelial carcinoma cells under hypoxic conditions

### Description
We demonstrate for the first time that under hypoxic conditions, A431 epithelial carcinoma cells exhibit increased viability when exposed to low-dose γ-irradiation, indicating that radiotherapy can promote tumor cell survival when oxygen supply is limited. When assessed using iTRAQ quantitative proteomics and Western blotting, irradiated tumor cells were observed to significantly up-regulate the expression of calcium-binding proteins CALM1, CALU and RCN1, suggesting important roles for these mediators in promoting tumor cell survival during hypoxia.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture and induction of hypoxia A431 epithelial carcinoma cells were purchased from ATCC and maintained in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS for culture at 37°C with 5% CO2. The cells were later seeded into 24-well plates (4×104 cells per well) or 10cm dishes (3×106 cells each) and incubated overnight, washed twice with 1X PBS, and washed twice more in serum-free medium. The cell pellets were then re-suspended in serum-free medium and transferred to a humidified CO2 incubator for culture either under normoxic conditions (Nx: 21% O2; 5% CO2) or were subjected to hypoxia by sealing the culture plate/dish inside a single GasPakTM anaerobe pouch (EZ Gas Generating Pouch Systems) to generate a low-oxygen atmosphere (Hx: <0.7% O2; >5% CO2).   Gamma irradiation After 24h incubation under normoxia or hypoxia, the A431 cells were exposed to 2-4 grays (G) of γ-irradiation in the bucket of Biobeam 8000 γ-irradiator (Gamma-Service Medical GmbH, Germany). Hypoxic cells remained sealed in anaerobic pouches for the duration of this process. Thereafter, the cells were returned to their respective culture conditions for a further 24h incubation.  Sample preparation, iTRAQ labeling, and LC-MS Proteomic experiments were performed in triplicate. The cellular proteins obtained from each experiment were dissolved in 8M urea in 20mM TEAB (pH 8.5) solution containing protease inhibitor cocktail (1:50). Protein concentrations were measured using BCA assays. For each condition, a total of 100µg protein was reduced with 5mM TCEP for 3h at 30°C then alkylated with 10mM MMTS for 45min at room temperature in the dark. The samples were then diluted with 20mM TEAB to achieve a final concentration of 1M urea prior to digestion with trypsin overnight at 37°C (mass ratio trypsin 1:50 protein). The resultant solution containing tryptic peptides was adjusted to pH 2-3 with TFA and desalted using Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (Waters). The peptides were then dried using a speedvac concentrator, dissolved in 1M TEAB (pH 8.5), and finally labeled with isobaric tags according to manufacturer’s protocol (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA); The N48 sample was labeled with 114; the N24+3G+N24 sample was labeled with 115; the H48 sample was labeled with 116; and the H24+3G+H24 sample was labeled with 117. The labeled samples were then pooled and desalted using Sep-Pak C18 cartridges.  The iTRAQ-labeled samples were fractionated on an ERLIC column (PolyLC, Columbia, MD; 4.6×200 mm, 5µm particle size, 300-Å pore size) using a Shimadzu Prominence UFLC system (Kyoto, Japan). Fractionation was performed using a  gradient of buffer A (10mM CH3COONH4 in 85% ACN/1% FA) and buffer B (30% ACN/0.1% FA) conducted over a 60min period at a constant flow rate of 0.9ml/min (0% buffer B for 5 min, 0-28% B for 40min, 28-100% B for 5min, 100% B for 10min). A total of 30 separate fractions were collected and desalted using Sep-Pak C18 cartridges. Each fraction was then dried and reconstituted in a 40µl volume of 3% ACN, 0.1% FA for Q-Exactive LC-MS/MS analysis. The detailed parameters used were as previously described (30).

### Data Protocol
Database searching Protein identification and quantification were performed using Proteome Discovery 1.4 software with Sequest searches conducted against the UniProt human database (released on 2012_05, comprising 87881 protein sequences) combined with 115 common contaminants (cRAP protein sequences). The false discovery rate (FDR) was determined using a decoy database search using reserve sequence and was set to less than 1% for both peptide and protein identification. Trypsin was selected as the specific enzyme with a maximum of two missed cleavages permitted per peptide. Parameters included; static modification: iTRAQ 4 plex (N-term), iTRAQ 4 plex (K), Methylthiol (C); dynamic modification: Oxidation (M), Deamidatioin (N, Q), iTRAQ 4 plex (Y). Data were searched with a peptide mass tolerance of 10ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.02Da.

### Publication Abstract
Hypoxia is thought to promote tumor radio-resistance via effects on gene expression in cancer cells that modulate their metabolism, proliferation, and DNA repair pathways to enhance survival. Here we demonstrate for the first time that under hypoxic condition A431 epithelial carcinoma cells exhibit increased viability when exposed to low-dose &#x3b3;-irradiation, indicating that radiotherapy can promote tumor cell survival when oxygen supply is limited. When assessed using iTRAQ quantitative proteomics and Western blotting, irradiated tumor cells were observed to significantly up-regulate the expression of calcium-binding proteins CALM1, CALU, and RCN1, suggesting important roles for these mediators in promoting tumor cell survival during hypoxia. Accordingly, shRNA-knockdown of CALM1, CALU, and RCN1 expression reduced hypoxic tumor cell resistance to low-dose radiation and increased apoptosis. These data indicate that &#x3b3;-irradiation of hypoxic tumor cells induces up-regulation of calcium-binding proteins that promote cancer cell survival and may limit the efficacy of radiotherapy in the clinic.

### Keywords
Calcium signaling pathway, Hypoxia, Itraq, Radiotherapy, Cancer

### Affiliations
NTU
Nanyang Technical University

### Submitter
Siu Kwan Sze

### Lab Head
Dr Newman Sze
NTU


