### Accession
PXD017786

### Title
Low-protein/high carbohydrate diet

### Description
Low-protein/high carbohydrate (LP/HC) diet promotes metabolic health and longevity in adult human and animal models. However, the complex molecular underpinnings of how LP/HC diet leads to metabolic benefits remain elusive. Through a multi-layered approach, here we observed that LP/HC diet promotes an energy-dissipating response consisting in the parallel recruitment of canonical and non-canonical (muscular) thermogenic systems in subcutaneous adipose tissue (sWAT). In particular, we measured Ucp1 induction in association with up-regulation of actomyosin components and several Serca (Serca1, Serca2a, Serca2b) ATPases. In beige adipocytes, we observed that AMPK activation is responsible for transducing the amino acid lowering in an enhanced fat catabolism, which sustains both Ucp1- and Serca-dependent energy dissipation. Limiting AMPK activation counteracts the expression of brown fat and muscular genes, including Ucp1 and Serca, as well as mitochondrial oxidative genes. We observed that mitochondrial reactive oxygen species are the upstream molecules controlling AMPK-mediated metabolic rewiring in amino acid-restricted beige adipocytes. Our findings delineate a novel metabolic phenotype of responses to amino acid shortage, which recapitulates some of the benefits of cool temperature in sWAT. In conclusion, this study highlights LP/HC diet as a valuable and practicable strategy to prevent metabolic diseases through the enhancement of mitochondrial oxidative metabolism and the recruitment of different energy dissipating routes in beige adipocytes.

### Sample Protocol
For quantitative proteomic analysis, protein concentration in sWAT samples was determined using the Pierce BCA Protein assay kit™ (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA), according to manufacturer’s instructions. An aliquot of each protein sample (100 μg) was adjusted to a final volume of 100 μl with 100 mM TEAB. Proteins were reduced with 5 μl of 200 mM tris(2-carboxyethylphosphine), for 60 min, at 55 °C, and then alkylated by adding 5 μl of 375 mM iodoacetamide in the dark, for 30 min, at 25 °C. Alkylated proteins were then precipitated by addition of 6 vol of cold acetone, pelleted by centrifugation at 8000 x g, for 10 min, at 4 °C, and then air dried. Each sample was digested with freshly prepared trypsin (ratio of enzyme to protein 1:50) in 100 mM TEAB, at 37 °C, overnight. Resulting peptides were labelled with the TMT Label Reagent Set (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, USA), at 25 °C, according to manufacturer’s instructions, using the matching: WD-TMT6-126, LP/HC-TMT6-127. After 1 h, reaction was quenched by adding 8 μl of 5% w/v hydroxylamine in each tube, and allowing reaction vortexing for 15 min. For a set of comparative experiments, tagged peptide mixtures were mixed in equal molar ratios (1:1) and vacuum-dried under rotation. Then, pooled TMT-labelled peptide mixtures were suspended in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, and fractionated by using the Pierce™High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide fractionation kit (Thermo-Fisher Scientific) to remove unbound TMT reagents, according to manufacturer’s instructions. After fractionation, 8 fractions of TMT-labelled peptides were collected, vacuum-dried and finally reconstituted in 0.1% FA.  TMT-labelled peptide fractions were analyzed on a nanoLC-ESI-Q-Orbitrap-MS/MS platform consisting of an UltiMate 3000 HPLC RSLC nano system (Dionex, USA) coupled to a Q-ExactivePlus mass spectrometer through a Nanoflex ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) (Visconti et al., 2019). Peptides were loaded on an Acclaim PepMap TM RSLC C18 column (150 mm × 75 μm ID, 2 μm particles, 100 Å pore size) (Thermo-Fisher Scientific), and eluted with a gradient of solvent B (19.92/80/0.08 v/v/v H2O/ACN/FA) in solvent A (99.9/0.1 v/v H2O/FA), at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The gradient of solvent B started at 5%, increased to 60% over 125 min, raised to 95% over 1 min, remained at 95% for 8 min, and finally returned to 5% in 1 min, with a column equilibrating step of 20 min before the subsequent chromatographic run. The mass spectrometer operated in data-dependent mode, using a full scan (m/z range 375–1500, nominal resolution of 70,000), followed by MS/MS scans of the 10 most abundant ions. MS/MS spectra were acquired in a scan m/z range 110–2000, using a normalized collision energy of 32%, an automatic gain control target of 100,000, a maximum ion target of 120 ms, and a resolution of 17,500. A dynamic exclusion of 30 s was used.

### Data Protocol
All MS and MS/MS raw data files per sample were merged for protein identification and relative protein quantification into ProteomeDiscoverervs 2.4 software (Thermo Scientific), enabling the database search by Mascot algorithm v. 2.4.2 (Matrix Science, UK) using the following criteria: UniProtKB protein database (Mus musculus, 17030 protein sequences, 10/2019) including the most common protein contaminants; carbamidomethylation of Cys and TMT6plex modification of lysine and peptide N-terminal as fixed modifications; oxidation of Met, deamidation of Asn and Gln, pyroglutamate formation of Gln, phosphorylation of Ser, Thr and Tyr as variable modifications. Peptide mass tolerance was set to ± 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance to ± 0.02 Da. Proteolytic enzyme and maximum number of missed cleavages were set to trypsin and 2, respectively. Protein candidates assigned on the basis of at least two sequenced peptides and an individual Mascot Score grater or equal to 25 were considered confidently identified. For quantification, ratios of TMT reporter ion intensities in the MS/MS spectra from raw datasets were used to calculate fold changes between samples. Results were filtered to 1% false discovery rate.

### Publication Abstract
Low-protein/high-carbohydrate (LPHC) diet has been suggested to promote metabolic health and longevity in adult humans and animal models. However, the complex molecular underpinnings of how LPHC diet leads to metabolic benefits remain elusive. Through a multi-layered approach, here we observed that LPHC diet promotes an energy-dissipating response consisting in the parallel recruitment of canonical and non-canonical (muscular) thermogenic systems in subcutaneous white adipose tissue (sWAT). In particular, we measured Ucp1 induction in association with up-regulation of actomyosin components and several Serca (Serca1, Serca2a, Serca2b) ATPases. In beige adipocytes, we observed that AMPK activation is responsible for transducing the amino acid lowering in an enhanced fat catabolism, which sustains both Ucp1-and Serca-dependent energy dissipation. Limiting AMPK activation counteracts the expression of brown fat and muscular genes, including Ucp1 and Serca, as well as mitochondrial oxidative genes. We observed that mitochondrial reactive oxygen species are the upstream molecules controlling AMPK-mediated metabolic rewiring in amino acid-restricted beige adipocytes. Our findings delineate a novel metabolic phenotype of responses to amino acid shortage, which recapitulates some of the benefits of cool temperature in sWAT. In conclusion, this highlights LPHC diet as a valuable and practicable strategy to prevent metabolic diseases through the enhancement of mitochondrial oxidative metabolism and the recruitment of different energy dissipating routes in beige adipocytes.

### Keywords
Adipose tissue, Diet

### Affiliations
Proteomic and Mass Spectrometry Laboratory Istituto per il sistema Produzione Animale in Ambiente Mediterraneo (ISPAAM) Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche (CNR)
ISPAAM CNR

### Submitter
CHIARA D'AMBROSIO

### Lab Head
Dr Andrea Scaloni
Proteomic and Mass Spectrometry Laboratory Istituto per il sistema Produzione Animale in Ambiente Mediterraneo (ISPAAM) Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche (CNR)


