### Accession
PXD004036

### Title
Antimicrobial resistance of Staphylococcus aureus by quantitative proteomics with TMT-labelling

### Description
The clinical development of antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) is currently under evaluation to combat the rapid increase in multi-drug resistant bacterial pathogens. However, many AMPs closely resemble components of the human innate immune system, and the ramifications of prolonged bacterial exposure to AMPs are not fully understood. Here we show that in vitro serial passage of a clinical USA300 methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus strain in a host-mimicking environment containing host-derived AMPs results in the selection of stable AMP-resistance. AMP-resistant S. aureus mutants often displayed little to no fitness cost and caused invasive disease in mice. Further, this phenotype coincided with diminished susceptibility to both clinically prescribed antibiotics and human defense peptides. These findings suggest that therapeutic use of AMPs could select for virulent mutants with cross-resistance to human innate immunity as well as antibiotic therapy. Thus, therapeutic use of AMPs and the implications of cross-resistance need to be carefully monitored and evaluated.

### Sample Protocol
The cell cultures were lysed using the FastPrep-24 instrument. Cell lysates were centrifuged, 50 μg of each sample from the supernatants were digested with trypsin using the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method overnight. Protein samples were reduced with 100 mM dithiothreitol and alkylated with 10 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate. Digested peptides were labeled using TMT 10-plex isobaric mass tagging reagents according to the manufacturer instructions.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using Proteome Discoverer version 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Reference proteome database for Staphylococcus aureus strain NCTC 8325 (March 2016) was downloaded from Uniprot and supplemented with common proteomic contaminants. Mascot 2.3.2.0 (Matrix Science) was used as a search engine with precursor mass tolerance of 5 ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 0.5 Da. Percolator was used for the validation of identification results; target false discovery rate of 1% was used as a threshold to filter confident peptide identifications. Modified peptides were fractionated into 21 fractions using reversed-phase XBridge C18 3.5 μm, 3.0x150 mm column. Each fraction was analyzed on Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer interfaced with Easy-nLC nanoflow liquid chromatography system.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Antimicobial resistance, Tmt, High-ph reverse-phase fractionation, Staphylococcus aureus, Antimicrobial peptide, Orbitrap fusion

### Affiliations
Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, Uppsala University, Box 582, 75123, Uppsala, Sweden
Proteomics Core Facility, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden

### Submitter
Egor Vorontsov

### Lab Head
Dr Dan I. Andersson
Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, Uppsala University, Box 582, 75123, Uppsala, Sweden


