### Accession
PXD015358

### Title
Human Cerebrospinal fluid LC-MSMS

### Description
Chronic Traumatic Encephalopathy (CTE) is a tauopathy that affects individuals with a history of repetitive mild traumatic brain injury, such as American football players. Initial neuropathologic changes in CTE include perivascular deposition of phosphorylated microtubule-associated protein tau (p-tau) neurofibrillary tangles and other aggregates in neurons, astrocytes and cell processes in an irregular pattern often at the depths of the cortical sulci. In later stages, the p-tau depositions become widespread and is associated with neurodegeneration. Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are known to carry neuropathogenic molecules, most notably p-tau. We therefore examined the protein composition of EVs isolated from the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) of former National Football League (NFL) players with cognitive and neuropsychiatric dysfunction, and an age-matched control group (CTRL) with no history of contact sports or traumatic brain injury.

### Sample Protocol
The EV fraction was isolated from CSF samples using the MagCapture Exosome Isolation Kit PS. Briefly, the CSF samples were centrifuged at 1,200 g for 20 min at 4°C, then the supernatant was centrifuged at 10,000 g for 30 min at 4°C. The supernatant was filtered by 0.22 μm Spin-X centrifuge tube, then the EV fraction was isolated from the flow-through using the MagCapture Exosome Isolation Kit PS, according to the manufacturer's instructions. Ice-cold 100% (w / v) trichloroacetic acid was added to the isolated EV fraction to a final concentration of 20% of TCA, then the mixed sample was incubated for 30 min on ice and was centrifuged at 15,000 g for 20 min at 4°C. The pellet was then washed twice with ice-cold acetone. After drying, the pellet was resuspended in Laemmli sample buffer with 5mM dithiothreitol, reduced for 20 min at 65°C, and alkylated with 15mM iodoacetamide for 20 min at room temperature in the dark. Subsequently, the samples were run in a 4% to 20% gradient gel until the dye front was 10 mm from the top of the gel. The gels were washed twice with distilled water, fixed with 100% Methanol, and stained with GelCode Blue Stain Reagent for 16 hrs. Each lane was then individually removed from the gel. Gel pieces were then transferred to 1.5 mL tubes and destained twice using 50% acetonitrile in 25mM HEPES at 22°C, for 15 min with shaking, and dehydrated with 100% acetonitrile for additional 10 min with shaking, for a total of three times. The destained gel piece was dried up using SpeedVac Concentrators. The gel pieces were digested with proteomic grade trypsin in 25mM HEPES overnight at 37°C. The digested peptide was extracted with 70% acetonitrile /1% formic acid, and were removed the gel by Ultrafree-MC Centrifugal Filter. The digested peptides were reconstituted in 25μL of 200mM EPPS (pH 8.0) and vortexed for 5 min. Tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling was performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions. In brief, 4μL of TMT reagent (20 ng/μL) was added to the digested peptides. Following incubation at room temperature for 1 h, the reaction was quenched with 2μL of 5% hydroxylamine for 15 min. The TMT-labeled peptide samples were pooled at a 1:1 ratio across 10 samples. The combined sample was added into 100 μL of 20% formic acid, 2 mL of 1% formic acid, desalted via StageTip, dried by vacuum centrifugation, and resuspended in 5% acetonitrile and 5% formic acid for nano-liquid chromatography and tandem mass-spectrometry (NanoLC-MS/MS). NanoLC–MS/MS analysis was conducted by an LTQ-Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer equipped with a Proxeon EASY-nanoLC 1200 liquid chromatography pump. Peptides were separated on a 100 μm inner diameter microcapillary column packed with ~40 cm of Accucore150 resin (2.6 μm, 150 Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific). We loaded 4 μL onto the column and separation was achieved using a 180 min gradient of 8 to 23% acetonitrile in 0.125% formic acid at a flow rate of ~550 nL/min. The analysis used an MS3 based TMT method, which has been shown to reduce ion interference. The scan sequence began with an MS1 spectrum (Orbitrap; resolution 120,000; mass range 400-1400 m/z; automatic gain control (AGC) target 5 × 105; maximum injection time 100 ms). Precursors for MS2/MS3 analysis were selected using a Top10 method. MS2 analysis consisted of collision-induced dissociation (quadrupole ion trap; AGC 2 × 10^4; normalized collision energy (NCE) 35; maximum injection time 150 ms). Following acquisition of each MS2 spectrum, we collected an MS3 spectrum using our recently described method in which multiple MS2 fragment ions were captured in the MS3 precursor population using isolation waveforms with multiple frequency notches. MS3 precursors were fragmented by high energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) and analyzed using the Orbitrap (NCE 65; AGC 1 × 10^5; maximum injection time 150 ms, resolution was 50,000 at 200 Th).

### Data Protocol
A compendium of in-house developed software was used to convert mass spectrometric data (Raw file) to the mzXML format, as well as to correct monoisotopic m/z measurements. Database searching included all entries from the Homo sapiens UniProt database (downloaded October, 2018). This database was concatenated with one composed of all protein sequences in the reversed order. Searches were performed using a 50ppm precursor ion tolerance for total protein level profiling. The product ion tolerance was set to 0.9 Da. These wide mass tolerance windows were chosen to maximize sensitivity in conjunction with SEQUEST searches and linear discriminant analysis. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+229.163 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) was set as a variable modification. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR). Filtering was performed using an in-house linear discrimination analysis (LDA) method to create one combined filter parameter from the following peptide ion and MS2 spectra metrics: SEQUEST parameters XCorr and ΔCn, peptide ion mass accuracy and charge state, in-solution charge of peptide, peptide length and mis-cleavages. Linear discrimination scores were used to assign probabilities to each MS2 spectrum for being assigned correctly and these probabilities were further used to filter the dataset with an MS2 spectra assignment FDR of smaller than a 1% at the protein level. For TMT-based reporter ion quantitation, we extracted the summed signal-to-noise (S / N) ratio for each TMT channel and found the closest matching centroid to the expected mass of the TMT reporter ion. PSMs were identified, quantified, and collapsed to a 1% peptide false discovery rate (FDR) and then collapsed further to a final protein-level FDR of 1%. Moreover, protein assembly was guided by principles of parsimony to produce the smallest set of proteins necessary to account for all observed peptides. Proteins were quantified by summing reporter ion counts across all matching PSMs. PSMs with poor quality, MS3 spectra with more than eight TMT reporter ion channels missing, MS3 spectra with TMT reporter summed signal-to-noise ratio less than 100, or no MS3 spectra were excluded from quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Chronic Traumatic Encephalopathy (CTE) is a tauopathy that affects individuals with a history of repetitive mild traumatic brain injury, such as American football players. Initial neuropathologic changes in CTE include perivascular deposition of phosphorylated microtubule-associated protein tau (p-tau) neurofibrillary tangles and other aggregates in neurons, astrocytes and cell processes in an irregular pattern often at the depths of the cortical sulci. In later stages, the p-tau depositions become widespread and is associated with neurodegeneration. Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are known to carry neuropathogenic molecules, most notably p-tau. We therefore examined the protein composition of EVs isolated from the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) of former National Football League (NFL) players with cognitive and neuropsychiatric dysfunction, and an age-matched control group (CTRL) with no history of contact sports or traumatic brain injury. EVs were isolated from the CSF samples using an affinity purification kit. Total tau (t-tau) and tau phosphorylated on threonine181 (p-tau<sub>181</sub>) in CSF-derived EVs from former NFL players and CTRL participants were measured by ultrasensitive immunoassay. The t-tau and p-tau<sub>181</sub> levels of CSF-derived EV were positively correlated with the t-tau and p-tau<sub>181</sub> levels of total CSF in former NFL players, respectively, but not in the CTRL group. 429 unique proteins were identified from CSF-derived EVs and quantified by TMT-10 plex method. The identified protein molecules were significantly enriched for the extracellular exosome molecules, Alzheimer's disease pathway and Age/Telomere Length ontology as determined by DAVID Gene Ontology analysis. Ingenuity pathway analysis of the differentially expressed EV proteins revealed enrichment of canonical liver/retinoid X receptor activation pathway. Upstream effect analysis predicted MAPT (tau) as an upstream regulator in former NFL players. These data will be useful for understanding the EV-mediated disease spread and development of novel EV biomarkers for CTE and related disorders.

### Keywords
Chronic traumatic encephalopathy, Extracellular vesicles, Cerebrospinal fluid, Lc-msmsms, Tmt label

### Affiliations
Departments of Pharmacology & Experimental Therapeutics and Neurology, Laboratory of Molecular NeuroTherapeutics, Boston University School of Medicine
Boston University School of Medicine

### Submitter
Satoshi Muraoka

### Lab Head
Dr Tsuneya Ikezu
Departments of Pharmacology & Experimental Therapeutics and Neurology, Laboratory of Molecular NeuroTherapeutics, Boston University School of Medicine


