### Accession
PXD037813

### Title
Mouse osteoclast secretory lysosomes nLC-ESI-MS/MS - WT vs Slc37a2 KO

### Description
To survey the proteome of osteoclast secretory lysosomes, we used superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles (SPIONs) to enrich for these endo-lysosomal-related organelles from murine osteoclast cultures. Briefly, large scale murine bone marrow monocyte (BMM)-derived osteoclast cultures were ‘pulsed’ with SPIONs to encourage uptake into endosomes and then ‘chased’ into secretory lysosomes upon the convergence of SPION-loaded endosomes with lysosomes and secretory pathways. Following the ‘pulse-chase’, osteoclasts were homogenized, SPION-loaded organelles captured-from post-nuclear supernatants using magnetic columns, and enriched organelles eluted and processed for 1D in-gel digestion and mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
1D in-gel trypsin digest of mouse osteoclast homogenates and enriched secretory lysosomes analysed by nLC-ESI-MS/MS (Biological triplicates)

### Data Protocol
For mass spectrometry analysis, peptides were separated at a flow rate of 300nl/min on a 50 cm long, 75µm internal diameter EASY-spray PepMap C18 column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 Nano-UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The column was maintained at 50°C. Buffer A and B were 0.1% formic acid in water and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile respectively. Peptides were eluted in 165min runs, with a gradient from 3-5% buffer B for 5min, from 5-25% buffer B for 105min, from 25-35% buffer B for 15min, from 35-95% buffer B for 20min and equilibration (3% buffer B) for 19min. Eluting peptides were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The instrument was operated in a data dependent, “Top Speed” mode, with cycle times of 3sec. Peptide precursor mass to charge ratio (m/z) measurements (MS1) were carried out at 120000 resolution in the 375 to 1500 m/z range. The MS1 AGC target was set to 4e5 and maximum injection time to 50msec. Precursor priority was set to “most intense” and precursors with charge state 2 to 7 only were selected for HCD fragmentation. Fragmentation was carried out using 35% collision energy. The m/z of the peptide fragments were measured in the ion trap using an AGC target of 1e4 and 50 msec maximum injection time.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse, Secretory lysosome, Lysosome, Lro, Osteoclast, Spion

### Affiliations
The University of Western Australia
The Bone Biology and Disease Laboratory, School of Biomedical Sciences, The University of Western Australia

### Submitter
Amy Ribet

### Lab Head
Dr Nathan Pavlos
The Bone Biology and Disease Laboratory, School of Biomedical Sciences, The University of Western Australia


