### Accession
PXD005280

### Title
Combining de novo peptide sequencing algorithms, a synergistic approach to boost both identifications and confidence in bottom-up proteomics

### Description
Complex MS-based proteomics datasets are usually analyzed by protein database-searches. While this approach performs considerably well for sequenced organisms, direct inference of peptide sequences from tandem mass spectra, i.e. de novo peptide sequencing, oftentimes is the only way to obtain information when protein databases are absent. However, available algorithms suffer from drawbacks such as lack of validation and often high rates of false positive hits (FP). Here we present a simple method of combining results from commonly available de novo peptide sequencing algorithms, which in conjunction with minor tweaks in data acquisition ensues lower empirical FDR compared to the analysis using single algorithms. Results were validated using state-of-the art database search algorithms as well specifically synthesized reference peptides. Thus, we could increase the number of PSMs meeting a stringent FDR of 5% more than threefold compared to the single best de novo sequencing algorithm alone, accounting for an average of 11,120 PSMs (combined) instead of 3,476 PSMs (alone) in triplicate 2 h LC-MS runs of tryptic HeLa digestion.

### Sample Protocol
Proteolytic (tryptic) digests of three sequenced organisms i.e. (i) human (Homo sapiens), (ii) mouse (Mus musculus), (iii) yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae), and of one organism without sequenced genome i.e. (i) fresh water snail Radix auricularia were analyzed using an Ultimate 3000 nano RSLC system coupled to a QExactive HF mass spectrometer (both Thermo Scientific). Each sample was measured in triplicate (1 μg each) resulting in a dataset of 12 MS/MS runs and the samples were analyzed in randomized order to minimize systematic errors.

### Data Protocol
MS data interpretation for reference samples was conducted using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific) with Mascot 2.4 (Matrix Science), SEQUEST and MS Amanda nodes. Database searches of the three reference organisms (i.e. human, mouse, yeast) were performed in a target/decoy mode against their respective protein sequence (FASTA) databases. Trypsin was selected as enzyme and two missed cleavage sites were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed and oxidation of methionine was set as dynamic modifications. MS and MS/MS tolerances were set to 10 ppm and 0:02 Da respectively, and only peptide-to-spectrum matches (PSMs) with search engine rank 1 and a false discovery rate (FDR) < 1% (Percolator setting) were considered. For de novo sequencing, with Rapid Novor and pNovo+, raw files had to be converted to mgf format using the ProteoWizard package v 3.0.7398.  a. PEAKS PEAKS Studio 7.5 (http://www.bioinfor.com) was used to generate de novo peptide annotations. Thermo raw files were directly loade and as only sample preprocessing option, precursor correction on the mass was selected. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and error tolerances were set to 10 ppm for the precursor mass and 0.02 Da for the fragment ions. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine as variable, with a maximum of 3 variable modifications allowed per peptide.Five candidates per spectrum were reported and the highest ranking candidate sequence was further used. b. Rapid Novor and PepNovo Rapid Novor and PepNovo were both operated via the DeNovoGUI-interface in version 1.9.6.(16) Precursor mass tolerance was set to10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance to 0.02 Da, trypsin was selected for enzyme specificity, carbamidomethylation of cysteines was setas a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine as variable modification. Up to 10 matches per spectrum were allowed, of which the top ranking was exported to a csv file via the DeNovoGUI export option. c. pNovo+ The command line interface was used to control pNovo+. In the parameter file, the same conditions as mentioned above for the other de novo sequencing algorithms were defined, and the top ranking peptide sequence for every annotated spectrum was used.

### Publication Abstract
Complex mass spectrometry based proteomics data sets are mostly analyzed by protein database searches. While this approach performs considerably well for sequenced organisms, direct inference of peptide sequences from tandem mass spectra, i.e., de novo peptide sequencing, oftentimes is the only way to obtain information when protein databases are absent. However, available algorithms suffer from drawbacks such as lack of validation and often high rates of false positive hits (FP). Here we present a simple method of combining results from commonly available de novo peptide sequencing algorithms, which in conjunction with minor tweaks in data acquisition ensues lower empirical FDR compared to the analysis using single algorithms. Results were validated using state-of-the art database search algorithms as well specifically synthesized reference peptides. Thus, we could increase the number of PSMs meeting a stringent FDR of 5% more than 3-fold compared to the single best de novo sequencing algorithm alone, accounting for an average of 11&#x202f;120 PSMs (combined) instead of 3476 PSMs (alone) in triplicate 2 h LC-MS runs of tryptic HeLa digestion.

### Keywords
False discovery rate, Lc-ms/ms, De novo peptide sequencing, Bottom-up proteomics

### Affiliations
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V., Dortmund
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V., Dortmund, Germany

### Submitter
Bernhard Blank-Landeshammer

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Albert Sickmann
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V., Dortmund, Germany


