### Accession
PXD043533

### Title
Human and animal skin identified by palaeoproteomics in Scythian leather objects from Ukraine

### Description
Leather was one of the most important materials of nomadic Scythians, who used it for clothing, shoes, and quivers, amongst other objects. However, we have little information about the animal species utilised for Scythian leather production. In this first systematic study, we used palaeoproteomics methods to analyse the species in 45 samples of leather and two fur objects recovered from 18 burials excavated at 14 different Scythian sites in southern Ukraine, 3 of which were analysed by LC-MS/MS. Our results demonstrate that Scythians primarily used domesticated species such as sheep, goat, cattle, and horse for the production of leather, while the furs were made of wild animals such as fox, squirrel and feline species. The surprise discovery is the presence of two human skin samples, which for the first time provide direct evidence of the Greek historian Herodotus’ claim that Scythians used the skin of their dead enemies to manufacture leather trophy items, such as quiver covers. We argue that leather manufacture is not incompatible with a nomadic lifestyle and that Scythians possessed sophisticated leather production technologies that ensured stable supply of this essential material.

### Sample Protocol
A total of 45 archaeological leather items were sampled for ZooMS analysis. From each item a sample of a minimum of 2x2mm was discreetly removed for analysis. The samples were prepared according to a previously published protocol for parchment [10.1073/pnas.1512264112] with previously described optimisations for archaeological leather [10.1016/j.culher.2019.04.008], this time including a gelatinisation of one hour at 65℃ before the trypsin digestion. In addition, 2 fur samples were also processed for PMF analysis (method:10.1371/journal.pone.0270040) but returned bad results, hence they are only presented from LC-MS/MS analysis.  ZooMS samples were prepared at University of Copenhagen in the laboratory facilities of the Globe Institute. After spotting, plates were sent for MALDI ToF-analysis at BioArCh, University of York. Mass spectra were acquired over the m/z range 800–4000.  For LC-MS/MS analysis, ZooMS eluates were provided at approximately 0.4 µg/µL in 50% acetonitrile (ACN). Of this, 3 µL of each sample was put into separate wells of a 96-well MS plate. Samples were then vacuum-centrifuged to remove the ACN. Samples were then resuspended in 12 µL of 5% ACN 0.1 % trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and analysed by LC-MS/MS based on previously published protocols for palaeoproteomic samples [10.1371/journal.pone.0270040,10.1002/anie.201713020].

### Data Protocol
ZooMS spectral analysis was performed using the open-source software mMass (www.mmass.org). The three spectra generated for each sample were averaged, and the average spectrum was then inspected manually for the presence of previously described peptide markers which may vary between species. Taxonomic identifications were assigned at the most conservative level of identification (genus or family) based on the presence of unambiguous markers. These are marked with ‘?’ if present at low intensity, or with a low signal to noise (S/N) ratio. Spectra of poor quality (i.e. low S/N ratio and with no distinct markers) were designated ‘No ID’. The reference database of animals for which peptide markers have been identified is constantly growing. Currently the database contains all common domesticated mammals, and numerous species within the biological families Cervidae, Bovidae, Equidae, Canidae, Felidae, Mustelidae, and Hominidae, which would be relevant to the material in question.  For the LC-MS/MS data analysis, Thermo RAW files were then searched using MaxQuant (v.1.6.3.4) for interpretation of spectra. Files were first run against the Swissprot Database (downloaded from Uniprot 09/06/2020) and the common contaminant database provided by MaxQuant (of which identifications were removed from analysis). From this initial search, iterative searches were made to narrow down the database to the relevant proteins from the relevant species.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Zooms, Lc-ms/ms, Leather, Scythians

### Affiliations
The Globe Institute, University of Copenhagen
University of Copenhagen

### Submitter
Meaghan Mackie

### Lab Head
Dr Matthew Collins
The Globe Institute, University of Copenhagen


