### Accession
PXD020661

### Title
An insight into Exosomal Cargo Isolated from three tissue specific Mesenchymal Stem Cells: Implication in Translational Research

### Description
Adult Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) derived exosomes have recently gained importance as a cell-free therapy for several chronic and inflammatory diseases. It is believed that  these exosomes contain several biologically active molecules (i.e. miRNAs, proteins) which help to cure the diseases. The majority of published reports to date that have investigated the secretome of MSCs have done so using canonical expansion of cell culture conditions. However, the microenvironment experience by MSC post administration into animal models and patients is strikingly different. Thus instead of using secretome, Exosomes purified from adipose tissue (AD), Wharton Jelly (WJ) and Bone marrow BM) are widely studied. However, the content of the exosomes may differ based on their sources from where they are originated. It remains unclear, however, which types of proteins are packaged into exosomes compared with the cells from which they are derived. To explore these exosomes as a cell-free therapy for specific diseases, it is therefore, important to get comprehensive knowledge of the bioactive molecules present in the exosomes. In this study, we have purified the exosomes from three different sources (AD, WJ, and BM) and using RNA-Seq  approach, we have categorized the common and different microRNAs present in the exosomes.

### Sample Protocol
25 ug of proteins were acetone precipitated. The pellets were suspended in 50 mM Triethyl ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.0 and denatured by adding 0.1% SDS. Subsequently, 5 mM Tris-2-carboxyethyl phosphine ( TCEP) was added in each sample and incubated at 60 °C for 1 hour to reduce the proteins followed by alkylation with 8.4 mM Iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 minutes in dark. Samples were digested with 1μg trypsin for overnight at 37 °C. Peptides were incubated with 8-plex iTRAQ labelling reagents (SCIEX), according to manufacturer’s recommendations. After labelling, reaction was stopped by diluting the labelled samples with two volume of water. The resultant labelled peptide from control and experimental samples were mixed together and dried under vacuum. The labelled peptide mixture was fractionated on Perkin Elmer Flexar HPLC system using Agilent Zorbax strong cation exchange (SCX) column (2.1 × 150 mm) having 5 μm particle size.  Cation exchange peptide fractions were separated at the rate of 5 μl/minute on eksigent 0.3 ×150 mm using the gradient of water and Acetonitrile and peptides were analyzed on 5600 TF for MS and MS/MS analysis. MS spectra were acquired from 350 Da to 1250 Da and MS/MS of the peptides were fragmented using IDA criteria. In brief, 25 most intense peaks were fragmented using collision induced dissociation (CID) with iTRAQ specific rolling collision energy in each cycle. The MS/MS spectra was acquired from 100 Da to 1600 Da.

### Data Protocol
5. Peptide identification and quantification. Identification and quantification of peptides and proteins was performed by theProteinPilot software version 5.1 (AB SCIEX) using Paragon algorithm as the search engine (RFE). MS/MS spectra were searched against the Mtb-complex database of protein sequences downloaded from NCBI in FASTA format and incorporated in ProteinPilot database for search using a parameter of carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues. To estimate the false discovery rate (FDR), a decoy database search strategy was used. The FDR is defined as the percentage of decoy proteins identified against the total protein identification. The FDR was calculated by searching the spectra against the Swiss-Prot database. The peptide selection criteria for relative quantification were performed as follows: only peptides unique for given protein were considered for relative quantification, excluding those common to other isoforms or proteins of the same family. Proteins were identified on the basis of having at least two peptides with an ion-score above 95% confidence.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Exosome, Stem cells

### Affiliations
REGIONAL CENTRE FOR bIOTECHNOLOGY, FARIDABAD, INDIA
Regional Centre for Biotechnology, Faridabad, India

### Submitter
Arup Banerjee

### Lab Head
Dr ARUP BANERJEE
REGIONAL CENTRE FOR bIOTECHNOLOGY, FARIDABAD, INDIA


