### Accession
PXD005929

### Title
Outer Membrane Proteome of Veillonella parvula: a Diderm Firmicute of the Human Microbiome

### Description
Veillonella parvula is a biofilm-forming commensal found in the lungs, vagina, mouth, and gastro-intestinal tract of humans, yet it may also develop into an opportunistic pathogen. Furthermore the presence of Veillonella has been associated with the development of a healthy immune system in infants. Veillonella belongs to the Negativicutes, a diverse clade of bacteria that represent an evolutionary enigma: they are phylogenetically placed within Gram-positive (monoderm) Firmicutes yet maintain an outer membrane (OM) with lipopolysaccharide similar to classic Gram-negative (diderm) bacteria. The OMs of Negativicutes have unique characteristics, such as the replacement of Braun’s lipoprotein by OmpM for anchoring the outer membrane to the peptidoglycan. Through phylogenomic analysis, we have recently provided the first bioinformatic annotation of the Negativicute diderm cell envelope. We showed that it is a unique type of envelope that was present in the ancestor of present-day Firmicutes and lost multiple times independently in this phylum, giving rise to the monoderm architecture. However, little experimental data is presently available for any Negativicute cell envelope. Here, we have performed the first experimental proteomic characterization of the cell envelope of these atypical diderm Firmicutes, producing an OM proteome of Veillonella parvula. We initially conducted a thorough bioinformatics analysis of all 1844 predicted proteins from Veillonella parvula DSM 2008’s genome using seven different localization prediction programs. These results were then complemented by protein extraction with surface exposed protein tags and subcellular fractionation, which were then sequenced by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry. The merging of proteomics and bioinformatics results allowed identification of 76 OM proteins. Their annotation markedly extends previous inferences on the nature of the cell envelope of Negativicutes, and provides important information on the role of OM systems in the lifestyle of Veillonella.

### Sample Protocol
1- In-Gel Protein Digestion  Protein sample was loaded on a SDS-PAGE gel (12 %). After the electrophoretic migration, the gel was stained with Coomassie Blue, each band of interest was cut and in-gel tryptic digestion was performed as described previously. Briefly, gel slices were washed in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 15 min, followed by several washing steps to eliminate the stain in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate/acetonitrile (1:1). Samples were reduced (10 mM DTT in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 30 minutes at 56°C) and alkylated (55 mM iodoacetamide in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 30 min at room temperature in the dark). Proteins were digested by 250 ng Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate overnight at 37°C. Resulting peptides were extracted, dried down by lyophilisation and then reconstituted in water/acetronitrile/formic acid (98:2:0,1).  2 - Liquid Protein Digestion Tryptic digestion was performed by eFASP (enhanced Filter-Aided Sample Preparation) as described previously. All steps were done in-filter. Briefly, samples were reduced (50 mM TCEP, 30 minutes at room temperature) and alkylated (50 mM iodoacetamide, 1 hour at 37°C in the dark). Then, proteins were incubated overnight at 37°C with 1 µg trypsin (Trypsin Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin, Promega). Peptides were recovered by centrifugation.  3 - Mass Spectrometry Analysis Trypsin-digested peptides coming from gel samples were analyzed by nano LC-MS/MS using an Ultimate 3000 system (Dionex, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos. 5 μL of each sample were loaded on a C18 pre-column (300 μm inner diameter × 5 mm; Dionex) at 30 μL/min in 2 % ACN, 0.1 % FA. After 5 min of desalting, the pre-column was switched online an in-house packed 15 cm nano-HPLC column (75 μm inner diameter) with C18 resin (3 μm particles, 100 Å pore size, ReproSil-Pur Basic C18, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) and equilibrated in 95 % solvent A (2 % ACN, 0.1 % FA) and 5 % solvent B (80 % ACN, 0.08 % FA). The peptides were eluted using a 2 to 50 % gradient of solvent B during 60 min at 300 nL/min flow rate. The LTQ-Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen) was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode with the XCalibur software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen). Survey scan MS were acquired in the Orbitrap on the 300 – 2000 m/z range with the resolution set to a value of 60 000 at m/z = 400. The 10 most intense ions per survey scan were selected for CID fragmentation, and the resulting fragments were analyzed in the linear trap (LTQ). Dynamic exclusion was employed within 20 s and repeat during 30 s to prevent repetitive selection of the same peptide. Digests coming from liquid samples were analyzed on a Q Exactive Plus instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen) coupled with an EASY nLC 1000 chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Sample was loaded on an in-house packed 40 cm nano-HPLC column (75 μm inner diameter) with C18 resin (1.9 μm particles, 100 Å pore size, Reprosil-Pur Basic C18-HD resin, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) and equilibrated in 98 % solvent A (H2O, 0.1 % FA) and 2 % solvent B (ACN, 0.1 % FA). Peptides were eluted using a 2 to 45 % gradient of solvent B during 120 or 240 min at 250 nL/min flow rate. The instrument method for the Q Exactive Plus was set up in the data dependent acquisition mode. After a survey scan in the Orbitrap (resolution 70 000 at m/z = 400), the 10 most intense precursor ions were selected for HCD fragmentation with a normalized collision energy set up to 28. Charge state screening was enabled, and precursors with unknown charge state or a charge state of 1 and >7 were excluded. Dynamic exclusion was enabled for 35 s.

### Data Protocol
All data were searched using Andromeda with MaxQuant software v1.4.1.2 against  Veillonella parvula Uniprot database (1844 entries) and concatenated with known contaminants and reversed sequences of all entries.  Andromeda searches were performed choosing trypsin as specific enzyme with a maximum number of 2 missed cleavages. Possible modifications included carbamidomethylation (Cys, fixed), oxidation (Met, variable) and Nter acetylation (variable). Maximum peptide charge was set to 7 and five amino acids were required as minimum peptide length. The mass tolerance in MS was set to 20 ppm for the first search then 5 ppm for the main search and 10 ppm for the MS/MS. Additional peptides were identified by the “match between run” option with a maximal retention time window of 1 min. One unique peptide to the protein group was required for the protein identification. A false discovery rate (FDR) cutoff of 1 % was applied at the peptide and protein levels. MaxLFQ, Maxquant’s label-free quantification (LFQ) algorithm was used to calculate protein intensity profiles across samples. Data were filtered by requiring a minimum peptide ratio count of 2 in MaxLFQ. For statistical and bioinformatics analysis, as well as for visualization, Perseus environment, which is part of Maxquant was used. The “proteinGroup.txt” file generated with Maxquant was used by Perseus to identify proteins enriched in Biotin samples. Protein identifications were filtered, removing hits to the reverse decoy database as well as proteins only identified by modified peptides or considered as potential contaminant. Protein LFQ intensities were logarithmized. Two valid values out of three were required for each protein for the confident quantification across all replicates and missing values imputed by values simulating low abundance values close to the noise level. For pairwise comparison and identification of enriched proteins, a modified t-test were applied with permutation-based FDR statistics set to 1% and a S0 of 1.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Veillonella parvula</i> is a biofilm-forming commensal found in the lungs, vagina, mouth, and gastro-intestinal tract of humans, yet it may develop into an opportunistic pathogen. Furthermore, the presence of <i>Veillonella</i> has been associated with the development of a healthy immune system in infants. <i>Veillonella</i> belongs to the Negativicutes, a diverse clade of bacteria that represent an evolutionary enigma: they phylogenetically belong to Gram-positive (monoderm) Firmicutes yet maintain an outer membrane (OM) with lipopolysaccharide similar to classic Gram-negative (diderm) bacteria. The OMs of Negativicutes have unique characteristics including the replacement of Braun's lipoprotein by OmpM for tethering the OM to the peptidoglycan. Through phylogenomic analysis, we have recently provided bioinformatic annotation of the Negativicutes diderm cell envelope. We showed that it is a unique type of envelope that was present in the ancestor of present-day Firmicutes and lost multiple times independently in this phylum, giving rise to the monoderm architecture; however, little experimental data is presently available for any Negativicutes cell envelope. Here, we performed the first experimental proteomic characterization of the cell envelope of a diderm Firmicute, producing an OM proteome of <i>V. parvula</i>. We initially conducted a thorough bioinformatics analysis of all 1,844 predicted proteins from <i>V. parvula</i> DSM 2008's genome using 12 different localization prediction programs. These results were complemented by protein extraction with surface exposed (SE) protein tags and by subcellular fractionation, both of which were analyzed by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry. The merging of proteomics and bioinformatics results allowed identification of 78 OM proteins. These include a number of receptors for TonB-dependent transport, the main component of the BAM system for OM protein biogenesis (BamA), the Lpt system component LptD, which is responsible for insertion of LPS into the OM, and several copies of the major OmpM protein. The annotation of <i>V. parvula's</i> OM proteome markedly extends previous inferences on the nature of the cell envelope of Negativicutes, including the experimental evidence of a BAM/TAM system for OM protein biogenesis and of a complete Lpt system for LPS transport to the OM. It also provides important information on the role of OM components in the lifestyle of <i>Veillonella</i>, such as a possible gene cluster for O-antigen synthesis and a large number of adhesins. Finally, many OM hypothetical proteins were identified, which are priority targets for further characterization.

### Keywords
Veillonella parvula, Outer membrane proteome

### Affiliations
Institut Pasteur
Unité de Biologie Moléculaire du Gène chez les Extrêmophiles, Département de Microbiologie, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France

### Submitter
Magalie Duchateau

### Lab Head
Dr Simonetta Gribaldo
Unité de Biologie Moléculaire du Gène chez les Extrêmophiles, Département de Microbiologie, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France


