### Accession
PXD028743

### Title
Mass spectrometry (MS) datasets of QKI5 co-immunoprecipitation samples in THP-1 cells

### Description
We performed QKI5 co-immunoprecipitation followed by MS analysis to identify QKI5-interacting proteins in THP-1 cells.

### Sample Protocol
cTHP-1 cells were collected and sub-cellular fractionation was used at first to extract nuclei. Then the nuclei were lysed with RIPA buffer and subjected to incubation with specific antibody or IgG and protein A beads (Invitrogen, USA) overnight at 4ºC for immunoprecipitation. After 3 washes with RIPA buffer, 1X SDS loading buffer was added to each sample and boiled at 95 ºC for 5 min to elute proteins from beads, before subjecting them to the following processes. The stained protein bands were cut off from the gel and sent to Protein Research and Technology Center (Tsinghua University, Beijing, China) for mass spectrometry (LC MS/MS) analysis. Briefly, proteins were subjected to in-gel tryptic digestion followed by peptide desalting and concentration before mass spectrometry detection.

### Data Protocol
THP-1 cells were collected and sub-cellular fractionation was used at first to extract nuclei. Then the nuclei were lysed with RIPA buffer and subjected to incubation with specific antibody or IgG and protein A beads (Invitrogen, USA) overnight at 4ºC for immunoprecipitation. After 3 washes with RIPA buffer, 1X SDS loading buffer was added to each sample and boiled at 95 ºC for 5 min to elute proteins from beads, before subjecting them to the following processes. The stained protein bands were cut off from the gel and sent to Protein Research and Technology Center (Tsinghua University, Beijing, China) for mass spectrometry (LC MS/MS) analysis. Briefly, proteins were subjected to in-gel tryptic digestion followed by peptide desalting and concentration before mass spectrometry detection.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Qki5 co-immunoprecipitation; mass spectrometry; thp-1 cells

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, School of Basic Medicine Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100005, China.

### Submitter
Yue Huo

### Lab Head
Dr Jia Yu
State Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, School of Basic Medicine Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100005, China.


