### Accession
PXD008968

### Title
Multisystems analysis of Mycobacterium tuberculosis reveals kinase-dependent remodeling of the pathogen-environment interface

### Description
Tuberculosis is the leading killer among infectious diseases worldwide. The rise of multi-drug resistance has prompted new approaches for tuberculosis drug development, including inhibition of virulence determinants and of signaling cascades that control many downstream pathways. Here we used a multisystems approach to determine the effects of a potent small molecule inhibitor of the essential Mycobacterium tuberculosis Ser/Thr protein kinases PknA and PknB. We observed differential phosphorylation of many proteins and extensive changes in gene expression, protein abundance, cell wall lipids and intracellular metabolites. The patterns of these changes indicate regulation by PknA and PknB of several pathways required for cell growth, including ATP synthesis, DNA synthesis and translation. These data also highlight effects on pathways for remodeling of the mycobacterial cell envelope via control of peptidoglycan turnover, lipid content, a SigE-mediated envelope stress response, transmembrane transport systems, and protein secretion systems. Integrated analysis of phosphoproteins, transcripts, proteins, and lipids identified an unexpected pathway whereby threonine phosphorylation of the essential response regulator MtrA decreases its DNA binding activity. Inhibition of this phosphorylation is linked to decreased expression of genes for peptidoglycan turnover, and of genes for mycolyl transferases, with concomitant changes in mycolates and glycolipids in the cell envelope. These findings reveal novel roles for PknA and PknB in regulating multiple essential cell functions and identify these kinases as potentially valuable targets for new anti-tuberculosis drugs. The linked multisystems data provide a valuable resource for future targeted investigations into the pathways regulated by these kinases in the M. tuberculosis cell.

### Sample Protocol
Triplicate filter-based cultures were harvested at each time point. The bacteria were scraped from each filter directly into TRI Reagent (Molecular Resource Center) and total protein extracts were prepared as previously described (Prisic S, Dankwa S, Schwartz D, Chou MF, Locasale JW, Kang CM, Bemis G, Church GM, Steen H, Husson RN. 2010. Extensive phosphorylation with overlapping specificity by Mycobacterium tuberculosis serine/threonine protein kinases. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 107:7521-7526).  Protein samples (300 µg) were prepared as described (McDowell GS, Gaun A, Steen H. 2013. iFASP: combining isobaric mass tagging with filter-aided sample preparation. Journal of proteome research 12:3809-3812) with minor modifications and without isobaric labeling. Phosphopeptide enrichment was performed using a ProPac IMAC column (Fisher Scientific) as previously described (Ruprecht B, Koch H, Medard G, Mundt M, Kuster B, Lemeer S. 2015. Comprehensive and reproducible phosphopeptide enrichment using iron immobilized metal ion affinity chromatography (Fe-IMAC) columns. Mol Cell Proteomics 14:205-215) with minor modifications.  Samples were dissolved in 12 µL loading buffer (5% ACN, 5% formic acid) and sonicated for 5 minutes. Samples were placed in an autosampler linked to a nanoflow HPLC system (nanoLC 400, Eksigent) and a Q Exactive mass spectrometer. For the separation, a nano cHiPLC Trap column (200 µm x 0.5 mm, ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 3 µm, 120 Å) and a nano cHiPLC column (75 µm x 15 cm, ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 3 µm, 120 Å) were used. Peptides were eluted with a 60-minute linear gradient from 93% buffer A (water with 0.2% formic acid) and 7% buffer B (acetonitrile with 0.2% formic acid) to 68% buffer A. The injection volume was 4 µL.  The Q Exactive mass spectrometer was run in positive ion mode. Full scans were carried out at a resolution of 70k with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3 x 106 ions and a maximum injection time of 120 ms, using a scan range of 350 to 2000 m/z. For MS/MS data acquisition, a normalized collision energy of 27 was used. Scans were carried out at a resolution of 35k with an AGC target of 3 x 106 ions and a maximum injection time of 120 ms. The isolation window was set to 2 m/z. An underfill ratio of 0.5% was set and a dynamic exclusion of 20 s applied.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using Maxquant (Version 1.5.2.8) and H37RV version 2 protein sequence, downloaded from PATRIC (80). Phosphorylation (STY) and oxidation (M) were used as variable modification and carbamidomethylation as fixed modification. Finally, the evidence file was used to extract the phosphopeptides. Using the modified sequence column, the average intensity of each modified peptide was calculated.  The phosphopeptides were normalized by the sum intensity of each sample. To determine the effects of active inhibitor vs. control compound on phosphopeptide abundance, we adapted metagenomeSeq (81), which accounts for the sparse nature of the detected phosphopeptides. All phosphopeptides that were detected in at least 7 out of the 36 samples were included in the metagenomeSeq estimates for Log2FC, accounting for experimental batch effect as a covariate in the linear model. P-values were adjusted using the Benjamini-Hochberg method.  Proteomic values were collected using a data independent acquisition approach and normalized by the sum intensity of each sample. Log2FC values and p-values, and Benjamini-Hochberg adjusted p-values for the comparison between active inhibitor and control compound at each time point were estimated using metagenomeSeq as in the phosphoproteomics. Protein expression enrichment for functional categories was performed on the Log2-transformed, quantile-normalized data using the ROMER procedure as implemented in limma with 9,999 rotations, correcting for batch effects between experiments (Majewski IJ, Ritchie ME, Phipson B, Corbin J, Pakusch M, Ebert A, Busslinger M, Koseki H, Hu Y, Smyth GK, Alexander WS, Hilton DJ, Blewitt ME. 2010. Opposing roles of polycomb repressive complexes in hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells. Blood 116:731-739. Ritchie ME, Phipson B, Wu D, Hu Y, Law CW, Shi W, Smyth GK. 2015. limma powers differential expression analyses for RNA-sequencing and microarray studies. Nucleic Acids Research 43:e47).  To identify motifs in the set of unique phosphopeptides we used motif-x (Chou MF, Schwartz D. 2011. Biological sequence motif discovery using motif-x. Current protocols in bioinformatics Chapter 13:Unit 13.15-24), with the following parameters: central character: T, S, or Y, width: 13, occurrences: 20, background: all protein FASTA sequences from H37Rv version 2, Significance: 0.0000417 (corresponding to a Bonferroni adjusted P-value of 0.01), background central character: none. To identify motifs overrepresented in phosphopeptides that had significantly increased or decreased phosphorylation after treatment with the inhibitor (Log2FC > 0.5 or < -0.5, respectively, adj. P < 0.001), we reran motif-x on the subset of phosphopeptides meeting these criteria. All motif-x parameters were the same as the analysis of all phosphopeptides, except the "occurrences", which was changed from 20 to 5 due to the smaller number of phosphopeptides that were significantly increased or decreased in response to the inhibitor.

### Publication Abstract
Tuberculosis is the leading killer among infectious diseases worldwide. Increasing multidrug resistance has prompted new approaches for tuberculosis drug development, including targeted inhibition of virulence determinants and of signaling cascades that control many downstream pathways. We used a multisystem approach to determine the effects of a potent small-molecule inhibitor of the essential <i>Mycobacterium tuberculosis</i> Ser/Thr protein kinases PknA and PknB. We observed differential levels of phosphorylation of many proteins and extensive changes in levels of gene expression, protein abundance, cell wall lipids, and intracellular metabolites. The patterns of these changes indicate regulation by PknA and PknB of several pathways required for cell growth, including ATP synthesis, DNA synthesis, and translation. These data also highlight effects on pathways for remodeling of the mycobacterial cell envelope via control of peptidoglycan turnover, lipid content, a SigE-mediated envelope stress response, transmembrane transport systems, and protein secretion systems. Integrated analysis of phosphoproteins, transcripts, proteins, and lipids identified an unexpected pathway whereby threonine phosphorylation of the essential response regulator MtrA decreases its DNA binding activity. Inhibition of this phosphorylation is linked to decreased expression of genes for peptidoglycan turnover, and of genes for mycolyl transferases, with concomitant changes in mycolates and glycolipids in the cell envelope. These findings reveal novel roles for PknA and PknB in regulating multiple essential cell functions and confirm that these kinases are potentially valuable targets for new antituberculosis drugs. In addition, the data from these linked multisystems provide a valuable resource for future targeted investigations into the pathways regulated by these kinases in the <i>M.&#xa0;tuberculosis</i> cell.<b>IMPORTANCE</b> Tuberculosis is the leading killer among infectious diseases worldwide. Increasing drug resistance threatens efforts to control this epidemic; thus, new antitubercular drugs are urgently needed. We performed an integrated, multisystem analysis of <i>Mycobacterium tuberculosis</i> responses to inhibition of its two essential serine/threonine protein kinases. These kinases allow the bacterium to adapt to its environment by phosphorylating cellular proteins in response to extracellular signals. We identified differentially phosphorylated proteins, downstream changes in levels of specific mRNA and protein abundance, and alterations in the metabolite and lipid content of the cell. These results include changes previously linked to growth arrest and also reveal new roles for these kinases in regulating essential processes, including growth, stress responses, transport of proteins and other molecules, and the structure of the mycobacterial cell envelope. Our multisystem data identify PknA and PknB as promising targets for drug development and provide a valuable resource for future investigation of their functions.

### Keywords
Dda, Phosphoproteomics, Systems biology, Proteomics, Dia

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School
Boston Children's Hospital | Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Mukesh Kumar

### Lab Head
Dr Hanno Steen
Boston Children's Hospital | Harvard Medical School


