### Accession
PXD036591

### Title
Isobaric labeling-based quantitative proteomics of cells purified from the intestine of Crohn’s disease patients reveals immune cell-epithelial cell crosstalk of potential importance in disease pathogenesis

### Description
Crohn's disease (CD) is a chronic condition characterized by recurrent flares of inflammation of the gastrointestinal tract. Despite decades of research, the etiology of CD is poorly understood and is characterized by dysregulated immune activation that progressively destroys the gastrointestinal tissue. At the center of the pathology is the intestinal mucosa, where the epithelium and the lamina propria are main cellular compartments. While the epithelium contains predominantly epithelial cells, the lamina propria is enriched in immune cells and contains supporting stroma. Thus, the cells constituting these compartments can be classified as epithelial cells, immune cells and stromal cells. Gaining insight into how these cell types interact with each other is important to further our understanding of CD pathogenesis. Here, using isobaric labeling-based quantitative proteomics, we perform an exploratory study to analyze in-depth proteome changes in epithelial cells, immune cells and stromal cells purified by cell sorting from the intestinal mucosa of CD patients and controls. Our workflow preserving the link between the different cell types in individuals opens the possibility to explore cellular crosstalk and to further refine data on cell-cell interactions in the development of CD.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen pellets of sorted cells were lysed in 25 µl of 5% SDS (w/v)/50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEAB, pH 7.5) and protein concentration was determined by BCA assay kit (Sigma). Equal protein amounts per each cell type were taken from each sample (11.5 µg for EpCAM+, 6.5 µg for CD45+, and 6 µg for DN) and reduced by 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) for 30 min at RT and alkylated by 10 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 min in dark. The excess of IAA was quenched by addition of TCEP (final concentration 20 mM) for 15 min. Protein digestion was done using S-Trap (Protifi) according to manufacturer instructions. Briefly, samples were acidified by phosphoric acid, mixed with 6 volumes of 90% methanol (MeOH)/100 mM TEAB, and loaded onto S-Trap phase. Columns were then washed four times by 90% MeOH/100 mM TEAB and captured proteins were digested by 1 µg of trypsin (Pierce) in 50 mM TEAB at 37 °C overnight. After digestion, peptides were eluted by consecutive washes of 50 mM TEAB, 0.2% formic acid (FA), and 50% acetonitrile (ACN)/0.2% FA and the combined eluate was vacuum-dried. Peptide labeling by 10-plex tandem mass tag (TMT, Thermo Fisher Scientific) was done in three independent TMT sets based on cell type but preserving the same isobaric label for the given patient across the sets. Briefly, peptides were dissolved in 50 mM TEAB, labeled for 1 h by TMT tags followed by quenching by hydroxylamine for 15 min, combined into cell-specific TMT sets, and desalted using spin columns (Pierce). Each cell type-specific TMT set was fractionated into 13 fractions with basic reversed-phase chromatography (XBridge BEH C18, 3.5 μm, 3.0×150 mm, Waters) on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLC system (Thermo Fischer Scientific) from 3% to 100% ACN in ammonium formate buffer (10mM, pH 10.00). Easy nanoLC 1200 liquid chromatography system connected to Orbitrap Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) were used for proteomic analysis of fractions from TMT sets. Peptides were first introduced onto trap column (PepMap 100 C18, 5 μm, 0.1×20 mm) and then separated on an in-house packed analytical column (Reprosil-Pur C18, 3 μm, 0.075×350 mm, Dr Maisch) using gradient (0.2% FA in water as phase A; 0.2% FA in ACN as phase B) running from 5 to 33% B in 77 min and from 33 to 100% B in 3 min, at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Positive ion MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 120,000 within m/z range of 375-1375 using AGC target 4×105 and maximum injection time 50 ms. MS/MS analysis was performed in data-dependent multi-notch mode with a top speed cycle of 3 s for the most intense multiply charged precursor ions. MS precursors above 10,000 threshold were first isolated by quadrupole using 0.7 m/z isolation window and then fragmented in ion trap (MS2) by collision-induced dissociation (CID) at a collision energy of 35%. Dynamic exclusion was set to 45 s with 10 ppm tolerance. MS2 spectra were acquired by ion trap using AGC target 1×105 and maximum injection time 50 ms. MS3 analysis was done taking 10 most abundant MS2 fragment ions using multi-notch isolation with 2 m/z window and fragmenting them by high-energy collision dissociation (HCD) at a collision energy of 65%. MS3 spectra were acquired by Orbitrap at a resolution of 50,000 within m/z range of 100-500 using AGC target of 1×105 and maximum injection time 105 ms.

### Data Protocol
Cell-specific proteomic datasets were processed by Proteome Discoverer ver. 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Data were searched using Mascot search engine (Matrix Science) against Homo sapiens Uniprot database. Parameters of search were as follows; precursor mass tolerance 5 ppm, fragment mass tolerance 0.5 Da, 1 allowed missed cleavage, cysteine carbamidomethylation and N-terminal and lysine TMT label as fixed modifications, and methionine oxidation as a variable modification. Spectral matches were validated by Percolator and only those peptides identified at false discovery rate (FDR) level <0.01 were considered. Quantification of TMT reporters was done from MS3 spectra of unique peptides only; with at least 65% of used precursor fragments matching to identified peptide and reporter ion tolerance 0.003 Da. Proteins not listed as contaminants and having at least one quantified unique peptide were used for further data interpretation.

### Publication Abstract
Crohn's disease (CD) is a chronic condition characterized by recurrent flares of inflammation in the gastrointestinal tract. Disease etiology is poorly understood and is characterized by dysregulated immune activation that progressively destroys intestinal tissue. Key cellular compartments in disease pathogenesis are the intestinal epithelial layer and its underlying lamina propria. While the epithelium contains predominantly epithelial cells, the lamina propria is enriched in immune cells. Deciphering proteome changes in different cell populations is important to understand CD pathogenesis. Here, using isobaric labeling-based quantitative proteomics, we perform an exploratory study to analyze in-depth proteome changes in epithelial cells, immune cells and stromal cells in CD patients compared to controls using cells purified by FACS. Our study revealed increased proteins associated with neutrophil degranulation and mitochondrial metabolism in immune cells of CD intestinal mucosa. We also found upregulation of proteins involved in glycosylation and secretory pathways in epithelial cells of CD patients, while proteins involved in mitochondrial metabolism were reduced. The distinct alterations in protein levels in immune- versus epithelial cells underscores the utility of proteome analysis of defined cell types. Moreover, our workflow allowing concomitant assessment of cell-type specific changes on an individual basis enables deeper insight into disease pathogenesis.

### Keywords
Tmt labeling, Epithelial cells, Cell sorting, Immune cells, Crohn’s disease

### Affiliations
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Institute of Biomedicine, University of Gothenburg, Sweden
Biomedical Research Center, University Hospital Hradec Kralove

### Submitter
Ivo Fabrik

### Lab Head
Dr Mary Jo Wick
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Institute of Biomedicine, University of Gothenburg, Sweden


