### Accession
PXD038052

### Title
Interactome of Drosophila Cryptochrome in Drosophila S2 cell line

### Description
Circadian rhythms are daily oscillations in metabolism and physiology and are generated by the circadian clock. In fruit fly Drosophila, the circadian clock is generated by a transcription-translation feedback loop in which the positive arm components Clock and Cycle activate the expression of the Period and Timeless genes of negative arm, as well as other circadian clock-regulated genes. After being retained in the cytoplasm, the Period and Timeless proteins then migrate to the nucleus to inhibit the Clock/Cycle transactivity by protein-protein interactions (PPIs). The endogenous circadian clock is synchronized with the geological (solar) clock via photoreceptors. Drosophila Cryptochrome protein functions as a circadian photoreceptor. In the early morning, exposure of Cryptochrome to light causes a conformational change in it which results in the formation of new PPIs. Light-activated Cryptochrome interacts with the core clock protein Timeless and the E3 ubiquitin ligase-substrate adaptor protein Jetlag, which results in the ubiquitylation of Timeless by Jetlag-E3 ligase complex and then degradation of Timeless within minutes by proteasome system. Rapid degradation of Timeless and then its partner protein Period, because of its instability in the absence of Timeless, relieves the inhibition on the Clock/Cycle transcription factors suddenly. Therefore, Clock/Cycle-driven expression of circadian clock-regulated genes are induced again, which is the restart of the circadian oscillation or the resetting of the clock. Following Timeless degradation, Cryptochrome is also degraded so the photoreceptor mechanism does not start a new resetting signal until all the required factors are re-synthesized in a circadian manner. Light-dependent degradation of Drosophila Cryptochrome can be observed in Drosophila S2 cell line in culture. In this project, we aimed at finding the interactome of Cryptochrome protein in Drosophila S2 cell line under light and in the dark using proximity labeling method. Because of the fast kinetics of Cryptochrome degradation, we chose the enzymes that can saturate in less than one hour. TurboID (TID) and APEX2 enzymes label proteins with biotin in the proximity even though they work with different mechanisms. They were fused to Cryptochrome protein, and proximity labeling was performed in the dark or under light. We have identified novel light-dependent or -independent interactors of Drosophila Cryptochrome and confirmed some of them using classical coimmunoprecipitation technique.

### Sample Protocol
Stable S2-APEX2, S2-DmCRY-APEX2, S2-TID, S2-DmCRY-TID cells were seeded in 2 of 150-mm plates. Biotin was added to S2-TID or S2-DmCRY-TID cells. For proximity labeling of proteins complexes using TID enzyme, biotin was added to the culture medium of the cells at a final concentration of 500 µM. Labeling was stopped by transferring cells to ice and washing three times with ice-cold 1x PBS. After final wash, the cell pellets were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and kept at -80°C until further processing. For proximity labeling of proteins with biotin tyramide (biotin-phenol), biotin tyramide was added directly to S2-APEX2 or S2-DmCRY-APEX2 cell culture medium at a final concentration of 500 mM and the medium was briefly swirled until the precipitate was dissolved. After a 30-minute incubation in the presence of biotin tyramide at 25 °C, hydrogen peroxide at a final concentration of 1 mM was added to cell culture medium to induce biotinylation. After a 1-minute incubation with gentle swirling, cells were spun down, cell pellets were washed three times with 15 ml of ice-cold 1x PBS, and snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen until processing for mass spectrometry. To enrich biotinylated proteins on streptavidin-coated magnetic beads, cell pellets (which had been collected from two of 150-mm plates) were taken out from -80 oC and lysed in 750 ml of RIPA lysis buffer (50 mM Tris.HCl pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% SDS, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 1% Triton X-100) with 1x protease inhibitor cocktail with gentle pipetting to disrupt the clumps and incubated at 4 oC for 10 minutes. Lysates were then sonicated for 6 sessions with 10-second pulses by a Branson Soniﬁer 250 at 30% duty cycle and an output level of 3. Samples were incubated on ice for 20 seconds between each session to prevent excess heating. After sonication, lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 17,000 x g at 4°C for 15 minutes. Before enrichment of biotinylated proteins on the beads, 250 mL streptavidin-coated magnetic beads were washed twice with 1mL of RIPA lysis buffer on DynaMag-2 magnetic rack. Cleared cell lysates (~750 ml) were then added onto equilibrated beads and rotated overnight at 4°C. The beads were then washed once with 1mL of RIPA lysis buffer, once with 1mL of 1 M KCl, once with 1 mL of 0.1 M Na2CO3, once with 1 mL of 2 M urea in 10 mM Tris.HCl pH 8.0, and twice with 1 mL RIPA lysis buffer to remove the unbound proteins. After final wash, the beads were resuspended in 1 mL of 10 mM Tris.HCl pH 7.4. The biotinylated proteins enriched on the magnetic beads were identified by mass spectrometry using an on-bead tryptic digestion protocol at the Koç University Proteomics Facility (KUPAM), Istanbul, Turkey as described previously (Gul et al., 2022, Doi: 10.1002/PROT.26314).

### Data Protocol
The data sets were searched against the Drosophila UNI-PROT database (UP00000083_2021). Raw files were analyzed by Thermo Proteome Discoverer versions 1.4 and 2.3 using Sequest HT and Mascot search engines for protein identification. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was used as a fixed modification, and acetylation (protein N-termini) and oxidation of methionine were used as variable modifications. A maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed for the tryptic peptides. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm, and both peptide and protein false discovery rates (FDRs) were set to 0.01.  The SAINTexpress version 3.6.3 statistical tool with default parameters and background contaminants was used to analyze the mass spectrometry data. Principal component analysis (PCA) was performed using the R ggfortify library to examine the behavior of the data. For each condition and biotinylation enzyme, proteins with Saint Score equal to or greater than 0.45 were selected as confidence. According to each biotinylation enzyme and condition, a Venn diagram was created with the ggvenn package in R programming. Using the PPI network of Drosophila melanogaster BIOGRID 4.4.214 with proteins with a Saint Score greater than or equal to 0.95, 20 subnetworks with optimum parameters (K=10, L=0) were created and combined with the KeyPathwayMiner (KPM) tool on Cytoscape. Protein interaction networks were visualized with Cytoscape 3.7.2. Gene ontology (GO) enrichment analysis of the proteins which have a Saint score equal to or bigger than 0.45 and BFDR value equal to or less than 0.05 is performed using g:Profiler. Functional analyzes were performed on the DAVID 2021 tool.

### Publication Abstract
In this study, we investigate the intricate regulatory mechanisms underlying the circadian clock in Drosophila, focusing on the light-induced conformational changes in the cryptochrome (DmCry). Upon light exposure, DmCry undergoes conformational changes that prompt its binding to Timeless and Jetlag proteins, initiating a cascade crucial for the starting of a new circadian cycle. DmCry is subsequently degraded, contributing to the desensitization of the resetting mechanism. The transient and short-lived nature of DmCry protein-protein interactions (PPIs), leading to DmCry degradation within an hour of light exposure, presents a challenge for comprehensive exploration. To address this, we employed proximity-dependent biotinylation techniques, combining engineered BioID (TurboID) and APEX (APEX2) enzymes with mass spectrometry. This approach enabled the identification of the in&#xa0;vitro DmCry interactome in Drosophila S2 cells, uncovering several novel PPIs associated with DmCry. Validation of these interactions through a novel co-immunoprecipitation technique enhances the reliability of our findings. Importantly, our study suggests the potential of this method to reveal additional circadian clock- or magnetic field-dependent PPIs involving DmCry. This exploration of the DmCry interactome not only advances our understanding of circadian clock regulation but also establishes a versatile framework for future investigations into light- and time-dependent protein interactions in Drosophila.

### Keywords
Protein−protein interactions, Drosophila, Proteomics, Apex2, Cryptochrome, Turboid

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Gebze Technical University, 41400, Kocaeli, Turkey
Gebze Technical University

### Submitter
Mehmet Serdar Koca

### Lab Head
Dr Nuri Ozturk
Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Gebze Technical University, 41400, Kocaeli, Turkey


