### Accession
PXD010091

### Title
miR-181a Restores Mitochondrial Dynamics in Skeletal Muscle Ageing

### Description
Global label free analysis of quadricesp skeletal muscle tissue from adult and old mice subjected to 15 min of isometric contractions.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue was homogenised in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate containing 10 mM N-ethylmalemide. Samples were desalted using Zeba desalting coloumns. 100ug of protein in 160ul of 25 mM Ammonium Bicaronate, 10ul of 1% (w/v) rapigest added for 10min at 80'C, 10 ul of 100mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride added and samples heated at 60 'C for 10min, 10ul of 100mM d(5) N-ethylmaleimide added and incbated in dark for 30 min. 10ul of 200 ug/ul solution of trypsin added and samples incubated overnight at 37'C. Sample was diluted 1:10 in 97% H2O, 3% MeCN and 0.1% Formic acid. 5ul of sample corresponding to 250ng was loaded onto Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanosystme coupled to a QExactive mass spectrometer. Sample was resolved on the analytical coloumn over 120min at a flow rate of 300nl/min. Data dependent acquisition consisted of a 70,000 resolution full scan MS scan and the 10 most abundant peaks were selected for MS/MS using a 17,000 resolution scan with an ion selection window of 3m/z and normailised collision energy of 30.

### Data Protocol
Raw spectra were converted to mgf files using Proteome Discovery and resulting files were searched against UniProt Rat sequence database using in house Mascot server. Search parameters used were peptide mass tolerance 10ppm, fragment mass tolerance 0.01Da, +1,+2,+3 ions, missed cleavages 1, instrument type ESI-TRAP. Variable modifications included were d(0) NEM, d(5) NEM of Cysteine, Arginine and Lysine, mono-, di-, tri- oxidation of Cys residues. Label free quantification was performed using PEAKS8 studio software, significantly changed proteins had -10LogP>20 and fold change > 2

### Publication Abstract
One of the key mechanisms underlying skeletal muscle functional deterioration during aging is disrupted mitochondrial dynamics. Regulation of mitochondrial dynamics is essential to maintain a healthy mitochondrial population and prevent the accumulation of damaged mitochondria; however, the regulatory mechanisms are poorly understood. We demonstrated loss of mitochondrial content and disrupted mitochondrial dynamics in muscle during aging concomitant with dysregulation of miR-181a target interactions. Using functional approaches and mito-QC assay, we have established that miR-181a is an endogenous regulator of mitochondrial dynamics through concerted regulation of Park2, p62/SQSTM1, and DJ-1 in vitro. Downregulation of miR-181a with age was associated with an accumulation of autophagy-related proteins and abnormal mitochondria. Restoring miR-181a levels in old mice prevented accumulation of p62, DJ-1, and PARK2, and improved mitochondrial quality and muscle function. These results provide physiological evidence for the potential of microRNA-based interventions for age-related muscle atrophy and of wider significance for diseases with disrupted mitochondrial dynamics.

### Keywords
Mitophagy, Mir-181a, Skeletal muscle

### Affiliations
NUI Galway
Discipline of Physiology, NUI Galway

### Submitter
Brian McDonagh

### Lab Head
Dr Brian McDonagh
Discipline of Physiology, NUI Galway


