### Accession
PXD015894

### Title
The protein interactomes of AtNHR2A and AtNHR2B unraveled common and specialized functions in plant immunity integrating distinct biological processes

### Description
AtNHR2A (Arabidopsis thaliana nonhost resistance 2A) and AtNHR2B (Arabidopsis thaliana nonhost resistance 2B) are two proteins required in nonhost resistance, a broad spectrum mechanism of plant immunity that protects plants against pathogens. AtNHR2A and AtNHR2B are localized to the cytoplasm, chloroplasts and other subcellular compartments of unknown identity. The multiple localizations of AtNHR2A and AtNHR2B, suggest that they are highly dynamic and versatile proteins likely participating in multiple biological processes. In spite of their importance, their specific functions have not been elucidated. Thus, to aid in the functional characterization of these proteins and identify the biological processes in which these proteins participate, we used immunoprecipitation coupled with mass spectrometry (IP-MS), to identify the proteins interacting with AtNHR2A and AtNHR2B and generate their interactome network. Further analysis of the AtNHR2A- and AtNHR2B-interacting proteins using published empirical information revealed that AtNHR2A and AtNHR2B function is not limited to plant immunity, highlighting that these proteins are hubs integrating defense outputs with other biological processes.

### Sample Protocol
Co-immunoprecipitation (Co-IP):Five miligrams of total protein extracts (in 5ml) were incubated with 200µl of GFP-Trap A beads (ChromoTek, Germany) and incubated overnight at 4°C with end to end rocking. After incubation, beads were washed once with in TEN buffer buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA) followed by two washes with higher stringency TEN buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 500 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA). Proteins bound to the beads were resuspended in 2 ml of TEN buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA) and digested with trypsin using the approaches described below.     On-bead trypsin digestion: Proteins bound to the beads were pre-digested with 0.2% of RapiGest SF (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate 121. After pre-digestion, beads were subjected to reduction and alkylation, followed by overnight digestion at 37°C with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) in 1:50 trypsin/protein ratio. Following digestion, beads were spun at 5,000 g for 2 min at 4°C, and the supernatant (peptides) was transferred to a new tube. The resulting peptides were dissolved in 20 µl 5% acetonitrile/0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and then analyzed with LC-MS/MS.     In-gel trypsin digestion: Proteins bound to the beads were eluted with 100 µl of 2X SDS-buffer and boiled at 90°C for 8 min. Proteins co- immunoprecipitated with AtNHR2A-GFP, AtNHR2B-GFP and free-GFP were separated by mass spectrometry compatible 4-20% Tris-Glycine precast gel (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc, Carlsbad, CA), and stained with PierceTM silver stain kit for Mass Spectrometry (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc, Carlsbad, CA). The stained gel lanes were then divided into four sections based on 4 ranges of molecular weight, and each section was sliced further into about 4-5 pieces of ca 1 mm2 size gel pieces to increase the trypsin contact surface area for  efficient trypsin digestion. Gel pieces were first destained with 15 mM potassium ferricyanide and 50 mM sodium thiosulfate and destained gel pieces were dehydrated using 100% HPLC grade acetonitrile and completely dried using a SpeedVac. Dried gel pieces were treated with10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) in 25 mM Ammonium bicarbonate (pH 7.8) at 60o C for 1 h to reduce proteins. Excess DTT was removed by pipetting and gel pieces were treated with 20 mM iodoacetamide in 25 mM Ammonium bicarbonate at room temperature for 1 h in dark to alkylate the reduced proteins. After the iodoacetamide treatment, gel pieces were washed thoroughly with 25 mM Ammonium bicarbonate, dehydrated with 100% Acetonitrile, and completely dried using a SpeedVac. One hundred microliters of MS grade Trypsin (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc, Carlsbad, CA) in 25 mM Ammonium bicarbonate were added to the dried gel pieces to a final concentration of 50 ng/l. Samples were kept at 40 C for 30 minutes to make sure trypsin is efficiently absorbed to the dried gel pieces. One hundred microliters of additional 25 mM Ammonium bicarbonate was added to each sample and incubated at 370 C for 24 h. Peptides released into the solution were extracted and desalted prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Mass Spectrometry and Data Analysis. Five microliters of on-bead digested peptides were injected and run on a LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro on a Dionex RSLCnano HPLC (ThermoFisher Scientific) using a 2h gradient available at The Proteomics and Mass spectrometry facility of the Donald Danforth Plant Science Center, St. Louis, MO.  In-gel digested peptides were separated with LC MS/MS analysis using an Agilent 1200 series micro flow HPLC with similar gradient as above and data dependent MS/MS analysis for LC separated peptides were performed using a Bruker Amazon-SL quadrupole ion trap mass spectrometer with a captive spray ionization source available at the University of Arkansas Statewide Mass Spectrometry Facility. The MS/MS spectra obtained from both methods were searched against the TAIR10_20101214 non-redundant Arabidopsis protein available in the The Arabidopsis Information Resource (TAIR) database, containing 35639 peptide entries and assuming trypsin digestion using MASCOT v 2.5 (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.5.1. Mascot search results were further validated using Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.7.2, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) to identify peptides representing proteins that specifically interact with AtNHR2A-GFP or AtNHR2B-GFP but not with free GFP. Protein identifications were accepted if they were represented by at least 2 unique peptides  in all biological replicates , each peptide showing probability higher than 80% (Mascot Ion Score higher than 20), and with a false discovery rate of <1.0% as determined by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm

### Publication Abstract
AtNHR2A (<i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i> nonhost resistance 2A) and AtNHR2B (<i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i> nonhost resistance 2B) are two proteins that participate in nonhost resistance, a broad-spectrum mechanism of plant immunity that protects plants against the majority of potential pathogens. AtNHR2A and AtNHR2B are localized to the cytoplasm, chloroplasts, and other subcellular compartments of unknown identity. The multiple localizations of AtNHR2A and AtNHR2B suggest that these two proteins are highly dynamic and versatile, likely participating in multiple biological processes. In spite of their importance, the specific functions of AtNHR2A and AtNHR2B have not been elucidated. Thus, to aid in the functional characterization of these two proteins and identify the biological processes in which these proteins operate, we used immunoprecipitation coupled with mass spectrometry (IP-MS) to identify proteins interacting with AtNHR2A and AtNHR2B and to generate their interactome network. Further validation of three of the identified proteins provided new insights into specific pathways and processes related to plant immunity where AtNHR2A and AtNHR2B participate. Moreover, the comprehensive analysis of the AtNHR2A- and AtNHR2B-interacting proteins using published empirical information revealed that the functions of AtNHR2A and AtNHR2B are not limited to plant immunity but encompass other biological processes.

### Keywords
Co-immunoprecipitation, Arabidopsis, Plant immunity, Affinity purification, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Department of Plant Pathology, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, AR, USA
University of Arkansas

### Submitter
Rohana Liyanage

### Lab Head
Dr Clemencia M. Rojas
Department of Plant Pathology, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, AR, USA


