### Accession
PXD008733

### Title
A tissue-based draft map of the murine MHC class I immunopeptidome

### Description
The array of peptides presented to CD8+ T cells by major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I molecules is referred to as the MHC class I immunopeptidome. Although the MHC class I immunopeptidome is ubiquitous in mammals and represents a critical component of the adaptive immune system, very little is known about its baseline composition across all tissues and organs in vivo. In this study, we applied mass spectrometry (MS) technologies to draft a tissue-based atlas of the MHC class I immunopeptidome in the C56BL/6 mouse model. Overall, 19 normal mouse tissues were extracted and a total number of ~30,000 high-confidence H2Db/Kb-associated peptides were identified and annotated in the atlas. The raw MS output files, the catalogue of H2Db/Kb-associated peptides, the tissue origin(s) of individual peptides and the H2Db/Kb-specific peptide spectral libraries, which consist of consensus spectra calculated from repeat measurements of the same peptide sequence, were shared via the SysteMHC Atlas project (dataset identifier SYSMHC00018). We expect that this unique dataset will be further expended in the future and will be re-used by the community to 1) investigate the tissue-specificity of the immunopeptidome, 2) perform highly reproducible spectral library-based analysis of immunopeptidomes from mice cohorts, and 3) rapidly identify disease-specific H2Db/Kb peptide antigens from various mouse models of autoimmune diseases and cancers.

### Sample Protocol
Mouse tissues and cell lines: Adrenal gland, bladder, bone marrow, brain, colon, heart, kidney, liver, lung, ovary, pancreas, small intestine, skin, spinal cord, spleen, stomach, testis, thymus, and uterus were extracted from C57BL/6 male or female mice. EL4, LLC1 (LL/2) and B16F10 cell lines were obtained from ATCC. GL261 cell line was obtained from DSMZ. All cell lines were cultured in DMEM with GlutaMAX-1 supplemented with 100 U/mL penicillin, 100 µg/mL streptomycin and 10% fetal bovine serum. B16F10 were treated with IFNγ (200 U/mL) for 24 h to increase the cell surface expression of H2Db and H2Kb molecules.   Isolation of MHC class I-associated peptides H2Db- and H2Kb-associated peptides were isolated by the conventional immunoaffinity purification method using the monoclonal antibody B22-249.R1 and Y-3, respectively. For generating the tissue-based map of the murine MHC class I immunopeptidome, each tissue/organs from five to six mice were pooled together before isolating MHC-peptide complexes for a given tissue. For each cell line used in this study, ~10^9 cells were grown before isolating MHC-peptide complexes. The cell surface abundance of MHC proteins was also quantified for each cell line using the QIFIKIT quantification flow cytometric assay.   DDA mass spectrometry MHC class I peptides from tissues and cell lines were acquired in DDA mode using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos and/or a Triple TOF 5600+ (see below). For retention time (RT) normalization and spectral libraries generation, peptides from the iRT Kit (Biognosys AG, Schlieren, Switzerland) were added to the samples prior to MS injection according to vendor instructions.  Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Fusion Lumos MHC class I peptides from tissues and cell lines were analyzed in DDA mode using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos system. Peptides were separated on an Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 column (250 mm x 75 um i.d., 2 Å particle size; ThermoFisher Scientific) using a flow rate of 300 nl min-1 and a linear gradient of 4–29.6% aqueous ACN (with 0.1% formic acid) in 120 min. Full mass spectra were acquired with the Orbitrap analyser operated at a resolving power of 120,000 (at m/z 200). MS/MS spectra were acquired in HCD mode with a normalized collision energy of 27%. Precursors were selected in the "top speed" mode with a cycle time of 3 s. Fragment ions (charge state 2-6+) were accumulated up to an AGC target value of 50,000 with a maximum injection time of 54 ms and the option "Inject ions for all available parallelizable time" enabled, and were detected in the Orbitrap analyzer at a resolution of 30,000 (at m/z 200). Dynamic exclusion was enabled for 30 s after a selection event with a tolerance of ± 10 ppm.  AB SCIEX TripleTOF 5600+ MHC class I peptides were also analyzed using a TripleTOF system in DDA mode as described previously. Samples were analyzed on an Eksigent nanoLC system coupled with an AB SCIEX TripleTOF 5600+ System. The samples were separated in a 75 µm-diameter PicoTip emitter (New Objective, Woburn, MA) packed with 20 cm of Magic 3 µm, 200 Å C18 AQ material (Bischoff Chromatography, Leonberg, Germany). The loaded material was eluted from the column at a flow rate of 300 nl/min and a linear gradient of 2–35% aqueous ACN (0.1% formic acid) over 120 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in DDA top20 mode, with 500 and 150 ms acquisition time for the MS1 and MS2 scans respectively, and 20 s dynamic exclusion. MS/MS spectra were acquired in CID mode. Rolling collision energy with a collision energy spread of 15 eV was used for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Database search engines, statistical validation and spectral library generation Raw mass spectrometry files were converted into the mzXML format by msConvert. The mzXML files were then individually searched using Comet and X!Tandem against the full non-redundant, canonical human genome as annotated by the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot (2014_02) with 20,270 ORFs and appended iRT peptide and decoy sequence. Oxidation (M) was the only variable modification. We used default search settings for both engines with the following key parameters: Precursor tolerance was set to ±15 p.p.m., high accuracy fragment ion tolerance was set to ±0.05 Da, and digestion specificity was set to unconstrained. The search identifications were then combined and statistically scored using PeptideProphet and iProphet within the TPP (4.8.0). iProphet estimated cut-off of 1% FDR was used. Spectral libraries were generated by SpectraST with default consensus library building parameters. H2Db- and H2Kb-specific peptide spectral libraries were generated on the atlas level that contains consensus spectra of peptides from different samples. For a given allele-specific spectral library, the same peptide ions generated under various fragmentation methods were specified and kept separated as different library entries.

### Publication Abstract
The large array of peptides presented to CD8+ T cells by major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I molecules is referred to as the MHC class I immunopeptidome. Although the MHC class I immunopeptidome is ubiquitous in mammals and represents a critical component of the immune system, very little is known, in any species, about its composition across most tissues and organs in vivo. We applied mass spectrometry (MS) technologies to draft the first tissue-based atlas of the murine MHC class I immunopeptidome in health. Peptides were extracted from 19 normal tissues from C57BL/6 mice and prepared for MS injections, resulting in a total number of 28,448 high-confidence H2D<sup>b</sup>/K<sup>b</sup>-associated peptides identified and annotated in the atlas. This atlas provides initial qualitative data to explore the tissue-specificity of the immunopeptidome and serves as a guide to identify potential tumor-associated antigens from various cancer models. Our data were shared via PRIDE (PXD008733), SysteMHC Atlas (SYSMHC00018) and SWATH Atlas. We anticipate that this unique dataset will be expanded in the future and will find wide applications in basic and translational immunology.

### Keywords
Tissue, Immunopeptidome, Mhc, Mass spectrometry, Map

### Affiliations
ETH Zurich
Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, 8093, Switzerland

### Submitter
Etienne Caron

### Lab Head
Dr Ruedi Aebersold
Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, 8093, Switzerland


