### Accession
PXD007252

### Title
Caloric restriction and rat fecal microbiota

### Description
Characterization of the fecal metaproteome in rats fed ad libitum or following a caloric restriction diet

### Sample Protocol
Fecal samples were subjected to bead-beating and heating/freezing steps after resuspension in an SDS-based, reducing extraction buffer. Protein extracts were cleaned up, alkylated and trypsin digested according to the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) procedure, with minor modifications.  LC-MS/MS analyses were carried out using an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) interfaced with an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano LC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The single-run 1D LC peptide separation was performed applying a 247 min separation gradient and loading 4 μg of peptide mixture per sample. The mass spectrometer was set up in a data-dependent MS/MS mode, with Higher Energy Collision Dissociation (HCD) as the fragmentation method.

### Data Protocol
Microbial peptide identification was carried out using the Proteome Discoverer informatic platform (version 2.0; Thermo Fisher Scientific), with Sequest-HT as search engine and Percolator for peptide validation (FDR < 1%). A custom collection of metagenomic sequences obtained in house from rat fecal samples (7,422,716 sequences in total) was employed as sequence database. Host peptide identification was carried out using the Proteome Discoverer informatic platform (version 1.4; Thermo Fisher Scientific), using the protein sequences belonging to the order Rodentia and deposited in UniProtKB/SwissProt (release 2017_05; 26,536 sequences in total) as database.

### Publication Abstract
Caloric restriction (CR) is known to promote health and longevity, likely via modification of the gut microbiota (GM). However, functional and metabolic changes induced in the GM during CR are still unidentified. Here, we investigated the short- and long-term effects of CR on the rat GM using a metaproteogenomic approach. We show that a switch from ad libitum (AL) low fat diet to CR in young rats is able to induce rapid and deep changes in their GM metaproteomic profile, related to a reduction of the Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes ratio and an expansion of lactobacilli. Specifically, we observed a significant change in the expression of the microbial enzymes responsible for short-chain fatty acid biosynthesis, with CR boosting propionogenesis and limiting butyrogenesis and acetogenesis. Furthermore, these CR-induced effects were maintained up to adulthood and started to be reversed after a short-term diet change. We also found that CR alters the abundance of an array of host proteins released in stool, mainly related to epithelial barrier integrity and inflammation. Hence, our results provide thorough information about CR-induced modifications to GM and host functional activity, and might constitute the basis for novel GM-based approaches aimed at monitoring the effectiveness of dietary interventions.

### Keywords
Stool, Rat, Diet, Proteomics, Gut, Microbiome

### Affiliations
Proteomics Laboratory, Porto Conte Ricerche, Alghero, Italy
Porto Conte Ricerche

### Submitter
Alessandro Tanca

### Lab Head
Dr Sergio Uzzau
Porto Conte Ricerche


