### Accession
PXD038288

### Title
Effects of FTY720 on phospho-proteome of leukemic cells

### Description
: FTY720 (Fingolimod) is an immunosuppressive drug approved by FDA for Multiple Sclerosis (MS), that has gained attention as anti-cancer drug, thanks to its ability to disrupt the binding between the onco-protein SET  and the tumor- suppressor phosphatase PP2A. We investigated FTY720 induced phospho-proteomic changes on acute myeloid leukemia cell lines carrying KMT2A-transocations. The phospho-proteomic data indicated that FTY720 treatment resulted in the down-regulation of phospho-sites associated to protein serine/threonine kinase activity, chromatin organisation and transcription. The findings support the hypothesis of a feedback loop between SET, PP2A and MYC, whereby FTY720 re-activates PP2A with an overall inhibitory effect on MYC, resulting in cell cycle arrest and apoptosis.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were treated with 5M FTY720 and harvested 48hrs after, when the cells were spun at 500g for 5min and then washed with PBS + 1mM NaF and 1mM Na3VO4. The cells were spun again at 500g for 5 min and the pellets frozen at -20C. Frozen cell pallets were lysed in 8M urea buffer and supplemented with phosphatase inhibitors (10 mM Na3VO4, 100 mM β-glycerol phosphate and 25 mM Na2H2P2O7  (Sigma)). Proteins were digested into peptides using trypsin as previously described (3, 4). Phosphopetides were desalted and enriched using the AssayMAP Bravo (Agilent Technologies) platform.  For desalting, protocol peptide clean-up v3.0 was used. Reverse phase S cartridges (Agilent, 5 μL bed volume) were primed with 250 μL 99.9% acetonitrile (ACN) with 0.1%TFA and equilibrated with 250 0.1% TFA at a flow rate of 10 μL/min. The samples were loaded at 20 μL/min, followed by an internal cartridge wash with 0.1% TFA at a flow rate of 10 μL/min. Peptides were then eluted with 105 μL of 1M glycolic acid with 50% ACN, 5% TFA and this is the same buffer for subsequent phosphopeptide enrichment. Following the Phospho Enrichment v 2.1 protocol, phosphopeptides were enriched using 5ul Assay MAP TiO2 cartridges on the Assay MAP Bravo platform. The cartridges were primed with 100ul of  5% ammonia solution with 15% ACN at a flow rate of 300 μL/min and equilibrated with 50 μL loading buffer (1M glycolic acid with 80% ACN, 5% TFA) at 10 μL/min. Samples eluted from the desalting were loaded onto the cartridge at 3 μL/min. The cartridges were washed with 50 μL loading buffer and the phosphorylated peptides were eluted with 25 μL 5% ammonia solution with 15% ACN directly into 25 μL 10% formic acid. Phosphopeptides were lyophilized in a vacuum concentrator and stored at -80˚C.  Dried phosphopeptides were dissolved in 0.1% TFA and analysed by nanoflow ultimate 3000 RSL nano instrument was coupled on-line to a Q Exactive plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Gradient elution was from 3% to 28% solvent B in 90 min at a flow rate 250 nL/min with solvent A being used to balance the mobile phase (buffer A was 0.1% formic acid in water and B was 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) . The spray voltage was 1.95 kV and the capillary temperature was set to 255 ºC. The Q-Exactive plus was operated in data dependent mode with one survey MS scan followed by 15 MS/MS scans. The full scans were acquired in the mass analyser at 375- 1500m/z with the resolution of 70 000, and the MS/MS scans were obtained with a resolution of 17 500.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were converted into Mascot Generic Format using Mascot Distiller (version 2.6.1) and searched against the SwissProt database (SwissProt_2020_04) restricted to human entries using the Mascot search daemon (version 2.6.1). Allowed mass windows were 10 ppm and 25 mmu for parent and fragment mass to charge values, respectively. Variable modifications included in searches were oxidation of methionine, pyro-glu (N-term) and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine. Phosphopeptide quantification was performed using in-house software Pescal. The resulting quantitative data was parsed into excel files for further normalisation and statistical analysis

### Publication Abstract
KMT2A-rearranged (KMT2A-R) is an aggressive and chemo-refractory acute leukemia which mostly affects children. Transcriptomics-based characterization and chemical interrogation identified kinases as key drivers of survival and drug resistance in KMT2A-R leukemia. In contrast, the contribution and regulation of phosphatases is unknown. In this study we uncover the essential role and underlying mechanisms of SET, the endogenous inhibitor of Ser/Thr phosphatase PP2A, in KMT2A-R-leukemia. Investigation of SET expression in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) samples demonstrated that SET is overexpressed, and elevated expression of SET is correlated with poor prognosis and with the expression of MEIS and HOXA genes in AML patients. Silencing SET specifically abolished the clonogenic ability of KMT2A-R leukemic cells and the transcription of KMT2A targets genes HOXA9 and HOXA10. Subsequent mechanistic investigations showed that SET interacts with both KMT2A wild type and fusion proteins, and it is recruited to the HOXA10 promoter. Pharmacological inhibition of SET by FTY720 disrupted SET-PP2A interaction leading to cell cycle arrest and increased sensitivity to chemotherapy in KMT2A-R-leukemic models. Phospho-proteomic analyses revealed that FTY720 reduced the activity of kinases regulated by PP2A, including ERK1, GSK3&#x3b2;, AURB and PLK1 and led to suppression of MYC, supporting the hypothesis of a feedback loop among PP2A, AURB, PLK1, MYC, and SET. Our findings illustrate that SET is a novel player in KMT2A-R leukemia and they provide evidence that SET antagonism could serve as a novel strategy to treat this aggressive leukemia.

### Keywords
Aml, Set, Phosphoproteomics, Fingolimod, Fty720, Lc-ms/ms, Pp2a

### Affiliations
Centre for Haemato Oncology
Centre for Genomics and Computational Biology Barts Cancer Institute  Queen Mary, University of London John Vane Science Centre, Charterhouse Square, London EC1M 6BQ Tel: +44 (0)20 7882 8266

### Submitter
Vinothini Rajeeve

### Lab Head
Dr Pedro R. Cutillas
Centre for Genomics and Computational Biology Barts Cancer Institute  Queen Mary, University of London John Vane Science Centre, Charterhouse Square, London EC1M 6BQ Tel: +44 (0)20 7882 8266


