### Accession
PXD030571

### Title
Inactivation of p21-Activated Kinase 2 (Pak2) Inhibits the Development of Nf2-Deficient Tumors by Restricting Downstream Hedgehog and Wnt Signaling

### Description
Since loss of the NF2 tumor suppressor gene results in p21-activated kinase (Pak) activation, PAK inhibitors hold promise for the treatment of NF2-deficient tumors. To test this possibility, we asked if loss of Pak2, a highly expressed group I PAK member, affects the development of malignant mesothelioma in Nf2;Cdkn2a-deficient (NC) mice and the growth properties of NC mesothelioma cells in culture. In vivo, deletion of Pak2 resulted in a markedly decreased incidence and delayed onset of both pleural and peritoneal malignant mesotheliomas in NC mice. In vitro, Pak2 deletion decreased malignant mesothelioma cell viability, migration, clonogenicity, and spheroid formation. RNA-seq analysis demonstrated downregulated expression of Hedgehog and Wnt pathway genes in NC;Pak2-/- mesothelioma cells versus NC;Pak2+/+ mesothelioma cells. Targeting of the Hedgehog signaling component Gli1 or its target gene Myc inhibited cell viability and spheroid formation in NC;P+/+ mesothelioma cells. Kinome profiling uncovered kinase changes indicative of EMT in NC;Pak2-/- mesothelioma cells, suggesting that Pak2-deficient malignant mesotheliomas can adapt by reprogramming their kinome in the absence of Pak activity. The identification of such compensatory pathways offers opportunities for rational combination therapies to circumvent resistance to anti-PAK drugs.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed on ice in buffer containing 50 mM HEPES (pH 7.5), 0.5% Triton X-100, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, 10 mM sodium fluoride, 2.5 mM sodium orthovanadate, 1X protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche), and 1% each of phosphatase inhibitor cocktails 2 and 3 (Sigma). Particulate was removed by centrifugation of lysates at 21,000 g for 15 minutes at 4°C and filtration through 0. 45 µm syringe filters. Protein concentrations were determined by BCA analysis. Five milligrams of lysate per replicate were run separately over MIB-beads. After 2x10 ml column washes in high-salt buffer and 1x10 ml wash in low-salt buffer (containing 50 mM HEPES (pH 7.5), 0.5% Triton X-100, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, and 10 mM sodium fluoride, and 1M NaCl or 150 mM NaCl, respectively), retained kinases were eluted from the column by boiling in 2x500 µl 0.5% SDS, 0.1 M Tris HCl (pH 6.8), and 1% 2-mercaptoethanol. Eluted peptides were reduced by incubation with 5 mM DTT at 65°C for 25 minutes, alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 30 minutes in the dark, and alkylation was quenched with DTT for 10 minutes. Samples were concentrated to approximately 100 µl with Millipore 10 kD cutoff spin concentrators. Detergent was removed by methanol/chloroform extraction, and the protein pellet was resuspended in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and digested with sequencing-grade modified trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37°C. Peptides were cleaned with PepClean C18 spin columns (Thermo), dried in a speed-vac, resuspended in 50 μl 0.1% formic acid, and extracted  with ethyl acetate (10:1 ethyl acetate:H2O).

### Data Protocol
Raw data analysis of LFQ experiments was performed using MaxQuant software 1.6.1.0 and searched using Andromeda 1.5.6.0 against the Swiss-Prot murine protein database (downloaded on July 26th, 2017, 16909 entries). The search was set up for full tryptic peptides with a maximum of two missed cleavage sites. All settings were default and searched using acetylation of protein N-terminus and oxidized methionine as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification. The precursor mass tolerance threshold was set at 10 ppm and maximum fragment mass error was 0.02 Da. LFQ quantitation was performed using MaxQuant with the following parameters; LFQ minimum ratio count: Global parameters for protein quantitation were as follows: label minimum ratio count: 1, peptides used for quantitation: unique, only use modified proteins selected and with normalized average ratio estimation selected.  Match between runs was employed for LFQ quantitation and the significance threshold of the ion score was calculated based on a false discovery rate of < 1%. Parameters were default unless specified. MaxQuant normalized LFQ values were imported into Perseus software (1.6.2.3) and filtered in the following manner:  kinases identified by site only were removed, reverse, or potential contaminant were removed then filtered for kinases identified by >1 unique peptide. Protein LFQ values were log2 transformed, filtered for a minimum valid number of 3, annotated, and subjected to a Student's t-test comparing control to treatment or parent to resistant. Parameters for the Student's t-test were the following: S0=2, side both using Benjamini-Hochberg FDR <0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Conditional knockout mice; malignant mesothelioma; nf2 and cdkn2a tumor suppressor genes; pak; hedgehog and wnt signaling; cancer stem cells

### Affiliations
Fox Chase Cancer Center
Cancer Signaling and Epigenetics Program, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States

### Submitter
Joseph Testa

### Lab Head
Dr Joseph R. Testa
Cancer Signaling and Epigenetics Program, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States


