### Accession
PXD009645

### Title
Revealing the immune perturbation of black phosphorus nanomaterials to macrophages by understanding the protein corona

### Description
The increasing number of biological applications for black phosphorus (BP) nanomaterials has precipitated considerable concern about their interactions with physiological systems. Here, we demonstrate the adsorption of plasma protein onto BP nanomaterials and the subsequent immune perturbation effect on macrophages. Using liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry, we discovered that BP nanosheets (BPNSs) were able to bind 23.3 percent of immune proteins from plasma, while BP quantum dots (BPQDs) bound 41.8 percent of immune proteins. In particular, the protein corona dramatically reshaped BP nanomaterial-corona complexes, influenced cellular uptake, activated the NF-κB pathway and even increased cytokine secretion by 2-5-fold. BP nanomaterials induced immunotoxicity and immune perturbation in macrophages in the presence of a plasma corona. These findings offer important insights into the development of safe and effective BP nanomaterial-based therapies.

### Sample Protocol
BP quantum dots (BPQDs) and BP nanosheets (BPNSs) were incubated with human plasma at 4 ℃ for 4 h, and plasma solutions were diluted with PBS keeping the final nanomaterials concentration constant. To obtain protein corona complexes, the mixed solutions were centrifuged to pellet particle-protein complexes. The precipitate was then resuspended three times with 500 μl PBS and centrifuged again for 20 min at 12000 rpm at 4 ℃.Corona complexes were depleted of the most abundant proteins using an Agilent Human 14 Multiple Affinity Removal System Column following the manufacturer’s protocol. Then, one volume of SDT buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM DTT, 150 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0) was added, and the solution was boiled for 15 min and centrifuged at 14000 g for 20 min. After that, 200 μg of proteins from each sample was incorporated into 30 μl SDT buffer. The detergent, DTT and other low-molecular-weight components were removed using UA buffer (8 M urea, 150 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0) by repeated ultrafiltration (Microcon units, 10 kDa). Then, 100 μl iodoacetamide (100 mM IAA in UA buffer) was added to block reduced cysteine residues, and the samples were incubated for 30 min in the dark. The filters were washed with 100 μl UA buffer three times and then 100 μl 25 mM NH4HCO3 buffer twice. Finally, the protein suspensions were digested with 4 μg trypsin (Promega) in 40 μl 25 mM NH4HCO3 buffer overnight at 37 °C, and the resulting peptides were collected as a filtrate. The peptides from each sample were desalted on C18 Cartridges (Empore™ SPE Cartridges C18, bed I.D. 7 mm, volume 3 ml, Sigma), concentrated by vacuum centrifugation and reconstituted in 40 µl of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (Fluka). The peptide content was estimated by UV light spectral density at 280 nm using an extinction coefficient of 1.1 of 0.1% (g/l) solution that was calculated on the basis of the frequency of tryptophan and tyrosine in vertebrate proteins.

### Data Protocol
Each fraction was injected into a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) for nanoLC-MS/MS analysis. MS/MS spectra were searched using the MASCOT engine (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.4). For protein identification, the following option were used: peptide mass tolerance=20 ppm, MS/MS tolerance=0.1 Da, enzyme=Trypsin, missed cleavage=2, fixed modification: carbamidomethyl (C), and variable modification: oxidation (M). The identified proteins were retrieved from the UniProtKB human database (Release 2017 _02) in FASTA format.

### Publication Abstract
The increasing number of biological applications for black phosphorus (BP) nanomaterials has precipitated considerable concern about their interactions with physiological systems. Here we demonstrate the adsorption of plasma protein onto BP nanomaterials and the subsequent immune perturbation effect on macrophages. Using liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry, 75.8% of the proteins bound to BP quantum dots were immune&#xa0;relevant proteins, while that percentage for BP nanosheet-corona complexes is 69.9%. In particular, the protein corona dramatically reshapes BP nanomaterial-corona complexes, influenced cellular uptake, activated the NF-&#x3ba;B pathway and even increased cytokine secretion by 2-4-fold. BP nanomaterials induce immunotoxicity and immune perturbation in macrophages in the presence of a plasma corona. These findings offer important insights into the development of safe and effective BP nanomaterial-based therapies.

### Keywords
Black phosphorus nanomaterials, Human plasma, Lc-ms/ms, Corona

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Coordination Chemistry, Institute of Chemistry and BioMedical Sciences, School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210093, China.
Nanjing University

### Submitter
Jianbin Mo

### Lab Head
Dr Jing Zhao
State Key Laboratory of Coordination Chemistry, Institute of Chemistry and BioMedical Sciences, School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210093, China.


