### Accession
PXD004175

### Title
TFG Cell-derived matrix proteome

### Description
Examining the effect of RNAi-mediated depletion of TFG on extracellular matrix secretion

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics of cell-derived matrix Cells were grown in SILAC medium for 6 cell division cycles prior to siRNA transfection. Amino-acids stock R0, R6 and R10 were prepared at 8.4 mg.ml‑1 and K0, K6 and K8 at 14.6 mg.ml-1. To make amino-acid stocks, 6 ml of sterile PBS for arginine or 3.5ml for lysine was added directly to the vial then filter sterilised using a 0.22 µm filter. For HeLa cells we used DMEM high glucose medium (Thermo Fisher) containing 5ml dialyzed FCS to which was added for “Light” 500 µl R0 + 500 µl K0 for “Medium” 500 µl R6 + 500 µl K4, and for “Heavy” 500 µl R10 + 500 µl K8. After siRNA transfection cells were grown for a further 72 hours. Cell derived matrix was prepared from these cells as follows. Cells were washed in PBS and extracted using pre-warmed extraction buffer (20 mM NH4OH, 0.5% Triton X-100 in PBS; 3 ml per 6 cm plate for 2 minutes). Extraction buffer was aspirated and plates washed with PBS containing calcium and magnesium twice. Residual DNA was digested with 10 ug/ml DNase I (Roche) in PBS containing calcium and magnesium for 30 min at 37°C. Extracts were washed again twice with PBS containing calcium and magnesium and finally solubilized in 80 μl of SDS-PAGE sample buffer, resolved on precast PAGE gels (NuPAGE 4–12%; Invitrogen) and analyzed by liquid chromatography–MS/MS-based quantification as described in (Steinberg et al., 2012). Briefly, gel lanes were cut into 6 slices, each of which was digested in-gel with trypsin using an automated digestion unit (ProGest; Digilab UK) and the resulting peptides. Peptides were then fractionated using a nano-HPLC system (UltiMate 3000; DionexThermo Scientific) in 1% (vol/vol) formic acid. Peptides in 1% (vol/vol) formic acid were injected onto a C18 nanotrap column (Acclaim PepMap; Dionex, Thermo Scientific). After washing with 0.5% (vol/vol) acetonitrile, 0.1% (vol/vol) formic acid peptides were resolved on a 250 mm × 75–µm C18 reverse-phase analytical column (Acclaim PepMap) over a 120-min organic gradient with a flow rate of 300 nl/min−1. Peptides were ionized by nano-electrospray ionization at 2.3 1 kV using a stainless steel emitter with an internal diameter of 30 µm (ES542; ProxeonThermo Scientific). Tandem MS analysis was performed on a mass spectrometer (LTQ Orbitrap Velos; Thermo Fisher Scientific). The Orbitrap was set to analyze the survey scans at 60,000 resolution, and the top six multiply charged ions in each duty cycle were selected for MS/MS in the LTQ linear ion trap. Data were acquired using the Xcalibar Xcalibur v2.1 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The raw data files were processed and quantified using Proteome Discoverer software v1.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with searches performed against the UniProt human database by using the SEQUEST algorithm with the following criteria: Peptide precursor mass tolerance at 10ppm and MS/MS tolerance at 0.8Da peptide tolerance at 10 ppm, trypsin as the enzyme, and carboxyamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and appropriate SILAC labels as variable modifications. The reverse database search option was enabled, and all data were filtered to satisfy a false discovery rate of <5%.

### Publication Abstract
Collagen is the most abundant protein in the animal kingdom. It is of fundamental importance during development for cell differentiation and tissue morphogenesis as well as in pathological processes such as fibrosis and cancer cell migration. However, our understanding of the mechanisms of procollagen secretion remains limited. Here, we show that TFG organizes transitional ER (tER) and ER exit sites (ERESs) into larger structures. Depletion of TFG results in dispersion of tER elements that remain associated with individual ER-Golgi intermediate compartments (ERGICs) as largely functional ERESs. We show that TFG is not required for the transport and packaging of small soluble cargoes but is necessary for the export of procollagen from the ER. Our work therefore suggests a key relationship between the structure and function of ERESs and a central role for TFG in optimizing COPII assembly for procollagen export.

### Keywords
Rpe1 cells

### Affiliations
University of Bristol

### Submitter
David Stephens

### Lab Head
Dr David Stephens
University of Bristol


