### Accession
PXD038945

### Title
Large scale proteomics in crops: Solanum lycopersicum LC-MSMS

### Description
Plants represent the nutritional basis of virtually all life on earth and protein-rich foods from crop plants are a global megatrend essential for sustaining an increasing human population and counteracting climate change. While the genomes of crops are increasingly elucidated, little is known about crop proteomes – the entirety of proteins that execute and control nearly every aspect of life. To address this shortcoming we optimized a protocol for mapping the proteome of different crops such as Solanum lycopersicum (tomato) fruit and included four technical replicates and three biological replicates from different tomato plants to demonstrate the robustness of the workflow.

### Sample Protocol
We used a universal protein extraction protocol originally developed for gel-based experiments and combine it with an automated single-pot solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation (SP3) protocol on a liquid handling robot to prepare high quality samples for proteomics. In addition, we provide an automated off-line peptide separation protocol and optimized micro-LC-MS/MS conditions that enables the identification and quantification of >10,000 proteins from any plant tissue within 6 hours of instrument time. We illustrate this workflow by analyzing the proteome of mature tomato fruits via. Our data demonstrate the robustness of the approach and which we propose for use in large-scale mapping of crop tissues.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (version 2.0.1.0) with its built-in search engine Andromeda was used for peptide and protein identification and quantifications. MSMS spectra were searched against the Uniprot database (34’658 known from July 2022) as well as against the ITAG4.0 database (https://solgenomics.net/, 34,725 entries). Unless otherwise specified, the default parameters of MaxQuant were used. Precursor tolerance was set to ±4.5 ppm and fragment ion tolerance to ±20 ppm (FTMS) and 0.4 Da (ITMS). Trypsin/P was chosen as the proteolytic enzyme with up to two missed cleavage sites. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was chosen as a fixed modification whereas the N-terminal protein acetylation and oxidation of methionine residues were chosen as variable modifications. The peptide spectrum match (PSM) was set at 1%, as was the false discovery rate (FDR) for proteins, using a target-decoy approach with reversed protein sequences. The MaxQuant search was performed once with filtering for 1% FDR at the PSM level and once without (100%) filtering of FDR at the PSM level. The 100% FDR MaxQuant search results were Prosit-rescored.

### Publication Abstract
Plants are an indispensable cornerstone of sustainable global food supply. While immense progress has been made in decoding the genomes of crops in recent decades, the composition of their proteomes, the entirety of all expressed proteins of a species, is virtually unknown. In contrast to the model plant <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i>, proteomic analyses of crop plants have often been hindered by the presence of extreme concentrations of secondary metabolites such as pigments, phenolic compounds, lipids, carbohydrates or terpenes. As a consequence, crop proteomic experiments have, thus far, required individually optimized protein extraction protocols to obtain samples of acceptable quality for downstream analysis by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). In this article, we present a universal protein extraction protocol originally developed for gel-based experiments and combined it with an automated single-pot solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation (SP3) protocol on a liquid handling robot to prepare high-quality samples for proteomic analysis of crop plants. We also report an automated offline peptide separation protocol and optimized micro-LC-MS/MS conditions that enables the identification and quantification of ~10,000 proteins from plant tissue within 6 h of instrument time. We illustrate the utility of the workflow by analyzing the proteomes of mature tomato fruits to an unprecedented depth. The data demonstrate the robustness of the approach which we propose for use in upcoming large-scale projects that aim to map crop tissue proteomes.

### Keywords
Crop, Lc-msms, Solanum lycopersicum, Tomato

### Affiliations
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technical University of Munich (TUM), Freising, Germany
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technical University of Munich (TUM), Freising, Germany 

### Submitter
Sarah Brajkovic

### Lab Head
Dr Bernhard Kuster
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technical University of Munich (TUM), Freising, Germany


