### Accession
PXD018635

### Title
Drosophila nephrocytes Bazooka knockdown vs control

### Description
We assessed the functional role of the cell polarity protein Bazooka on nephrocyte function. Here, we did a proteomics anaylsis of isolated garland nephrocytes from 3rd install larvae. Analysis of the data identified several differentially regulated proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Isolation of garland nephrocytes Wandering 3rd install larvae were used for dissection. Garland nephrocytes were isolated and transferred into 40 µl 8 % SDS buffer. Sample preparation for LC-MS Samples were heated at 95°C for 5 minutes. Afterwards they were reduced with 5 mM DTT at 37°C for 30 minutes. Proteins were then alkylated at RT with 10 mM IAA in the dark. Trypsin and LysC digestion were done using the SP3 ultrasensitive proteomics technique as previously described (Hughes, C. S. et al. Ultrasensitive proteome analysis using paramagnetic bead technology. Mol. Syst. Biol. 10, 757 (2014) and Koehler, S. et al. Proteome Analysis of Isolated Podocytes Reveals Stress Responses in Glomerular Sclerosis. JASN 31: 544–559, 2020). Liquid Chromatography-Tandem Mass spectrometry Samples were measured on a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). After loading on solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water), peptides were separated over an in-house packed 50-cm column (filled with Poroshell, 120 EC-C18, 2.7 µm [Agilent, Santa Clara, CA]) using the following 1-h gradient: within 43 min 5% to 25% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile), within 4 min 25% to 37% solvent B, within 1 min 37% to 85% solvent B, 85% solvent B for 5 min and an equilibration at 5% solvent B for another 5 min. Subsequently, a standard data-dependent acquisition method was used. MS/MS of the top 10 peptides followed the acquisition of a scan from 300 to 1750 mass-to-charge at a resolution of 70,000 (AGC target 3e6; maximum injection time 20 ms). An isolation window of 2.1 Th was used to isolate peptides. The automatic gain control target for MS2 was set at 500,000 at a maximum injection time of 60 ms. The resolution was set at 17,500. Singly charged and unassigned peptides were automatically excluded.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were searched against a Drosophila uniprot reference database dated 01/2018. Data was analyzed using MaxQUant version 1.5.3.8 with the parameters in this submission. Data was further analyzed using Perseus 1.6.2.2.

### Publication Abstract
Glomerular diseases are a major cause for chronic kidney disorders. In most cases podocyte injury is causative for disease development. Cytoskeletal rearrangements and morphological changes are hallmark features of podocyte injury and result in dedifferentiation and loss of podocytes. Here, we establish a link between the Par3 polarity complex and actin regulators necessary to establish and maintain podocyte architecture by utilizing mouse and Drosophila models to characterize the functional role of Par3A and Par3B and its fly homologue Bazooka in&#xa0;vivo. Only simultaneous inactivation of both Par3 proteins caused a severe disease phenotype. Rescue experiments in Drosophila nephrocytes revealed atypical protein kinase C (aPKC)-Par6 dependent and independent effects. While Par3A primarily acts via aPKC-Par6, Par3B function was independent of Par6. Actin-associated synaptopodin protein levels were found to be significantly upregulated upon loss of Par3A/B in mouse podocytes. Tropomyosin2, which shares functional similarities with synaptopodin, was also elevated in Bazooka depleted nephrocytes. The simultaneous depletion of Bazooka and Tropomyosin2 resulted in a partial rescue of the Bazooka knockdown phenotype and prevented increased Rho1-GTP, a member of a GTPase protein family regulating the cytoskeleton. The latter contribute to the nephrocyte phenotype observed upon loss of Bazooka. Thus, we demonstrate that Par3 proteins share a high functional redundancy but also have specific functions. Par3A acts in an aPKC-Par6 dependent way and regulates RhoA-GTP levels, while Par3B exploits Par6 independent functions influencing synaptopodin localization. Hence, Par3A and Par3B link elements of polarity signaling and actin regulators to maintain podocyte architecture.

### Keywords
Drosophila, Nephrocyte, Bazooka

### Affiliations
1) Department II of Internal Medicine and Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne, University of Cologne, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Cologne, Cologne, Germany
2) CECAD, University of Cologne, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Cologne, Cologne, Germany

Klinik II für Innere Medizin: Nephrologie, Rheumatologie, Diabetologie und  Allgemeine Innere Medizin Zentrum für Molekulare Medizin Köln (ZMMK) Uniklinik Köln Kerpener Str. 62 D-50937 Köln

### Submitter
Martin Hoehne

### Lab Head
Dr Paul Thomas Brinkkoetter
Klinik II für Innere Medizin: Nephrologie, Rheumatologie, Diabetologie und  Allgemeine Innere Medizin Zentrum für Molekulare Medizin Köln (ZMMK) Uniklinik Köln Kerpener Str. 62 D-50937 Köln


