### Accession
PXD022817

### Title
COVIDomics_plasma_2020_DDA-PASEF

### Description
In order to investigate variations in the endotype of COVID19 patients, we completed an integrated analysis of 112 research participants, including 74 COVID19 patients versus 37 SARS-CoV-2 negative controls. COVID19 patients tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 infection by PCR and/or antibody testing and were hospitalized due to COVID19 symptoms, but none of them had developed severe pathology requiring ICU admission at the time of blood collection. The control group was recruited from the same hospital system but tested negative for SARS-CoV-2 infection. Research blood draws were obtained from consented participants and analyzed by matched SARS-CoV-2 seroconversion assays, plasma proteomics using two alternative platforms [mass-spectrometry (MS), and SOMAscan assays], 82-plex cytokine profiling using Meso Scale Discovery (MSD) assays, and immune cell profiling via mass cytometry (MC).

### Sample Protocol
Plasma samples were digested in the S-Trap filter (Protifi, Huntington, NY) was performed following the manufacturer’s procedure. Briefly, a dried protein pellet prepared from organic extraction of patient plasma was solubilized in 400 ul of 5% SDS. Samples  were reduced with 10 mM DTT at 55 °C for 30 min, cooled to room temperature, and then alkylated with 25 mM iodoacetamide in the dark for 30 min. Next, a final concentration of 1.2% phosphoric acid and then six volumes of binding buffer (90% methanol; 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate, TEAB; pH 7.1) were added to each sample. After gentle mixing, the protein solution was loaded to a S-Trap filter, spun at 2000 rpm for 1 min, and the flow-through collected and reloaded onto the filter. This step was repeated three times, and then the filter was washed with 200 μL of binding buffer 3 times. Finally, 1 μg of sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega) and 150 μL of digestion buffer (50 mM TEAB) were added onto the filter and digested carried out at 47 °C for 1 h. To elute peptides, three stepwise buffers were applied, with 200 μL of each with one more repeat, including 50 mM TEAB, 0.2% formic acid in H2O, and 50% acetonitrile and 0.2% formic acid in H2O. The peptide solutions were pooled, lyophilized and resuspended in 1000 ul of 0.1 % FA. 20 ul of each sample was loaded onto individual Evotips for desalting and then washed with 20 μL 0.1% FA followed by the addition of 100 μL storage solvent (0.1% FA) to keep the Evotips wet until analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files conversion to peak lists in the MGF format, downstream identification, validation, filtering and quantification were managed using FragPipe version 13.0. MSFragger version 3.0 was used for database searches against a Human isoform containing UniProt fasta file (08/11/2020) with decoys and common contaminants added. The identification settings were as follows: Trypsin, Specific, with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages, up to 2 isotope errors in precursor selection allowed for, 10.0 ppm as MS1 and 20.0 ppm as MS2 tolerances; fixed modifications: Carbamidomethylation of C (+57.021464 Da), variable modifications: Oxidation of M (+15.994915 Da), Acetylation of protein N-term (+42.010565 Da), Pyrolidone from peptide N-term Q or C (-17.026549 Da). The Philosopher toolkit version 3.2.9 (build 1593192429) was used for filtering of results at the peptide and protein level of 0.01 FDR. Label free quantification was performed by AUC integration with matching between all runs using IonQuant.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Plasma, Covid-19, Multi-omics

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, USA
University of Colorado

### Submitter
Kirk  Hansen

### Lab Head
Dr Kirk Hansen
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, USA


