### Accession
PXD027278

### Title
Candida albicans CUG codon translation, comparison with other yeasts

### Description
Candida yeasts causing human infections are spread across the yeast phylum with Candida glabrata being related to Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Candida krusei grouping to Pichia spp., and Candida albicans, Candida parapsilosis and Candida tropicalis belonging to the CTG-clade. The latter lineage contains yeasts with an altered genetic code translating CUG codons as serine using a serine-tRNA with a mutated anticodon. It has been suggested that the CTG-clade CUG codons are mistranslated to a small extent as leucine due to mischarging of the serine-tRNA(CAG). The mistranslation was suggested to result in variable surface proteins explaining fast host adaptation and pathogenicity. Here, we re-assessed this potential mistranslation by high-resolution mass spectrometry-based proteogenomics of multiple CTG-clade yeasts, various C. albicans strains, isolated from colonized and from infected human body sites, and C. albicans grown in yeast and hyphal forms.

### Sample Protocol
Yeast cells were grown in YEPD medium at 30°C or 37°C. Cells were harvested and lysed exactly as described earlier. Proteins were resuspended in SDS sample buffer and resolved on 4-12 % gradient SDS-PAGE. SDS-PAGE-separated protein samples were processed as described by Shevchenko et al.. The resuspended peptides in sample loading buffer were separated and analysed on an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled online to either a Q Exactive HF or an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Data analysis and search were performed using MaxQuant v.1.6.0.1 (samples Calbicans_WO1_1, Calbicans_SC5314_1, C. dubliniensis, C. glabrata and C. tropicalis) and MaxQuant v.1.6.5.0 (all other samples) as search engine with a global and a peptide-level 1% FDR. To obtain peptide mappings free of codon-translation bias, 19 replicates for each genome annotation were generated with the codon translated as different amino acid in each replicate. To reduce database size and redundancy, predicted proteins were split at lysine and arginine residues into peptides resembling trypsin proteolysis. Peptides containing the respective codons were fused together with the two subsequent peptides so that codon-containing fragments can be detected with up to two missed cleavages. Search parameters for searching the precursor and fragment ion masses against the databases were as described in Mühlhausen et al..

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Candida albicans, Candida tropicalis, Candida dubliniensis

### Affiliations
MPI for Biophysical Chemistry
Group Systems Biology of Motor Proteins, Department of NMR-based Structural Biology, Max-Planck-Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Am Fassberg 11, 37077 Göttingen, Germany

### Submitter
Martin Kollmar

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Kollmar
Group Systems Biology of Motor Proteins, Department of NMR-based Structural Biology, Max-Planck-Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Am Fassberg 11, 37077 Göttingen, Germany


