### Accession
PXD012725

### Title
Rapid Assay of Individual Microbiome responses to drugs data part2

### Description
We developed an approach named Rapid Assay of Individual Microbiome (RapidAIM) to screen xenobiotics against individual microbiomes. To evaluate technical reproducibility, we tested 43 compounds against an individual's microbiome. The individual microbiome is cultured in triplicates in 96-well plates for 24 hours and the samples are then analyzed using a metaproteomics-based analytical approach to gain functional insight into the individual microbiomes responses following drug treatments.The tested compounds significantly affected overall microbiome abundance, microbiome composition and functional pathways at multiple taxonomic levels. The microbiome responses to berberine, metformin, diclofenac, fructooligosaccharide and most antibiotics were consistent among most individual microbiomes. Interestingly, most of our tested NSAIDs, statins, and histamine-2 blockers induced individually distinct responses. Our workflow offers an effective solution to systematically study the effects of many different compounds on individual microbiomes.

### Sample Protocol
We used a 96-well based protocol for sample processing. The 96-well plates are centrifuged at 300 g for 5 min to remove debris for three times. The supernatants were then transferred to a new plate and centrifuged at 2,272 g for 1 hour to pellet the microbiome. The pelleted microbiome was washed three times with cold PBS. Cell lysis was performed in 8 M urea in 100 mM Tris-HCl buffer (pH = 8.0), plus Roche PhosSTOP™ and Roche cOmplete™ Mini tablets, using a sonicator (Q125 Qsonica, USA) with an 8-tip-horn probe. Equal volume of samples (the volume 50μg DMSO control ) was acquired from each sample and were reduced and alkylated with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA), followed by a 10× dilution using 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH = 8.0) and tryptic digestion under 37°C for 18 hours using 1 µg of trypsin per well (Worthington Biochemical Corp., Lakewood, NJ). Digested peptides were desalted using 10-μm C18 column beads.An Agilent 1100 Capillary LC system (Agilent Technologies, San Jose, CA) and a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific Inc.) were used to analyse the samples following a 90 min gradient from 5 to 30% (v/v) acetonitrile at a 200 nL/min flow rate.

### Data Protocol
Protein/peptide identification and quantification, taxonomic assignment and functional annotations were done following the MetaPro-IQ workflow. Peptide and protein lists were generated by applying strict filtering based on a FDR of 0.01, and quantitative information of proteins were obtained with the maxLFQ algorithm on MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8). Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as a fixed modification and oxidation (M) and N-terminal acetylation (Protein N-term) were set as variable modifications. Instrument resolution was set as “High-High”.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Drug, Metaproteomics, In vitro culture, Microbiome

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada
Universtiy of Ottawa

### Submitter
Leyuan Li

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Figeys
Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada


