### Accession
PXD009463

### Title
Resuscitation from the viable but nonculturable state of Escherichia coli: the importance of a pyruvate sensing network

### Description
Viable but nonculturable (VBNC) organisms have been underestimated and neglected when studying dormant phenotypes. In clinical settings, VBNC cells may contribute to non-apparent infections capable of being reactivated after months or even years, as for the case of Mycobacterium tuberculosis. The lack of specific and reliable methodology prevents the proper characterization of the VBNC state. Ultimately, these organisms pose a public health risk with potential implications in several industries ranging from pharmaceuticals to food industry. Research regarding their induction and resuscitation is of major importance. Bacteria are able to respond to several environmental and physiological oscillations in part via two-component systems (TCSs). BtsS/BtsR and YpdA/YpdB are two TCSs of Escherichia coli that form a pyruvate sensing network. Their role in the VBNC state is explored in this study.

### Sample Protocol
Aliquots of VBNC cell cultures (100 mL) were harvested and resuspended in 20 mL of PBS buffer (8,1 mM Na2HPO4; 1,47 mM KH2PO4; 137 mM NaCl; 2,68 mM KCl; pH 8,25) plus 30 mL of Percoll (GE Healthcare Sciences) for a final colloidal silica solution concentration of 60%. Viable and dead cells were separated by several density gradient centrifugation steps. First, the sample was centrifuged at 10,000 rpm at 4°C for 1h until two distinct cell layers were visible. The lower one was collected and resuspended in 70 mL of PBS. The cells were washed and isolated by three centrifugation steps at 5,000 rpm for 45 min each at 4°C and finally the pellet was resuspended in 50 mL PBS.  Cells were then processed with the iST Kit (Preomics, Germany) following the standard instructions.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant 1.5.2.8 was used to identify proteins and quantify by LFQ with the following parameters: Database, uniprot_Ecoli_3AUP000000625_180323; MS tol, 10ppm; MS/MS tol, 0.5 Da; Peptide FDR, 0.1; Protein FDR, 0.01 Min. peptide Length, 5; Variable modifications, Oxidation (M); Fixed modifications, Carbamidomethyl (C); Peptides for protein quantitation, razor and unique; Min. peptides, 1; Min. ratio count, 2. Perseus: Identified proteins were considered as up/down-expressed if their MaxQuant LFQ values displayed a greater than log2 5-fold enrichment and p-value 0.05 (t-test adjusted to multiple comparisons) when compared to the control.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Escherichia coli</i> and many other bacterial species can enter into a viable but nonculturable (VBNC) state, which is a survival strategy adopted by cells exposed to adverse environmental conditions. Pyruvate is known to be one factor that promotes resuscitation of VBNC cells. Here we studied the role of a pyruvate-sensing network, composed of the histidine kinase-response regulator systems BtsS/BtsR and YpdA/YpdB and the target gene <i>btsT</i>, encoding the high-affinity pyruvate/H<sup>+</sup> symporter BtsT, in the resuscitation of VBNC <i>E. coli</i> K-12 cells after exposure to cold for 120&#x2009;days. Analysis of the proteome of VBNC cells revealed upregulation, relative to exponentially growing cells, of BtsT and other proteins involved in pyruvate metabolism. Provision of pyruvate stimulated protein and DNA biosynthesis, and thus resuscitation, in wild-type but not <i>btsSR ypdAB</i> mutant VBNC cells. This result was corroborated by time-dependent tracking of the resuscitation of individual VBNC <i>E. coli</i> cells observed in a microfluidic system. Finally, transport assays revealed that <sup>14</sup>C-labeled pyruvate was rapidly taken up into VBNC cells by BtsT. These results provide the first evidence that pyruvate is taken up as a carbon source for the resuscitation of VBNC <i>E. coli</i> cells.<b>IMPORTANCE</b> Viable but nonculturable (VBNC) bacteria do not form colonies in standard medium but otherwise retain their metabolic activity and can express toxic proteins. Many bacterial genera, including <i>Escherichia</i>, <i>Vibrio</i>, and <i>Listeria</i>, have been shown to enter the VBNC state upon exposure to adverse conditions, such as low temperature, radiation, and starvation. Ultimately, these organisms pose a public health risk with potential implications for the pharmaceutical and food industries, as dormant organisms are especially difficult to selectively eliminate and VBNC bacteria can be resuscitated if placed in an environment with appropriate nutrition and temperature. Here we used a microfluidic system to monitor the resuscitation of single VBNC cells over time. We provide new molecular insights into the initiation of resuscitation by demonstrating that VBNC <i>E. coli</i> cells rapidly take up pyruvate with an inducible high-affinity transporter, whose expression is triggered by the BtsSR-YpdAB sensing network.

### Keywords
Heterogeneity, Oxidative stress, Scavenging, Metabolism

### Affiliations
Biomedical Center-LMU
Ludwig-Maximilians Universität München Biozentrum Department Biologie I, Ber. Mikrobiologie Großhaderner Str. 2-4 82152 Martinsried

### Submitter
Ignasi Forne

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Kirsten Jung
Ludwig-Maximilians Universität München Biozentrum Department Biologie I, Ber. Mikrobiologie Großhaderner Str. 2-4 82152 Martinsried


