### Accession
PXD039394

### Title
IP-MS:Protein precipitated by antisense (AS) DNA oligomers crossing the junction site of circNEIL3

### Description
To identify the circNEIL3 interacting protein, we performed RNA pull-down assays after transfecting into cells with biotin-labeled sense (S) or antisense (AS) DNA oligomers crossing the junction site of circNEIL3, and the pull-down proteins were subjected to SDS-PAGE and Coomassie blue staining. ~45 kDa Band pulled down by the AS probe was specifically excised , digested and used for mass spectrometry analysis.

### Sample Protocol
To identify the circNEIL3-interacting protein, we performed RNA pull-down assays after transfecting into cells with biotin-labeled sense (S) or antisense (AS) DNA oligomers crossing the junction site of circNEIL3. In detail, cell lysates were resuspended in pull-down lysis buffer (20 mM Tris (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 10% glycerol, 0.5% NP-40, 0.5% TritonX-100, phosphatase inhibitors, protease inhibitors cocktail and RNase inhibitor), then homogenized by a homogenizer and certificated at 12,000 rpm for 15 min. The resultant supernatants were incubated with 400 pmol of biotin-labeled DNA probes, 2ug of in vitro circularized circRNAs or 200 pmol of biotin-labeled RNA probes at 4°C for 4 h, followed by incubation with 20 μL prepared streptavidin magnetic beads (Thermo, #65601) for another 1 h at 4°C before washing five times with wash buffer (20 mM Tri-HCl, pH7.5, 1 mM EDTA and 300 mM NaCl). The immunoprecipitated proteins were subjected to short-gel sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and stained for 20 minutes with Coomassie brilliant blue G-250 (Sangon, #175 A100615). Band at ~45 kDa, pulled down by the AS probe consistently from MDA-MB-231 cell line, was specifically excised, carefully washed, and dehydrated by acetonitrile. Then, 10 mmol/L dithiothreitol (Sigma-Aldrich, #D0632) was applied for reduction and 55 mmol/L iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich, #V900335) for alkylation. Proteins were digested with trypsin (Promega, #V5071) for 12 hours. After desalted using C18 ZipTip (Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s instructions, peptide samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were processed using Proteome Discoverer software v2.4 with Sequest HT engine using a human database downloaded from uniport and appended with known contaminants. Trypsin was selected as the enzyme, and only two missed cleavages were allowed. The precursor mass tolerance was 10 ppm, and the product ion tolerance was 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl cysteine were selected as fixed modifications, while methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. The percolator algorithm was used for FDR analysis. Peptides with FDR <1% were set as high confidence peptides

### Publication Abstract
Distant metastasis is a major contributor to cancer-related mortality. However, the role of circRNAs in this process remains unclear. Herein, we profiled the circRNA expression in a cohort of 68 colorectal carcinoma (CRC) primary tumors and their paired liver metastatic lesions. By overlapping with the TGF&#x3b2;-responsive circRNAs, circNEIL3 (hsa_circ_0001460) was identified as a TGF&#x3b2;-repressive and metastasis-related circRNA. Functionally, circNEIL3 effectively inhibited tumor metastasis in both and in&#xa0;vivo&#xa0;and in&#xa0;vivo models of various cancer types. Mechanistically, circNEIL3 exerts its metastasis-repressive function through its direct interaction with oncogenic protein, Y-box-binding protein 1 (YBX1), which consequently promotes the Nedd4L-mediated proteasomal degradation of YBX1. Importantly, circNEIL3 expression was negatively correlated to YBX1 protein level and metastatic tendency in CRC patient samples. Collectively, our findings indicate the YBX1-dependent antimetastatic function of circNEIL3 and highlight the potential of circNEIL3 as a biomarker and therapeutic option in cancer treatment.

### Keywords
Mda-mb-231 cell line, Gel-based proteomics, Rna-pulldown

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy and Cancer Center, West China Hospital, Sichuan University
Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, Frontiers Science Center for Disease-related Molecular Network, State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy and Cancer Center, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610041, China.

### Submitter
Shuang Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Yong Peng
Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, Frontiers Science Center for Disease-related Molecular Network, State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy and Cancer Center, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610041, China.


