### Accession
PXD034181

### Title
Global proteome comparison between MEF cells and mESC-R1 cells

### Description
The aim of this project is to use an integrated approach involving label-free strategy, HPLC fractionation and LC-MS/MS to quantify the dynamic changes of the whole proteome of Mouse Cell(MEF and R1 cells).

### Sample Protocol
The general workflow is indicated as:protein extraction,trypsin digestion, HPLC fractionation and LC-MS/MS amalysis.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using MaxQuant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against mouse database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Intensive bioinformatic analyses was then carried out to annotate those quantifiable targets, including GO annotation, domain annotation, subcellular localization, KEGG pathway annotation, functional cluster analysis, etc.

### Publication Abstract
Exploiting the pluripotent properties of embryonic stem cells (ESCs) holds great promise for regenerative medicine. Nevertheless, directing ESC differentiation into specialized cell lineages requires intricate control governed by both intrinsic and extrinsic factors along with the actions of specific signaling networks. Here, we reveal the involvement of the p21-activated kinase 4 (Pak4), a serine/threonine kinase, in sustaining murine ESC (mESC) pluripotency. Pak4 is highly expressed in R1 ESC cells compared with embryonic fibroblast cells and its expression is progressively decreased during differentiation. Manipulations using knockdown and overexpression demonstrated a positive relationship between Pak4 expression and the clonogenic potential of mESCs. Moreover, ectopic Pak4 expression increases reprogramming efficiency of Oct4-Klf4-Sox2-Myc-induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) whereas Pak4-knockdown iPSCs were largely incapable of generating teratomas containing mesodermal, ectodermal and endodermal tissues, indicative of a failure in differentiation. We further establish that Pak4 expression in mESCs is transcriptionally driven by the core pluripotency factor Nanog which recognizes specific binding motifs in the Pak4 proximal promoter region. In turn, the increased levels of Pak4 in mESCs fundamentally act as an upstream activator of the Akt pathway. Pak4 directly binds to and phosphorylates Akt at Ser473 with the resulting Akt activation shown to attenuate downstream GSK3&#x3b2; signaling. Thus, our findings indicate that the Nanog-Pak4-Akt signaling axis is essential for maintaining mESC self-renewal potential with further importance shown during somatic cell reprogramming where Pak4 appears indispensable for multi-lineage specification.

### Keywords
Mouse cells, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Division of Life Sciences and Medicine, the first affiliated hospital of University of Science & Technology of China
Division of Life Sciences and Medicine, the first affiliated hospital of University of Science & Technology of China, and CAS Center for Excellence in Molecular Cell Science, Innovation Center for Cell Signaling Network. Hefei, Anhui, China,

### Submitter
Fangyuan Cheng

### Lab Head
Dr Mian Wu
Division of Life Sciences and Medicine, the first affiliated hospital of University of Science & Technology of China, and CAS Center for Excellence in Molecular Cell Science, Innovation Center for Cell Signaling Network. Hefei, Anhui, China,


