### Accession
PXD008452

### Title
Monocyte responses to Al(OH)3 adjuvant

### Description
Monocytes, derived from three different donors, were stimulated with the vaccine adjuvant Al(OH)3 for 24 and 48 hours. Proteins were isolated and equal protein amounts were labeledusing TMT(6). We found that Al(OH)3 activates various pathways related to the innate immune response.

### Sample Protocol
Monocytes were lysed by adding 500 µl 4 M Guanidine·HCl in 100 mM phosphate buffer (pH=7.5) to the culture plate and incubated for 2 hours at 4°C. During these 2 hours, the cells were subjected to a freeze-thaw step. The protein concentrations were determined with a BCA protein assay. Protein samples from monocytes were diluted 4 times to reduce the Guanidine·HCl content to 1 M and adjust the pH to 7.5. Proteins were digested at 37°C. Equal protein amounts were labeled using TMT(6)). Labeling was performed on SPE columns which were equilibrated as described by Waters, columns were washed with buffer and the samples were loaded on the column, TMT was reconstituted in AcN, after which the AcN content was reduced to <2.5%. TMT was loaded on the column. columns were washed and samples were eluted with 90% AcN. Samples were pooled and dried. SCX fractionation was performed after which the peptide containing fractions, as determined bu UV, were analyzed on the MS. a 118 minute linear gradient was used.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics data were analyzed with Proteome Discoverer (PD) 2.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using default settings unless stated otherwise. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 5 ppm, MS/MS scans were searched against the human Uniprot database (Nov 2014), containing 23,048 entries, using the Sequest HT search engine with full enzyme specificity for Lys-C, with b and y type ions enabled for CID and HCD data with a fragment mass tolerance of 0.5 Da. The data was searched with Aspargine deamidation and Methionine oxidation as dynamic modifications. TMT(6) was set as a static modification on the Lysine residues and the peptide N-termini. For relative quantitation, the quantification node was used with TMT(6) as defined quantification method and an integration tolerance of 0.2 Da. A decoy database defined in the Percolator node was used to validate and filter the peptide-to-spectrum matches with a False Discovery Rate (FDR) of <5%. Only medium (FDR <5%) and High (FDR <1%) confident identified proteins were used in the further data analysis. The results of the SCX fractions of an individual donor were integrated in the data analysis by letting the software (PD 2.1) making a consensus report of theacross the fractions per sample, resulting in one output table per donor/technical replicate. If multiple entries occurred for the same protein, based on Uniprot and NCBI data, the ratios given by Proteome Discoverer were Log2-transformed and averaged for further analysis. Next, a median correction normalization was performed. Data of three biological replicates (donors) were compared and proteins that were upregulated or downregulated by 1.5 fold or more in at least two out of three biological replicates were considered substantially regulated. These regulated proteins were imported in STRING , to identify enriched pathways in these regulated protein sets (FDR<0.05), within Gene Ontology (GO) biological processes.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Alum-based adjuvant, Innate immune response

### Affiliations
Intravacc
Intravacc; Bilthoven; the Netherlands

### Submitter
Sietske Kooijman

### Lab Head
Dr Hugo Meiring
Intravacc; Bilthoven; the Netherlands


