### Accession
PXD014948

### Title
From coarse to fine: The absolute Escherichia coli proteome under diverse growth conditions

### Description
Accurate measurements of cellular protein concentrations are invaluable to quantitative studies of gene expression and physiology in living cells. Here, we developed a versatile mass spectrometric workflow based on data-independent acquisition proteomics (DIA/SWATH) together with a novel protein inference algorithm (xTop). We used this workflow to accurately quantify absolute protein abundances in E. coli for >2000 proteins over >60 growth conditions, including nutrient limitations, non-metabolic stresses and non-planktonic states. The resulting high-quality dataset of protein mass fractions allowed us to characterize proteome responses from a coarse (groups of related proteins) to a fine (individual) protein level. Hereby, a plethora of novel biological findings could be elucidated, including the generic upregulation of low-abundant proteins under various metabolic limitations, the non-specificity of catabolic enzymes upregulated under carbon limitation, the lack of larg e-scale proteome reallocation under stress compared to nutrient limitations, as well as surprising strain-dependent effects important for biofilm formation. These results present valuable resources for the systems biology community and can be used for future multi-omics studies of gene regulation and metabolic control in E. coli.

### Sample Protocol
The proteomic sample preparation was performed using an optimized E. coli protocol described previously by Schmidt et al. (Schmidt et al, 2016). Briefly, E. coli cell pellets, were lysed with 2% sodium deoxycholate, ultrasonicated and heated to 95°C. Proteins were reduced, alkylated and digested with LysC and trypsin. Exclusively to the Ribo-Seq reference samples a set of 29 AQUA peptides was spiked after digestion. The peptide mixtures were desalted, dried and resuspended to a concentration of 0.5 µg/µl. To all peptide mixtures the iRT peptide mix (Biognosys) was added directly before the MS-measurement. To increase proteome coverage, 33 µg of peptides from samples Lib1 to Lib30 were pooled and fractionated by off-gel electrophoresis (OGE) into 13 fractions. DDA mass spectrometry LC-MS/MS runs in DDA mode were performed on a TripleTOF 5600 mass spectrometer (SCIEX) interfaced with an NanoLC Ultra 2D Plus HPLC system (Eksigent). Peptides were separated using a 120 min gradient from 2 – 35% buffer B (0.1% v/v formic acid, 90% v/v acetonitrile). The 20 most intense precursors were selected for fragmentation. For the generation of the E. coli PQP resource 53 DDA-based proteomic measurements were performed in total.  DIA/SWATH-MS mass spectrometry Peptide mixtures were measured in SWATH-MS mode on two TripleTOF 5600 mass spectrometers (Sciex), both interfaced with an Eksigent NanoLC Ultra 2D Plus HPLC system as described previously (Collins et al, 2017). Peptides were separated using a 60 minutes gradient from 2–35% buffer B (0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 90% (v/v) acetonitrile). A 64-variable window DIA scheme was applied, covering the precursor mass range of 400–1,200 m/z, with a total cycle time of ~3.45 s. Per MS injection 2 μg of protein amount was loaded onto the HPLC column.

### Data Protocol
DDA data analysis The generated data set was searched using four different search engines in parallel: Comet (Eng et al, 2013), Myrimatch (Tabb et al, 2007), X!Tandem (Craig & Beavis, 2003) and OMSSA (Geer et al, 2004). The MS2 spectra were queried against a canonical E. coli proteome database downloaded from Uniprot and appended with the iRT protein (Biognosys) and 9 control or antibiotic resistance proteins. The search results were further processed and analyzed through the Trans-Proteomic-Pipeline (Deutsch et al, 2010). The combined results were filtered at a 1% protein FDR using MAYU (Reiter et al, 2009). Generation of peptide query parameters  A non-redundant consensus spectral library (Lam et al, 2008) was generated with SpectraST (Lam et al, 2007). To extract peptide query parameters from the spectral library file the python script “spectrast2tsv” was used (https://pypi.python.org/pypi/msproteomicstools). This script automatically extracted the six most abundant singly or doubly charged b- and y-ion fragments for each peptide precursor in the range between 350 to 2,000 m/z, excluding the precursor isolation window region. iRT peptides were used to generate normalized retention times for all peptides. The resulting E. coli PQP resource is freely available and downloadable at www.swathatlas.org.  DIA/SWATH-MS data analysis The DIA/SWATH-MS data was analysed using OpenSWATH (www.openswath.org) as described previously (Collins et al, 2017) We only changed the following parameter: m/z extraction windows = 50 PPM. To extract the data, we used the spectral library generated in the context of this work.  PyProphet-cli, an extended version of PyProphet, optimally combined peptide query scores into a single discriminative score and  estimated q-values using a semi-supervised algorithm (Rosenberger et al, 2017) (http://openswath.org/en/latest/docs/pyprophet.html). To assign the weight of each OpenSWATH subscore, we used the set of peptide peak groups subsampled from every run with the ratio of 0.07. The software was run using the experiment-wide and global context with a fixed lambda of 0.8 and then the results of the experiment-wide mode were filtered to 1% protein and peptide false discovery rate according to the global mode analysis. TRIC (Rost et al, 2016) was applied to align extracted and scored peak groups across all the runs following the filtration steps.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Peptide query parameters, Absolute protein quantification, Spectral library, Protein inference, Swath, Correlation to ribosome profiling, Protein sectors, Dia

### Affiliations
Bavarian Center for Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry (BayBioMS) Technical University Munich Gregor-Mendel-Straße 4 85354 Freising GERMANY
TU Munich

### Submitter
Christina Ludwig

### Lab Head
Dr Chrisitina Ludwig
Bavarian Center for Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry (BayBioMS) Technical University Munich Gregor-Mendel-Straße 4 85354 Freising GERMANY


