### Accession
PXD019496

### Title
O-GlcNAcase activity is necessary for the molecular signature of the Glioblastoma secretome

### Description
Glioblastoma (GBM) is a grade IV glioma highly aggressive and refractory to the therapeutic approaches currently in use nowadays. Although sugar metabolism through the hexosamine biosynthetic pathway (HBP) plays a key role in tumor aggressiveness and progression in different types of cancer, whether the HBP might be a targetable strategy for GBM is still lacking experimental evidence. Here we show that the HBP enzyme O-GlcNAcase (OGA) plays a critical role in GBM secretome signature. Using a label-free quantitative proteomics methodology, we identified 51 proteins in the GBM secretome whose abundance was significantly altered. Among these proteins, we observed that proteins related to proteasome activity and autophagy were consistently down-regulated in GBM cells upon OGA activity inhibition (iOGA). While the proteins IGFBP3 and HSPA5 were down regulated in iOGA GBM cells, the protein SQSTM1/p62 was a only identified in iOGA GBM cells. These in silico findings were in line with experimental evidence showing a decrease in autophagy in iOGA cells followed by a decrease in radio-resistance. Taken together our findings consistently bridge the protein profile in the secretome with functional evidence of autophagy regulation in GBM by the OGA activity. We propose that the assessment of tumor status from the main proteins present in its secretome may contribute to the advancement of diagnostic, prognostic and even therapeutic tools to approach this relevant malignancy.

### Sample Protocol
Cell line  The Glioblastoma cell line U87-MG (GBM) was obtained from Banco de Células do Rio de Janeiro and was genotyped using microsatellite markers of human lineages at the Macromolecular  Metabolism Laboratory Firmino Torres de Castro (Carlos Chagas Filho Biophysics Institute - UFRJ).     Cell culture and drug treatment  The cells were plated at a density of 7x10⁵/mL in DMEM medium (Dulbecco's Modified Eagle's Medium; Sigma-Aldrich®), supplemented with 10% Serum Bovine Fetal (SFB), (LGC Biotecnologia®) and 0.1mg/mL penicillin/ streptomycin (PS) in 25cm² bottles (CORNING) at 5% CO2 and 37ºC until confluence of 90%. The bottles were then washed with PBS  1% plus 2M NaCl twice and with 1% PBS in order to remove the excess SFB and salts in the culture medium. The culture medium was replaced by DMEM without phenol red and SFB plus 1μM Thiamet G (iOGA experimental group; TMG - Sigma-Aldrich®) or DMSO (control group). For each condition, three bottles were generated and the conditioned medium (CM) was collected separately after 72 hours of treatment at 5% CO2 and 37ºC. Each biological N was created from bottles of independent cultures generating a total of 2 biological replicates, DMSO1, DMSO2, iOGA1 and iOGA2.  Protein sample preparation   Approximately 21 mL of the CM from each group was centrifuged at 1300 rpm for 10 minutes at 4 ° C. Then, the volume was concentrated to 250µl in a 15 mL AMICON 3KDa tube (UFC900324, Millipore) by centrifugation at 5000rpm for 30 minutes. To the concentrated CM was added Halt 1x protease inhibitor (Halt ™ Protease Inhibitor Cocktail-Thermo Fisher, 100x) and protein quantification was performed using Quibit Protein Assay Kit (Q33211, Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Protein hydrolysis and Liquid Chromatography-Tandem MS (LC-MS/MS)  A 100µg of total protein added in 20µL of 7M urea and 2M thiourea in 0.2 M HEPES and DTT at the final concentration of 10mM for 1 hour at 30 ° C in the mixer without stirring. The iodoacetamide was added to the final concentration of 40 mM for 30 minutes in the dark. Next 2.22 µl of Dithiothreitol solution (100 mM DTT - concentration end of 10 mM) was added for one hour at 30 ° C in the mixer without shaking. After incubation, 2.46 µl of Iodoacetomide solution (IAA 400 mM - concentration 40 Mm) was added and the incubation was performed for 30 minutes at room temperature and in the dark. The final volume was diluted 10x with LC-MS standard deionized water and trypsin solution (Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin- PROMEGA V511A) was added to a final concentration of 1:50 trypsin/protein (w/w) during overnight at 37 ° C (16 hours) in the mixer under 900 rpm. After incubation, the samples were resuspended in 1% formic acid and passed through C18 microcolumns (ZipTip) for peptides desalting. The samples were dried using speed vac and frozen at -20ºC. Next, the peptides were solubilized in 0.1% formic acid and analyzed using an Easy1000 nanoLC system (Thermo Scientific) coupled to  an Orbitrap Quadrupole (Q Exavtive Plus, Thermo Scientific). For each sample, a volume of 9 μL (1 μg of peptides), was applied to a trap column with 200 µm of internal diameter and 2 cm long packed with Reprosil-Pur C18 resin (Dr. Maisch), with 200 Å pores and 5 µm granulometry (packaged in the laboratory). The peptides were eluted in an analytical column with 75 µm in diameter and 25 cm in length packed with Reprosil-Gold C18 resin (Dr. Maisch), with pores of 300 Å particle size of 3 µm. Peptide separation was performed using a gradient from 95% solvent A (ACN 5% and formic acid 0.1%) to 20% of solvent B (ACN 95% and 0.1 formic acid) for 120 min, 20-40% solvent B in 40 min and 40-95% solvent B in 7 min. After separation, the column was equilibrated with solvent A. Xcalibur 2.2 software was programmed to operate in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. The spectrum of MS1 was acquired with a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200 . The reading of the MS1 spectrum was performed using 10 ^ 6 ions (AGC) and 50 ms of Maximum IT. The reading of the MS2 spectrum comprised ions with a range of m/z 375 to 2,000. The 15 most intense ions were fragmented and then submitted to MS2 acquisition, using induced collision dissociation (HCD) and 200-2,000 m / z. MS2 resolution was 17,500 at m/z 200, AGC of 10 ^ 5 ions, Maximum IT of 100 ms. 2 m / z ion isolation window, normalized collision energy (NCE) of 30, dynamic exclusion time was 45s. Peptides with charge +1 and undetermined were rejected . For each biological sample, three experimental replicates (three injections) were made.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis Raw files were processed by the Proteome Discoverer (PD) 2.1 software (Thermo Scientific) and spectral data were searched using Sequest HT®-Percolator Validator algorithm. The UniProt database limited to Homo sapiens reference proteome set was downloaded from Uniprot consortium in June 2017. The parameters used in PD Sequest HT® node were: full-tryptic search space, up to two missed cleavages allowed for trypsin, precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, and fragment mass tolerance of 0.05 Da. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was included as fixed modification, and methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were included as dynamic modifications. To estimate the False Discovery Rate (FDR) of <1 % and protein inference we used the node Percolator present in the Proteome Discovery 2.1 (PD2.1) using maximum parsimony. A cutoff score was established to accept a false-discovery rate (FDR) of 1% at the peptide level.

### Publication Abstract
Glioblastoma (GBM) is a grade IV glioma highly aggressive and refractory to the therapeutic approaches currently in use. O-GlcNAcylation plays a key role for tumor aggressiveness and progression in different types of cancer; however, experimental evidence of its involvement in GBM are still lacking. Here, we show that O-GlcNAcylation plays a critical role in maintaining the composition of the GBM secretome, whereas inhibition of OGA activity disrupts the intercellular signaling via microvesicles. Using a label-free quantitative proteomics methodology, we identified 51 proteins in the GBM secretome whose abundance was significantly altered by activity inhibition of O-GlcNAcase (iOGA). Among these proteins, we observed that proteins related to proteasome activity and to regulation of immune response in the tumor microenvironment were consistently downregulated in GBM cells upon iOGA. While the proteins IGFBP3, IL-6 and HSPA5 were downregulated in GBM iOGA cells, the protein SQSTM1/p62 was exclusively found in GBM cells under iOGA. These findings were in line with literature evidence on the role of p62/IL-6 signaling axis in suppressing tumor aggressiveness and our experimental evidence showing a decrease in radioresistance potential of these cells. Taken together, our findings provide evidence that OGA activity may regulate the p62 and IL-6 abundance in the GBM secretome. We propose that the assessment of tumor status from the main proteins present in its secretome may contribute to the advancement of diagnostic, prognostic and even therapeutic tools to approach this relevant malignancy.

### Keywords
Glioblastoma secretome, O-glcnacase activity, Lcms

### Affiliations
Laboratório de Proteômica - LABPROT, Instituto de Química, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro
Laboratory of Proteomics/LADETEC, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil

### Submitter
Joseph Evaristo

### Lab Head
Dr Fábio César Sousa Nogueira
Laboratory of Proteomics/LADETEC, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil


