### Accession
PXD046788

### Title
Unraveling epigenetic changes in A. thaliana calli: Impact of HDAC inhibitors

### Description
The aim was to characterize epigenetic changes in histone proteins during callus formation from roots and shoots of Arabidopsis thaliana seedlings using mass spectrometry-based approach. Increased level of histone H3.3 variant was found to be the most prominent feature of 20-day-old calli, associated with chromatin relaxation. Methylation status in root- and shoot-derived calli reached the same level during long-term propagation, whereas differences in acetylation levels provided a long-lasting imprint of root and shoot origin. On the other hand, epigenetic signs of origin completely disappeared during 20 days of calli propagation in the presence of histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi), sodium butyrate and trichostatin A, although each HDACi affected the state of post-translational histone modifications in a specific manner.

### Sample Protocol
Seven-day-old seedlings and calli of Arabidopsis thaliana were used for nuclei isolation for mass spectrometry. Callus cultures originated from shoot or root parts of seedlings using CIM (Murashige-Skoog medium supplemented by 2 mg/L NAA (1-naphthalenacetic acid, Duchefa Biochemicals), 0.2 mg/L BAP (6-benzylaminopurine, Duchefa Biochemicals), 30 g/L sucrose and 0.8% (w/v) plant agar), and CIM supplemented by 0.5 mM NaB (Sig-ma-Aldrich) or 0.5 M TSA (Sigma-Aldrich). Histones were extracted 0.2M H2SO4, neutralized, and subjected to a double round of propionic anhydride derivatization, followed by clean-up with urea and ammonium bicarbonate buffer on a YM-10 Microcon ﬁlter unit. On-filter enzymatic digestion was performed with SOLu-Trypsin Dimethylated (Merck).  Newly released peptide N-termini were subjected to a double-round propionic anhydride derivatization. Tryptic digests comprising histone peptides were measured using liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid, Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The raw mass spectrometric data files were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer software (Thermo Fisher Scientific; version 2.2.0.388) with in-house Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, version 2.6.2) to compare acquired spectra with entries in the UniProtKB A. thaliana protein database (version 2020_08; 27500 protein sequences), cRAP contami-nant database (downloaded from  http://www.thegpm.org/crap/) and in-house AT-histone database (version 2017_02; 71 protein sequences). Mass tolerances for peptides and MS/MS fragments were 7 ppm (10 ppm for cRAP) and 0.03 Da (0.5 Da for cRAP), re-spectively. Semi-Arg-C for enzyme specificity allowing up to two missed cleavages was set. For searches against cRAP and UniProtKB A. thaliana databases the variable modification settings were oxidation (M), deamidation (N, Q), acetylation (K) and propionylation (K, N-term, S, T, Y), while for histone database searches they were acetylation (K), methyl-ation (K, R), dimethylation (K), trimethylation (K), phosphorylation (S, T), propionylation (K, N-term, S, T, Y) and methylation-propionylation (K). Selected histone peptide identifi-cations were manually verified and quantified from the peak areas derived from the EICs using Skyline (64-bit, v. 23.1.1.268 software), including identification alignment across the raw files based on retention time and m/z. The KNIME Analytics Platform was used for quantitative statistical analysis.

### Publication Abstract
The ability for plant regeneration from dedifferentiated cells opens up the possibility for molecular bioengineering to produce crops with desirable traits. Developmental and environmental signals that control cell totipotency are regulated by gene expression via dynamic chromatin remodeling. Using a mass spectrometry-based approach, we investigated epigenetic changes to the histone proteins during callus formation from roots and shoots of <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i> seedlings. Increased levels of the histone H3.3 variant were found to be the major and most prominent feature of 20-day calli, associated with chromatin relaxation. The methylation status in root- and shoot-derived calli reached the same level during long-term propagation, whereas differences in acetylation levels provided a long-lasting imprint of root and shoot origin. On the other hand, epigenetic signs of origin completely disappeared during 20 days of calli propagation in the presence of histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi), sodium butyrate, and trichostatin A. Each HDACi affected the state of post-translational histone modifications in a specific manner; NaB-treated calli were epigenetically more similar to root-derived calli, and TSA-treated calli resembled shoot-derived calli.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana; callus formation; epigenetics; histone posttranslational modifications; mass spectrometry; trichostatin a; sodium butyrate

### Affiliations
CEITEC Masaryk University
CEITEC-MU, Masaryk University, Brno

### Submitter
Gabriela Lochmanova

### Lab Head
Dr Zbynek Zdrahal
CEITEC Masaryk University


