### Accession
PXD006129

### Title
Fiber-associated microbiota protects against diet-induced amelioration of the colonic mucus barrier

### Description
Here we have shown that diet-mediated alterations of the gut microbiota composition cause an erosion of the colonic mucus barrier. A compensatory increase in cellular mucus production by the host is not sufficient to re-establish the barrier, possibly due to a lacking increase in mucus secretion. While microbial transplant from mice fed a fiber-rich diet can prevent the mucus defects, the mechanism seems to be independent of general fiber fermentation and rather depend on distinct bacterial species and/or their metabolites.

### Sample Protocol
Colonic mucus was collected, 2X cOmplete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail was added and samples were stored at -80ºC until further processing. Mucus samples were incubated overnight at 37°C in reduction buffer (6MGuHCl, 0.1MTris/ HCl pH 8.5 (Merck), 5mMEDTA, 0.1MDTT (Merck)) followed by a FASP (Filter-aided Sample Preparation) protocol using 6M guanidinium hydrochloride (GuHCl) instead of urea. Proteins were alkylated on 10 kDa cut-off filters and subsequently digested for 4 h with LysC (Wako, Richmond, VA, USA) followed by an overnight trypsin (Promega, Fitchburg, WI, USA) digestion. Peptides released from the filter after centrifugation were cleaned with StageTip C18 columns. NanoLC–MS/MS was performed on an EASY-nLC system (Thermo Scientific, Odense, Denmark), connected to a QExactive Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) through a nanoelectrospray ion source. Peptides were separated with in-house packed reverse-phase column (150 × 0.075 mm inner diameter, C18-AQ 3 μm) by 60-minute gradient from 5 to 30% of buffer B (A: 0.1% formic acid, B: 0.1% formic acid/80% acetonitrile) using flow rate of 200 nl/min. Full mass spectra were acquired from 320–1,600 m/z with resolution of 70,000 (m/z 200). Up to twelve most intense peaks (charge state ≥ 2) were fragmented and tandem mass spectrum was acquired with a resolution of 35,000 and automatic dynamic exclusion.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified with the MaxQuant program (version 1.4.1.2) by searching against the mouse UniProt protein database (downloaded 23.07.2015) supplemented with an in-house database containing all the mouse mucin sequences (http://www.medkem.gu.se/mucinbiology/databases/). Searches were performed with full tryptic specificity, maximum 2 missed cleavages, precursor tolerance of 20 ppm in the first search used for recalibration, followed by 7 ppm for the main search and 0.5 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modification. The required false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% both for peptide and protein levels and the minimum required peptide length was set to six amino acids. Proteins were quantified based on MaxQuant label-free quantification (LFQ) option using minimum two peptides for quantification. Data filtering, clustering and principal clustering analysis (PCA) was performed with Perseus software (version 1.4.1.3). The data was filtered based on the presence of a protein group in at least three out of five biological replicated. Missing values were replaced from normal distribution using with default values. Clustering and heatmap were performed using Euclidean distance, average linkage, preprocessing with k-means for rows and columns. For principal component analysis default parameters were used, number of components 5, cutoff method Benjamin-Hochberg with FDR 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Diet strongly affects gut microbiota composition, and gut bacteria can influence the colonic mucus layer, a physical barrier that separates trillions of gut bacteria from the host. However, the interplay between a Western style diet (WSD), gut microbiota composition, and the intestinal mucus layer is less clear. Here we show that mice fed a WSD have an altered colonic microbiota composition that causes increased penetrability and a reduced growth rate of the inner mucus layer. Both barrier defects can be prevented by transplanting microbiota from chow-fed mice. In addition, we found that administration of Bifidobacterium longum was sufficient to&#xa0;restore mucus growth, whereas administration of the fiber inulin prevented increased mucus penetrability in WSD-fed mice. We hypothesize that the presence of distinct bacteria is crucial for proper mucus function. If confirmed in humans, these findings may help to better understand diseases with an affected mucus layer, such as ulcerative colitis.

### Keywords
Gut microbiota, Metabolic disease, Obesity, Barrier function, Fiber, Mucus layer, Diet-microbe-host interaction, Western diet

### Affiliations
Liisa Arike, PhD Researcher Mucin Biology Group Department of Medical Biochemistry and Cell Biology University of Gothenburg Sweden
PhD

### Submitter
Liisa Arike

### Lab Head
Dr Liisa Arike
Liisa Arike, PhD Researcher Mucin Biology Group Department of Medical Biochemistry and Cell Biology University of Gothenburg Sweden


