### Accession
PXD006705

### Title
Targeting Focal Adhesion Kinase overcomes erlotinib resistance in smoke induced lung cancer by altering phosphorylation of Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor

### Description
Cigarette smoking is the leading cause for non-small cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC). Tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) targeting EGFR are in clinical practice and has benefitted patients with EGFR mutations. However, EGFR based targeted therapies have shown limited success in smokers. Identification of alternate signaling mechanism(s) leading to TKI resistance in smokers is critical for developing novel therapies for lung cancer. We observed increased resistance to erlotinib in H358 lung cancer cells exposed to cigarette smoke (H358-S) compared to parental cells. To systematically identify signaling pathways that could potentially confer resistance to erlotinib, we carried out stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC)-based phosphotyrosine analysis of H358-S and parental cells. We identified 238 unique phosphosites, of which 111 phosphosites were hyperphosphorylated (≥ 2-fold¬¬¬¬¬¬) in H358 -S cells. Importantly, we observed hyperphosphorylation of EGFR at Y1197 and non-receptor tyrosine kinases, including FAK and FRK in H358-S cells. Inhibition of FAK with its inhibitor PF-562271 led to decreased cellular proliferation and invasive ability of the smoke exposed cells.  Further, we observed that treatment with PF-562271 could restore dependency of H358-S cells on EGFR signaling.

### Sample Protocol
NCI-H358 lung cancer cells were grown in DMEM medium and adapted to SILAC media. Cells maintained in light media were treated with 0.1% cigarette smoke condensate for 12 months, while untreated cells were grown in 13C6-lysine/13C6-arginine-containing heavy media. The cells were then washed with cold PBS following serum starvation and lysed in urea lysis buffer. The protein concentration was estimated using Bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA). Equal amount of protein from both conditions were mixed followed by reduction and alkylation using dithiothreitol (5mM) and iodoacetamide (10mM) respectively. Urea concentration in sample was bought to <2M by diluting it with HEPES buffer (20 mM) and digested overnight at 370C using trypsin (Worthington Biochemical Corp). Immunoaffinity enrichment of tyrosine containing phosphopeptides was done using P-Tyr-1000 beads. Further, enriched peptide were subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis using an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data was searched against a Human RefSeq database (RefSeq 59) which was appended with frequently observed contaminants using MASCOT (v 2.2) and SEQUEST search algorithms through the Proteome Discoverer platform (v1.4, Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). For both algorithms, the search parameter included - maximum of 2 missed cleavage, fixed modification of carbamidomethylation at cysteine and dynamic modification included oxidation of methionine, phosphorylation at serine, threonine and tyrosine (+79.966 Da) and SILAC labels 13C6-Lysine; 13C6-Arginine (+6.02013 Da). The precursor mass error tolerance and fragment ion mass error tolerance was set to 20 ppm and 0.1 Da respectively. In addition, decoy database search was given to calculate false discovery rate (FDR). FDR <1% was considered for peptide identification. The PhosphoRS node (Version 3.0) in the Proteome Discoverer was used to calculate the phosphorylation probability at Y residue and peptides greater than 75% site localization probability was considered for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
EGFR-based targeted therapies have shown limited success in smokers. Identification of alternate signaling mechanism(s) leading to TKI resistance in smokers is critically important. We observed increased resistance to erlotinib in H358 NSCLC (non-small cell lung carcinoma) cells chronically exposed to cigarette smoke (H358-S) compared to parental cells. SILAC-based mass-spectrometry approach was used to study altered signaling in H358-S cell line. Importantly, among the top phosphosites in H358-S cells we observed hyperphosphorylation of EGFR (Y1197) and non-receptor tyrosine kinase FAK (Y576/577). Supporting these observations, a transcriptomic-based pathway activation analysis of TCGA NSCLC datasets revealed that FAK and EGFR internalization pathways were significantly upregulated in smoking patients, compared to the never-smokers and were associated with elevated PI3K signaling and lower level of caspase cascade and E-cadherin pathways activation. We show that inhibition of FAK led to decreased cellular proliferation and invasive ability of the smoke-exposed cells, and restored their dependency on EGFR signaling. Our data suggests that activation of focal adhesion pathway significantly contributes to erlotinib resistance, and that FAK is a potential therapeutic target for management of erlotinib resistance in smoke-induced NSCLC.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Nsclc, Drug resistance, Epidermal growth factor receptor, Cigarette smoke

### Affiliations
Institute of Bioinformatics, Bangalore, Karnataka, India

### Submitter
Aditi Chatterjee

### Lab Head
Dr Aditi Chatterjee
Institute of Bioinformatics, Bangalore, Karnataka, India


