### Accession
PXD010275

### Title
Identification of potential biomarkers in testicular cancer by SILAC and mass spectrometry

### Description
This study represents a proteomic resource for testis cancer with quantitative protein expression data for 5236 proteins. By quantitative mass-spectrometry-based proteomics, we compared the two Malignant germ cell tumour cell lines, TCam-2 with seminoma-like characteristics, and NTERA-2, an embryonal carcinoma-like cell line.

### Sample Protocol
For the proteomic characterization of human tumor cell lines we performed SILAC-based quantitative mass-spectrometry. SILAC was performed by culturing T-Cam2 and N-Tera2 cells in RPMI 1640 medium devoid of arginine and lysine (Pierce) supplemented with 10% dialyzed FCS (Invitrogen), 4 mM glutamine and antibiotics. “Heavy” and “light” medium were prepared by adding 0.115 mM 13C614N4 L-arginine and 0.275 mM L-lysine-4,4,5,5-D4 (Eurisotop) or equimolar levels of the corresponding non-labeled (light) amino acids (Merck Millipore), respectively. The metabolic labelling of the cells was switched for the biological replicate. For cell lysis 0,5 % Nonidet P-40 buffer containing 50 mM Tris/HCl, pH 7.8, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM Na3VO4, 1mM NaF, 0,2% Laurylmaltoside and protease inhibitors Complete (Roche) was used. Protein concentration was determined with DC Protein Assay (Bio-Rad) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Lysates were pooled at a 1:1 ratio and proteins were separated by 1D-PAGE (4 to 12% NuPAGE Bis-Tris Gel, Invitrogen). Following Coomassie-brilliant-blue staining, the gel was cut into 23 slices. Encompassing proteins were reduced with 10 mM DTT for 55 min at 56 °C, alkylated with 55 mM IAA for 20 min at 26°C and in gel-digested with modified trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37°C. Tryptic peptides were injected into a C18 precolumn (2.5 cm, 360 μm o.d., 100 μm i.d., Reprosil-Pur 120 Å, 5 μm, C18-AQ, Dr Maisch GmbH) at a flow rate of 10 μl/min. Bound peptides were eluted and separated on a C18 capillary column (20 cm, 360 μm o.d., 75 μm i.d., Reprosil-Pur 120 Å, 3 μm, C18-AQ, Dr Maisch GmbH) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min, with a gradient from 5 to 35% ACN in 0.1% formic acid for 90 min using an Proxeon nano LC coupled to an Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron). MS conditions were as followed: spray voltage, 1.8 kV; heated capillary temperature, 270°C; normalized collision- energy (NCE) 28. An Underfill ratio of 1.2 % and intensity threshold of 4.0 e4 were used. The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode to automatically switch between MS and MS/MS acquisition. Survey MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap (m/z 350–1600) with the resolution set to 70 000 at m/z 200 and automatic gain control target at 2 × e5. The 15 most intense ions were sequentially isolated for HCD MS/MS fragmentation anfd detection. Ions with single and unrecognized charge states were excluded.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched against a UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot human database containing 134,921 protein entries (downloaded July 2014) supplemented with 245 frequently observed contaminants via the Andromeda search engine. Precursor and fragment ion mass tolerances were set to 6 and 20 ppm after initial recalibration, respectively. Protein N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were allowed as variable modifications. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was defined as a fixed modification. Minimal peptide length was set to seven aminoacids, with a maximum of two missed cleavages. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% on both the peptide and the protein level using a forward-and-reverse concatenated decoy database approach. For SILAC quantification, multiplicity was set to two for double SILAC (Lys+0/Arg+0, Lys+4/Arg+6) labeling. At least two ratio counts were required for peptide quantification. The “match between runs” option of MaxQuant was disabled and the “re-quantify” option was enabled.

### Publication Abstract
Malignant germ cell tumors (GCT) are the most common malignant tumors in young men between 18 and 40 years. The correct identification of histological subtypes, in difficult cases supported by immunohistochemistry, is essential for therapeutic management. Furthermore, biomarkers may help to understand pathophysiological processes in these tumor types. Two GCT cell lines, TCam-2 with seminoma-like characteristics, and NTERA-2, an embryonal carcinoma-like cell line, were compared by a quantitative proteomic approach using high-resolution mass spectrometry (MS) in combination with stable isotope labelling by amino acid in cell culture (SILAC). We were able to identify 4856 proteins and quantify the expression of 3936. 347 were significantly differentially expressed between the two cell lines. For further validation, CD81, CBX-3, PHF6, and ENSA were analyzed by western blot analysis. The results confirmed the MS results. Immunohistochemical analysis on 59 formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded (FFPE) normal and GCT tissue samples (normal testis, GCNIS, seminomas, and embryonal carcinomas) of these proteins demonstrated the ability to distinguish different GCT subtypes, especially seminomas and embryonal carcinomas. In addition, siRNA-mediated knockdown of these proteins resulted in an antiproliferative effect in TCam-2, NTERA-2, and an additional embryonal carcinoma-like cell line, NCCIT. In summary, this study represents a proteomic resource for the discrimination of malignant germ cell tumor subtypes and the observed antiproliferative effect after knockdown of selected proteins paves the way for the identification of new potential drug targets.

### Keywords
Biomarker, Testis cancer, Silac

### Affiliations
University medical center Goettingen, Institute of Pathology
Department of Internal Medicine, Hematology/Oncology University Hospital Frankfurt Germany

### Submitter
Hanibal Bohnenberger

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Oellerich
Department of Internal Medicine, Hematology/Oncology University Hospital Frankfurt Germany


