### Accession
PXD027099

### Title
plasma proteomic profiling reveals Dampness Heat Diarrhea mechanisms in calves

### Description
Dampness heat diarrhea (DHD) is the leading cause in calves with diarrhea in traditional Chinese medicine (TCM). However, the methods for detecting DHD diarrhea remain subjective or infective. To address this issue, the calves with dampness heat diarrhea were collected and the plasma proteomic was analyzed using data-independent acquisition (DIA)-mass spectrometry- based proteomics. The analysis revealed a total of 52 differentially expressed proteins that were uniquely altered in the DHD calves’ plasma, compared to the control. Bioinformatics analysis showed that these altered proteins were involved in a wide range of biological processes, such as intestinal immune network for IgA production, purine metabolism and PI3K signaling pathway, which implying their potential roles in DHD.

### Sample Protocol
To address this issue, the calves with dampness heat diarrhea were collected and the plasma proteomic was analyzed using data-independent acquisition (DIA)-mass spectrometry- based proteomics.

### Data Protocol
The analysis revealed a total of 52 differentially expressed proteins that were uniquely altered in the DHD calves’ plasma, compared to the control. Bioinformatics analysis showed that these altered proteins were involved in a wide range of biological processes, such as intestinal immune network for IgA production, purine metabolism and PI3K signaling pathway, which implying their potential roles in DHD.

### Publication Abstract
Dampness heat diarrhea (DHD) is one of the most common syndromes of calf diarrhea. Its complex etiology and lack of objective diagnostic criteria bring great challenges to the diagnosis and treatment of this disease. This study aims to screen some prospective diagnostic biomarkers or therapeutic targets for calves with DHD by investigating the differential protein profiles of plasma between DHD calves and clinically healthy calves by mass spectrometry-based proteomic. A total of 120 DHD calves and 90 clinically healthy calves were divided into two groups randomly, 30 DHD calves and 30 clinically healthy calves in the test group, and 90 DHD calves and 60 clinically healthy calves in the validation group. In the test group, a total of 52 proteins were differentially expressed between calves with DHD and clinically healthy calves, 13 proteins were significantly increased and 39 proteins were significantly decreased. The differentially expressed proteins were associated with the intestinal immune network of IgA production, caffeine metabolism, purine metabolism, and PI3K signaling pathway. In the validation group, 13 proteins were selected from 52 differential expression proteins for parallel reaction monitoring validation to verify their associations with DHD calves. The targeted proteomic results showed that fibronectin precursor (FN1) and apolipoprotein C-IV precursor (APOC4) were significantly associated with DHD in calves, and they were downregulated in sick calves. In conclusion, the differential expression of plasma proteins was associated with DHD pathogenesis in calves, and the FN1 and APOC4 might be the potential clinical biomarkers for diagnosis of DHD in calves, and the intestinal immune network of IgA production, caffeine metabolism, purine metabolism, and PI3K signaling pathway are the candidate targets to treat DHD in calves. Our finding provides a reference for further investigating the pathogenesis, developing techniques of diagnosis, and screening treatment drugs for DHD in calves.

### Keywords
Calves, Proteome, Dampness heat diarrhea, Data-independent acquisition

### Affiliations
Lanzhou institute of husbandry and pharmaceutical sciences of CAASLanzhou institute of husbandry and pharmaceutical sciences of CAAS
Lanzhou institute of husbandry and pharmaceutical sciences of CAAS

### Submitter
Zunxiang Yan

### Lab Head
Dr Jianxi Li
Lanzhou institute of husbandry and pharmaceutical sciences of CAASLanzhou institute of husbandry and pharmaceutical sciences of CAAS


