### Accession
PXD047527

### Title
Assembly of respiratory complex I is regulated by FMN insertion into the N-module.

### Description
Respiratory complex I plays a crucial role in the mitochondrial electron transport chain and shows promise as a therapeutic target for various human diseases. While most studies focus on inhibiting complex I at the Q-site, little is known about inhibitors targeting other sites within the complex. In this study, we demonstrate that diphenyleneiodonium (DPI), a known N-site inhibitor, uniquely affects the stability of complex I by inhibiting its flavin cofactor FMN. Treatment with DPI blocks the final stage of complex I assembly, leading to the accumulation of assembly intermediates that lack the N-module. Remarkably, high-dose DPI treatment can completely and reversibly degrade complex I in different cellular models. The mechanism involves the accumulation of DPI in mitochondria, where it reacts with FMN, depleting the effective pool of FMN and halting complex I maturation. Consistently, growing cells in medium lacking the FMN precursor riboflavin or knocking out the mitochondrial FAD carrier gene SLC25A32 results in complex I degradation and impairs complex I-dependent respiration. Overall, our findings establish a direct connection between mitochondrial flavin homeostasis and complex I stability and assembly, paving the way for novel pharmacological strategies to regulate respiratory complex I.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics analysis.High-Throughput protein profiling was performed in collaboration with the CNIC-proteomics Unit. Total cellular pellet of 143B cells was digested with trypsin and labelled with tandem mass tags TMT (10plex), according to manufacturer’s instructions. Resulting peptides were injected onto a C-18 reversed phase (RP) nano- column (75 μm I.D. and 50 cm, Acclaim PepMap, Thermo Fisher, San José, CA, USA) and analyzed in a continuous acetonitrile gradient consisting of 8-31% B-solution (B=0.5% formic acid in acetonitrile) for 240 min, 50-90% B for 1 min. Subsequently, peptides were eluted from the RP nanocolumn at a flow rate of ~200 nL/min to an emitter nanospray needle for real-time ionization and peptide fragmentation in a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were acquired in a data-dependent manner, with an automatic switch between MS and MS/MS using a top 20 method. The raw files were analysed with Proteome Discoverer (version 2.1, Thermo Fisher Scientific), using Uniprot database. The parameter selected for database searching were: trypsin digestion with 2 maximum missed cleavage sites, precursor mass tolerance of 800 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 0.03 atomic mass unit (amu). MS/MS spectra were also queried against inverted databases constructed from the same target databases. Peptide identification from MS/MS data was performed using the probability ratio method95. False discovery rates  (FDR) of 1% was used as a threshold for peptide identification. Quantitative information were extracted from MS/MS spectra, by using TMT reporter ions, thanks to an in-house developed program (QuiXoT)96 and protein abundance changes were analysed using the Generic Integration Algorithm, as described in97

### Publication Abstract
Respiratory complex I plays a crucial role in the mitochondrial electron transport chain and shows promise as a therapeutic target for various human diseases. While most studies focus on inhibiting complex I at the Q-site, little is known about inhibitors targeting other sites within the complex. In this study, we demonstrate that diphenyleneiodonium (DPI), a N-site inhibitor, uniquely affects the stability of complex I by reacting with its flavin cofactor FMN. Treatment with DPI blocks the final stage of complex I assembly, leading to the complete and reversible degradation of complex I in different cellular models. Growing cells in medium lacking the FMN precursor riboflavin or knocking out the mitochondrial flavin carrier gene SLC25A32 results in a similar complex I degradation. Overall, our findings establish a direct connection between mitochondrial flavin homeostasis and complex I stability and assembly, paving the way for novel pharmacological strategies to regulate respiratory complex I.

### Keywords
Human nmodule

### Affiliations
CNIC

### Submitter
Enrique Calvo

### Lab Head
Dr Enrique Calvo
CNIC


