### Accession
PXD046898

### Title
Proteomic analysis of ARF regulatory molecules co-immunoprecipitating with human SDC4 (huSDC4)

### Description
Proteomic analysis of ARF regulatory molecules co-immunoprecipitating with human SDC4 (huSDC4) from Syn4WT, Syn4-/-, Syn4Y180E and Syn4Y180L MEFs. Peptide analysis by LC-MS/MS was performed using an UltiMate 3000 Rapid Separation LC (Dionex Corporation) coupled to an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher).

### Sample Protocol
Co-Immunoprecipitation for Proteomic Analysis: For proteomic analysis, approximately 5x10^7 cells for each cell line (Syn4WT, Syn4-/-, Syn4Y180E and Syn4Y180L MEFs) were lysed in800ml of 0 .5% Igepal buffer (0.5% Igepal CA-630, 10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 250 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EGTA, 10% glycerol, 10 mM sodium fluoride, 5 mM sodium orthovanadate, 10 μg/ml leupeptin, 10 μg/ml aprotinin and 0.5 mM AEBSF). Clarified lysates were incubated 3g mouse anti-huSDC4 (5G9) with 80ml Protein G sepharose beads for 1 Hr at 4°C. Beads were washed 3 times with lysis buffer, eluted with 80ml 5x reducing sample buffer and incubation at 95°C for 5 mins. Immune-complexes were separated by SDS/PAGE and stained with Instant Blue (Expedeon). Each sample was fractionated into 20 slices and de-stained with repeated incubations of 50% (v/v) Acetonitrile (ACN)/ 50% 25 mM NH4HCO3 (v/v) at RT. Gel pieces were dehydrated by 2 x 5 min incubations with ACN followed by vacuum centrifugation. Peptides were reduced via incubation with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 56°C for 1 h, followed by alkylation by incubating with 55 mM iodoacetamide (IA) for 45 min at RT while protected from light. DTT and IA were removed by two rounds of washing and dehydration: 5 min incubations with 25 mM NH4HCO3 followed by a 5 min incubation with ACN. ACN was removed by centrifugation and gel pieces dried via vacuum centrifugation. 1.25 ng/L porcine trypsin (Promega, Cat No:V5280) in 25 mM NH4HCO3 was added to the gel pieces, which were incubated at 4°C for 45 min followed by 37°C overnight. Trypsinised peptides were collected from gel pieces via centrifugation, followed by further extraction 30 min incubation at RT with 99.8% (v/v) ACN/0.2% (v/v) formic acid and then 50% (v/v) ACN/0.1% formic acid (v/v) followed by centrifugation. Collected eluates were dried by vacuum centrifugation and re-suspended in 10μl 5% (v/v) ACN in 0.1% formic acid per fraction.  Peptide analysis by LC-MS/MS was performed using an UltiMate 3000 Rapid Separation LC (Dionex Corporation) coupled to an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher).

### Data Protocol
Peptides were selected for fragmentation automatically by data-dependent analysis. Data produced were searched using Mascot (Matrix Science UK), against the uniprot.2011-05-03 mammalia database, with fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.50 Da and parent ion tolerance of 10.0 PPM.  Scaffold 4 (Proteome Software) was used to validate MS/MS-based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted at >95.0% probability by the Peptide Prophet and protein identifications were accepted at >99.0%. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy principles of parsimony.

### Publication Abstract
CAR (CARSKNKDC) is a wound-homing peptide that recognises angiogenic neovessels. Here we discover that systemically administered CAR peptide has inherent ability to promote wound healing: wounds close and re-epithelialise faster in CAR-treated male mice. CAR promotes keratinocyte migration in vitro. The heparan sulfate proteoglycan syndecan-4 regulates cell migration and is crucial for wound healing. We report that syndecan-4 expression is restricted to epidermis and blood vessels in mice skin wounds. Syndecan-4 regulates binding and internalisation of CAR peptide and CAR-mediated cytoskeletal remodelling. CAR induces syndecan-4-dependent activation of the small GTPase ARF6, via the guanine nucleotide exchange factor cytohesin-2, and promotes syndecan-4-, ARF6- and Cytohesin-2-mediated keratinocyte migration. Finally, we show that genetic ablation of syndecan-4 in male mice eliminates CAR-induced wound re-epithelialisation following systemic administration. We propose that CAR peptide activates syndecan-4 functions to selectively promote re-epithelialisation. Thus, CAR peptide provides a therapeutic approach to enhance wound healing in mice; systemic, yet target organ- and cell-specific.

### Keywords
Syndecan-4 arf6 cytohesin-2 cyth2 iqsec1 arno arfgef arfgap

### Affiliations
Institute of Systems, Molecular & Integrative Biology
University of Liverpool
Receptor Dynamics in Cancer Laboratory Department of Molecular & Clinical Cancer Medicine Institute of Systems, Molecular & Integrative Biology University of Liverpool UK

### Submitter
Mark Morgan

### Lab Head
Dr Mark Morgan
Receptor Dynamics in Cancer Laboratory Department of Molecular & Clinical Cancer Medicine Institute of Systems, Molecular & Integrative Biology University of Liverpool UK


