### Accession
PXD008535

### Title
MaxQuant Label Free Quantification wrapped as a Software Service

### Description
Scientific services in the area of OMICS research is becoming increasingly popular. In gen- eral omics research can produce a massive amount of data that can pose a challenge for computing infrastructure. While in the genomics area, many applications can run on Linux nodes the situation in proteomics is different. In proteomics, many applications are optimized to run on Windows computer only. As a sci- entific service provider, a core facility needs reliable, reproducible and easy to use integrated solutions. Liquid chromatography mass spectrometry intensity based label-free quantifica- tion using data-dependent acquisition is a popular approach in proteomics to perform relative quantification of proteins in complex samples. MaxQuant is a widely used software for this type of analysis which has a complex graphical user interface and provides information-rich outputs. We run it in which also includes Scaffold for search result validation and visualization and an R based quality control report generation. Data analysis workflows consists of several components: a workflow engine, compute hosts, and archives. In particular, applications can run on compute hosts, while the data is kept in an archive server. Therefore, the input and output need to be staged to the compute host and the results need to be staged back to the archive. This complexity can be overwhelming for a most common user. These different components have all been integrated into a robust and user-friendly application to process standardized label-free quantification experiments. We integrated MaxQuant as an in-house Software as a Service application so it can be used by any workflow engine in a platform-independent manner. In this manuscript, we provide a technical description of how MaxQuant as software service has been integrated into our heterogeneous compute environment for reproducible and automatic large scale high throughput data processing of label-free quantification experiments. In this Pride dataset we provide four raw files along with the full MaxQuant results, the Scaffold file, the QC-pdf report to have a concrete idea of the potential of our workflow. These data are generated in the FGCZ-course in Nov. 2016 (for further information see: http://www.fgcz.ch/education/genomics-courses01.html).

### Sample Protocol
Generating the sample: Yeast cells have been grown for 16hr on glucose media to an optical density of ~ 0.6. Cells are harvested and aliquoted in multiple batches. Individual batches have been processed by participants of the combined course according to the following protocol.  Digestion of the sample: Protein extraction was performed by mixing the yeast solution with lysis buffer to a final concentration of 4% SDS, 100mM TRIS/HCL pH 8.2. The solution was boiled at 95°C for 10 minutes and processed with High Intensity Focused Ultrasound (HIFU) for 30s setting the ultrasonic amplitude to 85%. Subsequently proteins where precipitated by TCA protein precipitation with a 10% TCA solution. The proteins wer resolubilized in 50mM TEAB pH8.5. Protein concentration was estimated using the Qubit® Protein Assay Kit (Life Technologies, Zurich, Switzerland). 30 µg of proteins were reduced and alkylated in one step with  2mM TCEP and 15mM Chloroacetamide. After incubation in a Thermoshaker at 600rpm at 30°C in the darkness for 30min the proteins were digested by adding 3 µg of trypsin and incubated in a Thermo shaker at 37°C for 4h. Subsequently the digestion was stopped by adding 5% TFA to a final volume of 0.5% TFA in the solution. Peptides were desalted using home-made stage tips, dried and re-solubilized in 15 µl of 3% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid for MS analysis.  MS analysis: Mass spectrometry analysis was performed on a QExactive mass spectrometer coupled to a nano EasyLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Solvent composition at the two channels was 0.1% formic acid for channel A and 0.1% formic acid, 99.9% acetonitrile for channel B. For each sample 4μL of peptides were loaded on a self-made column (75 μm × 150 mm) packed with reverse-phase C18 material (ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 μm, Dr. Maisch GmbH) and eluted at a flow rate of 300 nL/min by a gradient from 2 to 35% B in 80 min, 47% B in 4 min and 98% B in 4 min. Samples were acquired in a randomized order. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode (DDA), acquiring a full-scan MS spectra (300−1700 m/z) at a resolution of 70000 at 200 m/z after accumulation to a target value of 3000000, followed by HCD (higher-energy collision dissociation) fragmentation on the twelve most intense signals per cycle. HCD spectra were acquired at a resolution of 35000 using a normalized collision energy of 25 and a maximum injection time of 120 ms. The automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 50000 ions. Charge state screening was enabled and singly and unassigned charge states were rejected. Only precursors with intensity above 8300 were selected for MS/MS (2% underfill ratio). Precursor masses previously selected for MS/MS measurement were excluded from further selection for 30 s, and the exclusion window was set at 10 ppm. The samples were acquired using internal lock mass calibration on m/z 371.1010 and 445.1200.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data has been processed with MaxQuant v. 1.4.2 according to a standard procedure for label-free quantification (see the mqpar_checkedJG.xml for details). Furthermore, MaxQuant results have been loaded into Scaffold 4.4.1.1 (see ScaffoldDriver.xml for details) for visualisation and validation of the data.  Also, some of the txt-result files from MaxQuant have been used to produce the QC-pdf report. Additional details about parameter settings for the Andromeda-search in MaxQuant can be found in the Scaffold file.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Automation, Label free quantification, Scientific workflows and services, Maxquant, Software as a service, Quality control, Proteomics, Data dependent aquisition, Reproducible research

### Affiliations
Functional Genomics Center Zurich (UZH/ETHZ)
Functional Genomics Center Zurich Winterthurerstr. 190 CH-8057 Zurich, Switzerland

### Submitter
Jonas Grossmann

### Lab Head
Dr Grossmann Jonas
Functional Genomics Center Zurich Winterthurerstr. 190 CH-8057 Zurich, Switzerland


