### Accession
PXD011173

### Title
Human FZD6 phosphorylation LC-MS/MS

### Description
Frizzleds (FZD) function as receptors for secreted lipoglycoproteins of the Wingless/Int-1 (WNT) family, initiating an important signal transduction network in multicellular organisms. FZDs are classified as G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs), which control a wide variety of physiological functions. GPCRs are well known to be regulated by phosphorylation, which can lead to specification of downstream signaling or receptor desensitization. The role and underlying mechanisms of phosphorylation of FZDs remains largely unexplored. Here, we investigated the phosphorylation of human FZD6. In order to assess FZD6 phosphorylation experimentally, we employed mass spectrometry. HEK293 cells expressing FZD6-GFP were treated with either control, WNT-3A or WNT-5A containing conditioned medium for 30 min and processed for LC-MS/MS analysis. Six phosphorylated serine residues were detected in the C-terminus of FZD6 − S592, S620, S629, S648, S653 and S656.

### Sample Protocol
Human FZD6-GFP (pAcGFP1-N1) was overexpressed in human embryonic kidney cells (HEK293; ATCC). 24 hours after transfection, cells were treated by conditioned medium containing WNT-3A or WNT-5A or no WNT as a control. Treatment by the control, WNT-3A or WNT-5A containing conditioned medium produced in L cells (ATCC) was done in the ratio 1:4 to the standard Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium used for propagating the HEK293 cells. FZD6 was pulled down using anti-GFP antibody (rabbit, #20R-GR-011, Fitzgerald), samples were incubated with 10 mM DTT at 56°C for 45 min. After removal of DTT excess, samples were incubated with 55 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature (RT) in darkness for 30 min. The trypsin digestion was performed for 2 h at 40°C on a Thermomixer (750 rpm; Eppendorf). Digested peptides were extracted using 50% acetonitrile solution with 2.5% formic acid and concentrated in a SpeedVac concentrator (Eppendorf). An aliquot of a concentrated sample was directly analyzed by LC-MS/MS for protein identification. The rest of the sample was used for phospho-peptide analysis. The sample was diluted with acidified acetonitrile solution (80% acetonitrile, 2% FA). Phospho-peptides were enriched using the Pierce Magnetic Titanium Dioxide Phosphopeptide Enrichment kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to a slightly modified manufacturer protocol (samples were mixed with binding solution in a 1:2 ratio before loading and one additional washing step with binding solution after phospho-peptide capture was implemented). Eluates were concentrated under vacuum and then diluted in 10 μl of 0.1% formic acid (FA) solution before LC-MS/MS analysis.  The LC-MS analysis was performed on a nanoAcquity UPLC (Waters Corparation, USA) coupled to a LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron Corporation, Germany) equipped with a nano-ESI source and installed with a Picotip Emmitter (New Objective, USA).   For LC separation, the digested peptides were first enriched on a nanoAcquity UPLC 2G-V/Mtrap Symmetry  C18 pre-column (2 cm length, 180 µm inner diameter and 5 µm particle size) from Water Corporation and separated using NanoAcquity BEH130 C18 column (10 cm length, 100 µM inner diameter and 1.7 µm particle size from Water Corporation). The separation was achieved with the formation of gradient of 92 minutes containing buffer A (2% acetonitrile in water with 0.1% acetic acid) and buffer B (acetonitrile with 0.1% acetic acid, gradient, 2-5% buffer B in 2 min, 5-25% B in 63 min, 25-60% B in 25 min, 60-99% B in 1 min). The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 400 nL/ min. The eluted peptides analysed first in the FTMS operated in positive and profile mode. The second scan event is a ms/ms scan performed in data-dependent mode to fragment peptides and acquired data in positive and centroid mode. The MS automatically switch between Orbitrap-MS and LTQ-MS/MS acquisition to carry out the ms and ms/ms events. Survey full scan MS spectra (from m/z 300 to 1700) were acquired in the Orbitrap with resolution, R=30 000 with a target value of 1 x  E6. The method allowed sequential isolation of maximum twenty most intense ions depending on signal intensity and were subjected for CID fragmentation with a isolation width of 2 Da and a target value of 1 x E4 or with a maximum ion time of 100 ms. Target ions already selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 60 s. General MS conditions were electrospray voltage, 1,65 kV; no sheath and auxiliary gas flow, capillary temperature of 300 deg. C. Ion selection threshold was 1500 counts for MS/MS, activation time of 10 ms and activation energy of 35% normalized were also applied for MS/MS. Only doubly and triply charged ions were triggered for tandem ms analysis.

### Data Protocol
The data were analysed by Thermo Proteome Discoverer 1.4 and searched against human uniprot fasta database using sequest HT. The search parameter settings include, Trypsin as protease with two misscleavages; oxidation of  methionine, phophorylation of serine, threonine and tyrorine as dynamic modification; carbamidomethylation of cysteine as static modificaton. A peptide error tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment tolerance of 0.8Da was used for peptide identifications with a FDR of 1%. Peptides were validated by node percolator and the phosphopeptides by node PhosphoRs 3.0. The output results were later filtered to yield high confidence peptides and enabled protein grouping.

### Publication Abstract
Frizzleds (FZDs) are receptors for secreted lipoglycoproteins of the Wingless/Int-1 (WNT) family, initiating an important signal transduction network in multicellular organisms. FZDs are G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs), which are well known to be regulated by phosphorylation, leading to specific downstream signaling or receptor desensitization. The role and underlying mechanisms of FZD phosphorylation remain largely unexplored. Here, we investigated the phosphorylation of human FZD<sub>6</sub> Using MS analysis and a phospho-state- and -site-specific antibody, we found that Ser-648, located in the FZD<sub>6</sub> C terminus, is efficiently phosphorylated by casein kinase 1 &#x3f5; (CK1&#x3f5;) and that this phosphorylation requires the scaffolding protein Dishevelled (DVL). In an overexpression system, DVL1, -2, and -3 promoted CK1&#x3f5;-mediated FZD<sub>6</sub> phosphorylation on Ser-648. This DVL activity required an intact DEP domain and FZD-mediated recruitment of this domain to the cell membrane. Substitution of the CK1&#x3f5;-targeted phosphomotif reduced FZD<sub>6</sub> surface expression, suggesting that Ser-648 phosphorylation controls membrane trafficking of FZD<sub>6</sub> Phospho-Ser-648 FZD<sub>6</sub> immunoreactivity in human fallopian tube epithelium was predominantly apical, associated with cilia in a subset of epithelial cells, compared with the total FZD<sub>6</sub> protein expression, suggesting that FZD<sub>6</sub> phosphorylation contributes to asymmetric localization of receptor function within the cell and to epithelial polarity. Given the key role of FZD<sub>6</sub> in planar cell polarity, our results raise the possibility that asymmetric phosphorylation of FZD<sub>6</sub> rather than asymmetric protein distribution accounts for polarized receptor signaling.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Wnt-5a, Wnt-3a, Fzd6, Lc-ms/ms, Titanuim dioxide, Frizzled, Wnt, Label-free

### Affiliations
Universitätsmedizin Greifswald Interfakultäres Institut für Genetik und Funktionelle Genomforschung Abteilung für Funktionelle Genomforschung Felix-Hausdorff-Straße 8 17487 Greifswald Germany
Proteomics Core Facility and Research Group Proteomics
CEITEC-MU
Masaryk University
Brno, Czech Republic

### Submitter
David Potesil

### Lab Head
Dr Vishnu M Dhople
Universitätsmedizin Greifswald Interfakultäres Institut für Genetik und Funktionelle Genomforschung Abteilung für Funktionelle Genomforschung Felix-Hausdorff-Straße 8 17487 Greifswald Germany


