### Accession
PXD014708

### Title
Proteomic analysis of an induced pluripotent stem cell model reveals strategies to treat Juvenile Myelomonocytic Leukaemia

### Description
Juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia (JMML) is an aggressive myeloproliferative neoplasm of early childhood with a poor survival rate thus there is a requirement for improved treatment strategies. Induced pluripotent stem cells offer the ability to model disease and develop new treatment strategies. JMML is frequently associated with mutations in PTPN11. Children with Noonan syndrome, a development disorder, have an increased incidence of JMML associated with specific germline mutations in PTPN11. We undertook a proteomic assessment of myeloid cells derived from induced pluripotent stem cells obtained from Noonan syndrome patients with PTPN11 mutations, either associated or not associated with increased incidence of JMML. We report that the proteomic perturbations induced by the leukaemia-associated PTPN11 mutations are associated with TP53 and NF-ĸb signalling. We have previously shown that MYC is involved in the differential gene expression observed in Noonan syndrome patients associated with increased incidence of JMML. Thus, we employed drugs to target these pathways and demonstrate differentential effects on clonogenic hematopoietic cells derived from Noonan syndrome patients whom develop JMML and those who do not. Further, we demonstrated these small molecular inhibitors, JQ1 and CBL0137, preferentially extinguish primitive haematopoietic cells from sporadic JMML patients as opposed to cells from healthy individuals.

### Sample Protocol
Wild Type, NS and NS/JMML iPSC cells were differentiated towards hematopoietic progenitors over 14 days prior to enrichment of CD33+ cells using CliniMACS (Miltenyi Biotec). Cells from three biological replicates for each cell line were pooled prior to being lysed and subject to isobaric tagging using 8 channel iTRAQ reagent, nanoflow liquid chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry as previously described25 and detailed in supplementary methods. Two 10 µg aliquots of protein from each pool were subject to iTRAQ labelling and MS analysis (as outlined in Supplementary Table 1)

### Data Protocol
MS data of iTRAQ labelled samples was processed using ProteinPilot 5 software. All protein quantification ratios were checked to ensure they had a normal distribution (Supplementary Fig. 1) and a protein change defined as a ratio outside the range in which 95% of protein ratios for the replicate runs were found with a p-value <0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia (JMML) is an aggressive myeloproliferative neoplasm of early childhood with a poor survival rate, thus there is a requirement for improved treatment strategies. Induced pluripotent stem cells offer the ability to model disease and develop new treatment strategies. JMML is frequently associated with mutations in <i>PTPN</i>11. Children with Noonan syndrome, a development disorder, have an increased incidence of JMML associated with specific germline mutations in <i>PTPN</i>11. We undertook a proteomic assessment of myeloid cells derived from induced pluripotent stem cells obtained from Noonan syndrome patients with <i>PTPN</i>11 mutations, either associated or not associated with an increased incidence of JMML. We report that the proteomic perturbations induced by the leukemia-associated <i>PTPN</i>11 mutations are associated with TP53 and NF-K&#x3ba;b signaling. We have previously shown that MYC is involved in the differential gene expression observed in Noonan syndrome patients associated with an increased incidence of JMML. Thus, we employed drugs to target these pathways and demonstrate differential effects on clonogenic hematopoietic cells derived from Noonan syndrome patients, who develop JMML and those who do not. Further, we demonstrated these small molecular inhibitors, JQ1 and CBL0137, preferentially extinguish primitive hematopoietic cells from sporadic JMML patients as opposed to cells from healthy individuals.

### Keywords
Jmml, Noonan syndrome, Cbl0137, Ptpn11, Jq1

### Affiliations
University of Manchester

### Submitter
Bethany Geary

### Lab Head
Dr Tony Whetton
University of Manchester


