### Accession
PXD000260

### Title
Human triple negative breast cancer tissues

### Description
Tissue samples were cut into 8-µm frozen sections and then microdissected to obtain ~4,000 breast cancer epithelial cells using a P.A.L.M. MicroBeam system (Carl Zeiss MicroImaging, GmbH, Munich, Germany). Proteins were extracted from microdissected cells, followed by denaturation, reduction and alkylation. Protein samples were digested at 37oC for 4 h using MS-grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) at a 1:4 (enzyme:protein) ratio, and then acidified for further analysis. Global proteomic profiles of 126 TNBC samples were recorded on a nanoscale LC hyphenated LTQ-Orbitrap-XL MS system (ThermoElectron, Bremen, Germany). Peptide mixtures were separated on the nLC system (Ultimate 3000, Dionex, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) with a 3-h binary gradient (mobile phase A: H2O, mobile phase B: ACN) in a 3-μm C18 silica packed 50-cm capillary column with 75-μm inner-diameter. Mass spectra were acquired over a mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) range of 400–1,800 at a resolving power of 30,000 at 400 m/z. The top five most intensive parent ions from the full scan were isolated and fragmented by collisional activated dissociation in the linear ion trap. Dynamic exclusion was used to increase number of parent ions selected for fragmentation. MaxQuant search used Carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification for cysteine-containing peptides, and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation as variable modification.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
Ferritin heavy chain (FTH1) is a 21-kDa subunit of the ferritin complex, known for its role in iron metabolism, and which has recently been identified as a favorable prognostic protein for triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) patients. Currently, it is not well understood how FTH1 contributes to an anti-tumor response. Here, we explored whether expression and cellular compartmentalization of FTH1 correlates to an effective immune response in TNBC patients. Analysis of the tumor tissue transcriptome, complemented with in silico pathway analysis, revealed that FTH1 was an integral part of an immunomodulatory network of cytokine signaling, adaptive immunity, and cell death. These findings were confirmed using mass spectrometry (MS)-derived proteomic data, and immunohistochemical staining of tissue microarrays. We observed that FTH1 is localized in both the cytoplasm and/or nucleus of cancer cells. However, high cytoplasmic (c) FTH1 was associated with favorable prognosis (Log-rank p = 0.001), whereas nuclear (n) FTH1 staining was associated with adverse prognosis (Log-rank p = 0.019). cFTH1 staining significantly correlated with total FTH1 expression in TNBC tissue samples, as measured by MS analysis (Rs = 0.473, p = 0.0007), but nFTH1 staining did not (Rs = 0.197, p = 0.1801). Notably, IFN &#x3b3;-producing CD8+ effector T cells, but not CD4+ T cells, were preferentially enriched in tumors with high expression of cFTH1 (p = 0.02). Collectively, our data provide evidence toward new immune regulatory properties of FTH1 in TNBC, which may facilitate development of novel therapeutic targets.

### Keywords
Human, Prognosis, Lc-ms/ms, Laser capture microdissection, Triple negative breast cancer, Label-free proteomics

### Affiliations
Radboud Institute of Molecular Life Sciences

### Submitter
Ning Qing Liu

### Lab Head


