### Accession
PXD030225

### Title
Blood anticoagulation and processing time modify ex vivo proteome content of platelets

### Description
Ex vivo assays of platelet function critically inform mechanistic and clinical studies of hemostasis and thrombosis, where effects of divergent blood processing methods on platelet composition are apparent but remain unspecified. Parallel blood samples were collected from healthy human donors into sodium citrate, acid citrate dextrose, EDTA and heparin, and processed over an extended time course for physiological and biochemical experiments, including platelet proteome quantification with multiplexed tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling and high-resolution Tribrid mass spectrometry (MS). We evaluated how different blood anticoagulation options and processing times affect platelet protein content ex vivo. Following platelet isolation, TMT-MS quantified 3,358 proteins amongst all prepared platelet samples. Altogether, >400 proteins were differentially abundant in platelets isolated from blood processed at 24 h vs. 1 h post-phlebotomy, including sets of proteins pertinent to membrane trafficking and exocytosis.

### Sample Protocol
Blood was drawn by venipuncture from healthy adult volunteers (18+ years old) at OHSU following institutional review board (IRB) guidelines and informed consent from participants. Venous whole blood was collected into vacutainer tubes containing either sodium heparin, ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA), buffered sodium citrate, or acid citrate dextrose (ACD). After gentle mixing, 1 ml anticoagulated blood aliquots were prepared and processed immediately (t = 0 h) or incubated for t = 1, 2, 3, 5, 9, 24, 48 and 120 h at room temperature. The aliquots were centrifuged at 200× g for 20 min to obtain platelet-rich plasma. The upper 2/3 volume of PRP was transferred into a new Eppendorf tube and further centrifuged (for the eight incubation times) at 1000× g for 10 min to obtain platelet poor plasma followed by a 2,500 × g centrifugation of the PPP for 15 min to obtain platelet-free plasma. All centrifugation steps were performed without braking and at room temperature.  Frozen platelet lysates were thawed, heated at 90C for 10 min and sonicated using a Bioruptor Pico (Diagenode, # B01060010). Aliquots were analyzed for protein concentration by BCA assay. 50 micrograms of total protein per sample in 5% SDS were reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT), alkylated with iodoacetamide (IAA) and digested in S-Trap micro columns (ProtiFi, #C02-micro) overnight at 37C. The Pierce Peptide Assay (Thermo, #23275) was used to determine the eluted peptide concentration.   Two sets of 11-plex Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) isobaric reagents (ThermoFisher Scientific, # A34808) were used to label 18 platelet peptide samples (3 donors by 3 anticoagulants [ACD, EDTA, Heparin] at 2 time points [1 h and 24 h]), and 4 internal reference standard (IRS) peptide mixes. The reference standard was made by pooling equal amounts of peptides from all 18 individual samples and dividing into 4 technical replicates. 20 µg of peptides were distributed into channels of TMT-11plex 1 (9 one-hour samples + 2 pooled reference standards) and TMT-11plex 2 (9 twenty-four-hour samples + 2 reference standards). Labeled samples were combined into a 50-microgram mix of each plex in preparation for 2D-RPRP LC-MS/MS.  LC-MS/MS analysis: Multiplexed TMT-labeled samples were reconstituted in 10 mM ammonium formate pH 9 and separated by two-dimensional reverse-phase liquid chromatography using a Dionex NCS-3500RS UltiMate RSLCnano UPLC system. The 20-40 microliter reconstituted samples were injected onto a NanoEase 5-micron XBridge BEH130 C18 300-micron x 50 mm column (Waters) at 3 microliter/min in a mobile phase containing 10 mm ammonium formate (pH 10). Peptides were eluted by sequential injection of 20 microliter volumes of 14, 17, 20-30, 35, 40, 45, 50, and 90% ACN. Eluted peptides from the first-dimension column were diluted with mobile phase containing 0.1% formic acid at 24 microliter/min flow rate and delivered to an Acclaim PepMap 100-micron x 2 cm NanoViper C18, 5-micron trap on a switching valve. After 10 min of loading, the trap column was switched on-line to a PepMap RSLC C18, 2 micron, 75-micron x 25 cm EasySpray column (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were then separated at low pH in the second dimension using a 7.5–30% ACN gradient over 90 min in mobile phase containing 0.1% formic acid at 300 nanoliter/min flow rate. Tandem mass spectrometry data was collected using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid instrument configured with an EasySpray NanoSource (Thermo Scientific). Survey scans were performed in the Orbitrap mass analyzer (resolution = 120000), and data-dependent MS2 scans performed in the linear ion trap using collision-induced dissociation (normalized collision energy = 35) following isolation with the instrument's quadrupole. Reporter ion detection was performed in the Orbitrap mass analyzer (resolution = 60000) using MS3 scans following synchronous precursor scan isolation (SPS) of the top 10 ions in the quadrupole, and higher-energy collisional dissociation in the ion-routing multipole (normalized collision energy = 65).

### Data Protocol
The binary instrument files were processed with the PAW pipeline (https://github.com/pwilmart/PAW_pipeline). Binary files were converted to text files using MSConvert. Python scripts extracted TMT reporter ion peak heights and fragment ion spectra in MS2 format. The Comet search engine (version 2016.03) was used: 1.25 Da monoisotopic peptide mass tolerance, 1.0005 Da monoisotopic fragment ion tolerance, fully tryptic cleavage with up to two missed cleavages, variable oxidation of methionine residues, static alkylation of cysteines, and static modifications for TMT labels (at peptide N-termini and at lysine residues). Searches used UniProt proteome UP000005640 (human, taxon ID 9606, version 2020.01) canonical FASTA sequences (20,603 proteins). Common contaminants (174 sequences excluding any albumins) were added, and sequence-reversed entries were concatenated for a final protein FASTA file of 41,554 sequences.  Top-scoring peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) were filtered to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) using interactive delta-mass and conditional PeptideProphet-like linear discriminant function scores. Incorrect delta-mass and score histogram distributions were estimated using the target/decoy method. The filtered PSMs were assembled into protein lists using basic and extended parsimony principles and required two distinct peptides per protein. The final list of identified proteins, protein groups, and protein families were used to define unique and shared peptides for quantitative use. Total (summed) reporter ion intensities were computed from the PSMs associated with all unique peptides for each protein.   The protein intensity values for each biological sample in each biological condition were compared for differential protein expression using the Bioconductor package edgeR within Jupyter notebooks. Result tables contained typical proteomics summaries, reporter ion intensities, and statistical testing results.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Quantitative proteomics, Tandem mass tags, Anticoagulant, Platelets

### Affiliations
Oregon Health & Science University 2720 S Moody Ave Portland, Oregon 97201, USA
OHSU

### Submitter
Phillip Wilmarth

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Samuel Tassi Yunga
Oregon Health & Science University 2720 S Moody Ave Portland, Oregon 97201, USA


