### Accession
PXD021590

### Title
Peptide profiles in interstitial fluid of breast cancer samples with high or low CD10+ CAF infiltration

### Description
To investigate whether CD10 in CAFs exerts its functions by mediating peptide degradation, we applied a high performance liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (HPLC-MS/MS)-based approach to compare peptide profiles in interstitial fluid of breast cancer samples with high or low CD10+ CAF infiltration.

### Sample Protocol
Tumor interstitial fluid extraction. Briefly, fresh tumor tissue was rinsed with saline and blotted gently with tissue paper to remove excess saline. Then the tissue was placed onto a 20 μm nylon mesh membrane on a 50 ml conical centrifuge tube. The tube was centrifuged at 400 × g, a previously validated speed at which intracellular contents are not liberated, for 10 min at 4℃ to obtain TIF. TIF was snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80℃ until further use.   Peptide isolation. Briefly, protease inhibitor cocktail was added to TIF (1:100) immediately before use. Then, acetonitrile (ACN) was added (20% final v/v) to TIF, and the TIF was centrifuged at 20000 × g at 4℃ for 10 min. Supernatant containing endogenous peptides was dispensed to the Amicon Ultra 1.5 ml 10 KD Molecular Weight Cut Off (MWCO) centrifugal filter. The MWCO filter was centrifuged at 14000 × g for 30 min at 4℃. The flow-through was concentrated by a SpeedVac concentrator (Thermo Electron Corporation) and then resuspended in 20 μl of 0.1% formic acid (FA). Afterwards, the resulting sample was desalted by C18 ZipTips according to the manufacturer’s instruction. Briefly, the ZipTips were conditioned with 100% ACN and equilibrated for three times with 0.1% FA. Concentrated samples were dispensed onto the ZipTips slowly for at least 15 cycles and washed with 0.1% FA. Afterwards, peptides bound to the ZipTips were eluted with 20 μl of 50% ACN in 0.1% FA. The solution was dried and resuspended in 10 μl of 0.1% FA. The concentration of peptides was quantified using Pierce™ Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay (ThermoFisher Scientific). Liquid Chromatography - Tandem Mass Spectrometry. Peptides were analyzed on an Easy nLC 1200 system coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer in positive mode. Peptides were separated using a 75 μm × 150 mm capillary column packed with stationary phase (1.9 μm particle size, C18 AQ) with a gradient of 5 – 35% acetonitrile containing 0.1% FA over 90 min at 300 nl/min. An MS1 scan was acquired from 350 to 1800 m/z (120,000 resolution, 4e5 AGC, 50 ms injection time) followed by MS/MS data-dependent acquisition with EThcD and detection in the Orbitrap (50,000 resolution, 5e4 AGC, 86 ms injection time, calibrated charge-dependent ETD reaction times 60 ms, 30 NCE for HCD supplemental activation and 2.0 m/z quadrupole isolation width).

### Data Protocol
Data analysis. Data were processed with Proteome Discoverer (v2.3.0) using Andromeda against an in-house constructed database based on EROP-Moscow (Endogenous Regulatory OligoPeptide Knowledgebase) of Homo sapiens (release 03_2020) containing 790 peptides. For the analysis, the precursor MS and EThcD MS/MS tolerance were set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively, with nonspecific enzyme searching. The peptides were searched with carbamidomethylation (C) as a static modification, whereas oxidation (M), acetylation (H,K,R,S,T,Y) and methylation (D, E ,H, I, K, L, N, Q, R, S, T) as dynamic modifications. The false discovery rate for peptides was set at 0.01. Quantification of peptidomics data was performed with the precursor area detector node for label-free quantification (LFQ) in Proteome Discoverer.

### Publication Abstract
Carcinoma-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) consist of heterogeneous subpopulations that play a critical role in the dynamics of the tumor microenvironment. The extracellular signals of CAFs have been attributed to the extracellular matrix, cytokines, cell surface checkpoints, and exosomes. In the present study, it is demonstrated that the CD10 transmembrane hydrolase expressed on a subset of CAFs supports tumor stemness and induces chemoresistance. Mechanistically, CD10 degenerates an antitumoral peptide termed osteogenic growth peptide (OGP). OGP restrains the expression of rate-limiting desaturase SCD1 and inhibits lipid desaturation, which is required for cancer stem cells (CSCs). Targeting CD10 significantly improves the efficacy of chemotherapy in vivo. Clinically, CD10-OGP signals are associated with the response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy in patients with breast cancer. The collective data suggest that a nexus between the niche and lipid metabolism in CSCs is a promising therapeutic target for breast cancer.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, Tumor interstitial fluid, Breast cancer

### Affiliations
Sun Yat-Sen Memorial Hospital, Sun Yat-Sen University
Breast Tumor Center

Breast Tumor Center Sun Yat-Sen Memorial Hospital Sun Yat-Sen University 107 Yanjiang West Road Guangzhou 510120, P.R.China

### Submitter
Shubin Yu

### Lab Head
Dr Shubin Yu
Breast Tumor Center Sun Yat-Sen Memorial Hospital Sun Yat-Sen University 107 Yanjiang West Road Guangzhou 510120, P.R.China


