### Accession
PXD019156

### Title
MCM8IP activates the MCM8-9 helicase to promote DNA synthesis and homologous recombination upon DNA damage

### Description
Homologous recombination (HR) mediates the error-free repair of DNA double-strand breaks to maintain genomic stability. Here we characterize C17orf53/MCM8IP, an OB-fold containing protein that binds ssDNA, as a DNA repair factor involved in HR. MCM8IP-deficient cells exhibit HR defects, especially in long-tract gene conversion, occurring downstream of RAD51 loading, consistent with a role for MCM8IP in HR-dependent DNA synthesis. Moreover, loss of MCM8IP confers cellular sensitivity to crosslinking agents and PARP inhibition. Importantly, we report that MCM8IP directly associates with MCM8-9, a helicase complex mutated in primary ovarian insufficiency, and RPA1. We additionally show that the interactions of MCM8IP with MCM8-9 and RPA facilitate HR and promote replication fork progression and cellular viability in response to treatment with crosslinking agents. Mechanistically, MCM8IP stimulates the helicase activity of MCM8-9. Collectively, our work identifies MCM8IP as a key regulator of DNA damage-associated DNA synthesis during DNA recombination and replication.

### Sample Protocol
BioID Sample Preparation:

To identify RPA1 interactors, 293T T-REx cells expressing BirA*-RPA1 or BirA*-alone were induced (doxycycline, 24 hrs) and then labeled (50 µM biotin) with 1 mM hydroxyurea for 24 hrs. Cells were lysed in buffer (6 M Urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 0.5% Triton X-100) with 1 mM DTT and protease inhibitors. After sonication and centrifugation, lysates were incubated with streptavidin magnetic beads overnight. Beads were washed 4 times with lysis buffer and 4 times with lysis buffer lacking detergent.

To identify MCM8IP interactors, cells expressing BirA*-MCM8IP, MCM8IP-BirA* or BirA*-alone were induced and labeled as above. Cells were lysed in RIPA Buffer with protease/phosphatase inhibitors. Lysates were sonicated, treated with benzonase and cleared by centrifugation. Lysates were incubated with streptavidin magnetic beads for 4 hours. Beads were washed 4 times with RIPA buffer and another 4 times with 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl.

Protein-bound beads were washed 5 times with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, reduced with 5 mM DTT (56oC, 30 min), and alkylated with 10 mM IAA. Beads were digested overnight at 37°C with trypsin/LysC. Digestion was stopped with 1% TFA (final v/v) and cleared by centrifugation. Digested peptides were desalted on a SDB-RP StageTip, dried in a speed-vac and dissolved in 3% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid.

AP/MS Sample Preparation:

To identify MCM8IP interactors, 293T cells expressing MCM8IP-HA or GFP-HA were lysed in MCLB (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 1% NP40) with 150 mM NaCl and protease/phosphatase inhibitors. After 30 min incubation, lysates were cleared by centrifugation and the supernatant collected. Pellets were resuspended in MCLB with 500 mM NaCl and protease/phosphatase inhibitors and incubated for 1 hour. After centrifugation, the supernatant was adjusted to 150 mM NaCl, combined with the earlier supernatant and incubated with anti-HA agarose beads for 4 hours. Beads were washed 4 times with MCLB with 150 mM NaCl.

Samples were separated on 4-12% gradient SDS-PAGE. Protein gel slices were excised and subject to in-gel digestion. Briefly, gel slices were washed and dehydrated with acetonitrile and dried in a speed-vac. After reducing with DTT and alkylation with IAA, gel slices were washed, dried and rehydrated in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate with trypsin. Gel slices were digested overnight at 37oC. Digestion was collected and gel slices further extracted (1:2 v/v, 5% formic acid/acetonitrile). Supernatant from both extractions were combined, dried in a speed-vac and dissolved in 3% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid.

LC-MS/MS Analysis:

Thermo Scientific UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system, Thermo Scientific EASY Spray source with Thermo Scientific Acclaim PepMap100 2 cm x 75 µm trap column, and Thermo Scientific EASY-Spray PepMap RSLC C18 were used for peptide preparation.  50 cm x 75 µm ID column were used to separate desalted peptides with a 5-30% acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid over 50 min or 127 min at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. After each gradient, the column was washed with 90% buffer B (0.1% formic acid, 100% HPLC-grade acetonitrile) for 5 min and re-equilibrated with 98% buffer A (0.1% formic acid, 100% HPLC-grade water) for 40 min.

Thermo Fisher Q Exactive HF was used for peptide MS/MS analysis of BirA*-RPA1 and BirA*-alone. MS data were acquired with an automatic switch between a full scan and 15 data-dependent MS/MS scans (TopN method).  Target value for the full scan MS spectra was 3 x 10^6 ions in the 375-2000 m/z range with a maximum injection time of 100 ms and resolution of 60,000 at 200 m/z with data collected in profile mode. Precursors were selected using a 1.6 m/z isolation width and fragmented by higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) with normalized collision energy of 27 eV. MS/MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 15,000 at 200 m/z with an ion target value of 2x10^5, maximum injection time of 50 ms, dynamic exclusion for 15 s and data collected in centroid mode.

Thermo Fisher Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid was used for peptide MS/MS analysis of BirA*-MCM8IP, MCM8IP-BirA* and MCM8IP-HA and their controls. Survey scans of peptide precursors were performed from 400 to 1500 m/z at 120K FWHM resolution (at 200 m/z) with a 4x10^5 ion count target and a maximum injection time of 50 msec. The instrument was set to run in top speed mode with 3 sec cycles for the survey and the MS/MS scans. After a survey scan, tandem MS was performed on the most abundant precursors exhibiting a charge state from 2 to 6 of greater than 5x10^3 intensity by isolating them in the quadrupole at 1.6 Th. CID fragmentation was applied with 35% collision energy and resulting fragments were detected using the rapid scan rate in the ion trap. The AGC target for MS/MS was set to 1x10^4 and the maximum injection time limited to 35 msec. Dynamic exclusion was set to 45 sec with 10 ppm mass tolerance around the precursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was enabled.


### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometric data were analyzed using MaxQuant v.1.6.1.0 and Andromeda employed for database search at default settings with a few modifications. The default was used for first search tolerance and main search tolerance: 20 ppm and 6 ppm, respectively. MaxQuant was set up to search the reference human proteome database downloaded from UniProt. MaxQuant performed the search for trypsin digestion with up to 2 missed cleavages. Peptide, Site and Protein false discovery rates (FDR) were all set to 1% with a minimum of 2 peptides needed for identification but 2 peptides needed to calculate a protein level ratio. Carbamidomethyl modification of cysteine was used as a fixed modification while oxidation of methionine (M), deamination of asparagine or glutamine (NQ) and acetylation on N-termini of proteins were used as variable modifications. MaxQuant combined folders were uploaded into Scaffold 4 for data visualization. Spectral counting was used for analysis to compare samples.
J1 = BirA* alone, J2 = BirA*-RPA1, J32 = BirA* alone, J33 = BirA*-MCM8IP,
J34 = MCM8IP-BirA*, J35 = GFP-HA, J36 = MCM8IP-HA

### Publication Abstract
Homologous recombination (HR) mediates the error-free repair of DNA double-strand breaks to maintain genomic stability. Here we characterize C17orf53/MCM8IP, an OB-fold containing protein that binds ssDNA, as a DNA repair factor involved in HR. MCM8IP-deficient cells exhibit HR defects, especially in long-tract gene conversion, occurring downstream of RAD51 loading, consistent with a role for MCM8IP in HR-dependent DNA synthesis. Moreover, loss of MCM8IP confers cellular sensitivity to crosslinking agents and PARP inhibition. Importantly, we report that MCM8IP directly associates with MCM8-9, a helicase complex mutated in primary ovarian insufficiency, and RPA1. We additionally show that the interactions of MCM8IP with MCM8-9 and RPA facilitate HR and promote replication fork progression and cellular viability in response to treatment with crosslinking agents. Mechanistically, MCM8IP stimulates the helicase activity of MCM8-9. Collectively, our work identifies MCM8IP as a key regulator of MCM8-9-dependent DNA synthesis during DNA recombination and replication.

### Keywords
Mcm8ip, Rpa, C17orf53, Mcm8, Mcm9, Homologous recombination, Cisplatin

### Affiliations
Department of Genetics and Development Herbert Irving Comprehensive Cancer Center Columbia University Irving Medical Center New York, NY, USA
Columbia University Irving Medical Center

### Submitter
Alberto Ciccia

### Lab Head
Dr Alberto Ciccia
Department of Genetics and Development Herbert Irving Comprehensive Cancer Center Columbia University Irving Medical Center New York, NY, USA


