### Accession
PXD005629

### Title
A proteomic analysis of human olfactory bulb

### Description
Olfactory sensory neurons distinguish a large variety of odor molecules and direct the information through their axons to the olfactory bulb, the first site for the processing of olfactory information in the brain. Olfaction is very important for most mammals for the maintenance of a good quality of life. Accumulating evidences endorse that olfactory sensory decline is connected with neurodegenerative disorders including schizophrenia, depression, multiple sclerosis, Huntington's, Alzheimer's and Parkinson's diseases. For several decades, neuroanatomical, volumetric, and histological approaches have been the gold standard techniques employed to characterize the olfactory bulb functionality. Diagnosis and treatment of olfactory dysfunction remain significant health care challenges to society. Novel strategies and clues that assist in the identification of biomarker and drug development for aid in the prevention and cure of neurological diseases are necessary. However, little attention has been focused specifically on the molecular composition of the olfactory bulb from the perspective of proteomics. To this end, an in-depth mapping of the olfactory bulb proteome was carried out using high resolution tandem mass spectrometry, revealing a repertoire of 7,754 proteins. A large proportion of the identified proteins were predicted to be involved in diverse biological processes including signal transduction, metabolism, transport, olfaction and protein synthesis. Pathway analysis of the identified proteins shows that, these proteins are predominantly involved in metabolic and neural processes, chromatin modeling, and synaptic vesicle transport associated with neuronal transmission. In total, our study offers valuable understandings into the molecular composition of the human olfactory bulb proteome that could possibly help neuroscience community to understand the olfactory bulb better and open avenues for intervention strategies for olfactory dysfunction in the future.

### Sample Protocol
The olfactory bulb tissues were collected from autopsy cases with no history or histological findings of any neurological disease were collected form the Human Brain Bank of National Institute of Mental Health and Neurosciences (NIMHANS) Bangalore, India. The study is approved by institutional ethics committee. The tissues were lysed using buffer containing 4% SDS, 100mM DTT and 100 mMTris pH7.5. The tissue lysates were then homogenized and sonicated followed by heating for 10-15 min at 75oC. The lysates were cooled, centrifuged at 2,000 rpm for 10 minutes and the protein concentration of the cleared lysate was estimated using BCA assay. For further analysis, an equal amount of proteins from each of the donor was pooled.  Filter aided sample preparation (FASP) (Wisniewski et al., 2009) was carried out. Briefly, 450 µg proteins from the pooled samples were buffer exchanged with 8 M urea in a 30 kDa MWCO spin filters (EMD Millipore, Billerica, MA) to reduce the SDS concentration. This was followed by alkylation of cysteine residues with 10 mM iodo`acetamide. The proteins were digested using sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI. Cat#: V5111) overnight at 37ºC. The peptide digest desalted using Sep-Pak C18 columns (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA) and lyophilized. Prior to high pH reverse phase chromatography fractionation, the lyophilized samples were reconstituted in bRPLC solvent A (10mM TEABC, pH 8.5) and loaded on XBridge C18, 5 µm 250 x 4.6 mm column (Waters, Milford, MA) connected to Agilent 1100 series HPLC system. Using a gradient of 0 to 100% solvent B (10mM TEABC in Acetonitrile, pH 8.5), the peptide digest was resolved in 50 minutes. 96 fractions were collected which were pooled to 24 fractions, vacuum dried and stored at -80 until further LC-MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry derived data obtained from all LC-MS analysis were searched against Human RefSeq 75 database using Sequest and Mascot (version 2.2) search algorithms through Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The parameters used for data analysis included trypsin as protease with maximum two missed cleavage allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as fixed modification and acetylation of protein N-termini and oxidation of methionine were included as variable modifications. The minimum peptide length was specified to be 6 amino acids. The mass error of parent ions was set to 10 ppm, whereas for fragment ions it was set to 0.05 Da. The data were searched against decoy database and the false discovery rate was set to 1% at the peptide level.

### Publication Abstract
The importance of olfaction to human health and disease is often underappreciated. Olfactory dysfunction has been reported in association with a host of common complex diseases, including neurological diseases such as Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease. For health, olfaction or the sense of smell is also important for most mammals, for optimal engagement with their environment. Indeed, animals have developed sophisticated olfactory systems to detect and interpret the rich information presented to them to assist in day-to-day activities such as locating food sources, differentiating food from poisons, identifying mates, promoting reproduction, avoiding predators, and averting death. In this context, the olfactory bulb is a vital component of the olfactory system receiving sensory information from the axons of the olfactory receptor neurons located in the nasal cavity and the first place that processes the olfactory information. We report in this study original observations on the human olfactory bulb proteome in healthy subjects, using a high-resolution mass spectrometry-based proteomic approach. We identified 7750 nonredundant proteins from human olfactory bulbs. Bioinformatics analysis of these proteins showed their involvement in biological processes associated with signal transduction, metabolism, transport, and olfaction. These new observations provide a crucial baseline molecular profile of the human olfactory bulb proteome, and should assist the future discovery of biomarker proteins and novel diagnostics associated with diseases characterized by olfactory dysfunction.

### Keywords
Brplc, Neuroproteomics., Tissue, Ltq-orbitrap, Protein biomarkers

### Affiliations
Faculty Scientist,Institute of Bioinformatics, International Technology Park, Bangalore 560066, India
Institute of Bioinformatics, Bangalore, Karnataka, India.

### Submitter
Keshava Prasad T. S.

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. T. S. Keshava Prasad
Faculty Scientist,Institute of Bioinformatics, International Technology Park, Bangalore 560066, India


