### Accession
PXD005841

### Title
OsNOA1 functions in a threshold-dependent manner to regulate chloroplast proteins in rice at lower temperatures

### Description
While our earlier microarray analysis identified a number of possible candidate genes, which may be involved in OsNOA1 function (Yang et al., 2011a), a complementary study of the rice proteome profiles under the same condition has the potential to yield new insights into the biological functions of NOA1 and molecular mechanism of NOA1 associated regulation. In this study, we utilized previously-generated OsNOA1 RNAi lines (Yang et al., 2011a) and newly-generated OsNOA1 overexpression lines to further investigate the function and mechanism of NOA1 in rice. Here we report the proteome changes which include important candidate proteins involved in chloroplast ribosome biogenesis and several classes of proteins with significant changes in response to various levels of OsNOA1 under two different temperature conditions. Our results suggest that OsNOA1 can function in a threshold-dependent manner to regulate the biosynthesis of chloroplast proteins in rice at lower temperatures, and this regulation may be achieved via interactions between NOA1 and chloroplast ribosomes.

### Sample Protocol
Rice leaves from 30 seedlings were cut into pieces and thoroughly mixed. About 0.1 g of these pieces were collected for one sample replicate and stored at -80°C prior to further use. Rice leaf proteins from two biological replicate samples were then obtained by grinding tissues in liquid N2 followed by suspension in ice-cold sodium phosphate buffer (100 mM, pH 7.5) containing 1 mM EDTA, 100 µg/mL PMSF and 0.1% Triton X-100. The resulting homogenate was centrifuged at 12,000 × g for 15 min and supernatant was collected. The supernatant proteins were lyophilized and stored at -80°C until further analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw data acquired from the Orbitrap were converted into MGF files using Proteome Discoverer 1.2 (PD 1.2, Thermo). Subsequent database searches were carried out by Mascot Daemon (Version 2.3, Matrix Science, Boston, MA) for both protein identifications and TMT 6-plex quantitation against rice reference protein database downloaded from NCBI. The rice protein database consisting of 29,859 sequence entries and 10,725,680 amino acid residues, is a protein preferred database containing the combined proteins predicted by both longest six frame translations and expressed sequence tag (EST) scan. The default Mascot search settings used for 6-plex TMT quantitative processing and protein identification were as follows: one missed cleavage site by trypsin allowed with fixed carbamidomethyl modification of cysteine, fixed 6-plex TMT modifications on Lys and N-terminal amines and variable modifications of methionine oxidation, deamidation of Asn and Gln residues. The peptide and fragment mass tolerance values were 20 ppm and 0.1 Da, respectively. To estimate the false discovery rate (FDR) for a measure of identification certainty in each replicate set, we employed the target-decoy strategy of Elias and Gygi (Elias and Gygi, 2007). Specifically, an automatic decoy database search was performed in Mascot by choosing the decoy checkbox in which a random sequence of the database is generated and searched for raw spectra along with the real database. To reduce the probability of false peptide identification, only peptides with significance scores greater than “identity” at the 99% confidence interval by a Mascot probability analysis were counted as identified. It was required that each confident protein identification be based on at least two unique peptide identifications shown in Mascot. Proteins identified within the same family were grouped in the Mascot protein family summary. Furthermore, to be considered confidently quantified, we required that a protein produced at least two unique peptides that generate a complete TMT reporter ion series. The quantitative protein ratios were obtained by weighted quantitative peptides using 126-tag (for WT at 22°C) or 130-tag (for WT at 30°C) respectively as a denominator. The final ratios for each of the identified proteins were normalized using the median ratio with outlier removal setting automatic in Mascot for each set of experiments. The manufacturer's recommended isotope correction factors were applied.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Noa1, Threshold-dependent, Tmt, Chloroplast, Rice

### Affiliations
SCAU
State Key Laboratory for Conservation and Utilization of Subtropical Agro-bioresources, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou, China

### Submitter
Han He

### Lab Head
Dr Xin-Xiang Peng
State Key Laboratory for Conservation and Utilization of Subtropical Agro-bioresources, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou, China


