### Accession
PXD024607

### Title
Discovery of Thymosin beta-4 as a human exerkine and growth factor

### Description
Skeletal muscle has emerged as an endocrine organ secreting exercise-induced factors (exerkines), which play a pivotal role in inter-organ crosstalk. Via MS-based proteomics, we identified thymosin beta-4 (TMSB4X) to be the most upregulated secreted protein in the media of contracting C2C12 myotubes. TMSB4X was also acutely increased in the plasma of exercising humans and there was a net uptake of TMSB4X across the thigh during exercise. Chronic treatment of TMSB4X in mice did not ameliorate the metabolic disruptions associated with diet induced-obesity, nor did it enhance muscle regeneration in vivo. However, TMSB4X did increase osteoblast proliferation and neurite outgrowth, consistent with its WADA-classification as a prohibited growth factor.  Thus, we report TMSB4X as a novel human exerkine with a potential role in cellular crosstalk.

### Sample Protocol
Cell media Secretome: Urea powder (Sigma) was added to 900L of conditioned media to a final 2M concentration and pH adjusted by addition of 90L of 1M Tris-HCl pH8.5. Peptides were prepared by using filter-aided sample preparation and desalted on C18 StageTips. Eluted peptides were concentrated in a SpeedVac and resuspended in 6L of A*buffer (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid).  Cell proteome: Proteins were acetone precipitated from cell lysates (overnight) and protein pellets were washed with 80% acetone and suspended in 50L of Urea/Thiourea buffer (6M/2M). 20g of protein were diluted with four parts 25mM Tris pH8.5 and digested overnight in LysC and Trypsin at 37C. Samples were acidified to pH2 with 100% TFA, centrifuged (1000rpm, 5min) and the resulting peptides were desalted on C18 StageTips

### Data Protocol
LCMS/MS instrumentation consisted of an Easy nanoflow UHPLC coupled via a nanoelectrospray ion source to a QExactive mass spectrometer - HFX (ThermoScientific). Peptides were separated on a 50cm column with 75um inner diameter packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-aq 1.9um resin (Dr Maisch). Peptides were loaded in 0.5% formic acid buffer and eluted with a 2100-min linear gradient up to 80% acetonitrile and 0.5% formic acid (v/v) at 350nL/min. Mass spectra were acquired in a data-dependent manner (top 15 method, mass range: 300−1650 m/z, normalized collision energy: 27, MS and MS/MS maximum ion injection times: 25 and 110 ms, MS and MS/MS ion target values: 3e6 and 1e6). MaxQuant 1.5.8.6 and the Andromeda search engine were used to analyze the mass spectra using the label-free quantification algorithm (MS and MS/MS maximum mass deviation:  6ppm and 20ppm, maximum missed cleavages: 2, minimal peptide length: 6). The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% for peptide and protein identifications and “match between runs” was enabled with a retention time window of 30s. All statistical analyses of the MaxQuant output were performed in Perseus.Cellular proteome was also analyzed with similar method except the MS and MSMS injection times were 25ms.

### Publication Abstract
Skeletal muscle is an endocrine organ secreting exercise-induced factors (exerkines), which play a pivotal role in interorgan cross talk. Using mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics, we characterized the secretome and identified thymosin &#x3b2;4 (TMSB4X) as the most upregulated secreted protein in the media of contracting C2C12 myotubes. TMSB4X was also acutely increased in the plasma of exercising humans irrespective of the insulin resistance condition or exercise mode. Treatment of mice with TMSB4X did not ameliorate the metabolic disruptions associated with diet induced-obesity, nor did it enhance muscle regeneration in vivo. However, TMSB4X increased osteoblast proliferation and neurite outgrowth, consistent with its WADA classification as a prohibited growth factor. Therefore, we report TMSB4X as a human exerkine with a potential role in cellular cross talk.

### Keywords
Myokine, Exercise, Secreted factor, Contraction, Growth factor

### Affiliations
Novo Nordisk Center for Basic Metabolic Research, University of Copenhagen, Denmark.
Copenhagen University

### Submitter
atul shahaji deshmukh

### Lab Head
Dr Atul Shahaji Deshmukh
Novo Nordisk Center for Basic Metabolic Research, University of Copenhagen, Denmark.


