### Accession
PXD021190

### Title
Seven Novel Genes Related to Cell Proliferation and Migration of VHL-Mutated Pheochromocytoma

### Description
Pheochromocytoma has attracted much attention as a kind of neuroendocrine tumor with the highest genetic correlation in all types of tumors. Detailedly, the frequency of germline mutation in pheochromocytoma is as high as about 40%, and the mutation frequency of von Hippel Lindau (VHL) is the highest in all pheochromocytoma genes. However, the effects of VHL mutation on proteome of pheochromocytoma have remained unexplored. In this study, we compared and analyzed the proteomics of VHL-deficient and VHL WT PC12 cell line. It is showed that expressional level of 434 proteins (fold change > 1.3, VHL shRNA/WT) was significantly changed by VHL deficiency. Furthermore, the functions of these proteins were predicted by gene ontology (GO) and Kyoto Protocol Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG). Of the 434 proteins, 83 proteins, involved in cell proliferation, cell cycle, cell migration, and so on, were interpreted their complex regulatory relationships using String database. More importantly, we discovered 7 novel critical genes whose expression were up-regulated due to VHL deficiency, including Connective Tissue Growth Factor (CTGF), Syndecan Binding Protein (SDCBP), Cysteine Rich Protein 61 (CYR61/CCN1), Collagen Type III Alpha 1 Chain (COL3A1), Collagen Type I Alpha 1 Chain (COL1A1), Collagen Type V Alpha 2 Chain (COL5A2) and Serpin Family E Member 1 (SERPINE1), which may be related to cell proliferation and migration in VHL-mutated pheochromocytoma tumor samples. These results indicate that deficiency of VHL would promote the development of pheochromocytoma by activating expression of genes associated with cell proliferation and migration.

### Sample Protocol
PC12 cells were seeded in 6-well plates and cultured until the confluence of 50 % on the day before transfection. On the next day, the transfection experiments were performed when the cells were cultured to a suitable density. Then, the stable expression clones were screened using 1.5 µg/mL puromycin (Sigma, USA), and the knockdown efficiency was verified by RT-qPCR and Western blotting. The cell line with the best silencing effect was used for later protein analysis. The PC12 cell lines transfected with WT shRNA sequence were conducted as a control. The cell lines were homogenized three times in the ice cold lysis buffer (8M urea, 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail) using an Ultrasonic Cell Disruptor (Scientz). The remaining cellular debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4°C for 10 minutes. the cell supernatant was collected, and then the protein concentration was determined with the BCA kit according to the instructions (Beyotime Biotechnology, China). For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 ℃ and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein samples were diluted by adding 100 mM tetraethyl ammonium bromide (TEAB) to urea concentration less than 2 M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h digestion. After trypsin digestion, peptide was desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. Peptide was reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for TMT kit (Thermo Scientific, US). The tryptic peptides were fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Thermo Betasil C18 column (5 μm particles, 10 mm ID, 250 mm length). The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UHPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0 s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using the Maxquant search engine. UniPort-GOA database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/), InterProScan (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/), Gene Ontology (GO) annotations (http://geneonfelogy.org/), and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) annotation (http://www.genome.jp/kaas-bin/kaas_main and http://www.kegg.jp/kegg/mapper.html) were used to analyze differential proteins (P<0.05 and fold change> 1.30 or, <0.77). Species：Rattus norvegicus Tissue：PC12 Cellular total protein

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pheochromocytoma; proliferation; migration; proteomics; vhl

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Life Sciences, Central South University, Changsha
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Life Sciences, Central South University, No. 172, Tongzipo road, Yuelu District, Changsha 410013, Hunan Province, China

### Submitter
Feizhou Zhu

### Lab Head
Dr Feizhou Zhu
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Life Sciences, Central South University, No. 172, Tongzipo road, Yuelu District, Changsha 410013, Hunan Province, China


