### Accession
PXD037761

### Title
Circadian Proteomics Landscape of Mouse Livers Organized by Time-restricted Feeding: N-glycosylation

### Description
Meal timing is essential in synchronization of circadian rhythms in different organ systems through clock-dependent and -independent mechanisms. The liver is a critical metabolic organ whose circadian clock and transcriptome can be readily reset by meal timing. However, it remains largely unexplored how circadian rhythms in the liver are organized in time-restricted feeding that intervenes meal timing. Here, we applied affinity-purification based shotgun proteomics for N-glycosylation to characterize circadian features associated with day/sleep- (DRF) and night/wake (NRF)-time restricted feeding in nocturnal female mice. The transcriptomics and metabolomics datasets are public (see www.circametdb.org.cn).

### Sample Protocol
Mouse liver samples were pulverized in liquid nitrogen, and sonicated in the urea lysis buffer containing 100 mM NH4HCO3 (pH 8), 8 M Urea and 0.2% Sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) for 5 min on ice. The lysate was centrifuged at After centrifuging for 12,000 g for 15 min at 4℃, the supernatants were reduced by 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 56℃, and subsequently alkylated with sufficient iodoacetamide for 1 h at room temperature in the dark. Next, samples were completely mixed with 4X volume of precooled acetone by vortexing and incubated at -20℃ for at least 2 h. After centrifugation, the pellet was washed twice with cold acetone, and dissolved by dissolution buffer，which containing 0.1 M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, pH 8.5) and 6 M urea. Protein samples were subjected to 12% SDS-PAGE, all of which showed no visible sign of degradation. Peptide digestion: 500 μg proteins were aliquoted and diluted to 1 mg/mL for a volume of 500 μL, then 10 μL of 1 μg/μL trypsin and 2 mL of 50 mM TEAB buffer were added. Protein samples were digested at 37 °C overnight. Equal volume of 1% formic acid was mixed with digested samples and centrifuged at 12,000 g for 5 min at room temperature. The supernatant was slowly loaded to the C18 desalting column, washed with washing solution (0.1% formic acid, 4% acetonitrile) three times, then eluted twice by elution buffer (0.1% formic acid, 75% acetonitrile). The eluents of each sample were combined and lyophilized. N-glycopeptide enrichment using lectin: 100 μg of peptides, 90 μg of ConA and 90 μg of WGA were mixed together and dissolved by the binding buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl, 1 mM MnCl2, 1 mM CaCl2, 0.5 M NaCl, pH 7.6). After incubation for 1 h at room temperature, it was centrifuged at 12,000 g for 15 min, and washed twice with the binding buffer and then 40 mM NH4HCO3 in H218O. Appropriate amount of PNGase-F was added and incubated for 3 h at room temperature following by elution with 40 mM NH4HCO3. In preparation for analysis, the peptides were desalted using peptide desalting spin columns.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS Analysis: Prepare mobile phase A (100% water, 0.1% formic acid) and B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). The lyophilized powder was dissolved in 10 μL solution A and centrifuged at 14,000 g for 20 min at room temperature. 1 μg supernatant was used for detection. Shotgun proteomics analyses were performed using an EASY-nLCTM 1200 UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher) coupled with an Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) operating in the data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. 1 μg sample was injected into a home-made C18 Nano-Trap column (2 cm×75 μm, 3 μm). Peptides were separated in a home-made analytical column (15 cm×150 μm, 1.9 μm), using a linear gradient elution. The separated peptides were analyzed by Q Exactive HF-X, with ion source of Nanospray Flex™(ESI), spray voltage of 2.3 kV and ion transport capillary temperature of 320°C. Full scan ranges from m/z 350 to 1500 with resolution of 60,000 (at m/z 200), an automatic gain control (AGC) target value was 3×106 and a maximum ion injection time was 20 ms. The 40 most abundant precursor ions from full scan were selected and fragmented by higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) and analyzed in MS/MS, where resolution was 15000 (at m/z 200), the automatic gain control (AGC) target value was 5×104 and the maximum ion injection time was 80 ms, a normalized collision energy was set as 27%, an intensity threshold was 1.3×104, and the dynamic exclusion parameter was 30 s.  Protein identification and quantification:  The resulting spectra from each fraction were searched separately against the Unified Protein Database (Mus_musculus_uniprot_2019.01.18.fasta) by the search engines: Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (PD 2.2, Thermo). The searched parameters as follows: A mass tolerance of 10 ppm for precursor ion scans and a mass tolerance of 0.02 Da for the product ion scans were used. Carbamidomethyl was specified in PD 2.2 as fixed modifications. Oxidation of methionine (M), glycosylation of asparagine (N, deamidated/+2.988 Da (N)), and acetylation of the N-terminus were specified in PD 2.2 as variable modifications. A maximum of 2 mis-cleavage sites were allowed. Protein with at least 1 unique peptide was identified at FDR less than 1.0% on peptide and protein level, respectively. Proteins containing similar peptides and could not be distinguished based on MS/MS analysis were grouped separately as protein groups. Precursor quantification based on intensity was used for Label-free quantification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics; circadian rhythm; time-restricted feeding; inverted feeding; liver; glycosylation

### Affiliations
Southwest Hospital
Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Center for Circadian Metabolism and Cardiovascular Disease, Southwest Hospital, Army Medical University; Chongqing, China.

### Submitter
Min-Dian Li

### Lab Head
Dr Min-Dian Li
Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Center for Circadian Metabolism and Cardiovascular Disease, Southwest Hospital, Army Medical University; Chongqing, China.


