### Accession
PXD033965

### Title
Are Mouse Models a surrogate for human disease? A temporal, quantitative and molecular perspective.

### Description
It is unclear to what extent Tau molecular pathology in murine models reflect human Tauopathies. Nevertheless, mouse models that overexpress human mutant Tau (P301S and P301L) are widely used in studies of Tauopathies and Alzheimer’s Disease (AD). In this study, we perform an in-depth temporally and spatially resolved mass spectrometry-based proteomic analysis of P301S (hTau.P301S) and P301L (rTg(tauP301L)4510) mice as well as human patients with AD or frontotemporal dementia due to the P301L mutation, to identify differences and similarities between human AD, animal models and human P301L patients. Both mouse models and human P301L patients show progressive Tau accumulation driven by Tau phosphorylation during disease progression as also observed in early human AD. However, Tau ubiquitination and acetylation, important in human AD, are less or not represented in the mouse models or in P301L patients. Our analyses provide guidance regarding designing mechanistic studies and testing of Tau directed therapeutics.

### Sample Protocol
Sarkosyl fractionation was performed on frozen tissue samples. Heavy labelled 2N4R Tau standard was added to the insoluble  and soluble fractions and digestion was performed using Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP). Before LC-MRM analysis, part of the resuspended samples were spiked with isoform and mutation specific Tau peptides.   LC-SRM measurements of Tau L/H peptide ratios were performed as described previously (Mair et al., 2016). In total 18 Tau peptides were quantified, and the L/H ratios of the peak area were exported for every peptide.  Tau PTM profiling was performed on theremaining part of the sample buffer resuspended sample using an untargeted proteomics workflow.

### Data Protocol
SRM data were analyzed and validated in Skyline (version 2.6, MacCoss Lab Software, University of Washington, Seattle, WA). The absolute abundance of Tau was calculated using the FLEX peptide L/H ratio and the L/H ratio of the peptide with the highest ratio that is shared between the mouse and the transgene human Tau as described before (Singh et al., 2009). The modifications extent was calculated through normalization of the peptide L/H ratio to the shared or human-specific peptide with the highest L/H ratio, depending on the specificity of the peptide.  To identify PTMs of Tau, the MS raw data were processed with ProteinPilotTM Software 5.02 (Paragon  Algorithm 5.0.2.0.5174, Sciex), MaxQuant software version 1.6.5.0 (Cox and Mann, 2008), and Mascot using the Mascot Deamon version 2.6.0 (Matrix Science).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Quantitative and molecular perspective., Are mouse models a surrogate for human disease? a temporal

### Affiliations
Neurobiology, Boston Children`s Hospital
Boston childrens hospital

### Submitter
Kathrin Wenger

### Lab Head
Dr Judith Steen
Neurobiology, Boston Children`s Hospital


