### Accession
PXD040703

### Title
Proteomic analysis of circulating immune cells identifies novel cellular phenotypes associated with COVID-19 severity

### Description
Certain serum proteins, including CRP and D-dimer, have prognostic value in patients with SARS-CoV-2 infection. Nonetheless, these factors are non-specific, and provide limited mechanistic insight into the peripheral blood mononuclear cell (PBMC) populations which drive the pathogenesis of severe COVID-19. To identify novel cellular phenotypes associated with disease progression, we here describe a comprehensive, unbiased analysis of the total and plasma membrane proteomes of PBMCs from a cohort of 40 unvaccinated individuals with SARS-CoV-2 infection, spanning the whole spectrum of disease severity. Combined with RNA-seq and flow cytometry data from the same donors, we define a comprehensive multi-omic profile for each severity level, revealing cumulative immune cell dysregulation in progressive disease. In particular, the cell surface proteins CEACAMs1, 6 and 8, CD177, CD63 and CD89 are strongly associated with severe COVID-19, corresponding to the emergence of atypical CD3+CD4+CD177+ and CD16+CEACAM1/6/8+ mononuclear cells. Utilisation of these markers may facilitate real-time patient assessment by flow cytometry, and identify immune cell populations that could be targeted to ameliorate immunopathology.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma membrane (PM) and whole cell lysate (WCL) protein samples were prepared and digested into peptides as described previously (Weekes et al Cell. 2014 Jun 5;157(6):1460-1472. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2014.04.028). To label peptides with tandem mass tags (TMT), TMTpro reagents (0.8 mg, Thermo) were dissolved in 45 µl anhydrous acetonitrile. For PM samples, 35 µl of digested peptide was labelled with 10 µl of TMT reagent in a final volume of 50 µl with a final acetonitrile concentration of 30% (v/v). For WCL samples, desalted peptides were dissolved in 200 mM HEPES pH 8.5 and peptide concentration measured by microBCA (Thermo). 30 µg of peptide was labelled with 10 µl of TMT reagent at a final acetonitrile concentration of 30% (v/v). PM and WCL samples were then processed in parallel. Following incubation with TMT reagents at room temperature for 1 h, the reactions were quenched with hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 0.5% (v/v). Equivalent amounts of each sample were combined in batches. An unfractionated 1h analysis of each batch was carried out initially to ensure equivalent peptide loading across each TMT channel, thus avoiding the need for excessive electronic normalisation. Samples were then subjected to high pH reversed-phase (HpRP) fractionation. TMT-labelled tryptic peptides derived from WCL samples were fractionated using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC UHPLC system (Thermo) equipped with a 2.1 mm internal diameter (ID) x 25 cm long, 1.7 µm particle Kinetix Evo C18 column (Phenomenex). Mobile phase consisted of A: 3% acetonitrile (MeCN), B: MeCN, and C: 200 mM ammonium formate pH 10. Isocratic conditions were 90% A/10% C, and C was maintained at 10% throughout the gradient elution. Separations were conducted at 45 °C. Samples were loaded at 200 µl/minute for 5 min. The flow rate was then increased to 400 µl/minute over 5 minutes, after which the elution gradient proceeded as follows: 0-19% B over 10 minutes, 19-34% B over 14.25 minutes, 34-50% B over 8.75 minutes, followed by a 10 min wash at 90% B. UV absorbance was monitored at 280 nm and 15 s fractions were collected into 96 well microplates using the integrated fraction collector. For WCL samples, fractions were recombined orthogonally in a checkerboard fashion, combining alternate wells from each column of the plate into a single fraction, and commencing combination of adjacent fractions in alternating rows. This yielded two sets of 12 combined fractions, A and B. For PM samples, all wells in sets of two adjacent columns were recombined to yield six combined fractions. Wells were excluded prior to the start or after the cessation of elution of peptide-rich fractions, as identified from the UV trace. Samples were dried in a vacuum centrifuge and resuspended in 10 µl MS solvent (4% MeCN/5% formic acid) prior to LC-MS3.  For WCL samples, a series of 12 or 24 LC-MS3 analyses were next performed (either all of set A or all of sets A and B). For PM samples, either six fractions and an unfractionated singleshot sample were analysed (batch 1) or an unfractionated singleshot sample was analysed (batch 2). Mass spectrometry data were acquired using an Orbitrap Lumos (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). An Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano UHPLC equipped with a 300 µm ID x 5 mm Acclaim PepMap µ-Precolumn (Thermo) and a 75 µm ID x 50 cm 2.1 µm particle Acclaim PepMap RSLC analytical column was used. Loading solvent was 0.1% formic acid (FA), analytical solvent A: 0.1% FA and B: 80% MeCN + 0.1% FA. All separations were carried out at 55°C. Samples were loaded at 5 µl/min for 5 min in loading solvent before beginning the analytical gradient. The following gradient was used: 3-7% B over 3 min, 7-37% B over 173 min, followed by a 4 min wash at 95% B and equilibration at 3% B for 15 min. Each analysis used a MultiNotch MS3-based TMT method (4, 5). The following settings were used: MS1: 380-1500 Th, 120,000 Resolution, 2×105 automatic gain control (AGC) target, 50 ms maximum injection time. MS2: Quadrupole isolation at an isolation width of m/z 0.7, CID fragmentation (normalised collision energy (NCE) 35) with ion trap scanning in turbo mode from m/z 120, 1.5×104 AGC target, 120 ms maximum injection time. MS3: In Synchronous Precursor Selection mode the top 6 MS2 ions were selected for HCD fragmentation (NCE 65) and scanned in the Orbitrap at 60,000 resolution with an AGC target of 1×105 and a maximum accumulation time of 150 ms. Ions were not accumulated for all parallelisable time. The entire MS/MS/MS cycle had a target time of 3 s. Dynamic exclusion was set to ± 10 ppm for 70 s. MS2 fragmentation was trigged on precursors 5×103 counts and above.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed using a Sequest-based software pipeline for quantitative proteomics, ‘‘MassPike’’, through a collaborative arrangement with Professor Steven Gygi’s laboratory at Harvard Medical School. MS spectra were converted to mzXML using an extractor built upon Thermo Fisher’s RAW File Reader library (version 4.0.26). In this extractor, the standard mzxml format has been augmented with additional custom fields that are specific to ion trap and Orbitrap mass spectrometry and essential for TMT quantitation. These additional fields include ion injection times for each scan, Fourier Transform-derived baseline and noise values calculated for every Orbitrap scan, isolation widths for each scan type, scan event numbers and elapsed scan times. This software is a component of the MassPike software platform and is licensed by Harvard Medical School.  A combined database was constructed from the human Uniprot database (11/11/2020), the SARS-CoV-2 Uniprot reference proteome and common contaminants such as porcine trypsin and endoproteinase LysC. The combined database was concatenated with a reverse database composed of all protein sequences in reversed order. Searches were performed using a 20 ppm precursor ion tolerance. Fragment ion tolerance was set to 1.0 Th. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (57.02146 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (15.99492 Da) was set as a variable modification.  To control the fraction of erroneous protein identifications, a target-decoy strategy was employed 86. Peptide spectral matches (PSMs) were filtered to an initial peptide-level false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% with subsequent filtering to attain a final protein-level FDR of 1%. PSM filtering was performed using a linear discriminant analysis, as described previously 86. This distinguishes correct from incorrect peptide IDs in a manner analogous to the widely used Percolator algorithm (https://noble.gs.washington.edu/proj/percolator/), though employing a distinct machine-learning algorithm. The following parameters were considered: XCorr, DCn, missed cleavages, peptide length, charge state, and precursor mass accuracy. Protein assembly was guided by principles of parsimony to produce the smallest set of proteins necessary to account for all observed peptides (algorithm described in 86).  Proteins were quantified by summing TMT reporter ion counts across all matching peptide-spectral matches using ’’MassPike’’, as described previously87. Briefly, a 0.003 Th window around the theoretical m/z of each reporter ion was scanned for ions and the maximum intensity nearest to the theoretical m/z was used. The primary determinant of quantitation quality is the number of TMT reporter ions detected in each MS3 spectrum, which is directly proportional to the signal-to-noise (S:N) ratio observed for each ion. Conservatively, every individual peptide used for quantitation was required to contribute sufficient TMT reporter ions so that each on its own could be expected to provide a representative picture of relative protein abundance 87. A per-sample S:N ratio of >15 was required such that, for example, for a 16-plex experiment a combined S:N ratio of >240 across all TMT reporter ions would be needed for a peptide to pass filtering. An isolation specificity filter with a cut-off of 50% was additionally employed to minimise peptide co-isolation 87. Peptides meeting the stated criteria for reliable quantitation were then summed by parent protein, in effect weighting the contributions of individual peptides to the total protein signal based on their individual TMT reporter ion yields. Protein quantitation values were exported for further analysis in Excel.  For protein quantitation, reverse and contaminant proteins were removed, then each reporter ion channel was summed across all quantified proteins and normalised assuming equal protein loading across all channels. Missing values in the mass spectrometry data were imputed for a small number of donor-protein datapoints (11 datapoints in total for all WCL analyses, two datapoints in total for both PM analyses) by setting missing values to the minimum intensity observed for the protein within each multiplexed experiment. Data for all HLA isoforms were removed, due to variation in HLA allele expression between donors. Proteins originating from red blood cell (RBC) contaminants were removed if they met two criteria: (1) they were identified as one of the top 15% most abundant RBC proteins from Ravenhill et al88 and (2) they had a coefficient of variation greater than 0.75 in any given disease severity class when comparing protein abundance fold-change versus healthy control across donors.  Hierarchical centroid clustering of proteomic data was carried out in Cluster 3.0 (Stanford University) using an uncentred Pearson correlation similarity metric.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Phenotype, Biomarker, Covid-19, Plasma membrane, Pbmc, Cell surface

### Affiliations
Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University of Cambridge
University of Cambridge

### Submitter
Michael Weekes

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Weekes
Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University of Cambridge


