### Accession
PXD003266

### Title
mouse liver SWATH-MS -  Systems proteomics of liver mitochondria function

### Description
Here, we have profiled 386 individuals in 80 cohorts of the BXD mouse genetic reference population across two environmental states through a metabolic phenotyping program including glucose response, exercise capacity, and cold response. To understand how the observed phenotypic differences are related to genetic variance, we generated a multilayered set of molecular phenotypes—genomics, transcriptomics, proteomics, and metabolomics across all cohorts, then modeled these molecular patterns with the phenotypic variance.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples for SWATH-MS were denatured, reduced by Dithiothreitol and alkylated using Iodoacetamide, and then digested with trypsin to generate peptides mixture. Peptide mixture were further cleaned-up by C-18 column in prior to mass spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
Peptide spectral library were generated using results from shotgun MS. SWATH data extraction were done using OpenSWATH. mscore 0.01 and 0.05 were set for the first and second step respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Recent improvements in quantitative proteomics approaches, including Sequential Window Acquisition of all Theoretical Mass Spectra (SWATH-MS), permit reproducible large-scale protein measurements across diverse cohorts. Together with genomics, transcriptomics, and other technologies, transomic data sets can be generated that permit detailed analyses across broad molecular interaction networks. Here, we examine mitochondrial links to liver metabolism through the genome, transcriptome, proteome, and metabolome of 386 individuals in the BXD mouse reference population. Several links were validated between genetic variants toward transcripts, proteins, metabolites, and phenotypes. Among these, sequence variants in Cox7a2l alter its protein's activity, which in turn leads to downstream differences in mitochondrial supercomplex formation. This data set demonstrates that the proteome can now be quantified comprehensively, serving as a key complement to transcriptomics, genomics, and metabolomics--a combination moving us forward in complex trait analysis.

### Keywords
Mouse liver, Swath-ms

### Affiliations
IMSB, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
Biology

### Submitter
Yibo Wu

### Lab Head
Dr Ruedi Aebersold
IMSB, ETH Zurich, Switzerland


