### Accession
PXD027902

### Title
Proteomics-Based Retinal Target Engagement Analysis and Retina-Targeted Delivery of 17β-Estradiol by the DHED Prodrug in Males. Katalin Prokai-Tatrai,* Khadiza Zaman, Vien Nguyen, Daniel L. De La Cruz and Laszlo Prokai

### Description
We examined the impact of 17β-estradiol (E2) eye drops on the modulation of the proteome pro-file in the male rat retina. With discovery-driven proteomics, we have identified proteins that were regulated by the treatment. These proteins were assembled to several bioinformatics-based networks implicating E2’s beneficial effects on the male rat retina in a broad context of ocular neuroprotection including the maintenance of retinal homeostasis, facilitation of efficient dis-posal of damaged proteins, and mitochondrial respiratory chain biogenesis. We have also shown for the first time that the hormone’s beneficial effects on the male retina can be con-strained to this target site by treatment with the bioprecursor prodrug DHED. A large concen-tration of E2 was produced after DHED eye drops not only in male rat retinae but also in those of rabbits. However, DHED treatment did not increase circulating E2 levels thereby ensuring therapeutic safety in males. Targeted proteomics focusing on selected biomarkers of E2’s target engagement further confirmed the prodrug’s metabolism to E2 in the male retina and indicated that the retinal impact of DHED treatment was identical to that of the direct E2 treatment. Alto-gether, our study shows the potential of topical DHED therapy for an efficacious and safe protec-tion of the male retina without unwanted hormonal side-effects associated with current estrogen therapies.

### Sample Protocol
Sample Preparation To dissolve proteins of the retinae, each isolated retina was incubated in 200 µL of 8 M aqueous urea solution for 60 min, and subsequently centrifuged for 5 minutes at 1400g, as reported before [13,34]. After collecting the supernatant, protein contents were estimated using a Microplate reader (BioTek Synergy H1 with Take3 plates, Agilent, Palo Alto, CA, USA), and the samples were aliquoted to contain 100 µg protein each. The volume of the aliquoted samples was adjusted to 100 µL with 25 mm NH4HCO3 solution followed by reduction with dithiothreitol (1 mM at 65 °C for 30 min), carbamidomethylation (5 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature and in the dark for 30 min). After 9-fold dilution of the reduced and alkylated sample with aqueous 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution, sequencing-grade trypsin (2 µg) was added to digest the proteins overnight at 37 °C, after which the digestion was quenched with 5 µL of formic acid. The samples were desalted by solid-phase extraction using 1-mL Sep-Pak C-18 cartridges (Waters USA, Milford, MA), and then the extracts were dried under vacuum (Vacufuge, Eppendorf AG, Hamburg, Germany) into a 1.5-mL centrifuge tubes. The dried residues were dissolved in an aqueous medium containing 5% (v/v) and 0.1% (v/v) formic acid to produce 1 µg/µL protein content.   LC–MS/MS Analyses Data-dependent LC–ESI-MS/MS (ESI denotes electrospray ionization) acquisitions were used, as described previously [13,34]. Briefly, the system consisted of a Thermo Scientific (San Jose, CA, USA) LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer connected to EASY nLC-1000 nanoflow LC, and attached to an Easy nanospray system. Separations were done using 15 cm x 75 μm i.d. PepmapTM RSLC C18 column packed with 3-µm C18 particles (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA). Gradient elution was performed using water that contained 0.1% (v/v) formic acid as solvent A and acetonitrile containing 0.1% (v/v) formic acid as solvent B after the injection of 5 µL sample solution and 20 min column equilibration at 5% B while maintaining a constant column pressure at 600 bar. The peptides were eluted at 300 nL/min flow rate using the following gradient program: (i) isocratic at 5% B for 5 min; (ii) linear gradient to 40% B over 90 min and then (iii) 5 min of isocratic at 40% B; (iv) scaled up to 90% B for 5 min; (v) isocratic flow at 90% B for 5 min; and (vi) returning back to 5% B in 20 min. The ion source of the mass spectrometer was operated in positive-ion nanoESI mode with source voltage of 2.0 kV and ion-transfer tube temperature of 275 °C. Full-scan mass spectra were acquired at nominal mass resolution of 60,000 (at m/z 400) in the Orbitrap, and up to 20 data-dependent tandem mass spectra (MS/MS) were obtained in the LTQ Velos ion trap. Each full MS/MS scan was acquired using collision-induced dissociation (CID, at 35% normalized collision energy) of multiply charged ions (z  2). After a precursor ion was selected for fragmentation, it was dynamically excluded from MS/MS analyses for 60 sec.

### Data Protocol
Processing of Raw Data and Label-free Quantification MS/MS spectra were searched against the UniProt protein sequence database (species: Rattus norvegicus, 2019; 29938 entries) using the Mascot search algorithm (version 2.6.2; Matrix Science, Boston, MA, USA) run within the Proteome Discoverer software (version 2.3; Thermo Fisher Scientific) as described previously. Briefly, parent ion tolerance and fragment ion mass tolerance were set to 25 ppm and 0.80 Da, respectively, and one missed cleavage were set as search filters. Fixed and variable modifications included carbamidomethylation of cysteine and oxidation of methionine, respectively. Search results were validated to meet strong criteria of protein identifications using the Peptide Prophet [35] and Protein Prophet [36] algorithms requiring >95% and >99% probabilities, respectively, and at least two identified unique peptides for each protein using the Scaffold software (version 4.9.0, Proteome Software Inc.; Portland, OR, USA). Label-free quantification (LFQ) relied on spectral counting (SC)  built into the Scaffold software, and p < 0.05 was considered significantly different using unpaired t-tests for statistical comparison of protein expression levels between sample categories. Missing values, if any, were handled using Scaffold’s default method and settings.                                                       Bioinformatics The identified E2-regulated proteins were submitted to Ingenuity Pathway Analysis® (IPA®, QIAGEN, Redwood City, CA, USA) for annotations and building protein interaction networks, as along with the identification of associated biological functions and processes. Overlaps of p-values relied on IPA®’s calculations using the right-tailed Fisher’s exact test

### Publication Abstract
We examined the impact of 17&#x3b2;-estradiol (E2) eye drops on the modulation of the proteome profile in the male rat retina. With discovery-driven proteomics, we have identified proteins that were regulated by our treatment. These proteins were assembled to several bioinformatics-based networks implicating E2's beneficial effects on the male rat retina in a broad context of ocular neuroprotection including the maintenance of retinal homeostasis, facilitation of efficient disposal of damaged proteins, and mitochondrial respiratory chain biogenesis. We have also shown for the first time that the hormone's beneficial effects on the male retina can be constrained to this target site by treatment with the bioprecursor prodrug, DHED. A large concentration of E2 was produced after DHED eye drops not only in male rat retinae but also in those of rabbits. However, DHED treatment did not increase circulating E2 levels, thereby ensuring therapeutic safety in males. Targeted proteomics focusing on selected biomarkers of E2's target engagement further confirmed the prodrug's metabolism to E2 in the male retina and indicated that the retinal impact of DHED treatment was identical to that of the direct E2 treatment. Altogether, our study shows the potential of topical DHED therapy for an efficacious and safe protection of the male retina without the unwanted hormonal side-effects associated with current estrogen therapies.

### Keywords
Dhed prodrug, Prote-omics, Isotope-dilution, Targeted proteomics, Neuroprotection; lc-ms/ms, 17β-estradiol; e2; eye drops; male retina; parallel-reaction monitoring

### Affiliations
Professor and Robert A. Welch Chair in Biochemistry Department of Pharmacology and Neuroscience University of North Texas Health Science Center, FortWorth
Department of Pharmacology & Neuroscience UNT Health Science Center Fort Worth, TX, USA

### Submitter
Laszlo Prokai

### Lab Head
Dr Laszlo Prokai, Ph.D
Professor and Robert A. Welch Chair in Biochemistry Department of Pharmacology and Neuroscience University of North Texas Health Science Center, FortWorth


