### Accession
PXD027612

### Title
The SR protein kinase Sky2 is involved in regulation of dipeptide transport in Candida albicans

### Description
Metabolic adaption to different host niches is one of the most important virulence traits of human fungal pathogens. The metabolic versatility of fungi and other cellular processes such as proliferation, morphogenesis and stress responses are tightly regulated by complex networks in which protein kinases play a crucial role. Serine-arginine (SR) protein kinases are highly conserved in all eukaryotes, but their function in pathogenic Candida spp. has not yet been investigated. C. albicans genome encodes two (Sky1, Sky2) and Candida glabrata one (Sky1) homolog of the human SR protein kinase 1 (SRPK1). We utilized deletion strains of the respective genes in both fungi in order to examine their cellular functions. C. glabrata and C. albicans strains lacking SKY1 exhibited higher resistance to osmotic stress and toxic polyamine concentrations to their ortholog in the model yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae Sky1. Deletion of SKY2 in C. albicans resulted in impaired utilization of dipeptides as the sole nitrogen source. Subsequent phosphoproteomic analysis identified Ptr22, a transporter of di- and tri-peptides in C. albicans, as a potential Sky2 substrate. Overexpression of PTR22 in the sky2∆ restored the ability to grow on dipeptides as the sole nitrogen source and rendered the cells more susceptible to the dipeptide antibiotics Polyoxin D and Nikkomycin Z. Altogether, our results demonstrate that the two SR-like protein kinases in C. albicans have divergent functions: C. albicans and C. glabrata Sky1 is functionally similar to Sky1 in S. cerevisiae, whereas Sky2 regulates uptake of dipeptides.

### Sample Protocol
YPD overnight cultures of the wild type and mutant strains were adjusted to an optical density (OD600) of 0.1 in 900 ml YPD medium and grown for 4h at 37°C. Cells were disrupted by mortar and pestle with liquid nitrogen. Cell debris were homogenized in lysis buffer (1% (w/v) SDS, 150 mM NaCl, 100 mM TEAB (triethyl ammonium bicarbonate), one tablet each of cOmplete Ultra Protease Inhibitor Cocktail and PhosSTOP). After addition of 125 U Benzonase the samples were incubated at 37°C in a water bath sonicator for 30 min. Proteins were separated from unsolubilized debris by centrifugation (15 min, 18000 x g). Each 6 mg of total protein per sample was diluted with 100 mM TEAB to gain a final volume of 4 ml. Subsequently, cysteine thiols were reduced and carbamidomethylated in one step for 30 min at 70°C by addition of 120 µL of 500 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine and 120 µl of 625 mM 2-chloroacetamide. The samples were cleaned up by MeOH-chloroform-H2O precipitation (Wessel and Flügge 1984; PMID 6731838). Protein precipitates were resolubilized in 5% trifluoroethanol of aqueous 100 mM TEAB and digested for 18 h with a Trypsin+LysC mixture (Promega) at a protein to protease ratio of 33:1. Each sample was divided in 6 x 1 mg used for the phosphopeptide enrichment and 200 µg initial protein used for the reference proteome analyis. Samples were evaporated in a SpeedVac. The reference proteome sample was resolubilized in 50 µL of 0.05% TFA in H2O/ACN 98/2 (v/v) filtered through Ultrafree-MC 0.2 µm PTFE membrane spin filters (Merck-Millipore). The filtrate was transferred to HPLC vials and injected into the LC-MS/MS instrument. Phosphopeptides were enriched by using TiO2+ZrO2 TopTips (Glygen) loaded with 1 mg protein isolate using 6 TopTips per biological replicate after equilibration with 200 µl Load and Wash Solution 1, LWS1 (1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), 20% lactic acid, 25% acetonitrile (ACN), 54% H2O). TopTips were centrifuged at 1500 rpm (~200 x g) for 5 min at room temperature. After washing with 200 µl LWS1, the TiO2/ZrO2 resin was washed with 25% ACN and subsequently the phosphopeptides were eluted with 200 µl NH3 · H2O (NH4OH), pH 12. The alkaline solution was immediately evaporated using a SpeedVac. Samples were resolubilized in 50 µL of 0.05% TFA in H2O/ACN 98/2 (v/v) filtered through Ultrafree-MC 0.2 µm PTFE membrane spin filters (Merck-Millipore). The filtrate was also transferred to HPLC vials and injected into the LC-MS/MS instrument. Each sample was measured in triplicate (3 analytical replicates of 3 biological replicates of a reference proteome fraction and a phosphoproteome fraction. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on an Ultimate 3000 nano RSLC system connected to a QExactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide trapping for 5 min on an Acclaim Pep Map 100 column (2 cm x 75 µm, 3 µm) at 5 µL/min was followed by separation on an analytical Acclaim Pep Map RSLC nano column (50 cm x 75 µm, 2µm). Mobile phase gradient elution of eluent A (0.1% formic acid in water) mixed with eluent B (0.1% formic acid in 90/10 ACN/H2O) was performed using the following gradient for the more hydrophilic phosphoproteome samples: 0-5 min at 4% B, 15 min at 7% B, 50 min at 10% B, 100 min at 14% B, 150 min at 25% B, 190 min at 60% B, 205-215 min at 96% B, 215.1-240 min at 4% B. The reference proteome gradient was as follows: 0-4 min at 4% B, 10 min at 7% B, 50 min at 12% B, 100 min at 16% B, 150 min at 25% B, 175 min at 35% B, 200 min at 60 %B, 210-215 min at 96% B, 215.1-240 min at 4% B. Positively charged ions were generated at spray voltage of 2.2 kV using a stainless steel emitter attached to the Nanospray Flex Ion Source. The instrument was operated in Full MS / data-dependent MS2 Top15 mode. Precursor ions were monitored at m/z 300-1500 at a resolution of 120,000 FWHM using a maximum injection time of 120 ms and an AGC (automatic gain control) target of 3e6. Precursor ions with a charge state of z=2-5 were filtered at an isolation width of m/z 1.6 amu for further HCD fragmentation at 30% normalized collision energy (NCE). MS2 ions were scanned at 15,000 FWHM (ITmax=100 ms, AGC= 2e5) using a fixed first mass of m/z 120 amu. Dynamic exclusion of precursor ions was set to 30 s. The LC-MS/MS instrument was controlled by Chromeleon 7.2, QExactive HF Tune 2.8 and Xcalibur 4.0 software.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were searched against the UniProt database (2021/07/19 (YYYY/MM/DD); https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000000559) of Candida albicans SC5314 using Proteome Discoverer (PD) 2.4 (Thermo) and the algorithms of Mascot 2.4.1 (Matrix Science, UK), Sequest HT (version of PD2.4), MS Amanda 2.0, and MS Fragger 3.2. Two missed cleavages were allowed for the tryptic digestion. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. Modifications were defined as dynamic Met oxidation, phosphorylation of Ser, Thr, and Tyr, protein N-term acetylation as well as static Cys carbamidomethylation. A strict false discovery rate (FDR) < 1% (peptide and protein level) and a search engine score of >30 (Mascot), > 4 (Sequest HT), >300 (MS Amanda) or >8 (MS Fragger) were required for positive protein hits . The Percolator node of PD2.4 and a reverse decoy database was used for qvalue validation of spectral matches. Only rank 1 proteins and peptides of the top scored proteins were counted. Label-free protein quantification was based on the Minora algorithm of PD2.4 using the precursor abundance based on intensity and a signal-to-noise ratio >5. Normalization was performed by using the total peptide amount method. Imputation of missing quan values was applied by using abundance values of 75% of the lowest abundance identified per sample. For the reference proteome analysis used for master protein abundance correction of the phosphoproteome data, phosphopeptides were excluded from quantification. Differential protein abundance was defined as a fold change of >4, ratio-adjusted pvalue <0.05 (pvalue/log4ratio) and at least identified in 3 of 3 replicates. Differential phosphopeptide abundance was defined as a fold change of >4, ratio-adjusted pvalue <0.05 (pvalue/log4ratio) and at least identified in 2 of 3 replicates.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Candida albicans, Phosphoproteomics, Protein kinase, Sky2, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Stress- and Immunoproteomics group Department of Molecular and Applied Microbiology  Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute Jena
Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute

### Submitter
Thomas Krüger

### Lab Head
Dr Axel A. Brakhage
Stress- and Immunoproteomics group Department of Molecular and Applied Microbiology  Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute Jena


