### Accession
PXD022119

### Title
NALCN crosslinking experiments by BS3 crosslinker

### Description
We used BS3 as the crosslinker to identify the crosslinking sites between NALCN and other interacted proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Crosslinking experiments were carried out by incubating NALCN, other protential proteins and BS3, after trypsin digestion, the peptides were injected into LC-MS/MS for data acqusition.

### Data Protocol
The raw data from Fusion Lumos were converted to mgf files, which were further analyzed by plink software.

### Publication Abstract
NALCN, a sodium leak channel expressed mainly in the central nervous system, is responsible for the resting Na<sup>+</sup> permeability that controls neuronal excitability. Dysfunctions of the NALCN channelosome, NALCN with several auxiliary subunits, are associated with a variety of human diseases. Here, we report the cryo-EM structure of human NALCN in complex with FAM155A at an overall resolution of 3.1 angstroms. FAM155A forms extensive interactions with the extracellular loops of NALCN that may help stabilize NALCN in the membrane. A Na<sup>+</sup> ion-binding site, reminiscent of a Ca<sup>2+</sup> binding site in Ca<sub>v</sub> channels, is identified in the unique EEKE selectivity filter. Despite its 'leaky' nature, the channel is closed and the intracellular gate is sealed by S6<sub>I</sub>, II-III linker and III-IV linker. Our study establishes the molecular basis of Na<sup>+</sup> permeation and voltage sensitivity, and provides important clues to the mechanistic understanding of NALCN regulation and NALCN channelosome-related diseases.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Crosslinking, Nalcn

### Affiliations
Mass Spectrometry & Metabolomics Facility at Westlake University

### Submitter
Shan Feng

### Lab Head
Dr Shan Feng
Mass Spectrometry & Metabolomics Facility at Westlake University


