### Accession
PXD004098

### Title
Differential proteomics of human seminal fluid Normo Vs Astehnozoospermia

### Description
Scarcely understood defects lead to asthenozoospermia which results in poor fertility outcomes. Incomplete knowledge of these defects hinders the development of new therapies and reliance on interventional therapies, such as in vitro fertilization, increases. Sperm cells, being transcriptionally and translationally silent, necessitate the proteomic approach to study the sperm funnction. We have performed a differential proteomics analysis of human sperm and seminal fluid and identified over 1,700 proteins. We have included 667 proteins in sperm and 430 proteins in seminal plasma dataset for further analysis. Statistical and mathematical analysis combined with pathway analysis and self organizing maps clustering and correlation was performed on the dataset. It was found that sperm proteomic signature combined with statistical analysis as opposed to the seminal plasma proteomic signature can differentiate the normozoospermic versus the asthenozoospermic sperm samples.

### Sample Protocol
The seminal fluid was separated into sperm and seminal plasma by centrifugation. Spermatozoa were broken up by sonication (5 cycles of 3s each at 50% output). Rapigest SF was used to dissolve the sperm (0.5% SF) and seminal plasma (0.1% SF) proteins. After aliquoting equal amount of proteins (based on BCA assay) samples were reduced and alkylated by dithiothreitol (1 hour at 65 ºC) and iodoacetamide (1 hour at 25ºC) respectively. Trypsin was added to 1:50 (trypsin to protein) ratio and incubated over night at 37ºC. Samples were cleaned by C18 cleaning cartridges and reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid. Hi3 peptide mixture (Waters, Manchester, UK) was added (50fmol per 4µL injection) for normalization purposes post analysis by mass spectrometry.  Four µL sample, equivalent to 1.4µg total protein, was injected to nano Acquity UPLC (Ultra Performance Liquid Chromatography) - system (Waters Corporation, MA, USA). TRIZAIC nanoTile 85µm x 100 mm HSS-T3u wTRAP was used as separating device prior to mass spectrometer. The gradient was 90 minutes long from 1 to 85% B buffer. The data was acquired in DIA (data independent acquisition) fashion using HDMSE-mode.

### Data Protocol
The samples were run as triplicates and further analysis was done with, Progenesis QI for Proteomics – software (Nonlinear Dynamics, Newcastle, UK). The raw files were imported to Progenesis QI for proteomics software (Nonlinear Dynamics, Newcastle, UK) using lock mass correction with 785.8426 m/z, corresponding to doubly charged Glu1-Fibrinopeptide B. Default parameters for peak picking and alignment algorithm were used. The software facilitated the peptide identification with Protein Lynx Global Server and label-free quantification. The peptide identification was done against Uniprot human FASTA sequences (UniprotKB Release 2015_09, 20205 sequence entries) with (CLPB_ECOLI (P63285)), ClpB protein sequence inserted for label-free quantification. Modifications used were as follows: fixed at cysteine (carbamidomethyl) and variable in methionine (oxidation). Trypsin was used as digesting agent and one missed cleavage was allowed. Fragment and peptide error tolerances were set to auto and FDR less to 4%. One or more ion fragments per peptide, three or more fragments per protein and one or more peptides per protein were required for ion matching. These are default parameters in the software. The identified proteins are grouped as one according to parsimony principle and also peptides unique to the protein are reported. Hi3 peptides are used for normalizing the peptide abundancies and relative quantitation was based on all the non-conflicting peptides found. The peptide ranking is done across all the runs.  The abundancies of the peptides are averaged to provide a signal to the protein.

### Publication Abstract
Scarcely understood defects lead to asthenozoospermia, which results in poor fertility outcomes. Incomplete knowledge of these defects hinders the development of new therapies and reliance on interventional therapies, such as in vitro fertilization, increases. Sperm cells, being transcriptionally and translationally silent, necessitate the proteomic approach to study the sperm function. We have performed a differential proteomics analysis of human sperm and seminal plasma and identified and quantified 667 proteins in sperm and 429 proteins in seminal plasma data set, which were used for further analysis. Statistical and mathematical analysis combined with pathway analysis and self-organizing maps clustering and correlation was performed on the data set.It was found that sperm proteomic signature combined with statistical analysis as opposed to the seminal plasma proteomic signature can differentiate the normozoospermic versus the asthenozoospermic sperm samples. This is despite the results that some of the seminal plasma proteins have big fold changes among classes but they fall short of statistical significance. S-Plot of the sperm proteomic data set generated some high confidence targets, which might be implicated in sperm motility pathways. These proteins also had the area under the curve value of 0.9 or 1 in ROC curve analysis.Various pathways were either enriched in these proteomic data sets by pathway analysis or they were searched by their constituent proteins. Some of these pathways were axoneme activation and focal adhesion assembly, glycolysis, gluconeogenesis, cellular response to stress and nucleosome assembly among others. The mass spectrometric data is available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD004098.

### Keywords
Human, Spermatozoa, Seminal plasma, Asthenozoospermia

### Affiliations
Helsinki University
Transplantation laboratory and HUSLAB, Haartman Insititute, Univeristy of Helsinki, Finland

### Submitter
Sakari Joenväärä

### Lab Head
Dr Risto Renkonen
Transplantation laboratory and HUSLAB, Haartman Insititute, Univeristy of Helsinki, Finland


