### Accession
PXD025872

### Title
tMS2/PRM on fibrotic valve tissue

### Description
tMS2 scan on ENO2, TUJ1 and GFAP from a donor valve

### Sample Protocol
AV leaflets were collected from AV replacement surgeries for severe AV stenosis.Protein extraction and proteolysis were performed with the methanol-chloroform method and trypsin (Gold Grade; Promega, Wisconsin)/ RapiGest procedure (Waters, USA) respectively, as previously published.18 15 μg of protein were used per sample. The tryptic peptides were desalted using Oasis Hlb 1cc (10 mg) columns (Waters, USA), and dried with a tabletop speed vacuum (SPD1010, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). After re-suspension in 40 μl of 5% mass spectrometry grade acetonitrile (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) and 5% formic acid (Sigma-Aldrich, USA) the tryptic peptide samples were analyzed by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Data-dependent acquisition (DDA, unbiased peptide sequencing) - the peptides were analyzed using the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) fronted with an Easy-Spray ion source, coupled to an Easy-nLC1000 HPLC pump (Thermo Scientific). The peptides were separated using a dual column set-up: an Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 trap column, 75 µm X 20 mm; and an EASY-Spray LC heated (45 oC) column, 75 µm X 250 mm (Thermo Scientific). The gradient flow rate was 300 nL/min from 5 to 21% solvent B (acetonitrile/0.1 % formic acid) for 75 minutes, 21 to 30% Solvent B for 15 minutes, followed by five minutes of 95 % solvent B. Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid. The instrument was set to 120 K resolution, and the top N precursor ions in 3 seconds cycle time (within a scan range of 375-1500 m/z) were subjected to collision induced dissociation (CID, collision energy 30%) for peptide sequencing (or MS/MS).  The MS/MS data were queried against the human UniProt database (downloaded on August 1, 2014) using the SEQUEST search algorithm, via the Proteome Discoverer (PD) Package (version 2.1, Thermo Scientific), using a 10 ppm tolerance window in the MS1 search space, and a 0.6 Da fragment tolerance window for CID. Methionine oxidation was set as a variable modification, and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed modification. The peptide false discovery rate (FDR) was calculated using Percolator provided by PD: the FDR was determined based on the number of MS/MS spectral hits when searched against the reverse, decoy human database. Peptides were filtered based on a 1 % FDR. Peptides assigned to a given protein group, and not present in any other protein group, were considered as unique. Consequently, each protein group is represented by a single master protein (PD Grouping feature).   Parallel reaction monitoring (PRM, targeted peptide sequencing) – Spectral library –The peptide library resources for GFAP and TUJ1 included the DDA data above (both proteins), our previous AV proteomics data (GFAP),14 and http://www.peptideatlas.org/ (TUJ1 (TUBB3)). We re-acquired two peptide spectra per protein running the instrument in a targeted mode, also known as PRM.19, 20 The chromatographic gradients were the same as the DDA runs. For each precursor peptide mass (below), the isolation window was 1 m/z and we alternated between CID and HCD (higher collision energy dissociation, 30% collision energy) for sequencing. CID and HCD fragments were scanned in the Orbitrap at 30 K resolution within a scan range of 100-1000 m/z. Using higher resolution and quality PRM scans, the following peptides were confirmed in the valve tissue: TUBB3_ISVYYNEASSHK, [M+3H]3+ = 466.561, retention time (RT) 22 minutes; TUBB3_LHFF[Mox]PGFAPLTSR [M+2H]2+ = 810.921, RT 76 minutes; GFAP_ALAAELNQLR [M+2H]2+ = 549.817, RT 45 minutes; and GFAP_LEVERDNLAQDLATVR [M+3H]3+ = 614.663, RT 54 minutes.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Aortic valve

### Affiliations
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School
Brigham and Women's Hopsital Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Sasha  Singh

### Lab Head
Dr Elena Aikawa
Brigham and Women's Hopsital Harvard Medical School


