### Accession
PXD041951

### Title
Flavodoxin Landscape in Clostridioides difficile

### Description
C. difficile infections have become a major challenge in medical facilities today. The bacterium is capable of spore formation, which even allows survival of antibiotic treatment. Therefore, research on the physiology of C. difficile is important for the development of alternative treatment strategies. In this study, we investigated eight putative flavodoxins of C. difficile 630. Flavodoxins are small electron transfer proteins of specifically low potential. The unusually high number of flavodoxins in C. difficile compared to other bacteria suggests that they are expressed under different conditions. Therefore, we investigated expression along bacterial growth and found high transcription levels during the exponential growth phase, especially for floX. Since flavodoxins in other bacteria are capable of replacing ferredoxins with their [2Fe-2S] clusters under iron deficiency conditions, we also examined flavodoxin expression in C. difficile under low iron and no iron levels.

### Sample Protocol
C. difficile 630 was cultured in C. difficile minimal medium (CDMM) under anaerobic conditions using an anaerobic chamber from Don Whitley Scientific Ltd. (Bingley, England). Three different iron concentrations (14.4 µM, 0.0002 µM and no iron) were used and FeSO4 was supplemented respectively. For no iron conditions the chelator 2,2′-dipyridyl (DP) was added to the main culture at a final concentration of 75 µM.For intracellular protein extraction, cell pellets were resuspended in 1 mL TE buffer (10 mM Tris, 1 mM EDTA, pH 8.0) followed by mechanical disruption with 400 µL glass beads (0.1 mm, Scientific Industries, Inc., Bohemia, NY, USA) in three homogenization cycles (each 30 s, 6.5 m/s) using a FastPrep-24 5G (MP Biomedicals, LLC, Irvine, CA, USA). Cell debris and glass beads were removed by centrifugation at 12,000 x g for 15 min at 4 °C. The resulting intracellular protein extracts were stored at -80 °C. Protein concentrations were determined using Roti Nanoquant (Carl Roth, Karlsruhe, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. 50 µg of proteins were prepared for mass spectrometry using S-trap spin columns (Protifi, Huntington, NY, USA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Eluted peptides were desalted using 100 µL PierceTM C18 Tips (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Desalted peptides were vacuum-dried and stored at -20 °C. All mass spectrometric experiments were performed on a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer coupled to an EASY nLC 1200 (both Thermo, Bremen Germany). The LC was equipped with an in-house built, 20 cm x 100 µm reversed-phase (3 µm diameter C18 particles, ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, Dr. Maisch, Germany) column with an integrated emitter tip. Desalted peptides were dissolved in 12 µl solvent A (0.1% acetic acid in water) and about 50 µg of digested total protein amount per run was loaded onto the column. Elution was performed using a non-linear 100-minute-gradient of solvent B (0.1% acetic acid, 95% acetonitrile in water) in solvent A at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The eluate from the column was injected into the mass spectrometer via the nano-ESI source which was operated at 3.5 kV in positive mode.For the PRM experiment each MS cycle consisted of a survey scan (333 – 1650 Th mass range; 60,000 resolution at 200 m/z; 3e6 predictive automatic gain control target; max. 25 ms injection time; activated lock-mass correction) followed by up to 15 fragment ion scans (HCD at normalized energy of 27; fixed first mass of 100 Th; 120,000 resolution at 200 m/z; 1e6 predicted automatic gain control target; max. 240 ms injection time; 1.4 m/z isolation window with 0.2 m/z offset) selected from a scheduled inclusion list (30 precursor entries, 12 min window size each).

### Data Protocol
LC–MS/MS data were searched against a strain specific protein database (3762 entries, obtained from Uniprot on March 15th, 2021 (UP000001978)) using the Andromeda based search engine MaxQuant, version 1.6.17.0. Protein abundance was assessed by the Intensity-Based Absolute Quantification Index (iBAQ). We used the formula mi = iBAQi·Mi/Σ(iBAQj·Mj) to calculate the relative mass of protein present (mi) with the theoretical molecular weight Mi of a protein i.Upon manual curation PRM-assays for 2-5 peptides per protein were established and the obtained raw data were analysed in Skyline (version 21.2 (53)). For quantification, individual transition peak areas were summed peptide-wise and the resulting peptide intensities normalized against the survey scan’s total ion counts (MS1 TIC). Further, missing values were imputed assuming left-censored data, missing not at random by values from a value pool obtained by down-shifting the remaining data with a narrow distribution. Peptides for which more than 80% of the data were missing were removed from all samples prior to summing peptide intensities to obtain protein abundances.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Expression profiling, Parallel reaction monitoring, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
University of Greifswald, Institute of Microbiology

### Submitter
Daniela Zuehlke

### Lab Head
Dr Susanne Sievers
University of Greifswald, Institute of Microbiology


