### Accession
PXD003492

### Title
Elucidation of tonic and activated B cell receptor signaling in Burkitt’s lymphoma provides insights into regulation of cell survival

### Description
B-cell receptor (BCR) signaling promotes the survival of malignant B cells, such as Burkitt’s lymphoma (BL) and the activated B-cell-like subtype of diffuse large B cell lymphoma (ABC-DLBCL). In contrast to ABC DLBCL, where malignant cells require chronic activation of the BCR for their survival, BL cells are dependent on tonic BCR signaling that is antigen-independent. Elucidation and systematic comparison of tonic and activated BCR signaling led to the identification of novel signaling effectors, among them ACTN4 and ARFGEF2, which were identified as regulators of BL cell survival. As tonic and activated BCR signaling are relevant for important aspects of B cell biology, our study helps in gaining an understanding of BCR-induced processes not only in malignant but potentially also physiological settings.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC-labeled proteins were extracted from BL cells under various treatments and then enzymatically digested in to peptides. Phosphopeptides were enriched by TiO2 or anti-phosphotyrosine antibodies. Phosphopeptides were then fractionated using basic pH reverse phase chromatography and then analyzed by LC-MS/MS using general data-dependent Top N methods.

### Data Protocol
The MS raw files were processed by MaxQuant (1.5.2.8) and MS/MS spectra were searched against human database via the Andromeda search engine. Mass tolerance after recalibration of precursor mass and fragment ion mass were set as 6 and 20 ppm, respectively. Allowed variable modifications included phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine, methionine oxidation and Protein N-terminal acetylation. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was defined as a fixed modification. Minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids with the maximum of two enzymatic mis-cleavages. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% for both peptide and protein identifications.

### Publication Abstract
Burkitt's lymphoma (BL) is a highly proliferative B-cell neoplasm and is treated with intensive chemotherapy that, because of its toxicity, is often not suitable for the elderly or for patients with endemic BL in developing countries. BL cell survival relies on signals transduced by B-cell antigen receptors (BCRs). However, tonic as well as activated BCR signaling networks and their relevance for targeted therapies in BL remain elusive. We have systematically characterized and compared tonic and activated BCR signaling in BL by quantitative phosphoproteomics to identify novel BCR effectors and potential drug targets. We identified and quantified &#x223c;16,000 phospho-sites in BL cells. Among these sites, 909 were related to tonic BCR signaling, whereas 984 phospho-sites were regulated upon BCR engagement. The majority of the identified BCR signaling effectors have not been described in the context of B cells or lymphomas yet. Most of these newly identified BCR effectors are predicted to be involved in the regulation of kinases, transcription, and cytoskeleton dynamics. Although tonic and activated BCR signaling shared a considerable number of effector proteins, we identified distinct phosphorylation events in tonic BCR signaling. We investigated the functional relevance of some newly identified BCR effectors and show that ACTN4 and ARFGEF2, which have been described as regulators of membrane-trafficking and cytoskeleton-related processes, respectively, are crucial for BL cell survival. Thus, this study provides a comprehensive dataset for tonic and activated BCR signaling and identifies effector proteins that may be relevant for BL cell survival and thus may help to develop new BL treatments.

### Keywords
Cancer biology, Phosphoproteome, B cell receptor, Lymphoma

### Affiliations
MPI for Biophysical Chemistry
Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Group, Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Am Fassberg 11, 37077 Göttingen, Germany

### Submitter
Kuan-Ting Pan

### Lab Head
Dr Henning Urlaub
Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Group, Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Am Fassberg 11, 37077 Göttingen, Germany


