### Accession
PXD004803

### Title
2D-LC/MS/MS analysis of Escherichia coli during exposure to abrupt downshifts in temperature and water activity

### Description
2D-LC/MS/MS analysis was used to examine time-dependent changes in proteome of E. coli O157:H7 strain Sakai upon abrupt downshifts from 35°C aw 0.993 to 14°C aw 0.967. Bacterial cells were harvested before abrupt downshifts in both temperature and aw (i.e. control), or at 0 (i.e. immediately after the shift), 60, 250, 1605, 4,070, 5,700, 9,900 or 18,565 min after the shifts.

### Sample Protocol
All samples were subjected to the extraction protocol for both soluble and membrane proteins, according to the methodology previously described (Kocharunchitt, C., King, T., Gobius, K., Bowman, J. P., and Ross, T. (2012) Integrated Transcriptomic and Proteomic Analysis of the Physiological Response of Escherichia coli O157:H7 Sakai to Steady-state Conditions of Cold and Water Activity Stress. Mol. Cell. Proteomics 11, 1-16).

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data obtained from each protein sample were processed by the Computational Proteomics Analysis System (CPAS), a web-based system built on the LabKey Server (v9.1, released 02.04.2009). The experimental mass spectra produced were subjected to a semi-tryptic search against the combined databases of E. coli O157:H7 Sakai (5,318 entries in total) downloaded from the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI, https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/, downloaded 25.11.2008) using X!Tandem v2007.07.01. These databases included the E. coli O157:H7 Sakai database (5230 entries, NC_002695.fasta) and two E. coli O157:H7 Sakai plasmid databases, plasmid pO157 (85 entries, NC_002128.fasta) and plasmid pOSAK1 (three entries, NC_002127.fasta). The parameters for the database search were as follows: mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions: 10 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively; fixed modification: cysteine cabamidomethylation (+57 Da); and no variable modifications. The search results were then analyzed using the PeptideProphet and ProteinProphet algorithms from the Trans Proteomic Pipeline v3.4.2. All peptide and protein identifications were accepted at PeptideProphet and ProteinProphet of ≥0.9, corresponding to a theoretical error rate of ≤2%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
2d-lc/ms/ms, Water activity stress, Cold temperature, E. coli

### Affiliations
Centre for Food Safety and Innovation, University of Tasmania
Food Safety Centre

### Submitter
Chawalit Kocharunchitt

### Lab Head
Dr Chawalit Kocharunchitt
Centre for Food Safety and Innovation, University of Tasmania


