### Accession
PXD042953

### Title
Histone PTM profiling analysis of EZH2 mutants in isogenic cells

### Description
The Enhancer of Zeste 2 Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 Subunit (EZH2) is an essential epigenetic modifier able to methylate lysine 27 on histone H3 (H3K27) to induce chromatin compaction, protein complex recruitment and ultimately transcriptional repression. Hematologic malignancies, including Diffuse Large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL) and Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) have shown a high EZH2-mutation frequency (>20%) associated with poor clinical outcomes. Particularly, two distinct oncogenic mutations, so-called gain-of-function (Y641F and A677G) and loss-of-function (H689A and F667I) are found in the catalytic domain of EZH2. In this study, a comprehensive multi-omics approach was employed to characterize downstream effects of H3K27me3 deposition driven by EZH2 mutations. Human embryonic kidney cells (HEK293T) were transfected to generate three stable EZH2 mutants: EZH2(Y641F), EZH2(A677G), and EZH2(H689A/F667I), which were validated via immunoblotting and DIA-MS-based histone profiling assay.  The histone profiling assay demonstrated a significant increase of approximately two-fold in H3.1/H3.3K27me3 for Y641F EZH2 mutant. There was a modest increase in the combinatorial PTMs H3.1/H3.3K27me3K36me1 and a significant depletion in H3.1 and H3.3 K27me2. The most depleted peptide was H3.3K27me2K36me2. For the A677G EZH2 mutant, the assay demonstrated an enrichment on H3.1/H3.3K27me3, combinatorial K27me3K36me1 and a slight increase in K27me1 and K18ac but only on H3.1. The most depleted peptide was H3.3K27me2K36me2. The H689A/F667I cell line has the most alterations in global histone PTMs. The most highly enriched were H3.1/H3.3K36me2, H3.1K9me3 and H3.3K36me1. The most depleted modifications were H3.1K23ac and H3.1K27me3.

### Sample Protocol
2 x 107 cells were harvested and fractionated into cytoplasmic proteins and nuclei with lysis buffer 1 (LB1 – 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 20 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% Glycerol (vol/vol), 0.5% NP-40 (vol/vol), 0.25% Triton X-100 (vol/vol), supplemented with 1x Roche cOmplete protease tablet, 2 mM Sodium Vanadate, 10 mM Sodium Butyrate, 1 mM DTT) incubated with rotation for 15 min at 4 °C and spun down at 400 xg for 5 min at 4 °C. Nuclei were washed with lysis buffer 2 (LB2 – 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 20 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0.5 mM EGTA, supplemented with 1x Roche cOmplete protease tablet, 2 mM Sodium Vanadate, 10 mM Sodium Butyrate, 1 mM DTT), incubated and spun as before.  Nuclear pellets were then suspended in 0.4N H2SO4 and incubated for 2 h over ice with intermittent vortexing. Cellular debris was pelleted at >20,000 xg for 15 min at 4 °C, supernatant transferred to 2 mL tube and histones precipitated by addition of ice-cold acetone and incubation O/N at -20 °C.   Samples were washed with ice-cold acetone twice prior to suspension in ABC (100 mM) and quantification via Bradford. Histone proteins (100 μg) were incubated for 15 min at RT with ACN:PA (3: 1 vol/vol) four times to ensure complete conversion of unmodified and mono-methylated lysine residues. Histones were digested with trypsin (1:25 wt/wt) O/N at 400 rpm at 37 °C.  Histone peptides were incubated with ACN:PA twice to convert all of the newly formed N-termini, dried in a vacuum concentrator and quantified via Nanodrop to estimate concentration and yield prior to mass spectrometry analysis.  Histone peptides (1200 ng) were separated with a PepMap C18 column (Thermo Fisher Scientific Cat No ES800A 3 μm, 100 Å, 75 μm x 15 cm) coupled to a Q-Exactive Plus Hybrid Quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) by increasing 300 nL/min Buffer B (0.1% FA, ACN) over 75 min as follows: desalt/load peptides on trap 0-5 min 2% B, 5-45 min 45% B, 45-52 min 55% B, 52-56 min 95% B, 56-64 min hold at 95% B, equilibrate to 2% B for 64-75 min. Spectra were collected in data-independent acquisition (DIA) mode with the following parameters: MS1- resolution 35k, AGC target 3e6, maximum fill time 200 ms over a scan range 300-1100 m/z, MS2 – resolution 17.5k, AGC target 1e6 with a loop count of 8 and a sliding isolation window of 50 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were analyzed with EpiProfile 2.0. Significance was determined with Welch’s t-test.

### Publication Abstract
Somatic heterozygous mutations in the active site of the enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) are prevalent in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) and acute myeloid leukemia (AML). The methyltransferase activity of EZH2 towards lysine 27 on histone H3 (H3K27) and non-histone proteins is dysregulated by the presence of gain-of-function (GOF) and loss-of-function (LOF) mutations altering chromatin compaction, protein complex recruitment, and transcriptional regulation. In this study, a comprehensive multi-omics approach was carried out to characterize the effects of differential H3K27me3 deposition driven by EZH2 mutations. Three stable isogenic mutants (EZH2<sup>Y641F</sup>, EZH2<sup>A677G</sup>, and EZH2H<sup>689A/F667I</sup>) were examined using EpiProfile, H3K27me3 CUT&amp;Tag, ATAC-Seq, transcriptomics, label-free proteomics, and untargeted metabolomics. A discrete set of genes and downstream targets were identified for the EZH2 GOF and LOF mutants that impacted pathways involved in cellular proliferation, differentiation, and migration. Disruption of protein networks and metabolic signatures able to sustain aberrant cell behavior was observed in response to EZH2 mutations. This systems biology-based analysis sheds light on EZH2-mediated cell transformative processes, from the epigenetic to the phenotypic level. These studies provide novel insights into aberrant EZH2 function along with targets that can be explored for improved diagnostics/treatment in hematologic malignancies with mutated EZH2.

### Keywords
Leukemia, Epigenetics, Lymphoma, Ezh2

### Affiliations
The Ohio State University
Cancer Biology and Genetics, Wexner Medical Center, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA

### Submitter
Julian Aldana

### Lab Head
Dr Michael A. Freitas
Cancer Biology and Genetics, Wexner Medical Center, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA


