### Accession
PXD016733

### Title
Complexome profiling of mitochondrial protein complexes in single and double MIC26 and MIC27 knockout cells

### Description
Here we analysed the impact of two subunits of the mitochondrial contact site and cristae organizing system (MICOS) complex, MIC26 and MIC27, on the assembly and stability of mitochondrial complexes of the oxidative phosphorylation system (OXPHOS).

### Sample Protocol
Blue native electrophoresis Mitochondria were isolated from HAP1 WT, MIC26 KO, MIC27 KO and DKO cells. Sample preparation and blue native electrophoresis (BNE) of cultured cell pellets were essential done as described (Wittig et al. 2006). Mitochondria were resuspended in 35 µl solubilisation buffer (50 mM imidazole pH 7, 50 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 2 mM aminocaproic acid) and solubilized with 3g/g digitonin (Serva)/protein. Samples were supplemented with 2.5 µl 5% Coomassie G250 in 500 mM aminocaproic acid and 5 µl 0.1% Ponceau S in 50% glycerol. Equal protein amounts of samples were loaded on top of a 3 to 18% acrylamide gradient gel (dimension 14x14 cm). After native electrophoresis in a cold chamber, blue-native gels were fixed in 50% (v/v) methanol, 10% (v/v) acetic acid, 10 mM ammonium acetate for 30 min and stained with Coomassie (0.025% Serva Blue G, 10% (v/v) acetic acid). Sample preparation for complexome profiling Each lane of a BNE gel was cut into equal fractions and collected in 96 filter well plates (30-40 µm PP/PE, Pall Corporation). The gel pieces were destained in 60% Methanol, 50 mM ammoniumbicarbonate (ABC). Solutions were removed by centrifugation for 2 min at 600×g. Proteins were reduced in 10 mM DTT, 50 mM ABC for one hour at 56 °C and alkylated for 45 min in 30 mM iodoacetamid. Samples were digested for 16 hours with trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega) at 37°C in 50 mM ABC, 0.01% Protease Max (Promega) and 1 mM CaCl2. Peptides were eluted in 30% acetonitrile and 3% formic acid, centrifuged into a fresh 96 well plate, dried in speed vac and resolved in 1% acetonitrile and 0.5% formic acid.  Mass spectrometry for complexome profiling Liquid chromatography / mass spectrometry (LC/MS) was performed on Thermo Scientific™ Q Exactive Plus equipped with an ultra-high performance liquid chromatography unit (Thermo Scientific Dionex Ultimate 3000) and a Nanospray Flex Ion-Source (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded on a C18 reversed-phase precolumn (Thermo Scientific) followed by separation on a with 2.4 µm Reprosil C18 resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH) in-house packed picotip emitter tip (diameter 100 µm, 15 cm from New Objectives) using a gradient from 4% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid to 50 % mobile phase B (99% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) for 30 min with a flow rate 400 nl/min and washout with 99% B for 5 min.  MS data were recorded by data dependent acquisition. The full MS scan range was 300 to 2000 m/z with resolution of 70000, and an automatic gain control (AGC) value of 3*106 total ion counts with a maximal ion injection time of 160 ms. Only higher charged ions (2+) were selected for MS/MS scans with a resolution of 17500, an isolation window of 2 m/z and an automatic gain control value set to 105 ions with a maximal ion injection time of 150 ms. MS1 Data were acquired in profile mode.

### Data Protocol
MS Data were analyzed by MaxQuant (v1.6.1.0) [Cox et al. 2008] using default settings. Proteins were identified using human reference proteome database UniProtKB with 71785 entries, released in 02/2018. The enzyme specificity was set to Trypsin. Acetylation (+42.01) at N-terminus and oxidation of methionine (+15.99) were selected as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation (+57.02) as fixed modification on cysteines. False discovery rate (FDR) for the identification protein and peptides was 1%.  Intensity-based absolute quantification (IBAQ) values were recorded. The sum of all IBAQ values from sample was normalized to wildtype control. Protein abundance within native lanes were normalized to maximum appearance to enable comparison of mitochondrial complexes between control, single MICand double mutant cell lines. Slice numbers of the maximum appearance of mitochondrial complex I (979577 Da), complex II (220156 Da) complex III dimer (483695 Da), Complex IV (220156  Da), complex V (618824 Da) and respiratory supercomplex S1, a complex containing complex I, a dimer of complex III and one copy of complex IV (1663827 Da) were used for native mass calibration. The software NOVA (v.0.5.7) was used for hierarchical clustering of complexomics data [Giese et al. 2015].  Wittig I1, Braun HP, Schägger H. (2006) Blue native PAGE. Nat Protoc. 1:418-28. Cox J, Mann M. (2008) MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat Biotechnol. 26:1367-72. Giese H, Ackermann J, Heide H, Bleier L, Dröse S, Wittig I, Brandt U, Koch I. (2015) NOVA: a software to analyze complexome profiling data. Bioinformatics. 31:440-1.

### Publication Abstract
Homologous apolipoproteins of MICOS complex, MIC26 and MIC27, show an antagonistic regulation of their protein levels, making it difficult to deduce their individual functions using a single gene deletion. We obtained single and double knockout (DKO) human cells of <i>MIC26</i> and <i>MIC27</i> and found that DKO show more concentric onion-like cristae with loss of CJs than any single deletion indicating overlapping roles in formation of CJs. Using a combination of complexome profiling, STED nanoscopy, and blue-native gel electrophoresis, we found that MIC26 and MIC27 are dispensable for the stability and integration of the remaining MICOS subunits into the complex suggesting that they assemble late into the MICOS complex. MIC26 and MIC27 are cooperatively required for the integrity of respiratory chain (super) complexes (RCs/SC) and the F<sub>1</sub>F<sub>o</sub>-ATP synthase complex and integration of F<sub>1</sub> subunits into the monomeric F<sub>1</sub>F<sub>o</sub>-ATP synthase. While cardiolipin was reduced in DKO cells, overexpression of cardiolipin synthase in DKO restores the stability of RCs/SC. Overall, we propose that MIC26 and MIC27 are cooperatively required for global integrity and stability of multimeric OXPHOS complexes by modulating cardiolipin levels.

### Keywords
Oxidative phosphorylation system, Lc-msms, Complexome profiling, Micos

### Affiliations
Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology I, Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf, Medical Faculty, Düsseldorf, Germany
Functional Proteomics, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main , Germany

### Submitter
Ilka Wittig

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Reichert
Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology I, Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf, Medical Faculty, Düsseldorf, Germany


