### Accession
PXD040380

### Title
Identification of ME2c phosphorylation site(s)

### Description
This study aims to identify the potential phosphorylation site(s) of ME2c

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T cells were transfected 5’Flag tagged ME2c (pRK5-5’Flag-ME2c) together with HA tagged control vector or AKT1. 36 h after transfection, cells were harvested and lysed in IP Lysis Buffer with phosphatase and protease inhibitors. After immunoprecipitation by Flag M2 Affinity gel, phosphorylated ME2c proteins were separated using SDS-PAGE gel.

### Data Protocol
The proteins were excised and digested in gel with modified sequencing-grade trypsin. Digested peptides were separated by a 60-min gradient elution at a flow rate of 0.3 μL·min−1 with the Dionex/Thermo UltiMate 3000 HPLC System that was directly interfaced with Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). The analytical column was a homemade fused silica capillary column (75 μm ID, 150 mm length) packed with C-18 resin (300 A, 5 μm). Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid, and mobile phase B consisted of 80% acetonitrile and 0.08% formic acid. The Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent acquisition mode using Xcalibur 4.0.27.10 software and there is a single full-scan mass spectrum in the Orbitrap (300–1,800 m/z, 17,500 resolution) followed by four targeted tandem mass spectrometry scans at 30% normalized collision energy. Static peptide modifications included carbamidomethylation (C), dynamic oxidation (M) and phosphorylation (S, T and Y).One trypsin missed cleavage was allowed. Precursor tolerance and ion fragmenttolerance were set at 20 ppm and 0.05 Da, respectively. Confidence levels were set to 1% FDR (high confidence) and 5% FDR (middleconfidence).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Me2c

### Affiliations
School of Lifesciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing,China
Tsinghua University

### Submitter
Taiqi Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Peng Jiang
School of Lifesciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing,China


