### Accession
PXD036798

### Title
SARS-CoV-2 variants evolve convergent strategies to remodel the host response: Affinity Purification Mass Spectrometry (APMS)

### Description
We sought to compare differences in the SARS-CoV-2 virus-human protein interaction networks between mutated (from the SARS-CoV-2 variants of concern) and wild-type viral proteins. Here, we ectopically expressed 2x-strep-tagged constructs encoding mutant or wild-type SARS-CoV-2 viral proteins in HEK293T cells followed by affinity purification mass spectrometry (APMS). This allowed us to quantify differences in protein-protein interactions attributable to mutations present within SARS-CoV-2 variant proteins.

### Sample Protocol
For each bait, n = 3 independent biological replicates were prepared for affinity purification and seven million HEK293T cells were plated per 15-cm dish. The WT and mutant baits for each SARS-CoV-2 protein were transfected as one experiment on the same day, and one GFP control and one empty vector (pLVX-EF1α-IRES-Puro) control were included in each experiment. The amount of bait plasmid transfected was determined based on previous affinity purification experiments of WT only SARS-CoV-2 baits (2020 Nature paper). Total plasmid was normalized to 15 μg with empty vector and the following amounts of each bait or control plasmid were transfected: 2 μg GFP; 2.5 μg N, Orf3a, Orf9b; 5.0 μg Orf7b, Nsp2, Nsp6; 6.125 μg Nsp3; 7.5 μg E, Orf8, Nsp7, Nsp9, Nsp10, Nsp16; 10 μg Orf6, Nsp4, Nsp5, Nsp8, Nsp11, Nsp15; 12.5 μg S, M, Nsp12, Nsp14; 15 μg Orf3b, Orf7a, Orf9c, Orf10, Nsp1, Nsp13, empty vector. Each 15 μg plasmid per 15-cm dish was complexed with PolyJet Transfection Reagent (SignaGen Laboratories) at a 1:3 μg:μl ratio of plasmid:transfection reagent based on the manufacturer’s recommendations. After more than 38 h, cells were dissociated on ice using 10 ml Dulbecco’s phosphate-buffered saline without calcium and magnesium (DPBS) supplemented with 10 mM EDTA for at least 5 min and subsequently washed three times with 10 ml DPBS. Each step was followed by centrifugation at 200g, 4 °C for 5 min. Cell pellets were frozen immediately on dry ice and stored at −80 °C.  Frozen cell pellets were thawed on ice for 15–20 min and resuspended in 1 ml lysis buffer (IP buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4 at 4 °C, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA) supplemented with 0.5% Non-idet P40 substitute (NP40; Fluka Analytical) and cOmplete mini EDTA-free protease and PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor cocktails (Roche)). Samples were then frozen on dry ice for 10–20 min and partially thawed at 37 °C before incubation on a tube rotator for 30 min at 4 °C and centrifugation at 13,000g, 4 °C for 15 min to pellet debris. After reserving 50 μl lysate, up to 48 samples were arrayed into a 96-well Deepwell plate for affinity purification on the KingFisher Flex Purification System (Thermo Scientific) as follows: MagStrep ‘type3’ beads (30 μl; IBA Lifesciences) were equilibrated twice with 1 ml wash buffer (IP buffer supplemented with 0.05% NP40) and incubated with 0.95 ml lysate for 2 h. Beads were washed three times with 1 ml wash buffer and then once with 1 ml IP buffer. To directly digest bead-bound proteins as well as elute proteins with biotin, beads were manually suspended in IP buffer and divided in half before transferring to 50 μl denaturation–reduction buffer (2 M urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 1 mM DTT) and 50 μl 1× buffer BXT (IBA Lifesciences) dispensed into a single 96-well KF microtitre plate. Purified proteins were first eluted at room temperature for 30 min with constant shaking at 1,100 rpm on a ThermoMixer C incubator. After removing eluates, on-bead digestion proceeded (see ‘On-bead digestion’). Strep-tagged protein expression in lysates and enrichment in eluates were assessed by western blot and silver stain, respectively. The KingFisher Flex Purification System was placed in the cold room and allowed to equilibrate to 4 °C overnight before use. All automated protocol steps were performed using the slow mix speed and the following mix times: 30 s for equilibration and wash steps, 2 h for binding and 1 min for final bead release. Three 10-s bead collection times were used between all steps. Bead-bound proteins were denatured and reduced at 37 °C for 30 min and after being brought to room temperature, alkylated in the dark with 3 mM iodoacetamide for 45 min and quenched with 3 mM DTT for 10 min. Proteins were then incubated at 37 °C, initially for 4 h with 1.5 μl trypsin (0.5 μg/μl; Promega) and then another 1–2 h with 0.5 μl additional trypsin. To offset evaporation, 15 μl 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0 were added before trypsin digestion. All steps were performed with constant shaking at 1,100 rpm on a ThermoMixer C incubator. Resulting peptides were combined with 50 μl 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0 used to rinse beads and acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (0.5% final, pH < 2.0). Acidified peptides were desalted for MS analysis using a BioPureSPE Mini 96-Well Plate (20 mg PROTO 300 C18; The Nest Group) according to standard protocols.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched against the human proteome, the eGFP sequence, and the SARS-CoV-2 mutant and wild-type protein sequences using the default settings in MaxQuant. Detected peptides and proteins were filtered to 1% false-discovery rate.

### Publication Abstract
SARS-CoV-2 variants of concern (VOCs) emerged during the COVID-19 pandemic. Here, we used unbiased systems approaches to study the host-selective forces driving VOC evolution. We discovered that VOCs evolved convergent strategies to remodel the host by modulating viral RNA and protein levels, altering viral and host protein phosphorylation, and rewiring virus-host protein-protein interactions. Integrative computational analyses revealed that although Alpha, Beta, Gamma, and Delta ultimately converged to suppress interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs), Omicron BA.1 did not. ISG suppression correlated with the expression of viral innate immune antagonist proteins, including Orf6, N, and Orf9b, which we mapped to specific mutations. Later Omicron subvariants BA.4 and BA.5 more potently suppressed innate immunity than early subvariant BA.1, which correlated with Orf6 levels, although muted in BA.4 by a mutation that disrupts the Orf6-nuclear pore interaction. Our findings suggest that SARS-CoV-2 convergent evolution overcame human adaptive and innate immune barriers, laying the groundwork to tackle future pandemics.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Host response, Infection, Covid-19, Lung, Omics, Apms, Host, Protein-protein interactions

### Affiliations
UCSF
Professor, Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology

### Submitter
Mehdi Bouhaddou

### Lab Head
Dr Nevan J.
Professor, Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology


