### Accession
PXD006318

### Title
Schizosaccharomyces pombe Puf3 interactome

### Description
Puf3 is a RNA-binding protein, a member of the conserved Puf-protein family. Combining different functional genomics data, we have analyzed the role of Puf3 in post-transcriptional gene regulation in S. pombe. We present data on Puf3 interacting proteins and regulatory mRNA targets.

### Sample Protocol
TAP purification was performed as previously described (PMID: 15157891), except that cell lysis was carried out on frozen cells using a Retsch mortar machine. Final EGTA eluates were processed for mass spectrometry analysis as previously described (PMID: 20362542). Peptides were redissolved in 0.5% formic acid and analyzed with online nanoLC-MS/MS on a LTQ FT mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled with an Ultimate 3000 Nano/Capillary LC System (Dionex). Samples were first loaded and desalted on a trap (0.3 mm id × 5 mm) at 25 μL/min with 0.1% formic acid for 5 min and then separated on an analytical column (75 μm id × 15 cm) (both PepMap C18, LC Packings) over a 30 min linear gradient of 4%–32% CH3CN/0.1% formic acid at 300 nL/min. The LTQ FT was operated in standard data-dependent acquisition. The survey scans (m/z 400–2000) were acquired on the FT-ICR at a resolution of 100,000 at m/z 400, and one microscan was acquired per spectrum. The three most abundant multiply charged ions with a minimal intensity of 1000 counts were subject to MS/MS in the linear ion trap at an isolation width of 3 Th. Dynamic exclusion width was set at ± 10 ppm for 45 s. The automatic gain control target value was regulated at 5E5 for FT and 1E4 for the ion trap, with maximum injection time at 1000 ms for FT and 200 ms for the ion trap, respectively.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were processed with Proteome Discoverer v1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Database searches were performed with Mascot (Matrix Science) against the Schizosaccharomyces pombe Uniprot database (v. March 2017, ) and an in-house contaminant database. The search parameters were: trypsin/P digestion, 2 missed cleavages, 10 ppm mass tolerance for MS, 0.5 Da mass tolerance for MS/MS, with variable modifications of carbamidomethyl (C), N-acetylation (protein), N-formylation, oxidation (M), deamidation (NQ) and pyro-glu (N-term Q). Database search results were refined through processing with Mascot Percolator (significance threshold < 0.05, FDR < 1%). Protein identification required at least one high-confidence peptide (FDR < 1%) with a minimal Mascot score of 20.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Puf3, Rip-chip, Protein interactors, Post-transcriptional regulation, Rna-binding protein, Tap purification

### Affiliations
Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute
Functional Proteomics, Institute Cancer Research
&
Proteomic Mass Spectrometry, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute

### Submitter
James Wright

### Lab Head
Dr Jyoti Choudhary
Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute


