### Accession
PXD032358

### Title
Genetic and chemical validation of Plasmodium falciparum aminopeptidase PfA-M17 as a drug target in the hemoglobin digestion pathway

### Description
Plasmodium falciparum, the causative agent of malaria, continues to remain a global health threat since these parasites are now resistant to all anti-malaria drugs used throughout the world. Accordingly, drugs with novel modes of action are desperately required to combat malaria. P. falciparum parasites infect human red blood cells where they digest the hosts main protein constituent, hemoglobin. Leucine aminopeptidase PfA-M17 is one of several aminopeptidases that have been implicated in the last step of this digestive pathway. Here we utilize both reverse genetics and a compound specifically designed to inhibit the activity of PfA-M17 to show that PfA-M17 is essential for P. falciparum survival as it provides parasites with free amino acids for growth, many of which are highly likely to originate from hemoglobin. We further show that our inhibitor is on-target for PfA-M17 and has the ability to kill parasites at nanomolar concentrations. Thus, in contrast to other hemoglobin-degrading proteases that have overlapping redundant functions, we validate PfA-M17 as a potential novel drug target.

### Sample Protocol
Parasites were isolated from iRBCs via hypotonic lysis (150 mM Ammonium chloride, 10 mM Potassium bicarbonate, 1 mM Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) in Milli-Q water) for 5 min at 4°C. Following lysis, the pellets were then resuspended in 100 mM HEPES (4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid) pH 8.1, and a freeze-thaw lysis was performed by cycling (3 x) between dry ice and a heating block set at 37 °C for three minutes. Cell debris was pelleted by centrifuging at 20 000 x g for 20 min at 4 °C and supernatant collected. Parasite lysate was separated into equal technical replicates (4) and these replicates were separated into different conditions, DMSO control and compound 3 at 3 µM and 12 µM. The samples were then incubated at room temperature for 3 min before being thermally challenged and heated at 60 °C for 5 min. The denatured protein fraction was then removed via ultracentrifugation at 100 000 x g for 20 min at 4°C (Beckman Coulter Optima XE-90 – IVD ultracentrifuge with a 42.2 Ti rotor). The soluble fraction was reduced and alkylated using tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP) (10 mM final concentration) and iodoacetamide (40 mM final concentration) (Sigma) and heated at 45 °C for 15 min. Following alkylation and reduction, protein concentration was determined using a BCA assay, an appropriate concentration of trypsin (1:50; Promega) was added before incubation overnight at 37 °C. The following day, trypsin activity was quenched using 5% formic acid (FA) and samples were subjected to desalting using in-house-generated StageTips as described previously. The samples were then dried and resuspended in 12 μL of 2% (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.1% (v/v) FA containing indexed retention time (iRT) peptides (Biognosys) for LC-MS/MS analysis. LC-MS/MS was carried out using data-independent acquisition mode as described previously .

### Data Protocol
Raw files were then processed using SpectronautTM 13.0 against an in-house generated P. falciparum (Pf3D7 line) spectral library as described previously. Following protein identification and quantification, the fold change of drug treated conditions relative to the 0 µM control for each experiment was calculated, and the significance of the change was determined by a Welch’s t-test, with a p value < 0.05 deemed significant. Proteins that were significantly stabilised (fold change > 1.2, p value < 0.05) at multiple concentrations of compound 3 were considered ‘hits’ and these were plotted using paired volcano plots.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Plasmodium falciparum, Malaria, Haemoglobin digestion, Pfa-m17

### Affiliations
School of Medicine, Deakin University, Geelong, 3216, Australia
Monash University

### Submitter
Ghizal Siddiqui

### Lab Head
Dr Tania de Koning-Ward
School of Medicine, Deakin University, Geelong, 3216, Australia


