### Accession
PXD010201

### Title
The human allicin-proteome: global protein S-thioallylation of by the garlic defence substance allicin and its biological effects

### Description
A single clove of edible garlic (Allium sativum L.) produces up to 5 mg of allicin (diallylthiosulfinate), a thiol-reactive sulfur-containing defence substance that gives injured garlic tissue its characteristic smell. Allicin induces apoptosis or necrosis in a dose-dependent manner but sublethal doses influence cellular metabolism and signalling cascades. Oxidation of protein thiols and depletion of the glutathione pool are thought to be responsible for allicin’s physiological effects. Here, we studied the effect of Allicin on post-translational thiol-modification in human Jurkat cells using shotgun LC-MS/MS analyses. We identified 332 proteins in the human Jurkat cell proteome that were modified by S-thioallylation which causes a mass shift of 72 Dalton on cysteines. Many S-thioallylated proteins are high abundant proteins, including the cytoskeletal proteins tubulin, actin, cofilin, filamin and plastin-2, the heat shock chaperones HSP90 and HSPA4, the glycolytic enzymes GAPDH, ALDOA, PKM as well the protein translation factor EEF2. We confirmed that Allicin disrupted the actin cytoskeleton in mouseL929 fibroblasts. Allicin further resulted in Zn2+ release from proteins and stimulated the Zn2+-dependent IL1-triggered release of IL2 in murine EL4 T-cells. Allicin further caused inhibition of enolase activity. In conclusion, our study revealed the overall extent of widespread S-thioallylation in the human Jurkat cell proteome after allicin exposure which affects essential  cellular functions of selected allicin targets.

### Sample Protocol
The Jurkat T-cell lymphocytes were cultured in RPMI 1640 (Lonza, Verviers, Belgium) medium supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated FBS (PAA; Germany), 2 mM L-glutamine, 100 U/ml of penicillin, and 100 lg/ml of streptomycin (all Lonza, Verviers, Belgium). Cells were maintained at 37 °C, 100% humidity, and 5% CO2. Jurkat cells were exposed to Allicin for 10 min and harvested in phosphate buffer containing 100 mM NEM by centrifugation. After centrifugation (600 x g; Megafuge 1 OR, Hereus) cells were resuspended in 1 mL phosphate buffer, glass beads were added and centrifuged for 1 minute to lyse the cells. For identifications of S-thiolallylated peptides, NEM-alkylated protein extracts were prepared from Allicin-treated Jurkat cells after cell lysis. The protein extracts were separated by 15 % non-reducing SDS-PAGE followed by tryptic in-gel digestion and LTQ-Orbitrap-Velos mass spectrometry as described (15).

### Data Protocol
Post-translational thiol-modifications of proteins were identified by searching all MS/MS spectra in “dta” format against the human proteome target-decoy protein sequence database (52496 entries) extracted from UniprotKB release 12.7 (UniProt Consortium, Nucleic acids research 2007, 35, D193-197) using Sorcerer™-SEQUEST® (Sequest v. 2.7 rev. 11, Thermo Electron including Scaffold 4.0, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR). The SEQUEST search parameters were used as described previously (15). The Sequest search was carried out considering the following parameter: a parent ion mass tolerance 10 ppm, fragment ion mass tolerance of 1.00 Da. Up to two tryptic miscleavages were allowed. Methionine oxidation (Met+15.994915 Da), cysteine N-ethylmaleimide modifications (Cys+125.04767 Da) and S-thioallylation (Cys+72.00337 Da for C3H5S1) were set as variable modifications. The Scores and mass deviations of the identified S-thioallylated peptides of the 334 proteins with the 72 Da mass shift on Cys residues are shown in Table S3 including their fragmentation spectra and fragment ion tables.

### Publication Abstract
A single clove of edible garlic (Allium sativum L.) of about 10&#x202f;g produces up to 5&#x202f;mg of allicin (diallylthiosulfinate), a thiol-reactive sulfur-containing defence substance that gives injured garlic tissue its characteristic smell. Allicin induces apoptosis or necrosis in a dose-dependent manner but biocompatible doses influence cellular metabolism and signalling cascades. Oxidation of protein thiols and depletion of the glutathione pool are thought to be responsible for allicin's physiological effects. Here, we studied the effect of allicin on post-translational thiol-modification in human Jurkat T-cells using shotgun LC-MS/MS analyses. We identified 332 proteins that were modified by S-thioallylation in the Jurkat cell proteome which causes a mass shift of 72&#x202f;Da on cysteines. Many S-thioallylated proteins are highly abundant proteins, including cytoskeletal proteins tubulin, actin, cofilin, filamin and plastin-2, the heat shock chaperones HSP90 and HSPA4, the glycolytic enzymes GAPDH, ALDOA, PKM as well the protein translation factor EEF2. Allicin disrupted the actin cytoskeleton in murine L929 fibroblasts. Allicin stimulated the immune response by causing Zn<sup>2+</sup> release from proteins and increasing the Zn<sup>2+</sup>-dependent IL-1-triggered production of IL-2 in murine EL-4 T-cells. Furthermore, allicin caused inhibition of enolase activity, an enzyme considered a cancer therapy target. In conclusion, our study revealed the widespread extent of S-thioallylation in the human Jurkat cell proteome and showed effects of allicin exposure on essential cellular functions of selected targets, many of which are targets for cancer therapy.

### Keywords
T-cells, Cysteine, Allicin, Interleukin il1, S-thioallylation, Il2, Zinc, Protein modification, Actin, Fibroblasts, Cytoskeleton, Jurkat, Enolase

### Affiliations
Freie Universität Berlin
Freie Universität Berlin  Institut für Biologie-Mikrobiologie

### Submitter
Van Loi Vu

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Haike Antelmann
Freie Universität Berlin  Institut für Biologie-Mikrobiologie


