### Accession
PXD006251

### Title
Ndfip1 restricts mTORC1 signalling and glycolysis in regulatory T cells to prevent autoinflammatory disease

### Description
Project abstract: Foxp3+ T regulatory (Treg) cells have important functions in suppressing immune cell activation and establishing normal immune homeostasis. How Treg cells maintain their identity is not completely understood. Here we show that Ndfip1, a co-activator of Nedd4-family E3 ubiquitin ligases, is required for Treg cell stability and function. Ndfip1 deletion in Treg cells disrupts immune homeostasis and results in autoinflammatory disease. Ndfip1-deficient Treg cells are highly proliferative and are more likely to lose Foxp3 expression to become IL-4-producing TH2 effector cells. Proteomic analyses indicate that Ndfip1 deficiency alters the metabolic signature of Treg cells. Metabolic profiling reveals elevated glycolysis and increased mTORC1 signalling. Additional data suggest that Ndfip1 restricts Treg cell metabolic capacity and IL-4 production via distinct mechanisms. Thus, Ndfip1 preserves Treg lineage stability by preventing the expansion of highly proliferative and metabolically active cells that can cause immunopathology via secretion of IL-4.

### Sample Protocol
Effector-type Regulatory T cells (eTreg cells) and central Regulatory T cells (cTreg cells) were sorted from WT animals (Ndfip1+/+ Foxp3-Cre) and from animals that lack Ndfip1 in all Treg cells (Ndfip1fl/fl Foxp3-Cre). cTreg cells were identified as  CD4+YFP+CD62LhighCD44- cells and eTreg cells were identified as CD4+YFP+CD62LlowCD44+ cells. Cells were lysed using a lysis buffer containing 100mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 0.15M NaCl, 5mM EDTA, 1% NP-40, 0.5% Triton-X 100, protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche, 11697498001), 5mM of 1,10-phenyanthroline (o-PA), 5mM N-Ethymaleimide (NEM) and 0.1mM PR-619. 10ul of lysis buffer was used for every 10x10^6 cells. Protein was quantified by BCA (Pierce, 23227). ~15ug of lysate was mixed 1:1 with 4x Laemmli sample buffer for whole proteome analysis. Samples were boiled and run ~2cm past the stacking gel in 10% Criterion pre-cast Tris-HCL gels (Biorad). Gels were fixed overnight and stained briefly with Coomassie blue. Each lane of the Coomassie-stained gel was divided into 10-12 2mm x 9mm ‘pixels,’ each cut into 1 mm3 cubes. They were destained with 50% Methanol/1.25% Acetic Acid, reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol (Thermo), and alkylated with 40 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma). Gel pieces were then washed with 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma) and dehydrated with acetonitrile (Fisher). Trypsin (5ng/uL in 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate, Promega) was added to the gel pieces and proteolysis was allowed to proceed overnight at 37°C. Peptides were extracted with 0.3% triflouroacetic acid (J.T.Baker), followed by 50% acetonitrile. Extracts were combined and the volume was reduced by vacuum centrifugation.  Mass Spectrometry Analysis Tryptic digests were analysed by LC-MS/MS on a hybrid LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer coupled with a Dionex Ultimate 3000 (Thermofisher Scientific San Jose, CA). Peptides were separated by reverse phase (RP)-HPLC on a nanocapillary column, 75 μm id × 30 cm Reprosil-pur 1.9uM (Dr. Maisch, Germany). Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid (Thermo) and mobile phase B of 0.1% formic in acetonitrile. Peptides were eluted into the mass spectrometer at 300 nL/min with each RP-LC run comprising a 90 minute gradient from 3 to 45 % B in 90 minutes. The mass spectrometer was set to repetitively scan m/z from 300 to 1800 (R = 240,000 for LTQ-Orbitrap Elite) followed by data-dependent MS/MS scans on the twenty most abundant ions, with a minimum signal of 1500, dynamic exclusion with a repeat count of 1, repeat duration of 30s, exclusion size of 5000 and duration of 60s, isolation width of 2.0, normalized collision energy of 33, and waveform injection and dynamic exclusion enabled. FTMS full scan AGC target value was 1e6, while MSn AGC was 1e4, respectively. FTMS full scan maximum fill time was 10 ms, while ion trap MSn fill time was 100 ms; microscans were set at one.  FT preview mode; charge state screening, and monoisotopic precursor selection were all enabled with rejection of unassigned and 1+ charge states.

### Data Protocol
Proteomic data were analysed using Maxquant version 1.5.0.30 searching against the Uniprot complete mouse reference proteome, including isoforms, (updated Sept 19, 2013) and common laboratory contaminants. A minimum peptide length of 6 amino acids and a peptide and protein false discovery of 1% was required. The 3 biologic replicates for Ndfip1 sufficient and deficient eTreg cells and cTreg cells were analysed together, with match between runs and requantify turned on. Label free quantification via intensity based absolute quantification (iBAQ) was calculated in MaxQuant. Quantification data was normalized by the mean quantification value of identified proteins in each replicate and log2 transformed. Comparisons of protein hits from WT or Ndfip1-deficient eTreg or cTreg cells were calculated by log2 fold changes and evaluated for significance using a one-sample t-test. Area proportional Venn diagrams were generated with eulerAPE version 3.0 (http://www.eulerdiagrams.org/eulerAPE/).The gene-ontology analysis and corresponding network diagram in Figure 6e was generated with the BiNGO application in Cytoscape. The differentially regulated proteins identified in WT vs cKO eTreg comparisons were compared against the Mus musculus GO Biological Process annotation using a hypergeometric significance test with Benjamini-Hochberg FDR correction. A threshold of adjusted p-value of <0.01 was required for enrichment.

### Publication Abstract
Foxp3<sup>+</sup> T regulatory (T<sub>reg</sub>) cells suppress immune cell activation and establish normal immune homeostasis. How T<sub>reg</sub> cells maintain their identity is not completely understood. Here we show that Ndfip1, a coactivator of Nedd4-family E3 ubiquitin ligases, is required for T<sub>reg</sub> cell stability and function. Ndfip1 deletion in T<sub>reg</sub> cells results in autoinflammatory disease. Ndfip1-deficient T<sub>reg</sub> cells are highly proliferative and are more likely to lose Foxp3 expression to become IL-4-producing T<sub>H</sub>2 effector cells. Proteomic analyses indicate altered metabolic signature of Ndfip1-deficient T<sub>reg</sub> cells and metabolic profiling reveals elevated glycolysis and increased mTORC1 signalling. Ndfip1 restricts T<sub>reg</sub> cell metabolism and IL-4 production via distinct mechanisms, as IL-4 deficiency does not prevent hyperproliferation or elevated mTORC1 signalling in Ndfip1-deficient T<sub>reg</sub> cells. Thus, Ndfip1 preserves T<sub>reg</sub> lineage stability and immune homeostasis by preventing the expansion of highly proliferative and metabolically active T<sub>reg</sub> cells and by preventing pathological secretion of IL-4 from T<sub>reg</sub> cells.

### Keywords
Ndfip1, Central regulatory t cells (ctreg cells), Effector-type regulatory t cells (etreg cells), Regulatory t cells (treg cells)

### Affiliations
Cell Pathology Division 816F/ARC Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia The University of Pennsylvania 3615 Civic Center Blvd. 816F/ARC Philadelphia, PA 19104
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia

### Submitter
Steven Seeholzer

### Lab Head
Dr Paula Oliver
Cell Pathology Division 816F/ARC Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia The University of Pennsylvania 3615 Civic Center Blvd. 816F/ARC Philadelphia, PA 19104


