### Accession
PXD008214

### Title
Host-pathogen dynamics through secretome analysis of stimulated macrophages

### Description
The Toll-like receptors (TLRs) recognize different pathogen associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) and promote MyD88 dependent and independent responses. Previously, we have reported the discovery of the temporal changes in signaling cascades of macrophage proteome and secretome post-stimulation with different PAMPs. Here we present strategies to profile the secretome of TLR2-, TLR4, and TLR7- stimulated macrophages using whole pathogens were developed. Stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture of macrophages was integrated with whole pathogen macrophage stimulation and subsequent targeted proteomics to quantify cytokines, chemokines, and transcription factors.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC-labeled RAW264.7 cells were treated with pathogens for 6 hours (medium), and 24 hours (heavy) with Heat-killed Escherichia coli, heat-killed Staphylococcus aureus, and live Burkholderia cenocepacia. Following stimulation, 250 μL of the light (untreated), medium (6 h), and heavy (24 h) stimulated samples were combined (1:1:1 v:v ratio), speed-vacuum concentrated, and separated using one-dimensional SDS-PAGE, in-gel digested, and analyzed on a nanoLC-LTQ-Orbitrap-Velos using targeted MS

### Data Protocol
The raw mass spectrometry data were analyzed using MaxQuant version 1.6.0.16

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Targeted proteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Tlr7, Secretome, Tlr4, Macrophage, Tlr2

### Affiliations
Investigator Chief, Cellular Networks Proteomics Unit Laboratory of Immune System Biology National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases National Institutes of Health Bldg. 4 Rm. 101 4 Memorial Dr Bethesda MD 20892-1892
NIAID

### Submitter
Aleksandra Nita-Lazar

### Lab Head
Dr Aleksandra Nita-Lazar
Investigator Chief, Cellular Networks Proteomics Unit Laboratory of Immune System Biology National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases National Institutes of Health Bldg. 4 Rm. 101 4 Memorial Dr Bethesda MD 20892-1892


