### Accession
PXD008737

### Title
The Importance of Extracellular Vesicle Purification for Downstream Analysis: A Comparison of Differential Centrifugation and Size Exclusion Chromatography for Parasitic Helminths

### Description
Fascioliasis is a major neglected tropical disease that infects humans and ruminant species worldwide. Recent discoveries have identified that liver fluke extracellular vesicles are released into the host’s internal environment. To understand extracellular vesicle biology further, isolation of the extracellular vesicle is necessary for downstream applications. The most widely used purification method involves differential centrifugation however; there is no ‘gold standard’ to date of extracellular vesicle isolation.  Recently, size exclusion chromatography has been used to successfully purify EVs. In this study, liver flukes were collected to compare size exclusion chromatography EV purification, to the widely accepted method of differential centrifugation. Transmission electron microscopy and atomic force microscopy showed that size exclusion chromatography extracellular vesicles were smaller in size and diversity than differential centrifugation purified extracellular vesicles. Protein concentration and western blotting suggested that size exclusion chromatography purification had a high EV purity to protein yield ratio in comparison to differential centrifugation. Mass spectrometry analysis discovered a greater amount of protein identifications and unique peptide hits in differential centrifugation purified EVs with less diverse functionality, than size exclusion chromatography purified EVs. However, gene enrichment analysis against the Fasciola hepatica genome showed comparable results between purification methods. Furthermore, western blotting revealed that glutathione s-transferase sigma could be a potential marker for liver fluke EVs. These results suggest that size exclusion chromatography purification produces a higher EV purity to protein yield ratio and maintains extracellular vesicle composition, so therefore is a better suited method for further downstream experimentation with liver fluke extracellular vesicles, compared to differential centrifugation.

### Sample Protocol
Protein bands were excised from one dimensional SDS-PAGE electrophoresis and digested as described in Morphew et al. (2011). Briefly, protein bands were washed in 50% (v/v) acetonitrile and 50% (v/v) 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate at 37°C until destained. Destained bands were dehydrated in 100% acetonitrile at 37°C for 15 min, before being removed and dried at 50°C. Protein bands were then incubated with 10 mM Dithiothreitol in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 30 min at 80°C. The supernatant was discarded before bands were incubated with 55 mM iodoacetamide in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 20 min at room temperature in the dark. The supernatant was discarded and the bands were washed twice for 15 min at room temperature with 50% (v/v) acetonitrile and 50% (v/v) 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Excess was removed before 100% acetonitrile was added to the bands at room temperature for 15 min. The supernatant was removed and bands were dried at 50°C. Bands were rehydrated and digested using 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate containing trypsin (modified trypsin sequencing grade, Roche, UK) at 10 ng/µl at 37°C overnight. The supernatant was stored, before 100% acetonitrile was added to the bands at room temperature for 15 min, followed by adding 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate to the bands at room temperature for 15 minutes. This step was repeated and from each step, the supernatant was removed and pooled for each band.  The 100% acetonitrile step was repeated, and supernatant pooled, before the samples were re-suspended in 20 µl of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid for tandem mass spectrometry. Liquid Chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (Agilent 6550 iFunnel Q-TOF) coupled to a HPLC-Chip (1200 series, Agilent Technologies, Cheshire, UK) was used for peptide separations. The HPLC-Chip/Q-TOF system was equipped with a capillary loading pump (1200 series, Agilent Technologies) and a nano pump (1200 series, Agilent Technologies).  Sample injection was conducted with a micro auto sampler (1100 series, Agilent Technologies), where 1 µl of sample in 0.1% formic acid was loaded on to the enrichment column at a flow of 2.5 µL/min followed by separation at a flow of 300 nL/min.  A Polaris Chip was used (G4240-62030, Agilent Technologies), comprising a C18 enrichment/trap column (360 nl) and a C18 separation column (150 mm x 75 Âµm), where ions were generated at a capillary voltage of 1950 V. The solvent system was: solvent A (ultra-pure water with 0.1% formic acid), and solvent B (90% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid). The liquid chromatography was performed with a piece-linear gradient using 3-8% of solvent B over 0.1 minutes, 8-35% solvent B over 14.9 minutes, 35-90% solvent B over 5 minutes and hold at 90% solvent B for 2 minutes. Tandem mass spectrometry was performed in AutoMS2 mode in the 300-1700 Da range, at a rate of 5 spectra per second, performing MS2 on the 5 most intense ions in the precursor scan. Masses were excluded for 0.1 min after MS/MS was performed. Reference mass locking was used for internal calibration using the mass of 391.2843 Da.

### Data Protocol
Peak lists were generated with Mass Hunter Qualitative Analysis software (V B.06, Agilent Technologies) and exported as Mascot Generic Files. Samples were processed following Morphew et al. (2014). Briefly, samples were submitted to MASCOT daemon (Matrix Science, v2.4.1) MS/MS ions search against F. hepatica gene sequences, accessed through WormBase ParaSite (http://parasite.wormbase.org/, accession PRJEB6687). Search parameters included setting the enzyme to trypsin with one missed cleavage allowed, setting fixed modifications to carbamidomethylation with variable modifications set for oxidation of methionine, fixing monoisotopic masses with unrestricted protein masses with peptide and fragment mass tolerances at ±1.2 Da and ±0.6 Da respectively. Protein identifications were reported at a false discovery rate of 1%. For the overall list of proteins identified (Supplementary file 1), only proteins with at least 2 unique peptides and present in both replicates were selected. Protein sequences were searched using BLAST2GO (https://www.blast2go.com/) obtaining BLAST descriptions and gene ontology terms (Supplementary file 2). Gene ontology enrichment analysis was completed using GOATOOLS python package (http://www.python.org) (Supplementary file 4) where p>0.05 corrected for multiple comparisons by Holm-Bonferroni.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Size exclusion chromatography and fasciola hepatica., Purification, Extracellular vesicles, Differential centrifugation

### Affiliations
Aberystwyth University
Institute of Biological, Environmental and Rural Sciences, Aberystwyth University,  Aberystwyth SY23 3DA,  United Kingdom

### Submitter
Chelsea Davis

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Peter Brophy
Institute of Biological, Environmental and Rural Sciences, Aberystwyth University,  Aberystwyth SY23 3DA,  United Kingdom


