### Accession
PXD024724

### Title
A proteomic network approach resolves stage-specific molecular phenotypes in chronic traumatic encephalopathy

### Description
There is an association between repetitive head injury (RHI) and a pathologic diagnosis of chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE) characterized by the aggregation of proteins including tau. The underlying molecular events that cause these abnormal protein accumulations remain unclear. Here, we hypothesized that identifying human brain proteome from serial CTE stages (CTE I-IV) would provide critical new insights into CTE pathogenesis. Brain samples from frontotemporal lobar degeneration due to microtubule associated protein tau (FTLD-MAPT) mutations were also included as a distinct tauopathy phenotype for comparison.

### Sample Protocol
Brain homogenates were prepared from lateral prefrontal and temporal lobe cortex as previously described [21]. Briefly, ~100mg of frozen brain was homogenized in 500µl of 8M urea lysis buffer with protease inhibitors (8M urea, 100 mM NaHPO4, pH 8.5; HALT phosphatase/protease inhibitor (Thermo Fisher, Catalog #78440)). A Bullet Blender (Next Advance) was used to homogenize the tissues in 1.5ml Rhino Tubes with stainless steel beads (2 x 5 minutes at 4C). Samples were transferred to clean 1.5ml Eppendorf tubes, sonicated 3-4 times 15 seconds with 5 seconds between, and centrifuged at 1000xg. Protein assay (bicinchonic acid; BCA) was conducted and 25µg was loaded on a sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) to check integrity of the samples. One hundred micrograms protein was digested with lysyl-endopeptidase and trypsin followed by TMT labeling.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer (ThermoFisher Scientific version 2.2.0.388 ) was used to search all rawfiles.  The spectra were searched against a human database (90,304 target sequences) downloaded April 2015.  Search parameters included 20 ppm precusor ion tolerance, 0.6 Da fragment ion tolerance, static modification for carbamidomethyl cysteines (+57.021 Da) and tmt-labeled peptide n-terminals and lysines (+229.163 Da), dynamic modifications for oxidized methionines (+15.995 Da) and deamidated asparagine and glutamine (+0.984 Da).  PSM and Peptide level data were filtered to 0.01% FDR.  Strict parsimony was applied for protein grouping.  TMT reporter ions were matched with a 20ppm tolerance window and only razor and unique peptides were considered for quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cte, Tmt, Wgcna

### Affiliations
Assistant Professor Department of Neurology
Center of Neurodegenerative Diseases

### Submitter
Duc Duong

### Lab Head
Dr Chadwick Hales, MD, PhD
Assistant Professor Department of Neurology


