### Accession
PXD020055

### Title
Expression profiling of mouse embryonic stem cells by mass spectrometry

### Description
Embryonic stem cells from B6 and NOD backgrounds were derived freshly in the presence of 2i. After 3-5 passages on feeders, ES cells were cultured in 2i media without any feeders for several passages. In order to identify differentially expressed genes and proteins, we performed RNA-Seq and mass spectromety analysis respectively. Among the differentially expressed genes, we identified several important players in innate and adaptive immunity. Several of these genes had been linked to onset of type-1 diabetes. Proteomics analysis was able to quantitative differences in protein expression among the B6 and NOD ES cell lines.

### Sample Protocol
NOD and B6 ES cells were grown off feeders in 2i media for several passages. ES cells were collected using Trypsin EDTA, and washed twice in ice-cold PBS w/FBS. Cell lysates were prepared in radioimmunoprecipitation assay (RIPA) buffer (150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 1% Triton X-100, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, and 0.1% SDS) with cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) and centrifuged for 20 min at 20,000 x g. Protein concentrations of supernatants were determined by BCA (Thermo Fisher). For each sample, 100 μg of lysate was washed by chloroform/methanol precipitation. Air-dried pellets were resuspended in 1% RapiGest SF (Waters) and brought up in 100 mM HEPES (pH 8.0). Proteins were reduced with 5 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride for 30 min and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at ambient temperature and protected from light. Proteins were digested for 18 hr at 37°C with 2 μg trypsin (Promega). After digestion, 20 μg of peptides from each sample were reacted for 1 hr with the appropriate TMT-6plex NHS isobaric reagent (Thermo Fisher) in 40% (v/v) anhydrous acetonitrile and quenched with 0.4% NH4HCO3 for 1 hr. Samples with different TMT labels were pooled and acidified with 5% formic acid. Acetonitrile was evaporated on a SpeedVac and debris was removed by centrifugation for 30 min at 20,000 x g. MudPIT microcolumns were prepared and samples were loaded onto the column offline using a pressure chamber. LCMS/MS analysis was performed using a Q Exactive mass spectrometer equipped with an EASY nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher). MuDPIT experiments were performed by 5 min sequential injections of 0, 10, 20, 30, …, 100% buffer C (500 mM ammonium acetate in buffer A) onto the MudPIT column. Each step was followed by a gradient from buffer A (95% water, 5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) to buffer B (20% water, 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% fomic acid, v/v/v). Electrospray was performed directly from the analytical column by applying a voltage of 2.5 kV with an inlet capillary temperature of 275°C. Data-dependent acquisition of MS/MS spectra was performed with the following settings: eluted peptides were scanned from 400 to 1800 m/z with a resolution of 30000 and the mass spectrometer in a data dependent acquisition mode. The top ten peaks for each full scan were fragmented by HCD using a normalized collision energy of 30%, a 100 ms activation time, a resolution of 7500, and scanned from 100 to 1800 m/z. Dynamic exclusion duration was set to 120 s duration, and exclusion width between +/- 1.51 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification and TMT-based protein quantification was performed using the Integrated Proteomics Pipeline Suite IP2 (Integrated Proteomics Applications, Inc.) and modules ProLuCID, DTASelect and Census (Park et al., 2014, Tabb et al., 2002, Xu et al., 2015). MS2 spectra were extracted from Thermo XCalibur .raw file format using RawConverter (He et al., 2015). Spectra were searched using ProLuCID against a Uniprot mouse proteome database. The database was curated to remove redundant protein and splice-isoforms. Searches were carried out using a decoy database of reversed peptide sequences and the following search parameters: 50 ppm peptide precursor tolerance, 0.6 Da fragment mass tolerance, 6 amino acid minimum peptide length, trypsin cleavage (max. 2 missed cleavage events), static Cys modification of 57.0215 (carbamidomethylation), and static N-terminal and Lys modification of 229.1629 (TMT-sixplex). ProLuCID search results were filtered using DTASelect using combined XCorr and DeltaCN scores to minimize the peptide false discovery rate at 1% and minimum of 2 peptides per protein ID. TMT reporter ion intensities were extracted in Census using a mass tolerance of 0.05 Da, normalized across TMT channels based on total peptide abundance, and then summed for individual peptides belonging to the same protein. Protein abundances were log-transformed and scaled to a common pooled reference channel that was included in each mass spectrometry sample. Expression changes were calculated as the difference between mean log2 abundances of B6 and NOD samples. Significant expression changes was accessed by unpaired student t-test followed by Benjamini-Hochberg multiple testing correction.

### Publication Abstract
Autoimmune diabetes is a complex multifactorial disease with genetic and environmental factors playing pivotal roles. While many genes associated with the risk of diabetes have been identified to date, the mechanisms by which external triggers contribute to the genetic predisposition remain unclear. Here, we derived embryonic stem (ES) cell lines from diabetes-prone non-obese diabetic (NOD) and healthy C57BL/6 (B6) mice. While overall pluripotency markers were indistinguishable between newly derived NOD and B6 ES cells, we discovered several differentially expressed genes that normally are not expressed in ES cells. Several genes that reside in previously identified insulin-dependent diabetics (Idd) genomic regions were up-regulated in NOD ES cells. Gene set enrichment analysis showed that different groups of genes associated with immune functions are differentially expressed in NOD. Transcriptomic analysis of NOD blastocysts validated several differentially overexpressed Idd genes compared to B6. Genome-wide mapping of active histone modifications using ChIP-Seq supports active expression as the promoters and enhancers of activated genes are also marked by active histone modifications. We have also found that NOD ES cells secrete more inflammatory cytokines. Our data suggest that the known genetic predisposition of NOD to autoimmune diabetes leads to epigenetic instability of several Idd regions.

### Keywords
Nod, Lc-msms, B6, Esc

### Affiliations
Scripps Research Institute
Vanderbilt University

### Submitter
Lars Plate

### Lab Head
Dr R. Luke Wiseman
Scripps Research Institute


