### Accession
PXD016224

### Title
Characterization of the NTSR1-Arr2 complex

### Description
An in vitro prepared NTSR1-Arr2 complex was stabilized by use of heterobifunctional crosslinker. Here we characterize the crosslinks observed upon photo-illumination of this complex.

### Sample Protocol
Excised SDS-PAGE slices corresponding to protein or crosslinked proteins of interest were destained and diced to 1 mm pieces prior to reduction with 5 mM DTT for 30 mins, followed by alkylation with 10 mM acrylamide and finally digestion with Trypsin/LysC (Promega). Digestion was performed at an estimated 1:100 enzyme: substrate ratio overnight at 37 °C. After proteolysis, the reaction was quenched with 1% formic acid. Peptides were extracted and dried by speed vac before dissolving in 12 μl of reconstitution buffer (2% acetonitrile with 0.1% Formic acid); 3 μl of this solution was injected onto the LCMS. In a typical mass spectrometry experiment, an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) with liquid chromatography using a Nanoacquity UPLC (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA) was used at a flow rate of 450 nL/min. Reverse-phase chromatographic separations consisted of a mobile phase A that is 0.2% formic acid in water and a mobile phase B that is 0.2% formic acid in acetonitrile. Stationary phase consisted of pulled and packed in-house fused silica columns with an I.D. of 100 microns packed with Magic 1.8 micron 120 Å UChrom C18 (nanoLCMS Solutions) at a length of ~25 cm. Peptides were directly injected onto the analytical column using a gradient (2-45% B, followed by a high-B wash) of 80 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent fashion using either CID fragmentation or HCD/ETD decision tree fragmentation for MS/MS spectra. For CID and ETD, MS/MS spectra were detected in the ion trap and for HCD, MS/MS spectra were detected in the orbitrap.  Receptor samples were denatured, reduced, alkylated and digested according to manufacturer protocols (Protifi). Briefly, 5-10 μg of receptor sample in 0.004% LMNG/0.0004% CHS buffer was diluted two-fold with buffer containing ~10% SDS and 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, Sigma) pH 7.6. Cysteine residues were reduced by addition of freshly dissolved dithiothreitol (DTT, Sigma) to 20 mM final and heated to 95 C for 10 min. Samples were cooled to room temperature and iodoacetamide (Sigma) was added to 40 mM final. Samples were incubated for 30 minutes with light was excluded at 25 ÅãC with gentle agitation using a Thermomixer. 12% phosphoric acid was added to lower the pH for binding to the S-trap column, followed by binding buffer: 90% methanol, 100 mM TEAB pH 7.1. The sample was then added to the S-trap and sequentially spun at 4,000xg until all material was loaded discarding the flow-through. The column was washed three times with binding buffer, as above. Freshly reconstituted Trypsin/LysC (Promega) was diluted into 50 mM TEAB pH 8 supplemented with 0.02% protease max (Promega) and added to the S-trap (Protifi). The column was placed inside a clean microcentrifuge tube and incubated at 47 ÅãC in a Thermomixer, without agitation, for one hour. After digestion peptides were sequentially eluted by spinning through, 40 μL of 50 mM TEAB pH 8, 40 μL of 0.1% formic acid and 35 μL of 50% aqueous acetonitrile with 0.2% formic acid. The resulting solution was combined and evaporated with a speedvac overnight. Dried peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid and injected onto a reverse phase C18 IonOpticks 25 cm Aurora column using a nanoElute (Bruker Daltonics). Target on-column load was 200 ng total peptide per injection. The flow rate was 400 nL/min. Mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile and 97.9% water; mobile phase B was 0.1% formic acid and 99.9% acetonitrile. The gradient was linear from 4 %B to 36 %B over 30 min. The mass spectrometer was a timsTOF Pro (Bruker Daltonics) set to acquire data in PASEF (Parallel Accumulation SErial Fragmentation) mode. The TIMS accumulation time was set to 100 ms and precursors were pushed at 2.7 ms. The dynamic exclusion settings were set to exclude the same precursor masses for 0.4 min where charge states of 0-5 were allowed. For each sample three technical replicates were run and analyzed independently.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched using Byonic using a custom FASTA database for the purified protein constructs. Identified spectra were manually inspected to validate crosslinks and dead-end crosslinker-modified residues.  Raw .d files from the timsTOF Pro were searched with Byonic (Protein Metrics Inc) using a custom FASTA database which included the sequences of the human NTSR1 and human β-arrestin 1. The enzyme was Trypsin (KR) and set to fully specific, allowing for 2 missed cleavages. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm and the fragment ion tolerance at 40 ppm. The following modifications were allowed: C carbamidomethyl (+57.021464) as a fixed modification; N-term acetyl (+42.010565) as rare 1; N and Q deamidated (+0.984016), as rare 1; M oxidation, (+15.994915) as common 1, ST phosphorylation (+79.966331) as common 4; Y phosphorylation (+79.966331) as rare 1; C palmitoyl (+238.229666) as rare 1. The resulting Byonic results were imported into Byologic for quantitative analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Arresin, Gpcr, Crosslinking

### Affiliations
Stanford University
Stanford University, School of Medicine, Department of Molecular and Cellular Physiology, USA

### Submitter
John Janetzko

### Lab Head
Dr Brian K. Kobilka
Stanford University, School of Medicine, Department of Molecular and Cellular Physiology, USA


