### Accession
PXD034803

### Title
Glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide effects in type 1 diabetes

### Description
Glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide (GIP) has been proposed to exert insulin-independent effects on lipid and bone metabolism. We investigated the effect of a 6-day s.c. GIP infusion on circulating lipids, white adipose tissue (WAT), brown adipose tissue (BAT), hepatic fat content, and inflammatory markers in patients with type 1 diabetes. In a randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind, crossover study, 20 men with type 1 diabetes underwent a 6-day continuous s.c. infusion with GIP (6 pmol/kg/min) and placebo (saline), with an interposed seven-day washout period. Each intervention period involved three study days: Day 0 (baseline measurements, a baseline abdominal adipose tissue biopsy and blood sampling), Day 1 (fasting blood sample after 24 hours infusion), and Day 6 (fasting blood sample, an abdominal adipose tissue biopsy).

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics Pooled sample was assembled by taking plasma from 24 individual samples selected randomly. A part of the pooled sample was depleted from abundant proteins (depleted pool). Another part was used as is (undepleted pool). Both depleted and undepleted pooled samples were dissolved in a lysis buffer and incubated at 95°C for 10 minutes. Samples were digested with 1 µg of LysC and 1 µg trypsin at 37°C for 2 hours. The digestion was stopped by adding trifluoroacetic acid to final concentration of 0.2%. The samples were desalted and  fractionated using high pH UPLC system on an Acquity CSH C18 column (300 μm × 100 mm, 1.7 μm); 20 concatenated fractions were stored, peptides eluted with 2% B were collected as a separate fraction. Individual samples were prepared from two microliters of plasma. Plasma was diluted with a lysis buffer and incubated at 95°C for 10 minutes. Trypsin/LysC solution (1 µg of each protease) were added and incubated at 37°C for 2 hours. Digestion was quenched by addition of 0.2% TFA. Two microliters of each digested sample were desalted on EvoTips. The following LC separation was used for all samples. Peptides were analyzed using the Ultimate 3000 nano UPLC system. The solvents are (A) 0.1% FA in water; (B) 95% acetonitrile, 0.1% FA in water. A trap column µ-Precolumn C18 PepMap100 (5 µm, 300-µm i.d., 5 mm, 100 Å) and a homemade analytical column (75-µm i.d., 20 cm), filled with Inertsil ODS-3 2-µm beads (GL Sciences) were employed for separations. Peptides were eluted at a 300 nL/min flow rate using the following gradient: linear from 2% to 5% B over 1.5 minutes, then linear to 30% B over 51.5 minutes, and finally to 45 % B over 7 min. Exploris 480 mass spectrometer was employed. Fractions of depleted and undepleted pools were analyzed with 2 sec TopSpeed DDA. Survey scans: resolution - 120K, AGC target - 3e6, RF lens - 30%, injection time - Auto; range - 350 – 1500. Precursors charges - 2 - 6, quadrupole isolation - 1.2 Th. fragmentation -  HCD at 30 NCE. Fragmentation spectra: resolution - 30K, AGC target 1e5, injection time - Auto. Individual samples were analyzed in DIA mode. Survey scans were acquired every 2 seconds: resolution – 120K, AGC Target – 3e6, injection time – 50 ms, RF lens – 30%, scan range – 380 – 1020. DIA scans: window width – 10 Th, window Overlap – 0 Th, number of windows – 59, covering mass range 400 – 1000 Th, window borders were placed in the “dead” zones of peptide mass distribution, default charge state – 3, NCE – 30, resolution – 30K, AGC target – 1e6, injection time – 50 ms, first mass – 150 Th, profile data acquisition. All samples were spiked with the necessary amount of iRT peptide mixture.  Lipidomics Samples were extracted as described in doi:10.1161/ATVBAHA.111.234096. Just prior to lipidomics analysis, samples were resuspended in 25 µl eluent A (5:1:4 isopropanol/methanol/water with 5 mM ammonium acetate and 0.1% acetic acid) and centrifuged (5 min/16,000×g/22˚C) before transferring the supernatant to HPLC vials. A quality control (QC) sample was generated by pooling 6 µl of each sample. Four µl were injected using an Agilent 1290 Infinity UPLC system (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA) and compounds separated on a Zorbax Eclipse Plus C18 guard/column (2.1 × 5/50 mm, 1.8 μm particle size, Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA) kept at 50°C. The analytes were eluted using a flow rate of 400 μL/min and the following composition of eluent A) and eluent B (99:1 isopropanol/water with 5 mM ammonium acetate and 0.1% acetic acid): 0% B from 0 to 1 min, 0–20% B from 1 to 5 min, 20‐95% B from 5 to 15 min, 95 % B from 15 to 18 min and 95 to 0% B from 18 to 19 min before equilibration for 3 min with the initial conditions. The flow from the UPLC was coupled to a 6530B quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometer (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA) for mass spectrometric analysis in both positive and negative ion mode using the following general settings for MS1 mode: scanning range from 50-1700 m/z, 2 scans/s, gas temp at 325°C, drying gas at 8 l/min, nebulizer at 35 psig, sheath gas temp at 350°C, sheath gas flow at 11 min/L, VCap at 3500 V, fragmentor at 125 V and skimmer at 65 V. Each spectrum was internally calibrated during analysis using the signals of Hexakis 1H,1H,3H-tetrafluoropropoxy phosphazine, which was delivered to a second needle in the ion source by an isocratic pump running with a flow of 20 µl/min. Iterative data dependent analysis MS2 mode fragmenting was applied with the following general settings: scanning range from 50-1700 m/z, 1 scans/s, collision energy at 30 V, precursor threshold at 5000 counts and active exclusion after 2 spectra, which was released again after 0.5 min.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics DDA samples were processed using Thermo Proteome Discoverer (2.5.0.400). Sequest HT was used for the search. Search parameters were as follows: database – human proteome (reviewed sequences from UniProt) supplemented by common contaminants, precursor tolerance – 5 ppm, fragment tolerance – 0.02 Da, carboxamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification, oxidation of methionine as variable modification, semitrypsin with up to 2 missed cleavages as enzyme. INFERYS rescoring was applied. Search results were validated by Percolator. PSMs, peptides, and proteins were filtered to get 1% FDR. Search results were exported to Spectronaut (14.10.201222.47784) to create a spectral library. DIA data was searched and quantified with Spectronaut using default settings.  Lipidomics Compounds were annotated as discussed in Tsugawa et al Nat Biotechnol. 2020;38(10):1159-1163. A list of the annotated compounds was exported to PCDL manager B.08.00 (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA) to generate a database, which was used in Profinder 10.0 (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA) where areas were extracted. Features were removed if their average signal were less than 5 times more abundant in the QC samples compared to blanks (water extraction). The signals were normalized to relevant lipid species in the Splash mix internal standard prior to correction for signal drift using StatTarget and finally signals were normalized using QC in Metaboanalyst.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Multiomics, Diabetes, Blood plasma

### Affiliations
University of Southern Denmark
Profeesor Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology University of Southern Denmark Odense, Denmark

### Submitter
Vladimir Gorshkov

### Lab Head
Dr Frank Kjeldsen
Profeesor Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology University of Southern Denmark Odense, Denmark


