### Accession
PXD011311

### Title
Translation of non-standard codon nucleotides reveals minimal requirements for codon-anticodon interactions

### Description
The precise interplay between the mRNA codon and the tRNA anticodon is crucial for ensuring efficient and accurate translation by the ribosome. The insertion of RNA nucleobase derivatives in the mRNA allowed us to modulate the stability of the codon-anticodon interaction in the decoding site of bacterial and eukaryotic ribosomes, allowing an in-depth analysis of codon recognition. In addition to a quantitative analysis of the protein products that are formed in dependence of the modified codons, the interpretation of these RNA nucleobase derivatives by the ribosomal decoding site was also determined. For each modification, the translated peptides from the bacterial and eukaryotic systems were purified and analyzed by mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
For mass spectrometry ErmCL peptides were translated utilizing the PURExpress translation system and purified employing Vivaspin 2 (5 kDa, Hydrosart) centrifugal concentrators (Sartorius). The reactions were adjusted to 70% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid to prevent binding of the peptide to the membrane. The purification was performed as described by the manufacturer. Subsequently, the purified peptides were acetone precipitated and resuspended in ddH2O for mass spectrometry. Purified ErmCL peptides were analyzed using a Dionex, UltiMate 3000 nano-HPLC system (Germering, Germany) coupled via nanospray ionization source to a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Vienna, Austria). Peptides were separated on a fritless fused-silica column (75 μm i.d. × 280 μm o.d. × 10 cm length) packed with 3 μm reversed-phase C18 material (Reprosil). Solvents for HPLC were 0.1% formic acid (solvent A) and 0.1% formic acid in 85% acetonitrile (solvent B). The gradient started at 4% B. The concentration of solvent B was increased linearly from 4 to 50% during 50 min and from 50 to 100% during 5 min. A flowrate of 250 nl/min was applied. The Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer was operating in data dependent mode to switch between MS and MS/MS acquisition. Full scan MS spectra were acquired with a resolution of R = 70 000. Up to 12 of the most intense ions detected in the full scan MS were sequentially isolated and fragmented using higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) applying a normalized collision energy of 28.0. Fragments were scanned with a resolution of R = 35 000.

### Data Protocol
Database search was performed using ProteomeDiscoverer (Version 2.1, Thermo Scientific) with search engine Sequest HT. MS/MS spectra were searched against an E. coli database (Uniprot, strain K12, last modified June 2018, 4313 entries) to which 21 different ErmCL peptides sequences were added. The following settings were applied: the b and y ions were used for spectrum matching and scoring; precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm; fragment mass tolerance was 0.05 Da; false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 (1%); and N-terminal protein formylation was used as variable modification.

### Publication Abstract
The precise interplay between the mRNA codon and the tRNA anticodon is crucial for ensuring efficient and accurate translation by the ribosome. The insertion of RNA nucleobase derivatives in the mRNA allowed us to modulate the stability of the codon-anticodon interaction in the decoding site of bacterial and eukaryotic ribosomes, allowing an in-depth analysis of codon recognition. We found the hydrogen bond between the N<sup>1</sup> of purines and the N<sup>3</sup> of pyrimidines to be sufficient for decoding of the first two codon nucleotides, whereas adequate stacking between the RNA bases is critical at the wobble position. Inosine, found in eukaryotic mRNAs, is an important example of destabilization of the codon-anticodon interaction. Whereas single inosines are efficiently translated, multiple inosines, e.g., in the serotonin receptor 5-HT<sub>2C</sub> mRNA, inhibit translation. Thus, our results indicate that despite the robustness of the decoding process, its tolerance toward the weakening of codon-anticodon interactions is limited.

### Keywords
Ribosome, Translation elongation, Nucleotide modifications, Decoding, Biological, Codon-anticodon interactions

### Affiliations
Medical University of Innsbruck - Biocenter, Division of Genomics & RNomics

### Submitter
Thomas Hoernes

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias David Erlacher
Medical University of Innsbruck - Biocenter, Division of Genomics & RNomics


