### Accession
PXD033239

### Title
Novel, highly potent PROTACs targeting AURORA-A kinase

### Description
The family of AURORA kinases is essential for cell cycle progression and dysregulation of AURORA-A in cancer led to a large number of clinical and pre-clinical inhibitors. However, ATP competitive AURORA-A inhibitors usually do not target non-catalytic functions that have also been identified as mechanisms promoting tumorigenesis. To target non-catalytic as well as catalytic functions, we developed a series of PROTACs (PROteolysis targeting chimeras) based on the selective AURORA-A kinase inhibitor MK-5108 (VX-689) and the CEREBLON E3-ligase ligands. The most potent PROTAC, JB301, had good physicochemical properties and cell penetration resulting in degradation of AURORA-A in leukemic cells at single digit nM concentration. In the presented datasets, we determined the intracellular degradation specificity of the AURKA PROTAC JB300. We therefore treated MV4-11 cells with JB300 and the corresponding ligand MK-5108, or DMSO and quantified the induced degradation using a label free approach.

### Sample Protocol
5 million MV4-11 cells (in 10 ml) were seeded at least in quintuplicates for each treatment the evening before the treatment. Cells were treated with either 0.625 µM JB300, 0.625 µM MK-5108 or DMSO as control for 6 hours. After treatment, cells were washed twice with ice cold PBS supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitor and lysed in SDS lysis buffer (2% SDS in 40 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.6). Samples were boiled at 95 °C for 10 min and trifluoroacetic acid was added to a final concentration of 1 %. To neutralize the sample (final pH 7.6-8.0), 300 mM N-methylmorpholin was added to a final concentration of 2 %. The protein concentration in cell lysate was determined using the PierceTM BCA Protein Assay Kit (ThermoScientific) according to the protocol of the manufacturer. The beads suspension for sp3 sample workup was prepared by mixing magnetic SeraMag-A and SeraMag-B beads (10 µl per sample of each type; Cytiva) in a ratio of 1:1, washing them three times with ddH2O and resuspending them in 10 µl ddH2O per sample. A total of 200 µg per sample was mixed with 10 µl beads suspension. Acetonitrile (ACN) was added to a final concentration of 70 % and incubated at room temperature, 18 min, 800 rpm. After discarding the supernatant, beads were washed twice using 200 µl 80% ethanol. For reduction and alkylation, beads were resuspended in 100 µl of 2 mM CaCl2 in 40 mM Tris pH 7.6. Proteins were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 40 min at 37 °C and 1200 rpm, and alkylated with 55 mM chloroacetamide (CAA) at room temperature in the dark for 20 min, 1200 rpm. Proteins were digested (1:50 trypsin/substrate weight) overnight at 37 °C and 1200 rpm. The supernatant for each sample was collected. Beads were washed once with 120 µl 2 % Formic Acid (FA) and supernatants were combined with previous supernatants, resulting in a final concentration of 1 % FA. Peptides were desalted using Poly (divinylbenzene-co-N-vinylpyrrolidine) absorbent resin plates (Macherey-Nagel; wash solvent: 0.1% FA; elution solvent: 0.1% FA in 70% acetonitrile (ACN). Samples were frozen at −80 °C freezer, dried in a SpeedVac and stored at -20 °C until LC-MS2 analysis. A micro-flow LC-MSMS setup with a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used as described in detail in previous publications [PMID: 31919466, PMID: 33596053] Peptides were dissolved in 0.1 % FA and ½ of each sample was directly injected onto the microflow LC system. Online chromatography was performed using a commercially available Thermo Fisher Scientific Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 LC column (2 µm particle size, 1 mm ID × 150 mm; catalog number 164711). Column temperature was maintained at 55 °C using the integrated column oven. Peptides were delivered at a flow rate of 50 µl/min and separated using a two-step linear gradient (120 min) ranging from 1-24 % (105 min) and 24 35 % (15 min) of LC solvent B (0.1 % FA, 3 % DMSO in ACN) in LC solvent A (0.1 % FA, 3 % DMSO [PMID 23975139]. The Q Exactive HF-X was operated as follows: positive polarity; spray voltage 4 kV, capillary temperature 320 °C; vaporizer temperature 200 °C. The flow rates of sheath gas, aux gas and sweep gas were set to 40, 3, and 0, respectively. TopN was set to 50. Full MS was readout in the orbitrap, resolution was set to 120,000 and the mass range was set to 360–1300. Full MS AGC target value was 3E6 with a maximum IT of 100 ms and RF lens value was set to 40. Peptide match was set to preferred and default charge state was set to 2. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 40 s and exclude isotopes was switched on. For readout of MS2 spectra, orbitrap resolution was set to 15,000 and the mass range was set to 200–2000. The isolation width was set to 1.3 m/z, the first mass was fixed at 100 m/z, NCE was 28. The AGC target value was set to 1E5 at a maximum IT of 22 ms.

### Data Protocol
Protein and peptide identification and quantification was performed using MaxQuant [PMID 19029910] (version 1.6.17.0) by searching the MS2 data against all canonical protein sequences as annotated in the UniProt reference database (human proteins only, downloaded 24.08.2020) using the search engine Andromeda [PMID 21254760]. Carbamidomethylated cysteine was set as fixed modification; oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation were set as variable modification. Trypsin/P was specified as proteolytic enzyme and up to two missed cleavage sites were allowed. The minimum peptide length was set to seven and all data were adjusted to 1 % peptide-spectrum-match (PSM) and 1 % protein false discovery rate (FDR). LFQ based quantification was enabled including the match between runs option with normalization. Data analysis was performed using the Perseus software suite [PMID 27348712] (version 2.0.3.0) and Microsoft Excel on identified and quantified protein groups as provided in the proteinGroups.txt file. Proteingroups.txt was filtered for contaminants and reverse hits, and median centric normalization and log2 transformation were performed. Entries were filtered for at least three valid values in one condition. Two-sample t-test were performed (S0:0.1, permutation-based FDR: 5%, number of randomizations: 250). For principal component analysis (PCA) remaining missing values were replaced from normal distribution (width 0.3, down shift: 1.8).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Protac, Aurka, Protein degrader

### Affiliations
Technical University of Munich, Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Emil-Erlenmeyer-Forum 5, 85354 Freising, Germany
German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), Germany
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics
Technical University of Munich (TUM), Freising, Germany
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany

### Submitter
Nicola Berner

### Lab Head
Dr Bernhard Kuster
Technical University of Munich, Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Emil-Erlenmeyer-Forum 5, 85354 Freising, Germany


