### Accession
PXD020344

### Title
N-glycoproteins have a major role in MGL binding to colorectal cancer cell lines

### Description
Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the second leading cause of cancer death worldwide due in part to a high proportion of patients diagnosed at advanced stages of the disease. For this reason, many efforts have been made towards new approaches for early detection and prognosis. Cancer-associated aberrant glycosylation, especially the Tn and STn antigens, can be detected using the macrophage galactose-type C-type lectin (MGL/CLEC10A/CD301), which has been shown to be a promising tool for CRC prognosis. We had recently identified the major MGL binding glycoproteins in two high MGL binding CRC cells lines, HCT116 and HT29. We investigated here the impact of N-linked and O-linked glycans carried by these proteins for the binding to MGL. In addition, we performed quantitative proteomics to study the major differences in proteins involved in glycosylation in these cells. Our results showed that N-glycans have a significant, previously underestimated, importance in MGL binding to CRC cell lines.

### Sample Protocol
SDS-PAGE and NanoLC-MS/MS analysis: For sample clean-up, a short SDS-PAGE run (NuPAGE™ 4-12% Bis-Tris Protein Gels, Thermo Fisher Scientific) of the samples obtained from the MGL pull-downs after PNGase F treatment was performed. Gels were stained with SimplyBlue™ Safe Stain (Invitrogen) for 1 hour at RT and washed with distilled water for 3 hours. Bands corresponding to the whole lane were cut from the gel, and the proteins were then subjected to reduction with dithiothreitol (10 mM), alkylation with iodoacetamide (50 mM) and in-gel trypsin digestion with trypsin (Worthington Enzymes), using a Proteineer DP digestion robot (Bruker).  Tryptic peptides were separated by online C18 nano-HPLC MS/MS with an Easy nLC 1000 gradient HPLC system (Thermo, Bremen, Germany) coupled to a Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo), as previously described. Briefly, fractions were loaded onto a homemade precolumn and eluted via a homemade analytical nano-HPLC column (for 20 min), followed by electrospray injection into the Mass Spectrometer. The MS was operated in data-dependent MS/MS (top-10 mode) with a normalised collision energy of 32% and recording of the MS2 spectrum in the Orbitrap.  Quantitative proteomics using TMT labelling: Cell lysis, digestion and TMT labelling was performed. Cellular extract from 4 x 106 HCT116, HT29 and LS174T cells were prepared in triplicate by a 4 min incubation at 95°C in SDS lysis buffer (5% SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6). Protein concentration was determined by BCA assay. 100 µg of protein was used for subsequent reduction with 5 mM TCEP, alkylation with 15 mM iodoacetamide and quenching with 10 mM DTT. Protein lysates were cleaned by methanol-chloroform precipitation. The resulting protein pellets were resuspended in 40 mM Hepes (pH 8.4) and incubated with 10 µg trypsin O/N at 37°C. Peptide concentration was measured with BCA assay. 10 µg of each of the 9 peptide preparations was dissolved in 25 µl of 40 mM Hepes (pH 8.4) and incubated with 40 µg of one of the 9 amino reactive TMT10plex Label Reagents (126 to 130, Thermo Scientific, Lot #UG282327) for 1 h at room temperature. Excess TMT label was quenched by incubation with 6 μl 5 % hydroxylamine for 15 min at room temperature. The 9 labelled peptide samples were then mixed, freeze-dried and measured using MultiNotch MS3 procedure.  TMT-labelled peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid and subsequently analysed by on-line C18 nanoHPLC MS/MS with a system consisting of an Easy nLC 1200 gradient HPLC system (Thermo, Bremen, Germany), and an Orbitrap Fusion LUMOS mass spectrometer (Thermo). Fractions were injected onto a homemade precolumn (100 μm × 15 mm; Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ 3 μm, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany) and eluted via a homemade analytical nano-HPLC column (50 cm ×  75 μm; Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 μm). The analytical column temperature was maintained at 50°C with a Sonation PRSO-V2 column oven. The gradient was run from 5% to 30% solvent B (20/80/0.1 water/acetonitrile/formic acid (FA) v/v) in 240 min. The nano-HPLC column was drawn to a tip of ∼5 μm and acted as the electrospray needle of the MS source. The LUMOS mass spectrometer was set to use the MultiNotch MS3-based TMT method. The MS spectrum was recorded in the Orbitrap (resolution 120,000; m/z range 400−1500; automatic gain control (AGC) target 2 × 105; maximum injection time 50 ms). Dynamic exclusion was after n=1 with an exclusion duration of 60 s with a mass tolerance of 10 ppm. Charge states 2-4 were included Precursors for MS2/MS3 analysis were selected using a TopSpeed of 3 sec. MS2 analysis consisted of collision-induced dissociation (quadrupole ion trap analysis; AGC 1 × 104; normalized collision energy (NCE) 35; maximum injection time 50 ms). The isolation window for MS/MS was 0.7 Da. Following acquisition of each MS2 spectrum, the MultiNotch MS3 spectrum was recorded using an isolation window for MS3 of 2 Da. MS3 precursors were fragmented by high energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) and analysed using the Orbitrap (NCE 65; AGC 1 × 105; maximum injection time 105 ms, resolution 60,000).

### Data Protocol
For the samples obtained from the MGL pull-downs after PNGase F treatment protein identification, raw data was first converted to mzXML using Proteowizard. Peptide and protein identification as well as the after statistical validation were performed in Trans Proteomics Pipeline version 5.1.0 using included software pipeline: X! Tandem Jackhammer TPP (2013.06.15.1-LabKey, Insilicos, ISB) search engine, PeptideProphet and ProteinProphet. The parameters were set as follows: precursor mass error of 10 ppm, fragment mass error of 0.04 Da, carbamidomethyl (Cys) and oxidation (Met) as fixed and variable modifications respectively. All results were filtered for FDR threshold of 1% as well as a minimum of two per protein. Data extraction and table generation was done using R version 3.4.4.  For samples from Cell lysate quantitative proteomics using TMT labelling. In a post-analysis process, raw data were first converted to peak lists using Proteome Discoverer version 2.4 (Thermo Electron), and then submitted to the Uniprot Homo sapiens minimal database (20205 entries), using Mascot v. 2.2.04 (www.matrixscience.com) for protein identification. Mascot searches were done with 10 ppm and 0.02 Da deviation for precursor and fragment mass, respectively, and trypsin enzyme was specified. Methionine oxidation and Acetyl (Protein N-term) were set as variable modifications and Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as a static modification. Peptides with an FDR<1% were accepted. The TMT ratio from the MultiNotch MS3 spectra were used for quantification using Proteome Discoverer 2.4.

### Publication Abstract
Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the second-leading cause of cancer death worldwide due in part to a high proportion of patients diagnosed at advanced stages of the disease. For this reason, many efforts have been made towards new approaches for early detection and prognosis. Cancer-associated aberrant glycosylation, especially the Tn and STn antigens, can be detected using the macrophage galactose-type C-type lectin (MGL/CLEC10A/CD301), which has been shown to be a promising tool for CRC prognosis. We had recently identified the major MGL-binding glycoproteins in two high-MGL-binding CRC cells lines, HCT116 and HT29. However, we failed to detect the presence of <i>O</i>-linked Tn and STn glycans on most CRC glycoproteins recognized by MGL. We therefore investigated here the impact of <i>N</i>-linked and <i>O</i>-linked glycans carried by these proteins for the binding to MGL. In addition, we performed quantitative proteomics to study the major differences in proteins involved in glycosylation in these cells. Our results showed that <i>N</i>-glycans have a significant, previously underestimated, importance in MGL binding to CRC cell lines. Finally, we highlighted both common and cell-specific processes associated with a high-MGL-binding phenotype, such as differential levels of enzymes involved in protein glycosylation, and a transcriptional factor (CDX-2) involved in their regulation.

### Keywords
Glycoproteomics; tmt labelling; c-type lectin; colorectal cancer; lacdinac; tn antigen

### Affiliations
Center for Proteomics and Metabolomics Leiden University Medical Center
LUMC/UVIC

### Submitter
Yassene Mohammed

### Lab Head
Dr Paul J. Hensbergen
Center for Proteomics and Metabolomics Leiden University Medical Center


