### Accession
PXD016010

### Title
Top Down Proteomic analysis of Gingival Crevicular Fluid in deciduous, exfoliating and permanent teeth in children

### Description
Gingival Crevicular Fluid, a plasma-derived exudate present in the gingival crevice was collected from deciduous, exfoliating and permanent teeth from 20 children (60 samples) with the aim to characterize and quantify by a mass spectrometry based top-down proteomic approach, the peptide/proteins in the fluid and verify possible variations occurring during the exfoliating process.  The results obtained confirmed the presence in Gingival Crevicular Fluid of α-Defensins 1-4, Thymosin β4 and Thymosin β10, as described in previous works and revealed the presence of other interesting peptides never described before in Gingival Crevicular Fluid, such as specific fragments of α-1-antitrypsin, α-1-antichymotrypsin, Thymosin β4 and Thymosin β10 fragments, Fibrinopeptide A, Fibrinopeptide B, S100A, LVV Hemorphin-7 (hemoglobin chain β fragment), as well as some other peptides deriving from α and β subunits of hemoglobin. Statistical analysis evidenced different levels in 5 proteins/peptides in the three groups in particular with higher level in exfoliating teeth. Our study demonstrate that an in-depth analysis of a biological fluid like Gingival Crevicular Fluid, present in small amount, can provide useful information for the understanding of different biological processes like teeth eruption.

### Sample Protocol
For the study were enrolled 20 children in healthy condition from dentistry institute (8M 12F mean age: 9, min: 8 yr.o.; max:10 yr.o.). Children were enrolled if they were in the late mixed dentition phase because GCF had to be withdrawn from three different sites: a permanent tooth, a deciduous tooth and a tooth in the exfoliation phase. Totally we obtain 60 samples; 3 for each child enrolled for the study.Collection time was established between 9.00 a.m. and 12.00 a.m. Before collection, oral cavity was washed to remove pre-secreted saliva. GCF collection was performed by inserting three pre-weighted sterile blotting paper cones (28 mm, ISO n. 20, Dentalica, Milano, Italy) in the physiological grooves of three selected sites (three paper cones for each site). Each site was isolated with cotton rolls and the tooth to be sampled was dried with warm air for 20 sec. After 2 min cones were removed, weighted, and washed one time with 100 μL of 0.2% Formic Acid (FA) aqueous solution. After centrifugation, the acidic washings were pooled and the resultant solution stored at -80 °C until the analysisHPLC High-resolution ESI-MS/MS experiments were carried out by an Ultimate 3000 Micro HPLC apparatus (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA) coupled to Orbitrap ELITE apparatus (ThermoFisher). A Zorbax 300SB-C8 column (3.5 μm particle diameter; column dimension 1.0 x150 mm) was used for protein separation. The following solutions were used as eluents in gradient elution: (eluent A) 0.1% (v/v) aqueous FA and (eluent B) FA in acetonitrile-water 80/20 containing a FA final concentration of 0.1%. The applied gradient was 0-2 min 5% B, 2–40 min from 5% to 70% B (linear), 40-45 min from 70% to 99% B (linear), at a flow rate of 50 μl/min.  MS/MS spectra were collected in Data Dependent Scan (DDS) mode

### Data Protocol
Experimental mass values were obtained by deconvolution of averaged ESI-MS spectra automatically performed using Xcalibur software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped on the experimental apparatus used. Experimental and theoretical monoisotopic mass values, available at the Swiss-Prot Data Bank (http://us.expasy.org/tools). All the proteins and peptides and fragment in the present study were confirmed by high resolution HPLC-ESI-MS/MS analysis. Quantification was based on calculation of the area of the RP-HPLC-ESI-MS eXtracted Ion Current (XIC) peaks. The XIC analysis selectively reveals a protein in the chromatographic profile by extracting the ion current associated with the multiply charged ions characteristic of the protein. The area of the XIC peaks is proportional to the peptide/protein concentration under constant analytical conditions.

### Publication Abstract
Gingival Crevicular Fluid (GCF), a plasma-derived exudate present in the gingival crevice was collected from deciduous, exfoliating and permanent teeth from 20 children (60 samples) with the aim to characterize and quantify by a mass spectrometry based top-down proteomic approach, the peptide/proteins in the fluid and verify possible variations occurring during the exfoliating process. The results obtained confirmed the presence in GCF of &#x3b1;-Defensins 1-4, Thymosin &#x3b2;4 and Thymosin &#x3b2;10, as described in previous works and revealed the presence of other interesting peptides never described before in GCF such as specific fragments of &#x3b1;-1-antitrypsin, &#x3b1;-1-antichymotrypsin; fragments of Thymosin &#x3b2;4 and Thymosin &#x3b2;10; Fibrinopeptide A and its fragments and Fibrinopeptide B; S100A8 and S100A9, LVV Hemorphin-7 (hemoglobin chain &#x3b2; fragment), as well as some other peptides deriving from &#x3b1; and &#x3b2; subunits of hemoglobin. Statistical analysis evidenced different levels in 5 proteins/peptides in the three groups. Our study demonstrate that an in-depth analysis of a biological fluid like GCF, present in small amount, can provide useful information for the understanding of different biological processes like teeth eruption. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD016010 and PXD016049. SIGNIFICANCE: GCF due to his site-specific nature has a great potential in containing factors that are specific for action at a given site and might have diagnostic value to detect qualitative and quantitative variations of proteins/peptides composition linked to physiological or pathological conditions.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Top down

### Affiliations
Biochemistry and Clinical Biochemistry Institute, Medicine Faculty, Catholic University of Rome
Fondazione Policlinico Universitario A. Gemelli IRCCS Rome Italy
Istituto di Biochimica e Biochimica Clinica, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Roma, Italia.  Fondazione Policlinico Universitario A. Gemelli IRCCS, Roma, Italia.

### Submitter
Federica Iavarone

### Lab Head
Dr Federica Iavarone
Istituto di Biochimica e Biochimica Clinica, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Roma, Italia.  Fondazione Policlinico Universitario A. Gemelli IRCCS, Roma, Italia.


