### Accession
PXD020418

### Title
Exploring GPCR-arrestin interfaces with genetically encoded crosslinkers

### Description
-arrestins (arr1 and arr2) are ubiquitous regulators of G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) signalling. Available data suggest that -arrestins dock to different receptors in different ways. However, the structural characterization of arrestin-GPCR complexes is challenging and alternative approaches to study arrestin-GPCR complexes are needed. Here, starting from the finger loop as a major site for the interaction of arrestins with GPCRs, we genetically incorporate non-canonical amino acids for photo- and chemical crosslinking into arr1 and arr2 and explore binding topologies to GPCRs forming either stable or transient complexes with arrestin: the vasopressin receptor 2 (rhodopsin-like), the corticotropin releasing factor receptor 1 and the parathyroid hormone receptor 1 (both secretin-like). We show that each receptor leaves a unique footprint on arrestin, whereas the two -arrestins yield quite similar crosslinking patterns. Furthermore, we show that the method allows defining the orientation of arrestin respect to the GPCR. Finally, we provide direct evidence for the formation of arrestin oligomers in the cell.

### Sample Protocol
Samples from SEC were proteolyzed either by trypsin or a combination of trypsin and endoproteinase GluC with the SMART Digest trypsin kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) following the manufacturer’s protocol (1 h, 70 °C). For the combined trypsin / GluC digestion, trypsin beads were removed after the tryptic digestion before GluC was added. Proteolysis was allowed to proceed for 2 h at 37°C. Then cysteines were reduced with DTT and alkylated with iodoacetamide.  Samples were analyzed on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano-HPLC system coupled with an Orbitrap Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Chromatography was performed by applying 90-min gradients with reversed phase C18 columns (µPAC 900 nl C18 trapping column and µPAC™ 50 cm C18 chip-based separation column, Pharmafluidics). For MS data acquisition, a data-dependent top 10 method was used. FTMS survey scans were performed in the m/z range 375-1799, R=140,000 at m/z 200, AGC (automated gain control) target value 3x106, and a maximum injection time of 100 ms. MS/MS scans were performed of the 10 most abundant signals of the survey scan with stepped HCD (higher energy collision-induced dissociation) with 27, 30 and 33% NCE (normalized collision energy), quadrupole isolation window 2 Th, AGC target value 2x105, and maximum injection time 250 ms. Dynamic exclusion was enabled, exclusion time was set to 60 s.

### Data Protocol
LC/MS data were processed with the Proteome Discoverer software, version 2.4, (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For peptide identification, MS/MS data were searched against the Uniprot database (version Feb. 2019, taxonomy human, 73,801 entries, with sequence of arrestin-strep added) using Sequest HT with the following settings: Precursor mass error < 5 ppm, product ion mass error < 0.02 Da, variable modifications: Oxidation of Met, acetylation of protein N-termini, conversion of Asp to Bpa, fixed modification: carbamidomethylation of Cys, up to three missed cleavage sites. Peptides were filtered for FDRs (false discovery rate) < 1%.

### Publication Abstract
&#x3b2;-arrestins (&#x3b2;arr1 and &#x3b2;arr2) are ubiquitous regulators of G&#xa0;protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) signaling. Available data suggest that &#x3b2;-arrestins dock to different receptors in different ways. However, the structural characterization of GPCR-arrestin complexes is challenging and alternative approaches to study GPCR-arrestin complexes are needed. Here, starting from the finger loop as a major site for the interaction of arrestins with GPCRs, we genetically incorporate non-canonical amino acids for photo- and chemical crosslinking into &#x3b2;arr1 and &#x3b2;arr2 and explore binding topologies to GPCRs forming either stable or transient complexes with arrestins: the vasopressin receptor 2 (rhodopsin-like), the corticotropin-releasing factor receptor 1, and the parathyroid hormone receptor 1 (both secretin-like). We show that each receptor leaves a unique footprint on arrestins, whereas the two &#x3b2;-arrestins yield quite similar crosslinking patterns. Furthermore, we show that the method allows defining the orientation of arrestin with respect to the GPCR. Finally, we provide direct evidence for the formation of arrestin oligomers in the cell.

### Keywords
-arrestins / genetically encoded crosslinkers / g protein-coupled receptor / gpcr-arrestin complexes / live cells

### Affiliations
MLU Halle, Inst. f. Pharmacy
Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry & Bioanalytics Institute of Pharmacy Martin-Luther University Halle-Wittenberg Germany

### Submitter
Christian Ihling

### Lab Head
Dr Andrea Sinz
Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry & Bioanalytics Institute of Pharmacy Martin-Luther University Halle-Wittenberg Germany


