### Accession
PXD028803

### Title
Plasma proteomic profile of patients with tick-borne encephalitis and co-infections

### Description
Despite the increasing number of patients suffering from tick-borne diseases, including tick-borne encephalitis (TBE) and Lyme disease, the mechanisms of development of these diseases and their effects on human body are still unknown. Moreover, the increasing number of cases of co-infections of these diseases additionally hampers the correct diagnosis and the application of effective therapy. Therefore, the aim of this study was to evaluate the changes in proteomic profile of human plasma induced by the development of TBE and to compare it with changes in TBE patients co-infected with other tick-borne pathogens.  The results obtained by proteomic analysis using nanoLC-QExactive/MS showed that the most highly elevated groups of proteins in the plasma of TBE patients with co-infection were involved in the pro-inflammatory response and protein degradation, while the antioxidant proteins and factors responsible for protein biosynthesis were mainly down regulated. The main proteins, which expression differentiated patients with TBE from co-infected patients, such as AP-1, fumarylacetoacetase, serpin, annexin, or carbonic anhydrase 2, are involved in TBE virulence or antibacterial responses. These results were accompanied by the enhanced GSH- and 4-HNE-protein adducts formation, observed in TBE and co-infected patients on higher level than in the case of only TBE patients. In conclusion, the differences in the proteomic profiles between patients with TBE and co-infected indicate that the mechanisms of development of these diseases are diverse and, consequently, require different treatment, what is particularly important for further research, including the development of novel diagnostics tools.

### Sample Protocol
Protein digestion and proteomic analysis  Before digestion, proteins contained in all types of samples were denatured by mixing with 8M urea. Next, proteins were reduced with 10mM 1,4-dithiothreitol (DTT) and alkylated by incubation with 50mM iodoacetamide (IAA). To stop the alkylation, the DTT was again added. Following fourfold dilution, samples were in-solution digested overnight (37°C) with trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) in a ratio of 1:50 (trypsin:proteins). To stop the trypsinization, 10%  formic acid (FA) was added in an amount ensuring the final concentration in the samples at 0.1% [24]. Obtained peptide mixture was dried under inert gas and dissolved in 5% acetonitrile (ACN) with 0.1% FA.   Peptides were separated using high-performance liquid chromatography system (Ultimate 3000; Dionex, Idstein, Germany) on μPAC 200 column (PharmaFluidics, Ghent, Belgium) at a flow rate of 0.300 µL/min with 200cm long separation channel and 5µm silicon pillars. The solvents gradient started at 3 min and increased to 60% eluent B (90% acetonitrile + 0.03% formic acid) for 90 min. Eluent A contained 5% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid. Eluted peptides were analyzed using a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer with an electrospray ionization source (ESI) (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, Bremen, Germany) and the conditions of the analysis for peptide identification have been described in detail previously [25].

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and label-free quantification Raw data were acquired with the Xcalibur software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) and analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 2.0 (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, Seattle, WA, USA). Input data were searched against the UniProtKB-SwissProt database (taxonomy: Homo sapiens, release 2021-02). The following search parameters were used for the identification of proteins; peptide mass tolerance set to 10 ppm, MS/MS mass tolerance set to 0.02 Da, up to two missed cleavages allowed, cysteine carbamidomethylation and carboxymethylation, methionine oxidation, as well as 4-hydroxynonenal (4-HNE) – cysteine/lysine/histidine set as a dynamic modiﬁcations [26,27]. Protein label-free quantification was performed according to the signal intensities of the precursor ions. The levels of 4-HNE-protein adducts were estimated based on the peak intensity of peptides modified by 4-HNE.

### Publication Abstract
Despite the increasing number of patients suffering from tick-borne encephalitis (TBE), Lyme disease, and their co-infection, the mechanisms of the development of these diseases and their effects on the human body are still unknown. Therefore, the aim of this study was to evaluate the changes in the proteomic profile of human plasma induced by the development of TBE and to compare it with changes in TBE patients co-infected with other tick-borne pathogens. The results obtained by proteomic analysis using a nanoLC-Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer showed that the most highly elevated groups of proteins in the plasma of TBE patients with co-infection were involved in the pro-inflammatory response and protein degradation, while the antioxidant proteins and factors responsible for protein biosynthesis were mainly downregulated. These results were accompanied by enhanced GSH- and 4-HNE-protein adducts formation, observed in TBE and co-infected patients at a higher level than in the case of patients with only TBE. In conclusion, the differences in the proteomic profiles between patients with TBE and co-infected patients indicate that these diseases are significantly diverse and, consequently, require different treatment, which is particularly important for further research, including the development of novel diagnostics tools.

### Keywords
Tick-borne encephalitis; plasma; proteomic profile; protein adducts; co-infections; lyme disease; neuroborreliosis; human granulocytic anaplasmosis;

### Affiliations
Medical University of Białystok
Zakład Chemii Nieorganicznej i Analitycznej Uniwersytet Medyczny w Białymstoku Mickiewicza 2D, 15-222 Białystok

### Submitter
Agnieszka Gęgotek

### Lab Head
Dr Agnieszka Gęgotek
Zakład Chemii Nieorganicznej i Analitycznej Uniwersytet Medyczny w Białymstoku Mickiewicza 2D, 15-222 Białystok


