### Accession
PXD037918

### Title
Citrullinated glucose-regulated protein 78 is a candidate target for cancer immunotherapy

### Description
In this study we investigate the potential of targeting citrullinated GRP78 for cancer therapy. We select five peptides and show the identification CD4 T cell responses to one citrullinated GRP78 epitope that is restricted through HLA DP*0401 and HLA-DR*0101 alleles. This peptide is detected by mass spectrometry in B16 melanoma grown in vivo and citrulline specific CD4 responses to this epitope mediate efficient therapy of established B16 melanoma tumours in HHDII/DP4 transgenic mouse model. We demonstrate the existence of a repertoire of responses to the citrullinated GRP78 peptide in healthy individuals.

### Sample Protocol
For optimization of target peptide detection, a rat brain sample was lysed in 4M Gua*HCl 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) and protein concentration estimated using modified Bradford assay. Two aliquots, corresponding to ~40 mg protein equivalent, were spiked with 9 pmol and 900 pmol of the mixture of 20 peptides. Samples were labelled with TMTzero TM and subsequently processed through ultrafiltration cartridges (50 kDa cut-off, Amicon, Millipore). The flowthroughs were purified via solid-phase extraction on HLB-cartridges (Waters) and eluates split into and dried in a SpeedVac. For tumour sample analysis, murine tumor lysates in 4M Gua*HCl 100 mM TEAB were assessed for protein concentration using modified Bradford assay. Four aliquots of the synthetic peptide mixture were reduced, alkylated and labelled with TMT TM reagents (TMT10-130N, TMT10-130C, TMT10-131, TMT11-131C) and mixed in a 1:4:6:10 ratio. 0.8 mg of murine protein from each of 5 tumour samples was TMT-labelled (TMT10-126, TMT10-127N, TMT10-127C, TMT10-128N, TMT10-128C) and mixed to form ~4 mg of murine protein mixture. The sample was processed through ultrafiltration cartridges (50 kDa cut-off, Amicon, Millipore) to enrich lower mass proteins and endogenous peptides in the flow-through. The sample was reduced, alkylated and spiked with 90 pmol of the synthetic peptide mixture (in a 1:4:6:10 ratio) before HLB purification. The resulting eluate was divided into two aliquots (10% unfractionated and 90% to bRP fractionation) and dried. The unfractionated sample was transferred to MS and bRP-fractionation was conducted using the Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit according to manufacturer`s instruction for TMT-labelled peptides to initially produce 8 fractions. Fractions 1 and 2 were combined as well as fractions 7 and 8 to finally produce six fractions.

### Data Protocol
Data files were searched against a murine non-redundant UniProtKB database (vs Oct 2020) supplemented with synthetic reference peptide sequences using Sequest in Proteome Discoverer 2.1. No cleavage specificity was enforced, precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm, fragment mass tolerances were set to 0.6 or 0.02 Da for ion trap and Orbitrap scans, respectively. TMT modification of N-termini and lysines were, as well as carbamidomethylation of cysteines were set as static modifications, oxidation of methionine and citrullination of arginine were set as variable modifications. A 1% PSM-level false discovery rate was enforced via the Percolator algorithm. TMT reporter values were corrected for isotopic impurities and, subsequently, adjusted relative to the 131C (reference) channel and log 2 -transformed. For peptides with multiple (matched) spectra, peptide expression values were calculated as the median across all PSM values.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Citrullination, Immunotherapy, Grp78, Peptidomics

### Affiliations
Proteome Sciences
Scancell Unit 202 Bellhouse Building Sanders Road Oxford Science Park Oxford OX4 4GD UK

### Submitter
Michael Bremang

### Lab Head
Dr Victoria Brentville
Scancell Unit 202 Bellhouse Building Sanders Road Oxford Science Park Oxford OX4 4GD UK


