### Accession
PXD007978

### Title
Isolation of PfPuf3 protein complex and mass spectrometry (MS) analysis

### Description
Recent studies of the Puf family of RNA-binding proteins revealed that besides their traditional roles in translational regulation of mRNAs, some Puf proteins are also involved in ribosome biogenesis by binding rRNA. In this study, we report the role of a Puf-like protein (Puf3) in ribosome biogenesis in Plasmodium falciparum and Plasmodium yoelii. Secondary structure prediction suggested that the RNA-binding domain of Puf3 consists of 11 pumilio repeats, similar to human Puf-A/yeast Puf6, which is involved in ribosome biogenesis. Neither pfpuf3 nor pypuf3 could be genetically disrupted, suggesting they may be essential for the intraerythrocytic developmental cycle (IDC). A time-course study of PfPuf3 protein indicated that PfPuf3 was expressed during the entire IDC, with peak expression in early trophozoites. Cellular fractionation of PfPuf3 revealed that it is preferentially partitioned to the nuclear rather than the cytoplasmic fractions, which is consistent with a nuclear localization of PfPuf3::GFP and PyPuf3::GFP as seen by immunofluorescence. Further, we found PfPuf3 co-localized with a well-known nucleolus maker, PfNop1, demonstrating that PfPuf3 is a nucleolar protein. This localization is in contrast to the cytoplasmic localization of PfPuf1 and PfPuf2, but matches the localization of human Puf-A and yeast Puf6. Affinity purification of a C-terminal PTP-tagged variant of PfPuf3 revealed an association with 32 proteins associated with the 60S ribosome, and an enrichment of 28S rRNA and internal transcribed spacer 2. Taken together, these results demonstrate a nucleolar localization of PfPuf3 and suggest an essential function of PfPuf3 in ribosomal biogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
Tandem affinity purification (TAP) of PfPuf3 was performed using the PfPuf3-PTP parasite line and 3D7 as contro.Parasites were isolated as describe above. Parasite pellet was lysed with five-fold volume of pre-cooled PA150 buffer(150 mM KCl, 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.7 at room temperature, 3 mM MgCl2, 0.5 mM DTT, 0.1% v/v Tween 20) containing a protease inhibitor cocktail (one pill in 10 ml PA150 buffer, Roche). Then the parasites were manually lysed by 60-100 strokes in a Dounce homogenizer with a tight pestle and centrifuged at 16,000× g for 20 min at 4°C. The supernatant was incubated with 100 μl (settled volume) of IgG agarose beads (GE Healthcare) at 4°C for 2 h. The beads were washed three times with pre-cooled PA150 and equilibrated twice with the TEV buffer (150 mM KCl, 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.7 at room temperature, 3 mM MgCl2, 0.5 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, 0.1% v/v Tween 20). Then the beads were incubated overnight with 2 ml of TEV buffer containing 100-150 U of TEV protease with gentle rotation at 4°C. The supernatant was obtained by centrifugation at 500× g for 5 min at 4°C. Subsequently, 200 μl of anti-protein C affinity matrix (Roche) equilibrated with 1 ml of PC-150 (150 mM KCl, 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.7 at room temperature, 3 mM MgCl2, 1 mM CaCl2, 0.1% v/v Tween 20) were added into the supernatant with 7.5 μl 1 M CaCl2. After incubation for 2 h at 4°C, the beads were washed four times with PC150 and eluted with a buffer containing 10 mM EGTA/5 mM EDTA.

### Data Protocol
The eluted protein complex was analyzed by nano LC/MS/MS with a Waters NanoAcquity HPLC system interfaced to a Q Exactive™ Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded on a trapping column and eluted over a 75 μm analytical column at 350 nL/min. MS and MS/MS were performed at 70,000 FWHM and 17,500 FWHM resolution, respectively. The 15 most abundant ions were selected for MS/MS and Mascot Generic Files (MGF) from RAW files were extracted by Proteome Discoverer v1.4 (Thermo Scientific). Parasite proteins were identified by searching the Uniprot P. falciparum protein database (v01/2014, 5369 entries) concatenated with the SWISS-PROT Human database (20,160 entries). The combined database (25,529 entries) was reversed and appended back to the forward database (51,058 entries total). All peak list files (MGFs) were analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science; London, UK; version 2.5.1). Search parameters included trypsin digestion (C-terminal K and R cleavage) full cleavage with 2 missed sites, fixed modification: +57 on C (carbamidomethyl), variable modifications: -17 on n (Gln->pyro-Glu), +1 on NQ (deamidated), +16 on M (oxidation), +42 on n (acetyl), fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.02 Da, peptide mass tolerance of 10 ppm. Mascot DAT files were parsed into the Scaffold software for validation, filtering and to create a nonredundant list per sample. Data were filtered at 1% protein and peptide false discovery rates (FDRs) and required at least two unique peptides per protein.

### Publication Abstract
In this study, we characterized the Puf family gene member Puf3 in the malaria parasites <i>Plasmodium falciparum</i> and <i>Plasmodium yoelii</i> Secondary structure prediction suggested that the RNA-binding domains of the Puf3 proteins consisted of 11 pumilio repeats that were similar to those in the human Puf-A (also known as PUM3) and <i>Saccharomyces cerevisiae</i> Puf6 proteins, which are involved in ribosome biogenesis. Neither <i>P. falciparum</i> (Pf)<i>P</i><i>uf3</i> nor <i>P. yoelii</i> (Py)<i>Pu</i><i>f3</i> could be genetically disrupted, suggesting they may be essential for the intraerythrocytic developmental cycle. Cellular fractionation of PfPuf3 in the asexual stages revealed preferential partitioning to the nuclear fraction, consistent with nuclear localization of PfPuf3::GFP and PyPuf3::GFP as detected by immunofluorescence. Furthermore, PfPuf3 colocalized with the nucleolar marker PfNop1, demonstrating that PfPuf3 is a nucleolar protein in the asexual stages. We found, however, that PyPuf3 changed its localization from being nucleolar to being present in cytosolic puncta in the mosquito and liver stages, which may reflect alternative functions in these stages. Affinity purification of molecules that associated with a PTP-tagged variant of PfPuf3 revealed 31 proteins associated with the 60S ribosome, and an enrichment of 28S rRNA and internal transcribed spacer 2 sequences. Taken together, these results suggest an essential function for PfPuf3 in ribosomal biogenesis.

### Keywords
Plasmodium falciparum

### Affiliations
PSU
Entomology Department, Penn State Univeristy

### Submitter
Xiaoying Liang

### Lab Head
Dr Liwang Cui
Entomology Department, Penn State Univeristy


