### Accession
PXD028779

### Title
Quantitative proteomic analysis of plasma exosomes to identify the candidate biomarker of Imatinib Resistance in Chronic Myeloid Leukemia patients

### Description
Imatinib (IM), a tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI), has markedly improved the survival and life quality of chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) patients. However, the lack of speciﬁc biomarkers for IM resistance remains a serious clinical challenge. Recently, growing evidence has suggested that exosome-harbored proteins were involved in tumor drug resistance and could be novel biomarkers for the diagnosis and drug sensitivity prediction of cancer. Therefore, we aimed to investigate the proteomic proﬁle of plasma exosomes derived from CML patients to identify ideal biomarkers for IM resistance. We extracted exosomes from pooled plasma samples of 9 imatinib-resistant CML patients and 9 imatinib-sensitive CML patients by ultracentrifugation. Then, we identified the expression levels of exosomal proteins by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) based label free quantification. Bioinformatics analyses were used to analyze the proteomic data. we found that RPL13 and RPL14 exhibited exceptional upregulation in imatinib-resistant CML patients, which were further confirmed by PRM and WB. Proteomic analysis of plasma exosomes provides new ideas and important information for the study of IM resistance in CML. Especially the exosomal proteins (RPL13 and RPL14), which may have great potential as biomarkers of IM resistance.

### Sample Protocol
Exosomes were solubilized in lysis buffer (8 M urea and 1% protease inhibitor) and sonicated three times at high intensity using an ultrasonic processor (Scientz). The suspension was centrifuged at 12,000 × g (4 °C, 15 min) to remove debris. Then, the supernatant was gathered and measured with BCA protein quantification kit. To digest proteins, proteins were first reduced by 5 mM dithiothreitol (56 °C, 30 min), followed by alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide (room temperature, 15 min in darkness). Furthermore, the sample was diluted to a final urea concentration to < 2M by adding 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buﬀer (TEAB). Finally, proteins were digested twice with trypsin，the first digestion were performed with trypsin（overnight, 37 °C）at a ratio of 1:50 (enzyme:protein) and 1:100 for the second digestion (4h).Digested samples were subjected to LC-MS/MS detection using a minor modiﬁcations of previously described method by Hou et al(18). The tryptic peptide mixture was resuspended in solvent A (0.1% formic acid) and directly inject into a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15 cm length, 75 μm i.d.). Then, the peptides were separated on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a linear gradient mobile phase buffer at constant ﬂow rate of 400 nL min-1. The chromatography gradient was carried out starting at 6% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile), increased to 23% B over 26 min, changed to 35% in 8 min, climbing to 80% in 3 min and maintenance at 80% for an additional 3 min. The eluted peptides were loaded into the nanospray ionization (NSI) source and performed tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) analysis on a Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled online to the UPL (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The applied voltage of electrospray was 2.0 kV. The intact peptides were detected for MS full scans with the scanning range of m/z was 350 to1800 and a resolution of 70,000 in the Orbitrap. Subsequently, the selected peptides were detected at a resolution of 17,500 and normalized collision energy (NCE) of 28. The MS analysis was performed by a data-dependent scan mode that alternated between one MS scan and 20 MS/MS scans, and the dynamic exclusion was set to 15.0 s. Automatic gain control (AGC) target value and fixed first mass were set to 5E4 and 100 m/z, respectively.

### Data Protocol
The secondary mass spectrum data were retrieved using Proteome Discoverer (PD) 2.4 software (Thermo Scientific) with the Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). In detail, the raw MS/MS data files were searched against the human UniProt/SwissProt proteome database with reverse decoy database. The cleavage enzyme was set as Trypsin/P, and the number of missed cleavages was allowed up to two. The length of minimal peptide specified to be 7 amino acid residues, the maximal modification number of allowed per peptides was set as 5. Precursor mass tolerance were set to 10 ppm and 5 ppm for the first search and the main search, respectively. The fragment ion mass tolerance was as 0.02 Da. The acetylation modification on N-terminal and oxidation modification on methionine were designated as variable modifications. The carbamidomethyl modification on cysteine residues was designated as a fixed modification. The quantitative method of proteins was label-free quantiﬁcation (LFQ), and the false discovery rate (FDR) of protein identification and peptide-spectrum match (PSM) identification was set as 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Imatinib, Ribosomal protein l14., Proteomics, Ribosomal protein l13, Chronic myeloid leukemia, Exosomes

### Affiliations
Jiangxi Province Key Laboratory of Laboratory Medicine, Department of Clinical Laboratory, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang University, Nanchang, China.
The Second Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang University

### Submitter
song li

### Lab Head
Dr Bo Huang
Jiangxi Province Key Laboratory of Laboratory Medicine, Department of Clinical Laboratory, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang University, Nanchang, China.


