### Accession
PXD030522

### Title
Whole eye proteomic analysis of bbs1 zebrafish mutants

### Description
Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) is a ciliopathy characterized by retinal dystrophy, intellectual disability, polydactyly, obesity and renal anomalies. In photoreceptors (PR), light sensation occurs in outer segments (OSs), which are specialized primary cilia. BBS1, the major BBS gene, is part of a protein complex called “BBSome”, which is involved in intracellular protein transport. However, the precise function of BBS1/BBSome in controlling trafficking of ciliary proteins in PRs remains unclear. We generated a bbs1 knock out zebrafish mutant to investigate the role of Bbs1 and the BBSome in vivo. To detect global changes in the eye proteome and to verify the knock-out of Bbs1, we conducted a whole eyes proteomic investigation.

### Sample Protocol
A single zebrafish adult eye was lysed in HEPES-Buffer using a microcentrifuge tube pestle to homogenize the tissue. The four control and four bbs1 knock out samples were processed using a commercial iST Kit (PreOmics, Germany). For each sample, 50 µg of protein were mixed with ‘Lyse’ buffer, boiled at 95°C for 10 minutes, transferred to the cartridge and digested by adding 50 µl of the ‘Digest’ solution. After 60 minutes of incubation at 37 °C, the digestion was stopped with 100 µl of ‘Stop’ solution. The solutions in the cartridge were removed by centrifugation at 3800 g, while the peptides were retained by the iST-filter. Finally, the peptides were washed, eluted, dried and re-solubilized in 20 µL of injection buffer (3% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). The peptide concentration was determined using a Lunatic (Unchained Labs) instrument and each sample was diluted 1:10 before injection. Mass spectrometry analysis was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a Digital PicoView source (New Objective) and coupled to a M-Class UPLC (Waters). Solvent composition at the two channels was 0.1% formic acid for channel A and 0.1% formic acid, 99.9% acetonitrile for channel B. For each sample 3 uL of peptides were loaded on a commercial MZ Symmetry C18 Trap Column (100Å, 5 µm, 180 µm x 20 mm, Waters) connected to a nanoEase MZ C18 HSS T3 Column (100Å, 1.8 µm, 75 µm x 250 mm, Waters). A gradient from 5 % to 24% B in 82 min and 24 % to 34 % B in additional 8 min was applied. The column was cleaned after the run by increasing to 95 % B and holding 95 % B for 10 min prior to re-establishing loading condition.  Samples were acquired in a blocked order, first acquiring mutant samples before wild type sample data acquisition to avoid carry-over. The mass spectrometer was operated in a two-scan mode where scan priority one was given to a targeted data analysis of Bbs peptides and peptides of selected housekeeping proteins added to the inclusion list (at least two peptides per protein), while scan priority two was given to standard data-dependent mode (DDA). Full-scan MS spectra (300−1’500 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 120’000 at 200 m/z after accumulation to a target value of 500’000. MS/MS were recorded in the linear ion trap using quadrupole isolation with a window of 1.6 Da and HCD fragmentation with 35% fragmentation energy. The ion trap was operated in rapid scan mode with AGC target set to Standard and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Only precursors with intensity above 5’000 were selected for MS/MS and the maximum cycle time was set to 3 s. Charge state screening was enabled. Singly, unassigned, and charge states higher than seven were rejected. Precursor masses previously selected for MS/MS measurement were excluded from further selection for 20 s, and the exclusion window was set at 10 ppm. The samples were acquired using internal lock mass calibration on m/z 371.1012 and 445.1200.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw MS data were processed by MaxQuant (version 2.0.1.0), followed by protein identification using the integrated Andromeda search engine8. Spectra were searched against a Swissprot zebrafish reference proteome (taxonomy id: 7955, version from 20201007), concatenated to its reversed decoyed fasta database and common protein contaminants. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification, while methionine oxidation and N-terminal protein acetylation were set as variable. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin/P allowing a minimal peptide length of 7 amino acids and a maximum of two missed-cleavages. MaxQuant Iontrap default search settings were used. The maximum false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 for peptides and 0.05 for proteins. Label free quantification was enabled and a 2 minutes window for match between runs was applied. In the MaxQuant experimental design template, each file is kept separate in the experimental design to obtain individual quantitative values. Protein fold changes were computed based on Intensity values reported in the proteinGroups.txt file. A set of functions implemented in the R package “SRMService” was used to filter for proteins with 2 or more peptides allowing for a maximum of 4 missing values, and to normalize the data with a modified robust z-score transformation and to compute p-values using the t-test with pooled variance. If all measurements of a protein are missing in one of the conditions, a pseudo fold change was computed replacing the missing group average by the mean of 10% smallest protein intensities in that condition.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Eye, Bbs1, Lc-ms/ms, Zebrafish

### Affiliations
Institute of Medical Genetics, Bachmann-Lab, University of Zurich, Switzerland
University of Zurich

### Submitter
Markus Masek

### Lab Head
Dr Ruxandra Bachmann-Gagescu
Institute of Medical Genetics, Bachmann-Lab, University of Zurich, Switzerland


