### Accession
PXD003622

### Title
Enhanced snoMEN vectors facilitate establishment of GFP–HIF-1α protein replacement human cell lines

### Description
The snoMEN (snoRNA Modulator of gene ExpressioN) vector technology was developed from a human box C/D snoRNA, HBII-180C, which contains an internal sequence that can be manipulated to make it complementary to RNA targets, allowing knock-down of targeted genes. Here we have screened additional human nucleolar snoRNAs and assessed their application for gene specific knock-downs to improve the efficiency of snoMEN vectors. We identify and characterise a new snoMEN vector, termed 47snoMEN, that is derived from box C/D snoRNA U47, demonstrating its use for knock-down of both endogenous cellular proteins and G/YFP-fusion proteins. Using multiplex 47snoMEM vectors that co-express multiple 47snoMEN in a single transcript, each of which can target different sites in the same mRNA, we document >3-fold increase in knock-down efficiency when compared with the original HBII-180C based snoMEN. The multiplex 47snoMEM vector allowed the construction of human protein replacement cell lines with improved efficiency, including the establishment of novel GFP–HIF-1α replacement cells. Quantitative mass spectrometry analysis confirmed the enhanced efficiency and specificity of protein replacement using the 47snoMEN-PR vectors. The 47snoMEN vectors expand the potential applications for snoMEN technology in gene expression studies, target validation and gene therapy.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC experiments were performed as previously described [34-40]. Cells were grown for at least six cell divisions in L-arginine-, or L-arginine 13C6 15N4-labelling media before analysis. Cells were resuspended in 8% Urea - 0.1M TEAB buffer to solubilize proteins. Lysates from each cell were mixed in a 1:1 ratio based on total protein concentration and sonicated to fragment genomic DNA. Proteins were reduced with TCEP (25 mM in denaturing urea buffer) and alkylated with iodoacetamide. Lysates were diluted with digest buffer (100 mM Tris pH 8.0 + 1 mM CaCl2) to reach 4 M urea, and then digested with 1:50 Lys-C (Wako Chemicals, Japan). The digest was diluted with digest buffer to reach 0.8 M urea and digested with trypsin (Promega; 1:50). The digests were then desalted using SepPak-C18 SPE cartridges, dried and resuspended in 80% Acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA. Peptides were separated using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 HPLC system equipped with a HILIC (hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography) column, using a similar protocol to the hSAX method described previously [41]. The peptide fractions were desalted using SepPak-C18 SPE plates and then resuspended in 5% formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
For Trypsin+Lys-C double digests, peptide chromatography was performed using a Dionex RSLCnano HPLC. Peptides were injected directly onto a 75 μm × 50 cm PepMap-C18 column using the following mobile phases: 2% acetonitrile +0.1% formic acid (Solvent A) and 80% acetonitrile +0.1% formic acid (Solvent B). The linear gradient began with 5% A to 35% B over 220 min with a constant flow rate of 200 nl/min. The peptide eluent flowed into a nanoelectrospray emitter at the front end of a Q-Exactive (quadrupole Orbitrap) mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). A typical ‘Top10’ acquisition method was used and an in-house developed software (Peptracker ID=PT4248) was used to evaluate peptide identifications and abundance ratios.

### Publication Abstract
The snoMEN (snoRNA Modulator of gene ExpressioN) vector technology was developed from a human box C/D snoRNA, HBII-180C, which contains an internal sequence that can be manipulated to make it complementary to RNA targets, allowing knock-down of targeted genes. Here we have screened additional human nucleolar snoRNAs and assessed their application for gene specific knock-downs to improve the efficiency of snoMEN vectors. We identify and characterise a new snoMEN vector, termed 47snoMEN, that is derived from box C/D snoRNA U47, demonstrating its use for knock-down of both endogenous cellular proteins and G/YFP-fusion proteins. Using multiplex 47snoMEM vectors that co-express multiple 47snoMEN in a single transcript, each of which can target different sites in the same mRNA, we document &gt;3-fold increase in knock-down efficiency when compared with the original HBII-180C based snoMEN. The multiplex 47snoMEM vector allowed the construction of human protein replacement cell lines with improved efficiency, including the establishment of novel GFP-HIF-1&#x3b1; replacement cells. Quantitative mass spectrometry analysis confirmed the enhanced efficiency and specificity of protein replacement using the 47snoMEN-PR vectors. The 47snoMEN vectors expand the potential applications for snoMEN technology in gene expression studies, target validation and gene therapy.

### Keywords
Human, Rna, Snorna, Snomen

### Affiliations
Principle Investigator
School of Life Sciences

### Submitter
Vackar Afzal

### Lab Head
Dr Angus Lamond
Principle Investigator


