### Accession
PXD010996

### Title
Identification of Covalent Modifications Regulating Immune Signaling Complex Composition and Phenotype

### Description
Cells signal through rearrangements of protein communities governed by covalent modifications and reversible interactions of distinct sets of proteins. A method that identifies those post-transcriptional modifications regulating signaling complex composition and functional phenotypes in one experimental setup would facilitate an efficient identification of novel molecular signaling checkpoints. Here we devised Modifications, Interactions and Phenotypes by Affinity Purification Mass Spectrometry (MIP-APMS), comprising the streamlined cloning and transduction of tagged proteins into functionalized reporter cells as well as affinity chromatography, followed by MS-based quantification. We report the time-resolved interplay of more than 50 previously undescribed modification and hundreds of protein-protein interactions of 19 immune protein complexes in monocytes. Validation of interdependecies between covalent, reversible and functional protein complex regulations by knock-out or site-specific mutation, revealed isgylation and phosphorylation of TRAF2 as well as ARHGEF18 interaction in Toll-like receptor 2 signaling. Moreover, we identify distinct mechanisms of action for small molecule inhibitors of p-38 (MAPK14). Our method provides a fast and cost-effective pipeline for the molecular interrogation of protein communities in diverse biological systems and primary cells.

### Sample Protocol
Affinity-enrichment and mass spectrometry: U937 cell lines expressing C-terminally His tagged proteins under a PGK promoter were generated and grown to near-confluency per interaction experiment, activated with PAM3CSK4 (5min, 15 min, 30 min) or treated with small molecule inhibitors of MAPK14, harvested and snap frozen. Cell pellets were lysed and subjected to affinity purification, followed by single-shot mass spectrometric analysis on an Q-exactive instrument (Scheltema, 2014).  Whole proteome measurements: U937 cells were lysed in SDC lysis buffer and digested sequentially with LysC and trypsin as described (Kulak et al., 2017). Peptides were desalted on stacked SDB-RPS cartridges (Waters Sep-pak) and eluted using 80% acetonitrile. MS measurements were performed in three replicates on an Q-exactive instrument (Scheltema, 2014).

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3.16) was used to analyze MS raw files. MS/MS spectra were searched against the human Uniprot FASTA database (Version July 2015, 91645 entries) and a common contaminants database (247 entries) by the Andromeda search engine (Cox, 2008). Cysteine carbamidomethylation was applied as fixed and N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. To identify and quantify phosphorylations, acetylations and methylations, a variable modification search was performed, consecutively. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages and a minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was applied at the peptide and protein level. Peptide identification was performed with an allowed initial precursor mass deviation of up to 7 ppm and an allowed fragment mass deviation of 20 ppm. Nonlinear retention time alignment of all measured samples was performed in MaxQuant. Peptide identifications were matched across all samples within a time window of 1 min of the aligned retention times. Protein identification required at least 1 'razor peptide' in MaxQuant. A minimum ratio count of 1 was required for valid quantification events via MaxQuant's Label Free Quantification algorithm (MaxLFQ). Data were filtered for common contaminants and peptides only identified by site modification and hits to the reverse database were excluded from further analysis. Each quantified protein was required to be identified in 10 out of 16 replicates of at least one cell line. Protein LFQ intensities were logarithmized to the base 2 and missing values imputed from a random normal distribution centered on the detection limit. Samples were clustered by Pearson correlation into different control groups. To identify interactors, a two-tailed T-test (FDR < 0.01, enrichment > 2) was performed in the Perseus environment using all other cell-lines in the respective control group (Tyanova, 2016).  Prior to analysis of dynamic PPIs, LFQ intensities of significant interactors were normalized to the LFQ intensities of respective bait proteins to avoid loading artefacts. Conversely, intensities of modified peptides were normalized to the intensity of the respective protein intensity, decreasing the total coefficient of variation (data not shown). We used a T-test (p-value < 0.05) to identify significantly changing  interactors and PTMs between activation or inhibitor treatment conditions.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Monocytes, Phosphorylation, Ap-ms, Acetylation, Methylation, Tlr2

### Affiliations
Proteomics
Experimental Systems Immunology, Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Felix Meissner
Experimental Systems Immunology, Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany


