### Accession
PXD007104

### Title
Sesamum floral buds LC-MSMS

### Description
Sesamum indicum is an oilseed crop. One of the biotic factor that affect the production is a phyllody disease caused by phytoplasma which may target the reproductive system of the plant rendering the plant sterile. The aim of the study is to see the differential expression at proteomic level during the phytoplasma infection in Sesamum indicum.

### Sample Protocol
100g of the sample was taken for digestion. The sample is diluted with 50mM NH4HCO3. The sample was treated with 100mM DTT at 95oC for 1hr followed by 250mM IDA and incubated in dark at room temperature for 45min. The sample is then digested with Trypsin and incubated overnight at 37˚C. The resulting sample was vacuum dried and dissolved in 50ul of 0.1% formic acid in water. After centrifugation at 13000g the supernatant was loaded into the vial and 10ul sample was injected on C18 UPLC column for separation of peptides followed by analysis on the Q-TOF instrument for MS and MSMS.

### Data Protocol
Following data acquisition, the raw data was obtained and evaluated by MassLynx 4.1 WATERS. The raw files were analyzed for protein identification and expression using the WATERS Protein Lynx Global Server (PLGS) version 3.0.2. The individual peptide peak lists based on their m/z value were searched against the database containing sequences for Proteins (Mollicutes and Eutycotiledons) and matched based on probabilities of peptide matching using the PLGS server.

### Publication Abstract
"Candidatus Phytoplasma australiense" is associated with floral malformations in sesame but the interaction remains largely unexplored. A label-free quantitative shotgun proteomics approach through liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry quadruple time-of-flight was used to analyze changes in the proteome of asymptomatic (control) and symptomatic (phytoplasma-infected) sesame plants to identify proteins differentially expressed during phytoplasma infection at early stages of flower development. A total of 3457 and 1704 proteins were identified from asymptomatic and symptomatic samples respectively through proteome profiling with three runs per sample. Several differentially abundant proteins (DAPs) were identified which might be involved in sesame-phytoplasma interaction. The DAPs identified were related to transcription, cell division, chromosome partitioning, defense mechanisms, negative regulation of flower development, amino acid transport and metabolism, signal transduction and RNA processing, and its modifications. Of these proteins, 21 were downregulated while 212 were significantly upregulated in symptomatic sesame plants compared to the control plants. The floral development-related proteins like UBP16 and DCAF1 were found to be downregulated while negative regulators/repressors of floral development genes, HUA2, PIE1, and ICU2, were upregulated in symptomatic samples indicating phytoplasma's role in altering the expression of these genes. Validation of these genes through quantitative retro-transcripted PCR suggested that the DAPs observed in symptomatic sesame might be induced by phytoplasma presence to suppress flowering via negative regulation of flower development.

### Keywords
Floral buds, Lc-msms, Sesamum, Reproductive system

### Affiliations
UNIVERSITY OF HYDERABAD
Department of Plant Sciences, School of Life Science, University of Hyderabad, Hyderabad, INDIA

### Submitter
INJANGBUANANG PAMEI

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Ragiba Makandar
Department of Plant Sciences, School of Life Science, University of Hyderabad, Hyderabad, INDIA


