### Accession
PXD019640

### Title
The pan-HER kinase inhibitor Neratinib modulates plant defense signaling by covalent targeting of an Arabidopsis epoxide hydrolase

### Description
The goal of this project was to identify the target of the human covalent kinase inhibitor drug neratinib in Arabidopsis samples. To this end we applied activity-based protein profilling using the neratinib alkyne derivative.

### Sample Protocol
Affinity purification and MS sample preparation Before affinity purification, unbound reporter and salts from the click reaction were removed by protein precipitation. Therefore, the samples were incubated with a 4× equivalent of methanol (-20 °C, 1.5 h-overnight). Precipitated proteins were collected by centrifugation (10 min, 14,000 rpm) and washed with 500 µl methanol. The resulting protein pellet was dissolved in 1% (w/v) SDS (37 °C, 10-30 min), diluted with 1× PBS (~0.1% SDS) and the obtained protein mixture was incubated with 100 µl of avidin bead slurry (Thermo Scientific, 20219) for 1 h while gently rotating at room temperature in the dark.  For samples designated for in-gel digestion, the beads were washed 5× with 1% (w/v) SDS (10 min, room temperature, in the dark, gently rotating) and collected by centrifugation (400 × g, 5 min) before adding 35 µl 4× LDS gel loading dye (423 mM Tris HCl, 563 mM Tris base, 8% (w/v) lithium dodecyl sulfate (LDS), 40% (w/v) glycerol, 2 mM EDTA, 0.075% (w/v) SERVA Blue G250; supplemented with 100 mM DTT). The samples were incubated for 20 min at 90 °C to release avidin-bound proteins. Separation of proteins was performed by gel electrophoresis on a 11% Bis-Tris resolving gel and labeled proteins were visualized by scanning fluorescence on a Typhoon FLA 9000 scanner (GE Healthcare). Labeled protein bands were excised and cut into small pieces. Gel pieces were then washed twice with ultrapure water (VWR Chemicals) and twice with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) solution. The proteins were reduced with 10 mM TCEP (Sigma) in 100 mM ABC (30 min, 62 °C) while gently shaking and subsequently alkylated by adding 55 mM iodoacetamide (IA; Sigma) in 100 mM ABC (30 min, room temperature, in the dark). The gel pieces were washed three times with a 1:1 mixture of acetonitrile (ACN; Sigma)/100 mM ABC (3× 500 µl) and once with ACN (50 µl). After the last wash, the gel slabs were completely dried by using a vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf) for 10 min. The dried gel pieces were incubated with a 1 ng µl-1 trypsin solution (Promega, V5111/V5113) in 25 mM ABC (200 µl, 37 °C, ~16 h, vigorous shaking). The supernatant was transferred to a fresh Eppendorf tube, the gel slabs were incubated with 5% FA (v/v; Fisher Scientific) (100 µl, 15 min) and the supernatant was combined with the recovered digestion mix to stop the digestion. The remaining gel pieces were subsequently washed three times with ACN (100 µl, 70 µl and 50 µl), the supernatants of these washes were combined with the recovered digestion mix and dried in a vacuum concentrator. For samples designated for on-bead digestion, the beads were washed 5× with 1% (w/v) SDS (10 min, room temperature, gently rotating) and 4× with ultrapure water (VWR Chemicals; 10 min, room temperature, vigorously shaking) and collected by centrifugation (400 × g, 5 min). Beads were subsequently taken up in 100 µL 0.8 M urea in 50 mM ABC and reduced with 10 mM DTT (Sigma) in 50 mM ABC (1 h, room temperature) while vigorously shaking and subsequently alkylated by adding 25 mM IA (Sigma) in 50 mM ABC (1 h, room temperature, in the dark). DTT was added to a final concentration of 35 mM to quench IA (10 min, room temperature). For protein digestion, 10 µl of a 100 ng µl-1 Trypsin solution (Pierce, 90057) in 50 mM acetic acid were added (37 °C, ~16 h, vigorous shaking). Beads were collected by centrifugation and the supernatant was recovered and mix with formic acid (FA) to a final concentration of 5% (v/v). The beads were washed with 50 µL 1% (v/v) FA and the supernatant was combined with the recovered digestion mix. To remove remaining beads from the peptide solution, the mix was passed over a home-made two disc glass microfiber membrane (GE Healthcare; poresize 1.2 µm, thickness 0.26 mm) tip.  Sample clean-up for LC–MS.   Peptides were desalted on home-made C18 StageTips. For samples from in-gel digestion, the dried peptide pellets were dissolved in 0.5% (v/v) FA solution. StageTips were subsequently equilibrated with methanol , 80% (v/v) ACN 0.5% (v/v) FA and 0.5% (v/v) FA. The tryptic digests were passed twice over a two membrane (3M) disc StageTip and the immobilized peptides were then washed twice with 0.5% (v/v) FA. Bound peptides were eluted from the StageTips by a two-step elution with 80% (v/v) ACN 0.5% (v/v) FA. After elution from the StageTips, samples were dried using a vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf) and the peptides were resuspended in 10 µl 0.1% (v/v) FA.

### Data Protocol
Andromeda searches allowed oxidation of methionine residues (16 Da), acetylation of the protein N-terminus (42 Da) as dynamic modifications and the static modification of cysteine (57 Da, alkylation with IA). Enzyme specificity was set to “Trypsin/P”. The instrument type in Andromeda searches was set to Orbitrap and the precursor mass tolerance was set to ±20 ppm (first search) and ±4.5 ppm (main search). The MS/MS match tolerance was set to ±0.5 Da. The peptide spectrum match FDR and the protein FDR were set to 0.01 (based on target-decoy approach). Minimum peptide length was 7 amino acids. For protein quantification unique and razor peptides were allowed. Modified peptides with dynamic modifications were allowed for quantification. The minimum score for modified peptides was 40. In addition to the default settings, label-free protein quantification (MaxLFQ algorithm) was switched on, and unique and razor peptides were considered for quantification with a minimum ratio count of 2. Retention times were recalibrated based on the built-in nonlinear time-rescaling algorithm. MS/MS identifications were transferred between LC-MS/MS runs with the “Match between runs” option in which the maximal match time window was set to 0.7 min and the alignment time window set to 20 min. The quantification was based on the “value at maximum” of the extracted ion current. At least two quantitation events were required for a quantifiable protein. MS/MS spectra data were searched against the UniProt Arabidopsis thaliana (strain cv. Columbia) (UP000006548_3702.fasta; 39 381 entries) or UniProt Homo sapiens (UP000005640_9606.fasta; 74 416 entries) database, accordingly. All searches included a contaminants database (as implemented in MaxQuant, 245 sequences). The contaminants database contains known MS contaminants and was included to estimate the level of contamination. Further data analysis and filtering of the MaxQuant output was done in Perseus v1.6.2.1. MS/MS counts (in-gel digests) or Label-free quantification (LFQ) intensities (on-bead digests) were loaded into the matrix from the proteinGroups.txt file and potential contaminants as well as hits from the reverse database and hits only identified by peptides with a modification site were removed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Kinase, Plant immunity, Inhibitor, Neratinib, Abpp

### Affiliations
Farnusch Kaschani, Analytics Core Facility Essen (ACE), Chemische Biologie, Universität Duisburg-Essen, ZMB, Germany
University Duisburg-Essen

### Submitter
Farnusch Kaschani

### Lab Head
Dr Farnusch Kaschani
Farnusch Kaschani, Analytics Core Facility Essen (ACE), Chemische Biologie, Universität Duisburg-Essen, ZMB, Germany


