### Accession
PXD022970

### Title
PLK1 phosphorylation of Epstein-Barr virus nuclear antigen 2

### Description
The Epstein-Barr virus nuclear antigen 2 (EBNA2) initiates and maintains the proliferation of infected B cells. In search of additional cellular strategies, that control EBNA2 function, we have performed a label-free mass spectrometry-based quantification of cellular proteins in EBNA2 immuno-precipitates and found polo-like kinase 1 (PLK1) to be bound to EBNA2. EBNA2/PLK1 complex formation is strongly enforced by EBNA2 S379 phosphorylation catalyzed by the mitotic CYCLIN B/CDK1 complex.

### Sample Protocol
EBNA2 and GST-fused EBNA2 proteins were subjected to PLK1 kinase assays. 50 µg EBNA2 or 130 µg GST-fused EBNA2 protein were incubate in PK buffer (NEB, 50mM Tris-HCl, 10mM MgCl2, 0.1mM EDTA, 2mM DTT, 0.01% Brij 35, pH 7.5), 1.25 mM ATP in presence or absence of 250 ng active PLK1 at 37 °C for 1h. All reactions were carried out in a total volume of 20 μL and then were quenched with 5 μL 5x Lämmli sample buffer. Proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE, and stained with Coomassie colloidal blue. Bands corresponding to EBNA2 full length (86 kD) or GST-EBNA2 C-terminal fragment (28 kD) were sliced out from the gel lane, and proteins were then reduced, alkylated, and digested with either Trypsin or GluC. Dried peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% FA/2% ACN and subjected to MS analysis using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC+ system coupled to a Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer. Peptides were delivered to a trap column (75 μm × 2 cm, packed in-house with 5 μm Reprosil C18 resin) and washed using 0.1% FA at a flow rate of 5 μL/min for 10 min. Subsequently, peptides were transferred to an analytical column (75 μm × 45 cm, packed in-house with 3 μm Reprosil C18 resin) applying a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Peptides were chromatographically separated using a 50 min linear gradient from 4% to 32% solvent B (0.1% FA, 5% DMSO in ACN) in solvent A (0.1% FA in 5% DMSO). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS. Full-scan MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 200, using AGC target value of 5e5 charges and maxIT of 10 ms. The 10 most intense ions within the survey scan were selected for HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy set to 28%. Isolation window was set to 1.7 Th, and MS/MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 15,000 at m/z 200, using an AGC target value of 2e5, and a maxIT of 75 ms.  Dynamic exclusion was set to 20 s.

### Data Protocol
Peptide and protein identification was performed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30). Spectra were searched against a SwissProt database, either the Spodoptera frugiperda (OX 7108 - 26,502 sequences) or Escherichia coli (UP000002032 – 4,156 sequences), supplemented with the EBNA2 protein sequence. Enzyme specificity was set to Trypsin/P or GluC accordingly, and the search included cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification, protein N-term acetylation, oxidation of methionine, and phosphorylation of serine, threonine, tyrosine residue (STY) as variable modifications. Up to two and three missed cleavage sites were allowed for trypsin and GluC, respectively. Precursor tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm (after MS1 feature re-calibration), and fragment ion tolerance to 20 ppm.  The match between runs feature was enable. Peptides identification were further filtered for a minimum Andromeda score of 20 or 40, for unmodified and modified (phosphorylated) sequences, respectively. A site localization probability of at least 0.75 was used as the threshold for confident localization.

### Publication Abstract
While Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) establishes a life-long latent infection in apparently healthy human immunocompetent hosts, immunodeficient individuals are at particular risk to develop lymphoproliferative B-cell malignancies caused by EBV. A key EBV protein is the transcription factor EBV nuclear antigen 2 (EBNA2), which initiates B-cell proliferation. Here, we combine biochemical, cellular, and in&#x2009;vivo experiments demonstrating that the mitotic polo-like kinase 1 (PLK1) binds to EBNA2, phosphorylates its transactivation domain, and thereby inhibits its biological activity. EBNA2 mutants that impair PLK1 binding or prevent EBNA2 phosphorylation are gain-of-function mutants. They exhibit enhanced transactivation capacities, accelerate the proliferation of infected B cells, and promote the development of monoclonal B-cell lymphomas in infected mice. Thus, PLK1 coordinates the activity of EBNA2 to attenuate the risk of tumor incidences in favor of the establishment of latency in the infected but healthy host.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Mass spectrometry, Cancer

### Affiliations
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technical University of Munich, Emil-Erlenmeyer-Forum 5, D-85354, Freising, Germany Bavarian Center for Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry, Technical University of Munich, Gregor-Mendel-Strasse 4, D-85354, Freising, Germany
Technical University of Munich

### Submitter
Piero Giansanti

### Lab Head
Dr Bernhard Kuster
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technical University of Munich, Emil-Erlenmeyer-Forum 5, D-85354, Freising, Germany Bavarian Center for Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry, Technical University of Munich, Gregor-Mendel-Strasse 4, D-85354, Freising, Germany


