### Accession
PXD044913

### Title
Comparison of extracellular vesicle proteome between glaucoma and non-glaucoma trabecular meshwork cells

### Description
Extracellular matrix (ECM) materials accumulate in the trabecular meshwork (TM) tissue of patients with glaucoma, which is associated with a decrease in aqueous humor outflow and therefore an increase in intraocular pressure. To explore a potential mechanism for ECM regulation in the TM, we purified extracellular vesicles (EVs) from conditioned media of differentiated TM cells in culture isolated from non-glaucomatous and glaucomatous human donor eyes. EVs were purified using the double cushion ultracentrifugation gradient method. Fractions containing EV markers CD9 and TSG101 were analyzed using nanoparticle tracking analysis to determine their size and concentration. We then determined their proteomic cargo by mass spectrometry and compared protein profiles of EVs between normal and glaucomatous TM cells using PANTHER.  Key protein components from EV preparations were validated with Western blotting. Results showed changes in the percentage of ECM proteins associated with EVs from glaucomatous TM cells compared to non-glaucomatous TM cells (5.7% vs 13.1% respectively). Correspondingly, we found that two ECM-related cargo proteins found across all samples, fibronection and EDIL3 were significantly less abundant in glaucomatous EVs (<0.3 fold change across all groups) compared to non-glaucomatous EVs. Overall, these data establish that ECM materials are prominent cargo in EVs from TM cells, and their binding to EVs is diminished in glaucoma

### Sample Protocol
For each sample, approximately 8 μg total protein was used to prepare peptide mixtures for proteomic profiling. Proteins were cleaved with the trypsin/endoproteinase Lys-C mixture (Promega, V5072) using the paramagnetic beads-based method. Each digest was dissolved in 15 μl of 1/2/97% (by volume) of the trifluoroacetic acid/acetonitrile/water solution, and 5 μl were injected into a 5 μm×5 mm PepMap Neo C18 column (Thermo Scientific) in 1% acetonitrile in water for 3 min at 5 μl/min. The analytical separation was next performed using an EasySpray PepMap Neo 75 μm X 150 mm, 2 μm, C18 column (Thermo Scientific) over 90 min at a flow rate of 0.3 μl/min at 35°C using Vanquish Neo UHPLC system (Thermo Scientific). The 5-30% mobile phase B gradient was used, where phase A was 0.1% formic acid in water and phase B 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile. Peptides separated by LC were introduced into the Q Exactive HF Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) using positive electrospray ionization at 1900 V and capillary temperature of 275°C. Data collection was performed in the data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode with 120,000 resolutions (at m/z 200) for MS1 precursor measurements. The MS1 analysis utilized a scan from 375-1500 m/z with a target AGC value of 1.0e6 ions, the RF lens set at 30%, and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Advanced peak detection and internal calibration (EIC) were enabled during data acquisition. Peptides were selected for MS/MS using charge state filtering (2-5), monoisotopic peak detection, and a dynamic exclusion time of 25 seconds with a mass tolerance of 10 ppm. MS/MS was performed using HCD with a collision energy of 30±5% with detection in the ion trap using a rapid scanning rate, AGC target value of 5.0e4 ions, maximum injection time of 150 ms, and ion injection for all available parallelizable time enabled.

### Data Protocol
For label-free relative protein quantification, raw mass spectral data files (.raw) were imported into Progenesis QI for Proteomics 4.2 software (Nonlinear Dynamics) for duplicate runs alignment of each preparation and peak area calculations. Peptides were identified using Mascot version 2.5.1 (Matrix Science) for searching the UniProt 2019 reviewed human database containing 20243 entrees. Mascot search parameters were: 10 ppm mass tolerance for precursor ions; 0.025 Da for fragment-ion mass tolerance; one missed cleavage by trypsin; fixed modification was carbamidomethylation of cysteine; variable modification was oxidized methionine. Only proteins identified with 2 or more peptides (Mascot scores >15 for a peptide and >50 for a protein corresponding to protein corresponding to protein confidence P<0.05), were included in the protein quantification analysis. To account for variations in experimental conditions and amounts of protein material in individual LC-MS/MS runs, the integrated peak area for each identified peptide was corrected using the factors calculated by the automatic Progenesis algorithm utilizing the total intensities for all peaks in each run. Values representing protein amounts were calculated based on a sum of ion intensities for all identified constituent non-conflicting peptides. Protein abundances were averaged for two duplicate runs for each sample.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Trabecular meshwork, Proteomics, Ete, Extracellular vesicles

### Affiliations
Duke University
Duke University, Eyer Centetr

### Submitter
Nik Skiba

### Lab Head
Dr W. Daniel Stamer
Duke University, Eyer Centetr


