### Accession
PXD003871

### Title
Yeast not5 mutant protein translation analysis

### Description
Analysis of translation rate and turnover differences between wild type and not5 mutant yeast using pulse-chase mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Yeast were lysed using a detergent based protocol with sonication. Samples were processed using the SP3 method, fractionated using high-pH reversed phase C18, and analyzed on an Orbitrap Velos MS.

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed in MaxQuant using R for supplemental processing.

### Publication Abstract
The current understanding of gene expression considers transcription and translation to be independent processes. Challenging this notion, we found that translation efficiency is determined during transcription elongation through the imprinting of mRNAs with Not1, the central scaffold of the Ccr4-Not complex. We determined that another subunit of the complex, Not5, defines Not1 binding to specific mRNAs, particularly those produced from ribosomal protein genes. This imprinting mechanism specifically regulates ribosomal protein gene expression, which in turn determines the translational capacity of cells. We validate our model by SILAC and polysome profiling experiments. As a proof of concept, we demonstrate that enhanced translation compensates for transcriptional elongation stress. Taken together, our data indicate that in addition to defining mRNA stability, components of the Ccr4-Not imprinting complex regulate RNA translatability, thus ensuring global gene expression homeostasis.

### Keywords
Yeast, Protein synthesis, Turnover, Silac

### Affiliations
BC Cancer Agency
British Columbia Cancer Research Centre

### Submitter
Christopher Hughes

### Lab Head
Dr Gregg Morin
British Columbia Cancer Research Centre


