### Accession
PXD003796

### Title
Distinct Combinatorial Cascade of Events Generated by ECM Proteolysis Dictates Cell Behavior, part 2

### Description
It is well established that the expression profiles of multiple and possibly redundant matrix remodeling proteases (e.g. collagenases) strongly differentiates in disease and development. Although enzymatic redundancy might be inferred from their close similarity in structure, their in-vivo activity can lead to extremely diverse tissue-remodeling outcomes. We observed that proteolysis of collagen, generated uniquely by individual homologous proteases, leads to a specific cascade of combinatorial events, which eventually affects overall extracellular matrix (ECM) topography, visco-elastic properties

### Sample Protocol
Extra cellular matrix proteins were isolated, then subjected to tryptic digestion or MMP digestion followed by tryptic digestion.Extra cellular matrix proteins were isolated, then subjected to tryptic digestion or MMP digestion followed by tryptic digestion.

### Data Protocol
The acquired spectra from Orbitrap-XL were submitted to in-house MASCOT server (version 2. 4,  Matrix Science, London, UK (49))  and searched against a SwissProt and  NCBI databases. Search parameters included fixed modification of 57.02146 Da (carboxyamidomethylation) on Cys, and variable modifications of 15.99491 Da (oxidation) on Met, 0.984016 Da (deamidation) on Asn and Gln (Q/N) and hydroxylation of Proline (Pro). The search parameters were as follows: maximum 2 missed cleavages, initial precursor ion mass tolerance 10 ppm, fragment ion mass tolerance 0.6 Da. Half-trypsin cleavage was allowed from ether end in order to detect collagenase cleaved peptides. The identity of the peptides were concluded from the detected collision-induced dissociation products by Mascot software and confirmed by manual inspection of the fragmentation series. Relative quantitation of the peptides revealing specific MMP1 and/or MMP13 cleavage sites was conducted with the Scaffold software (version Scaffold 3.6.3, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR, USA). To validate the datasets generated by MS, database search files generated by Mascot were imported into Scaffold and further analyzed from within Scaffold, using the spectral quantitative value display option with filter settings of: Min Protein 99%, Min # Peptides 2, min Peptide 95%. Each 21 Mascot outputs from searches of the 21 gel slices segments of each biological replicate were imported into Scaffold, combined and the number of assigned peptides and spectra in each biological replicates used for protein identification and quantification. The integrated PeptideProphet (50) and ProteinProphet algorithms (51) were used to control for false discovery rate and the probabilities  were set to minimum 95% and 99%, respectively, and at least 2 unique matched peptides per protein were required for confident protein identification. To assign the cleavage sites of Col I to  the  MMPs digestion, the semi-tryptic peptides detected by MS were associated with the specificity of MMPs to collagen  only (52). The cleavage sites from five experiments provided from silver and Comassie blue stains were analyzed. A list of proteolytic cleavage sites was divided for those reproducible in all experiments and those, which were randomly detected.

### Publication Abstract
It is well established that the expression profiles of multiple and possibly redundant matrix-remodeling proteases (e.g., collagenases) differ strongly in health, disease, and development. Although enzymatic redundancy might be inferred from their close similarity in structure, their in vivo activity can lead to extremely diverse tissue-remodeling outcomes. We observed that proteolysis of collagen-rich natural extracellular matrix (ECM), performed uniquely by individual homologous proteases, leads to distinct events that eventually affect overall ECM morphology, viscoelastic properties, and molecular composition. We revealed striking differences in the motility and signaling patterns, morphology, and gene-expression profiles of cells interacting with natural collagen-rich ECM degraded by different collagenases. Thus, in contrast to previous notions, matrix-remodeling systems are not redundant and give rise to precise ECM-cell crosstalk. Because ECM proteolysis is an abundant biochemical process that is critical for tissue homoeostasis, these results improve our fundamental understanding its complexity and its impact on cell behavior.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Ecm

### Affiliations
Weizmann Institute of Science
Weizmann Institute of Science, Israel

### Submitter
Yishai Levin

### Lab Head
Dr Irit Sagi
Weizmann Institute of Science


