### Accession
PXD002757

### Title
Plasma Proteome Profiling of CML in Pakistan

### Description
Systematic characterization of the plasma proteome in healthy and diseased state may uncover the potential biomarkers of disease diagnosis, prognosis and/or relapse detection. We, in this research project, have employed two-dimensional gel electrophoresis in conjunction with mass spectrometry-based analysis in a proteome-wide search for the identification of biomarkers of chronic-phase chronic myeloid leukemia (CP-CML).

### Sample Protocol
Sample Processing: The peripheral blood samples (3cc) from healthy donors and the CP-CML patients were collected in EDTA-coated tubes following the approved guidelines; centrifuged at 2,000 × g for 10 minutes to separate plasma and then stored at -80°C, in 250 µl aliquots, until their use for analysis. Fractionation of proteins by two-dimensional gel electrophoresis Total protein contents in the collected plasma samples were estimated by Bradford assay using bovine serum albumin (BSA) as standard. Protein fractionation using 2D-gel electrophoresis was performed according to the procedure described previously with minor modifications 10. Briefly, the plasma sample was diluted with rehydration solution [7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 2 % CHAPS, 65 mM DTT and 0.25 % Servalyte] to a concentration of 1 µg/µl and applied onto 18 cm long, linear immobilized pH gradient (pH 4-7) strip (Serva Electrophoresis, Heidelberg, Germany). The dried strip was subjected to passive rehydration overnight at 20°C and then focused on IEF flatbed (IEF-SYS, SciePlas, UK) for a total of 60 kVhr. Following first dimension IEF, strips were successively equilibrated with equilibration buffer-I [6 M urea, 2 % SDS, 30 % glycerol and 1% DTT in 1.5 mM Tris-Cl (pH 8.8)] and buffer-II [6 M urea, 2 % SDS, 30 % glycerol, 5 % iodoacetamide in 1.5 mM Tris-Cl (pH 8.8)], each for 15 minutes. Equilibrated strips were aligned on 12 % SDS-gel and electrophoresed at 80 V initially for 1 hour and then at 160 V until the bromophenol blue tracking dye reached the bottom of the gel. After electrophoresis, the gel was placed in fixative solution (30 % ethanol, 10 % acetic acid) overnight, stained with coomassie colloidal blue dye and then destained with deionized water to a clear background. 2D gel images were acquired using Syngene gel documentation system and the individual protein spots, detected in the samples of CML group, were analyzed for pI and molecular weight, followed by quantification and matching with the spots observed in samples of the control group using the Dymension v.3.0.1.2 (Syngene, UK) and ImageMaster 2D Platinum v7.0.6 (GE Healthcare Amersham Biosciences) software programs. In-gel digestion and mass spectrometric analysis After matching the proteins of healthy and CP-CML subjects, individual gel spots were excised under sterile conditions, washed twice with deionized water and then destained completely by incubation with 100 µl of 0.2 M ammonium biocarbonate (AB) and 50 % acetonitrile solution (1:1) at 37°C for 30 min. Proteins in gel spots were thereafter reduced and alkylated by successive incubations with 100 µl 20 mM tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine containing 25 mM AB and 40 mM iodoacetamide containing 25 mM AB, each at 37°C for 30 min. in dark. The gel pieces were washed with 100 µl of 5 mM  β-mercaptoethanol containing 25 mM AB for 15 min. at 37°C and dried completely in a speed vac. For tryptic digestion, the gel slices were rehydrated with 20 µl of 0.02 mg/ml sequencing grade trypsin (Promega, V511A) and left for overnight digestion at 37°C. Resulting peptides were extracted from the gel by centrifugation, washed with 40 mM AB/ acetic acid (incubation 37°C for 30 min.) and spotted on target plate for mass spectrometric analysis. For MALDI analysis, 1 µl of the digested peptides was mixed with equal volume of freshly prepared saturated solution of α-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid prepared in 0.1 % triflouroacetic acid/acetonitrile. 1 µl of this mixture was then spotted onto the target plate, air dried until solvent evaporation and then analyzed using MALDI-TOF-TOF MS (Ultraflex III, Bruker Daltonics, Germany). A 337 nm nitrogen laser and a 2 GHz digitizer were used at a laser frequency of 100 Hz and an intensity of 60 % - 70 %. Spectra were acquired in linear positive ion mode with accelerating voltage of 25 kV and lens potential of 6 kV. Delayed extraction was applied at 100 ns, the detector gain was set to 7.5 and the sample rate to 0.5 GS/s. Spectra were acquired in the mass to charge (m/z) range of 1000-5000.

### Data Protocol
Data Processing Protocol: In-silico characterization and pathway analysis Peptide mass spectra obtained from MS analysis were searched against the SWISS-PROT and NCBInr databases using the MASCOT software from Matrix Science (www.matrixscience.com) and further confirmed by MS-fit program from Protein Prospector (www.prospector.ucsf.edu). Search parameters included Homo sapiens as species and methionine oxidation and carboxymethylation of cysteine residues as variable and fixed modifications, respectively. Enzymatic digestion of proteins was done with trypsin. Peptide mass tolerance of 50-100 ppm was allowed and the identified proteins with MOWSE score >60 were considered as acceptable. The identified proteins were categorized according to their GO (www.geneontology.com) annotations based on molecular functions. Network construction analyses and canonical pathways were generated through the use of MetaCoreTM (Functional Genomics Centre, University of Zurich, Switzerland) and protein functional analysis software, STRING v.9.1 (string.db.org). Statistical analysis and validation of biomarker candidates The statistical analyses were performed using SPSS software program ver.20. The spot intensity differences obtained from 2D-gel images of at least 3 different sets of independent plasma samples were analyzed by non-parametric Mann-Whitney U test. Associations with a p-value ≤0.05 were considered as statistically significant. Proteins with high fold-changes (≥2.5) were considered for validation studies by enzyme linked immunosorbant assays (ELISA). To minimize sample handling bias or pipetting errors, pre-coated ELISA plates [against human-alpha-1-antitrypsin (AAT or Serpin A1), anti-chymotrypsin (AACT or Serpin A3), transthyretin (TTR, also known as pre-albumin), fibrinogen gamma (FGG), vitamin-D binding protein (VDBP), CD5 molecule-like (CD5-L), stress-induced phosphoprotein 1 (STIP1) and haptoglobin (HP), acquired from GenWay Biotech Inc., CA, USA and Biomatik Corporation, USA, were used in the validation of candidate biomarkers. All assays were performed in triplicates according to the recommended instructions of the supplier. one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with an unpaired Student's t-test (applied to check the significance of differences amongst the group mean values) with a p-value ≤0.05 were considered as statistically significant.

### Publication Abstract
Better and sensitive biomarkers are needed to help understand the mechanism of disease onset, progression, prognosis and monitoring of the therapeutic response. Aim of this study was to identify the candidate circulating markers of chronic-phase chronic myeloid leukemia (CP-CML) manifestations, having potential to develop into predictive- or monitoring-biomarkers. A proteomic approach, two-dimensional gel electrophoresis in conjunction with mass spectrometry (2DE-MS), was employed for this purpose. Based on the spot intensity measurements, six proteins were found to be consistently dysregulated in CP-CML subjects compared to the healthy controls [false discovery rate (FDR) threshold &#x2264;0.05]. These were identified as &#x3b1;-1-antichymotrypsin, &#x3b1;-1-antitrypsin, CD5 molecule-like, stress-induced phosphoprotein 1, vitamin D binding protein isoform 1 and transthyretin by MS analysis [PMF score &#x2265;79; data accessible via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD002757]. Quantitative ELISA, used for validation of candidate proteins both in the pre-treated and nilotinib-treated CP-CML cases, demonstrate that CD5 molecule-like, transthyretin and alpha-1-antitrypsin may serve as useful predictive markers and aid in monitoring the response of TKI-based therapy (ANOVA p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.0001). Two of the circulating marker proteins, identified in this study, had not previously been associated with chronic- or acute-phase myeloid leukemia. Exploration of their probable association with CP-CML, in a larger study cohort, may add to our understanding of the disease mechanism besides developing clinically useful biomarkers in future.

### Keywords
Pathway analysis, 2de, Cml, Human plasma proteome, Mass spectrometry, Elisa

### Affiliations
School of Biological Sciences, University of the Punjab, Lahore, Pakistan

### Submitter
Muhammad Akhtar

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. M. Waheed Akhtar
School of Biological Sciences, University of the Punjab, Lahore, Pakistan


