### Accession
PXD029959

### Title
Differential scaling between G1 protein production and cell size dynamics promotes commitment to the cell division cycle in budding yeast

### Description
In the unicellular eukaryote Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Cln3–cyclin-dependent kinase activity enables Start, the irreversible commitment to the cell division cycle. However, the concentration of Cln3 has been paradoxically considered to remain constant during G1, due to the presumed scaling of its production rate with cell size dynamics. Measuring metabolic and biosynthetic activity during cell cycle progression in single cells, we found that cells exhibit pulses in their protein production rate. Rather than scaling with cell size dynamics, these pulses follow the intrinsic metabolic dynamics, peaking around Start. Using a viral- based bicistronic construct and targeted proteomics to measure Cln3 at the single-cell and population levels, we show that the differential scaling between protein production and cell size leads to a temporal increase in Cln3 concentration, and passage through Start. This differential scaling causes Start in both daughter and mother cells across growth conditions. Thus, uncou- pling between two fundamental physiological parameters drives cell cycle commitment.

### Sample Protocol
Measurement of Cln3 and Whi5 via targeted proteomics in cell cyclesynchronous cultures. Elutriation and sampling. For the targeted proteomics experiments, single wild-type colonies were used to inoculate liquid YPD cultures. After overnight growth, cultures were diluted in fresh media at an OD600 of 0.5–1 and were allowed to undergo around two or three cell divisions before being harvested for elutriation. Elutriation was performed as described previously77. Cultures of 100 ml were loaded into a large elutriation chamber (40 ml) at a pump speed of 40 ml min−1 and a rotor speed of 3,200 r.p.m. The elutriation buffer was YPD pre-warmed at 30 °C. Approximately 300 ml media containing small-sized cells was collected by increasing the pump speed to 65 ml min−1. The elutriated cells were centrifuged at 3,900 r.p.m. for 2 min, resuspended in 35 ml pre-warmed YPD and incubated at 30 °C with shaking. Sampling took place every 10 min. Specifically, 2 ml of culture was centrifuged (30 s; 11,000 RCF), the supernatant was discarded, and cells were flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen. At each time point, 100 µl culture was also used to measure the cell size distribution of the population using CASY TT, and 200 µl culture was fixed with 70% ethanol for determination of the budding index via microscopy. Sample preparation. Cell pellets were reconstituted in 40 µl 2% sodium deoxycholate, 7.5 mM TECEP and 100 mM ammoniumbicarbonate, and sonicated twice for 10 s using a UP200St with VialTweeter (Hielscher Ultrasonics). Heat treatment was performed for 10 min at 37 °C. After cooling, the concentration was determined by BCA assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific; 23252), and 100 µg protein per sample was used for the subsequent steps. Alkylation was performed by the addition of iodoacetamide to a final concentration of 40 mM and incubation for 45 min in the dark at room temperature. Samples were diluted 1:2 using 100 mM ammoniumbicarbonate, and mass spectrometry-grade trypsin (Promega; V5280) was added at a ratio of 1:50 (µg trypsin:µg protein) and incubated overnight at 37 °C at 400 r.p.m. The reaction was stopped by adding trifluoroacetic acid to a final concentration of 1%. Sample cleanup by solid-phase extraction was performed with Pierce C18 tips (Thermo Fisher Scientific; 87784), according to the supplier’s manual. The eluate fraction was dried under vacuum and reconstituted with 20 µl 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Targeted parallel reaction-monitoring (PRM) with tandem liquid chromatography– mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis of selected peptides and proteins. In a first step, PRM assays78 were generated from a mixture containing 500 fmol of each heavy reference peptide (JPT Peptide Technologies) and iRT KIT peptides, according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Biognosys), and shotgun data-dependent acquisition LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Q-Exactive HF platform. The setup of the micro-reverse-phase liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry system was as described previously79. Chromatographic separation of peptides was carried out using an EASY-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a heated reversed-phase HPLC column (75 μm × 30 cm) packed in house with 1.9 μm C18 resin (ReproSil-Pur C18 AQ; Dr. Maisch). Peptides were analysed per LC-MS/MS run using a linear gradient ranging from 95% solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water (v/v)) and 5% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 19.9% water and 0.1% formic acid (v/v/v)) to 45% solvent B over 60 min at a flow rate of 200 nl min−1. Mass spectrometry analysis was performed on a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source (both Thermo Fisher Scientific). Each MS1 scan was followed by high-collision-dissociation of the ten most abundant precursor ions with dynamic exclusion for 20 s. The total cycle time was approximately 1 s. For MS1, 3 × 106 ions were accumulated in the Orbitrap cell over a maximum time of 100 ms and scanned at a resolution of 120,000 full width at half maximum (FWHM; at 200 m/z). MS2 scans were acquired at a target setting of 1 × 105 ions, an accumulation time of 50 ms and a resolution of 30,000 FWHM (at 200 m/z). Singly charged ions and ions with an unassigned charge state were excluded from triggering MS2 events. The normalized collision energy was set to 28%, the mass isolation window was set to 1.4 m/z and one microscan was acquired for each spectrum.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw files were searched against a yeast database (UniProt; download date: 30 October 2014; total of 6,652 entries) using the MaxQuant software (version 1.0.13.13) with default parameters. The best six transitions for each peptide were selected automatically using an in-house software tool and imported to Spectrodive software (version 7.5). A mass isolation lists containing two peptides for each protein was exported from Spectrodive and imported into the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos operating software for PRM analysis. For the complete list of peptides and transitions used for PRM analysis, see Supplementary Table 4. Chromatographic separation of peptides was carried out using an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a heated reversed-phase HPLC column (75 μm × 37 cm) packed in house with 1.9 μm C18 resin (ReproSilPur C18 AQ; Dr. Maisch). For PRM analysis, peptide samples were prepared as described above and spiked with the heavy reference peptide mix above at fmol peptide −1 μg−1 of the total peptide mass. The peptides were separated using the following stepwise gradient: from 95% solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water (v/v)) and 5% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 19.9% water and 0.1% formic acid (v/v/v)) to 28% solvent B until 45 min and then 45% solvent B until 60 min at a constant flow rate of 200 nl min−1. For the PRM mass spectrometry analysis (MS2 scans), the resolution of the Orbitrap was set to 120,000 FWHM (at 200 m/z), and the fill time was set to 250 ms to reach a target value of 1 × 106 ions. The ion isolation window was set to 0.4 Th. For each MS cycle, a full MS1 scan at 60,000 FWHM (at 200 m/z) was included. In addition, a few selected samples were also analysed in data-dependent acquisition mode using the same liquid chromatography gradient and parameters as above. After database searching (using MaxQuant and the parameters as above), proteotypic peptides for three abundant yeast proteins (glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase 3, enolase 2 and actin (two peptides for each protein)) were extracted and used for normalizing the PRM results for starting material variations (for details, see below). Quantitative analysis. The PRM files were imported and processed using the Spectrodive software with the default settings. For each target peptide, the total peak areas of the most intense transitions were exported. Only peptides with an elution group q value < 0.01 were considered for quantitative analysis. Subsequently, the raw files were imported into the Skyline software (version 4.2) to extract and sum the MS1 intensities of peptide ions belonging to constitutively expressed proteins (glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase 3, enolase 2 and actin (two peptides for each protein were selected)). PRM (MS2) intensities of target peptides were then normalized to the summed (MS1) intensity of selected peptides from the constitutively expressed proteins. The obtained normalized intensities were divided by the median of all samples to shift the final expression values into a meaningful scale of around 1. The mean of the different peptides from each protein was then estimated for each time point for each replicate experiment.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Phosphorylation, Yeast, Cell division

### Affiliations
PCF, Biozentrum, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland
Proteomics Core Facility

### Submitter
Alexander Schmidt

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Schmidt
PCF, Biozentrum, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland


