### Accession
PXD023842

### Title
Clinical and molecular characteristics indicate mitochondrial dysfunction in Charcot-Marie-Tooth families with the AARS1 Arg326Trp mutation

### Description
Introduction Aminoacyl tRNA-synthetases are ubiquitously expressed enzymes that attach amino acids to their cognate tRNA molecule. Mutations in several of the aminoacyl tRNA-syntheases are described to cause peripheral neuropathy, i.e. AARS1, GARS1, HARS1, YARS1 and WARS1. The Alanyl-tRNA Synthetase (AARS) is encoded by the AARS1. Bi-allelic mutations have been described responsible for epileptic encephalopathy with persistent myelination defect, while mutation in a single allele cause Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 2 (CMT2). Do date it is uncertain how a single AARS1 mutation cause tissue specific neuropathy.  Methods The AARS1 was sequenced by next-generation sequencing in probands. Family members were examined by Sanger sequencing. Blood samples from affected and healthy controls were used for quantitative RNA analysis, biochemical analysis of alanine, and proteomics.   Results Three Norwegian CMT2 families carried the same novel heterozygous AARS1 variant (NM_001605.2:c.976C>T p.(Arg326Trp)). The three families consisted of in total 17 genetically examined family members, of which 11 individuals carried the AARS1 variant and six unaffected individuals did not carry the variant. All individuals carrying the AARS1 variant presented with a mild to moderately severe CMT2 phenotype with adult onset, except a man age 91 years (reported by his son). Label-free quantitative proteomic analysis of four affected individuals pointed towards an effect on the immune system, comprising proteins known to represent components of systemic response to chronic injury and inflammation. Interestingly, a wide-spread impact on mitochondrial dysfunction was identified. Specifically, the oxidative phosphorylation complexes I, IV and V were highly downregulated.  Conclusion Three Norwegian CMT2 families with an AARS1 variant, suggests mitochondrial dysfunction in AARS1 neuropathy.

### Sample Protocol
Blood for protein analysis was collected on CPT-vacutainers. Peripheral blood mononuclear (PBMC) cells were isolated according to standard procedure for isolation and cryopreservation of PBMCs. For proteome analysis the cell pellets were thawn on ice and dissolved in 0.1% ProteaseMaxTM Surfactant (Promega) in 50 mM NH4HCO3. The cells were lysed by vortexing, heating to 95˚C for 5min followed by sonication for 30 minutes. The proteins were reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin (Promega) according to ProteaseMax-protocol from the manufacturer. The resulting peptides were purified by C18-microcolumns and analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS using nEASY-LC coupled to QExactive Plus with 50cm EASY Spray PepMap®RSLC-column and 120 min separation gradient.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification and label-free quantification the LC-MS/MS data was searched with MaxQuant ver 1.6.1.0 againt UniProt human (Oct 2017) database. Additional data processing and statistical analysis was done using Perseus ver 1.6.1.3.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Aars1, Mitochondrial dysfunction, Proteomics, Cmt2, Peripheral neuropathy

### Affiliations
University of Oslo
Head of Proteomics

### Submitter
Tuula Nyman

### Lab Head
Dr Tuula Nyman
Head of Proteomics


