### Accession
PXD001601

### Title
Comparative proteomic analysis to study the involvement of the Tor pathway in the human-pathogenic fungus Aspergillus fumigatus

### Description
The Tor kinase is one of the major regulatory nodes in a eukaryotic cell and until now, little is known about this kinase in filamentous fungi. Here, we analysed the Tor kinase in Aspergillus fumigatus, which is the most important airborne fungal pathogen of humans and the main causative agent of invasive aspergillosis. Because deletion of the single tor gene of A. fumigatus was apparently lethal, we generated a conditional lethal tor mutant. This was achieved by fusing the tor gene with the inducible xylose promoter and replacing the endogenous tor gene by the inducible xylp-tor gene cassette. The generated transgenic strain opened up the possibility to activate or silence the tor gene under controlled conditions. Since we did not observe any effect of rapamycin on Tor of A. fumigatus, the generation of the inducible Tor gene was even more valuable for an in-depth analysis of the Tor kinase. By LC-MS/MS analyses of mycelial proteins we identified the regulatory network of Tor. Tor controls a variety of genes and proteins involved in nutrient sensing, stress response, cell cycle progression, protein biosynthesis and degradation. Tor is a major kinase responsible for protein import into the mitochondria, and consequently responsible for the correct function of most processes occurring into these organelles, e.g. respiration and ornithine metabolism. Regulation of iron acquisition by Tor was found to be independent of the HapX transcription factor.

### Sample Protocol
Hyphae of the xylp-tor mutant and wild-type samples were harvested via gauze filtration, immediately quick-freezed and ground in liquid nitrogen. After addition of lysis buffer (1% (w/v) SDS, 150mM NaCl, 100 mM TEAB (triethyl ammonium bicarbonate, 1 tablet of cOmplete EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche)) cells were sonicated for 15 min in a water bath. To each sample 4 µL benzonase (25 U/µL, Novagen) was added followed by 30 min of incubation at 37 °C, subsequent centrifugation (15 min, 14,000g, 4 °C) and collection of the supernatant. Based on the total protein analysis by the Merck Millipore Direct Detect System, 100 µg of protein were filled up to 100 µL with 50 mM TEAB. Disulfide bonds were reduced at 55 °C for 1 h after addition of 5 µL 200mM TCEP (tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine). Reduced cysteine residues were alkylated for 30 min in the dark at RT after addition of 5 µL of 375mM iodoacetamide. Subsequently, proteins were precipitated using the protocol of Wessel and Flügge (1984). The protein precipitate was dried in a speed vac and resolubilized in 100µL of 100mM TEAB. Protein digestion was performed using 4 µg trypsin (Serva NB Premium Grade) followed by an incubation for 18 h at 37 °C. Tryptic peptides were filtered (15 min, 14,000 g, 4 °C) through 10 kDa MWCO centrifugal filters (VWR, Cat. No. 516-0229) and subsequently derivatized with TMT 6-plex (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Pierce) reagents according to the manufacturer’s manual. The 3 biological replicates of the wild type were labelled with TMT-126, TMT-128 and TMT-130 reagents. The xylp–tor strains were accordingly labelled with TMT-127, TMT-129 and TMT-131. After the reaction had been stopped (8 µL 5 % (v/v) hydroxylamine, 15 min incubation) and all 6plex reactions had been mixed together, the sample was dried in a speed vac and subsequently resolubilized in 60 µL of 0.05 % (v/v) TFA in 2/98 (v/v) ACN/H2O for LC-MS/MS analysis. LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out on an Ultimate 3000 nano RSLC system coupled to a QExactive Plus mass spectrometer (both Thermo Fisher Scientific). Three LC-MS/MS runs were applied as analytical replicates (6 µL sample injection each). Peptides were enriched and desalted online based on a pre-concentration setup using a nano trap column (Acclaim Pep Map 100, 2 cm x 75 µm, 3 µm) at a flow rate of 5 µL/min. After 4 min, a valve switch was performed to elute the pre-concentrated peptides onto the analytical column. For separation of peptides, an Acclaim Pep Map RSLC column (50 cm x 75 µm, 2 µm) was used as stationary phase (Thermo Fisher Scientific). All solvents were MS-grade. The binary mobile phase consisting of eluent A (0.1% formic acid in H2O) and eluent B (0.1% formic acid in 90/10 ACN/H2O v/v) was applied for ultralong 10 h gradient elution: 0-4 min at 4% B, 14 min at 8% B, 220 min at 12% B, 450 min at 30% B, 500 min at 50% B, 519-529 min at 96% B, 530-600 min at 4% B. LC performance was routinely checked by cytochrome C standard digest and blind injections prior and after analysis and by monitoring UV absorption at 214 nm during analysis. The Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) provided with a stainless steel emitter was used to generate positively charged ions at 2.2 kV spray voltage. The capillary temperature was set to 220 °C and the S-lens RV level was set to 50. The mass spectrometer was calibrated externally prior to the analysis with positive CalMix solution and internally during the measurements based on the lock mass of m/z 445.12003 amu for [C2H6SiO]6 (polydimethylsiloxane). The hybrid quadrupole/orbitrap mass analyser was operated in Full MS / dd MS2 (TopN) mode. Precursor ions were measured in full scan mode within a mass range of m/z 300-1600 at a resolution of 70k FWHM using a maximum injection time of 120 ms and an AGC (automatic gain control) target of 1e6. For data-dependent acquisition, up to 10 most abundant precursor ions per scan cycle with an assigned charge state of z = 2-6 were selected in the quadrupole for further fragmentation using an isolation width of m/z 2.0. Fragment ions were generated in the HCD cell at a normalized collision energy of 36 V using nitrogen gas. Dynamic exclusion of precursor ions was set to 40 s. Fragment ions were monitored at a resolution of 17.5k (FWHM) using a maximum injection time of 140 ms and an AGC target of 2e5. The fixed first mass was set to m/z 115 to match the TMT reporter ions (m/z 126-131). The LC-MS/MS instrument was operated by means of the Thermo/Dionex Chromeleon Xpress v6.80 SR13 build 3818 software and the Thermo QExactive Plus Tune / Xcalibur v3.0.63 2.3 build 1765 graphical interface software.

### Data Protocol
Thermo raw files were processed via the Proteome Discoverer (PD) v1.4.0.288. Tandem mass spectra were searched against the AspGD protein database of Aspergillus fumigatus Af293 (www.aspergillusgenome.org/download/sequence/A_fumigatus_Af293/current/A_fumigatus_Af293_current_orf_trans_all.fasta.gz; status: 2014/10/26) using the algorithms of Mascot v2.4.1 (Matrix Science, UK), Sequest HT and MS Amanda. Two missed cleavages were allowed for trypsin digestion. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. Dynamic modifications were oxidation of Met, TMT-6plex reaction on Lys, the peptide N-terminus and Tyr (not considered for quantification). The static modification was based on the carbamidomethylation of Cys by iodoacetamide. Percolator node and a reverse decoy database was used for (qvalue) validation of the peptide spectral matches (PSMs) using a maximum Delta CN of 0.05 and a strict target false discovery (FDR) rate < 1%. At least 2 peptides per protein were required for positive protein hits. TMT quantification was restricted to an integration tolerance of 10 ppm using the most confident centroid. TMT reporter ion ratios were calculated by comparison of all biological replicates of the xylp–tor mutant against the wild type (127/126, 127/128, 127/130, 129/126, 129/128, 129/130, 131/126, 131/128, 131/130). Only unique peptides were considered for quantification. Quan channel correction was applied and the reporter ion ratios were normalized based on the protein median. The significance threshold for differential protein regulation was set to factor >1.5 (up- or down-regulation). The data was further manually evaluated based on the average reporter ion count (>2 for medium confidence, >4 for high confidence). Furthermore, the average variability was observed as a function of the differential regulation and the precursor ion count.

### Publication Abstract
The Tor (target of rapamycin) kinase is one of the major regulatory nodes in eukaryotes. Here, we analyzed the Tor kinase in Aspergillus fumigatus, which is the most important airborne fungal pathogen of humans. Because deletion of the single tor gene was apparently lethal, we generated a conditional lethal tor mutant by replacing the endogenous tor gene by the inducible xylp-tor gene cassette. By both 2DE and gel-free LC-MS/MS, we found that Tor controls a variety of proteins involved in nutrient sensing, stress response, cell cycle progression, protein biosynthesis and degradation, but also processes in mitochondria, such as respiration and ornithine metabolism, which is required for siderophore formation. qRT-PCR analyses indicated that mRNA levels of ornithine biosynthesis genes were increased under iron limitation. When tor was repressed, iron regulation was lost. In a deletion mutant of the iron regulator HapX also carrying the xylp-tor cassette, the regulation upon iron deprivation was similar to that of the single tor inducible mutant strain. In line, hapX expression was significantly reduced when tor was repressed. Thus, Tor acts either upstream of HapX or independently of HapX as a repressor of the ornithine biosynthesis genes and thereby regulates the production of siderophores.

### Keywords
Fungi, Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms; tmt, Tor kinase

### Affiliations
Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knoell Institute Jena
Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knoell Institute Jena Department of Molecular and Applied Microbiology Subgroup Stress- and Immunoproteomics

### Submitter
Thomas Krueger

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Olaf Kniemeyer
Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knoell Institute Jena Department of Molecular and Applied Microbiology Subgroup Stress- and Immunoproteomics


