### Accession
PXD042174

### Title
Higher-order assembly is a regulatory switch that promotes outer kinetochore recruitment

### Description
To faithfully segregate chromosomes during vertebrate mitosis, kinetochore-microtubule interactions must be restricted to a single site on each chromosome. Prior work on pair-wise kinetochore protein interactions has been unable to identify the mechanisms that prevent kinetochore formation in regions with a low density of CENP-A nucleosomes. To investigate the impact of higher-order assembly on kinetochore formation, we generated defined oligomers of the inner kinetochore protein CENP-T using two distinct, genetically engineered systems in human cells. Although individual CENP-T molecules interact poorly with other kinetochore proteins, oligomers that mimic the centromeric density of CENP-T trigger the robust formation of functional, cytoplasmic kinetochore-like particles. Both in cells and in vitro, each molecule of oligomerized CENP-T recruits substantially higher levels of outer kinetochore components than monomeric CENP-T molecules. Thus, the density-dependence of CENP-T restricts outer kinetochore recruitment to centromeres, where densely packed CENP-A recruits a high local concentration of CENP-T.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were treated with doxycycline for 24 hours and STLC for 16 hours before harvesting. Mitotic cells were harvest by shake-off, then cross-linked in 0.1% formaldehyde. Constructs were immunoprecipitated using an appropriate antibody, then cross-links were reversed by heating to 65C. Eluates were cleaned up and trypsinized on an S-trap (Protifi). Quantitative mass spectrometry samples were labeled with TMT tags and fractionated using a High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation kit (Pierce). All samples were analyzed with two compensation voltages on an Orbitrap Exploris 480 equipped with a FAIMS Pro Interface. Quantitative mass spectrometry samples were analyzed in 8 separate fractions.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed as described in Sissoko et al. (2023). Information on numbered cell lines can be found in Supplementary Table 1.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Kinetochore, Cenp-t

### Affiliations
MIT Department of Biology, Cambridge, MA, USA;  Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA, USA.
Whitehead Institute

### Submitter
Gunter Sissoko

### Lab Head
Dr Iain McPherson
MIT Department of Biology, Cambridge, MA, USA;  Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA, USA.


