### Accession
PXD026091

### Title
COVID-19 patient plasma exosome proteomics

### Description
Proteomics analysis of exosomes isolated from four temporal phases of COVID-19

### Sample Protocol
The proteins from exosome were reconstituted with 8M Urea in 50 mM NH4HCO3. The proteins were reduced with 10 mM DTT at 37℃ for 1 h and alkylated with 25 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 1 h in the dark. After reduction and alkylation, the lysates were diluted with 6x volume of 50 mM NH4HCO3, and  digested with trypsin at 37℃ for 18 h using an enzyme: substrate ratio 1:50. All tryptic peptides were desalted by StageTip and dried with a Speed-Vac concentrator before use. For MS analyses, the resuspended peptides were analyzed by LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled online to an Easy-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in a data-dependent mode. The peptides were separated by reverse phase LC with a 150 μm (ID) ×250 mm (length) analytical column packed with C18 particles of 1.9 μm diameter. The mobile phases for the LC contains buffer A (100% H2O, 0.1 % FA ) and buffer B (100 % ACN, 0.1 % FA), a 180-min non-linear gradient was used for the separation. All MS measurements were performed in the positive ion mode. Precursor ions were measured in the Orbitrap analyzer at 240,000 resolution and a target value of 106 ions was used for each MS scan. The twenty most intense ions from each MS scan were isolated, fragmented, and measured in the linear ion trap. The CID normalized collision energy was set to 35.

### Data Protocol
The data was analyzed using a pre-release version of Thermo Scientific Proteome DiscovererTM software version 2.3. The Homo Sapiens proteome sequence database containing 20,417 entries downloaded from Uniprot was used for the database searching. The mass tolerance was set to 0.05 Da. The maximum number of missed cleavages was set at two, the minimum peptide length was set at six amino acids and the maximum peptide length was set at 144 amino acids. Methionine oxidation was included in the search as the variable modifications. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as stable modifications. Protein abundances are calculated by summing sample abundances of the connected peptides groups. Data were normalized to sum of total intensity for each sample before statistical analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Exosomes represent a subtype of extracellular vesicle that is released through retrograde transport and fusion of multivesicular bodies with the plasma membrane<sup>1</sup>. Although no perfect methodologies currently exist for the high-throughput, unbiased isolation of pure plasma exosomes<sup>2,3</sup>, investigation of exosome-enriched plasma fractions of extracellular vesicles can confer a glimpse into the endocytic pathway on a systems level. Here we conduct high-coverage lipidomics with an emphasis on sterols and oxysterols, and proteomic analyses of exosome-enriched extracellular vesicles (EVs hereafter) from patients at different temporal stages of COVID-19, including the presymptomatic, hyperinflammatory, resolution and convalescent phases. Our study highlights dysregulated raft lipid metabolism that underlies changes in EV lipid membrane anisotropy that alter the exosomal localization of presenilin-1 (PS-1) in the hyperinflammatory phase. We also show in vitro that EVs from different temporal phases trigger distinct metabolic and transcriptional responses in recipient cells, including in alveolar epithelial cells, which denote the primary site of infection, and liver hepatocytes, which represent a distal secondary site. In comparison to the hyperinflammatory phase, EVs from the resolution phase induce opposing effects on eukaryotic translation and Notch signalling. Our results provide insights into cellular lipid metabolism and inter-tissue crosstalk at different stages of COVID-19 and are a resource to increase our understanding of metabolic dysregulation in COVID-19.

### Keywords
Plasma, Covid-19, Exosome

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Molecular Developmental Biology, Institute of Genetics and Developmental Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China
State Key Laboratory of Molecular Developmental Biology, Institute of Genetics and Developmental Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Ni zhen

### Lab Head
Dr Guanghou Shui
State Key Laboratory of Molecular Developmental Biology, Institute of Genetics and Developmental Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China


