### Accession
PXD001187

### Title
Influence of digestion protocol in Protein Quantitation

### Description
Quantitative determination of absolute and relative protein amounts is an essential requirement for most current bottom-up proteomics applications, but protein quantitation estimates are affected by several sources of variability such as sample preparation, mass spectrometric acquisition, and data analysis. Among them, sample digestion has attracted much attention from the proteomics community, as protein quantitation by bottom-up proteomics relies on the efficiency and reproducibility of protein enzymatic digestion, with the presence of missed cleavages, nonspecific cleavages, or even the use of different proteases having been postulated as important sources of variation in protein quantitation. Here we evaluated both in-solution and filter-aided digestion protocols and assessed their influence in the estimation of protein abundances using five E. coli mixtures with known amounts of spiked proteins. We observed that replicates of trypsin specificity digestion protocols are highly reproducible in terms of peptide quantitation, with digestion technique and the chosen proteolytic enzyme being the major sources of variability in peptide quantitation. Finally, we also evaluated the result of including peptides with missed cleavages in protein quantitation and observed no significant differences in precision, accuracy, specificity, and sensitivity compared with the use of fully tryptic peptides.

### Sample Protocol
Five E. coli mixtures with known amounts of spiked-in proteins were prepared and digested following different protein digestion protocols.  Each peptide mixture was analyzed using a LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) coupled to a nano-LC (Proxeon, Odense, Denmark) equipped with a reversed-phase chromatography 12-cm column with an inner diameter of 75 μm, packed with 5 μm C18 particles (Nikkyo Technos Co. Ltd., Japan). Chromatographic gradients started at 97% buffer A and 3% buffer B with a flow rate of 300 nl/min, and gradually increased to 93% buffer A and 7% buffer B in 1 min, and to 65% buffer A and 35% buffer B in 60 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ionization mode with nanospray voltage set at 2.2 kV and source temperature at 250 ºC.The instrument was operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode, and full MS scans with 1 microscan at resolution of 60,000 were used over a mass range of m/z 250-2,000 with detection in the Orbitrap. Auto gain control (AGC) was set to 1e6, dynamic exclusion was set at 60 s, and the charge state filter disqualifying singly charged peptides was activated. Following each survey scan, the top twenty most intense ions with multiple charged ions above a threshold ion count of 5000 were selected for fragmentation at normalized collision energy of 35 %. Fragment ion spectra produced via collision-induced dissociation (CID) were acquired in the linear ion trap, AGC was set to 5e4, isolation window of 2.0 m/z, activation time of 0.1 ms and maximum injection time of 100 ms was used. All data were acquired with Xcalibur software v2.2.

### Data Protocol
Acquired data were analyzed using the Proteome Discoverer software suite (v1.3.0.339, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the Mascot search engine (v2.3, Matrix Science18) was used for peptide identification. Data corresponding to the protein mixes in the E. coli background were searched against an in-house generated database containing all the spiked-in proteins (Table 1), and the E. coli Swissprot protein database (version of July 2012) plus the most common contaminants. In both cases, a precursor ion mass tolerance of 7 ppm at the MS1 level was used, and up to three missed cleavages for trypsin were allowed. The fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da. Oxidation of methionine and protein acetylation at the N-terminal were defined as variable modification. Carbamidomethylation on cysteines was set as a fix modification. The identified peptides were filtered using a FDR < 0.01. Peptide areas were used for protein quantitation. Protein relative quantitation and the corresponding mean square error were achieved by extracting the peptide areas with the Proteome Discoverer software suite (v1.3.0.339, Thermo Fisher Scientific) followed by median normalization. Only unique peptides per protein were used for the differential protein quantitation analysis with the linear mixed-effects model implemented in the R package MSstats v2.019. When a peptide was missing completely in a condition, the nointeraction (default) option was used, which indicates that the quantified interferences are random artifacts that should be considered as noise. Sensitivity and specificity were calculated using the results from MSstats, and their variance was estimated by resampling bootstrap (n=1,000 iterations) using the boot R package.

### Publication Abstract
Quantitative determination of absolute and relative protein amounts is an essential requirement for most current bottom-up proteomics applications, but protein quantitation estimates are affected by several sources of variability such as sample preparation, mass spectrometric acquisition, and data analysis. Among them, sample digestion has attracted much attention from the proteomics community, as protein quantitation by bottom-up proteomics relies on the efficiency and reproducibility of protein enzymatic digestion, with the presence of missed cleavages, nonspecific cleavages, or even the use of different proteases having been postulated as important sources of variation in protein quantitation. Here we evaluated both in-solution and filter-aided digestion protocols and assessed their influence in the estimation of protein abundances using five E. coli mixtures with known amounts of spiked proteins. We observed that replicates of trypsin specificity digestion protocols are highly reproducible in terms of peptide quantitation, with digestion technique and the chosen proteolytic enzyme being the major sources of variability in peptide quantitation. Finally, we also evaluated the result of including peptides with missed cleavages in protein quantitation and observed no significant differences in precision, accuracy, specificity, and sensitivity compared with the use of fully tryptic peptides.

### Keywords
Protein quantitation, Digestion protocols, Fasp

### Affiliations
University Pompeu Fabra
Proteomics Unit UPF/CRG

### Submitter
Cristina Chiva

### Lab Head
Dr Eduard Sabidó
Proteomics Unit UPF/CRG


