### Accession
PXD015522

### Title
N-glycoproteome of Magnaporthe oryzae

### Description
Genetic studies have shown essential functions of N-glycosylation during infection of the plant pathogenic fungi, however, systematic roles of N-glycosylation in fungi is still largely unknown. Biological analysis demonstrated N-glycosylated proteins were widely present at different development stages of Magnaporthe oryzae and especially strong in the appressorium and invasive hypha.A large-scale quantitative proteomics analysis was then performed to explore the roles of N-glycosylation in M. oryzae.

### Sample Protocol
Mycelia were incubated at 28°C in liquid culture medium on a rotary shaker (180 rpm) for 36 h. Colony growth and conidiation were performed as described previously [13]. Conidia harvested from 7-day-old OTA cultures were used to test virulence and to observe the infection process. Appressorium formation was performed by dropping a conidial suspension (1 × 105 conidia/mL) onto a hydrophobic coverslip and incubated in a dark, moist chamber at 28ºC. To perform quantitative N-glycoproteomics analysis, the mycelium, conidium and appressorium were harvested as mentioned above and were stored at −80°C before processing. Lysis buffer containing 45ml TCA:acetone (1:9) and 65 mM DTT was added to the frozen samples, followed by refrigerated centrifugation, washing, boiling and sonication. The total protein was quantified using the BCA method. Protein trypsin digestion  Total proteins were processed according to the “filter-aided sample preparation” (FASP) method as reported. A total of 1.2 mg of protein for each sample was dissolved in a solution containing 8 M urea, 0.1 M NH4HCO3 and Tris-HCl pH 8.0 in a 10-kDa ultrafiltration tube. The samples were subsequently alkylated for 30 min with 50 mM iodoacetamide in the dark and then centrifuged for 10 min at 14000 g. Samples were diluted with UA buffer (8 M urea, 150 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0) and washed with 25 mM NH4HCO3 three times. The proteins were incubated with trypsin (proteins/trypsin, 50:1, w/w) at 37 °C for 18 h. The digestive reaction was stopped by adding formic acid, and the peptides were desalted on a solid phase extraction C18 cartridge (Waters, MA).   Lectin enrichment and deglycosylation After digestion, peptides were eluted in the lectin binding buffer (1 mM CaCl2, 1 mM MnCl2, 0.5 M NaCl, 20 mM Tris-HCl [pH 7.3]) and subsequently transferred to a 30 kDa filtration unit. Lectin mixture containing concanavalin A (ConA), wheat germ agglutinin (WGA), and Ricinus communis  agglutinin (RCA120) was added to the top of the filters. The non-bound peptides were eluted, and the captured peptides were washed with the binding buffer after adding PNGase F. Deglycosylation was performed in H218O for 3 h at 37°C and the deglycosylated peptides eluted and analyzed.  Tandem Mass Spectrometry Analysis  The deglycosylated peptides were resuspended in 0.1% FA, then analyzed with LC−MS/MS. LC-MS/MS was performed using a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer coupled with an Easy nLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA). Testing samples were loaded onto a 100 μm × 20 mm C18 precolumn (Thermo Fisher Scientific, CA) and chromatographic separation was performed on a 75 μm × 10 cm C18 nanocolumn. A high-performance liquid chromatography gradient was achieved using 0−55% buffer B (0.1% FA and 95% acetonitrile) and buffer A (0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min for more than 90 min. A Q-Exactive mass spectrometer was used for the analysis. The MS data was acquired with a precursor ion range of 300−1800 in positive ion mode. Resolution was set to 70 000 at m/z 200, the dynamic exclusion 25 s, maximum ion injection time 20 ms and automatic gain control target 3 × 106. Higher-energy collisional dissociation at a normalized collision energy of 27 eV was used to acquire the 10 most intense ions for MS2 scans with a resolution of 17500 at m/z 200 and 60 ms maximum IT.

### Data Protocol
Data Analysis The label-free quantitative analysis of N-glycosylated peptides was performed using the MaxQuant software version 1.3.0.5 according to a previous study [57]. Tandem mass spectra were searched against the Uniprot database (uniprot_magnaporthe_oryzae_39370_20150929.fasta). Ten LC−MS/MS raw files were obtained from two replicates of five samples. The search parameters were set as follows: enzyme cleavage was trypsin; the maximum missed cleavage sites were two; variable modifications were oxidation on methionine and deamidation (18O) in asparagine; peptide mass tolerance was 10 ppm; false discovery rate (FDR) thresholds were 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
N-glycoproteomics

### Affiliations
Huazhong Agricultural University
State Key Laboratory for Biology of Plant Diseases and Insect Pests, Institute of Plant Protection, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing, China

### Submitter
Xiaolin Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Wende Liu
State Key Laboratory for Biology of Plant Diseases and Insect Pests, Institute of Plant Protection, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing, China


