### Accession
PXD016614

### Title
Integrative proteome and acetylome analyses of murine responses to Cryptococcus neoformans infection

### Description
Cryptococcus neoformans, an environmental opportunistic human fungal pathogen, is a causative agent for acute pulmonary infection and meningoencephalitis. Understanding the host’s response to C. neoformans infection is critical for developing effective treatment. Even though some have elucidated the host response at the transcriptome level, little is known about how it modulates its defense machinery through the proteome mechanism or how protein posttranslational modification responds to the infection. In this work, we employed a Cryptococcus murine infection model and mass spectrometry to systematically determine the proteome and acetylome statuses of two primary organs (lung and brain) in the early stage of infection. To extensively analyze the host response, we compared and integrated the proteome data to the transcriptome results. We demonstrated a significant overlap between two data sets. Critical genes, including genes involved in phagosome, lysosome, or osteoblast differentiation and platelet activation are significantly altered in protein and gene expression during infection. In the acetylome analysis, we demonstrated that lung and brain tissues differentially regulate protein acetylation during infection. The three primary groups of proteins altered in acetylation status are histones, proteins involved in glucose and fatty acid metabolism, and proteins from the immune system. These analyses provide an integrative regulation network of the host responding to C. neoformans and shed new light on understanding the host’s regulation mechanism when responding to C. neoformans.

### Sample Protocol
Six- to eight-week-old female mice were purchased from Changsheng Biotech (Liaoning, China), and used for infection experiments. Mice care and use was in the College of Life and Health Sciences of Northeastern University with an alternating 12 h light-dark cycle and incessantly food and water supply. For infection experiments, mice were anesthetized by 2,2,2-Tribromoethanol and intranasally administered 105 fungal cells in 50 μl of PBS buffer. For the fungal burden analysis, the infected mice were sacrificed by exposure to CO2 for 5 min on post-infection day 10. The infected brain or lung tissues proteins were isolated.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using the MaxQuant search engine (version 1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the UniProt database (http://www.uniprot.org) that was concatenated with a reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as a cleavage enzyme, and up to 4 missing cleavages were allowed. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set at 20 ppm in the first search and 5 ppm in the main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as a fixed modification, and acetylation modification and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. The FDR was adjusted to < 1%, and the minimum score for modified peptides was set as > 40.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Cryptococcus neoformans</i> is a causative agent for pulmonary infection and meningoencephalitis. Understanding the host's response to <i>C. neoformans</i> infection is critical for developing effective treatment. Even though some have elucidated the host response at the transcriptome level, little is known about how it modulates its defense machinery through the proteome mechanism or how protein posttranslational modification responds to the infection. In this work, we employed a murine infection model and mass spectrometry to systematically determine the proteome and acetylome statuses of lungs and brains in the early stage of infection. To extensively analyze the host response, we integrated the proteome data to the transcriptome results. Critical genes, including genes involved in phagosome, lysosome, and platelet activation are significantly altered in protein and gene expression during infection. In the acetylome analysis, we demonstrated that lung and brain tissues differentially regulate protein acetylation during infection. The three primary groups of proteins altered in acetylation status are histones, proteins involved in glucose and fatty acid metabolism, and proteins from the immune system. These analyses provide an integrative regulation network of the host responding to <i>C. neoformans</i> and shed new light on understanding the host's regulation mechanism when responding to <i>C. neoformans</i>.

### Keywords
Mouse brain, Mouse lung, Lysine acetylome, Cryptococcus neoformans infection

### Affiliations
College of Life and Health Sciences, Northeastern University, Liaoning, Shenyang, China
Northeastern University

### Submitter
Hai-Long Li

### Lab Head
Dr Chen Ding
College of Life and Health Sciences, Northeastern University, Liaoning, Shenyang, China


