### Accession
PXD010169

### Title
Proteomic profiling of the proteolytic events in the secretome of the transformed phenotype of melanocyte-derived cells using Terminal Amine Isotopic Labeling of Substrates

### Description
The comprehensive profiling of the repertoire of secreted proteins from cancer cells and/or tissue samples provides information on the signaling events that take place during oncogenesis as well as on the cross-talk between normal and tumoral cells. Moreover, the analysis of post translational modifications in secreted proteins may unravel biological circuits regulated by irreversible modifications such as, for example, proteolytic processing. In this context, we used Terminal Amine Isotopic Labeling of Substrates (TAILS) to perform a system-wide investigation on the N-terminome of the secretomes derived from a paired set of mouse melanocyte cell lines: Melan-a (a normal melanocyte) and Tm1 (its transformed phenotype). TAILS analysis allowed the profiling of co-translational modifications such as acetylated N-termini as well as proteolytic events in both secretomes. Although no significant difference has been found in the proportion of acetylated natural N-termini in both cell line secretomes, when evaluating amino acid identities at the scissile bond in internal peptides it was possible to detect significant differences, suggesting distinct proteolytic processes acting in the normal and tumoral secretomes. The mapping and annotation of cleavage sites in the tumoral secretome suggested functional roles of active proteases in central biological processes related to oncogenesis, such as the processing of growth factors, cleavage of extracellular matrix proteins and the shedding of ectopic domains from the cell surface, some of which may represent novel processed forms of the corresponding proteins. In the context of the tumor microenvironment, these results suggest important biological roles of proteolytic processing in murine melanoma secreted proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lines Melan-a, a murine melanocyte and Tm1, its transformed-phenotype1, were cultured in RPMI medium (pH 7.0), containing 2.0 g/L of sodium bicarbonate, 100 mg/L streptomycin, 25 mg/L ampicillin, 2 mM Glutamine, 10% of Fetal Bovine Serum (FBS) and 200 nM 12-o-tetradecanoyl phorbol-13-acetate. The tumoral melanocyte-derived cell line, Tm1, was derived from Melan-a cells after sequential cycles of substrate adhesion impediment1. Cell cultures were maintained at 37°C in a humidified atmosphere of 5% CO2 and 95% air. Subconfluent cell cultures were washed three-times with warm buffered phosphate-saline (without Ca2+ and Mg2+) and, after culturing the cells in T175 cm2 flasks for 24 h under phenol red-free, FBS-free RPMI medium, the conditioned media was harvested and centrifuged (2,200 x g, 10 min, 4 ºC) for removing any remaining cell. Protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma, USA) was added to each sample and the secretomes were filtered (0.22 um; Millipore, USA) and concentrated (5,000 x g; 4 °C) using ultrafiltration devices (Vivaspin 20, 3 kDa cutoff, GE Healthcare,USA). Protein contents were measured by the Bradford method.2 Secretomes were independently obtained from three biological replicates derived from each cell line. N-terminome analysis was carried out using the Terminal Amine Isotopic Labeling of Substrates protocol with modifications. For each biological replicate, 500 ug of secretome proteins were precipitated for 12 h, with ice cold acetone at -80 °C. After centrigugation (14 000 x g, 4 ºC, 10 min), protein pellets were resuspended with the addition of guanidine hydrochloride (GuHCl) to a final concentration of 3 M, followed by the addition of dithiothreitol (DTT) to a final concentration of 5 mM. The mixture was incubated at 37 °C for 60 min. Iodoacetamide (IAA) was then added to a final concentration of 15 mM and the samples were incubated for 30 min at room temperature, in the dark. To quench the excess of IAA, DTT was added to a final concentration of 15 mM. N-termini were differentially labeled via stable-isotope reductive dimethylation with either light or heavy formaldehyde solutions, as follows: Melan-a (light) and Tm1 (heavy). Secretome samples from each experimental condition were incubated overnight at 37 °C with either light or heavy sodium cyanoborohydride (NaBH3CN, light, or NaBD3CN, heavy) to a final concentration of 20 mM followed by the addition of formaldehyde 12CH2O (light) or 13CD2O (heavy) to a final concentration of 40 mM, resulting in mass differences of +28.031300 Da and +36.075670 Da for the light and heavy-labeled samples, respectively. The reaction was terminated by adding 1 M Tris (pH 6.8; to a final concentration of 100 mM) to each sample and the mixture was incubated for 2 h at 37 °C. Samples were then combined at a 1:1 ratio. Clean-up of samples was performed by the addition of ice cold acetone (8 volumes) and methanol (1 volume), followed by the incubation of samples for 3 h at -80 °C. After centrifugation at 14,000 x g for 10 min, 4 ºC, protein pellets were washed twice with one volume of ice cold methanol and then resolubilized with 100 mM NaOH solution (final concentration of 2.5 mM), followed by the addition of HEPES buffer, pH 7.5, to a final concentration of 25 mM in 500 uL of reaction solution. Trypsin (Proteomics grade, Sigma, USA) was added at a 1:100 ratio (w/w) and the mixture was incubated at 37 °C for 18 h. N-terminal peptides were enriched by negative selection using sodium 4-formylbenzene-1,3-disulfonate. The peptide mixture was subjected to a three-step disulfomodification procedure. Briefly, 4-formylbenzene -1,3-disulfonate acid (4FDA) was added to the peptide mixture solution to a final concentration of 20 mM followed by the addition of NaBH3CN 20 mM (final concentration). The reaction was incubated at room temperature for 1 h. Two subsequent steps of incubation with 40 mM of 4FDA and 40 mM of NaBH3CN, and 60 mM of 4FDA and 60 mM of NaBH3CN were performed for 1 h and 18 h, respectively. The reaction was terminated by adding 1 M Tris (pH 6.8) to a final concentration of 100 mM, for 1 h at room temperature. After desalting using C-18 cartridges (3M Empore, USA) peptide samples were dried in a SpeedVac, resuspended in 300 uL of 1% acetic acid and 15% acetonitrile and subjected to strong cation exchange (SCX) using SCX StageTips.5 While disulfomodified (tryptic) peptides were mainly eluted in the flowthrough, N-terminal blocked peptides (either by chemical dimethylation or naturally acetylated), corresponding to natural or neo-N-terminal peptides, were eluted in two fractions collected after the addition of 150 mM and 500 mM of NaCl in 1% acetic acid 15% ACN, respectively. Finally, fractions were desalted using C18 StageTips, dried in a SpeedVac and redissolved in 50 uL of 0.1% formic acid prior to nanoflow LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric (RAW) data were analyzed within the Trans Proteomics Pipeline platform6 (v.4.8 ;Build 201411201551-6764). Briefly, RAW files were converted to the mzXML file format and searched with Comet search engine7 (version 2014.02, rev. 2) against the UniProt/SwissProt database restricted to the taxonomy ‘Rodentia’ (release 07_2017; 36,407 entries). Peptide identification was based on a search with mass deviation of the precursor ion of 20 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.8 Da. As primary amine dimethylation prevents the cleavage of trypsin at dimethylated-Lysine residues, enzyme specificity was set to semi Arg-C and at least two missed cleavages were allowed. Separate searches were carried out to account for the two cell lines/labeling states that were used (Melan-a and Tm1, light and heavy dimethyl-labeled peptides, respectively). Free N-terminal peptides searching was carried out by selecting the light (+28.03 Da) and heavy (+36.07 Da) dimethylation as fixed modifications at peptide N-terminus and Lysine side-chains, depending on the secretome analyzed. Acetylated N-termini were searched by selecting N-terminal acetylation (+42.01 Da) and the heavy (or light) Lysine side chain dimethylation as fixed modifications. For all searches cysteine carbamidomethylation was selected as fixed modification whereas methionine oxidation, glutamine/asparagine deamidation were selected as variable modifications. Search results were further filtered with PeptideProphet to a > 99% confidence interval, corresponding to a False Discovery Rate (FDR) of less than 1%.

### Publication Abstract
The comprehensive profiling of the repertoire of secreted proteins from cancer cells samples provides information on the signaling events in oncogenesis as well as on the cross-talk between normal and tumoral cells. Moreover, the analysis of post-translational modifications in secreted proteins may unravel biological circuits regulated by irreversible modifications such as proteolytic processing. In this context, we used Terminal Amine Isotopic Labeling of Substrates (TAILS) to perform a system-wide investigation on the N-terminome of the secretomes derived from a paired set of mouse cell lines: Melan-a (a normal melanocyte) and Tm1 (its transformed phenotype). Evaluation of the amino acid identities at the scissile bond in internal peptides revealed significant differences, suggesting distinct proteolytic processes acting in the normal and tumoral secretomes. The mapping and annotation of cleavage sites in the tumoral secretome suggested functional roles of active proteases in central biological processes related to oncogenesis, such as the processing of growth factors, cleavage of extracellular matrix proteins and the shedding of ectopic domains from the cell surface, some of which may represent novel processed forms of the corresponding proteins. In the context of the tumor microenvironment, these results suggest important biological roles of proteolytic processing in murine melanoma secreted proteins.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Melanoma, N-terminomics, Keywords: secretome, Tails, Cancer

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Functional Proteomics  -

Department of Science and Technology -
Federal University of São Paulo (UNIFESP), Sao Jose dos Campos-SP, Brazil
Laboratory of Functional Proteomics - Department of Science and Technology - Federal University of São Paulo (UNIFESP), Sao Jose dos Campos-SP, Brazil Country: Brazil

### Submitter
Andre Zelanis

### Lab Head
Dr André Zelanis
Laboratory of Functional Proteomics - Department of Science and Technology - Federal University of São Paulo (UNIFESP), Sao Jose dos Campos-SP, Brazil Country: Brazil


