### Accession
PXD032834

### Title
Interactome of PRMT5 in malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum

### Description
Protein arginine methyltransferases (PRMTs) modify proteins that cause their functional change by modulating their localization and interactions with their partners, which controls their functions on cellular processes, such as transcription and signal transduction, DNA repair, and RNA processing. The majority of studies on PRMTs are focused on yeast and mammals. We characterize PfPRMT5, a type II PRMT, from the early eukaryote Plasmodium falciparum. PfPRMT5 contains the conserved domain structures of type II enzyme with a diverse long N-terminus. This study revealed that PfPRMT5 associated with other invasion related transcriptional regulators such as AP2-I and BDP1. Furthermore, PfPRMT5 was associated with RNA splicing machinery, indicating that PfPRMT5 plays a critical role in regulating invasion and harbors conserved function in RNA metabolism.

### Sample Protocol
PfPRMT5 was tagged with PTP tag and tandem affinity purification (TAP) of PfPRMT5 assiciated proteins was performed from parasite cytosolic or nuclear extract using the PTP-tagged PfPRMT5 parasite line. Briefly, the Parasites pellet was lysed in 5 volume of a hypotonic buffer (5 mM Na2HPO4, pH 8.0 containing a protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche)) in ice for 5 min and the supernatant is harvested for IPs from cytosol, the pellete was further lysed in 5 volumes of the PA150 buffer (150 mM KCl, 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.7, 3 mM MgCl2, 0.5 mM DTT, and 0.1% Tween 20) containing a protease inhibitor cocktail. The lysate was centrifuged for 10 min at 16,000× g, and the supernatant was used as nuclear extract. The cytosolic and nuclear extracts were incubated with 100 μl (settled volume) of IgG agarose beads (GE Healthcare) at 4°C for 2h. The beads were washed twice with PA150 and equilibrated twice with the TEV buffer (150 mM KCl, 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.7, 3 mM MgCl2, 0.5 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, and 0.1% Tween 20). To release the bound proteins, 2 ml of TEV buffer and 150 U of TEV protease were added to the beads, and the column was rotated overnight at 4°C. The eluate was collected and rinsed with another 4 ml of the PC-150 buffer (150 mM KCl, 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.7, 3 mM MgCl2, 1 mM CaCl2, 0.1% Tween 20). Then, 7.5 μl of 1 M CaCl2 was added to titrate the EDTA from the buffer, and the proteins were incubated with anti-protein C beads for 2 h at 4°C. The beads were washed four times with PC150 and eluted with the buffer containing 10 nM EGTA/5 mM EDTA. To identify any proteins transicently or weakly binding PfPRMT5, the elute from TEV digestion was also used for mass spectrometry analysis. The proteins in the final elution were separated briefly in a 10% Bis-Tris SDS-PAGE gel for 10 min. Proteins in gel were excised, and in-gel digestion was conducted.

### Data Protocol
The digests were analyzed by nano-liquid chromatography followed by tandem mass spectrometry (LC/MS/MS) using a Waters NanoAcquity HPLC system interfaced to a Q Exactive™ Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded on a trapping column and eluted over a 75 μm analytical column at 350 nL/min. MS and MS/MS were performed at 70,000 FWHM and 17,500 FWHM resolutions, respectively. The fifteen most abundant ions were selected for MS/MS. Parasite proteins were identified by searching the Uniprot P. falciparum protein database (v01/2014). Data were filtered at 0.7-1% protein and 0.2% peptide false discovery rates (FDR) and at least two unique peptides per protein. Mascot DAT files were parsed into the Scaffold software for validation and filtering to create a non-redundant list per sample.

### Publication Abstract
Protein arginine methyltransferases (PRMTs) regulate many important cellular processes, such as transcription and RNA processing in model organisms but their functions in human malaria parasites are not elucidated. Here, we characterize PfPRMT5 in Plasmodium falciparum, which catalyzes symmetric dimethylation of histone H3 at R2 (H3R2me2s) and R8, and histone H4 at R3 in vitro. PfPRMT5 disruption results in asexual stage growth defects primarily due to lower invasion efficiency of the merozoites. Transcriptomic analysis reveals down-regulation of many transcripts related to invasion upon PfPRMT5 disruption, in agreement with H3R2me2s being an active chromatin mark. Genome-wide chromatin profiling detects extensive H3R2me2s marking of genes of different cellular processes, including invasion-related genes in wildtype parasites and PfPRMT5 disruption leads to the depletion of H3R2me2s. Interactome studies identify the association of PfPRMT5 with invasion-related transcriptional regulators such as AP2-I, BDP1, and GCN5. Furthermore, PfPRMT5 is associated with the RNA splicing machinery, and PfPRMT5 disruption caused substantial anomalies in RNA splicing events, including those for invasion-related genes. In summary, PfPRMT5 is critical for regulating parasite invasion and RNA splicing in this early-branching eukaryote.

### Keywords
Plasmodium falciparum, Malaria, Interactome, Protein arginine methyltransferase

### Affiliations
Department of Internal Medicine, Morsani College of Medicine, University of South Florida
University of Sourth Florida

### Submitter
JUN MIAO

### Lab Head
Dr Jun Miao
Department of Internal Medicine, Morsani College of Medicine, University of South Florida


