### Accession
PXD005570

### Title
Grapevine Leaf proteome -  Overexpression of a stress-responsive U-box protein gene VaPUB affects the accumulation of resistance related proteins in Vitis vinifera 'Thompson Seedless'

### Description
To investigate differentially accumulated proteins caused by transgenic events, comparative proteomic analysis using two-dimensional polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis was employed for Vitis vinifera ‘Thompson seedless’ leaves and transgenic Vitis vinifera ‘Thompson seedless’ leaves. Obtained proteins were digested with trypsin and subjected to MALDI-TOF-MS/MS analysis. According to annotations and a Blast search, proteins analyzed by MALDI-TOF/TOF were classified into 4 functional categories: carbon and energy metabolism, oxidation reaction, protein metabolism and resistance.

### Sample Protocol
Protein was extracted using the TCA-acetone extraction method. Then proteins were separated by using a 24 cm gel strip that covered a non-linear rang from pH 4 to pH 7 (GE Healthcare), followed by a 12.5% polyacrylamide gel. After electrophoresis, the gel was stained with colloidal Coomassie Brilliant Blue G-250. Selected gel spots were digested by trypsin (Promega) and identified by MALDI-TOF/TOF analysis using 5800 Plus MALDI TOF/TOFTM Analyzer (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) in MS/MS mode.

### Data Protocol
Data were analysed using MASCOT program (Matrix Science, London, England) to search NCBInr database (NCBInr 20150706x; 69146588 sequences; 24782014966 residues). Viridiplantae (Green Plants) (3066261 sequences) was chosen as the taxonomic catergory. Other parameters used for database searches were as follows: mass accuracy 100 ppm, allowed 1 missed cleavage, fixed modification carbamidomethyl (C) and variable modifications Acetyl (Protein N-term), Deamidated (NQ), Dioxidation (W) and Oxidation (M).

### Publication Abstract
Many U-box proteins have been identified and characterized as important factors against environmental stresses such as chilling, heat, salinity and pathogen attack in plant. Our previous research reported the cloning of a novel U-box protein gene VaPUB from Vitis amurensis 'Zuoshanyi' grape and suggested a function of it in related to cold stress in the model plant Arabidopsis system. In this study, the role of VaPUB in response to biotic and abiotic stress was further analyzed in the homologous grapevine system by studying the transcript regulation and the protein accumulation in VaPUB transgenic vines. The expression analysis assay shown that VaPUB was significantly up-regulated 6&#xa0;h after cold treatment and as early as 2&#xa0;h post inoculation with Plasmopara viticola, a pathogen causing downy mildew disease in grapevine. Over-expressing VaPUB in V.&#xa0;Vinifera 'Thompson Seedless' affected the microstructure of leaves. The proteome assay shown that the accumulation of pathogenesis-related protein PR10 and many proteins involved in carbon and energy metabolism, oxidation reaction and protein metabolism were significantly altered in transgenic vines. In comparison with wild type plants, the expression level of PR10 family genes was significantly decreased in VaPUB transgenic vines under P.&#xa0;viticola treatment or cold stress. Results from this study showed that the U-box protein gene PUB quickly responded to both biotic stress and abiotic stress and significantly influenced the accumulation of resistance related proteins in grapevine.

### Keywords
Vitis, Maldi-tof/tof

### Affiliations
China agricultural university
China Agricultural University

### Submitter
Li JIAO

### Lab Head
Dr Li JIAO
China Agricultural University


