### Accession
PXD002933

### Title
The E. coli type III secreted effectors NleB and EspL interact with the microtubule associated protein ensconsin to disrupt vesicle trafficking, part 1

### Description
Enteropathogenic and enterohaemorrhagic E. coli (EPEC and EHEC) translocate a set of type III effector proteins into host cells that are critical for bacterial virulence.  These effectors subvert normal host pathways by interacting with a variety of targets within the cell, but the binding partners and mechanism of action of the majority of effectors are not understood.  We identified the microtubule associated protein, ensconsin, as a novel target for two EPEC/EHEC effectors.  We found that the secreted effectors NleB and EspL bind host ensconsin and work synergistically to paralyze kinesin-based intracellular vesicular transport.  Our findings demonstrate that EPEC/EHEC encode multiple effectors that control intracellular vesicle movement and suggest a simple strategy for broad-based immobilization of host cells by pathogens.

### Sample Protocol
Effectors were expressed exogenously in host cells or produced recombinantly in bacteria and used to pull down bound host proteins. Samples where reduced (DTT), alkylated (IAA) and digested (trypsin) before analysis on LC-MS/MS (LTQ-FT or Orbitrap)

### Data Protocol
Mascot search against a combined E. coli/Human database then quantified with MSQuant

### Publication Abstract
Enteropathogenic and enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli cause enteric diseases resulting in significant morbidity and mortality worldwide. These pathogens remain extracellular and translocate a set of type III secreted effector proteins into host cells to promote bacterial virulence. Effectors manipulate host cell pathways to facilitate infection by interacting with a variety of host targets, yet the binding partners and mechanism of action of many effectors remain elusive. We performed a mass spectrometry screen to identify host targets for a library of effectors. We found five known effector targets and discovered four novel interactions. Interestingly, we identified multiple effectors that interacted with the microtubule associated protein, ensconsin. Using co-immunoprecipitations, we confirmed that NleB1 and EspL interacted with ensconsin in a region that corresponded to its microtubule binding domain. Ensconsin is an essential cofactor of kinesin-1 that is required for intracellular trafficking, and we demonstrated that intracellular trafficking was severely disrupted during wild type EPEC infections but not during infections with &#x394;nleB1 or &#x394;espL mutants. Our findings demonstrate the efficacy of quantitative proteomics for identifying effector-host protein interactions and suggest that vesicular trafficking is a crucial cellular process that may be targeted by NleB1 and EspL through their interaction with ensconsin.

### Keywords
Human, Host-pathogen, Effector, E. coli

### Affiliations
Centre for High-Throughput Biology, University of British Columbia
Centre for High Throughput Biology

### Submitter
Leonard Foster

### Lab Head
Dr Leonard James Foster
Centre for High-Throughput Biology, University of British Columbia


