### Accession
PXD002996

### Title
Identification of syntrophic acetate-oxidizing bacteria in anaerobic digesters

### Description
Inhibition of the anaerobic digestion process through accumulation of volatile fatty acids (VFA) is a recurring problem which is the result of unbalanced growth between acidogenic bacteria and methanogens. A speedy recovery is essential for an establishment of a feasible economical biogas productions. Yet, little is known regarding the organisms participating in the recovery. In this study the organisms involved in the recovery were studied using protein-stable isotope probing (Protein-SIP) and mapping this data onto a binned metagenome. Under acetate-accumulated simulating conditions a formation of 13C-labeled CO2 and CH4 was detected immediately after the addition of [U-13C]acetate, indicative of a high turnover rate of acetate.  Several labeled peptides were detected in protein-SIP analysis. These 13C-labeled peptides were mapped onto a binned metagenome for improved taxanomical classification of the organisms involved. The results revealed that Methanosarcina and Methanoculleus were actively involved in acetate turnover, as were five subspecies of Clostridia and one Bacteroidetes. The organisms affiliating with Clostridia and Bacteroidetes all contained the FTFHS gene for formyltetrahydrofolate synthetase, a key enzyme for reductive acetogenesis; indicating that these organisms are possible syntrophic acetate-oxidizing bacteria (SAOB) that can facilitate acetate consumption via syntrophic acetate oxidation coupled with hydrogenotrophic methanogenesis (SAO-HM). This study represents the first study applying protein-SIP for analysis of complex biogas samples, a promising method for identifying key microorganisms involved in specific pathways.

### Sample Protocol
Protein-SIP and amplicon analysis Liquid samples (5mL) for protein-SIP and amplicon analysis were collected from all reactors periodically and stored at -20°C until analysis. Sampling was performed at 8, 24, 32, 48, 96, 144, and 192 hrs following the beginning of the experiment. Protein extraction was performed using an protocol as previously described (Hansen et al., 2014). Cell debris was removed by centrifugation at 14,500 xg for 10 min at 4°C.   Proteins were acetone-precipitated as previously described (Botelho et al., 2010). Precipitated proteins were resuspended in SDS-PAGE sample buffer supplemented with dithiothreitol to a final concentration of 40 mM and denatured by boiling at 95°C for 10 min prior to being loaded onto a pre-cast 4-15% gradient SDS-gel (BioRad) and separated for 10 min at 160V.  In-gel digestion In-gel digestion of samples was performed as previously described (Shevchenko et al., 2006). Briefly, each gel lane was cut out and then further excised. The gel pieces were washed, reduced and alkylated prior to being digested with trypsin. Digested peptides were extracted, dried and desalted using the StageTip protocol as described elsewhere (Rappsilber et al., 2007). Prior to MS analysis, peptides were resuspended in 0.1% (V/V) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and 2% acetonitrile (V/V).  LC-MS/MS Tryptic peptides were analyzed by an automated liquid chromatograph-electrospray ionization –tandem mass spectrometer (LC-ESI-MS/MS) consisting of an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) via a Nanospray Flex ion source (Thermo Sientific). The analytical conditions were as previously described (Kjeldal et al., 2014), with following modifications; analytes were eluted during a 120 min linear gradient, ranging from 12-40% (V/V) of solvent B (0.1% (V/V) formic acid (FA), 0.005% (V/V) heptafluorbutyric acid (HFBA), 90% (V/V) acetonitrile).

### Data Protocol
Protein analysis A six-frames translation (every region of DNA has six possible reading frames) and prediction of open reading frames (ORFs) in the in-house constructed metagenome of the anaerobic reactor of Foulum was carried out in MaxQuant (v. 1.5.1.2). A two-search strategy as previously described was utilized (Seifert et al., 2013). Briefly, an initial survey search was performed searching against the nonredundant NCBI database restricting the taxonomy to prokaryota. Sequences that were identified in the survey search were exported from NCBI and merged with the six-frame translation of the metagenome, and the merged database was used in the subsequent main search.  Raw files from all reactors were searched against all the prokaryotic entries of NCBInr (21st of August 2014) using Proteome Discoverer v. 1.4 (Thermo Scientific) and Mascot v. 2.3 (Matrix Science). Trypsin was selected as the digestion enzyme. A precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.05 Da was used, and two missed cleavages were allowed. Oxidation of methionine was set as a dynamic modification and carboxymethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification. Search reports from all reactors were loaded into a single multiconsensus report in Proteome discoverer. Low confidence Peptide Spectral Matches (PSMs) were allowed and delta Cn was set to 0.5. The list of weakly filtered protein identifications was exported as a fasta file. Prior to the main search contaminants and reverse entries as decoys were added to the fasta file.  Secondly, for the main search we used OMSSA (Geer et al., 2004) in an OpenMS pipeline (Sturm et al., 2008). Fixed and static modifications were set as in the survey search. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 5 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da. False discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1%. Raw files were analyzed using OpenMS (Sachsenberg et al., 2014). Data was matched against a merged database comprised of the six-frame translation of the ORFs of the metagenome and the pre-search results from the NCBI database. RIA and protein LR were, as described elsewhere, determined using the opensource software OpenMS and the MetaproSIP tool (http://openms.de/metaprosip) (Kleindienst et al., 2014).

### Publication Abstract
Inhibition of anaerobic digestion through accumulation of volatile fatty acids occasionally occurs as the result of unbalanced growth between acidogenic bacteria and methanogens. A fast recovery is a prerequisite for establishing an economical production of biogas. However, very little is known about the microorganisms facilitating this recovery. In this study, we investigated the organisms involved by a novel approach of mapping protein-stable isotope probing (protein-SIP) onto a binned metagenome. Under simulation of acetate accumulation conditions, formations of (13)C-labeled CO2 and CH4 were detected immediately following incubation with [U-(13)C]acetate, indicating high turnover rate of acetate. The identified (13)C-labeled peptides were mapped onto a binned metagenome for improved identification of the organisms involved. The results revealed that Methanosarcina and Methanoculleus were actively involved in acetate turnover, as were five subspecies of Clostridia. The acetate-consuming organisms affiliating with Clostridia all contained the FTFHS gene for formyltetrahydrofolate synthetase, a key enzyme for reductive acetogenesis, indicating that these organisms are possible syntrophic acetate-oxidizing (SAO) bacteria that can facilitate acetate consumption via SAO, coupled with hydrogenotrophic methanogenesis (SAO-HM). This study represents the first study applying protein-SIP for analysis of complex biogas samples, a promising method for identifying key microorganisms utilizing specific pathways.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Biogas, Protein-stable isotope probing, Anaerobic digesters

### Affiliations
Professor in Environmental Microbiology and Biotechnology,Section for Biotechnology Department of Chemistry and Bioscience, Aalborg University, Denmark
Aalborg University

### Submitter
Henrik Kjeldal

### Lab Head
Dr Jeppe Lund Nielsen
Professor in Environmental Microbiology and Biotechnology,Section for Biotechnology Department of Chemistry and Bioscience, Aalborg University, Denmark


