### Accession
PXD024782

### Title
Balanced Input from the tRNA Prenyltransferase MiaA Controls the Stress Resistance and Virulence Potential of Extraintestinal Pathogenic Escherichia coli

### Description
In Escherichia coli, the highly conserved enzymes MiaA and MiaB mediate the sequential prenylation and methylthiolation of adenosine-37 within tRNAs that decode UNN codons. We found that MiaA, but not MiaB, is critical to the fitness and virulence of extraintestinal pathogenic E. coli (ExPEC), a major cause of urinary tract and bloodstream infections. Deletion of miaA has pleiotropic effects, attenuating bacterial fitness and virulence within diverse host environments and rendering ExPEC especially sensitive to stressors like nitrogen and oxygen radicals and osmotic shock. We find that stress can stimulate striking changes in miaA expression. To assess how changing MiaA levels affect the pathogen proteome, we used MS to analyze the proteins express by the reference ExPEC isolate UTI89 and derivatives that either lack or overexpress MiaA.

### Sample Protocol
The ExPEC isolate UTI89 and its derivatives UTI89∆miaA, UTI89/pRR48 (empty vector), and UTI89/pMiaAPtac (IPTG-inducible MiaAwere grown from frozen stocks in 5 ml of LB at 37°C overnight in loosely capped 20-by-150-mm borosilicate glass tubes with shaking (225 rpm, with tubes tilted at a 30° angle). UTI89/pRR48 and UTI89/pMiaAPtac were grown overnight in the presence of ampicillin (100 g/ml) to help maintain the plasmids, but the antibiotic was not included subsequent steps. Overnight cultures were brought to an OD600 of ~1.0 and then sub-cultured 1:100 into LB and grown to mid-log phase (OD600~0.5) in LB shaking at 37°C. IPTG (1 mM) was included for UTI89/pRR48 and UTI89/pMiaAPtac. About 1X109 CFU from each culture was pelleted at 8,000 x g for 1.5 minutes. Supernatants were then removed, and cells from 3 independent replicates were plunged into liquid nitrogen. Shotgun proteomic analysis of cell lysates was performed with the MSRC Proteomics Core at Vanderbilt University by first partially resolving 20 µg of protein lysates about 1.5 cm using a 10% Novex precast gel, excising the protein region, and then performing in-gel tryptic digestion to recover peptides. These peptides were analyzed by high resolution data dependent LC-MS/MS. Briefly, samples were autosampled onto a 200 mm by 0.1 mm (Jupiter 3 micron, 300A), self-packed analytical column coupled directly to an Q-exactive plus mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher) using a nanoelectrospray source and resolved using an aqueous to organic gradient. Both the intact masses (MS) and fragmentation patters (MS/MS) of the peptides were collected in a data dependent manner utilizing dynamic exclusion to maximize depth of coverage. Resulting peptide MS/MS spectral data were searched against the UTI89 protein database using MaxQuant-LFQ along with subsequent MS1-based integrations and normalizations.

### Data Protocol
Label-free quantification (LFQ) values from three independent replicates were loaded into Prostar software for statistical analysis and visualization. For this analysis, UTI89, UTI89∆miaA, UTI89/pRR48, and UTI89/pMiaAPtac were referred to, respectively, as 1.x, 2.x, 3.x, and 4.x, with x indicating replicate 1, 2, or 3. The data set was filtered by requiring all conditions to contain at least two values. Imputation for partially observed values was done with the Structured Least Square Adaptative algorithm. Imputation for conditions in which values were missing for a specific protein in all three biological replicates used the DetQuantile algorithm with the settings Quantile:2.5 and Factor:1. Statistical analysis was performed using the 1vs1 settings and Student’s t-tests.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Fidelity, Translation, Bacterial fitness, Frameshifting, Proteome, Translational regulation, Urinary tract infection, Extraintestinal pathogenic escherichia coli, Miaa, Sepsis, Uropathogenic, Miab, Stress response, Trna modification, Expec

### Affiliations
Division of Microbiology and Immunology, Pathology Department, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, Utah
Vanderbilt University

### Submitter
Connor Beebout

### Lab Head
Dr Matthew A Mulvey
Division of Microbiology and Immunology, Pathology Department, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, Utah


