### Accession
PXD023187

### Title
Protein cycling in the eastern tropical North Pacific oxygen deficient zone: a de novo-discovery peptidomic approach

### Description
Peptides and proteins were identified using a novel de novo-discovery approach in suspended and sinking organic particles from the eastern tropical North Pacific and in a culture of a dominant autotroph from the region, the cyanobacterium Prochlorococcus. De novo peptide sequencing, where the sequence of amino acids is determined directly from mass spectra rather than from comparison to theoretical spectra from a selected sequence database, was found to be a useful tool for discovery of peptides present in a sample but not initially included in the search database. Iterative de novo-informed database search results suggested the presence of fungal peptides and proteins in deep sinking particles, consistent with growing evidence that fungi play an important role in degradation of sinking material in the ocean. The de novo-discovery approach also allowed the tracking of modified autotrophic cyanobacterial peptides to the deep sea, where they contributed 0.63% of the phylum-level identifiable peptide pool in a bathymetric sediment trap sample. Overall, the amino acid composition of the peptides in the sinking material showed little change with depth, consistent with earlier observations of bulk organic matter and/or amino acid composition during the early stages of degradation. However, we identified an abundance of modified amino acids in sinking and suspended particles, including high levels of deamidation, suggesting that partial degradation of protein could potentially fuel observed anammox and contribute to observed pool of refractory organic nitrogen. We also observe methylation of arginine, which has previously been shown to slow degradation of peptides in seawater. Our results demonstrate several examples how de novo-discovery allows for a deeper evaluation of proteins and peptides in environmental systems undergoing degradation.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were collected in the ETNP on board the R/V Sikuliaq at an offshore ODZ station (16.58◦N, 107.05◦W) from January 8-13, 2017 (cruise ID: SKQ201617S). Suspended OM samples were collected with in situ pumps (McLane Labs, Falmouth, MA) fitted with combusted 142 mm diameter GF-D and GF-75 glass fiber filters (2.7 µm and 0.3 µm, respectively) and immediately frozen at -80 ◦C; volumes filtered were between 300 and 1000 L. Only the 0.3 µm filters were used in this study, which we presume to include both free-living microbes as well as small suspended detrital organic matter. These samples are hence called suspended particles. Sinking particles were collected with free-drifting, unpoisoned sediment net traps with deployments lasting between 24 and 96 hours. Sediment trap samples were filtered onto 47 mm GF-75 glass fiber filters (0.3 µm) and immediately frozen at -80 ◦C. These samples are referred to as sinking particles. The protein extraction technique used here is detergent-free and results in a crude protein extract that is chromatographically challenging but also presumably not biased for or against any particular type of protein.  For both the small (0.3 µm - 2.7 µm) suspended and sinking POM, protein was extracted from one or two 11 mm diameter punches of filter into detergent-free ammonium bicarbonate buffer.  The chilled suspension was lysed via three cycles each of mechanical disruption with silica beads (50% 100 µm diameter and 50% 400 µm), freeze-thawing, and 30 seconds in a high-power water bath sonicator. The resulting lysate was then centrifuged at 4800 rpm to isolate protein in the supernatant from the beads and cell debris. Protein concentration in the extract was estimated using a Lowry assay with reagents and protocol from Bio-Rad. Extracted protein underwent reduction of disulfides, carbamidomethylation of free cysteine residues using iodocetamide, and in-solution protease digestion using trypsin.  Digested peptides (1 µg) were desalted using a macro-spin C18 column (NestGroup, Southborough, MA), and resuspended in 5% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid and Waters Hi3 E. coli peptide standard mixture (100 fmol/L). Reverse-phase LC-HRMS analysis was performed with a Waters nanoACQUITY UPLC coupled to a Thermo Q Exactive Plus HRMS equipped with an NSI source. Digested peptides were separated on a home-packed analytical column consisting of a 37 cm long, 75-µm i.d. fused-silica capillary column packed with C18 particles (Magic C18AQ, 100˚A, 5mm; Michrom) coupled to a 4 cm long, 100 m i.d. precolumn (Magic C18AQ, 200˚A, 5mm; Michrom). Solvents of 100% LC/MS grade water with 0.1% formic acid (A) and 100% LC/MS grade acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid (B) were used to elute peptides over a 120-minute gradient from 5-35% solvent B. All analyses were carried out in positive mode at an NSI spray voltage of 2 kV, and data-dependent acquisition (DDA) on the top 10 ions.

### Data Protocol
A composite database to search ETNP POM was constructed consisting of assembled proteins from site- and region-specific metagenomes and single amplified genomes and relevant culture genomes.  The overall composite database contained 4,075,587 protein sequences. Database searching and validation was conducted using the open-source software contained in the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (TPP), with Comet (2016.01 rev. 2) as the search engine.  Search parameters included tryptic enzymatic constraint, 2 max. missed cleavages, 8 max. modifications per peptide, 15 ppm peptide mass tolerance, and 0.5 Da fragment mass tolerance.   De novo peptide sequencing was performed in Peaks (v8.5; Bioinformatics Solutions, Waterloo, Canada) using a collision-induced dissociation (CID) fragmentation model. Tryptic de novo searches allowing up to 2 missed cleavages were run with the same fixed and variable optimized PTMs as the Comet and PeaksDB database searches described above. Parent mass error tolerance was 15.0 ppm and fragment mass error tolerance was 0.5 Da.  The output of de novo sequencing is a list of candidate peptide sequences, precursor intensities, and confidence scores. The output is composed of highly similar full and partial peptide sequences. To thus assemble protein information from the de novo results, we aligned them to each dataset’s respective reference database using PepExplorer (freely available at patternlabforproteomics.org).  All peptide output was also processed using Unipept (https://unipept.ugent.be), a commonly used taxonomic annotation tool that provides access and alignment to the entire UniProt sequence repository, or UniProt KnowledgeBase, which as of 06.19.18 contained 558 reviewed and 137,213,158 unreviewed entries (UniProt Consortium, 2018).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Eastern tropical north pacific, Metaproteomics, Oxygen deficient zones, Marine organic matter, Particulate organic matter, De novo peptide sequencing, Protein and peptide cycling

### Affiliations
University of Washington
Oceanography, University of Washington, USA

### Submitter
Richard Keil

### Lab Head
Dr Richard Keil
Oceanography, University of Washington, USA


