### Accession
PXD022711

### Title
Proteome-wide analysis of heat-stress in Pinus radiata somatic embryos reveals a combined response of sugar metabolism and translational regulation mechanisms

### Description
Recent research has demonstrated that high temperatures during initial stages of conifer somatic embryogenesis can modulate the subsequent phases of the process, as well as the behaviour of the resulting plants ex vitro. In this sense, the development of high-throughput techniques has facilitated the study of the molecular response of plants to numerous stress factors. Proteomics offers a reliable image of the cell status and is known to be extremely susceptible to environmental temperature changes. As a result, in this study, the proteome of radiata pine somatic embryos was studies by LC-MS after the application of high temperatures during induction of embryonal masses (23 °C, 8 weeks, control, 40 °C, 4 h, 60 °C, 5 min). Then, the content of specific soluble sugars and sugar alcohols by HPLC was analysed. Results confirmed a decreased initiation rate of embryonal masses under high temperatures and a slight increase in the production of somatic embryos, as observed in previous studies. Besides, heat provoked a long-term readjustment of the protein synthesis machinery, by regulating translation and the composition of ribosomes. The levels of proteins related to methylation and posttranscriptional regulation mechanisms were also altered under high temperatures, coupled with higher contents of heat shock proteins and chaperones, transmembrane transport proteins, enzymes involved in the synthesis of fatty acids, specific compatible sugars (myo-inositol), and changes in the composition of cell-wall carbohydrates. These modifications occurred at the expense of the synthesis of molecules involved in oxidative stress responses, such as peroxidases, thiamine, phenolic compounds and some amino acids, by a decreased activity of the glycolytic pathway and reduced nitrogen assimilation.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extracts (50 µL) were re-precipitated with 4 volumes of cold acetone (250 μL) for 30 min at -80 °C. Samples were centrifuged at 20,000 g, refrigerated at 4 °C for about 20 min and the pellet was re-suspended in 50 µL of 1× Laemmli Sample Buffer. The total protein concentration was measured for each sample using the Pierce 660 nm Protein Assay kit (Thermo Scientific™, Waltham, Massachusetts, USA). For data-dependent acquisition (DDA) experiments, replicates from each treatment were pooled into three different samples (Cond1 = 23 °C, 8 weeks; Cond2 = 40 °C, 4 h; Cond3 = 60 °C, 5 min) before sample processing and for data-independent acquisition (DIA) each sample was processed individually. Protein content from each sample (adjusted based on the protein quantification values obtained previously) was separated by SDS-PAGE for about 17 min at 110 V (Short-GeLC Approach, Anjo et al., 2015) and stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue G-250. For DDA experiments, each lane was divided into 5 gel pieces and for DIA experiments into 3 gel pieces for further individual processing. After destaining with a 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 30% acetonitrile solution, gel bands were incubated overnight with trypsin for protein digestion and peptides were extracted from the gel using 3 solutions containing different percentages of acetonitrile (30, 50, and 98%) with 1% formic acid. The organic solvent was evaporated using a vacuum-concentrator and peptides were re-suspended in 30 μL of a solution containing 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Each sample was sonicated using a cup-horn (Ultrasonic processor, 750W) for about 2 min, 40% amplitude, and pulses of 1 sec ON/OFF. Ten μL of each sample were analysed by LC-MS/MS, either for DIA or DDA experiments.Protein samples were analysed on a NanoLC™ 425 System coupled to a Triple TOF™ 6600 mass spectrometer (Sciex, Framingham, Massachusetts, USA). The ionization source was the OptiFlow® Turbo V Ion Source equipped with the SteadySpray™ Low Micro Electrode (1-10μL). The chromatographic separation was performed on a Triart C18 Capillary Column 1/32" (12 nm, S-3μm, 150 x 0.3 mm, YMC) and using a Triart C18 Capillary Guard Column (0.5 × 5 mm, 3 μm, 12nm, YMC) at 50°C. The flow rate was set to 5 μL min-1 and mobile phases A and B were 5% DMSO plus 0.1% formic acid in water and 5% DMSO plus 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile, respectively. The LC program was performed as followed: 5 – 35% of B (0 - 40 min), 35 – 90% of B (40 – 41 min), 90% of B (41-45 min), 90 - 5% of B (45 – 46 min), and 5% of B (46 – 50 min). The ionization source was operated in the positive mode set to an ion spray voltage of 4500 V, 10 psi for nebulizer gas 1 (GS1), 15 psi for nebulizer gas 2 (GS2), 25 psi for the curtain gas (CUR), and source temperature (TEM) at 100 °C. For DDA experiments, the mass spectrometer was set to scanning full spectra (m/z 350-1250) for 250 ms, followed by up to 100 MS/MS scans (m/z 100 – 1500). Candidate ions with a charge state between +1 and +5 and counts above a minimum threshold of 10 counts per second were isolated for fragmentation and one MS/MS spectrum was collected before adding those ions to the exclusion list for 15 s (mass spectrometer operated by Analyst® TF 1.7, Sciex). The rolling collision was used with a collision energy spread of 5. For SWATH experiments, the mass spectrometer was operated in a looped product ion mode and specifically tuned to a set of 90 overlapping windows, covering the precursor mass range of 350-1250 m/z. A 50 ms survey scan (350-1250 m/z) was acquired at the beginning of each cycle, and SWATH-MS/MS spectra were collected from 100-1800 m/z for 35 ms resulting in a cycle time of 3.2 s.

### Data Protocol
A specific ion-library of the precursor masses and fragment ions was created by combining all files from the DDA experiments in one protein identification search using the ProteinPilot™ software (v5.0, Sciex®). The paragon method parameters were the following: searched against the reviewed Viridiplantae database (Swissprot) downloaded on 1st April from UniProtKB (www.uniprot.org; The UniProt Consortium, 2019), cysteine alkylation by acrylamide, digestion by trypsin, and gel-based ID. An independent False Discovery Rate (FDR) analysis, using the target-decoy approach provided by Protein Pilot™, was used to assess the quality of identifications.SWATH data processing was performed using SWATHTM processing plug-in for PeakViewTM (v2.0.01, Sciex®). Protein relative quantification was performed in all samples using the information from the protein identification search. Quantification results were obtained for peptides with less than 1% of FDR, by the sum of up to 5 fragments/peptide and selecting the peptides presenting a coefficient of variation (CV) smaller than 50%. Each peptide was normalized for the total sum of areas for the respective sample. Protein relative quantities were obtained by the sum of the normalized values for up to 15 peptides protein-1 and a correlation analysis between samples was performed to assure that all samples from the same condition showed the same behaviour.For the analysis of the protein results, two different approaches were employed, combining multivariate and univariate analyses. First, we performed a partial least square-discriminant analysis (PLS-DA) using the MetaboAnalyst web-based platform (www.metaboanalyst.ca; Pang et al., 2020) to find out the separation between the three conditions and simultaneously identify the most significant top protein features able to classify the three groups based on variable influence on projections (VIP) values. Those proteins were then clustered based on their biological function according to the FunRich software and the Plants database from UniProtdatabase (https://www.uniprot.org/help/plants). In parallel, as cross-validation, a Kruskal-Wallis test was performed to select the proteins which were statistically different between the 3 conditions. The Dunn’s test of Multiple Comparisons, with Benjamini-Hochberg p-value adjustment, was performed to determine in which comparisons statistical differences were observed. Finally, proteins overlapping between the Kruskal-Wallis test significant proteins and PLS-DA VIP list were selected and a cluster analysis was performed to them using the MetaboAnalyst web-based platform in order to investigate their relation and relative abundance by generating heatmap and correlation matrix plots. For the heatmap hierarchical clustering the Euclidean distance and the Complete algorithm were used and for the correlation matrix the Pearson’s correlation test was applied.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Compatible solutes, Carbohydrates, Radiata pine, High temperatures, Somatic embryogenesis., Proteomics, Heat shock proteins, Methylation

### Affiliations
Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology, University of Coimbra
Department of Forestry Science, NEIKER, Arkaute, Spain.

### Submitter
Vera Mendes

### Lab Head
Dr Paloma Moncaleán
Department of Forestry Science, NEIKER, Arkaute, Spain.


