### Accession
PXD027727

### Title
ASF1 acts with RIF1 to promote DNA end-joining in BRCA1 deficient cells

### Description
RIF1 acts downstream of 53BP1 to coordinate DNA double strand break repair pathway choice between non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) and homologous recombination (HR). Here we identified ASF1 as an endogenous RIF1-associated protein. We showed that ASF1 forms complex with RIF1 and regulates RIF1-dependent functions in DNA damage response.

### Sample Protocol
The CRISPR/Cas9 technology was used to knock in SFB tag (S-tag, Flag tag, and streptavidin-binding tag) to the N-terminus of endogenous RIF1. 293T RIF1 SFB knock-in cells and 293T cells with overexpression of N-terminal SFB-tagged ASF1A or ASF1B were collected for tandem affinity purification. For tandem affinity purification, HEK293T cells were subjected to lysis with NETN buffer (100mM NaCl; 1mM EDTA; 20mM Tris HCl; and 0.5% Nonidet P-40) with protease inhibitors at 4 oC for 20 min. Crude lysates were subjected to centrifugation, 14,000 rpm for 20 minutes at 4 oC. Supernatant were incubated with streptavidin conjugated beads (GE Healthcare) for two hours at 4 oC. Then the beads were washed three times with NETN buffer, and bounded proteins were eluted with NETN buffer containing 2 mg/ml biotin (Sigma-Aldrich) for one hours at 4 oC. The elutes were incubated with S-protein agarose (Sigma-Aldrich) for two hours followed by three washing using NETN buffer. The beads were subjected to NuPage 10% Bis-Tris Midi-gel running, and the gel was fixed and stained with coomassie brilliant blue. Protein bands were excised and subjected to mass spectrometry analysis. Excised gel bands were de-stained completely and washed with H2O three times. Gel bands were dehydrated with 75% acetonitrile, and then subjected to trypsin (V5280, Promega Corporation) digestion in 50 mM NH4HCO3 at 37 oC for overnight. The peptides were extracted with acetonitrile and vacuum dried. Samples were reconstituted in the MS loading solution (2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid), delivered onto a nano reverse-phase HPLC system, and eluted with acetonitrile gradient from 5-35% containing 0.1% formic acid, for 75 minutes at 300 nL/min. The eluates directly entered Q Exactive Orbitrap MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific), setting in positive ion mode and data-dependent manner.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS data were submitted to Mascot 2.5 (Matrix Science) using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The database used for searching was Homo sapiens downloaded from Uniprot. Oxidation for methionine and carboxyamidomethyl for cysteine were set as variable modifications. The mass tolerance for precursor was 10 ppm, and for product ion was 0.02 Da. Tolerance of two missed cleavages of trypsin was applied. Common contaminant proteins were removed from the identification list.

### Publication Abstract
Replication timing regulatory factor 1 (RIF1) acts downstream of p53-binding protein 53BP1 to inhibit the resection of DNA broken ends, which plays critical roles in determining the DNA double-strand break repair pathway choice between nonhomologous end joining and homologous recombination (HR). However, the mechanism by which this choice is made is not yet clear. In this study, we identified that histone chaperone protein ASF1 associates with RIF1 and regulates RIF1-dependent functions in the DNA damage response. Similar to loss of RIF1, we found that loss of ASF1 resulted in resistance to poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibition in BRCA1-deficient cells with restored HR and decreased telomere fusion in telomeric repeat-binding protein 2 (TRF2)-depleted cells. Moreover, we showed that these functions of ASF1 are dependent on its interaction with RIF1 but not on its histone chaperone activity. Thus, our study supports a new role for ASF1 in dictating double-strand break repair choice. Considering that the status of 53BP1-RIF1 axis is important in determining the outcome of PARP inhibitor-based therapy in BRCA1- or HR-deficient cancers, the identification of ASF1 function in this critical pathway uncovers an interesting connection between these S-phase events, which may reveal new strategies to overcome PARP inhibitor resistance.

### Keywords
Tap-ms, Asf1, Rif1, Interactome

### Affiliations
The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center
Department of Experimental Radiation Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA

### Submitter
Zhen Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Junjie Chen
Department of Experimental Radiation Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA


