### Accession
PXD021506

### Title
Label-free shotgun proteomics of Triton X-100 insoluble fractions of Lon and FtsH conditional mutants of Mycoplasma pneumoniae under depleting and inducing conditions

### Description
Using Mycoplasma pneumoniae as a model organism, we conditionally depleted the two essential ATP-dependent proteases (Lon and FtsH) of this bacterium, by engineering strains carrying a Lon and/or FtsH inducible expression locus. An integrative comparative study combining label-free shotgun proteomics and RNA-seq allowed us to decipher the global cellular response to Lon and FtsH depletion and to define protease substrates in this genome-reduced organism. This particular dataset corresponds to the analysis of the Triton X-100 insoluble fractions of Lon and FtsH mutants grown under inducing and depleting conditions. The dataset for the whole cell lysate is available under the identifier PXD016343.

### Sample Protocol
M. pneumoniae strains ΔIndLon and ΔIndFtsH were grown in 20 ml cultures supplemented with 20 µg/ml of chloramphenicol and 10 ng/ml of tetracycline to induce Lon and/or FtsH expression. After 48h of culture, cells were washed with Hayflick twice and scraped off from the flasks in 20 ml of fresh medium without tetracycline. To grow cells under inducing or depleting conditions, new 20 ml cultures containing plain medium (depletion) or supplemented with 100 ng/ml tetracycline (induction) were inoculated with 1:5 or 1:12.5 dilutions of cell suspension, respectively. After 48h (Lon) or 72h (FtsH) of depletion, cells were washed with PBSx1 thrice and lysed directly into the flask with a lysis buffer containing 1% Triton X-100 in PBSx1. Lysed cells were collected and incubated at 4°C on a rotating platform for 1 h and then centrifuged at 20,000 x g for 15 min. The insoluble Triton X-100 fractions were resuspended in lysis buffer (4% SDS, 100mM HEPES, pH 7.4) and homogenized by sonication using a Bioruptor sonication system (Diagenode) with an On/Off interval time of 30/30 sec at high frequency for 10 min. Finally, proteins were quantified using the Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit. For MS analysis, samples were digested with trypsin using the filter-aided protocol (FASP) (Wiśniewski et al., 2009) and analyzed using a LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher  Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific (Proxeon), Odense, Denmark). Peptides (1µg) were loaded onto the 2-cm Nano Trap column with an inner diameter of 100 μm packed with C18 particles of 5 μm particle size (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and were separated by reversed-phase chromatography using a 25-cm column with an inner diameter of 75 μm, packed with 1.9 μm C18 particles (Nikkyo Technos Co., Ltd. Japan). Chromatographic gradients started at 93% buffer A and 7% buffer B with a flow rate of 250 nl/min for 5 minutes and gradually increased 65% buffer A and 35% buffer B in 120 min. After each analysis, the column was washed for 15 min with 10% buffer A and 90% buffer B. Buffer A: 0.1% formic acid in water. Buffer B: 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ionization mode with nanospray voltage set at 2.1 kV and source temperature at 300°C. Ultramark 1621 was used for external calibration of the FT mass analyzer prior analyses, and an internal calibration was performed using the background polysiloxane ion signal at m/z 445.1200. The acquisition was performed in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode and full MS scans with 1 micro scans at resolution of 60,000 were used over a mass range of m/z 350-2000 with detection in the Orbitrap. Auto gain control (AGC) was set to 1E6, dynamic exclusion (60 seconds) and charge state filtering disqualifying singly charged peptides was activated. In each cycle of DDA analysis, following each survey scan, the top twenty most intense ions with multiple charged ions above a threshold ion count of 5000 were selected for fragmentation. Fragment ion spectra were produced via collision-induced dissociation (CID) at normalized collision energy of 35% and they were acquired in the ion trap mass analyzer. AGC was set to 1E4, isolation window of 2.0 m/z, an activation time of 10 ms and a maximum injection time of 100 ms were used. All data were acquired with Xcalibur software v2.2. Digested bovine serum albumin (New england biolabs cat # P8108S) was analyzed between each sample to avoid sample carryover and to assure stability of the instrument and QCloud (Chiva et al., 2018) has been used to control instrument longitudinal performance during the project.

### Data Protocol
Acquired spectra were analyzed using the Proteome Discoverer software suite (v2.0, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the Mascot search engine v2.5 Matrix Science (Perkins et al., 1999). The data were searched against a home-made database consisting on a list of common contaminants and all possible M. pneumoniae ORFs >19aa (87,051 entries). For peptide identification a precursor ion mass tolerance of 7 ppm was used for MS1 level, trypsin was chosen as enzyme and up to three missed cleavages were allowed. The fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da for MS2 spectra. Oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation were used as variable modifications whereas carbamidomethylation on cysteines was set as a fixed modification. False discovery rate (FDR) in peptide identification was set to a maximum of 5%. Peptide quantification data were retrieved from the “Precursor ion area detector” node from Proteome Discoverer (v2.0) using 2 ppm mass tolerance for the peptide extracted ion current (XIC).

### Publication Abstract
Protein degradation is a crucial cellular process in all-living systems. Here, using Mycoplasma pneumoniae as a model organism, we defined the minimal protein degradation machinery required to maintain proteome homeostasis. Then, we conditionally depleted the two essential ATP-dependent proteases. Whereas depletion of Lon results in increased protein aggregation and decreased heat tolerance, FtsH depletion induces cell membrane damage, suggesting a role in quality control of membrane proteins. An integrative comparative study combining shotgun proteomics and RNA-seq revealed 62 and 34 candidate substrates, respectively. Cellular localization of substrates and epistasis studies supports separate functions for Lon and FtsH. Protein half-life measurements also suggest a role for Lon-modulated protein decay. Lon plays a key role in protein quality control, degrading misfolded proteins and those not assembled into functional complexes. We propose that regulating complex assembly and degradation of isolated proteins is a mechanism that coordinates important cellular processes like cell division. Finally, by considering the entire set of proteases and chaperones, we provide a fully integrated view of how a minimal cell regulates protein folding and degradation.

### Keywords
Degradation, Insoluble fraction, Protease, Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Protein homeostasis

### Affiliations
Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), The Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, Dr. Aiguader 88, Barcelona 08003, Spain
Centre for Genomic Regulation

### Submitter
Marc Weber

### Lab Head
Dr Luis Serrano
Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), The Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, Dr. Aiguader 88, Barcelona 08003, Spain


