### Accession
PXD009540

### Title
Rapamycin regulate cholesterol metabolism and ribosomal proteins in Alzheimer’s disease

### Description
In order to disclose the mechanisms, a high-throughput quantitative proteomics analysis was established to investigate the proteome profiles changes of hippocampus and temporal lobe of WT mice, APP/PS1 mice and rapamycin treated APP/PS1 mice.The extraction of proteins of hippocampus and temporal tissue employed liquid nitrogen grounding method, which was described as previous works of our laboratory and other laboratories [20, 21]. After fully and immediately grinding under the protection of liquid nitrogen, the products was dissolved by lysis buffer (8 M urea and 1  cocktail in PBS, pH = 8.0) prepared in ice ahead of schedule and then the solutions were transferred to a 1.5-mL tube in ice. Cellular debris was removed by centrifugation (12,000 rpm, 15 min, 4 °C) and the liquid supernatant was transferred into a fresh 1.5-mL tube and immediately stored at -80 °C. The protein concentration of the supernatant was detected by Nanodrop 2000 (Thermo Scientific, NJ, USA) following the manufacture instructions.

### Sample Protocol
The extraction of proteins of hippocampus and temporal tissue employed liquid nitrogen grounding method, which was described as previous works of our laboratory and other laboratories [20, 21]. After fully and immediately grinding under the protection of liquid nitrogen, the products was dissolved by lysis buffer (8 M urea and 1  cocktail in PBS, pH = 8.0) prepared in ice ahead of schedule and then the solutions were transferred to a 1.5-mL tube in ice. Cellular debris was removed by centrifugation (12,000 rpm, 15 min, 4 °C) and the liquid supernatant was transferred into a fresh 1.5-mL tube and immediately stored at -80 °C. The protein concentration of the supernatant was detected by Nanodrop 2000 (Thermo Scientific, NJ, USA) following the manufacture instructions. The protein solutions of WT-hippocampus group, APP/PS1-hippocampus group, APP/PS1-Rapamycin-hippocampus group, WT-temporal lobe group, APP/PS1-temporal lobe group and APP/PS1-Rapamycin-temporal lobe group were selected to continue TMT labeling experiments and each group proteins were 100 g proteins pooled from 4 mice (25 g /mice).

### Data Protocol
In order to gather the data from the Q Exactive mass spectrometer, Xcalibur 2.1.2 was used and the mode was set to data-dependent acquisition mode.Gene ontology (GO) enrichment analysis of differential express proteins was calculated by FunRich software (http://www.funrich.org) based on Uniprot database. STRING database version 10.0 (http://string-db.org) was used to detect the protein-protein interaction of altered proteins and the medium confidence threshold set to 0.4. For the Wiki pathway analysis, we used an online WEB-based GEne SeT analysis Toolkit (WebGestalt, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, USA, http://www.webgestalt.org/option.php). Cytoscape (3.6.0) was used to the proteins mapping of pathways and protein-protein interactions.

### Publication Abstract
As an inhibitor of the immune system and a longevity drug, rapamycin has been suggested as a treatment for Alzheimer's disease, although the underlying mechanisms remain to be clarified. To elucidate the mechanisms, we performed a high-throughput quantitative proteomics analysis and bioinformatics analysis of the changes in the proteome profiles of hippocampus and temporal lobe of wild-type mice, APP/PS1 mice and rapamycin-treated APP/PS1 mice (ProteomeXchange: PXD009540). Morris Water Maze tests were used to evaluate the effectiveness of rapamycin in APP/PS1 treatment and Western blot analysis was used to verify the proteomics data. The results of Morris Water Maze tests indicated that rapamycin improved the spatial learning and memory abilities of APP/PS1 mice. Proteome analysis identified 100 significantly changed (SC) proteins in hippocampus and 260 in temporal lobe in APP/PS1 mice. Among these, 57 proteins in hippocampus and 167 proteins in temporal lobe were rescued by rapamycin. STRING analysis indicated relatively more complicated protein interactions of AD-related rapamycin rescued proteins in temporal lobe. Pathway analysis showed that SC proteins in APP/PS1 mice were mainly enriched in cholesterol biosynthesis pathway and cytoplasmic ribosomal proteins. After rapamycin treatment, the expression of most proteins in these signaling pathways were reversed. Overall, our findings demonstrate that rapamycin may be an potential strategy which can effectively delays the progression of AD.

### Keywords
Temporal lobe, Alzheimer’s disease, Protomics, Rapamycin, Hippocampus

### Affiliations
National Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology & Department of Immunology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences 
National Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology & Department of Immunology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, 5 Dong Dan San Tiao, Dongcheng District, Beijing 100005, China.

### Submitter
Wei Ge

### Lab Head
Dr Wei Ge
National Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology & Department of Immunology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, 5 Dong Dan San Tiao, Dongcheng District, Beijing 100005, China.


