### Accession
PXD001514

### Title
BACE1 KO mouse CSF LC-MSMS -  Label-free Quantitative Proteomics of Mouse Cerebrospinal Fluid Detects β-Site APP Cleaving Enzyme (BACE1) Protease Substrates In Vivo

### Description
Analysis of murine cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) by quantitative mass spectrometry is challenging due to low CSF volume, low total protein concentration and the presence of highly abundant proteins such as albumin. We demonstrate that the CSF proteome of individual mice can be analyzed in a quantitative manner to a depth of several hundred proteins in a robust and simple workflow consisting of single ultra HPLC runs on a benchtop mass spectrometer. The workflow is validated by a comparative analysis of BACE1-/- and wild type mice using label-free quantification. The protease BACE1 cleaves the amyloid precursor protein (APP) as well as several other substrates and is a major drug target in Alzheimer’s disease. We identified a total of 715 proteins with at least 2 unique peptides and quantified 522 of those proteins in CSF from BACE1-/- and wild type mice. Several proteins, including the known BACE1 substrates APP, APLP1, CHL1 and contactin-2 showed lower abundance in the CSF of BACE1-/- mice, demonstrating that BACE1 substrate identification is possible from CSF. Additionally, ectonucleotide pyrophosphatase 5 was identified as a novel BACE1 substrate and validated by immunoblot and in vitro BACE1 protease assay. Taken together, our study shows the deepest characterization of the mouse CSF proteome to date and the first quantitative analysis of the CSF proteome of individual mice. The BACE1 substrates identified in CSF may serve as biomarkers to monitor BACE1 activity in Alzheimer patients treated with BACE inhibitors.

### Sample Protocol
The in-solution digestion was performed according to Olsen et al. 2006. All steps were performed at room temperature. Briefly, 5 µl of CSF were solubilized in denaturation buffer (6 M urea (Sigma, U5128) in 10 mM HEPES pH 8.0, sample to buffer ratio 1:10) in low protein binding tubes (Eppendorf). 1 µl of reduction buffer (10 mM dithiothreitol in 0.05 M ammonium bicarbonate) was added for 10 µl of digestion buffer, followed by incubation for 30 minutes. Then, 1 µl of iodoacetamide solution for 10 µl of digestion buffer was added, followed by incubation for 20 minutes. 0.5 µg Lys-C solution (Promega) was added and incubated for 4 h. The sample was the diluted 4-fold with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 0.4 µg trypsin (Promega) was added and incubated for 16 h. The digestion reaction was stopped using 1 µl of 100% trifluoroacetic acid. Homemade C18 STAGE Tips were used for purification of the in-solution digested samples. Cleanup was done according to Rappsilber et al. 2007. The eluted peptides from one digestion reaction (5 µl of CSF) were split into two aliquots and processed on individual STAGE Tips, each representing one technical replicate. Peptides were eluted in 60% acetonitrile, dried by speedvac, resuspended in 10 µl 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in water and loaded onto the autosampler. 8 µl of the peptide solution was injected per run. Thus, each technical replicate contained the peptides of 2 µl of digested CSF. MASS SPECTROMETRY Samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS, coupling an Easy nLC1000 nanoflow HPLC system to the Q Exactive benchtop mass spectrometer (both Thermo Fisher Scientific). A two-column setup was used. The pre-column (Acclaim Pep Map 100, 75 μm x 2 cm, nano Viper C18, 3 μm, Thermo Fisher Scientific), waste line and the analytical column (Pep Map RSLC, C18, 2 μm, 75 μm x 50 cm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) were interconnected using a three way tee connector. Peptides were eluted in a trilinear gradient at 50 °C at a maximum pressure of 800 bar. The aqueous solvent (solvent A) consisted of HPLC grade 0.1% formic acid in water, whereas the organic solvent was pure HPLC grade acetonitrile (solvent B) (both Sigma). The column was equilibrated with at least 10 column volumes of solvent A, followed by loading of the sample at maximum pressure of 800 bar (in solvent A). The trilinear gradient consisted of the following linear increases in solvent B: 5-25% 175 minutes, 25-35% 45 minutes, 35-60% 20 minutes. The layout of the gradient was provided by Nagarjuna Nagaraj (Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany). At the end of the gradient, the column was washed with at least 10 column volumes of 95% solvent B in order to avoid sample carryover. The analysis of BACE1 -/- and wild type samples was alternated. Online electrospray of the eluting peptides into the Q Exactive mass spectrometer was achieved with the Easy Spray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Full MS spectra were recorded at a resolution of 70,000 over a mass range between m/z 400-1800. The automatic gain control target was set to 3x10E6 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms was allowed. The 10 most intense peptide ions were chosen for fragmentation. The MS/MS spectra were recorded at a resolution of 17,500 with the automatic gain control target set to 100,000 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. A mass window of 2.0 m/z was applied to precursor selection. Normalized collisional energy for the higher-energy collision-induced dissociation fragmentation was set to 25%. A dynamic exclusion with a time window of 40 seconds was applied. Singly charged molecules were not selected for fragmentation and the monoisotopic precursor selection was enabled. The underfill ratio (minimum percentage of the estimated target value at maximum fill time) was set to 0.1%.

### Data Protocol
Overall, 26 LC-MS/MS files (five BACE1 -/- and eight wild type CSF samples with two technical replicates each) were subjected to data analysis using the MaxQuant software environment (version 1.3.0.5). The implemented Andromeda search engine was used for matching the peak lists against a concatenated forward and reverse database including the complete UniProt-SwissProt mouse database (release 2012-08, with a total of 59345 database entries) and the standard MaxQuant contaminant database. The following settings were chosen for the MaxQuant software environment: Oxidation of methionines and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Mass deviation was set to 20 ppm for the first and 6 ppm for the main search. The maximum number of peptide modifications was set to 5, the maximum number of missed cleavages was set to 2. Peptide and site false discovery rate (FDR) were set to 0.01. The search for co-fragmented peptides in the MS/MS spectra was enabled (“second peptides” option). Quantification was achieved using the LFQ (Label-Free Quantification) and iBAQ (intensity Based Absolute Quantification) algorithms. Razor and unique peptides were used for LFQ quantification. Reproducibility of retention times was checked manually. According to this inspection the match between runs option was enabled, allowing a time window of 2 minutes to search for already identified peptides in all obtained chromatograms. Statistical evaluation of the data was performed with the freely available Perseus statistics software (version 1.2.0.17) and Microsoft Excel. Common contaminants and reverse decoy matches were removed from the protein identification list. At least 2 unique peptides per protein were required for a protein identification. Only proteins that were identified and quantifiable in at least one technical of at least three biological replicates in each group were used for relative quantification. The arithmetic mean was used to obtain the average LFQ intensity within each biological group. For statistical evaluation a two-sided t-test was used. The p-value was corrected using false discovery rate (FDR) based multiple hypothesis testing. Both t-test and FDR based multiple hypothesis testing were carried out with the default settings of the Perseus statistics software.

### Publication Abstract
Analysis of murine cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) by quantitative mass spectrometry is challenging because of low CSF volume, low total protein concentration, and the presence of highly abundant proteins such as albumin. We demonstrate that the CSF proteome of individual mice can be analyzed in a quantitative manner to a depth of several hundred proteins in a robust and simple workflow consisting of single ultra HPLC runs on a benchtop mass spectrometer. The workflow is validated by a comparative analysis of BACE1-/- and wild-type mice using label-free quantification. The protease BACE1 cleaves the amyloid precursor protein (APP) as well as several other substrates and is a major drug target in Alzheimer's disease. We identified a total of 715 proteins with at least 2 unique peptides and quantified 522 of those proteins in CSF from BACE1-/- and wild-type mice. Several proteins, including the known BACE1 substrates APP, APLP1, CHL1 and contactin-2 showed lower abundance in the CSF of BACE1-/- mice, demonstrating that BACE1 substrate identification is possible from CSF. Additionally, ectonucleotide pyrophosphatase 5 was identified as a novel BACE1 substrate and validated in cells using immunoblots and by an in vitro BACE1 protease assay. Likewise, receptor-type tyrosine-protein phosphatase N2 and plexin domain-containing 2 were confirmed as BACE1 substrates by in vitro assays. Taken together, our study shows the deepest characterization of the mouse CSF proteome to date and the first quantitative analysis of the CSF proteome of individual mice. The BACE1 substrates identified in CSF may serve as biomarkers to monitor BACE1 activity in Alzheimer patients treated with BACE inhibitors.

### Keywords
Mouse csf, Csf, Label-free quantification

### Affiliations
German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE) Munich Department of Neuroproteomics Feodor-Lynen-Str. 17 81377 Munich Germany
DZNE Munich Neuroproteomics

### Submitter
Stephan Mueller

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan Lichtenthaler
German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE) Munich Department of Neuroproteomics Feodor-Lynen-Str. 17 81377 Munich Germany


