### Accession
PXD015835

### Title
A census of RNA/protein complexes in a model Gram-positive bacterium reveals exonuclease-mediated sRNA activation in competence regulation

### Description
22 total proteome samples from S. pneumoniae wild type resolved on a glycerol gradient resulting in 20 fractions and a pellet fraction. A lysate sample is given as input control.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were alkylated, acetone precipitated and digested with trypsin. Peptides were desalted and MS performed using an Orbitrap Fusion/Velos Pro equipped with a PicoView Ion Source.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was analyzed using MaxQuant 1.5.7.4. Searches were performed against UP000000585. 3 miscleavages were allowed and false discovery rate was set to 1% on protein and peptide level. Proteins with less than 2 razor/unique peptides were not considered.

### Publication Abstract
RNA-protein interactions are the crucial basis for many steps of bacterial gene expression, including post-transcriptional control by small regulatory RNAs (sRNAs). In stark contrast to recent progress in the analysis of Gram-negative bacteria, knowledge about RNA-protein complexes in Gram-positive species remains scarce. Here, we used the Grad-seq approach to draft a comprehensive landscape of such complexes in Streptococcus pneumoniae, in total determining the sedimentation profiles of ~&#xa0;88% of the transcripts and ~&#xa0;62% of the proteins of this important human pathogen. Analysis of in-gradient distributions and subsequent tag-based protein capture identified interactions of the exoribonuclease Cbf1/YhaM with sRNAs that control bacterial competence for DNA uptake. Unexpectedly, the nucleolytic activity of Cbf1 stabilizes these sRNAs, thereby promoting their function as repressors of competence. Overall, these results provide the first RNA/protein complexome resource of a Gram-positive species and illustrate how this can be utilized to identify new molecular factors with functions in RNA-based regulation of virulence-relevant pathways.

### Keywords
Yham, Streptoccocus pneumoniae, Cbf1, Grad-seq

### Affiliations
Helmholtz Institute for RNA-based Infection Research (HIRI), Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research (HZI), D-97080 Würzburg, Germany Institute of Molecular Infection Biology, University of Würzburg, D-97080 Würzburg, Germany
University of Würzburg

### Submitter
Jens Hör

### Lab Head
Dr Jörg Vogel
Helmholtz Institute for RNA-based Infection Research (HIRI), Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research (HZI), D-97080 Würzburg, Germany Institute of Molecular Infection Biology, University of Würzburg, D-97080 Würzburg, Germany


