### Accession
PXD006700

### Title
Two-Step Co-Immunoprecipitation (TIP) Enables an Efficient and Highly Selective Isolation of Native Protein-Complexes

### Description
Co-immunoprecipitation (co-IP) is the most frequently used technique for the isolation of protein-protein (PPI) or protein-nucleic acid interactions (PNI) under native expression conditions. A major disadvantage of co-IP is the abundance of non-specific binders that can impede downstream applications. To overcome this limitation, we developed the two-step co-IP (TIP) that significantly improves the purification of native protein-containing complexes. TIP can be applied with a broad range of specific mono- and polyclonal antibodies. Using TIP we purified IKKalpha- and CD95- interacting proteins in primary human T cells, detected all major binders by mass spectrometry analysis and identified two novel CD95-associated proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for MS analysis Co-IP beads were resolved in 25 µL reducing sample buffer at 70 °C for 10 min. A short (2 cm) gel electrophoresis run was performed using a 1,0 mm 12 or 15 wells, 4-12 % BisTris Gel (Invitrogen) applying MES buffer at 200 V, 300 mA, 50 W for 9 min 30 sec. Gels were stained with Coomassie, entire lanes were excised in two pieces. Proteins in the individual gel slices were reduced, alkylated and in-gel digested with trypsin (Promega). Prior to MS analysis, extracted peptides of the individuals gel pieces were combined and delivered for MS.  LC-MS/MS Peptides from trypsin digestions were separated using a nanoAcquity ultra high performanceliquid chromatography (UPLC) system (Waters). Peptides were trapped with a constant flow of 10 µL/ min on a 180 µm × 20 mm nanoAcquity UPLC 2G Trap Column filled with Symmetry C18, 5 µm particles. Sample separation was performed on a 75 µm × 200 mm nanoAcquity BEH C18, 1.7 µm analytical column applying a constant flow of 400 nL/min. Chromatography was carried out using an 1 h stepped linear gradient of solvent A (98.9% water, 1% acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid) and solvent B (99.9% acetonitrile and 0.1% µl formic acid) in the following sequence: from 0 to 4% B in 1 min, from 4 to 40% B in 40 min, from 40 to 60% B in 5 min, from 60 to 85% B in 0.1 min, 6 min at 85% B, from 85 to 0% B in 0.1 min, and 9 min at 0% B. The nanoUPLC was coupled online to a nano electrospray source of a linear ion trap quadrupole (LTQ) Orbitrap XL (Thermo Fisher Scientific) MS. A Pico-Tip Emitter tip type 360 µm OD × 20 µm ID; 10 µm (New Objective) was uses for sample ionization and introduction into the MS. The MS was operated in the sensitive mode with the following parameters: ESI voltage was set to 2400 V, the capillary temperature was 200 °C and the normalized collision energy was 35 V. The orbitrap filling time was set at maximum of 500 ms. Full scan MS spectra were acquired in a mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) range from 350–2000 in the profile mode with a mass resolution of 60,000. Simultaneously, six most abundant precursor ions from the full-scan MS were selected for MS/MS fragmentation in the LTQ. MS/MS data were acquired in centroid mode. Only multiply charged (2+, 3+…) precursor ions were selected for MS/MS.The dynamic exclusion list was restricted to 500 entries, with a maximum retention period of 30 s and a relative mass window of 7 ppm.

### Data Protocol
Protein quantification was performed with the MaxQuant software 1.5.3.8 wherein peptide identification was performed using the Andromeda search engine integrated into the MaxQuant environment against the human SwissProt database (uniprot-organism_9606+reviewed_yes 03/2016). The peptide mass tolerance for database searches was set to 7 ppm and fragment mass tolerance to 0.4 Da. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification. Variable modifications included oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine and protein N-terminal acetylation. Two missed cleavage site in case of incomplete trypsin hydrolysis was allowed. Furthermore, proteins were considered as identified if at least two unique peptides were identified. Identification under the applied search parameters refers to false discovery rate (FDR) < 1% and a match probability of p<0.01, where p is the probability that the observed match is a random event. Data transformation and evaluation was performed with the Perseus software (version 1.5.2.4). Contaminants as well as proteins identified by site modification and proteins derived from decoy database containing reversed protein sequences were strictly excluded from further analysis. Protein ratios were calculated by label free quantification (LFQ) comparing affinity purified experiment and control samples. For statistical analyses, 2-sided t-tests were applied to calculate differences in protein enrichment between these groups with a p-values <0.01 and protein fold changes >4. To avoid zero LFQ values for calculating expression levels, the lowest LFQ values of each data set regarded were substituted for values equal zero.

### Publication Abstract
Coimmunoprecipitation (co-IP) is one of the most frequently used techniques to study protein-protein (PPIs) or protein-nucleic acid interactions (PNIs). However, the presence of coprecipitated contaminants is a well-recognized issue associated with single-step co-IPs. To overcome this limitation, we developed the two-step co-IP (TIP) strategy that enables sequential coimmunoprecipitations of endogenous protein complexes. TIP can be performed with a broad range of mono- and polyclonal antibodies targeting a single protein or different components of a given complex. TIP results in a highly selective enrichment of protein complexes and thus outperforms single-step co-IPs for downstream applications such as mass spectrometry for the identification of PPIs and quantitative PCR for the analysis of PNIs. We benchmarked TIP for the identification of CD95/FAS-interacting proteins in primary human CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells, which recapitulated all major known interactors, but also enabled the proteomics discovery of PPM1G and IPO7 as new interaction partners. For its feasibility and high performance, we propose TIP as an advanced tool for the isolation of highly purified protein-protein and protein-nucleic acid complexes under native expression conditions.

### Keywords
Chromatin, Cd95, Immunoprecipitation, Antibody, Btip, Ikk, Nfkb, Co-ip, Chip, Primary cells, Co-immunoprecipitation, Bridging, Polyclonal, Tip, Monoclonal

### Affiliations
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany Functional Proteome Analysis
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ)

### Submitter
Uwe Warnken

### Lab Head
Dr Martina Schnoelzer
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany Functional Proteome Analysis


