### Accession
PXD045732

### Title
Lachesis muta snake venom peptidome

### Description
Snake venoms are known to be major sources of peptides with different pharmacological properties. In this study, we comprehensively explored the venom peptidomes of three specimens of Lachesis muta, the largest venomous snake in South America, using mass spectrometry techniques. The analysis revealed 19 main chromatographic peaks common to all specimens. A total of 151 peptides were identified, including 69 from a metalloproteinase, 58 from the BPP-CNP precursor, and 24 from a L-amino acid oxidase. To our knowledge, 126 of these peptides were reported for the first time in this work, including a new SVMP-derived peptide fragment, Lm-10a. Our findings highlight the dynamic nature of toxin maturation in snake venoms, driven by proteolytic processing, post-translational modifications, and cryptide formation.

### Sample Protocol
Venoms were collected from three specimens of Lachesis muta: two (one male and one female) from São José da Lage (AL, Brazil) and one (male) from Rio Branco (AC, Brazil). The specimens were kept in the Laboratório de Herpetologia, Instituto Butantan (SP, Brazil), and venoms were collected into a beaker in ice bath, immediately mixed with an inhibitor solution (PMSF 2 mM and EDTA 5 mM), subjected to a centrifugation at 1,700 g for 30 minutes at 4 °C to remove debris, lyophilized and stored at -20 °C. The procedures were performed in accordance with the relevant guidelines and regulations. Venoms were analyzed under the authorization for access to the genetic patrimony, SisGen number A57EBEE. All procedures were approved by the Research Ethics Committee of Universidade Federal de São Paulo (Protocol number: CEUA no 2589220322).Lyophilized samples were dissolved in formic acid 0.1% and submitted to a solid-phase extraction (SPE) using C18 stage tips. Peptides were eluted with 40% ACN, as previously described. The eluted peptidomics samples were vacuum-dried and stored at -20 °C until MS analysis. MS analysis was performed on a Synapt G2 HDMS mass spectrometer (Waters) coupled to a nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters). L. muta peptidomics samples were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (FA), . The aliquots were injected into a trap column (Acquity UPLC M-Class Symmetry C18 Trap Column, 100 Å, 5 μm, 300 μm × 25 mm, Waters) for the desalinization with phase A (0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 8 µl/min for 5 minutes, and then eluted to an analytical column (Acquity UPLC M-Class HSS T3 Column, 1.8 μm, 300 μm × 150 mm, Waters) using an elution gradient of 7-35% B (0.1% formic acid in ACN) in 60 minutes at 3 l/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-independent acquisition (DIA) and data-dependent acquisition (DDA) modes as previously described. The ESI source was operated in positive mode with capillary voltage of 3.0 kV, lock temperature of 100 °C, and cone voltage of 40 V. Venoms of each specimen were analyzed in technical duplicates, resulting in a total of 12 LC-MS/MS runs, 6 for DIA and 6 for DDA.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed and analyzed as previously described [17]. Briefly, for DIA runs, MS data was processed in Progenesis QI for proteomics (PQIP, Nonlinear Dynamics) using low energy threshold of 750 counts and elevated energy threshold of 50 counts. Data were normalized and aligned with a reference run automatically selected. After processing, a mgf file with all MS/MS spectra was exported from PQIP and imported into PEAKS Studio 7.5 (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc.) for de novo analysis, database search, post-translational modification (PTM) and mutation (SPIDER) searches. The de novo sequenced peptides with average local confidence (ALC) scores ≥ 50% were selected for database searches. The processing parameters in PEAKS Studio 7.5 were as follows: mass tolerance of 10 ppm for precursor ions, mass tolerance of 0.025 Da for fragment ions, no enzyme specificity, N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation and pyroglutamic acid from N-terminal glutamic acid or glutamine as variable modifications, and maximum of three PTMs per peptide. Database, PTM and SPIDER searches were performed using UniProt database of Lachesis (180 sequences, downloaded on October 18th, 2021), utilizing de novo sequenced peptides and a maximum false discovery rate of 1%. For the DDA runs, MS raw data were processed in the PEAKS Studio X+ (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc.) using the same parameters as PEAKS Studio 7.5. Peptides not identified by automated searches were subjected to manual de novo analysis, as previously described [13,14]. Peptides were validated if the observed masses were within 30 ppm of the theoretical mass, and major fragments observed in MS/MS spectra matched b or y ions, with a minimum of five matches.

### Publication Abstract
Snake venoms are known to be major sources of peptides with different pharmacological properties. In this study, we comprehensively explored the venom peptidomes of three specimens of Lachesismuta, the largest venomous snake in South America, using mass spectrometry techniques. The analysis revealed 19 main chromatographic peaks common to all specimens. A total of 151 peptides were identified, including 69 from a metalloproteinase, 58 from the BPP-CNP precursor, and 24 from a l-amino acid oxidase. To our knowledge, 126 of these peptides were reported for the first time in this work, including a new SVMP-derived peptide fragment, Lm-10a. Our findings highlight the dynamic nature of toxin maturation in snake venoms, driven by proteolytic processing, post-translational modifications, and cryptide formation.

### Keywords
Bradykinin potentiating peptides, Snake venom, Lachesis muta, Snake venom metalloproteinases, Peptidomics, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Universidade Federal de Sao Paulo
Department of biochemistry, UNIFESP, Brazil.

### Submitter
Alexandre Keiji Tashima

### Lab Head
Dr Alexandre Keiji Tashima
Department of biochemistry, UNIFESP, Brazil.


