### Accession
PXD020293

### Title
Translation and codon usage regulate Argonaute slicer activity to trigger small RNA biogenesis

### Description
In the Caenorhabditis elegans germline, thousands of mRNAs are concomitantly expressed with antisense 22G-RNAs, which are loaded into the Argonaute CSR-1. Despite their essential functions for animal fertility and embryonic development, how CSR-1 22G-RNAs are produced remains unknown. Here, we show that CSR-1 slicer activity is primarily involved in triggering the synthesis of small RNAs on the coding sequences of germline mRNAs and post-transcriptionally regulates a fraction of targets. CSR-1-cleaved mRNAs prime the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase, EGO-1, to synthesize 22G-RNAs in phase with ribosome translation in the cytoplasm, in contrast to other 22G-RNAs mostly synthesized in germ granules. Moreover, codon optimality and efficient translation antagonize CSR-1 slicing and 22G-RNAs biogenesis. We propose that codon usage differences encoded into mRNA sequences might be a conserved strategy in eukaryotes to regulate small RNA biogenesis and Argonaute targeting

### Sample Protocol
Strains used for quantification of FLAG-IPs are MHE 27 (csr-1(gc017[csr-1::3xFLAG::1HA]), MHE 33 (csr-1(gc017[csr-1::3xFLAG::1HA];gc021[D769A]/nT1[unc-?(n754) let-? qIs51] (IV;V), MHE 7 MHE7 (prg-1(gc007[prg-1::3xFLAG::2xHA])I). Bristol N2 was used as control for background. Synchronous population of 120,000 (for CSR-1 IPs and PRG-1 (PIWI) IPs for RNase treatment or control condition) worms were harvested at 48 hours post hatching or 20,000 (for CSR-1 IPs comparing WT IP with catalytic mutant) worms were harvested and sorted at 44 hours post hatching and suspended in the IP buffer (50 mM HEPES pH7.5, 300 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 10% Glycerol, 0.25% NP40, protease inhibitor cocktails (Fermentas)) followed by 30 strokes using a metal dounce on ice. Crude protein extracts were centrifuged at 18,000 g at 4°C for 10 minutes. Protein concentration was quantified by the Pierce 660 nm protein assay. For RNase treatment, RNase I (Invitrogen) 50 U/mg of extract was used at 37 °C for 5 minutes. ~5 mg of protein extract (for CSR-1 IPs in RNase or control condition) or 1 mg of protein extract (for CSR-1 IPs comparing WT IP with catalytic mutant ) was incubated with 15 μl of packed Anti-FLAG M2 Magnetic Agarose Beads (Sigma M8823) for 1 hour at 4°C. After four washes with the IP buffer the beads were washed twice with 100 μL of 25 mM NH4HCO3 (ABC). Finally, beads were resuspended in 100 μl of ABC buffer and digested by adding 0.20 μg of trypsine/LysC (Promega) for 1 hour at 37 °C. Samples were then loaded onto homemade Tips packed with Empore™ C18 Extraction Disks (3M™ Discs 2215) for desalting. Peptides were eluted using 40/60 MeCN/H2O + 0.1% formic, vacuum concentrated to dryness and were re-dissolved in solvent A (2% MeCN, 0.3% TFA) before LC-MS/MS analysis. Spectra were recorded on an Orbitrap fusion tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific)

### Data Protocol
For identification, the data were searched against the C. elegans (CAEEL) UP000001940 database using Sequest HT through Proteome Discoverer (v.2.2). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, and a maximum of two missed cleavage sites was allowed. Oxidized methionine and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Maximum allowed mass deviation was set to 10 ppm for monoisotopic precursor ions and 0.6 Da for MS/MS peaks. The resulting files were further processed using myProMS v.3.9.2 (Poullet et al., 2007) (work in progress). False-discovery rate (FDR) was calculated using Percolator and was set to 1% at the peptide level for the whole study. MassChroQ v.2.2.1 (Valot et al., 2011) was used to perform a global peptide retention time alignment separately on all samples of each IP condition and to compute label-free quantification using peptide extracted ion chromatograms (XICs). For protein quantification, XICs from proteotypic peptides shared between compared conditions (TopN matching) with missed cleavages were used. Median and scale normalization was applied on the total signal to correct the XICs for each biological replicate (N=4). To estimate the significance of the change in protein abundance, a linear model based on two-tailed T-tests was performed, and p-values were adjusted using the Benjamini–Hochberg FDR

### Publication Abstract
In the Caenorhabditis elegans germline, thousands of mRNAs are concomitantly expressed with antisense 22G-RNAs, which are loaded into the Argonaute CSR-1. Despite their essential functions for animal fertility and embryonic development, how CSR-1 22G-RNAs are produced remains unknown. Here, we show that CSR-1 slicer activity is primarily involved in triggering the synthesis of small RNAs on the coding sequences of germline mRNAs and post-transcriptionally regulates a fraction of targets. CSR-1-cleaved mRNAs prime the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase, EGO-1, to synthesize 22G-RNAs in phase with translating ribosomes, in contrast to other 22G-RNAs mostly synthesized in germ granules. Moreover, codon optimality and efficient translation antagonize CSR-1 slicing and 22G-RNAs biogenesis. We propose that codon usage differences encoded into mRNA sequences might be a conserved strategy in eukaryotes to regulate small RNA biogenesis and Argonaute targeting.

### Keywords
Csr-1, C. elegans, Small rna, Argonaute

### Affiliations
Head of the Mass Spectrometry facility of the Institut Curie (LSMP)
Curie Institute

### Submitter
Valentin SABATET

### Lab Head
Dr Damarys Loew
Head of the Mass Spectrometry facility of the Institut Curie (LSMP)


