### Accession
PXD032272

### Title
An integrative transcriptomic and proteomic analysis of an industrial clavulanic acid-overproducing Streptomyces clavuligerus

### Description
Clavulanic acid is a clinically-important secondary metabolite used in treatment of infectious diseases. We aimed to decipher complex regulatory mechanisms acting in clavulanic acid biosynthesis through the analysis of transcriptome- and proteome-wide alterations in an industrial clavulanic acid overproducer Streptomyces clavuligerus, namely DEPA and its wild-type counterpart NRRL3585.

### Sample Protocol
AB SCIEX TripleTOF 5600+ instrument (AB SCIEX, Redwood City, CA, USA) and Eksigent expert nano-LC 400 system (AB SCIEX) were used in nano-LC-MS/MS analysis. A trap column (180 μm x 20 mm column, 300 Å, nanoACQUITY UPLC® 2G-VM Trap 5μm Symetry® C18, Waters, UK) and a separation column (75 μm, x 150 mm column, nanoACQUITY UPLC® 1.8 μm 120 Å HSS T3, C18, Waters, UK) were included in the LC system. For injection of the elute into mass spectrometer, NanoSpray III source with a 10 μm ID nanospray emitter tip (New Objective, Woburn, MA) was used. Voltage required for electrospray ionization was arranged at 2400 V. MS and MS/MS data were acquired from Analyst® TF v.1.6 (AB SCIEX) software.

### Data Protocol
The peptide identification (Analysis of LC-MS/MS data) was carried out using Paragon search algorithm provided by ProteinPilot 4.5 Beta (AB SCIEX) software. As the parameters of the database search, set of biologicals modifications for a standard iodoacetamide cys alkylation was selected and 0.05 Da for-precursor ion mass and 0.1 Da for-fragment mass tolerance was set.

### Publication Abstract
Clavulanic acid (CA) is a clinically important secondary metabolite used to treat infectious diseases. We aimed to decipher complex regulatory mechanisms acting in CA biosynthesis by analyzing transcriptome- and proteome-wide alterations in an industrial CA overproducer Streptomyces clavuligerus strain, namely DEPA and its wild-type counterpart NRRL3585. A total of 924 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) and 271 differentially produced proteins (DPPs) were obtained by RNA-seq and nanoLC-MS/MS analyses, respectively. In particular, CA biosynthetic genes, namely, car (cad), cas2, oat2, pah, bls, ceas2, orf12, and claR, a cluster situated regulatory (CSR) gene, were significantly upregulated as shown by RNA-seq. Enzymes of clavam biosynthesis were downregulated considerably in the DEPA strain, while the genes involved in the arginine biosynthesis, one of the precursors of CA pathway, were overexpressed. However, the biosynthesis of the other CA precursor, glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate (G3P), was not affected. CA overproduction in the DEPA strain was correlated with BldD, BldG, BldM, and BldN (AdsA) overrepresentation. In addition, TetR, WhiB, and Xre family transcriptional regulators were shown to be significantly overrepresented. Several uncharacterized/unknown proteins differentially expressed in the DEPA strain await further studies for functional characterization. Correlation analysis indicated an acceptable degree of consistency between the transcriptome and proteome data. The study represents the first integrative-omics analysis in a CA overproducer S. clavuligerus strain, providing insights into the critical control points and potential rational engineering targets for a purposeful increase of CA yields in strain improvement. KEY POINTS: &#x2219; Transcriptome and proteome-wide alterations in industrial CA overproducer strain DEPA &#x2219; An acceptable degree of consistency between the transcriptome and proteome data &#x2219; New targets to be exploited for rational engineering.

### Keywords
Streptomyces clavuligerus depa, Nanolc-ms/ms, Clavulanic acid overproduction, Rna seq

### Affiliations
Erciyes University Genkök
Erciyes University Gene and Stem Cell Research Center

### Submitter
Servet ÖZCAN

### Lab Head
Dr Servet Ozcan
Erciyes University Gene and Stem Cell Research Center


