### Accession
PXD018703

### Title
Dynamic Palmitoylation Events Following T-Cell Receptor Signaling

### Description
Palmitoylation is the reversible addition of palmitate to cysteine via a thioester linkage. The reversible nature of this modification makes it a prime candidate as a mechanism for regulating signal transduction in T-cell receptor signaling. Following stimulation of the T-cell receptor we find a number of proteins are newly palmitoylated, including those involved in vesicle-mediated transport and Ras signal transduction. Among these stimulation-dependent palmitoylation targets are the v-SNARE VAMP7, important for docking of vesicular LAT during TCR signaling, and the largely undescribed palmitoyl acyltransferase DHHC18 that is expressed in two isoforms in T cells. Using our newly developed On-Plate Palmitoylation Assay (OPPA), we show DHHC18 is capable of palmitoylating VAMP7 at Cys183. Cellular imaging shows that the palmitoylation-deficient protein fails to be retained at the Golgi.

### Sample Protocol
For SILAC-labeled samples, gel lanes were cut into 30 equal-sized bands and in-gel tryptic digestion was performed as described in Lange et al. (Lange et al. Identification of Phosphorylation-Dependent Interaction Partners of the Adapter Protein ADAP using Quantitative Mass Spectrometry: SILAC vs 18O-Labeling. J. Proteome Res., 10.1021/pr1003054 (2010)). Samples were resuspended in 6 μl 0.1% (v/v) TFA and 5% (v/v) acetonitrile. Peptides were analyzed by a reversed-phase capillary liquid chromatography system (Ultimate 3000 nanoLC system (Thermo Scientific) connected to an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). LC separations were performed on a capillary column (Acclaim PepMap100, C18, 3 μm, 100 Å, 75 μm i.d. × 25 cm, Thermo Scientific) at an eluent flow rate of 300 nL/min using a linear gradient of 3–25% B in 53 min with further increase to 80% B in 80 min. Mobile phase A contained 0.1% formic acid in water and mobile phase B contained 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. Mass spectra were acquired in a data-dependent mode with one MS survey scan with a resolution of 60,000 (Orbitrap Elite) and MS/MS scans of the 15 most intense precursor ions in the linear trap quadrupole.

### Data Protocol
Identification and quantification of SILAC samples was performed using MaxQuant (version 1.4.1.1) software. Data were searched against the Uniprot human protein database (July 2013). The criteria for identification were set to at least 1 unique peptide and at least 2 razor + unique peptides, while the criterion for quantification was a ratio count of at least 2. Based on the distribution of quantified proteins, the criteria for enrichment was established as a heavy/light ratio of at least 1.75 in at least two of the four replicate experiments.

### Publication Abstract
Palmitoylation is the reversible addition of palmitate to cysteine via a thioester linkage. The reversible nature of this modification makes it a prime candidate as a mechanism for regulating signal transduction in T-cell receptor signaling. Following stimulation of the T-cell receptor we find a number of proteins are newly palmitoylated, including those involved in vesicle-mediated transport and Ras signal transduction. Among these stimulation-dependent palmitoylation targets are the v-SNARE VAMP7, important for docking of vesicular LAT during TCR signaling, and the largely undescribed palmitoyl acyltransferase DHHC18 that is expressed in two isoforms in T cells. Using our newly developed On-Plate Palmitoylation Assay (OPPA), we show DHHC18 is capable of palmitoylating VAMP7 at Cys183. Cellular imaging shows that the palmitoylation-deficient protein fails to be retained at the Golgi and to localize to the immune synapse upon T cell activation.

### Keywords
Vamp7, In vitro palmitoylation, Palmitoylation, Dhhc18, Dhhc pats, Palmitome, S-acylation, Tcr signaling, Lat, Dhhc20, Ti-vamp, T-cell activation

### Affiliations
FU Berlin
Freie Universität Berlin, Institute for Chemistry & Biochemistry, Laboratory of Protein Biochemistry, Thielallee 63, 14195 Berlin

### Submitter
Miguel Alvaro

### Lab Head
Dr Christian Freund
Freie Universität Berlin, Institute for Chemistry & Biochemistry, Laboratory of Protein Biochemistry, Thielallee 63, 14195 Berlin


