### Accession
PXD028805

### Title
Quantitative proteomics during anthers development in Oryza longistaminata

### Description
Tandem mass tags (TMT)-based quantitative analysis was used to investigate the profiles of proteins related to lipid and carbohydrate metabolism in 4-, 6- and 8.5-mm O. longistaminata spikelets before flowering. O. longistaminata plants were sampled at three important stages of pollen development: 4-mm spikelet (Ls-4mm, primary sporogenous cells, Stage 4), 6-mm spikelet (Ls-6mm, microspore mother cells, Stage 6) and 8.5-mm spikelet (Ls-8.5mm, second mitosis cells, Stage 12) .

### Sample Protocol
Anther samples from three developmental stages were thoroughly ground to powder in liquid nitrogen. Samples from each group were combined with a four-fold volume of phenol extraction buffer, then ultrasonically fragmented. An equal volume of Tris was added, and the mixture was centrifuged at 5500 g and 4°C for 10 min. The supernatant was combined with a five-fold volume of 0.1 M ammonium acetate/methanol for precipitation overnight. Protein precipitates were washed with methanol and acetone, then redissolved in 8 M urea, and the protein concentration was determined with a BCA kit. The same amount of each protein sample was taken for enzymatic hydrolysis. The final concentration of 20% trichloroacetic was added slowly, then the mixture was vortexed and precipitated at 4℃ for 2 h. The supernatant was discarded after centrifugation at 4500 g for 5 min. The pellet was washed and precipitated with pre-cooled acetone 2–3 times. After the precipitate was dried, TEAB was added to a final concentration of 200 mM, the precipitate was dispersed by ultrasound, and trypsin was added at a ratio of 1:50 for enzymatic hydrolysis overnight. DTT was added to a final concentration of 5 mM and reduced at 56℃ for 30 min. Finally, IAA was added to a final concentration of 11 mM and incubated at room temperature in the dark for 15 min.

### Data Protocol
For liquid chromatography, the peptides were dissolved in mobile phase A and separated using a nanoElute ultra-performance liquid system (Bruker). Mobile phase A was an aqueous solution of 0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile. Mobile phase B was a solution of 0.1% formic acid and 100% acetonitrile. The liquid phase gradient settings were: 0–70 min, 5%–22% B; 70–84 min, 22%–32% B; 84–87 min, 32%–80% B; 87–90 min, 80% B. The flow rate was maintained at 300 nL/min. After separation by the ultra-performance liquid system, the peptide was injected into the capillary ion source for ionization and then analyzed by timsTOF3 mass spectrometry. The voltage of the ion source was set to 2.0 kV. High resolution TOF was used to detect and analyze the parent ions of the peptide and its secondary fragments. The secondary mass spectrum scanning range was set to 100–1700. Data collection used the parallel cumulative serial fragmentation (PASEF) mode. After one primary mass spectrometry collection, the secondary spectrograms with the charge number of parent ions in the range of 0–5 were collected in PASEF mode ten times. The dynamic exclusion time of tandem mass spectrometry was set at 30 s to avoid repeated scanning of parent ions.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Oryza longistaminata</i> is an African wild rice species that possesses special traits for breeding applications. Self-incompatibility is the main cause of sterility in <i>O. longistaminata</i>, but here we demonstrated that its pollen vitality are normal. Lipid and carbohydrate metabolism were active throughout pollen development. In this study, we used I<sub>2</sub>-KI staining and TTC staining to investigate pollen viability. Aniline-blue-stained semithin sections were used to investigate important stages of pollen development. Tandem mass tags (TMT)-based quantitative analysis was used to investigate the profiles of proteins related to lipid and carbohydrate metabolism in 4-, 6-, and 8.5-mm <i>O. longistaminata</i> spikelets before flowering. Pollen was found to germinate normally <i>in vitro</i> and <i>in vivo</i>. We documented cytological changes throughout important stages of anther development, including changes in reproductive cells as they formed mature pollen grains through meiosis and mitosis. A total of 31,987 RNA transcripts and 8,753 proteins were identified, and 6,842 of the proteins could be quantified. RNA-seq and proteome association analysis indicated that fatty acids were converted to sucrose after the 6-mm spikelet stage, based on the abundance of most key enzymes of the glyoxylate cycle and gluconeogenesis. The abundance of proteins involved in pollen energy metabolism was further confirmed by combining quantitative real-time PCR with parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) analyses. In conclusion, our study provides novel insights into the pollen viability of <i>O. longistaminata</i> at the proteome level, which can be used to improve the efficiency of male parent pollination in hybrid rice breeding applications.

### Keywords
Oryza longistaminata; pollen viability; proteome

### Affiliations
Key Laboratory of Crop Physiology, Ecology and Genetic Breeding, Ministry of Education,Research Center of Super Rice Engineering and Technology, Jiangxi Agricultural University, Nanchang 330045, Jiangxi Province, China
Key Laboratory of Crop Physiology, Ecology and Genetic Breeding, Ministry of Education,Research Center of Super Rice Engineering and Technology, Jiangxi Agricultural University, Nanchang, Jiangxi Province, China;
30045

### Submitter
Xiaosong Peng

### Lab Head
Dr Xiaosong Peng,Haohua He
Key Laboratory of Crop Physiology, Ecology and Genetic Breeding, Ministry of Education,Research Center of Super Rice Engineering and Technology, Jiangxi Agricultural University, Nanchang 330045, Jiangxi Province, China


