### Accession
PXD010744

### Title
Quantitative proteomic analysis of primary prostate cancer tissue specimens

### Description
Currently, comprehensive and quantitative proteomic analysis of human prostate cancer tissue specimens remains scarce, hindering the identification of protein complexes and pathways deregulated in prostate cancer. In this study, we applied TMT-SPS-MS3-based quantitative proteomics to analzye 9 normal controls, 9 low-grade prostate cancer, and 9 high-grade prostate cancer. About 3,600 proteins were quantified across all the 27 prostate specimens. Statistical analysis identified 651 proteins that are differentially expressed in high-grade prostate cancer and normal prostate. Pathway enrichment analysis revealed that the LXR/RXR activation and integrin signaling pathways are substantially downregulated in high-grade prostate cancer, compared with normal prostate cancer. In addition, protein complex analysis suggested that mitochondrial ribosomes and ribosome-biogenesis complexes are significnatly overexpressed, whereas the cholesterol effluex and focal adhesion comlexes are significantly downregulated in high-grade prostate cancer, compared with normal controls. Furthermore, differential correlation analysis indicated that the spliceosome machinery might be more active in low-grade prostate cancer, compared with normal controls. The results are expected to shed light on the molecular mechnanisms underlying the development and progression of primary prostate cancer in human patients.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from tissue specimens and digested into peptides using filter-aided sample preparation (FASP). Peptides were labeled with 10-plex TMT reagents. Each set of peptide samples was desalted and fractionated into 24 fractions by high-pH reversed-phase liquid chromatography. Each fraction was analyzed by LC-SPS=MS3 using an EASY-nLC 1200 connnected to a Orbitrap Fusion Lumos.

### Data Protocol
RAW files were analyzed by MaxQuant to identify and quantify proteins. The proteins quantified across all the 27 tissue samples were selected for statistical and bioinformatic analyses. For bioinformatic analysis, the Perseus and R were applied.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tissue, Protein complex, Pathway, Differential expression analysis, Proteomics, Sps-ms3, Tmt, Prostate cancer, Differential correlation analysis

### Affiliations
Departments of Surgery and Biomedical Sciences Cedars-Sinai Medical Center
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center

### Submitter
Wei Yang

### Lab Head
Dr Wei Yang
Departments of Surgery and Biomedical Sciences Cedars-Sinai Medical Center


