### Accession
PXD027444

### Title
Changes in Mycobacterium avium subsp. paratuberculosis proteome after cultivation in milk

### Description
Mycobacterium avium subspecies paratuberculosis (MAP) is the causative agent of Johne’s disease in cattle. MAP can be either shed directly into milk by infected cows, or introduced via fecal contamination. Viable MAP are detectable in milk and other dairy products, indicating survival of MAP after the pasteurization process. Although direct evidence is still lacking, MAP are discussed as a possible factor in the morbidity for chronic inflammatory bowel diseases in humans, such as Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis. Therefore, it is broadly accepted in the scientific community that exposure to MAP, especially through contaminated milk and dairy products, should be kept to a minimum. To gain deeper insight into the role of milk in MAP transmission and the question of why MAP can survive pasteurization, we investigated MAP proteome changes after incubation in milk at 37°C (simulating the environment in the mammary gland) and 4°C (simulating tank milk) as well as incubation in liquid control medium at 37°C.

### Sample Protocol
Mycobacterium avium subsp. paratuberculosis (MAP) strain DSM 44133 was obtained from the German Collection of Microorganisms and Cell Cultures (DSMZ, Braunschweig, Germany). MAP were cultivated on Herrold`s egg yolk agar (HEYM; BD Biosciences, Heidelberg, Germany) for four weeks.  Fresh milk (1.5 % fat, short time high temperature (72 °C 20 s)) was defatted (20 min, 2000 x g, 4 °C) and filtered (paper filter followed by 0.45 µm filter followed by 0.2 µm filter).   MAP were harvested from HEYM agar by carefully washing three times with PBS (10 min, 16000 x g). Two aliquots of 2x10^9 cfu/ml MAP were transferred to the defatted, filtered milk and one aliquot was transferred to liquid control Middlebrook 7H9 medium (M7H9; Sigma-Aldrich, Taufkirchen). One MAP+milk aliquot as well as the MAP+M7H9 aliquot were incubated at 37°C for 48h. The other MAP+milk aliquot was incubated at 4°C for 48h.  After incubation, samples were shortly warmed to 38°C and filtrated through a 0.45 µm filter. The filters were washed twice with PBS and MAP were harvested from filters by flushing with PBS. Extracted MAP-PBS suspension was centrifuged (30 min, 2500 x g) and remaining supernatants were again centrifuged (10 min, 16000 x g) to make sure that all MAP were sedimented. Finally, MAP pellets were refiltrated (in opposite direction) washed three times with PBS (10 min, 16000 x g).  For efficient lysis, MAP pellets were resuspended in lysis buffer (1% Nonidet P-40, 10 mM NaCl, 10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6), then treated with silica beads (0.1 mm; 40 mg beads/100 µl lysate) in Ribolyser (Hybaid, Tedding-ton, UK; level 6, 3 x 30 sec), then heated (74 °C, 5 min) and finally treated with ultrasound (6 x 30 sec on ice).  10µg total protein was digested with LysC and trypsin by a modified filter-aided sample preparation (FASP)[1] as follows: To every lysate, 1 µl 1 M dithiothreitol was added and incubated for 30 min at 60 °C. After cooling down, samples were diluted 1:3 in urea (UA)-buffer (8 M urea and 0.1 M Tris-HCl pH 8.5 diluted in HPLC-grade water) and incubated with 10 µl of 300 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. After addition of 2 µl 1 M dithiothreitol, samples were transferred to 30 kDa cut-off centrifuge filters (Sartorius, Göttingen, Germany) and centrifuged (15 min, 14000 x g), followed by three washing steps with 200 µl UA-buffer and 100 µl ammoniumbicar-bonate (ABC) -buffer (50 mM diluted in HPLC-grade water) each. Afterwards, the proteins were subjected to proteolysis with 1 µg Lys C (Lysyl Endopeptidase C) in 40 µl ABC-buffer at 37 °C overnight. After centrifugation (15 min, 15000 x g) over new tubes and renewed washing with 20 µl ABC-buffer, collected Lys-C fractions were acidified with 0.5% tri-fluoroacetic acid to pH 2 and frozen at -20 °C. Filters were subsequently incubated with 2 µg trypsin in 50 µl of ABC-buffer at 37 °C overnight. Peptides of tryptic digestion were collected by centrifugation (15 min, 15000 x g) and additional washing with 20 µl ABC-buffer containing 5% acetonitrile, and were also finally acidified with 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid to pH 2.  Acidified eluted peptides were analyzed in the data-dependent mode on a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) online coupled to a UItimate 3000 RSLC nano-HPLC (Dionex, Idstein, Germany). Samples were automatically injected and loaded onto the C18 trap column and after 5 min eluted and separated on the C18 analytical column (75µm IDx15cm, Acclaim PepMAP 100 C18. 100Å/size, LC Pack-ings, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) by a 90min non-linear acetonitrile gradient at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. MS spectra were recorded at a resolution of 60000 and after each MS1 cycle, the 10 most abundant peptide ions were selected for fragmentation.   [1]  A. Grosche et al., The Proteome of Native Adult Muller Glial Cells From Murine Retina. Mol Cell Proteomics 15, 462-480 (2016)

### Data Protocol
Acquired MS spectra were imported into Progenesis software (version 2.5 Nonlinear Dynamics, Waters) and analyzed as previously described [2][3]. After alignment, peak picking, exclusion of features with charge state of 1 and > 7 and normalization, spectra were exported as Mascot Generic files (mgf) and searched against a database containing all entries of Mycobacterium avium subspecies paratuberculosis from NCBI Protein database combined with the Ensembl bovine database (version 80) with Mascot (Matrix Science, Version 2.5.1). Search parameters used were 10 ppm peptide mass tolerance, 20 mmu fragment mass tolerance, one missed cleavage allowed, carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification, and methionine oxidation and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine as variable modifications. Mascot integrated decoy database search was set to a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% when searching was performed on the concatenated mgf files with a percolator ion score cut-off of 13 and an appropriate significance threshold p. Peptide assignment was reimported to Progenesis Software. All unique peptides allocated to a protein were considered for quantification.   [2] S. M. Hauck et al., Label-free LC-MSMS analysis of vitreous from autoimmune uveitis reveals a significant decrease in secreted Wnt signalling inhibitors DKK3 and SFRP2. J Proteomics 75, 4545-4554 (2012) [3] S. M. Hauck, M. F. Lepper, M. Hertl, W. Sekundo, C. A. Deeg, Proteome Dynamics in Biobanked Horse Peripheral Blood Derived Lymphocytes (PBL) with Induced Autoimmune Uveitis. Proteomics 17 (2017)

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mycobacterium avium subspecies paratuberculosis, Dairy product, Lc-ms/ms, Food safety, Milk

### Affiliations
Research Unit Protein Science, Helmholtz Center Munich, German Research Center for Environmental Health GmbH, Germany
LMU Munich, Veterinary Sciences, Chair of Physiology, Lena-Christ-Straße 48, 82152 Planegg/Martinsried,  Germany

### Submitter
Roxane Degroote

### Lab Head
Dr Stefanie M Hauck
Research Unit Protein Science, Helmholtz Center Munich, German Research Center for Environmental Health GmbH, Germany


