### Accession
PXD033650

### Title
De novo mapping of the apicomplexan Ca2+-responsive proteome: concentration range thermal profiling experiment 2

### Description
Apicomplexan parasites cause persistent mortality and morbidity worldwide through diseases including malaria, toxoplasmosis, and cryptosporidiosis. Ca2+ signaling pathways have been repurposed in these eukaryotic pathogens to regulate parasite-specific cellular processes governing the transition between the replicative and lytic phases of the infectious cycle. Despite the presence of conserved Ca2+-responsive proteins, little is known about how specific signaling elements interact to impact pathogenesis. We mapped the Ca2+-responsive proteome of the model apicomplexan T. gondii via time-resolved phosphoproteomics and thermal proteome profiling. The waves of phosphoregulation following PKG activation and stimulated Ca2+ release corroborate known physiological changes but identify specific molecular components in these pathways. Thermal profiling of parasite extracts identified many expected Ca2+-responsive proteins, such as parasite Ca2+-dependent protein kinases. Our approach also identified numerous Ca2+-responsive proteins that are not predicted to bind Ca2+, yet are critical components of the parasite signaling network. We characterized protein phosphatase 1 (PP1) as a Ca2+-responsive enzyme that relocalized to the parasite apex upon Ca2+ store release. Conditional depletion of PP1 revealed that the phosphatase regulates Ca2+ uptake to promote parasite motility. PP1 may thus be partly responsible for Ca2+-regulated serine/threonine phosphatase activity in apicomplexan parasites.

### Sample Protocol
Parasite harvest and treatment Parasites and host cells were grown for one week in SILAC media and were considered separate biological replicates. SILAC media was prepared from DMEM for SILAC (Thermo Fisher 88364), 10% dialyzed FBS (Thermo Fisher A3382001) and L-Arginine HCl/L-Lysine-2-HCl (Thermo Fisher 89989 and 89987) or C-13 N-15 L-Arginine HCl/C-13 N-15 L-Lysine-2HCl (Thermo Fisher 89990 and 88209). Confluent HFF cells in 15-cm dishes were infected with 2–5 ✕ 107 RH tachyzoites each. When the parasites had fully lysed the host cell monolayer (40-48 hours later), the extracellular parasites passed through a 5 µm filter. The parasite solution was concentrated by centrifugation for 10 minutes at 1000 x g. Parasites were resuspended in 1 ml of wash buffer (5 mM NaCl, 142 mM KCl, 1 mM MgCl2, 5.6 mM glucose, 25 mM HEPES pH 7.2) and spun again for 10 minutes at 1000 x g.  The parasite pellet was resuspended in 1200 µl of lysis buffer (5 mM NaCl, 142 mM KCl, 1 mM MgCl2, 5.6 mM glucose, 25 mM HEPES pH 7.2 with 0.8% IGEPAL CA-630, 1X Halt Protease Inhibitors, and 250 U/ml benzonase) and subjected to three freeze-thaw cycles. An equivalent volume of parasite lysate was combined with 2X [Ca2+]free buffers to attain the final concentrations: 0 nM, 10 nM, 100 nM, 250 nM, 500 nM, 750 nM, 1 µM, 10 µM, 100 µM, and 1 mM. The solutions were aliquoted into two PCR tubes and were incubated for 5 minutes at 5% CO2/37°C. The tubes were placed on heat blocks pre-warmed at 50°C, 54°C or 58°C for 3 minutes and were then immediately placed on ice. Insoluble aggregates were removed by filtration as described in (Herneisen and Lourido, 2021). In brief, the lysates were applied to a pre-equilibrated 96-well filter plate (Millipore MSHVN4510) and were spun at 500 x g for 5 minutes. The concentrations of the filtrates containing soluble fractions were quantified with a DC assay. The heavy and light samples were combined at 1:1 wt/wt, yielding an estimated 50 µg total per concentration.   Protein cleanup and digestion Proteins were reduced with 5 mM TCEP for 20 minutes at 50°C. Alkylation of cysteines was performed with 15 mM MMTS for 10 minutes at room temperature. The samples were precipitated in 80% ethanol and were washed using the SP3 protocol. After the final wash, the samples were resuspended in 35 µl of digest buffer (50 mM TEAB) and 1 µg Trypsin). Digestion proceeded overnight at 37°C on a thermomixer shaking at 1,000 rpm. The beads were magnetically separated, and the peptide eluatse were removed from further analysis.  TMT10plex labeling Peptides were labeled according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Thermo Scientific 90111), with the following modifications. The eluates were combined with 100 µg of TMT10plex reagent in 15 µl of acetonitrile, for an estimated 1:2 w/w peptide:tag labeling reaction. The labeling proceeded for 1 hour at room temperature and was quenched for 15 minutes with 5% hydroxylamine. The samples were then pooled, flash-frozen, and lyophilized to dryness.  Fractionation Samples were fractionated with the Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions for TMT-labeled peptides.

### Data Protocol
MS data acquisition The fractions were lyophilized and resuspended in 10-20 µl of 0.1% formic acid for MS analysis and were analyzed on an Exploris 480 Orbitrap mass spectrometer equipped with a FAIMS Pro source (Bekker-Jensen et al., 2020) connected to an EASY-nLC chromatography system as described above. Peptides were separated at 300 nl/min on a gradient of 6–21% B for 41 minutes, 21–36% B for 20 minutes, 36–50% B for 10 minutes, and 50 to 100% B over 15 minutes. The orbitrap and FAIMS were operated in positive ion mode with a positive ion voltage of 1800V; with an ion transfer tube temperature of 270°C; using standard FAIMS resolution and compensation voltages of -50 and -65V (injection 1) or -40 and -60 (injection 2). Full scan spectra were acquired in profile mode at a resolution of 120,000, with a scan range of 350-1200 m/z, automatically determined maximum fill time, standard AGC target, intensity threshold of 5 × 103, 2-5 charge state, and dynamic exclusion of 30 seconds with a cycle time of 2 seconds between master scans. MS2 spectra were generated with a HCD collision energy of 36 at a resolution of 30,000 using TurboTMT settings with a first mass at 110 m/z, an isolation window of 0.7 m/z, standard AGC target, and auto injection time.  Thermal profiling concentration range analysis Raw files were analyzed in Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) to generate peak lists and protein and peptide IDs using Sequest HT (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the ToxoDB release49 GT1 protein database. The search included the following post-translational modifications for the first biological replicate, which was collected from parasites grown in light SILAC medium: dynamic phosphorylation (+79.966 Da; S, T, Y), dynamic oxidation (+15.995 Da; M), dynamic acetylation (+42.011 Da; N-Terminus), static TMT6plex (+229.163 Da; any N-Terminus), static TMT6plex (+229.163 Da; K), and static methylthio (+45.988 Da; C). The heavy samples were searched for the additional modifications Lys8-TMT6plex (+237.177 Da; K) and static Label:13C(6)15N(4) (+10.008 Da; R).

### Publication Abstract
Apicomplexan parasites cause persistent mortality and morbidity worldwide through diseases including malaria, toxoplasmosis, and cryptosporidiosis. Ca<sup>2+</sup> signaling pathways have been repurposed in these eukaryotic pathogens to regulate parasite-specific cellular processes governing the replicative and lytic phases of the infectious cycle, as well as the transition between them. Despite the presence of conserved Ca<sup>2+</sup>-responsive proteins, little is known about how specific signaling elements interact to impact pathogenesis. We mapped the Ca<sup>2+</sup>-responsive proteome of the model apicomplexan <i>Taxoplasma gondii</i> via time-resolved phosphoproteomics and thermal proteome profiling. The waves of phosphoregulation following PKG activation and stimulated Ca<sup>2+</sup> release corroborate known physiological changes but identify specific proteins operating in these pathways. Thermal profiling of parasite extracts identified many expected Ca<sup>2+</sup>-responsive proteins, such as parasite Ca<sup>2+</sup>-dependent protein kinases. Our approach also identified numerous Ca<sup>2+</sup>-responsive proteins that are not predicted to bind Ca<sup>2+</sup>, yet are critical components of the parasite signaling network. We characterized protein phosphatase 1 (PP1) as a Ca<sup>2+</sup>-responsive enzyme that relocalized to the parasite apex upon Ca<sup>2+</sup> store release. Conditional depletion of PP1 revealed that the phosphatase regulates Ca<sup>2+</sup> uptake to promote parasite motility. PP1 may thus be partly responsible for Ca<sup>2+</sup>-regulated serine/threonine phosphatase activity in apicomplexan parasites.

### Keywords
Toxoplasma, Calcium signaling, Thermal proteome profiling, Tpp, Systems biology, Proteomics, Parasite, Apicomplexan, Cetsa

### Affiliations
Associate Professor, Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Whitehead Institute of Biomedical Research
Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA, USA 02142
Department of Biology, Massachusetts Insitute of Technology

### Submitter
Alice Herneisen

### Lab Head
Dr Sebastian Lourido
Associate Professor, Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Whitehead Institute of Biomedical Research


