### Accession
PXD002475

### Title
HCV Cryoprecipitate LC-MS/MS with iTRAQ Quantification

### Description
The discovery of hepatitis C virus (HCV) in 1989 revealed the virus as the etiology of 40%-90% of the “essential” mixed cryoglobulinemia, where immune complex forms deposit called cryoprecipitate at temperatures below 37 °C. Cryoprecipitate constitutes monoclonal IgM and polyclonal IgG, some of which has reactivity against HCV core and NS3 epitopes. Resultant immune complex is considered entrapped on microvascular endothelium via C1q receptor, leading to complement activation and organ injury presenting predominantly as dermopathy, peripheral neuropathy and nephropathy. However, currently little is known on whether auto-reactive, cold-precipitating IgG components enriched in cryoprecipitate may play some role on the deposition of immune complex and subsequent complement-mediated injury of specific organs. Recently, with the advent of high-throughput immune repertoire sequencing and mass spectrometry, technical feasibility is growing to delineate antibodies of interest and their sequences directly from serum. To date, vast majority of studies actually utilized the antigen column for affinity purification of antibodies of interest, although this strategy is not applicable to disease entity with unknown antigen involvement. In such cases, disease-specific and organ-specific immune deposits may be a good alternative source of etiological antibodies. Herein, targeting HCV cryoglobulinemic vasculitis as a model, we conducted a proof-of-concept study aiming at characterizing the IgG components most prone to cryoprecipitation.  To this end, we longitudinally studied one patient with cryoglobulinemic vasculitis with chronic HCV infection. After obtaining informed consent, cryoprecipitate and supernatant were separated from peripheral blood sample. Fab fragments from Protein G-purified IgG were recovered after papain digestion for isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ)-based quantitative proteomics. Simultaneously, total RNA was isolated from peripheral blood, and immunoglobulin heavy chain variable region (IGHV) was PCR-amplified with unique molecular identifier (UMI) strategy to construct a personal IGHV sequence library of immunoglobulin variable region. Sequencing output from MiSeq was bioinformatically converted into mass spectrometry database. Search was performed using MaxQuant software.

### Sample Protocol
Cryoprecipitate was isolated from peripheral serum from a patient with chronic hepatitis C and cryoglobulinemia. Supernatant and cryoprecipitate were separated manually. Supernatant was simply diluted in PBS. Cryoprecipitate was dissolved in 20% SDS, and diluted in PBS. Protein G-mag sepharose bead was utilized to purify IgG molecules. Purified IgG was digested with papain, and Fab fragments were collected from the flow-through from protein-A beads. Fab fragments were quantified by BCA kit and SDS-PAGE gel stain with SYPRO dye. BSA (1 μg ) was spiked-in to 100 μg of Fab proteins for an internal quantity control. Proteins were TCA-precipitated, trypsinized, and iTRAQ-labeled (reporter 116 for cryoprecipitate-derived Fab protein, and reporter 117 for supernatant). Mass spectra were acquired using Thermo Scientific LTQ Orbitrap XL Mass Spectrometer. In parallel, total RNA was isolated from whole blood specimen collected together with cryoglobulin specimen, and immunoglobulin heavy chain variable region (IGHV) was amplified via RT-PCR, utilizing a unique-molecular identifier (UMI) strategy. PCR products were subjected to MiSeq 300bp paired-end sequencing.

### Data Protocol
Generated FastQ files were de-multiplexed using MiGEC (Shugay, Mikhail, et al. Nature methods 11.6 (2014): 653-655.). Subsequently assembled reads were aligned to IMGT reference sequences via IMGT/High-V Quest (http://www.imgt.org/HighV-QUEST/search.action). V-D-J region amino acid sequences extracted from the output file were used as a personal immunoglobuline repertoire database for MS/MS search. Search was performed using MaxQuant software (Cox, Jürgen, and Matthias Mann. Nature biotechnology 26.12 (2008): 1367-1372.). For detailed parameters used in the present search, please see the “parameter.txt” file, or “mqpar.xml” file, both included in the SEARCH result.

### Publication Abstract
Antibodies cross-reactive to pathogens and autoantigens are considered pivotal in both infection control and accompanying autoimmunity. However, the pathogenic roles of autoantibodies largely remain elusive without a priori knowledge of disease-specific autoantigens. Here, through a novel quantitative proteogenomics approach, we demonstrated a successful identification of immunoglobulin variable heavy chain (VH) sequences highly enriched in pathological immune complex from clinical specimens obtained from a patient with hepatitis C virus-induced cryoglobulinemia (HCV-CG). Reconstructed single-domain antibodies were reactive to both HCV antigens and potentially liver-derived human proteins. Moreover, over the course of antiviral therapy, a substantial "de-evolution" of a distinct sub-repertoire was discovered, to which proteomically identified cryoprecipitation-prone autoantibodies belonged. This sub-repertoire was characterized by IGHJ6*03-derived, long, hydrophobic complementarity determining region (CDR-H3). This study provides a proof-of-concept of de novo mining of autoantibodies and corresponding autoantigen candidates in a disease-specific context in human, thus facilitating future reverse-translational research for the discovery of novel biomarkers and the development of antigen-specific immunotherapy against various autoantibody-related disorders.

### Keywords
Human, Antibody, Hcv, Immunoglobulin, Itraq

### Affiliations
Department of Infectious Diseases Internal Medicine Graduate School of Medicine University of Tokyo, Japan
The University of Tokyo

### Submitter
Masato Ogishi

### Lab Head
Dr Hiroshi Yotsuyanagi
Department of Infectious Diseases Internal Medicine Graduate School of Medicine University of Tokyo, Japan


