### Accession
PXD024480

### Title
Nsp1 and Nsp2 interactome and proteome

### Description
The samples represent pulldowns of protein Nsp1 and Nsp2 from SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV2, as well its unfunctional mutants. Additionally, total proteomes of corresponding samples were analyzed.

### Sample Protocol
The BioID IP eluates (10 µL each) were diluted in ultra-pure water whereas cell lysates each corresponding to 20 µg of protein were diluted in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (NH4HCO3) buffer, pH 7.8 to a final volume of 100 µL. All samples were reduced with 10 mM DTT at 56°C for 30 min, and subsequently alkylated with 30 mM IAA at room temperature  for 30 min in the dark. Next, the samples were subjected to ethanol (EtOH) precipitation followed by in-solution protein digestion. Briefly, each sample was diluted 10-fold with ice-cold EtOH in 1:10 (v/v) ratio, vortexed and incubated at -40°C for 60 min followed by centrifugation in a pre-cooled (4°C) centrifuge at 20,000 g for 30 min. The obtained pellet was washed with 100 µL of ice-cold acetone, briefly vortexed and centrifuged as mentioned above for 5 min. The supernatant was discarded, the pellet was dried under laminar flow hood and re-solubilized in 60 µL of digestion buffer comprising: 0.2 M GuHCl, 2 mM CaCl2, 50 mM NH4HCO3, pH 7.8. 100 ng of Trypsin Gold and 1 µg of Trypsin sequenced grade (both Promega) were added to BioID eluates and  total cell lysates , respectively and subjected to proteolysis at 37°C for 16 h.  Lastly, all samples were acidified with 10% TFA to pH < 3.0 and an aliquot of the each digest i.e. 10% of BioID and 5% of total cell lysate was quality controlled as described previously  30% of BioID eluates and 10% of total cell lysates digests were analyzed using an Ultimate 3000 nano RSLC system coupled to Orbitrap Lumos (both Thermo Scientific). Peptides were pre-concentrated on a 100 µm x 2 cm C18 trapping column for 5 min using 0.1% TFA  with a flow rate of 20 µL/min followed by separation on a 75 µm x 50 cm C18 main column (both Acclaim Pepmap nanoviper, Thermo Scientific) with a 60 min (BioID samples) or 120 min (cell lysate samples) LC gradient ranging from 3-35% of B (84% ACN in 0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. The Orbitrap Lumos was operated in data-dependent acquisition  modeand MS survey scans were acquired from m/z 300 to 1500 at a resolution of 120000 using the polysiloxane ion at m/z 445.12002 as lock mass [2]. For MS1 scans, the automatic gain control (AGC)target value was set to 2 x 105 with a maximum injection time (IT) of 50 ms. MS2 spectra were acquired in the linear ion trap (rapid scan mode) after higher-energy collisional dissociation with a normalized collision energy of 30% and an AGC target value of 2 x 103 and a maximum IT of 300 ms, by utilizing a maximal duty cycle of 3 s, prioritizing the most intense ions and injecting ions for all available parallelizable time. Selected precursor ions were isolated using quadrupole with a 1.2 m/z window taking into account a dynamic exclusion of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
All MS raw data were processed with Proteome Discoverer software 2.3.0.523 (Thermo Scientific, Germany) and searched in a target/decoy fashion against a concatenated version of the human Uniprot database (downloaded on on November 2019, 20300 target sequences); Nsp1, Nsp2 from Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARC-CoV2); Nsp1, Nsp2 from Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (HCoV-SARS) and BioID using SEQUEST-HT algorithm. The search parameters were: precursor and fragment ion tolerances of 10 ppm and 0.5 Da for MS and MS/MS, respectively. Trypsin was set as enzyme with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of Cys as fixed modification and oxidation of Met was selected as  dynamic modification. The false discovery rate  was set to 0.01 for both peptide and protein identifications using Percolator.

### Publication Abstract
SARS-CoV-2, responsible for the ongoing global pandemic, must overcome a conundrum faced by all viruses. To achieve its own replication and spread, it simultaneously depends on and subverts cellular mechanisms. At the early stage of infection, SARS-CoV-2 expresses the viral nonstructural protein 1 (NSP1), which inhibits host translation by blocking the mRNA entry tunnel on the ribosome; this interferes with the binding of cellular mRNAs to the ribosome. Viral mRNAs, on the other hand, overcome this blockade. We show that NSP1 enhances expression of mRNAs containing the SARS-CoV-2 leader. The first stem-loop (SL1) in the viral leader is both necessary and sufficient for this enhancement mechanism. Our analysis pinpoints specific residues within SL1 (three cytosine residues at the positions 15, 19, and 20) and another within NSP1 (R124), which are required for viral evasion, and thus might present promising drug targets. We target SL1 with the antisense oligo (ASO) to efficiently and specifically down-regulate SARS-CoV-2 mRNA. Additionally, we carried out analysis of a functional interactome of NSP1 using BioID and identified components of antiviral defense pathways. Our analysis therefore suggests a mechanism by which NSP1 inhibits the expression of host genes while enhancing that of viral RNA. This analysis helps reconcile conflicting reports in the literature regarding the mechanisms by which the virus avoids NSP1 silencing.

### Keywords
Traumatic brain injury, Cerebrospinal fluid, Extracellular vesicle

### Affiliations
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V. Otto-Hahn-Straße 6b 44227 Dortmund, Germany  P: +49 (0)2 31.13 92-100  F: +49 (0)2 31.13 92-200 Albert.Sickmann@isas.de www.isas.de
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V.

### Submitter
Olga Shevchuk

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Albert Sickmann
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V. Otto-Hahn-Straße 6b 44227 Dortmund, Germany  P: +49 (0)2 31.13 92-100  F: +49 (0)2 31.13 92-200 Albert.Sickmann@isas.de www.isas.de


