### Accession
PXD015766

### Title
SEC23B-dependent COPII Vesicles Regulate T Cell Immunity

### Description
The coordinated release of proteins by T cells enables controlled biological responses. While the molecular mechanisms underlying T cell secretion are being increasingly understood, whether the critical ER-to-Golgi trafficking pathway regulates T cell immunity is not known. We utilized mice with a T cell-specific deletion of SEC23B, a core subunit of Coat Protein Complex II (COPII) which drives ER-to-Golgi cargo transport. We found that following activation, SEC23B-deficient T cells display an altered secretome compared to wild-type, which includes reduced secretion of T cell-derived inflammatory mediators, and which is associated with functional ramifications in vitro and in vivo. Together, these data reveal a critical role for the SEC23B-dependent COPII pathway in T cell immunity.

### Sample Protocol
Purified T cells were stimulated by plate-bound αCD3 (10ug/mL) and soluble αCD28 (5ug/mL)  in CTS OpTmizer serum free medium for 24 hours (37ºC, 5% CO2). Cultures were transferred to 50mL tubes and centrifuged (400xg, 10 minutes). Cells underwent flow cytometric analysis to confirm activation (CD69) and degree of cell death (Annexin V and 7-AAD). Supernatants were passed through a 40m filter and underwent ultracentrifugation (120,000xg, 90 minutes) to remove exosomes. The samples were then concentrated using a 3kD cutoff ultrafilter (5000xg, 40 minutes). Protein concentration was determined by BCA protein assay, and samples were stored at -70ºC until use.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer (v2.3; Thermo Fisher) was used for data analysis. MS2 spectra were searched against UniProt homo sapien database (release 2019-06-20; 20353  sequences) using the following search parameters: MS1 and MS2 tolerance were set to 10 ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively; carbamidomethylation of cysteines (57.02146 Da) and TMT labeling of lysine and N-termini of peptides (229.16293 Da) were considered static modifications; oxidation of methionine (15.9949 Da) and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine (0.98401 Da) were considered variable. Identified proteins and peptides were filtered to retain only those that passed ≤1% FDR threshold. Quantitation was performed using high-quality MS3 spectra (Average signal-to-noise ratio of 6 and <40% isolation interference).

### Publication Abstract
T cell-mediated responses are dependent on their secretion of key effector molecules. However, the critical molecular determinants of the secretion of these proteins are largely undefined. Here, we demonstrate that T cell activation increases trafficking via the ER-to-Golgi pathway. To study the functional role of this pathway, we generated mice with a T cell-specific deletion in SEC23B, a core subunit of coat protein complex II (COPII). We found that SEC23B critically regulated the T cell secretome following activation. SEC23B-deficient T cells exhibited a proliferative defect and reduced effector functions in vitro, as well as in experimental models of allogeneic and xenogeneic hematopoietic cell transplantation in vivo. However, T cells derived from 3 patients with congenital dyserythropoietic anemia II (CDAII), which results from Sec23b mutation, did not exhibit a similar phenotype. Mechanistic studies demonstrated that unlike murine KO T cells, T cells from patients with CDAII harbor increased levels of the closely related paralog, SEC23A. In vivo rescue of murine KO by expression of Sec23a from the Sec23b genomic locus restored T cell functions. Together, our data demonstrate a critical role for the COPII pathway, with evidence for functional overlap in vivo between SEC23 paralogs in the regulation of T cell immunity in both mice and humans.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Mouse, Lymphocytes

### Affiliations
University of Michigan

### Submitter
Pavan Reddy

### Lab Head
Dr Pavan Reddy
University of Michigan


