### Accession
PXD004150

### Title
protein turnover during homeostatic plasticity

### Description
Using quantitative proteomics we identified group of synaptic genes with decreased protein synthesis during homeostatic plasticity. To obtain further information about their mRNA levels/sequences (3’UTR) we performed polyA RNAseq. Using EISA analysis of Ribominus RNAseq dataset we could further differentiate between transcriptional respective post-transcriptional dependent alterations in mRNA levels. In addition Ribominus RNAseq from cell body and processes (dendrites, axons) RNA samples showed us local changes in mRNA levels during homeostatic plasticity. At the end, small RNAseq helped us to identify miRNAs that are increased during homeostatic plasticity and might regulate downregulated genes.

### Sample Protocol
Neuronal enriched cultures were fed without Arg/Lys from 9DIV (to dilute the non-labeled arginine and lysine). Decrease of non-labeled arginine and lysine concentration in the medium did not have obvious effect on cell morphology and viability. At 15DIV Arg-6/Lys-4 (200uM/400uM; + Pro – 1.72mM) was added to the medium. PTX was applied at 18DIV for 48h. At 20DIV proteins were extracted and concentration measured as described earlier. Samples were mixed 1:1 with neuronal spike-in standard and separated by 1D SDS-PAGE gel electrophoresis (BIO-RAD). Gels were stained with colloidal Blue Staining Kit (Invitrogen). Each gel lane (representing one sample each) was separated into 11 gel pieces and proteins were subjected to in gel digestion using the protease trypsin as described in (Shevchenko et al. 2006). After stage Tip purification (Rappsilber et al. 2007) samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos instrument (Konzer et al. 2013). Raw data were analyzed by 1.3.7.4 Maxquant.

### Data Protocol
Newly synthesized proteins and pre-existing protein level were calculated as described in suppl. Fig.1C. Accuracy of mixing (sample mixed with neuronal spike-in standard in 1:1 ratio) was checked. If mixing was correct then: M/L (Arg6/LysD4 vs Arg/Lys) + H/L (Arg10/Lys8 vs Arg/Lys) = 1. If not calculations were corrected for this error. All experiments were performed in biological triplicates. We identified and quantified 1225 different proteins. To test if changes in new protein synthesis for specific genes were reproducible we used one sample t-test (2-tailed, heteroscedastic). Proteins with p-value < 0.05 were considered as differentially expressed (n=182; increased (n=85), decreased (n=97). maxquant version 1.3.7.4.

### Publication Abstract
Synaptic downscaling is a homeostatic mechanism that allows neurons to reduce firing rates during chronically elevated network activity. Although synaptic downscaling is important in neural circuit development and epilepsy, the underlying mechanisms are poorly described. We performed small RNA profiling in picrotoxin (PTX)-treated hippocampal neurons, a model of synaptic downscaling. Thereby, we identified eight microRNAs (miRNAs) that were increased in response to PTX, including miR-129-5p, whose inhibition blocked synaptic downscaling <i>in&#xa0;vitro</i> and reduced epileptic seizure severity <i>in&#xa0;vivo</i> Using transcriptome, proteome, and bioinformatic analysis, we identified the calcium pump Atp2b4 and doublecortin (Dcx) as miR-129-5p targets. Restoring Atp2b4 and Dcx expression was sufficient to prevent synaptic downscaling in PTX-treated neurons. Furthermore, we characterized a functional crosstalk between miR-129-5p and the RNA-binding protein (RBP) Rbfox1. In the absence of PTX, Rbfox1 promoted the expression of Atp2b4 and Dcx. Upon PTX treatment, Rbfox1 expression was downregulated by miR-129-5p, thereby allowing the repression of Atp2b4 and Dcx. We therefore identified a novel activity-dependent miRNA/RBP crosstalk during synaptic scaling, with potential implications for neural network homeostasis and epileptogenesis.

### Keywords
Neuron silac homeostatic plasticity

### Affiliations
Philipps-University Marburg
Marburg University

### Submitter
Marek Rajman

### Lab Head
Dr Gerhard Schratt
Marburg University


