### Accession
PXD015466

### Title
Interactome of AMPK complex study using TAP-MS

### Description
The adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase (AMPK) complex is a key enzyme in regulating cellular energy homeostasis. This complex is well studied and it is known to function in many cellular pathways. However, the interactome of AMPK complex has not yet been systematically established, although protein-protein interaction is critically important for protein function and regulation. Here, we applied tandem-affinity purification coupled with mass spectrometry (TAP-MS) strategy to study the AMPK complex interactome to discover its new functions. We conducted TAP-MS for all the seven AMPK complex subunits. The control TAP-MS group in the dataset includes forty-six control TAP-MS results using non-related baits. HEK293T proteome profiling results were used as background controls in HCIPs analysis. With these analysis, we identified 145 high confident interacting proteins (HCIPs) of AMPK, which allowed us to build an interaction network of AMPK complex.

### Sample Protocol
For tandem affinity purification, HEK293T cells were subjected to lysis with NETN buffer (100mM NaCl; 1mM EDTA; 20mM Tris HCl; and 0.5% Nonidet P-40) with protease inhibitors at 4 oC for 20 min. Crude lysates were subjected to centrifugation, 14,000 rpm for 20 minutes at 4 oC. Supernatant were incubated with streptavidin conjugated beads (GE Healthcare) for two hours at 4 oC. Then the beads were washed three times with NETN buffer, and bounded proteins were eluted with NETN buffer containing 2 mg/ml biotin (Sigma-Aldrich) for one hours at 4 oC. The elutes were incubated with S-protein agarose (Sigma-Aldrich) for two hours followed by three washing using NETN buffer. The beads were subjected to NuPage 10% Bis-Tris Midi-gel running, and the gel was fixed and stained with coomassie brilliant blue. Protein bands were excised and subjected to mass spectrometry analysis. Excised gel bands were de-stained completely and washed with H2O three times. Gel bands were dehydrated with 75% acetonitrile, and then subjected to trypsin (V5280, Promega Corporation) digestion in 50 mM NH4HCO3 at 37 oC for overnight. The peptides were extracted with acetonitrile and vacuum dried. Samples were reconstituted in the MS loading solution (2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid), delivered onto a nano reverse-phase HPLC system, and eluted with acetonitrile gradient from 5-35% containing 0.1% formic acid, for 75 minutes at 700 nL/min. The eluates directly entered LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific), setting in positive ion mode and data-dependent manner with full MS scan from 350-1200 m/z, resolution at 60,000, MS/MS scan with minimum signal threshold 1000, isolation width at 2 Da. For the profiling analysis of HEK293T cells, we havest the cell and run the SDS-PAGE gel to seperate the protein. The whole lane of the sample in the gel was excised into eighting fractions and analyzed by MS.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS spectra from the raw data were treated with Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and searched with Mascot 2.4 (Matrix Science) against the database with proteins in Homo sapiens downloaded from Uniprot. An automatic decoy database search was performed. Several parameters in Mascot were set for peptide searching, including oxidation for methionine and carboxyamidomethyl for cysteine were set as variable modifications, tolerance of two missed cleavage of trypsin, and the precursor mass tolerance was 10 ppm; the product ion tolerance was 0.5 Da. The identified proteins and peptides were filtered by FDR < 0.01 at the peptide level based on the target-decoy method.

### Publication Abstract
Adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase (AMPK) is an obligate heterotrimer that consists of a catalytic subunit (&#x3b1;) and two regulatory subunits (&#x3b2; and &#x3b3;). AMPK is a key enzyme in the regulation of cellular energy homeostasis. It has been well studied and is known to function in many cellular pathways. However, the interactome of AMPK has not yet been systematically established, although protein-protein interaction is critically important for protein function and regulation. Here, we used tandem-affinity purification, coupled with mass spectrometry (TAP-MS) analysis, to determine the interactome of AMPK and its functions. We conducted a TAP-MS analysis of all seven AMPK subunits. We identified 138 candidate high-confidence interacting proteins (HCIPs) of AMPK, which allowed us to build an interaction network of AMPK complexes. Five candidate AMPK-binding proteins were experimentally validated, underlining the reliability of our data set. Furthermore, we demonstrated that AMPK acts with a strong AMPK-binding protein, Artemis, in non-homologous end joining. Collectively, our study established the first AMPK interactome and uncovered a new function of AMPK in DNA repair.

### Keywords
Tap, Interactome, Ampk

### Affiliations
The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center
Department of Experimental Radiation Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA

### Submitter
Zhen Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Junjie Chen
Department of Experimental Radiation Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA


