### Accession
PXD008376

### Title
Integrated transcriptomic and proteomic analyses revealed the participation of endogenous protease inhibitors in the regulation of protease gene expression in Helicoverpa armigera

### Description
Insects adapt to plant protease inhibitors (PIs) present in their diet by differentially regulating multiple digestive proteases. However, mechanisms regulating protease gene expression in insects are largely enigmatic. Ingestion of Capsicum annuum protease inhibitor-7 (CanPI-7) arrests growth and development of Helicoverpa armigera (Lepidoptera: noctuidae). Using de novo RNA sequencing and proteomic analysis, we examined the response of  H. armigera larvae fed on recombinant C. annuum PI (CanPI) at different time intervals. Here, we present evidence supporting a dynamic transition in H. armigera protease expression upon CanPI feeding with general down-regulation of protease genes at early time points (0.5 to 6 h) and significant up-regulation of specific trypsin, chymotrypsin and aminopeptidase genes at later time points (12 to 48 h).

### Sample Protocol
Insect culture and feeding assays-Feeding experiments were carried out with neonates of H. armigera maintained in the laboratory at optimum growth conditions (27±2°C, 60±5% relative humidity and a photoperiod of 14 h light and 10 h dark). Artificial diet (AD) was prepared based on our earlier report (Mahajan NS et al, 2013) 150 μg of recombinant Capsicum annuum protease inhibitor (CanPI-7) was incorporated per gram of AD for the feeding bioassays. First instar larvae were fed on AD and CanPI-7 incorporated AD for 48 h. Each larva was maintained in an individual vial. Each set containing 100 insects was maintained and whole larvae were harvested at various time intervals (0.5, 2, 6, 12, 24, and 48 h). At each stage of bioassay, the harvested insect tissues were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at −80°C until further useProtein extraction and in-solution trypsin digestion-A high throughput label free quantitative proteomic analysis was conducted to understand digestive physiology of H. armigera larvae when fed on CanPI-7 diet. For proteomic analysis samples obtained from different time points (each time point containing 100 insects) were pooled into three stages upon CanPI-7 exposure i. e. early (0.5, 2 and 6 h), mid (12 and 24 h) and late (48 h) stages. Proteins from whole insects were extracted according to the method of Schuster and Davies (Schuster AM and Davies E, 1983) with few modifications. In brief, whole insect tissues were finely ground using mortar and pestle in liquid nitrogen. 100 mg of tissue was homogenized in 1 mL of extraction buffer (0.7 M sucrose, 0.5 M Tris-HCl, 50 mM EDTA, 0.1 M KCl, 2% [v/v] beta mercaptoethanol and 5% insoluble PVPP), vortexed thoroughly and centrifuged at 13,000 g for 20 minutes at 4°C. The supernatant was transferred to a fresh tube and equal volume of water-saturated phenol was added. The mixture was vortexed thoroughly and centrifuged at 13,000 g for 30 minutes at 4°C. The phenol phase was precipitated overnight with 5 volumes of 0.1 M ammonium acetate in methanol at 20°C. The pellet was washed twice with 0.1 M ammonium acetate in methanol and once with 100% acetone, air dried and re-suspended in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 2 M thio-    urea and 50 mM DTT). The suspension was centrifuged and clear solution containing total proteins was used for trypsin digestion. Protein concentration was determined by Bradford’s method (Bradford MM, 1976). Total 100 µg of proteins were reduced by 100 mM DTT for 15 minutes at 60°C, alkylated with 200 mM iodoacetamide for 30 minutes in dark and kept overnight at 37°C for trypsin digestion using Promega sequencing grade Trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA). The digestion reaction was stopped after 16 h by adding concentrated formic acid and further incubating for 10 min at 37°C before brief vortex and centrifuge. The peptides were desalted by using Zip-tip C18 (Millipore®), concentrated by vacuum centrifuge and stored at -80°C until further use. In-gel trypsin digestion-The HaPI-2 band was excised and washed with 50% acetonitrile (ACN) in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate followed by dehydration with 100% ACN. Gel pieces were reduced with 10 mM DTT for 45 min at 56°C and thiol groups were subsequently alkylated using 55 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in dark at room temperature. The gel pieces were then dehydrated to remove excess iodoacetamide and digested with 12.5ng/ul trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) at 37°C overnight. The resulting peptides were extracted using 50% ACN in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate acidified with 0.1% formic acid. The extracted peptides were desalted by using Zip-tip C18 (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA), vacuum dried and stored at -80°C until further use.

### Data Protocol
Instrumentation method-Samples were acquired in TripleTOF 5600 (AB Sciex) using instrumental methods, Parameters, acquisition methods, peptide spectral library, SWATH MS and Data processing described by Korwar et al (2015) with little modification. In Brief, Peptide digest (3 μg) were separated by Eksigent C18-reverse phase column (100*0.3mm, 3μm, 120Å) using Eksigent MicroLC 200 system (Eksigent, Dublin, CA). The sample was loaded onto the column with 97% of mobile phase A (100% water, 0.1% FA) and 3% of mobile phase B (100% ACN, 0.1% FA) at 8 μl/min flow rate. Peptides were eluted with a 120 min linear gradient of 3 to 50% mobile phase B. The column temperature was set to 40 °C and auto sampler at 4 °C. The same chromatographic conditions were used for both DDA and SWATH acquisition. Shot gun method (DDA) - All samples were analyzed on AB-Sciex 5600 Triple TOF mass-spectrometer in positive and high-sensitivity mode. The DDA acquisition consist of full scan (MS) and information dependent MS/MS. The accumulation time in full scan was 250ms for a mass range of 350-1800 m/z. The parent ions are selected based on the following criteria's: ions in the ms scan with intensities more than 120 counts per second (CPS), charge stage between +2 to +5, mass tolerance 50mDa and once a precursor ion was fragmented by MS/MS its mass and the mass of its isotopes were excluded for a period of 15 s.  Ions were fragmented in the collision cell using rolling collision energy with an additional CE spread of ± 15 eV. In- gel instrumentation method (DDA)- The samples were acquired in Triple TOF 5600 (AB Sciex) in duplicates using above mentioned column. The sample was loaded onto the column with 97% of mobile phase A (100% water, 0.1% FA) and 3% of mobile phase B (100% ACN, 0.1% FA). Peptides were eluted with 60 min gradient of 3% to 85% mobile phase B, keeping the column temperature 40°C and auto sampler temperature 4°C. Flow rate for sample loading and elution was kept 8 μl/min. For acquisition, DDA method (MS and MS/MS) was kept same as mentioned earlier. SWATH MS (DIA)- In SWATH-MS mode, the instrument was specifically tuned to optimize the quadrupole settings for the selection of precursor ion selection windows 25 m/z wide. Using an isolation width of 26 m/z (containing 1 m/z for the window overlap), a set of 34 overlapping windows was constructed covering the precursor mass range of 400–1250 m/z. SWATH MS/MS spectra were collected from 100 to 2000 m/z. Ions were fragmented in the collision cell using rolling collision energy with an additional CE spread of ± 15 eV. An accumulation time (dwell time) of 96 ms was used for all fragment-ion scans in high-sensitivity mode, and for each SWATH-MS cycle a survey scan in high-resolution mode was acquired for 100 ms resulting in a duty cycle of 3.33 s.  The source parameters are similar to that off DDA acquisition. Peptide spectral library- Samples from early stage, mid stage and late stage were acquired in 2 biological replicates and 2 technical replicates in DDA method. All DDA mass spectrometric files were searched using Protein Pilot software (version 5.0.1, AB Sciex) with the Paragon algorithm against the H. armigera six frame translated transcriptome (number of entries in database = 213314). The search parameters were as follows: sample type: identification; cys alkylation: iodoacetamide; digestion: Trypsin ; instrument: Triple TOF 5600; special factors: None; and False Discovery Rate (FDR): 5%. The Protein Pilot output file was used as a standard spectral library. For each stage, a combined spectral library was prepared containing biological replicated of both control and CanPI-7 fed samples. SWATH Data Process- All samples were acquired in 3 technical triplicates using the SWATH-MS, data independent acquisition method. The standard spectral library was loaded into the Peak view software (version 1.2.03, AB Sciex). The spectral alignment and targeted data extraction of SWATH-MS data was performed using Peak view software with the following parameters: Number of peptides per protein 6, number of transitions per peptide 10, Peptide confidence 95%, FDR threshold 1%, XIC extraction window 3 min, XIC width 30 ppm and shared peptides were excluded. All the data independent acquisition files were loaded and exported in to MarkerView software (version 1.2.1.1 AB Sciex), where they were used for the further quantitative and statistical analyzed. Normalization was performed using total area sum.. In-gel data Processing- Raw files of both replicates were searched using Protein Pilot software (version 5.0.1, AB Sciex) keeping the same parameters and database used earlier.

### Publication Abstract
Insects adapt to plant protease inhibitors (PIs) present in their diet by differentially regulating multiple digestive proteases. However, mechanisms regulating protease gene expression in insects are largely enigmatic. Ingestion of multi-domain recombinant <i>Capsicum annuum</i> protease inhibitor-7 (CanPI-7) arrests growth and development of <i>Helicoverpa armigera</i> (Lepidoptera: Noctuidae). Using <i>de novo</i> RNA sequencing and proteomic analysis, we examined the response of <i>H. armigera</i> larvae fed on recombinant CanPI-7 at different time intervals. Here, we present evidence supporting a dynamic transition in <i>H. armigera</i> protease expression on CanPI-7 feeding with general down-regulation of protease genes at early time points (0.5 to 6 h) and significant up-regulation of specific trypsin, chymotrypsin and aminopeptidase genes at later time points (12 to 48 h). Further, coexpression of <i>H. armigera</i> endogenous PIs with several digestive protease genes were apparent. In addition to the differential expression of endogenous <i>H. armigera</i> PIs, we also observed a distinct novel isoform of endogenous PI in CanPI-7 fed <i>H. armigera</i> larvae. Based on present and earlier studies, we propose potential mechanism of protease regulation in <i>H. armigera</i> and subsequent adaptation strategy to cope with anti-nutritional components of plants.

### Keywords
Insect adaptation, Protease regulation, Helicoverpa armigera, Transcriptome, Swath, Plant protease inhibitor, Tripletof 5600

### Affiliations
Principal Scientist and Chair,
Biochemical Sciences Division,
CSIR-National Chemical Laboratory,
Pune,
INDIA
Principal Scientist and Chair, Biochemical Sciences Division, CSIR-National Chemical Laboratory, Pune, INDIA

### Submitter
Ashok Giri

### Lab Head
Dr Ashok P. Giri
Principal Scientist and Chair, Biochemical Sciences Division, CSIR-National Chemical Laboratory, Pune, INDIA


