### Accession
PXD005785

### Title
The effect of chronic inflammation on molecular pathways of long-term potentiation in an APP/PS1 mouse model of Alzheimer Disease

### Description
Alzheimer Disease (AD) is the most common cause of dementia and neuroinflammation, initiated by systemic bacterial infection, is believed to contribute significantly to its pathogenesis.  Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) is an endotoxin, which stimulates inflammatory reactions by increasing the levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines through binding to Toll like receptor-4 (TLR-4) and CD14, in an NF-κΒ-dependent fashion. These receptors are expressed in the circumventricular organs, choroid plexus and leptomeninges as well as on microglia cells, thereby providing an entry for an innate immune reaction to spread through the cerebral tissue.  Here, 9 months old APP695/PS1ΔE9 (APP/PS1) double transgenic mice and wild type littermates were treated with weekly intraperitoneal injections of LPS or PBS over 13 weeks to evaluate the effect of repeated infections on the innate immune response of the hippocampal proteome. The effect on the proteome was evaluated using a quantitative iTRAQ 8-plex proteomics approach, with 3D-LC-MS/MS to gain a deep coverage of the hippocampal proteome. Furthermore, the effect of long-term inflammation on amyloid beta (Aβ) protein level was evaluated using stereological plaque load estimation followed by investigation of protein levels of Aβ40 and Aβ42 by Mesoscale. An effect of infection on proteins involved in long-term potentiation was observed, including p-MAPK, p-CREB and phosphorylation motifs of PKA and 14-3-3. Furthermore the complement system, redox reactions and the activation of retinoid receptors were found significantly changed in APP/PS1 mice infected with LPS.  This study provides new insight into the effect of bacterial infections in the development of AD.

### Sample Protocol
itraq-8plex labelling approach after trypsinisation and quantification of unmodified peptides

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer 1.4 with DanteR-based normalisation, roll-up and strict statistics via LIMA

### Publication Abstract
Neuroinflammation, characterized by chronic activation of the myeloid-derived microglia, is a hallmark of Alzheimer's disease (AD). Systemic inflammation, typically resulting from infection, has been linked to the progression of AD due to exacerbation of the chronic microglial reaction. However, the mechanism and the consequences of this exacerbation are largely unknown. Here, we mimicked systemic inflammation in AD with weekly intraperitoneal (i.p.) injections of APP<sub>SWE</sub>/PS1<sub>&#x394;E9</sub> transgenic mice with <i>E. coli</i> lipopolysaccharide (LPS) from 9 to 12 months of age, corresponding to the period with the steepest increase in amyloid pathology. We found that the repeated LPS injections ameliorated amyloid pathology in the neocortex while increasing the neuroinflammatory reaction. To elucidate mechanisms, we analyzed the proteome of the hippocampus from the same mice as well as in unique samples of CNS myeloid cells. The repeated LPS injections stimulated protein pathways of the complement system, retinoid receptor activation and oxidative stress. CNS myeloid cells from transgenic mice showed enrichment in pathways of amyloid-beta clearance and elevated levels of the lysosomal protease cathepsin Z, as well as amyloid precursor protein, apolipoprotein E and clusterin. These proteins were found elevated in the proteome of both LPS and vehicle injected transgenics, and co-localized to CD11b<sup>+</sup> microglia in transgenic mice and in primary murine microglia. Additionally, cathepsin Z, amyloid precursor protein, and apolipoprotein E appeared associated with amyloid plaques in neocortex of AD cases. Interestingly, cathepsin Z was expressed in microglial-like cells and co-localized to CD68<sup>+</sup> microglial lysosomes in AD cases, and it was expressed in perivascular cells in AD and control cases. Taken together, our results implicate systemic LPS administration in ameliorating amyloid pathology in early-to-mid stage disease in the APP<sub>SWE</sub>/PS1<sub>&#x394;E9</sub> mouse and attract attention to the potential disease involvement of cathepsin Z expressed in CNS myeloid cells in AD.

### Keywords
Brain, Neuroinflammation, Ltp, Lps

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark
University of Southern Denmark

### Submitter
Stefan J. Kempf

### Lab Head
Dr Martin R. Larsen
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark


