### Accession
PXD009562

### Title
Time-course phosphoproteome response during adenovirus type 2 infection

### Description
Time-course systematic and quantitative analysis combining TiO2 enrichment and SILAC to investigate changes in the phosphoproteome of Ad2 and IMR-90 cells after adenovirus infection

### Sample Protocol
Human lung fibroblast cells (IMR-90) were purchased from American Type Culture Collection and cultured in minimum essential medium (without lysine and arginine) supplemented with 10% dialyzed fetal bovine serum, 100 U/mL penicillin and 100 μg/mL streptomycin, l-lysine (0.89 mM) and l-arginine (0.40 mM) in light (L) medium or 13C15N-labeled lysine (Lys8, 0.89 mM) and 13C15N-labeled arginine (Arg10, 0.40 mM) in heavy (H) medium. After six cell doublings, 16.8 x 106 labelled cells were either mock infected (only medium) or infected with Ad2 at a multiplicity of infection of 100 in a serum free medium for 60 min. Then the medium was replaced with fresh SILAC-labelled medium and cells were collected, washed with PBS, and directly snap frozen on dry ice. Cells were collected and lysed with 300 µL of lysis buffer and protein concentration was determined by Bio-Rad protein assay after checking the compatibility with Thiourea, which was not specified compatible by the provider. For the five time points, 100 µg of L labelled mock samples were mixed with 100 µg of H labelled cells infected with Ad2 in a 1:1 ratio. As a biological replicate, a SILAC swap experiment for each time point was performed by mixing 100 µg of L labelled cells infected with Ad2 with 100 µg of H labelled mock. In total, 10 sample mixtures were generated. Thereafter, 75 µL of 50 mM AmBi (pH 8), was added to each mixture and the samples were sonicated for 1 minute and spun down, followed by an incubation step at 50 °C for 15 minutes with 40 µL of 45 mM DTT to reduce the disulphide bonds. Thereafter, the proteins were alkylated with 40 µL of 100 mM IAA for 15 minutes in the dark, and transferred to the molecular weight cut-off filters (3kDa), previously equilibrated with 20% ACN and water. The samples were centrifuged at 14,000 × g at RT for 15 minutes, and consecutive washes were performed with 250 µL of 50 mM AmBi in 20 % ACN (twice) and 150 µL of 50 mM AmBi (once) to remove urea excess. Between each washing step, the filter units were centrifuged at 14,000 × g at RT for 10 minutes. Finally, protein digestion was performed by adding 80 µL of 0.1 µg/µL trypsin (Promega Corporation, Madison, WI, USA), 100 µL 50 mM AmBi buffer, and incubation took place at 37 °C overnight. Resulting peptides were centrifuged at 14,000 × g at RT for 10 minutes and dried in SpeedVac. Phosphopeptide enrichment was performed as previously described with minor modifications (Palmisano et al., 2012). Supernatants obtained in all steps were saved for the protein regulation analysis (see below). The samples were acidified by addition of 50 µL of 20% TFA (v/v) and cleaned-up using Pierce™ C18 Spin Columns. These columns were activated by 2 x 200 µL of 50% ACN and equilibrated with 2 x 200 µL of 0.5% TFA (v/v). The peptides were adsorbed to the media using 2 repeated cycles of 40 µL sample loading, and the columns were washed using 2 × 200 μL 0.5% TFA (v/v). Finally, the peptides were eluted in 2 × 30 μL of 70% ACN (v/v), dried in SpeedVac, and resuspended in 13 µL of 0.1% FA (v/v) for nanoLC-MS/MS analysis. The supernatants containing the non-phosphorylated peptides were dried to remove ACN, and resuspended in 200 µL of 0.5% FA (v/v) to obtain a final peptide concentration of ≈ 1 µg/µL. 30 µL of this solution (≈ 30 µg of peptides) were cleaned-up using Pierce™ C18 Spin Columns as described above. Finally, the peptides were dried in SpeedVac and resuspended in 100 µL of 0.1% FA (v/v) for nanoLC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
All raw data were processed using MaxQuant (1.5.7.4) and database searches were performed using the implemented Andromeda search engine. For the phosphoproteome analysis, the spectra were correlated to the Uniprot human database (release 2018–02, 20,258 entries) combined with a human adenovirus type 2 database (release 2018–02, 46 entries). False discovery rate (FDR) was calculated based on reverse sequences from the target-decoy search and an FDR of 1% was accepted for protein and peptide identification. For data processing, only peptides with a minimum of 7 amino acids and two maximum miss cleavages were accepted, and the mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm for the main search, and 20 ppm for the fragment masses. Trypsin was selected as digestive enzyme, carbamidomethylation of cysteines as fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine, acetylation of the protein N-terminus and phosphorylation (STY) as variable modifications. The minimum Andromeda score for accepting an MS/MS identification for modified peptides was set to 40, and the minimum delta score was set to 6. For SILAC quantification, Lys8 and Arg10 were set as heavy labels. For the protein regulation analysis and for comparison purposes, MS/MS spectra were correlated to the human database released in 2017–02, 156,787 entries, combined with human adenovirus type 2 database released in 2017–02, 560 entries).

### Publication Abstract
PTMs such as phosphorylations are usually involved in signal transduction pathways. To investigate the temporal dynamics of phosphoproteome changes upon viral infection, a model system of IMR-90 cells infected with human adenovirus type 2 (Ad2) is used in a time-course quantitative analysis combining titanium dioxide (TiO<sub>2</sub> ) particle enrichment and SILAC-MS. Quantitative data from 1552 phosphorylated sites clustered the highly altered phosphorylated sites to the signaling by rho family GTPases, the actin cytoskeleton signaling, and the cAMP-dependent protein kinase A signaling pathways. Their activation is especially pronounced at early time post-infection. Changes of several phosphorylated sites involved in the glycolysis pathway, related to the activation of the Warburg effect, point at virus-induced energy production. For Ad2 proteins, 32 novel phosphorylation sites are identified and as many as 52 phosphorylated sites on 17 different Ad2 proteins are quantified, most of them at late time post-infection. Kinase predictions highlighted activation of PKA, CDK1/2, MAPK, and CKII. Overlaps of kinase motif sequences for viral and human proteins are observed, stressing the importance of phosphorylation during Ad2 infection.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Human adenovirus, Silac, Mass spectrometry, Ad2

### Affiliations
Uppsala University, Department of Chemistry-BMC, Analytical Chemistry
Uppsala University

### Submitter
Sara Lind

### Lab Head
Dr Sara Lind
Uppsala University, Department of Chemistry-BMC, Analytical Chemistry


