### Accession
PXD035499

### Title
Identification of MHC-I presented porcine respiratory and re-productive syndrome virus (PRRSV) peptides reveals immu-nogenic epitopes within several non-structural proteins recog-nized by CD8+ T cells

### Description
Porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus (PRRSV) is one of the most relevant por-cine pathogens worldwide. Active control of the disease relies on modified live virus vaccines (MLVs), as most inactivated vaccines provide very limited protection. Neutralizing antibodies occur late in infection, therefore CD8+ T cells are considered important correlates of protection and are a frequent focus of investigation. Our aim was to identify viral peptides naturally bound by the class I major histocompatibility complex (MHC-I), and to confirm their ability to stimu-late CD8+ T cells. For this purpose, we immunoprecipitated MHC-I/peptide complexes of PRRSV (strain AUT15-33) -infected cells (SLA-I Lr-Hp 35.0/24mod) to isolate the viral epitopes and ana-lyzed them with liquid chromatography coupled to mass spectrometry (LC-MS). Furthermore, we employed these identified peptides to stimulate peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) of previously PRRSV infected pigs and measured the PRRSV-specific CD8+ T cell re-sponse with an intracellular cytokine staining (ICS). Our data reveals that PRRSV non-structural proteins (NSPs) encoded in open reading frame 1a and 1b (ORF1) present the major source of MHC-I presented peptides. Additionally, we show that our identified epitopes are able to trig-ger IFNγ responses in vitro. These findings are a basis for understanding the proteasomal degra-dation of PRRSV proteins, the cellular ability to display them via MHC-I, and their potential to restimulate CD8+ T cells.

### Sample Protocol
Eighteen h post infection (p.i.) of porcine alveolar macrophages (PAMs) with PRRSV, strain AUT15-33 medium was collected, the cells were scraped off in PBS and transferred to a 50 mL tube. Cells were washed three times at 300 x g for 3 minutes at RT with a Sigma 3-10 centrifuge (Sigma, Germany). The supernatant was dis-carded and the cell pellet frozen at -80°C. For cell lysis, RIPA buffer (150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris, 1% NP-40, protease inhibitor cocktail for tissue (Carl Roth, Germany), pH 7.5) was added to the frozen pellet and incubated over night at 4°C. The cell lysate was centrifuged with a fixed angle Mikro 20 centrifuge (Hettich, Germany) at 21.382 x g for 20 minutes at 4°C. The pellet was discarded, and the supernatant stored at 4°C until further use. Protein A/G magnetic beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) were washed three times with RIPA buffer in a magnetic rack. For the precipitation of MHC-I/peptide complexes, the an-tibody PT85A was used, as previously described [28]. PT85A and isotype control (Mouse IgG2a Isotype Control, Invitrogen, MA, USA) were diluted in RIPA buffer and incubated with the magnetic beads on a shaker for 1 h at 4°C. Beads were washed three times with RIPA buffer and incubated with the centrifuged cell lysate on a shaker for 1 h at 4°C. The beads were washed three times with RIPA buffer and three times with IP wash buffer (150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris). At last, the MHC-I/peptide complex was eluted from the magnetic beads with 8M Urea (BioUltra, ≥99%, Sigma Aldrich, MO, USA) at RT. Until LC-MS analy-sis, the samples were stored at -20°C. Recovered peptides were reduced with a final concentration of 10 mM dithiothreitol and incubated at 56°C for 1 h. After cooling down to room temperature, reduced cysteines were alkylated with iodoacetamide at a final concentration of 55 mM for 30 min in the dark. Urea content was diluted down to a concentration of 2M. Peptides were then concentrated and desalted via solid phase extraction (SPE) using stage tips with two stacked C18 plugs (Empore™, MERCK KgaA, Germany) [29]. Samples were acidified by addition of a final concentration of 1% TFA. Stage tips were activated three times with acetonitrile and equil-ibrated three times with 0.4% formic acid, 2% TFA in water before loading the samples. Salts were removed with 100 µL of 0.1% TFA and purified peptides were eluted using two times 50 µL 90% acetonitrile, 0.4% formic acid. Finally, eluted peptides were dried in a vacuum concentrator and reconstituted in 10 µL of 0.1% TFA. Label-free 1D-shotgun LC-MS/MS analysis was performed as untargeted Data Dependent Acquisition (DDA) on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Dionex Ultimate 3000RSLC nano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) via nanoflex source interface. Samples were loaded onto a trap column (Pepmap 100, 5 μm, 5 × 0.3 mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 10 μL/min using 0.1% TFA. After loading, the trap column was switched in-line with a 50 cm, 75 µm inner diameter analytical column (packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 3 μm, Dr. Maisch) at 50°C. Mobile-phase A con-sisted of 0.4% formic acid in water and mobile-phase B of 0.4% formic acid in a mix of 90% acetonitrile and 10% water. 230 nL/min and a 90 minutes gradient was used. MS scans were acquired at 300 – 1200 m/z in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000 (at m/z 200) and an RF lens amplitude of 40%. AGC targeted 4 x 105 ions at maximum 100 msec. A TopN dependent scan with a cycle time of 3 sec set the acquisition of MS2 spectra in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 15,000 using a fixed first mass of m/z 120 and a quadrupole isolation window of 0.8 Da. Quadrupole isolation was enabled and HCD was applied with a NCE of 30%. AGC target was set to 1 x 104 with a maximum injection time of 150 msec. Peptide monoisotopic precursor selection (MIPS) was enabled for charge states 2-6 with an intensity threshold set to 5 x 104 and a dynamic exclusion of 20 sec. A single lock mass at m/z 445.120024 was employed [30]. XCalibur version 4.3.73.11 and Tune 3.4.3072.18 were used to operate the instrument.

### Data Protocol
Data bank analysis was done using SearchGUI v4.1.1 [31] and Peptide Shaker v2.2.5 [32]. Mass spectra were searched against AUT15-33 and the Sus scrofa (UP000008227) proteo-me. A target/decoy database assembled from reversed sequences was created for both pro-teomes. Mass spectra were searched using the engines MS Amanda [33] and X! Tandem [34][35], with following identification settings: unspecific digestion, 10 ppm precursor tol-erance, 0.02 Da fragment tolerance, carbamidomethylation of C as a fixed modification, and oxidation of M as a variable modification. A false discovery rate of 1.0% was utilized to filter the identified peptides. Sequence logo was created with IceLogo version 1.3.8. us-ing the Sus scrofa reference proteome as consensus.

### Publication Abstract
Porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus (PRRSV) is one of the most relevant porcine pathogens worldwide. Active control of the disease relies on modified live virus vaccines (MLVs), as most inactivated vaccines provide very limited protection. Neutralizing antibodies occur late in infection; therefore, CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells are considered important correlates of protection and are a frequent focus of investigation. Our aim was to identify viral peptides naturally bound by the class I major histocompatibility complex (MHC-I) and to confirm their ability to stimulate CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells. For this purpose, we immunoprecipitated MHC-I/peptide complexes of PRRSV (strain AUT15-33) -infected cells (SLA-I Lr-Hp 35.0/24 mod) to isolate the viral epitopes and analyzed them with liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Furthermore, we employed these identified peptides to stimulate peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) of previously PRRSV-infected pigs and measured the PRRSV-specific CD8<sup>+</sup> T-cell response with an intracellular cytokine staining (ICS). Our data revealed that PRRSV non-structural proteins (NSPs), encoded in open reading frame 1a and 1b (ORF1), present the major source of MHC-I-presented peptides. Additionally, we show that our identified epitopes are able to trigger IFN&#x3b3; responses <i>in vitro</i>. These findings are a basis for understanding the proteasomal degradation of PRRSV proteins, the cellular ability to display them via MHC-I, and their potential to restimulate CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells.

### Keywords
Porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus; prrsv; arteriviridae; cd8+ t cells; im-munopeptidome; epitopes; swine leukocyte antigen class i; major histocompatibility complex class i; mass spectrometry; restimulation; intracellular cytokine staining

### Affiliations
Institute of Virology, University of Veterinary Medicine Vienna
Institue of Virology, University of Veterinary Medicine Vienna, Austria

### Submitter
Marlene Mötz

### Lab Head
Dr Till Rümenapf
Institue of Virology, University of Veterinary Medicine Vienna, Austria


