### Accession
PXD012766

### Title
Utilisation of Galleria mellonella larvae to characterise  development of Staphylococcus aureus infection

### Description
Staphylococcus aureus is a common human opportunistic pathogen which causes a wide range of infections from superficial skin infections to invasive infections including pneumonia and bloodstream infections. Here we describe how an inoculum of S. aureus activates the cellular and humoral response of Galleria mellonella larvae while growing and disseminating throughout the host, forming nodules and ultimately killing the host.  An inoculum of S. aureus (2×106/ larva) decreased larval viability at 24 (80 ± 5.77%), 48 (55.93 ± 5.55%) and 72 (10.23 ± 2.97%) hours and this was accompanied by significant proliferation and disseminated of S. aureus between 6 hours to 48 hours and the formation of nodules in the host. The hemocyte (immune cell) densities increased between 4 and 24 hours and cells isolated from larvae after 6 and 24 hours exposure to heat killed S. aureus (2×106/ larva) showed altered killing kinetics as compared to control larvae. Alterations in the  humoral immune response of larvae 6 and 24 hours post infection was also determined by quantitative shotgun proteomics. The proteome of 6 hour infected larvae was enriched for antimicrobial proteins, members of the prophenoloxidase cascade and a range of peptidoglycan recognition proteins. By 24 hours there was a significant increase in a range of antimicrobial peptides with anti-staphylococcal activity and proteins associated with nodule formation. The results presented here find S. aureus interacts with the larval host immune response, induces its expression and also forms nodules which are a hallmark of soft tissue infections during human infection.

### Sample Protocol
Label free shotgun quantitative proteomics was conducted on hemocyte-free hemolymph from larvae (n = 10) at 0, 6 and 24 hours post infection with S. aureus (2 × 106/ larva). Protein (75 μg) was prepared according to established protocols

### Data Protocol
Protein identification from the MS/MS data was performed using the Andromeda search engine in MaxQuant (version 1.2.2.5; http://maxquant.org/) to correlate the data against a 6-frame translation of the EST contigs for G. mellonella [23,24].  Results processing, statistical analyses and graphics generation were conducted using Perseus v. 1.5.5.3. LFQ intensities were log2-transformed and ANOVA of significance and t-tests between the hemolymph proteomes of 0, 6 and 24 hours S. aureus treated larvae was performed using a p-value of 0.05 and significance was determined using FDR correction (Benjamini-Hochberg). Proteins that had non-existent values (indicative of absence or very low abundance in a sample) were also used in statistical analysis of the total differentially expressed group following imputation of the zero values using a number close to the lowest value of the range of proteins plus or minus the standard deviation. After data imputation these proteins were included in subsequent statistical analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Staphylococcus aureus is a human opportunistic pathogen that causes a wide range of superficial and systemic infections in susceptible patients. Here we describe how an inoculum of S. aureus activates the cellular and humoral response of Galleria mellonella larvae while growing and disseminating throughout the host, forming nodules and ultimately killing the host. An inoculum of S. aureus (2&#xd7;10<sup>6</sup> larva<sup>- 1</sup> ) decreased larval viability at 24 (80&#xb1;5.77&#x200a;%), 48 (55.93&#xb1;5.55&#x200a;%) and 72 h (10.23&#xb1;2.97&#x200a;%) and was accompanied by significant proliferation and dissemination of S. aureus between 6 and 48&#x2009;h and the formation of nodules in the host. The hemocyte (immune cell) densities increased between 4 and 24&#x2009;h and hemocytes isolated from larvae after 24&#x2009;h exposure to heat-killed S. aureus (2&#xd7;10<sup>6</sup> larva<sup>- 1</sup> ) showed altered killing kinetics as compared to those from control larvae. Alterations in the humoral immune response of larvae 6 and 24&#x2009;h post-infection were also determined by quantitative shotgun proteomics. The proteome of 6&#x2009;h-infected larvae was enriched for antimicrobial proteins, proteins of the prophenoloxidase cascade and a range of peptidoglycan recognition proteins. By 24&#x2009;h there was a significant increase in the abundance of a range of antimicrobial peptides with anti-staphylococcal activity and proteins associated with nodule formation. The results presented here indicate how S. aureus interacts with the larval immune response, induces the expression of a variety of immune-related peptides and also forms nodules which are a hallmark of soft tissue infections during human infection.

### Keywords
Infection, Mini-model, : galleria, Immunity, Staphylococcus

### Affiliations
Maynooth University
Department of Biology, Maynooth University, Co. Kildare, Ireland.

### Submitter
Gerard Sheehan

### Lab Head
Dr Kevin Kavanagh
Department of Biology, Maynooth University, Co. Kildare, Ireland.


