### Accession
PXD028659

### Title
Ubiquitination regulation of streptococcus agalactiae infection in dairy cow mammary epithelial cells

### Description
A total of 5239 proteins were identified in this study, of which 4601 proteins contained quantitative information. If 1.5 times is used as the change threshold and t-test p-value<0.05 as the standard, then among the quantified proteins, the expression of 325 proteins in the T/C comparison group will be up-regulated and the expression of 704 proteins will be down-regulated. Based on the above data, we conducted a systematic bioinformatics analysis of proteins containing quantitative information, including protein annotation, functional classification, functional enrichment, and cluster analysis based on functional enrichment. And combining the above information provides a reference direction for the downstream in-depth research based on proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
Sample was sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% protease inhibitor cocktail, 50 μM PR-619). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit (Beyotime) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The protein of each sample was enzymatically hydrolyzed in equal quantities, and the volume was adjusted to be consistent with the lysate. The samples were slowly added to the final concentration of 20% pre-cooled trichloroacetic acid (TCA) to precipitate protein, then vortexed to mix and incubated for 2 h at 4 °C. The precipitates were collected by centrifugation at 4500 g for 5 min at 4 °C. The precipitated proteins washed with cold acetone three times while discarding the supernatant after 5 min 4500g centrifugation under 4℃. After drying the precipitation, TEAB with a final concentration of 200 mM was added, and sonication was performed three times on ice by a high-intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz, Ningbo, China). Finally, trypsin was added according to the 1:50 trypsin/protein mass ratio for overnight digestion. The protein solution was reduced by 5 mM DTT for 30 min at 56℃ to reduce disulfide bonds and alkylated through 11 mM indole-3- acetic acid (IAA) for 15 min under room temperature with darkness, the peptides were desalted with Strata C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and then peptide concentration was measured with NanoPhotometer (IMPLEN). Equal peptide of each sample was dried by vacuum centrifugation. It needs 2 mg peptide for ubiquitination analysis.

### Data Protocol
The MS data were analyzed using the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.15.0). MS data were searched against the Uniprot_Bos_taurus_9913_PR_20201217.fasta, 37512 sequences for identifying proteins and ubiquitination sites from tandem mass spectra, while sequences of reverse decoy and common contaminant proteins were used for false positive control. Trypsin/P was the cleavage enzyme, and up to 4 missing cleavages were allowed. Minimum peptide length was set at 7, and 5 modifications per peptide were allowed. Mass error was set as 20 ppm for precursor ions, and fragment ion tolerance was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethylation (C) was defined as a fixed modification, while oxidation on methionine, and ubiquitination on lysine and protein N- terminal methionine were set as variable modifications. The thresholds of false discovery rate (FDR) for the identification of proteins, peptides and modification sites were set at 1%. Default settings in MaxQuant were adopted for the other parameters. The identified potential lysine ubiquitination sites with the localization probability less than 75% or from the reverse or contaminant sequences were deleted.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ubiquitination, Proteomic analysis, Potential biomarkers, Bovine mammary epithelial cells, Streptococcus agalactiae

### Affiliations
18947009802
Beijing Key Laboratory for Dairy Cow Nutrition, Beijing University of Agriculture

### Submitter
Xin Li

### Lab Head
Dr Jinjin Tong
Beijing Key Laboratory for Dairy Cow Nutrition, Beijing University of Agriculture


