### Accession
PXD011771

### Title
Laboratory evolution of Escherichia coli enables life based on fluorinated amino acids

### Description
Organofluorine compounds are toxic to various living beings in different habitats. This usher the development of strategies based on the metabolic capacity of various fast-growing microbial strains to evolve an effective adaptation strategy for efficient environmental cleaning. We tackle this problem by trying to answer an essential question: can fluorinated amino acids be used as xenobiotics in general to build up biomass, or do large amounts of fluorine in the cells render them nonviable? To gain information about the effect of long-term exposure of a cellular proteome to fluorine, we constructed an experimental model based on bacterial adaptation in artificial fluorinated habitats. In particular, we propagated Escherichia coli (E. coli) in the presence of either 4- or 5-fluoroindole as essential precursors for the in situ synthesis of tryptophan (Trp) analogues. We found that full adaptation requires astonishingly few genetic mutations but is accompanied by large rearrangements in regulatory networks, membrane integrity and quality control of protein folding. These findings highlight the cellular mechanisms of the evolutionary adaption process and provide the molecular foundation for novel and innovative bioengineering of microbial strains potentially useful in bioaugmentation in fluorine-contaminated areas.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation Proteomics sample preparation was based on a modified protocol of the Filter-aided Sample Preparation (FASP). Wildtype TUB00 and isolates from early (4TUB34, 5TUB23) and final time-points of the evolution experiment (4TUB93, 5TUB83) were cultivated at 30 °C, 180 rpm in light SILAC media (TUB00 in NMM(19/0/30); 4TUB34 and 4TUB93 in NMM(19/30/1) 4-fluoroindole; 5TUB23 and 5TUB83 in NMM(19/30/1) 5-fluoroindole). The reference strain TUB00ΔArgA,ΔLysA (TUB00-dKO, Budisa Lab, TU Berlin) was cultivated in heavy SILAC medium NMM(17/30/1) containing all amino acids except Trp, Arg or Lys and supplemented with 0.5 g/L 13C615N4-Arg, 13C615N2-Lys (Silantes, Munich, Germany). Arg and Lys auxotrophy ensured the complete isotope labelling of the proteome. Two parallel cultivations of TUB00-dKO were grown in presence of 1 µM indole and 30 µM of either 4- or 5-fluoroindole. All cultures were harvested by centrifugation (3,000 g, 5 minutes) during the early stationary phase (OD600 0.8 - 1). Subsequently, cells were resuspended in 100 µl lysis buffer (0.5 % SDS, 0.1 M Tris pH 8.5 at 25 °C, 0.1 M DTT), heated at 95 °C for 5 minutes and cleared from insoluble material by spinning at 20,000 g for 15 minutes. Extracts from the adapted strains and TUB00 were mixed in equal mass ratio with the heavily-labeled reference TUB00-dKO. The samples were mixed and diluted with Urea buffer (8 M in 100 mM TRIS pH 8.5 at 25 °C), applied on the filter and centrifuged at 13000 g for 20 minutes, 25°C. Following this step, 50 mM iodoacetamide in 8 M urea was added, mixed shortly and incubated for 20 minutes in the dark. After that, the iodoacetamide was depleted by spinning again and three wash steps with Urea buffer were applied. The buffer was exchanged to 1 M Urea in 100 mM Tris, pH 8.0 at 25 °C by three iterations of spinning and reapplication of this buffer. Tryptic digestion of the samples was achieved by adding 2.5 µg of trypsin per sample (estimated ratio 1:80 (m/m)) and incubation for 16 hours at 37 °C. The tryptic digestion was stopped by adding 10 % trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to 0.5 %. The eluate was collected and pooled with two further elution steps using the digestion buffer with 0.5 % TFA. The samples were finally cleaned by Stage-tipping. The C18 solid phase was activated with 20 µl MeOH and equilibrated with 2x20 µl 0.1% TFA, prior loading 150 µl sample. The sample was washed twice with 20 µl 0.1% TFA and stored at -20 °C until further use.   MS data acquisition and analysis for SILAC Two µg of peptides dissolved in 3.2 % acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid were loaded directly on 50 cm EASY-Spray column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) packed with C18-stationary phase and equilibrated to 3 % B at a flow of 0.3 ml/min. Mobile phase A consisted of water with 0.1 % formic acid, while mobile phase B contained 80 % (v/v) acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid. Peptide elution was achieved through gradient elution at 0.25 ml/min flow ramping up linearly 4 - 35 % B over 122 minutes, increasing to 45 % in 10 minutes and to 95 % in 8 minutes. Eluting peptides were sprayed into a hybrid Orbitrap-linear ion trap mass spectrometer (Fusion Lumos Tribrid, Thermo Fisher Scientific), quadrupole-isolated from 375 - 1500 m/z and recorded in a MS1 scan using the Orbitrap detector (R = 120,000). Peptides fulfilling isotopic compositional constraints, an intensity threshold, possessing a charge state of 2 - 6 and a recognized mass difference of the corresponding SILAC-pair (Lys8: 8.0142 Da; Arg10: 9.9874 Da) were then isolated using a window of 1.6 Da. Fragmentation was accomplished using CID with stepped 35 % normalized collision energy +/- 1 % and resulting fragments were recorded in the linear ion trap set to scanning rate "rapid". Dynamic exclusion was enabled for a duration of 60 seconds after single observation within boundaries of 5 ppm each.

### Data Protocol
Processing of raw-files was performed using MaxQuant 1.5.7.4 with reviewed protein entries downloaded from SwissProt database for E. coli K-12 MG1655 and F-plasmid, as well as modified FASTAs containing the mutations found in genomics experiments (in total 4413 entries) plus frequently detected contaminants. For the main search, Lys8 and Arg10 were set as heavy labels of which a maximum of 3 per peptide were allowed; missed cleavages were set to 2 using trypsin as protease with restraint on N-terminally proline-containing peptides. Allowed variable modification included N-terminal acetylation, methionine-oxidation and replacement of tryptophan by fluorotryptophan (mass shift of +17.9905781679 Da). The re-quantify option for quantitation of missing SILAC-pairs was enabled. Protein FDR for identification was set to 0.01. Matching between runs was enabled with standard settings. Minimum of labeled SILAC-pairs for quantitation of protein ratio was set to 1 using unique and razor peptides employing the advanced ratio estimation option of MaxQuant. All other settings were kept default. Further analysis was conducted using Perseus 1.5.7.0. The data was cleared from decoy hits, proteins identified by site only and contaminants first. Then, the data was transformed to log2 ratios of light to heavy isotopic species (L/H) and the technical replicates of SILAC experiment TUB00 vs. TUB00-dKO ("Ctrl1") were averaged using the median. Moreover, the data was filtered to contain a minimum of three valid values for each protein within an individual SILAC experiment. A two-sided two-sample t-test was performed comparing SILAC experiment TUB00 vs. TUB00-dKO with ALE isolates TUBn vs. TUB00-dKO to check for changes in the evolved strains. Artificial variance was set to a value of 2.5 and permutated FDR to 0.01. Only proteins found to exceed a combination of distinct minimum value of log2-fold change and p-value from t-test were assigned as significant (as visualized in volcano plots, see Fig.S4). Histograms were created using R script (3.4.4) with the ggplot2 package.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
E coli, Fluorine, Evolution, Silac, Multi-omics, Noncanonical

### Affiliations
TU Berlin, Bioanalytics, J. Rappsilber PhD
Bioanalytics, Institute of Biotechnology, Technische Universität Berlin, 13355 Berlin, Germany. Wellcome Centre for Cell Biology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH9 3BF, United Kingdom.

### Submitter
Ludwig Sinn

### Lab Head
Dr Juri Rappsilber
Bioanalytics, Institute of Biotechnology, Technische Universität Berlin, 13355 Berlin, Germany. Wellcome Centre for Cell Biology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH9 3BF, United Kingdom.


