### Accession
PXD031763

### Title
Silencing of STE20-Type Kinase STK25 in Human Aortic Endothelial and Smooth Muscle Cells is Atheroprotective

### Description
Recent studies highlight the importance of lipotoxic damage in aortic cells as the major pathogenetic contributor of atherosclerotic disease. Since the STE20-type kinase STK25 has been shown to exacerbate ectopic lipid storage and associated cell injury in several metabolic organs, we here investigated its role in the main cell types of vasculature. We depleted STK25 by small interfering RNA in human aortic endothelial and smooth muscle cells exposed to oleic acid and oxidized LDL. In both cell types, the silencing of STK25 reduced lipid accumulation and suppressed activation of inflammatory and fibrotic pathways as well as lowered oxidative and endoplasmic reticulum stress. Notably, in smooth muscle cells, STK25 inactivation hindered the shift from a contractile to a synthetic phenotype. Together, we provide the first evidence that antagonizing STK25 signaling in human aortic endothelial and smooth muscle cells is atheroprotective, highlighting this kinase as a new potential therapeutic target for atherosclerotic disease.

### Sample Protocol
Protein digestion and TMT-labeling The cells were lysed in 2% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) and X1 Pierce Phosphatase inhibitor (A32957, Thermo Fischer Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). A representative reference pool containing equal amounts from 10 of the samples, were made (NTC control basal + siSTK25 basal). Aliquots containing 200 µg of total protein from each sample were incubated at 37°C for 60 min in the lysis buffer with DL-dithiothreitol (DTT) at 100 mM final concentration. The reduced samples were processed using the modified filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method (Wisniewski JR et. al. Nat Methods. 2009 May;6(5):359-62). Briefly, samples were reduced with 100 mM dithiothreitol at 37°C for 60 min, transferred to 30 kDa MWCO Pall Nanosep centrifugation filters (Sigma-Aldrich), washed repeatedly with 8 M urea and once with digestion buffer prior (0.5% sodium deoxycholate (SDC) in 50 mM TEAB) to alkylation with 10 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate in digestion buffer for 30 min. Digestion was performed in digestion buffer by addition of Pierce MS grade Trypsin (Thermo Fisher Scientific), in an enzyme to protein ratio of 1:100 at 37°C for three hours. An additional portion of trypsin was added and incubated overnight. Peptides were collected by centrifugation. Digested peptides were labelled using TMT 11-plex isobaric mass tagging reagents (Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturer instructions. Samples were combined into two TMT-sets, each including two groups and a reference. Sodium deoxycholate was removed by acidification with 10% TFA and peptides were desalted using Pierce Peptide Desalting Spin Columns (Thermo Scientific) following the manufacturer’s instructions.  An aliquot corresponding to 200 µg was withdrawn for the total proteome analysis, an aliquot of 1 mg was subjected to phosphopeptide enrichment using the High-Select Fe-NTA Enrichment Kit and another 1 mg aliquot was treated with the High-Select TiO2 Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit (both Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instruction. The eluted phosphopeptide samples were pooled and pre-fractionated into 20 fractions, whereas the combined sets for total proteome were pre-fractionated into 40 fractions. Peptide separations were performed using basic reversed-phase chromatography (bRP-LC) with a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLC system (Thermo Fischer Scientific) on a reversed-phase XBridge BEH C18 column (3.5 μm, 3.0x150 mm, Waters Corporation). Total proteome samples were fractionated via a linear gradient from 3% to 40% solvent B over 18 min followed by an increase to 100% B over 5 min, whereas phosphopeptides were separated from 3% to 40% solvent B over 12 min and an increase to 100% B over 4 min. Solvent A was 10 mM ammonium formate buffer at pH 10.00 and solvent B was 90% acetonitrile, 10% 10 mM ammonium formate at pH 10.00. The fractions of the phosphoproteomics samples were concatenated into 10 fractions (1+11, 2+12, …10+20) while the whole proteomics fractions were concatenated into 20 fractions (1+21, 2+22, …20+40), dried and reconstituted in 3% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid.  nLC-MS/MS  The fractions of the whole proteome samples were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion™ Tribrid™ mass spectrometer interfaced with Easy-nLC1200 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were trapped on an Acclaim Pepmap 100 C18 trap column (100 μm x 2 cm, particle size 5 μm, Thermo Fischer Scientific) and separated on an in-house packed analytical column (75 μm x 40 cm, particle size 3 μm, Reprosil-Pur C18, Dr. Maisch) using a linear gradient from 5% to 33% B over 75 min followed by an increase to 100% B for 5 min, and 100% B for 10 min at a flow of 300 nL/min. Solvent A was 0.2% formic acid and solvent B was 80% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid. Precursor ion mass spectra were acquired at 120 000 resolution and MS/MS analysis was performed in a data-dependent multinotch mode where CID spectra of the most intense precursor ions were recorded in ion trap at collision energy setting of 35 for 3 s (‘top speed’ setting). Precursors were isolated in the quadrupole with a 0.7 m/z isolation window, charge states 2 to 7 were selected for fragmentation, dynamic exclusion was set to 60 s and 10 ppm. MS3 spectra for reporter ion quantitation were recorded at a resolution of 50 000 with HCD fragmentation at collision energy of 65 using the synchronous precursor selection. Analyses of the phosphoproteomics samples were similar besides the most abundant doubly or multiply charged precursors from the MS1 scans were isolated with a dynamic exclusion within 10 ppm for 45 seconds. The isolated precursors were fragmented by higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) at 38% collision energy and the MS2 spectra were detected in the Orbitrap at 50 000 resolution, with the fixed first m/z 100 and maximum injection time 150 ms.

### Data Protocol
The data files of the fractions from each set were merged for identification and relative quantification using Proteome Discoverer version 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Identification was performed using Mascot version 2.5.1 (Matrix Science) as a search engine by matching against the Homo sapiens database of SwissProt. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 5 ppm and fragment mass tolerance to 0.6 Da. Tryptic peptides were accepted with zero missed cleavage, variable modifications of methionine oxidation and fixed cysteine alkylation, TMT-label modifications of N-terminal and lysine were selected. For the phosphoproteomics samples, variable modification of serine, threonine or tyrosine phosphorylation was added. The reference samples were used as denominator and for calculation of the ratios. Percolator was used for the validation of identified proteins.  Quantification was performed in Proteome Discoverer 2.4. TMT reporter ions were identified with 3 mmu mass tolerance in the MS2 HCD spectra for the phosphopeptide experiment or in the MS3 HCD spectra for the total proteome experiment, and the TMT reporter S/N values for each sample were normalized within Proteome Discoverer 2.4 on the total peptide amount. Only the unique identified peptides were taken into account for the protein quantification

### Publication Abstract
Recent studies highlight the importance of lipotoxic damage in aortic cells as the major pathogenetic contributor to atherosclerotic disease. Since the STE20-type kinase STK25 has been shown to exacerbate ectopic lipid storage and associated cell injury in several metabolic organs, we here investigate its role in the main cell types of vasculature. We depleted STK25 by small interfering RNA in human aortic endothelial and smooth muscle cells exposed to oleic acid and oxidized LDL. In both cell types, the silencing of STK25 reduces lipid accumulation and suppresses activation of inflammatory and fibrotic pathways as well as lowering oxidative and endoplasmic reticulum stress. Notably, in smooth muscle cells, STK25 inactivation hinders the shift from a contractile to a synthetic phenotype. Together, we provide several lines of evidence that antagonizing STK25 signaling in human aortic endothelial and smooth muscle cells is atheroprotective, highlighting this kinase as a new potential therapeutic target for atherosclerotic disease.

### Keywords
Atherosclerosis; stk25; lipid accumulation; calcification; phenotypic switch

### Affiliations
SAMBIO Core Facilities, Sahgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg
Proteomics Core Facility, University of Gothenburg, Sweden

### Submitter
Proteomics Core Facility

### Lab Head
Dr Carina Sihlbom
Proteomics Core Facility, University of Gothenburg, Sweden


