### Accession
PXD020229

### Title
Crosslinking mass spectrometry of the unconventional kinetoplastid kinetochore protein KKT4

### Description
The kinetochore is the macromolecular protein machine that drives chromosome segregation by interacting with spindle microtubules. Unlike most other eukaryotes that have canonical kinetochore proteins, a group of evolutionarily divergent eukaryotes called kinetoplastids (such as Trypanosoma brucei that causes human African trypanosomiasis) have a unique set of kinetochore proteins. To date, the only kinetoplastid kinetochore protein that is known to bind microtubules is KKT4, which has no high-resolution structure information available. Here we used X-ray crystallography, NMR spectroscopy, and crosslinking mass spectrometry to characterise the structure and dynamics of KKT4.

### Sample Protocol
Prior to the experiment, bis(sulfosuccinimidyl)suberate, BS3 (ThermoFisher) crosslinker was equilibrated at room temperature for 2 hr and then resuspended to 0.87 mM in distilled water. Immediately after, 2 μL of the crosslinker was mixed with 18 μL of ~5 μM KKT4 in 25 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 2 mM MgCl2, 0.1 mM EDTA, 0.5 mM EGTA-KOH, 10% glycerol, 250 mM NaCl, 0.1% and NP40. The crosslinking reaction was incubated on ice for 60 min. 1-ethyl-3-(3-dimethylaminopropyl)carbodiimide hydrochloride (EDC) and N-Hydroxysulfosuccinimide sodium salt (Sulfo-NHS) were resuspended in distilled water to 4 mM and 10 mM respectively. Immediately after, 1 μL of EDC and 1 μL of Sulfo-NHS were mixed with 18 μL of ~5 μM KKT4. The crosslinking reaction was incubated at RT for 60 min. Following the incubation, all the crosslinking samples were boiled for 10 min and resolved on a NuPAGE 4–12% gradient polyacrylamide gel (Invitrogen). Gels were stained using SimplyBlue (Invitrogen) and bands corresponding to crosslinked KKT4 were cut out and subjected to mass spectrometry. Gel bands were destained by cycles of incubation with 50% acetonitrile in 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) and 100% acetonitrile. Subsequently, dried gel bands were incubated with 10 mM TCEP in 100 mM TEAB for 30 min at RT followed by centrifugation. Supernatant was removed. Subsequently, 50 mM 2-chloroacetamide in 100 mM TEAB was added to the gel and incubated for 30 min at RT in the dark. A gel bands were, subsequently, washed with 100% acetonitrile 3 times followed by addition of 100 ng of trypsin and digested overnight at 37°C.  Peptides were resuspended in 5% formic acid and 5% DMSO and analysed by LC-MS with an Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system (Thermo Fischer Scientific) coupled to an QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific) through an EASY-Spray nano-electrospray ion source (Thermo Fischer Scientific). The peptides were trapped on a C18 PepMap100 pre-column (300 μm i.d. x 5 mm, 100Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water). The peptides were separated on an in-house packed analytical column (75 μm i.d. x 50cm packed with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 μm, 120 Å, Dr.Maisch GmbH) using a linear gradient (length: 45 min, 15% to 50% solvent B. Acquisition was performed in data-dependent mode (DDA). Full scan MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap (scan range 350–1500 m/ z, resolution 70000, AGC target 3-6, maximum injection time 50 ms) followed by 10 MSMS events at 30% NCE (resolution 17500, AGC target 5-4, maximum injection time 120 ms, isolation window 1.5 m/z) with first fixed mass at 180 m/z. Charge exclusion was selected for unassigned 1+ and 2+ ions.

### Data Protocol
MS data were converted into mgf format using pParse and searched by the pLink software (Yang et al. 2012) (version 1 for BS3 dataset and version 2 for EDC dataset) using FASTA databases containing KKT1–4, 6, 7–11, 14, 15, 20, and alpha/beta tubulins without KKIP1 (for BS3 dataset) or with KKIP1 (for EDC dataset). Search parameters were as follows: maximum number of missed cleavages = 2, fixed modification = carbamidomethyl-Cys, variable modification 1 = Oxidation-Met, variable modification 2 = Glu to pyro-Glu.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Kkt4, Kinetochore, Kinetoplastid, Trypanosoma brucei

### Affiliations
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Bungo Akiyoshi

### Lab Head
Dr Bungo Akiyoshi
University of Oxford


