### Accession
PXD018011

### Title
Identification of tomato proteins that interact with Replication initiator protein (Rep) of the geminivirus TYLCV

### Description
In this study, an GFP-based affinity purification followed by mass spectrometry (AP-MS) approach is used in order to identify new tomato proteins that interact with the Replication initiator protein (Rep, AL1, C1) from Tomato yellow leaf curl virus (TYLCV).

### Sample Protocol
Protoplasts were isolated from in vitro shoot cultures of tomato and a total of 40 million protoplasts per sample were subjected to Polyethylene-glycol mediated transformation with: (i) TYLCV Rep fused to GFP, (ii) Rep-GFP + tomato Proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) fused to the FLAG tag and (iii) FLAG-PCNA as a negative control. Transfected protoplasts were incubated in Gamborg B5 liquid medium at 25°C overnight in dark conditions. Three independent transfections were performed and the next day, the protoplasts were collected by centrifugation (5 minutes at 85 g) and resuspended as 10 million protoplasts per ml of Triton X-buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 10 mM KCl, 10% glycerol, 1 mM DTT, 10 mM MgCl2, 2 mM EDTA, 1% Triton X-100, 1 mM PMSF, and 1 mM NaF). Protoplast mixtures were incubated on ice for 30 min and sonicated twice for 15 seconds to lyse the cells. NaCl was added up to 420 mM and the samples were incubated on ice for 1 h with occasional mixing. After centrifugation the supernatant was transferred into new lobind tubes and 1 ml was incubated for 1 h with 25 ul (50% slurry) of GFP-Trap_beads (Chromotek) at 4°C. The resin was captured using a magnetic stand and washed 3 times in 0.5 ml of washing buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA, 1 mM PMSF protease inhibitor) and finally two times with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. The affinity purified proteins were reduced (50 mM DTT), alkylated (50 mM IodoAcetAmide) terminated by adding cysteine (50 mM). Protein samples were subjected to on-bead tryptic digestion (0.5 ug sequencing grade) and peptides were cleaned using home-made C18 microColumns. Digested peptides were analyzed using a nano LC-MS/MS LTQ-Orbitrap XL setup.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (1.5.2.8) with Andromeda search engine was used for identification and relative quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
Geminiviruses are plant-infecting DNA viruses that reshape the intracellular environment of their host in order to create favorable conditions for viral replication and propagation. Viral manipulation is largely mediated <i>via</i> interactions between viral and host proteins. Identification of this protein network helps us to understand how these viruses manipulate their host and therefore provides us potentially with novel leads for resistance against this class of pathogens, as genetic variation in the corresponding plant genes could subvert viral manipulation. Different studies have already yielded a list of host proteins that interact with one of the geminiviral proteins. Here, we use affinity purification followed by mass spectrometry (AP-MS) to further expand this list of interacting proteins, focusing on an important host (tomato) and the Replication initiator protein (Rep, AL1, C1) from <i>Tomato yellow leaf curl virus</i> (TYLCV). Rep is the only geminiviral protein proven to be essential for geminiviral replication and it forms an integral part of viral replisomes, a protein complex that consists of plant and viral proteins that allows for viral DNA replication. Using AP-MS, fifty-four 'high confidence' tomato proteins were identified that specifically co-purified with Rep. For two of them, an unknown EWS-like RNA-binding protein (called Geminivirus Rep interacting EWS-like protein 1 or GRIEP1) and an isoform of the THO complex subunit 4A (ALY1), we were able to confirm this interaction with Rep <i>in planta</i> using a second method, bimolecular fluorescence complementation (BiFC). The THO subunit 4 is part of the THO/TREX (TRanscription-EXport) complex, which controls RNA splicing and nuclear export of mRNA to the cytoplasm and is also connected to plant disease resistance. This work represents the first step towards characterization of novel host factors with a putative role in the life cycle of TYLCV and possibly other geminiviruses.

### Keywords
Tylcv, Pcna, Interactome, Proteomics, Geminivirus, Rep, Viral replication

### Affiliations
Biochemistry
Wageningen University

### Submitter
Sjef Boeren

### Lab Head
Dr Sjef Boeren
Wageningen University


