### Accession
PXD026411

### Title
Quantitative proteome for C.elegans by 3plex mTRAQ

### Description
Vesicle-mediated transport is a fundamental part of the secretory and endocytic pathways. In addition to their role in membrane protein trafficking, Arf-like protein subfamily of small GTPases also plays an important role in development, maintenance of Golgi structure and function. Proper protein trafficking is critical for cellular integrity and studies demonstrate that aberrant protein sorting leads to various diseases in many organisms including humans. However, to date, there is no report showing the role of Golgi apparatus and Golgi proteins in organismal longevity. Organisms dynamically reprogram their transcriptome and proteome as a response to internal and external changes, which alter physiological processes including aging. Compared to many transcriptomic studies that identified aging-regulatory genes, proteomic studies that identified aging-regulatory proteins are relatively scarce. By using a quantitative proteomic approach, we identified MON-2, an Arf-Gef protein implicated in Golgi-to-endosome trafficking, as a longevity-promoting protein. We found that MON-2 is essential for the long lifespan of various longevity mutants. Our results demonstrate that Golgi-to-endosome trafficking is an integral part of lifespan regulation.

### Sample Protocol
clk-1 and isp-1 mutants, and wild-type animals were synchronized and harvested when the majority of the animals reached L4 stage. We used L4 stage to avoid any complications associated with reproduction. Total 1 mg of worm samples were collected by pooling 3 to 4 independent biological repeats of each samples. The samples were harvested with M9 buffer including 0.01% PEG in the buffer and froze with liquid nitrogen immediately. The frozen samples were thawed on ice and were pooled together, and then washed with 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0) for 5 times to eliminate the residual PEG in the buffer. Worm samples were pelleted, sonicated and quantified by BSA assay.

### Data Protocol
The RAW-files from the LTQ XL-Orbitrap mass spectrometer were converted into mzXML-files by use of ReAdW 4.3.1 with centroid option and then into mgf-files by use of the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (TPP; version 4.5 RAPTURE rev 2) with the following parameters: minimum peak count, 5; minimum threshold for peak intensity, 0.01; and MH+ mass range, 600-4200. Peptide and protein identification were accomplished by comparing the mgf files with UniprotKB C.elegans database (25831 entries, July 2012) on a Mascot search engine with the following parameters: protease, trypsin; fixed modification, Carbamidomethyl (C), variable modifications, mTRAQ delta 0 (N-term, K), mTRAQ delta 4 (N-term, K), mTRAQ delta 8 (N-term, K) and oxidation (M); taxonomy, Caenorhabditis elegans; missed cleavages, 2; peptide tolerance, 15 ppm and MS/MS tolerance, ±0.5 Da. Peptide and protein assignment were performed with TPP. The Mascot result files were used as an input for the pepXML module, allowing trypsin restriction and ‘monoisotopic masses’ options. Then, Peptide-Prophet was applied with ‘accurate mass binning’ option. Peptides with probabilities greater than 0.9 (FDR <0.02) were included in the subsequent Protein-Prophet, and proteins having protein probability greater than 0.9 (FDR <0.01,2 unique and quantified peptides ) were gathered. Quantification of the mTRAQ sample was performed using in-house software Quad-Quant

### Publication Abstract
The Golgi apparatus plays a central role in trafficking cargoes such as proteins and lipids. Defects in the Golgi apparatus lead to various diseases, but its role in organismal longevity is largely unknown. Using a quantitative proteomic approach, we found that a Golgi protein, MON-2, was up-regulated in long-lived <i>Caenorhabditis elegans</i> mutants with mitochondrial respiration defects and was required for their longevity. Similarly, we showed that DOP1/PAD-1, which acts with MON-2 to traffic macromolecules between the Golgi and endosome, contributed to the longevity of respiration mutants. Furthermore, we demonstrated that MON-2 was required for up-regulation of autophagy, a longevity-associated recycling process, by activating the Atg8 ortholog GABARAP/LGG-1 in <i>C. elegans</i>. Consistently, we showed that mammalian MON2 activated GABARAPL2 through physical interaction, which increased autophagic flux in mammalian cells. Thus, the evolutionarily conserved role of MON2 in trafficking between the Golgi and endosome is an integral part of autophagy-mediated longevity.

### Keywords
C. elegans, Mtraq, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Center for Theragnosis, Korea Institute of Science and Technology, Republic of Korea
KIST

### Submitter
Shinyeong Ju

### Lab Head
Dr Cheolju Lee
Center for Theragnosis, Korea Institute of Science and Technology, Republic of Korea


