### Accession
PXD041091

### Title
Identification of PP2A-B55 targets in Drosophila uncovers regulation of Emerin during nuclear envelope reassembly

### Description
Entry into mitosis is triggered by mitotic kinases that phosphorylate multiple proteins to induce profound cellular changes including nuclear envelope breakdown, chromosome condensation and spindle assembly. Conversely, mitotic exit requires protein dephosphorylation as cells return to their interphase organization. Protein Phosphatase 2A in complex with its B55/Tws regulatory subunit (PP2A-B55) is known to play a crucial role in this transition. However, the precise events and substrates that it regulates are incompletely understood. We used proteomic approaches in Drosophila to identify proteins that interact with PP2A-B55 and are dephosphorylated in a PP2A-B55 dependent manner. Among several candidates, we identified Otefin (also known as Emerin) as a target of PP2A-B55 in the process of nuclear envelope reformation after mitosis. Emerin is a protein of the inner nuclear membrane that interacts with the DNA-binding protein Barrier-to-Autointegration Factor (BAF) via a LEM domain. Our results indicate that phosphorylation of Emerin at Ser50 and Ser54 near its LEM domain negatively regulates its association with BAF, Lamin and additional Emerin. Using live imaging, we show that dephosphorylation of Emerin at the identified sites determines the timing of nuclear envelope reformation. Genetic rescue experiments indicate that this regulation is required in vivo during embryonic development. Phosphoregulation of the Emerin-BAF complex formation by PP2A-B55 appears as a key event of mitotic exit that is likely to be conserved across species.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were reconstituted in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate with 10 mM TCEP [Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride; Thermo Fisher Scientific], and vortexed for 1h at 37°C. Chloroacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) was added for alkylation to a final concentration of 55 mM. Samples were vortexed for another hour at 37°C. One microgram of trypsin was added, and digestion was performed for 8 h at 37°C. Supernatants were desalted on stage-tips (The Nest Group). Samples were dried down and solubilized in 5% ACN0.2% FA. The samples were loaded on a home-made reversed-phase column (150-μm i.d. by 150 mm) with a 220-min gradient from 10 to 30% ACN-0.2% FA and a 600-nl/min flow rate on an Easy nLC-1000 connected to an Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). Each full MS spectrum acquired at a resolution of 240,000 was followed by tandem-MS (MS-MS) spectra acquisition on the most abundant multiply charged precursor ions for a maximum of 3s. Tandem-MS experiments were performed using collision-induced dissociation (CID) at a collision energy of 30%.

### Data Protocol
The data were processed using PEAKS X (Bioinformatics Solutions, Waterloo, ON) and a Uniprot Drosophila unreviewed database. Scaffold version 5.0.0 (Proteome Sofware Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS-based peptide and protein identifications

### Publication Abstract
Mitotic exit requires the dephosphorylation of many proteins whose phosphorylation was needed for mitosis. Protein phosphatase 2A with its B55 regulatory subunit (PP2A-B55) promotes this transition. However, the events and substrates that it regulates are incompletely understood. We used proteomic approaches in <i>Drosophila</i> to identify proteins that interact with and are dephosphorylated by PP2A-B55. Among several candidates, we identified emerin (otefin in <i>Drosophila</i>). Emerin resides in the inner nuclear membrane and interacts with the DNA-binding protein barrier-to-autointegration factor (BAF) via a LEM domain. We found that the phosphorylation of emerin at Ser50 and Ser54 near its LEM domain negatively regulates its association with BAF, lamin and additional emerin in mitosis. We show that dephosphorylation of emerin at these sites by PP2A-B55 determines the timing of nuclear envelope reformation. Genetic experiments indicate that this regulation is required during embryonic development. Phosphoregulation of the emerin-BAF complex formation by PP2A-B55 appears as a key event of mitotic exit that is likely conserved across species.

### Keywords
Lamin, Emerin, Mitosis, Baf, Pp2a, Otefin, Nuclear envelope, Mitotic exit

### Affiliations
IRIC-Université de Montréal
Proteomic Platform

### Submitter
Eric Bonneil

### Lab Head
Dr Vincent Archambault
IRIC-Université de Montréal


