### Accession
PXD018890

### Title
Label-free proteomic identification of proteins regulated by RIPK2 in PC3 cells

### Description
Label-free proteomics comparison of PC3 cells with versus without CRISPR/Cas9 knockout of RIPK2. The goal was to identify proteins downstream of RIPK2 in prostate cancer cells.

### Sample Protocol
Control and RIPK2-KO PC3 cells were regularly cultured and harvested at the confluency of ~90%. Proteins were extracted from cell pellets by adding about three volumes of lysis buffer (80 mM Tris-HCl, 100 mM DTT, 4% SDS, pH7.4). Cell lysates were sonicated in a water-bath sonicator (Elma S180H) to reduce the viscosity, and centrifuged at 16,000×g for 5 min at room temperature. Protein concentration was measured using the Pierce 660nm Protein Assay Kit according to the manufacturer’s instruction. Proteins (60 µg per sample) were digested into tryptic peptides using the filter-aid sample preparation (FASP) method32. Tryptic peptides were dried down in a SpeedVac and reconstituted with 0.2% formic acid. Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry analysis was performed using an EASY-nLC 1000 connected to an LTQ Orbitrap Elite hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo). Ten microliters of peptide solution were loaded onto a 2-cm trap column and separated on a 50-cm EASY-Spray analytical column heated to 55°C, using a 200-min gradient of 2-34% B in 174 min, 34-60% B in 10 min, 60-100% B in 2 min, and 100% B in 14 min at the flow rate of 150 nL/min. Separated peptides were ionized by an EASY-Spray ion source. Mass spectra were acquired in a data-dependent manner, with automatic switching between MS and MS/MS scans. In MS scans, the lock mass at m/z 445.120025 was applied to provide internal mass calibration. The full scan (m/z 400-1200) was performed in 240,000 resolution at m/z 400 Th, with an ion packet setting of 1×106 for automatic gain control and a maximum injection time of 500 ms. Up to 20 most intense peptide ions with charge state of ≥ 2 were automatically selected for MS/MS fragmentation by rapid collision-induced dissociation (rCID), using 7,500 resolution. 1 × 104 automatic gain control, 50 ms maximum injection time, 10 ms activation time and 35% normalized collision energy. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a repeat count of 1, an exclusion duration of 30 s, and a repeat duration of 90 s.

### Data Protocol
The acquired MS data (24 RAW files) were searched against the Uniprot_Human database (released on 01/22/2016, containing 20,985 sequences) using the Andromeda algorithm33 in the MaxQuant (v1.5.5.1) environment34. The searching parameters were set as follows: trypsin/P as the protease; oxidation (M), acetyl (protein N-term), Deamidation (NQ) as variable modifications; carbamidomethyl (C) as fixed modification; up to two missed cleavage; minimal peptide length as 7; mass tolerance for MS1 was 4.5 ppm for main search and for MS2 was 0.5 Da; identification of second peptides enabled; LFQ quantification enabled, and match-between-runs within 2 min were enabled. A stringent 1% FDR was used to filter PSM, peptide, and protein identifications.

### Publication Abstract
Despite progress in prostate cancer (PC) therapeutics, distant metastasis remains a major cause of morbidity and mortality from PC. Thus, there is growing recognition that preventing or delaying PC metastasis holds great potential for substantially improving patient outcomes. Here we show receptor-interacting protein kinase 2 (RIPK2) is a clinically actionable target for inhibiting PC metastasis. RIPK2 is amplified/gained in ~65% of lethal metastatic castration-resistant PC. Its overexpression is associated with disease progression and poor prognosis, and its genetic knockout substantially reduces PC metastasis. Multi-level proteomics analyses reveal that RIPK2 strongly regulates the stability and activity of c-Myc (a driver of metastasis), largely via binding to and activating mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase 7 (MKK7), which we identify as a direct c-Myc-S62 kinase. RIPK2 inhibition by preclinical and clinical drugs inactivates the noncanonical RIPK2/MKK7/c-Myc pathway and effectively impairs PC metastatic outgrowth. These results support targeting RIPK2 signaling to extend metastasis-free and overall survival.

### Keywords
Ripk2, Proteomics, Prostate cancer

### Affiliations
Departments of Surgery and Biomedical Sciences Cedars-Sinai Medical Center Los Angeles, CA 90048
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center

### Submitter
Wei Yang

### Lab Head
Dr Wei Yang
Departments of Surgery and Biomedical Sciences Cedars-Sinai Medical Center Los Angeles, CA 90048


