### Accession
PXD030621

### Title
One Brucella proteins solution sample, complete protein and 5 modifications  Label-free omics research (No duplication,F8097WB remaining protein) analysis report.

### Description
Considering the role of PTMs(2-hydroxyisobutyrylation, succinylation, crotonylation, acetylation, and malonylation) in various biological processes of Brucella virulence and survival, we propose that the virulence of Brucella is associated with the PTMs of proteins. Taken together, this study provides the first global survey of PTMs in Brucella. This is a prospective starting point for further functional analysis of PTMs during the survival of Brucella in hosts, interpretation of the function of Brucella proteins, and elucidation of the pathogenic mechanism of Brucella.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial culture and protein extraction Virulent B. abortus 2308 was obtained from Tecon Biological Co., Ltd. (Urumqi, China) and cultured in tryptone soy agar (TSA). The colonies were cultured in TSA medium at 37 °C in a shaking incubator. Bacteria were cultured in stationary or exponential growth stages and then harvested(33). The bacteria solution was sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail). The remaining cell debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min(34). The supernatant was collected, and the protein concentration was determined using a BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Trypsin digestion For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at 25 °C in the dark. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB（tetraethyl-ammonium bromide）to a urea concentration of less than 2 M. Finally, trypsin was added at a 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h digestion.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS Analysis The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A) and directly loaded onto a homemade reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75-μm internal diameter). The gradient comprised an increase from 6 to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 26 min, then 23 to 35% over 8 min, and 35 to 80% over 3 min. Elution was completed by holding at 80% for the last 3 min. The procedure was performed at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min using an EASY-nLC 1000 ultra-performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) system.  The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by MS/MS in Q ExactiveTM Plus coupled online to the UPLC. The applied electrospray voltage was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1,800 for a full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using a NCE setting of 28, and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. We followed a data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan and 20 MS/MS scans with a 15.0 s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control was set at 5E4. The fixed first mass was set to 100 m/z. Database Search The MS/MS data were processed using the MaxQuant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the SwissProt database database concatenated with the reverse decoy database. Trypsin was specified as a cleavage enzyme, allowing up to two missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in the first search and 5 ppm in the main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on cysteine was specified as a fixed modification, and oxidation on methionine was specified as a variable modification. FDR was adjusted to < 1%, and the minimum score for peptides was set at > 40. GO and KEGG pathway annotation The GO annotation proteome was derived from the UniProt-GOA database (www. http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/). First, the protein identity (ID) was converted to UniProt ID and then mapped to GO IDs by protein ID. If some identified proteins were not annotated by the UniProtGOA database, the InterProScan software was used to annotate the GO function of the protein based on the protein sequence alignment method. Subsequently, proteins were classified by Gene Ontology annotation based on three categories: biological process, cellular component, and molecular function. The KEGG database was used to annotate protein pathways. First, the KEGG online service tool KAAS(KEGG Automatic Annotation Server) was used to annotate the proteins’ KEGG database description. The annotation results were mapped to the pathway database using the online service tool KEGG mapper. Subcellular Localization The subcellular localization prediction software wolfpsort was used to predict subcellular localization. Wolfpsort is an updated version of PSORT/PSORT II for the prediction of eukaryotic sequences. For prokaryotic species, the subcellular localization prediction software CELLO was used.  Enrichment of GO and pathways Proteins were classified by GO annotation into three categories: biological process, cellular compartment, and molecular function. For each category, a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test was employed to test the significance of enrichment of the identified proteins against all proteins in the species database. The KEGG enriched pathways were similarly identified. Pathways and GO-terms with a corrected p-value < 0.05 were considered significant. Significant pathways were classified into hierarchical categories according to the KEGG website.  Protein-protein interaction network analysis All identified protein database accessions or sequences were searched against the STRING database version 10.5 for protein-protein interactions. Only interactions between the proteins belonging to the searched data set were selected, thereby excluding external candidates. STRING defines a metric called “confidence score” to define interaction confidence; we identified all interactions that had a high confidence score (> 0.7). The interaction network from STRING was visualized in the R package networkD3.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Brucella 2308 lc-msms

### Affiliations
Key Laboratory of Livestock Infectious Diseases, Ministry of Education, Shenyang Agricultural University, Shenyang, China

### Submitter
Jingjing Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Zeliang Chen
Key Laboratory of Livestock Infectious Diseases, Ministry of Education, Shenyang Agricultural University, Shenyang, China


