### Accession
PXD042242

### Title
RNA Methyltransferase METTL16’s Protein Domains Have Differential Functional Effects on Cell Processes

### Description
METTL16, a human m6A RNA methyltransferase, contains multiple RNA binding domains and is known to modify U6 and MAT2A RNAs. Usingmutagensis, we generated HEK293 cell lines stabling expressing nutated or WT forms of METTL16 to dtermine the imapct these mutations have on cell processes after removal of endogenous METTL16. We performed bottom-up, untargeted data dependent proteomics analysison all five cell lines to determine the global changes in peptide/protein abdundances; we identified 200-300 statistically significant altered proteinscompared to the wild-type exogenous METTL16 clone.

### Sample Protocol
Cells from five-independent cell cultures for each group (biological replicates, n=5) of cell lines with stable METTL16 expression were lifted with 1 mL Accutase; washed with DPBS and stored at -80 C. Cell pellets were thawed on ice, resuspended in ice cold lysis buffer (40 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 8 M urea, 40 mM NaCl, 2 mM MgCl2, and 1 X HALT Protease Inhibitor Cocktail. After freeze thaw and soication (30% amplitude, 15 sec, 4 °C), cell lysate was clarified via centrifugation (10K x g, 10 min, 4 °C). Total pro-tein content of the clarified lysate was determined by BCA assay. MS-based proteomic analysis was performed on an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (ThermoFisher) coupled to a Q Exactive Plus Hybrid Orbitrap mass Spectrometer via nanoelectrospray ionization, peptides were separated using an effective linear gradient of 10-40% acetonitrile (0.1% formic acid) over 120 min. Data dependent acquisition paramters: positive mode; MS1,resolution of 70,000 AGC target of 2x106 ions, maximum injection time 100 ms. Data dependent acquisition was used to collect MS2 spectra on the top 15 most abundant precursor ions with a charge >1, isolation window of 1.5 m/z, fixed first mass of 140 m/z, and a normalized collision energy of 27. MS2 spectra were acquired at 17,500 resolution, maximum injection time of 50 ms, and AGC target of 1x105.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discover 2.5 was used for processing. Defaults search parameters included Met oxidation (+15.99492 Da) as a variable modification and Cys carbiomidomethylation (+57.02146 Da) as a fixed modification. Data were searched against the Uniprot Homo Sapiens reference proteome (UP000005640, downloaded March 3, 2022) supplemented with additional sequences for the wild-type, PP185/186AA, N-terminal, and Δ-Linker METTL16 mutant and CRISPR proteins. Precursor ion m/z tolerance: ±10 ppm; fragment ion m/z tolerance: ±0.6 Da; 3 missed cleavages allowed. Filtered by a 1% false discovery rate at the peptide-level. Label free quantification was carried out using MS1 precursor intensity. Intensities were normalized to both the average intensities and the distribution width of the intensities within the sample. Relative abundances for low sampling proteins were determined via imputation.  Equal amounts of proteins (1 mg/mL) were reduced using 5 mM DTT (final concentration, 30 min, 32 °C) and then alkylated with iodoacetamide (15 mM IAM, 30 min, room temperature in the dark). Unreacted iodoacetamide was quenched with an additional 15 mM DTT. After reductive alkylation, samples were diluted to a final concentration of 1.5 M urea (40 mM Tris, pH 8.0, 30 mM NaCl and 5 mM CaCl2) and di-gested with MS grade Trypsin overnight (1:50, total protein:Trypsin ratio, 37 °C). Samples were acidified with 0.1% formic acid and desalted via solid phase extraction (C18 SEP-PAK columns) Peptides were eluted (25%-50% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid) and the resulting eluant was lyophilized overnight. Peptides were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid and concentrations were determined by coulometric assays. Concentrations were adjusted to 0.25 mg/mL with 0.1% formic acid.

### Publication Abstract
METTL16, a human m6A RNA methyltransferase, is currently known for its modification of U6 and MAT2A RNAs. Several studies have identified additional RNAs to which METTL16 binds, however whether METTL16 modifies these RNAs is still in question. Moreover, a recent study determined that METTL16 contains more than one RNA-binding domain, leaving the importance of each individual RNA-binding domain unknown. Here we examined the effects of mutating the METTL16 protein in certain domains on overall cell processes. We chose to mutate the N-terminal RNA-binding domain, the methyltransferase domain, and the C-terminal RNA-binding domain. With these mutants, we identified changes in RNA-binding ability, protein and RNA expression, cell cycle phase occupancy, and proliferation. From the resulting changes in RNA and protein expression, we saw effects on cell cycle, metabolism, intracellular transport, and RNA processing pathways, which varied between the METTL16 mutant lines. We also saw significant effects on the G1 and S phase occupancy times and proliferative ability with some but not all the mutants. We have therefore concluded that while METTL16 may or may not m6A-modify all RNAs it binds, its binding (or lack of) has a significant outcome on a variety of cell processes.

### Keywords
Mettle16

### Affiliations
Brody School of Medicine at ECU
Department of Biochemsitry and Molecular Biology, Brody School of Medicine at East CAraolina University, Greenville, NC USA

### Submitter
Tonya Zeczycki

### Lab Head
Dr Kyle D. Mansfield
Department of Biochemsitry and Molecular Biology, Brody School of Medicine at East CAraolina University, Greenville, NC USA


