### Accession
PXD019769

### Title
Msmeg overexpressing rv2577- protein identification in different cellular fractions

### Description
The presence of Rv2577 in the cell wall and soluble fractions was determined by nano-HPLC- MS/MS

### Sample Protocol
The cell wall and soluble protein fractions were separated by 12% SDS-PAGE followed by staining with Coomassie and Western blotting using the anti-HA antibody. The corresponding bands corresponded in the polyacrylamide gel were cut, Cys residues were reduced and alkylated with iodoacetamide and in gel digested with trypsin. Supernatants were run in SDS-PAGE and each line was cut in three bands that were separately processed as previously described. Tryptic peptides were separated using a nano-HPLC system (UltiMate 3000, Thermo Scientific) fitted with a reverse phase nano-column (PepMap RSLC C18, 50 cm x 75 µm ID, 2 µm, Thermo Scientific) and coupled online with a hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q-Exactive Plus, Thermo). A linear gradient of solvent B (acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid (v/v)) from 5% to 55% in 120 min was used. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode, MS/MS of top 12 signals were acquired using a dynamic exclusion list

### Data Protocol
A target decoy database was constructed with sequences from M. smegmatis strain ATCC 700084/MC 2 155 downloaded from Uniprot (December 2017) plus Rv2577 sequence and 127 most common proteomic contaminants. Patternlab for proteomics platform was used from protein identification by database search (FDR<1% at protein level). Trypsin was set as the proteolytic enzyme, cysteine carbamidomethylation and methionine oxidation were set as fixed and variable modifications respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Tuberculosis, a lung disease caused by <i>Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb)</i>, is one of the ten leading causes of death worldwide affecting mainly developing countries. <i>Mtb</i> can persist and survive inside infected cells through modulation of host antibacterial attack, i.e., by avoiding the maturation of phagosome containing mycobacteria to more acidic endosomal compartment. In addition, bacterial phosphatases play a central role in the interplay between host cells and <i>Mtb</i>. In this study, we characterized the Rv2577 of <i>Mtb</i> as a potential alkaline phosphatase/phosphodiesterase enzyme. By an <i>in vitro</i> kinetic assay, we demonstrated that purified Rv2577 expressed in <i>Mycobacterium smegmatis</i> displays both enzyme activities, as evidenced by using the artificial substrates <i>p-</i>NPP and bis-(<i>p-</i>NPP). In addition, a three-dimensional model of Rv2577 allowed us to define the catalytic amino acid residues of the active site, which were confirmed by site-directed mutagenesis and enzyme activity analysis, being characteristic of a member of the metallophosphatase superfamily. Finally, a mutation introduced in Rv2577 reduced the replication of <i>Mtb</i> in mouse organs and impaired the arrest of phagosomes containing mycobacteria in early endosomes; which indicates Rv2577 plays a role in <i>Mtb</i> virulence.

### Keywords
Rv2577, Mycobacteria

### Affiliations
Institut Pasteur de Montevideo
Analyitical Biochemistry and Proteomics Unit Instituto de Investigaciones Biologicas Clemente Estable/ Institut Pasteur de Montevideo

### Submitter
Rosario Durán

### Lab Head
Dr Rosario Duran
Analyitical Biochemistry and Proteomics Unit Instituto de Investigaciones Biologicas Clemente Estable/ Institut Pasteur de Montevideo


