### Accession
PXD007764

### Title
Proteomic analysis of Naegleria gruberi mitochondria

### Description
The formation of mitochondria has enabled eukaryotes to thrive and evolve into multitude of unicellular and multicellular species. The nature of the early mitochondria and its relationship to the ancestral host cell is still unknown. Using a phylogenomic approach we have discovered the presence of core subunits of type II secretion pathway (T2SS) in several unicellular eukaryotes (protists) belonging to jakobids, hetereloboseans and malawimonads. We show that the proteins carry mitochondrial signal sequences and are localized in the protist mitochondria.The mitochondria of Nagleria gruberi were isolated by differential centrifugation and analysed by mass spectrometry. The data analyses revealed about 1000 proteins enriched in the mitochondrial fraction including the components of T2SS.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Digestion Cell pellets were lysed in 100mM TEAB containing 1% SDC and boiled at 95°C for 5 min. Protein concentration was determined using BCA protein assay kit (Thermo) and 20 µg of protein per sample was used for MS sample preparation. Cysteins were reduced with 5mM final concentration of TCEP (60°C for 60 min) and blocked with 10mM final concentration of MMTS (10 min Room Temperature). Samples were digested with trypsine (trypsin/protein ration 1/20) at 37°C overnight. After digestion samples were acidified with TFA to 1% final concentration. SDC was removed by extraction to ethylacetate (Masuda et al, 2008) and peptides were desalted on Michrom C18 colum. nLC-MS 2  Analysis Nano Reversed phase columns (EASY-Spray column, 50 cm x 75 µm ID, PepMap C18, 2 µm particles, 100 Å pore size) were used for LC/MS analysis. Mobile phase buffer A was composed of water, 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid . Mobile phase B was composed of 80 %acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. Samples were loaded onto the trap column (Acclaim PepMap300, C18, 5 µm, 300 Å Wide Pore, 300 µm x 5 mm, 5 Cartridges) for 4 min at 15 μl/min loading buffer was composed of water, 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid . Peptides were eluted with Mobile phase B gradient from 2% to 40% B in 120 min. Eluting peptide cations were converted to gas-phase ions by electrospray ionization and analyzed on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion (Q-OT- qIT, Thermo). Survey scans of peptide precursors from 400 to 1600 m/z were performed at 120K resolution (at 200 m/z) with a 5 × 10 5  ion count target. Tandem MS was performed by isolation at 1,5 Th with the quadrupole, HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 30, and rapid scan MS analysis in the ion trap. The MS 2  ion count target was set to 10 4  and the max injection time was 35 ms. Only those precursors with charge state 2–6 were sampled for MS 2 . The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 45 s with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis All data were analyzed and quantified with the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3.8) (Cox, Hein et al. 2014). The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% for both proteins and peptides and we specified a minimum peptide length of seven amino acids. The Andromeda search engine was used for the MS/MS spectra search against the our own Naegleria gruberi database (31645 entries). Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to Arg and Lys, also allowing cleavage at proline bonds and a maximum of two missed cleavages. Dithiomethylation of cysteine was selected as fixed modification and N- terminal protein acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. The “match between runs” feature of MaxQuant was used to transfer identifications to other LC-MS/MS runs based on their masses and retention time (maximum deviation 0.7 min) and this was also used in quantification experiments. Quantifications were performed with the label-free algorithms described recently

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Type two secretion, Evolution, Protist

### Affiliations
Charles University
„BIOCEV – Biotechnology and Biomedicine Centre of the Academy of Sciences and Charles  University“ (CZ.1.05/1.1.00/02.0109)

### Submitter
Karel Harant

### Lab Head
Dr Mgr. Pavel Doležal, Ph.D.
„BIOCEV – Biotechnology and Biomedicine Centre of the Academy of Sciences and Charles  University“ (CZ.1.05/1.1.00/02.0109)


