### Accession
PXD008302

### Title
Quantitative Proteomic Analysis of Pancreatic Cyst Fluid Proteins Associated with Malignancy in Intraductal Papillary Mucinous Neoplasms

### Description
Intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm (IPMN) is a benign tumor that grows within the pancreatic ducts characterized by the production of thick mucinous fluid by surrounding tumor cells. IPMN is the most important precursor lesion for pancreatic cancer that is the fourth most common cause of cancer deaths. Differentiating between low-grade dysplasia (LGD), high-grade dysplasia (HGD), and invasive intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms (IPMNs) remains a diagnostic challenge with current biomarkers, necessitating the development of novel biomarkers that can distinguish IPMN malignancy. We investigated differentially expressed proteins among pancreatic cyst fluids consisted of LGD, HGD, and invasive IPMN patients by using our novel proteomic strategy, and finally we discovered pancreatic cyst fluid protein marker candidates that can predict the malignant potential of IPMNs.

### Sample Protocol
9 individual pancreatic cyst fluid samples of different types [LGD (n=3), HGD (n=3), and invasive IPMN (n=3)] were used for our report. All samples were centrifuged, and only the supernatant was used. Protein extraction and digestion were accomplished using the FASP procedure, and then tryptic-digested peptides were desalted by a C18-StageTip columns. The same portions of individual samples were pooled and fractionated to construct a spectral library. In contrast, the 9 individual samples were not fractionated.

### Data Protocol
The MS data from the Q Exactive were processed in MaxQuant (version 1.5.5.1 with built-in Andromeda search engine). Precursor MS signal intensities were determined, and HCD MS/MS spectra were de-isotoped and filtered, such that only the 10 most abundant fragments per 100-m/z range were retained. Protein groups were identified by searching the MS and MS/MS data of the peptides against the Uniprot human database (2014 December, 88,717 entries). Forward and reverse proteins sequences were taken into account when the data were searched with regard to trypsin/P specificity. The following parameters were used in the database search: precursor and HCD fragment mass tolerances of 6 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively; tolerance of up to 2 missed cleavages; carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification; and oxidation of Met and acetylation of protein N-term as variable modifications. The minimum peptide length was set to 6 residues. All peptides, modification sites, and protein identifications were filtered at a false discovery rate (FDR) of less than 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Pancreatic cancer is now the fourth leading cause of cancer deaths in the United States, and it is associated with an alarmingly low 5-year survival rate of 5%. However, a patient's prognosis is considerably improved when the malignant lesions are identified at an early stage of the disease and removed by surgical resection. Unfortunately, the absence of a practical screening strategy and clinical diagnostic test for identifying premalignant lesions within the pancreas often prevents early detection of pancreatic cancer. To aid in the development of a molecular screening system for early detection of the disease, we have performed glycomic and glycoproteomic profiling experiments on 21 pancreatic cyst fluid samples, including fluids from mucinous cystic neoplasms and intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms, two types of mucinous cysts that are considered high risk to undergo malignant transformation. A total of 80 asparagine-linked (N-linked) glycans, including high mannose and complex structures, were identified. Of special interest was a series of complex N-linked glycans containing two to six fucose residues, located predominantly as substituents on &#x3b2;-lactosamine extensions. Following the observation of these "hyperfucosylated" glycans, bottom-up proteomics experiments utilizing a label-free quantitative approach were applied to the investigation of two sets of tryptically digested proteins derived from the cyst fluids: 1) all soluble proteins in the raw samples and 2) a subproteome of the soluble cyst fluid proteins that were selectively enriched for fucosylation through the use of surface-immobilized Aleuria aurantia lectin. A comparative analysis of these two proteomic data sets identified glycoproteins that were significantly enriched by lectin affinity. Several candidate glycoproteins that appear hyperfucosylated were identified, including triacylglycerol lipase and pancreatic &#x3b1;-amylase, which were 20- and 22-fold more abundant, respectively, following A. aurantia lectin enrichment.

### Keywords
Ipmn dysplasia, Pancreatic cyst fluid, Intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm (ipmn), Mucinous cystic neoplasm (mcn), Lc-ms/ms, Biomarker candidates

### Affiliations
Joint faculty of Department of Biomedical Sciences & Bioengineering, Seoul National University College of Medicine, 103 Daehak-ro, Seoul, Korea
Seoul National University College of Medicine

### Submitter
Misol Do

### Lab Head
Dr Youngsoo Kim
Joint faculty of Department of Biomedical Sciences & Bioengineering, Seoul National University College of Medicine, 103 Daehak-ro, Seoul, Korea


