### Accession
PXD002997

### Title
Proteome analysis of Bordetella pertussis isolated from human macrophages

### Description
Previous studies indicated that B. pertussis, historically considered as extracellular pathogen, can invade and replicate within human macrophages. In order to investigate factors involved in the intracellular survival, we analyzed the proteome of intracellular B. pertussis at 3h and 48 h post macrophage infection. From totally 762 identified proteins, we observed differences in gene expression profiles of intracellular bacteria as compared to extracellular bacteria. More than 300 proteins showed significant differences in the level of expression (p< 0.05) between internalized and non-internalized samples. Different intensities were found for proteins associated with virulence, stress response, cell division, transport, and many genes with unknown functions. Proteins involved in stress response increased in level early after infection, including ClpX, GroEL and HsIU. Two proteins involved in iron uptake were found increased as early as 3 h post infection and remained at high level 48 h post-infection. These proteins are BfrD and BfrE, recently identified as TonB-dependent outer membrane catecholamine receptors involved in iron uptake from transferrin in B. bronchiseptica. Interestingly, we found at least three proteins of the Type III Secretion System (TTSS) increased already at 3 h after infection, the proteins BteA, BscC, and BopN suggesting that TTSS becomes operative when bacteria infect human macrophages.  Selected virulence factors and metabolic enzymes were validated using the multiple reaction monitoring. These results represent the first characterization of intracellular B. pertussis proteome and demonstrate that this pathogen undergoes an adaptive response that enables the development of an intracellular infection.

### Sample Protocol
THP-I differentiated into macrophages by preincubation with 20 nM of phorbol 12-myristate13-acetate were infected with GFP-expressing B. pertussisTohama I (multiplicity of infection: 100 bacteria per cell) and incubated for 3 h and 48 h. Intracellular bacteria were isolated by sucrose gradient.  Additionally, control bacteria were cultivated in DMEM and harvested by centrifugation (10,000 x g for 15 min at room temperature). Bacterial cells were resuspended in 50 µL urea/thiourea (8M/2M).  The proteins were solubilized during 1 h at room temperature (RT) and centrifuged at 20,000 x g at 20°C for 1 h. Total protein concentration in the supernatant was determined by Bradford assay. Finally, four µg of proteins solved in UT were further diluted in 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate, reduced with 25 mM DTT, alkylated with 100 mM iodoacetamide, and proteolytically digested with 4 mL of trypsin (0.25 µg/µL) (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) overnight in a water bath at 37°C. The tryptic digest was stopped by addition of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) to a final concentration of 0.1% v/v. Cellular debris was removed by centrifugation at 16,000 x g for 10 min at RT. The supernatant was transferred to a 1.5 mL tube and peptides were puriﬁed and desalted using C18-ZipTip columns (Merck Millipore, Billerica, MA , USA). Nano-LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Proxeon nano-LC system (Proxeon, Odense, Denmark) connected to a LTQ-Orbitrap-MS (ThermoElectron, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a nano-ESI source. For LC separation, an Acelaim PepMap 100 column (C18, 3 mm, 100A, Dionex, Sunnyvale CA, USA) capillary of 15-cm length was used. The solvent gradient used started from 100% buffer A/0% buffer B (15 min) to 60% B (290 min) with a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The MS was operated in data-dependent mode to automatically switch between Orbitrap-MS and LTQ-MS/MS acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (from m/z 300 to 2000) were acquired in the Orbitrap with resolution R 560,000 at m/z 400 (after accumulation to a target of 1000,000 ions in the LTQ). The method used allowed sequential isolation of up to five of the most intense ions, depending on signal intensity, for fragmentation on the linear ion trap using collision-induced dissociation at a target value of 100,000 ions. Target ions already selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 60 s. General MS conditions were: electrospray voltage, 1.5 kV; no sheath and auxiliary gas ﬂow. Ion selection threshold was set to 500 counts for MS/MS, and an activation Q-value of 0.25 and activation time of 30 ms were also applied for MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification, raw data were post-processed with the Sorcerer™ software package v3.5 (Sage-N Research Inc. Milpitas, CA, USA). After conversion, all Tandem-MS spectra were searched using the SEQUEST® search engine (ThermoFinnigan, San Jose, CA, USA, version v.27, rev.11) against the B. pertussis Tohama I FASTA database assuming the digestion with trypsin (precursor ion tolerance of 20 ppm, fragment ion mass tolerance 1 Da, variable oxidation of methionine). Peptide identifications were accepted if they exceeded specific database search engine thresholds and as a result, SEQUEST® identifications required at least deltaCn scores of greater than 0.10 and XCorr scores of greater than 2.2, 3.8, and 3.8 for doubly, triply, and quadruply charged peptides, respectively. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Scaffold software (Proteome Software, Portland, OR, USA) was used to validate protein identifications derived from MS/MS sequencing results. Scaffold verifies peptide identifications assigned by SEQUEST® using the X!Tandem database searching program (Craig and Beavis 2003). Peptide and protein identiﬁcations were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95 % probability respectively, as speciﬁed by the Peptide Prophet algorithm. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they reached greater than 99% probability and contained at least 2 identified unique peptides. These identification criteria typically established <0.01% false discovery rate based on a decoy database search strategy at the protein level. Identified peptides/proteins were further quantified using unweighted spectral counting. To this end, total spectra identified in a dataset were normalized with spectra identified in dataset that was to be compared. This normalization, which is achieved by using a display option called "Quantitative value" in Scaffold v 3.0, was used to determine relative abundance of proteins within datasets and the statistical significance was assessed by using a Student's t test (p<0.05). Ratios were calculated from average values of each three independent biological replicates for the internalized samples related on the control.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Internalization, Proteomics, Macrophages, B. pertussis

### Affiliations
University Medicine Greifswald, Germany
University Medicine Greifswald

### Submitter
Kristin Surmann

### Lab Head
Dr Frank Schmidt
University Medicine Greifswald, Germany


