### Accession
PXD007644

### Title
Proteomic dissection of substrate nanotopography-sensitive mechanotransductive signalling hubs that foster neuronal differentiation.

### Description
Neuronal cells are competent in precisely sensing nanotopographical features of their microenvironment and the intrinsic information impacts on neuronal functioning and differentiation “interpreted” by mechanotransductive processes. Attempts to influence and direct neuronal differentiation behaviour by engineering substrates that mimic appropriate extracellular matrix (ECM) topographies are hampered by the difficulty since many details of mechanosensing/-transduction are still elusive. Introducing omics methods into these biomaterial approaches has the potential to provide a deeper insight into the molecular processes and signalling cascades underlying mechanosensing/-transduction but their exigence in cellular material is often opposed by technical limitations of the biomaterial fabrication methods. Supersonic cluster beam deposition (SCBD) of zirconia nanoparticles allows instead the realisation of large macroscopic areas with biocompatible nanostructured films equipped with controllable and reproducible ECM-like nanoroughness that have been recently shown to foster neuron differentiation and maturation. Exploiting this capacity of SCBD, we challenged mechanosensing/-transduction and differentiative behaviour of neuron-like PC12 cells interacting with diverse nanotopographies and/or by changing their biomechanical status, to analyse their phosphoproteomic profiles in these settings. Versatile proteins were found to be affected that can be associated to significant processes along the mechanotransductive signal sequence, i.e. cell/cell interaction, glycocalyx and ECM, membrane/f-actin linkage and integrin activation, cell/substrate interaction, IAC, actomyosin organisation/cellular mechanics, nuclear organisation and transcription. The phosphoproteomic data suggested furthermore an involvement of ILK, mTor, Wnt and calcium signalling in these nanotopography- and/or cell mechanics-related processes. Altogether, potential nanotopography-sensitive, mechanotransductive signalling hubs participating to neuronal differentiation were dissected.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture and preparation of the cells for the experiments PC12 (PC-12 Adh ATCC Catalog no. CRL-1721.1TM) were routinely kept in culture in RPMI-1640 medium which was supplemented with 10% horse serum, 5% fetal bovine serum, 2 mM L-glutamine, 10 mM HEPES, 100 units/ml penicillin, 1 mM pyruvic acid, and 100 μg/ml streptomycin and at 5% CO2 (98% air-humified). Subculturing was performed every 2-3 days by detaching the cells with 1 mM EDTA in HBSS or a trypsin solution, centrifugation at 1000x g (5 min) and resuspension in the culture medium. For the experiments the PC12 cells were detached with 1 mM EDTA in HBSS and centrifuged at 1000 x g (5 min), washed with low serum medium (RPMI-1640 with only 1% HS and without FBS but all the other supplements), and centrifuged again at 1000 x g (5min). Before plating the cells on the different substrate conditions, the cells were counted with an improved Neubauer chamber to seed them (after resuspension in RPMI low serum medium) with the concentration of ~4000 cells/cm2  onto the microscope slides which were placed into non-treated 4well dishes with the dimensions 127,8 x 85,5 mm.  For the condition NGF, the NGF stimulus (human NGF-β, Sigma-Aldrich) was added to the medium right after plating the cells with a final concentration of 50 ng/ml. For the condition ns-Zr15 hypo, the cells were re-suspended in RPMI low serum medium diluted 7,5/2,5 with deionized water (supplements were kept at the aforementioned concentrations) and pre-incubated in this hypoosmotic medium for 15 min before plating the cells eventually into the well, always in the hypoosmotic medium. For the PLL hyper condition, after adhesion of the cells (1 hour after plating) a hyperosmotic shock was applied to the cells (150 mM sucrose final concentration in the RPMI low serum medium) for 15 min, then after washing once with RPMI low serum medium, the cells were left in RPMI low serum medium for the rest of the experiment.    The cells were left in the incubator for 24 hours in all conditions. After washing twice with PBS, the cellular material was yielded for the proteomic analysis by scratching the cells from the microscope slides with cell scrapers in the presence of icecold PBS supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Cell Signaling Tecnology), calyculine A (serine/threonine phosphatase inhibitor) 10nM (Cell signalling Tecnology),microcystin-LR 10nM (Enzo Life Sciences).  Shotgun mass spectrometry and label free quantification After reduction and derivatisation, the proteins were digested with trypsin sequence grade (Roche) for 16 h at 37 °C using a protein:trypsin ratio of 1:20. LC-ESI-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Dionex UltiMate 3000 HPLC System with a PicoFrit ProteoPrep C18 column (200 mm, internal diameter of 75 μm) (New Objective, USA). Gradient: 1% ACN in 0.1 % formic acid for 10 min, 1-4 % ACN in 0.1% formic acid for 6 min, 4-30% ACN in 0.1% formic acid for 147 min and 30-50 % ACN in 0.1% formic for 3 min at a flow rate of 0.3 μl/min. The eluate was electrosprayed into an LTQ Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) through a Proxeon nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The LTQ-Orbitrap was operated in positive mode in data-dependent acquisition mode to automatically alternate between a full scan (m/z 350-2000) in the Orbitrap (at resolution 60000, AGC target 1000000) and subsequent CID MS/MS in the linear ion trap of the 20 most intense peaks from full scan (normalized collision energy of 35%, 10 ms activation). Isolation window: 3 Da, unassigned charge states: rejected, charge state 1: rejected, charge states 2+, 3+, 4+: not rejected; dynamic exclusion enabled (60 s, exclusion list size: 200). Four technical replicate analyses of each sample were performed. Data acquisition was controlled by Xcalibur 2.0 and Tune 2.4 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Mass spectra were analysed using MaxQuant software (version 1.3.0.5). The initial maximum allowed mass deviation was set to 6 ppm for monoisotopic precursor ions and 0.5 Da for MS/MS peaks. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, defined as C-terminal to arginine and lysine excluding proline, and a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylcysteine was set as a fixed modification, N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation and Ser/Thr/Tyr phosphorylation as variable modifications. The spectra were searched by the Andromeda search engine against the rat Uniprot sequence database (release 29.05.2013). Protein identification required at least one unique or razor peptide per protein group. Quantification in MaxQuant was performed using the built in XIC-based label free quantification (LFQ) algorithm using fast LFQ. The required false positive rate (FDR) was set to 1% at the peptide, 1% at the protein and 1% at the site-modification level, and the minimum required peptide length was set to 6 amino acids.

### Data Protocol
Statistical analyses were performed using the Perseus software (version 1.4.0.6, www.biochem.mpg.de/mann/tools/). Only proteins/phosphopeptides present and quantified in at least 3 out of 4 technical repeats were considered as positively identified in a sample and used for statistical analyses. An Anova test (Permutation based FDR 0.05) was carried out to identify proteins/phosphopeptides differentially expressed among the different conditions. Focusing on specific comparison, proteins/phosphopeptides were considered differentially expressed if they were present only in one condition or showed significant t-test difference (Post hoc Bonferroni test p value = 0.0167).

### Publication Abstract
Neuronal cells are competent in precisely sensing nanotopographical features of their microenvironment. The perceived microenvironmental information will be "interpreted" by mechanotransductive processes and impacts on neuronal functioning and differentiation. Attempts to influence neuronal differentiation by engineering substrates that mimic appropriate extracellular matrix (ECM) topographies are hampered by the fact that profound details of mechanosensing/-transduction complexity remain elusive. Introducing omics methods into these biomaterial approaches has the potential to provide a deeper insight into the molecular processes and signaling cascades underlying mechanosensing/-transduction but their exigence in cellular material is often opposed by technical limitations of major substrate top-down fabrication methods. Supersonic cluster beam deposition (SCBD) allows instead the bottom-up fabrication of nanostructured substrates over large areas characterized by a quantitatively controllable ECM-like nanoroughness that has been recently shown to foster neuron differentiation and maturation. Exploiting this capacity of SCBD, we challenged mechanosensing/-transduction and differentiative behavior of neuron-like PC12 cells with diverse nanotopographies and/or changes of their biomechanical status, and analyzed their phosphoproteomic profiles in these settings. Versatile proteins that can be associated to significant processes along the mechanotransductive signal sequence, i.e., cell/cell interaction, glycocalyx and ECM, membrane/f-actin linkage and integrin activation, cell/substrate interaction, integrin adhesion complex, actomyosin organization/cellular mechanics, nuclear organization, and transcriptional regulation, were affected. The phosphoproteomic data suggested furthermore an involvement of ILK, mTOR, Wnt, and calcium signaling in these nanotopography- and/or cell mechanics-related processes. Altogether, potential nanotopography-sensitive mechanotransductive signaling hubs participating in neuronal differentiation were dissected.

### Keywords
Shot gun proteomics, Quantitative proteomics, Integrin signalling, Neuronal differentiation, Zirconia nanosubstrates, Mechanotransduction, Biomaterial, Biophysics, Ngf, Pc12 cells, Cell mechanics

### Affiliations
Dipartimento di Medicina Veterinaria, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milano; Italy
University of Milano

### Submitter
gabriella tedeschi

### Lab Head
Dr Gabriella Tedeschi
Dipartimento di Medicina Veterinaria, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milano; Italy


