### Accession
PXD041843

### Title
Viral pIC-pocketing: RSV sequestration of eIF4F Initiation Complexes into bi-phasic biomolecular condensates

### Description
Orthopneumoviruses characteristically form membrane-less cytoplasmic inclusion bodies (IBs) wherein RNA replication and transcription occur. Herein, we report a strategy whereby the orthopneumoviruses sequester various components of the eiF4F Initiation Complex machinery into viral IBs to facilitate translation of their own mRNAs; pIC-pocketing. Mass spectrometry analysis of sub-cellular fractions from RSV-infected cells identified significant modification of the cellular translation machinery; however; interestingly, ribopuromycylation assays showed no changes to global levels of translation. Electron micrographs of RSV-infected cells revealed bi-phasic organisation of IBs; specifically, spherical “droplets” nested within the larger inclusion. Using correlative light and electron microscopy (CLEM), combined with fluorescence in situ hybridisation (FISH), we showed that the observed bi-phasic morphology represents functional compartmentalisation of the IB and that these domains are synonymous with the previously reported inclusion body associated granules (IBAGs). Detailed analysis demonstrated that IBAGs concentrate nascent viral mRNA, the viral M2-1 protein as well as many components of the eIF4F complex, involved in translation initiation. Interestingly, although ribopuromycylation-based imaging indicates the majority of viral mRNA translation likely occurs in the cytoplasm, there was some evidence for intra-IBAG translation, consistent with the likely presence of ribosomes in a subset of IBAGs imaged by electron microscopy. The mechanistic basis for this pathway was subsequently determined; the viral M2-1 protein interacting with eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4G (eIF4G) to facilitate its transport between the cytoplasm and the separate phases of the viral IB. In summary, our data shows that IBs function to spatially regulate early steps in viral translation within a highly selective biphasic liquid organelle.

### Sample Protocol
Tryptic digestion In-gel digestion was similar to Shevchenko et al. Fractionated samples (normalised to 20 µg) were run approx. 1 cm into a 4-12% NuPage gel (Invitrogen) before staining with Coomassie blue (GelCode Blue Safe Protein Stain, Fisher) for 2 hours, then de-stained with ultrapure water. The entire lane length (1mm wide) was excised and cut into smaller pieces (approx. 1mm3) before de-staining with 50 % acetonitrile (v/v) in 25mM ammonium bicarbonate. Proteins were reduced for 10 minutes at 60°C with 10 mM dithiothreitol (Sigma) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and then alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate at RT for 30 minutes in the dark. Gel pieces were washed for 15 minutes in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and then dehydrated with 100% acetonitrile. Acetonitrile was removed and the gel plugs rehydrated with 0.01 µg/µL proteomic grade trypsin (Thermo) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Digestion was performed overnight at 37°C. Peptides were extracted with 50% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA (v/v) and the extracts were reduced to dryness using a centrifugal vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf). Peptides were re-suspended in 3 % (v/v) methanol, 0.1 % (v/v) TFA for analysis by MS.   NanoLC MS ESI MS/MS analysis. LC-MS/MS analysis was similar to that described by Aljabr et al (2019). Peptides were analysed by on-line nanoflow LC using the Ultimate 3000 nano system (Dionex/Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were loaded onto a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 2 cm × 75 μm inner diameter, C18, 3 μm, 100 Å) at 9μl /min with an aqueous solution containing 0.1 % (v/v) TFA and 2% (v/v) acetonitrile. After 3 min, the trap column was set in-line an analytical column (Easy-Spray PepMap® RSLC 50 cm × 75 μm inner diameter, C18, 2 μm, 100 Å) fused to a silica nano-electrospray emitter (Dionex).  The column was operated at a constant temperature of 35°C and the LC system coupled to a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Chromatography was performed with a buffer system consisting of 0.1 % formic acid (buffer A) and 80 % acetonitrile in 0.1 % formic acid (buffer B). The peptides were separated by a linear gradient of 3.8 – 50 % buffer B over 90 minutes at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The Q-Exactive was operated in data-dependent mode with survey scans acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200. Scan range was 300 to 2000m/z. Up to the top 10 most abundant isotope patterns with charge states +2 to +5 from the survey scan were selected with an isolation window of 2.0Th and fragmented by higher energy collisional dissociation with normalized collision energies of 30. The maximum ion injection times for the survey scan and the MS/MS scans were 250 and 50ms, respectively, and the ion target value was set to 1E6 for survey scans and 1E5for the MS/MS scans. MS/MS events were acquired at a resolution of 17,500. Repetitive sequencing of peptides was minimized through dynamic exclusion of the sequenced peptides for 20s.

### Data Protocol
Thermo RAW files were imported into Progenesis QI for proteomics (version 4.1, Nonlinear Dynamics).  Peaks were picked by the software using default settings and filtered to include only peaks with a charge state between +2 and +7. Spectral data were converted into .mgf files and exported for peptide identification. Spectral data were analysed using the PEAKS studio 7 software (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, ON, Canada, Bin Ma et al).  Tandem MS data were searched against Human (Uniprot, UP000005640, December 2019) and HRSV A2 predicted proteomes (Uniprot UP000181262, December 2019) and a contaminant database (cRAP, GPMDB, 2012). The search parameters were as follows: precursor mass tolerance was set to 15ppm and fragment mass tolerance was set as 0.02Da. Two missed tryptic cleavages were permitted. Carbamidomethylation (cysteine) was set as a fixed modification. Oxidation (methionine) was set as variable modification. The false discovery rate was set at 1%. The PEAKS search results were imported back into Progenesis as pepXml files.  Peptide intensities were normalised against the reference run selected by Progenesis and these intensities were used to highlight relative differences in protein expression between sample groups using non-conflicting peptides. Only proteins with 2 or more identified peptides were included in quantitative analysis. Statistical analysis (ANOVA) of the data was performed using Progenesis (with associated FDR adjusted q-value) to identify significantly (q≤ 0.01, and relative fold change ≥ 2) differentially expressed proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Respiratory syncytial virus, Inclusion bodies, Eif4f complex

### Affiliations
The Pirbright Institute, Woking, Surrey, GU24 0NF, UK
Infection Biology

### Submitter
Stuart Armstrong

### Lab Head
Dr Dalan Bailey
The Pirbright Institute, Woking, Surrey, GU24 0NF, UK


