### Accession
PXD008285

### Title
Dynamic Yin-Yang regulation network of O-GlcNAcylation and phosphorylation mediates vernalization response for flowering in winter wheat

### Description
Protein post-translational modification (PTM) increases the functional diversity of the proteome and regulates numerous biological processes in eukaryotes. Two types of PTMs, O-linked-acetyl glucosamine modification (O-GlcNAc) and phosphorylation have been identified on the same amino acid, are considered as Yin-Yang modification for their antagonistic function recently. Vernalization, a prolonged cold exposure promoted flowering, is important for grain yield in temperate cereals, such as winter wheat. O-GlcNAcylation on TaGRP2 and phosphorylation on VER2 are involved in regulation of vernalization response (VRN) genes. However, less is known about how plant senses vernalization with general Yin-Yang modifications. Here we report that altering O-GlcNAc signaling by chemical inhibitors could change the vernalization response and affect flowering transition. Furthermore, we enriched O-GlcNAcylated and phosphorylated peptides from winter wheat plumules at different processing time points during vernalization by Lectin weak affinity chromatography (LWAC) and iTRAQ-TiO2, respectively. In total, about 200 O-GlcNAcylated proteins and 124 differential expressed phosphorylated proteins were identified by Mass Spectrum (MS). Based on GO enrichment, the identified O-GlcNAcylated proteins are mainly involved in response to abiotic stimulus and hormone, metabolic processing and gene expression. While dynamic phosphorylated proteins during vernalization participate in translation, transcription and metabolic processing. Of note, 31 proteins with both phosphorylation and O-GlcNAcylation modification were identified. Among them, TaGRP2 was further confirmed to participate in regulation of vernalization promoted flowering. The global modification profiles and genetic data at specific regulator suggested that the dynamic network of O-GlcNAcylation and phosphorylation on the key nodes regulate vernalization response and mediate flowering in wheat.

### Sample Protocol
Total proteins from the wheat plumules (V0 and V21) were extracted with NitroExtraTM (Cat. PEX-001-250ML, N-Cell Technology) added the inhibitor PUGNAc of OGA . The mixture was thoroughly vortexed for 1 min and centrifugated at 16,000 g and 4 °C for 1 h, The supernatant was pipetted into fresh 10 mL tubes and three fold volumes of cold TCA-acetone were added, -20 ℃ to precipitate 2 h. And then centrifugated at 16,000 g and 4 °C for 30 min, the supernatant was was pipetted into fresh 1.5 mL tubes, then quantified of protein by Bradford method, bovine serumalbumin (BSA) (1 mg/mL) as the standard. The proteins from each sample were digested by trypsin (m/m 1:30), incubated at 37 ℃, 16 h. And the samples for identification of O-GlcNAcylated-proteins were de-glycosylated with PNGase F (P7367-50UN, Sigma) and PNGase A (G0535-.005UN, Sigma). O-linked glycopeptides were enriched from the sample with Glycopeptide Enrichment Kit according to manufacture protocol (72103-3, Millipore). And the sample was analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano System (Thermo Scientific/ Dionex) coupled to LTQ Velos Dual-Pressure Ion Trap (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany)

### Data Protocol
The raw data files of O-GlcNAcylated proteins were converted to MGF (Mascot Generic Format). The MGF files were searched against the UniProt, NCBI and common MS contaminant database using Mascot (Matrix Science) Software. The tolerance for MS1 and MS2 error is 1 Da and 0.5 Da respectively. Caramidomethylation (+57 Da) was added as fixed modification while Oxidation (M) and O-GlcNAc (S/T) were added as variable modification. A maximum of 2 trypsin miss cleavages was allowed.

### Publication Abstract
<i>O</i>-GlcNAcylation and phosphorylation are two posttranslational modifications that antagonistically regulate protein function. However, the regulation of and the cross talk between these two protein modifications are poorly understood in plants. Here we investigated the role of <i>O</i>-GlcNAcylation during vernalization, a process whereby prolonged cold exposure promotes flowering in winter wheat (<i>Triticum aestivum</i>), and analyzed the dynamic profile of <i>O</i>-GlcNAcylated and phosphorylated proteins in response to vernalization. Altering <i>O</i>-GlcNAc signaling by chemical inhibitors affected the vernalization response, modifying the expression of <i>VRN</i> genes and subsequently affecting flowering transition. Over a vernalization time-course, <i>O</i>-GlcNAcylated and phosphorylated peptides were enriched from winter wheat plumules by Lectin weak affinity chromatography and iTRAQ-TiO2, respectively. Subsequent mass spectrometry and gene ontology term enrichment analysis identified 168 <i>O</i>-GlcNAcylated proteins that are mainly involved in responses to abiotic stimulus and hormones, metabolic processing, and gene expression; and 124 differentially expressed phosphorylated proteins that participate in translation, transcription, and metabolic processing. Of note, 31 vernalization-associated proteins were identified that carried both phosphorylation and <i>O</i>-GlcNAcylation modifications, of which the majority (97%) exhibited the coexisting module and the remainder exhibited the potential competitive module. Among these, TaGRP2 was decorated with dynamic <i>O</i>-GlcNAcylation (S87) and phosphorylation (S152) modifications, and the mutation of S87 and S152 affected the binding of TaGRP2 to the RIP3 motif of <i>TaVRN1</i> in vitro. Our data suggest that a dynamic network of <i>O</i>-GlcNAcylation and phosphorylation at key pathway nodes regulate the vernalization response and mediate flowering in wheat.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation modification, Proteomics, O-glcnacylation modification

### Affiliations
Key Laboratory of Plant Molecular Physiology, Institute of Botany, Chinese Academy of Sciences
Institute of Botany, CAS

### Submitter
Shujuan Xu

### Lab Head
Dr Kang Chong
Key Laboratory of Plant Molecular Physiology, Institute of Botany, Chinese Academy of Sciences


