### Accession
PXD012332

### Title
Proteome analysis of xylose metabolism in Rhodotorula toruloides during lipid production 

### Description
Our study is the first investigation of proteome of oleaginous yeast Rhotodorula toruloides during conversion of xylose into lipids. We performed comparative proteomics of R. toruloides during cultivation of two carbon sources: glucose and xylose. Proteome analysis revealed significantly lower levels of ribosomal proteins and translation associated factors in xylose-grown cells as compared to glucose-grown cells. We showed that proteins involved in sugar transport, phospholipid and leucine biosynthesis as well as peroxisomal beta-oxidation and oxidative stress response were differentially regulated in response to carbon source. 

### Sample Protocol
Rhodotorula toruloides was grown in the presence of glucose or xylose during batch cultivation. Samples for proteome analysis were collected at the beginning of cultivation as well as during early exponential phase, late exponential phase and lipid production phase. Protein extraction was followed by generation of tryptic peptides according to the Filter Aided Sample Prep protocol. Tryptic peptides were analyzed using LC-MS/MS. 

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant and Perseus was used for quantitatively analyzing the proteins of Rhodotorula toruloides. 

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Xylose, Lipid production, Rhodotorula toruloides, Proteome

### Affiliations
Systems and Synthetic Biology, Department of Biology and Biological Engineering, Chalmers University of Technology, SE-412 96 Göteborg, Sweden
Chalmers University of Technology

### Submitter
Ievgeniia Tiukova

### Lab Head
Dr Jens Nielsen
Systems and Synthetic Biology, Department of Biology and Biological Engineering, Chalmers University of Technology, SE-412 96 Göteborg, Sweden


