### Accession
PXD018223

### Title
Quantitative Proteomics of Mouse Liver (FTO-KO,WT) in response to DEN injection

### Description
Single nucleotide polymorphisms in the FTO gene encoding a m6A demthylase are associated with obesity and cancer development. However, the functional role of FTO in the developemnt of progression of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) as a proteotypic obesity-associated cancer remains unclear. Here, we have generated mice with hepatic FTO deficiency (FTOL-KO) and subjected them to DEN induced HCC-development. FTOL-KO mice exhibit increased HCC burden. While control mice exhibit a dynamic regulation of FTO upon induction of liver damage, this response is abrogated in mice lacking FTO. Proteomic analyses revealed that liver damage-induced increases in FTO expression promotes m6A-demethylation of  CUL4A reducing its protein expression. Functionally, knockdown of CUL4A restores the increased hepatocyte proliferation observed upon loss of FTO. Collectively, our study reveals a protective role for FTO-dependent dynamic m6A mRNA demethylation of CUL4A in the initiation of HCC development.

### Sample Protocol
50 µg of isolated proteins were precipitated in ice cold acetone overnight at -20 °C. Afterwards, proteins were centrifuged 10 minutes at 15,000 xg at 4 °C and washed once in 80 % acetone. Subsequently, protein pellets were dried at RT for 5 minutes and resuspended in 6 M urea/ 2 M thio-urea in 10 mM HEPES. Prior to digestion, proteins were first reduced using 5 mM TCEP for 1 hour at RT and alkylated with 40 mM CAA for 30 minutes. Protein digestion was performed by incubating 3.5 hours with Lys-C (1:100), subsequently Urea concentration was diluted to 2 M using 50 mM Ammonium bicarbonate and digested overnight at RT with Trypsin (1:100). Prior to peptide loading, samples were acidified with 1:20 formic acid. StageTips were washed once with Methanol (40 g for 1 min), once with buffer B (80 % Acetonitril 0.1 % Formic acid), and twice with buffer A (0.1 % Formic acid). Subsequently, peptides were loaded on StageTips and washed ones with Buffer A and twice with Buffer B. Dried StageTips were stored at 4 °C until elution and mass spectrometry analysis was performed (Rappsilber et al., 2003).  LC-MS/MS instrumentation consisted of a nanoLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled via a nano-electrospray ionization source to a QExactive HF-x mass spectrometer. Peptides were separated using an in-house packed (C18 PoroShell, 2.7 µm, Agilent) 50 cm column (ID: 75 µm) and a binary buffer system: A) 0.1 % formic acid and B) 0.1 % formic acid in 80 % acetonitrile. In total, a gradient of 90 min was used with a linear increase from 4 % B to 32 % B within 75 min followed by an increase to 95 % B and re-equilibration steps.  MS1 Spectra were acquired at a mass resolution of 60000 using an AGC target of 3e6 and a maximum injection time of 20 ms. The mass spectrometer operated in a Top18 data-dependent mode using a MS/MS mass resolution of 7500 (at 200 m/z), a maximum injection time of 11 ms (AGC target 1e5). The isolation window was set to 1.3 m/z. A normalized collision energy of 28 was used.

### Data Protocol
Acquired MS/MS spectra were correlated against the Uniprot Mus Musculus reference proteome (downloaded Jan. 2019) using MaxQuant (Cox and Mann, 2008) and the search engine Andromeda (Cox et al., 2011). MaxQuant settings were used as default and Match-between runs and the MaxLFQ algorithm were enabled. To identify significantly changed proteins a two-sided t-test was performed. To correct for the multiple testing error, the FDR was estimated by a permutation-based approach. FDR < 0.05 using a fudge factor s0 of 0.1 was considered as statistically significant (Tusher et al., 2001). Visualization and anaylsis of data was done in InstantClue (Nolte et al., 2018).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Fto, Cul4a, Liver, Den

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing, 50931 Cologne, Germany
Max-Planck-Institute for Biology of Ageing Department of Mitochondrial Proteostasis Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 9b 50931 Cologne

### Submitter
Hendrik Nolte

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Langer
Max-Planck-Institute for Biology of Ageing Department of Mitochondrial Proteostasis Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 9b 50931 Cologne


