### Accession
PXD035113

### Title
Proteolytic degradation is the culprit behind a bioprosthetic heart valve failure

### Description
Whereas the risk factors for structural valve deterioration (SVD) of glutaraldehyde (GA)- treated bioprosthetic heart valves (BHVs) are well-studied, those responsible for the failure of next-generation BHVs fixed with alternative chemicals remain largely unknown. Here, we collected 11 ethylene glycol diglycidyl ether (EGDE)-treated BHVs excised because of SVD and 5 calcified aortic valves (AVs) replaced with BHVs due to the calcific aortic valve disease (CAVD), further deciphering their proteomic profile.

### Sample Protocol
Here we interrogated 11 EGDE-treated BHVs (KemCor, PeriCor or UniLine, NeoCor) removed from the mitral position during the repeated heart valve replacement because of their failure. KemCor and PeriCor are xenoaortic (porcine) BHVs (XAP-BHVs, n = 5) while UniLine is a xenopericardial (bovine) BHV (XPB-BHVs, n = 5). Upon the excision, BHVs were immersed into the physiological saline and transferred to the laboratory for the gross examination. Following the separation of the leaflets from the frame, degenerated valve segments were excised and total protein was extracted. In addition, we investigated 5 AVs excised during the primary heart valve replacement due to the CAVD. For the protein extraction, we used the part of the leaflets from their base to the free margin. To extract the total protein from the BHVs or AVs, tissues were homogenised in T-PER buffer supplied with Halt protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Quantification of total protein was conducted using BCA Protein Assay Kit. Proteins were cleaned from components of T-PER Buffer by acetone precipitation and were resuspended in 8M Urea/50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Then the protein concentration was measured by Qubit 2.0 fluorometer with QuDye Protein Quantification Kit according to the manufacturer recommendations.  The samples (15 μg) were incubated for 1 h at 37 °C in 5 mM DTT with subsequent incubation in 15 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark at room temperature. Next, the samples were diluted with seven volumes of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and incubated for 16 h at 37 °C with 300 ng of trypsin (ratio 1:50; “Trypsin Gold”). Finally,  the samples were evaporated in Labconco Centrivap Centrifugal Concentrator, dissolved in water with 0.1% formic acid and desalted with C18 ZipTip according to the manufacturer recommendations. Desalted peptides were evaporated and dissolved in 20 μL of water/0.1% formic acid for further LC-MS/MS analysis. Approximate 500 ng of peptides were used for shotgun proteomics analysis by UHPLC-MS/MS with ion mobility in TimsToF Pro mass spectrometer. UHPLC was performed in the two-column separation mode with Acclaim™ PepMap™ 5 mm Trap Cartridge and Bruker Fifteen separation column (C18 ReproSil AQ, 150 mm × 0.75 mm, 1.9 µm, 120 A) in gradient mode with 400 nL/min flow rate and 40 °C. Phase A was water/0.1% formic acid, phase B was acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid. The gradient was from 2% to 30% phase B for 42 min, then to 95% of phase B for 6 min with subsequent wash with 95% phase B for 6 min. Before each sample, trap and separation columns were equilibrated with 10 and 4 column volumes respectively.  The mass spectrometry acquisition was performed in DDA-PASEF mode with 0.5 s cycle in positive polarity with the fragmentation of ions with at least two charges in m/z range from 100 to 1700 and ion mobility range from 0.85 to 1.30 1/K0.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was performed in Peaks Xpro software (a license granted to St. Petersburg State University; Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, ON, Canada) using human protein SwissProt database (https://www.uniprot.org/; accessed on 17 October 2021; organism: Human [9606]; uploaded on 2 March 2021; 20,394 sequences) and protein contaminants database CRAP (https://www.thegpm.org/crap/; version of 4 March 2019; accessed on 17 October 2021). The search parameters were: parent mass error tolerance 10 ppm and fragment mass error tolerance 0.05 ppm, protein and peptide FDR less than 1% and 0.1% respectively, two possible missed cleavage sites, proteins with at least two unique peptides were included for further analysis. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification. Methionine oxidation, acetylation of protein N-term, asparagine, and glutamine deamidation were set as variable modifications. Label-free quantification by peak area under the curve was used for further analysis in R (version 3.6.1; R Core Team, 2019). First of all, we performed qualitative analysis—all proteins presented in three of five biological replicates were identified and the biological groups were compared by Venn diagram with “VennDiagram” package. Then the proteins with NA in more than 25% of samples were removed and imputation of missed values by k-nearest neighbors was performed by the “impute” package. Then log-transformation and quantile normalization with further analysis of differential expression by “limma” package were performed. Finally, we performed clasterization of samples by sparse partial least squares discriminant analysis in the package “MixOmics”. “ggplot2” and “EnhancedVolcano” packages were used for visualization.

### Publication Abstract
Background Whereas the risk factors for structural valve degeneration (SVD) of glutaraldehyde-treated bioprosthetic heart valves (BHVs) are well studied, those responsible for the failure of BHVs fixed with alternative next-generation chemicals remain largely unknown. This study aimed to investigate the reasons behind the development of SVD in ethylene glycol diglycidyl ether-treated BHVs. Methods and Results Ten ethylene glycol diglycidyl ether-treated BHVs excised because of SVD, and 5 calcified aortic valves (AVs) replaced with BHVs because of calcific AV disease were collected and their proteomic profile was deciphered. Then, BHVs and AVs were interrogated for immune cell infiltration, microbial contamination, distribution of matrix-degrading enzymes and their tissue inhibitors, lipid deposition, and calcification. In contrast with dysfunctional AVs, failing BHVs suffered from complement-driven neutrophil invasion, excessive proteolysis, unwanted coagulation, and lipid deposition. Neutrophil infiltration was triggered by an asymptomatic bacterial colonization of the prosthetic tissue. Neutrophil elastase, myeloblastin/proteinase 3, cathepsin G, and matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs; neutrophil-derived MMP-8 and plasma-derived MMP-9), were significantly overexpressed, while tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases 1/2 were downregulated in the BHVs as compared with AVs, together indicative of unbalanced proteolysis in the failing BHVs. As opposed to other proteases, MMP-9 was mostly expressed in the disorganized prosthetic extracellular matrix, suggesting plasma-derived proteases as the primary culprit of SVD in ethylene glycol diglycidyl ether-treated BHVs. Hence, hemodynamic stress and progressive accumulation of proteases led to the extracellular matrix degeneration and dystrophic calcification, ultimately resulting in SVD. Conclusions Neutrophil- and plasma-derived proteases are responsible for the loss of BHV mechanical competence and need to be thwarted to prevent SVD.

### Keywords
Human, Timstof pro, Calcific aortic valve disease, Pasef, Bioprosthetic heart valve

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Molecular, Translational and Digital Medicine, Research Institute for Complex Issues of Cardiovascular Diseases, Kemerovo, Russia
Emmanuel Levy Lab, Dept. of Chemical and Structural Biology, Weizmann Institute of Science

### Submitter
Arseniy Lobov

### Lab Head
Dr Anton G. Kutikhin
Laboratory of Molecular, Translational and Digital Medicine, Research Institute for Complex Issues of Cardiovascular Diseases, Kemerovo, Russia


