### Accession
PXD001450

### Title
Characterization and quantification of chicken eggshell proteins during pivotal events of shell calcification

### Description
Gallus gallus avian eggshell is composed of 95% calcium carbonate on calcitic form and of 3.5% extracellular organic matrix (proteins, polysaccharides and proteoglycans). This highly ordered structure with a polycrystalline organization result of the control of mineral deposition by the organic matrix components in the lumen of the uterus. This interaction leads to the eggshell ultrastructure and consequently contributes to its resulting mechanical properties. This study used GeLC MS/MS analyses combined to label free quantitative analysis to identify and quantify matrix proteins at the pivotal step of the calcification process (amorphous calcium carbonate deposit, amorphous calcium carbonate transformation into calcite, large calcite crystal units and rapid growth phase). The study gave new insight on proteins playing crucial role in the biomineralization of the shell.

### Sample Protocol
A total of 24 individual eggshell protein extracts were used. Six samples collected at the same time point were pooled in equal amounts for each time point (5 hours post ovulation. (p.o.), 6 hp.o. , 7h p.o. and 16h p.o.). The four pooled samples were fractionated on a 4-20% SDS-PAGE gel. Proteins were stained with Coomassie blue and the entire SDS-PAGE lanes were sectioned into 15 bands for each individual pooled sample. Excised proteins were in-gel digested with bovine trypsin and analyzed by nanoscale liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (nano LC-MS/MS  using LTQ velos Orbitrap mass spectrometer).

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were converted to MGF with Proteome Discoverer software (version 1.3; Thermo Fischer Scientific, San Jose, USA). Precursor mass range of 350-5000 Da and signal to noise ratio of 1.5 were the criteria used for generation of peak lists. In order to identify the proteins, the peptide and fragment masses obtained were matched automatically against the chordata section of nr NCBI database (2132453 sequences, downloaded on 2013/05/13). MS/MS ion searches were performed using MASCOT Daemon and search engine (version 2.3; Matrix Science, London, UK). The parameters used for database searches include trypsin as a protease with allowed two missed cleavage, carbamidomethylcysteine (+57 Da), oxidation of methionine (+16) and N-terminal protein acetylation (+42) as variable modifications. The tolerance of the ions was set to 5 ppm for parent and 0.8 Da for fragment ion matches. Mascot results obtained from the target and decoy databases searches were incorporated to Scaffold 3 software (version 3.4, Proteome Software, Portland, USA). To perform label-free quantitative proteomic analyses based on spectral counting method, Scaffold 3 Q+ software (version 3.6, Proteome Software, Portland, USA) was used to quantify the proteins at the four events of mineralization process.

### Publication Abstract
Eggshell is a bioceramic composed of 95% calcium carbonate mineral and 3.5% organic matrix. Its structural organisation is controlled by its organic matrix. We have used quantitative proteomics to study four key stages of shell mineralisation: 1) widespread deposition of amorphous calcium carbonate (ACC), 2) ACC transformation into crystalline calcite aggregates, 3) formation of larger calcite crystal units and 4) development of a columnar structure with preferential calcite crystal orientation. This approach explored the distribution of 216 shell matrix proteins found at the four stages. Variations in abundance according to these calcification events were observed for 175 proteins. A putative function related to the mineralisation process was predicted by bioinformatics for 77 of them and was further characterised. We confirmed the important role of lysozyme, ovotransferrin, ovocleidin-17 and ovocleidin-116 for shell calcification process, characterised major calcium binding proteins (EDIL3, ALB, MFGE8, NUCB2), and described novel proteoglycans core proteins (GPC4, HAPLN3). We suggest that OVAL and OC-17 play a role in the stabilisation of ACC. Finally, we report proteins involved in the regulation of proteins driving the mineralisation. They correspond to numerous molecular chaperones including CLU, PPIB and OCX21, protease and protease inhibitors including OVM and CST3, and regulators of phosphorylation.

### Keywords
Proteins, Eggshell, Organic matrix, Quantification, Lc-ms/ms, Chicken

### Affiliations
INRA-Nouzilly-PRC
Equipe "Fonction et regulation des proteines de l'oeuf" INRA UR83 Recherches avicoles F-37380 Nouzilly

### Submitter
G HARICHAUX

### Lab Head
Dr Joel GAUTRON
Equipe "Fonction et regulation des proteines de l'oeuf" INRA UR83 Recherches avicoles F-37380 Nouzilly


