### Accession
PXD039200

### Title
An affinity-directed phosphatase (AdPhosphatase) system  for targeted protein dephosphorylation

### Description
Reversible protein phosphorylation, catalysed by protein kinases and phosphatases, is a  fundamental process that controls protein function and intracellular signalling. Failure of  phospho-control accounts for many human diseases. While a kinase phosphorylates multiple  substrates, a substrate is often phosphorylated by multiple kinases. This renders phospho control at the substrate level challenging, as it requires inhibition of multiple kinases, which  would thus affect other kinase substrates. Here, we describe the development and application  of the affinity-directed phosphatase (AdPhosphatase) system for targeted dephosphorylation  of specific phospho-substrates. By deploying the Protein Phosphatase 1 or 2A catalytic  subunits conjugated to an antigen-stabilised anti-GFP nanobody, we can promote the  dephosphorylation of two independent phospho-proteins, FAM83D or ULK1, knocked in with  GFP-tags using CRISPR/Cas9, with exquisite specificity. By redirecting protein phosphatases  to neo-substrates through nanobody-mediated proximity, AdPhosphatase can alter the phospho-status and function of target proteins and thus, offers a new modality for potential  drug discovery approaches.

### Sample Protocol
Interactome analysis  Cells were first lysed in NP-40 lysis buffer. Filtered extracts (5-10 mg protein) were incubated with 10 μl of appropriate beads for specified IP for 4 hr at 4°C. Following incubation, beads were washed 3x. Bead-bound proteins were denatured and eluted in 2x LDS for 5 min at 95°C. The filtered eluate was loaded onto a 4-12% SDS-PAGE. Gels were stained with InstantBlue.  Gel pieces were washed once in HPLC grade water, and then shrank in anhydrous acetonitrile (ACN) with gentle shaking. The gel pieces were reduced with 5 mM DTT in 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0 for 20 min at 65°C, followed by alkylated with 20 mM IAA in 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0 for 20 min at room temperature. Gel pieces were then shrunk again in ACN and re-swollen in 50 mM TEAB pH 8.0 containing 5 μg/ml trypsin for 16 hr at 30°C for digestion. An equivalent volume of ACN was added to the digest for 15 min and the supernatant was collected. Gel pieces were then re-swollen with 0.1% TFA for 5 min with shaking, and peptides were extracted twice with ACN for 5 min each with shaking. After each extraction, the supernatant was collected. Digested peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid and injected into a U3000 RSLC HPLC system coupled to a Orbitrap Lumos. Peptides were enriched on Trap column (2 cm x 100 μM, C18 5 μM, 100 Å) and subsequently separated on a 15 cm EasySpray column equilibrated with a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Data was acquired in the DDA mode. Full scan spectra (m/z 400-1,600) were acquired in the orbitrap with resolution set to 60,000 at m/z 400. The 20 most intense ions, above a specified minimum signal threshold of 2,000, were fragmented by collision induced dissociation and recorded in the linear ion trap automatic gain control target; 30,000, Msn AGC target; 5,000).  Global proteome and phospho-proteome analysis : Cells were lysed in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0, protease inhibitors and phosphatase inhibitors) by Bioruptor® sonication. Lysates were clarified by centrifugation. Equal protein from each condition were reduced with 5 mM DTT at room temperature for 30 min and alkylated with 20 mM IAA in the dark at room temperature for 15 min. Samples were then digested with Lys-C at 30°C for 4 hr. Samples were then diluted to a urea concentration of 1.5 M and were then digested with trypsin (1:20) at 30°C for 16 hr. The digest was quenched with the addition of 1% FA (v/v) and samples were desalted on 200 mg SepPak C18 cartridges and dried.  Peptides were resuspended in 50 mM TEAB and labelled using TMT labels as per the manufacturer’s instructions. Following label check by LC-MS/MS, the labelling reaction was quenched with 5% hydroxylamine for 15 min at room temperature. Labelled peptides from each condition were pooled together and dried. Pooled peptides were separated by bRP chromatography fractionation with Ultimate 3000 HPLC system operating at 569 μl/min with two buffers: buffer A (10 mM ammonium formate, pH 10) and buffer B (80% ACN, 10 mM ammonium formate, pH 10). Peptides were resuspended in 100 μl of buffer A and separated on a C18 reverse phase column. A total of 96 fractions were collected. 10% of each fraction were concentrated into 12 fractions for proteome analysis, whilst the remaining 90% were used for IMAC-based phospho-peptide enrichment. Each concentrated fraction was then dried by SpeedVac.  IMAC beads were prepared from Ni-NTA superflow agarose beads that were stripped of Nickel with 100 mM EDTA and incubated in an aqueous solution of 10 mM FeCl3. Dried peptide fractions were reconstituted to a concentration of 0.5 μg/μl in 80% ACN/0.1% TFA. Peptide mixtures were enriched for phosphorylated peptides with 10 μl IMAC beads for 40 min. Enriched IMAC beads were loaded on C18 stage tips. Stage tips were equilibrated with methanol followed by 50% ACN/0.1% FA then 1% FA. The beads with enriched peptide were loaded onto C18 stage tips and washed with 80% ACN/0.1% TFA. Phosphorylated peptides were eluted from IMAC beads with 500 mM dibasic sodium phosphate, pH 7.0. Peptides were analysed on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer interfaced with Dionex Ultimate 3000 liquid chromatography system. Peptides were separated on an analytical column (75 μm x 50 cm, RSLC C18) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min using a step gradient of 5-7% solvent B (90% ACN/0.1% FA) for the first 10 min, followed by 7-35% up to 150 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in a DDA mode. A full scan (from m/z 375-1500) was acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000 at 200 m/z. The AGC target for MS1 was set as standard and ion filling time set at 50 ms. The most intense ions with charge state ≥2 were isolated and fragmented using HCD fragmentation with 38% normalised collision energy and detected at a mass resolution of 50,000 at 200 m/z. The AGC target for MS2 was set as standard and ion filling time set at 86 ms, while dynamic exclusion was set for 60 s.

### Data Protocol
Interactome analysis  Data was searched against the SwissProt human database with variable modifications allowing for oxidation of Met, phosphorylation of Ser/Thr or Tyr residues, along with oxidation or dioxidation modifications. Carbamidomethylation of Cys was set as a fixed modification. Error tolerances were set to 10 ppm (parts per million) for MS1 and 0.6 Da for MS2. Data analysis was performed using Scaffold v 4.4.6 (Proteome Software).  Global proteome and phospho-proteome analysis  The mass spectrometry raw data were searched using Sequest HT search engines with Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Phosphopeptide-enriched fractions from each replicate were searched against the uniprot protein database . The search parameter used as carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues and TMT of lysine and N terminal as a fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine, the phosphorylations of serine, threonine and tyrosine, were selected as dynamic modifications. Trypsin was set as the protease and a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm, and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da was allowed. All peptide-spectrum matches (PSM) were identified at a 1% false-discovery rate (FDR). The probability of phosphorylation for each site was calculated by the phosphoRS node in Proteome Discoverer. Only phospho-peptides with >75% site localisation probability were considered for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Reversible protein phosphorylation, catalyzed by protein kinases and phosphatases, is a fundamental process that controls protein function and intracellular signaling. Failure of phospho-control accounts for many human diseases. While a kinase phosphorylates multiple substrates, a substrate is often phosphorylated by multiple kinases. This renders phospho-control at the substrate level challenging, as it requires inhibition of multiple kinases, which would thus affect other kinase substrates. Here, we describe the development and application of the affinity-directed phosphatase (AdPhosphatase) system for targeted dephosphorylation of specific phospho-substrates. By deploying the Protein Phosphatase 1 or 2A catalytic subunits conjugated to an antigen-stabilized anti-GFP nanobody, we can promote the dephosphorylation of two independent phospho-proteins, FAM83D or ULK1, knocked in with GFP-tags using CRISPR-Cas9, with exquisite specificity. By redirecting protein phosphatases to neo-substrates through nanobody-mediated proximity, AdPhosphatase can alter the phospho-status and function of target proteins and thus, offers a new modality for potential drug discovery approaches.

### Keywords
Affinity-directed phosphatase; adphosphatase; targeted dephosphorylation; ppp1ca;ppp2ca; nanobody; ulk1; fam83d

### Affiliations
University of Dundee
Professor Gopal Sapkota  MRC Investigator  MRC Protein Phosphorylation & Ubiquitylation Unit  Sir James Black Centre  School of Life Sciences  University of Dundee  Dundee DD1 5EH   United Kingdom  

### Submitter
Gopal Sapkota

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Gopal Sapkota
Professor Gopal Sapkota  MRC Investigator  MRC Protein Phosphorylation & Ubiquitylation Unit  Sir James Black Centre  School of Life Sciences  University of Dundee  Dundee DD1 5EH   United Kingdom  


