### Accession
PXD026729

### Title
In-depth Profiling and Quantification of the Acetylproteome in Hepatocellular Carcinoma with a Trapped Ion Mobility Mass Spectrometer

### Description
In this study, we employed an integrated proteomics and acetyl-proteomics strategy to characterize of 8 tumors and 8 matched normal adjacent tissues (NATs) with 4D proteomics technology. Proteomics analysis identified a total of 6551 proteins, of which 5411 proteins were quantified across all samples. A total of 8789 acetylation sites on 2348 proteins were identified, of which 5112 sites of 1620 proteins contained quantitative information.

### Sample Protocol
Sample was grinded by liquid nitrogen into cell powder and then transferred to a 5mL centrifuge tube. Then, samples were disrupted using four volumes of lysis buffer (1% Triton X-100, 1% protease inhibitor cocktail III , 3 μM TSA and 50 mM NAM  followed by sonication three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor . The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 12000g at 4 °C for 10 min . Finally, the supernatant was collected and protein concentration was measured with BCA kit. Take an equal amount of each sample protein for enzymatic hydrolysis, and adjust the volume to the same with the lysis buffer. The sample was slowly added to the final concentration of 20% TCA vortexed to mix, and precipitated at 4°C for 2 hours. Centrifuge at 4500g for 5min, and discard the supernatant, and wash the precipitate 2-3 times with pre-cooled acetone. After drying the pellet, add TEAB  with a final concentration of 200 mM, and ultrasonically disperse the pellet. Trypsin  was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight. The sample was reduced with 5 mM DTT for 60 min at 37°C and alkylated with 11 mM IAM for 45 min at room temperature in darkness. Peptides were desalted with Strata X SPE column and then peptide concentration was measured with NanoPhotometer . Equal peptide of each sample was dried by vacuum centrifugation. It needs 2 mg peptide for acetylation analysis and 5 μg for 4D-label free analysis. For acetylation, tryptic peptides dissolved in NETN buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA , 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0) were incubated with pre-washed antibody beads at 4°C overnight with gentle shaking. Then the beads were washed four times with NETN buffer and twice with water. The bound peptides were eluted from the beads with 0.1% TFA . Finally, the eluted fractions were combined and vacuum-dried. For LC-MS/MS analysis, the resulting peptides were desalted with C18 ZipTips  according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Peptides were analyzed by nano-LC-MS/MS using a NanoElute UHPLC system coupled online to a hybrid trapped ion mobility spectrometry - quadrupole time of flight mass spectrometer  with a modified nano-electrospray ion source.

### Data Protocol
The tandem mass spectra were searched against the reviewed human UniProt database  using MaxQuant. Trypsin/P was selected as the proteolytic enzyme, and two missed cleavages sites were allowed. For proteomics, carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. For acetyl-proteomics, carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation and acetylation on lysine as variable modifications. The positions of acetylation sites were determined by site probabilities calculated by PTM score, and localization probability >0.75 was used as cutoff. Peptides with the minimum of seven amino-acid length were considered and the required FDR was set to 1% at the peptide and protein level. The maximum number of peptide modifications is set to 5. Match Between Run was applied with default parameters. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in first search and 20 ppm in main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Quantification in MaxQuant was performed using the Label Free Quantification algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the third most common cause of cancer-related death worldwide with limited therapeutic options. Comprehensive investigation of protein posttranslational modifications in HCC is still limited. Lysine acetylation is one of the most common types of posttranslational modification involved in many cellular processes and plays crucial roles in the regulation of cancer. In this study, we analyzed the proteome and K-acetylome in eight pairs of HCC tumors and normal adjacent tissues using a timsTOF Pro instrument. As a result, we identified 9219 K-acetylation sites in 2625 proteins, of which 1003 sites exhibited differential acetylation levels between tumors and normal adjacent tissues. Interestingly, many novel tumor-specific K-acetylation sites were characterized, for example, filamin A (K865), filamin B (K697), and cofilin (K19), suggesting altered activities of these cytoskeleton-modulating molecules, which may contribute to tumor metastasis. In addition, we observed an overall suppression of protein K-acetylation in HCC tumors, especially for enzymes from various metabolic pathways, for example, glycolysis, tricarboxylic acid cycle, and fatty acid metabolism. Moreover, the expression of deacetylase sirtuin 2 (SIRT2) was upregulated in HCC tumors, and its role of deacetylation in HCC cells was further explored by examining the impact of SIRT2 overexpression on the proteome and K-acetylome in Huh7 HCC cells. SIRT2 overexpression reduced K-acetylation of proteins involved in a wide range of cellular processes, including energy metabolism. Furthermore, cellular assays showed that overexpression of SIRT2 in HCC cells inhibited both glycolysis and oxidative phosphorylation. Taken together, our findings provide valuable information to better understand the roles of K-acetylation in HCC and to treat this disease by correcting the aberrant acetylation patterns.

### Keywords
Acetyl-proteomics, Timstof pro, Cellular metabolism, Pasef, Non-histone, Proteomics, Hepatocellular carcinoma, Sirt2

### Affiliations
School of Pharmaceutical Science and Technology, Tianjin University
tianjin university

### Submitter
jia xu

### Lab Head
Dr Ruibing Chen
School of Pharmaceutical Science and Technology, Tianjin University


