### Accession
PXD012191

### Title
Cx37 Phosphorylation and cell cycle regulation

### Description
Using alanine and aspartate substitutions to mimic dephosphorylated and phosphorylated Cx37, respectively, we showed that induced expression of Cx37 in rat insulinoma cells could arrest cell cycle progression, support cell cycle progression or cause cell death in a phosphosite specific manner. In the current study, we induced Cx37 expression for 24h in 80-90% confluent Rin cells, which arrests their proliferation for many days, and determined by mass spectrometry which sites in Cx37 were phosphorylated under control conditions, following stimulation of PKC with phorbol ester, or following inhibition of PKC with bis-indolylmaleimide. The results consistently showed phosphorylation of serine 319, a high probability target for CMGC kinases. Serines 275, 321 and 328 were also identified as phosphorylated residues; these sites are also high probability targets of growth factor activated kinases. No quantitative differences between treatment groups were identified. Since growth arrest was the phenotype displayed by the cells from which the Cx37 isolated, it seems likely that S319, when phosphorylated, promotes growth arrest. Single site mutations of Serines 275, 321 and 328 also alter growth phenotype: S275D induces cell death at low cell densities but has no detectable effect on Rin cell proliferation at high cell densities; S321D induces cell death at all cell densities; and both S328A and S238D induce cell death at all densities. These results support the conclusion that Cx37 regulates growth phenotype in a phosphorylation-site specific manner and suggest that intra-molecular interactions are modulated by differential phosphorylation in the carboxy terminal domain.

### Sample Protocol
In-gel digestion. Proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE and stained with Bio-Safe Coomassie G-250 Stain. The single band corresponding to the location of the individual protein on the SDS-PAGE gel was excised. The gel slices were subjected to trypsin digestion and the resulting peptides were purified by C18-based desalting exactly as previously described (Kruse, R., Krantz, J., Barker, N., Coletta, R. L., Rafikov, R., Luo, M., Hojlund, K., Mandarino, L. J., and Langlais, P. R. (2017) Characterization of the CLASP2 Protein Interaction Network Identifies SOGA1 as a Microtubule-Associated Protein. Mol Cell Proteomics 16, 1718-1735). The dried peptides were resuspended in 6 ml of 0.1% FA (v/v) followed by sonication for 2 min. 2.5 ml of the final sample was then analyzed by mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were extracted from Xcalibur ‘RAW’ files and charge states were assigned using the ProteoWizard 2.1.x msConvert script using the default parameters (Chambers, M. C., Maclean, B., Burke, R., Amodei, D., Ruderman, D. L., Neumann, S., Gatto, L., Fischer, B., Pratt, B., Egertson, J., Hoff, K., Kessner, D., Tasman, N., Shulman, N., Frewen, B., Baker, T. A., Brusniak, M. Y., Paulse, C., Creasy, D., Flashner, L., Kani, K., Moulding, C., Seymour, S. L., Nuwaysir, L. M., Lefebvre, B., Kuhlmann, F., Roark, J., Rainer, P., Detlev, S., Hemenway, T., Huhmer, A., Langridge, J., Connolly, B., Chadick, T., Holly, K., Eckels, J., Deutsch, E. W., Moritz, R. L., Katz, J. E., Agus, D. B., MacCoss, M., Tabb, D. L., and Mallick, P. (2012) A cross-platform toolkit for mass spectrometry and proteomics. Nat Biotechnol 30, 918-920). The fragment mass spectra were then searched against the mus musculus SwissProt_2018_01 database (16,965 entries) using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.4) using the default probability cut-off score. The search variables that were used were: 10 ppm mass tolerance for precursor ion masses and 0.5 Da for product ion masses; digestion with trypsin; a maximum of two missed tryptic cleavages; variable modifications of oxidation of methionine and phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine. Cross-correlation of Mascot search results with X! Tandem was accomplished with Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.8.7; Proteome Software, Portland, OR, USA). Probability assessment of peptide assignments and protein identifications were made through the use of Scaffold. Only peptides with ≥ 95% probability were considered.

### Publication Abstract
Differential phosphorylation of the carboxyl-terminus of connexin 37 (Cx37-CT) regulates phenotypic switching between cell growth phenotypes (cell death, cell cycle arrest, proliferation). The specific phosphorylation events in the Cx37-CT that are necessary for these growth regulatory effects are currently unknown. Through the combined use of deletion and site specific (de)phospho-mimetic Cx37-CT mutants, our data suggest a phosphorylation-dependent interaction between the mid-tail (aa 273&#x207b;317) and end-tail (aa 318&#x207b;333) portions of the Cx37-CT that regulates cell survival. As detected by mass spectrometry, Cx37 was phosphorylated at serines 275, 321, and 328; phosphomimetic mutations of these sites resulted in cell death when expressed in rat insulinoma cells. Alanine substitution at S328, but not at S275 or S321, also triggered cell death. Cx37-S275D uniquely induced the death of only low density, non-contact forming cells, but neither hemichannel open probability nor channel conductance distinguished death-inducing mutants. As channel function is necessary for cell death, together the data suggest that the phosphorylation state of the Cx37-CT controls an intra-domain interaction within the CT that modifies channel function and induces cell death.

### Keywords
Gap junction; growth arrest; proliferation; cell death; differential phosphorylation

### Affiliations
Department of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, University of Arizona College of Medicine
University of Arizona

### Submitter
Paul Langlais

### Lab Head
Dr Paul R. Langlais
Department of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, University of Arizona College of Medicine


