### Accession
PXD032047

### Title
Mimicking tumor cell heterogeneity of colorectal cancer in a patient-derived organoid-fibroblast model

### Description
Patient derived organoids (PDOs) have been established as a 3D culture model which closely recapitulates the in vivo tumor biology. However, one limitation of this culture model is the lack of tumor microenvironment which has a significant role in tumor progression and drug response. To address this, we established and molecularly characterized a novel 3D co-culture model of colorectal cancer (CRC) based on PDOs and patient matched fibroblasts. Both normal and cancer associated fibroblasts, NFs and CAFs respectively, were able to support organoid growth without addition of niche factors to the media. Additionally, co-cultures showed closer resemblance to primary patient material than organoid mono-cultures as evaluated by histology. Finally, RNA gene expression signatures of tumor cells and fibroblasts isolated from mono- or co-cultures demonstrated that co-cultures support greater cell type heterogeneity. In this proteomics dataset we compared pairs of NFs and CAFs derived from five patients. Collectively, we present a newly established human derived organoid-fibroblast model which, closely recapitulates in vivo tumor heterogeneity and involves the tumor microenvironment.

### Sample Protocol
Fibroblasts were grown in 10 cm dishes in EGM2-MV medium (PromoCell Cat# C22022) (, washed once with ice cold PBS and lyzed in 150 ul 8M urea buffer (8 M urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 150 mM NaCl, 1mM PMSF, 1x protease inhibitor cocktail Roche Cat#11836153001, 5mM sodium butyrate).  To the lysate 1 µl benzonase was added and the samples were incubated for 5 min at room temperature. Samples were sonicated for 30 sec and the lysate was centrifuged for 10 mins at max speed. Proteins were precipitated with four volumes ice-cold acetone at -20°C overnight. After centrifugation at 10000 x g for 30 min the supernatant was discarded and the remaining pellets washed with 150 µL 80% ice-cold acetone. After centrifugation at 10000 x g for 5 min the supernatant was discarded and remaining acetone allowed to evaporate. The protein pellet was resuspended in 50 µL 8 M urea in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and the protein concentration determined using a Bradford assay (BioRad). Proteins were reduced using 10 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at room temperature, alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the dark, and remaining iodoacetamide quenched with addition of 5 mM dithiothreitol. Aliquots of 60 µg protein were diluted to 4 M urea using 50 mM ammoniumbicarbonate, then 600 ng Lys-C were added and the samples incubated at 25°C for 2 h. After dilution to 1 M urea 600 ng trypsin were added and the samples incubated at 37°C overnight. The samples were acidified with 0.5 % trifluoroacetic acid and one fifth of each sample was desalted using C18 Stagetips (REF). Sample quality and concentration was determined by injecting 3% of each sample on a HPLC-UV system at 214 nm, using a monolithic C18 column for peptide separation.  An estimated 600 ng peptides were separated on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano-flow chromatography system (Thermo-Fisher), using a pre-column for sample loading (Acclaim PepMap C18, 2 cm × 0.1 mm, 5 μm, Thermo-Fisher), and a C18 analytical column (Acclaim PepMap C18, 50 cm × 0.75 mm, 2 μm, Thermo-Fisher), applying a segmented linear gradient from 2% to 35% and finally 80% solvent B (80 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid; solvent A 0.1 % formic acid) at a flow rate of 230 nL/min over 120 min. Eluting peptides were analyzed on a Q Exactive HF-X Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher), which was coupled to the column with a nano-spray ion-source using coated emitter tips (PepSep, MSWil). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode (DDA), survey scans were obtained in a mass range of 375-1500 m/z with lock mass activated, at a resolution of 120k at 200 m/z and an AGC target value of 3E6. The 25 most intense ions were selected with an isolation width of 1.2 m/z, fragmented in the HCD cell at 28% collision energy and the spectra recorded for max. 54 ms at a target value of 1E5 and a resolution of 15k. Peptides with a charge of +2 to +6 were included for fragmentation, the peptide match and the exclude isotopes features enabled, and selected precursors were dynamically excluded from repeated sampling for 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using the MaxQuant software package (version 1.6.0.16, Tyanova et al., 2016) and the Uniprot human reference proteome (www.uniprot.org, release 2018_08), as well as a database of most common contaminants. The search was performed with full trypsin specificity and a maximum of two missed cleavages at a protein and peptide spectrum match false discovery rate of 1%. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues were set as fixed, oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. Label-free quantification the “match between runs” feature and the LFQ function were activated - all other parameters were left at default.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Normal fibroblast, Colorectal cancer, Cancer associated fibroblast

### Affiliations
Department of Pathology, Medical University of Vienna, Austria
Mass Spectrometry Facility, Max Perutz Labs Vienna, University of Vienna, Vienna Biocenter, Dr.-Bohr-Gasse 7, 1030 Vienna

### Submitter
Markus Hartl

### Lab Head
Dr Gerda Egger
Department of Pathology, Medical University of Vienna, Austria


