### Accession
PXD020987

### Title
Quantitative LC-MS/MS Proteomics of human small intestine

### Description
The objective was to determine the expression of a wide range proteins pertinent to metabolism and disposition of chemicals and nutrients in the intestinal epithelium. Ileum and jejunum biopsy specimens were obtained from 16 patients undergoing gastrointestinal elective surgery. Mucosal fractions were prepared and analysed using targeted and global proteomic approaches.  A total of 29 enzymes, 32 transporters, 6 tight junction proteins, 2 adhesion proteins, alkaline phosphatase, thioredoxin, 5 markers and 1 regulatory protein were quantified; 60 for the first time.

### Sample Protocol
After informed consent, human small intestinal tissues were obtained from 16 patients undergoing elective surgery at Salford Royal NHS Foundation Trust, UK.  The human intestinal samples were taken from macroscopically normal regions, at least 5 cm from obviously diseased bowel. Following sample removal, mucosal tissue was rapidly separated from muscle and serosal layers by blunt dissection. Samples of mucosa (~1 cm2) were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C for subsequent analysis.  Snap-frozen tissue samples were ground to powder using a cooled mortar and pestle, and resuspended in buffer containing 150 mM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS, 50 mM Tris base pH 8.0, with protease inhibitors (0.5mM phenylmethanesulfonylfluoride and 50µl/ml Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Sigma Aldrich, Poole, UK)). Following incubation and mixing at 4oC for 30 min, the extract was centrifuged at 14,000 g for 5 min at 4oC. The supernatant was removed and stored in aliquots at -80oC. Protein concentrations were determined using a Bradford assay (Bio-Rad). Briefly, two technical replicates for each of the 16 human small intestinal samples were prepared, spiked with QconCAT,19 and subjected to the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol.  Over 5000 proteins were identified.

### Data Protocol
All data analysis was performed using MaxQuant version 1.6.7.0 using a customised database, which included human UniprotKB proteome (UP000005640), containing 71,790 sequences (Oct 2019), supplemented with forward and reverse sequences, in addition to 5 in-house QconCAT sequences (designed for the analysis of human enzymes and transporters) and 4 sequences of standard proteins (ALBU_BOVIN, MYG_HORSE, CYC_BOVIN and ADH1_YEAST).  Mass tolerance of 5 ppm was used for precursor ions and 0.5 Dalton for fragment ions. The search included cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification. Peptide methionine oxidation was set as a variable modification. Up to one missed cleavage was allowed for trypsin/P digestion. Peptide false discovery rate was set as 1% and peptides with a minimum of 7 amino acid length were considered. Evidence data files were used for targeted and global proteomic data analysis.  After initial processing the MaxQuant data were stripped of protein identifiers and rebuilt.  A global razor was constructed by assigning any non-unique peptides to as many proteins for which unique peptides could be detected.  This was done on a dataset by dataset basis, so that if a unique peptide was detected in one or more samples in any dataset, non-unique peptides could be used as a basis for quantification in the other samples.  The razor involves first ranking proteins by number of detected peptides and then by order in “Human Proteome CAPKR10”.  This bespoke database (21234 sequences) was constructed from the reduced (one sequence, one protein) Uniprot Human Protein fasta file, available at with additional proteins (from the full Uniprot database used by MaxQuant) added when they are detected in our samples.  Finally, this database is organized so that intact proteins are favoured over fragments and cDNA-derived proteins, and long primary sequences are favoured over short sequences.  This database contains a small number of single nucleotide polymorphic variants of the ABC transporters ABCB3 and ABCC6.

### Publication Abstract
ABC transporters (ATP-binding cassette transporter) traffic drugs and their metabolites across membranes, making ABC transporter expression levels a key factor regulating local drug concentrations in different tissues and individuals. Yet, quantification of ABC transporters remains challenging because they are large and low-abundance transmembrane proteins. Here, we analysed 200 samples of crude and membrane-enriched fractions from human liver, kidney, intestine, brain microvessels and skin, by label-free quantitative mass spectrometry. We identified 32 (out of 48) ABC transporters: ABCD3 was the most abundant in liver, whereas ABCA8, ABCB2/TAP1 and ABCE1 were detected in all tissues. Interestingly, this atlas unveiled that ABCB2/TAP1 may have TAP2-independent functions in the brain and that biliary atresia (BA) and control livers have quite different ABC transporter profiles. We propose that meaningful biological information can be derived from a direct comparison of these data sets.

### Keywords
Human, Jejunum, Quantitative proteomics, Gut, Lc-ms/ms, Small intestine, Ileum

### Affiliations
The University of Manchester
Centre for Applied Pharmacokinetic Research, School of Health Sciences, The University of Manchester, UK

### Submitter
Jill Barber

### Lab Head
Dr Jill Barber
Centre for Applied Pharmacokinetic Research, School of Health Sciences, The University of Manchester, UK


