### Accession
PXD031987

### Title
A monoclonal anti-HMGB1 antibody attenuates neurodegeneration in an experimental animal model of glaucoma

### Description
Neuroinflammation is a crucial process for the loss of retinal ganglion cells (RGC), a major characteristic of glaucoma. High expression of high mobility group box protein 1 (HMGB1) plays a detrimental role in inflammatory processes and is elevated in the retinas of glaucoma patients. Therefore, this study aimed to investigate the effects of intravitreal injection of an anti-HMGB1 monoclonal antibody (anti-HMGB1 Ab) in an experimental animal model of glaucoma. Two groups of Spraque Dawley rats received episcleral vein occlusion to chronically elevate intraocular pressure (IOP): (1) IgG group, intravitreal injection of an unspecific IgG as a control, n=5, (2) HMGB1 group, intravitreal injection of an anti-HMGB1 Ab, n=6. IOP, retinal nerve fiber layer thickness (RNFLT), and the retinal flash response was monitored longitudinally. Post-mortem examinations included immunohistochemistry, microarray, and mass spectrometric analysis. RNFLT was significantly increased in the HMGB1 group compared to the IgG group (p<0.001). RGC density showed improved neuronal cell survival in the retina in HMGB1 compared to the IgG group (p<0.01). Mass spectrometric proteomic analysis of retinal tissue showed increased abundance of RNA metabolism-associated heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoproteins (hnRNPs), such as hnRNP U, D, and H2, in animals injected with the anti-HMGB1 Ab, indicating that application of the antibody may cause increased gene expression. Microarray analysis showed significantly decreased expression of C-X-C motif chemokine ligand 8 (CXCL8, p<0.05) and connective tissue growth factor (CTGF, p<0.01) in the HMGB1 group. Thus, these data suggest that intravitreal injection of anti-HMGB1 Ab reduced HMGB1-dependent inflammatory signaling and mediated RGC neuroprotection.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction from the collected retinal pellets (HMGB1 OS n=5, IgG OS n=5) was performed as described in previous publications using the Tissue Protein Extraction Reagent buffer (T-PER, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA). After protein homogenization, a buffer exchange was performed using 3 kDa Amicon® ultra centrifugal filters (Merck Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany) to enrich and dissolve the proteins in LC-MS grade water. Subsequently, the protein concentration of each sample was determined using a BCA assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL USA) and measured with the Multiscan Ascent photometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL USA) at 570 nm. Then, a protein amount of 10 µg of each sample was evaporated to dryness in the SpeedVac (Eppendorf, Darmstadt, Germany) for 30 min at 30° C. The in-solution trypsin digestion and the peptide purification before the LC-MS analysis was performed as already described in previous publications [110]. The liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) measurements were performed with a hybrid linear ion trap - Orbitrap MS system (LTQ Orbitrap XL, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL USA) online coupled to the EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA). The purified and tryptic digested samples were dissolved in 80 µl of 0.1% formic acid (FA, dissolved in H2O, solvent A), and 2 µl of each sample (0.125 µg/µl) were injected into the system per run. The flow rate was set to 300 nl/min, and the peptides were separated using a PepMap C18 column system (75 µm x 500 mm; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA). For peptide elution solvent B (0.1% FA dissolved in Acetonitrinle, ACN) was used. The gradient for the peptide elution was set to 200 min as follows: 5–30% B (0–160 min), 30–100% B (160–180 min), and 100% B (180–200 min). The LTQ Orbitrap operated in the positive ionization mode and data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode: a high-resolution scan (m/z 300 to 2000) was performed in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 30,000 at 400 m/z. The automatic gain control was set to 1∙106 ions. For internal calibration, the lock mass was set to 445.120025 m/z (poly-dimethyl cyclosiloxane). The dynamic exclusion mode was enabled with the following settings: repeat count = 1, repeat duration = 30 s, exclusion list size = 100, exclusion duration = 300 s, and exclusion mass width = ± 20 ppm. The five most intense precursor ions were selected for collision-induced dissociation (CID) fragmentation in the ion trap using a normalized collision energy of 35%. The LC-MS raw data were analyzed with the bioinformatics software MaxQuant v. 1.6.17 (Max Planck Institute for Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany) for protein identification and quantification. Tandem MS spectra were searched against the SwissProt database with the taxonomy Rattus norvegicus (date: 04/05/21, entries: 8,131 sequences) and the following settings: peptide mass tolerance of ± 30 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of ± 0.5 Da, tryptic cleavage, a maximum of two missed cleavage, carbamidomethylation as fixed modification, and acetylation (protein N-terminal) as well as oxidation as variable modifications. All protein identifications were filtered with a false discovery rate (FDR) < 1%.

### Data Protocol
Statistical analysis of the MaxQuant generated output data ("proteins.txt") was performed by using the software program Perseus, version 1.6.15.0 (Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany). For analysis, the LFQ intensities were log2 transformed. Subsequently, the data were filtered for contaminants. Hits only 'identified by side' were also excluded. The identification of the proteins was based on at least two peptides which must be detected in all replicates of the study group. Missing intensity values were imputed by random numbers received from the normal distribution. To analyze the proteins to be changed significantly, a two-sided student's t-test was performed. Protein changes with p-values < 0.05 were identified as statistically significant.

### Publication Abstract
Neuroinflammation is a crucial process for the loss of retinal ganglion cells (RGC), a major characteristic of glaucoma. High expression of high-mobility group box protein 1 (HMGB1) plays a detrimental role in inflammatory processes and is elevated in the retinas of glaucoma patients. Therefore, this study aimed to investigate the effects of the intravitreal injection of an anti-HMGB1 monoclonal antibody (anti-HMGB1 Ab) in an experimental animal model of glaucoma. Two groups of Spraque Dawley rats received episcleral vein occlusion to chronically elevate intraocular pressure (IOP): (1) the IgG group, intravitreal injection of an unspecific IgG as a control, n = 5, and (2) the HMGB1 group, intravitreal injection of an anti-HMGB1 Ab, n = 6. IOP, retinal nerve fiber layer thickness (RNFLT), and the retinal flash response were monitored longitudinally. Post-mortem examinations included immunohistochemistry, microarray, and mass spectrometric analysis. RNFLT was significantly increased in the HMGB1 group compared with the IgG group (p &lt; 0.001). RGC density showed improved neuronal cell survival in the retina in HMGB1 compared with the IgG group (p &lt; 0.01). Mass spectrometric proteomic analysis of retinal tissue showed an increased abundance of RNA metabolism-associated heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoproteins (hnRNPs), such as hnRNP U, D, and H2, in animals injected with the anti-HMGB1 Ab, indicating that the application of the antibody may cause increased gene expression. Microarray analysis showed a significantly decreased expression of C-X-C motif chemokine ligand 8 (CXCL8, p &lt; 0.05) and connective tissue growth factor (CTGF, p &lt; 0.01) in the HMGB1 group. Thus, these data suggest that intravitreal injection of anti-HMGB1 Ab reduced HMGB1-dependent inflammatory signaling and mediated RGC neuroprotection.

### Keywords
Glaucoma, Neuroprotection, Animal model, Neurodegeneration, Discovery proteomics, Antibodies, Microarray

### Affiliations
Department of Experimental Ophthalmology, Medical Center of the Johannes Gutenberg-University Mainz, Langenbeckstr. 1, 55131 Mainz, Germany Phone: + 49 6131 17 3328  Fax: + 49 06131 4970563
Stiftstraße 16, 60313 Frankfurt am Main

### Submitter
Henrik Tonner

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Dr. Franz H. Grus
Department of Experimental Ophthalmology, Medical Center of the Johannes Gutenberg-University Mainz, Langenbeckstr. 1, 55131 Mainz, Germany Phone: + 49 6131 17 3328  Fax: + 49 06131 4970563


