### Accession
PXD014399

### Title
Human DDK rescues stalled forks and counteracts checkpoint inhibition at unfired origins to complete DNA replication

### Description
To date few DDK substrates other than the MCM helicase have been identified, and none are implicated in fork protection or restart.  Here we searched for such factors, using SILAC and quantitative mass spectrometry to identify the DDK phosphoproteome during fork stalling.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC labeled RPE-1 cells expressing WT or analogue sesitive CDC7 were lysed using modified RIPA and mixed 1:1. Proteins were immunoprecipitated with acetone, resuspended in 8M urea and digested with LysC and trypsin. Peptides were purified and concetrated by Sep-Pak, followed by Strong Cation Exchange (SCX) chromatrography, and TiO2 based phosphopeptide enrichment. Phospho-peptides were stagetipped, and analyzed by LC-MS/MS on a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
All raw files were processed in MaxQuant v1.0.14.7 and using the MASCOT search engine  (v2.3.02) against the International Protein Index (IPI) database for humans (v. 3.68).

### Publication Abstract
Eukaryotic genomes replicate via spatially and temporally regulated origin firing. Cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) and Dbf4-dependent kinase (DDK) promote origin firing, whereas the S phase checkpoint limits firing to prevent nucleotide and RPA exhaustion. We used chemical genetics to interrogate human DDK with maximum precision, dissect its relationship with the S phase checkpoint, and identify DDK substrates. We show that DDK inhibition (DDKi) leads to graded suppression of origin firing and fork arrest. S phase checkpoint inhibition rescued origin firing in DDKi cells and DDK-depleted Xenopus egg extracts. DDKi also impairs RPA loading, nascent-strand protection, and fork restart. Via quantitative phosphoproteomics, we identify the BRCA1-associated (BRCA1-A) complex subunit MERIT40 and the cohesin accessory subunit PDS5B as DDK effectors in fork protection and restart. Phosphorylation neutralizes autoinhibition mediated by intrinsically disordered regions in both substrates. Our results reveal mechanisms through which DDK controls the duplication of large vertebrate genomes.

### Keywords
Analogue-sesitive, Phosphoproteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Replication, Chemical genetics, Cdc7, Ddk, Stalled forks

### Affiliations
Molecular Biology Program, Sloan Kettering Institute, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065, USA
Copenhagen University

### Submitter
Stephanie Munk

### Lab Head
Dr Prasad Jallepalli
Molecular Biology Program, Sloan Kettering Institute, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065, USA


