### Accession
PXD012592

### Title
The ubiquitin-like modifier FAT10 interferes with SUMO activation

### Description
In this study, the proteins SumoE1 and Fat10 or Fat10-AV mutant were crosslinked using the crosslinking reagent H12/D12 BS3 in order to determine specific interaction sites of Fat10 and SumoE1. Furthermore, quantitative chemical crosslinking coupled to mass spectrometry (q-XL-MS) was used to compare crosslink abundances of SumoE1 in presence of Sumo as well as Sumo and Fat10 versus crosslink abundances of SumoE1 in absence of Sumo and Fat10 in order to determine the influence of Sumo and Fat10 on the structural dynamics of SumoE1.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were crosslinked and measured essentially as described in Leitner A. et al., 2014. In short, approximately 100 µg of Fat10 were incubated with 100 µg of SumoE1 on ice for 10 min and crosslinked by addition of H12/D12 BS3 (Creative Molecules) at a final concentration of 1 nmol BS3 / 1 µg protein for 30 min at 37 °C while shaking at 650 rpm in a Thermomixer (Eppendorf). After quenching by addition of ammonium bicarbonate to a final concentration of 50 mM and incubation for 10 min at 37 °C, samples were dried, reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin. Digested peptides were separated from the solution and retained by a solid phase extraction system (SepPak, Waters) and then separated by size exclusion chromatography prior to liquid chromatography (LC)-MS/MS analysis on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Data were searched using xQuest in ion-tag mode with a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm. For matching of fragment ions, tolerances of 0.2 Da for common ions and 0.3 Da for crosslink ions were applied. For q-XL-MS analysis, approximately 100 µg of SumoE1 were incubated solitary, with Sumo (molar ratio 1:4) or with Sumo and Fat10 (molar ratio 1:4:4) for 15 min at 30 °C in 1 x reaction buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6, 50 mM NaCl, 10 mM MgCl2, 4 mM ATP, 0.1 mM DTT) prior to crosslinking by addition of H12/D12 BS3 (Creative Molecules) at a ratio of 1 nmol / 1 µg protein for 30 min at 37 °C while shaking at 650 rpm in a Thermomixer (Eppendorf). After quenching by addition of ammonium bicarbonate to a final concentration of 50 mM and incubation for 10 min at 37 °C, samples were reduced, alkylated, and digested with trypsin. Digested peptides were separated from the solution and retained by a solid phase extraction system (SepPak, Waters), and then separated by size exclusion chromatography prior to liquid chromatography (LC)-MS/MS analysis on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Amounts of potential crosslinks were normalized prior to MS by measuring peptide bond absorption at 215 nm for each fraction. Data were searched using xQuest in ion-tag mode with a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm. For matching of fragment ions, tolerances of 0.2 Da for common ions and 0.3 Da for crosslink ions were applied. Crosslinked samples were prepared in triplicates (i.e. three separate crosslink batches for each condition) and each of these was measured as technical duplicates. Crosslinks which were identified with deltaS < 0.95 and ID-Score ≥ 20 were used as input for q-XL-MS analysis with xTractsoftware.

### Data Protocol
Centroid mzXML files of BS3-linked samples were searched using xQuest in ion-tag mode with a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm. For matching of fragment ions, tolerances of 0.2 Da for common ions and 0.3 Da for crosslink ions were applied. Crosslinks which were identified with deltaS < 0.95 and ID-Score ≥ 20 were used as input for q-XL-MS analysis with xTract (see uploaded xtract.csv files). For xTract analysis data were converted to profile mzXML files. Samples containing only SumoE1 and no additional proteins during crosslinking were set as reference experiments. The chromatographic peaks of identified crosslinks in the samples with SumoE1 in presence or absence of Sumo or Sumo and Fat10 (n=3, each sample analyzed additionally as technical duplicate) were integrated and summed up over different peak groups (taking different charge states and different unique crosslinked peptides for one unique crosslinking site into account). Only high-confidence crosslinks that were identified consistently in both, light and heavy labeled states (xTract settings violations was set to 0), were selected for further quantitative analysis.

### Publication Abstract
The covalent attachment of the cytokine-inducible ubiquitin-like modifier HLA-F adjacent transcript 10 (FAT10) to hundreds of substrate proteins leads to their rapid degradation by the 26&#x2009;S proteasome independently of ubiquitylation. Here, we identify another function of FAT10, showing that it interferes with the activation of SUMO1/2/3 in vitro and down-regulates SUMO conjugation and the SUMO-dependent formation of promyelocytic leukemia protein (PML) bodies in cells. Mechanistically, we show that FAT10 directly binds to and impedes the activity of the heterodimeric SUMO E1 activating enzyme AOS1/UBA2 by competing very efficiently with SUMO for activation and thioester formation. Nevertheless, activation of FAT10 by AOS1/UBA2 does not lead to covalent conjugation of FAT10 with substrate proteins which relies on its cognate E1 enzyme UBA6. Hence, we report that one ubiquitin-like modifier (FAT10) inhibits the conjugation and function of another ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO) by impairing its activation.

### Keywords
Fat10, Xl-ms, Sumoe1, Q-xl-ms

### Affiliations
Universität Konstanz
Department of Biology, University of Konstanz, Germany

### Submitter
Florian Stengel

### Lab Head
Dr Florian Stengel
Department of Biology, University of Konstanz, Germany


