### Accession
PXD029493

### Title
LC-MS/MS analysis: coIP of Tssc4-Flag from nuclear extracts of HEK293 cells

### Description
Interactome analysis of human Flag-tagged Tssc4, Tssc4 mutant and background control. The coIP's (n=3) were performed from nucelar extract of HEK293 cells followed by LC-ESI-MS/MS analysis.

### Sample Protocol
For mass spectrometric analysis of TSSC4 interactors, Flp-In™ T-REx™ 293 cells stably expressing C-terminal 3xFlag-HBH-tagged wt TSSC4 or TSSC4M1M2M3 were grown in T75 flasks, and nuclear extract was prepared as described above. As control, unmodified Flp-In™ T-REx™ 293 cells were used. 500 µg nuclear extract were incubated with 800 µl immunoprecipitation (IP) buffer (10 mM HEPES-NaOH, pH 7.3, 150 mM NaCl,10 mM MgCl2, 10 mM KCl, 0.5 mM EGTA) supplemented with 3 U/ml benzonase and proteinase inhibitors for 1 hour on a rotating wheel. For each IP, 50 µl Flag M2 affinity gel (Sigma Aldrich), equilibrated in IP buffer, were added to the reaction and incubated over night at 4 °C on a rotating wheel. The resin was washed four times with IP buffer (without supplements) with centrifugation at 4000 x g for 1 minute. Bound proteins were eluted by incubation with 50 µl 3xFlag Peptide (Sigma Aldrich) at a concentration of 0.5 µg/µl in 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl for 30 minutes on ice. The supernatant was run on a SDS-PAGE gel until entrance into the separating gel. Coomassie-stained bands were excised and digested with trypsin using a standard protocol. After in-gel digestion, peptides were extracted and dried for LC-MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The dataset contains files in .raw format measured on an Orbitrap Q Exactive HF instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific). LC separations were done by C18 reversed phase chromatographie.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms coip

### Affiliations
Freie Universität Berlin, Institute of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Core Facility BioSupraMol, Thielallee 63, D-14195, Berlin, Germany
Freie Universität Berlin, Institute of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Laboratory of Protein Biochemistry, Thielallee 63, D-14195, Berlin, Germany

### Submitter
Benno Kuropka

### Lab Head
Dr Benno Kuropka
Freie Universität Berlin, Institute of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Core Facility BioSupraMol, Thielallee 63, D-14195, Berlin, Germany


