### Accession
PXD032206

### Title
Cytospora chrysosperma wild type and CcPmk1 deletion mutant LC-MS/MS

### Description
We compare the phosphoproteome analysis of Cytospora chrysosperma wild type and CcPmk1 deletion mutant, which can help us to identify the putative regulation pattern of CcPmk1 through protein phosphorylation.

### Sample Protocol
To prepare the phosphoproteomic samples, the wild type and ΔCcPmk1 strains were grown in the PDB medium supplemented with sterilized poplar branches to mimic the infection status with shaking at 150 rpm and 25°C for 2 days. The cultures were filtered with Miracloth (Calbiochem) and then minced individually with liquid nitrogen and lysed in lysis buffer followed by 5 min of ultrasonication on ice. Supernatant was acquired with centrifugation at 12000 g and 4°C for 15 min. The supernatant was treated with DTT and sufficient iodoacetamide. The resulting supernatant was mixed with 4 times volume of precooled acetone by well vortex and incubated at -20°C for at least 2 h. The precipitation was collected by using centrifugation and washed with ice-cold acetone for 2 times. The pellet was dissolved by dissolution buffer (100 mM TEAB, pH=8.5 and 6 M urea). Total protein concentration was calculated by Bradford protein assay. The protein solution from each sample was digested with Trypsin Gold (Promega) at 1:50 trypsin -to-protein mass ratio at 37°C for 16 h. The peptides were desalted with C18 cartridge and vacuum-dried. The peptides were redissolved in buffer solution (250 mM acetic acid with 30% acetonitrile and, pH=2.5-3.0). Modified peptides were enriched by using phos-select iron affinity gel (Sigma, P9740) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The bounded peptides were eluted, dried and desalted using peptide desalting spin columns (Thermo Fisher, 89852). The collected phosphopeptides were used for LC-MS/MS Analysis with an EASY-nLCTM 1200 UHPLC system (ThermoFisher), coupled with an Orbitrap Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). Briefly, the phosphopeptides were dissolved in 0.1% FA and separated on a home-made analytical column (15 cm×150 µm, 1.9 µm), using a 120 min linear gradient from 5 to 100% of eluent B (0.1% FA in 80% ACN) in eluent A (0.1% FA in H2O) at a flow rate of 600 nL/min. Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer coupled with UHPLC. The applied electrospray voltage was 2.3 kV. The m/z scan range was 350-1500 for full MS scans at a resolution of 60000 (at 200 m/z). Then, the 40 most abundant precursor ions were selected for fragmentation using higher energy collisional dissociation fragment analysis at a resolution of 15000 (at 200 m/z) with the dynamic exclusion parameter of 30 s. The automatic gain control (AGC) target value was set at 5e4.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS spectra data were search through database by using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (PD 2.2, thermo). The searched parameters of a mass tolerance of 10 ppm for precursor ion scans and a mass tolerance of 0.02 Da for the product ion scans were used. A maximum of 2 miscleavage sites were allowed. For protein identification, protein with at least 1 unique peptide was identified at false discovery rate less than 1.0% on peptide and protein level, respectively. Precursor quantification based on intensity was used for Label-free quantification. The protein quantitation results were statistically analyzed by Mann-Whitney Test. The differentially expressed peptides or proteins were defined as p < 0.05 and [fold change, FC] > 1.5 or < 0.67.

### Publication Abstract
Pmk1, a highly conserved pathogenicity-related mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) in pathogenic fungi, is phosphorylated and activated by MAP2K and acts as a global regulator of fungal infection and invasive growth by modulating downstream targets. However, the hierarchical CcPmk1 regulatory network in <i>Cytospora chrysosperma</i>, the main causal agent of canker disease in many woody plant species, is still unclear. In this study, we analyzed and compared the phosphoproteomes and metabolomes of &#x394;<i>CcPmk1</i> and wild-type strains and identified pathogenicity-related downstream targets of CcPmk1. We found that CcPmk1 could interact with the downstream homeobox transcription factor CcSte12 and affect its phosphorylation. In addition, the &#x394;<i>CcSte12</i> displayed defective phenotypes that were similar to yet not identical to that of the &#x394;<i>CcPmk1</i> and included significantly reduced fungal growth, conidiation, and virulence. Remarkably, CcPmk1 could phosphorylate proteins translated from a putative secondary metabolism-related gene cluster, which is specific to <i>C. chrysosperma</i>, and the phosphorylation of several peptides was completely abolished in the &#x394;<i>CcPmk1</i>. Functional analysis of the core gene (<i>CcPpns1</i>) in this gene cluster revealed its essential roles in fungal growth and virulence. Metabolomic analysis showed that amino acid metabolism and biosynthesis of secondary metabolites, lipids, and lipid-like molecules significantly differed between wild type and &#x394;<i>CcPmk1</i>. Importantly, most of the annotated lipids and lipid-like molecules were significantly downregulated in the &#x394;<i>CcPmk1</i> compared to the wild type. Collectively, these findings suggest that CcPmk1 may regulate a small number of downstream master regulators to control fungal growth, conidiation, and virulence in <i>C. chrysosperma</i>. <b>IMPORTANCE</b> Understanding the pathogenic mechanisms of plant pathogens is a prerequisite to developing effective disease-control methods. The Pmk1 MAPK is highly conserved among phytopathogenic fungi and acts as a global regulator of fungal pathogenicity by modulating downstream transcription factors or other components. However, the regulatory network of CcPmk1 from <i>C. chrysosperma</i> remains enigmatic. The present data provide evidence that the core pathogenicity regulator CcPmk1 modulates a few downstream master regulators to control fungal virulence in <i>C. chrysosperma</i> through transcription or phosphorylation and that CcPmk1 may be a potential target for disease control.

### Keywords
Cytospora chrysosperma, Lc-ms/ms, Ccpmk1

### Affiliations
Forest Pathology Laboratory, Colleage of Forest, Beijing Forestry University, China
Beijing Forestry Univiersity

### Submitter
Dianguang Xiong

### Lab Head
Dr Dianguang Xiong
Forest Pathology Laboratory, Colleage of Forest, Beijing Forestry University, China


