### Accession
PXD045629

### Title
AP-MS of C18ORF25 with AMPK- and S67 phosphorylation-depedent interactions

### Description
C18ORF25 is a homolog of Arkadia (RNF111), an E3 ubiquitin ligase with SUMO-interaction motifs (SIMs) (PMID: 31417085). However, C18ORF25 lacks the entire C-terminal RING domain of RNF111 which is required for ubiquitin binding suggesting it lacks ubiquitination activity and may therefore act as an adaptor or signalling scaffold (PMID: 26283374). We have previously shown that mice lacking C18Orf25 throughout the entire body have increased adiposity, decreased lean mass, lower exercise capacity and significantly reduced ex vivo skeletal muscle force production (PMID: 35882232). Skeletal muscle isolated from C18Orf25 knockout (KO) mice have reduced cAMP-dependent protein kinase A (PKA) levels, and reduced phosphorylation of several contractile proteins and proteins involved in calcium handling. Furthermore, analysis of single muscle fibres from C18Orf25 KO mice revealed impaired SR calcium cycling in fast-twitch fibres only (PMID: 35882232). We also previously showed that the exercise-regulated phosphorylation of S67 on C18ORF25 is directly catalysed by AMPK. This phosphorylation site plays an important role in the function of C18ORF25 as re-expression of a phospho-mimetic S66/67D but not phospho-dead S66/67A in C18Orf25 KO mice is able to rescue skeletal muscle contractile defects PMID: 35882232).  In the present study, we further investigated the potential molecular functions of C18ORF25. We performed affinity purification coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (AP-MS) to probe the protein:protein interaction (PPI) landscape of C18ORF25. Included in this analysis was also an investigation of potential S67 phosphorylation-dependent PPIs.

### Sample Protocol
C2C12 cells were grown in Dulbecco's Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM) (GIBCO by Life Technologies; # 11995065), supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) (Life Technologies; #26140079), pyruvate and GlutaMAX (GIBCO by Life Technologies). Cells were kept at 37°C and 5% CO2 in a humidified incubator Direct Heat CO2 Incubator featuring Oxygen Control (In Vitro Technologies). Mouse C18Orf25 cDNA (8030462N17Rik; NM_178670.4) was purchased VectorBuilder with an N-terminal 3xFLAG tag as either wild-type or S66/67A mutations and sub-cloned into a pAAV expression vector containing CMV promoter. The vectors sequences and mutations were confirmed by Sanger sequencing and restriction enzyme digestions (PMID: 35882232). Vectors were transiently transfected at 60% confluence in a 6-well plate with 3 µg DNA, 9 µl of P3000 reagent and 9 µl of Lipofectamne 3000 prepared in reduced-serum Minimal Essential Medium (Opti-MEM) (Life Technologies). After 24 hours, the cells were differentiated into myotubes with the replacement of 10% FBS with 2% Horse Serum and cultured for a further 3 days. On the day of harvest, cells were incubated in 1ml of DMEM, Pyr, Gln, 0.2% BSA for 2 hours to achieve a basal state. Relevant cells were then stimulated for 30 minutes with 2mM AICAR in basal media and 100uM of A-769662 in DMSO. Cells were washed twice with cold PBS, then lysed in 200ul of interactome lysis buffer (0.3% CHAPS, 150mM NaCl, 50mM Tris pH 7.5, 5% glycerol, EDTA-Free PIC, PhosIC). Lysates were pushed through a 22G needle 6 times followed by a 27G needle 3 times. Lysates were spun down at 18,000 g for 10 minutes and normalised to 700 µg of protein as determined with BCA (ThermoFisher Scientific). 1.5ul of mouse anti-FLAG M2 (Sigma #F1804) was added to each lysate and incubated for 2 hours with rotation at 4°C. 40ul of protein-G beads (Invitrogen; #10004D) was washed with wash buffer II (150mM NaCl, 50mM Tris pH 7.5, 5% glycerol) and added to each lysate and rotated for 2 hours at 4°C. The beads were then washed twice with 950ul of wash buffer I (0.01% CHAPS in wash buffer II), followed by two washes in 1ml of wash buffer II leaving the final wash solution with the beads. 50ul of beads was then removed for western blot where proteins were eluted with 50ul of 2x Lamaelli + TCEP buffer. The remaining final wash solution was then removed after which we performed an on-bead digestion by adding 50ul digestion buffer (2M urea, 50mM Tris pH 7.5 containing 1 mM TCEP, 5mM CAA) as well as 0.2ug of Trypsin and LysC overnight at 37°C. Samples were then acidified to a final concentration of 1% TFA in 90% isopropanol and purified by in-house packed SDB-RPS (Sigma; #66886-U) microcolumns. The purified peptides were resuspended in 2% acetonitrile in 0.1% TFA and stored at −80°C prior to direct injection by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were analyzed on a Dionex 3500 nanoHPLC, coupled to an Orbitrap Exploris mass spectrometer (ThermoFischer Scientific) via electrospray ionization in positive mode with 2.1 kV at 275 °C and RF set to 40%. Separation was achieved on a 50 cm × 75 µm column packed with C18AQ (1.9 µm; Dr Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany) (PepSep, Marslev, Denmark) over 60min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The peptides were eluted over a linear gradient of 3–40% Buffer B (Buffer A: 0.1% formic acid; Buffer B: 80% v/v acetonitrile, 0.1% v/v FA) and the column was maintained at 50 °C. The instrument was operated in data-independent acquisition mode with an MS1 spectrum acquired over the mass range 350–951 m/z (60,000 resolution, 250% automatic gain control (AGC) and 50 ms maximum injection time) followed by MS/MS via HCD fragmentation with 37 windows with 16 m/z isolation and a 1 m/z overlap (30,000 resolution, 2000% AGC and maximum injection time set to auto). Data were searched against the UniProt mouse database (October 2020; UP000000589_109090 and UP000000589_109090_additional) with Spectronaut v15.0.210615.50606 using library-free directDIA with default parameters and peptide spectral matches, peptide and protein false discovery rate (FDR) set to 1%. All data were searched with oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation set as the variable modification and carbamidomethylation set as the fixed modification. Peptide quantification was carried out at MS2 level using 3-6 fragment ions, with automatic interference fragment ion removal as previously described (PMID: 29070702). The MS1 mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm, while the mass tolerance for MS/MS fragments was set to 0.02 Da. Dynamic mass MS1 and MS2 mass tolerance was enabled, and retention time calibration was accomplished using local (non-linear) regression. A dynamic extracted ion chromatogram window size was performed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Exercise, C18orf25, Ampk phosphorylation dependent protein interactions

### Affiliations
The University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Benjamin Parker

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin Parker
The University of Melbourne


