### Accession
PXD029508

### Title
Identification and profiling of dynamic changes of site-specific histone acylations in HEK293T cells under metabolites treatment

### Description
1. Systematic survey of PTM site and stoichiometry on histone proteins has been lagged behind due to the lack of efficient quantitative peptide comparison methodology on histone proteins. Our quantitative mass spectrometry-based proteomics approach, Site-Profiling, used SILAC-based peptide ratio analysis on histone acylations with and without SCFA-derived metabolic treatment to directly compare the same peptide with the same modification and the same chain length. Different from the published methods that isotopically labeled metabolites, which might cause false-positive results and information lost, we only labelled all the lysines and arginines in histones and thus the same modification under native conditions would be kept, resulting that all modification peptides were comparable in parallel before and after metabolites stimulation. By a comprehensive analysis of all peptides containing the same histone marks, Site-Map can compare the abundance of each site-specific modification upon the treatment of the corresponding metabolite. 2. To reveal the site dependency of histone Kbhb distributed at the super enhancer region, we developed a method to isolate the super enhancer condensates by co-immunoprecipitation with coactivators BRD4. Same site-mapping method was utilized for comparasion the site dependency of histone Kbhb enriched with BRD4 or not.

### Sample Protocol
1. HEK293T cells were treated with or without 50 mM NaCr. Histones were extracted via TCA precipitation. Purified histones from the treated or untreated group were relatively digested with trypsin or GluC in solution or in gel, respectively. The digested peptides were collected for dimethyl labeling and further subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis by loading onto a 100 μm × 2 cm pre-column and separated on a 75 μm × 15 cm capillary column in-house packed with 4 μm C18 bulk material (InnosepBio), on a Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap (Q Exactive Plus) mass spectrometer with nanospray flex ion source and Thermo ScientificTM EASY-nLCTM 1000 liquid chromatograph. The peptides were chromatographically separated by a 70 min gradient 3-100% buffer B in buffer A (buffer A: 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid/water; buffer B: 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid/acetonitrile). For Kbhb modification, SILAC cells were used. Heavy-labelled cells were treated with 20 mM Nabhb. 2. Nabhb treated or untreated HEK293T cells were dispersed by trypsinization and resuspended in DMEM. For crosslinking, the cells suspension was treated with CH2O or 13CD2O at a final concentration of 1% (wt/vol) and incubated for 10 min at room temperature, followed by quenching with 0.125 M glycine for 5 min at room temperature. After pelleted through 1,000 g for 5 min at 4 °C, chromatin fraction was isolated and treated with Micrococcal Nuclease, followed by sonication. The sonicated chromatin was incubated with anti-BRD4 antibody for coimmunoprecipitation. The supernatant and the beads binded histones were adjust to the same amount of H3 for dimethyl labeling, respectively. After trypsin digestion, the resulting peptides were load on LC-MS/MS as the same protocol described above for site-specific histone Kbhb modification detection.

### Data Protocol
Quantification was analyzed by Maxquant and pFind. The raw files were searched against Human all histone canonical and isoform fasta database (111 sequences) (downloaded from Uniprot on March 5th, 2019) by MaxQuant (version 1.6.1.0, download from https://maxquant.org) and pFind (version 2.8.8, download from http://pfind.org/software/pFind/index.html), with the following parameters: The carbamidomethyl (Cys) was set as the fixed modification, while oxidation (Met), acetyl (protein N-terminal), Kac, K/Rme, Kcr/Kbhb was set as variable modification. +/- 10 ppm was set for peptide pass tolerance and +/- 0.6 Da was set for fragment mass tolerance. A maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed for trypsin and GluC digestion.   FDR was determined by searching a reverse database and was set to 0.01 for proteins and peptides. Proteins with spectral counts no less than 2 were recognized as possible candidates after Maxquant or pFind searching.  To make pFind also suitable to run quantification searching, the modification.ini and quant.ini documents in the pFind software package were rewritten. To make sure the credibility of the peptides, all searched Kcr/Kbhb modified histone H3 peptides were evaluated for variability, similarity between b/y-ion ratios, elution times, and interfering signals by manual analysis with Xcalibur™ Software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, version 3.0.63). To ensure correct peak detection and accurate integration, all of the above selected peak boundaries were manually inspected and reassigned as needed. Only when the peptide transitions with a signal-to-noise of > 3 and at least three light and three heavy high-quality SRM transitions, were the peptides considered ‘quantifiable’. To keep the potent crosstalk information of the adjacent modifications or combinatorial modifications, the final peptide list consisted of peptides with different modification patterns with their specific L/H ratios. Maxquant and pFind converted data containing all checked peptides, ratio and spectral count information were stored in .txt format and transformed into Office Open XML spreadsheet (xlsx) format and then processed as the following procedure. First, all peptides containing Kcr/Kbhb modifications on H3 proteins that have been screened with the above roles were listed. Second, all peptides containing Kcr/Kbhb modifications on H3 proteins with the different chain length and different modification patterns were listed as a category, as peptide 1-8 of this site-specific modification. Third, all peptides with the same chain length, same modification patterns and but with different delta mass or different charges were combined. The final ratio of this peptide was calculated based on the weighted average of the searched ratio of the all the above peptides.

### Publication Abstract
A generalizable strategy with programmable site specificity for in situ profiling of histone modifications on unperturbed chromatin remains highly desirable but challenging. We herein developed a single-site-resolved multi-omics (SiTomics) strategy for systematic mapping of dynamic modifications and subsequent profiling of chromatinized proteome and genome defined by specific chromatin acylations in living cells. By leveraging the genetic code expansion strategy, our SiTomics toolkit revealed distinct crotonylation (e.g., H3K56cr) and &#x3b2;-hydroxybutyrylation (e.g., H3K56bhb) upon short chain fatty acids stimulation and established linkages for chromatin acylation mark-defined proteome, genome, and functions. This led to the identification of GLYR1 as a distinct interacting protein in modulating H3K56cr's gene body localization as well as the discovery of an elevated super-enhancer repertoire underlying bhb-mediated chromatin modulations. SiTomics offers a platform technology for elucidating the "metabolites-modification-regulation" axis, which is widely applicable for multi-omics profiling and functional dissection of modifications beyond acylations and proteins beyond histones.

### Keywords
Site-specific, Histone acylation, Hek293t, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Peking University
1Peking-Tsinghua Center for Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China 2Academy of Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China 3Synthetic and Functional Biomolecules Center, Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences, Key Laboratory of Bioorganic Chemistry and Molecular Engineering of Ministry of Education, College of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China

### Submitter
Fangfei Qin

### Lab Head
Dr Peng R. Chen
1Peking-Tsinghua Center for Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China 2Academy of Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China 3Synthetic and Functional Biomolecules Center, Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences, Key Laboratory of Bioorganic Chemistry and Molecular Engineering of Ministry of Education, College of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China


