### Accession
PXD012666

### Title
Lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylatome profiling reveals extensive lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation in common wheat

### Description
In this work, we first analyzed wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) lysine Khib sites by mass spectrometry. A total of 3,348 lysine modification sites from 1,047 proteins were identified in wheat seedlings. The identified Kcr proteins were discovered to be widespread. Bioinformatic data indicated these Kcr proteins involved in diverse biology and metabolic processes. Our data indicated that Khib is as dynamic as Kac and Khib changes in response to the deacetylase inhibitors Trichostatin A (TSA) and nicotinamide (NAM). We tested histone Khib and deacylation activities of several wheat HATs and HDACs using wheat Krnose EMS mutants. Finally, we confirmed lysine Khib on K206 of PGK was a regulatory modification using mustagenesis experiments and found that de-Khib impaired protein interactions of PGK. Our data demonstrate that the regulatory scope of lysine Khib is broad and comparable with that of other major PTMs. Wheat histone Khib are dynamically regulated by environmental cues and are likely to be removed by different mechanisms.

### Sample Protocol
Plant material and growth conditions Wheat donor progenitors, including Triticum Urartu (PI428185) with AA genome, Aegilops speltoides (PI542245) with SS genome, Aegilops tauschii var. strangulate (AS2393) with DD genome, tetraploid Triticum durum Langdon (AABB), and hexaploid wheat cultivar Aikang 58 were planted. They were grown in an illuminated incubator (RTOP-1000D, China) at 25°C/15°C day/night temperatures under a 16 h/8 h light/dark photoperiod. The leaf tissue from two-leaf periods of these seedlings was collected, respectively. Then, above-mentioned samples were frozen in liquid nitrogen rapidly for protein extraction and subsequent procedures.  For protein extract The sample was grinded by liquid nitrogen into cell powder and then transferred to a 5-mL centrifuge tube. After that, four volumes of lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Triton-100, 10 mM dithiothreitol, and 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail) was added to the cell powder, followed by sonication three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz). (Note: For PTM experiments, inhibitors were also added to the lysis buffer, e.g. 3 μM TSA and 50 mM NAM for acetylation.) The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 20,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the protein was precipitated with cold 20% TCA for 2 h at -20 °C. After centrifugation at 12,000 g 4 °C for 10 min, the supernatant was discarded. The remaining precipitate was washed with cold acetone for three times. The protein was redissolved in 8 M urea and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  Trypsin Digestion For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM NH4HCO3 to urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion.  HPLC Fractionation The tryptic peptides were fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Thermo Betasil C18 column (5 μm particles, 10 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated with a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0) over 60 min into 60 fractions. Then, the peptides were combined into fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging.  Affinity Enrichment To enrich Khib modified peptides, tryptic peptides dissolved in NETN buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0) were incubated with pre-washed antibody beads (Lot number PTM-804, PTM Bio) at 4°C overnight with gentle shaking. Then the beads were washed four times with NETN buffer and twice with H2O. The bound peptides were eluted from the beads with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. Finally, the eluted fractions were combined and vacuum-dried. For LC-MS/MS analysis, the resulting peptides were desalted with C18 ZipTips (Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

### Data Protocol
Database Search The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against UniProt_Triticum database (116722  sequences,  released at 2018-04) database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 4 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation modification and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for modified peptides was set > 40.  Bioinformatics analysis. The Motif-X software was used to analyze the model of sequences with amino acids in specific positions of crotonyl-21-mers (seven amino acids upstream and downstream of the crotonylation site) in all of the protein sequences. And all the database protein sequences were used as background database parameter, other parameters with default. Lys-crotonylated motifs were analyzed by motif-x at a significance level of 0.000001 [55]. Secondary structures of proteins were predicted by NetSurfP [56]. The Gene Ontology (GO) annotation proteome was derived from http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA. The lysine crotonylation (Kcr) proteins were classified by GO annotation based on three categories: biological processes, cellular components and molecular functions. WoLFPSORT (http://www.genscript.com/wolf-psort.html) was used to predict subcellular localization. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database was used to annotate protein pathway [57]. GO term and KEGG pathway enrichment were performed using the DAVID bioinformatics resources 6.7. Identified proteins domain functional description were annotated by InterProScan (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/) based on protein sequence alignment method. For enrichment or depletion (right-tailed test) of specifc annotation terms among the members of resulting protein clusters, Fisher’s exact test was used to obtain the p values. In all of the clusters, any terms with p values below 0.05 were treated as signifcant.  The identified crotonylated protein were searched against the STRING database version 10.0 for protein-protein interactions. Interaction network form STRING was visualized in Cytoscape [58].

### Publication Abstract
As a novel post-translational modification (PTM), lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation (Khib) is considered to regulate gene transcriptional activities in eukaryotic cells; however, the functions of Khib-modified proteins in plants remain unknown. Here, we report that Khib is an evolutionarily-conserved PTM in wheat and its progenitors. A total of 3348 Khib sites on 1074 proteins are identified in common wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) by using affinity purification and mass spectroscopy of 2-hydroxyisobutyrylome. Bioinformatic data indicate that Khib-modified proteins participate in a wide variety of biological and metabolic pathways. Immunoprecipitation confirms that Khib-modified proteins are present endogenously. A comparison of Khib and other main PTMs shows that Khib-modified proteins are simultaneously modified by multiple PTMs. Using mutagenesis experiments and co-immunoprecipitation assays, we demonstrate that Khib on K206 of phosphoglycerate kinase (PGK) is a key regulatory modification for its enzymatic activity, and mutation on K206 affects the interactions of PGK with its substrates. Furthermore, Khib modification of low-molecular-weight proteins is a response to the deacetylase inhibitors nicotinamide and trichostatin. This study provides evidence to promote our current understanding of Khib in wheat plants, including the cooperation between Khib and its metabolic regulation.

### Keywords
Triticum aestivum l.; post-translational modification; lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation; mass spectrometry; function

### Affiliations
PTM Biolabs lnc.
Agronomy College, Henan Agricultural University, China

### Submitter
xiaomei li

### Lab Head
Dr Feng Chen
Agronomy College, Henan Agricultural University, China


