### Accession
PXD031729

### Title
Proteomic analysis of small extracellular vesicles (sEVs) derived from primary keratinocytes cultured in different calcium concentrations, treated with a peanut allergen extract and atopic dermatitis (AD)-relevant cytokines

### Description
Epidermal keratinocytes are key for maintenance of the integrity of the epidermis. One of the main drivers of keratinocyte differentiation is the calcium gradient; calcium concentration gradually increases towards the outer layers of the epidermis. Atopic dermatitis (AD) is a disorder associated with a chronic inflammatory state and a compromised epidermal barrier. Keratinocytes secrete lipid-rich small extracellular vesicles (sEVs) that acts as mediators of both local and long-distance signaling.

### Sample Protocol
Primary keratinocytes were grown as a monolayer until they reached 80% confluence. Then, the cells were cultured in extracellular vesicle (EV)-depleted medium at either 0.06 mM or 1.5 mM Ca2+ concentration with addition of AD-relevant cytokines (IL-4, IL-13, IL-22, TSLP) for 3 days. For some conditions, a peanut allergen extract was added to the culture. At the end of the culture conditioned media were harvested for sEV isolation by differential centrifugation. sEV samples were prepared in 3 biological replicates. After sEV lysis with 1% SDS and cysteine residues’ reduction with dithiothreitol, samples were processed in a standard Multi-Enzyme Digestion Filter Aided Sample Preparation (MED-FASP) procedure with cysteine alkylation by iodoacetamide and consecutive proteolytic digestion by LysC, trypsin, and chymotrypsin. Peptides obtained after each digestion were separately desalted on a C18 resin in a STAGE Tips procedure, and subsequently measured in the data-dependent acquisition mode on a Triple TOF 5600+ mass spectrometer (SCIEX) coupled with an Ekspert MicroLC 200 Plus System (Eksigent).

### Data Protocol
All measurement files were subjected to joint database search in the MaxQuant 1.6.2.6a against the Homo sapiens SwissProt database (version from 09.11.2020). Resulting intensities were normalized using Total Protein Approach and protein concentrations in pmol/mg were calculated. Concentrations were imported into Perseus software and log2-transformed, data was restricted to 50% valid values, missing values were imputed from normal distribution and all values were normalized by z-score. T-tests between the test groups were conducted, and the results with p-value lower than 0.05 were considered to be statistically significant.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Allergy, Atopic dermatitis, Extracellular vesicles, Keratinocyte

### Affiliations
University of Gdansk
Laboratory of Mass Spectrometry, Core Facility Laboratories, Intercollegiate Faculty of Biotechnology UG&MUG, University of Gdansk, Gdansk, Poland

### Submitter
Paulina Czaplewska

### Lab Head
Dr Paulina Czaplewska
Laboratory of Mass Spectrometry, Core Facility Laboratories, Intercollegiate Faculty of Biotechnology UG&MUG, University of Gdansk, Gdansk, Poland


