### Accession
PXD026216

### Title
p97/VCP as a therapy target for developing drugs against human coronavirus

### Description
Understanding how human coronavirus dysregulate host proteome during infection in human cells will identify general pathways that are common to coronavirus infection. NMS-873 is an allosteric p97/VCP ATPase inhibitor and was show to have antiviral effect in multiple viruses including SARS-CoV2. We first demonstrated that genetic knock down of p97 reduced HCoV-229E, HCoV-OC43 infection and secretion. To investigate how p97/VCP assists virus infection, we used unbiased quantitative proteomics to compare dysregulated proteomes caused by HCoV-229E, HCoV-OC43 and SARS-CoV2 infection. We then compared dysregulated proteomes after HCoV-229E and HCoV-OC43 infection with and without p97 knockdown. Moreover, we elucidated the impact of p97 on different stages of viral life cycle using two potent p97 inhibitors, CB-5083 and NMS-873 and demonstrate their can block HCoV replication. Together, our data provide insights to repurpose potential cancer drugs that target the essential host protein p97/VCP.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were harvested and spun down to remove the supernatant. LC-MS samples were prepared using the Thermo EasyPep Mini MS Sample Prep Kit. Samples were then re-suspended in 0.1% formic acid and peptide concentration was tested using the Pierce Quantitative Fluorometric Peptide Assay. 20 g of peptide from each sample was  labelled with TMTpro 16plex reagents. Samples were combined and separated into 8 fractions using the High pH reversed-phase peptide Fractionation Kit. TMT labeling LC-MS/MS experiments were performed using an EASY-nLC 1000 connected to an Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
The proteomic analysis was performed with Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Scientific) using the Uniprot human database and the SequestHT with Percolator validation. Normalization was performed relative to the total peptide amount.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cornoavirus, Proteomic, P97

### Affiliations
Caltech
BBE, Caltech

### Submitter
Shan Li

### Lab Head
Dr Tsui-Fen Chou
BBE, Caltech


