### Accession
PXD014842

### Title
Partial loss of CFIm25 causes aberrant alternative polyadenylation and learning deficits

### Description
We previously showed that NUDT21-spanning copy-number variations (CNVs) are associated with intellectual disability (ID), and that NUDT21-encoded CFIm25 regulates the protein levels of at least one dose-sensitive, ID-associated protein: MeCP2 (Gennarino et al., 2015). However, the patients’ CNVs also spanned multiple other genes raising the possibility that loss or gain of these other genes caused their symptoms. To determine if reduced NUDT21 function alone is sufficient to cause disease, we generated Nudt21 heterozygous null mice to mimic the human state of reduced expression. We found that although these mice have 50% reduced Nudt21 mRNA, they only have 30% less of its cognate protein, CFIm25. Despite this partial protein-level compensation, the Nudt21+/- mice have learning deficits and cortical hyperexcitability. Further, to determine the molecular mechanism driving neural dysfunction, we partially inhibited NUDT21 in human embryonic stem cell-derived neurons to reduce CFIm25 by 30%. This reduction in CFIm25 was sufficient to induce misregulated alternative polyadenylation (APA) and protein levels in hundreds of genes, dozens of which are associated with intellectual disability and whose dysregulation is likely contributing to disease symptoms. Altogether, these results indicate that disruption of NUDT21­-regulated APA events in the brain can cause intellectual disability.

### Sample Protocol
1)5ug/ul of protein from the cells was digested using trypsin overnight. 2)Peptides were fractionated on C18 columns using 2,4,6,8,10,12,14,16,18,20,22,24,26,28 and 30% ACN. These 15 fractions are combined to 15 runs: 021222/041424/061626/081828/102030. 3)The peptides were subjected to an Orbitrap Fusion and Dionex Ultimate 300 for LC-MS/MS for identification on a 90 min gradient with 120K resolution with 15 sec dyanmic exclusion, 28% HCD cell energy and 300-1400 mass range.

### Data Protocol
1)Raw files generated after running on the MS are then searched for spectral identification using proteome discoverer. 2)Mascot search engine is used to search the spectra against NCBI human RefSeq database. 3)Percolater is used to filter quality spectra with q values < 0.05 for 5% FDR.  4)Peptides are grouped into proteins using inhouse algorith gpGrouper, an alternative peptide grouping program PMID 30093420.

### Publication Abstract
We previously showed that <i>NUDT21</i>-spanning copy-number variations (CNVs) are associated with intellectual disability (Gennarino et al., 2015). However, the patients' CNVs also included other genes. To determine if reduced <i>NUDT21</i> function alone can cause disease, we generated <i>Nudt21</i><sup>+/-</sup> mice to mimic <i>NUDT21</i>-deletion patients. We found that although these mice have 50% reduced <i>Nudt21</i> mRNA, they only have 30% less of its cognate protein, CFIm25. Despite this partial protein-level compensation, the <i>Nudt21</i><sup>+/-</sup> mice have learning deficits, cortical hyperexcitability, and misregulated alternative polyadenylation (APA) in their hippocampi. Further, to determine the mediators driving neural dysfunction in humans, we partially inhibited <i>NUDT21</i> in human stem cell-derived neurons to reduce CFIm25 by 30%. This induced APA and protein level misregulation in hundreds of genes, a number of which cause intellectual disability when mutated. Altogether, these results show that disruption of <i>NUDT21</i>-regulated APA events in the brain can cause intellectual disability.

### Keywords
Mecp2, Intellectual disability (id), Neurons, Cfim25, Nudt21

### Affiliations
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, 77054
Baylor College of Medicine

### Submitter
Bhoomi Bhatt

### Lab Head
Dr Huda Zoghbi
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, 77054


