### Accession
PXD048184

### Title
Asp23-controlled cell wall imbalance promotes membrane vesicles biogenesis in Staphylococcus aureus

### Description
Membrane vesicles (MVs) are produced by species across all domains of life and have diverse physiological functions and promising applications. While the mechanisms for vesiculation in Gram-negative bacteria are well-established, the genetic determinant and regulation of MVs biogenesis in Gram-positive bacteria remain still largely unknown. Here, we demonstrate that a Q225P substitution in the alternative sigma factor SigB greatly triggers MVs production in Staphylococcus aureus strain Newman by directly repressing expression of alkaline shock protein 23, wherein the Q225P mutation hinders the specific binding of SigB to the asp23 promoter. Isogenic deletion of asp23 consistently promotes MVs formation in Newman, highlighting the critical role of both sigB and asp23 in modulating S. aureus vesiculation. While bacterial growth and cytoplasmic membrane fluidity do not be impaired, mutation of asp23 elicits a weakened cell wall and enhanced autolysis that potentially involved in LrgAB-controlled hydrolases and PSMα-mediated activities, which ultimately leads to hypervesiculation in Newman. Furthermore, TEM and proteomic analysis suggest nearly identical morphology and composition, but virulence-associated factors are significantly enriched in MVs upon asp23 deletion. Overall, this study reveals novel genetic determinants and cues underlying S. aureus vesiculation, advancing the understanding of the physiology of MVs biogenesis in Gram-positive bacteria.

### Sample Protocol
MVs were recovered from S. aureus as previously described (Safe Staphylococcal platform for the development of multivalent nanoscale vesicles against viral infections). Briefly, the log-phase cultures of S. aureus strains of interest were inoculated into 1 L of BHI broth (1:100) and incubated for 16 h at 37°C with shaking at 200 rpm. The culture supernatants were collected by centrifugation at 10,000 × g at 4°C for 30 min to remove bacterial pellets, and then filtered through 0.22 μm Millex syringe filters (Beyotime, China) to eliminate any remaining cell debris. The filtered supernatants were further centrifuged at 200,000 × g at 4°C for 3 h, and the resulting MVs pellets were washed twice with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS, pH 7.2). To remove membrane fragments and protein aggregates, the crude MVs were resuspended in 4.4 mL of 50% Optiprep buffer (STEMCELL, Canada), and transferred to an ultracentrifuge tube. Carefully, 4 mL of 40% Optiprep gradient buffer and 1.6 mL of 10% Optiprep gradient buffer were sequentially added to the upper layer. The tube was centrifuged horizontally at 20,000 × g at 4°C for 3 h, allowing the MVs to be collected at the interface of the 40% and 10% layers. The collected MVs were finally dissolved in PBS and stored at −80°C. For quantitation, MVs were separated by 12% SDS-PAGE followed by staining with Coomassie Brilliant Blue R-250 (Thermo Scientific, USA) and photographed. The protein concentration of the MVs was determined using an enhanced BCA Protein Assay Kit following the recommended instructions (Beyotime, China). The lipid content was quantified using the membrane-specifc fuorescent lipophilic dye FM4-64 according to the suggested protocols (Invitrogen, USA).

### Data Protocol
The protein cargos in MVs of S. aureus Newman (NMMVs) and mutant NM∆asp23 (∆asp23MVs) were detected using 4D-label-free liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) that conducted by Jingjie PTM BioLab (Hangzhou, China). Briefly, proteins from three biological replicates of NMMVs and ∆asp23MVs were digested with trypsin, desalted by Strata X SPE column, dissolved in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid, and ultimately subjected to 4D-label-free LC-MS/MS analysis. The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Proteome Discoverer search engine (v.2.4). Tandem mass spectra were searched against S. aureus Newman NCBI_AP009351.1_20230720_seqkit.fasta (2580 entries) concatenated with reverse decoy and contaminants database. Trypsin (Full) was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. Min. peptide length was set as 6 and max. number of modification per peptide was set as 3. Mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. False discovery rate (FDR) of protein, peptide and PSM was adjusted to <1%. The WolF PSORT software was used for predicting subcellular localization of the identified proteins. KEGG pathway annotation was performed through BLAST comparison (blastp, evalue ≤ 1e-4), for each sequence, the annotation is based on the top-scoring comparison result. Fisher’s exact test was used to analyze the significance of functional enrichment of differentially expressed proteins (DEPs). Functional terms with Fold enrichment > 1.5 and P value < 0.05 were considered as significant.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Membrane vesicles; staphylococcus aureus; sigb; asp23; proteomic analysis

### Affiliations
Department of Emergency Medicine, Xinqiao Hospital, Army Medical University, 83 Xinqiao Street, Shapingba District, Chongqing 400037, China

### Submitter
Zhu Keting

### Lab Head
Dr Keting Zhu
Department of Emergency Medicine, Xinqiao Hospital, Army Medical University, 83 Xinqiao Street, Shapingba District, Chongqing 400037, China


