### Accession
PXD031079

### Title
Differences in proteins between normal and asthmatic mice and effects of knockout TL1A on asthmatic mice

### Description
Asthma, a heterogeneous disease, is characterized by chronic inflammation, epithelial–mesenchymal transformation (EMT), and airway remodeling. After immune system activation, macrophages, T cells, and other cells gather and secrete various factors, such as interleukin-1β, 4, 5, 10, 13, and TNF-a, which break the anti-inflammatory balance and aggravate the progression of asthma. TNF-a, a member of the TNF superfamily, has promising future in the pathophysiological progress of autoimmune diseases and the development and application of related drugs. However, the mechanisms of TNF-a in mucus secretion, airway hyperreactivity, and airway remodeling of human asthma remains unclear. Tumor necrosis factor-like cytokine 1A is a type II transmembrane protein with a stable trimer structure similar to TNF-a. Migone et al. first uncovered the presence of TL1A as a membrane-bound protein (mTL1A) or a soluble protein (sTL1A) from mTL1A cleaved by an underlying enzyme. DR3 is a type I membrane protein that contains a death domain in the cytoplasmic region and remains highly homologous with other TNFRSF members. Interestingly, Evangelos et al. found that TNF-a-stimulated human lung myofibroblasts significantly increase TL1A expression and collagen production. Our study will identify the specific role of TNF-a-stimulated mTL1A/DR3 or sTL1A/DR3 axis in the EMT of asthma model.

### Sample Protocol
Mice were stimulated with OVA for 60 days. The lungs of mice were collected and lysed at 4 ºC. Then, the immunoprecipitants were run on SDS-PAGE gel. After Coomassie blue staining, the protein bands were collected for mass spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
PEAKS Q was used for iTRAQ quantification. Normalization was performed by averaging the abundance of all peptides. Median values were used for averaging. Given that iTRAQ quantification typically underestimates the degree of real fold changes between two samples, differential protein screening was performed using a fold change ratio ⩾ 1.20 (for upregulated DEPs) or ⩽ 0.83 (for downregulated DEPs) and Significance ⩾ 15. Protein significance analysis was performed in PEAKS 8.0 (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, Canada. A two-tailed t-test was used for calculation of significant differences in protein ratios (P < 0.05).

### Publication Abstract
Tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-like cytokine 1A (TL1A), a member of the TNF family, exists in the form of membrane-bound (mTL1A) and soluble protein (sTL1A). TL1A binding its only known functional receptor death domain receptor 3 (DR3) affects the transmission of various signals. This study first proposed that the TL1A/DR3 axis was significantly upregulated in patients and mice with both asthma and high TNF-a expression and in TNF-a-stimulated epithelial Beas-2B cells. Two independent approaches were used to demonstrate that the TL1A/DR3 axis of mice was strongly correlated with TNF-a in terms of exacerbating asthmatic epithelial-mesenchymal transformation (EMT). First, high expression levels of EMT proteins (e.g., collagen I, fibronectin, N-cadherin, and vimentin) and TL1A/DR3 axis were observed when mice airways were stimulated by recombinant mouse TNF-a protein. Moreover, EMT protein and TL1A/DR3 axis expression synchronously decreased after mice with OVA-induced asthma were treated with infliximab by neutralizing TNF-a activity. Furthermore, the OVA-induced EMT of asthmatic mice was remarkably improved upon the deletion of the TL1A/DR3 axis by knocking out the <i>TL1A</i> gene. TL1A siRNA remarkably intervened EMT formation induced by TNF-a in the Beas-2B cells. In addition, EMT was induced by the addition of high concentrations of recombinant human sTL1A with the cell medium. The TL1A overexpression <i>via</i> pc-mTL1A <i>in vitro</i> remarkably increased the EMT formation induced by TNF-a. Overall, these findings indicate that the TL1A/DR3 axis may have a therapeutic role for asthmatic with high TNF-a level.

### Keywords
Airway remodeling, Tnf-a, Ova, Emt, Asthma, Tl1a

### Affiliations
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences
Department of Respiratory, Shandong Provincial Qianfoshan Hospital, Cheeloo College of Medicine, Shandong University, Jinan, China. Department of Respiratory, The First Affiliated Hospital of Shandong First Medical University & Shandong Provincial Qianfoshan Hospital, Shandong Institute of Respiratory Diseases.

### Submitter
Yabo Zhou

### Lab Head
Dr Dong Zhang
Department of Respiratory, Shandong Provincial Qianfoshan Hospital, Cheeloo College of Medicine, Shandong University, Jinan, China. Department of Respiratory, The First Affiliated Hospital of Shandong First Medical University & Shandong Provincial Qianfoshan Hospital, Shandong Institute of Respiratory Diseases.


