### Accession
PXD001924

### Title
s54-dependent response to nitrogen limitation and virulence in Burkholderia cenocepacia H111

### Description
Using a discovery shotgun proteomics approach, the expressed proteome of Burkholderia cenocepacia (strain H111) was analyzed under normal and starved nitrogen growth conditions. B. cenocepacia is an opportunistic human pathogen that is particularly problematic for patients suffering from cystic fibrosis.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were grown in ABC medium with normal (15 mM) and limited (0.3 mM) nitrogen levels, and subjected to sub-cellular fractionation (Cyt=cytoplasmic, TM=total membrane). Proteins were extracted and separated by 1D SDS-PAGE, and the gels were cut into ten slices. After reduction and carbamidomethylation, the proteins were digested with trypsin and resulting peptides were separated by RP-HPLC and analyzed with an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) interfaced with a nanoelectrospray source.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were searched against a protein sequence database containing 6932 annotated B. cenocepacia H111 proteins (based on the recently finished genome sequence (accession nos. HG938370, HG938371, and HG938372)) and protein sequences of 256 common contaminants. Spectra were searched against this database with MS-GF+ (MS-GFDB v9949) using the following parameters: Carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification on all Cysteines, oxidation of Methionines, deamidation of Asparagines and Glutamines, as well as cyclization of N-terminal Glutamines were considered as optional modifications. Spectra were searched for a match to fully-tryptic and semi-tryptic peptides and the automatic decoy search option was enabled. Search results were filtered and summarized using in-house tools. Requiring either three spectra or two distinct unambiguous peptides, 2,854 proteins were identified under normal nitrogen, and 2,792 proteins under nitrogen starved conditions (total of 3,215 proteins) at an estimated FDR of less than 1%. Additional RNA-seq data are held at GEO under the accession GSE66328.

### Publication Abstract
Members of the genus Burkholderia are versatile bacteria capable of colonizing highly diverse environmental niches. In this study, we investigated the global response of the opportunistic pathogen Burkholderia cenocepacia H111 to nitrogen limitation at the transcript and protein expression levels. In addition to a classical response to nitrogen starvation, including the activation of glutamine synthetase, PII proteins, and the two-component regulatory system NtrBC, B. cenocepacia H111 also upregulated polyhydroxybutyrate (PHB) accumulation and exopolysaccharide (EPS) production in response to nitrogen shortage. A search for consensus sequences in promoter regions of nitrogen-responsive genes identified a &#x3c3;(54) consensus sequence. The mapping of the &#x3c3;(54) regulon as well as the characterization of a &#x3c3;(54) mutant suggests an important role of &#x3c3;(54) not only in control of nitrogen metabolism but also in the virulence of this organism.

### Keywords
Burkholderia cepacia complex (bcc), Biofilm, Cystic fibrosis

### Affiliations
CeMM - Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences
Institute of Plant Biology, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland

### Submitter
Ulrich Goldmann

### Lab Head
Dr Gabriella Pessi
Institute of Plant Biology, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland


