### Accession
PXD011057

### Title
The Leishmania mexicana promastigote flagellar proteome

### Description
Leishmania are protists (class: Kinetoplastida) with a single multifunctional flagellum used for motility, attachment to the sand fly vector and sensory functions. To discover the protein composition of the L. mexicana promastigote flagellum, we fractionated L. mexicana promastigotes by mechanical shearing and differential centrifugation into four fractions: detergent soluble (Fs) and insoluble (Fi) fractions of isolated flagella and detergent soluble (Cs) and insoluble fractions (Ci) of deflagellated cell body remnants. A label-free quantitation method (SINQ; Trudgian et al., 2011, Proteomics 10.1002) was used to identify proteins enriched in each of the four fractions. This PRIDE upload contains .RAW, .MGF and .XML files, as well as the SINQ quantification output file “SINQ_raw_data” and the genome sequence annotation used for protein identification “MFiebig_20140619” (Fiebig et al., 2015, PLoS Pathogens II:e1005186). XML files are named SUB7467; MSS10859. .RAW and .MGF files are structured as follows (for each fraction there are eight files, corresponding to individual gel pieces): “Ci: C131121_030; C131121_031; C131121_032; C131121_033; C131121_034; C131121_035; C131121_036; C131121_037”, “Cs: C131121_040; C131121_041; C131121_042; C131121_043; C131121_044; C131121_045; C131121_046; C131121_047”, “Fi: C131121_010; C131121_011; C131121_012; C131121_013; C131121_014; C131121_015; C131121_016; C131121_017”, “Fs: C131121_020; C131121_021; C131121_022; C131121_023; C131121_024; C131121_025; C131121_026; C131121_027”.

### Sample Protocol
L. mexicana promastigotes were deflagellated using a 0.075M Ca2+ shock in combination with mechanical shearing. Sheared flagella and deflagellated cell bodies were separated by using differential centrifugation on a sucrose gradient and both fractions were further separated into detergent (1% octylglucoside) soluble and insoluble fractions for analysis of four fractions by mass spectrometry: cell body insoluble (Ci), cell body soluble (Cs), flagellar insoluble (Fi) and flagellar soluble (Fs). Protein samples were processed as stated in Gundry et al., 2009 (Curr Protoc Mol Biol 10(25): doi: 10.1002/0471142727.mb1025s88). Briefly, 5-20 µg protein sample was pre-fractionated on a 10% SDS-PAGE. Each sample lane was cut in eight pieces, washed twice in 100-200 µl of 25 mM Ammonium bicarbonate dissolved in 50% acetonitrile, washed twice in 100-300 µl 100% acetonitrile and vacuum centrifuged by using a SpeedVac. 100 µl of 10 mM TCEP (Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride) was added and incubated for 30 minutes at 37°C. Gel pieces were washed with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate and once again dried. 100-300 µl of 55 mM Iodoacetamide were added, samples incubated for 60 minutes in darkness at RT and desiccation procedure was repeated. Samples were deglycosylated by adding a mixture of 10 µl 1x G7 buffer + 1 µl PNGase F (BioLabs NEB #P0704) (500 units) and were incubated for 2 days at RT, covered by water. Gel pieces were dried in 100% acetonitrile as above, 20 µl trypsin solution (Promega V5111) was added and samples were incubated overnight at 37°C. 1 µl of formic acid was added, the supernatant was separated and gel pieces were mixed with 200 µl of 0.1% Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and incubated for 15 minutes. The extract was mixed with the separated solution, vacuum centrifuged to total dryness and resuspended in 50 µl of 0.1% TFA. Samples were desalted using C18 (Octadecyl) extraction disks (3M Empore, 2215), stuck in a 10 µl pipette tip and centrifuged briefly at 400·g with 30 µl of 100% acetonitrile to equilibrate the column. Columns were washed twice with 30 µl of 0.1% TFA. Digest mixture was loaded on the column, centrifuged, washed with 0.1% TFA and eluted with two washes of 50% acetonitrile in 0.1% TFA. Samples were dried by using a SpeedVac and resuspended in 10 µl 0.1% TFA. Desalted samples were analysed on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC (Dionex, Camberley, UK) system run in direct injection mode coupled to a QExactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron, Hemel Hempstead, UK). Desalted samples were resolved on a 25 cm long by 75 micron inner diameter picotip analytical column (New Objective, Woburn, MA, USA) which was packed in-house with ProntoSIL 120-3 C18 Ace-EPS phase, 3 µm bead (Bischoff Chromatography, Germany). The system was operated at a flow-rate of 300 nl/min. A 40 minute gradient was used to separate the peptides. The mass spectrometer was operated in a “Top 10” data dependent acquisition mode. Precursor scans were performed in the orbitrap at a resolving power of 70,000, from which the ten most intense precursor ions were selected by the quadrupole and fragmented by HCD (Higher-energy C-trap dissociation) at normalised collision energy of 28%. The quadrupole isolation window was set at 3 Da.  Charge state +1 ions and undetermined charge state ions were rejected from selection for fragmentation. Dynamic exclusion was enabled for 40s.

### Data Protocol
Raw output files .RAW from QExactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer were converted to .MGF file using ProteoWizard (Filter settings: threshold “count 200 most-intense”, peak picking “true 1-“). Converted files were uploaded to the Central Proteomics Facilities Pipeline (CPFP, Trudgian et al., 2010, Bioinformatics 10.1093). Filter settings for CPFP were set to PSM & peptide-level FDR “1.00%”, PSM & peptide-level q-value “0.01”, protein group FDR “1.00%” and protein group q-value “0.01”. CPFP was used to operate meta-searches with Mascot, X!Tandem kscore and OMSSA against the MFiebig_20140619 sequence database (provided in project files; Fiebig et al., 2015, PLoS Pathogens II:e1005186). Filter settings for the meta-search was set to missed cleavages “2”, precursor tolerance “0.1 Da”, charge state(s) “1+, 2+ and 3+”, modifications “carbamidomethylation (C), oxidation (M), and deamidation (N/Q)”, quantitation “none” and quantitation tolerance “0.02”. Search results were quantified by using normalized spectral index quantification SINQ (Trudgian et al., 2011, Proteomics 10.1002). Filter settings were set to PROT_MAX_QVAL “0.01”, PSM_MAX_QVAL “0.01”, FRAGMENT_TOL “0.1”, maximum q-value (local FDR) “0.01”  and peptides per protein “at least 2”.

### Publication Abstract
The protozoan parasite Leishmania possesses a single flagellum, which is remodelled during the parasite's life cycle from a long motile flagellum in promastigote forms in the sand fly to a short immotile flagellum in amastigotes residing in mammalian phagocytes. This study examined the protein composition and in vivo function of the promastigote flagellum. Protein mass spectrometry and label free protein enrichment testing of isolated flagella and deflagellated cell bodies defined a flagellar proteome for L. mexicana promastigote forms (available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD011057). This information was used to generate a CRISPR-Cas9 knockout library of 100 mutants to screen for flagellar defects. This first large-scale knockout screen in a Leishmania sp. identified 56 mutants with altered swimming speed (52 reduced and 4 increased) and defined distinct mutant categories (faster swimmers, slower swimmers, slow uncoordinated swimmers and paralysed cells, including aflagellate promastigotes and cells with curled flagella and disruptions of the paraflagellar rod). Each mutant was tagged with a unique 17-nt barcode, providing a simple barcode sequencing (bar-seq) method for measuring the relative fitness of L. mexicana mutants in vivo. In mixed infections of the permissive sand fly vector Lutzomyia longipalpis, paralysed promastigotes and uncoordinated swimmers were severely diminished in the fly after defecation of the bloodmeal. Subsequent examination of flies infected with a single paralysed mutant lacking the central pair protein PF16 or an uncoordinated swimmer lacking the axonemal protein MBO2 showed that these promastigotes did not reach anterior regions of the fly alimentary tract. These data show that L. mexicana need directional motility for successful colonisation of sand flies.

### Keywords
Leishmania, Flagellum

### Affiliations
University of Oxford, Sir William Dunn School of Pathology
Royal Society University Research Fellow, Group Leader and Research Lecturer at Sir William Dunn School of Pathology (University of Oxford); Fellow by special election at St. Edmund Hall (University of Oxford)

### Submitter
Tom Beneke

### Lab Head
Dr Eva Gluenz
Royal Society University Research Fellow, Group Leader and Research Lecturer at Sir William Dunn School of Pathology (University of Oxford); Fellow by special election at St. Edmund Hall (University of Oxford)


