### Accession
PXD006070

### Title
Rumen metaproteome -  A Structural and Functional Elucidation of the Rumen Microbiome Influenced by Various Diets and Microenvironments

### Description
The structure and function of the microbiome inhabiting the rumen are, amongst other factors, mainly shaped by the animal’s feed intake. Describing the influence of different diets on the inherent community arrangement and associated metabolic activities of the most active ruminal fractions (bacteria and archaea) is of great interest for animal nutrition, biotechnology and climatology. Samples were obtained from three fistulated Jersey cows rotationally fed with corn silage, grass silage or hay, each supplemented with a concentrate mixture. Samples were fractionated into ruminal fluid, squeezed solid and solid matter. DNA, proteins and metabolites were analyzed subsequently. DNA extracts were used for Illumina sequencing of the 16S rRNA gene and the metabolomes of rumen fluids were determined by 500MHz-NMR spectroscopy. Tryptic peptides derived from protein extracts were measured by LC-ESI-MS/MS and spectra were processed by a two-step database search for quantitative metaproteome characterization. Protein- and DNA-based datasets revealed significant differences between sample fractions and diets and affirmed similar trends concerning shifts in phylogenetic composition. Ribosomal genes and proteins belonging to the phylum of Proteobacteria, particularly Succinivibrionaceae, exhibited a higher abundance in corn silage-based samples while fiber-degraders of the Lachnospiraceae family emerged in great quantities throughout the solid phase fractions. The analysis of 8163 quantified bacterial proteins revealed the presence of 166 carbohydrate active enzymes in varying abundance. Cellulosome affiliated proteins were less expressed in the grass silage, glycoside hydrolases appeared in slightest numbers in the corn silage. Most expressed glycoside hydrolases belonged to families 57 and 2. Enzymes analogous to ABC transporters for amino acids and monosaccharides were more abundant in the corn silage whereas oligosaccharide transporters showed a higher abundance in the fiber-rich diets. Proteins involved in carbon metabolism were detected in high numbers and identification of metabolites like short-chain fatty acids, methylamines and phenylpropionate by NMR enabled linkage between producers and products. This study forms a solid basis to retrieve deeper insight into the complex network of gut microbial adaptation.

### Sample Protocol
Rumen matter was taken from five different positions (cranial, caudal, dorsal, ventral, medial) and squeezed vigorously by hand using disposable polyethylene gloves to obtain the liquid phase (LP) sample fraction, the remains constituted the solid phase (SP) sample fraction. Equal parts of the LP and SP sample fractions were pooled across the five rumen positions. As a third sample fraction ventral rumen fluid (RF) was collected using a vacuum pump. In total 27 samples (of three cows, diets and sample fractions) were frozen immediately at -80°C until further processing.  Sample preparation was performed as described recently (Deusch and Seifert, 2015). To detach firmly fiber-associated bacteria, 4 g of each SP sample were shaken horizontally for 2 h at 4°C in 35 ml precooled 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8; 0.2 M NaCl; 0.1% methylcellulose 400cP). To dilute the liquid fractions, 5 ml of the respective buffer were added to 8 g of the LP and RF samples. All samples were sonicated briefly for 1 min and pressed through two-layered sterile cheesecloth. Residues were rinsed again with 30 ml of the above mentioned buffer and pressed vigorously. Obtained filtrates were centrifuged at 200 x g for 10 min at 4°C and supernatants were further filtered through sterile 40 µm PE filters. Cells were pelleted at 10,000 x g for 15 min at 4°C and washed three times in 1 ml 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5; 0.1 mg/ml chloramphenicol; 1 mM PMSF). Subsequently, aliquoted cell pellets were stored at -20°C. Protein extraction was performed as described previously (Deusch and Seifert, 2015). Cell pellets were resuspended by vortexing in 200 µl 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5; 0.1 mg/ml chloramphenicol; 1 mM PMSF) and 300 µl of 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5; 2% SDS) were added. After shaking in a Thermo-Mixer (Eppendorf) for 10 min at 60°C and 1,200 rpm 1 ml of 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5; 0.1 mg/ml MgCl2; 1 mM PMSF; 1 µl/ml Benzonase, Novagen) was added. Cells were lysed by ultra-sonication on ice, four times 2 min (amplitude 60%; cycle 0.5) followed by shaking in a Thermo-Mixer for 10 min at 37°C and 1,200 rpm. Samples were centrifuged at 10,000 × g for 10 min at 4°C and proteins in the supernatant were precipitated for 30 min at 4°C using 20% precooled trichloroacetic acid. Subsequently, precipitates were centrifuged at 12,000 × g for 15 min at 4°C, protein pellets were washed twice in precooled acetone and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Protein pellets were resuspended in 35 µl Laemmli buffer by 5 min sonication bath and vortexing followed by incubation for 5 min at 95°C to reduce disulfide bonds. 20 µl were purified with a short run on a one-dimensional sodium dodecyl sulphate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (1D-SDS-PAGE; 4% stacking gel, 20 mA; 12% running gel, 40 mA). Each gel lane of 0.5 cm length representing one sample was cut out and subjected to in-gel trypsin (Promega, Madison, USA) digestion overnight (Jehmlich et al., 2008). Obtained peptides were purified and desalted using Stage tips equipped with five layers of Empore™ SPE Disks (C18; diameter 47 mm; thickness 0.5 mm) as described in detail by Rappsilber et al. (2007). LC-ESI-MS/MS analyses were performed in technical duplicates on an EasyLC 1000 nano-UHPLC (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Prior to LC-ESI-MS/MS measurements peptides were reconstituted in 20 µl 0.1% formic acid and 4 µl were injected by the autosampler. Separations of the peptide mixtures were done on a 20 cm fused silica emitter of 75 µm inner diameter (Proxeon Biosystems), in-house packed with reversed-phase ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 1.9 µm resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH). Peptide mixtures were injected onto the separation column in HPLC solvent A (0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 500 nl/min and eluted with a solvent B (80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid) gradient of 1-33% within the first 73 min followed by an increase to 50% within 3 min plus an additional 3 min at 90%. The Q Exactive HF was operated in the positive ion mode. Full scan was acquired in the mass range from 300 to 1650 m/z in the Orbitrap mass analyzer at a resolution of r = 120,000 followed by higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation of the twelve most intense precursor ions. High resolution MS/MS spectra were acquired with a resolution of r = 30,000. The target values were 3 x 106 charges for the MS scans and 1 x 105 charges for the MS/MS scans with a maximum fill time of 25 ms and 45 ms, respectively. The dynamic precursor exclusion was set to 30 s and peptide match was enabled.

### Data Protocol
To reduce the size of databases and therewith improve the false discovery rate of peptide identifications and enhance the coverage of the rumen metaproteome, a two-step approach was applied (Jagtap et al., 2013; Hansen et al., 2014). First, all 54 raw data files were processed separately by Thermo Proteome Discoverer software (v. 1.4.1.14), Mascot engine (v. 2.4) in searching independently against the UniProtKB/TrEMBL databases (v. April 28, 2016) for bacteria (Taxonomy ID 2; 40,026,301 sequences) and archaea (Taxonomy ID: 2157; 1,200,545 sequences). Oxidation of methionine was set as variable modification and carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification. Precursor ion tolerance was defined at 10 ppm and fragment ion tolerance at 0.02 Da with two missed trypsin cleavages. Furthermore, all peaks besides the top 12 peaks per 100 Da in each MS/MS were removed to denoise spectra before identification and the Percolator node was activated with a false discovery rate of 1%. Using Thermo Proteome Discoverer, protein grouping was enabled with a minimum PSM confidence of medium and a delta Cn better than 0.15, strict maximum parsimony principle was applied. As a second step, the protein identifications inferred from the previous process were used to create sample-specific databases for label-free quantification (LFQ) of proteins via MaxQuant (v. 1.5.3.8) as previously demonstrated (Cox et al., 2014). The final in-house databases contained 22,331 bacterial and 818 archaeal protein sequences. The LFQ modality of MaxQuant was enabled with a minimum ratio count of two. Matching between runs with a match time window of 0.7 min and re-quantification was applied. Technical duplicates were combined to one experiment. Oxidation of methionine was set as variable modification with a maximum of five modifications per peptide and carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification. Besides, the default settings of MaxQuant were kept which included two missed trypsin cleavages, fully tryptic peptides, a peptide and protein false discovery rate below 1%, at least one peptide per protein (Gupta and Pevzner, 2009), a precursor mass tolerance of 4.5 ppm after mass recalibration and a fragment ion mass tolerance of 20 ppm. The phylogenetic composition was inferred from the proteins quantified by MaxQuant as annotated in the UniProtKB/TrEMBL database.

### Publication Abstract
The structure and function of the microbiome inhabiting the rumen are, amongst other factors, mainly shaped by the animal's feed intake. Describing the influence of different diets on the inherent community arrangement and associated metabolic activities of the most active ruminal fractions (bacteria and archaea) is of great interest for animal nutrition, biotechnology, and climatology. Samples were obtained from three fistulated Jersey cows rotationally fed with corn silage, grass silage or grass hay, each supplemented with a concentrate mixture. Samples were fractionated into ruminal fluid, particle-associated rumen liquid, and solid matter. DNA, proteins and metabolites were analyzed subsequently. DNA extracts were used for Illumina sequencing of the 16S rRNA gene and the metabolomes of rumen fluids were determined by 500 MHz-NMR spectroscopy. Tryptic peptides derived from protein extracts were measured by LC-ESI-MS/MS and spectra were processed by a two-step database search for quantitative metaproteome characterization. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with the identifier PXD006070. Protein- and DNA-based datasets revealed significant differences between sample fractions and diets and affirmed similar trends concerning shifts in phylogenetic composition. Ribosomal genes and proteins belonging to the phylum of Proteobacteria, particularly Succinivibrionaceae, exhibited a higher abundance in corn silage-based samples while fiber-degraders of the Lachnospiraceae family emerged in great quantities throughout the solid phase fractions. The analysis of 8163 quantified bacterial proteins revealed the presence of 166 carbohydrate active enzymes in varying abundance. Cellulosome affiliated proteins were less expressed in the grass silage, glycoside hydrolases appeared in slightest numbers in the corn silage. Most expressed glycoside hydrolases belonged to families 57 and 2. Enzymes analogous to ABC transporters for amino acids and monosaccharides were more abundant in the corn silage whereas oligosaccharide transporters showed a higher abundance in the fiber-rich diets. Proteins involved in carbon metabolism were detected in high numbers and identification of metabolites like short-chain fatty acids, methylamines and phenylpropionate by NMR enabled linkage between producers and products. This study forms a solid basis to retrieve deeper insight into the complex network of microbial adaptation in the rumen.

### Keywords
Metaproteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Rumen

### Affiliations
University of Hohenheim
University of Hohenheim (Germany), Institute of Animal Science

### Submitter
Jana Seifert

### Lab Head
Dr Jana Seifert
University of Hohenheim (Germany), Institute of Animal Science


