### Accession
PXD029558

### Title
Meta-proteomic analysis of two mammoth’s trunk for an indirect picture of their habitat and characterization of the alpha-1 type I collagen sequence

### Description
The investigation of archaeological samples, which are of inestimable value, requires minimally destructive or non-destructive sampling techniques. One of the most promising and recent non-invasive techniques is known under the acronym EVA, an ethylene vinyl acetate film which avoids contamination and proteins damages. The present work reports the results of the metaproteomic analysis performed on the middle part of a trunk, and on the portion of a trunk tip tissue of two different woolly mammoths some 40000 years’ old. In particular, proteins were extracted by applying EVA (Ethylene-Vinyl Acetate) films to the surface of these tissues belonging to two Mammuthus primigenus specimens, discovered in two regions located in the Russian Far East, and then investigated via a shotgun MS-based approach. This approach allowed to obtain two interesting results: i) an indirect description of the habitat of these two mammoths, and ii) an improved sequence characterization of the alpha-1 type I collagen (col1a1), the major component of type I collagen. Sequence characterization of the col1a1 highlighted some differences between M. primigenius and other Proboscidea together with the identification of two potentially diagnostic amino acidic mutations that could be used to reliably distinguish the Mammuthus primigenius respect to the other two genera of elephantids (i.e. Elephas and Loxodonta), and the extinct American mastodon (i.e. Mammut americanum). The results were validated through the level of deamidation and other diagenetic chemical modifications of the sample peptides, which were used to discriminate the “original” endogenous peptides from contaminant ones.

### Sample Protocol
Sample Collection and preparation for proteomics analyses  An EVA diskette was gently humidified with ultrapure water and then placed on the surface of the two sample tissues here investigated for 60 min. A section of the EVA diskette (5mm X 5mm) was cut with a scalpel and the proteins trapped in its film were eluted sequentially with 200 μL of volatile buffers (formate at pH 3, followed by ammonia at pH 10) and finally with volatile solvents (acetonitrile) so as to collect positively and negatively charged as well as hydrophobic proteins. The dried eluate was suspended in 50mM Ammonium bicarbonate and the proteins were quantified by a fluorimetric assay using the Qubit Protein Assay kit with the Qubit 1.0 Fluorometer (ThermoFisher Scientifc, Milan, Italy).  The eluate was reduced by dithiothreitol (1:50, 3 h at room temperature) and alkylated by iodoacetamide (two times the concentration of DTT, 1h in the dark at 20°C). The sample was finally digested by porcine trypsin at an enzyme–substrate ratio of 1:50 (overnight, 37 °C). The resulting peptide mixture solutions were dried under vacuum (Concentrator Plus, Eppendorf), re-dissolved in 50 µL of 5% aqueous FA, filtered by ultracentrifugation (750 µL, 0.2 µm Nonsterile Micro-Centrifugal Filters, Sepachrom, Rho, Milan), and analyzed by UHPLC/high resolution nanoESI–MS/MS. An empty diskette of EVA film was used as control sample. It was processed and analyzed by proteomics on the same way of the EVA diskette placed in contact with the surface of mammoth samples.   Mass spectrometry analysis Mass spectrometry data were acquired via a Thermo Fisher Scientific Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid® (Q-OT-qIT) mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Liquid chromatography was carried out using a Thermo Scientific Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Sunnyvale, CA). One microliter of peptide mixture was loaded onto an Acclaim ®Nano Trap C18 Column (100 µm i.d. x 2 cm, 5 µm particle size, 100 Å). After washing the trapping column with solvent A (H2O + 0.1% FA) for 3 min at a flow rate of 7 μL/min, the peptides were eluted from the trapping column onto a PepMap® RSLC C18 EASY-Spray column (75 µm i.d. x 50 cm, 2 µm particle size, 100 Å) and separated by elution at a flow rate of 0.25 µL/min at 40°C by a linear gradient of solvent B (ACN + 0.1% FA) in A, 5% for 3 min, followed by 5% to 65% in 85 min, 65% to 95% in 5 min, finishing by holding 95% B 5 min, 95% to 5% in 10 min and re-equilibrating at 5% B for 15 min. The eluting peptide cations were converted to gas-phase ions by electrospray ionization using the following parameters: source voltage, 1.75 kV; ion transfer tube temperature, 275 °C; m/z range 200-1600 (Resolution @ 200 m/z: 120 K). Tandem MS was performed with low-resolution in the ion trap for those precursors with charge state 2÷4; HCD fragmentation: normalized C.E. of 35. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 60 s with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on. The instrument was run in top speed mode with 3 s cycles. MS/MS spectral quality was enhanced enabling the parallelizable time option. MS data acquisition was carried out by utilizing the Xcalibur v. 3.0.63 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). To avoid cross-contamination with other biological samples all solvents were prepared freshly and ancient samples were not processed or analyzed in one batch with modern references. To avoid carryover during nLC-MS/MS runs, from three to five blank runs were performed before each analysis using the same gradient program. Spectra acquired in the last blank run were searched against the SwissProt database without species origin restrictions.

### Data Protocol
Database Search, protein identification, and deamidation calculation  nLC–MS/MS data were processed by MaxQuant (MQ) software 1.6.3.4 (https://www.maxquant.org/). The raw data were analyzed and searched against three different databases separately: i) a proteins database, referred in the text as Proboscidea database (30304 entries, February 2021) including Swiss-Prot and TrEMBL sequences of Loxodonta africana, Elephas maximus, Mammut americanum and Mammuthus prigimegius; ii) a Viridiplantae database (Swiss-Prot; 40656 entries, February 2021); and iii) a Bacteria and Nematoda database including 334868 and 5099 Swiss-Prot entries from bacteria and nematode, respectively (February 2021). Moreover, the common Repository of Adventitious Proteins (c-RAP; https://www.thegpm.org/crap/) contaminant database was enabled in the database search.  The first step of database search was carried out using the following parameters: a) tryptic peptides with a maximum of 3 missed cleavage sites; b) cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification; c) oxidation of methionine, the transformation of N-terminal glutamine and N-terminal glutamic acid residue to pyroglutamic acid form, and the deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, oxidation of proline as variable modifications. Match type was “match from and to”. The decoy mode was “revert”. PSM, Protein and Site decoy fraction FDR were set at 0.01 as threshold for peptide and protein identifications. Minimum score for modified and unmodified peptides was set at 40. All the other parameters were set as default.  In the data analysis only peptides with intensity over the Max Quant threshold were considered. Then, each database was investigated to identify additional chemical modifications and improve peptides identifications. All the parameters were the same of the previous step; in particular, the following chemical modifications were investigated, as variable modifications: i) oxidation, di-oxidation, formation of kynurenine, and formation of oxo-lactone, for tryptophan residues; ii) oxidation, di-oxidation, iodination and di-iodination, and formation of dopaquinone, for tyrosine residues; iii) acetylation of lysine; iv) di-oxidation of methionine; v) tri-oxidation of cysteine. Finally, to be sure of the species assigned by the software to each protein identified, all the identified peptides underwent BLASTp (Basic Local Alignment Search Tool for protein) searches through the NCBI database (http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi) to validate species identifications and to rule out conserved peptides between species. A protein was considered identified if a minimum of two peptides were matched. The metaproteomics analysis was performed by consulting the open-source web application Unipept (Unipept 4.3; http://unipept.ugent.be), using all the peptides identified with a score>40 and an intensity over the MaxQuant threshold, regardless of the initially assigned protein.  An estimation of the percentage of deamidation for each sample was calculated with the aid of a freely available command-line script for Python 2.x (https://github.com/dblyon/deamidation), which use the MaxQuant “evidence.txt” file. The calculations were done separately for potentially original peptides and potential contaminants peptides as previously reported in Mackie et al. 2018.  With the aim to characterize collagen amino acid sequence, nLC-nESI MS/MS data were analyzed and searched against the all UniProt publicly available entries of collagen alpha-1chain (COL1A1; total of 772 sequences) using integrated PEAKS X De Novo sequencing (v. 10.0, Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, ON Canada) and the MaxQuant softwares. Database search was carried out using the following parameters: i) tryptic peptides with a maximum of 3 missed cleavage sites; ii) cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification; iii) oxidation of methionine, oxidation of proline, the transformation of N-terminal glutamine and N-terminal glutamic acid residue to pyroglutamic acid form, and the deamidation of asparagine and glutamine as variable modifications. Database search by PEAKS, and in particular SPIDER algorithm, was carried out using the following parameters: the precursor mass tolerance threshold was set to 15 ppm and the maximum fragment mass error was set to 0.6 Da; Peptide spectral matches (PSM) were validated using a Target Decoy PSM Validator node based on q-values at a 1% False Discovery Rate (FDR); score thresholds for Peptide spectral matches (PSMs) were set to obtain for each database search FDR values, for PSMs, Peptide sequences, and Proteins identified, below the 1.0% value. Database search by Max Quant software was carried out using the parameters previously described for metaproteomics analysis.

### Publication Abstract
The recent paleoproteomic studies, including paleo-metaproteomic analyses, improved our understanding of the dietary of ancient populations, the characterization of past human diseases, the reconstruction of the habitat of ancient species, but also provided new insights into the phylogenetic relationships between extant and extinct species. In this respect, the present work reports the results of the metaproteomic analysis performed on the middle part of a trunk, and on the portion of a trunk tip tissue of two different woolly mammoths some 30,000&#xa0;years&#xa0;old. In particular, proteins were extracted by applying EVA (Ethylene-Vinyl Acetate studded with hydrophilic and hydrophobic resins) films to the surface of these tissues belonging to two Mammuthus primigenus specimens, discovered in two regions located in the Russian Far East, and then investigated via a shotgun MS-based approach. This approach allowed to obtain two interesting results: (i) an indirect description of the habitat of these two mammoths, and (ii) an improved characterization of the collagen type I, alpha-1 and alpha-2 chains (col1a1 and col1a2). Sequence characterization of the col1a1 and col1a2 highlighted some differences between M. primigenius and other Proboscidea together with the identification of three (two for col1a1, and one for col1a2) potentially diagnostic amino acidic mutations that could be used to reliably distinguish the Mammuthus primigenius with respect to the other two genera of elephantids (i.e., Elephas and Loxodonta), and the extinct American mastodon (i.e., Mammut americanum). The results were validated through the level of deamidation and other diagenetic chemical modifications of the sample peptides, which were used to discriminate the "original" endogenous peptides from contaminant ones. The data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange with identifier&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;PXD029558&#x2009;&gt;&#x2009;.

### Keywords
Non-invasive technique, Mammoth, Collagen, Paleoproteomic, High-resolution mass spectrometry, Meta-proteomics

### Affiliations
University of Catania
Department of Chemical Sciences, Organic Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, University of Catania, Via S. Sofia 64, 95123 Catania, Italy

### Submitter
Vincenzo Cunsolo

### Lab Head
Dr Salvatore Foti
Department of Chemical Sciences, Organic Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, University of Catania, Via S. Sofia 64, 95123 Catania, Italy


