### Accession
PXD030746

### Title
Data in support of Gold micro-particles for knee osteoarthritisGold micro-particles for knee osteoarthritis

### Description
This study investigated the effect of intraarticular gold micro particle implants for the treatment of pain and inflammation in KOA. The present open, exploratory, proof-of-concept study investigated whether intraarticular gold ions could act as a KOA treatment option through modulation of inflammatory mediators, pain sensitivity, and central pain mechanisms.   The primary aim of this study were 1) to measure the effect on pain and function after intra-articular injection of 20 mg gold microparticles > 20 µm into the KOA joint using the patient’s synovial fluid (SF) as a carrier and 2) measure associated possible proteomic changes in the SF and serum.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for proteome analysis was prepared essentially as Birkelund (Birkelund et al., 2020). The protein concentration in biofluids was measured by a microassay. A total of 25ug SF and serum subject to in-situ trypsinization (trypsin ratio 1:100) using reduction and alkylation using a Filter Aided Sample Preparation protocol (10kDa cut-off) before analysis with tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS). To expand the protein coverage of the MS analysis, a pH-fractioning of the enzymatically digested samples was carried out. A total of 500ng tryptic digest were analyzed in technical duplicates in randomized order using a nano UPLC ESI MS/MS setup consisting of a Dionex RSLC nano pump (Dionex RSLC, Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected to a Bruker timsTOF PRO mass spectrometer operated in DIA-PASEF positive ion mode (Bruker Daltronics, DE).

### Data Protocol
The analyses of the proteomic primary raw data output were searched against spectral databases generated by fractionated pooled samples using human reference proteome database (05.2021; 20364 entries) in Biognosys Spectronaut (v. 14.10) (Schaab et al., 2012) and using statistical analysis (Koh et al., 2019). Quantitative proteome analysis of SF and serum samples were accomplished by discovery proteomics using DIA-PASEF (Meier et al., 2020).  Raw data is provided as zip files and search output as Biognosys output.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Gold, Pain, Proteomics, Inflammation, Osteoartritits

### Affiliations
Aalborg University

### Submitter
Allan Stensballe

### Lab Head
Dr Allan Stensballe
Aalborg University


