### Accession
PXD030415

### Title
K48/K63-linked polyubiquitination of ATG9A at K581/K838 by TRAF6 E3 ligase

### Description
Excessive generation and accumulation of highly reactive oxidizing molecules causes oxidative stress and oxidative damage to cellular components. Accumulating evidence indicates that autophagy diminishes oxidative damage in cells and maintains redox homeostasis by degrading and recycling intracellular damaged components. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying the activation of oxidative stress-mediated autophagic response remain elusive. Here we show that ubiquitin E3 ligase TNF receptor-associated factor 6 (TRAF6) and the deubiquitinase A20 coordinate to regulate ATG9A ubiquitination and autophagy activation in cells responding to oxidative stress. The reactive oxygen species (ROS)-dependent TRAF6-mediated non-proteolytic, K48/63-linked ubiquitination of ATG9A enhances its association with Beclin 1 and the assembly of class III phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI3KC3/VPS34) UVRAG complex, thereby stimulating autophagy. Notably, depletion of ATG9A or expression of the ATG9A ubiquitination mutants markedly decreases ROS-induced VPS34 activation and autophagy. We further find that lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced ROS production also stimulates TRAF6-mediated ATG9A ubiquitination and enhances the assembly of the UVRAG-containing VPS34 complex in an ATG9A-dependent manner. Ablation of ATG9A causes aberrant TLR4 endosomal trafficking and decreased phosphorylation of IRF-3 in LPS-stimulated macrophages. Our findings provide important insight into how K48/K63-linked ubiquitination of ATG9A contributes to the regulation of oxidative stress-induced autophagy.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T cells transfected with V5-ATG9A and Flag-TRAF6 were lysed and immunoprecipitated with anti-V5 antibodies, resolved by SDS-PAGE, and then subjected to SYPRO Ruby (Invitrogen, S12000) staining. The bands corresponding to ATG9A were excised, in-gel digested with Lys-C (Wako, 125–05061)/trypsin (Promega, V5111), and subjected to liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS) analysis (Orbitrap Fusion™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer).

### Data Protocol
The data obtained from LC-MS/MS acquisition were processed by Proteome Discoverer (v2.4.1.15; Thermo Scientific) and searched against Swiss-Prot human protein sequence database with the Mascot Daemon server (v.2.6.2; Matrix Science). The modifications search criteria applied were carbamidomethyl (C), oxidation (M), GlyGly (K) and LeuArgGlyGly (K). The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide identifications was set as 1%. The ubiquitin sites and peptide sequence assignments contained in Mascot search results were further validated by manual confirmation from raw MS/MS data.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Traf6, Atg9a

### Affiliations
Academia Sinica,Institute of Biological Chemistry
Institute of Biological Chemistry, Academia Sinica

### Submitter
YI-TING WANG

### Lab Head
Dr Guang-Chao Chen
Academia Sinica,Institute of Biological Chemistry


