### Accession
PXD033065

### Title
A Spin-Tip Enrichment Strategy for the Simultaneous Analysis of N-Glycopeptides and Phosphopeptides from Human Pancreatic Tissues

### Description
Post-translational modifications (PTMs) change protein structures and functions. Methods for the simultaneous enrichment of multiple PTM types can maximize coverage in analyses. We present a protocol using dual-functional Ti(IV)-immobilized metal affinity chromatography followed by mass spectrometry for the simultaneous enrichment and analysis of protein N-glycosylation and phosphorylation in pancreas tissues.

### Sample Protocol
Cadaveric human pancreas tissue was cryopulverized. Proteins were extracted using SDS then precipitated with acetone. Pellets were resuspended in urea and digested using LysC/trypsin. Desalted peptides were enriched using dual-functional Ti(IV)-IMAC in a spin-tip format to separate N-glycopeptides and phosphopeptides into seven fractions, which were analyzed using LC-MS/MS using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos with stepped HCD fragmentation. This simultaneous enrichment was compared to conventional N-glycopeptide and phosphopeptide enrichment using ERLIC and IMAC, respectively.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched using Byonic (in Proteome Discoverer 2.5) and MaxQuant for glycopeptide and phosphopeptide identification, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Mass spectrometry can provide deep coverage of post-translational modifications (PTMs), although enrichment of these modifications from complex biological matrices is often necessary due to their low stoichiometry in comparison to non-modified analytes. Most enrichment workflows of PTMs on peptides in bottom-up proteomics workflows, where proteins are enzymatically digested before the resulting peptides are analyzed, only enrich one type of modification. It is the entire complement of PTMs, however, that leads to biological functions, and enrichment of a single type of PTM may miss such crosstalk of PTMs. PTM crosstalk has been observed between protein glycosylation and phosphorylation, the two most common PTMs in human proteins and also the two most studied PTMs using mass spectrometry workflows. Using the simultaneous enrichment strategy described herein, both PTMs are enriched from post-mortem human pancreatic tissue, a complex biological matrix. Dual-functional Ti(IV)-immobilized metal affinity chromatography is used to separate various forms of glycosylation and phosphorylation simultaneously in multiple fractions in a convenient spin tip-based method, allowing downstream analyses of potential PTM crosstalk interactions. This enrichment workflow for glyco- and phosphopeptides can be applied to various sample types to achieve deep profiling of multiple PTMs and identify potential target molecules for future studies.

### Keywords
N-glycopeptides, Simultaneous enrichment, Post-translational modifications (ptms), Phosphopeptides, Dual-functional ti(iv)-immobilized metal affinity chromatography (imac), Pancreas, Electrostatic repulsion hydrophilic interaction chromatography (erlic)

### Affiliations
University of Wisconsin-Madison
School of Pharmacy, University of Wisconsin-Madison

### Submitter
Dylan Nicholas Tabang

### Lab Head
Dr Lingjun Li
School of Pharmacy, University of Wisconsin-Madison


