### Accession
PXD030300

### Title
Amyloid peptide β-dependent loss of endothelial barrier function

### Description
Alzheimer’s disease is the most common form of dementia and is associated with the accumulation of amyloid peptide β in the brain parenchyma. Vascular damage and microvascular thrombosis contribute to the neuronal degeneration and the loss of brain function typical of this disease. In this study, we utilised a murine model of Alzheimer’s disease to evaluate the neurovascular effects of this disease. Upon detection of an increase in the phosphorylation of the endothelial surface receptor VE-cadherin, we focused our attention on endothelial cells.

### Sample Protocol
The hippocampus was excised from paraformaldehyde-fixed mouse brain sections (100 μm thickness) and lysed in 100 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) plus 1% w/w sodium deoxycholate (SDC) buffer. After boiling, samples were sonicated and reduced in the presence of 10 mM dithiotreitol (DTT). Samples were alkylated in presence of 20 mM iodoacetamide and the tryptic digestion of 20 μg was performed at a 500:1 protein to enzyme ratio overnight.

### Data Protocol
Acquired LC-MS/MS data were searched against the reviewed mouse protein data base Uniprot (October 2020, 17,053 protein entries, EMBL) using the Sequest algorithm integrated in the Proteome Discoverer software version 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Only peptide with a high confidence (false discovery rate of 1% using a decoy data base approach) were accepted as identified. Peptide areas were summed to protein areas and used for quantitative analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Alzheimer's disease is the most common form of dementia and is associated with the accumulation of amyloid peptide &#x3b2; in the brain parenchyma. Vascular damage and microvascular thrombosis contribute to the neuronal degeneration and the loss of brain function typical of this disease. In this study, we utilised a murine model of Alzheimer's disease to evaluate the neurovascular effects of this disease. Upon detection of an increase in the phosphorylation of the endothelial surface receptor VE-cadherin, we focused our attention on endothelial cells and utilised two types of human endothelial cells cultured in vitro: 1) human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) and 2) human brain microvascular endothelial cells (hBMECs). Using an electrical current impedance system (ECIS) and FITC-albumin permeability assays, we discovered that the treatment of human endothelial cells with amyloid peptide &#x3b2; causes a loss in their barrier function, which is oxidative stress-dependent and similarly to our observation in mouse brain associates with VE-cadherin phosphorylation. The activation of the superoxide anion-generating enzyme NADPH oxidase 1 is responsible for the oxidative stress that leads to the disruption of barrier function in human endothelial cells in vitro. In summary, we have identified a novel molecular mechanism explaining how the accumulation of amyloid peptide &#x3b2; in the brain parenchyma may induce the loss of neurovascular barrier function, which has been observed in patients. Neurovascular leakiness plays an important role in brain inflammation and neuronal degeneration driving the progression of the Alzheimer's disease. Therefore, this study provides a novel and promising target for the development of a pharmacological treatment to protect neurovascular function and reduce the progression of the neurodegeneration in Alzheimer's patients.

### Keywords
Oxidative stress, Amyloid peptide β, Alzheimer’s disease, Endothelial barrier, Hippocampus

### Affiliations
University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf
Institute of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine
Mass Spectrometric Proteomics
Institute of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine, University Medical Center Hamburg Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany

### Submitter
Christoph Krisp

### Lab Head
Dr Giordano Pula
Institute of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine, University Medical Center Hamburg Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany


