### Accession
PXD030755

### Title
Revisiting non-coding nature of viroids

### Description
Viroids are small circular highly structured pathogens infecting a broad range of plants, caus-ing economic losses. Since their discovery in the 70s, they have been considered as non-coding pathogens. In the last few years the discovery of other RNA entities, similar in terms of size and structure, that where shown to be translated (e.g cirRNAs, precursors of miRNA, RNA sat-ellites) as well as studies showing that some viroids are located in ribosomes, have reemerged the idea that viroids may be translated. In this study we used advanced bioinformatic analy-sis, in vitro experiments and LC-MS/MS to search for small viroid peptides of the Pospiviroidae PSTVd. Our results suggest that in our experimental conditions, even though the circular form of PSTVd is found in ribosomes, no produced peptides were identified. This indicates that the presence of PSTVd in ribosomes is most probably not related to peptide pro-duction but rather to another unknown function that requires further study

### Sample Protocol
Sp3-mediated protein digestion: N. benthamiana plants were agroinfected with PSTVdNB and upper leaves were collected 4 wpi. Leaf tissue was pooled and homogenized in 4% SDS, 0.1 M DTT, 0.1M Tris pH 8 lysis buffer. Three biological replicas of each group (either non-inoculated or 4 wpi) were processed using the sensitive sp3 protocol. The cysteine residues were reduced in 100 mM DTT and alkylated in 100 mM iodoa-cetamide (Acros Organics). Twenty micrograms of beads (1:1 mixture of hydrophilic and hydrophobic SeraMag carboxylate-modified beads, GE Life Sciences) were added to each sample in 50% ethanol. Protein clean-up was performed on a magnetic rack. The beads were washed twice with 80% ethanol and once with 100% acetonitrile (Fisher Chemical). The captured proteins were digested overnight at 37°C under vigorous shaking (Thermo-mixer) with 0.5 μg Trypsin/LysC (mixture MS grade, Promega) prepared in 25 mM ammo-nium bicarbonate. Next day, the supernatants were collected, dried using a vacuum cen-trifuge, solubilized in a mobile phase A, sonicated and the peptide concentration deter-mined through measurement of the absorbance at 280 nm. LC-MS/MS: Nano-liquid chromatography of the resulting tryptic peptide mixture was carried out using a Ultimate3000 RSLC system configured with an Acclaim pepmap C18 trap column (ThermoFisher Scientific) and a 25 cm-long pepsep nano column (pepsep) for a total of 500 ng of peptides was loaded on the precolumn at a flow rate of 6 µL/min for 4 min with 0.1% formic acid in water. The peptide separation was achieved using 0.1% (vol/vol) formic acid in water (mobile phase A) and 0.1% (vol/vol) formic acid in acetonitrile (ACN) (mobile phase B). The flow rate was set to 350 nL/min in the first 12 min of the gradient and 250 nL/min in the main gradient. The gradient was linear from 8% to 28% phase B in 35 min, 28% to 36% in 5min, 36 to 95% in 0.5 min staying isocatic for 5 min and then equilibrating at 8% for 10 min at 350 nL/min. The data acquisition was performed in positive mode using a Q Exactive HF-X Or-bitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). MS data were acquired in a da-ta-dependent strategy selecting up to top 12 precursors based on precursor abundance in the survey scan (m/z 350–1500). The resolution of the survey scan was 120 000 (at m/z 200) with a target value of 3 × 10E6 ions and a maximum injection time of 100ms. HCD MS/MS spectra were acquired with a target value of 1 x 105 and resolution of 15 000 (at m/z 200) using an NCE of 28. The maximum injection time for MS/MS was 22 ms. Dynamic exclu-sion was enabled for 20 s after one MS/MS spectra acquisition. The isolation window for MS/MS fragmentation was set to 1.2 m/z. Three technical replicas were acquired.

### Data Protocol
The generated raw files were searched using the MaxQuant Software (1.6.14.0) [50] using Andromeda, against the predicted proteome based on the N. benthamiana Genome v1.0.1 (Niben v1.0.1, containing 56701 proteins, 2015), with the predicted PSTVd ORFs and the MaxQuant common contaminant database. To be accepted for the identification, an error of less than 20 ppm (first recalibration search) and 4.5 ppm tolerance in the main search of peptide mass tolerance was accepted. Up to 2 missed cleavages were allowed and the modifications taken into account were: oxidation (M); acetylation (protein N-term); deamidation (NQ) as variable and carbamidomethylation (Cys) as fixed modifications. Matching between runs and second peptide options were activated. Protein, peptide and “site” identifications were validated at a FDR of 1% using a reversed database. The above data analysis was repeated using an “unspecific” search mode against the predicted PSTVd ORFs, removing the constrain for tryptic generated peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Viroids are small, circular, highly structured pathogens that infect a broad range of plants, causing economic losses. Since their discovery in the 1970s, they have been considered as non-coding pathogens. In the last few years, the discovery of other RNA entities, similar in terms of size and structure, that were shown to be translated (e.g., cirRNAs, precursors of miRNA, RNA satellites) as well as studies showing that some viroids are located in ribosomes, have reignited the idea that viroids may be translated. In this study, we used advanced bioinformatic analysis, in vitro experiments and LC-MS/MS to search for small viroid peptides of the PSTVd. Our results suggest that in our experimental conditions, even though the circular form of PSTVd is found in ribosomes, no produced peptides were identified. This indicates that the presence of PSTVd in ribosomes is most probably not related to peptide production but rather to another unknown function that requires further study.

### Keywords
Pstvd, Translation, Viroid, Cirrna, Non-coding rna, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Protein Analysis Laboratory
B.S.R.C. "Alexander Fleming",
Alexander Fleming Street 34
16672, Vari,
Greece
Department of Biology, University of Crete, Vassilika Vouton, GR-71409 Heraklion/Crete, Greece  Institute of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Foundation for Research and Technology, Greece, GR-71110 Heraklion/Crete, Greece

### Submitter
Martina Samiotaki

### Lab Head
Dr Kriton Kalantidis
Department of Biology, University of Crete, Vassilika Vouton, GR-71409 Heraklion/Crete, Greece  Institute of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Foundation for Research and Technology, Greece, GR-71110 Heraklion/Crete, Greece


