### Accession
PXD000893

### Title
secretome study for human hepatic model during entamoeba invasion

### Description
Investigations of human parasitic diseases depend on the availability of appropriate in vivo animal models and ex vivo experimental systems, and are particularly difficult for pathogens whose exclusive natural hosts are humans, as for Entamoeba histolytica, the protozoan parasite responsible for amoebiasis.  We elaborated a human hepatic in vitro model consisting of cultured liver sinusoidal endothelial cells and hepatocytes in a 3D collagen-I environment. We have characterized the model's barrier function, its chemical and structural complexity and examined E. histolytica invasion. This study deals with secretome of hepatic model under various invasion conditions.

### Sample Protocol
To identify compounds released by the hepatic cells into the culture medium on top of the model, fresh serum-free DMEM was added and collected after 3h. Proteins contained in the collected medium were precipitated with methanol-chloroform (Wessel & Flügge 1984Wessel & Flügge 1984), redissolved in 8M urea in 25mM NH4HCO3, reduced with 5mM TCEP (45min, 37°C), alkylated with 50mM iodoacetamide (60min, 37°C) in the dark, diluted to 1M urea and digested for 16h at 37°C with trypsin (1µg, sequencing grade gold, Promega). Peptide mixtures were acidified to pH 2.8 with formic acid, desalted with minispin C18 columns (Nest Group), vacuum-dried and solubilized in 0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile for mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using Thermo Proteome Discoverer software suite (version 1.4). For the search engine SEQUEST, the peptide precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 Raw MS data files were processed with the Thermo Proteome Discoverer software suite (version 1.4) using SEQUEST search engine with peptide precursor mass and fragment ion mass tolerances set to 10ppm and 0.6Da, respectively. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine residues was used as fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine along with N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. All raw spectra were queried against the H. sapiens, E. histolytica and B.taurus UniProt databases with the false discovery rate (FDR) set to 0.01 for peptide and protein identifications using the percolator node.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lsec cell, Proteomics, Secretome, Hepatic cell, Entamoeba

### Affiliations
Cell Biology of Parasitism Unit Insitut Pasteur, 28 rue du Dr Roux, 75724 Paris Cedex 15, FRANCE
VProteomics

### Submitter
gagan jhingan

### Lab Head
Dr Nancy Guillen
Cell Biology of Parasitism Unit Insitut Pasteur, 28 rue du Dr Roux, 75724 Paris Cedex 15, FRANCE


