### Accession
PXD027040

### Title
Extracellular vesicles of Acholeplasma laidlawii can be internalized by human fibroblasts and modulate expression of proteins

### Description
We demonstrated that extracellular vesicles of A. laidlawii can be internalized by human skin fibroblasts as a result of their co-incubation in vitro. Incubation of HSF with A. laidlawii EVs resulted in a significant modulation of 23 cellular proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Fibroblasts were lysed with CHAPS и NP40 and treated by the Nuclease Mix. Protein concentration in the samples was measured by the Bradford method. Protein samples were stained with fluorescent dyes - CyDye-DIGE Cy3 and CyDye-DIGE Cy5 for the control and experimental cultures, respectively. One-dimensional electrophoresis in a 12% polyacrylamide gel was then done to check the efficacy of staining. Experiments were done at least in triplicate. IEF was performed in glass tubes in 4% polyacrylamide gel. After IEF, the gel tubes were equilibrated and placed onto the surface of a gradient (9–16%) polyacrylamide gel. Electrophoresis was performed in Tris-Glycine-SDS buffer. Gels were scanned using a Typhoon Trio scanner. Gel images were analysed with PDQuest v.8.01 software. A cut-off value was set at a 1.5-fold change, and differences in spot intensities were analysed by Student's test, where p<0.05 was considered as statistically significant.  For identification, HSF proteins were chosen that consistently demonstrated a significant up- or down-regulation in at least three biological replicates. Protein spots were cut out from a gel and washed in ddiH2O and acetonitrile:200 mM NH4HCO3 (1:1). Protein reduction was performed using 10 mM DTT and 100 mМ NH4HCO3, followed by alkylation using a mixture of 50 mM iodoacetamide and 100 mM NH4HCO3. The gels were incubated in acetonitrile, dried and incubated in trypsin Gold solution at 37°C overnight. To extract peptides, a solution containing 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) in deionized water was added to gel fragments that were then incubated in an ultrasonic bath. The resulting extracts were collected into separate tubes. Samples were analysed by mass-spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was performed using a MALDI-TOF/TOF mass-spectrometer Ultraflex III BRUKER in the positive ion mode in the diapason of 500-4000 Da using reflectron. The accuracy of the measured monoisotopic masses in the reflect mode after calibration to the peaks of trypsin autolysis was 0.007%; possible methionine oxidation and modification of cysteines by acrylamide were taken into consideration. Proteins were identified from the masses of proteolytic fragments using Mascot Peptide Fingerprint software and UniProt database.

### Publication Abstract
The extracellular vesicles (EVs) produced by bacteria transport a wide range of compounds, including proteins, DNA and RNA, mediate intercellular interactions, and may be important participants in the mechanisms underlying the persistence of infectious agents. This study focuses on testing the hypothesis that the EVs of mycoplasmas, the smallest prokaryotes capable of independent reproduction, combined in the class referred to as Mollicutes, can penetrate into eukaryotic cells and modulate their immunoreactivity. To verify this hypothesis, for the first time, studies of in vitro interaction between human skin fibroblasts and vesicles isolated from Acholeplasma laidlawii (the ubiquitous mycoplasma that infects higher eukaryotes and is the main contaminant of cell cultures and vaccines) were conducted using confocal laser scanning microscopy and proteome profiling, employing a combination of 2D-DIGE and MALDI-TOF/TOF, the Mascot mass-spectrum analysis software and the DAVID functional annotation tool. These studies have revealed for the first time that the extracellular vesicles of A. laidlawii can penetrate into eukaryotic cells in vitro and modulate the expression of cellular proteins. The molecular mechanisms behind the interaction of mycoplasma vesicles with eukaryotic cells and the contribution of the respective nanostructures to the molecular machinery of cellular permissiveness still remain to be elucidated. The study of these aspects is relevant both for fundamental research into the "logic of life" of the simplest prokaryotes, and the practical development of efficient control over hypermutable bacteria infecting humans, animals and plants, as well as contaminating cell cultures and vaccines.

### Keywords
Human, Maldi, Extracellular vesicles, Acholeplasma laidlawii, 2d-dige

### Affiliations
Kazan Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics, FRC Kazan Scientific Center of RAS, Russia

### Submitter
Alexey Mouzykantov

### Lab Head
Dr Alexey A. Mouzykantov
Kazan Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics, FRC Kazan Scientific Center of RAS, Russia


