### Accession
PXD048736

### Title
Proteotranscriptomics of the most popular hoast sea anemone Entacmaea quadricolor reveals not all toxin genes expressed are recruited into its venom arsenal

### Description
While the unique symbiotic relationship between anemonefish and sea anemones is iconic, it is still not fully understood how anemonefish withstand and thrive within this venomous host environment. In this study we used a proteotranscriptomics approach to elucidate the proteinaceous toxin repertoire from the most popular host sea anemone Entacmaea quadricolor. Although 1251 different toxin or toxin-like RNA transcripts were expressed in E.quadricolor tentacles and 2736 proteins were detected in milked venom, only 135 (approx. 10%) of proteins in venom were classified as putative toxins. This work raises the perils of defining a dominant venom type based on transcriptomics data alone in sea anemones, as we found that the dominant venom type differed between the transcriptome and proteome data. Moreover, anemonefishes interact with sea anemone proteins, so it is important when determining the dominant toxin type to examine the peptides and proteins that are present in host sea anemone venom and mucus which anemonefishes are known to interact.

### Sample Protocol
Lyophilized venom from four E. quadricolor individuals in the non-hosting period and four E. quadricolor individuals in the hosting period underwent proteomics analysis at the Flinders University Omics Facility. A 50 µg protein pool of all eight samples (25 µg non-hosting:25 µg hosting), was reduced and alkylated following a standard procedure. Briefly, a mixture of hydrophobic and hydrophilic Sera-Mag Carboxylate SpeedBeads (Cytiva) was used for protein clean up and trypsin digestion following the manufacturer’s instructions. Following the trypsin digestion, peptides in each sample were cleaned up with a 200 µl C18 StageTip and eluted in 80% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid. The sample was then dried down in a Christ RVC 2-25 CD plus vacuum concentrator (Christ, Osterode am Harz, Germany) and resuspended in 5% acetonitrile. Approximately 5.8 µg peptides were recovered from the pooled venom sample as measured by the NanoDrop.

### Data Protocol
For measuring protein expression levels, approximately 1ug of tryptic peptides (6.4 µL) from each individual sample was injected onto a PepMap™ 100 trap column (0.3 x 5 mm, 5 µm C18, Thermo Fischer). For Data Independent Acquisition (DIA) runs, a Thermo Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer was configured to acquire 34 variable m/z precursor isolation windows spanning 350- 1200 m/z mass range, with a 1 m/z overlap between windows. Precursor spectra over a 350 - 1200 m/z mass range were acquired prior to DIA scans employing RunStart EASY-ICTM as the internal mass calibration with a resolution of 120,000, AGC target 8e5, dynamic maximum inject time were used for all full scan MS spectra. An ms2 resolution of 30,000, AGC target 1e6, dynamic maximum inject time mode, and normalised fixed HDC collision energy of 30 % was employed for all DIA scans. Spectronaut software V16.022 (Biognosys AG, Schlieren, Switzerland) using factory (default) settings was used for peak detection, deconvolution and normalization of the spectra utilising the spectral library and to determine levels of the proteins detected in each venom sample. Briefly, quantification was performed at the ms2 level with fragment ions that passed filtering used for quantification that was calculated by measuring the area under the curve between the XIC peak boundaries for each target ion.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Toxin, Venomics, Sea anemone, Proteotranscriptomics

### Affiliations
College of Science and Engineering, Flinders University, Bedford Park, South Australia 5042, Australia
Flinders University

### Submitter
Alex Colella

### Lab Head
Professor Catherine Abbott
College of Science and Engineering, Flinders University, Bedford Park, South Australia 5042, Australia


### SDRF
- cell type: not applicable
- disease: Not applicable
- organism part: venom
- organism: Entacmaea quadricolor
- instrument: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos
- label: label free sample
- modification parameters: nan

