### Accession
PXD020213

### Title
Identification of GltB-interacting proteins by CoIP-MS

### Description
To investigate whether GltB possess more function, Co-immunoprecipitation coupled with Mass Spectrometry (CoIP-MS) was used to isolate the putative GltB binding proteins.We used strains PAO1/p-gtrS-YFP and ΔgltB/p-gtrS-YFP to ensure the membrane protein GtrS of great interest is at high levels. A target GltB-specific antibody anti-GltB was used and ΔgltB/p-gtrS-YFP was set up as a negative control. The whole gel lane was divided into small fractions and in-gel digested for liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis. Control sample was also analyzed in parallel to distinguish the background proteins.

### Sample Protocol
CoIP samples as described above were evaporated by lyophilizer (ThermoFisher, SAVANT SPD111V), then resuspended in 16 μl distilled water and mixed with 4 μl 5 x SDS-PAGE loading buffer and loaded onto a 12% polyacrylamide gel. SDS-PAGE was carried out at 80 V for 15 min followed by 120 V for 80 min. The gel was first visualized with Coomassie brilliant blue stain, and then each gel lane was divided into small fractions and digested with trypsin before mass spectrometric analysis. For trypsin digestion, the protein gel was reduced with 20 mM DTT (50 mM NH4HCO3) at 56°C for 30 min and alkylated with iodoacetamide (50 mM NH4HCO3) at a final concentration of 100 mM at room temperature for 20 min in darkness. Then proteins were digested overnight with 1:50 (protein: enzyme, w/w) trypsin (Promega) at 37°C.

### Data Protocol
The proteome analysis was performed on an Orbitrap Q-Exactive HF (Thermo Fisher Scientific) platform connected to an online nanoflow EASY nLC1200 HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The tryptic peptides were loaded onto 15-cm columns packed in-house with C18 1.9 μm ReproSil particles (Dr. Maisch GmbH) and separated with a 60-min gradient at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. A homemade column oven maintained the column temperature at 50°C. A data-dependent acquisition MS method was used, in which one full scan (350–1500 m/z, R = 70,000 at 200 m/z) at a target of 3e6 ions was first performed, followed by top 15 data-dependent MS/MS scans with higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) at a resolution of 17,500 at 200 m/z. Other instrument parameters were set as follows: 27% normalized collision energy (NCE), 1e3 AGC target, 100 ms maximum injection time, 2.0 m/z isolation window. Raw mass spectrometry data were processed using MaxQuant version 1.6.0.1 against the P. aeruginosa database, with a false-discovery rate (FDR) < 0.01 at the level of proteins and peptides. Control sample was also analyzed in parallel to distinguish the background proteins. After excluding the background interfering proteins, the rest of proteins were identified as potential GltB interacting protein.

### Publication Abstract
A two-component system GtrS-GltR is required for glucose transport activity in <i>P. aeruginosa</i> and plays a key role during <i>P. aeruginosa</i>-host interactions. However, the mechanism of action of GtrS-GltR has not been definitively established. Here, we show that <i>gltB</i>, which encodes a periplasmic glucose binding protein, is essential for the glucose-induced activation of GtrS-GltR in <i>P. aeruginosa</i>. We determined that GltB is capable of binding to membrane regulatory proteins including GtrS, the sensor kinase of the GtrS-GltR TCS. We observed that alanine substitution of glucose-binding residues abolishes the ability of GltB to promote the activation of GtrS-GltR. Importantly, like the <i>gtrS</i> deletion mutant, <i>gltB</i> deletion mutant showed attenuated virulence in both <i>Drosophila melanogaster</i> and mouse models of infection. In addition, using CHIP-seq experiments, we showed that the promoter of <i>gltB</i> is the major in vivo target of GltR. Collectively, these data suggest that periplasmic binding protein GltB and GtrS-GltR TCS form a complex regulatory circuit that regulates the virulence of <i>P. aeruginosa</i> in response to glucose.

### Keywords
Gltb-interacting protein, Lc-ms/ms, Pseudomonas aeruginosa

### Affiliations
Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica Chinese Academy of Sciences 
Shanghai institute of materia medica

### Submitter
Chenchen Xu

### Lab Head
Dr Lefu Lan
Shanghai institute of materia medica


