### Accession
PXD047337

### Title
ANDROGEN DRIVES MELANOMA INVASIVENESS AND METASTATIC SPREAD BY INDUCING TUMORIGENIC FUCOSYLATION: Fucoproteomics

### Description
Melanoma incidence and mortality rates are historically higher for men than women. Although emerging studies have highlighted tumorigenic roles for the male sex hormone androgen and its receptor (AR) in melanoma, cellular and molecular mechanisms underlying these sex-associated discrepancies are poorly defined. Here, we delineate a previously undisclosed mechanism by which androgen-activated AR transcriptionally upregulates fucosyltransferase 4 (FUT4) expression, which drives melanoma invasiveness by interfering with adherens junctions (AJs). Global phosphoproteomic and fucoproteomic profiling, coupled with in vitro and in vivo functional validation, further reveals that AR-induced FUT4 fucosylates L1 cell adhesion molecule (L1CAM), which is required for FUT4-increased metastatic capacity. Tumor microarray and gene expression analyses demonstrate that AR-FUT4-L1CAM-AJs signaling correlates with pathological staging in melanoma patients. By delineating key androgen-triggered signaling that enhances metastatic aggressiveness, our findings help to explain sex-associated clinical outcome disparities and highlight AR/FUT4 and its effectors as potential prognostic biomarkers and therapeutic targets in melanoma.

### Sample Protocol
Empty vector (EV)/FUT4-overexpression (OE) and shNT/shFUT4 (RNAi knockdown) melanoma cells were lysed, and 800µg of lysates were used for lectin pull-down.  Control agarose beads (ThermoFisher Scientific) and AAL lectin-conjugated agarose beads (Vector Laboratories) were pre-blocked with 2% IgG-Free BSA on a rotator at 4°C for 2-3 h. Cells were lysed with the IP buffer (1% Triton X-100; 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4; 150 mM NaCl in ddH2O + protease and phosphatase inhibitors). After sonication, the concentration of lysates was determined by DC Protein Assay (Bio-Rad). For each pull-down reaction, 400 μg of lysates were diluted 1:4 with the dilution buffer (detergent-free IP buffer) and rotated with 30 µl of pre-blocked beads overnight at 4°C. The next day, the beads were washed 3 times with PBS. Beads-bound proteins were eluted and denatured by boiling in 20 µl of 2x Laemmli buffer at 95-100°C for 10 min. After 20 min of SDS-PAGE separation, the gel was rinsed with water and stained with InstantBlue solution (Abcam) for 30 min. Gel bands were excised and minced, followed by de-staining with aqueous 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Ambic) containing 50% methanol, reduction with 2 mM TCEP in 25 mM Ambic, alkylation with 20 mM IAA in 25 mM Ambic, and trypsin digestion. Peptides were extracted from the gel by incubation in aqueous 50% acetonitrile/0.1% TFA for 20 min at room temperature. The resulting peptide solutions were purified by the Ziptip procedure (Millipore). The eluted peptides were dried by vacuum centrifugation and suspended in 15μL of solvent A (aqueous 2% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid.     A nanoflow ultra-high-performance liquid chromatograph (RSLC, Dionex) connected to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) was used for tandem mass spectrometry peptide sequencing. The LC-MS/MS was performed by the Proteomics & Metabolomics Core at Moffitt Cancer Center. Briefly, peptide mixtures were first loaded onto a pre-column (100µm ID x 2cm packed with C18 reversed-phase resin, 5 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size) and washed for 8 min with aqueous solvent A. The trapped peptides were eluted onto the analytical column (C18, 75 µm ID x 25 cm, 2 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size, Dionex).  The 120-minute gradient was programmed as follows: 95% solvent A for 8 min, solvent B (aqueous 90% ACN + 0.1% FA) from 5% to 38.5% in 90 min, then solvent B from 50% to 90% in 7 min and held at 90% for 5 min, followed by solvent B from 90% to 5% in 1 min and re-equilibration for 10 min. The flow rate on the analytical column was 300 nl/min. Twenty tandem mass spectra were collected using data-dependent acquisition (DDA) following each survey scan. The resolution settings were 60,000 and 17,500 for MS and MS/MS, respectively. The isolation window was 2.0Th with an offset of 0.5.

### Data Protocol
The data were processed and analyzed using MaxQuant software (version 1.5.2.8.)94. The fragment mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm. Peptides with a minimum of 7 amino acids and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages were considered. Methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were selected as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was used as the fixed modification. The false discovery rate (FDR) was applied at 0.05. MaxQuant data was further normalized with IRON (Iterative Rank-Order Normalization) within each dataset. For this upload, similar parameters were used for Mascot searches.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Androgen, Fucoproteomics, Melanoma, Fucosylation, Lectin pulldown, Metastasis

### Affiliations
Tumor Biology Moffitt Cancer Center Tampa, FL, USA
Moffitt Cancer Center

### Submitter
John Koomen

### Lab Head
Dr Eric Lau, PhD
Tumor Biology Moffitt Cancer Center Tampa, FL, USA


