### Accession
PXD036741

### Title
Syntaxin5’s flexibility in SNARE pairing supports Golgi functions

### Description
The intracellular transport system is an evolutionally conserved, essential, and highly regulated network of organelles and small transport carriers that traffic protein and lipid cargoes within the cell. The Conserved Oligomeric Golgi (COG) complex is the major Golgi Multisubunit Tethering Complex. Its key function is orchestration of SNARE mediated fusion of cargo carriers at the Golgi. We hypothesized the depletion of the major Golgi SNAREs GS28 (GOSR1) and GS15 (BET1L) due to COG malfunction is the major contributor to COG-related glycosylation defects. To test this, we created single, double and triple knockouts (KO) of Golgi SNAREs in HEK293T cells and analyzed the resulting mutants using a comprehensive set of biochemical, mass-spectrometry (MS) and microscopy approaches. Deletion of GS28 significantly affected GS15, but not the other two partners, STX5 and YKT6. Surprisingly, our analysis revealed that COG dysfunction is more deleterious for Golgi function than disrupting the canonical Golgi SNARE complex indicating the existence of an adaption mechanism. Indeed, quantitative mass-spectrometry analysis of STX5-interacting proteins revealed unexpected flexibility in Golgi SNARE pairing in mammalian cells. We uncovered two novel non-canonical Golgi SNARE complexes – STX5/SNAP29/VAMP7 and STX5/VTI1B/GS15/YKT6 which were increased in GS28 KO cells. Upon GS28 deletion, SNAP29 remarkably localized to the Golgi. Merely mislocalizing STX5 from Golgi abolished the SNARE substitution causing dramatic glycosylation defects. Our data points to the remarkable plasticity in the intra-Golgi membrane fusion machinery and places STX5 as the only essential Golgi Qa-SNARE.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T KO cells were plated on 15 cm dishes. Cells were grown to 100% confluency. Prior to lysis, cells were treated with 1mM NEM for 15min at 37°C in order to inhibit NSF activity and thereby preserve SNARE complexes. Thereafter, cells were washed thrice with DPBS and lysed for 1h on ice in 1% Triton lysis buffer made in 50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1 mM PMSF and 1X Protease inhibitor cocktail. Lysates were centrifuged at 20,000 r.c.f for 10 min at 4°C. The supernatant was collected. A small volume of the supernatant was set aside as the “input”. For STX5 IP, STX5 (Lab) antibody was added to the remaining supernatant at a 1:100 dilution. Lysates were incubated with the antibody at 4°C, for 16h on a rotor. Antigen-antibodies complexes were pulled down using Protein G- Agarose (Roche, Lot #70470320). First, the beads were washed thrice in the wash buffer composed of 0.05% Triton in the Tris-NaCl buffer described above and then introduced into the lysates. The beads were incubated with the lysates on a rotor for 90 min at RT. The beads were collected by centrifugation and washed thrice in the 0.05% Triton wash buffer followed by three more washes with 1X PBS to get rid of the excess detergent. Bound protein was eluted by heating the beads in 2X Laemmli sample buffer containing 10% β-mercaptoethanol at 95°C for 10 min.preparation for MS was described in (Wisniewski et al., 2009). Briefly, purified proteins were reduced, alkylated, and digested using filter-aided sample preparation. Tryptic peptides were then separated by reverse-phase XSelect CSH C18 2.5 um resin (Waters) on an in-line 150 x 0.075 mm column using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo). Peptides were eluted using a 60 min gradient from 98:2 to 65:35 buffer A:B ratio. Eluted peptides were ionized by electrospray (2.2 kV) followed by mass spectrometric analysis on an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo). To assemble a chromatogram library, six gas-phase fractions were acquired on the Orbitrap Exploris with 4 m/z DIA spectra (4 m/z precursor isolation windows at 30,000 resolution, normalized AGC target 100%, maximum inject time 66 ms) using a staggered window pattern from narrow mass ranges using optimized window placements. Precursor spectra were acquired after each DIA duty cycle, spanning the m/z range of the gas-phase fraction (i.e. 496-602 m/z, 60,000 resolution, normalized AGC target 100%, maximum injection time 50 ms). For wide-window acquisitions, the Orbitrap Exploris was configured to acquire a precursor scan (385-1015 m/z, 60,000 resolution, normalized AGC target 100%, maximum injection time 50 ms) followed by 50x 12 m/z DIA spectra (12 m/z precursor isolation windows at 15,000 resolution, normalized AGC target 100%, maximum injection time 33 ms) using a staggered window pattern with optimized window placements. Precursor spectra were acquired after each DIA duty cycle

### Data Protocol
Following data acquisition, spectra were searched using an empirically corrected library and a quantitative analysis was performed to obtain a comprehensive proteomic profile. Proteins will be identified and quantified using EncyclopeDIA (Searle et al., 2018). Scaffold DIA was used for visualization. The False discovery rate (FDR) thresholds, at both the protein and peptide levels, were set at 1%. Protein exclusive intensity values were assessed for quality using ProteiNorm (Graw et al., 2020). Popular normalization methods were evaluated including log2 normalization (Log2), median normalization (Median), mean normalization (Mean), variance stabilizing normalization (VSN) (Huber et al., 2002), quantile normalization (Quantile) (Bolstad, 2022) cyclic loess normalization (Cyclic Loess) (Ritchie et al., 2015), global robust linear regression normalization (RLR) (Chawade et al., 2014), and global intensity normalization (Global Intensity) (Chawade et al., 2014). The individual performance of each method was evaluated by comparing the following metrices: total intensity, pooled intragroup Coefficient of Variation (PCV), Pooled intragroup Median Absolute Deviation (PMAD), Pooled intragroup estimate of variance (PEV), intragroup correlation, sample correlation heatmap (Pearson), and log2-ratio distributions. The VSN normalized data was used to perform statistical analysis using Linear Models for Microarray Data (limma) with empirical Bayes (eBayes) smoothing to the standard errors (Ritchie et al., 2015). Proteins with an FDR adjusted p-value ≤0.05 and a fold change ≥2 were considered significant.

### Publication Abstract
Deficiency in the conserved oligomeric Golgi (COG) complex that orchestrates SNARE-mediated tethering/fusion of vesicles that recycle the Golgi's glycosylation machinery results in severe glycosylation defects. Although two major Golgi v-SNAREs, GS28/GOSR1, and GS15/BET1L, are depleted in COG-deficient cells, the complete knockout of GS28 and GS15 only modestly affects Golgi glycosylation, indicating the existence of an adaptation mechanism in Golgi SNARE. Indeed, quantitative mass-spectrometry analysis of STX5-interacting proteins revealed two novel Golgi SNARE complexes-STX5/SNAP29/VAMP7 and STX5/VTI1B/STX8/YKT6. These complexes are present in wild-type cells, but their usage is significantly increased in both GS28- and COG-deficient cells. Upon GS28 deletion, SNAP29 increased its Golgi residency in a STX5-dependent manner. While STX5 depletion and Retro2-induced diversion from the Golgi severely affect protein glycosylation, GS28/SNAP29 and GS28/VTI1B double knockouts alter glycosylation similarly to GS28 KO, indicating that a single STX5-based SNARE complex is sufficient to support Golgi glycosylation. Importantly, co-depletion of three Golgi SNARE complexes in GS28/SNAP29/VTI1B TKO cells resulted in severe glycosylation defects and a reduced capacity for glycosylation enzyme retention at the Golgi. This study demonstrates the remarkable plasticity in SXT5-mediated membrane trafficking, uncovering a novel adaptive response to the failure of canonical intra-Golgi vesicle tethering/fusion machinery.

### Keywords
Snares, Gor1, Gosr2, Membrane trafficking, Stx5, Golgi, Cog, Bet1l, Vti1b, Ykt6, Snap29

### Affiliations
Department of Physiology and Cell Biology, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, 4301 West Markham Street, Little Rock, AR 72205, USA.
University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences

### Submitter
Zinia DSouza

### Lab Head
Dr Vladimir V Lupashin
Department of Physiology and Cell Biology, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, 4301 West Markham Street, Little Rock, AR 72205, USA.


