### Accession
PXD014848

### Title
DETECTION OF ODF1 IN KIDNEY MEDULLA

### Description
ODF1 has been described as an exclusively expressed testicular protein and is located in the outer dense fibers along the sperm tail. ODF1 has been involved in the sperm motility and in the development of the flagellum, but the function of ODF1 is not already clear. Applying western blot, immunofluorescence, and RT-PCR techniques we identified the protein and mRNA of ODF1 in the rat kidney. Finally, the presence of ODF1 in kidney has been confirmed through proteomic analysis using mass spectrometry. The results derived from these different complementary approaches indicate that, to our knowledge and for the first time, ODF1 is demonstrated to be present in an additional organ different to testis.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were obtained from the testis, kidney medulla and further cytoskeleton fraction isolation, as was described above, but without addition of protease inhibitor. Firstly, a proteomic analysis was carried out in testis and the peptides of ODF1 that were detected were compared with the ones isolated from kidney. Protein digestion and Mass Spectrometry analysis were performed at the Proteomics Core Facility CEQUIBIEM, at the University of Buenos Aires/CONICET (National Research Council) as follows: Coomassie G250-stained SDS-PAGE gel excised protein bands were sequentially washed and destained with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate 50% acetonitrile, and 100% acetonitrile; reduced and alkylated with 10 mM DTT and 20 mM iodoacetamide and in-gel digested with 100 ng Trypsin (Promega V5111) in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate overnight at 37°C.  Peptides were recovered by elution with 50% acetonitrile-0.5% trifluoroacetic acid, including brief sonication, and further concentrated by speed-vacuum drying. Samples were resuspended in 15 ul of water containing 0.1% Formic Acid. After that, the peptides were purified and desalted with ZipTip C18 columns (Millipore). The digests were analysed by nanoLC-MS/MS in a Thermo Scientific QExactive Mass Spectrometer coupled to a nanoHPLC EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific, Germany). For the LC-MS/MS analysis, approximately 1 μg of peptides was loaded onto the column and eluted for 120 minutes using a reverse phase column (C18, 2 µm, 100A, 50 µm x 150 mm) Easy-Spray Column PepMap RSLC (P/N ES801) suitable for separating protein complexes with a high degree of resolution. The flow rate used for the nano column was 300 nL min-1 and the solvent range from 7% B (5 min) to 35% (120 min). Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid in water whereas B was 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. The injection volume was 2µL. The MS equipment has a high collision dissociation cell (HCD) for fragmentation and an Orbitrap analyzer (Q-Exactive-Thermo Scientific, Germany). A voltage of 3,5 kV was used for Electro Spray Ionization (Thermo Scientific, EASY-SPRAY). XCalibur 3.0.63 (Thermo Scientific, Germany) software was used for data acquisition and equipment configuration that allows peptide identification at the same time of their chromatographic separation. A Data dependent method was used: Full-scan mass spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer. The scanned mass range was 400-1800 m/z, at a resolution of 70000 at 400 m/z and the twelve most intense ions in each cycle, were sequentially isolated, fragmented by HCD and measured in the Orbitrap analyzer. Peptides with a charge of +1 or with unassigned charge state were excluded from fragmentation for MS2. In a second stage a targeted approach was used, employing an m/z inclusion list with the m/z of ODF peptides which had been previously detected in testes samples

### Data Protocol
QExactive raw data was processed using Proteome Discoverer software (version 2.1.1.21 Thermo Scientific) and searched against Rattus norvegicus Uniprot database (http://www.uniprot.org/) and ODF sequence, with trypsin specificity and a maximum of two missed cleavage per peptide. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine was set as variable modification.  Proteome Discoverer searches were performed with a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and product ion tolerance to 0.05 Da. Protein hits were filtered for high confidence peptide matches with a maximum protein and peptide false discovery rate of 1% calculated by employing a reverse database strategy, for medium confidence peptide matches a peptide false discovery rate of 5% was allowed

### Publication Abstract
ODF1 has been described as an exclusively expressed testicular protein and is located in the outer dense fibers along the sperm tail. ODF1 has been involved in the sperm motility and in the development of the flagellum, but the function of ODF1 is not already clear. Other ODF proteins, such as ODF2 have been characterized in other tissues like the basal body of the kidney primary cilium, but so far only the mRNA of ODF1 has been described in other tissues. These observations let us to hypothesize that the expression of the protein ODF1 could not be limited to the testis. Therefore, in the present work we proposed to evaluate if the ODF1 protein could also be present in tissues other than the testis. Here we demonstrated through western blot, immunofluorescence, and RT-PCR techniques that the protein and mRNA of ODF1 have been identified in the rat kidney. Finally, the presence of ODF1 in kidney has also been confirmed through proteomic analysis using mass spectrometry. The results derived from these different complementary approaches indicate that, to our knowledge and for the first time, ODF1 is demonstrated to be present in an additional organ different to testis. This results raise new questions about potential other functions and locations of the ODF1 protein.

### Keywords
Testis, Odf1, Kidney

### Affiliations
Morpho-phisiology department, Faculty of Medicine, NAtional University of Cuyo. IHEM (Histology and Embriology Institute of Mendoza), CONICET, Mendoza Argentina.
National University of Cuyo

### Submitter
María Eugenia Cabrillana

### Lab Head
Dr Miguel Walter Fornés
Morpho-phisiology department, Faculty of Medicine, NAtional University of Cuyo. IHEM (Histology and Embriology Institute of Mendoza), CONICET, Mendoza Argentina.


