### Accession
PXD018687

### Title
Physiological tau interactome in brain and its link to tauopathies_complete submission

### Description
Alzheimer's disease (AD) and most of other tauopathies are incurable neurodegenerative diseases with unpleasant symptoms and consequences. The common hallmark of all these diseases is tau pathology but its connection with disease progress has not been completely understood so far. Therefore, uncovering novel tau interacting partners and pathology affected molecular pathways can reveal the causes of diseases as well as potential targets for development of AD treatment. Despite of large amount of known tau interacting partners, limited number of studies focused on in vivo tau interactions in disease or healthy conditions are available. Here, we applied an in vivo crosslinking approach, capable of capturing weak and transient protein-protein interactions, to a unique transgenic rat model of progressive tau pathology similar to human AD. We have identified 175 potential novel and known tau interacting proteins by MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry. Several of the most promising candidates for potential drug development were selected for validation by coimmunoprecipitation and colocalization experiments in animal and cellular models.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins and protein complexes crosslinked in vivo by formaldehyde were extracted from rat brainstems and tau-positive complexes were isolated using tandem immunoprecipitation. Stringent immunoprecipitation conditions were used to minimize nonspecific binders. Three tau-specific columns and two control columns were used. Elution of proteins was performed using 0.2M formic acid. Eluates were concetrated using SpeedVac and proteins were digested in 70% formic acid for 48 hrs at 37C. After drying, samples were diluted in 6M guanidine hydrochloride, alkylated with iodoacetamide and submitted to secondary digestion with trypsin. Reaction was quenched and dried using SpeedVac. Peptides were diluted in 2% acetonitrile and 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid in LC-MS water, separated using Dionex UltiMate 3000 UHPLC chromatography system equiped with C18 analytical column and individual fractions were spotted onto MALDI target plate. For mass spectrometry analysis of peptides, an ultrafleXtreme MALDI-ToF mass spectrometer (Bruker) in positive linear mode for MS and reflection mode for tandem MS/MS was used.

### Data Protocol
For the control of the instrument and data processing the flexControl 3.4, WARP-LC 1.3 and ProteinScape 3.1.5 software (Bruker Daltonik, Germany) were used. Proteins were identified using MASCOT database searching engine. Search parameters details were as follows:  Database: SwissProt 2017_11 Taxonomy: Rattus (8,031 sequences) Enzyme: None (all possible cleavages) Missed Cleavages: 1 Fixed Modifications: Carbamidomethyl (C) Variable Modifications: Deamidated (NQ)  Formyl (K)  Formyl (N-term)  Oxidation (M)  Schiff base (K)  Schiff base (N-term) Instrument Type CID: MALDI-TOF-TOF Instrument Type ETD: ETD-TRAP Peptide Tolerance: 30.0 ppm Peptide Charge: 1+ Mass: Monoisotopic Peptide Decoy: OFF Significance Threshold: 0,05 Type of search: MS/MS Ion Search MS/MS Tolerance: 0.3 Da Percolator: OFF Ions Score Cut-off: 15 Ions Score Threshold for Significant Peptide IDs:   35 Identity Threshold (only Mascot): OFF Peptide Rank Cut-off: 10 Min. Peptide Length: 5

### Publication Abstract
Alzheimer's disease (AD) and most of the other tauopathies are incurable neurodegenerative diseases with unpleasant symptoms and consequences. The common hallmark of all of these diseases is tau pathology, but its connection with disease progress has not been completely understood so far. Therefore, uncovering novel tau-interacting partners and pathology affected molecular pathways can reveal the causes of diseases as well as potential targets for the development of AD treatment. Despite the large number of known tau-interacting partners, a limited number of studies focused on in vivo tau interactions in disease or healthy conditions are available. Here, we applied an in vivo cross-linking approach, capable of capturing weak and transient protein-protein interactions, to a unique transgenic rat model of progressive tau pathology similar to human AD. We have identified 175 potential novel and known tau-interacting proteins by MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry. Several of the most promising candidates for possible drug development were selected for validation by coimmunoprecipitation and colocalization experiments in animal and cellular models. Three proteins, Baiap2, Gpr37l1, and Nptx1, were confirmed as novel tau-interacting partners, and on the basis of their known functions and implications in neurodegenerative or psychiatric disorders, we proposed their potential role in tau pathology.

### Keywords
Tauopathies, Tau protein, Tau pathology, Mass spectrometry, Alzheimer's disease, In vivo crosslinking, Tau interaction partners

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Proteomics and Metabolomics, Institute of Neuroimmunology, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Dubravska cesta 9, 84510, Bratislava, Slovakia
Institute of Neuroimmunology, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Dubravska cesta 9, 84510, Bratislava, Slovakia

### Submitter
Jozef Hanes

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Andrej Kovac
Laboratory of Proteomics and Metabolomics, Institute of Neuroimmunology, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Dubravska cesta 9, 84510, Bratislava, Slovakia


