### Accession
PXD029936

### Title
Proteome-wide cellular thermal shift assay reveals novel crosstalk between brassinosteroid and auxin signaling

### Description
We demonstrated that bikinin changed the thermal stability of some of its target proteins as well as several known or putative interacting proteins of Arabidopsis GSK3s. By combining the thermal- and the phospho-proteomes of bikinin we uncovered the auxin carrier PIN-FORMED1 (PIN1) as a novel substrate of the Arabidopsis GSK3s. We showed that inhibition the kinase activity of GSK3s by brassinosteroids or the specific chemical inhibitor bikinin led to the loss of PIN1 polarity, revealing a novel crosstalk between brassinosteroid and auxin signaling. Hence, our study demonstrates the applicability of CETSA MS in plant intact cells for identification of small-molecule targets and for discovery of novel protein-protein interactions.

### Sample Protocol
4 days after subcultivation, 30 ml Arabidopsis cell suspension cultures were treated with 0.1% (v/v) DMSO or 50 μM bikinin for 30 min in MSMO medium and five independent biological replicates were collected for each treatment. Then, for each of them, 500 mg of ground cells were collected and homogenized in 5 ml protein extraction buffer. The total protein extract was used and phosphopeptide enrichment was conducted on five biological replicates respectively, according to an improved procedure (Vu et al, 2018, J Exp Bot, 69, 4609-24). Samples were vacuum-dried and then subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched against the Arabidopsis Information Resource (TAIR) 10 database for Arabidopsis thaliana (version TAIR10 _pep_20101214) by the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.4.1). MaxQuant settings can be found in the Supplementary Information (Dataset S3E). The ‘Phospho(STY).txt’ output file generated by the MaxQuant search was loaded into the Perseus software (version 1.6.10.45) for analysis. All the data were selected firstly by a localization prob-cut-off >0.75. Log2-transformed phosphosite label-free quantification (LFQ) intensities were used for further analysis and the two-sample test with a P value cut-off <0.05 was carried out to test for differences among the treatments.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Arabidopsis cell suspension, Brassinosteroids, Chemical genetics, Auxin，ms/ms spectra

### Affiliations
PSB-VIB
Ive De Smet - Group leader Functional Phosphoproteomics VIB-UGent Center for Plant Systems Biology Ghent University Technologiepark-Zwijnaarde 71 - 9052 Ghent - Belgium www.psb.ugent.be

### Submitter
Xiangyu Xu

### Lab Head
Dr Ive DeSmet
Ive De Smet - Group leader Functional Phosphoproteomics VIB-UGent Center for Plant Systems Biology Ghent University Technologiepark-Zwijnaarde 71 - 9052 Ghent - Belgium www.psb.ugent.be


