### Accession
PXD027667

### Title
Beta-synuclein potentiates synaptic vesicle dopamine uptake and rescues dopaminergic neurons from MPTP-induced death in the absence of other synucleins

### Description
Previous studies demonstrated that dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra pars compacta (SNpc) of mice with null mutations for genes encoding a-synuclein and/or y-synuclein are resistant to 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) toxicity. An original straightforward interpretation of these results was that these proteins are directly involved in the mechanism of MPTP-induced degeneration and this view has become commonly accepted. Here we provide evidence that a plausible explanation of this resistance is not the absence of these synucleins per se but their substitution on the membrane of synaptic vesicles by the third member of the family, b-synuclein. Dopaminergic neurons of mice lacking b-synuclein singularly or in combination with the loss of other synucleins, were sensitive to the toxic effect of MPTP. Dopamine uptake by synaptic vesicles isolated from the striatum of triple a/b/y-synuclein deficient mice was significantly reduced, while reintroduction of b-synuclein either in vivo or in vitro reversed this effect. Proteomic analysis of complexes formed on the surface of synuclein-free synaptic vesicles after addition of recombinant b-synuclein identified multiple integral constituents of these vesicles as well as typically cytosolic proteins, including key enzymes involved in dopamine synthesis, tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) and aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase (AADC). Therefore, b-synuclein plays a scaffolding role for the assembly of molecular complexes that enhance the ability of synaptic vesicles to uptake and sequester dopamine and other structurally similar molecules, including MPP+. Deficiency of b-synuclein therefore results in the accumulation of MPP+ in the cytosol, where it imposes a damaging effect on presynaptic terminals and ultimately the destruction of dopaminergic neurons.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of samples for mass spectrometry: Samples were processed for LC-MS by in-solution digestion. Briefly samples were sequentially reduced and alkylated in the dark with 10 mM dithiothreitol (15minutes) and 25mM iodoacetamide (30 minutes) respectively. Trypsin (Promega,V5280), was added to each sample for a final 1:25, protease:protein ratio and incubated at 37°C overnight. Post-digestion, samples were acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) followed by de-salting using reversed-phase spin tips (Glygen Corp, PN: TT2C18) according to the manufacturer’s recommendations. Briefly, spin-tips were solvated and equilibrated with successive washes of 60% ACN + 0.1%FA and 1% ACN + 0.1%FA. Samples were then loaded onto the spin-tips and washed with 1% ACN + 0.1%FA and then eluted with 60% ACN + 0.1%FA. Eluents were subsequently dried to completion using a vacuum centrifuge.  LC-MS analysis: Dried peptides were solubilised in 0.1% TFA and 2.5µg of digested peptides were analysed in technical duplicate. A Thermo Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system was used to separate peptides with samples loaded onto a trap column (Acclaim Pepmap 100, 100µm I.D., 2cm length) at 8µL/min in loading buffer (98% water, 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA). Peptides were eluted on-line to an analytical column (Acclaim Pepmap RSLC, 50cm × 75µm I.D.) A 120-minute gradient separation was used, 4-45% of buffer B (composition: 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). Eluted peptides were analysed using a Thermo LTQ Velos Orbitrap operating in positive polarity with a top 10 CID (collision-induced dissociation) method. Ions for dissociation were determined from an initial 15000 resolution MS survey scan followed by CID on the 10 most abundant ions. Method settings include: default charge state 2, 2.0 m/z isolation width, a normalised collision energy of 35, activation Q value - 0.25 and activation time of 10ms.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis: Raw files were analysed using MaxQuant v1.5.3.8. Variable modifications of methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation and CAMthiopropanoyl (lysine and Protein N-term) were permitted. The reduced DTSSP cross-linker gives a +145.01975 Da addition to potential amine-reactive sites. Fixed modification of carbamidomethylation and up to four missed cleavages were also permitted. Label-free quantitation (LFQ), “Re-quantify”, “match between runs” and “iBAQ” options were all selected. Raw data was searched against the UniprotKB mouse database downloaded in November 2015. This contained 79,900 protein sequences: 16,811 from the SwissProt reviewed section and 63,089 from the TrEMBL unreviewed section. A 1% false discovery rate (FDR) at the peptide and protein level was selected.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dopaminergic neurons, Mptp toxicity, Synapse, Vesicles, Dopamine, Lc-msms, Mouse, Transgenic mice, Neurodegenerative disease, Synuclein, Parkinson’s disease, Neurotransmitter vesicular uptake

### Affiliations
MRC - London Institute of Medical Sciences
Medical Research Council - London Institute of Medical Sciences

### Submitter
Alex Montoya

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Holger Kramer
MRC - London Institute of Medical Sciences


