### Accession
PXD034159

### Title
RNA pulldown-MS, Dlg4 RNA in mouse brain

### Description
Goal was to identify RNA-binding proteins with a preference for m6A-modified RNA using an RNA bait generated from a known m6A site in the Dlg4 (PSD-95) mRNA 3`-UTR. By comparison of differential enrichment between m6A-RNA pulldown fractions and A-RNA or no RNA fractions, we can identify m6A-binding proteins.

### Sample Protocol
RNA baits/probes generated using solid-state synthesis (MerMade system) with a 5`-Biotin handle and A or m6A at its native motif. Mouse brains were extracted from euthanized adult mice (C57BLK6, ≥6 wks). These lysates were then mixed with RNA probes immobilized to Streptavidin-agarose matrix and allowed to incubate. Pulldowns were then washed at least five times, before elution with free biotin and probed for YTHDF2 capture by WB (known m6A reader), prior to submission for proteomics analysis.

### Data Protocol
Exclusive unique peptide counts for each pulldown fraction replicate were assigned a pseudocount (+1), with differential enrichment subsequently calculated by log2(m6A+1/A+1) for each set of biological replicates. These enrichment values for each replicate were then assigned a classification based on differential enrichment, where: log2FC ≤ -1 is an A binding protein, -1 < log2FC < 1 is a non-specific binder, and log2FC ≥ 1 is an m6A binding protein.

### Publication Abstract
N<sup>6</sup>-methyladenosine (m<sup>6</sup>A) is deposited co-transcriptionally on thousands of cellular mRNAs and plays important roles in mRNA processing and cellular function. m<sup>6</sup>A is particularly abundant within the brain and is critical for neurodevelopment. However, the mechanisms through which m<sup>6</sup>A contributes to brain development are incompletely understood. RBM45 acts as an m<sup>6</sup>A-binding protein that is highly expressed during neurodevelopment. We find that RBM45 binds to thousands of cellular RNAs, predominantly within intronic regions. Rbm45 depletion disrupts the constitutive splicing of a subset of target pre-mRNAs, leading to altered mRNA and protein levels through both m<sup>6</sup>A-dependent and m<sup>6</sup>A-independent mechanisms. Finally, we find that RBM45 is necessary for neuroblastoma cell differentiation and that its depletion impacts the expression of genes involved in several neurodevelopmental signaling pathways. Altogether, our findings show a role for RBM45 in controlling mRNA processing and neuronal differentiation, mediated in part by the recognition of methylated RNA.

### Keywords
Pulldown, Rna, Lc-ms/ms, M6a

### Affiliations
Meyer Laboratory, Department of Biochemistry Duke University, School of Medicine
Assistant Professor of Biochemistry Assistant Professor of Neurobiology  Nanaline Duke Room 155 Box 3711, DUMC Durham, NC 27710

### Submitter
Kate Meyer

### Lab Head
Dr Kate Meyer
Assistant Professor of Biochemistry Assistant Professor of Neurobiology  Nanaline Duke Room 155 Box 3711, DUMC Durham, NC 27710


