### Accession
PXD001627

### Title
Proteomic analysis of dormancy induction in grapevine

### Description
Grapes are a valuable fruit and an important economic crop in the world, where wine production is a major industry. In grapevine, the environmental regulation of bud dormancy varies among its diverse genotypes. Certain grapevine genotypes become dormant in response to decreasing photoperiod and others require low temperature or both environmental cues to induce dormancy. This study used a proteomic approach to gain an understanding of the underlying molecular events involved in bud dormancy commitment.

### Sample Protocol
Two F2 siblings (F2-110 and F2-40) with differences in photoperiod induced dormancy responsiveness were subjected to long day (LD, 14 hr, dormancy inhibition) or short day (SD, 13 hr, dormancy commitment). The buds were harvested in two timepoints of 28 days and 42 days. The buds from the eight different samples were harvested in biological triplicates. Proteins were extracted using phenol extraction protocol and methanol-chloroform precipitation, digested by filter aided sample preparation (FASP) method and Lys-C and trypsin digestion. Proteins were identified using LC-MS/MS spectra acquired by gas phase fractionation (GPF) in four mass ranges with m/z values of 400 – 506, 501 – 658, 653 – 913 and 908 – 1600 from a Velos Pro linear ion trap mass spectrometer (Thermo). Peptides were searched against the UniProtKB Vitis vinifera genome. Protein abundances were quantified using spectral counting.

### Data Protocol
Raw files obtained from the nanoLC-MS/MS were converted to mzXML files and searched against the UniProtKB Vitis vinifera genome (65,328 entries, March 2013) using the global proteome machine (GPM) software, Version 2.1.1 (http://www.thegpm.org) and the X!Tandem algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
Certain grapevine genotypes become dormant in response to decreasing photoperiod and others require low temperature or both environmental cues to induce dormancy. This study used a proteomic approach to gain an understanding of the underlying molecular events involved in bud dormancy commitment. Two F<sub>2</sub> siblings (F2-110 and F2-040) with differences in photoperiod induced dormancy responsiveness were subjected to long day (LD, 15&#x202f;h, paradormancy maintenance or dormancy inhibition) or short day (SD, 13&#x202f;h, endodormancy commitment) treatment. Proteins were extracted at two time points (28&#x202f;days and 42&#x202f;days) of LD and SD photoperiod exposure, and label-free quantitative shotgun proteomic analysis was performed for three biological replicates of each treatment and time point. A total of 1577 non-redundant proteins were identified in the combined dataset of eight different conditions (2 genotypes, 2 photoperiods and 2 timepoints, available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD001627). Genotype specific patterns of budbreak and protein expression were detected in response to the differential photoperiod treatment at the two time points. Peroxidases, dehydrogenases and superoxide dismutases were more abundant at 42 SD than at 28 SD in the dormancy responsive F2-110, suggesting that oxidative stress response related proteins could be markers of endodormancy commitment in grapevine buds.

### Keywords
Dormancy, Grapevine, Photoperiod, Vitis riparia

### Affiliations
Professor
Macquarie University

### Submitter
Iniga George

### Lab Head
Dr Paul A Haynes
Professor


