### Accession
PXD007544

### Title
Novel role of LRP1 in the regulation of smooth muscle contractile function by regulating cytoskeletal dynamics and Ca2+ signaling.

### Description
This project contains the proteomics data for the manuscript "Novel role of LRP1 in the regulation of smooth muscle contractile function by regulating cytoskeletal dynamics and Ca2+ signaling." by Au et al.

### Sample Protocol
The descending thoracic aorta from smooth muscle LRP1-/- and wt mice were harvested and proteins were extracted in guanidine. Proteins were digested with trypsin using the filter aided sample prep (FASP) protocol. Peptides were then isotopically labeled with acetone or 6d-Acetone. Labeled peptides were mixed and analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a top-10 DDA method on an LTQ-Orbitrap

### Data Protocol
Database searching and protein quantification were performed using MaxQuant with the details described in the provided xml file. MaxQuant results were statistically analyzed using the R programming language and LIMMA.

### Publication Abstract
Objective- Mutations affecting contractile-related proteins in the ECM (extracellular matrix), microfibrils, or vascular smooth muscle cells can predispose the aorta to aneurysms. We reported previously that the LRP1 (low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 1) maintains vessel wall integrity, and smLRP1<sup>-/-</sup> mice exhibited aortic dilatation. The current study focused on defining the mechanisms by which LRP1 regulates vessel wall function and integrity. Approach and Results- Isometric contraction assays demonstrated that vasoreactivity of LRP1-deficient aortic rings was significantly attenuated when stimulated with vasoconstrictors, including phenylephrine, thromboxane receptor agonist U-46619, increased potassium, and L-type Ca<sup>2+</sup> channel ligand FPL-64176. Quantitative proteomics revealed proteins involved in actin polymerization and contraction were significantly downregulated in aortas of smLRP1<sup>-/-</sup> mice. However, studies with calyculin A indicated that although aortic muscle from smLRP1<sup>-/-</sup> mice can contract in response to calyculin A, a role for LRP1 in regulating the contractile machinery is not revealed. Furthermore, intracellular calcium imaging experiments identified defects in calcium release in response to a RyR (ryanodine receptor) agonist in smLRP1<sup>-/-</sup> aortic rings and cultured vascular smooth muscle cells. Conclusions- These results identify a critical role for LRP1 in modulating vascular smooth muscle cell contraction by regulating calcium signaling events that potentially protect against aneurysm development.

### Keywords
Dda, Lrp1, Lc-msms, Cardiovascular, Proteomics, Aorta, Shotgun

### Affiliations
The University of Washington, Department of Genome Sciences
Center for Vascular and Inflammatory Diseases, Department of Surgery, Department of Physiology, The University of Maryland School of Medicine,  Baltimore, MD

### Submitter
William Fondrie

### Lab Head
Dr Dudley K Strickland
Center for Vascular and Inflammatory Diseases, Department of Surgery, Department of Physiology, The University of Maryland School of Medicine,  Baltimore, MD


