### Accession
PXD003751

### Title
Central role of phosphorylation in the circadian control of liver metabolism

### Description
Circadian clocks are endogenous oscillators that drive organismal metabolism and physiology. Here, we report the first global in vivo quantification of circadian phosphorylation rhythms in mammals. Of more than 20,000 in vivo phosphosites, 25% significantly oscillate in the mouse liver, including novel sites on core clock proteins. Analyzing kinase substrate motifs, we find that the EGF/RAS/ERK pathway is predominantly activated during the day and the AKT/mTOR/p70S6K at night.  The extent and amplitude of phosphorylation cycles dominate the rhythms of transcript and protein abundance. A dominant regulatory role for phosphorylation-dependent circadian tuning of signaling pathways allows the organism to rapidly and economically respond to daily changes in nutrient availability and integrate different signaling triggers.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extracts from mouse livers were obtained by homogenization of 1 mg of liver was done in 1 ml of lysis buffer (0.1 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6, 4% of sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) and 0.05 mM of dithiothreitol (DTT) supplemented with complete protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktails (Roche)) using an Ultra Turbax blender (IKA) at maximum speed at 4C for 30–60 seconds. Homogenates were then sonicate in bioruptor (4C for 15 min, or until a homogenous suspension was formed). After 5 min of incubation at 95C the mixture was then cleared by centrifugation at 16,0006g at room temperature for 10 min. Protein content was determined by measurements of tryptophan fluorescence as previously described [56]. Prior to phosphopeptide enrichment, using EasyPhos {Humphrey, 2015 #139}, 2 mg of protein lysates were precipitate with acetone. Pellets were resuspended in 500 µl TFE digestion buffer and protein digestion was performed by adding 1:100 (protein:enzyme) trypsin and LysC with rapid agitation (2,000 rpm.) followed by incubation overnight at 37 °C. To the digested peptides 150 μl 3.2 M KCl, 55 μl 150 mM KH2PO4, 800 μl acetonitrile (ACN) and 95 μl trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) were added. Peptides were mixed at RT for 1 min at 2,000 rpm, cleared by centrifugation and transferred to clean 2 ml 96-well deep-well plates. TiO2 beads were subsequently added to peptides at a ratio of 10:1 beads/protein, suspended in 80% ACN/6% TFA, and incubated at 40 °C for 5 min at 2,000 r.p.m. Beads were subsequently pelleted by centrifugation for 1 min at 3,500g, and the supernatant (containing non-phosphopeptides) was aspirated and discarded. Beads were suspended in Wash buffer (60% ACN, 1% TFA) and transferred to a clean 2 ml 96-well-plates, and washed a further four times with 1 ml wash buffer. After the final wash, beads were suspended in 100 μl transfer buffer (80% ACN, 0.5% acetic acid) and transferred onto the top of a C8 StageTip, and centrifuged for 3–5 min at 500g or until no liquid remained on StageTip. Bound phosphopeptides were eluted 2× with 30 μl Elution buffer (40% ACN, 15% NH4OH (25%, HPLC grade)), and collected by centrifugation into clean PCR tubes. Peptide samples were concentrated in a SpeedVac for 15 min at 45 °C and acidified by the addition of 10 μl 10% TFA. After that peptides were desalted by loading onto styrenedivinylbenzene–reversed phase sulfonated (SDB-RPS; 3M Empore) StageTips in 100 μl SDB-RPS wash buffer (0.2% TFA), and centrifuged for 3 min at 500g. StageTips were then washed with 100 μl wash buffer, and phosphopeptides were subsequently eluted with 60 μl elution buffer (80% ACN, 5% NH4OH (25%, HPLC grade)) by centrifugation for ~5 min at 500g. Samples were immediately concentrated in a SpeedVac for 30 min at 45 °C to a final volume of 2 ul. Peptides were diluted 2x with buffer containing 2% ACN and 0.1% TFA.

### Data Protocol
Prior to MS peptides mixtures were separated on a 50 cm reversed phase column (diameter of 75 mm packed in-house-with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ3-mm 1.9 μM resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH) over a 270 min gradient of  5% - 50% buffer B (0.1% formic acid and 80% ACN) using the Proxeon Ultra EASY-nLC system with a flow rate of 300nl/min. The nLC system was coupled to a Q exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) acquiring full scans (300–1,600 m/z, R = 60,000 at 200 m/z) at a target of 3e6 ions. The ten most intense ions were isolated to a target of 1e5 with maximum injection time 120 ms and fragmented with higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) (isolation window 1,4 m/z, normalized collision energy 27%), underfill ration 20%) and detected in the Orbitrap (R=15,000 at 200 m/z).  Raw mass spectrometry files were processed with the MaxQuant environment (version 1.5.3.2) and the search engine Andromeda using a false-discovery rate (FDR) < 0.01 at the protein, peptide and modification level. The search included variable modifications for oxidized methionine (M), acetylation (protein N-term) and phospho (STY) and fixed modifications for carbamidomethyl (C). Peptides with at least six amino acid were consider for identification and “match between runs” was enable with a matching time window of 0.7min. Peptides and proteins were identified using a Uniprot FASTA database from mouse (from Septiembre 2014) containing 51,210 entries.

### Publication Abstract
Circadian clocks are self-sustainable endogenous oscillators, present in virtually every cell, driving daily cycles of metabolism and physiology. The molecular mechanism of the circadian clock is based on interconnected transcriptional and translational feedback loops. While many studies have addressed circadian rhythms of the transcriptome and, to a lesser extent, the proteome, none have investigated the phosphoproteome. We apply mass spectrometry-based phosphoproteomics to obtain the first global in&#xa0;vivo quantification of circadian phosphorylation in mammals. Of more than 20,000 phosphosites, 25% significantly oscillate in the mouse liver, including novel sites on core clock proteins. The extent and amplitude of phosphorylation cycles far exceeds those observed in RNA and protein abundance. Our data indicate a dominant regulatory role for phosphorylation-dependent circadian tuning of signaling pathways. This allows the organism to integrate different signals and rapidly and economically respond to daily changes in nutrient availability and physiological states.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Circadian, Liver metabolism

### Affiliations
Dept. Proteomics and Signal Transduction Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry Am Klopferspitz 18 D-82152 Martinsried (near Munich)
Proteomics

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr matthias mann
Dept. Proteomics and Signal Transduction Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry Am Klopferspitz 18 D-82152 Martinsried (near Munich)


