### Accession
PXD044236

### Title
Title Page Cardiac Gene Therapy Rescues Diabetic Cardiomyopathy and Lowers Blood Glucose

### Description
Diabetic cardiomyopathy, an increasingly global epidemic and a major cause of heart failure with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF), is associated with hyperglycemia, insulin resistance, and intra-cardiomyocyte calcium mishandling. Here we identify that, in db/db mice with type 2 diabetes induced HFpEF, abnormal remodeling of cardiomyocyte transverse-tubule microdomains occurs with downregulation of the membrane scaffolding protein cardiac bridging integrator 1 (cBIN1). Transduction of cBIN1 by AAV9 gene therapy can restore transverse-tubule microdomains to normalize intracellular distribution of calcium handling proteins and, surprisingly, glucose transporter 4 (GLUT4). Cardiac proteomics revealed that AAV9-cBIN1 normalizes components of calcium handling and GLUT4 translocation machineries. Functional studies further identified that AAV9-cBIN1 normalizes insulin-dependent glucose uptake in diabetic cardiomyocytes. Phenotypically, AAV9-cBIN1 rescues cardiac lusitropy, improves exercise intolerance, and ameliorates hyperglycemia in diabetic mice. Restoration of transverse-tubule microdomains can improve cardiac function in the setting of diabetic cardiomyopathy, and also improve systemic glycemic control.

### Sample Protocol
LC-MS/MS-based label free quantitation was used to examine global protein abundance from heart lysates obtained from db/m + GFP, db/db + GFP, and db/db + cBIN1 groups (n = 4, 4, 3 hearts for each group respectively, with 2 technical repeats per heart). Sample preparation for mass spectrometry was performed using a standard FASP protocol that we have previously published. Samples were diluted with Urea buffer, reduced, and alkylated, then proteins were digested with trypsin overnight at 37°C, and acidified to using 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were analyzed with an Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo) interfaced with an Easy nLC-1000 UPLC and outfitted with a ESI Source Solutions pulled tip column type 2 (15 cm x 75 μm inner diameter, 3 μm particle size, 120 Å pore diameter, ESI Source Solutions). Spectra were acquired in data-dependent acquisition mode with dynamic exclusion enabled and fragmented using Collision Induced dissociation. The top twenty MS1 peaks were analyzed at a resolution of 30,000. Samples were run in duplicate to generate technical replicates.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were processed with MaxQuant version 1.6.7.0 , for identification against the Uniprot Mouse database.The search was carried out using the Andromeda search engine built in MaxQuant. The search included variable modifications for oxidation of methionine, acetylation of protein n-termini and fixed modification of carbamidomethylation of cysteine. The mass tolerance for MS1 and MS2 searches was 20 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. A false discovery rate of 1% was used for both proteins and peptides and only peptides with more than 6 amino acid residues were considered for identification and quantitation. Label free quantitation was carried out in MaxQuant using 2 technical replicates for each biological sample. During label free quantitation the isotopic patterns for each feature was matched across multiple runs using peptide identification, high mass accuracy and nonlinear remapping of retention times. Data was normalized using compiled peptide intensities and pair wise peptide ratios were calculated across the runs for all unique peptides mapping to a protein and displayed as an LFQ intensity value.

### Publication Abstract
Diabetic cardiomyopathy, an increasingly global epidemic and a major cause of heart failure with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF), is associated with hyperglycemia, insulin resistance, and intracardiomyocyte calcium mishandling. Here we identify that, in db/db mice with type 2 diabetes-induced HFpEF, abnormal remodeling of cardiomyocyte transverse-tubule microdomains occurs with downregulation of the membrane scaffolding protein cardiac bridging integrator 1 (cBIN1). Transduction of cBIN1 by AAV9 gene therapy can restore transverse-tubule microdomains to normalize intracellular distribution of calcium-handling proteins and, surprisingly, glucose transporter 4 (GLUT4). Cardiac proteomics revealed that AAV9-cBIN1 normalized components of calcium handling and GLUT4 translocation machineries. Functional studies further identified that AAV9-cBIN1 normalized insulin-dependent glucose uptake in diabetic cardiomyocytes. Phenotypically, AAV9-cBIN1 rescued cardiac lusitropy, improved exercise intolerance, and ameliorated hyperglycemia in diabetic mice. Restoration of transverse-tubule microdomains can improve cardiac function in the setting of diabetic cardiomyopathy and can also improve systemic glycemic control.

### Keywords
Glucose uptake, Diabetic cardiomyopathy, Calcium handling, Gene therapy, Transverse-tubule microdomain

### Affiliations
Dr. Sarah Franklin, Principal Investigator, CVRTI, University of Utah
University of Utah

### Submitter
Ryan Bia

### Lab Head
Dr Sarah Franklin
Dr. Sarah Franklin, Principal Investigator, CVRTI, University of Utah


