### Accession
PXD016261

### Title
Evaluation of tumor interstitial fluid-extraction methods for proteome analysis: comparison of biopsy elution versus centrifugation

### Description
The analysis of Tumor Interstitial Fluid (TIF) composition is a valuable procedure to identify anti-metastatic targets, and different laboratories have set up techniques for TIF isolation and proteomic analyses. However, those methods had never been compared in samples from the same tumor and patient. In this work, we compared the two most used methods, elution and centrifugation, in pieces of the same biopsy samples of cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma (cSCC). First, we established that high G-force (10000g) was required to obtain TIF from cSCC by centrifugation. Secondly, we compared the centrifugation method with the elution method in pieces of three different cSCC tumors. We found that the mean protein intensities based in the number of peptide spectrum matches was significantly higher in the centrifuged samples than in the eluted samples. Regarding the robustness of the methods, we observed higher overlapping between both methods (77-80%) than among samples (50%). These results suggest that exists an elevated consistence of TIF composition independently of the method used. However, we observed a three-fold increase of extracellular proteins in non-overlapped proteome obtained by centrifugation. We therefore conclude that centrifugation is the method of choice to study the proteome of TIF from cutaneous biopsies.

### Sample Protocol
Human cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma samples Three surplus biopsies of cSCC from patients were obtained after surgical resection and extensively washed with a sterile dressing to eliminate blood clots. The tumor samples were from the tumor surface, in an area without any apparent necrosis or inflammation. Immediately, the tissue was collected with sterile forceps and put on a plate (6-well) with 1 ml of PBS. The forceps was used to gently shake the tissue in the PBS and the washing was repeated three times. The tissue was cut into two equal halves in volume and tissue characteristics. Elution method For large biopsies (>0.2 gr), tissue was carefully cut into small pieces (0.1 gr) avoiding as long as possible cell damage with the minimum manipulation. The cutting of tissue was done while keeping it in a full of PBS plate, in order to avoid TIF evaporation. Then, eluted in 750 µl of PBS containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors (PBSi) for 2 hours at 37ºC and 5% CO2. Finally, 500 μl of PBSi were collected and filtered (0.45 μm) to avoid cells contamination. The final sample was stored at -80ºC until the proteomic analysis. The cocktail of protease and phosphatase inhibitors (cOmplete™, EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail) was purchased at Roche. Centrifugation method In this method, biopsy was blotted gently with tissue paper to remove excess of PBS and transferred to 2 ml centrifuge tubes (Clearspin 2 ml tubes. 0.45 mm Cellulose acetate membrane. Sterile ClearLine (Ref 007859ACL)) used for TIF isolation. These two steps were carried out quickly to avoid evaporation from the tissue. Immediately, the samples were centrifuged at 10000 g for 20 minutes at 4ºC (Eppendorf, 5415R), recovering 5-15 µl accumulated in the bottom of the tube. PBSi was added for a final volume of 50 µl. This final sample was stored at -80ºC until the proteomic analysis. Proteomic analysis of the samples Protein extraction, quantification and digestion The TIFs were mixed with 6M Urea / 200mM Ammonium Bicarbonate (ABC) to help the proteins to be solubilized and then quantified with the RCDC Protein Assay kit (Biorad, #5000-120). Ten μg of protein from each sample were digested in-solution using both LysC and Trypsin. Briefly, the samples were reduced with 10mM dithiothreitol (DTT, in 200mM ABC) for 1h at 37ºC and 650 rpm in the thermo-mixer, alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA, in 200mM ABC) for 30 minutes at room temperature in the dark at 650 rpm in the thermo-mixer. Then, samples were diluted to have them at 2M Urea final concentration and the required amount of 1μg/μl LysC (WAKO, #125-05061) was added to have a 1:10 ratio enzyme:protein (w:w). The digestion was performed overnight at 37ºC at 650 rpm in the thermo-mixer. After that, samples were diluted again to have them at 1M Urea final concentration. Finally, the required amount of 1μg/μl trypsin (sequencing-grade, Promega, #V5280) was added to have a 1:10 ratio enzyme:protein (w:w) and incubated for 8h at 37ºC at 650 rpm in the thermo-mixer. Peptide desalting Peptide mixtures were desalted using the commercial columns Ultra Microspin C18, 300A silica (The Nest Group, #SUM SS18V) according to the manufacturer instructions. Finally, the samples were dried in a SpeedVac and kept at -20ºC until the LC-MS/MS analysis. LC-MS/MS analysis Samples were analyzed in a Proxeon 1000 liquid chromatographer coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer. Samples were re-suspended in 45 microliters of 0.5% formic acid in water, and 4.5 μl (2 micrograms) were injected for LC-MSMS analysis. Peptides were trapped on an NTCC-360/75-3-123 LC column and separated using a C18 reverse phase LC column-Easy Spray (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The gradient used for the elution of the peptides was 1% to 35% in 90min followed by a gradient from 35% to 85% in 10 min with 250nL/min flow rate. Eluted peptides were subjected to electrospray ionization in an emitter needle (PicoTipTM, New Objective, Scientific Instrument Services, Ringoes, NJ, USA) with an applied voltage of 2,000 V. Peptide masses (m/z 300-1700) were analyzed in data-dependent mode where a full scan MS was acquired on the Orbitrap with a resolution of 60,000 FWHM at 400 m/z. Up to the 10 most abundant peptides (minimum intensity of 500 counts) were selected from each MS scan and then fragmented using CID (collision-induced dissociation) in the linear ion trap using helium as collision gas with 38% normalized collision energy. The scan time settings were: full MS at 250ms and MSn at 120ms. Generated .raw data files were collected with Thermo Xcalibur (v.2.2) (Termo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Proteomic Data Analysis Raw data processing and database search Proteome Discoverer software suite (v2.0, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the Mascot search engine (v2.5, Matrix Science) were used for peptide identification and quantification. Samples were searched against a SwissProt database containing entries corresponding to Human (version of March 2018) a list of common contaminants and all the corresponding decoy entries. Trypsin was chosen as enzyme and a maximum of three miscleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation (C) was set as a fixed modification, whereas oxidation (M) and acetylation (N-terminal) were used as variable modifications. Searches were performed using a peptide tolerance of 7 ppm and a product ion tolerance of 0.5 Da. Resulting data files were filtered for FDR <1%. Bioinformatic analysis The handling of the protein lists created with Proteome Discoverer as well as the generation of the Venn diagrams and bar plots were performed with R (3.5.2) and R Studio (1.1.419) with the help of the “Vennerable” package. Gene Ontology enrichment analysis The Gene Ontology enrichment analysis was performed with the DAVID Bioinformatics tools9 (https://david.ncifcrf.gov/) using the “Functional Annotation” functionality. For this analysis, all the levels of specificity of the “Cellular Compartment” Ontology were selected (GOTERM_CC_ALL) and the “Functional Annotation Clustering” option was chosen for the visualization of the results. The enrichment threshold or statistical significance (EASE score) was set to 0.001. The enriched GO terms related to the different cell compartments were extracted using R (3.5.2) and R Studio (1.1.419).

### Publication Abstract
The analysis of tumor interstitial fluid (TIF) composition is a valuable procedure to identify antimetastatic targets, and different laboratories have set up techniques for TIF isolation and proteomic analyses. However, those methods had never been compared in samples from the same tumor and patient. In this work, we compared the two most used methods, elution and centrifugation, in pieces of the same biopsy samples of cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma (cSCC). First, we established that high G-force (10&#x202f;000<i>g</i>) was required to obtain TIF from cSCC by centrifugation. Second, we compared the centrifugation method with the elution method in pieces of three different cSCC tumors. We found that the mean protein intensities based in the number of peptide spectrum matches was significantly higher in the centrifuged samples than in the eluted samples. Regarding the robustness of the methods, we observed higher overlapping between both methods (77-80%) than among samples (50%). These results suggest that there exists an elevated consistence of TIF composition independently of the method used. However, we observed a 3-fold increase of extracellular proteins in nonoverlapped proteome obtained by centrifugation. We therefore conclude that centrifugation is the method of choice to study the proteome of TIF from cutaneous biopsies.

### Keywords
Elution, Cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma, Spin, Centrifugation, Tumor interstitial fluid, Proteome, Skin cancer

### Affiliations
Cell cycle lab. Institut de Recerca Biomèdica de Lleida (IRB Lleida).
Proteomics Unit - Josep Carreras Leukaemia Research Institute

### Submitter
Joan Josep Bech-Serra

### Lab Head
Dr Eloi Gari
Cell cycle lab. Institut de Recerca Biomèdica de Lleida (IRB Lleida).


