### Accession
PXD032844

### Title
Novel antibody-peptide binding assay indicates presence of immunoglobulins against EGFR phospho-site S1166 in high-grade glioma.

### Description
The project’s aim was to develop and test the applicability of a method to determine the presence of serum immunoglobulins against specific autoantibodies. The method combined immunoglobulin G enrichment (using Melon Gel), molecular weight filtration, and targeted mass spectrometry and the feasibility was successfully tested in an experiment using a peptide library (tryptic digest) of dinitrophenyl labelled peptides and anti-DNP. In a second step, a phospho-peptide library, derived from glioblastoma multiform tissue, was tested against plasma samples from glioma patients and healthy donors, to determine the presence of complexes of IgG with immunoaffinity to EGFR or GFAP phospho-peptides. As a result, we found immunoaffinity to EGFR phospho-peptide GSHQIS[+80]LDNPDYQQDFFPK (covering the phospho-site S1166) in plasma of glioma patients.

### Sample Protocol
In brief, a peptide library (digest of DNP-labelled alpha-casein in the feasibility test, or phospho-peptide fraction of GBM tissue in the applicability experiment) was mixed and incubated for 30 minutes with an antibody containing sample (feasibility test: anti-DNP; applicability experiment: plasma samples). Next, IgG and IgG-peptide complexes were enriched and separated from unbound peptides (combining Melon Gel IgG Purification Kit and molecular weight filtration), the IgG-bound peptides released by acidification and separated by MW-filtration, and ultimately measured with targeted parallel reaction (PRM) monitoring LC-MS. In an additional experiment the fractions of IgG bound peptides were measured with untargeted shotgun proteomics.

### Data Protocol
PRM data was analyzed with the software package Skyline (MacLean et al., 2010). For analysis of the shotgun proteomics experiment, we used Mascot (Matrix Science, version 2.3) and Scaffold (Proteome Software, version 5.10).

### Publication Abstract
We investigated the feasibility of detecting the presence of specific autoantibodies against potential tumor-associated peptide antigens by enriching these antibody-peptide complexes using Melon Gel resin and mass spectrometry. Our goal was to find tumor-associated phospho-sites that trigger immunoreactions and raise autoantibodies that are detectable in plasma of glioma patients. Such immunoglobulins can potentially be used as targets in immunotherapy. To that aim, we describe a method to detect the presence of antibodies in biological samples that are specific to selected clinically relevant peptides. The method is based on the formation of antibody-peptide complexes by mixing patient plasma with a glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) derived peptide library, enrichment of antibodies and antibody-peptide complexes, the separation of peptides after they are released from immunoglobulins by molecular weight filtration and finally mass spectrometric quantification of these peptides. As proof of concept, we successfully applied the method to dinitrophenyl (DNP)-labeled &#x3b1;-casein peptides mixed with anti-DNP. Further, we incubated human plasma with a phospho-peptide library and conducted targeted analysis on EGFR and GFAP phospho-peptides. As a result, immunoaffinity against phospho-peptide GSHQIS[+80]LDNPDYQQDFFPK (EGFR phospho-site S1166) was detected in high-grade glioma (HGG) patient plasma but not in healthy donor plasma. For the GFAP phospho-sites selected, such immunoaffinity was not observed.

### Keywords
Autoantibodies, Melon gel, Peptide antigen, Immunoglobulin g, Glioblastoma

### Affiliations
Head of Laboratory of Neuro-Oncology, Neurology, Clinical & Cancer Proteomics
Erasmus MC Rotterdam
Department of Neurology

### Submitter
Christoph Stingl

### Lab Head
Dr Theo M. Luider
Head of Laboratory of Neuro-Oncology, Neurology, Clinical & Cancer Proteomics


