### Accession
PXD004651

### Title
Lipidomics reveals dramatic lipid compositional changes in the maturing postnatal lung

### Description
Lipidomics, proteomics and metabolomics characterization of the ontogeny of lipid, protein and metabolite changes during normal postnatal lung development

### Sample Protocol
Samples were extracted with a chloroform methanol mixture, partitioning the samples into 3 fractions: protein, lipid and metabolite. The protein fraction was digested with trypsin, then analyzed by LC-MS/MS. The metabolite fraction was derivatized with MSTFA, then analyzed by GC-MS. The lipid fraction was analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Data was searched with MSGF+ using PNNL's DMS Processing pipeline

### Publication Abstract
Lung immaturity is a major cause of morbidity and mortality in premature infants. Understanding the molecular mechanisms driving normal lung development could provide insights on how to ameliorate disrupted development. While transcriptomic and proteomic analyses of normal lung development have been previously reported, characterization of changes in the lipidome is lacking. Lipids play significant roles in the lung, such as dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine in pulmonary surfactant; however, many of the roles of specific lipid species in normal lung development, as well as in disease states, are not well defined. In this study, we used liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) to investigate the murine lipidome during normal postnatal lung development. Lipidomics analysis of lungs from post-natal day 7, day 14 and 6-8 week mice (adult) identified 924 unique lipids across 21 lipid subclasses, with dramatic alterations in the lipidome across developmental stages. Our data confirmed previously recognized aspects of post-natal lung development and revealed several insights, including in sphingolipid-mediated apoptosis, inflammation and energy storage/usage. Complementary proteomics, metabolomics and chemical imaging corroborated these observations. This multi-omic view provides a unique resource and deeper insight into normal pulmonary development.

### Keywords
Metabolomics, Mouse, Lung, Proteomics, Development, Lipidomics, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory

### Submitter
Matthew Monroe

### Lab Head
Dr Charles Ansong
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory


