### Accession
PXD040835

### Title
Epigenetic mechanisms to propagate histone acetylation by p300/CBP

### Description
Histone acetylation is important for the activation of gene transcription but little is known about its direct ‘read/write’ mechanisms. Here, we report cryo-electron microscopy structures in which a p300/CBP multidomain monomer recognizes histone H4 N-terminal tail (NT) acetylation (ac) in a nucleosome and acetylates non-H4 histone NTs within the same nucleosome. p300/CBP not only recognized H4NTac via the bromodomain pocket responsible for ‘reading’, but also interacted with the DNA minor grooves via the outside of that pocket. This directed the catalytic center of p300/CBP to one of the non-H4 histone NTs. The primary target that p300 ‘writes’ by ‘reading’ H4NTac was H2BNT, and H2BNTac promoted H2A-H2B dissociation from the nucleosome. We propose a model in which p300/CBP ‘replicates’ histone NT acetylation within the H3-H4 tetramer to inherit epigenetic storage, and ‘transcribes’ it from the H3-H4 tetramer to the H2B-H2A dimers to activate context-dependent gene transcription through local nucleosome destabilization.

### Sample Protocol
Reconstituted nucleosomes were reacted with WT P300 and Y1064F P300 respectively and sampled at 0 min. 1 min and 3 min. Each sample was separated by SDS-PAGE and stained with CBB. Separated protein bands were cut out and de-stained, followed by in-gel digestion with Achromobacter protease I (a gift from Dr. T. Masaki, Ibaraki University, Ibaraki). The resulting peptides were analyzed using LC-MSMS consisting of Q Exactive (Thermo Fischer scientific) and Easy nLC1000 (Thermo Fischer scientific). For liquid chromatography, 0.1% formic acid was used as a solvent A and 80% acetonitrile including 0.1% formic acid was used as a solvent B. The peptides were separated by a spray column (NTCC-360/75-3-105, NIKKYO technos) with a 0-44% B solvent gradient for 20 minutes. Measurements were technically tripled and carried out in positive mode using the TOP10 method.

### Data Protocol
The acquired data were analyzed with MASCOT 2.8 and Proteome Discoverer 3.0 The MASCOT search was performed with the following parameters. database; Swissprot (Homo sapiens) and in house-database including Histone H2A, H2B, H3, H4; parameters: enzyme = trypsin/P; maximum missed cleavages = 4; variable modifications = Gln- > pyro-Glu (N-term Q), Oxidation (M), Acetyl (K); product mass tolerance = ± 30 ppm; product mass tolerance = ± 30 mmu; instrument type = ESI-TRAP.

### Publication Abstract
Histone acetylation is important for the activation of gene transcription but little is known about its direct read/write mechanisms. Here, we report cryogenic electron microscopy structures in which a p300/CREB-binding protein (CBP) multidomain monomer recognizes histone H4 N-terminal tail (NT) acetylation (ac) in a nucleosome and acetylates non-H4 histone NTs within the same nucleosome. p300/CBP not only recognized H4NTac via the bromodomain pocket responsible for reading, but also interacted with the DNA minor grooves via the outside of that pocket. This directed the catalytic center of p300/CBP to one of the non-H4 histone NTs. The primary target that p300 writes by reading H4NTac was H2BNT, and H2BNTac promoted H2A-H2B dissociation from the nucleosome. We propose a model in which p300/CBP replicates histone N-terminal tail acetylation within the H3-H4 tetramer to inherit epigenetic storage, and transcribes it from the H3-H4 tetramer to the H2B-H2A dimers to activate context-dependent gene transcription through local nucleosome destabilization.

### Keywords
P300/cbp, Acetylation, Histone

### Affiliations
RIKEN Center for Sustainable Resource Science
Biomolecular characterization unit, Center for Sustainable Resource Science, RIKEN

### Submitter
Takehiro Suzuki

### Lab Head
Dr Naoshi Dohmae
Biomolecular characterization unit, Center for Sustainable Resource Science, RIKEN


