### Accession
PXD021703

### Title
ProAlanase is an effective alternative to trypsin for proteomics applications and disulfide bond mapping_part3

### Description
Trypsin is the protease of choice in bottom-up proteomics. However, its application can be limited by the amino acid composition of target proteins and the pH of the digestion solution. In this study we characterize ProAlanase, a protease from the fungus Aspergillus niger that cleaves primarily on the C-terminal side of proline and alanine residues. ProAlanase achieves high proteolytic activity and specificity when digestion is carried out at acidic pH (1.5) for relatively short (2 h) time periods. To elucidate the potential of ProAlanase in proteomics applications, we conducted a series of investigations comprising comparative multi-enzymatic profiling of a human cell line proteome, histone PTM analysis, ancient bone protein identification, phosphosite mapping and de novo sequencing of a proline-rich protein and disulfide bond mapping in monoclonal antibody. The results demonstrate that ProAlanase is highly suitable for proteomics analysis of the arginine- and lysine-rich histones, enabling high sequence coverage of multiple histone family members. It also facilitates an efficient digestion of bone collagen thanks to the cleavage at the C-terminus of hydroxyproline which is highly prevalent in collagen. This allows to identify complementary proteins in ProAlanase- and trypsin-digested ancient bone samples, as well as to increase sequence coverage of non-collagenous proteins. Moreover, digestion with ProAlanase improves protein sequence coverage and phosphosite localization for the proline-rich protein Notch3 intracellular domain (N3ICD). Furthermore, we achieve a nearly complete coverage of N3ICD protein by de novo sequencing using the combination of ProAlanase and tryptic peptides. Finally, we demonstrate that ProAlanase is efficient in disulfide bond mapping, showing high coverage of disulfide-containing regions in a non-reduced monoclonal antibody.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were processed using different lysis/extraction buffers and preparation methods. In all cases proteins were reduced and alkylated with the 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and 11 mM 2-chloroacetamide (CAA). ProAlanase (Promega), trypsin, Glu-C and rAsp-N were used for generation of peptides. Peptide mixtures were purified by loading on C18 material using StageTip cartridges. After purification peptides were separated on a 15 cm C18 LC column and analyzed either on Q Exactive HF-X or on Orbitrap Fusion Lumos MS instruments. HeLa, mammoth and N3ICD samples were analyzed in DDA mode with a Top6/Top10/Top12 methods with 15000/30000/60000 resolution. NIST mAb samples were analyzed using an in-source reduction (ISR) during the electrospray process (LC-ISR-MS/MS). The source settings for simultaneous ionization and ISR were: spray voltage of 3.5 kV, sheath, auxiliary and sweep gasses of 15, 10 and 0 arbitrary units respectively, ion transfer tube temperature of 300°C and vaporizer temperature of 135°C. The samples were analyzed in DDA mode with a 2 s cycle time method with 120000 resolution.

### Data Protocol
The raw LC-MS/MS data were processed with MaxQuant v1.6.1.1 (optimization experiments and Pleistocene mammoth samples) and v1.6.5.0 (N3ICD samples), using the Andromeda search engine. The data generated in optimization experiments were searched against the reviewed Homo sapiens UniProt/Swiss-Prot proteome (proteome ID: UP000005640) with 20407 entries (canonical fasta only), downloaded 2018-09-13. Mammoth data were searched against Loxodonta Africana UniProt proteome (proteome ID: UP000007646) containing 25894 entries (including protein isoforms), downloaded 2018-09-12. The N3ICD data were searched against Homo sapiens UniProt/Swiss-Prot proteome (proteome ID: UP000005640) with 20935 entries, including the entries for FLAG tag and a murine intracellular domain of Notch3 receptor (>sp|Q61982|1663-2318), downloaded 2019-04-01. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was speciﬁed as ﬁxed modiﬁcation for all searches. For human data analysis such variable modifications, as oxidation of methionine, protein N-terminal acetylation, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine and glutamine-to-pyroglutamate conversion were considered. For mammoth data search methionine oxidation, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, proline hydroxylation and glutamine-to-pyroglutamate conversion were specified as variable modifications. For N3ICD data analysis protein N-terminal acetylation, oxidation of methionine, phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine, as well as deamidation of asparagine and glutamine residues, were set as variable modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% on peptide spectrum match (PSM), PTM site and protein level. The raw LC-MS/MS files from disulfide bond mapping experiment were analyzed using Byonic software. A simple fasta file containing only the light and the heavy chains of NIST mAb was used for searching the data. No FDR cut-offs were utilized, as above mentioned data searches were primarily used for identification of peptide constituents of disulfide-containing chromatographic peaks. De novo sequencing of the N3ICD protein was performed using PEAKS X+ Studio. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was speciﬁed as ﬁxed modiﬁcation, while protein N-terminal acetylation, oxidation of methionine, phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine residues, were set as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Trypsin is the protease of choice in bottom-up proteomics. However, its application can be limited by the amino acid composition of target proteins and the pH of the digestion solution. In this study we characterize ProAlanase, a protease from the fungus <i>Aspergillus niger</i> that cleaves primarily on the C-terminal side of proline and alanine residues. ProAlanase achieves high proteolytic activity and specificity when digestion is carried out at acidic pH (1.5) for relatively short (2 h) time periods. To elucidate the potential of ProAlanase in proteomics applications, we conducted a series of investigations comprising comparative multi-enzymatic profiling of a human cell line proteome, histone PTM analysis, ancient bone protein identification, phosphosite mapping and <i>de novo</i> sequencing of a proline-rich protein and disulfide bond mapping in mAb. The results demonstrate that ProAlanase is highly suitable for proteomics analysis of the arginine- and lysine-rich histones, enabling high sequence coverage of multiple histone family members. It also facilitates an efficient digestion of bone collagen thanks to the cleavage at the C terminus of hydroxyproline which is highly prevalent in collagen. This allows to identify complementary proteins in ProAlanase- and trypsin-digested ancient bone samples, as well as to increase sequence coverage of noncollagenous proteins. Moreover, digestion with ProAlanase improves protein sequence coverage and phosphosite localization for the proline-rich protein Notch3 intracellular domain (N3ICD). Furthermore, we achieve a nearly complete coverage of N3ICD protein by <i>de novo</i> sequencing using the combination of ProAlanase and tryptic peptides. Finally, we demonstrate that ProAlanase is efficient in disulfide bond mapping, showing high coverage of disulfide-containing regions in a nonreduced mAb.

### Keywords
Low-ph, Phosphorylation, Disulfide bonds, De novo sequencing, Proteomics, Histones, Sequence coverage, Proline-rich, Proalanase

### Affiliations
University of Copenhagen, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research
Professor, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Copenhagen, Denmark

### Submitter
Diana Samodova

### Lab Head
Dr Jesper Velgaard Olsen
Professor, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Copenhagen, Denmark


