### Accession
PXD032392

### Title
pChem_benchmarking_dataset_initial_test_negative_data_20220318

### Description
we will acquire three types of data sets as negative controls from 1) probe-free samples (i.e., regular proteomics sample), 2) probe-labeled samples without isotope-coding, and 3) probe-free samples treated with isotope reagents (i.e., without probe labeling, peptides cannot be isotopically labeled).

### Sample Protocol
we will acquire three types of data sets as negative controls from 1) probe-free samples (i.e., regular proteomics sample), 2) probe-labeled samples without isotope-coding, and 3) probe-free samples treated with isotope reagents (i.e., without probe labeling, peptides cannot be isotopically labeled).

### Data Protocol
For pChem analysis, raw data files were blind-searched against homo sapiens Uniprot canonical database. All mass shifts within the given range (1,000 Da by default) are retained.  Then, several semi-empirical criteria are applied to automatically recognize the genuine probe-derived modifications (PDMs). First, the isotope coding information is utilized to eliminate non-PDMs or other unrealistic modifications. For the six-heavy carbon coding strategy, in this case, the theoretical mass difference between a pair of light and heavy PDMs is 6.020132 Da. If such a measured mass difference is out of the range of [6.020132 - 0.001, 6.020132 + 0.001] Da, corresponding to 166 ppm tolerance for 6.020132Da, then the modification will be neglected. Second, less abundant modification candidates with the PSM counting number lower than a predefined threshold (i.e., 5% of total, by default) are also filtered out. Third, only the modifications with masses larger than the pre-defined threshold, e.g., 200 Da by default,

### Publication Abstract
Chemoproteomics has emerged as a key technology to expand the functional space in complex proteomes for probing fundamental biology and for discovering new small-molecule-based therapies. Here we report a modification-centric computational tool termed pChem to provide a streamlined pipeline for unbiased performance assessment of chemoproteomic probes. The pipeline starts with an experimental setting for isotopically coding probe-derived modifications that can be automatically recognized by pChem, with masses accurately calculated and sites precisely localized. pChem exports on-demand reports by scoring the profiling efficiency, modification homogeneity and proteome-wide residue selectivity of a tested probe. The performance and robustness of pChem were benchmarked by applying it to eighteen bioorthogonal probes. These analyses reveal that the formation of unexpected probe-derived modifications can be driven by endogenous reactive metabolites (for example, bioactive aldehydes and glutathione). pChem is a powerful and user-friendly tool that aims to facilitate the development of probes for the ever-growing field of chemoproteomics.

### Keywords
Negative controls

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Proteomics, Beijing Proteome Research Center, National Center for Protein Sciences • Beijing, Beijing Institute of Lifeomics, Beijing, China

### Submitter
jixiang he

### Lab Head
Dr Jing Yang
State Key Laboratory of Proteomics, Beijing Proteome Research Center, National Center for Protein Sciences • Beijing, Beijing Institute of Lifeomics, Beijing, China


