### Accession
PXD011326

### Title
An iPSC Model of Early Onset Parkinson's Disease

### Description
Early onset Parkinson’s Disease (onset <50 years) accounts for between 10-20 percent of all patients. While some of these cases are associated with specific mutations, the majority are sporadic where the cause is unknown. We generated induced pluripotent stem cells from sporadic early onset patients and differentiated them to dopamine neurons. At early stages in culture (30 days) we found significant elevations in soluble α-synuclein protein levels when compared to controls. This was associated with reductions in lysosomal membrane proteins such as LAMP1 and an increase in phosphorylated protein kinase C-α (p-PKCα). Testing activators of lysosomal function showed that specific phorbal esters reduced both α-synuclein and p-PKCα levels and increased LAMP1 expression. Interestingly, very low doses of the drug PEP005 were able to reduce α-synuclein levels without affecting p-PKCα. Similar effects of PEP005 on α-synuclein expression were seen following infusion into the mouse brain. Our data show that early onset sporadic Parkinson’s Disease can be accurately predicted using a ratio of α-synuclein and p-PKCα in dopamine neural cultures derived from patient iPSC’s and that specific phorbal esters can alter both biomarkers making these drugs promising candidates to treat Parkinson’s Disease.

### Sample Protocol
iPSC derived dopaminergic neuron frozen pellets were lysed using 2%SDS + 10mM TCEP (tris 2-carboxyethyl phosphine) buffer and sonicated. The bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA assay, Pierce, #23225) assay was used to determine protein concentration and 125 μg of protein were digested using FASP Protein Digestion kits (Expedeon). 3.125 μg of trypsin/lysC was used to digest each sample overnight at 37°C with shaking at 1000 21   rpm. Samples were desalted using Oasis MCX μelution plate and were eluted with 300 μl of Methanol/Ammonium Hydroxide. Samples were dried in speedvac until dry and resuspended in Biognosys iRT solution. Sample/iRT solution (4 μg) was loaded onto the SCIEX 6600.

### Data Protocol
Data were acquired in data independent acquisition (DIA) mode using 100 variable windows over a 45 minute gradient. Top 50 data dependent acquisition (DDA) was also performed on the same samples. DIA files were compared the DDA library using OpenSWATH as outlined in Shulbert et al63. Transition level data was run through MAP DIA software to obtain peptide and protein level data. In addition, differential protein analysis was performed by MAP DIA64. To filter out any peptides that had high variance within triplicates, a CV filter was applied where peptides that had a CV above 20% within each technical replicate were excluded. Peptide level data was then summed to give protein level data65. This data was then used for downstream analysis, including principal component analysis, GSEA and STRING.

### Publication Abstract
Young-onset Parkinson's disease (YOPD), defined by onset at &lt;50 years, accounts for approximately 10% of all Parkinson's disease cases and, while some cases are associated with known genetic mutations, most are not. Here induced pluripotent stem cells were generated from control individuals and from patients with YOPD with no known mutations. Following differentiation into cultures containing dopamine neurons, induced pluripotent stem cells from patients with YOPD showed increased accumulation of soluble &#x3b1;-synuclein protein and phosphorylated protein kinase C&#x3b1;, as well as reduced abundance of lysosomal membrane proteins such as LAMP1. Testing activators of lysosomal function showed that specific phorbol esters, such as PEP005, reduced &#x3b1;-synuclein and phosphorylated protein kinase C&#x3b1; levels while increasing LAMP1 abundance. Interestingly, the reduction in &#x3b1;-synuclein occurred through proteasomal degradation. PEP005 delivery to mouse striatum also decreased &#x3b1;-synuclein production in vivo. Induced pluripotent stem cell-derived dopaminergic cultures reveal a signature in patients with YOPD who have no known Parkinson's disease-related mutations, suggesting that there might be other genetic contributions to this disorder. This signature was normalized by specific phorbol esters, making them promising therapeutic candidates.

### Keywords
Human, Parkinson's disease, Ipsc

### Affiliations
Cedars Sinai Medical Center

### Submitter
Victoria Dardov

### Lab Head
Dr Jennifer Van Eyk
Cedars Sinai Medical Center


