### Accession
PXD001650

### Title
Evaluation of the Effect of Trypsin Digestion Buffers on Artificial Deamidation

### Description
This work comprehensively compared 50 mM of ammonium acetate (pH 6), Tris-HCl (pH 8), ABC and TEAB as in-solution trypsin digestion buffers. Both iTRAQ quantification and label-free results indicate that ammonium acetate (pH 6) is more suitable than other buffers for studying endogenous deamidation and N-glycosylation due to the significant decrease of artificial Asn deamidation in comparison to other buffers without affecting protein and peptide identification and Gln deamidation. Determination of the half-life of Asn deamidation in the four buffers further validates the conclusion. Our results also indicate that among the commonly used tryspin digestion buffers, ABC and TEAB are not suitable for studying Asn deamidation and N-glycosylation, but Tris-HCl may be used if trypsin digestion has to be done at around pH 8.

### Sample Protocol
Male Sprague−Dawley rats were handled in accordance with the guidelines of NTU Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (NTU-IACUC), NTU, Singapore. Rat kidneys were snap-frozen immediately in liquid nitrogen after collection, and kept at -80oC until use. The tissue was cut into small pieces and ground into fine powders in liquid nitrogen with a pestle. The powders were then suspended in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8) with protease inhibitor (05 892 791 001, Roche) added (10 ml/tablet). The suspension was sonicated for 10 seconds thrice on ice and centrifuged at 20,000g at 4oC for 20 min. The protein concentration of the supernatant was then determined by the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay. About 5 mg tissue lysate was diluted to 4 mg/ml using the lysis buffer, reduced with 10 mM DTT at 37oC for 2 h and alkylated with 40 mM iodoacetamide for 45 min in the dark. After the concentration of urea was diluted to 1M with 50mM Tris-HCl (pH 8), trypsin (T8802, Sigma) was added at a weight ratio of 1:50. It was then incubated at 37oC for 15 h. The obtained tryptic peptides were desalted using a Sep-Pak® C18 cartridge (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) and dried in a SpeedVac (Thermo Electron, Waltham, MA, USA). The trypsin digestion using other digestion buffers was done using the same procedure as that of Tris-HCl trypsin digestion except for the lysis buffers (NH4Ace: 8 M urea, 50 mM ammonium acetate, pH 6; ABC: 8 M urea, 50 mM ABC, pH not adjusted; TEAB: 8 M urea, 50 mM TEAB, pH not adjusted) and digestion buffers (NH4Ace: 50 mM ammonium acetate, pH 6; ABC: 50 mM ABC, pH not adjusted; TEAB: 50 mM TEAB, pH not adjusted). Three technical replicates were done for each step. 


### Data Protocol
The raw data were first converted into .apl files with MaxQuant 1.4.1.2 using the function of “Partial processing” with step 1 to 5, and then the .apl files were converted into Mascot generic file format using an in-house Perl script. The UniProt rat protein database (release 2013_10, 28855 sequences) concatenated with cRAP contaminants (version 2012.01.01) and their reverse complement were combined and used for database searches. The database search was performed using an in-house Mascot server (version 2.4.0, Matrix Science, Boston, MA, USA) with MS tolerance of 10 ppm, #13C of 2 and MS/MS tolerance of 0.02 Da. Two missed cleavage sites of trypsin were allowed. Carbamidomethylation (C) was set as a fixed modification, and oxidation (M) and deamidation (NQ) were set as variable modifications. Only peptides with an expectation value of ≤ 0.05 and a minimum length of 7 are used for statistical analysis, resulting in a FDR of less than 1%. For high confidence protein identification, only protein groups identified with at least 2 unique peptides ( E value ≤ 0.05) are reported, and only peptides of which the search engine rank is 1 and peptides in top scored proteins are counted.

### Publication Abstract
Nonenzymatic deamidation occurs readily under the condition of trypsin digestion, resulting in the identification of many artificial deamidation sites. To evaluate the effect of trypsin digestion buffers on artificial deamidation, we compared the three commonly used buffers Tris-HCl (pH 8), ammonium bicarbonate (ABC), and triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), and ammonium acetate (pH 6), which was reported to reduce Asn deamidation. iTRAQ quantification on rat kidney tissue digested in these four buffers indicates that artificial Asn deamidation is produced in the order of ammonium acetate &lt; Tris-HCl &lt; ABC &lt; TEAB, and Gln deamidation has no significant differences in all tested buffers. Label-free experiments show the same trend, while protein and unique peptide identification are comparable using these four buffers. To explain the differences of these four buffers in producing artificial Asn deamidation, we determined the half-life of Asn deamidation in these buffers using synthetic peptides containing -Asn-Gly- sequences. It is 51.4 &#xb1; 6.0 days in 50 mM of ammonium acetate (pH 6) at 37 &#xb0;C, which is about 23, 104, and 137 times that in Tris-HCl, ABC, and TEAB buffers, respectively. In conclusion, ammonium acetate (pH 6) is more suitable than other tested buffers for characterizing endogenous deamidation and N-glycosylation.

### Keywords
Rat, Artificial deamidation, Kidney

### Affiliations
Nanyang Technological Univeristy
School of Biological Sciences, Nanyang Technological University

### Submitter
Piliang Hao

### Lab Head
Dr Siu Kwan Sze
School of Biological Sciences, Nanyang Technological University


