### Accession
PXD021040

### Title
Disruption of endothelial glycocalyx after ischemic stroke onset: Activated scission activity of proHPSE by acrolein exposure

### Description
Infiltration of peripheral immune cells after blood-brain barrier (BBB) dysfunction causes severe inflammation after a stroke. Although the endothelial glycocalyx functions as a barrier to circulating cells, the relationship between stroke severity and glycocalyx dysfunction remains unclear. In this study, glycosaminoglycans (GAGs), a component of the endothelial glycocalyx, in ischemic stroke were studied using a photochemically induced thrombosis (PIT) mouse model. As results, decreased levels of heparan sulfate (HS) and chondroitin sulfate (CS) and increased activity of hyaluronidase 1 and heparanase (HPSE) were observed in ischemic brain tissues. HPSE expression in cerebral vessels increased after stroke onset and infarct volume greatly decreased after co-administration of N-acetylcysteine (NAC)+GAG oligosaccharides as compared to NAC administration alone. These results suggest that the endothelial glycocalyx was injured after the onset of stroke. Interestingly, scission activity of proHPSE produced by HBMEC/ciβ and HEK293 cells transfected with hHPSE1 cDNA were activated by acrolein exposure. We identified the ACR modified amino acid residues of proHPSE using nano LC-MS/MS, suggesting that ACR modification of Lys139 (6-kDa linker), and Lys107 and Lys161, located in the immediate vicinity of the 6-kDa linker, at least in part, is attributed to the activation of proHPSE. Since proHPSE, but not HPSE, localizes outside cells by binding with HS proteoglycans, ACR-modified proHPSE represents a promising target to protect the endothelial glycocalyx.

### Sample Protocol
The 65 kDa protein band was excised, reduced with 50 mM dithiothreitol at 37 °C for 2 h, and alkylated by 100 mM acrylamide at 25 °C for 30 min. The protein band was digested with TPCK treated trypsin (Worthington Biochemical Co, USA) and PNGase F (Roche Diagnostics, Switzerland) at 37 °C overnight. An aliquot of digestion mixture was analyzed by nano liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) using a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled with Easy-nLC1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides were separated on a nano ESI spray column (75 μm (inside diameter) × 100 mm (length), NTCC analytical column C18, 3 μm, Nikkyo Technos), with a gradient of 0-99% buffer B (100% (v/v) acetonitrile with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid) in buffer A (MilliQ water with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nl min-1 over 20 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in the positive-ion mode for mass spectrometry and tandem mass spectrometry, and the tandem mass spectrometry spectra were acquired using the data-dependent TOP 10 method.

### Data Protocol
The acquired data were processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with integrated Mascot (version 2.6.0, Matrix Science). The MSMS data were searched against the in-house database containing proHPSE sequence, using the following parameters: enzyme = trypsin; maximum missed cleavages = 3; variable modifications = Gln->N pyro-Glu (N-term Q), oxidation (M), propionamide (C), deamidated (NQ), Acrolein adduct (C): C(3) H(4) O(1), Acrolein adduct (N-term): C(3) H(2), FDP-lysine (K): C(6) H(6) O(1), MP-lysine (K): C(6) H(4) and Nim-propanalhistidine (H): C(3) H(4) O(1)); mass values, monoisotopic; peptide mass tolerance, 15 ppm; fragment mass tolerance, ±30 mmu; peptide charge, 1 +, 2 + and 3 +; instrument type, ESI-TRAP. Label free quantification was carried out ussing Proteome Discoverer 2.2.

### Publication Abstract
Infiltration of peripheral immune cells after blood-brain barrier dysfunction causes severe inflammation after a stroke. Although the endothelial glycocalyx, a network of membrane-bound glycoproteins and proteoglycans that covers the lumen of endothelial cells, functions as a barrier to circulating cells, the relationship between stroke severity and glycocalyx dysfunction remains unclear. In this study, glycosaminoglycans, a component of the endothelial glycocalyx, were studied in the context of ischemic stroke using a photochemically induced thrombosis mouse model. Decreased levels of heparan sulfate and chondroitin sulfate and increased activity of hyaluronidase 1 and heparanase (HPSE) were observed in ischemic brain tissues. HPSE expression in cerebral vessels increased after stroke onset and infarct volume greatly decreased after co-administration of <i>N</i>-acetylcysteine + glycosaminoglycan oligosaccharides as compared with <i>N</i>-acetylcysteine administration alone. These results suggest that the endothelial glycocalyx was injured after the onset of stroke. Interestingly, scission activity of proHPSE produced by immortalized endothelial cells and HEK293 cells transfected with hHPSE1 cDNA were activated by acrolein (ACR) exposure. We identified the ACR-modified amino acid residues of proHPSE using nano LC-MS/MS, suggesting that ACR modification of Lys<sup>139</sup> (6-kDa linker), Lys<sup>107</sup>, and Lys<sup>161</sup>, located in the immediate vicinity of the 6-kDa linker, at least in part is attributed to the activation of proHPSE. Because proHPSE, but not HPSE, localizes outside cells by binding with heparan sulfate proteoglycans, ACR-modified proHPSE represents a promising target to protect the endothelial glycocalyx.

### Keywords
Acrolein heparanase

### Affiliations
RIKEN Center for Sustainable Resource Science
Biomolecular characterization unit, Center for Sustainable Resource Science, RIKEN

### Submitter
Takehiro Suzuki

### Lab Head
Dr Naoshi Dohmae
Biomolecular characterization unit, Center for Sustainable Resource Science, RIKEN


