### Accession
PXD029732

### Title
A Clinical trial ready proteomics workflow to support large-scale analysis of Human Plasma: application to the Fenofibrate Intervention and Event Lowering in Diabetes (FIELD) trial

### Description
Background: Proteomic mass spectrometry is widely used to quantify proteins in biological specimens for biomarker discovery. Clinical studies requiring proteomic analysis of plasma are more complicated due to the high dynamic range and abundance of major plasma proteins. There is an unmet need to develop robust, rapid and cost-effective workflows able to support large-scale clinical studies of thousands of plasma specimens. We set about developing a suitable system to be used for the analysis of plasma collected from FIELD trial participants which investigated five years oral fenofibrate on coronary heart disease and microvascular complications.

### Sample Protocol
Depletion by Immunoaffinity Depletions were performed as per manufacturer’s instructions by the Australian Proteomics Analysis Facillity (APAF) (Macquarie University, Sydney, Australia). For Immunoaffinity depletion of serum albumin and IgG: ProteoPrep immunoaffinity depletion columns (Sigma-Aldrich, USA) were equilibrated in loading buffer (20 mM sodium phosphate, 150 mM NaCl, pH 7.4) and 50 µl of neat plasma added. Samples were incubated in the columns for 15 mins at room temperature followed by twice washing with 400 µL loading buffer. The washes were combined and stored at -80°C as these contained the unbound plasma proteins. The bound fraction was discarded.  For non-specific depletion of serum albumin, a Cibacron Blue F3GA agarose gel was used. Aurum Affi-gel (BioRad, USA): depletion was performed as per manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, columns were drained, washed with loading buffer (20 mM sodium phosphate, pH 7.4).  125 µl of neat plasm diluted in 375 µl of loading buffer was then added to the column and spun through using a benchtop centrifuge at 10,000g for 20sec.  This procedure was repeated with another 400µL of loading buffer, and the eluates combined and stored at -80°C. The bound fraction containing mainly albumin was discarded.  Preparation of protein digests from un-delipidated neat plasma  Neat plasma digests were prepared by transferring 10 µl of raw plasma to a fresh labeled 1.5 ml Eppendorf tube and adding 800 µl of 1% w/v SDC in 100 mM TEAB and vortexed. 100 µl of diluted plasma was then removed to a fresh tube and 1µl of 1M TCEP was added together with 4 µl of 1 M CLA. Samples were then boiled at 95°C for 10 mins. Next, 1 µg of sequencing grade trypsin was added, and samples were digested over night at 37°C.   Methanol Chloroform extraction  10 µl of plasma was aliquoted into a clean 1.5ml Eppendorf tube and then 50 µl of cold MilliQ H20 was added. Next 75 µl of 1M monopotassium phosphate, 125 µl of methanol, 375 µl of chloroform and 150 µl of cold water were added to the plasma followed by 2 mins of vortexing on high speed. Samples were then centrifuged at 18,000 RCF in order for the aqueous and organic phases to be removed (top and bottom liquid fractions). The tube was then dried in a vacuum desiccator for 5 minutes to remove any residual solvent or water. The protein pellet was then re-suspended in 200 µl of 1% SDC 100mM TEAB and a 10 µl aliquot was removed for BCA protein assay. Next, an additional 2 µl of TCEP and 8 µl of CLA were added to each sample before being boiled at 95°C in a heating block for 10 minutes. Sequencing grade trypsin was then added to the tubes in a 1:10 ration of enzyme to total protein mass. After digestion, FA was added to precipitate the SDC and the samples were then centrifuged for 5 mins prior to STAGE Tip desalting in line with the method described above.  The combined stage tip digest/de-salting/de-lipidation workflow was conducted as described previously4. The procedure that was followed was identical the digestion method mentioned above for neat plasma. However, post digestion, 250 µl of 99% ethyl acetate, 1% TFA was added to each sample and vortexed for 10 s. Samples were then STAGE tipped in a multiplex batch of up to 96 utilising the 3D printed apparatus as described in Harney et al5.

### Data Protocol
DIA Data analysis was performed using Spectronaut Pulsar X v12.0.2  (Biognosys, Switzerland) using our in house developed method for enhanced spectral libraries derived from public datasets4 . All samples were normalised and searched against an enhanced spectral library. Protein identifications and quantities were then exported as a .csv prior to being imported into the analysis platform Perseus V1.6.1.26. Protein areas were then log2 transformed and missing values were imputed using values within a normal distribution reduced by three standard deviations.  DDA samples were searched with MaxQuant V1.6.5 against the human proteome FASTA database (UP000005640, 20,350 entries) using the following settings: 1% FDR, reverse decoy mode, min peptides 1, FTMS mass tolerance 20ppm, missed cleavages set to max 2. Modifications: oxidation of methionine, variable and carbamidomethyl (C) fixed, LFQ enabled with default settings.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Plasma, Clinical trial, Clionical proteomics, Orbitrap, Dia

### Affiliations
BIomarker and bowel cancer laboratory, Kolling institute of medical research, university of sydney
University of Technology Sydney

### Submitter
Matthew O'Rourke

### Lab Head
Dr Mark Molloy
BIomarker and bowel cancer laboratory, Kolling institute of medical research, university of sydney


