### Accession
PXD013379

### Title
Core matrisome protein signature during periodontal ligament maturation from pre-occlusal eruption to occlusal function

### Description
The pre-occlusal eruption brings the rat molars into functional occlusion, which implicates tensional strains during mastication. We hypothesized that upon establishment of occlusion, the periodontal ligament undergoes cell and extracellular matrix maturation to adopt to this mechanical function. We thus aimed to characterize the protein content and changes in expression levels of tensionally relevant extracellular matrix components in the periodontal ligament between the eruption and newly established occlusion in rat molars. Twelve Wistar male rats were divided into 3 groups based on eruption and occlusal stages: covering the pre-occlusal stages at time of eruption, the first day of occlusion and 1 week after occlusion. We employed laser capture microdissection to obtain samples of the periodontal ligament at three regions, cervical, apical and subapical. The proteome was screened with Tandem Mass Tag 10-plexTM mass spectrometry and the expression of key proteins were confirmed by immunofluorescence.  Differential expression of matrisome proteins was seen in the cervical and the apical region. Downregulation of pro-metabolic proteins, such as apolipoproteins implicated in lipid transport was observed. Alpha-fetoprotein, a stem cell marker, was also downregulated indicating cell differentiation and PDL maturation. Upregulated proteins were components of the extracellular matrix, involving several proteoglycans and glycoproteins and the matrisome was thus further analyzed. Periostin appeared around collagen α-1 (III) fibers and its expression was particularly strong on Sharpey’s fibers. This co-localization coincided with organization of collagen fibers in direction of the occlusal forces. Establishment of occlusion coincides with cellular differentiation and the maturation of the extracellular matrix of the periodontal ligament, as seen by downregulation of the stem cell marker Alpha-fetoprotein and apolipoproteins, and the progressive accumulation of collagen type III fibers, proteoglycans, glycoproteins. The increase in collagen fiber associates periostin may reflect a physiological response to enforce cell-ECM contacts during PDL maturation.

### Sample Protocol
Periodontal ligament tissue samples from three different regions were obtained by laser capture microdissectio and stored at -80°C. Samples were resuspended in approximately 25 µl of TEAB 0.1M, Rapigest 0.1% (Waters), with volume adapted in order to have the same area concentration. Samples were then heated at 100°C for 5 min. and lysis was performed by sonication (6 x 30 sec.) at 70% amplitude and 0.5 pulse. Samples were kept 30 sec. on ice between each cycle of sonication. Samples were centrifuged at 13’500 rpm for 30 sec., samples volume were adjusted to 25 µl, and then protein reduction was performed by addition of 0.5 µl of Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP) 50 mM in water for 1 hour at 60°C. Cysteine alkylation was performed by addition of 0.5 µl of iodoacetamide 200 mM in water for 1 hour at room temperature (RT) and in the dark. Overnight digestion was performed at 37 °C with 1 µL of freshly prepared trypsin (Promega; 0.2 µg/µl in TEAB 0.1 M). Samples were spin down and 3.3 µl of each of the forty-eight LCM samples were taken to create a control pool (called mix1) and eight additional LCM samples were also pooled together to create a second control (called mix2). Six TMT-10plex isobaric label reagent set (Thermo Scientific) were dissolved in 18.5 µl of ACN (i.e 60 label reagents in total) and added to the different samples. TMT labelling was performed for 1 hour at RT and stopped by addition of 2 ml of hydroxylamine 5% for 15 min. at room temperature. Labelled samples of each TMT10 experiment were pooled together, acidified with 50 ml of Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and let react for 45 min. at 37°C in order to cleave the Rapigest. Samples were then centrifuged 20 min. at 13’300 rpm and supernatants were transferred to new tubes. Samples were dried under speed-vacuum, desalted desalted with a C18 microspin column (Harvard Apparatus, Holliston, MA, USA) according to manufacturer’s instructions, dried again under speed-vacuum and stored at -20°C.  LC-ESI-MS/MS was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with an Easy nLC1200 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were trapped on a Acclaim pepmap100, C18, 3μm, 75μm x 20mm nano trap-column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated on a 75 μm x 500 mm, C18, 2μm, 100 Å Easy-Spray column (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The analytical separation was run for 125 min using a gradient of H2O/FA 99.9%/0.1% (solvent A) and CH3CN/FA  80%/0.1% (solvent B). The gradient was run as follows: 0-2 min 92 % A and 8 % B, then to 72 % A and 28 % B in 105min, then to 58% A and 42% B in 20 min  and finally to 5 % A and 95 % B in 10 min with a stay for 23 min at this composition. Flow rate was of 250 nL/min. Data-dependant analysis (DDA) was performed with MS1 full scan at a resolution of 120’000 FWHM followed by as many subsequent MS2 scans on selected precursors as possible within 3 second maximum cycle time. MS1 was performed in the Orbitrap with an AGC target of 4x105, a maximum injection time of 50 ms and a scan range from 375 to 1500 m/z. MS2 was performed in the Orbitrap using higher-energy collisional dissociation HCD at 38% NCE. Isolation windows was at 0.7 u with an AGC target of 5x104 and a maximum injection time of 86 ms. A dynamic exclusion of parent ions of 60 s. with 10 ppm mass tolerance was applied.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using Proteome Discoverer (PD) 2.2 software (Thermo Fisher). Briefly, Spectrum were extracted and searched against the Rattus norvegicus reference proteome database (Uniprot, release 2018-09, 31562 entries) combined with an in-house database of common contaminant using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.5.1). Trypsin was selected as the enzyme, with one potential missed cleavage. Precursor ion tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment ion tolerance to 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine (+57.021) was specified as fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine (+15.995), as well as TMT10plex (+229.163) on lysine residues and on peptide N-termini were specified as variable modifications. The search results was validated with percolator for a q value set at 0.01. PSM and peptides were filtered with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%, and then grouped to proteins with again a FDR of 1% and using only peptides with high confidence level. Both unique and razor peptides were used for quantitation and protein and peptides abundances values were based on S/N values of reporter ions. The abundances were normalised on “Total Peptide Amount” and then scaled with “On Controls Average” (i.e. using mix1 abundances as reference). All the protein ratio were calculated from the medians of the summed abundances of replicate groups and associated p-values were calculated with an ANOVA test based on individual protein or peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Tooth eruption is a continuous biological process with dynamic changes at cellular and tissue levels, particularly within the periodontal ligament (PDL). Occlusion completion is a significant physiological landmark of dentition establishment. However, the importance of the involvement of molecular networks engaging in occlusion establishment on the final PDL maturation is still largely unknown. In this study, using rat and mouse molar teeth and a human PDL cell line for RNAseq and proteomic analysis, we systematically screened the key molecular links in regulating PDL maturation before and after occlusion establishment. We discovered Notch, a key molecular pathway in regulating stem cell fate and differentiation, is a major player in the event. Intercepting the Notch pathway by deleting its key canonical transcriptional factor, <i>RBP-Jkappa</i>, using a conditional knockout strategy in the mice delayed PDL maturation. We also identified that Lamin A, a cell nuclear lamina member, is a unique marker of PDL maturation, and its expression is under the control of Notch signaling. Our study therefore provides a deep insight of how PDL maturation is regulated at the molecular level, and we expect the outcomes to be applied for a better understanding of the molecular regulation networks in physiological conditions such as tooth eruption and movement and also for periodontal diseases.

### Keywords
Periodontal ligament, Tooth eruption, Extracellular matrix, Matrisome, Occlusal forces

### Affiliations
University of Geneva
Deptartment of Orthodontics, University Clinic of Dental Medicine, University of Geneva

### Submitter
Balazs Denes

### Lab Head
Dr Balazs Jozsef Denes
Deptartment of Orthodontics, University Clinic of Dental Medicine, University of Geneva


