### Accession
PXD015373

### Title
Tissue Thermal Proteome Profiling

### Description
We introduce tissue Thermal Proteome Profiling (tissue-TPP) which enables the discovery of drug targets and off-targets as well as measurements of target occupancy in tissue samples derived from dosed animals. Here we report the first proteome-wide thermal stability map of tissues and organ-specific target profiles of the non-covalent histone deacetylase inhibitor, panobinostat. In addition, we devised blood-CETSA/TPP to monitor target and off-target engagement directly in whole blood.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were processed with a modified SP3 protocol, digested using trypsin and labeled with TMT. Shotgun proteomics using a Q-Exactive and Fusion Lumos Orbitrap was then performed.

### Data Protocol
TMT quantification was used, by using the isobarquant python package (Franken et al., Nat Protoc (2015)), and Mascot 2.4 was used for protein identification. Search parameters: trypsin, missed cleavages 3, peptide tolerance 10ppm, 0.02Da for MS/MS tolerance. Fixed modifications were carbamidomethyl on cysteines and TMT10plex on lysine. Variable modifications included acetylation on protein N-terminus, oxidation of methionine and TMT10plex on peptide N-termini.

### Publication Abstract
Monitoring drug-target interactions with methods such as the cellular thermal-shift assay (CETSA) is well established for simple cell systems but remains challenging in vivo. Here we introduce tissue thermal proteome profiling (tissue-TPP), which measures binding of small-molecule drugs to proteins in tissue samples from drug-treated animals by detecting changes in protein thermal stability using quantitative mass spectrometry. We report organ-specific, proteome-wide thermal stability maps and derive target profiles of the non-covalent histone deacetylase inhibitor panobinostat in rat liver, lung, kidney and spleen and of the B-Raf inhibitor vemurafenib in mouse testis. In addition, we devised blood-CETSA and blood-TPP and applied it to measure target and off-target engagement of panobinostat and the BET family inhibitor JQ1 directly in whole blood. Blood-TPP analysis of panobinostat confirmed its binding to known targets and also revealed thermal stabilization of the zinc-finger transcription factor ZNF512. These methods will help to elucidate the mechanisms of drug action in vivo.

### Keywords
Human, Tpp, Blood

### Affiliations
EMBL Heidelberg
Cellzome, a GSK company

### Submitter
Nils Kurzawa

### Lab Head
Dr Marcus Bantscheff
Cellzome, a GSK company


