### Accession
PXD027406

### Title
Exercise plasma boosts memory and dampens brain inflammation via clusterin

### Description
Physical exercise seems universally beneficial to human and animal health, slowing cognitive aging and neurodegeneration. Cognitive benefits are tied to increased plasticity and reduced inflammation within the hippocampus, yet little is known about the factors and mechanisms mediating these effects. We discovered that “runner” plasma, collected from voluntarily running mice and infused into sedentary mice, reduces baseline neuroinflammatory gene expression and experimentally induced brain inflammation. Plasma proteomic analysis revealed a concerted increase in complement cascade inhibitors including clusterin (CLU), a central protein for the anti-inflammatory effects of runner plasma. Intravenously injected CLU strongly binds to brain endothelial cells reducing their inflammatory gene expression in an acute model of brain inflammation and in an Alzheimer’s disease mouse model. Cognitively impaired patients participating in structured exercise for 6 months had higher plasma clusterin levels. These findings demonstrate the existence of anti-inflammatory “exercise factors” that are transferrable, target the cerebrovasculature and benefit the brain, and are present in humans engaging in exercise.

### Sample Protocol
Rapigest SF (Waters, Cat#186001861) was added to each plasma sample for a final concentration of 1 µg/µL.  The proteins were reduced (5 mM dithiothreitol, 56 °C, 30 minutes) and alkylated (14 mM iodoacetamide, room temperature in the dark, 1 hour).  The proteins were then digested over night at 37 °C with trypsin/lysC mix (Promega, Cat#V5073) at an enzyme/substrate ratio of 1:20.  Trifluoroacetic acid was added to each sample at a 0.5% final concentration, followed by incubation at 37 °C for 45 minutes and centrifugation at 16,000 RCF for 10 minutes.  The samples were then desalted on an AssayMap Bravo platform using underivatized polystyrene-divinylbenzene reverse phase S (RP-S) cartridges (Agilent, Cat#G5496-60033), and were then dried down using vacuum concentrator (Labconco, Cat# 7810010). TMT labeling was achieved using a TMT-10plex Isobaric Label Reagent Set (Thermo Fisher, Cat# 90111) according to the kit’s directions. A global standard was created to enable a comparison between 10plex sets by taking aliquots of equal volume from each sample and combining them. Portions of each sample were used to check ion distributions and labeling efficiency. The rest was combined in adjusted ratios with the other labeled samples in their respective TMT10plex set, lyophilized in a centrifugal vacuum concentrator, and resuspended in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, and fractionated and desalted using a High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Scientific, cat# 84868). Finally, the samples were dried down via vacuum centrifugation before being resuspended in 0.1% formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The raw data for TMT-labeled samples was analyzed using Proteome Discoverer (Thermo Scientific) using SEQUEST-HT. Precursor mass tolerance was ±10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was ±0.6 Da. Static modifications were carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.021 Da) and TMT-labeled N-terminus and lysine (+229.163 Da). Differential modifications were oxidation of methionine (+15.995 Da) and acetylation of protein N-terminal (+42.011 Da). Proteome Discoverer searched the spectra against the Uniprot Mouse database, including the identification of common contaminants using the SEQUEST algorithm. Percolator was applied to filter out false MS2 assignments at a false discovery rate of 1% at peptide and protein levels. For quantification, a mass tolerance of ± 20 ppm window was applied to the integration of reporter ions using the most confident centroid method. A co-isolation threshold of 30, and SPS MS3 matches of 65 % and an average reporter signal to noise value of 10 threshold was applied.

### Publication Abstract
Physical exercise is generally beneficial to all aspects of human and animal health, slowing cognitive ageing and neurodegeneration<sup>1</sup>. The cognitive benefits of physical exercise are tied to an increased plasticity and reduced inflammation within the hippocampus<sup>2-4</sup>, yet little is known about the factors and mechanisms that mediate these effects. Here we show that 'runner plasma', collected from voluntarily running mice and infused into sedentary mice, reduces baseline neuroinflammatory gene expression and experimentally induced brain inflammation. Plasma proteomic analysis revealed a concerted increase in complement cascade inhibitors including clusterin (CLU). Intravenously injected CLU binds to brain endothelial cells and reduces neuroinflammatory gene expression in a mouse model of acute brain inflammation and a mouse model of Alzheimer's disease. Patients with cognitive impairment who participated in structured exercise for 6 months had higher plasma levels of CLU. These findings demonstrate the existence of anti-inflammatory exercise factors that are transferrable, target the cerebrovasculature and benefit the brain, and are present in humans who engage in exercise.

### Keywords
Plasma, Mouse, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Stanford University
Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA

### Submitter
Niclas Olsson

### Lab Head
Dr Tony Wyss-Coray
Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA


