### Accession
PXD021315

### Title
Label-free quantitative proteome analysis reveals the underlying mechanisms of grain nuclear proteins involved in wheat water-deficit response

### Description
In this study, we performed the first large-scale nuclear proteome analysis of wheat developing grains under water deficit by label-free based quantitative proteomic approach.

### Sample Protocol
Chinese elite winter wheat cultivar Zhongmai 175was used as material, which has better adaptation, high yield and superior noodle quality widely cultivated in the north wheat production area of China in recent years. Field trial was performedat the experimental station of China Agricultural University,Wuqiao, Hebei province (116°3702300E and 37°1600200N) of Chinaduring2018-2019 growing season. The field experiments included a control group with well-watered irrigation and water-deficit treatment group without irrigation after flowering. The well-watered irrigation was subjected to traditional flood irrigation with 75 mm at both jointing and flowering stages while no irrigation was set as rain-fed region without artificial water irrigation. Each treatment was conducted with three biological duplicates, andeach experimental plot was 4 m×9 m with row spaced at 0.16 meter. One meter wide zone between plots was designed as an unirrigated zone to minimize the interference from adjacent plots. The plants were marked after flowering, and the developing grains from five periods (10, 15, 20days postanthesis, DPA) in three biological replicates were collected, and immediately transferred in liquid nitrogen, and then stored at -80°C prior to analysis.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification, oxidation on Met was specified as variable modifications. Label-free quantification method was LFQ, FDR was adjusted to <1% and minimum score for peptides was > 40.In quantitative analysis, the available quantitative protein was regarded as a differentially accumulated protein (DAP) identified at least twice in three biological replicates, whose cut-off value was greater than or equal to 2 times or less than 2 times (Student's t test,p<0.05).

### Publication Abstract
In this study, we performed the first nuclear proteome analysis of wheat developing grains under water deficit by using a label-free based quantitative proteomic approach. In total, we identified 625 unique proteins as differentially accumulated proteins (DAPs), of which 398 DAPs were predicted to be localized in nucleus. Under water deficit, 146 DAPs were up-regulated and mainly involved in the stress response and oxidation-reduction process, while 252 were down-regulated and mainly participated in translation, the cellular amino metabolic process, and the oxidation-reduction process. The <i>cis</i>-acting elements analysis of the key nuclear DAPs encoding genes demonstrated that most of these genes contained the same <i>cis</i>-acting elements in the promoter region, mainly including ABRE involved in abscisic acid response, antioxidant response element, MYB responsive to drought regulation and MYC responsive to early drought. The <i>cis</i>-acting elements related to environmental stress and hormones response were relatively abundant. The transcription expression profiling of the nuclear up-regulated DAPs encoding genes under different organs, developmental stages and abiotic stresses was further detected by RNA-seq and Real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction, and more than 50% of these genes showed consistency between transcription and translation expression. Finally, we proposed a putative synergistic responsive network of wheat nuclear proteome to water deficit, revealing the underlying mechanisms of wheat grain nuclear proteome in response to water deficit.

### Keywords
Label-free quantitation., Water deficit, Nuclear proteome, Developing grains, Wheat

### Affiliations
Capital Normal University

### Submitter
Tingting Li

### Lab Head
Dr Yueming Yan
Capital Normal University


