### Accession
PXD034242

### Title
The non-classical major-histocompatibility-complex II protein SLA-DM is crucial for African swine fever virus replication

### Description
African swine fever virus (ASFV) is a lethal animal pathogen which enters its host cells through endocytosis. So far, host factors specifically required for ASFV replication have been barely identified. In this study a genome-wide CRISPR/Cas9 knockout screen in porcine cells indicated that the genes RFXANK, RFXAP, SLA-DMA, SLA-DMB, and CIITA are important for productive ASFV infection. The proteins encoded by these genes belong to the major-histocompatibility-complex II (MHC II), or swine-leucocyte-antigen-complex II (SLA II). RFXAP and CIITA are MHC II-specific transcription factors, whereas SLA-DMA/B are subunits of the non-classical MHC II molecule SLA-DM. Targeted knockout of either of these genes led to severe replication defects of different ASFV isolates, reflected by substantially reduced plating efficiency, cell-to-cell spread, and progeny virus titers. For the characterization of the knockouts on a proteome level the protein contents of the knockout cell lines were analyzed by mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Confluent monolayers of WSL, WSL DMAKO (11), WSL DMBKO (9), WSL CIITAKO (1) and WSL RFXAPKO (6) (n = 3 per clone) were lysed in 2 % SDS (0.1 M Tris pH 8.0) for 10 min at 95°C. Lysates were clarified by centrifugation (14.000 x g, 10 min) and the supernatants collected. Aliquots containing 100 µg protein (determined by BCA assay) were precipitated by addition of 3 volumes of ice-cold acetone. Protein pellets were recovered by centrifugation at 10 000 x g at 4°C for 15 min and digested to peptides using EasyPep™ Mini MS Sample Prep Kit (Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturers protocol.  Peptides were resuspended in 0.1 % formic acid (FA) and peptide yields assessed by BCA assay. Peptides (1 µg/sample) were separated on a nanoElute® (Bruker, Bremen, Germany) HPLC equipped with an IonOpticks Aurora column (25 cm x 75 µm ID, 1.6 µm C18) at a temperature of 40°C with a flow rate of 400 nL/min coupled to a TimsTOF Pro instrument (Bruker). Solvent A was 0.1 % FA and solvent B 0.1 % FA in acetonitrile. Peptides were eluted with a 11 min gradient from 2 % to 16 % solvent B (0-60 min), 15-24 % solvent B (60-90 min), 24 %-34 % solvent B (90-105 min), 35-95 % solvent B (105-107 min) and 95% solvent B (107-115 min). The TimsTOF Pro instrument was equipped with a CaptiveSpray nano electrospray ion source (Bruker) and was operated in Parallel Accumulation and Serial Fragmentation (PASEF) mode using the standard DDA method for proteome analysis (1.1 sec cycle time) recommended by the manufacturer.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS-data were processed with Fragpipe (Yu et al., 2020) using a data base with porcine sequences downloaded from Ensembl repository (Aken et al., 2017). Qualitative and quantitative analysis of protein identifications was performed using the statistical language R (Team, 2020) and Perseus v1.6.15.0 (Tyanova et al., 2016).

### Publication Abstract
African swine fever virus (ASFV) is a lethal animal pathogen that enters its host cells through endocytosis. So far, host factors specifically required for ASFV replication have been barely identified. In this study a genome-wide CRISPR/Cas9 knockout screen in porcine cells indicated that the genes RFXANK, RFXAP, SLA-DMA, SLA-DMB, and CIITA are important for productive ASFV infection. The proteins encoded by these genes belong to the major histocompatibility complex&#xa0;II (MHC II), or swine leucocyte antigen complex II (SLA II). RFXAP and CIITA are MHC&#xa0;II-specific transcription factors, whereas SLA-DMA/B are subunits of the non-classical MHC&#xa0;II molecule SLA-DM. Targeted knockout of either of these genes led to severe replication defects of different ASFV isolates, reflected by substantially reduced plating efficiency, cell-to-cell spread, progeny virus titers and viral DNA replication. Transgene-based reconstitution of SLA-DMA/B fully restored the replication capacity demonstrating that SLA-DM, which resides in late endosomes, plays a crucial role during early steps of ASFV infection.

### Keywords
African swine fever virus (asfv), Major histocompatibility complex ii (mhc ii), Sla-dmb, Swine leucocyte antigen complex ii (sla ii), Sla-dma, Genome-wide crispr/cas9 knockout screening (gecko)

### Affiliations
Institute of molecular virology and cell biology
Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut

### Submitter
Axel Karger

### Lab Head
Dr Axel Karger
Institute of molecular virology and cell biology


