### Accession
PXD012763

### Title
Profiling transcriptome and proteome of orange-spotted grouper (Epinephelus coioides) after nervous necrosis virus infection

### Description
Grouper is an important commercial maricultural fish, which suffer viral nervous necrosis (VNN) disease at the larval and juvenile stages, but the changes of transcriptomics and proteomics during viral infection remain unknown. In this study, we applied RNA-seq and label-free mass spectrum for the first time to depict the map of transcriptomics and proteomics in non-infected, susceptible-infected and tolerate-infected grouper in larval stage. Further analyses showed that the transcriptome and proteome change dramatically among 3 distinct groups, indicating that different immune response for infected and perststent grouper in larval stage. These valuable transcriptomics and proteomics datasets enable the investigation of molecular mechanism in nervous necrosis (VNN) virus infection, thus helps the further development of molecular breeding and marine fishery

### Sample Protocol
All health orange-spotted groupers were separated into 2 groups, each group with 3 replicates. Each replicate (400 larva groupers) is maintained in a water tank under the condition mentioned above for 5 days. For the treatment group, 200 ml rough extract of NNV (RGNNV) infected grouper with 5.0×105 NNV copies/ml were added to each tank for 5 days. For the control group, 200 ml rough extract of normal grouper without NNV infection were added to each tank for 5 days. Most groupers in treatment group presented abnormal swimming behavior (whirling and spiraling) and death, only a few groupers (~15 groupers per replicate) behaved normal and retained in persistent state, while all grouper in control group were normal. We categorized groupers into 3 groups based on our observation: 1) infected group (I), which is death after NNV infection; 2) persistent group (P), which can survive after NNV infection; 3) control group (C), which is without NNV treatment (Fig. 1). We sampled the whole body of grouper in each replication of infected (I), persistent (P) and control (C) group, respectively. All samples were immediately kept in RNAlater (Ambion, USA) and stored at -80 °C for RNA and protein extraction.

### Data Protocol
Label-free quantitative Liquid Chromatography Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS) was used to depict the proteomics of grouper with NNV infection, NNV persistent and without NNV infection. Library preparation was carried out by following the procedure in previous study (ref). Briefly, proteins pellets precipitated by trichloroacetic acid (TCA)-acetone were dissolved in 8M urea containing 100mM Tris HCl pH 8.5. Then, cysteines were reduced by adding dithiothreitol (DTT) to a final concentration of 5mM and incubated for 30 min. After alkylation with adding chloroacetamide and incubated for 30 min, the solution was diluted to a final concentration of 1M urea with 100mM Tris HCl pH 8.5. Subsequently, the proteins were digested with trypsin (1:50 enzyme-to-protein ratio) at 37 °C overnight. Then, peptides were desalted and pre-fractionated into three fractions using the Empore Styrene divinylbenzene Reversed Phase Sulfonate material (SDB-RPS, 3 M). After elution, peptides were dried, re-dissolved in 2% ACN, 0.1% TFA, and adjusted to a final concentration of 0.1 μg/μl. Finally, peptides were separated with an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher) on a 16 cm C18 column (3 μm bead size) with a 120 min segmented linear gradient and analyzed with a QExactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) according to manufacturer’s protocol. MaxQuant software (version 1.3.0.5, Max-Planck-Institute of Biochemistry, Am Klopferspitz, Germany) was used to analyses the MS data (ref).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nervous necrosis virus infection, Transcriptome, Proteome

### Affiliations
Fisheries Research Institute of Fujian

### Submitter
hui Ge

### Lab Head
Dr Ge Hui
Fisheries Research Institute of Fujian


