### Accession
PXD009927

### Title
Apolipoprotein A1 forms 5/5 and 5/4 antiparallel dimers in human high-density lipoprotein

### Description
We performed zero-order chemical cross-linking mass spectrometry experiments on reconstituted discoidal HDL and human HDL to determine the APOA1 orientations in these particles.

### Sample Protocol
Reconstituted discoidal HDL was prepared using a mixture of recombinant [14N]APOA1 and [15N]APOA1. Human HDL was isolated from plasma by sequential ultracentrifugation. Subsequently, they were cross-linking using EDC (1-ethyl-3-[3-dimethylaminopropyl]carbodiimide hydrochloride, followed by standard bottom-up proteomics sample prepration and LC/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Data was analyzed using xQuest (version 2.1.1). For rHDL, the database was built from the sequence of recombinant APOA1. For human HDL, the database contained the sequences of thirty-nine proteins (from Uniprot database) consistently detected in HDL in previous studies.

### Publication Abstract
Apolipoprotein A1 (APOA1), the major protein of high-density lipoprotein (HDL), contains 10 helical repeats that play key roles in protein-protein and protein-lipid interactions. The current structural model for HDL proposes that APOA1 forms an antiparallel dimer in which helix 5 in monomer 1 associates with helix 5 in monomer 2 along a left-left (LL5/5) interface, forming a protein complex with a 2-fold axis of symmetry centered on helix 5. However, computational studies suggest that other orientations are possible. To test this idea, we used a zero-length chemical cross-linking reagent that forms covalent bonds between closely apposed basic and acidic residues. Using proteolytic digestion and tandem mass spectrometry, we identified amino acids in the central region of the antiparallel APOA1 dimer of HDL that were in close contact. As predicted by the current model, we found six intermolecular cross-links that were consistent with the antiparallel LL5/5 registry. However, we also identified three intermolecular cross-links that were consistent with the antiparallel LL5/4 registry. The LL5/5 is the major structural conformation of the two complexes in both reconstituted discoidal HDL particles and in spherical HDL from human plasma. Molecular dynamic simulations suggest that that LL5/5 and LL5/4 APOA1 dimers possess similar free energies of dimerization, with LL5/5 having the lowest free energy. Our observations indicate that phospholipidated APOA1 in HDL forms different antiparallel dimers that could play distinct roles in enzyme regulation, assembly of specific protein complexes, and the functional properties of HDL in humans.

### Keywords
Chemical cross-linking, Molecular modeling, Apoa1, High density lipoprotein, Tandem mass spectrometric analysis

### Affiliations
University of Washington

### Submitter
Yi He

### Lab Head
Dr Jay W Heinecke
University of Washington


