### Accession
PXD019544

### Title
Multiomics Characterization of Potential Therapeutic Vulnerabilities in Low-grade Serous Ovarian Carcinoma

### Description
Fourteen LGSOC cell lines were interrogated using whole exome sequencing, RNA sequencing, and mass spectrometry-based proteomics. Somatic mutation, copy-number aberrations, gene and protein expression were analyzed and integrated using different computational approaches. LGSOC cell line data was compared to publicly available LGSOC tumor data (AACR GENIE cohort), and also used for predictive biomarker identification of MEK inhibitor (MEKi) efficacy. Protein interaction databases were evaluated to identify novel therapeutic targets.

### Sample Protocol
Seven LGSOC cell lines were selected for global proteome analysis in triplicate using 3 separately cultured samples for each. Cultures of 5 different high grade serous cell lines were also analyzed as a control. Cells were collected by trypsinization and washed with 1X dPBS. A minimum of 1.0x106 cells per cell line were used in these analyses. Cells pellets were lysed in 200 uL of a buffer containing guanidine hydrochloride (4M), HEPES (pH 8.5, 50 mM), 2-chloroacetamide (40 mM), tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (10 mM), ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (5 mM), 1x phosphatase inhibitor, and 1x protease inhibitor. Bead beating of the cells was performed in Lysing Matrix D tubes on a FastPrep24 (6 M/s for 45 s, 60 s rest, 6 M/s for 45 s). Cell lysate was then heated at 95 C for 15 min with 1200 rpm mixing. 50 ug of each sample was diluted 10x in 50 mM HEPES pH 8.5 (concentration determined using by BCA assay) and digested using a 50:1 ratio of protein:trypsin/Lys-C mixture at 37 C overnight with shaking at 1200 rpm. A small aliquot of each LGSOC sample was mixed and analyzed as LGSOC-mixed control. The five HGSOC samples were mixed and analyzed as a HGSOC-mixed control sample. An aliquot of all the LGSOC and HGSOC samples were mixed and analyzed as an all sample pooled internal standard. Tandem mass tag (TMT10) labeling was performed by adding 100 ug TMT label in acetonitrile and incubating at room temperature for thirty minutes twice. Excess label was quenched with 10 uL of 1 M glycine. Individual TMT channels were combined and the volume of the combined TMT labeled sample was reduced to 10-20% of the original volume. Three 10-plex batches were prepared, where each batch contained one replicate of each of the LGSOC samples, the LGSOC-mixed control, the HGSOC mixed control, and the all sample pooled internal standard. The combined samples were fractionated by high pH reverse-phase high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) in a gradient of acetonitrile and 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate in water into 48 individual fractions. These 48 fractions were concatenated into 12 fractions by combining every twelfth fraction, each of which was analyzed by low pH nanoLC mass spectrometry (MS) using a MS/MS/MS (MS3) method on a Thermo Scientific Easy nLC coupled to an ThermoFisher Orbitrap Fusion MS.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were searched against Uniprot human reference proteome using Sequest HT engine through the Proteome Discoverer (v2.1.1.21). Precursor ion tolerance was set to 20ppm. Dynamic modifications included Oxidation (+15.995 Da, M), Acetylation (+42.011 Da, N-Term), Phosphorylation (+79.966 Da, STY) and static modification included Carbamidomethyl (+57.021 Da, C) and TMT (+229.163 Da, K, N-Term).  PSM identification FDR was calculated using Percolator by searching the results against a decoy sequence set, only peptide-to-spectrum matches (PSMs)  with FDR< 5% were retained in the analysis. Only peptides that were identified in all three batches were retained.  ComBat, a function from sva R-package was used to adjust for batch effects using an empirical Bayes adjustment. Detection of differentially expressed proteins from the collected peptide data was determined by the Probe-level Expression Change Averaging (PECA) in R.

### Publication Abstract
Low-grade serous ovarian carcinoma (LGSOC) is a rare tumor subtype with high case fatality rates in patients with metastatic disease. There is a pressing need to develop effective treatments using newly available preclinical models for therapeutic discovery and drug evaluation. Here, we use multiomics integration of whole-exome sequencing, RNA sequencing, and mass spectrometry-based proteomics on 14 LGSOC cell lines to elucidate novel biomarkers and therapeutic vulnerabilities. Comparison of LGSOC cell line data with LGSOC tumor data enabled predictive biomarker identification of MEK inhibitor (MEKi) efficacy, with KRAS mutations found exclusively in MEKi-sensitive cell lines and NRAS mutations found mostly in MEKi-resistant cell lines. Distinct patterns of Catalogue of Somatic Mutations in Cancer mutational signatures were identified in MEKi-sensitive and MEKi-resistant cell lines. Deletions of <i>CDKN2A/B</i> and <i>MTAP</i> genes were more frequent in cell lines than tumor samples and possibly represent key driver events in the absence of KRAS/NRAS/BRAF mutations. These LGSOC cell lines were representative models of the molecular aberrations found in LGSOC tumors. For prediction of <i>in vitro</i> MEKi efficacy, proteomic data provided better discrimination than gene expression data. Condensin, minichromosome maintenance, and replication factor C protein complexes were identified as potential treatment targets in MEKi-resistant cell lines. This study suggests that CDKN2A/B or MTAP deficiency may be exploited using synthetically lethal treatment strategies, highlighting the importance of using proteomic data as a tool for molecular drug prediction. Multiomics approaches are crucial to improving our understanding of the molecular underpinnings of LGSOC and applying this information to develop new therapies. SIGNIFICANCE: These findings highlight the utility of global multiomics to characterize LGSOC cell lines as research models, to determine biomarkers of MEKi resistance, and to identify potential novel therapeutic targets.

### Keywords
Ovarian carcinoma, Tmt

### Affiliations
gsc
Canada's Michael Smith Genome Sciences Centre, BC Cancer Agency, Vancouver V5Z 1L3, Canada.

### Submitter
Gian Luca Negri

### Lab Head
Dr Gregg Morin
Canada's Michael Smith Genome Sciences Centre, BC Cancer Agency, Vancouver V5Z 1L3, Canada.


