### Accession
PXD037618

### Title
G3BP1-dependent suppression of polyglutamine aggregation in Huntington’s models and its failure upon stress granule formation

### Description
To define the interactome of huntingtin protein (HTT) in human neurons, we assessed interactors of HTT with coimmunoprecipitation experiments with huntingtin antibody or polyqlutamine antibody (it only recognizes mutant huntingtin protein with abnormal polyqlutamine expansion) in striatal neurons differentiated from control and patient-derived iPSC lines (HD-iPSCs). GFP antibody used as a negative control.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed in modified Radioimmunoprecipitation assay (RIPA) buffer (50 mM Tris–HCl (pH 7.4), 150 mM NaCl, 0.25% sodium deoxycholate, 1% IgPal, 1 mM PMSF, and 1 mM EDTA) supplemented with protease inhibitor (Roche). Lysates were centrifuged at 10,000g for 10 min at 4°C. Then, the supernatant was collected and incubated with total anti-HTT antibody (Cell Signaling, #5656, 1:50) or anti-polyQ-expanded HTT antibody (DSHB, MW1, 1:50) for 30 min and subsequently with 100 μl Protein A beads (Miltenyi, Germany) for 1 h on the overhead shaker at 4°C. As a control, the same amount of protein was incubated with anti-GFP (ImmunoKontakt, 210-PS-1GFP, 1:100) in parallel. After this incubation, supernatants were subjected to magnetic column purification. We then performed three washes using wash buffer 1 (50 mM Tris–HCl (pH 7.4), 150 mM NaCl, 0.05% IgPal, and 5% glycerol). Next, columns were washed five times with wash buffer 2 (50 mM Tris–HCl (pH 7.4), 150 mM NaCl). Then, we subjected the columns to in-column tryptic digestion containing 7.5 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 2 M urea, 1 mM DTT and 5 ng ml-1 trypsin. Digested peptides were eluted using two times 50 μl of elution buffer 1 containing 2 M urea, 7.5 mM Ambic and 5 m IAA. Digests were incubated overnight at room temperature with mild shaking in the dark. The next day, samples were stage tipped for label-free quantification. All samples were analyzed on a Q-Exactive Plus (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer that was coupled to an EASY nLC 1200 UPLC (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded with solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) onto an in-house packed analytical column (50 cm × 75 µm I.D., filled with 2.7 µm Poroshell EC120 C18, Agilent). Peptides were chromatographically separated at a constant flow rate of 250 nl min−1 using 150 min methods: 5–30% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile) within 119 min, 30–50% solvent B within 19 min, followed by washing and column equilibration. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode. The MS1 survey scan was acquired from 300 to 1750 m/z at a resolution of 70,000. The top 10 most abundant peptides were subjected to higher collisional dissociation fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 27%. The AGC (automatic gain control) target was set to 5e5 charges. Product ions were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500.

### Data Protocol
All mass spectrometric raw data were processed with Maxquant (version 1.5.3.8) using default parameters. The downstream analyses were carried out on LFQ values with Perseus (v. 1.5.2.4).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Stress granule, Huntington’s disease

### Affiliations
CECAD Research Center
University of Cologne, Germany

### Submitter
Prerana Wagle

### Lab Head
Dr David Vilchez
University of Cologne, Germany


