### Accession
PXD038062

### Title
Rat Kidney MS analysis with dehydration and cyclosporine treatment

### Description
Background- CINAC-patients can be identified by the recently discovered renal proximal tubular cell lysosomal lesions which are also observed in patients experiencing calcineurin inhibitor (CNI) nephrotoxicity, suggesting that CINAC is a toxin-induced nephropathy. An alternative hypothesis advocates chronic heat stress/dehydration as the major etiological factor for CINAC. Here, we evaluated in rats to what extent heat stress/dehydration reflects the renal CINAC histopathology in humans. Methods- Wistar rats were divided in 3 groups. Group 1(n=6) had free access to drinking water (control group). Group 2(n=8) was water deprived for 10 hours per 24hr, 5 days/week and placed in an incubator (37°C) for 30 min/hr during water deprivation. Group 3(n=8) underwent daily oral gavage with cyclosporine (40mg/kg body weight). After 28 days kidneys were collected for light- and electron microscopic histopathology and proteomic analysis. Results- Cyclosporine rats developed renal cortical lesions mimicking those of CINAC patients i.e. atrophic proximal tubules with associated tubulo-interstitial fibrosis. PASM staining demonstrated enlarged argyrophilic granules in the affected proximal tubules, identified as lysosomes by LAMP1 immunofluorescent staining. Electron microscopy confirmed the presence of enlarged dysmorphic lysosomes, closely mimicking the dysmorphic lysosomes seen in CINAC-patients. Dehydration was demonstrated by urinary osmolality and fluctuating body weight but showed none of the histological features of CINAC patients. Proteomic analysis confirmed cellular toxicity of cyclosporine, whereas the dehydration group lacked any of these toxicity markers. Conclusion- Dehydration/heat stress alone does not lead to the renal proximal tubular and interstitial lesions as observed in CINAC-patients. The histopathological analogy between CINAC and CNI nephrotoxicity in rats and humans and CINAC supports the toxicological etiology.

### Sample Protocol
Mass spectrometry and quantitative proteomics (using iTRAQ labeling) were performed on dissected cortical kidney tissue samples of control, dehydrated and cyclosporine exposed animals as described previously  (Anckaerts et al., 2019 ). Kidney cortical tissue samples were ground completely in a protein extraction buffer (8M urea, 2M thiourea, 0.1% SDS in 50mM triethylammonium bicarbonate solution). The concentrations of the extracted proteins were assessed using the reducing agent and detergent compatible (RCDC) protein assay kit (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA). Before trypsin digestion, equal amounts of protein from each sample were reduced and alkylated by tris-2-carboxyethyl phosphine and 5-methyl-methanoethiosulphate, respectively. The resulting peptides from each sample were labeled using iTRAQ reagents (AB-Sciex, Framingham, MA, USA) according to the manufacturer's instructions. To improve LC-MS/MS proteome coverage, samples were subjected to a 2D-LC fractionation system (Dionex ULTIMATE 3000, ThermoScientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The mixed peptides were first fractionated on a strong cation exchange chromatography polysulfoethyl aspartamide column (1 × 150 mm, (Dionex)) and secondly separated on a nano-LC C18 column (200Å, 2μm, 75μm × 25cm (Dionex)). The nano-LC was coupled online to a Q-Exactive™-Plus Orbitrap (ThermoScientific) mass spectrometer. The nano-LC eluents were infused to the Orbitrap mass spectrometer with a capillary at 1.7 KV on a nanoelectrospray ionization (nano-ESI) source at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Data-dependent acquisition in positive ion mode was performed for a selected mass range of 350–1800 m/z at MS1 level (140,000 resolution) and MS2 level (17,500 resolution). The raw data were analyzed by Proteome Discoverer 2.0 software (ThermoScientific) using Sequest HT as search engine against the rattus norvegicus UniProt/SwissProt database with a threshold of confidence above 99% (false discovery rate less than 1%). Next, the list of identified proteins containing iTRAQ ratios of expression levels over control samples was then generated.

### Data Protocol
Data-dependent acquisition in positive ion mode was performed for a selected mass range of 350–1800 m/z at MS1 level (140,000 resolution) and MS2 level (17,500 resolution). The raw data were analyzed by Proteome Discoverer 2.0 software (ThermoScientific) using Sequest HT as search engine against the rattus norvegicus UniProt/SwissProt database with a threshold of confidence above 99% (false discovery rate less than 1%). Next, the list of identified proteins containing iTRAQ ratios of expression levels over control samples was then generated.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Kidney ms dehydration cyclosporine

### Affiliations
Receptor Biology Lab, University of Antwerp
Receptor Biology Lab,
University of Antwerp

### Submitter
Stuart Maudsley

### Lab Head
Dr Stuart Maudsley
Receptor Biology Lab, University of Antwerp


