### Accession
PXD007920

### Title
Differential kinobeads selectivity profiling

### Description
The goal of this project was to use differential kinobeads profiling for the discrimination of reversible and irreversible kinase targets of different covalent kinase inhibitors. For this, differences in target engagement measured in a lysate- and a cell-based kinobeads assay were compared in a kinome-wide scale.

### Sample Protocol
Cell-based kinobeads assay: Treatment of either Ramos or A549 cells with different concentrations of covalent inhibitor. Washing of cells prior to lysis. Kinobeads affinity enrichment and subsequent elution of enriched proteins. Labeling of the different conditions (concentrations of inhibitor) with TMT label and subsequent mass spectrometry analysis. Lysate-based kinobeads assay: Incubation of either Ramos or A549 lysate or a mix of both lysates with different concentrations of covalent inhibitor. Kinobeads affinity enrichment and subsequent elution of enriched proteins. Labeling of the different conditions (concentrations of inhibitor) with TMT label and subsequent mass spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using an in-house pipeline and searched with Mascot 2.4

### Publication Abstract
Chemoproteomics profiling of kinase inhibitors with kinobeads enables the assessment of inhibitor potency and selectivity for endogenously expressed protein kinases in cell lines and tissues. Using a small panel of targeted covalent inhibitors, we demonstrate the importance of measuring covalent target binding in live cells. We present a differential kinobeads profiling strategy for covalent kinase inhibitors where a compound is added either to live cells or to a cell extract that enables the comprehensive assessment of inhibitor selectivity for covalent and noncovalent targets. We found that Acalabrutinib, CC-292, and Ibrutinib potently and covalently bind TEC family kinases, but only Ibrutinib also potently binds to BLK. ZAK was identified as a submicromolar affinity Ibrutinib off-target due to covalent modification of Cys22. In contrast to Ibrutinib, 5Z-7-Oxozeaenol reacted with Cys150 next to the DFG loop, demonstrating an alternative route to covalent inactivation of this kinase, e.g., to inhibit canonical TGF-&#x3b2; dependent processes.

### Keywords
Lysate-based assay, Cc-292, Lc-ms/ms, Ramos b-lymphocyte, Cell-based assay, A549 lung epithelia cell line, Acalabrutinib, Kinobeads, Ibrutinib, Saturated ibrutinib, 5z-7-oxozeaenol

### Affiliations
Cellzome

### Submitter
Maria Faelth Savitski

### Lab Head
Dr Marcus Bantscheff
Cellzome


