### Accession
PXD021642

### Title
Novel protein biomarkers of monoamine metabolism defects correlate with disease severity

### Description
Background: Genetic defects of monoamine neurotransmitters are rare neurological diseases amenable to treatment with variable response. They are major causes of early parkinsonism and other spectrum of movement disorders including dopa-responsive dystonia.  Objectives: To conduct proteomic studies in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) samples of patients with monoamine defects to detect biomarkers involved in pathophysiology, clinical phenotypes, and treatment response. Methods: 90 patients from diverse centers of the “International Working Group on Neurotransmitter Related Disorders” were included in the. Clinical and molecular metadata were related to the protein abundances in the CSF. Results: Concentrations of four proteins were significantly altered, detected by Mass spectrometry and confirmed by immunoassays. First, decreased levels of Apolipoprotein D were found in severe cases of aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase deficiency. Second, low levels of Apolipoprotein H were observed in patients with the severe phenotype of tyrosine hydroxylase deficiency (THD), whereas increased concentrations of oligodendrocyte myelin glycoprotein were found in the same subset of THD patients. Third, decreased levels of Collagen6A3 were observed in treated tetrahydrobiopterin deficiency patients. Conclusion: This study, the largest cohort of patients with monoamine defects studied so far, reports the proteomic characterization of CSF and identify four novel biomarkers that bring new insights into the consequences of early dopaminergic deprivation in the developing brain. They open new possibilities to understand their role in the pathophysiology of these disorders and they may serve as potential predictors of disease severity and therapies.

### Sample Protocol
CSF samples were randomized. For each patient, 70 µl of CSF were precipitated with 6 volumes of cold acetone (-20ºC), the pellet was dissolved in 6M Urea with 200mM ammonium bicarbonate, reduced with dithiothreitol (120 nmol, 37ºC, 60 min) and alkylated in the dark with iodoacetamide (240 nmol, 25ºC, 30 min). The resulting protein extract was diluted to 2M urea with 200 mM ammonium bicarbonate for digestion with endoproteinase LysC (1:10 w:w, 37ºC, o/n, 129-02541, Wako), and then diluted 2-fold with 200 mM ammonium bicarbonate for trypsin digestion (1:10 w:w, 37ºC, 8h, V5113, Promega). After digestion, peptide mix was acidified with formic acid and desalted with a MicroSpin C18 column (The Nest Group, Inc) prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Peptide mixtures were injected in an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer equipped with a chromatographic nano-UPLC system (Proxeon-1000) and a 50-cm C18 column (EASY-Spray; 75µm, PepMap RSLC C18, 2µm particles, 45ºC) using 90 minutes chromatographic gradients (ACN:H2O, 1% FA). The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ionization mode with an EASY-Spray nanosource with spray voltage set at 1.4 kV and source temperature at 275°C. The instrument was operated in data-independent acquisition mode, with a full MS scans over a mass range of m/z 350–1,300 with detection in the Orbitrap (60K resolution) and with auto gain control (AGC) set to 2e5. In each cycle of data-independent acquisition analysis, following each survey scan, 40 consecutive windows of 10 Da each were used to isolate and fragment all precursor ions from 500 to 900 m/z. A normalized collision energy of 28% +/-5% was used for higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation. MS2 scan range was set from 350 to 1850 m/z, with an AGC Target of 5e4 and a maximum injection time of 60 ms. Fragment ion spectra were acquired in the the Orbitrap mass analyzer at 30K resolution. All data were acquired with Xcalibur software v3.0.63. Acquired raw data was transformed to mzXML file format with msconvert from the ProteoWizard suite v3.0.9393. Converted mzXML were further analyzed using DIA Umpire v2.1.2 with the search engine Comet with trypsin specificity, one allowed missed cleavage, and oxidation of methionine as variable modification, and carbamidomethylation at cysteine as fixed modification. Error tolerance was set at 10 ppm for MS1 and 20 ppm at MS2. The SwissProt human protein database with reviewed entries and decoys was used as reference database (version April 2016). Peptides and proteins were filtered at 1% FDR and their quantification was based on the sum of the six most intense fragment ions per peptide, and the six most intense peptides per protein, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics, Monoamine metabolism defects

### Affiliations
Centre de Regulació Genòmica
CRG,UPF

### Submitter
Eduard Sabidó

### Lab Head
Dr Eduard Sabido
CRG,UPF


