### Accession
PXD004266

### Title
HEK cell MYO7A-PDZD7 immunoprecipitation

### Description
Through its activity in stereocilia, MYO7A (myosin VIIA) is essential for hair cell function in the inner ear. Utilizing multiple stages of immunoaffinity enrichment, we have developed a strategy that allows us to partially purify stereocilia membranes from thousands of chick inner ears and isolate low-abundance MYO7A protein complexes from those membranes, including one with the scaffolding protein PDZD7. To confirm the interaction of PDZD7 and MYO7A, we expressed them singly or together in HEK cells, and immunoprecipitated detergent-soluble fractions with specific antibodies. PDZD7 and MYO7A interacted strongly in these tissue-culture cells.

### Sample Protocol
After transfection with MYO7A, MYO6, and PDZD7 plasmids, cells were homogenized and subjected to high-speed centrifugation, control antibody binding using magnetic beads with covalently attached antibody, and anti-MYO7A (mAb 138-1) antibody binding. Proteins were eluted with SDS and heat and samples from each transfection, including total detergent extracts, were processed with the eFASP method to generate peptides. Two technical replicates for each sample were carried out; peptides were separated, detected, and quantified using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
We used MaxQuant, with its built-in Andromeda search engine, to match peptides to mouse protein database entries, to assemble peptides into proteins, and the quantify those proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tissue culture cells, Immunoprecipitation, Myosin, Pdz

### Affiliations
Oregon Hearing Research Center Oregon Health & Science University Portland  OR  97239
Oregon Hearing Research Center

### Submitter
Peter Barr-Gillespie

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Barr-Gillespie
Oregon Hearing Research Center Oregon Health & Science University Portland  OR  97239


