### Accession
PXD029947

### Title
rabbit spleen LC-MSMS label free proteomics studies

### Description
9 rabbit spleen  label free proteomics studies.In order to study some drugs on animal innate immunity, we built rabbit models, using rabbit immune organs - spleen made mass spectrometry based label free proteomics studies. Finally, it is expected to find the target of the drug and the mechanism of action.

### Sample Protocol
For tissue samples: The sample was grinded with liquid nitrogen into cell powder and then transferred to a 5-mL centrifuge tube. After that, four volumes of lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% protease inhibitor cocktail) was added to the cell powder, followed by sonication three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz). (Note: For PTM experiments, inhibitors were also added to the lysis buffer, e.g. 3 μM TSA and 50 mM NAM for acetylation, 1% phosphatase inhibitor for phosphorylation). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

### Data Protocol
The tryptic peptides were dissolved in solvent A (0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile/ in water), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (25-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). Peptides were separated with a gradient from 5% to 25% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 90% acetonitrile) over 90 min, 25% to 35% in 22 min and climbing to 80% in 4 min then holding at 80% for the last 4 min, all at a constant flowrate of 450 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1200 UPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The separated peptides were analyzed in Exploris 480TM (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a nano-electrospray ion source. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.2 kV and the compensation voltages was -35 V. The full MS scan resolution was set to 60,000 for a scan range of 400–1200 m/z. Up to 20 most abundant precursors were then selected for further MS/MS analyses with 20 s dynamic exclusion. The HCD fragmentation was performed at a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 35%. The fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 15,000. Fixed first mass was set as 110 m/z. Automatic gain control (AGC) target was set at 100%, with an intensity threshold of 5E4 ions/s and MS2 maximum injection time was set as Auto.

### Publication Abstract
Infectious respiratory diseases caused by <i>Bordetella bronchiseptica</i> (<i>Bb</i>) are seriously endangering the development of the rabbit industry in China. Unfortunately, no licensed vaccines are available for this pathogen. The present study was designed to determine whether the inactivated <i>Bb</i> antigen formulated with vegetable oil adjuvant (named E515) which contains soybean oil, vitamin E, and ginseng saponins, functions as a safe and effective vaccine (E515-<i>Bb</i>) against <i>Bb</i> infection in rabbits. Based on local and systemic reactions, both the E515 adjuvant alone and the E515-<i>Bb</i> vaccine exhibited good safety in rabbits. Immune response analysis implies that rabbits immunized with the E515-<i>Bb</i> vaccine produced significantly higher, earlier, and longer-lasting specific antibody responses and activated Th1/Th2/Th17 cell responses than those immunized with the aluminum hydroxide (Alum)-adjuvanted <i>Bb</i> vaccine (Alum-<i>Bb</i>) or <i>Bb</i> antigen alone. Moreover, the E515-<i>Bb</i> vaccine effectively protected rabbits from <i>Bb</i> infection. Additionally, integrated multi-omics analysis revealed that the immunoprotective effect of the E515-<i>Bb</i> vaccine was achieved through upregulation of the complement and coagulation cascades and cell adhesion molecule (CAM) pathways, and the downregulation of the P53 pathway. Overall, these results indicate that the E515-<i>Bb</i> vaccine is safe, elicits an efficient immune response and provides good protection against <i>Bb</i> infection in rabbits. Thus, the E515-adjuvanted <i>Bb</i> vaccine can be considered a promising candidate vaccine for preventing <i>Bb</i> infection.

### Keywords
Rabbit spleen lc-mama

### Affiliations
Zhejiang Academy of Agricultural Sciences
杭州景杰生物科技股份有限公司

### Submitter
huang jiacheng

### Lab Head
Dr Xuemei Cui
Zhejiang Academy of Agricultural Sciences


