### Accession
PXD037141

### Title
Comparative proteomic analysis of hepatopancreas reveals key proteins in regulatory mechanism of ovary maturation of Macrobrachium nipponense

### Description
Hepatopancreas proteomics analyses Macrobrachium nipponense, reveals key proteins in regulatory mechanism of ovary maturation of Macrobrachium nipponense.

### Sample Protocol
Take the sample from - 80 ° C, weigh 5mg of tissue sample into 1.5ml EP tube, and add cell lysate and protease inhibitor to fully homogenize. After the broken tissues and cell fragments were removed by differential centrifugation, the supernatant was transferred to a new centrifuge tube, and the protein concentration was determined using BCA kit. Take 5 from the sample respectively μ G Total protein, Western blotting, staining and decolorization to test the protein content.

### Data Protocol
Search the corresponding database based on Raw files obtained from mass spectrometry detection, and then identify proteins based on the results of database search, and analyze peptide and protein to assess the quality of mass spectrometry detection data; Next, the quantitative analysis of proteins was carried out, including the overall difference analysis of identified proteins, the screening of differential proteins and the cluster analysis of expression patterns; Then annotate the common functional databases of the identified proteins, including COG, GO and KEGG databases; Finally, a series of differential protein function analysis, such as GO, KEGG function enrichment analysis and interaction network analysis, were carried out for the screened differential proteins.

### Publication Abstract
A TMT-based (Tandem Mass Tag) liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) proteomics approach was employed to explore differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) and KEGG pathways in hepatopancreas of 5 ovary stages. In total, 17,999 peptides were detected, among which 3395 proteins were identified. Further analysis revealed 26, 24, 37, and 308 DEPs in HE-I versus HE-II, HE-II versus HE-&#x2162;, HE-&#x2162; versus HE-&#x2163;, and HE-&#x2163; versus HE-&#x2164;, respectively (HE-I, HE-II, HE-III, HE-IV, and HE-V means hepatopancreas sampled from ovary stage I to V.). Gene ontology (GO) analysis indicated that DEPs were significantly enriched in "catalytic activity", "metabolic process", and "cell" of 4 comparison groups in turn. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) enrichment results showed that in hepatopancreas, as the ovaries developed to maturation, carbohydrate metabolism, lipid metabolism, amino acid metabolism, and lysosome played important roles in turn. The mRNA expression of 15 selected DEPs were consistent with proteome results by qPCR analysis. Further mRNA expression investigation results suggested 4 proteins (fatty acid-binding protein, NPC intracellular cholesterol transporter 1, Serine hydroxymethyltransferase, and Crustapin) were involved in ovary maturation. These results enhance the understanding of the regulatory role of hepatopancreas in <i>M. nipponense</i> ovary maturation and provide new insights for understanding the crustacean regulation mechanisms.

### Keywords
Macrobrachium nipponense,  ovary maturation,  hepatopancreas,  comparative proteomics

### Affiliations
Nanjing Genepioneer Biotechnology Co., LTD  
Freshwater Fisheries Research Center, Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences

### Submitter
Na Yan

### Lab Head
Dr Hui Qiao
Freshwater Fisheries Research Center, Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences


