### Accession
PXD019413

### Title
Progressive proteome changes in the myocardium of a pig model for Duchenne muscular dystrophy

### Description
We used samples from a genetically engineered pig model displaying fundamental biochemical, clinical and pathological hallmarks of human DMD, to get insight into the hierarchy of molecular derangements during progression of DMD-associated cardiomyopathy. We performed an iTRAQ-based proteome analysis of myocardium samples from 2-day-old and 3-month-old DMD and WT pigs.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were processed as described in the iTRAQ reagent kit’s protocol (SCIEX). Digestion was performed using porcine trypsin at an enzyme to protein ratio of 1/50 (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) and incubation overnight at 37 °C. Tryptic peptides from WT-2D, DMD-2D, WT-3M and DMD-3M were labeled with 114, 115, 116 and 117 reagents, respectively and pooled and further processed as suggested by the iTRAQ kit’s protocol. For preparative isoelectric focusing, the OFFGEL system (3100 OFFGEL Fractionator, Low Res Kit, pH 3–10, Agilent) was used as described in the instruments manual. Prior to LC–MS/MS analysis, samples were desalted using C18 spin columns (Pierce, Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA). For LC-MS analysis, an Ultimate 3000 nano-LC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Triple TOF 5600 mass spectrometer (SCIEX) was used. Chromatography was done using a 50 cm column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, 75 µm x 50 cm nanoViper, C18, 2 µm, 100A, Thermo Scientific) at a flowrate of 200 nL/min using 0.1% FA as solvent A and 0.1% FA in acetonitrile as solvent B. The method consisted of the following multi-step gradient: 5% to 25 % B in 290 min and 25% B to 50 % B in 30 min followed by a 15 min elution step at 84% B. MS acquisition was performed in the data dependent mode using a top 70 method.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched using MASCOT V2.6.1 and the Sus scrofa subset of the NCBI refseq database. For identification, the following parameters were used: i) Enzyme: Trypsin; ii) Fixed modifications: Methylthio (C); iii) Variable modifications: Oxidation (M); iv) Peptide charge: 2+, 3+ and 4+; v) Peptide tol. ±: 50 ppm; vi) MS/MS tol. ±: 0.1 Da; vii) Quantitation: iTRAQ 4plex. For iTRAQ signal quantification and statistical evaluation, Scaffold V4.8.9 (Proteome Software, Inc) was used.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Heart, Proteomics, Myocardium, Pig model, Dmd, Itraq

### Affiliations
Gene Center Munich  Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität Munich (LMU)  Feodor-Lynen-Str. 25  81377 Munich  Germany
Laboratory for Functional Genome Analysis
Gene Center Munich
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität Munich (LMU)
Feodor-Lynen-Str. 25
81377 Munich
Germany

### Submitter
Thomas Fröhlich

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Fröhlich
Gene Center Munich  Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität Munich (LMU)  Feodor-Lynen-Str. 25  81377 Munich  Germany


