### Accession
PXD031543

### Title
Quantitative Phosphoproteomic Analyses Identify STK11IP as a Lysosome-Specific Substrate of mTORC1 that Regulates Lysosomal Acidification

### Description
The evolutionarily conserved serine/threonine kinase mTORC1 is a central regulator of cell growth and proliferation. mTORC1 is activated on the lysosome surface. However, once mTORC1 is activated, it is unclear whether mTORC1 phosphorylates local lysosomal proteins to regulate specific aspects of lysosomal biology. By integrating analyses of lysosome proteome with mTORC1-regulated phosphoproteome, we identify STK11IP as a lysosome-specific substrate of mTORC1. mTORC1 phosphorylates STK11IP at S404. Knockout of STK11IP leads to a robust increase of autophagy flux. Dephosphorylation of STK11IP at S404 represses the role of STK11IP as an autophagy inhibitor. Mechanistically, STK11IP binds to V-ATPase, and regulates the activity of V-ATPase. Knockout of STK11IP protects mice from fasting or Methionine/Choline-Deficient Diet diet-induced fatty liver. Thus, our study demonstrates that STK11IP phosphorylation represents a novel mechanism for mTORC1 to regulate lysosomal acidification and autophagy, and points to STK11IP as a promising therapeutic target for the amelioration of diseases with aberrant autophagy signaling.

### Sample Protocol
Sample Preparation for IP-Lysosome Confluent HEK293T cells that stably expressing LAMP1-GFP-FLAGX3 (LGF) were rinsed with cold PBS, scraped, spun down and resuspended in 750 μl of fractionation buffer: 140 mM KCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 50 mM Sucrose, 20 mM HEPES, pH 7.4, supplemented with protease inhibitors. The cells were mechanically broken with a pellet pestle and were spun down at 1000 g for 10 min to remove nucleus and cells debris. The samples were then spun down at 20,000 g for 25 min to yield the organelles pellets. The pellet was resuspended in fraction buffer and subjected to immunoprecipitation with 100 μl of a 50% slurry of anti-FLAG magnetic beads (M8823, Sigma). Four hours later, beads were washed 4 times using fractionation buffer, then eluted with 1% SDS lysis buffer (1% SDS, 10 mM HEPES, pH 7.0, 2 mM MgCl2, 20 U ml-1 universal nuclease), and the proteins were subjected to MS analysis. Sample for the TurboID-STK11IP in HEK293T cells The TurboID-STK11IP stably expressing HEK293T cells were cultured in no-Biotin DMEM medium for five generations. Biotin (50 μM) labeling was then initiated with complete or amino acid depleted medium for 2 hours. The labeling was stopped by washing the cells with ice-cold PBS and the cells were lysed with the 1% SDS lysis buffer. The lysates were diluted to 0.1% SDS with PBS, and the proteins were immunoprecipitated using streptavidin beads. After the pull down, beads were washed for three times, and were boiled for 30 minutes. For the MS sample, which was prepared using on-beads digestion following the previous report 1.  Mass spectrometry experiment Protein lysates were reduced by 2 mM dithiothreitol, and alkylated by adding iodoacetamide to a final concentration of 50 mM, followed by incubation in the dark for 20 min. The lysates were extracted by methanol-chloroform-precipitation and the proteins were solubilized in 8 M urea, then digested with Lys-C. The samples were then diluted to a final concentration of 2 M urea by the addition of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 7.8). Proteins were digested overnight with sequencing-grade trypsin at a 1:100 (enzyme/substrate) ratio. Digestion was quenched by the addition of trifluoroacetic acid to a final concentration of 0.1%. For TMT MS samples, peptides were desalted using SepPak C18 columns (Waters) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Peptides were fractionated by using an off-line two-dimensional SCX-RP-HPLC (strong-cation-exchange reversed-phase HPLC) protocol.

### Data Protocol
The MS samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS experiments on an LTQ Velos Pro Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo) using a top-20 CID (collision-induced dissociation) method. MS/MS spectra were searched against a composite database of the human protein database using the Proteome Discovery and its reversed complement using the Sequest algorithm. Search parameters allowed for a static modification of 57.02146 Da for cysteine and a dynamic modification of oxidation (15.99491 Da) on methionine, respectively. Search results were filtered to include <1% matches to the reverse database by the linear discriminator function using parameters including Xcorr, dCN, missed cleavage, charge state (exclude 1C peptides), mass accuracy, peptide length and fraction of ions matched to MS/MS spectra. Peptide quantification was performed by using the Core Quant algorithm 2.

### Publication Abstract
The evolutionarily conserved serine/threonine kinase mTORC1 is a central regulator of cell growth and proliferation. mTORC1 is activated on the lysosome surface. However, once mTORC1 is activated, it is unclear whether mTORC1 phosphorylates local lysosomal proteins to regulate specific aspects of lysosomal biology. Through cross-reference analyses of the lysosome proteome with the mTORC1-regulated phosphoproteome, we identify STK11IP as a lysosome-specific substrate of mTORC1. mTORC1 phosphorylates STK11IP at Ser<sup>404</sup>. Knockout of STK11IP leads to a robust increase of autophagy flux. Dephosphorylation of STK11IP at Ser<sup>404</sup> represses the role of STK11IP as an autophagy inhibitor. Mechanistically, STK11IP binds to V-ATPase, and regulates the activity of V-ATPase. Knockout of STK11IP protects mice from fasting or Methionine/Choline-Deficient Diet (MCD)-induced fatty liver. Thus, our study demonstrates that STK11IP phosphorylation represents a mechanism for mTORC1 to regulate lysosomal acidification and autophagy, and points to STK11IP as a promising therapeutic target for the amelioration of diseases with aberrant autophagy signaling.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics stk11ip

### Affiliations
Department of biochemistry, UT Southwestern Medical Center
UT Southwestern Medical Center

### Submitter
Xu-Dong Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Yonghao Yu
Department of biochemistry, UT Southwestern Medical Center


