### Accession
PXD008366

### Title
An effector from the Huanglongbing-associated pathogen targets citrus proteases

### Description
The dataset for this project was to identify significantly changing papain-like cysteine proteases during Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus infection in Navel trees from a Texas citrus grove.

### Sample Protocol
Sample processing for PLCP abundance: A total of 250 μg of uninfected and infected leaf extract was ground in 50 mM Tris (pH 6.8) and 2 µM DTT in a total reaction volume of 500 µL. Protein extracts were divided for the detection of activity (below) and PLCP abundance. Proteins were precipitated as described above for ABPP assay. The protein pellet was re-suspended in 8 M urea in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC). The samples were reduced and alkylated with 10 mM DTT and 30 mM of iodoacetamide (IAA) in 100 mM ABC for 1 hr, respectively. Samples were then diluted to a final concentration of 1 M urea by adding 100 mM ABC. Two micrograms of trypsin were added and the samples incubated overnight at 37ºC. The tryptic digest was arrested by lowering the pH to ≤3 with formic acid. Peptide desalting and purification was performed with the macrospin C18 column protocol (The Nest Group).  Sample processing for PLCP activity: To determine PLCP activities in leaf extracts of uninfected and infected trees, 250 mg of tissues were ground in 50 mM Tris (pH 6.8) with 2 μM DTT, then precipitated as describes above for the ABPP assay, followed by further enrichment of the DCG-04 labeled products on streptavidin beads. Beads were washed three times with 50 mM ABC.  Samples were reduced with 50 mM DTT for 1 hr at 60ºC and alkylated with 50 mM IAA for 1 hr at room temperature. Tryptic on-bead digests were performed with 250 ng of trypsin and the samples incubated at 37ºC overnight. Digestion was arrested by adding 60% acetonitrile (ACN)/0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to the resin and incubating for 10 minutes at room temperature. Peptides were submitted to the Genomics Center Proteomics Core at University of California, Davis for liquid chromatography -MS/MS. Each sample had 0.25pmol of the Pierce Peptide Retention Time Calibration Mixture (Thermo Scientific, CA) spiked prior to LC-MS/MS.  Peptides were analyzed by MS as described previously. The LC-MS/MS system configuration consisted of a CTC Pal autosampler (LEAP Technologies) and Paradigm HPLC device (Michrom BioResources) coupled to a QExactive hybrid quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, CA) with a CaptiveSpray ionization source (Michrom BioResources).

### Data Protocol
The raw data files were imported into Maxquant version 1.5.6.5 for label-free intensity based quantification. The database search engine Andromeda was used to search MS/MS spectra against the C. clementina and C. sinensis database downloaded from Phytozome with a tolerance level of 20ppm for the first and 6ppm for the main search. Trypsin/P was set as the enzyme and two missed cleavages were allowed. Protein N-terminal acetylation, Methionine oxidation, and NQ deamidation were set as variable modifications.  The maximum number of modifications per peptide was set as five and contaminants were included. The "match between runs" feature was checked with a match time window of 0.7 min and an alignment time window of 20 min. The FDR for protein level and peptide spectrum match (PSM) was set to 1%. The minimum peptide length was 6, minimum razor and unique peptides was changed to 0, and minimum unique peptides was set to 1. The minimum ratio count for protein quantification was set to 2. To ensure that abundance and activity data were analyzed separately, the “Separate LFQ in parameter groups” option in the global parameters tab was selected. The other settings were remained as default. The MaxQuant output file ProteinGroups.txt was imported into Perseus 1.5.015. The potential contaminants, reverse hits and proteins identified only by modified peptides were excluded. The LFQ intensities were log2-transformed. Proteins not consistently identified in at least two out of the three replicates in at least one group were discarded. Missing values were substituted with values from a normal distribution using default settings (width 0.5, downshift 1.8). Differentially changing proteins were identified using a two-sample student’s t-test. A p-value of less than 0.5 was used for truncation.

### Publication Abstract
The citrus industry is facing an unprecedented challenge from Huanglongbing (HLB). All cultivars can be affected by the HLB-associated bacterium 'Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus' (CLas) and there is no known resistance. Insight into HLB pathogenesis is urgently needed in order to develop effective management strategies. Here, we use Sec-delivered effector 1 (SDE1), which is conserved in all CLas isolates, as a molecular probe to understand CLas virulence. We show that SDE1 directly interacts with citrus papain-like cysteine proteases (PLCPs) and inhibits protease activity. PLCPs are defense-inducible and exhibit increased protein accumulation in CLas-infected trees, suggesting a role in citrus defense responses. We analyzed PLCP activity in field samples, revealing specific members that increase in abundance but remain unchanged in activity during infection. SDE1-expressing transgenic citrus also exhibit reduced PLCP activity. These data demonstrate that SDE1 inhibits citrus PLCPs, which are immune-related proteases that enhance defense responses in plants.

### Keywords
Huanglongbing, Candidatus liberibacter asiaticus

### Affiliations
University of California, Davis
Department of Plant Pathology University of California-Davis One Shield Avenue, Davis, CA 95616

### Submitter
Jessica Franco

### Lab Head
Dr Gitta Coaker
Department of Plant Pathology University of California-Davis One Shield Avenue, Davis, CA 95616


