### Accession
PXD021557

### Title
Small-Molecule Activity-Based Probe for Monitoring Ubiquitin 2 C‑Terminal Hydrolase (UCHL1) Activity in Live Cells and Zebrafish 3 Embryos

### Description
Many reagents have emerged to study the function of specific enzymes in vitro. On the other hand, target specific reagents are scarce or need improvement, allowing investigations of the function of individual enzymes in their native cellular context. Here we report the development of a target-selective fluorescent small-molecule activity-based DUB probe that is active in live cells and an in vivo animal model. The probe labels active ubiquitin carboxy-terminal hydrolase L1 (UCHL1), also known as neuron-specific protein PGP9.5 (PGP9.5) and Parkinson disease 5 (PARK5), a DUB active in neurons that constitutes 1 to 2% of the total brain protein. UCHL1 variants have been linked with neurodegenerative disorders Parkinson’s and Alzheimer’s diseases. In addition, high levels of UCHL1 also correlate often with cancer and especially metastasis. The function of UCHL1 activity or its role in cancer and neurodegenerative disease is poorly understood and few UCHL1-specific activity tools exist. We show that the reagents reported here are specific to UCHL1 over all other DUBs detectable by competitive activity-based protein profiling and by mass spectrometry. Our cell-penetrable probe, which contains a cyanimide reactive moiety, binds to the active-site cysteine residue of UCHL1 in an activity-dependent manner. Its use is demonstrated by the fluorescent labeling of active UCHL1 both in vitro and in live cells. We furthermore show that this probe can selectively and spatiotemporally report UCHL1 activity during the development of zebrafish embryos. Our results indicate that our probe has potential applications as a diagnostic tool for diseases with perturbed UCHL1 activity.

### Sample Protocol
we performed a DUB activity assay with the Rh-Ub-PA424 probe on cell lysates. Labeled proteins were captured on neutravidin beads and loaded onto SDS PAGE gels. The lane was cut into four equal parts, and gel slices were subjected to reduction with dithiothreitol, alkylation with iodoacetamide, and in-gel trypsin digestion using a Proteineer DP digestion robot (Bruker). Tryptic peptides were extracted from the gel slices, lyophilized, dissolved in 95/3/0.1 v/v/v water/acetonitrile/formic acid, and subsequently analyzed by online C18 nanoHPLC MS/MS with a system consisting of an Easy nLC 1000 gradient HPLC system (Thermo, Bremen, Germany) and a LUMOS mass spectrometer (Thermo).

### Data Protocol
The LUMOS mass spectrometer was operated with data-dependentMS/MS (top-10 mode) with collision energy at 32 V and recording of theMS2 spectrum in the orbitrap. In the master scan (MS1), the resolution was 120 000 and the scan range was 400−1500 at an AGC target of 400 000 at a maximum fill time of 50 ms. Dynamic exclusion occurred after n = 1 with an exclusion duration of 10 s. Charge states 2−5 were included. For MS2, precursors were isolated with the quadrupole with an isolation width of 1.2 Da. The HCD collision energy was set to 32 V. The first mass was set to 110 Da. The MS2 scan resolution was 30 000 with an AGC target of 50 000 at a maximum fill time of 60 ms. Protein identification and label-free quantification were performed using Proteome Discovere version 2.4 and Maxquant version 1.6.7.0, with all default parameters, using the Uniprot Homo sapiens minimal database (20 205 entries). In addition, iBAQ was ticked in the global parameters tab. These iBAQ values were averaged over the three replicates, and the values were used to produce the relevant bar graphs. Proteins were filtered (iBAQ value >0 in all probe-treated samples and unique peptides >3) and ranked for iBAQ values, and the top 12 (iBAQ > 108) were selected for display. In addition, all Ub system-related enzymes (DUBs, E1, E2, and E3) from the list were selected, and corresponding iBAQvalues were plotted.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Orbitrap

### Affiliations
Leiden University Medical Center
Centre for Proteomics and Metabolomics Leiden University Medical Centre

### Submitter
G Janssen

### Lab Head
Dr Peter A. van Veelen
Centre for Proteomics and Metabolomics Leiden University Medical Centre


