### Accession
PXD010506

### Title
Integrated Transcriptomics, Proteomics and Glycomics for a Deeper Insight of the Mechanism of  Breast Cancer Brain Metastasis: Emphasizing on Glycosylation

### Description
Breast cancer brain metastasis has been recognized as one of the central issues in breast cancer research. Elucidation of the process and pathway that mediate this step is expected to provide important clues for a better understanding of breast cancer metastasis. Increasing evidence suggests that the aberrant glycosylation patterns greatly contribute to the cell invasion and cancer metastasis. Herein, we combined next generation RNA sequencing with liquid chromatograph-tandem mass spectrometry based proteomic and N-glycomic analysis from five breast cancer cell lines and one brain cancer cell line to investigate the possible mechanism of breast cancer brain metastasis. 24763 genes were identified including 14551 differentially expressed genes across six cell lines while proteomic analysis allowed the quantitation of 1096 differentially expressed proteins with approximately 83.8% proteins’ regulation matching their gene expression change. The genes/proteins associated with cell movement were highlighted in the breast cancer brain metastasis. Integrin signaling pathway and the up-regulation of α-integrin (ITGA2, ITGA3) associated with the brain metastatic process was shown through Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA). Overall 91 glycosylation genes were selected from transcriptomic data and all exhibited differential expression. 12 glycogenes showed unique expression in 231BR. The regulation of these genes could result in an activation prediction of sialylation function in 231BR by ingenuity pathway analysis. In agreement with the changes of glycogenes, 60 N-glycans out of 63 identified exhibited differential expression among cell lines. The correlation of glycogenes and glycans revealed the importance of sialylation and sialylated glycans in breast cancer brain metastasis. Highly sialylated glycans, which were up-regulated in brain seeking cell line 231BR, probably contributes to brain metastasis.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic Analysis. Three biological replicates of cells from different cell lines were suspended in 50mM ABC buffer (containing 5% SDC) and then homogenized by beads beater homogenizer. After lysing, 5 μL of cell lysate was taken out for protein assay using micro BCA method (Thermo Scientific/Pierce, Rockford, IL) according to manufacturer’s instruction. The remaining cell lysate was denatured in 80 ℃ water bath for 30 min. Then the denatured proteins were reduced by 5 mM DTT at 60 ℃ for 45 min and then alkylated by 20 mM IAA at 60 ℃ in dark for 45 min followed by quenching the reaction through adding another 5 mM DTT and incubating at 60 ℃ for 30 min. Then protease Trypsin-Lys C (Promega, MS gold grade) was added to the sample with 1:25 enzyme to protein ratio and incubated at 37.5 ℃ for 18 h. After tryptic digestion, formic acid was added (final concentration is 0.5%) to remove the SDC.46 After centrifugation at max speed for 10 min, supernatant which contained peptides was collected and dried. Samples were then resuspended with 5% ACN water and ready for proteomic analysis. Proteomics analysis was performed by LC-MS/MS (Thermo Ultimate 3000 nano system coupled with LTQ Orbitrap Velos).47 The online purification was performed using a C18 Acclaim PepMap 100 trapping column (75 µm I.D. x 2 cm, 3 µm particle sizes, 100 Å pore sizes, Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA). Peptide separation was achieved using a C18 Acclaim PepMap RSLC column (75 µm I.D. x 15 cm, 2 µm particle sizes, 100 Å pore sizes, Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA). 1 μg of proteins was injected for the analysis under 60,000 resolution. A 120-minute LC method was used for the separation of the digested peptide sample. Briefly, the LC gradient of solvent B in LC-MS/MS analysis was: 5% over 10 min, 5%-20% over 55 min, 20-30% over 25 min, 30-50% over 20 min, 50%-80% over 1 min, 80% over 4 min, 80%-5% over 1 min and 5% over 4 min. Two scan events were applied for the data-dependent acquisition. The first scan event was full MS scan at the resolution of 60K. The second scan event was CID MS/MS scan which fragmented the top 10 intense precursor ions that selected from the first scan, using the normalized collision energy (CE) of 35%, Q value of 0.25 and 10 ms activition time.

### Data Protocol
Proteomic Data was then converted to mascot file by Proteome Discover version 1.2 software (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) and then searched searched against a UniProt database (2014_06, Homo sapiens, 20214 entries) in MASCOT version 2.4 (Matrix Science Inc., Boston, MA). MASCOT result was verified using Scaffold (version Scaffold_3.6.3, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR). Peptide identification probability and protein identification probability were set to 95% and 99%, respectively, and the matched peptide number was 2. Normalized spectra count was applied for quantitation. Then an additional filter was utilized to remove the proteins which were detected only once in three replicates.

### Publication Abstract
Breast cancer brain metastasis has been recognized as one of the central issues in breast cancer research. The elucidation of the processes and pathways that mediate this step will provide important clues for a better understanding of breast cancer metastasis. Increasing evidence suggests that aberrant glycosylation patterns greatly contribute to cell invasion and cancer metastasis. Herein, we combined next-generation RNA sequencing with liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry-based proteomic and N-glycomic analysis from five breast cancer cell lines and one brain cancer cell line to investigate the possible mechanisms of breast cancer brain metastasis. The genes/proteins associated with cell movement were highlighted in breast cancer brain metastasis. The integrin signaling pathway and the up-regulation of &#x3b1;-integrin (ITGA2, ITGA3) were associated with the brain metastatic process. 12 glycogenes showed unique expression in 231BR, which could result in an increase of sialylation during brain metastasis. In agreement with the changes of glycogenes, 60 out of 63 N-glycans that were identified exhibited differential expression among cell lines. The correlation between glycogenes and glycans revealed the importance of sialylation and sialylated glycans in breast cancer brain metastasis. Highly sialylated N-glycans, which were up-regulated in brain-seeking cell line 231BR, likely play a role in brain metastasis.

### Keywords
Transcriptomics, Integrative omics analysis, Glycomics, Proteomics, Breast cancer brain metastasis

### Affiliations
Texas Tech University
Department of chemistry and biochemistry, Texas Tech University, Lubbock, Texas, USA, 79413.

### Submitter
Wenjing Peng

### Lab Head
Dr Yehia Mechref
Department of chemistry and biochemistry, Texas Tech University, Lubbock, Texas, USA, 79413.


