### Accession
PXD000909

### Title
Silkworm testis LC-MS/MS -  Proteomics analysis of adult testis from Bombyx mori

### Description
The development of the testis involves a large number of tissue-specific proteins, possibly because that sperms in it are the most divergent of all cell types. Although the proteome of the larval testis of Bombyx mori has been reported, no comprehensive data on adult testis proteome is available for silkworm.  In this study, Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry was employ to investigate the protein compositions of the adult testis of silkworm. A total of 14431 peptides were identified in the adult testis of B. mori, which were match to 2292 proteins. Thirty-two heat shock proteins constitute a group of most abundant proteins in the adult testis, suggested that they are critical for the development, differentiation and survival of germ cells. Other proteins in this analysis were also involved in testis-specific processes mainly including sperm motility, meiosis, germ cell development, and spermatogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
Testes proteins were digested according to the Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) method: 500 µg testes proteins were reduced with 10 mM dithiotreitol (DTT) for 150 min at 37 ºC, and then the sample were mixed with 200 μL of UA solution (8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris-HCl, PH8.5) and loaded onto a 30 000 spin filter (Millipore, USA). The samples were washed twice with UA solution by centrifugation at 12,000 g for 15 min, and discarded the flow-through from the collection tube. Reduced cysteines were alkylated with 100 μL IAA solution (50 mM iodoacetamide in UA solution) in darkness at room temperature (RT) for 30 min. Discarding the filter units, and add 100 μL of UA to wash twice with the filter unit. UA buffer was exchanged twice with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Finally, proteins were digested with trypsin (enzyme to protein ratio 1:50) at 37°C for 16 h. Collected the sample and concentrated to dry. Dried peptides were resuspend in 0.1% formic acid and separated on EASY-Spray column (C18, 2 μm, 100 Å, 75μm × 50 cm) by using Thermo Fisher Scientific EASY-nLC 1000 system. The gradient was seted as 3∼90% (3∼8%, 5 min; 8∼20%, 70 min; 20∼30%, 85min; 30∼90%, 5min; 90%, 15min) acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid over 180 min at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. MS/MS analysis was performed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Mass spectra were acquired in a data-dependent mode, with an automatic switch between MS and MS/MS scans using a top 20 method. MS spectra were acquired in the Q Exactive hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap analyzer, with a mass range of 300–1800 m/z. Peptide fragmentation was performed with the HCD method. The maximum ion injection time for the survey scan and the MS/MS scan were 20 ms and 60 ms, respectively. Each fraction was analyzed in duplicate.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed by MaxQuant version 1.3.0.1 and the Andromeda search engine against the silkworm proteome database previously reported. Oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-terminal was set as a variable modification, and Carbamido methylation of cysteines was set as the fixed modification. Max missed cleavage was set as 2. The first search tolerance was set to 20 ppm, followed by a main search tolerance of 6 ppm. HCD fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm. Minimal peptide length was set to six amino acids for identification. The false accepted article discovery rate (FDR) for all peptides, modification sites, and protein identifications were set to 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
The development of the testis involves a large number of tissue-specific proteins, possibly because the sperms in it are the most divergent of all cell types. In this study, LC-MS/MS was employed to investigate the protein compositions of the adult testis of silkworm. A total of 14,431 peptides were identified in the adult testis of Bombyx mori, which were matched to 2292 proteins. Thirty-two HSPs constitute a group of most abundant proteins in the adult testis, suggesting that they are critical for the development, differentiation, and survival of germ cells. Other proteins in this analysis were also involved in testis-specific processes mainly including sperm motility, meiosis, germ cell development, and spermatogenesis. The data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD000909 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD000909).

### Keywords
Testis, Lc-ms/ms, Silkworm

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Silkworm Genome Biology, Southwest University, Chongqing 400716, China
State Key Laboratory of Silkworm Genome Biology

### Submitter
Yan Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Ping Zhao
State Key Laboratory of Silkworm Genome Biology, Southwest University, Chongqing 400716, China


