### Accession
PXD004097

### Title
Canine Flexor Tendon Healing -  Effect of adipose-derived stromal cells and BMP12 on intrasynovial tendon repair: A biomechanical, biochemical, and proteomics study

### Description
The project investigated the changes in proteomics profile of canine flexor digitorum profundus tendons 28 days after tendon transection and surgical repair with (ASCs+BMP12) or without a stem cell and growth factor based treatment (repair only). Specifically, adipose-derived mesenchymal stromal cells together with BMP12 were delivered with a polymer scaffold consisting of multiple alternating layers of a heparin/fibrin-based delivery system and a polylactic co-glycolic acid (PLGA) scaffold. Non-operated tendons from contralateral digits were used as normal control (Normal).

### Sample Protocol
Tendon fragments were diced into fine pieces and processed by Alvin J. Siteman Cancer Center Proteomics Shared Resource at Washington University School of Medicine, including Trypsin and Lys C digestion and time of flight liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry (TOF LC-MS/MS).

### Data Protocol
All samples were analyzed using Mascot (MatrixvScience, London, UK; version 2.4.1). Mascot was set up to search the Uni-Dog-Reference-20131009 database (26,438ventries) with trypsin as the digestion enzyme. Scaffold 4.1.1 (Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 90% probability by the Peptide Prophet algorithm33 with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95% probability and contained at least one identified peptide. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on tandem mass spectroscopy analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.

### Publication Abstract
The outcomes of flexor tendon repair are highly variable. As recent efforts to improve healing have demonstrated promise for growth factor- and cell-based therapies, the objective of the current study was to enhance repair via application of autologous adipose derived stromal cells (ASCs) and the tenogenic growth factor bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) 12. Controlled delivery of cells and growth factor was achieved in a clinically relevant canine model using a nanofiber/fibrin-based scaffold. Control groups consisted of repair-only (no scaffold) and acellular scaffold. Repairs were evaluated after 28 days of healing using biomechanical, biochemical, and proteomics analyses. Range of motion was reduced in the groups that received scaffolds compared to normal. There was no effect of ASC + BMP12 treatment for range of motion or tensile properties outcomes versus repair-only. Biochemical assays demonstrated increased DNA, glycosaminoglycans, and crosslink concentration in all repair groups compared to normal, but no effect of ASC + BMP12. Total collagen was significantly decreased in the acellular scaffold group compared to normal and significantly increased in the ASC + BMP12 group compared to the acellular scaffold group. Proteomics analysis comparing healing tendons to uninjured tendons revealed significant increases in proteins associated with inflammation, stress response, and matrix degradation. Treatment with ASC + BMP12 amplified these unfavorable changes. In summary, the treatment approach used in this study induced a negative inflammatory reaction at the repair site leading to poor healing. Future approaches should consider cell and growth factor delivery methods that do not incite negative local reactions.

### Keywords
Flexor tendon, Bmp12, Tof lc-ms/ms, Stem cell, Canine

### Affiliations
Washington University in St. Louis
Washington University in St. Louis, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, St. Louis, MO, USA

### Submitter
Hua Shen

### Lab Head
Dr Richard H Gelberman
Washington University in St. Louis, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, St. Louis, MO, USA


