### Accession
PXD003682

### Title
Systematic analysis of the lysine acetylome in Beauveria bassiana

### Description
Lysine acetylation emerging as a ubiquitous and conserved posttranslational modification plays an important regulatory role in almost every aspect of eukaryotes and prokaryotes. To gain insight into the nature, extent and biological function of lysine acetylation in Beauveria bassiana, a filamentous entomopathogenic fungus, we used immunoaffinity-based acetyl-lysine peptide enrichment integrated with high resolution mass spectrometry to comprehensively characterize lysine acetylated proteins in this fungus. Here we identified a total of 283 proteins with 464 acetylated sites, representing the first acetylproteome reported to date in filamentous fungi. Bioinformatics analysis of this acetylome showed that the acetylated proteins are involved in a wide range of cellular functions, such as metabolism, transcription, and exhibit diverse subcellular localizations. Enrichment of molecular function, biological process, and KEGG pathway implied that identified acetylated proteins of B. bassiana were very important in chromatin organization, ribosome, nucleosome assembly, carbon metabolism, and biosynthesis of secondary metabolites. Moreover, we matched five conserved lysine acetylated motifs containing of KacY, KacH, KacF, FxKac, KacxxxxK and one specific motif KacW in B. bassiana. Taken together, our acetylome analysis revealed a surprising breadth of cellular processes affected by lysine acetylation and also furnishes some fresh intervention nodes for the rational improvement of the friednly entomopathogenic fungus.

### Sample Protocol
1.Protein Extraction Sample was first grinded by liquid nitrogen, then the cell powder was transferred to 5 mL centrifuge tube and sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 10 mM DTT, 2 mM EDTA, 3μM TSA, 50mM NAM and 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail Ⅲ). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 20,000g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the protein was precipitated with cold 15% TCA for 2 h at -20 °C. After centrifugation at 4 °C for 10 min, the supernatant was discarded. The remaining precipitate was washed with cold acetone for three times. The protein was redissolved in buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM NH4CO3, pH 8.0) and the protein concentration was determined with 2-D Quant kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. 2. Trypsin Digestion For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 37 °C and alkylated with 20 mM IAA for 45 min at room temperature in darkness. For trypsin digestion, the protein sample was diluted by adding 100 mM NH4CO3 to urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion.  3. Affinity Enrichment To enrich Kac peptides, tryptic peptides dissolved in NETN buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0) were incubated with pre-washed antibody beads (PTM Biolabs) at 4°C overnight with gentle shaking. The beads were washed four times with NETN buffer and twice with ddH2O. The bound peptides were eluted from the beads with 0.1% TFA. The eluted fractions were combined and vacuum-dried. The resulting peptides were cleaned with C18 ZipTips (Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s instructions, followed by LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
1. LC-MS/MS Analysis Peptides were dissolved in 0.1% FA, directly loaded onto a reversed-phase pre-column (Acclaim PepMap 100, Thermo Scientific). Peptide separation was performed using a reversed-phase analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, Thermo Scientific). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 8% solvent B (0.1% FA in 98% ACN) for 2 min, 8% to 22% solvent B (0.1% FA in 98% ACN) for 20 min ,22 % to 35% for 10 min and climbing to 85% in 5 min then holding at 85% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system, the resulting peptides were analyzed by Q ExactiveTM hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. Intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28; ion fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans was applied for the top 20 precursor ions above a threshold ion count of 2.0E4 in the MS survey scan with 10.0s dynamic exclusion. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. Automatic gain control (AGC) was used to prevent overfilling of the ion trap; 5E4 ions were accumulated for generation of MS/MS spectra. For MS scans, the m/z scan range was 350 to 1800.  2. Database Search The resulting MS/MS data was processed using MaxQuant with integrated Andromeda search engine (v.1.4.2). Tandem mass spectra were searched against Beauveria Bassiana database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 4 missing cleavages, 5 modifications per peptide and 5 charges. Mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethylation on Cys was specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met, acetylation on Lys and acetylation on protein N-terminal were specified as variable modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) thresholds for protein, peptide and modification site were specified at 1%. Minimum peptide length was set at 7. All the other parameters in MaxQuant were set to default values. The site localization probability was set as > 0.75.

### Publication Abstract
Lysine acetylation (Kac) events in filamentous fungi are poorly explored. Here we show a lysine acetylome generated by LC-MS/MS analysis of immunoaffinity-based Kac peptides from normal hyphal cells of Beauveria bassiana, a fungal entomopathogen. The acetylome comprised 283 Kac proteins and 464 Kac sites. These proteins were enriched to eight molecular functions, 20 cellular components, 27 biological processes, 20 KEGG pathways and 12 subcellular localizations. All Kac sites were characterized as six Kac motifs, including a novel motif (KacW) for 26 Kac sites of 17 unknown proteins. Many Kac sites were predicted to be multifunctional, largely expanding the fungal Kac events. Biological importance of identified Kac sites was confirmed through functional analysis of Kac sites on Pmt1 and Pmt4, two O-mannosyltransferases. Singular site mutations (K88R and K482R) of Pmt1 resulted in impaired conidiation, attenuated virulence and decreased tolerance to oxidation and cell wall perturbation. These defects were close to or more severe than those caused by the deletion of pmt1. The Pmt4 K360R mutation facilitated colony growth under normal and stressful conditions and enhanced the fungal virulence. Our findings provide the first insight into the Kac events of B. bassiana and their links to the fungal potential against insect pests.

### Keywords
Entomopathogenic fungi; lysine acetylation; acetylome; asexual development; stress responses

### Affiliations
zhejiang university
Institute of Microbiology, College of Life Sciences, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, China

### Submitter
wang zhikang

### Lab Head
Dr Zhi-Kang Wang
Institute of Microbiology, College of Life Sciences, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, China


