### Accession
PXD010283

### Title
Sepioloidea lineolata MSMS

### Description
Sepioloidea lineolata, the striped pyjama squid (family Sepiadariidae), is a small species of benthic squid distributed along the Southern Indo-Pacific coast of Australia. All sepiadariid squids are known to secrete large volumes of viscous slime when stressed.  The proteome of S. lineolata slime was analysed by combining high resolution mass spectrometry data with an S. lineolata transcriptome assembled from five tissues including slime.  The composition of S. lineolata slime was also compared to that of the closely related S. austrinum (southern bottletail squid). Of the 550 protein groups identified in S. lineolata slime, 321 had orthologs in S. austrinum, and the abundance of these (iBAQ) was highly correlated between species. Both slimes were dominated by a small number of highly abundant proteins and several of these were short secreted proteins that had no homologues outside the class Cephalopoda. The extent of N-glycosylation in the slime of S. lineolata was also studied via glycan cleavage with PNGase-F.  Four proteins had strong evidence of N-glycosylated, with treatment with PNGase-F showing a slight increase in peptide identification rates.

### Sample Protocol
Each S. lineolata slime sample was dried using a SpeedVac Concentrator and Savant Refrigerated Vapor trap (ThermoScientific) for 15  minutes. Samples were resuspended in 7M urea, 3M Tris pH=8.3 (buffer A). 1 µL of TCEP (tris [2-carboxyethyl] phosphine hydrochloride, 200 mM solution in water) was then added to the samples and incubated overnight. 4 µL of 1M IAA (iodoacetamide in water) was added the following day and incubated in the dark. 500 µL of 50 mM Tris (pH 8.3) and 1 μg trypsin were then added to samples and left to incubate for 6h.  Another 1μg trypsin was added for double digestion and incubated overnight at 37°C. The digested samples were purified for mass spectrometry analysis using the C18 stage tips procedure.  All samples were then split into two groups, one control group without PNGase F and one with PNGase F. These samples were left to incubate overnight.  The PNGase F samples were purified again using the C18 stage tips procedure. For all samples, peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile and were loaded onto a trap column (C18 PepMap 100 μm i.d. × 2 cm trapping column, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 5 µL/min for 6 min before switching the precolumn in line with the analytical column (Easy-Spray 75 μm i.d. × 50 cm, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The separation of peptides was performed at 250 nl/min using a linear acetonitrile gradient of buffer A and buffer B (0.1% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile), starting from 5% buffer B to 60% over 300 min. The LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system coupled online to a QExactive HF mass spectrometer (both from Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The MS instrument was operated in a data-dependent mode. The 20 most abundant precursor ions detected in the full MS survey scan (m/z range of 350−1,500, R = 120,000) were isolated with a 1.4 m/z mass window for further high-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) MS/MS analysis with a resolution of 15,000. Spectra were acquired under automatic gain control (AGC) for survey spectra (AGC: 3×106) and MS/MS spectra (AGC: 2×105). In all cases, one microscan was recorded using dynamic exclusion of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
A reference protein database for S. lineolata was constructed with a total of 43,760 amino acid sequences. This was a combined database of the full set of proteins predicted by Transdecoder combined with 18 additional proteins identified by searching all MS/MS spectra against all open reading frames generated by a six-frame translation of the reference transcriptome.   To do this a database was constructed by concatenating known (Transdecoder predicted) and novel (ORFs longer than 15AA from six-frame translations) sequences.  An equal number of decoys were added to this database to produce a total of 5.3 million entries.    All MS/MS spectra from S. lineolata samples were then searched against this database using Mascot, MS-GF+ and X!Tandem with the following parameters; parent mass tolerance: 10 ppm; fragment mass tolerance: 0.5 Da; allowed missed cleavages: 2; fixed modifications: carbamidomethyl C; variable modifications: oxidation of methionine, acetylation at the protein N-terminus; enzyme: trypsin with semi-tryptic peptides allowed.   All Peptide Sequence Matches (PSM) from this search were then classified as coming from the ‘known’ or ‘novel’ protein sets and split into separate files accordingly.  In cases of redundancy between known and novel sets the PSM was assumed to have come from the ‘known’ set. PeptideProphet and then iProphet were then used to calculate posterior error probabilities (PEP’s) for all PSMs in the ‘known’ and ‘novel’ sets separately as is recommended practice for proteogenomic analysis.  ProteinProphet was then used to combine results from ‘known’ and ‘novel’ sets when performing protein inference to produce a single protXML file.  This file was then processed using the protxml_to_gff tool to map all peptides with PEP < 0.05 and within proteins with PEP < 0.01 back to the reference transcriptome.  This process produced two gff3 files corresponding to peptides from ‘known’ and ‘novel’ sets respectively.  Peptides found only within the ‘novel’ set were used as evidence to support inclusion of the 18 additional proteins in the S. lineolata reference protein database.  Visualisation of peptide tracks along with transdecoder predictions was performed in Geneious (Biomatters Ltd, version 7.1.6).  The entire proteogenomic analysis was performed using tools available for the Galaxy bioinformatics platform and is available as a workflow from the Galaxy toolshed    The database consisting of 43,760 S. austrinum amino acid sequences was combined with known contaminants (cRAP) or all MaxQuant analyses Mass spectrometry data from acetone and urea extraction methods were analysed using MaxQuant (Version 1.5.3.8) with intensity-based absolute-protein-quantification method (iBAQ) turned on, and the protein database mentioned above for peptide and protein identification.  MaxQuant calculates an average iBAQ value across the two different extraction methods and this was used as an approximate measure of absolute protein abundance. MaxQuant uses the Andromeda search engine internally to match MS/MS Spectra to peptides. Settings used were; Parent mass tolerance: 4.5ppm; Fragment mass tolerance: 20ppm; Allowed missed cleavages: 2; Enzyme: Trypsin; Fixed modifications: Carbamidomethyl C; Variable modifications: oxidation of methionine, acetylation at the protein N-terminus. In order to account for mass shifts resulting from both chemical deamidation and glycan cleavage by PNGase-F we allowed for both N and Q deamidation in database searches. Protein groups were retained at 1% FDR.

### Publication Abstract
Cephalopods are known to produce an extensive range of secretions including ink, mucus, and venom. Sepiadariidae, a family of small, benthic bobtail squids, are notable for the high volume of viscous slime they emit when stressed. One species, <i>Sepioloidea lineolata</i> (striped pyjama squid), is covered with glands along the perimeter of the ventral mantle, and these structures are hypothesized to be the source of its slime. Using label-free quantitative proteomics, we analyzed five tissue types (dorsal and ventral mantle muscle, dorsal and ventral epithelium, and ventral mantle glands) and the slime from four individuals. In doing so, we were able to determine the relationship between the slime and the tissues as well as highlight proteins that were specifically identified within the slime and ventral mantle glands. A total of 28 proteins were identified to be highly enriched in slime, and these were composed of peptidases and protease inhibitors. Seven of these proteins contained predicted signal peptides, indicating classical secretion, with four proteins having no identifiable domains or similarity to any known proteins. The ventral mantle glands also appear to be the tissue with the closest overall proteomic composition to the slime; therefore, it is likely that the slime originates, at least in part, from these glands.

### Keywords
Squid, Comparison, Glycosylation, Cephalopod, Slime

### Affiliations
La Trobe University
Centre for Sustainable Tropical Fisheries and Aquaculture, James Cook University, Townsville, QLD, 4811, Australia

### Submitter
Nikeisha Caruana

### Lab Head
Dr Jan Maree Strugnell
Centre for Sustainable Tropical Fisheries and Aquaculture, James Cook University, Townsville, QLD, 4811, Australia


