### Accession
PXD001072

### Title
Characterization of the surfaceome of the metal-reducing bacterium Desulfotomaculum reducens

### Description
Desulfotomaculum reducens strain MI-1 is a Gram-positive, sulfate-reducing bacterium also capable of reducing Fe(III). Metal reduction in Gram-positive bacteria is poorly understood. Here, we investigated Fe(III) reduction with lactate, a non-fermentable substrate, as the electron donor. Lactate consumption is concomitant to Fe(III) reduction, but does not support significant growth, suggesting that little energy can be conserved from this process and that it may occur fortuitously. D. reducens can reduce both soluble (Fe(III)-citrate) and insoluble (hydrous ferric oxide, HFO) Fe(III). Because physically inaccessible HFO was not reduced, we concluded that reduction requires direct contact under these experimental conditions. This implies the presence of a surface exposed reductase capable of transferring electrons from the cell to the extracellular electron acceptor. With the goal of identifying candidate Fe(III) reductases, we carried out an investigation of the surface proteome (surfaceome) of D. reducens. Cell surface exposed proteins were extracted by trypsin cell shaving or by lysozyme treatment, and analyzed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Analysis of cell wall extracts : Protoplasts were obtained by re-suspending the cell pellets in 2 mL of an enzymatic mix composed of 1 mg/mL lysozyme , mutanolysin and lysostaphin  in sucrose and TRIS buffer, amended with 4-(2-Aminoethyl) benzenesulfonyl fluoride hydrochloride. The suspensions were incubated at 37 °C and monitored over time by optical microscopy until rod-shaped cells were converted to round bodies by cell wall digestion. After 45 minutes, the majority (>90 %) of the fermentation samples were converted to protoplasts; the iron reduction samples were incubated for 1h, then half the sample was removed for further processing while the rest was incubated for another hour, before further processing, to increase the protoplast yield (~50 %, which did not increase with longer incubations). Protoplasts were harvested by centrifugation at 1000x g for 10 minutes. The supernatant was filtered (0.2 µm pore size, PTFE filters) to remove residual cells or protoplasts. Protein concentration was estimated using the Pierce BCA Protein assay and samples were diluted to the same concentration, then stored at -20 °C until SDS-PAGE was carried out. SDS-PAGE was performed on a 15 % acrylamide gel. Prior to loading the samples on the gel, they were mixed 1:1 v/v with the loading buffer (125 mM Tris buffer at pH 6.8, 4 % SDS, 20 % glycerol, 0.04 % bromophenol blue, freshly amended with 5 % v/v ß-mercaptoethanol, Applichem) and boiled in a water bath for 15 minutes. Gels were stained for protein with Coomassie blue. Each lane was excised and digested for liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis. Dimethyl Labeling and SAX fractionation of shaved and shed proteins Each sample (10 μg) was reconstituted in 50 μl of 4 M Urea, 10% acetonitrile and buffered with Tris-HCl pH 8.5 to a final concentration of 30 mM. Proteins were reduced in 10 mM DTE at 37°C for 60 min. Cooled samples were subsequently incubated in 40 mM iodoacetamide at 37°C for 45 min in a light-protected environment. Reaction was quenched by addition of DTE to a final concentration of 10 mM. A first digestion step was then performed using Lys-C (1:50 enzyme: protein) for 2 hours at 37°C. After diluting the samples 5-fold, a second digestion step was performed overnight at 37°C using Mass Spectrometry grade trypsin gold (1:50 enzyme: protein) and 10 mM CaCl2. The reaction was stopped by addition of 2 μl of pure FA and peptides were concentrated by vacuum centrifugation to a final volume of 70 μl. Samples were dimethyl-labeled. Three experiments were conducted. In the first experiment, the shed-proteins from fermentation cells sample were labeled with light dimethyl reactants (CH2O + NaBH3CN), the shed-proteins from Fe(III)-reducing cells sample was labeled with medium reactants (CD2O + NaBH3CN); duplicate samples were labeled in opposite ways. In the second experiment the shaved-proteins from the fermentation sample were labeled with light dimethyl reactants, the shaved-proteins from the Fe(III)-reducing sample were labeled with medium reactants; duplicate samples were labeled in opposite ways.  In the last experiment, the proteins shed from the fermentation sample were labeled with light dimethyl reactants, the shaved proteins from the fermentation sample were labeled with medium reactants, and the shaved proteins from the Fe(III)-reducing sample were labeled with heavy methyl reactants (13CD2O + NABH3CN); the labeling was swapped for the duplicates of the latter two samples. As a final step of the labeling procedure, samples were mixed in 1:1:1 (vol:vol:vol- Light: Medium: Heavy) ratio and lyophilized. Strong anion exchange (SAX) fractionation was performed. The eluted fraction were dried by vacuum centrifugation and used for LC-MS analysis. LC-MS/MS analysis: Samples were resuspended in 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% FA for LC-MS/MS injections. One-dimensional liquid chromatography separation was performed using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano UPLC system (Dionex) on-line connected with an Orbitrap Q Exactive Mass-Spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific). A custom made capillary pre-column (Magic AQ C18; 3 μm-200 Å; 2cm x 100 μm ID) was used for sample trapping and cleaning. Analytical separation was then performed using a C18 capillary column (Nikkyo Technos Co; Magic AQ C18; 3μm-100Å; 15cm x 75μm ID) at 250nl/min. using the following mobile phases: A (98% acetonitrile, 0.1% FA) and B (90% acetonitrile, 0.1% FA). Mass spectrometric measurements were performed using a data-dependent top 20 method, with the full-MS scans acquired at 70K resolution (at m/z 200) and MS/MS scans acquired at 17.5K resolution (at m/z 200).

### Data Protocol
Data Analysis of cell wall extracts : LC-MS/MS spectra were searched against the predicted D. reducens proteome obtained from the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) (Geer et al., 2010) using Mascot 2.3 (Matrix Science) and SEQUEST in Proteome Discoverer v.1.4. All searches were performed with Trypsin cleavage specificity, up to 2 missed cleavages allowed and ion mass tolerance of 10 ppm for the precursor and 0.05 Da for the fragments. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification, whereas oxidation (M), acetylation (Protein N-term), phosphorylation (STY) were considered as variable modifications. Scaffold 4.1.1 (Proteome Software) was used for further data analysis. Results were filtered with a protein threshold FDR of 0.01, and a minimum of two peptides per protein. The spectrum counting label-free quantitative method of Scaffold (normalized total spectra) was used to compare different conditions: the sum of the total spectrum counts for all proteins identified within each sample is adjusted to a common value (i.e., the average of the sums of all the samples) by applying a scaling factor to each protein.  Data analysis of dimethyl labeled peptide samples Acquired RAW files were processed using MaxQuant version 1.3.0.5and its internal search engine Andromeda . MS/MS spectra were searched against the predicted D. reducens proteome. MaxQuant default identification settings were used in combination with dimethyl-labeling parameters. Search results were filtered with a false-discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01. Known contaminants and reverse hits were removed before statistical analysis. Relative quantification between different conditions was obtained by calculating the significance B values for each of the identified proteins using Perseus

### Publication Abstract
Desulfotomaculum reducens strain MI-1 is a Gram-positive, sulfate-reducing bacterium also capable of reducing Fe(III). Metal reduction in Gram-positive bacteria is poorly understood. Here, we investigated Fe(III) reduction with lactate, a non-fermentable substrate, as the electron donor. Lactate consumption is concomitant to Fe(III) reduction, but does not support significant growth, suggesting that little energy can be conserved from this process and that it may occur fortuitously. D. reducens can reduce both soluble [Fe(III)-citrate] and insoluble (hydrous ferric oxide, HFO) Fe(III). Because physically inaccessible HFO was not reduced, we concluded that reduction requires direct contact under these experimental conditions. This implies the presence of a surface exposed reductase capable of transferring electrons from the cell to the extracellular electron acceptor. With the goal of characterizing the role of surface proteins in D. reducens and of identifying candidate Fe(III) reductases, we carried out an investigation of the surface proteome (surfaceome) of D. reducens. Cell surface exposed proteins were extracted by trypsin cell shaving or by lysozyme treatment, and analyzed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. This investigation revealed that the surfaceome fulfills many functions, including solute transport, protein export, maturation and hydrolysis, peptidoglycan synthesis and modification, and chemotaxis. Furthermore, a few redox-active proteins were identified. Among these, three are putatively involved in Fe(III) reduction, i.e., a membrane-bound hydrogenase 4Fe-4S cluster subunit (Dred_0462), a heterodisulfide reductase subunit A (Dred_0143) and a protein annotated as alkyl hydroperoxide reductase but likely functioning as a thiol-disulfide oxidoreductase (Dred_1533).

### Keywords
Desulfotomaculum reducens metal-reducing surfaceome

### Affiliations
EPFL Proteomics Core Facility
PCF

### Submitter
Romain Hamelin

### Lab Head
Dr Marc Moniatte
EPFL Proteomics Core Facility


