### Accession
PXD001054

### Title
Redox Proteome of Skeletal Muscle

### Description
Adult and aged mouse gastrocnemius muscle analysed by redox shotgun proteomics, applying a label free quantitative proteomic approach that includes a differential Cysteine labelling step allowing simultaneous identification of up and down regulated proteins between samples and also the identification and relative quantification of the reversible oxidation state of susceptible redox Cysteine residues.

### Sample Protocol
Adult (12 months) and aged (25 months) C57BL/6 male mice were purchased from Charles River and housed in the Specific Pathogen-Free (SPF) Facility at the University of Liverpool for at least 2 weeks before use. All experiments were performed in accordance with United Kingdom Home Office guidelines under the United Kingdom Animals (Scientific Procedures) Act 1986. Animals were sacrificed by cervical dislocation and gastrocnemius muscles were immediately dissected. A gastrocnemius muscle from each mouse was placed immediately in a thiol blocking buffer containing (25 mM d(0) NEM, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8) for redox proteomic analysis. Briefly protein extracts for redox analysis were prepared using a hand homogeniser in the presence of thiol blocking buffer containing d(0) NEM under anaerobic conditions. Protein lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 15,000g for 10 minutes at 4 °C and protein concentrations were calculated by Bradford assay (BioRad) using BSA as a standard. Protein extracts for redox analysis were desalted using Zeba spin desalting columns (Thermo) and protein concentrations were re-calculated as before. 200 µg in 160 µl of 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate of the desalted protein extract was denatured by addition of 10 μL of 1% w/v RapiGest™ (Waters, Manchester, UK) in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate and followed by incubation at 80°C for 10 min. Reversibly oxidized Cys residues were reduced by the addition of 10 µl of 100 mM TCEP and incubated at 60°C for 10 min. Cys residues that were reduced at this stage were subsequently alkylated with 10 µl of 200 mM d(5) NEM and incubated at room temperature for 30 min. Trypsin (Sigma, Poole, UK) was reconstituted in 50 mM acetic acid  and 2 μg added to the samples followed by incubation overnight at 37°C. The digestion was terminated and RapiGest™ removed by acidification (3 μL of TFA and incubation at 37°C for 45 min) and centrifugation (15000 × g for 15 min). The data-dependent label-free analysis was performed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC™ nano system (Thermo Scientific, Hemel Hempstead, UK) coupled to a QExactive™ mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The sample (5 µL corresponding to 200 ng of protein) was loaded onto the trapping column (Thermo Scientific, PepMap100, C18, 75 μm X 20 mm), using partial loop injection, for seven minutes at a flow rate of 4 μL/min with 0.1% (v/v) TFA. The sample was resolved on the analytical column (Easy-Spray C18 75 µm x 500 mm 2 µm column) using a gradient of 97% A (0.1% formic acid) 3% B (99.9% ACN 0.1% formic acid) to 60% A 40% B over 120 minutes at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The data-dependent program used for data acquisition consisted of a 70,000 resolution full-scan MS scan (AGC set to 106 ions with a maximum fill time of 250 ms) the 10 most abundant peaks were selected for MS/MS using a 17,000 resolution scan (AGC set to 5 X 104 ions with a maximum fill time of 250 ms) with an ion selection window of 3 m/z and a normalised collision energy of 30. To avoid repeated selection of peptides for MS/MS the program used a 30 second dynamic exclusion window.

### Data Protocol
Raw spectra were converted to mascot generated files (mgf) using Proteome Discoverer software (Thermo Scientific). The resulting mgf files were searched against the Uniprot Mouse database sequence database (12/05/2012, 16376 sequences) using an in-house Mascot server (Matrix Science, London, UK). Search parameters used were: peptide mass tolerances, 10 ppm; fragment mass tolerance, 0.01 Da, 1+, 2+ and 3+ ions; missed cleavages, 1; instrument type, ESI-TRAP. Variable modifications included were: d(0) NEM, d(5) NEM, mono-, di- and tri-oxidation of  cysteine residues and oxidation of methionine. Label-free relative quantification software PEAKS™ 7 (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc, Waterloo Canada) was used to analyse RAW data files against the same mouse protein database for identifications with Mascot (17). Proteins were considered significantly changed between adult and aged samples using a -10logP score of 20 (equivalent to a P value of 0.01), a fold change ≥ 1.5 and using a quality value of 0.8.

### Publication Abstract
The molecular mechanisms underlying skeletal muscle aging and associated sarcopenia have been linked to an altered oxidative status of redox-sensitive proteins. Reactive oxygen and reactive nitrogen species (ROS/RNS) generated by contracting skeletal muscle are necessary for optimal protein function, signaling, and adaptation. To investigate the redox proteome of aging gastrocnemius muscles from adult and old male mice, we developed a label-free quantitative proteomic approach that includes a differential cysteine labeling step. The approach allows simultaneous identification of up- and downregulated proteins between samples in addition to the identification and relative quantification of the reversible oxidation state of susceptible redox cysteine residues. Results from muscles of adult and old mice indicate significant changes in the content of chaperone, glucose metabolism, and cytoskeletal regulatory proteins, including Protein DJ-1, cAMP-dependent protein kinase type II, 78 kDa glucose regulated protein, and a reduction in the number of redox-responsive proteins identified in muscle of old mice. Results demonstrate skeletal muscle aging causes a reduction in redox-sensitive proteins involved in the generation of precursor metabolites and energy metabolism, indicating a loss in the flexibility of the redox energy response. Data is available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD001054.

### Keywords
Redox, Skeletal muscle

### Affiliations
NUI Galway
University of Liverpool, Musculoskeletal Biology

### Submitter
Brian McDonagh

### Lab Head
Dr Brian McDonagh
University of Liverpool, Musculoskeletal Biology


