### Accession
PXD015955

### Title
in vivo environment swiftly restricts human pancreatic progenitors towards monohormonal identity via a HNF1A/HNF4A mechanism

### Description
Generating insulin-producing β-cells from human induced pluripotent stem cells is a promising cell replacement therapy aimed at improving or curing certain forms of diabetes. Nevertheless, despite important recent advances, the efficient production of functionally mature β-cells is yet to be achieved, with most current differentiation protocols generating a heterogeneous population comprising of subpopulation of cells expressing different islet hormones, including hybrid polyhormonal entities. A solution to this issue is transplanting end-stages differentiating cells into living hosts, which was demonstrated to majorly improve β-cell maturation. Yet, to date, the cellular and molecular mechanisms underlying the transplanted cells response to the in vivo environment exposure was not yet properly characterized. Here we use global proteomics and large-scale imaging techniques aimed at demultiplexing and filtering cellular processes and molecular signatures modulated by the immediate in vivo effect. We show that in vivo exposure swiftly confines in vitro generated human pancreatic progenitors to single hormone expression. The global proteome landscape of the transplanted cells was closer to the one presented by native human islets, especially in regard to energy metabolism and redox balance. Moreover our study indicates a possible link between these processed and certain epigenetic regulators involved in maintenance and propagation of the islet cells identity. Pathway analysis predicted HNF1A and HNF4A as key regulators controlling the in vivo islet-promoting response, with experimental evidence confirming their involvement in confining islet cell identity. To our knowledge this is the first study demultiplexing the immediate response of the transplanted pancreatic progenitors to in vivo exposure.

### Sample Protocol
Encapsulated cells were lysed directly in the alginate beads, in a buffer containing 8M Urea, 200 mM EPPS pH8.5 and protease inhibitors (Roche complete with EDTA) and sonicated (30 seconds x 3 times at 30% power), before Chloroform-Methanol precipitation. Human islets were processed as previously described. TMT reagents were re-suspended in ACN. Desalted peptides were re-suspended in 50 μL of 200 mM HEPES pH 8.5, 15 μL of ACN, and 5 μL of the TMT reagents were added to the respective peptide samples, gently vortexed, and incubated for 1.5 h at RT. To prevent unwanted labelling, the reaction was quenched by adding 10 μL of 5% hydroxylamine and incubated for 15 min at RT. Equal amounts of the TMT-labelled samples were combined and concentrated to near dryness, followed by desalting via C18 solid phase extraction. The combined labelled peptide samples were pre-fractionated by basic pH reversed phase HPLC. We fractionated the pooled TMT-labeled peptide sample using the Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (cat. # 84868). Twelve fractions were collected using: 7.5%, 10%, 12.5%, 15%, 17.5%, 20%, 22.5%, 25%, 27.5%, 30%, 35%, and 60% acetonitrile. Every sixth fraction was combined to yield a total of 6 fractions. Samples were subsequently acidified with 1% formic acid and vacuum centrifuged to near dryness. Each fraction was desalted via StageTip, dried again via vacuum centrifugation, and reconstituted for LC-MS/MS processing. From each of the 6 fractions, ∼5 μg was dissolved in 5% aqueous formic acid (FA) /5% acetonitrile prior to LC-MS/MS analysis on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) coupled to a Proxeon EASY-nLC 1200 liquid chromatography (LC) pump (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were fractionated on a 75-μm inner diameter microcapillary column packed with ∼35 cm of Accucore resin (2.6 μm, 150 Å, ThermoFisher Scientific). For each analysis, we loaded ~1 μg onto the column. Peptides were separated using a 3 hr gradient of 6 to 26% acetonitrile in 0.125% formic acid at a flow rate of ∼350 nL/min. Each analysis used the multi-notch MS3-based TMT method52 on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer, which has been shown to reduce ion interference compared to MS2 quantification. The scan sequence began with an MS1 spectrum (Orbitrap analysis; resolution 120,000; mass range 400−1400 m/z; automatic gain control (AGC) target 2 × 105; maximum injection time 100 ms). Precursors for MS2/MS3 analysis were selected using a TopSpeed of 3 sec. MS2 analysis consisted of collision-induced dissociation (quadrupole ion trap analysis; AGC 4 × 103; normalized collision energy (NCE) 35; maximum injection time 150 ms). Following acquisition of each MS2 spectrum, we collected an MS3 spectrum in which multiple MS2 fragment ions were captured in the MS3 precursor population using isolation waveforms with multiple frequency notches. MS3 precursors were fragmented by high-energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) and analysed using the Orbitrap (NCE 55; AGC 5 × 104; maximum injection time 150 ms, resolution was 60,000 at 400 m/z). Samples were analyzed in duplicate, one with advanced peak determination (ADP) activated and a second run with this option off. Both analyses used the real-time search (RTS) algorithm (REF: J Proteome Res. 2019 Mar 1;18(3):1299-1306. doi: 10.1021/acs.jproteome.8b00899. Epub 2019 Feb 4.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed using a Sequest-based in-house software pipeline, and spectra were converted to mzXML using a modified version of ReAdW.exe. Database searching included all entries from the human Uniprot database (March 11, 2014). This database was concatenated with one composed of all protein sequences in the reversed order. Searches were performed using a 50 ppm precursor ion tolerance for total protein level analysis. The product ion tolerance was set to 0.9 Da. These wide mass tolerance windows were chosen to maximize sensitivity in conjunction with Sequest searches and linear discriminant analysis. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+229.163 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) was set as a variable modification. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR). PSM filtering was performed using a linear discriminant analysis, as described previously, while considering the following parameters: XCorr, ΔCn, missed cleavages, peptide length, charge state, and precursor mass accuracy. For TMT-based reporter ion quantitation, we extracted the summed signal-to-noise (S/N) ratio for each TMT channel and found the closest matching centroid to the expected mass of the TMT reporter ion. The search space for each reporter ion was limited to a range of 0.003 m/z to prevent overlap between the isobaric reporter ions. For protein-level comparisons, PSMs were identified, quantified, and collapsed to a 1% peptide false discovery rate (FDR) and then collapsed further to a final protein-level FDR of 1%. Moreover, protein assembly was guided by principles of parsimony to produce the smallest set of proteins necessary to account for all observed peptides. Proteins were quantified by summing reporter ion counts across all matching PSMs using in-house software, as described previously. PSMs with poor quality, MS3 spectra with more than eight TMT reporter ion channels missing, MS3 spectra with TMT reporter summed signal-to-noise ratio that is less than 100, or no MS3 spectra were excluded from quantitation. Protein quantitation values were exported for further analysis in Microsoft Excel and GraphPad Prism (version 8). Each reporter ion channel was summed across all quantified proteins and normalized assuming equal protein loading of all 10 samples.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Ipsc, In vivo transplant, Alginate

### Affiliations
University of Bergen
Department of Clinical Science, University of Bergen, Norway

### Submitter
Thomas Aga Legøy

### Lab Head
Dr Simona Chera
Department of Clinical Science, University of Bergen, Norway


