### Accession
PXD010470

### Title
SseF-SscB Interaction -  Revealing the mechanisms of membrane protein export by virulence-associated bacterial secretion systems

### Description
Bacterial type III secretion systems are able to secrete membrane proteins. In this project we could show that cognate T3SS chaperones are able to bind to the transmembrane segments of T3SS substrates to avoid erroneous targeting to the bacterial inner membrane. Here, we studied the Salmonella SPI-2 T3SS secreted protein SseF and the interaction with its chaperone SscB by in vivo photocrosslinking. LC-MS/MS analysis was done to provide additional evidence that SscB is the interaction partner leading to the upshift of the SseF band in an SDS-PAGE analysis.

### Sample Protocol
In vivo photocrosslinking S. Typhimurium ∆sscB, pMIB5873 was grown at 37 °C in LB Lennox. pMIB5873 constitutively expressed ssrB and a truncated allele of hns (H-NS Q92am) to enhance expression of SPI-2. Cultures were supplemented with 1 mM rhamnose to induce expression of SseFFLAG from low copy number pTACO10 plasmids. Additionally, the cultures were supplemented with the artificial amino acid para-benzoyl phenyl alanine (pBpa) to a final concentration of 1 mM and afterwards incubated for 5.5 h. 2 ODU of bacterial cells were harvested and washed once with 1 mL cold PBS. Cells were resuspended in 1 mL PBS and transferred into 6-well cell culture dishes. UV irradiation with lambda= 365 nm was done on a UV transilluminator table for 30 min. Samples were resuspended in SDS-loading buffer, heated for 15 min at 50°C and proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE. The band corresponding to crosslinked SseF and the not-pBpa-containing control were excised from the gel and analyzed by mass spectrometry.  Mass spectrometry of crosslinked interaction partners The identification of crosslinked proteins by mass spectrometry was performed as follows. LC-MS/MS analyses of peptides were performed on an EASY-nLC 1200 coupled to a QExactive HF mass spectrometer (both Thermo Scientific) as decribed elsewhere with slight modifications: The peptide mixtures were injected onto the column in HPLC solvent A (0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 500 nl/min and subsequently eluted with a 57-min segmented gradient of 10-33-50-90% HPLC solvent B (80% ACN in 0.1% formic acid). During peptide elution the flow rate was kept constant at 200 nl/min. Full scan was acquired in the mass range from m/z 300 to 1650 at a resolution of 120,000 followed by HCD fragmentation of the 7 most intense precursor ions. High-resolution HCD MS/MS spectra were acquired with a resolution of 60,000. The target values for the MS scan and MS/MS fragmentation were 3x 106 and 105 charges with a maximum fill time of 25 ms and 110 ms, respectively. Precursor ions were excluded from sequencing for 30 s after MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
The MS data were processed with MaxQuant software suite v.1.5.2.8. Database search was performed using the Andromeda search engine, which is part of MaxQuant. MS/MS spectra were searched against a target database consisting of 10,152 protein entries from S. Typhimurium and 248 commonly observed contaminants. In database search, full tryptic in addition to chymotryptic specificity (cleavage C-terminal of phenylalanine, tryptophan, tyrosine, leucine and methionine) was required and up to five missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification, protein N-terminal acetylation, and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications. The dependent peptide algorithm was enabled. Initial precursor mass tolerance was set to 4.5 parts per million (ppm) and at the fragment ion level 20 ppm was set for HCD fragmentation. Peptide, protein and modification site identifications were filtered at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
Many bacteria export effector proteins fulfilling their function in membranes of a eukaryotic host. These effector membrane proteins appear to contain signals for two incompatible bacterial secretion pathways in the same protein: a specific export signal, as well as transmembrane segments that one would expect to mediate targeting to the bacterial inner membrane. Here, we show that the transmembrane segments of effector proteins of type III and type IV secretion systems indeed integrate in the membrane as required in the eukaryotic host, but that their hydrophobicity in most instances is just below the threshold required for mediating targeting to the bacterial inner membrane. Furthermore, we show that binding of type III secretion chaperones to both the effector's chaperone-binding domain and adjacent hydrophobic transmembrane segments also prevents erroneous targeting. These results highlight the evolution of a fine discrimination between targeting pathways that is critical for the virulence of many bacterial pathogens.

### Keywords
Salmonella, In vivo photocrosslinking, Pbpa, Ssef, Sscb, Type iii secretion systems

### Affiliations
Tuebingen University
Sektion of Cellular and Molecular Microbiology Interfaculty Institute of Microbiology and Infection Medicine University of Tübingen Germany

### Submitter
Nicolas Nalpas

### Lab Head
Dr Samuel Wagner
Sektion of Cellular and Molecular Microbiology Interfaculty Institute of Microbiology and Infection Medicine University of Tübingen Germany


