### Accession
PXD001029

### Title
Species identification of archaeological skin objects from Danish bogs

### Description
Denmark has an extraordinarily large and well-preserved collection of archaeological skin garments found in peat bogs, dated to approximately 920 BC - AD 775. These objects provide not only the possibility to study prehistoric skin costume and technologies, but also to investigate the animal species used for production of skin garments. Until recently, species identification of archaeological skin was mainly performed by light and scanning electron microscopy or analysis of ancient DNA. However, the efficacy of these methods can be limited due to the harsh, mostly acidic environment of peat bogs leading to morphological and molecular degradation within the samples. We compared species assignment results of twelve archaeological skin samples from Danish bogs using Mass Spectrometry (MS)-based peptide sequencing, against results obtained using light and scanning electron microscopy

### Sample Protocol
Mass Spectrometry-based peptide sequencing sample preparation, procedure A  For each ancient skin sample, two subsamples of 11-48mg were cut into small pieces with a scalpel. Each subsample was then transferred in a protein LoBind 1.5mL tube (Eppendorf, Germany). Each of the two subsamples was processed independently as follows. Each sample was re-suspended in 500µL of 100mM ammonium bicarbonate solution at pH 8.00, it was shaken vigorously for 1min and it was pelleted by centrifugation at 14000g for 5min. The supernatant was discarded. This step was performed twice. The pellet was re-suspended in 1mL 1.2M HCl and incubated at 4˚C for 24h. It was then pelleted by centrifugation at 14000g for 10min. The supernatant was collected and dried in a centrifugal evaporator for 20min at room temperature. The pellet generated after evaporation was re-suspended in 200µL 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.00. The pH was checked using pH-indicator strips and adjusted to 8.00 with concentrated ammonium hydroxide and the solution was incubated at 70˚C for 24h. After centrifugation at 14000g for 10min, to precipitate any eventual insoluble residue, the supernatant was collected and transferred in a fresh protein LoBind 1.5mL tube. Digestion was then started adding 4µL of 0.5µg/µL sequencing grade trypsin solution (Promega, Nacka Sweden) and incubating at 37˚C overnight. The following morning 2µL of fresh trypsin were added and digestion was extended for 6 additional hours. Digestion was quenched with 10% trifluoroacetic acid to a final concentration of 0.2-0.8% to reach pH < 2.00 and tryptic peptides were immobilised on C18 stage-tips, as described in procedure B.  LC-ESI high-resolution MS/MS analysis, procedure A  All peptide mixtures were analysed by online nanoflow reversed-phase C18 liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) as described previously [1].  Mass Spectrometry-based peptide sequencing sample preparation and LC-ESI high-resolution MS/MS analysis, procedure B  All peptide mixtures were prepared and analysed as described previously [2].  References:  1- Cappellini E, Jensen LJ, Szklarczyk D, Ginolhac A, Fonseca RARd, et al. (2011) Proteomic Analysis of a Pleistocene Mammoth Femur Reveals More than One Hundred Ancient Bone Proteins. Journal of Proteome Research 11: 917–926.  2- Cappellini E, Gentry A, Palkopoulou E, Ishida Y, Cram D, et al. (2014) Resolution of the type material of the Asian Elephant, Elephas maximus Linnaeus, 1758 (Proboscidea, Elephantidae). Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society 170: 222-232.

### Data Protocol
Raw files generated during spectra acquisition were searched on a workstation using the MaxQuant algorithm v. 1.2.2.5 [6] and the Andromeda peptide search engine [7] initially against a target/reverse custom-made list all the mammalian Alpha-1 type I, Alpha-2 type I and Alpha-1 type III collagen sequences publicly available in UniProt and nrNCBI (approximately 240 accessions in total), and then against the target/reverse protein list in the Bos taurus and Homo sapiens reference proteomes (34365 and 84946 -including isoforms- accessions downloaded from UniProtKB on Oct. 24 2012 and Dec. 31 2012, for B. taurus and H. sapiens respectively) together with the complete list of proteins available in NCBI RefSeq after taxonomical restriction to Ovis aries (22752 accessions, downloaded on Jan. 8, 2013) and Capra hircus (31461 accessions, downloaded on Dec. 2, 2013). In every search, spectra were also matched against the common contaminants such as wool keratin and porcine trypsin sequences, downloaded from Uniprot.

### Publication Abstract
Denmark has an extraordinarily large and well-preserved collection of archaeological skin garments found in peat bogs, dated to approximately 920 BC - AD 775. These objects provide not only the possibility to study prehistoric skin costume and technologies, but also to investigate the animal species used for the production of skin garments. Until recently, species identification of archaeological skin was primarily performed by light and scanning electron microscopy or the analysis of ancient DNA. However, the efficacy of these methods can be limited due to the harsh, mostly acidic environment of peat bogs leading to morphological and molecular degradation within the samples. We compared species assignment results of twelve archaeological skin samples from Danish bogs using Mass Spectrometry (MS)-based peptide sequencing, against results obtained using light and scanning electron microscopy. While it was difficult to obtain reliable results using microscopy, MS enabled the identification of several species-diagnostic peptides, mostly from collagen and keratins, allowing confident species discrimination even among taxonomically close organisms, such as sheep and goat. Unlike previous MS-based methods, mostly relying on peptide fingerprinting, the shotgun sequencing approach we describe aims to identify the complete extracted ancient proteome, without preselected specific targets. As an example, we report the identification, in one of the samples, of two peptides uniquely assigned to bovine foetal haemoglobin, indicating the production of skin from a calf slaughtered within the first months of its life. We conclude that MS-based peptide sequencing is a reliable method for species identification of samples from bogs. The mass spectrometry proteomics data were deposited in the ProteomeXchange Consortium with the dataset identifier PXD001029.

### Keywords
Archaeology, Ancient proteins, Archaeological skin objects from bogs

### Affiliations
Centre for GeoGenetics, Natural History Museum of Denmark, University of Copenhagen, Øster Voldgade 5-7, 1350 Copenhagen, Denmark
Natural History Museum of Denmark

### Submitter
Enrico Cappellini

### Lab Head
Dr Enrico Cappellini
Centre for GeoGenetics, Natural History Museum of Denmark, University of Copenhagen, Øster Voldgade 5-7, 1350 Copenhagen, Denmark


