### Accession
PXD040942

### Title
Frizzled receptors facilitate Tiki inhibition of Wnt signaling at the cell surface

### Description
Tiki antagonizes Wnt3a signaling by cleaving and inactivating Wnt3a in Wnt-producing cells. Tiki also functions in Wnt-receiving cells to antagonize Wnt signaling by an unknown mechanism. Here, we demonstrate that Tiki inhibition of Wnt signaling at the cell surface requires Frizzled receptors. Tiki associates with the Wnt-FZD complex and cleaves the N-terminus of Wnt3a or Wnt5a, preventing the Wnt-FZD complex from recruiting and activating the coreceptor LRP6 or ROR1/2 without affecting Wnt-FZD complex stability. Intriguingly, we demonstrate that the N-terminus of Wnt3a is required for Wnt3a binding to LRP6 and activating β-catenin signaling, while the N-terminus of Wnt5a is dispensable for recruiting and phosphorylating ROR1/2. Both Tiki enzymatic activity and its association with the Wnt-FZD complex contribute to its inhibitory function on Wnt5a. Our study uncovers the mechanism by which Tiki antagonizes Wnt signaling at the cell surface and reveals a negative role of FZDs in Wnt signaling by acting as Tiki cofactors. Our findings also reveal an unexpected role of the Wnt3a N-terminus in the engagement of the coreceptor LRP6.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293 cells stably expressing TIKI2-mTB were cultured in DMEM with 10% FBS. Cells were labeled with 200 μm biotin for 6 hours before harvest. Labeling was stopped by transferring the cells to ice and washing them with ice-cold PBS. Cells were detached from the dishes by gently pipetting a stream of PBS directly onto the cells, and then pellets were collected by centrifuging the resulting cell suspension at 500 × g for 3 min. Cell pellets were washed with PBS five times and lysed in 5 mL RIPA lysis buffer by gentle pipetting and incubating for 5 min at 4°C. Lysates were clarified by centrifugation at 14000 × g for 10 min at 4°C. The supernatant of the lysates was incubated with 100 μl of NeutrAvidin agarose beads (Pierce) at 4°C with slow rotation for 16 hours. The beads were subsequently washed twice with 1 mL of RIPA lysis buffer, once with 1 mL of 1 M KCl, once with 1 mL of 0.1 M Na2CO3, once with 1 mL of 2 M urea in 10 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, and twice with 1 mL RIPA lysis buffer. After enrichment, biotinylated proteins were eluted by boiling the beads in 120 µL of 2× protein loading buffer (125 mM Tris-HCl pH 6.8, 2% SDS, 10% glycerol) supplemented with 2 mM biotin.

### Data Protocol
Original mass spectrometry data was used to search human uniport database by mascot softwire.

### Publication Abstract
The membrane-tethered protease Tiki antagonizes Wnt3a signaling by cleaving and inactivating Wnt3a in Wnt-producing cells. Tiki also functions in Wnt-receiving cells to antagonize Wnt signaling by an unknown mechanism. Here, we demonstrate that Tiki inhibition of Wnt signaling at the cell surface requires Frizzled (FZD) receptors. Tiki associates with the Wnt-FZD complex and cleaves the N-terminus of Wnt3a or Wnt5a, preventing the Wnt-FZD complex from recruiting and activating the coreceptor LRP6 or ROR1/2 without affecting Wnt-FZD complex stability. Intriguingly, we demonstrate that the N-terminus of Wnt3a is required for Wnt3a binding to LRP6 and activating &#x3b2;-catenin signaling, while the N-terminus of Wnt5a is dispensable for recruiting and phosphorylating ROR1/2. Both Tiki enzymatic activity and its association with the Wnt-FZD complex contribute to its inhibitory function on Wnt5a. Our study uncovers the mechanism by which Tiki antagonizes Wnt signaling at the cell surface and reveals a negative role of FZDs in Wnt signaling by acting as Tiki cofactors. Our findings also reveal an unexpected role of the Wnt3a N-terminus in the engagement of the coreceptor LRP6.

### Keywords
Ror1/2, Fzd, Tiki, Lrp6, Wnt

### Affiliations
Key Laboratory of Molecular Biophysics of the Ministry of Education, College of Life Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China
The Key Laboratory for Human Disease Gene Study of Sichuan Province and the Department of Laboratory Medicine, Sichuan Provincial People's Hospital, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China

### Submitter
Dong Luo

### Lab Head
Dr Xinjun Zhang
The Key Laboratory for Human Disease Gene Study of Sichuan Province and the Department of Laboratory Medicine, Sichuan Provincial People's Hospital, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China


