### Accession
PXD008706

### Title
A Systematic Protein Turnover Map for Decoding Protein Degradation

### Description
Protein degradation is mediated by an expansive and complex network of protein modification and degradation enzymes. Matching degradation enzymes with their targets and determining globally which proteins are degraded by the proteasome or lysosome/vacuole have been a major challenge. Furthermore, an integrated view of protein degradation for cellular pathways has been lacking. Here, we present an analytical platform that combines systematic gene deletions with quantitative measures of protein turnover to deconvolve protein degradation pathways for Saccharomyces cerevisiae . The resulting turnover map (T-MAP) reveals target candidates of nearly all E2 and E3 ubiquitin ligases and identifies the primary degradation routes for most proteins. We further mined this T-MAP to identify new substrates of ER-associated degradation (ERAD) involved in sterol biosynthesis and to uncover regulatory nodes for sphingolipid biosynthesis. The T-MAP approach should be broadly applicable to the study of other cellular processes, including mammalian systems.

### Sample Protocol
For each time point, ~25 OD units of cells were harvested by centrifugation. Cells were lysed in 200 µl buffer containing 50 mM Tris/HCl pH=9.0, 5% SDS and 100 mM DTT for 30 min at 55°C. Lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 17000g for 10 min. Supernatants were diluted with buffer UA (8 M urea, 0.1 M Tris/HCl pH=8.5) to a final concentration of 0.5% SDS. Proteins were digested with the endoproteinase LysC following the protocol for filter-aided sample preparation (FASP, 12). Briefly, protein extracts were loaded on a 30k centricon filter unit (Amicon) by centrifugation at 14000g. Samples were washed twice by addition of 200 µl buffer UA and alkylated for 20 min in the dark by addition of 5.5 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in 200 µl buffer UA. Samples were washed additional 4 times by addition of 200 µl buffer UA and centrifugation. 60 µl of buffer UA containing 0.5 mg/ml LysC were added to the filter units and incubated at 37°C over-night. Peptides were recovered by centrifugation into a fresh tube and additional elution with 200 µl of 0.5 M NaCl. Samples were acidified by addition of trifluoroacidic acid (TFA) and cleared of precipitates by centrifugation at 17000g for 5 min. Peptide concentration was measured and 5 µg of peptides were desalted following the protocol for StageTip purification 13. Samples were eluted with 60 µL buffer B (80% ACN, 0.1% formic acid in H20) and reduced in a Vacufuge plus (Eppendorf) to a final volume of 3 µL. 2 µL of buffer A (0.1 % formic acid in H20) were added and the resulting 5 µL were injected into the HPLC

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS and MS/MS spectra were analyzed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8), utilizing its integrated ANDROMEDA search algorithms. Peak lists were searched against the UNIPROT databases for S.cerevisiae or S.pombe with common contaminants added. The search included carbamidomethylation of cysteines as fixed modification, and methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. Maximum allowed mass deviation for MS peaks was set to 6ppm and 20ppm for MS/MS peaks. Maximum missed cleavages were 3. The false discovery rate was determined by searching a reverse database. Maximum falsediscovery rates were 0.01 both on peptide and protein levels. Minimum required peptide length was 6 residues. Proteins with at least two peptides (one of them unique) were considered identified. The “match between runs” option was enabled with a time window of 1 min to match identification between replicates.

### Publication Abstract
Protein degradation is mediated by an expansive and complex network of protein modification and degradation enzymes. Matching degradation enzymes with their targets and determining globally which proteins are degraded by the proteasome or lysosome/vacuole have been a major challenge. Furthermore, an integrated view of protein degradation for cellular pathways has been lacking. Here, we present an analytical platform that combines systematic gene deletions with quantitative measures of protein turnover to deconvolve protein degradation pathways for Saccharomyces cerevisiae. The resulting turnover map (T-MAP) reveals target candidates of nearly all E2 and E3 ubiquitin ligases and identifies the primary degradation routes for most proteins. We further mined this T-MAP to identify new substrates of ER-associated degradation (ERAD) involved in sterol biosynthesis and to uncover regulatory nodes for sphingolipid biosynthesis. The T-MAP approach should be broadly applicable to the study of other cellular processes, including mammalian systems.

### Keywords
Profiling, Yeast, Pulse silac, Turnover

### Affiliations
Genetics and Complex Diseases Harvard School of Public Health 677 Huntington Ave Boston, MA 02115
Harvard School of Public Health

### Submitter
romain christiano

### Lab Head
Dr Romain Christiano
Genetics and Complex Diseases Harvard School of Public Health 677 Huntington Ave Boston, MA 02115


