### Accession
PXD003820

### Title
7-Ketocholesterol overcomes drug resistance in Chronic Myeloid Leukemia cell lines beyond MDR1 mechanism_part3

### Description
Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is a myeloproliferative disease with a characteristic BCR-ABL tyrosine kinase (TK) fusion protein. Despite the clinical efficacy accomplished by TKIs therapies disease progression may affect patient response rate to these inhibitors due to a multitude of factors that could lead to development of a mechanism known as multidrug resistance (MDR). 7-ketocholesterol (7KC) has been extensively reported to cause cell death in a variety of cancer models. In this study, we showed the in vitro efficacy of 7KC against MDR leukemia cell line, Lucena. 7KC treatment induced reduction in cell viability, together with apoptosis-mediated cell death. Moreover, downregulation of MDR protein caused intracellular drug accumulation and 7KC co-incubation with either Daunorubicin or Vincristine reduced cell viability compared to the use of each drug alone. Additionally, quantitative label-free mass spectrometry-based protein quantification showed alteration of different molecular pathways involved in cell cycle arrest, induction of apoptosis and misfolded protein response. Conclusively, this study highlights the effect of 7KC as a sensitizing agent of multidrug resistance CML and elucidate its molecular mechanisms.

### Sample Protocol
Cell models, cell culture and experimental conditions Two CML cell lines were used in this study, K562 and its MDR counterpart Lucena, which was derived over K562 exposure to  Vincristine. Both cells were maintained in RPMI 1640 medium with 10% (v/v) FBS, 100 U/ml penicillin-streptomycin, 35.7 mM NaHCO3 and 20 mM Hepes at 37 ° C with 5% CO2, with addition of 60 nM vincristine sulfate (VCR) for Lucena. Mass spectrometry label free quantification sample preparation Cell fractionation of nuclear and cytoplasm enriched extracts was performed essentially as previously described [32] in order to improve the number of protein identifications. Briefly, Lucena cells in the presence and absence of 7KC (75 µM) were resuspended in cell extract buffer (10 mM HEPES–KOH, pH 7.9, 1.5  mM MgCl2, 10  mM KC1, 0.5  mM DTT and 0.2 mM PMSF). Cells were kept on ice for 10 min and centrifuged at 4 °C at 14 000 g for 30 min . The supernatant was collected, and the pellet was resuspended in nuclear extraction buffer (20  mM HEPES-KOH, pH 7.9, 25% glycerol, 420  mM NaCl, 1.5  mM MgC12, 0.2  mM EDTA, 0.5  mM DTT and 0.2 mM PMSF), kept on ice for 20 min and centrifuged at 4 °C at 14 000 g for 2 min. The remaining supernatant was called nuclear enriched extract while the pellet was combined with the first supernatant and called cytoplasm enriched extract. Lucena enriched fractions were added 8 M urea with protease inhibitors cocktail and 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB). Proteins were reduced at a final concentration of 10 mM DTT for 30 min at room temperature and subsequently alkylated in 40 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30min in the dark. Following incubation, the samples were diluted in water, pH 7.5, and digested with  trypsin 2% (w/w) overnight at room temperature. Samples were acidified to 1% formic acid and centrifuged at 14,000  g for 10 min to stop the trypsin digestion and remove insoluble material (e.g. lipids). Supernatant was collected and dried prior to desalting.  Desalting  Samples were resuspended in 0.1% TFA and desalted using self-made micro-columns made with a C18 plug taken from a C18 disk (Sigma-Aldrich) and inserted in the constrict end of a P200 tips. The acidified samples were loaded onto the micro-column by applying a gentle air pressure with the syringe and washed three times with 0.1% TFA. Peptides were eluted with 50% ACN, 0.1% TFA, followed by 70% ACN, 0.1% TFA.  LC-MS/MS analysis Samples were resuspended in 0.1% FA and loaded onto an EASY-nLC system (Thermo Scientific). The peptides were loaded on Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ (3 µm) collumn and eluted in an organic solvent gradient from 100% phase A (0.1% FA) to 34% phase B (0.1% FA, 95% ACN) during 70 and 90 min at a constant flow rate of 250 nL/min for nuclear and cytoplasmic fractions, respectively. Further analysis of the cytoplasmic fraction was done using a gradient of 120 min. MS analysis was perfomed by LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to the nanoLC system. The LTQ-Orbitrap Velos was operated in positive ion mode with data-dependent acquisition. The full scan was acquired in the Orbitrap with an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 10e6 ions and a maximum fill time of 500 ms. Peptides from the nuclear and cytoplasmic fractions were fragmented by low-resolution CID MS/MS and HCD MS/MS, respectively. Ions selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for a duration of 30s. For CID fragmentation, each MS scan was acquired at a resolution of 60,000 FWHM followed by 20 MS/MS scan of the most intense ions. For the HCD fragmentation, each MS scan was acquired at resolution of 30,000 FWHM followed by 7 MS/MS scan of the most intense ions. Three biological replicates for each condition were run. All raw data were accessed in Xcalibur software (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Database searches and bioinformatics analyses Raw data were processed using Proteome Discoverer v1.4 (Thermo Scientific) and searched against the SwissProt human database (20,243 entries) with common contaminants using Sequest search engine. Database searches were performed with the following parameters: precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, product ion mass tolerance of 0.6 Da (for CID fragmentation) or 0.05Da (for HCD fragmentation), Cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification, and two missed cleavages for trypsin [33]. Searches were also conducted with the following variable modifications: Methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation and Asparagine deamidation. Percolator algorithm was used to select peptides with FDR less than 1% and a q-value up to 0.01. Quantification was performed using the Proteome Discoverer workflow node Precursor Ions Area Detector. Peak areas for each peptide sequence were calculated and assembled into protein areas using the three most abundant distinct peptides for each protein. Normalization was carried out using the median area for every biological replicate in each condition. A ratio for each protein between controls and treated samples was measured.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Cell death and 7-ketocholesterol., Quantitative proteomics, Multidrug resistance, Oxysterols, Chronic myeloid leukemia

### Affiliations
University of Sao Paulo
GlycoProteomics Laboratory, Department of Parasitology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, University of Sao Paulo, Avenida Lineu Prestes 1374, CEP 05508-000, Sao Paulo, Brazil

### Submitter
Giuseppe Palmisano

### Lab Head
Dr Giuseppe Palmisano
GlycoProteomics Laboratory, Department of Parasitology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, University of Sao Paulo, Avenida Lineu Prestes 1374, CEP 05508-000, Sao Paulo, Brazil


