### Accession
PXD039945

### Title
Effects of pro-opiomelanocortin neuropeptides on immunological pathways mediated by the melanocortin 3 receptor revealed by label-free quantitative thermal proteome profiling

### Description
In a thermal proteome profiling experiment we have identified 300 unique proteins that become thermally stabilized or destabilized downstream of signal activation of the melanocortin 3 receptor (MC3R) when expressed in HEK293 cells. Upon stimulation with either one of the endogenous MC3R-agonists ACTH, alpha-, or gamma-MSH, derived from the pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC) prohormone, we found that the majority of these thermally affected proteins is related to immunoregulatory processes including signaling cascades up- and downstream of the key transcription factors IRF, STAT and NFkappaB. Here, we have developed a computational pipeline that allows assessment of thermal melting curves from data obtained with label-free quantitation from ion-mobility enhanced LC-MS data. It enables differential expression analysis within the data obtained from a thermal proteome profiling experiment, since all relative abundance information is retained. We found with principal component analysis that the three POMC-peptides act in very distinguished ways on the expression pattern in the MC3R-expressing HEK293 cells. This is consistent with our findings from thermal proteome profiling analysis where we identified 142, 107 and 95 proteins to be thermally affected by ACTH, alpha- and gamma-MSH, respectively, with only 4 proteins identified across all three agonists, and an additional 36 proteins shared pairwise between the agonists. Interestingly, we found proteins involved in immune responses to be enriched according to gene set enrichment analysis with Reactome pathways. As a result of these findings, we inferred transcription factor activities of the involved thermally affected transcription factors using Bayesian analysis based on differential expression data. Our findings on transcription factor activity were validated with patterns of peptide phosphorylation abundance analysis. These combined efforts revealed that all three agonists act via the cAMP-PKA-CREB pathway but that there are differences in the further downstream affected pathways and the identities of the thermally affected pathways proteins in particular kinases.

### Sample Protocol
For the TPP experiments the treatment solution contained no additives or different concentration (20, 100, 500 nM) of ACTH, alpha-MSH and gamma-MSH, respectively for 1 h (37 °C, 5 % CO2). After ligand treatment the cells were detached with accutase and washed with ice-cold PBS three times. Ice-cold PBS containing protease inhibitor (10 µL/mL) was added to a final cell concentration of 4e6 cells/100 µL. Seven aliquots with 100 µL each were centrifuged at 300 g for 3 min (4 °C) and kept on ice until further use.Each aliquot was heated on the heating block (Thermomixer Compact, Eppendorf) for 3 minutes at one of the following temperatures: T in [37, 42, 47, 52, 57, 62, 67] °C, followed by 3 min at room temperature. Immediately after the temperature treatment the samples were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and then kept on ice.  Lysis, sample purification and protein digestion RapiGest was added to the samples (1 µL/100 µL). Cells were lyzed during two freeze-thaw cycles with freezing in liquid nitrogen and thawing in the heating block set to 25 °C, detailed procedure described previously (Literature). After each heating step the samples were vortexed. The samples were centrifuged at 14,000 g  at 4 °C for 90 min to separate the soluble protein fraction from the aggregated proteins. The supernatant was transferred into new tubes and the protein concentration was measured with a Nanodrop. Samples were kept on ice.  Sample purification and protein digestion was done with filter-aided sample preparation as described previously (Literature). Briefly, 20 μg of total protein was placed on centrifugal filter units (Microcon-30 kDa; Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) prior conditioned with 1% formic acid. On filter, samples were washed with urea buffer (8 M urea and 100 mM Tris (pH 8.5)) and centrifuged at 14,000 g  at 4 °C for 15 min.  Sample reduction was performed with 8 mM DTT at 56 °C for 15 min, followed by alkylation with 50 mM IAA at room temperature for 20 minutes. In a second incubation with 8 mM DTT excess IAA was removed. An intermittent washing step with urea buffer (8 M urea and 100 mM Tris (pH 8.5)) was repeated twice after each incubation. Before tryptic digestion (enzyme-protein-ratio 1:50 (w/w)) the samples were washed with 50 mM NH4HCO3 three times and centrifuged at 14,000g for 10 min each.  Trypsin digestion was performed overnight (16  h) in a wet chamber at 37 °C. Resulting peptides were collected by washing the filter with 50 mM NH4HCO3 and centrifugation at 14 000 g for 10 min twice followed by addition of trifluoroacetic acid to a final concentration of 1% (v/v). Samples were dried in the speedvac (Concentrator 5301, Eppendorf) at 45 °C and reconstituted in a solution of 3 % acetonitrile and 0.1 % formic acid in water (protein concentration 150 ng/µL).  Proteomic Sample analysis with LC-MS Tryptic peptides were analyzed with a nanoAcquity UPLC system coupled to  a Synapt G2-Si HDMS mass spectrometer with a nanoelectrospray ionization source (Waters Corporation, Manchester, UK). The nanoAcquity UPLC system consisted of a C18, 5 µm, 180 µm x 20 mm trap column and a HSS-T3 C18 1.8 µm, 75 µm x 250 mm analytical column (Waters Corporation, Manchester, UK) set to trapping mode. 300 ng protein of sample were injected per run. Mobile phase A contained 0.1 % formic acid and 3 % dimethyl sulfoxide in water (v/v) and B 0.1 % formic acid and 3 % dimethyl sulfoxide in acetonitrile (v/v).  Peptide separation was done with a gradient across 3-40 % (v/v) mobile phase B at a constant flow rate of 0.3 µL/min over 120 min. A lock-mass correction was performed with spraying lock-mass solution composed of [Glu1]-fibrinopeptide B (0.1 µM) and leu-enkephalin (1 µM) every 60 s through the reference channel. Data was acquired in data independent acquisition workflow (DIA) in positive ion mode with a UDMSE. The system performance and stability was controlled with injection of a commercially available HeLa digest (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA) after every seventh sample injection.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed with PLGS 3.0.3 (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, USA) against the SWISSPROT Human database (UniProtK version 12/10/2021). Analysis parameters were assigned as following: false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01, digestion reagent was Trypsin, number of peptide missed cleavages was set to 1.  Minimum fragment ion matches 1 per peptide and 3 per protein. Minimum peptide matches were 2 per protein.  Carbamidomethyl cysteine was set as a fixed modification, and lysine acetylation, C-terminal amidation, asparagine deamidation, glutamine deamidation, and methionine oxidation were set as variable modification. In consecutive analysis, the samples subjected to 37 °C were also searched with phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine as variable modification.  \subsection{Label-free quantification with ISOQuant} ISOQuant 1.8 workflow uses PLGS identifications, intensity normalization and protein isoform and homology filtering for annotation of signal clusters based on accurate mass, retention and drift time\cite{Distler2014,Distler2016}. The workflow allows maximum recovery of inferred protein abundances for relative protein quantification with the TOP3 method, where the average intensity of the three most intense peptides of each protein was used for quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Thermal proteome profiling with label-free quantitation using ion-mobility-enhanced LC-MS offers versatile data sets, providing information on protein differential expression, thermal stability, and the activities of transcription factors. We developed a multidimensional data analysis workflow for label-free quantitative thermal proteome profiling (TPP) experiments that incorporates the aspects of gene set enrichment analysis, differential protein expression analysis, and inference of transcription factor activities from LC-MS data. We applied it to study the signaling processes downstream of melanocortin 3 receptor (MC3R) activation by endogenous agonists derived from the proopiomelanocortin prohormone: ACTH, &#x3b1;-MSH, and &#x3b3;-MSH. The obtained information was used to map signaling pathways downstream of MC3R and to deduce transcription factors responsible for cellular response to ligand treatment. Using our workflow, we identified differentially expressed proteins and investigated their thermal stability. We found in total 298 proteins with altered thermal stability, resulting from MC3R activation. Out of these, several proteins were transcription factors, indicating them as being downstream target regulators that take part in the MC3R signaling cascade. We found transcription factors CCAR2, DDX21, HMGB2, SRSF7, and TET2 to have altered thermal stability. These apparent target transcription factors within the MC3R signaling cascade play important roles in immune responses. Additionally, we inferred the activities of the transcription factors identified in our data set. This was done with Bayesian statistics using the differential expression data we obtained with label-free quantitative LC-MS. The inferred transcription factor activities were validated in our bioinformatic pipeline by the phosphorylated peptide abundances that we observed, highlighting the importance of post-translational modifications in transcription factor regulation. Our multidimensional data analysis workflow allows for a comprehensive characterization of the signaling processes downstream of MC3R activation. It provides insights into protein differential expression, thermal stability, and activities of key transcription factors. All proteomic data generated in this study are publicly available at DOI: 10.6019/PXD039945.

### Keywords
Mc3r, Pomc, Tpp, Label-free quantitation

### Affiliations
Department of Pharmaceutical Biosciences, Uppsala University
Uppsala University

### Submitter
Erik Jansson

### Lab Head
Dr Erik Jansson
Department of Pharmaceutical Biosciences, Uppsala University


