### Accession
PXD013616

### Title
The Role of CDYL-Regulated Crotonylation of RPA1 in Homologous Recombination-Mediated DNA Repair

### Description
Lysine crotonylation (Kcr) is a recently-identified protein short-chain acylation. We have previously reported that chromodomain Y-like transcription corepressor CDYL acts as a crotonyl-CoA hydratase and negatively regulates histone Kcr. However, the global crotonylome of CDYL-regulated Kcr on non-histone substrates remains unclear. Using proteome-wide quantitative Kcr analysis, we identified 14,311 Kcr sites across 3,734 proteins in HeLa cells, providing by far the largest crotonylome data set from a single study. Upon depletion of CDYL, 1,141 Kcr sites from 759 proteins were increased by more than 1.5 fold, and 933 Kcr sites from 528 proteins were decreased by more than 0.67 fold. Upregulated crotonylome alterations upon CDYL depletion include components from diverse cellular pathways such as RNA splicing, DNA replication, and amino acid metabolism. Specifically, CDYL regulates K88 and K379 of crotonylation on RPA1, which affects its binding to other DNA repair factors including BLM, DNA2L, RAD50 and WRN. We showed evidence that CDYL-mediated RPA1 crotonylation is critical for the homologous recombination (HR) repair of camptothecin (CPT)-induced DNA damage. Together, our results provide a broad lysine crotonylome in response to CDYL and shed new light on the role of RPA1 Kcr in DNA repair, implicating functional importance of Kcr on non-histone substrates in diverse cellular processes.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Extraction and Trypsin Digestion Sample was sonicate three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, 3 μM TSA and 50 mM NAM). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion. HPLC Fractionation The tryptic peptides were fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Thermo Betasil C18 column (5 μm particles, 10 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated with a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0) over 60 min into 60 fractions. Then, the peptides were combined into 10 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging. Kcr Peptides Enrichment Tryptic peptides were dissolved in NETN buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0) and then incubated with antibody beads (PTM Bio Inc, Hangzhou) at a ratio of 15 µL beads per milligram of protein at 4 °C overnight. The antibody beads were washed four times with NETN buffer and twice with ddH2O. The Kcr peptides were then eluted by adding elution buffer of 0.1% TFA. The eluted peptides were cleaned with C18 ZipTips (Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s instructions, followed by analysis with LC-MS/MS. LC-MS/MS Analysis The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 26 min, 23% to 35% in 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using MaxQuant with integrated Andromeda search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against swissprot database (20203 sequences) concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 4 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification, lysine crotonylation modification and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for modified peptides was set > 40.

### Publication Abstract
Previously, we reported that chromodomain Y-like (CDYL) acts as a crotonyl-coenzyme A hydratase and negatively regulates histone crotonylation (Kcr). However, the global CDYL-regulated crotonylome remains unclear. Here, we report a large-scale proteomics analysis for protein Kcr. We identify 14,311 Kcr sites across 3734 proteins in HeLa cells, providing by far the largest crotonylome dataset. We show that depletion of CDYL alters crotonylome landscape affecting diverse cellular pathways. Specifically, CDYL negatively regulated Kcr of RPA1, and mutation of the Kcr sites of RPA1 impaired its interaction with single-stranded DNA and/or with components of resection machinery, supporting a key role of RPA1 Kcr in homologous recombination DNA repair. Together, our study indicates that protein crotonylation has important implication in various pathophysiological processes.

### Keywords
Cdyl;crotonylation; rpa1;dna repair

### Affiliations
zhejiang scientific technology universitiy
Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research (Ministry of Education), Beijing Key Laboratory of Protein Posttranslational Modifications and Cell Function, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Peking University Health Science Center, Beijing 100191, China

### Submitter
xiaonan fu

### Lab Head
Dr Jing Liang
Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research (Ministry of Education), Beijing Key Laboratory of Protein Posttranslational Modifications and Cell Function, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Peking University Health Science Center, Beijing 100191, China


