### Accession
PXD011483

### Title
Protein disaggregation by HSP101

### Description
Proteins that are vital to cell survival can become unfolded during heat stress, leading to the formation of toxic aggregates. Molecular chaperones, proteases and autophagic pathways are required to protect cells from the accumulation of protein aggregates. Small Heat Shock Proteins (sHSPs) form a first line of defense by binding to unfolding proteins to prevent irreversible protein aggregation and the complex is rapidly sequestered in stress granules during heat stress recovery. HSP101 subsequently accumulates on the surface of these insoluble foci to mediate protein disaggregation. The dynamics of this process is consistent between different cell types but indicates that protein homeostasis varies particularly between shoot and root cells. Immunoblot analysis revealed that a substantial portion of proteins present in these foci have ubiquitin moieties and protein disaggregation is necessary prior to proteasomal degradation. Co-immuno precipitation of HSP101 revealed an interaction with the 26S proteasome and localization studies revealed that HSP101 and RPN1 (Proteasome regulatory particle) initially accumulate in distinct cytosolic foci during heat stress but co-localize in the same foci during heat stress recovery which could spatiotemporal facilitate the degradation of the aggregated ubiquitinated proteins. To determine which proteins are degraded by the proteasome after disaggregation, we catalogued 620 proteins that are resolubilized by HSP101 during heat stress recovery. GO-annotation analysis revealed a significant enrichment for RNA-binding proteins, UBC13-MMS2 complex, transcription factors and ubiquitin-protein ligases. None of these proteins were preferentially targeted by the proteasome, indicating that ubiquitination occurs on a broad range of proteins and is important for the clearance of a diverse array of proteins.

### Sample Protocol
For each sample, 0.7 gm of plant tissue was harvested and a crude protein extract prepared using 1.0 ml protein isolation buffer (25 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 200 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA, 0.1% Triton X-100, 5 mM ε-amino-N-caproic acid, and 1 mM benzamidine). Crude protein samples kept on ice whenever possible throughout the procedure. Protein concentrations were determined using a Coomassie Brilliant Blue dye binding assay. After grinding the sample using a mortar and pestle, samples were further homogenized with a Cole-Parmer PTFE glass tissue grinder for 1 min on ice. The crude protein extract was transferred to a microcentrifuge tube, and 500 l was used for separation into soluble and insoluble fractions, while 300 l (total fraction) was added to 100 l 4x SDS sample buffer (8% w/v SDS, 46% v/v glycerol, 20% v/v beta-mercaptoethanol, 250 mM Tris pH 6.8 and 0.01% w/v Bromophenol blue) to monitor total protein content. Samples that were further processed for mass spectrometry analysis were kept separated and processed as described below. For the isolation of the insoluble protein fraction, samples were spun in a tabletop centrifuge at 16,100g for 15 mins at 4˚C. The supernatant was removed and 300 l was added to 100 l 4x SDS sample buffer for immunoblot analysis. To facilitate resuspending the pellet fraction and to make the washing of the insoluble fraction more effective, 0.1 g of quartz sand (Sigma-Aldrich) was added to the pellet fraction and samples were washed six times with 1 ml protein isolation buffer. For each wash, the pellet was resuspended by pipetting and vortexing, and the samples were subsequently centrifuged at 16,100g for 15 min. After the washes, the insoluble fraction was washed once more in 25 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5. The pellet fraction was resuspended in 2x sample buffer creating a total volume of 500ul. Samples were spun for 30s at 1,500g and the soluble fraction was transferred to a new microcentrifuge tube. Alternatively, for the samples that were prepared for mass spectrometry analysis, Triton X-100 was excluded in the last two washing steps and further processed as described below. 150 µl of each sample was precipitated in 4:1:3 (v/v) methanol/chloroform/water and collected by centrifugation. The pellet was reconstituted in the original extraction buffer and precipitated again using the same protocol. The resulting pellets were vacuum dried in a Speed Vac™ centrifugal evaporator (Savant Instruments) and resuspended into 100 µl of 8 M urea, reduced for 1-hr at 22 °C with 10 mM dithiothreitol, followed by alkylation with 20 mM iodoacetamide for 1-hr. The reaction was quenched with 20 mM dithiotreitol, diluted with 900 µl of 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate and digested overnight at 37°C with 0.5 µg of sequencing-grade modified porcine trypsin (Promega).  The peptides were acidified with 10% trifluoroacetic acid pH<3 and vacuum dried to a final volume of ~250 µl, and desalted using a 100 µl Bond Elut OMIX C18 pipette tip (Agilent Technologies) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  The peptides were eluted in 50 µl of 75% acetonitrile and 0.1% acetic acid, vacuum dried, and resuspended in 20 µl 5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Nano-scale LC separation of the tryptic peptides was performed using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 Rapid Separation system equipped with a 75 µm x 25 cm Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 column (Thermo Fisher Scientific), in combination with a 2-hr linear 4% to 36% acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid and a flow rate of 250 nl/min. Eluted peptides were analyzed online by a Q Exactive Plus spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in the positive ESI mode.  Data-dependent acquisition of full MS scans (mass range of 380-1500 m/z) at a resolution of 70,000 was collected, with the automatic gain control (AGC) target set to 3 x 106, and the maximum fill time set to 200 msec. High-energy collision-induced dissociation fragmentation of the 15 strongest peaks was performed with an intensity threshold of 4 x 104 counts and an isolation window of 3.0 m/z, and excluded precursors that had unassigned, +1, +7, +8, or >+8 charge states.  MS/MS scans were conducted at a resolution of 17,500, with an AGC target of 2 x 105 and a maximum fill time of 100 msec.  Dynamic exclusion was performed with a repeat count of 2 and an exclusion duration of 30 sec, while the minimum MS ion count for triggering MS/MS was set to 4 x 103 counts.  Each sample was analyzed in quadruplicate to enable broad coverage; the first two runs were performed without an exclusion list, while the third and fourth runs were performed with an exclusion list containing the 5,000 most abundant peptides that were detected in the first two runs, to increase sample coverage.  Raw files with and without exclusion lists were merged, resulting in two technical replicates per sample.  A digest of cytochrome C (Thermo Fischer Scientific) was analyzed every 18th run to monitor sensitivity and retention time drift.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS datasets were queried by Proteome Discoverer (version 2.0.0.802; Thermo Fisher Scientific) against the Arabidopsis protein database (TAIR10_PEP_20101214_UPDATED; http:/www.arabidopsis.org) supplemented with a list of common protein contaminants.  Peptides were assigned by SEQUEST HT (Eng, McCormack et al. 1994), allowing a maximum of 2 missed tryptic cleavages, a minimum peptide length of 6, a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, and fragment mass tolerances of 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines and oxidation of methionine were specified as static and dynamic modifications, respectively.  An FDR of 0.01 (high confidence) and 0.05 (medium confidence) validated peptide spectral matches.  Label-free quantification based on MS1 precursor ion intensity was performed in Proteome Discoverer with a minimum Quan value threshold set to 0.0001 for unique peptides; the “3 Top N” peptides were used for area calculation

### Publication Abstract
Stressful environments often lead to protein unfolding and the formation of cytotoxic aggregates that can compromise cell survival. The molecular chaperone heat shock protein (HSP) 101 is a protein disaggregase that co-operates with the small HSP (sHSP) and HSP70 chaperones to facilitate removal of such aggregates and is essential for surviving severe heat stress. To better define how HSP101 protects plants, we investigated the localization and targets of this chaperone in Arabidopsis (<i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i>). By following HSP101 tagged with GFP, we discovered that its intracellular distribution is highly dynamic and includes a robust, reversible sequestration into cytoplasmic foci that vary in number and size among cell types and are potentially enriched in aggregated proteins. Affinity isolation of HSP101 recovered multiple proteasome subunits, suggesting a functional interaction. Consistent with this, the GFP-tagged 26S proteasome regulatory particle non-ATPase (RPN) 1a transiently colocalized with HSP101 in cytoplasmic foci during recovery. In addition, analysis of aggregated (insoluble) proteins showed they are extensively ubiquitylated during heat stress, especially in plants deficient in HSP101 or class I sHSPs, implying that protein disaggregation is important for optimal proteasomal degradation. Many potential HSP101 clients, identified by mass spectrometry of insoluble proteins, overlapped with known stress granule constituents and sHSP-interacting proteins, confirming a role for HSP101 in stress granule function. Connections between HSP101, stress granules, proteasomes, and ubiquitylation imply that dynamic coordination between protein disaggregation and proteolysis is required to survive proteotoxic stress caused by protein aggregation at high temperatures.

### Keywords
Insoluble proteins, Arabidopsis

### Affiliations
University of Massachussetts Amherst
Washington University in Saint Louis

### Submitter
Fionn McLoughlin

### Lab Head
Dr Elizabeth Vierling
University of Massachussetts Amherst


