### Accession
PXD000159

### Title
SIRT6 and SIRT7 binding proteome

### Description
To find the SIRT6 and SIRT7 binding proteins, we expressed V5-tagged SIRT6 and SIRT7 and pulled down this protein with anti-V5 agarose affinity gel. Sirtuins are a family of NAD-dependent deacetylases which deacetylate not only histones but also a wide range of target proteins. Sirtuins are conserved from yeast to mammal, and are known to regulate many processes such as cellular metabolism, apoptosis, cellular senescence, cell cycle, and organism-level aging. Among the members of sirtuins showing different subcellular localization, SIRT1, SIRT6 and SIRT7 are localized in nucleus. Whereas many functions and interacting proteins of SIRT1 have been studied, functions of SIRT6 and SIRT7 are not extensively revealed yet. Since it is important to understand the molecular function of SIRT6 and SIRT7, we here aimed to identify interacting proteins in mammalian cells.<br>Extra primary submitter: <a href="mailto:nglee@postech.ac.kr" target="_top">Namgyu Lee</a>, Department of Life Sciences, Pohang University of Science and Technology, Pohang, 790-784, Republic of Korea
<br>Lab head: <a href="mailto:kchoi@postech.ac.kr" target="_top">Kwan Yong Choi</a>, Department of Life Sciences and Division of Integrative Biosciences and Biotechnology, Pohang University of Science and Technology, Pohang, 790-784, Republ ic of Korea

### Sample Protocol
Affinity purification and nano-liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry were used for exploring novel SIRT6 and SIRT7-interacting partners which were validated by co-immunoprecipitation, immunoblot and confocal microscopy. Taken together, our study has identified novel SIRT6 and SIRT7-interacting proteins. 

### Data Protocol
Bioinformatics pipeline: We performed peak list generation of MS data, and identification/quantification of peptides and proteins from three technical replicates of LC-MS/MS data using MaxQuant quantification tool with Andromeda search engine (version 1.3.0.5) (Cox and Mann, 2008; Cox et al., 2009; Cox et al., 2011). Top 10 peaks per 100 Da were used for analysis. Enzyme specificity for trypsin was used. The minimal peptide length was six amino-acids, and we allowed two mis-cleavages. Variable modification options were used for the oxidation of methionine (15.995 Da), and carbamidomethylation of cysteine (57.021 Da). The tolerance was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.8 Da for fragment ions. SwissProt database (Homo sapiens reference proteome set, release 2013_01, 20,226 entries), to which contaminants and reverse sequences were added. For peptide and protein identification the one percent false discovery rate (FDR) was determined by accumulating 1% of reverse database hits. In the case of identified peptides that are all shared between two proteins, these are combined and reported as one protein group. For comparison between samples we used label-free quantification with a minimum of two ratio counts to determine the normalized protein label-free quantification (LFQ) intensity (Luber et al., 2010).

### Publication Abstract
Sirtuins are NAD(+) -dependent deacetylases that regulate a range of cellular processes. Although diverse functions of sirtuins have been proposed, those functions of SIRT6 and SIRT7 that are mediated by their interacting proteins remain elusive. In the present study, we identified SIRT6- and SIRT7-interacting proteins, and compared their interactomes to investigate functional links. Our interactomes revealed 136 interacting proteins for SIRT6 and 233 for SIRT7 while confirming seven and 111 proteins identified previously for SIRT6 and SIRT7, respectively. Comparison of SIRT6 and SIRT7 interactomes under the same experimental conditions disclosed 111 shared proteins, implying related functional links. The interaction networks of interactomes indicated biological processes associated with DNA repair, chromatin assembly, and aging. Interactions of two highly acetylated proteins, nucleophosmin (NPM1) and nucleolin, with SIRT6 and SIRT7 were confirmed by co-immunoprecipitation. NPM1 was found to be deacetylated by both SIRT6 and SIRT7. In senescent cells, the acetylation level of NPM1 was increased in conjunction with decreased levels of SIRT6 and SIRT7, suggesting that the acetylation of NPM1 could be regulated by SIRT6 and SIRT7 in the aging process. Our comparative interactomic study of SIRT6 and SIRT7 implies important functional links to aging by their associations with interacting proteins. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifiers PXD000159 and PXD000850 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD000159, http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD000850).

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Sirt7, Sirt6

### Affiliations
Department of Life Science

### Submitter
Dae-Kyum Kim

### Lab Head


