### Accession
PXD009324

### Title
3D-Printed Device for Consistent and High-Throughput Peptide Sample Clean-up Using StageTips

### Description
Mass spectrometry (MS) is a fundamental technology for the study of proteomics. A core technique for MS analysis is solid-phase extraction (SPE) for the removal of contaminants and sample concentration, and StageTips are one of the most commonly used devices used for SPE in modern proteomics workflows. Here, we detail a device that can accommodate up to 96 StageTips enabling high-speed centrifugal-based processing of StageTips, including collection into PCR tubes, or 96-well plates, simplifying the processing of samples for MS analysis. The device can be rapidly and economically manufactured using a 3D printer employing fused deposition modelling.  We show that high impact polystyrene (HIPS) is a particularly suitable material for building this device, providing good chemical resistance and is able to withstand high centrifugal speeds to enable repeated use.  We provide detailed schematics as well as the corresponding CAD files for the community, enabling reproduction of the device on any common 3D printer model. Using an optimized protocol, we show that our tip spinner device provides similar peptide identifications and comparable inter-sample consistency than previously established centrifugation-based cleanup on individual StageTips. As such, this apparatus facilitates greater throughput in  sample preparation for mass spectrometry, without detracting from sample quality.

### Sample Protocol
Protein digestion and peptide clean up  MCF-10A cells (ATCC, Virginia, USA) were cultured in DMEM containing 10% FCS at 37oC with 10% CO2 until 95% confluent. Cultures were lysed in 8 M urea/100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0) and proteins digested with LysC (1:100 ratio) for 2 h at 37oC. Subsequently, the urea was diluted to 2 M using 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0) and trypsin was added at a 1:100 ratio. The digest was allowed to proceed overnight at 37oC and was stopped by the addition of 10% TFA to 1% final concentration. Peptides were desalted using 500 mg tC18 Sep-pak Vac cartridges (Waters, Massachusetts, USA). Eluted peptides were dried using GeneVac EZ2 and the resulting peptides were resuspended in 5% formic acid. C18 StageTips were generated as described above. For clean-up in the tip spinner (Figure 1), StageTips were inserted into a holder and placed in the top, which was then stacked onto the wash-bottom containing a regular 96-well microtiter plate to collect the equilibration solutions, sample flow-through and washes (as per Figure 1a). Each tip was wetted with 100 L of 100% acetonitrile and centrifuged at 1,000 x g for 1 min. Following wetting, each StageTip was equilibrated with 100 L of 0.1% TFA in H2O and centrifuged as above for 2 min. Each equilibrated tip was loaded with 100 L of MCF-10A digest sample (300 ng of peptides) in 1% TFA and centrifuged as above for 2 min. Each tip was washed with 100 L of 0.1% TFA and centrifuged as above for 2 min. For elution of peptides, the wash-bottom was exchanged with a bottom with a holder supporting an unskirted PCR plate that has been trimmed to fit (as per Figure 1b). To elute, 100 L of 50% acetonitrile and 0.1% TFA was added to each tip and centrifuged as above for 5 min. Samples in the PCR plate were dried using a GeneVac EZ-2 (Genevac, Ipswick, UK) using the HPLC setting at 45oC. 10 L of 5% formic acid was added to each sample for subsequent LC-MS/MS analysis. For the tube-based StageTip clean-up, StageTips were produced as above, and solvents and samples were added in the same order and quantity as above. 3D printed tube adaptors were placed in 2 mL tubes and centrifuged using an Eppendorf 5430R centrifuge at 1000 x g at room temperature for the same times as above. Eluted samples were dried and resuspended as above for LC-MS/MS. The CAD design file for the tube adapters is included as Supplementary file 5 and the tube adaptors were printed with HIPS at maximum infill as described above for the tip spinner). LC-MS/MS and analysis of spectra – Using a Thermo Fisher Dionex RSLCnano UHPLC, peptides in 5% (vol/vol) formic acid (injection volume 3 μL) were directly injected onto a 45 cm x 75 um C18 (Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany, 1.9 μm) fused silica analytical column with a ~10 μm pulled tip, coupled online to a nanospray ESI source. Peptides were resolved over gradient from 5% acetonitrile to 40% acetonitrile over 60 min with a flow rate of 300 nL min−1. Peptides were ionized by electrospray ionization at 2.3 kV. Tandem mass spectrometry analysis was carried out on a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher) using HCD fragmentation. The data-dependent acquisition method used acquired MS/MS spectra of the top 10 most abundant ions at any one point during the gradient.

### Data Protocol
RAW data were analysed using the quantitative proteomics software MaxQuant24 (http://www.maxquant.org, version 1.5.7.0), and the MaxQuant output have also been uploaded to the ProteomeXchange Consortium under the same identifier. This version of MaxQuant includes an integrated search engine, Andromeda25. Peptide and protein level identification were both set to a false discovery rate of 1% using a target-decoy based strategy. The database supplied to the search engine for peptide identifications was human Swissprot database downloaded on the 30th September 2017, containing 42,170 protein sequence entries. Mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm for precursor ions and MS/MS mass tolerance was 20 ppm. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin (cleavage C-terminal to Lys and Arg) with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages permitted. Deamidation of Asn and Gln, oxidation of Met, pyro-Glu (with peptide N-term Gln) and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. N-ethyl malamaide on Cys was searched as a fixed modification. We used the MaxLFQ algorithm for label-free quantitation, integrated into the MaxQuant environment24,26. Processed data was plotted using Tableau (version 10.0.2), and Pearson correlation coefficients were calculated using the R software package (version 3.3).

### Publication Abstract
Intermittent fasting (IF) increases lifespan and decreases metabolic disease phenotypes and cancer risk in model organisms, but the health benefits of IF in humans are less clear. Human plasma derived from clinical trials is one of the most difficult sample sets to analyze using mass spectrometry-based proteomics due to the extensive sample preparation required and the need to process many samples to achieve statistical significance. Here, we describe an optimized and accessible device (Spin96) to accommodate up to 96 StageTips, a widely used sample preparation medium enabling efficient and consistent processing of samples prior to LC-MS/MS. We have applied this device to the analysis of human plasma from a clinical trial of IF. In this longitudinal study employing 8-weeks IF, we identified significant abundance differences induced by the IF intervention, including increased apolipoprotein A4 (APOA4) and decreased apolipoprotein C2 (APOC2) and C3 (APOC3). These changes correlated with a significant decrease in plasma triglycerides after the IF intervention. Given that these proteins have a role in regulating apolipoprotein particle metabolism, we propose that IF had a positive effect on lipid metabolism through modulation of HDL particle size and function. In addition, we applied a novel human protein variant database to detect common protein variants across the participants. We show that consistent detection of clinically relevant peptides derived from both alleles of many proteins is possible, including some that are associated with human metabolic phenotypes. Together, these findings illustrate the power of accessible workflows for proteomics analysis of clinical samples to yield significant biological insight.

### Keywords
96-well, Stagetip, 3d-printed

### Affiliations
The University of Sydney
The University of Sydney, School of Life and Environmental Sciences, Charles Perkins Centre, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.

### Submitter
Mark Larance

### Lab Head
Dr Mark Larance
The University of Sydney, School of Life and Environmental Sciences, Charles Perkins Centre, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.


