### Accession
PXD035256

### Title
mTORC2 interactome and localization determine aggressiveness of high-grade glioma cells through association with gelsolin.

### Description
The mTOR complex 2 (mTORC2) has been implicated as a key regulator of glioblastoma cell migration. However, the roles of mTORC2 in the migrational control process have not been entirely elucidated. Here we elaborate that mTORC2 is crucial for GBM cell motility. Inhibition of mTORC2 resulted in impaired cell movement, affecting microfilaments and microtubules' functions. Later, we quantitatively characterized the mTORC2 interactome using affinity-purification mass spectrometry (AP-MS) in glioblastoma. We demonstrated that changes in cell migration ability alter mTORC2-associated proteins. These interacting proteins help determine the capability of glioma cell movement.

### Sample Protocol
1. Sample preparation 1.1 In-Gel Digestion Each gel slice was further cut into small pieces (1 mm3), then washed in 50% acetonitrile (ACN) in 25 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer overnight to be fully destained and washed once again with the same buffer. All gels were dried down by vacuum centrifugation. Proteins in the gel slices were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 56˚C for 1 hour, followed by alkylation with 50 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 45 min. Tryptic digestion in 25 mM TEAB was performed using sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37 °C. Peptides were eluted with 50% ACN, and 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), dried with a SpeedVac, and stored at -20 °C before LC-MS/MS analysis.  1.2 GELFREE Fractionation and In-Solution Digestion For GELFREE separation, IP eluates were loaded into an 8% cartridge of the GELFREE 8100 system (Expedeon). Proteins were subsequently separated into 6 fractions. The collected samples were processed by eFASP protocol using a 30 kDa MWCO cut-off centrifugal filter (Millipore). Laemmli buffer was exchanged into 0.2% deoxycholic acid (DCA) in 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC). Proteins were trypsin-digested on the filter after reduction and alkylation. DCA was removed by acid precipitation using TFA and three rounds of ethyl aceAfter the purification step, additional wash steps were performed with the beads using wash buffer I (0.05% IGEPAL CA-630, 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris HCl pH 7.5, and 5% glycerol), followed by wash buffer II (150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris, and 5% glycerol) to remove trace amount of detergents. During the elution step, 25 μL of elution buffer I (2 M Urea, 50 mM Tris, and 1 mM DTT, 5 ng/µL trypsin) was incubated with the beads for 30 minutes for the partial digestion to release mTORC2 interactome from the antibodies. Proteins were then eluted and alkylated twice with 50 μL elution buffer II (2 M Urea, 50 mM Tris, and 5 mM Chloroacetamide) for 30 minutes. Finally, the supernatants of each sample were pooled in a new tube and incubated overnight at room temperature for complete digestion. The digestion was stopped by adding 2 μL trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). The final peptide clean-up step was performed using C18 StageTips (Empore) with Jupiter 300 (Phenomenex). Peptides were dried by SpeedVac (Thermo Scientific™) and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis.tate extraction. Peptides were dried with vacuum centrifugation and stored at -20 °C. 1.3 On-bead digestion 2. Mass spectrometry LC-MS/MS Tryptic peptides were analyzed by Thermo EASY-nanoLC™ 1000 System equipped with a 25-cm PepMap C18 EASY-Spray column and Q-Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific™) with a flow rate of 300 nL/min over a 90-minute gradient. The sample injection volume was 10 µL. Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid (FA) in water, and solvent B was 0.1% FA in acetonitrile. The gradient was ramped from 5 to15% solvent B for 45 minutes, then increased from 15 to 40% within 8 minutes, then jumped to 95% in 2 minutes, and remained at 95% for 5 minutes. Eluted peptides from nano-LC were sprayed into the orbitrap mass spectrometer at 2.5 kV capillary voltage in the positive ion mode and 255 °C capillary temperature. MS/MS was operated at Top 10 data-dependent acquisition (DDA). For the full MS scans, 75,000 resolution, target ion at 1 x 106, and maximum IT of 120 ms were chosen. For the MS/MS mode, 12,500 resolution, 3 x 104 AGC, and 25 ms maximum IT were set. An isolation window was set to 1.2 m/z. The normalized collision energy was used at 27. The dynamic exclusion was set at 30 seconds with dynamic fixed first mass.

### Data Protocol
1. LC-MS/MS Data Processing The proteome database search was performed by MaxQuant 1.6.2.1 with Andromeda algorithm (Cox and Mann, 2008; Cox et al., 2011) against human SwissProt proteome and common contaminants (http://www.thegpm.org/crap/) databases. The search allowed up to 2 missed cleavages with a mass tolerance of 10 ppm and 0.02 Da for MS1 and MS2, respectively. Carbamidomethylation (C) as static modification, oxidation (15.994915@M), phosphorylation (79.966331@S, T, Y) and ubiquitination (114.042927@K) as variable modifications, were included. The second peptide, dependent peptide, and match between runs were enabled. The match between runs feature was set at 0.7 min time window, 20 min alignment window. The false discovery rate (FDR) was controlled at 1%.  2. Label-Free Quantitative Proteomic Analysis Label-free quantitation (LFQ) by spectral counting was enabled without normalization in MaxQuant 1.6.2.1 program in the experiments requiring quantitative analyses. Statistical analysis was performed by Perseus 1.6.0.2 software (Tyanova et al., 2016) with no imputation. Proteins identified by site and reverse matches were removed. To quantify the relative changes of each identified protein, the spectral counting value of each condition was compared to another condition.

### Publication Abstract
mTOR complex 2 (mTORC2) has been implicated as a key regulator of glioblastoma cell migration. However, the roles of mTORC2 in the migrational control process have not been entirely elucidated. Here, we elaborate that active mTORC2 is crucial for GBM cell motility. Inhibition of mTORC2 impaired cell movement and negatively affected microfilament and microtubule functions. We also aimed to characterize important players involved in the regulation of cell migration and other mTORC2-mediated cellular processes in GBM cells. Therefore, we quantitatively characterized the alteration of the mTORC2 interactome under selective conditions using affinity purification-mass spectrometry in glioblastoma. We demonstrated that changes in cell migration ability specifically altered mTORC2-associated proteins. GSN was identified as one of the most dynamic proteins. The mTORC2-GSN linkage was mostly highlighted in high-grade glioma cells, connecting functional mTORC2 to multiple proteins responsible for directional cell movement in GBM. Loss of GSN disconnected mTORC2 from numerous cytoskeletal proteins and affected the membrane localization of mTORC2. In addition, we reported 86 stable mTORC2-interacting proteins involved in diverse molecular functions, predominantly cytoskeletal remodeling, in GBM. Our findings might help expand future opportunities for predicting the highly migratory phenotype of brain cancers in clinical investigations.

### Keywords
Ap-ms, Mtorc2 interactome, Glioblastoma, Gelsolin, Cell migration

### Affiliations
Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University
Center of Excellence in Systems Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University

### Submitter
Naphat Chantaravisoot

### Lab Head
Dr Trairak Pisitkun
Center of Excellence in Systems Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University


