### Accession
PXD018517

### Title
The RNF185/Membralin ubiquitin ligase complex is a new ERAD branch involved in the degradation of a distinct subset of integral membrane proteins.

### Description
The endoplasmic reticulum-associated degradation (ERAD) pathway is responsible for ubiquitin-mediated quality control of secretory and ER-resident proteins. In the present study, two short-lived ER integral membrane model proteins were used to screen a genome-wide CRISPR-Cas9 library, resulting in the identification of a new ERAD branch consisting of the RNF185/Membralin ubiquitin ligase complex.  Biochemical and affinity pull-down studies followed by mass spectrometry revealed that the ubiquitin-like domain containing proteins TMUB-1 and -2 are also part of the core complex being specifically enriched by RNF185/Membralin but not by other known ERAD factors like HRD1.  Genetic studies showed that the RNF185/Membralin complex control the degradation of endogenous integral membrane proteins, including TMUB2 itself and CYP51A1 from which the initial recombinant model protein was derived.

### Sample Protocol
Flp-In T-REx HEK293 (ThermoFischerScientific) clones were established using manufacturer’s guidelines. Affinity purification pull-down was carried out on 3xFLAG-tagged RNF185, Membralin and HRD1 and on endougenously mNG-tagged Membralin. Protein samples were FASP digested using LysC and trypsin proteases. Peptide samples from 3xFLAG- and mNG-tagged samples were separated by nano-flow reversed-phase liquid chromatography coupled to Q Exactive and Q Exactive HF Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific), respectively. The mass spectrometers were operated in a data-dependent mode; the 10 or 12 most intense precursor ions were submitted to fragmentation in the mNG and 3xFLAG samples, respectively.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched against the Uniprot human reference proteome database (UP000005640, retrieved 2019-07-02) using MaxQuant, version 1.6.3.4 using default parameters. False discovery rate for both protein and peptide matches was set at 1%. Data analysis was performed using Perseus software, version 1.5.5.3.

### Publication Abstract
Misfolded proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) are degraded by ER-associated degradation (ERAD). Although ERAD components involved in degradation of luminal substrates are well characterized, much less is known about quality control of membrane proteins. Here, we analyzed the degradation pathways of two short-lived ER membrane model proteins in mammalian cells. Using a CRISPR-Cas9 genome-wide library screen, we identified an ERAD branch required for quality control of a subset of membrane proteins. Using biochemical and mass spectrometry approaches, we showed that this ERAD branch is defined by an ER membrane complex consisting of the ubiquitin ligase RNF185, the ubiquitin-like domain containing proteins TMUB1/2 and TMEM259/Membralin, a poorly characterized protein. This complex cooperates with cytosolic ubiquitin ligase UBE3C and p97 ATPase in degrading their membrane substrates. Our data reveal that ERAD branches have remarkable specificity for their membrane substrates, suggesting that multiple, perhaps combinatorial, determinants are involved in substrate selection.

### Keywords
Endoplasmic reticulum-associated degradation (erad); e3 ligase rnf185; membralin; tmem259; tmub1; tmub2; ubiquitin

### Affiliations
Sir William Dunn School of Pathology University of Oxford United Kingdom
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Pedro Carvalho

### Lab Head
Dr Pedro Carvalho
Sir William Dunn School of Pathology University of Oxford United Kingdom


