### Accession
PXD012612

### Title
The HSP40 chaperone Ydj1/DnaJA1 drives amyloid beta toxicity

### Description
Amyloid beta 42 (Abeta42) is the principal trigger of neurodegeneration during Alzheimer’s disease (AD); however, the etiology of Abeta42 toxicity remains elusive. In a proteomic approach using a yeast model for intracellular Abeta42 toxicity, we here identify the HSP40 family member Ydj1, the yeast orthologue of human DnaJA1, as a crucial factor in Abeta42-mediated toxicity.

### Sample Protocol
Isolation of mitochondria from differentially SILAC labeled yeast strains followed by expression proteomics analysis.

### Data Protocol
The MS raw data files were processed by MaxQuant software (version 1.3.05; PMID: 19029910). A full length yeast uniprot database (version Jan. 2014) was employed containing the human Abeta42 sequence. Carbamidomethylcysteine was set as fixed modification, methionine oxidation and protein amino‐terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. SILAC 0/0 and 4/10 were used as quantification mode.

### Publication Abstract
Amyloid beta 42 (Abeta42) is the principal trigger of neurodegeneration during Alzheimer's disease (AD). However, the etiology of its noxious cellular effects remains elusive. In a combinatory genetic and proteomic approach using a yeast model to study aspects of intracellular Abeta42 toxicity, we here identify the HSP40 family member Ydj1, the yeast orthologue of human DnaJA1, as a crucial factor in Abeta42-mediated cell death. We demonstrate that Ydj1/DnaJA1 physically interacts with Abeta42 (in yeast and mouse), stabilizes Abeta42 oligomers, and mediates their translocation to mitochondria. Consequently, deletion of YDJ1 strongly reduces co-purification of Abeta42 with mitochondria and prevents Abeta42-induced mitochondria-dependent cell death. Consistently, purified DnaJ chaperone delays Abeta42 fibrillization in vitro, and heterologous expression of human DnaJA1 induces formation of Abeta42 oligomers and their deleterious translocation to mitochondria in vivo. Finally, downregulation of the Ydj1 fly homologue, Droj2, improves stress resistance, mitochondrial morphology, and memory performance in a Drosophila melanogaster AD model. These data reveal an unexpected and detrimental role for specific HSP40s in promoting hallmarks of Abeta42 toxicity.

### Keywords
Yeast, Alzheimer’s disease, Lc-ms/ms, Silac, Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Affiliations
Dr. Jörn Dengjel Department of Biology, University of Fribourg  Chemin du Musée 10, 1700 Fribourg, Switzerland  T  +41 26 300 8631                 E     joern.dengjel@unifr.ch
University of Fribourg

### Submitter
Joern Dengjel

### Lab Head
Dr Joern Dengjel
Dr. Jörn Dengjel Department of Biology, University of Fribourg  Chemin du Musée 10, 1700 Fribourg, Switzerland  T  +41 26 300 8631                 E     joern.dengjel@unifr.ch


