### Accession
PXD031683

### Title
Disease-associated KBTBD4 mutations in medulloblastoma elicit neomorphic ubiquitylation activity to promote CoREST degradationDisease-associated KBTBD4 mutations in medulloblastoma elicit neomorphic ubiquitylation activity to promote CoREST degradation

### Description
E3 ubiquitin ligases of the Cullin RING Ligase (CRL) family assemble into multiprotein complexes to diversify substrate adaptors and ensure selectivity in substrate engagement for degradation. Here we show a novel mechanism whereby mutations in substrate adaptors can drive neo-substrate degradation in cancer. KBTBD4 is a CRL3 substrate adaptor harbouring recurrent indel mutations in a subset of non-WNT/non-SHH medulloblastomas. We show that these mutations, arising in the substrate recognition domain of KBTBD4, promote the recruitment and ubiquitylation of the REST Corepressor (CoREST), which forms a complex to modulate chromatin accessibility and transcriptional programmes. We observe that this neomorphic activity of KBTBD4 mutants induces changes in epigenetic markers and significant alterations in transcription, diverting normal cellular programmes towards increased stemness. These results highlight mutation-driven neomorphic E3 ligase activity as a previously unrecognised mechanism in tumorigenesis, with implications for medulloblastoma pathogenesis and treatment.

### Sample Protocol
FLAG-KBTBD4 wild type or mutants along with an empty vector control were transfected into HEK293T cells at 60% confluency with PEI-MAX 40kDA (11 µg DNA with 66ug PEI per 15cm dish). 40 h post transfection, cells were treated with 100 nM MLN4924 (Calbiochem, 951950-33-7) for 4 h before harvesting. Cells were then washed with ice-cold PBS and lysed in lysis buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol, 0.1% NP-40, 1 mM EDTA and 5 mM MgCl2) containing protease inhibitors (Sigma-Aldrich), beta-glycerolphosphate, DTT, PMSF and okadaic acid. 25 mg protein extract per sample was precleared with protein A agarose (Invitrogen), and then immunoprecipitated by ANTI-FLAG M2 Affinity Gel (Sigma-Aldrich). Flag-KBTBD4 and its interactors were eluted with 3xFLAG peptide (Sigma-Aldrich). The FLAG eluates were first incubated with 5 mM DTT for 30 min for reduction and then with 20 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min for alkylation. Then the proteins in the eluates were precipitated by methanol/chloroform to remove organic impurities. Precipitated proteins were reconstituted in 20 mM HEPES pH 8, 8 M urea, and then diluted to 20 mM HEPES pH 8, 1 M urea before adding immobilised trypsin resin (Pierce 20230) for 16 h at 37°C. Trypsin digestion was terminated by adding 1% TFA and trypsin resin removed by centrifugation. Tryptic-digested peptides were desalted using the SOLA HRP SPE cartridges (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and dried using a vacuum spinner (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  LC‐MS/MS and data analysis Dried tryptic-digested peptides were re-constituted in 15 µL of LC-MS grade water containing 1% acetonitrile and 0.1% TFA. Samples were analysed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLC coupled to a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides were loaded onto a trap column (PepMapC18; 300µm x 5mm, 5 µm particle size, Thermo Fischer Scientific) for 1 min at 20 μL/min flowrate. The loaded peptides were separated on a 50 cm-long chromatographic EasySpray column (ES803, Thermo Fischer Scientific) with a gradient of 2 to 35% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid and 5% DMSO at 250 nL/min flow rate for 60 min. The Q-Exactive was operated in a data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode to automatically switch between full MS-scan and MS/MS acquisition. Survey-full MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyser over an m/z window of 380-1500 and at a resolution of 70k (AGC target at 3e6 ions). Prior to MSMS acquisition, the top fifteen most intense precursor ions (charge state >=2) were sequentially isolated in the Quad (m/z 1.6 window) and fragmented on the HCD cell (normalised collision energy of 28). MS/MS data were obtained in the orbitrap at a resolution of 17.5K with a maximum acquisition time of 128 ms, an AGC target of 1e5 and a dynamic exclusion of 27 seconds.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were searched against the Human UniProt-SwissProt database (Jan 2018; containing 20,259 human sequences) using the Mascot data search engine. The search was carried out by enabling the Decoy function, whilst selecting trypsin as enzyme (allowing 1 missed cleavage), peptide charge of +2, +3, +4 ions, peptide tolerance of 10 ppm and MS/MS of 0.05 Da; #13C at 1; Carboamidomethyl (C) as fixed modification; and Deamidated (NQ), Oxidation (M), as a variable modification. MASCOT outputs were filtered using an ion score cut off of 20 and a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Medulloblastoma is the most common malignant brain tumour in children. Genomic studies have identified distinct disease subgroups: wnt/wingless (WNT), sonic hedgehog (SHH), and non-WNT/non-SHH, comprising group 3 and group 4. Alterations in WNT and SHH signalling form the pathogenetic basis for their subgroups, whereas those for non-WNT/non-SHH tumours remain largely elusive. Recent analyses have revealed recurrent in-frame insertions in the E3 ubiquitin ligase adaptor Kelch Repeat and BTB Domain Containing 4 (KBTBD4) in cases of group 3/4 medulloblastoma. Critically, group 3/4 tumours with KBTBD4 mutations typically lack other gene-specific alterations, such as MYC amplification, indicating KBTBD4 insertion mutations as the primary genetic driver. Delineating the role of KBTBD4 mutations thus offers significant opportunities to understand tumour pathogenesis and to exploit the underpinning mechanisms therapeutically. Here, we show a novel mechanism in cancer pathogenesis whereby indel mutations in KBTBD4 drive its recognition of neo-substrates for degradation. We observe that KBTBD4 mutants promote the recruitment and ubiquitylation of the REST Corepressor (CoREST), which forms a complex to modulate chromatin accessibility and transcriptional programmes. The degradation of CoREST promoted by KBTBD4 mutation diverts epigenetic programmes inducing significant alterations in transcription to promote increased stemness of cancer cells. Transcriptional analysis of &gt;200 human group 3 and 4 medulloblastomas by RNA-seq, highlights the presence of CoREST and stem-like signatures in tumours with KBTBD4 mutations, which extend to a further sub-set of non-mutant tumours, suggesting CoREST alterations as a novel pathogenetic mechanism of wide relevance in groups 3 and 4. Our findings uncover KBTBD4 mutation as a novel driver of epigenetic reprogramming in non-WNT/non-SHH medulloblastoma, establish a novel mode of tumorigenesis through gain-of-function mutations in ubiquitin ligases (neo-substrate recruitment) and identify both mutant KBTBD4 and CoREST complexes as new druggable targets for improved tumour-specific therapies.

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Epigenetic remodelling, Kbtbd4, Medulloblastoma, Corest

### Affiliations
Target Discovery Institute, NDMRB
Cancer Research UK and Medical Research Council Oxford Institute for Radiation Oncology, Department of Oncology, University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 7DQ, UK

### Submitter
iolanda Vendrell

### Lab Head
Dr Vincenzo D'Angiolella
Cancer Research UK and Medical Research Council Oxford Institute for Radiation Oncology, Department of Oncology, University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 7DQ, UK


