### Accession
PXD047447

### Title
Membrane Vesicles in Acidithiobacillia class extreme acidophiles: influence on collective behaviours of 'Fervidacidithiobacillus caldus'

### Description
Membrane Vesicles (MVs) are envelope derived extracellular sacs that perform a broad diversity of physiological functions in bacteria. While considerably studied in pathogenic microorganisms, the roles, relevance and biotechnological potential of MVs from environmental bacteria are less well established.  Acidithiobacillaceae family bacteria are active players in the sulfur and iron biogeochemical cycles in extreme acidic environments and drivers of the leaching of mineral ores contributing to acid rock/mine drainage (ARD/AMD) and industrial bioleaching. One key aspect to such rol is the ability of these bacteria to tightly interact with the mineral surfaces and extract electrons and nutrients to support their chemolithotrophic metabolism. Despite recent advances in the characterization of acidithiobacilli biofilms and extracellular matrix (ECM) components, our understanding of its architectural and mechanistic aspects remains scant. In this work, we show that vesiculation is a common phenomenon in distant members of the Acidithiobacillaceae family, and further explore the role of MVs in multicellular colonization behaviours using `Fervidacidithiobacillus caldus´ as bacterial model. Production of MVs in `F. caldus´ occurred in both planktonic cultures and biofilms formed on sulfur surfaces, where MVs appeared individually or in chains resembling Tube-Shaped Membranous Structures (TSMSs) important for microbial communication. Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry data and bioinformatic analysis of the MVs-associated proteome revealed that F. caldus MVs were enriched in proteins involved in cell-cell and cell-surface processes, and largely typified the MVs as outer MVs (OMVs). Finally, microbiological assays showed that amendment of `F. caldus´ MVs to cells and/or biofilms affects collective colonizing behaviours relevant to the ecophysiology and applications of these acidophiles providing grounds for their exploitation in mining biotechnologies.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were subjected to chloroform methanol extraction, dried on a rotary concentrator and resuspended in 30 μL 8 M Urea and 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Later, they were reduced with DTT to a final concentration of 20 mM in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate and incubated for 1 h at room temperature. Samples were alkylated by adding iodoacetamide to a final concentration of 20 mM in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate and incubated for 1 h in darkness at room temperature. Subsequently, the samples were diluted 8 times with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Digestion was performed with sequencing grade Trypsin (#V5071, Promega) in a 1:50 ratio of protease:protein (mass / mass) during 16 h at 37°C, reaction was stopped by pH adding 10 % formic acid. Then, the samples were submitted to a Clean-up Sep-Pack C18 Spin Columns (Waters Milford) according with the supplier recommendations (For reversed-phase sorbents, preconditioning of the sorbent with an organic solvent (i.e., methanol, acetonitrile, isopropanol, or tetrahy- drofuran). Subsequently, the clean peptides were dried in a rotary concentrator (hypervac vc2200 coupled to hyoercool hc3110) at 1,000 rpm overnight at 10°C.  For nLC-MS/MS, 200 ng of the peptides obtained were injected into a nanoUHPLC nanoElute (Bruker Daltonics) coupled to a timsTOF Pro mass spectrometry (`Trapped Ion Mobility Spectometry – Quadrupole Time Of Flight Mass Spectrometer`, Bruker Daltonics) using an Aurora UHPLC column (25 cm x 75 μm ID, 1.6 μm C18, IonOpticks, Australia). The liquid chromatography was performed using a 90-min gradient of 2 % to 35 % Buffer B (0.1 % Formic acid – Acetonitrile). The collection of results was carried out using TimaControl 2.0 software (Bruker Daltonics) under 10 PASEF cycles, with a mass range of 100-1700 m/z ionization of the capillary 1,500 V and a temperature of 180°C in the capillary, TOF frequency 10 KHz at 50,000 FWHM resolution.

### Data Protocol
Data obtained was analysed with the PEAKS Studio X + software (Bioinformatics Solutions). Mass tolerance parameters of 50 ppm were used, using monoisotopic masses, and Ionic fragments of 0.05 Da. Trypsin was used as enzyme, specific digestion mode and a maximum of 2 cleavage losses per peptide (`missed cleavage per peptides`). The database used for the identification of the `F. caldus´ proteome (strain ATCC 51756/DSM 8584/KU) was available from Uniprot (proteome ID UP000005522, 2,867 entries). FDR estimation was included through a decoy database. As a filter, an FDR ≥ 1% (significance ≥ 20 in PEAKS Studio X+) and 1 minimum unique peptide per protein were used for the ID. For semiquantitative analysis of proteins, the exponentially modified protein abundance index (emPAI) was calculated according (Ishihama et al., 2005; Shinoda et al., 2010). Protein sequences were assessed for orthologs and conserved domains against the Cluster of Orthologous Groups of proteins (COG) database using PSI-BLAST (Altschul et al., 1997), and Conserved domains database using CDD (Marchler-Bauer et al., 2017), respectively. Protein location was predicted by using SignalP 5.0 Server (Almagro Armenteros et al., 2017), Transmembrane HMM (TMHMM) (Krogh et al., 2001) and pSort (Gardy et al., 2003).

### Publication Abstract
Membrane vesicles (MVs) are envelope-derived extracellular sacs that perform a broad diversity of physiological functions in bacteria. While considerably studied in pathogenic microorganisms, the roles, relevance, and biotechnological potential of MVs from environmental bacteria are less well established. <i>Acidithiobacillaceae</i> family bacteria are active players in the sulfur and iron biogeochemical cycles in extremely acidic environments and drivers of the leaching of mineral ores contributing to acid rock/mine drainage (ARD/AMD) and industrial bioleaching. One key aspect of such a role is the ability of these bacteria to tightly interact with the mineral surfaces and extract electrons and nutrients to support their chemolithotrophic metabolism. Despite recent advances in the characterization of acidithiobacilli biofilms and extracellular matrix (ECM) components, our understanding of its architectural and mechanistic aspects remains scant. Using different microscopy techniques and nano-tracking analysis we show that vesiculation is a common phenomenon in distant members of the <i>Acidithiobacillaceae</i> family, and further explore the role of MVs in multicellular colonization behaviors using '<i>Fervidacidithiobacillus caldus</i>' as a bacterial model. Production of MVs in '<i>F. caldus</i>' occurred in both planktonic cultures and biofilms formed on sulfur surfaces, where MVs appeared individually or in chains resembling tube-shaped membranous structures (TSMSs) important for microbial communication. Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry data and bioinformatic analysis of the MV-associated proteome revealed that '<i>F. caldus</i>' MVs were enriched in proteins involved in cell-cell and cell-surface processes and largely typified the MVs as outer MVs (OMVs). Finally, microbiological assays showed that amendment of '<i>F. caldus</i>' MVs to cells and/or biofilms affects collective colonizing behaviors relevant to the ecophysiology and applications of these acidophiles, providing grounds for their exploitation in biomining.

### Keywords
Outer membrane vesicles (omvs), Adhesins, Surface colonization, Biofilm, Swarming, Tube-shaped membranous structures (tsmss), Sulfur oxidation, Acidithiobacillus

### Affiliations
Centro Científico y Tecnológico de Excelencia Ciencia & Vida, Fundación Ciencia & Vida, Santiago, Chile.  Instituto Milenio de Oceanografía (IMO), Universidad de Concepción, Concepción, Chile.
MELISA Institute

### Submitter
Guillermo Nourdin

### Lab Head
Dr Matías Castro
Centro Científico y Tecnológico de Excelencia Ciencia & Vida, Fundación Ciencia & Vida, Santiago, Chile.  Instituto Milenio de Oceanografía (IMO), Universidad de Concepción, Concepción, Chile.


