### Accession
PXD004222

### Title
D10 Stereocilia Membrane Enrichment

### Description
Through its activity in stereocilia, MYO7A (myosin VIIA) is essential for hair cell function in the inner ear. Utilizing multiple stages of immunoaffinity enrichment, we have developed a strategy that allows us to partially purify stereocilia membranes from thousands of chick inner ears and isolate low-abundance MYO7A protein complexes from those membranes. The D10 stereocilia membrane enrichment protocol involves density centrifugation steps and immuno-enrichment of stereocilia using the D10 antibody, directed against the major stereocilia transmembrane protein PTPRQ. The data in this submission document the effectiveness of the enrichment procedure.

### Sample Protocol
We carried out two enrichment experiments, each with ~1000 ears’ worth of E19-E20 chicken inner ears. Ears were homogenized, subjected to low-speed centrifugation, sucrose gradient density centrifugation, D10 antibody binding using magnetic beads with covalently attached antibody, extraction, and solubilization using RIPA buffer. Samples from each step were processed with the eFASP method to generate peptides. Two technical replicates for each of the two experiments was carried out; peptides were separated, detected, and quantified using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
We used MaxQuant, with its built-in Andromeda search engine, to match peptides to mouse protein database entries, to assemble peptides into proteins, and the quantify those proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Stereocilia, Hair bundles, Auditory, Hair cells, Chicken, Inner ear, Vestibular

### Affiliations
Oregon Hearing Research Center Oregon Health & Science University Portland  OR  97239
Oregon Hearing Research Center

### Submitter
Peter Barr-Gillespie

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Barr-Gillespie
Oregon Hearing Research Center Oregon Health & Science University Portland  OR  97239


