### Accession
PXD002021

### Title
Exploiting the multiplexing capabilities of tandem mass tags for high-throughput estimation of cellular protein abundances by mass spectrometry

### Description
The generation of dynamic models of biological processes critically depends on the determination of precise cellular concentrations of biomolecules. Measurements of system-wide absolute protein levels are particularly valuable information in systems biology. Recently, mass spectrometry based proteomics approaches have been developed to estimate protein concentrations on a proteome-wide scale. However, for very complex proteomes, fractionation steps are required, increasing samples number and instrument analysis time. As a result, the number of full proteomes that can be routinely analyzed is limited. Here we combined absolute quantification strategies with the multiplexing capabilities of isobaric tandem mass tags to determine cellular protein abundances in a high throughput and proteome-wide scale even for highly complex biological systems, such as a whole human cell line. We generated two independent data sets to demonstrate the power of the approach regarding sample throughput, dynamic range, quantitative accuracy and proteome coverage in comparison to existing mass spectrometry based strategies.

### Sample Protocol
Human cells, HEK 293 cell line [27], were exponentially grown in DMEM media with 10% FCS for 8 days to 90% confluence. Cells were collected by centrifugation at 400g at 4°C, washed twice with 2 ml ice-cold PBS buffer, harvested by centrifugation at 500g and the pellet was snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C until further processing. For S. pombe, cultures of wild type 972 h+ cells were grown in YE medium [28] at 25˚C to concentrations of 3.5x106 cells/ml and around 10^8 cells of each sample were collected by centrifugation at 2,000xg, washed twice with PBS buffer and harvested by centrifugation at 2,000xg. Cells were resuspended in 100µl lysis buffer (100 mM ammoniumbicarbonate, 2% sodium deoxycholate, 5mM TCEP), disrupted by strong indirect sonication (100% amplitude, 0.5 cycle, 2 × 10 s) in a Vial Tweeter (Hielscher) and reduced for 15min at 95°C. Since the reducing reagent can interfere with the accuracy of standard protein colorimetric assays (e.g. Bradford, BCA), a novel reducing reagent tolerant BCA assay was used to determine accurate protein concentrations of the samples (Reducing Agent-Compatible BCA Assay, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Notably, the tandem mass tag labeling efficiency critically depends on accurate peptide amounts to achieve complete labeling and therefore, the BCA measurement should be done in triplicates and with various sample amounts to obtain protein concentrations of high confidence. In the meantime, samples were alkylated with 10mM iodoacetamide for 30min in the dark at 25°C. After quenching the reaction with 12mM N-acetyl-cysteine, the proteins were proteolyzed for 4h at 37°C using sequencing-grade Lys-C (Wako Chemicals) at 1/200 w/w. Then, the samples were diluted with 100mM ammoniumbicarbonate buffer to a final sodium deoxycholate concentration of 1% and further digested by incubation with sequencing-grade modified trypsin (1/50, w/w; Promega, Madison, Wisconsin) over night at 37°C. The sequential double Lys-C/trypsin digestion has been recently shown to be more efficient in generating fully cleaved peptides than tryptic digest alone [29] and is therefore recommended for all protein samples analyzed by LC-MS. Sodium deoxycholate is one of a few LC-MS compatible detergents, since it precipitates after acidification [30] using 2M HCl to a final concentration of 50mM and can then be easily removed by centrifugation at 10,000g for 15min before LC-MS analysis. All peptide samples were then desalted by C18 reversed-phase spin columns according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Macrospin, Harvard Apparatus), separated in aliquots of 25 ug peptides, dried under vacuum and stored at -80ºC until further use. For label-free single dimension 1D-LC/MS analysis, samples were solubilized in solvent A (98% water, 2% acetonitrile, 0.15% formic acid) at a concentration of 0.5 ug/ul and 2 ul were injected per LC-MS run.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw-files were converted to the mascot generic file (mgf) format using the msconvert tool (part of ProteoWizard, version 3.0.4624 (2013-6-3)). Using the MASCOT algorithm (Matrix Science, Version 2.4.0), the mgf files were searched against a decoy database containing normal and reverse sequences of the predicted entries of Homo sapiens (SwissProt, www.uniprot.org, release date 30/10/2014) or Schizosaccharomyces pombe (ftp://ftp.sanger.ac.uk/, release date 10/08/2011) including commonly observed contaminants (in total 41,250 sequences for Homo sapiens and 10,584 for S. pombe) generated using the SequenceReverser tool from the MaxQuant software (Version 1.0.13.13). The precursor ion tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment ion tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. The search criteria were set as follows: full tryptic specificity was required (cleavage after lysine or arginine residues unless followed by proline), 2 missed cleavages were allowed, carbamidomethylation (C), TMT6plex (K and peptide n-terminus) were set as fixed modification and oxidation (M) as a variable modification. Next, the database search results were imported to the Scaffold Q+ software (version 4.3.2, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) and the protein false identification rate was set to 1% based on the number of decoy hits. Specifically, peptide identifications were accepted if they could achieve an FDR less than 1.0% by the scaffold local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could achieve an FDR less than 1.0% and contained at least 1 identified peptide. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet program [34]. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters. Acquired reporter ion intensities in the experiments were employed for automated quantification and statically analysis using a modified version of our in-house developed SafeQuant R script [29]. The single steps include correction of reporter ion intensities for isotopic impurities according to the manufacturer’s instructions followed by summing the reporter ion intensities for each peptide and protein identification, global normalization across all acquisition runs and ratio calculation and statistical analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Mass spectrometry based proteomics has become the method of choice for pinpointing and monitoring thousands of post-translational modifications, predominately phosphorylation sites, in cellular signaling studies. Critical for achieving this analytical depth is the enrichment of phosphorylated peptides prior to liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (MS) analysis. Despite the high prevalence of this modification, the numbers of identified phosphopeptides lag behind those achieved for unmodified peptides, and the cause for this still remains controversial. Here, we use an effective phosphatase protocol that considerably improves global ionization efficiency and, therefore, the overall sensitivity and coverage of standard phosphoproteomics studies. We demonstrate the power of our method on the model system of Salmonella-infected macrophages by extending the current quantitative picture of immune signaling pathways involved in infection. In combination with sensitive, label-free targeted MS for phosphorylation site validation, our approach is ideally suited to exploring cellular phosphorylation based signaling networks in high detail.

### Keywords
Hek cells, S. pombe, Absolute quantification, Tmt, Ibaq

### Affiliations
Proteomics Core Facility
University of Basel, Biozentrum, 4056 Basel, Switzerland

### Submitter
Alexander Schmidt

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Schmidt
University of Basel, Biozentrum, 4056 Basel, Switzerland


