### Accession
PXD024085

### Title
Proteomic analysis of Streptomyces coelicolor vesicles

### Description
Streptomyces coelicolor is a model organism for the study of Streptomyces, a genus of Gram-positive bacteria that undergoes a complex life cycle and produces an enormous repertoire of bioactive metabolites and extracellular enzymes. This study investigated the production and characterization of membrane vesicles (MVs) in liquid cultures of S. coelicolor M145 from a structural and biochemical point of view using microscopic, physical and -omics analyzes. Two main populations of MVs, F3 and F4 MVs, with different size and cargo were isolated and purified. S. coelicolor MV cargo is complex and contains many “messages” such as proteins and metabolites. A total of 166 proteins involved in cell metabolism and differentiation, molecular processing and transport was identified in MVs. In particular, a subset of these proteins was protected from the degradation after proteinase K treatment, indicating their localization inside the vesicles. Vesicle proteome includes many stress response proteins which also play an important role in S. coelicolor morpho- physiological differentiation. Moreover, MVs packaged with an array of metabolites such as antibiotics, vitamins, amino acids and components of carbon metabolism. The analysis of S. coelicolor MV cargo will provide informations to elucidate their biogenesis and functions

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial strain and culturing conditions In this study, Streptomyces coelicolor A3 (2) M145 SCP1- SCP2- was used. S. coelicolor seed culture was prepared by inoculating an amount of about 108 spores in 30 mL of J Medium, for 30 h, at 30 °C, and under rotation at 200 rpm. Biomass was harvested by centrifugation at 3000 x g for 10 min, at 4 °C; after two washes with sterile water, it was resuspended in 30 mL of sterile water. Then, 10 mL of the bacterial suspension were inoculated in 500 mL of Minimal Medium (MM) and incubated at 30 °C, for 136 h, under rotation at 180 rpm. Isolation and puriﬁcation of Membrane Vesicles MVs were isolated and purified according to Prados-Rosales et al. (2014). Briefly, the culture supernatant was prepared by centrifuging the bacterial culture at 4,000 x g for 10 min, at 4 °C, and then it was filtered through a 0.2 µm-pore size ﬁlter. The filtrate was concentrated using an Amicon Ultraﬁltration system having a 100 kDa-exclusion ﬁlter. The concentrated supernatant was subjected to sequential centrifugations at 4,000 and 15,000 x g for 15 min, at 4 °C. The remaining supernatant was ultracentrifugated at 100000 x g (SW 40 Ti Rotor, Beckman Coulter) for 1 h, at 4 °C. The MVs pellet was suspended in Dulbecco's phosphate-buffered saline (DPBS) without Ca2+ and Mg2+ ions (Gibco), and mixed with the OptiPrep solution (Sigma–Aldrich) to obtain a final 35% v/v OptiPrep solution. The sample was loaded into a 14 mL ultracentrifugation tube and 2 mL of OptiPrep solutions with decreasing concentration (from lower to upper: 30 – 25 – 20 – 15 – 10% v/v) were layered on top. Hence, samples were ultracentrifugated at 140,000 x g for 16 h, at 4 °C, using a swinging rotor (SW 40 Ti Rotor, Beckman Coulter). Then, all the six gradient fractions (F1-F6) were collected proceeding from the top, diluted with DPBS and finally ultracentrifugated at 38,400 x g (SW 55 Ti Rotor, Beckman Coulter) for 2 h, at 4 °C. Pellets were suspended in 0.2 mL of sterile DPBS and aliquots were streaked on Soya Flour Mannitol medium (SFM) and MM plates to verify their sterility; they were stored at -80°C until use. Fractions were examined by 12% T SDS-PAGE and silver staining for the evaluation of the corresponding protein content. Proteomic analysis Two biological replicates of PK-treated and untreated MVs fractions F3 and F4 were subjected to 12% T SDS-PAGE. In particular, aliquots of 40 microliters were used for each sample and protein patterns were revealed by colloidal Coomassie blue staining. Each lane was cut in 16 slices (indicated with letters from a to p), which were thoroughly triturated, in-gel reduced with dithiothreitol and S-alkylated with iodoacetamide, and finally digested with trypsin. Peptides were extracted from gel particles using 5% v/v formic acid/acetonitrile (1:1 v/v) and digest solutions were concentrated and desalted before mass spectrometry analysis by using microZip TipC18 pipette tips (Millipore). Peptide mixtures were analyzed in triplicate using a nanoLC-ESI-Q-Orbitrap-MS/MS platform, consisting of a Q ExactivePlus Orbitrap mass spectrometer equipped with a Nanospray Flex ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) connected to an UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano-liquid chromatographer (Dionex, USA). Protein digests were separated on a 15 cm length x 75 mm inner diameter column packed with Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 resin (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Mobile phases were 0.1% v/v formic acid in water (eluent A) and 0.1% v/v formic acid in acetonitrile/water 4/1 v/v (eluent B), running at a total flow rate of 300 nL/min. A linear gradient started 20 min after sample loading; eluent B ramped from 3% to 40% v/v over 40 min, and from 40% to 80% v/v over 5 min. The mass spectrometer operated in data-dependent scan mode, allowing the acquisition of all MS spectra in the positive ionization mode within a scan range of m/z 375-1500. Up to 8 of the most intense precursor ions in MS were selected for higher energy collisional ion fragmentation (HCD). A nominal resolving power at 70,000 full width at half-maximum (FWHM), an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3 x 106 ions, and a maximum ion injection time (IT) of 80 ms were set to generate precursor spectra. MS/MS fragmentation spectra were obtained by applying a normalized collision energy of 28%, a nominal resolving power of 17,500 FWHM, an AGC target of 5 x 104 ions, a maximum IT of 110 ms, and an isolation window of m/z 1.2. In order to prevent repeated fragmentation of the most abundant precursor ions, a dynamic exclusion of 20 s was applied. Singly charged precursor ions or with more than six charges were excluded from the fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS raw data were subjected to protein database searches using Proteome Discoverer vs 2.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA), enabling the database search by Mascot engine (Matrix Science, UK) vs 2.4.2 using the following criteria: UniProtKB protein database for S. coelicolor (downloaded in April 2018) including the most common protein contaminants plus proteinase K. Carbamidomethylation of Cys as static modification and oxidation of Met as variable modification were used. Precursor ions mass tolerance was fixed to ± 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance to ± 0.05 Da. Maximum number of missed cleavages was set to 2. All other parameters were kept as default. Protein candidates were considered identified when at least two peptides were sequenced and the corresponding protein false discovery rate confidence was “High”. Since large proteins after proteolytic digestion tend to generate more peptides/mass spectra than small ones, the normalized spectral abundance factor (NSAF) constitutes a useful tool to take into account the effect of protein length on spectral count. Indeed, NSAF is defined as the number of spectral counts (SpC) identifying a protein, divided by the protein’s length (L), divided by the sum of SpC/L for all proteins in the experiment. Hence, NSAF values enable the comparison of abundance of individual proteins in multiple independent samples. The ratio between NSAF values of untreated MVs and PK-treated MVs for the same protein constituted a strong indication for protein localization in the vesicles. In particular, proteins with NSAF ratio > 2 were categorized as associated with vesicle-surface; when the value was < 1.5, proteins were categorized as internal; proteins with NSAF ratios in the range between 1.5 and 2 were not reliably assigned to a localization.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Streptomyces coelicolor vesicles, Proteomics, Lc-msms analysis

### Affiliations
ISPAAM-CNR
Laboratory of Molecular Microbiology and Biotechnology, STEBICEF Department, University of Palermo, 90128 Palermo, Italy

### Submitter
Giovanni Renzone

### Lab Head
Dr Anna Maria Puglia
Laboratory of Molecular Microbiology and Biotechnology, STEBICEF Department, University of Palermo, 90128 Palermo, Italy


