### Accession
PXD007058

### Title
C4PR_LIV Evaluation of Parameters for Confident Phosphorylation Site Localization using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid Mass Spectrometer

### Description
Confident identification of sites of protein phosphorylation by mass spectrometry (MS) is essential to advance understanding of phosphorylation-mediated signaling events. However, development of novel instrumentation requires that methods for MS data acquisition and its interrogation be evaluated and optimized for high throughput phosphoproteomics. Here, we compare and contrast eight MS acquisition methods on the novel tribrid Orbitrap Fusion MS platform, using both a synthetic phosphopeptide library and a complex phosphopeptide-enriched cell lysate. As well as evaluating multiple fragmentation regimes (HCD, EThcD and neutral loss triggered ET(ca/hc)D), and analyzers for MS/MS (orbitrap (OT) versus ion trap (IT)), we also compare two commonly used bioinformatics platforms, Andromeda with PTM-score, and MASCOT with ptmRS, for confident phosphopeptide identification and, crucially, phosphosite localization. Our findings demonstrate that optimal phosphosite identification is achieved using HCD fragmentation and high resolution orbitrap-based MS/MS analysis, employing MASCOT/ptmRS for data interrogation. Although EThcD is optimal for confident site localization for a given PSM, the increased duty cycle compared with HCD compromises the numbers of phosphosites identified. Finally, our data highlights that a charge-state dependent fragmentation regime, and a multiple algorithm search strategy, are likely to be of benefit for confident large-scale phosphosite localization.

### Sample Protocol
U2OS T-Rex Flp-in cells were maintained in DMEM supplemented with 10% (v/v) fetal bovine serum, penicillin (100 U/mL), streptomycin (100 U/mL) and L-glutamine (2 mM), at 37 °C, 5% CO2. Once 80 % confluence was reached, cells were washed with PBS and released with trypsin (0.05 % (v/v)). Cells were centrifuged at 220 x g and lysed with 500 μL 0.25 % (w/v) RapiGest SF (Waters, UK) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate with 1x PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor cocktail tablet (Roche). The lysate was sonicated briefly and centrifuged at maximum speed for 20 minutes. Protein concentration was determined using the Bradford assay and 4 mg was set aside for protein digestion. Disulfide bonds were reduced by addition of 3 mM DTT in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and heated at 60°C for 15 minutes. The resulting free cysteine residues were alkylated with 14 mM iodoacetamide (dark, room temperature, 45 minutes) and excess iodoacetamide quenched by addition of DTT to a final concentration of 7 mM.  Proteins were digested overnight with trypsin (2% (w/w); Promega) at 37 °C.  RapiGest SF hydrolysis was induced by addition of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to 1 % (v/v) and incubated at 37 °C for up to 2 h, 400 rpm. Insoluble hydrolysis product was removed by centrifugation (13,000 x g, 15 min, 4°C)15. Peptides were desalted using C18 macro columns (Harvard Apparatus, Cambridge, UK). Briefly, columns were conditioned with 100 % methanol and washed with H2O and 1% (v/v) TFA. Peptides were loaded on to the column and centrifuged for 1 minute at 110 x g. The flow-through was re-applied a total of 5 times and peptides were eluted with 80% (v/v) MeCN and 1% (v/v) TFA and dried to completion by vacuum centrifugation. Dried peptides were dissolved in loading buffer (80 % (v/v) MeCN, 5 % (v/v) TFA, 1 M glycolic acid), sonicated and incubated with 5 mg titanium dioxide resin (5:1 (w/w) beads:protein; GL Sciences) at 1400 rpm for 10 minutes on a thermomixer. Wash steps were performed sequentially with 150 μL loading buffer; 150 μL wash buffer 1 (80% (v/v) MeCN, 1% (v/v) TFA) and 150 μL wash buffer 2 (10 % (v/v) MeCN, 0.2% (v/v) TFA). Phosphopeptides were eluted with increasing pH (1 % (v/v) ammonium hydroxide and 5 % (v/v) ammonium hydroxide) and dried to completion by vacuum centrifugation9. Peptides were re-solubilized in 240 μL of 96 % (v/v) H2O, 3 % (v/v) MeCN, 1 % (v/v) TFA. Reversed-phase capillary HPLC separations were performed using an UltiMate 3000 nano system (Dionex) coupled in-line with a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Synthetic phosphopeptide standards (~10 pmol, split in to 5 pools to separate phosphoisomers and thus ensure confidence in phosphosite localization) and  6 µL enriched phosphopeptides (equivalent to 100 μg of digested cell lysate) were loaded onto the trapping column (PepMap100, C18, 300 μm x 5 mm), using partial loop injection, for seven minutes at a flow rate of 9 μL/min with 2% (v/v) MeCN, 0.1% (v/v) TFA and then resolved on an analytical column (Easy-Spray C18 75 µm x 500 mm, 2 µm bead diameter column) using a gradient of 96.2% A (0.1% (v/v) formic acid (FA)): 3.8% B (80%  (v/v) MeCN, 0.1%  (v/v) FA) to 50% B over 97 minutes at a flow rate of 300 nL/min.. MS(/MS) data were acquired on an Orbitrap Fusion as follows: all MS1 spectra were acquired over m/z 350-2000 in the orbitrap (120K resolution at 200 m/z for high-low strategies and 60K resolution at 200 m/z for high-high strategies); automatic gain control (AGC) was set to accumulate 2E5 ions, with a maximum injection time of 50 ms.  Data-dependent tandem MS analysis was performed using a top speed approach (cycle time of 3 s) with multiple fragmentation methods tested (see Table 1 for summary of parameters). The normalized collision energy was optimized at 32% for HCD. MS2 spectra were acquired with a fixed first m/z of 100. The intensity threshold for fragmentation was set to 50,000 for orbitrap methods and 5000 for ion trap methods and included charge states 2+ to 5+. A dynamic exclusion of 60 seconds was applied with a mass tolerance of 10 ppm. For neutral loss triggered ETcaD/EThcD methods, fragmentation was enabled for all precursor ions exhibiting neutral loss of mass 97.9763 Da or 80 Da with a mass tolerance of 20 ppm for orbitrap data and 0.5 m/z for ion trap data, where the neutral loss ion was one of the top 10 most intense MS2 ions. ETD calibrated parameters were applied. AGC was set to 10,000 with a maximum injection time set at 50 ms for IT and 70 ms for OT; ETD reaction time was charge-dependent.

### Data Protocol
Data was processed using either Thermo Proteome Discoverer (v. 1.4) in conjunction with MASCOT (v 2.6), or with Andromeda integrated in MaxQuant (version 1.5.8.0) using default settings unless otherwise specified. To address the requirement of MASCOT for centroided data, raw data files were converted to mzML format in order to perform MS2 de-isotoping prior to processing with MASCOT through the Proteome Discoverer (PD) pipeline. Peak lists were searched against a database containing either the synthetic phosphopeptide sequences or the human UniProt database (201512; 20187 sequences). Parameters were set as follows: MS1 tolerance of 10 ppm; MS2 mass tolerance of 0.01 Da for orbitrap detection, 0.6 Da for ion trap detection; enzyme specificity was set as trypsin with 2 missed cleavages allowed; no enzyme was defined for the phosphopeptide library processing; carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification; phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine, and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications. Non-fragment filtering was applied to ETD scans to remove the precursor peak within a 4 Da window and remove charged reduced precursor and neutral loss ions from charged reduced precursor ions within a 2 Da window. ptmRS was run in PhosphoRS mode using diagnostic fragment ions and analyzer specific fragment ion tolerances as previously defined in the search. For EThcD data, 'Treat all spectra as EThcD' option was set to 'True'. Data was filtered to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) on PSMs using automatic decoy searching with Mascot and a target-decoy search with Andromeda.

### Publication Abstract
Confident identification of sites of protein phosphorylation by mass spectrometry (MS) is essential to advance understanding of phosphorylation-mediated signaling events. However, the development of novel instrumentation requires that methods for MS data acquisition and its interrogation be evaluated and optimized for high-throughput phosphoproteomics. Here we compare and contrast eight MS acquisition methods on the novel tribrid Orbitrap Fusion MS platform using both a synthetic phosphopeptide library and a complex phosphopeptide-enriched cell lysate. In addition to evaluating multiple fragmentation regimes (HCD, EThcD, and neutral-loss-triggered ET(ca/hc)D) and analyzers for MS/MS (orbitrap (OT) versus ion trap (IT)), we also compare two commonly used bioinformatics platforms, Andromeda with PTM-score, and MASCOT with ptmRS for confident phosphopeptide identification and, crucially, phosphosite localization. Our findings demonstrate that optimal phosphosite identification is achieved using HCD fragmentation and high-resolution orbitrap-based MS/MS analysis, employing MASCOT/ptmRS for data interrogation. Although EThcD is optimal for confident site localization for a given PSM, the increased duty cycle compared with HCD compromises the numbers of phosphosites identified. Finally, our data highlight that a charge-state-dependent fragmentation regime and a multiple algorithm search strategy are likely to be of benefit for confident large-scale phosphosite localization.

### Keywords
Mascot/ptmrs, Phosphoproteomics, Andromeda/ptmscore, Mass spectrometry, Orbitrap fusion

### Affiliations
University of Liverpool
Institute of Integrative Biology University of Liverpool Crown Street, Liverpool  L69 7ZB

### Submitter
Samantha Ferries

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Claire E Eyers
Institute of Integrative Biology University of Liverpool Crown Street, Liverpool  L69 7ZB


