### Accession
PXD030924

### Title
Protein profiling of WERI RB1 and etoposide resistant WERI ETOR reveals new insights to overcome topoisomerase inhibitor resistance in retinoblastoma

### Description
Chemotherapy resistance is one of the reasons for the loss of the eye in retinoblastoma (RB) pa-tients. RB chemotherapy resistance has been investigated in different cell culture models like WERI RB1. Furthermore, chemotherapy resistant RB subclones like the etoposide resistant WERI ETOR cell line have been established to improve understanding of chemotherapy resistance in RB. Ob-jective of this study was to characterize the cell line models of an etoposide sensitive WERI RB1 and its etoposide resistant subclone WERI ETOR by proteomics analysis. Subsequently, quantitative proteomic data served for correlation analysis with known drug perturbation profiles. . WERI RB1 and WERI ETOR were cultured and prepared for quantitative mass spectrometry. Comparative proteomic profiling was performed with electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry in data-independent acquisition mode (SWATH). The raw SWATH files were processed using neural networks in library free mode along with machine learning algorithms. Pathway enrichment was performed using the REACTOME pathway resource and correlated to the Molecular Signature Database (MSigDB) hallmark gene set collections for functional annotation. Also, a drug connec-tivity analysis using the L1000 database was used to correlate the mechanism-of-action (MOA) for different anticancer reagents to WERI RB1 / WERI ETOR signatures. A total 4,756 proteins were identified across all samples which revealed a distinct clustering between groups. Of these pro-teins, 64 proteins were significantly altered (q < 0.05 & log2FC |>2|, 22% higher in WERI ETOR). Pathway analysis showed an enriched metabolic pathway for retinoid metabolism and transport pathway in WERI ETOR and for sphingolipid de novo biosynthesis in WERI RB1. In addition, this study showed similar protein signatures of topoisomerase inhibitors and WERI ETOR as well as of ATPase inhibitors, acetylcholine receptor antagonists and VEGFR inhibitors and WERI RB1. In this study, WERI RB1 and WERI ETOR were characterized as a cell line model for chemotherapy re-sistance in RB by using data-independent mass spectrometry. The global proteome revealed the activation of sphingolipid de novo biosynthesis in WERI RB1 and potential treatment options for etoposide resistant RB.

### Sample Protocol
The PierceTM Mass Spec Sample Prep Kit for Cultured Cells (Thermo Scientific, Wal-tham, MA, USA) was used for the preparation and precipitation of peptides according to the manufacturer´s instructions. 106 cells were first lysed with a Cell Lysis Buffer and DNA and RNA were enzymatically digested using Nuclease for Cell Lysis. Total protein concentration was subsequently determined using the fluorescence-based EZQTM Protein Quantitation Kit (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Briefly, protein samples were spotted and fixed onto an assay paper and then stained with the proprietary fluorescence reagent. Fluorescence visualization was done with the TyphoonTM FLA 9000 laser scanner (GE Healthcare, Chicago, IL, USA). Subse-quently, 50µg proteins were reduced, alkylated and precipitated. An enzymatic protein digestion was then carried out by adding the Digestion Buffer and Lys-C Protease (xxx) to the acetone-precipitated protein pellet . The samples were then frozen at -80°C with Tryp-sin Storage Solution to stop digestion. The samples were lyophilized, resuspended in solvent A (0.1% FA in 2% ACN) to a final concentration of 1 µg/ml, and were loaded into the HPLC (Thermo Scientific, Wal-tham, MA, USA). The reconstituted peptides were first desalted on a trap column (Luna, 5 μm C18 (2), 20 x 0.3 cm; Phenomenex, Torrance, CA, USA) and separated on an analytical column (LC Column, 3 μm C18 (2), 150mm x 0.3mm, Phenomenex, Torrance, CA, USA) using a multi-step gradient of solvent B (80% ACN, 0.08% FA) in solvent A for 90 min at a flow rate of 5µL/min. Mass spectra were acquired on a Triple ToF 5600+ (ScieX, Framing-ham, MA, USA) in a data-independent (SWATH) acquisition mode. The working parame-ters of the mass spectrometer were: Ion Spray Voltage Floating at 5200V; ion source gas, 12; ion source gas, 20; curtain gas, 40; source temperature, 350°C. The optimized declus-tering potential (DP) was set at 100 V. The SWATH acquisition parameters were as follow: one 0.49965sec MS scan (m/z 350–1.250), followed by 100 variable Q1 windows with the size range 3-135.4 Da.

### Data Protocol
The raw SWATH files were processed using the software tool DIA-NN (Da-ta-Independent Acquisition by Neural Networks) developed by Vadim Demichev et al. (20). The “match between runs” function was used to first develop a spectral library from data-independent acquisition data. The precursor ion generation settings were set to pep-tide length of 7-52 amino acids, maximum number of missed cleavages to one and max-imum number of variable modifications to zero. The precursor and fragment ion m/z range were 350-1.250 m/z. A full analysis log including the used processing settings is in-cluded in Figure S1. Precursors that passed the FDR cut-off of 0.01 were grouped to protein-/gene-groups. For those groups consisting of multiple identifiers, the protein groups were reduced to the first listed identifier. The duplicates from a protein-group resembling were removed. The filtered dataset was further processed in the software tool Perseus (21). MVs were imputed by random numbers drawn from a normal distribution with a width of 0.3 and down shift of 1.8 (default settings) and total matrix imputation mode. The resulting data matrix was used for subsequent statistical analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Chemotherapy resistance is one of the reasons for eye loss in patients with retinoblastoma (RB). RB chemotherapy resistance has been studied in different cell culture models, such as WERI-RB1. In addition, chemotherapy-resistant RB subclones, such as the etoposide-resistant WERI-ETOR cell line have been established to improve the understanding of chemotherapy resistance in RB. The objective of this study was to characterize cell line models of an etoposide-sensitive WERI-RB1 and its etoposide-resistant subclone, WERI-ETOR, by proteomic analysis. Subsequently, quantitative proteomics data served for correlation analysis with known drug perturbation profiles. Methodically, WERI-RB1 and WERI-ETOR were cultured, and prepared for quantitative mass spectrometry (MS). This was carried out in a data-independent acquisition (DIA) mode. The raw SWATH (sequential window acquisition of all theoretical mass spectra) files were processed using neural networks in a library-free mode along with machine-learning algorithms. Pathway-enrichment analysis was performed using the REACTOME-pathway resource, and correlated to the molecular signature database (MSigDB) hallmark gene set collections for functional annotation. Furthermore, a drug-connectivity analysis using the L1000 database was carried out to associate the mechanism of action (MOA) for different anticancer reagents to WERI-RB1/WERI-ETOR signatures. A total of 4756 proteins were identified across all samples, showing a distinct clustering between the groups. Of these proteins, 64 were significantly altered (q &lt; 0.05 &amp; log2FC |&gt;2|, 22 higher in WERI-ETOR). Pathway analysis revealed the &#x201c;retinoid metabolism and transport&#x201d; pathway as an enriched metabolic pathway in WERI-ETOR cells, while the &#x201c;sphingolipid de novo biosynthesis&#x201d; pathway was identified in the WERI-RB1 cell line. In addition, this study revealed similar protein signatures of topoisomerase inhibitors in WERI-ETOR cells as well as ATPase inhibitors, acetylcholine receptor antagonists, and vascular endothelial growth factor receptor (VEGFR) inhibitors in the WERI-RB1 cell line. In this study, WERI-RB1 and WERI-ETOR were analyzed as a cell line model for chemotherapy resistance in RB using data-independent MS. Analysis of the global proteome identified activation of &#x201c;sphingolipid de novo biosynthesis&#x201d; in WERI-RB1, and revealed future potential treatment options for etoposide resistance in RB.

### Keywords
Chemotherapy resistance, Weri etor, Retinoblastoma, Mass spectrometry, Weri rb1

### Affiliations
Section for Translational Surgical Oncology and Biobanking, Department of Surgery, University of Lübeck and University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Campus Lübeck, Ratzeburger Allee 160, 23538 Lübeck Germany
Section for Translational Surgical Oncology and Biobanking, Department of Surgery, University of Luebeck & and University Hospital Clinic Schleswig-Holstein

### Submitter
Thorben Sauer

### Lab Head
Dr Timo Gemoll
Section for Translational Surgical Oncology and Biobanking, Department of Surgery, University of Luebeck & and University Hospital Clinic Schleswig-Holstein


