### Accession
PXD005589

### Title
Dessert banana vs plantain: characterization of allele specific protein isoforms that are correlated to the fruit maturation process

### Description
Dessert bananas have a soft texture and sweet taste at maturity. Plantain fruits belongs to Musa spp (AAB) and are known cooking bananas. This popular name is due to the fact that these fruits do keep a high amount of starch even after complete maturation and have a different flesh texture being not pleasant for fresh consumption. Plantains are a main starch food resource in African countries and India. Although a vital food source for big communities, studies about plantain are still scarce. The exploration of the biodiversity of the Musa gender can improve the breeding programs for many different problems, besides of a deeper knowledge about fruit development. We used here an easy and reproducible protocol for protein extraction and identification, resulting in the first fruit proteome of plantain species available until now. In addition we compared the results with the proteome from the dessert banana Cavendish (AAA). We identify in total 2390 proteins with false discovery rate of 0.2%. Genetically, both the dessert banana and the plantain are quite close but show a quite contrasting phenotype as mentioned above. The phenotype is undoubtedly associated to unique alleles. Using our in-house workflow for identifying allele specific peptides, we have found 98 candidate peptides to be unique for B genome and so encoded by a variety specific allele. From the 98 candidates we could confirm 59 mutations identified in the B genome. GO enrichment analysis of those B allele specific proteins showed that 20% of the proteins are related to sugar and/or starch metabolism. We hypothesize that the expression of B genome in plantain can be a key for the particular maturation process in plantain.

### Sample Protocol
For our experiment, five plantain fruits and five Cavendish fruits were bought in local supermarkets in Leuven/Belgium. Fruits were cleaned, separated from the peel,cut into thin slices and immersed immediately in liquid nitrogen. All samples where then submitted to lyophilization to water content of 2,5%. After drying, the samples were hermetically sealed and stored at room temperature until the proteomics analysis was performed.Protein extractions were performed by phenol extraction\ammoniun acetate precipitation.Twenty µg of proteins were digested with trypsin (manufacturer). The digested samples (0.5µg/5µL) were first injected in UPLC system and then in the Q Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
All data were acquired with Xcalibur 3.0.63 software (ThermoScientific). For protein identification, we sent the raw data to MASCOT version 2.2.06 (Matrix Science) against the Musa A-B database (76.220 proteins). The parameters used to search: parent tolerance of 10 PPM, fragment tolerance of 0.02 Da, variable modification was oxidation M, fixed modification was carbamidomethyl C and up to one missed cleavage for trypsin. Results from MASCOT were imported to Scaffold version 3.6.5. In Scaffold the threshold minimum 1 peptide  identified with 95% confidence.

### Publication Abstract
Proteomics has been applied with great potential to elucidate molecular mechanisms in plants. This is especially valid in the case of non-model crops of which their genome has not been sequenced yet, or is not well annotated. Plantains are a kind of cooking bananas that are economically very important in Africa, India, and Latin America. The aim of this work was to characterize the fruit proteome of common dessert bananas and plantains and to identify proteins that are only encoded by the plantain genome. We present the first plantain fruit proteome. All data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD005589. Using our in-house workflow, we found 37 alleles to be unique for plantain covered by 59 peptides. Although we do not have access (yet) to whole-genome sequencing data from triploid banana cultivars, we show that proteomics is an easily accessible complementary alternative to detect different allele specific SNPs/SAAPs. These unique alleles might contribute toward the differences in the metabolism between dessert bananas and plantains. This dataset will stimulate further analysis by the scientific community, boost plantain research, and facilitate plantain breeding.

### Keywords
Allele specific, Plantain, Banana breeding, Proteomic, Banana

### Affiliations
SYBIOMA: Facility for SYstems BIOlogy based MAss spectrometry, Leuven, Belgium Department of Biosystems, KULeuven, Willem Decroylaan 42 bus 2455- 3001 Leuven, Belgium.  Tel. +32(0)16-379311
KULeuven

### Submitter
Nadia  Campos

### Lab Head
Dr Sebastien Carpentier
SYBIOMA: Facility for SYstems BIOlogy based MAss spectrometry, Leuven, Belgium Department of Biosystems, KULeuven, Willem Decroylaan 42 bus 2455- 3001 Leuven, Belgium.  Tel. +32(0)16-379311


