### Accession
PXD009744

### Title
Differential Proteome Analysis of Human Neuroblastoma Xenograft Primary Tumors and Matched Spontaneous Distant Metastases

### Description
Metastasis formation is the major cause for cancer-related deaths and the underlying mechanisms remain poorly understood. In this study we describe spontaneous metastasis xenograft mouse models of human neuroblastoma used for unbiased identification of metastasis-related proteins by applying an infrared laser (IR) for sampling primary tumor and metastatic tissues, followed by mass spectrometric proteome analysis. IR aerosol samples were obtained from ovarian and liver metastases, which were indicated by bioluminescence imaging (BLI), and matched subcutaneous primary tumors. Corresponding histology proved the human origin of metastatic lesions. Ovarian metastases were commonly larger than liver metastases indicating differential outgrowth capacities. Among ~1,700 proteins identified at each of the three sites, 89 proteins were differentially regulated in ovarian metastases while 290 proteins were regulated in liver metastases. There was an overlap of 26 and 10 proteins up- and down-regulated at both metastatic sites, respectively, most of which were so far not related to metastasis such as LYPLA2, ACTL8, EIF4B, LGALS7, GFAP, and ELAVL4. Moreover, we established in vitro sublines from primary tumor and metastases and demonstrate differences in cellular protrusions, migratory/invasive potential and glycosylation. Summarized, this work identified several novel putative drivers of metastasis formation that are tempting candidates for future functional studies.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue ablation products captured on the glass fiber filter (laser ablation products of metastasis and primary tumor tissues) were extracted using 1 % sodium deoxycholate (SDC, extraction buffer) at pH 8 and 0.1 M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB). The sampling filters were incubated with the extraction buffer on a shaker for 10 min at 95 °C, followed by 5 min ultrasonication (Bandelin, Sonoplus 2200, Berlin, Germany, 6 cycles, 30 seconds). Proteins from cultured cells were extracted by adding extraction buffer and incubation on a shaker for 5 min at 95 °C, also followed by 5 min ultrasonication. Protein quantification was performed with a bichinonic acid assay (BCA) performed in accordance with the literature 22 (Tecan Spark, Männedorf, Switzerland). Tryptic digestion of 50 µg protein extract of each sample was performed in a 10 kDa microcentrifuge filter (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) in accordance with Wisniewski 23. Briefly, 2 x 500 µL of 6 M urea were added to the FASP filter and removed by centrifugation. Reduction and alkylation were performed adding 100 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 10 min at 56 °C followed by 300 mM iodacetamide (IAA) for 30 min in the dark. 425 µL of 100 mM NH4HCO3 followed by 0.5 µg trypsin were added to the sample and incubated for 16 hours at 37 °C. Tryptic digestion was stopped by centrifugation at 14000 x g for 20 minutes. The obtained digest was evaporated to complete dryness with a vacuum concentrator (SpeedVac™, Thermo scientific, Bremen) and stored at -20 °C. HPLC-grade water, methanol and acetonitrile were obtained from Merck (Darmstadt, Germany). Sequence-grade trypsin and resuspension buffer were purchased from Promega (Madison, USA). Urea, DTT, IAA and NH4HCO3 were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich (Munich, Germany). TEAB and the BCA Kit were preserved from Thermo Scientific (Bremen, Germany), and formic acid (FA) from Honeywell Fluka (Bucharest, Romania).

### Data Protocol
Raw data from LC-MS analysis were processed with Max Quant (Version 1.5.8.3) (PMID 19029910), identification performed with Andromeda against the human SwissProt database (www.uniprot.org, downloaded November 10, 2014, 20161 entries), the murine SwissProt database (downloaded February 16, 2017, 16750 entries) and a contaminant database with 298 entries.  The MaxQuant parameters were set as followed: the precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm, the fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da and two missed cleavages were allowed for peptide identification; an FDR of 1 % was given and a maximum of 5 modifications per peptide were allowed. As a fixed modification the carbamidomethylation on cysteine residues and as variable modifications the oxidation of methionine residues and the acetylation of protein N-terminals were set. The LFQ minimum ratio count was set to 1. Perseus (Version 1.6.0.2) statistical analysis of LFQ intensities was performed with at least three replicates from every sample group. Proteins only identified by site, reversed hits, contaminants and proteins matching exclusively with the murine database were removed. At least two unique peptides had to be found to identify a protein correctly. All values were transformed with the logarithm of 10 and the median was subtracted. Two categorical groups were created and two values in at least one group had to be valid for further steps. Missing values were replaced from normal distribution and a two sample t-test was processed with an FDR of 0.05. Received significantly regulated proteins with and at least 2-fold change were considered for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Metastasis formation is the major cause for cancer-related deaths and the underlying mechanisms remain poorly understood. In this study we describe spontaneous metastasis xenograft mouse models of human neuroblastoma used for unbiased identification of metastasis-related proteins by applying an infrared laser (IR) for sampling primary tumor and metastatic tissues, followed by mass spectrometric proteome analysis. IR aerosol samples were obtained from ovarian and liver metastases, which were indicated by bioluminescence imaging (BLI), and matched subcutaneous primary tumors. Corresponding histology proved the human origin of metastatic lesions. Ovarian metastases were commonly larger than liver metastases indicating differential outgrowth capacities. Among ~1,900 proteins identified at each of the three sites, 55 proteins were differentially regulated in ovarian metastases while 312 proteins were regulated in liver metastases. There was an overlap of 21 and 7 proteins up- and down-regulated at both metastatic sites, respectively, most of which were so far not related to metastasis such as LYPLA2, EIF4B, DPY30, LGALS7, PRPH, and NEFM. Moreover, we established in vitro sublines from primary tumor and metastases and demonstrate differences in cellular protrusions, migratory/invasive potential and glycosylation. Summarized, this work identified several novel putative drivers of metastasis formation that are tempting candidates for future functional studies.

### Keywords
Infrared laser ablation, Spontaneous metastasis, Bioluminescence imaging, Proteome analysis

### Affiliations
University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Institut of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine
Institute of Anatomy and Experimental Morphology, University Cancer Center Hamburg, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf

### Submitter
Lorena Hänel

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Tobias Lange
Institute of Anatomy and Experimental Morphology, University Cancer Center Hamburg, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf


