### Accession
PXD013024

### Title
HiRIEF-LC-MS based proteomics on Small Intestinal Neuroendocrine Tumors (SI-NET) and SI-NET cell lines

### Description
Associated to PXD009877 which contains Part I and Part II.   Part III – Pevonedistat/MLN4924 and Bortezomib treatment of the SI-NET (small intestinal – neuroendocrine tumor) cell line CNDT2. High Resolution Isoelectric Focusing (HiRIEF) LC-MS and relative quantification by TMT 10-plex was used to analyze cellular response to the proteasome inhibitor Bortezomib alone or in combination with the neddylation inhibitor pevonedistat (MLN4924) at 12h after treatment in the CNDT2 cell line. The data was obtained from one TMT 10-plex experiment which included 4 untreated controls (TMT channels 126, 127N, 127C and 128N), 3 samples treated with 500 nM Bortezomib for 12 hours (TMT channels 128C, 129N and 129C) as well as 3 samples treated with both Bortezomib and Pevonedistat at 500 nM respectively for 12 hours (TMT channels 130N, 130C and 131).

### Sample Protocol
Proteasomal inhibition profiling CNDT2. Proteins were extracted from cells using SDS buffer (4%, 1mM DTT, 25mM HEPES) and heating to 95 degrees for 5 min followed by sonication. Proteins were reduced with 1 mM dithiothreitol for 45 min at RT, and subsequently alkylated with 4 mM iodoacetamide for 45 min at RT in the dark. Next, proteins were digested to peptides using Lys-C and trypsin with a modified sp3 protocol. Peptides from each sample were then individually labelled by TMT10plex, pooled and cleaned up by SCX. Peptides were then prefractionated using HiRIEF method with the IPG strip of pH range 3-10 into 72 fractions that were individually analyzed by LC-MS except for fraction 20-27, 32-36, 43-50, 54-64 and 67-71 which were, respectively, accumulated in the trap column and separated jointly on the LC column.

### Data Protocol
Orbitrap raw MS/MS files were converted to mzML format using msConvert from the ProteoWizard tool suite (Holman et al., 2014). Spectra were then searched using MSGF+ (Kim and Pevzner, 2014) and Percolator (Granholm et al., 2014). All searches were done against the human protein subset of Ensembl 92. MSGF+ settings included precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, fully-tryptic peptides, maximum peptide length of 50 amino acids and a maximum charge of 6. Fixed modifications were TMT-10plex on lysines and peptide N-termini, and carbamidomethylation on cysteine residues, a variable modification was used for oxidation on methionine residues. Quantification of TMT-10plex reporter ions was done using OpenMS project's IsobaricAnalyzer (Sturm et al., 2008). PSMs found at 1% FDR (false discovery rate) were used to infer gene identities  Protein quantification by TMT10plex reporter ions was calculated using TMT PSM ratios to the entire sample set (all 10 TMT-channels) and normalized by dividing by the sample median. The median PSM TMT reporter ratio from PSMs unique to a gene/protein was used for quantification. Protein false discovery rates were calculated using the picked-FDR method and limited to 1% FDR (Savitski et al., 2015).

### Publication Abstract
Patients with small intestinal neuroendocrine tumors (SI-NETs) frequently develop spread disease; however, the underlying molecular mechanisms of disease progression are not known and effective preventive treatment strategies are lacking. Here, protein expression profiling was performed by HiRIEF-LC-MS in 14 primary SI-NETs from patients with and without liver metastases detected at the time of surgery and initial treatment. Among differentially expressed proteins, overexpression of the ubiquitin-like protein NEDD8 was identified in samples from patients with liver metastasis. Further, NEDD8 correlation analysis indicated co-expression with RBX1, a key component in cullin-RING ubiquitin ligases (CRLs). In vitro inhibition of neddylation with the therapeutic agent pevonedistat (MLN4924) resulted in a dramatic decrease of proliferation in SI-NET cell lines. Subsequent mass spectrometry-based proteomics analysis of pevonedistat effects and effects of the proteasome inhibitor bortezomib revealed stabilization of multiple targets of CRLs including p27, an established tumor suppressor in SI-NET. Silencing of NEDD8 and RBX1 using siRNA resulted in a stabilization of p27, suggesting that the cellular levels of NEDD8 and RBX1 affect CRL activity. Inhibition of CRL activity, by either NEDD8/RBX1 silencing or pevonedistat treatment of cells resulted in induction of apoptosis that could be partially rescued by siRNA-based silencing of p27. Differential expression of both p27 and NEDD8 was confirmed in a second cohort of SI-NET using immunohistochemistry. Collectively, these findings suggest a role for CRLs and the ubiquitin proteasome system in suppression of p27 in SI-NET, and inhibition of neddylation as a putative therapeutic strategy in SI-NET.

### Keywords
Human, Pevonedistat, Bortezomib, Cell line, Neuro endocrine tumor

### Affiliations
Karolinska Institutet
Dept. Oncology Pathology, Science for Life Laboratory, Karolinska Institutet, Sweden

### Submitter
Mattias Vesterlund

### Lab Head
Dr Janne Lehtiö
Dept. Oncology Pathology, Science for Life Laboratory, Karolinska Institutet, Sweden


