### Accession
PXD039423

### Title
Preimplantation mouse embryo proteome during 8C to 16C division

### Description
Preimplantation stages of mouse embryo development involve temporal and spatial specification and segregation of three late blastocyst cell lineages; trophectoderm (TE), primitive endoderm (PrE) and epiblast (EPI). Spatial separation of the outer TE lineage from the two inner-cell-mass (ICM) lineages (PrE and EPI) starts with the 8- to 16-cell transition and concludes following transit through the 16- to 32-cell stages. This results in a nascent early blastocyst ICM derived from descendants of primary founding inner cells and a secondarily contributed population; of which subsequent relative EPI versus PrE potencies are subject to debate. We showed that generation of primary but not the secondary ICM populations is highly dependent on temporally discreet activation of the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR – specifically mTORC1) around 8-cell stage M-phase entry. Moreover, that this role is mediated via the regulated function of the 7-methylguanosine- (7mG) cap binding initiation complex (EIF4F) and potentiating the translation of a subset of key but otherwise intransigent mRNAs containing 5’ UTR terminal oligopyrimidine (TOP-) sequence motifs. To find out translation of which mRNAs is regulated by mTOR during 8- to 16-cell transition, we analysed proteomes of control and mTOR-inhibited embryos during this time window.

### Sample Protocol
F1 generation of 8-week female hybrid mice (generated via C57BL6 female and CBA/W strain crosses) were intraperitoneally injected with 7.5IU of PMSG (pregnant mare serum gonadotrophin; Merck) and reinjected after 48 hours with 7.5IU hCG (human chorionic gonadotrophic hormone; Merck), before overnight mating with F1 stud males. At least 4 hours before dissection, culture dishes were prepared with twenty 10l drops of KSOM medium (Embryo-Max; Millipore), covered with mineral oil (Irvine Scientific) and equilibrated in an incubator at 37°C and 5% CO2 atmosphere. 2-cell stage (E1.5) embryos were recovered into and washed through, on a heated stage, 20L drops of prewarmed (37°C) M2 media containing 4mg/ml BSA (bovine serum albumin - Merck) and then transferred through the series of KSOM culture drops of pre-equilibrated plates, before transfer into the incubator (37°C and 5% CO2) and in vitro cultured to the 8C stage (E2.5+4h). At this point, embryos were transferred into KSOM with 20 µM mTOR inhibitor Torin1 (Selleckchem) or equivalent volume of DMSO vehicle control and cultured in the incubator (37°C and 5% CO2) until E2.5+8h and E2.5+9h. At these two timepoints, embryos were washed through Hanks’ balanced salts solution, lysed in SDT buffer (4% SDS, 0.1M DTT, 0.1M Tris/HCl, pH 7.6) prewarmed to 95°C.  Individual protein solutions were processed using filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method as described previously (Bora 2021). FASP eluates were transferred into the LC-MS vials and analyzed using RSLCnano system connected to Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as described previously (Bora 2021) with the following changes. Peptides trapped on the trap column were eluted and separated on the analytical column using 130 min long nonlinear gradient program (1-56% of mobile phase B; mobile phase A: 0.1% FA in water; mobile phase B: 0.1% FA in 80% ACN; start at 1% B, 95min 30% B, 130min 56 % B). MS data were acquired in a data-dependent strategy with top 20 approach and with survey scan (350-2000 m/z). The resolution of the survey scan was 120,000 (200 m/z) with a target value of 4×105 ions and maximum injection time of 100 ms. HCD MS/MS (30% relative fragmentation energy) spectra were acquired with a target value of 5.0x104. The MS/MS spectra were recorded in Orbitrap at resolving power of 15 000 (200 m/z) and the maximum injection time for MS/MS 22 ms. Dynamic exclusion was enabled for 30 s after one MS/MS spectra acquisition. The isolation window for MS/MS fragmentation was set to 1.2 m/z.  Literature Bora, P.; Gahurova, L.; Mašek, T.; Hauserova, A.; Potěšil, D.; Jansova, D.; Susor, A.; Zdráhal, Z.; Ajduk, A.; Pospíšek, M.; Bruce, A.W. P38-MAPK-Mediated Translation Regulation during Early Blastocyst Development Is Required for Primitive Endoderm Differentiation in Mice. Commun Biol, 2021, 4, 1–19.

### Data Protocol
The analysis of the mass spectrometric RAW data files was carried out using the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.2.10) using default settings unless otherwise noted. MS/MS ion searches were done against modified cRAP database (based on http://www.thegpm.org/crap, 112 protein sequences) containing protein contaminants like keratin, trypsin etc., and UniProtKB protein database for Mus musculus (https://ftp.uniprot.org/pub/databases/uniprot/current_release/knowledgebase/reference_proteomes/Eukaryota/UP000000589/UP000000589_10090.fasta.gz; downloaded 2019-05-08, version 2019/05, number of protein sequences: 22,287). Oxidation of methionine and proline, deamidation (N, Q) and acetylation (protein N-terminus) as optional modification, and trypsin/P enzyme with 2 allowed miss cleavages and minimal peptide length 6 aminoacids were set. Peptides and proteins with FDR threshold <0.01 and proteins having at least one unique or razor peptide were considered only. Match between runs was set for all analyses and second peptides option was checked. Protein intensities reported in proteinGroups.txt file and evidence intensities reported in evidence.txt file (output of MaxQuant program) were further processed using the software container environment (https://github.com/OmicsWorkflows), version 3.7.1a.

### Publication Abstract
Preimplantation mouse embryo development involves temporal-spatial specification and segregation of three blastocyst cell lineages: trophectoderm, primitive endoderm and epiblast. Spatial separation of the outer-trophectoderm lineage from the two other inner-cell-mass (ICM) lineages starts with the 8- to 16-cell transition and concludes at the 32-cell stages. Accordingly, the ICM is derived from primary and secondary contributed cells; with debated relative EPI versus PrE potencies. We report generation of primary but not secondary ICM populations is highly dependent on temporal activation of mammalian target of Rapamycin (mTOR) during 8-cell stage M-phase entry, mediated via regulation of the 7-methylguanosine-cap (m<sup>7</sup>G-cap)-binding initiation complex (EIF4F) and linked to translation of mRNAs containing 5' UTR terminal oligopyrimidine (TOP-) sequence motifs, as knockdown of identified TOP-like motif transcripts impairs generation of primary ICM founders. However, mTOR inhibition-induced ICM cell number deficits in early blastocysts can be compensated by the late blastocyst stage, after inhibitor withdrawal; compensation likely initiated at the 32-cell stage when supernumerary outer cells exhibit molecular characteristics of inner cells. These data identify a novel mechanism specifically governing initial spatial segregation of mouse embryo blastomeres, that is distinct from those directing subsequent inner cell formation, contributing to germane segregation of late blastocyst lineages.

### Keywords
Cap-dependent translation, Mouse preimplantation embryos, Mtor

### Affiliations
Proteomics Core Facility and Research Group Proteomics
CEITEC-MU
Masaryk University
Brno, Czech Republic
Proteomics Core Facility and Research Group Proteomics, CEITEC-MU, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic

### Submitter
David Potesil

### Lab Head
Dr Zbynek Zdrahal
Proteomics Core Facility and Research Group Proteomics, CEITEC-MU, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic


