### Accession
PXD029113

### Title
Sequestosome 1 is part of the interaction network of VAPB

### Description
VAPB (Vesicle-Associated-membrane Protein-associated proteins B) is a tail-anchored mem-brane protein of the endoplasmic reticulum that can also be detected at the inner nuclear mem-brane. As a component of many contact sites between the endoplasmic reticulum and other or-ganelles, VAPB is engaged in multiple protein interactions with a plethora of binding partners. A mutant version of VAPB, P56S-VAPB, that results from a single point mutation is involved in a familial form of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS8). We performed RAPIDS (rapamycin- and APEX-dependent identification of proteins by SILAC) to identify proteins that interact with or are in close proximity to P56S-VAPB. The mutation abrogates the interaction of VAPB with many known binding partners. Instead, Sequestosome 1 (SQSTM1) was identified as a major in-teraction/proximity partner, a protein that is known as an autophagic adapter. Remarkably, not only the mutant P56S-VAPB, but also the wild type protein interacts with SQSTM1, as shown by proximity ligation assays and co-immunoprecipiation experiments.

### Sample Protocol
For SILAC, cells were grown in medium containing heavy or light isotopes of argi-nine and lysine. For this purpose, DMEM (high glucose) lacking glutamine, lysine and ar-ginine (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) was supplemented with 10% (v/v) dialyzed FBS, 6 mM L-glutamine, 100 U ml-1 penicillin and 100 µg ml-1 streptomycin. To obtain SILAC media with heavy and light isotopes, either 0.4 mM 13C615N2-L-lysine (Silan-tes, Munich, Germany) and 0.2 mM 13C615N4-L-arginine (Silantes, Munich, Germany) or 0.4 mM 12C614N2-L-lysine (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) and 0.2 mM 12C614N4-L-arginine (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) were added, respectively. To ensure sufficient incor-poration of heavy amino acids, cells were passaged five to seven times in SILAC medium before the biotinylation experiment. The incorporation rate was confirmed to be ≥97% by mass spectrometry. Samples were separated on 4-12% NuPAGE Novex Bis-Tris Minigels (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, California). Gels were stained with Coomassie Blue, and each lane sliced into 11-12 equidistant bands. After washing, gel slices were reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT), alkylated with 2-iodoacetamide and digested with trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega, Madison Wisconsin) overnight. The resulting peptide mixtures were then extracted, dried in a SpeedVac, reconstituted in 2% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid/ (v/v) and analysed by nanoLC-MS/MS on a hybrid quadrupole/orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany) as described previously {Atanassov et al., 2013}.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using MaxQuant Software version 1.6.3.4 (Max Planck Institute for Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany). Proteins were identified against the human ref-erence proteome (v2020.02) along with a set of common lab contaminants. The Arginine R10 and Lysine K8 labels including the ‘Re-quantify’ option were specified for relative protein quantitation. Perseus Software version 1.5.6.0 (Max Planck Institute for Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany) was used for statistical evaluation of relative protein quantitation values and a two-sided Significance B test {Cox et al., 2008} was performed using normalized log2 ratios. For the analysis, a Benjamini-Hochberg correction was applied and a threshold value of 0.05 was chosen.

### Publication Abstract
VAPB (Vesicle-Associated-membrane Protein-associated protein B) is a tail-anchored membrane protein of the endoplasmic reticulum that can also be detected at the inner nuclear membrane. As a component of many contact sites between the endoplasmic reticulum and other organelles, VAPB is engaged in multiple protein interactions with a plethora of binding partners. A mutant version of VAPB, P56S-VAPB, which results from a single point mutation, is involved in a familial form of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS8). We performed RAPIDS (rapamycin- and APEX-dependent identification of proteins by SILAC) to identify proteins that interact with or are in close proximity to P56S-VAPB. The mutation abrogates the interaction of VAPB with many known binding partners. Here, we identify Sequestosome 1 (SQSTM1), a well-known autophagic adapter protein, as a major interaction/proximity partner of P56S-VAPB. Remarkably, not only the mutant protein, but also wild-type VAPB interacts with SQSTM1, as shown by proximity ligation assays and co-immunoprecipiation experiments.

### Keywords
Vapb; amyotrophic lateral sclerosis; sqstm1; sequestosome, P62

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry
Core Facility Proteomics, Department of Clinical Chemistry, University Medical Center Göttingen, Germany

### Submitter
Christof Lenz

### Lab Head
Dr Christof Lenz
Core Facility Proteomics, Department of Clinical Chemistry, University Medical Center Göttingen, Germany


