### Accession
PXD025088

### Title
Polymyxin resistance in colibactin-producing Escherichia coli induces host genotoxicity

### Description
The complex reservoir of metabolite-producing bacteria in the gastrointestinal tract contributes tremendously to human health and disease. Bacterial composition, and by extension gut metabolomic composition, is undoubtably influenced by the use of modern antibiotics. Herein, we demonstrate that polymyxin B, a last resort antibiotic used for chronic multidrug resistant infections infections, influences the production of the genotoxic metabolite colibactin from adherent-invasive Escherichia coli (AIEC) NC101. Colibactin can augment colorectal cancer (CRC) through DNA double stranded breaks and interstrand crosslinks. While the structure and biosynthesis of colibactin has been elucidated, chemical-induced regulation of its biosynthetic gene cluster and subsequent production of the genotoxin by pathogenic E. coli are largely unexplored. This research highlights the regulation of the colibactin-producing biosynthetic gene cluster under polymyxin stress. Using a multi-omic approach, we have identified that polymyxin stress enhances the abundance of colibactin biosynthesis proteins (Clb’s) in multiple pks+ E. coli strains, including pro-carcinogenic AIEC: NC101, the probiotic strain: E. coli Nissle 1917, and the antibiotic testing strain: E. coli ATCC 25922. Expression analysis via qPCR revealed that increased transcription of clb genes likely contributes to elevated Clb protein levels in NC101. Enhanced production of Clb’s by NC101 under polymyxin stress matched an increased production of the colibactin prodrug motif, a proxy for the mature genotoxic metabolite. Furthermore, E. coli with heightened tolerance for polymyxin antibiotics induced greater DNA damage, assessed by quantification of γH2AX staining in cultured intestinal epithelial cells. This study establishes a key link between the polymyxin B stress response and colibactin production in pks+ E. coli. Ultimately, our findings will inform future studies investigating colibactin regulation, the microbial response to antibiotics in the gut, and the ability of seemingly innocuous commensal microbes to induce host disease.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were resuspended in 2 mL of lysis buffer (100 mM Tris-HCl, 0.1% TritonX-100, pH 8.0). Cells were lysed via sonication using a E220 Focused-ultrasonicator (Covaris) for 2 m at 200 cycles/burst, 150 W power, and 13% duty cycle or by shaking in a thermocycler for 30 m at 25 ⁰C (850 RPM). Following lysis, protein was precipitated in 5:1 cold 100 mM ammonium acetate in methanol:cell lysate. Samples were incubated at -20⁰C for 30 min and proteins were pelleted by centrifugation for 10 min at 3,220 RCF. Precipitated protein was resuspended in 4 M urea, 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8 and quantified with a CB-X assay (Biosciences, St. Louis, MO, USA) against BSA standards. Proteins (50-100 μg) were reduced (10 mM dithiothreitol, 30 min, 25⁰C) and alkylated (30 mM iodoacetamide, 45 min, 25⁰C, dark).  Reduced and alkylated proteins were precipitated with 10:1 cold acetone:sample and collected via centrifugation (20,000 RPM, 10 m). Precipitated protein was resuspended in 2 M urea, 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8. Reduced and alkylated proteins were enzymatically digested with Trypsin gold (1:50 enzyme:protein) (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) for 16 h, shaking at 850 rpm at 25 ⁰C . Samples were acidified using trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a pH < 3, desalted using 50 mg C18 Sep Paks (Waters), and dried in a CentriVap (Labconco).

### Data Protocol
Raw files were automatically aligned in Progenesis QI for Proteomics (Nonlinear Dynamics, version 2.0) and peptides were identified in Mascot (Matrix Science, version 2.5.1). Strain specific databases were imported and used for identification of each strain, respectively. Sequences for common laboratory contaminants (www.thegpm.org/cRAP; 116 entries) were appended to each of the databases prior to searching. MGF files were exported from Progenesis QI and searched using precursor/fragment tolerance of 15 ppm/0.02 Da, trypsin specificity, two possible missed cleavages, fixed modification cysteine carbamidomethylation, and variable modifications of methionine oxidation and protein N-term acetylation. Significant peptide identifications above the homology threshold were adjusted using the embedded Mascot percolator algorithm and uploaded to Progenesis for peak matching before exporting protein measurements. Label-free quantitative proteomic quantitation was used to compare normalized abundances of Clb enzymes in treated vs. non-treated conditions. A students t-test with a Benjamini-Hochberg FDR correction was used to determine proteins that were significantly changing between WT and evolved conditions (q-value < 0.05).

### Publication Abstract
The complex reservoir of metabolite-producing bacteria in the gastrointestinal tract contributes tremendously to human health and disease. Bacterial composition, and by extension gut metabolomic composition, is undoubtably influenced by the use of modern antibiotics. Herein, we demonstrate that polymyxin B, a last resort antibiotic, influences the production of the genotoxic metabolite colibactin from adherent-invasive <i>Escherichia coli</i> (AIEC) NC101. Colibactin can promote colorectal cancer through DNA double stranded breaks and interstrand cross-links. While the structure and biosynthesis of colibactin have been elucidated, chemical-induced regulation of its biosynthetic gene cluster and subsequent production of the genotoxin by <i>E</i>. <i>coli</i> are largely unexplored. Using a multiomic approach, we identified that polymyxin B stress enhances the abundance of colibactin biosynthesis proteins (Clb's) in multiple <i>pks+ E</i>. <i>coli</i> strains, including pro-carcinogenic AIEC, NC101; the probiotic strain, Nissle 1917; and the antibiotic testing strain, ATCC 25922. Expression analysis via qPCR revealed that increased transcription of <i>clb</i> genes likely contributes to elevated Clb protein levels in NC101. Enhanced production of Clb's by NC101 under polymyxin stress matched an increased production of the colibactin prodrug motif, a proxy for the mature genotoxic metabolite. Furthermore, <i>E</i>. <i>coli</i> with a heightened tolerance for polymyxin induced greater mammalian DNA damage, assessed by quantification of &#x3b3;H2AX staining in cultured intestinal epithelial cells. This study establishes a key link between the polymyxin B stress response and colibactin production in <i>pks+ E</i>. <i>coli</i>. Ultimately, our findings will inform future studies investigating colibactin regulation and the ability of seemingly innocuous commensal microbes to induce host disease.

### Keywords
Escherichia coli, Antimicrobial resistance, Colibactin

### Affiliations
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill - Department of Chemistry
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill

### Submitter
Leslie Hicks

### Lab Head
Dr Leslie M. Hicks
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill - Department of Chemistry


