### Accession
PXD029344

### Title
Deep membrane proteome profiling of high-risk human paraganglioma

### Description
We combined glycopeptide enrichment by N-glyco-FASP (Zielinska et al., 2010), SPEG (Tian et al., 2007) with a hydrophobic segment-oriented hpTC method (Vít et al 2016) and a standard “detergent and trypsin” approach into a tree-pronged “Pitchfork” strategy for the analysis of membrane proteome in high-risk human paraganglioma.

### Sample Protocol
Tumor samples and pooledcontrol adrenal tissue were pulverized under liquid nitrogen (LN) andaliquoted. 5 PGL samples and 1 pooled control adrenal medullas underwent 4parallel analyses, using two glycocapture methods (SPEG, N-glyco-FASP), amethod for enrichment and extraction of transmembrane peptides (hpTC), and a standarddetergent-trypsin based analysis. SPEG: 100 mg of tissuehomogenized in LN was solubilized in a high-salt buffer (2 M NaCl, 1mM EDTA in10mM HEPES-NaOH, pH = 7.4), sonicated and centrifuged. The pellet wasre-extracted using 20 G hypodermic needle in 100mM Na2CO3,1mM EDTA, shaken for 30 min. on ice (2x). The pellet was resusp. in 5% SDC in100mM NH4HCO3, incubated 15 min., homogenized by sonicationand debris was pelleted. The proteins were reduced with 20mM DTT and alkylatedwith 45mM IAA and the sample was diluted to a 1% SDC and 50mM NH4HCO3.Trypsin was added at a 1:50 ratio and the sample was incubated at 37 °C o/n.The sample was acidified with TFA and SDC was removed by extraction with ethylacetate added at 1:1 by shaking for 1 min. and centrifugation for 2 min. (3-4x).The sample was desalted using OptiTrap and resusp. in 500 µl of Affi-Gel HzCoupling Buffer (Bio-Rad), oxidized with 10mM NaIO4 for 1 h, theoxidation was quenched using 20mM Na2S2O3 (10min.). The sample was mixed with washed Affi-Gel Hz Hydrazide Gel beads androtated o/n. The beads were washed and bound peptides cleaved in 25 µl of 50mM NH4HCO3with 3 U of PNGase F at 37 °C o/n. The supernatant was collected bycentrifugation along with additional washes (2×50mM NH4HCO3,1x0.5 M NaCl and 1x80% ACN).N-glyco-FASP: The digestwas prepared the same way as in SPEG, solubilized and diluted with bindingbuffer (0.5M NaCl, 1mM MnCl2, 1mM CaCl2, 20mM tris-HCl,pH = 7.6) and mixed with 100 μg WGA, 100 μg ConA and 80 μg RCA120, rocked for 1h on a 10 kDa ultrafilter (Microcon Ultracel-10 Membrane), washed 4x with bindingbuffer, 2x with 50mM NH4HCO3 and incubated in 50mM NH4HCO3with 2 units of PNGase F at 37 °C o/n. The peptides were collected bycentrifugation and additional 3 washes (2× 50mM NH4HCO3, 1x0.5 M NaCl) were made. hpTC: 100 mg of tissue pulverizedin LN was homogenized in hypotonic buffer (10mM NaCl, 2mM MgCl2, 10mMHEPES, pH = 7.4) using 20 G hypodermic needle and the lysate was treated with120 KU of bovine DNase I with 25mM MgCl2 and 5mM CaCl2for 30 min. at 37 °C. The membranes were pelleted, shaken in 100mM Na2CO3with 1mMEDTA for 30 min. on ice (2x). The pellet was resusp. in 50mM NH4HCO3with 20 µg trypsin and incubated at 37°C. The sample was washed 2x with Na2CO3,pelleted and 3x snap-frozen/thawed between the washes. The membranes weresolubilized in 70% TFA with CNBr (20 mg/ml) and incubated in the dark o/n. Thesuspension was evaporated, and the peptides solubilized in 80% ACN, 10%isopropanol and 5% FA, and diluted 1:10 with 0.5% FA. The sample was desalted anddelipidated on an OptiTrap column: washed with 0.5 ml 0.5% FA, 5x 0.5 mldichloromethane with 0.5% FA, again with 0.5% FA, and eluted with 80% ACN, 10%isopropanol, 0.5% FA.SDC-trypsin: Ca. 10 mg oftissue was homogenized in LN, solubilized and digested: The material was resusp.in 5% SDC in 100mM NH4HCO3 and digested the same way asthe membrane fraction in SPEG and N-glyco-FASP (see above).The samples wereseparated on a reversed phase nano column (EASY-Spray column, 50 cm x 75 µm ID,PepMap C18, 2 µm particles, 100 Å pore size). Mobile phase buffer A wascomposed of water, 2% ACN and 0.1% FA. B was composed of 80% ACN, 0.1% FA.Samples were loaded onto the trap column (Acclaim PepMap300, C18, 5 µm, 300 ÅWide Pore, 300 µm x 5mM, 5 Cartridges) for 4 min at 15 μl/min, with a loadingsolution (2% ACN, 0.1% TFA). After 4 min. the valve was switched, and B wasincreased from 4% to 35% B in 120 min at 300 nL/min, followed by a wash with75% B 5 min at 400 nL/min, then 4% B for 5 minutes until the end of the run(for all samples except hpTC). For the hpTC samples, B was increased from 4% to50% B in 120 min at 300 nL/min, followed by a wash with 75% B 5 min at 400nL/min, and then 4% B for 5 minutes until the end of the run. Eluting peptidecations were converted to gas-phase ions by electrospray ionization andanalyzed on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion (Q-OT-qIT, Thermo). Survey scans of precursorsfrom 350 to 1400 m/z were performed at 120K resolution (at 200 m/z) with a 5×105ion count target. MS2 was performed by isolation at 1.5 Th withquadrupole, HCD fragmentation with a normalized collision energy of 30, andrapid scan MS analysis in the ion trap. The MS2 ion count target wasset to 104 and the max injection time was 35 ms. Only precursorswith charge state 2–6 were sampled for MS2. The dynamic exclusionduration was set to 45 s with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursorand its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on. Theinstrument was run in top speed mode with 2 s cycles (Hebert et al., 2014).

### Data Protocol
For protein identification, MS raw data files were analyzed using MaxQuant v1.6.0.7. Thedata was searched against the human subset of the Swiss-Prot database (20,395sequences). The search settings differed between the methods. Trypsin/P with 2max missed cleavage sites was selected in all methods, in addition, CNBr(defined as cleavage C-terminal to methionine) with 2 max missed cleavage siteswas selected in the hpTC analyses. N-terminal protein acetylation and oxidationof methionine were included as variable modifications for all methods. ForSPEG, asparagine deamidation to aspartate was included, and for hpTC the changeof methionine (C-terminal to any peptide) to homoserine lactone (Met -48.003)and homoserine (Met -29.993) was included. For all methods except hpTC,carbamidomethylation of cysteine was used as a fixed modification. The falsediscovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% for both, proteins and peptides. The identified proteins’FASTA sequences from each separate LC-MS/MS analysis (4 per sample - gFASP,hpTC, SPEG, SDC-trypsin) were submitted to TMHMM Server v. 2.0(http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/TMHMM/) to identify integral membrane proteins(IMPs) and to filter out non-membrane proteins. This resulted in 4 sub-list ofIMPs (corresponding to gFASP, hpTC, SPEG, SDC-trypsin) for each sample. A finallist of all IMPs identified was then compiled for each sample from the foursub-lists of IMPs. The set of 501 common IMPs, identified concurrently in all 5tumors was established. The list of”tumor enriched“ proteins is composed of IMPsexpressed in all tumors but not found in the control tissue. To determinewhether an IMP is localized on the cell surface, Surface protein consensus(SPC) scores were searched using the SurfaceGenie web application athttps://gundrylab.shinyapps.io/surfacegenie/. Proteins with SPC scoreequal to or larger than 3 were then considered as cell surface proteins. 

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Pitchfork strategy, Lc-msms, Membrane proteome, Paraganglioma

### Affiliations
Charles University, First Faculty of Medicine, BIOCEV
BIOCEV, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, Czech Republic

### Submitter
Ondrej Vit

### Lab Head
Dr Jiri Petrak
BIOCEV, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, Czech Republic


