### Accession
PXD002049

### Title
CPTAC proteomic analysis of TCGA colon and rectal carcinomas using standard and customized databases, part 9

### Description
The goal of the CPTAC, TCGA Cancer Proteome Study of Colorectal Tissue is to analyze the proteomes of TCGA tumor samples that have been comprehensively characterized by molecular methods. Ninety-five TCGA tumor samples were used in this study.

### Sample Protocol
Analytical Sample Protocol - Alkylation: Iodoacetamide, Fractionation: Peptide IEF, Fractions: 15, Proteolysis: Trypsin, Starting Amount: 200 ug; Chromatography Protocol - Column Length: 11 cm, Column Type: C18, Gradient Length: 95 min, Injected: 1 ug, Inside Diameter: 100 um, Particle Size: 5 um; Mass Spectrometry Protocol - Dissociation: CID, Instrument: Thermo LTQ Orbitrap Velos, MS1 Resolution: 60000, Precursors: Top 8. See associated protocols and methods documents at https://cptac-data-portal.georgetown.edu.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification employed the RefSeq Human protein sequence database using three different database search engines: myrimatch, pepitome and MS-GF+. Spectral identification files were converted to IDPicker SQLite databases (idpDB) using IDPicker 3. The resulting files were used for final protein assembly providing the minimal list of proteins that could explain the available peptides identified. Initially, spectrum-to-peptide match stringency was set at 0.1% FDR with a minimum of 2 distinct peptides identified per protein. The dataset was limited to the 7526 protein groups identified while spectral counts were increased by relaxing the spectrum-to-peptide match FDR to 1%. Assembly at the gene level resulted in the identification of 7211 gene groups for the full dataset. Variant peptide sequences were identified by separate database searches using data from RNA-seq of the individual carcinomas using the R package customProDB. A total of 796 single amino acid variants were identified.

### Publication Abstract
Understanding proteomic differences underlying the different phenotypic classes of colon and rectal carcinoma is important and may eventually lead to a better assessment of clinical behavior of these cancers. We here present a comprehensive description of the proteomic data obtained from 90 colon and rectal carcinomas previously subjected to genomic analysis by The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA). Here, the primary instrument files and derived secondary data files are compiled and presented in forms that will allow further analyses of the biology of colon and rectal carcinoma. We also discuss new challenges in processing these large proteomic datasets for relevant proteins and protein variants.

### Keywords
Cptac cptac-tcga_colorectal_cancer cptac-vu

### Affiliations
Vanderbilt University

### Submitter
Robbert Slebos

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel C. Liebler, Ph.D.
Vanderbilt University


### SDRF
- organism: Homo sapiens
- organism part: colon
- organism part.1: rectum
- disease: colon and rectal tumors
- cell type: not applicable
- label: AC=MS:1002038;NT=label free sample
- fractionation method: NT=Reversed-phase chromatography;AC=PRIDE:0000563
- instrument: NT=LTQ Orbitrap Velos;AC=MS:1001742
- modification parameters: NT=Acetyl;AC=UNIMOD:1;PP=Protein N-term;MT=Fixed
- modification parameters.1: NT=Oxidation;MT=variable;TA=M;AC=UNIMOD:35
- modification parameters.2: NT=Gln->pyro-Glu;MT=variable;TA=Q;AC=UNIMOD:28

