### Accession
PXD047898

### Title
Maximizing glycoproteomics identification depth in complex mixtures on the timsTOF Pro platform

### Description
Glycoproteins play important roles in numerous physiological processes and are often implicated in disease. Analysis of site-specific protein glycobiology through glycoproteomics is evolving rapidly in recent years thanks to hardware and software innovations. Introduction of Parallel Accumulation Serial Fragmentation (PASEF) on hybrid trapped ion mobility time-of-flight instruments combined deep proteome sequencing with separation of (near-)isobaric precursor ions or converging isotope envelopes through ion mobility separation. Despite these advantages, the use of PASEF in integrated glycoproteomics workflows to comprehensively capture the glycoproteome has received little attention. To address this gap, we have developed an integrated methodology using the timsTOF Pro2 to enhance N-glycopeptide identifications in complex mixtures. We explored its potential by systematically evaluating the impact of ion optics tuning, collision energies, mobility isolation width, and the use of dopant-enriched nitrogen gas (DEN) on glycopeptide identification rates. This comprehensive approach showed a marked increase in unique glycopeptide identification rates compared to standard proteomics settings while evaluating key parameters on a large set of glycopeptides. With short liquid chromatography gradients of 30 minutes, we increased the number of unique N-glycopeptide identifications in full human plasma glycopeptide samples from around 100 identifications under standard proteomics condition to over 1500 with our optimized glycoproteomics approach, highlighting the need for tailored solutions.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma samples of healthy donors were obtained from the Sanquin blood bank (Nijmegen, Netherlands) according to their protocols of informed consent. Samples from 5 individuals were pooled and preparation was performed as described previously. Ten microliters of human plasma were denatured with 10μL urea (8 M urea, 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0) and reduced with 15 μL of 10 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at room temperature. Alkylation was performed by addition of 15 μL of 50 mM 2-chloroacetamide and incubation in the dark for 20 min at room temperature. Proteins were first digested with LysC (1 μg LysC/50 μg protein) for 3 hours at room temperature. Subsequently, samples were diluted with three volumes of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer. A tryptic digest was performed overnight at 37°C by the addition of 1ug trypsin per 50 ug protein. Glycopeptides were enriched using Sepharose CL-4B beads (Merck). 100 μL of slurry were added to a well of a 0.20 μm pore size 96 multi well filter plate (AcroPrep Advance, VWR). The beads were washed three times with 20% ethanol and 83% acetonitrile. After applying the digested sample, the plate was incubated for 20 min at room temperature while shaking. The filter plate was centrifuged to remove the supernatant and beads were washed three times with 83% ACN and three times with 83% ACN with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Glycopeptides were eluted with 50 μL water.

### Data Protocol
The samples were analyzed employing a nanoElute liquid chromatography system (Bruker Daltonics) connected to a timsTOF Pro2 instrument (Bruker Daltonics). A CaptiveSprayer nanoflow electrospray ionization source was used either with dopant-enriched nitrogen gas via the nanobooster or without DEN. Separation of peptides and glycopeptides was achieved on an Elute Fifteen C18 reversed-phase column (0.075 mm ID × 150 mm length, 1.9 µm particles, 120 Å pore size) maintained at 45°C. The elution gradient for most optimization steps consisted of a linear increase from 7% to 45% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid (FA) and 0.02% TFA over 15 minutes, with a flow rate of 500 nL/min. More information on the used gradients can be found in supplementary table S1. Mass spectrometry measurements were conducted in positive ionization mode with a capillary voltage of 1500 V and, if used, a nanobooster gas pressure of 0.2 bar N2. MS conditions were optimized starting from default setting for proteomics measurements provided by Bruker Daltonics and adjusted to facilitate glycopeptide identification. The MS conditions of the proteomics method and optimized glycoproteomics methods can be found in supplementary table S2. Glycopeptides were identified using MSFragger Glyco. MSFragger searches were performed using fragpipe 15.0, MSFragger 3.4, and philosopher 4.1.1. The glyco-N-HCD search parameters were: 20 ppm mass tolerance with an isotope error of 0–2, semi-tryptic enzyme specificity, peptide length 5–50 amino acids, and 600–20,000 m/z range. Carbamidomethylation at cysteine residues was set as fixed modification whereas methionine oxidation and N-terminal ammonia loss were set as variable modifications. Human secreted protein reference sequence database was downloaded from Uniprot (downloaded on 2021.11.22) and glycan mass offsets were extracted for unique compositions in the GlyGen glycan reference database (downloaded on 22.4.2022).31-32 The FDR was set to 1% at PSM, peptide, protein, and glycan levels. DataAnalysis v5.3 (Bruker Daltonics) was used for raw data analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Glycoproteomics, Trapped ion mobility spectrometry, Glycopeptide, Dda-pasef

### Affiliations
Translational Metabolic Laboratory, Department of Human Genetics, Radboudumc, Nijmegen, The Netherlands
Radboudumc

### Submitter
Hans Wessels

### Lab Head
Dr Hans Wessels
Translational Metabolic Laboratory, Department of Human Genetics, Radboudumc, Nijmegen, The Netherlands


