### Accession
PXD000253

### Title
Quantitative Mass Spectrometry Reveals Plasticity of Metabolic Networks in Mycobacterium smegmatis

### Description
Carbon metabolism in Mycobacterium smegmatis was analysed using reverse-phase chromatography coupled to orbitrap high-resolution mass spectrometer using trypsin digestion. MS/MS files were searched against the Mycobacterium smegmatis strain MC2-155 database Release 1 - July 2010 ) by MaxQuant software (version 1.3.0.5). Mass spectra were searched with an initial mass tolerance of 7 ppm in MS mode and 0.5 Da in MS/MS mode. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, whereas oxidation (M), acetylation (Protein N-term)  and Phospho (S, T, Y) were considered as variable modifications. Minimum required peptide length was set to seven amino acids and at least two (unique + razor) peptides were required for protein identification. A cut-off was fixed at 1% FDR at the peptide and protein level. Reverse and contaminants sequences were removed and proteins with a Posterior Error Probability (PEP) lower than 0.1 were accepted for further data treatment. Protein quantification was performed with razor and unique peptides, using only unmodified, oxidated (M) and acetylated (Protein N-term) peptides. A minimum of two ratio counts was required to quantify proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Carbon metabolism in Mycobacterium smegmatis was analysed using reverse-phase chromatography coupled to orbitrap high-resolution mass spectrometer using trypsin digestion.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS files were searched against the Mycobacterium smegmatis strain MC2-155 database Release 1 - July 2010 ) by MaxQuant software (version 1.3.0.5). Mass spectra were searched with an initial mass tolerance of 7 ppm in MS mode and 0.5 Da in MS/MS mode. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, whereas oxidation (M), acetylation (Protein N-term) and Phospho (S, T, Y) were considered as variable modifications. Minimum required peptide length was set to seven amino acids and at least two (unique + razor) peptides were required for protein identification . A cut-off was fixed at 1% FDR at the peptide and protein level. Reverse and contaminants sequences were removed and proteins with a Posterior Error Probability (PEP) lower than 0.1 were accepted for further data treatment. Protein quantification was performed with razor and unique peptides, using only unmodified, oxidated (M) and acetylated (Protein N-term) peptides. A minimum of two ratio counts was required to quantify proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Mycobacterium tuberculosis has a remarkable ability to persist within the human host as a clinically inapparent or chronically active infection. Fatty acids are thought to be an important carbon source used by the bacteria during long term infection. Catabolism of fatty acids requires reprogramming of metabolic networks, and enzymes central to this reprogramming have been targeted for drug discovery. Mycobacterium smegmatis, a nonpathogenic relative of M. tuberculosis, is often used as a model system because of the similarity of basic cellular processes in these two species. Here, we take a quantitative proteomics-based approach to achieve a global view of how the M. smegmatis metabolic network adjusts to utilization of fatty acids as a carbon source. Two-dimensional liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry of isotopically labeled proteins identified a total of 3,067 proteins with high confidence. This number corresponds to 44% of the predicted M. smegmatis proteome and includes most of the predicted metabolic enzymes. Compared with glucose-grown cells, 162 proteins showed differential abundance in acetate- or propionate-grown cells. Among these, acetate-grown cells showed a higher abundance of proteins that could constitute a functional glycerate pathway. Gene inactivation experiments confirmed that both the glyoxylate shunt and the glycerate pathway are operational in M. smegmatis. In addition to proteins with annotated functions, we demonstrate carbon source-dependent differential abundance of proteins that have not been functionally characterized. These proteins might play as-yet-unidentified roles in mycobacterial carbon metabolism. This study reveals several novel features of carbon assimilation in M. smegmatis, which suggests significant functional plasticity of metabolic networks in this organism.

### Keywords
Dimethyl, Carbon-sources, Maxquant, Mycobacterium smegmatis, Lc-ms/ms, Metabolic pathways

### Affiliations
PCF

### Submitter
Romain Hamelin

### Lab Head
Dr Moniatte  
PCF


