### Accession
PXD027229

### Title
Characterisation of the free and membrane-associated fractions of the thylakoid lumen proteome in Arabidopsis thaliana

### Description
In plants chloroplasts, the lumen of the thylakoid membrane houses proteins that are vital for photosynthetic electron transport, including water-splitting at photosystem (PS) II and shuttling of electrons from cytochrome b6f to PSI. Other lumen proteins maintain photosynthetic activity through biogenesis and turnover of PSII complexes. Although all lumen proteins are soluble, these known details have highlighted interactions of some lumen proteins with thylakoid membranes or thylakoid-intrinsic proteins. Meanwhile, the functional details of most lumen proteins, as well as their distribution between the soluble and membrane-associated lumen fractions, remain unknown. The current study isolated the soluble free lumen (FL) and membrane-associated lumen (MAL) fractions from Arabidopsis thaliana, and used gel- and mass spectrometry-based proteomics methods to analyse the contents of each proteome. These results identified lumenal proteins, and clearly distinguished the difference between the FL and MAL proteomes. The most abundant proteins in the FL fraction were involved in PSII assembly and repair, while the MAL proteome was enriched in proteins that support of the oxygen-evolving complex (OEC). Novel proteins, including a new PsbP domain-containing isoform, as well as several novel post-translational modifications and N-termini, are reported, and bi-dimensional separation of the lumen proteome identified several potential multi-protein oligomers in the thylakoid lumen.

### Sample Protocol
Fifty rosettes of six weeks old Arabidopsis thaliana (L.) Heynh. Col-0 plants grown under 100 µmoles photons m-2 s-1 in a phytotron (8 h light/16 h darkness) were harvested and, under dim light in a cold room, plant tissue was ground in ice-cold grinding buffer containing 330 mM sorbitol, 50 mM Hepes-KOH (pH 7.8), 10 mM KCl, 10 mM EDTA and 10 mM NaF (Buffer A), followed by filtration through Miracloth (Millipore) mesh. The filtrate was centrifuged twice at 1000 × g  at 4 °C for 1 min, the supernatant discarded and the pellet re-suspended in buffer A with 2.5 mM EDTA and 5 mM NaCl. The suspension was diluted to a chlorophyll concentration of 0.2 mg ml-1 in shock buffer containing 10 mM Na4P2O7 (pH 7.8) and 10 mM NaF, and homogenised thoroughly with a glass homogeniser, before centrifugation at 7500 × g at 4 °C for 5 min. The resulting thylakoid membrane pellet was washed once with shock buffer, twice with wash buffer (2 mM Tricine pH 7.8, 300 mM sucrose), and once with fragmentation buffer (30 mM NaH2PO4 pH 7.8, 50 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 100 mM sucrose) by repeated centrifugations at 7500 × g at 4 °C for 5 min, and then re-suspended in fragmentation buffer with 10 mM NaF and EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail (Merck). The solution was passed slowly through a cold Yeda press twice at N2 pressure of 10 MPa to invert the membranes, centrifuged twice at 200 000 × g at 2 °C for 60 min, and the supernatant (free lumen-FL-proteome) was removed and stored. The membrane pellet was washed in fragmentation buffer and centrifuged at 200 000 × g at 2 °C for 60 min, re-suspended to 1.0 mg ml-1 chlorophyll in stripping buffer (2.6 M urea, 0.2 M NaCl, 50 mM CaCl2, 20 mM MES pH 6.0, 0.3 M sucrose), incubated on ice for 60 min, and then centrifuged twice at 200 000 × g at 2 °C for 60 min, to obtain the ‘membrane-associated lumen’ (MAL) proteome supernatant. For analysis in mass spectrometry (MS) of total lumen proteomes, 20 µg of FL or MAL proteins were loaded onto an SDS-PAGE gel containing 6 % acrylamide and 6 M urea 6%, run approximately 0.5 cm and excised for MS analysis. Lumen proteins have been analyzed also by bi-dimensional clear native (CN)-PAGE/SDS-PAGE, where 50 µg of free lumen (FL) fractions were separated by 9.5 - 14 % CN-PAGE in the first dimension, after which proteins were separated in second dimension by loading the CN-PAGE lane across the top of an SDS-PAGE gel containing 15 % acrylamide and 6 M urea. The second-dimension gels were subsequently stained with ProQ Diamond to visualize the phosphoproteins, and then with SYPRO Ruby to visualize all proteins, following manufacturer instructions (Invitrogen/Molecular Probes). Gels were then stained with silver nitrate method. Protein spots of interest were excised from the gel for MS analysis. The excised gel pieces (~ 1 mm3) were shrunk completely by incubating 3 times for 10 min in 100 µl of 100% acetonitrile (ACN), incubated in 25 mM Dithiothreitol (DTT)/100 mM NH4HCO3 for 30 min at 56°C in a Thermomixer (Eppendorf) and, after shrinking as above, alkylated for 20 min with 55 mM of iodacetamide (IAA)/ 100 mM NH4HCO3 at 22°C in the dark. After two consecutive washes alternating 100% ACN and 100 mM NH4HCO3, the gel pieces were completely shrunk as described above. For protein digestion, the gel pieces were completely re-hydrated in a solution of 40 mM NH4HCO3/10% ACN with either of 0.01 (10 µl for protein spots) or 0.13 µg/µl (150 µl for total soluble proteins) of trypsin (Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin V5111, Promega, Madison) at 4°C. After adding 20 µl of 40 mM NH4HCO3/10% ACN, the gel pieces were incubated at 37°C in the Thermomixer (Eppendorf) shaking at 600 rpm for 13-14 hours. The tryptic peptides have been extracted by an equal volume of 100% ACN  and incubating for 15 min at 37°C. The supernatant has been collected in a new Eppendorf and the gel pieces have been incubated two more times for 15 min with 50% ACN/5% formic acid (FA) to collect the remaining peptides. The supernatants have been pooled and dried in a speed-vac for 3 hours, and dissolved in 2% FA to be analyzed by nLC-ESI MS/MS. For mass spectrometry analysis, the peptides samples were separated on a C18 precolumn (5 × 0.3 mm, PepMap C18, LC Packings) and a C18 nanocolumn (15 cm × 75 μm, Magic 5 μm, 200 Å C18, Michrom BioResources, Sacramento, CA) with a flow rate of 300 nL/min using 0.1% FA, 2% ACN as a buffer A and 0.1% FA, 80% ACN as a buffer B. Gradients comprised 3 % to 43 % solvent B over 60 min (for total soluble proteins)/13 min (for gel spot samples), followed by 43 % to 100 % solvent B for 5 min/2 min, and finally 100 % solvent B for 10 min/5 min. The mass spectrometer used was a Q-Exactive (Thermo Fisher Scientific), with resolution set to 140000, scan range 300 to 1800 m/z for MS1, and 17500 with scan range 200 to 2000 m/z for MS2. Dynamic exclusion was set to 20 s and up to 20 masses with m/z ≥2+ were selected for MS2 for every MS1 scan

### Data Protocol
The obtained spectra have been analyzed via Mascot (v.2.6.1) using Proteome Discover 2.2 (Thermo Scientific) and the embedded ptmRS algorithm to validate the identified phosphorylations. The variable modifications allowed were Met oxidation, protein N-term acetylation, Ser, Thr and Tyr phosphorylation. Cys carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification. Posterior error probabilities was evaluated by validating PSMs with Mascot identity threshold for strict and relaxed significance and allowing only PSMs with medium or high confidence. The MS/MS spectra were matched against a non-redundant Arabidopsis proteome database (TAIR10; https://www.arabidopsis.org/) supplemented with most common contaminants (35,502 entries in total). In order to find potential N-terminal peptides of the mature lumen proteins, the same analysis was repeated with the semi-trypsin setting, allowing the identification of peptides with either N-terminal or C-terminal residues different from arginine or lysine. False discovery rate of the identified peptides was evaluated using the Percolator node in PD2.2 (for total soluble proteins) or Mascot score (for protein spots)

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Post-translational modification, Thylakoid lumen, Photosynthesis, Chloroplast

### Affiliations
Institute of Biosciences and Bioresources, National Research Council of Italy, Sesto Fiorentino (FI)
Molecular Plant Biology, University of Turku, Finland

### Submitter
Andrea Trotta

### Lab Head
Dr Eva-Mari Aro
Molecular Plant Biology, University of Turku, Finland


