### Accession
PXD040777

### Title
Chemoproteomics reveals disruption of metal homeostasis and metalloproteins by the antibiotic holomycin

### Description
The natural product holomycin contains a unique cyclic disulfide and exhibits broad-spectrum antimicrobial activities. Reduced holomycin chelates metal ions with high affinity and disrupts metal homeostasis in the cell. To identify cellular metalloproteins that are affected by holomycin, reactive-cysteine profiling was performed using isotopic Tandem Orthogonal Proteolysis–Activity-based Protein Profiling. This chemoproteomic analysis showed that holomycin treatment increases the reactivity of metal-coordinating cysteine residues in several zinc-dependent and iron-sulfur cluster-dependent enzymes. Whole-proteome abundance analysis revealed that holomycin treatment induces zinc starvation, iron starvation, and cellular stress. This study sets the stage for investigating the impact of metal-binding molecules on metalloproteomes using chemoproteomics.

### Sample Protocol
Whole-proteome sample preparation for reductive dimethylation analysis  After treatment with holomycin or DMSO, cells were pelleted by centrifugation (5,000 g, 10 min, 4 °C) and lysate prepared in PBS. Protein concentration was determined by DC Protein Assay Kit. Proteomes (125 µL, 1 mg/mL) were precipitated by adding trichloroacetic acid to 10% (v/v) concentration (−80 °C, overnight). Precipitated proteins were pelleted by centrifugation (15,000 g, 10 min), washed with 500 µL ice cold acetone, and pelleted by centrifugation (5,000 g, 10min). The supernatant was removed, and the pellet was allowed to air dry prior to resuspension in 30 µL of 8 M urea in PBS. Reductive alkylation was performed by sequentially adding 70 µL PBS, 1.5 µL of 1 M DTT (65 °C, 15 min), and 2.5 µL of 500 mM iodoacetamide (25 °C, 30 min). Reactions were subsequently diluted with PBS (120 µL), followed by the addition of 2 µg sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega) (4 µL of 20 µg trypsin solution in PBS) and 2.5 µL of 100 mM CaCl2 (37 °C, overnight). Following trypsin digestion, reductive demethylation (ReDiMe) was performed by adding 4 µL of a 20% light formaldehyde 12CH2O or 20% heavy 13CD2O formaldehyde solution to either holomycin or DMSO treated samples, along with 20 µL of 0.6 M sodium cyanoborohydride (25 °C, 2 hours).2 Reactions were quenched with 16 µL of a 5% (v/v) ammonium hydroxide solution (25 °C, 15 min). The light and heavy tryptic peptide samples were combined, desalted using a Sep-Pak column, and dried down using speed-vac. Samples were resuspended in 500 µL of high pH Buffer A (95% H2O, 5% acetonitrile, 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate) and separated into 24 fractions by off-line high-pH fractionation using an Agilent 1100 Series HPLC and a Gilson FC203B fraction collector. The first and last fraction were discarded, and the remaining 22 fractions were dried using speed-vac, and each was resuspended in 30 µL of low pH buffer A (95% H2O, 5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid).  Chemoproteomic labeling and enrichment of cysteine residues E. coli cultures treated with holomycin or DMSO were concentrated to 10 mL with spent media and treated with 10 μL of 100 μM iodoacetamide-alkyne probe (1 hr, 37 °C). Cultures were pelleted and lysate prepared in PBS. The lysate was diluted to 2 mg/mL and subjected to click chemistry with 100 µM Azo-L (holomycin) or 100 µM Azo-H (control), 1 mM TCEP, 100 µM TBTA, and 1 mM CuSO4 (final concentrations).5 Samples were incubated (1 hr, 25 °C) and combined pairwise, followed by centrifugation (6500 g, 4 min, 4°C) to pellet the precipitated proteins. Pellets were washed twice in cold methanol, after which the pellet was solubilized in PBS containing 1.2% (w/v) SDS in PBS via sonication and heating (5 min, 80 °C). The SDS-solubilized, probe-labeled proteome samples were diluted with 5 mL of PBS to a final SDS concentration of 0.2% (w/v). The solutions were then incubated with 100 µL of Pierce streptavidin-agarose beads overnight at 4 °C, followed by incubation at room temperature for 2 hrs. The beads were washed sequentially with 5 mL of 0.2% SDS/PBS, three times with PBS (5 mL per wash), and three times with H2O (5 mL per wash) with centrifugation (1,400 g, 3 min) between washes to pellet the beads.  On-bead trypsin and Azo digestion The washed protein-bound beads were resuspended in 500 µL of 6 M urea in PBS and 10 mM dithiothreitol (65 °C, 15 min). Samples were alkylated by adding iodoacetamide to a final concentration of 20 mM (37 °C, 30 min), then diluted 3-fold with PBS and centrifuged (1,400 g, 2 min). The pelleted beads were resuspended in a mixture of 200 µL of 2 M urea/PBS, 1 mM CaCl2, and 2 µg sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) and incubated overnight at 37 °C with shaking. The beads were pelleted by centrifugation (1,400 g, 2 min) and washed three times with PBS (500 µL per wash), then three times with H2O (500 µL per wash). Azo-labeled peptides were cleaved from the beads by adding 50 µL of 50 mM sodium hydrosulfite (Na2S2O4) and rotating at room temperature for 1 hr. Beads were pelleted by centrifugation (1,400 g, 3 min), and the supernatant was transferred to a new centrifuge tube. Cleavage was repeated twice more (75 µL of 50 mM Na2S2O4), with supernatants transferred to the same centrifuge tube as the previous supernatant. The beads were washed twice with H2O (100 µL per wash) and combined with the previous elution. Formic acid (17.5 µL) was added to the sample, which was stored at −20 °C.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS and data analysis for reductive dimethylation whole-proteome quantification: LC-MS/MS was performed on a Thermo LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an easy-nanoLC system (Agilent). For each of the 22 off-line fractions, 10 µL of peptide mixture was pre-loaded onto a C18 pre-column. Peptides were eluted onto a 100 mm fused silica column packed with 10 cm C18 using a 4 hr gradient of buffer B in buffer A (buffer A: 95% H2O, 5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid; buffer B: 20% H2O, 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). The flow rate through the column was set to ~0.4 µL/min and the spray voltage was set to 2.75 kV. One full MS1 scan (400-1800 MW) was followed by 8 data dependent scans of the nth most intense ions with dynamic exclusion enabled. The resulting tandem MS data were searched using the SEQUEST algorithm against the E. coli K-12 reverse-concatenated FASTA database (UniProt). MS datasets were independently searched with light and heavy ReDiMe parameter files with a static modification on blysine and the peptide N-terminus of +28.0313 (light) or +34.0632 (heavy), and a static modification of +57.02146 on cysteine was specified to account for iodoacetamide alkylation. SEQUEST output files were filtered using DTASelect 2.0. Quantification of light:heavy ratios (R) was performed using the CIMAGE quantification package as previously described.4 Reported ratios are the average R value from 2 replicates with a coefficient of variance < 50%.   LC/LC-MS/MS and data analysis for cysteine reactivity profiling: Liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (LC/LC-MS/MS) analysis was performed on an LTQ-Orbitrap Discovery mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher) coupled to an Agilent 1200 series HPLC. Azo digests were pressure loaded onto a 250 µm fused silica desalting column packed with 4 cm of Aqua C18 reverse phase resin (Phenomenex). The peptides were then eluted onto a biphasic column (100 µm fused silica with a 5 µm tip, packed with 10 cm C18 and 4 cm Partisphere strong cation exchange resin (SCX, Whatman) using a five-step multidimensional LC/LC-MS/MS protocol (Multidimensional Protein Identification Technology, MudPIT).6 Each of the five steps used a salt push (0%, 50%, 80%, 100%, 100%), followed by a gradient of 5-100% Buffer B in Buffer A (Buffer A: 95% water, 5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid; Buffer B: 20% water, 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). The flow rate through the column was set to ~0.25 µL/min and the spray voltage was set to 2.75 kV. One full MS1 scan (400-1800 MW) was followed by 8 data dependent scans of the nth most intense ions with dynamic exclusion enabled. The generated tandem MS data were searched using the SEQUEST algorithm against the E. coli K-12 reverse-concatenated FASTA database (UniProt). A static modification of +57.02146 on cysteine was specified to account for iodoacetamide alkylation and differential modifications of +456.2849 (Azo-L modification) and +462.2987 (Azo-H modification) were specified on cysteine to account for probe modifications. SEQUEST output files were filtered using DTASelect 2.0. Quantification of light:heavy ratios (R) was performed using the CIMAGE quantification package as previously described.4 Reported R values were the average of at least two replicates.

### Publication Abstract
The natural product holomycin contains a unique cyclic ene-disulfide and exhibits broad-spectrum antimicrobial activities. Reduced holomycin chelates metal ions with a high affinity and disrupts metal homeostasis in the cell. To identify cellular metalloproteins inhibited by holomycin, reactive-cysteine profiling was performed using isotopic tandem orthogonal proteolysis-activity-based protein profiling (isoTOP-ABPP). This chemoproteomic analysis demonstrated that holomycin treatment increases the reactivity of metal-coordinating cysteine residues in several zinc-dependent and iron-sulfur cluster-dependent enzymes, including carbonic anhydrase II and fumarase A. We validated that holomycin inhibits fumarase A activity in bacterial cells and diminishes the presence of iron-sulfur clusters in fumarase A. Whole-proteome abundance analysis revealed that holomycin treatment induces zinc and iron starvation and cellular stress. This study suggests that holomycin inhibits bacterial growth by impairing the functions of multiple metalloenzymes and sets the stage for investigating the impact of metal-binding molecules on metalloproteomes by using chemoproteomics.

### Keywords
Chemoproteomics, Antibiotics, Metalloproteins

### Affiliations
Boston College
Boston College Department of Chemistry

### Submitter
Julia Falco

### Lab Head
Dr Eranthie Weerapana
Boston College Department of Chemistry


