### Accession
PXD010627

### Title
Drosophila Testis Proteome -  Stage-specific testes proteomics of Drosophila melanogaster identifies essential proteins for male fertility

### Description
Spermiogenesis in Drosophila melanogaster is a highly conserved process and essential for male fertility. In this haploid phase of spermatogenesis, motile sperm are assembled from round cells, flagella are assembled, and needle-shaped nuclei with highly compacted genomes are formed. We aimed at identifying proteins relevant for the maturation phase from spermatids to sperm. As transcription takes place mainly in spermatocytes, and transcripts with relevance for post-meiotic sperm development are translationally repressed for days, we comparatively analysed the prote-ome of larval testes (stages before meiotic divisions), of testes of 1–2-day-old pupae (meiotic and early spermatid stages) and adult flies (late spermatids and sperm). We identified 6677 pro-teins, with 422 solely detected in larval testes, 623 in pupal testes and 634 in adult testes. We analysed a few so far uncharacterized proteins with repect to stage specific expression and im-portance for male fertility. For example, Mst84B (gene CG1988), a very basic cysteine- and lysine-rich nuclear protein, was present in the phase of transition from a histone-based to a pro-tamine-based chromatin structure. CG6332 encodes d-Theg, which is related to the mouse tHEG and human THEG proteins. Mutants of d-Theg lacked sperm in the seminal vesicles and were sterile. The identification of numerous predicted proteins underscores the high potential of pro-teome analysis for future analyses of spermatogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
Peptides were separated on an Easy nano-flow HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific,) using a binary buffer system consisting of buffer A (0.1% formic acid or 0.5% acetic acid) and buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid or 0.5% acetic acid). This system was coupled to a Or-bitrap based mass spectrometer via a nano-electrospray ionization source (Velos or QExactive). Peptides were eluted from in-house packed 20 cm (3 µm beads, 75 µm ID, Dr. Maisch Germa-ny) or 50 cm (1.8 µm beads, 75 µm ID, Dr. Maisch Germany) column by linearly increasing the relative amount of buffer B from 7% to 38% in buffer B within 40 min and further increase to 65 % buffer B within 10 min, followed by 5 min at 95% buffer B and then re-equilibration for 5 min to 5% buffer B. Column temperature was kept constant at 50°C using an in-house build column oven. MS spectra in a mass range of 350–1650 m/z were acquired using an AGC target of 3E6 at a resolution of 70,000 at 200 m/z. The instrument worked in data-dependent mode; the ten most intense peaks for fragmentation (HCD or CID) in a 100–1650 m/z mass range were isolated. The AGC target was set to 5E5, combined with a resolution of 35,000 at 200 m/z, and a maximum injection time was set to 60 ms.

### Data Protocol
The complete set of raw files was processed using MaxQuant (1.5.3.8) and the implemented Andromeda search engine (Cox and Mann, 2008, Cox et al., 2016). For protein assignment, ESI-MS/MS fragmentation spectra were correlated to the UniProt fruit fly database (Drosophila mel-anogaster, complete proteome, June 2017) as well as a list of contaminants. A maximum of two missed cleavages and a mass tolerance of 4.5 ppm and 7 ppm were set for the first and main MS/MS search, respectively. Carbamidomethyl at cysteine residues was defined as a fixed modi-fication, and oxidation at methionine and acetylation at the N-terminus of proteins were set as variable modifications. A minimal peptide length of seven amino acids was required for identi-fication. For quantification, a minimal ratio count of 2 was selected. The FDR was controlled to 0.01 by a target-decoy approach at the peptide-spectrum-match and protein level using the im-plemented reverse-algorithm. MaxQuant output text files were filtered for contaminants and reverse entries. Gene ontology based on Uniprot identifiers was annotated in the Perseus soft-ware ( Tyanova et al., 2016).  Data visualization and analysis was done in the in-house developed software Instant Clue (www.instantclue.uni-koeln.de).

### Publication Abstract
Spermiogenesis in Drosophila melanogaster is a highly conserved process and essential for male fertility. In this haploid phase of spermatogenesis, motile sperm are assembled from round cells, and flagella and needle-shaped nuclei with highly compacted genomes are formed. As transcription takes place mainly in spermatocytes and transcripts relevant for post-meiotic sperm development are translationally repressed for days, we comparatively analysed the proteome of larval testes (only germ cell stages before meiotic divisions), testes of 1-2-day-old pupae (germ cell stages before meiotic divisions, meiotic and early spermatid stages) and adult flies (germ cell stages before meiotic divisions, meiotic and early spermatid stages, late spermatids and sperm). We identified 6,171 proteins; 61 proteins were detected solely in one stage and are thus enriched, namely 34 in larval testes, 77 in pupal testes and 214 in adult testes. To substantiate our mass spectrometric data, we analysed the stage-specific synthesis and importance for male fertility of a number of uncharacterized proteins. For example, Mst84B (gene CG1988), a very basic cysteine- and lysine-rich nuclear protein and was present in the transition phase from a histone-based to a protamine-based chromatin structure. CG6332 encodes d-Theg, which is related to the mouse tHEG and human THEG proteins. Mutants of d-Theg were sterile due to the lack of sperm in the seminal vesicles. Our catalogue of proteins of the different stages of testis development in D. melanogaster will pave the road for future analyses of spermatogenesis.

### Keywords
Larvae, Pupal, Adult, Tests

### Affiliations
Institute for Genetics and Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD), University of Cologne, Joseph-Stelzmann-Strasse 26, 50931 Cologne, Germany. Center for Molecular Medicine (CMMC), University of Cologne, 50931 Cologne, Germany
Institute for Genetics and Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD)

### Submitter
Hendrik Nolte

### Lab Head
Dr Marcus Krüger
Institute for Genetics and Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD), University of Cologne, Joseph-Stelzmann-Strasse 26, 50931 Cologne, Germany. Center for Molecular Medicine (CMMC), University of Cologne, 50931 Cologne, Germany


