### Accession
PXD006473

### Title
M. bovis BCG PknG physiological substrates

### Description
Mycobacterial Ser/Thr kinases play a critical role in bacterial physiology and pathogenesis. Linking kinases to the substrates they phosphorylate in vivo, thereby elucidating their exact functions, is still a challenge. The aim of this work was to associate protein phosphorylation in mycobacteria with important subsequent macro cellular events by identifying the physiological substrates of PknG in Mycobacterium bovis BCG.  The study compared the phosphoproteome dynamics during the batch growth of M. bovis BGC versus the respective PknG knock-out mutant (ΔPknG-BCG) strains.

### Sample Protocol
We employed TiO2 phosphopeptide enrichment techniques combined with label-free quantitative phosphoproteomics workflow on LC/MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Identified PknG substrates were validated by targeted mass spectrometry workflow. A spectral library was generated using the discovery phosphoproteomic data in Skyline (version 3.6.0.10162), with the best representative spectrum for each identified peptide and phosphopeptide. To understand the kinase–substrate interaction of the target peptides, a structure-based modelling study was undertaken. The target peptides were modelled and docked into an existing ADP-bound PknG structure (PDB id 4Y0X) using CABS-dock web server (http://biocomp.chem.uw.edu.pl/CABSdock) to identify each peptide’s binding site.

### Publication Abstract
Mycobacterial Ser/Thr kinases play a critical role in bacterial physiology and pathogenesis. Linking kinases to the substrates they phosphorylate <i>in vivo</i>, thereby elucidating their exact functions, is still a challenge. The aim of this work was to associate protein phosphorylation in mycobacteria with important subsequent macro cellular events by identifying the physiological substrates of PknG in <i>Mycobacterium bovis</i> BCG. The study compared the phosphoproteome dynamics during the batch growth of <i>M. bovis</i> BCG <i>versus</i> the respective PknG knock-out mutant (&#x394;PknG-BCG) strains. We employed TiO<sub>2</sub> phosphopeptide enrichment techniques combined with label-free quantitative phosphoproteomics workflow on LC-MS/MS. The comprehensive analysis of label-free data identified 603 phosphopeptides on 307 phosphoproteins with high confidence. Fifty-five phosphopeptides were differentially phosphorylated, of these, 23 phosphopeptides were phosphorylated in <i>M. bovis</i> BCG wild-type only and not in the mutant. These were further validated through targeted mass spectrometry assays (PRMs). Kinase-peptide docking studies based on a published crystal structure of PknG in complex with GarA revealed that the majority of identified phosphosites presented docking scores close to that seen in previously described PknG substrates, GarA, and ribosomal protein L13. Six out of the 22 phosphoproteins had higher docking scores than GarA, consistent with the proteins identified here being true PknG substrates. Based on protein functional analysis of the PknG substrates identified, this study confirms that PknG plays an important regulatory role in mycobacterial metabolism, through phosphorylation of ATP binding proteins and enzymes in the TCA cycle. This work also reinforces PknG's regulation of protein translation and folding machinery.

### Keywords
Kinases, Pkng; phosphoproteomics; mycobacteria

### Affiliations
Department of Intergrated Biomedical Sciences Institute of Infectious Disease and molecular medicine
University of Cape Town

### Submitter
Kehilwe Nakedi

### Lab Head
Dr Jonathan M Blackburn
Department of Intergrated Biomedical Sciences Institute of Infectious Disease and molecular medicine


