### Accession
PXD032781

### Title
Interaction of LATS1 with SMAC links the MST2/Hippo pathway with apoptosis in an IAP dependent manner

### Description
Metastatic malignant melanoma is the deadliest skin cancer type, and it is characterized by its high resistance to apoptosis. The main driving mutations in melanoma cause hyperactivation of genes within the ERK pathway, with BRAF mutations being the most frequent ones, followed by NRAS, NF1 and MEK mutations. Increasing evidence shows that the MST2/Hippo pathway is also deregulated in this cancer type. While mutations are rare, MST2/Hippo pathway core proteins expression levels are often dysregulated in melanoma. The expression of the tumour suppressor RASSF1A, a bona fide activator of the pro-apoptotic MST2 pathway, is silenced by promoter methylation in over half of melanomas and correlates with poor prognosis. Here, using mass spectrometry-based interaction proteomics we identified Second Mitochondria-derived Activator of Caspases (SMAC) as a novel LATS1 interactor. We show that RASSF1A-dependent activation of the pro-apoptotic MST2 pathway promotes LATS1-SMAC interaction and negatively regulates the anti-apoptotic signal mediated by the members of the IAP family. Moreover, proteomic experiments identified a common cluster of the apoptotic regulator that bind to SMAC and LATS1. Mechanistic analysis show that the LATS1-SMAC complex promotes XIAP ubiquitination and its subsequent degradation which ultimately results apoptosis. Importantly, we show that the oncogenic BRAFV600E mutant prevents the pro-apoptotic signal mediated by the LAST1-SMAC complex while treatment of melanoma cell lines with BRAF inhibitors promotes this complex, indicating that inhibition of the LATS1-SMAC might be necessary for BRAFV600E-driven melanoma. Finally, we show that LATS1-SMAC interaction is regulated by the SMAC mimetic Birinapant which requires the inhibition of C-IAP1 and the degradation of XIAP, indicating that the MST2/Hippo pathway is part of the mechanism of action of Birinapant. Overall, the current work shows SMAC-dependent apoptosis is regulated by the LATS1 tumour suppressor and supports the idea that LATS1 is a signalling hub that regulates the crosstalk between the MST2 pathway, the apoptotic network and the RAF/ERK pathway.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were transfected with desired tagged constructs (FLAG-LATS1, GFP-SMAC, HA-RASSF1A) and serum deprived overnight. ~1 mg of protein extract was incubated with 5 µL of ab-conjugated beads. After 3 washes with 1% NP40 washing buffer (1 % NP40, 20 mM Hepes, 300 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, 10 mM NaF) two extra washes were performed with detergent-free washing buffer to remove detergent. Immunoprecipitated complexes were trypsin-digested on-beads. First, samples were incubated in 60 µL EBI (2 M Urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 5 µg/mL Trypsin- Promega Sequencing Grade) at 600 rpm and 26 ̊C for 30 min followed by centrifugation at 14000 rpm at 4 ̊C for 30 sec. Supernatants were collected and beads containing peptides were further eluted by adding 2 x 25 µL EBII (2 M Urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 1 mM DTT), vortexed and centrifuged. Supernatants were collected and added to the previous elution rounds and left overnight at room temperature for further digestion. Then, 20 µL of 50 mM IAA (Sigma-Aldrich) were added, mixed and incubated for 30 min at room temperature. C18 stage tips were prepared as previously described (Rappsilber et al 2007) and activated by loading 50 µL of 50 % AcN (Fisher) – 0.1 % TFA (Sigma-Aldrich). Stage tips were centrifuged at 5800 rpm for 30 sec and flow-through discarded. Next, stage tips were washed with 50 µL of 0.1 % TFA and flow through discarded. Prior to loading the digested samples to the C18 stage tips, TFA was added to each sample (final concentration 1 % TFA). Samples were loaded into the C18 stage tips, flow through discarded, and washed twice with 50 µL 0.1 % TFA. Peptides were eluted in clean tubes by adding twice 25 µL of 50 % AcN – 0.1 % TFA. Finally, samples were evaporated in a CentriVap Concentrator. LCMSMS Method (Bruker timsTof Pro): Samples were run on a Bruker timsTof Pro mass spectrometer connected to a Bruker nanoElute nano-lc chromatography system. Tryptic peptides were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid. Each sample was loaded onto an Aurora UHPLC column (25cm x 75μm ID, C18, 1.6 μm) (Ionopticks) and separated with an increasing acetonitrile gradient over 30 minutes at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode with a capillary voltage of 1500 V, dry gas flow of 3 l/min and a dry temperature of 180 °C. All data was acquired with the instrument operating in trapped ion mobility spectrometry (TIMS) mode. Trapped ions were selected for ms/ms using parallel accumulation serial fragmentation (PASEF). A scan range of (100-1700 m/z) was performed at a rate of 10 PASEF MS/MS frames to 1 MS scan with a cycle time of 1.15s.

### Data Protocol
Maxquant: The raw data was searched against the Homo sapiens subset of the Uniprot Swissprot database (reviewed) using the search engine Maxquant (release 1.6.11.0) using specific parameters for trapped ion mobility spectra data dependent acquisition (TIMS DDA). Each peptide used for protein identification met specific Maxquant parameters, i.e., only peptide scores that corresponded to a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 were accepted from the Maxquant database search. The normalised protein intensity of each identified protein was used for label free quantitation (LFQ).

### Publication Abstract
Metastatic malignant melanoma is the deadliest skin cancer, and it is characterised by its high resistance to apoptosis. The main melanoma driving mutations are part of ERK pathway, with BRAF mutations being the most frequent ones, followed by NRAS, NF1 and MEK mutations. Increasing evidence shows that the MST2/Hippo pathway is also deregulated in melanoma. While mutations are rare, MST2/Hippo pathway core proteins expression levels are often dysregulated in melanoma. The expression of the tumour suppressor RASSF1A, a bona fide activator of the MST2 pathway, is silenced by promoter methylation in over half of melanomas and correlates with poor prognosis. Here, using mass spectrometry-based interaction proteomics we identified the Second Mitochondria-derived Activator of Caspases (SMAC) as a novel LATS1 interactor. We show that RASSF1A-dependent activation of the MST2 pathway promotes LATS1-SMAC interaction and negatively regulates the antiapoptotic signal mediated by the members of the IAP family. Moreover, proteomic experiments identified a common cluster of apoptotic regulators that bind to SMAC and LATS1. Mechanistic analysis shows that the LATS1-SMAC complex promotes XIAP ubiquitination and its subsequent degradation which ultimately results in apoptosis. Importantly, we show that the oncogenic BRAF<sup>V600E</sup> mutant prevents the proapoptotic signal mediated by the LATS1-SMAC complex while treatment of melanoma cell lines with BRAF inhibitors promotes the formation of this complex, indicating that inhibition of the LATS1-SMAC might be necessary for BRAF<sup>V600E</sup>-driven melanoma. Finally, we show that LATS1-SMAC interaction is regulated by the SMAC mimetic Birinapant, which requires C-IAP1 inhibition and the degradation of XIAP, suggesting that the MST2 pathway is part of the mechanism of action of Birinapant. Overall, the current work shows that SMAC-dependent apoptosis is regulated by the LATS1 tumour suppressor and supports the idea that LATS1 is a signalling hub that regulates the crosstalk between the MST2 pathway, the apoptotic network and the ERK pathway.

### Keywords
Mst2, Lats1, Hippo, Melanoma, Iap, Smac, Apoptosis

### Affiliations
Systems Biology Ireland, University College Dublin

### Submitter
David Matallanas

### Lab Head
Dr David Gómez Matallanas
Systems Biology Ireland, University College Dublin


