### Accession
PXD029669

### Title
Streptomyces sp. MB42 proteomics response to catechin, dopamine, phenylephrine

### Description
Streptomyces sp. MB42 produces antimicrobial compound under the pressence of specific compounds. This experiment is to see which gene cluster upregulated during the treatment of target compound.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were prepared essentially as described (1,2). Briefly, bacterial culture was pelleted and lysed in 100 µL lysis buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6, 50 mM EDTA) and disrupted by sonication (for Marco’s sample, sonication was skipped). Total protein was precipitated using the chloroform-methanol method (3), and the proteins dissolved in 0.1% RapiGest SF surfactant (Waters) at 95°C. The protein concentration was measured at this step using BCA method. Protein samples were then reduced by adding 5 mM DTT and incubate at 60°C for 30 min, followed by thiol group protection with 21.6 mM iodoacetamide incubation at room temperature in dark for 30 min. Then 0.1 μg trypsin (recombinant, proteomics grade, Roche) per 10 μg protein was added, and samples were digested at 37°C overnight. After digestion, trifluoroacetic acid was added to 0.5% and samples were incubated at 37°C for 30 min followed by centrifugation to degrade and remove RapiGest SF. Peptide solution containing 6 μg peptide was then cleaned and desalted using STAGE-Tips (4). Briefly, 6 μg of peptide was loaded on a conditioned StageTip with 2 pieces of 1 mm diameter C18 disk (Empore, product number 2215), washed twice with 0.5% formic acid solution, and eluted with elution solution (80% acetonitrile, 0.5% formic acid). Acetonitrile was then evaporated in a SpeedVac. Final peptide concentration was adjusted to 40 ng·μL-1 using sample solution (3% acetonitrile, 0.5% formic acid) for analysis. The desalted peptides solution was separated on an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system set in a trap-elute configuration with a nanoEase M/Z Symmetry C18 100 Å, 5 µm, 180 µm × 20 mm (Waters) trap column for peptide loading/retention and nanoEase M/Z HSS C18 T3 100 Å, 1.8 µm, 75 µm × 250 mm (Waters) analytical column for peptide separation. Mobile phase A composed of 0.1% formic acid (FA) in ULC-MS grade H2O (Biosolve), while mobile phase B composed of 0.1% FA, 10% H2O in ULC-MS grade acetonitrile (ACN, Biosolve). The flow gradients used for analysis was a shallow 113 min gradient of mobile phase A and B controlled by a flow sensor at 0.3 µL·min-1. The gradient was programmed with linear increment from 1% to 5% B from 0 to 2 min, 5% to 13% B from 2 to 63 min, 13% to 22% B from 63 to 85 min, 22% to 40% B from 85 to 104 min, 90% at 105 min and kept at 90% to 113 min. The eluent was introduced by electro-spray ionisation (ESI) via the nanoESI source (Thermo) to QExactive HF (Thermo Scientific). The QExactive HF was operated in positive mode with data dependent acquisition. The MS survey scan was set with mass range 350-1400 m·z-1 at 120,000 resolution. For individual peaks, the data dependent intensity threshold of 2.0 × 104 was applied for triggering an MS/MS event, isotope exclusion on and dynamic exclusion was 20 s. Unassigned, +1 and charges >+8 were excluded with peptide match mode preferred. For MS/MS events, the loop count was set to 10, isolation window at 1.6 m·z-1, resolution at 15,000, fixed first mass of 120 m·z-1, and normalised collision energy (NCE) at 28 eV.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed using MaxQuant v1.6.17.0 using default label free quantification parameters.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Antibiotic, Catechin, Dopamine, Streptomyces sp. mb42, Phenylephrine

### Affiliations
Leiden University
MBT, Institute of Biology Leiden, Leiden University

### Submitter
Chao DU

### Lab Head
Dr Chao DU
MBT, Institute of Biology Leiden, Leiden University


