### Accession
PXD020089

### Title
IRG1 Inflammasome Proteomics Experiments

### Description
BMDMs of indicated phenotypes were stimulated with LPS for 24h and analyzed or restimulated with LPS for additional 3h and analyzed. In some experiments 1mM itaconate was added at 4h of LPS first stimulation.

### Sample Protocol
In brief, cell pellets were lysed in 8M urea and cysteines were reduced and alkylated.  Proteins were sequentially digested with LysC (1:50 enzyme:substrate, Wako Chemicals) and trypsin (1:100 enzyme:substrate, Promega) and desalted by solid phase extraction.  Peptide amounts were normalized and labelled with TMT10plex Isobaric Label Reagents (Thermo Fisher).  Pooled peptides were fractionated by basic pH reverse phase into a 96-well plate and fractions were consolidated into 24 samples in a checkerboard manner.  Peptides were separated on a 50 μM C18 EASY-Spray column (Thermo Scientific) using a 70 min, 8−28% acetonitrile gradient and spectra were acquired on an Oribtrap Fusion (Thermo Scientific) using a TMT-MS3 method.

### Data Protocol
All RAW files were processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 and searched against the Uniprot mouse reference proteome (UP000000589).  Searches were conducted with dynamic modifications allowed for methionine oxidation (+15.995), lysine itaconylation (+112.016), cysteine itaconylation (+130.026) or cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57.021).  Signal-to-noise values for all peptides were summed within each TMT channel and each channel was scaled according to the highest channel sum so that the sum abundance of each channel is equal.  Peptides were filtered for a minimum sum signal-to-noise value of 160 across all 10 channels.  Quantitative data from razor peptides were excluded and only unique peptides were used for protein quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
Itaconate is a unique regulatory metabolite that is induced upon Toll-like receptor (TLR) stimulation in myeloid cells. Here, we demonstrate major inflammatory tolerance and cell death phenotypes associated with itaconate production in activated macrophages. We show that endogenous itaconate is a key regulator of the signal 2 of NLR family pyrin domain containing 3 (NLRP3) inflammasome activation after long lipopolysaccharide (LPS) priming, which establishes tolerance to late NLRP3 inflammasome activation. We show that itaconate acts synergistically with inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) and that the ability of various TLR ligands to establish NLRP3 inflammasome tolerance depends on the pattern of co-expression of IRG1 and iNOS. Mechanistically, itaconate accumulation upon prolonged inflammatory stimulation prevents full caspase-1 activation and processing of gasdermin D, which we demonstrate to be post-translationally modified by endogenous itaconate. Altogether, our data demonstrate that metabolic rewiring in inflammatory macrophages establishes tolerance to NLRP3 inflammasome activation that, if uncontrolled, can result in pyroptotic cell death and tissue damage.

### Keywords
Irg1, Itaconylation, Proteomics, Lcms, Bmdm, Lps

### Affiliations
Agios
Proteomics, Cell Metabolism, Agios, Cambridge, MA, USA

### Submitter
Kate Lizotte

### Lab Head
Dr Sebastian Hayes
Proteomics, Cell Metabolism, Agios, Cambridge, MA, USA


