### Accession
PXD024490

### Title
Quantitative proteomics and transcriptomics analysis of fruit development and ripening in watermelon

### Description
Here, we used RNA sequencing and tandem mass tag (TMT)–based quantitative proteomics technology to study the comprehensive mRNA and protein expression changes during fruit development and ripening in watermelon. A total of 6,226 proteins were quantified, and the number of quantitative proteins is the largest in fruit proteome to date, comparable to studies in model organisms such as rice and Arabidopsis. Omics analysis showed that smaller changes occurred in protein abundance compared to mRNA abundance. Furthermore, protein and transcript abundance were poorly correlated, and the correlation coefficients decreased during fruit development and ripening. Our comprehensive transcriptomic and proteomic data offer a valuable resource for watermelon research, and provide new insights into the molecular mechanisms underlying complex regulatory networks of fruit ripening in watermelon.

### Sample Protocol
Sample was first grinded by liquid nitrogen, then the powder was transferred to 5 mL centrifuge tube and sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (including 1% TritonX-100, 10 mM dithiothreitol, and 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, 50 μM PR-619，3 μM TSA，50 mM NAM and 2 mM EDTA). An equal volume of Tris-saturated phenol (pH 8.0) was added; then, the mixture was further vortexed for 5 min. After centrifugation (4 °C, 10 min, 5 000g), the upper phenol phase was transferred to a new centrifuge tube. Proteins were precipitated by adding at least four volumes of ammonium sulfate-saturated methanol and incubated at -20 °C for at least 6 h. After centrifugation at 4 °C for 10 min, the supernatant was discarded. The remaining precipitate was washed with ice-cold methanol once, followed by ice-cold acetone for three times. The protein was redissolved in 8 M urea and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion.After trypsin digestion, peptide was desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. Peptide was reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for TMT kit. Briefly, one unit of TMT reagent were thawed and reconstituted in acetonitrile. The peptide mixtures were then incubated for 2 h at room temperature and pooled, desalted and dried by vacuum centrifugation.The tryptic peptides were fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Thermo Betasil C18 column (5 μm particles, 10 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated with a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0) over 60 min into 60 fractions. Then, the peptides were combined into 6 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging. The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 26 min, 23% to 35% in 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system.The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z. The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against uniprot database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 4 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da.

### Data Protocol
The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The gradient was comprised of anincrease from 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 26 min, 23% to 35% in 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rateof 400 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system.The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to theUPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were thenselected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20MS/MS scans with 15.0s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z.1. The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against uniprot database concatenated with reverse decoy database.Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 4 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the masstolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and acetylation modification and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for modified peptides was set > 40. GO annotation proteome was derived from the UniProt-GOA database ( http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/). Identified protein IDs were converted to UniProt ID, and then mapped to GO ID by protein IDs. If some identified proteins were not existed in UniProt-GOA database, protein’s GO functional annotation were based on protein sequence alignment method using the InterProScan soft. Proteins were classified into three categories by GO annotation: Cellular Compartment (CC),  Molecular Function (MF), and Biological Process (BP). For each category, a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test was used to test the enrichment of the DEPs against all identified proteins. A corrected p-value < 0.05 is considered as significant for GO analysis. The KEGG database was employed to identify enriched pathways, and the analysis was conducted according to above GO analysis. KEGG pathways were classified into hierarchical categories according to the KEGG website. For further hierarchical clustering based on DEPs functional classification (such as GO, Pathway, Domain, and Complex). Firstly, we collated all the categories obtained after enrichment along with their P values. Secondly, we filtered the categories which were at least enriched in one of the clusters with P value <0.05, and the function x = −log10 (P value) was used to transform the filtered P value matrix. Finally, these x values were z-transformed for each functional category. These z scores were then clustered by one-way hierarchical clustering (Euclidean distance, average linkage clustering) in Genesis. Cluster membership were visualized by a heat map using the “heatmap.2” function from the “gplots” R-package.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tmt; watermelon; fruit ripening

### Affiliations
Beijing Academy of Agriculture and Forestry Sciences

### Submitter
yu yongtao

### Lab Head
Dr Yongtao yu
Beijing Academy of Agriculture and Forestry Sciences


