### Accession
PXD004241

### Title
Quantitative proteomic analysis of HIV-1 Tat-induced dysregulation in SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells

### Description
Despite affecting up to 70% of HIV+ patients and being the leading cause of dementia in patients under 40 years, the molecular mechanisms involved in the onset of HAND are not well understood. To address this, we performed SILAC-based quantitative proteomic analysis on HIV-Tat treated SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells. Isolated protein was fractionated by SDS-PAGE and analysed by nLC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Velos. Using MaxQuant, we identified and quantitation 3077 unique protein groups. Statistical analysis identified 407 differentially regulated proteins, of which 29 were identified as highly significantly and stably dysregulated using an additional standard deviation-based cutoff. GO-term analysis shows dysregulation in both protein translation machinery as well as cytoskeletal regulation which have both been implicated in other dementias. In addition, several key cytoskeletal regulatory proteins such as ARHGEF17, the Rho GTPase, SHROOM3 and CMRP1 are down-regulated. Together, we show that HIV-Tat can dysregulate neuronal cytoskeletal regulatory proteins which could lead to the major HAND clinical manifestation - synapse loss.

### Sample Protocol
Heavy and light SILAC labelled Neurobllastoma cells were treated with 1 ug/mL HIV-1 Tat protein or control, respectively, for 24 hours in triplicate. After treatment, cells were harvested and washed and counted then mixed in equal quantities and lysed. Following Lysis, IMAC separation was performed. The two resultant fractions were separated by SDS-PAGE. 10 fractions were then taken per lane and peptides were extracted by in-gel digestion. peptides were then measured by LC-MS using a nLC easyII LC coupled to an orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
The raw data files were searched using MaxQuant (version 1.3.0.5) against the Human Uniprot Global Proteome, (12 January 2013, taxonomy ID 9606) and the MaxQuant built in common contaminant database, using a reverse decoy database with global FDR set at 5%. Trypsin was used as the protease, allowing two missed cleavages and a fixed modification of Carbamidomethyl (C) and variable modifications of Oxidation (M) and Acetyl (Protein N-term). Only unique, unmodified peptides were used for quantitation. The text outputs from MaxQuant (proteingroups.txt, peptides.txt, evidence.txt, paramters.txt, summary.txt) were imported into the statistical platform R (http://www.r-project.org/). Decoy Hits (Rev) and Contaminants (Con) were removed. Data was further curated by removing any protein with a H/L variability greater than 300, indicating greater than 3 SD across all redundant quantifiable peptides for the protein within a sample, thereby removing inaccuracies in protein quantitation from the data. A two-tailed t-test was then performed on the entire dataset, using a subset of the entire dataset, those proteins within 1sd and with a variance below 0.25, against which to assess differential regulation of the dataset. Proteins with a t-test p-value below 0.05 were identified as significantly differentially expressed and those with a t-test p-value below 0.05 and average expression above the 2SD cutoff were deemed highly and significantly differentially expressed.

### Publication Abstract
Despite affecting up to 70% of HIV-positive patients and being the leading cause of dementia in patients under 40 years, the molecular mechanisms involved in the onset of HIV-associated neurocognitive disorders (HAND) are not well understood. To address this, we performed SILAC-based quantitative proteomic analysis on HIV-Tat treated SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells. Isolated protein was fractionated by SDS-PAGE and analyzed by nLC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Velos. Using MaxQuant, we identified and quantified 3077 unique protein groups, of which 407 were differentially regulated. After applying an additional standard deviation-based cutoff, 29 of these were identified as highly significantly and stably dysregulated. GO term analysis shows dysregulation in both protein translation machinery as well as cytoskeletal regulation that have both been implicated in other dementias. In addition, several key cytoskeletal regulatory proteins such as ARHGEF17, the Rho GTPase, SHROOM3, and CMRP1 are downregulated. Together, these data demonstrate that HIV-Tat can dysregulate neuronal cytoskeletal regulatory proteins that could lead to the major HAND clinical manifestation-synapse loss.

### Keywords
Network analysis, Proteomics, Neuroblastoma

### Affiliations
Proteome centre Tubingen
Institute of Infectious Disease & Molecular Medicine and Department of Integrative Biomedical Sciences, UCT.

### Submitter
Tariq Ganief

### Lab Head
Dr Jonathan Blackburn
Institute of Infectious Disease & Molecular Medicine and Department of Integrative Biomedical Sciences, UCT.


