### Accession
PXD014711

### Title
Drug-tolerant cell-derived exosomes regulate proteasome inhibitor resistance pathways in MLL leukemias

### Description
The interplay between cancer cells and microenvironment can influence treatment response and plays a key role in the emergence of drug resistance. Rapidly acquired resistance prevents proteasome inhibitors (PIs) therapies from achieving stable and complete responses. Investigating the underlying mechanisms and developing effective strategies against PI resistance are highly desired in the clinic. Here we uncovered that PI resistance was reversible in MLL leukemia, which consistent with the finding that patients could regain sensitivity to PIs after a drug holiday. Exosomes derived from drug-tolerant cells could transmit PI resistance to sensitive cells via facilitating cell cycle arrest and stemness pathway in MLL leukemia cells. Furthermore, TieDIE algorithm integration analysis of transcriptome and proteome datasets identified candidate exosomal proteins, providing potential therapeutic targets for treating refractory MLL leukemia. Therefore, exosomal regulatory proteins may serve as a predictor and a potential therapeutic target for PI resistance, and inhibiting the secretion of exosomes is a promising strategy for restoring PI resistance in vivo, which provides a paradigm and may also be applied for the treatment of other cancers resulting from chemotherapy relapse.

### Sample Protocol
Exosomes isolated from RS4;11-naive and RS4;11-resistant cells through ultracentrifugation were dissolved in RIPA buffer, and exosomal proteins were extracted and then digested overnight at 37°C by trypsin (Promega) through using FASP approach. Briefly, 30 μg exosomal proteins were used and three biological repeats of each treatment were prepared. An equal amount of peptides (measured by Nanodrop, A280) were injected into Easy-nLC 1000 coupled with an LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were eluted to analytical column (75 µm × 15 cm) packed with Jupiter Proteo resin (3 µm, C18, 300 Å, Phenomenex). The mobile phase consisted of buffer A (0.1% formic acid in water) and buffer B (0.1% formic acid in 95% acetonitrile). A flow rate of 300 nl/min and 120 min of the gradient from 5% B to 90% B was applied for the separation of peptides. MS scan range was from 350 to 2000 m/z with the resolution of 60,000.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were submitted for database search by MaxQuant (version 1.6.1.0) software against the UniProt Human database (release 2017_11_28, 20244 entries). The maximum of missed cleavages was set as 2, and trypsin was selected for protein digestion. Oxidation of modifications and acetylation of protein N termini were considered as variable modifications. The mass tolerance values for precursor and fragment ions were 6 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. Both maximum peptide and protein false discovery rates (FDR) were limited to 1%. Label-free quantification was performed by intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ), which based on at least two unique peptides to quantify the different protein profiling. Quantile normalization was performed to ensure each sample has the same distribution, the 2 fold change and p < 0.05 cut-off was set up for the screening of differentially expressed proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Proteasome inhibitors significantly improve cancer outcomes, but their use is eventually followed by proteasome inhibitor resistance and relapse. Current understanding of proteasome inhibitor resistance is limited to cell-autonomous mechanisms; whether non-autonomous mechanisms can be implicated in the development of proteasome inhibitor resistance is unclear. Here, we show that proteasome inhibitor tolerance can be transmitted non-autonomously through exosome-mediated intercellular interactions. We revealed that reversible proteasome inhibitor resistance can be transmitted from cells under therapy stress to na&#xef;ve sensitive cells through exosome-mediated cell cycle arrest and enhanced stemness in mixed-lineage leukemia cells. Integrated multi-omics analysis using the Tied Diffusion through Interacting Events algorithm identified several candidate exosomal proteins that may serve as predictors for proteasome inhibitor resistance and potential therapeutic targets for treating refractory mixed-lineage leukemia. Furthermore, inhibiting the secretion of exosomes is a promising strategy for reversing proteasome inhibitor resistance in vivo, which provides a novel proof of principle for the treatment of other refractory or relapsed cancers.

### Keywords
Mll leukemia, Drug tolerance, Proteasome inhibitor, Exosomes

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Medical Genomics, Shanghai Institute of Hematology, Rui Jin Hospital, School of Medicine and School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Shanghai Jiao Tong University

### Submitter
Zhi Qiao

### Lab Head
Dr Han Liu
State Key Laboratory of Medical Genomics, Shanghai Institute of Hematology, Rui Jin Hospital, School of Medicine and School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University


