### Accession
PXD018839

### Title
Defective NADPH Production in Mitochondrial Disease Complex I Causes Inflammation and Cell Death

### Description
Electron transport chain (ETC) defects occurring from mitochondrial disease mutations compromise ATP synthesis and render cells vulnerable to nutrient and oxidative stress conditions. This bioenergetic failure is thought to underlie pathologies associated with mitochondrial diseases. However, the precise metabolic processes resulting from a defective mitochondrial ETC that compromise cell viability under stress conditions are not entirely understood. We design a whole genome gain-of-function CRISPR activation screen using human mitochondrial disease complex I (CI) mutant cells to identify genes whose increased function rescue glucose restriction-induced cell death. The top hit of the screen is the cytosolic Malic Enzyme (ME1), that is sufficient to enable survival and proliferation of CI mutant cells under nutrient stress conditions. Unexpectedly, this metabolic rescue is independent of increased ATP synthesis through glycolysis or oxidative phosphorylation, but dependent on ME1-produced NADPH and glutathione (GSH). Survival upon nutrient stress or pentose phosphate pathway (PPP) inhibition depends on compensatory NADPH production through the mitochondrial one-carbon metabolism that is severely compromised in CI mutant cells. Importantly, this defective CI-dependent decrease in mitochondrial NADPH production pathway or genetic ablation of SHMT2 causes strong inflammatory cytokine signatures associated with redox dependent induction of ASK1 and activation of stress kinases p38 and JNK. These studies find that a major defect of CI deficiencies is decreased mitochondrial one-carbon NADPH production that is associated with increased inflammation and cell death.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were prepared as previously described (Navarrete-Perea J. et al 2018 J. Proteome Res. 17: 2226-2236) with some modifications. Samples were lysed  in 8M urea and 200mM EPPS (4-(2-hydroxyethl)-1-piperazinepropanesulfonic acid, pH 8.5 with protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Millipore Sigma). Protein concentration was determined by BCA assay according to manufacturer’s instructions (Pierce). Samples were reduced with 5mM TCEP (tris(2-carboxylethyl)phosphine) and alkylated with 10mM iodoacetamide. The reaction was quenched with 10mM DTT. Approximately 100 μg  protein was chloroform-methanol precipitated and resuspended in 200mM EPPS, pH 8.5. Protein was digested by Lys-C (1:50 protease:peptide ratio) overnight in a thermomixer  at 27 oC and 1100 rpm followed by trypsin (1:100) for 6 hr at 37 oC, 1100 rpm. Peptide quantification was performed using the micro-BCA assay. 50 μg  of peptide from each condition was labeled with tandem mass tag reagents (1:4; peptide:TMT label) (TMT10 , Pierce) for 2 hours at 25 oC . Modification of tyrosine residues with TMT was reversed by the addition of 5% hydroxyl amine for 20 minutes at 25 oC. The reaction was quenched with 0.5% TFA and 2 μg of each sample was pooled, desalted, and analyzed by LC-MS3  to check labeling efficiency and mixing ratios (label check). samples were combined at a 1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1 ratio using normalization factors determined by the label check. Combined samples were desalted on a Sep-Pak solid phase extraction column (Waters) and dried by speedvac. The sample was resuspended in 5% acetonitrile in 10mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH8 and fractionated offline by basic reversed-phase HPLC into a 96 well plate. Separation was performed using a 50 min linear gradient from 15% to 45% acetonitrile in 10mM ammonium bicarbonate at a flow rate of 0.4ml/min over a 300 Extend C18 column (Agilent). Fractions were combined in checkerboard fashion into 24 final samples and dried by speedvac .

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data processing and spectra assignment In-house developed software was used to convert acquired mass spectrometric data from the .RAW file to the mzXML format. Erroneous assignments of peptide ion charge state and monoisotopic m/z were also corrected by the internal software. SEQUEST algorithm was used to assign MS2 spectra by searching the data against a protein sequence database including Mouse Uniprot Database (downloaded June 2018) and known contaminants such as mouse albumin and human keratins. A forward (target) database component was followed by a decoy component including all listed protein sequences. Searches were performed using a 20 ppm precursor ion tolerance and requiring both peptide termini to be consistent with trypsin specificity. 16-plex TMT labels on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+304.2071 Da) were set as static modifications and oxidation of methionine residues (+15.99492 Da) as a variable modification. An MS2 spectra assignment false discovery rate (FDR) of less than 1% was implemented by applying the target-decoy database search strategy. Filtering was performed using a linear discrimination analysis method to create one combined filter parameter from the following peptide ion and MS2 spectra properties: XCorr and Cn, peptide ion mass accuracy, and peptide length. Linear discrimination scores were used to assign probabilities to each MS2 spectrum for being assigned correctly and these probabilities were further used to filter the data set with an MS2 spectra assignment FDR to obtain a protein identification FDR of less than 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Electron transport chain (ETC) defects occurring from mitochondrial disease mutations compromise ATP synthesis and render cells vulnerable to nutrient and oxidative stress conditions. This bioenergetic failure is thought to underlie pathologies associated with mitochondrial diseases. However, the precise metabolic processes resulting from a defective mitochondrial ETC that compromise cell viability under stress conditions are not entirely understood. We design a whole genome gain-of-function CRISPR activation screen using human mitochondrial disease complex I (CI) mutant cells to identify genes whose increased function rescue glucose restriction-induced cell death. The top hit of the screen is the cytosolic Malic Enzyme (ME1), that is sufficient to enable survival and proliferation of CI mutant cells under nutrient stress conditions. Unexpectedly, this metabolic rescue is independent of increased ATP synthesis through glycolysis or oxidative phosphorylation, but dependent on ME1-produced NADPH and glutathione (GSH). Survival upon nutrient stress or pentose phosphate pathway (PPP) inhibition depends on compensatory NADPH production through the mitochondrial one-carbon metabolism that is severely compromised in CI mutant cells. Importantly, this defective CI-dependent decrease in mitochondrial NADPH production pathway or genetic ablation of SHMT2 causes strong increases in inflammatory cytokine signatures associated with redox dependent induction of ASK1 and activation of stress kinases p38 and JNK. These studies find that a major defect of CI deficiencies is decreased mitochondrial one-carbon NADPH production that is associated with increased inflammation and cell death.

### Keywords
Human, Mitochondria, Nature communication manuscript:  ncomms-19-24220b, Tmt

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School
Dana Farber Cancer Institute: Dept. of Cancer Biology Harvard Medical School: Department of Cell Biology

### Submitter
mark Jedrychowski

### Lab Head
Dr Pere Puigserver
Dana Farber Cancer Institute: Dept. of Cancer Biology Harvard Medical School: Department of Cell Biology


