### Accession
PXD027486

### Title
Fetal immunomodulatory environment following cartilage injury – the key to cartilage regeneration?

### Description
Fetal cartilage fully regenerates following injury while in adult mammals cartilage injury leads to osteoarthritis (OA). OA is characterized by cartilage breakdown and joint inflammation and associated with significant pain and socioeconomic costs. As no clinically satisfactory treatment is available to date, disease-modifying therapies aimed to achieve cartilage regeneration are urgently required. The inherent regeneration potential of fetal individuals may hold answers to this unmet need. Therefore, to characterize the differences in fetal and adult response to cartilage injury, we carried out histology and comprehensive proteome analyses on fetal (day 80/150-day gestation) and adult cartilage samples one (fetal samples) and three (adult and fetal samples) days after surgical induction of a full-thickness cartilage lesion. In addition, proteins secreted by inflamed fetal MSCs in vitro were compared with the in vivo response to injury to evaluate their therapeutic potential. Histology of synovial samples revealed the presence of neutrophils one day post injury (p.i.) and an influx of macrophages into the subsynovial tissue on day 3 p.i. in fetal samples. In contrast, adult synovial samples showed invasion of neutrophils on day 3 p.i. Activation and migration of Iba1+- macrophages of the synovial lining was observed both in fetal and adult animals. Comparative mass spectrometry revealed 57 proteins significantly up-regulated (> 2FC, FDR<0.05), and 67 proteins significantly down-regulated (<-2 FC) upon injury in adults. Neutrophil-related proteins and acute phase proteins were the two major upregulated protein groups in adult cartilage following injury compared to fetal sheep. In contrast, several immunomodulating proteins and growth factors were significantly higher expressed in the fetus than the adult. Comparison of the in vitro MSCs with the in vivo fetal proteome revealed shared upregulation of 17 proteins, which were considered to be of potential therapeutic interest. The results of this study support our molecular understanding of successful fetal cartilage healing and new therapeutic strategies to induce regeneration in adult articular cartilage by modulating the inflammatory environment. The shared protein upregulation in fetal cartilage in vivo and in fetal MSCS during in vitro inflammation supports the possible therapeutic potential of these factors in specific and fetal MSCs in general.

### Sample Protocol
In vivo cartilage injury model Standardized cartilage lesions were created in musculoskeletally mature (2-5 years, body weight 95±12 kg), female Merino-cross ewes (Ovis aries) without orthopaedic disease and fetal lambs (80 gd, term=∼150 days). Following a minimally invasive medial parapatellar arthrotomy, bilateral full-thickness cartilage lesions with a diameter of 7 mm (adult sheep) resp. 1 mm (fetal lamb) and a depth of 1mm were created in the medial femoral condyle. Tissue samples were harvested immediately following euthanasia on day one and three (fetal sheep), respectively day 0 (uninjured control) and day three after injury (adult sheep) from three biological replicates per comparison group (adult injured, adult control, fetal injured, fetal uninjured twin control). After macroscopic evaluation using the OARSI scoring system, the medial femoral condyles and patellae with attached synovial membrane were surgically excised and left, and right knees were randomly assigned to mass spectrometry and histology. For mass spectrometry, the (cartilage) tissue remnants contained in the defect area and the cartilage rim surrounding the lesion (3 mm width in adults; 1 mm width in fetal sheep) were excised, cultivated in serum-free RPMI medium (Gibco, Life Technologies, Austria) supplemented with 1% penicillin and 1% streptomycin (ATCC, LGC Standards GmbH, Germany) for 6 h, sterile-filtered (0.2 μm filter), precipitated with ice-cold ethanol and stored at −20°C until further processing.  Fetal MSCs secretome production Fetal MSC were thawed and cultured in standard culture medium (DMEM, supplemented with 10% FCS, 1% Pen/Strep and 1% Amphotericin) until a sufficient cell number was reached (between Passage 2 and 4), then cells were transferred to StemMACS™ MSC Expansion Media plus corresponding medium supplements as per manufacturer’s instructions. Fetal MSC secretomes were harvested and centrifuged at 4° at 1400g for 5 minutes. The obtained supernatant was precipitated in ice cold 99,6% Ethanol and stored at -20° until further processing and downstream analysis. Mass spectrometry After precipitation, proteins were dissolved in sample buffer [7.5 M urea, 1.5 M thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 0.05% SDS, 100 mM dithiothreitol (DDT)] and protein concentrations were determined using Bradford assay (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Munich, Germany). A 20 μg sample of each protein was used for a filter-aided digestion, as described previously (Aukland, 1991; Aukland et al., 1997b, 1997a; Wiśniewski et al., 2009; Bileck et al., 2014). Briefly, 3 kDa molecular weight cut-off filters (Pall Austria Filter GmbH) were conditioned with MS-grade water (Millipore GmbH). Protein samples were concentrated on the pre-washed filter by centrifugation at 15,000 g for 15 min. After reduction with DTT [5 mg/ml dissolved in 8 M guanidinium hydrochloride in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) buffer, pH 8] and alkylation with iodoacetamide (10 mg/ml in 8 M guanidinium hydrochloride in 50 mM ABC buffer), samples were washed and 1 μg trypsin was added before incubation at 37°C for 18 h. After enzymatic digestion, peptide samples were cleaned with C18 spin columns 226 (Pierce, Thermo Scientific, Germany), dried and stored at −20°C until analysis. For mass spectrometric analyses, dried samples were reconstituted in 5 μl 30% formic acid (FA) containing 10 fmol each of four synthetic standard peptides and diluted with 40 μl mobile phase A  (H2O:ACN:FA=98:2:0.1). 10µl of this solution were then injected into the Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano LC-system coupled to a QExactive orbitrap mass spectrometer equipped with a nanospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria). This peptide solution was loaded onto a 2 cm×75 μm C18 Pepmap100 precolumn (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria) at a flow rate of 10 μl/min using mobile phase A. Afterwards, peptides were eluted from the precolumn to a 50 cm×75 μm Pepmap100 analytical column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min and separation was achieved using a gradient of 8% to 40% mobile phase B (ACN:H2O:FA=80:20:0.1) over 95 min. For mass spectrometric analyses, MS scans were performed in the range of m/z 400-1400 at a resolution of 70,000 (at m/z=200). MS/MS scans of the eight most abundant ions were achieved through high-energy collisional dissociation fragmentation at 30% normalized collision energy and analysed in the orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500 (at m/z=200). All samples were analysed in duplicate.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and label-free quantitative (LFQ) data analysis were performed using the open source software MaxQuant 1.3.0.5 including the Andromeda search engine (Cox and Mann, 2008). Protein identification was achieved searching against Ovis aries in the Uniprot Database (version 09/2014 with 26,864 entries) allowing a mass tolerance of 5 ppm for MS spectra and 20 ppm for MS/MS spectra, as well as a maximum of two missed cleavages. In addition, carbamidomethylation on cysteine residues was included as a fixed modification, whereas methionine oxidation and N-terminal protein acetylation were included as variable modifications. Furthermore, search criteria included a minimum of two peptide identifications per protein, at least one of them unique, and the false discovery rate (FDR) calculation based on q-values, performed for both peptide identification as well as protein identification, less than 0.01. Prior to statistical analyses, proteins were filtered for reversed sequences, contaminants and a minimum of three independent identifications per protein. Proteins identified in the present work were assigned to human orthologues and subsequently classified according to cell leakage or genuinely secreted based on the UniProt database (accessed February - May 2021). Statistical evaluation was performed with Perseus software (version 1.6.0.2) using LFQ intensities of the MaxQuant result file (Tyanova et al., 2016). After filtering potential contaminants, the LFQ values were Log(2)-transformed. Technical duplicates were averaged. Only proteins detected in three of three biological replicates in either control and/or treatment groups were considered for data evaluation. Permutation-based FDR was set to 0.05 for t-tests and provided significant protein expression changes corrected for multi-parameters (S0 = 0.1).

### Publication Abstract
Fetal cartilage fully regenerates following injury, while in adult mammals cartilage injury leads to osteoarthritis (OA). Thus, in this study, we compared the in vivo injury response of fetal and adult ovine articular cartilage histologically and proteomically to identify key factors of fetal regeneration. In addition, we compared the secretome of fetal ovine mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) in vitro with injured fetal cartilage to identify potential MSC-derived therapeutic factors. Cartilage injury caused massive cellular changes in the synovial membrane, with macrophages dominating the fetal, and neutrophils the adult, synovial cellular infiltrate. Correspondingly, proteomics revealed differential regulation of pro- and anti-inflammatory mediators and growth-factors between adult and fetal joints. Neutrophil-related proteins and acute phase proteins were the two major upregulated protein groups in adult compared to fetal cartilage following injury. In contrast, several immunomodulating proteins and growth factors were expressed significantly higher in the fetus than the adult. Comparison of the in vitro MSCs proteome with the in vivo fetal regenerative signature revealed shared upregulation of 17 proteins, suggesting their therapeutic potential. Biomimicry of the fetal paracrine signature to reprogram macrophages and modulate inflammation could be an important future research direction for developing novel therapeutics.

### Keywords
Cartilage, Regeneration, Immunomodulation, Inflammation, Fetal, Neutrophil, Macrophage

### Affiliations
University of Vienna
University of Vienna, Faculty of Chemistry, Department of Analytical Chemistry

### Submitter
Christopher Gerner

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher Gerner
University of Vienna, Faculty of Chemistry, Department of Analytical Chemistry


