### Accession
PXD031713

### Title
Cryo-EM structures of Gid12-bound GID E3 reveal steric blockade as a mechanism inhibiting substrate ubiquitylation

### Description
Protein degradation, a major eukaryotic response to cellular signals, is subject to numerous layers of regulation. In yeast, the evolutionarily conserved GID E3 ligase mediates glucose-induced degradation of fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase (Fbp1) and other gluconeogenic enzymes. “GID” is a collection of E3 ligase complexes; a core scaffold, RING-type catalytic core and supramolecular module along with interchangeable substrate receptors select targets for ubiquitylation. However, knowledge of additional cellular factors directly regulating GID-type E3s remains rudimentary. Here, we structurally and biochemically characterize Gid12 as a modulator of the GID E3 ligase complex targeting Fbp1. Our collection of cryo-EM reconstructions shows that Gid12 forms an extensive interface sealing the substrate receptor Gid4 onto the scaffold, and remodeling the degron binding site. Gid12 also sterically blocks a recruited Fbp1 from the ubiquitylation active sites. Our analysis of the role of Gid12 establishes principles that may more generally underlie E3 ligase regulation.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for total proteome MS analysis Frozen cell pellets were lysed in SDC Buffer (1% Sodium deoxycholate (wt/vol) in 100 mM Tris pH 8.5) and boiled for 5 min at 95 °C. Lysates were then cooled on ice for 5 min and sonicated using the Bioruptor sonication device for 30 min. Reduction and alkylation was performed by adding Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and 2-Chloracetamide (CAA) at the final concentrations of 10mM and 40 mM, respectively, and incubating them for 5 min at 45 °C. Samples were digested overnight by the addition of 1:50 LysC (1:50 wt/wt: Wako) and Trypsin (1:50 wt/wt: Sigma-Aldrich) overnight at 37°C with agitation (1,500 rpm). The next day, peptides were desalted using SDB-RPS (Empore) StageTips. Briefly, samples were ten-fold diluted using 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) in isopropanol and then loaded onto the StageTips, which were subsequently washed with 200 µL of 1% TFA in isopropanol and then with 0.2% TFA/2% acetonitrile (ACN) twice. Peptides were eluted using 75 µL of 80% ACN/1.25 % NH4OH and dried using a SpeedVac centrifuge (Concentrator Plus; Eppendorf) for 1 hour at 30 °C. Peptides were resuspended in 0.2% TFA/2% ACN and peptide concentration was determined using the Nanodrop 2000 (Thermo Scientific). 150 ng of peptides were subjected to LS-MS/MS analysis.   LC–MS/MS Measurements for total proteome experiments Peptides were loaded on a 50 cm reversed phase column (75 μm inner diameter, packed in house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 μm resin). To maintain a column temperature of 60°C, we used a homemade column oven. An EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was connected online with a mass spectrometer (Orbitrap Exploris 480, Thermo Fisher Scientific) via nano-electrospray source. Peptides were separated using a binary buffer system consisting of buffer A (0.1% formic acid (FA)) and buffer B (80% ACN, 0.1% FA). We used a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min. We loaded 150 ng of peptides and eluted them with a 60 min gradient. The gradient starts with 5% buffer B and increases consistently to 65% in 50 min, until it reaches 95% in 55 min and remains constant for the last 5 min. MS data was acquired using a data independent acquisition (DIA) mode with a full scan range of 300 to 1,650 m/z at 120,000 resolution, automatic gain control (AGC) of 3e6 and a maximum injection time of 20 ms. The higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) was set to 28. Each full scan was followed by 32 DIA scans which were performed at a 30,000 resolution, an AGC of 1e5 and a maximum injection time of 54 ms.

### Data Protocol
Data Processing and Bioinformatics Analysis for total proteome experiments DIA raw files were analysed using directDIA in Spectronaut version 15 (Biognosys). The search was done against UniProt S.cerevisiae reference proteome of canonical and isoform sequences with 6,077 entries for final protein identification and quantification. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin with up to two missed cleavages. Maximum and minimum peptide length was set to 52 and 7, respectively. The search included carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation of proteins as variable modifications. A protein and precursor FDR of 1% were used for filtering and subsequent reporting in samples (q-value mode with no imputation).         The bioinformatics analyses and visualization were done using Perseus version 1.6.1.360 and Python version 3.5.5 with the following packages: pandas 1.3.2, numpy 1.21.2, matplotlib 3.4.3 and seaborn 0.11.2. First, protein intensities were log2-transformed.  Next, the dataset was filtered by a minimum of three valid values in at least one experimental group and subsequently imputed using a Gaussian normal distribution (width = 0.3 and downshift = 1.8). Student t-test was performed using a permutation-based false discovery rate (FDR) of 5% and S0 value of 0.1. Hierarchical clustering was performed using the Euclidian distance.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Gid e3, Ubiquitination, E3 ligase, Proteomics, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Proteomics
Director, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Director, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry


