### Accession
PXD017129

### Title
Serum proteome profiling in canine chronic valve disease using TMT-based quantitative proteomics

### Description
Cardiovascular-related disorders (CVD) account for the highest mortality rates in the world, and affect the quality and the quantity of life of patients, creating an economic burden of prolonged therapeutic intervention. The aim of this study was to evaluate the serum protein profile of healthy and CVD affected dogs, by means of an isobaric tandem mass tag (TMT) label-based high-resolution quantitative proteomic approach.

### Sample Protocol
Serum was obtained from all dogs by centrifugation of completely clotted blood at 3500g for 10 min at room temperature. Samples were aliquoted and stored at −80 °C until analysed.  Proteomic analysis of canine serum samples was performed by TMT-based quantitative approach as described previously (Horvatić, Guillemin et al. 2018). In brief, after total protein concentration determination using Bradford assay (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, USA), 35 μg of total proteins from samples and internal standard (a pool of equal protein amount from all samples used as a reference for normalization) were diluted to a volume of 50 μL using 0.1 M triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, Thermo Scientific, Rockford, USA), reduced by adding 2.5 μL of 200 mM DTT (60 min, 55 °C) (Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA), alkylated by adding 2.5 μL of 375 mM IAA (30 min, room temperature in the dark) (Sigma Aldrich, St. Lois, MO, USA) and acetone-precipitated (addition of 300 μL, overnight, −20 °C). Protein pellets were collected subsequently by centrifugation (9000g, 4 °C), dissolved in 50 μL of 0.1 M TEAB and digested using 1 μL of trypsin (1 mg/mL, Promega; trypsin-to-protein ratio 1:35, at 37 °C overnight). TMT sixplex reagents (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA) were prepared according to the manufacturer's procedure and 19 μL of the appropriate TMT label was added to each sample used for the labelling reaction (60 min, room temperature) which was quenched by 5% hydroxylamine (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA). Five TMT-modified peptide samples were combined with the internal standard (labeled with TMT m/z 126) into the new tube, aliquoted, dried and stored at −20 °C for further analysis. High resolution LC-MS/MS analysis of TMT-labelled peptides was carried out using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex, Germering, Germany) coupled to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Peptides were dissolved in loading solvent (1% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) and loaded onto the trap column (C18 PepMap100, 5 μm, 100A, 300 μm×5 mm), desalted for 12 min at the flow rate of 15 μL/min and separated on the analytical column (PepMap™ RSLC C18, 50 cm×75 μm) using a linear gradient of 5–45% mobile phase B (0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN) over 120 min, 45% to 90% for 2 min, held at 80% for 2 min and re-equilibrated at 5% B for 20 min at the flow rate of 300 nL/min. Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water. Ionisation was achieved using nanospray Flex ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) containing a 10 μm-inner diameter SilicaTip emitter (New Objective, USA). The MS operated in positive ion mode using DDA Top8 method. Full scan MS spectra were acquired in range from m/z 350.0 to m/z 1800.0 with a resolution of 70,000, 110 ms injection time, AGC target 1×106, a ± 2.0 Da isolation window and the dynamic exclusion 30 s. HCD fragmentation was performed at step collision energy (29% and 35% NCE) with a resolution of 17,500 and AGC target of 2×105. Precursor ions with unassigned charge state, as well as charge states of +1 and more than +7 were excluded from fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Acquired MS/MS spectra were analysed for protein identification and quantification using the SEQUEST algorithm implemented into Proteome Discoverer (version 2.0., ThermoFisher Scientific). Database search against Canis lupus FASTA files (downloaded from NCBI database on 14/10/2016, 41787 sequences) was performed according to the following parameters: two trypsin missed cleavage sites, precursor and fragment mass tolerances of 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively; carbamidomethyl (C) fixed peptide modification, oxidation (M), deamidation (N,Q) and TMT sixplex (K, peptide N-terminus) dynamic modifications. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide identification was calculated using the Percolator algorithm in the Proteome Discoverer workflow based on the search results against a decoy database and was set at 1% FDR.

### Publication Abstract
Chronic valve disease (CVD) is the most common clinically significant heart disease of dogs, affecting 20 to 40% of dogs. The aim of this study was to evaluate the serum protein profile of healthy and CVD affected dogs, by means of an isobaric tandem mass tag (TMT) label-based high-resolution quantitative proteomic approach. Additionally, conventional cardiac biomarkers were measured in the serum, functional bioinformatics analysis was employed for elucidating molecular mechanisms and pathways associated with CVD, and validation of proteomic results was performed by immunoassays and Western blotting. Of 290 identified and quantified proteins, 15 proteins showed significantly different abundances (p&#x202f;&lt;&#x202f;.05), including antithrombin-III, alpha-2-antiplasmin, tetranectin, apolipoprotein M, adiponectin, inter-alpha-trypsin inhibitor heavy chain H1, gelsolin and apolipoprotein B-100. The identified proteins with differently abundances are involved in a number of pathways, such as complement and coagulation cascades, haemostasis, regulation of actin cytoskeleton, lipid metabolism and transport. We found comparative similarities with human disease in terms of identified proteins and GO pathways, which confirmed similar pathophysiology of this disease, but also differences, mainly in lipid metabolism. SIGNIFICANCE: There have been few investigations of canine serum proteome despite the potential for biomarker discovery and comparative disease analysis. Establishing serum proteomic signatures in healthy dogs and dogs with CVD will benefit for understanding the aetiology of disease in dogs, identify putative biomarkers and provide models of comparative human disease. Circulating biomarkers are important for understanding of the mechanisms of cardiovascular disease and high incidence of CVD in dogs prioritizes the search for novel biomarkers.

### Keywords
Serum proteomics, Tandem mass tag, Dog, Chronic valve disease

### Affiliations
University of Zagreb, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine
VetMedZg Laboratory,Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia      Institute of Biodiversity, Animal Health & Comparative Medicine, College of Medicine, Veterinary Medicine and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK

### Submitter
Anita Horvatic

### Lab Head
Dr Peter David Eckersall
VetMedZg Laboratory,Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia      Institute of Biodiversity, Animal Health & Comparative Medicine, College of Medicine, Veterinary Medicine and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK


