### Accession
PXD008830

### Title
RBPome of primary mouse T helper cells

### Description
Post-transcriptional gene regulation by mRNA-binding proteins (RBPs) ensures an important layer to control protein outcome. It includes many fundamental processes, ranging from splicing to transport, decay and translation. Although recent technical developments allow the identification of mRNA-binding proteins, the total RBPome of different primary immune cells remains unknown. Here, we performed an RBP capture of the two major primary T helper cell types in mouse: T helper effector-like and regulatory-like (Foxp3+) cells. The two datasets show a high overlap of ~80% to reveal a high confidence common T helper cell RBPome of 240 proteins. 60% of those proteins have not been previously associated with any immune function. Most importantly, 11 RBPs were not previously identified through any mammalian mRNA-capture approach. These novel RBPs include some well-known T cell proteins associated with non-immune functions such as Stat1 and Vav1. Overall our data suggest an underestimated complexity of gene regulatory pathways.

### Sample Protocol
Eluates from the RBPome capture were incubated with 10ug/ml Rnase A in 100mM Tris, 50mM NaCl, 1mM EDTA at 37°C at 37°C for 30 min. Rnase-treated eluates were acetone precipitated and resuspended in denaturation buffer (6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 10 mM Hepes pH 8), reduced with 1mM DTT and alkylated with 5.5 mM IAA. Samples were diluted 1:5 with 62.5 mM Tris pH 8.1 and proteins digested with 0.5 ug Lys-C and 0.5 ug Trypsin at room temperature over night. The resulting peptides were desalted using stage-tips containing C18 material (3M, St. Paul). Peptides were separated on a reverse phase column (50cm length, 75μm inner diameter) packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 μm resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH). Reverse-phase chromatography was performed with an EASY-nLC 1000 ultra-high pressure system, coupled to a Q-Exactive HF Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded with buffer A (0.1% (v/v) formic acid) and eluted with a nonlinear 120-min gradient of 5–60% buffer B (0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 80% (v/v) acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. After each gradient, the column was washed with 95% buffer B and re-equilibrated with buffer A. Column temperature was kept at 50 °C by an in-house designed oven with a Peltier element and operational parameters were monitored in real time by the SprayQc software. MS data were acquired with a top8 shotgun proteomics method, where in each cycle a full scan is followed by up to 15 data-dependent MS/MS scans. Target value for the full scan MS spectra was 3 × 106 charges in the 300−1,650 m/z range with a maximum injection time of 20 ms and a resolution of 60,000. Isolation of precursors was performed with the quadrupole at window of 1.4 m/z. Precursors were fragmented by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with normalized collision energy (NCE) / stepped NCE of 27. MS/MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 15,000 with an ion target value of 1 × 105, a maximum injection time of 120 ms, and an underfill ratio of 2%. Repeated sequencing of peptides was minimized by a dynamic exclusion time of 20s.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were analyzed by the MaxQuant software (43) (version 1.5.1.6) and peak lists were searched against the mouse Uniprot FASTA database, and a common contaminants database (247 entries) by the Andromeda search engine. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification, methionine oxidation and N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications. False discovery rate was 1% for proteins and peptides (minimum length of 7 amino acids) and was determined by searching a reverse database. Peptides specificity was set to trypsin requiring C-terminal arginine or lysine with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Maximal allowed precursor mass deviation for peptide identification was 4.5ppm after time-dependent mass calibration and maximal fragment mass deviation was 20ppm. “Match between runs” was activated with a retention time alignment window of 20 min, a match time window of 0.5 min, and a minimum ratio setting of 2.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rbp, Mrna interactome capture, Immune cells

### Affiliations
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max-Planck-Institute of Biochemistry, Munich, Germany
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany

### Submitter
Michael Wierer

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max-Planck-Institute of Biochemistry, Munich, Germany


