### Accession
PXD021937

### Title
Rat retinae data for use as spectral library, for pathway remodelling as well as protein mapping

### Description
Spectral libraries generated by data-dependent acquisition (DDA) are a useful tool for the analysis of data created by data-independent acquisition (DIA) in mass spectrometry. The quality of DIA analysis is dependent on the quality of the spectral library. We used retinal rat tissue to create a spectral library of rats retina proteome. This data set may therefore be valuable for the future analysis of retinal proteins and research projects that focus on ocular disorders or function.

### Sample Protocol
The rat retina samples were prepared, fractionated by gel electrophoresis resulting in 12 bands and 4 additional technical replicates. After tryptic digestion, all samples were spiked with indexed retention time (iRT) peptides and were measured using a DDA mass spectrometry approach. The here provided data set can be used as a retina-specific spectral library.

### Data Protocol
A total of 60 DDA measurements (12 fractions from each of 5 technical replicates of pooled samples) were utilized. The spectral library was created using Spectronaut™  Pulsar software, whereby default settings were applied. False discovery rate, called “Qvalue”, was set to a threshold of ≤0.01.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Spectral library, Lc-msms, Rat, Data-independent acquisition, Retina proteome

### Affiliations
Medizinisches Proteom-Center

### Submitter
Annika Guntermann

### Lab Head
Dr Caroline May
Medizinisches Proteom-Center


