### Accession
PXD023708

### Title
Proteomics profiling of human synovial fluid suggests global increased protein interplay in early-osteoarthritis (OA) and lost in late-stage OA

### Description
The underlying molecular mechanisms in osteoarthritis (OA) development are largely unknown. This study explores the proteome and the pairwise interplay of proteins on a global level in synovial fluid from patients with late-stage knee OA (arthroplasty), early knee OA (arthroscopy due to degenerative meniscal tear) and from deceased controls without knee OA.  Synovial fluid samples were analyzed using state-of-the-art mass spectrometry with data-independent acquisition. The differential expression of the proteins detected was clustered and evaluated with data mining strategies and a multilevel model. Group-specific slopes of associations were estimated between expressions of each pair of identified proteins to assess the co-expression (i.e. interplay) between the proteins in each group.  More proteins were increased in early-OA vs controls than late-stage OA vs controls. For most of these proteins, the fold changes between late-stage OA vs controls and early stage OA vs controls were remarkably similar suggesting potential involvement in the OA process. Further, for the first time this study illustrated distinct patterns in protein co-expression suggesting that the global interplay between the protein machinery is increased in early-OA and lost in late-stage OA. Further efforts should probably focus on earlier stages of the disease than previously considered.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation The total protein content in the synovial fluid sample was determined using a BCA protein assay kit. From each sample 50 μL synovial fluid were mixed with 10 μL MS-safe proteinase inhibitor cocktail and 10 μL hyaluronidase 10 μL / μg protein and further incubated for 3 h at 37°C. Four out of the 7 samples in the early OA samples were diluted with saline solution during sampling of synovial fluid; these samples were adjusted to the mean total protein content calculated from the remaining 3 samples in that group. All samples were depleted of the 7 most abundant proteins with the multiple affinity removal system (MARS Hu7 spin cartridge) according to the manufacturers protocol (Agilent Technologies). Samples were further reduced using 4 mM DTT, with shaking at +56°C for 30 min and alkylated using 16 mM iodoacetamide for 1 h at room temperature in the dark. In order to remove residual salts, the samples were precipitated with 1:9 volume 95% EtOH (with 50mM NaAc) at 4°C overnight. The precipitated samples were centrifuged and the supernatants were removed from the pellets. The samples were dissolved in 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate and digested with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) at a protease/protein ratio of 1:50, overnight at 37°C. Following digestion, samples were cleaned up with a 30kDa filter (Pall Life Sciences) and the flow-through was desalted with C18 96 well plates (SOLAμ™ Thermo Fisher Scientific). The samples were further spiked with iRT peptides before analyses with mass spectrometry.  Instrumentation and data analysis The samples were analyzed with an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a Thermo Scientific Q-Exactive HFX™ mass spectrometer using data-independent acquisition (DIA). For liquid chromatography, mobile phase A consisted of water containing 0.1% formic acid (FA) and mobile phase B consisted of acetonitrile (ACN) containing 0.1% FA. Peptides were loaded on an Acclaim PepMap® 100 nanoViper pre-column (Thermo Scientific, C18, 3 μm particles, 75 μm i.d. 2 cm long) at 300 nL/min for 125 min using 95% mobile phase A. The peptides were separated on a PepMap® RSLC C18 analytical column (Thermo Scientific, C18, 2 μm particles, 75 μm i.d. 25 cm long) at 300 nL/min using an ACN /formic acid gradient consisting of an initial step of 5–7% B over 5 min followed by 7–20% B over 85 min, 20–30% B over 20 min, 30–90 % B over 5 min, held at 90 % B for 5 min and then equilibrated for 15 min at 3% B, Separation was performed at 45 °C and the total acquisition time was 125 min. DIA settings: method duration 125 min, full scan resolution 120 000, scan range 350-1650 m/z. AGC target 3.0e6, maximum injection time 100 ms, Orbitrap resolution 45 000, AGC 3.0e5 with a variable isolation window 30/ 26/ 22/ 20/ 18/ 20/ 19/ 20/ 21/ 23/ 24/ 26/ 31/ 32/ 37/ 40/ 53/ 66/ 99/ 574 m/z, and normalized collision energy 27 eV. Data-dependent acquisition (DDA) settings: method duration 125 min, mass range 350-1650 m/z., full MS scan resolution 120 000, AGC 3e6, maximum injection time 20 ms, Orbitrap resolution 15 000, AGC target 1.0e5, maximum injection 20ms, normalized collision energy 27 eV.

### Data Protocol
The MS raw data were further analyzed with Spectronaut™Pulsar software (version 12.0.20491.15, Biognosys AG, Switzerland) for protein identification and quantitative data extraction. In total 118 runs were used from both the DDA and DIA files were converted to HTRMS format using HTRMS Converter (Biognosys AG, Switzerland) to generate the spectral library. The human protein fasta files were downloaded from the uniprot database (20190416). Default settings were used with additional modifications: cysteine carbamidomethylation was used as a fixed modification, and deamination, pyro-glutamic acid (N-term Glu to pyroglutamic acid), methionine oxidation, hydroxyproline and acetylation were used as variable modifications. Using Trypsin/P as the specific digestion type with maximum of 2 miss cleavages. A subsequent protein search was conducted in Spectronaut™ Pulsar using the recently created spectral library and the same human database as background proteome. Precursor quantitation was performed at MS2 level, and area under the curve was used as quantitation type.  Statistical analysis The quantitative data were extracted using Spectronaut™Pulsar software. The differential expression of proteins between the different groups was analyzed using a linear mixed effects model with the sample group, protein type and their interaction as independent variables and subject as a random effect to account for clustering of proteins within an individual, and transformed differential expression as the outcome 20.The protein expression was transformed using logarithm with base 2 before the analysis. Further, the model was adjusted for age, sex and body mass index. Only proteins that had a maximum of one missing value in the early-stage OA group, two missing values in the late-stage OA group and two missing values in the control group were included, to enable enough samples for estimation. Residual diagnostics confirmed adequate model fit. As the sample size of the early-stage OA group was lower than the others due to sample availability, and also because this group had the highest amount of missing data on protein differential expression, a sensitivity analysis where performed where the early stage OA group was, allowing a larger set of proteins to be included in this analysis, 474 proteins (compared to 406 proteins when including all three groups).

### Publication Abstract
The underlying molecular mechanisms in osteoarthritis (OA) development are largely unknown. This study explores the proteome and the pairwise interplay of proteins in synovial fluid from patients with late-stage knee OA (arthroplasty), early knee OA (arthroscopy due to degenerative meniscal tear), and from deceased controls without knee OA. Synovial fluid samples were analyzed using state-of-the-art mass spectrometry with data-independent acquisition. The differential expression of the proteins detected was clustered and evaluated with data mining strategies and a multilevel model. Group-specific slopes of associations were estimated between expressions of each pair of identified proteins to assess the co-expression (i.e., interplay) between the proteins in each group. More proteins were increased in early-OA versus controls than late-stage OA versus controls. For most of these proteins, the fold changes between late-stage OA versus controls and early-stage OA versus controls were remarkably similar suggesting potential involvement in the OA process. Further, for the first time, this study illustrated distinct patterns in protein co-expression suggesting that the interplay between the protein machinery is increased in early-OA and lost in late-stage OA. Further efforts should focus on earlier stages of the disease than previously considered.

### Keywords
Synovial fluid, Dia, Osteoarthritis

### Affiliations
Lund University

### Submitter
Neserin Ali

### Lab Head
Dr Neserin Ali
Lund University


