### Accession
PXD030043

### Title
Quantitative analysis of redox proteome reveals protein thiol switches regulating fundamental processes in developmental haematopoiesis

### Description
Foetal and adult hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells (HSPCs) are characterized by distinct redox homeostasis that may influence their differential cellular behaviour in normal and malignant haematopoiesis. In this work, we have applied a quantitative mass spectrometry-based redox proteomic approach to comprehensively describe reversible cysteine modifications in primary mouse foetal and adult HSPCs. We defined the redox state of 4455 cysteines in foetal and adult HSPCs and demonstrated a higher susceptibility to oxidation of protein thiols in foetal HSPCs. Our data identified ontogenically active redox switches in proteins with a pronounced role in metabolism and protein homeostasis. Additional redox proteomic analysis identified redox switches acting in mitochondrial respiration as well as protein homeostasis to be triggered during onset of MLL-ENL leukemogenesis in foetal HSPCs. Our data has demonstrated that redox signalling contributes to the regulation of fundamental processes of developmental haematopoiesis and has pinpointed potential targetable redox-sensitive proteins in in utero-initiated MLL-rearranged leukaemia.

### Sample Protocol
Cells in 10% TCA corresponding to 400’000 cells/replicate were sonicated 5x 15s and centrifuged. Firstly, naturally occurring free protein thiols were blocked by suspending pellet in lysis buffer (LB, 3% sodium deoxycholate [SDC]/200mM triethylammonium bicarbonate [TEAB]/1mM EDTA) with 4 mM of a first label of iodoTMT (“iodoTMT1”) and incubation for 2h at 37 °C. Unreacted iodoTMT1 was removed by precipitation with acetone (1:4). Next, reversibly oxidized protein thiols were reduced with 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethel)phosphine (TCEP)/LB for 1 h at 50 °C followed by blocking of new free thiols with 4mM of a second label of iodoTMT (“iodoTMT2”) for 2h at 37 °C. Unreacted iodoTMT2 was removed by acetone precipitation. Labelled samples of FL and ABM were combined for each replicate and digested with LysC (Wako) (enzyme: protein = 1: 50 w/w) in 1% RapiGest/50mM ammonium bicarbonate for 4 h followed by overnight digestion with trypsin (Promega; enzyme: protein = 1: 50 w/w). RapiGest was precipitated by addition of 0.5% trifluoracetic acid (TFA) and removed by centrifugation. An aliquot corresponding to 4 µg of sample was stored for full sample analysis (“Full fraction”). Remaining sample was enriched with immobilized anti-TMT antibody resin (Thermo Scientific) according to manufacturer protocol, with slight modifications. All fractions (Full, Flow-through, Enriched fraction) were dried by vacuum centrifugation and cleaned-up using in-house made C18 micro-spin columns. Samples were dissolved in 4% ACN/0.1% formic acid (FA) prior to analysis by LC/MS.

### Data Protocol
MS raw data were processed with MaxQuant 1.5.6.5 80. For data including MS3-based acquisition, ‘Reporter ion MS3’mode with quantification of cysteine-specific iodoTMT labels reporter ions was used.Data were searched using the built-in Andromeda search engine against the Swissprot mouse data base (downloaded 2017.07.05; 25,170 protein entries) together with commonly observed contaminants and reversed sequences for all entries. Methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were set as dynamic modifications. Trypsin/P was set as the enzyme in specific digestion mode, allowing two missed cleavage sites. No fixed modifications were considered. The ‘match between runs’ algorithm was applied. Precursor and MS/MS fragment mass tolerance were set to 20 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. An FDR of 1% was required for identification at protein, site and PSM level. The minimum ratio count for protein quantification was set to two and razor and unique peptides were considered for protein quantification. Full, enriched and flow-through fractions of each replicate were jointly processed. Data was filtered for contaminants, peptides identified only by site and non-cysteine peptides. Hits without quantitative information representing either free (SH) or oxidized (Sox) thiols were removed. Reporter ion intensities were log2 transformed. Data were normalized by adjusting the median of each channel to the median of the medians of each condition (foetal and adult) representing either free (SH) or oxidized (Sox) thiols, respectively. Normalized log2 data were non-transformed, and the sum of SH and Sox quantitative values were calculated for each ID. Zero values were replaced by “NA” and oxidation level was calculated as [Sox/(SH+Sox)]*100. After confirming normal distribution of the data, the p-value for each peptide was determined using a two-sided t-test corrected for multiple testing using permutation-based FDR correction implemented in Perseus (version 1.6.6.0) 81. Changes in oxidation level with an adjusted p-value < 0.05 were considered differential.

### Publication Abstract
Fetal and adult hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells (HSPCs) are characterized by distinct redox homeostasis that may influence their differential cellular behavior in normal and malignant hematopoiesis. In this work, we have applied a quantitative mass spectrometry-based redox proteomic approach to comprehensively describe reversible cysteine modifications in primary mouse fetal and adult HSPCs. We defined the redox state of 4,438 cysteines in fetal and adult HSPCs and demonstrated a higher susceptibility to oxidation of protein thiols in fetal HSPCs. Our data identified ontogenic changes to oxidation state of thiols in proteins with a pronounced role in metabolism and protein homeostasis. Additional redox proteomic analysis identified oxidation changes to thiols acting in mitochondrial respiration as well as protein homeostasis to be triggered during onset of MLL-ENL leukemogenesis in fetal HSPCs. Our data has demonstrated that redox signaling contributes to the regulation of fundamental processes of developmental hematopoiesis and has pinpointed potential targetable redox-sensitive proteins in in utero-initiated MLL-rearranged leukemia.

### Keywords
Redox proteomics, Hematopoiesis, Leukemia, Oxidative modifications

### Affiliations
Lund Stem Cell Center, Division of Molecular Hematology, Lund University, Lund, Sweden
BIOCEV, 1st Medical Faculty, Charles University, Vestec, Czech Republic

### Submitter
Kristyna Pimkova

### Lab Head
Dr Kristyna Pimkova
Lund Stem Cell Center, Division of Molecular Hematology, Lund University, Lund, Sweden


