### Accession
PXD022797

### Title
Design of a proteolytically stable sodium-calcium exchanger 1 (NCX1)-phospholemman (PLM) disruptor peptide for in vivo studies

### Description
The cardiac sodium–calcium exchanger (NCX1) is important for normal Na+ and Ca2+ homeostasis and cardiomyocyte relaxation and contraction. NCX1 activity is reduced by its endogenous inhibitor phosphorylated phospholemman (pSer68-PLM). Disrupting the pSer68-PLM-NCX1 interaction is therefore a potential therapeutic strategy to reverse NCX1 inhibition in cardiac disease. We have previously designed a high affinity NCX1-PLM disruptor peptide (OPT) that reverses the inhibitory pSer68-PLM-NCX1 interaction in HEK293 cells. In the present study, we performed N and C-terminal truncation analyses of OPT and identified PYKEIEQLIELANYQV as the minimal pSer68-PLM binding sequence. To increase peptide stability in human serum, we replaced the proline in its N-terminus with an N-methyl-proline (NOPT) after identification of N-terminus as substitution tolerant by two dimensional peptide array analysis. Mass spectrometry analysis revealed that the half-life of the novel NOPT peptide was increased 10-fold compared to that of OPT. Biotinylated NOPT pulled down endogenous PLM from rat left ventricle lysate and exhibited pSer68-PLM binding in an ELISA-based assay. Importantly, NOPT reduced the PLM-NCX1 interaction in an ELISA-based assay and cell permeable NOPT-TAT increased the NCX1 activity in adult cardiomyocytes isolated from both wild type (WT) and HF animals. Finally, we found that NOPT interacted with pSer68-PLM with a KD value of 2.7±3.8 μM, whereas the NCX1 cytoplasmic part interacted with PLM and pSer68-PLM with KD values of 14±2 nM and 24±14 nM. In conclusion, we have here developed a proteolytically stable NCX1-PLM disruptor peptide that upregulates NCX1 activity in WT and HF cardiomyocytes.

### Sample Protocol
Peptide stability was analysed by incubating the peptide (300 μM) in 30 % human serum (diluted in phosphate-buffered saline; PBS) (21792, Innovative research, Michigan, USA) at 37°C. Aliquots of 50 µl were collected at different time points (0-48 hours) and thereafter added trichloroacetic acid (TCA) to a final concentration of 5 % to stop the reaction. The aliquots were kept at -20°C before centrifugation at 13 000 g for 15 minutes to remove the serum proteins. The supernatants were stored at -20°C until the mass spectrometry analysis. The peptides were purified using µC18 tips (Pierce C18 Tips, 100µl) according to manufacturer’s instructions. 142fmol purified peptide sample was analyzed by a nEASY-LC coupled to QExactive/QExactive Plus with EASY Spray PepMap®RSLC, C18, 2 µl, 100Å, 75 µm x 25 column using a 60-minute separation gradient (0-30% acetonitrile).

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were submitted to MaxQuant database search for protein and peptide identification and intensity-based quantification. The search parameters were: First search error window of 20 ppm and main search error of 4.5 ppm; Unspecific enzyme; Minimal unique peptides 1; and FDR 0.01 (1%) for peptide and protein identification. Minimum and maximum peptide length for unspecific search were set to 8 and 25, respectively. The Uniprot human database was used (download from UniProt Sept. 2015) including the sequence for NOPT as the search database.

### Publication Abstract
The cardiac sodium-calcium exchanger (NCX1) is important for normal Na<sup>+</sup>- and Ca<sup>2+</sup>-homeostasis and cardiomyocyte relaxation and contraction. It has been suggested that NCX1 activity is reduced by phosphorylated phospholemman (pSer68-PLM); however its direct interaction with PLM is debated. Disruption of the potentially inhibitory pSer68-PLM-NCX1 interaction might be a therapeutic strategy to increase NCX1 activity in cardiac disease. In the present study, we aimed to analyze the binding affinities and kinetics of the PLM-NCX1 and pSer68-PLM-NCX1 interactions by surface plasmon resonance (SPR) and to develop a proteolytically stable NCX1 activator peptide for future <i>in vivo</i> studies. The cytoplasmic parts of PLM (PLM<sub>cyt</sub>) and pSer68-PLM (pSer68-PLM<sub>cyt</sub>) were found to bind strongly to the intracellular loop of NCX1 (NCX1<sub>cyt</sub>) with similar <i>K</i> <sub><i>D</i></sub> values of 4.1 &#xb1; 1.0&#xa0;nM and 4.3 &#xb1; 1.9&#xa0;nM, but the PLM<sub>cyt</sub>-NCX1<sub>cyt</sub> interaction showed higher on/off rates. To develop a proteolytically stable NCX1 activator, we took advantage of a previously designed, high-affinity PLM binding peptide (OPT) that was derived from the PLM binding region in NCX1 and that reverses the inhibitory PLM (S68D)-NCX1 interaction in HEK293. We performed N- and C-terminal truncations of OPT and identified PYKEIEQLIELANYQV as the minimum sequence required for pSer68-PLM binding. To increase peptide stability in human serum, we replaced the proline with an N-methyl-proline (NOPT) after identification of N-terminus as substitution tolerant by two-dimensional peptide array analysis. Mass spectrometry analysis revealed that the half-life of NOPT was increased 17-fold from that of OPT. NOPT pulled down endogenous PLM from rat left ventricle lysate and exhibited direct pSer68-PLM binding in an ELISA-based assay and bound to pSer68-PLM<sub>cyt</sub> with a <i>K</i> <sub><i>D</i></sub> of 129&#xa0;nM. Excess NOPT also reduced the PLM<sub>cyt</sub>-NCX1<sub>cyt</sub> interaction in an ELISA-based competition assay, but in line with that NCX1 and PLM form oligomers, NOPT was not able to outcompete the physical interaction between endogenous full length proteins. Importantly, cell-permeable NOPT-TAT increased NCX1 activity in cardiomyocytes isolated from both SHAM-operated and aorta banded heart failure (HF) mice, indicating that NOPT disrupted the inhibitory pSer68-PLM-NCX1 interaction. In conclusion, we have developed a proteolytically stable NCX1-derived PLM binding peptide that upregulates NCX1 activity in SHAM and HF cardiomyocytes.

### Keywords
Phospholemman; sodium-calcium exchanger; peptidomimetics; peptide array; cardiac

### Affiliations
University of Oslo
Head of Proteomics

### Submitter
Tuula Nyman

### Lab Head
Dr Tuula Nyman
Head of Proteomics


