### Accession
PXD013725

### Title
Mechanism of antimicrobial synergy between doxycycline and carprofen against methicillin-resistant Staphylococus pseudintermedius

### Description
We previously showed that doxycycline and carprofen , a veterinary non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug, have synergistic antimicrobial activity against methicillin-resistant Staphylococus pseudintermedius (MRSP) carrying the tetracycline resistance determinant TetK. To elucidate the molecular mechanism of this synergy, we investigated the effects of the two drugs, individually and in combination, using a comprehensive approach including two-dimensional differential in-gel electrophoresis (2D DIGE).

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were purified via 2D Clean-up Kit, solubilized in DIGE buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% CHAPS, and 30 mM Tris-HCl) and protein concentrations determined using the 2D Quant Kit. The CyDye DIGE Fluor minimal dyes, Cy3 or Cy5, were used to label all treated samples and untreated control (50 μg of protein each) according to Ettan DIGE System manual. To eliminate dye-specific bias, all types of samples were dye-swapped by labelling with both Cy3 and Cy5. Internal standard was prepared by mixing aliquots of every protein sample (25 μg from each) and labelled with Cy2. Protein samples were combined in pairs and mixed together with an aliquot of internal standard, and supplemented with 1% dithiothreitol, 1% IPG buffer pH 4–7 and 0.02% bromophenol blue. Prior to isoelectric focusing (IEF), IPG strips (pH 4–7, 24 cm) were rehydrated in DeStreak rehydration solution with 0.5% IPG buffer pH 4–7 overnight. The samples were applied using the cup-loading method and IEF was performed at a total of 50 kVh per stripe on Ettan IPGphor. IPG strips were subsequently reduced, alkylated and proteins were separated in the second dimension with 12.5% SDS-PAGE gels on Ettan DALT six Electrophoresis Unit according to manual. Gels were imaged at 100 μm resolution by using Typhoon 9500 Variable Mode Imager.  Prior to spot identification, gels were stained with Sypro Ruby according to the manufacturer manual. Selected spots were manually excised and subjected to in-gel digestion using Trypsin (Sigma-Aldricht) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Next, peptides were isolated from gel spots (by H2O, trifluoroacetic acid and acetonitrile solutions) and purified by RP C18 chromatography (μZipTip, Millipore). Peptides extracted from protein spots were analysed by an EASY-nLC mounted with an EASY-Spray column (PepMap, C18, 3μm, 100 Å, 75 μm x 15 cm) coupled with a Q Exactive Biotech mass spectrometer (both Thermo Fisher Scientific). Buffer A consisted of 0.1% formic acid (FA) in water, and buffer B was 0.1% FA in 99% acetonitrile. 5 µl of sample were injected. The flowrate was 100 nl/min and the gradient consisted of linear increase from 0% to 30% B in 30 min. On-line MS/MS spectra were recorded in the positive mode using the Full MS method with a resolution of 70000, an AGC target of 3e6, max IT of 50 ms and a mass range from 200 to 2000 m/z. The top 7 spectra from the MS were analysed using the dd-MS2 method, with a resolution of 35000 and AGC target of 1e6.

### Data Protocol
Spots on separate gels were detected and analyzed using Difference In-gel Analysis (DIA) module, and matched between gels using BVA module within DeCyder Image Analysis Software v 7.0 software. Mass spectra of proteins were exported and compared to the whole MRSP E104 proteome using Proteome Discoverer software (v 1.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The search method used was Sequest HT, with precursor mass tolerance 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance set to 0.05 Da, static modification carbamidomethyl +57.021 Da for cysteine. The target Decoy PSM validator was used as validation method. The top score identified proteins for every spot were selected.

### Publication Abstract
We previously showed that doxycycline (DOX) and carprofen (CPF), a veterinary non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug, have synergistic antimicrobial activity against methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus pseudintermedius (MRSP) carrying the tetracycline resistance determinant TetK. To elucidate the molecular mechanism of this synergy, we investigated the effects of the two drugs, individually and in combination, using a comprehensive approach including RNA sequencing, two-dimensional differential in-gel electrophoresis, macromolecule biosynthesis assays and fluorescence spectroscopy. Exposure of TetK-positive MRSP to CPF alone resulted in upregulation of pathways that generate ATP and NADH, and promote the proton gradient. We showed that CPF is a proton carrier that dissipates the electrochemical potential of the membrane. In the presence of both CPF and DOX, the energy compensation strategy was attenuated by downregulation of all the processes involved, such as citric acid cycle, oxidative phosphorylation and ATP-providing arginine deiminase pathway. Furthermore, protein biosynthesis inhibition increased from 20% under DOX exposure alone to 75% upon simultaneous exposure to CPF. We conclude that synergistic interaction of the drugs restores DOX susceptibility in MRSP by compromising proton-motive-force-dependent TetK-mediated efflux of the antibiotic. MRSP is unable to counterbalance CPF-mediated PMF depletion by cellular metabolic adaptations, resulting in intracellular accumulation of DOX and inhibition of protein biosynthesis.

### Keywords
Antimicrobial resistance, 2d dige

### Affiliations
Department of Veterinary and Animal Sciences University of Copenhagen Denmark
University of Copenhagen

### Submitter
Zofia Magnowska

### Lab Head
Dr Luca Guardabassi
Department of Veterinary and Animal Sciences University of Copenhagen Denmark


