### Accession
PXD011812

### Title
iTRAQ experiment to identify proteins that changed before and after NMT1 was knocked down in both Bel-7402 and Bel-7404 cells

### Description
We performed proteomics isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification (iTraq) to identify proteins that changed before and after NMT1 was knocked down in both Bel-7402 and Bel-7404 cells.

### Sample Protocol
The iTraq was performed by Luming Biotechnology (Shanghai, China). Briefly, peptides were labeled using an iTraq 8-plex kit (AB SCIEX, Washington, D.C) in two technical replicates as per manufacturer’s instructions. The iTraq based LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out using a Triple TOF 5600 System (AB SCIEX, USA) fitted with a Nanospray III source (AB SCIEX, USA) and a pulled quartz tip as the emitter (New Objectives, USA). Data was processed by the protein pilot software (v. 5.0, AB SCIEX, USA) against Homo Sapiens database using the Paragon algorithm.

### Data Protocol
iTRAQ-based proteomics analysis was performed using HCT29 cells. Following euxanthone treatment, cells were dissolved in lysis buffer and labelled with iTRAQ labelling reagents. The samples were subjected to LC analysis and tandem mass spectrometry analysis. Protein identification and relative iTRAQ quantification service were provided by Luming Biotechnology (Shanghai, China). The cutoff value for the differentially expressed proteins was adjusted to P < 0.05 and the fold change was set to > 2.0 or < 0.5.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Itraq，liver cancer，nmt1 knockdown

### Affiliations
Tongji university
Department of Clinical Laboratory, Shanghai Tenth People’s Hospital of Tongji University, Shanghai, 200072, China

### Submitter
Guoqing Zhu

### Lab Head
Dr Fenyong Sun
Department of Clinical Laboratory, Shanghai Tenth People’s Hospital of Tongji University, Shanghai, 200072, China


