### Accession
PXD015182

### Title
YTHDF1 links hypoxia adaptation and non-small cell lung cancer progression

### Description
10plex TMT labelling quantification expriments were performed to access the knockdown effect of YTHDF1 in cells.3 shGFPs control samples, 3 YTHDF1 shRNA-2 knockdown samples , 3 YTHDF1 shRNA-3 knockdown samples and 1 mixture sample were labelled by TMT 10-plex reagents.

### Sample Protocol
The H1299 cells/A549 cells were washed three times with cold PBS and the cells were lysed in SDT lysis buffer (0.2% SDS (m/v), 100 mM DTT, 100 mM Tris, pH=7.6). The lysates were incubated for 10 min at 95℃ and centrifuged at 15,000 ×g for 30 min. The supernatants were collected, and protein concentration was determined by tryptophan fluorescence emission assay as described previously(3). FASP was performed as described previously with slight modifications (1, 4), using 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) instead of ammonium bicarbonate buffer for compatibility with TMT labeling. TMT labeling Peptides were reconstituted in 100 mM TEAB and their concentration determined by the BCA assay. 3 shGFPs control samples, 3 YTHDF1 shRNA-2 knockdown samples , 3 YTHDF1 shRNA-3 knockdown samples and 1 mixture sample were labelled by TMT 10-plex reagents (0.8 mg, each) (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with reporters at m/z = 126, 127N, 127C, 128N, 128C, 129N, 129C, 130N, 130C, 131, respectively. Each sample containing 50 μg of peptide in 50 μL volume of TEAB buffer was combined with 41 μL of its respective 10-plex TMT reagent and incubated for 1 h at room temperature. Then, 8 μL of 5% hydroxylamine was added to the sample and incubated for 15 min to quench the reaction. Equal amounts of each TMT-labelled sample were combined in new microcentrifuge tubes and dried down using a SpeedVac.  High pH reversed-phase liquid chromatography peptides fractionation Half of the TMT-labeled peptides mixture was fractionated using a Waters XBridge BEH130 C18 3.5 μm 2.1 × 150 mm column on an Agilent 1290 HPLC operating at 0.2 mL/min. Buffer A consisted of 10 mM ammonium formate and buffer B consisted of 10 mM ammonium formate with 90% acetonitrile; both buffers were adjusted to pH 10 with ammonium hydroxide as described previously (5). A CBS-B programed multifunction automatic fraction-collecting instrument (Huxi instrument, Shanghai, China) was coupled to the HPLC and used to collect eluted peptides. The total number of fractions collected was 28 and concatenated to 14 (pooling equal interval RPLC fractions). Ammonium hydroxide and/or ammonium formate were evaporated in a SpeedVac.  Nanoflow liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry All experiments were performed on an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer with an nanoLC easy1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded on a self-packed column (75 μm × 150 mm, 3 μm ReproSil-Pur C18 beads, 120 Å, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany) and separated with a 90 min gradient at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Solvent A was 100% H2O, and 0.08% formic acid; solvent B was 80% acetonitrile, and 0.08% formic acid. The Orbitrap Fusion was programmed in the data-dependent acquisition mode. An MS1 survey scan of 375–1500 m/z in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000 was collected with an AGC target of 400,000 and maximum injection time of 50 ms. Precursor ions were filtered according to monoisotopic precursor selection, charge state (+ 2 to + 7), and dynamic exclusion (45 s with a ±10 ppm window). Then, the most intense precursors were subjected to HCD fragmentation with a duty cycle of 3 s. The instrument parameters were set as follows: 38% normalized collision energy with 5% stepped collision energy, 50,000 resolution, 100,000 AGC target, 105 ms maximum injection time, 105 Da first mass, 1 m/z isolation width.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed by search against the UniProt/SwissProt Huamn database containing 71562 sequence entries using Maxquant (1.6.1.0)(2), with default settings for 10-plex TMT quantification. Trypsin/P was selected as the digestive enzyme with allowance of one missed cleavage. Minimum 7 amino acids for peptide, >2 peptides were required per protein. For peptide and protein identification, false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1%.TMT reporter ion intensity were used for quantification.  Hierarchical clustering of proteins was performed on logarithmized data, using Euclidean distances and complete clustering method by Package of “pheatmap” in language R. Two tailed student t-test was performed with language R. p < 0.05 in combine with foldchange >1.2 was set as a criterion for a significant change. Pathways enriched with significantly changing proteins were determined using a homemade pathway mapping tool based on the KEGG (Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes) pathway database (http://www.genome.jp/kegg/pathway.html). The enrichment within a given pathway was assessed by the hypergeometric distribution.

### Publication Abstract
Hypoxia occurs naturally at high-altitudes and pathologically in hypoxic solid tumors. Here, we report that genes involved in various human cancers evolved rapidly in Tibetans and six Tibetan domestic mammals compared to reciprocal lowlanders. Furthermore, m<sup>6</sup>A modified mRNA binding protein YTHDF1, one of evolutionary positively selected genes for high-altitude adaptation is amplified in various cancers, including non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). We show that YTHDF1 deficiency inhibits NSCLC cell proliferation and xenograft tumor formation through regulating the translational efficiency of CDK2, CDK4, and cyclin D1, and that YTHDF1 depletion restrains de novo lung adenocarcinomas (ADC) progression. However, we observe that YTHDF1 high expression correlates with better clinical outcome, with its depletion rendering cancerous cells resistant to cisplatin (DDP) treatment. Mechanistic studies identified the Keap1-Nrf2-AKR1C1 axis as the downstream mediator of YTHDF1. Together, these findings highlight the critical role of YTHDF1 in both hypoxia adaptation and pathogenesis of NSCLC.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms  tmt10plex

### Affiliations
Shanghai Institue of Materia and Medica, CAS
Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Science

### Submitter
Jing Gao

### Lab Head
Dr Zhou Hu
Shanghai Institue of Materia and Medica, CAS


