### Accession
PXD018381

### Title
Acute BAF perturbation causes immediate changes in chromatin accessibility

### Description
Loss-of-function mutations in genes coding for subunits of the large, multifarious BRG1/BRM associated factor (BAF) chromatin remodeling complexes are frequently causative for cancer or developmental diseases1-5. Cells lacking the most frequently mutated subunits like the ATPase SMARCA4 typically exhibit drastic chromatin accessibility changes, especially of important regulatory regions6-12. However, so far it remains unknown how these changes are established over time, and whether they are causative for intra-complex synthetic lethalities abrogating the formation (SMARCC1-SMARCC2)8,13,14 or activity (SMARCA4-SMARCA2)15-17 of BAF complexes. Here, we utilize the dTAG system18 to induce acute degradation of BAF subunits in wild-type and BAF mutant backgrounds and analyze the resulting chromatin accessibility changes with high kinetic resolution. We observe that chromatin alterations are established faster than the duration of one cell cycle and that maintaining genome accessibility requires constant ATP-dependent remodeling. Completely abolishing BAF complex function by acute degradation of a synthetic lethal subunit in a paralog-deficient background results in a near-complete loss of chromatin accessibility at BAF-controlled sites, especially at super-enhancers, providing a mechanism for intra-complex synthetic lethalities.

### Sample Protocol
Samples rested at RT for 20 minutes before heating to 99°C for 5 min. FASP was performed using a 30 kDa molecular weight cutoff filter (VIVACON 500; Sartorius Stedim Biotech GmbH, 37070 Goettingen, Germany) essentially according to the procedure described by Wisniewski et al.31. Fifty microliters of each cleared protein extract was mixed with 200 μL of freshly prepared 8 M urea in 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5) (UA-solution) in the filter unit and centrifuged at 14.000 × g for 15 min at 20 °C to remove SDS. Any residual SDS was washed out by a second washing step with 200 μL of UA. The proteins were alkylated with 100 μL of 50 mM iodoacetamide in the dark for 30 min at RT. Afterward, three washing steps with 100 μL of UA solution were performed, followed by three washing steps with 100µL of 50 mM TEAB buffer (Sigma-Aldrich). Proteins were digested with 1,25 µg trypsin overnight at 37 °C. Peptides were recovered using 40 μL of 50 mM TEAB buffer followed by 50 μL of 0.5 M NaCl (Sigma-Aldrich). Peptides were desalted using C18 solid phase extraction spin columns (The Nest Group, Southborough, MA), organic solvent removed in a vacuum concentrator at 45°C and reconstituted in 5% formic acid and stored at -80°C until LC-MS/MS analysis. Liquid chromatography mass spectrometry was performed on a Q Exactive™ Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) coupled to a Dionex U3000 RSLC nano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) via nanoflex source interface. Tryptic peptides were loaded onto a trap column (Acclaim™ PepMap™ 100 C18, 3μm, 5 × 0.3 mm, Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) at a flow rate of 10 μL/min using 2% acetonitrile in 0.1% TFA as loading buffer. After loading, the trap column was switched in-line with a 40 cm, 75 µm inner diameter analytical column (packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 3 μm, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). Mobile-phase A consisted of 0.4% formic acid in water and mobile-phase B of 0.4% formic acid in a mix of 90% acetonitrile and 10% water. The flow rate was set to 230 nL/min and a 90 min gradient used (4 to 24% solvent B within 82 min, 24 to 36% solvent B within 8 min and, 36 to 100% solvent B within 1 min, 100% solvent B for 6 min before re-equilibrating at 4% solvent B for 18 min).  For the MS/MS experiment, the Q Exactive™ MS was operated in a top 10 data-dependent acquisition mode with a MS1 scan range of 375 to 1,650 m/z at a resolution of 70,000 (at 200 m/z). Automatic gain control (AGC) was set to a target of 1×106 and a maximum injection time of 55 ms. MS2-scans were acquired at a resolution of 15,000 (at 200 m/z) with AGC settings of 1×105 and a maximum injection time of 110 ms. Precursor isolation width was set to 1.6 Da and the HCD normalized collision energy to 28%. The threshold for selecting precursor ions for MS2 was set to 3.6 x 104. For enhanced detection of the 29 core BAF complex members, an inclusion list containing 755 peptide m/z values was generated using Skyline (https://skyline.ms/project/home/software/Skyline) for preferential precursor selection using a 10 ppm m/z inclusion tolerance. Dynamic exclusion for selected ions was 90 sec. A single lock mass at m/z 445.120024 was employed. All samples were analysed in duplicates, back-to-back replicates. XCalibur version 4.1.31.9 and Tune 2.9.2926 were used to operate the instrument.

### Data Protocol
Acquired raw data files were processed using the Proteome Discoverer 2.4.0.305 platform, utilising the database search engine Sequest HT. Percolator V3.0 was used to remove false positives with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% on peptide and protein level under strict conditions. Searches were performed with full tryptic digestion against the human SwissProt database v2017.06 (20,456 sequences and appended known contaminants) with up to two miscleavage sites. Oxidation (+15.9949 Da) of methionine and phosphorylation of serine, threonine or tyrosine (+79.966331 Da) was set as variable modification, whilst carbamidomethylation (+57.0214 Da) of cysteine residues was set as fixed modifications. All spectra having peptide matches worse than high were send into a second search event using acetylation (+42.010565 Da), methylation (+14.01565 Da), dimetylation (+28.03130 Da) and trimethylation (+42.046950 Da) as well as ubiquitination (+114.042927 Da) as variable modification on lysine. Data was searched with mass tolerances of ±10 ppm and 0.02 Da on the precursor and fragment ions, respectively. Results were filtered to include peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) with Sequest HT cross-correlation factor (Xcorr) scores of ≥1 and high peptide confidence. For calculation of protein areas Minora Feature Detector node and Precursor Ions Quantifier node, both integrated in Thermo Proteome Discoverer were used. Automated chromatographic alignment and feature linking mapping were enabled with total peptide amount used for normalization between individual runs. Normalized protein abundances were used for Principal Component Analysis33. For each biological replicate, two technical replicates were summated, followed by log¬2 transformation and fold change calculation. Only proteins that were present in both the control and treatment conditions were included in fold change calculation. p values were calculated by Welch Two Sample t-test. Because dTAG experiment affects only a small subset of proteins (BAF complex proteins numbering less than 20 per condition), multiple testing was not considered for significance estimate.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dtag knock-in, Chromatin accessibility, Mammalian swi/snf complex, Enhancer, Atac-seq, Synthetic lethality, Kinetics, Baf complex, Chromatin remodeling, Acute chemical degradation

### Affiliations
CeMM Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences, Lazarettgasse 14 AKH BT 25.3 1090 Vienna, Austria
Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Andre Mueller

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan Kubicek
CeMM Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences, Lazarettgasse 14 AKH BT 25.3 1090 Vienna, Austria


