### Accession
PXD000994

### Title
TurboRAW2MGF: Removing isobaric-related ions improves the peptide/protein identification

### Description
Isobaric labelling technique coupled with high resolution mass spectrometry has been widely employed in the proteomics workflows requiring relative quantification. For each high resolution tandem mass spectrum (MS/MS), it can be used not only to quantify the peptide from different samples by reporter ions，but also to identify the peptide it derived from. Since isobaric related ions act as noises in database searching, the MS/MS spectrum should be preprocessed before peptide/protein identification. In this paper, we demonstrated that there were a lot of high frequency, high abundance isobaric related ions in MS/MS spectrum. By combining removing isobaric related ions with deisotoping and deconvolution in MS/MS preprocessing procedure, the peptide/protein identification sensitivity improved significantly. A user-friendly software TurboRaw2MGF (v2.0) has been implemented for converting  raw TIC data files to mascot generic format files which can be downloaded for free from https://github.com/shengqh/RCPA.Tools/releases as part of the software suite ProteomicsTools.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from GK rat liver tissue and digested by trypsin. The peptide mixture was labelled by iTRAQ-plex4 or iTRAQ-plex8. An LTQ-Orbitrap Velos was used for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
TurboRAW2MGF was used for extracting tandem mass spectra from raw files. Using Mascot algorithm, all MS/MS spectra were searched against a composite target-decoy rat Uniprot database. BuildSummary was used to generate a confident protein list for both peptide and protein with a false discovery rate  ≤ 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
Isobaric labeling techniques coupled with high-resolution mass spectrometry have been widely employed in proteomic workflows requiring relative quantification. For each high-resolution tandem mass spectrum (MS/MS), isobaric labeling techniques can be used not only to quantify the peptide from different samples by reporter ions, but also to identify the peptide it is derived from. Because the ions related to isobaric labeling may act as noise in database searching, the MS/MS spectrum should be preprocessed before peptide or protein identification. In this article, we demonstrate that there are a lot of high-frequency, high-abundance isobaric related ions in the MS/MS spectrum, and removing isobaric related ions combined with deisotoping and deconvolution in MS/MS preprocessing procedures significantly improves the peptide/protein identification sensitivity. The user-friendly software package TurboRaw2MGF (v2.0) has been implemented for converting raw TIC data files to mascot generic format files and can be downloaded for free from https://github.com/shengqh/RCPA.Tools/releases as part of the software suite ProteomicsTools. The data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD000994.

### Keywords
Peptide identification, Isobaric labelling, Preprocessing, Ltq-orbitrap, Itraq

### Affiliations
Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences
Vanderbilt University

### Submitter
Quanhu Sheng

### Lab Head
Dr Quanhu Sheng
Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences


