### Accession
PXD047188

### Title
Detection of candidate ovarian cancer protein biomarkers in sera using a multiplexed targeted mass spectrometry assay

### Description
Ovarian cancer is the most lethal gynecologic malignancy in women, and high-grade serous ovarian cancer (HGSOC) is the most common subtype. Currently, no clinical test has been approved by the FDA to screen the general population for ovarian cancer. This underscores the critical need for the development of a robust methodology combined with novel technology to detect diagnostic biomarkers for HGSOC in the sera of women. Targeted mass spectrometry (MS) can be used to identify and quantify specific peptides/proteins in complex biological samples with high accuracy, sensitivity, and reproducibility. In this study, we sought to develop and conduct analytical validation of a multiplexed Tier 2 targeted MS parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) assay for the relative quantification of 23 putative ovarian cancer protein biomarkers in sera.

### Sample Protocol
The total protein concentration of serum from each patient was determined by a BCA assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). One hundred micrograms of serum protein was used for trypsin digestion. The serum proteins were denatured using 0.1% Rapigest (Waters, Milford, MA) and 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 60°C, and then alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Subsequently, trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) was added at an enzyme/protein ratio of 1:50, followed by incubation for 18 h at 37°C. The digestion was terminated by adding trifluoroacetic acid (Sigma, St.Louis, MO) to a final concentration of 0.5% (v/v) followed by incubation for 30 min at 37°C. The Rapigest was removed by centrifugation at 13,000 rpm for 10 min. After removing the Rapigest, the digested serum was then desalted and concentrated using C18 Sep-Pak cartridges containing 1 mg sorbent (Waters) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The eluted peptides were frozen for 30 min at -80°C and then dried by vacuum centrifugation. The peptides were resuspended in 5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid, and the peptide concentration was measured using a NanoDrop (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  A multiplexed targeted PRM MS assay was developed using a Q Exactive Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer coupled with a Vanquish HPLC system interfaced with an Ion Max HESI-II source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Mobile phase A and B contained 0.1% formic acid in water and 90% acetonitrile/ 0.1% formic acid, respectively. The peptides were separated on an Accucore RP-MS 100 mm x 2.1 mm, 2.6 µm column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a linear gradient of 5-28% mobile phase B for 30 min at a flow rate of 0.5 mL/min. For measurement of the target peptides, the mass spectrometer was operated in PRM mode. Mass spectra were acquired in profile mode with a setting of 35,000 resolution at 200 m/z, 2e5 AGC target, 100 ms maximum injection time (IT), 1.6 m/z isolation window, and normalized collision energy of 30. A scheduled method was used with 1-min retention time windows (concurrently monitored precursors within each window: 2 to 18). Ionization source parameters were as follows: spray voltage, 3.8 kV; sheath gas, 26; auxiliary gas, 6; capillary temperature, 380°C.

### Data Protocol
The .raw files were imported into Skyline (64-bit) 22.2.0.351. All peak integrations were manually reviewed, and any transitions with detected interferences were omitted from the data analysis. Transition ions were manually selected based on their signal intensities. For the ‘DVSYLYR’ peptide corresponding to FOLR1, only two transition ions for the light and heavy peptides were selected. For the other peptides, the three transition ions for the light and heavy peptides were manually selected in same manner. The sum of these transition ions represented the integrated peak areas that were used for relative quantification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
High-grade serous ovarian cancer (hgsoc), Diagnostic biomarkers, Parallel reaction monitoring (prm), Serum, Insulin-like growth factor-binding protein 2 (ibp2)

### Affiliations
University of Minnesota
Department of Laboratory Medicine & Pathology, University of Minnesota

### Submitter
Joohyun Ryu

### Lab Head
Dr Stefani Thomas
Department of Laboratory Medicine & Pathology, University of Minnesota


