### Accession
PXD036092

### Title
Isoprenoid alcohols utilization by malaria parasites

### Description
Plasmodium falciparum is the etiological agent of human malaria, one of the most widespread diseases in tropical and subtropical world regions. One of the biggest problems in controlling the disease is the emergence of drug resistance, which leads to the need to discover new antimalarial compounds. One of the most promissory drugs purposed is fosmidomycin, an inhibitor of the biosynthesis of isoprene units by the methylerythritol 4-phosphate (MEP) pathway which in some cases failed in clinic studies. Once formed, isoprene units are condensed to form longer structures such as farnesyl and geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate (GGPP), which are necessary for heme O and A formation, ubiquinone, and dolichyl phosphate biosynthesis as well as for protein isoprenylation. Even though the natural substrates of polyprenyl transferases and syntheses are polyprenyl pyrophosphates, it was already demonstrated that isoprenoid alcohols (polyprenols) such as farnesol (FOH) and geranylgeraniol (GGOH) can rescue parasites from fosmidomycin. This study better investigated how this rescue phenomenon occurs by performing drug-rescue assays. By this, it was observed that phytol (POH), a 20-carbon plant isoprenoid, rescues parasites from the fosmidomycin effect, similarly to FOH or GGOH. Contrarily, neither dolichols nor nonaprenol rescue parasites from fosmidomycin. Considering this, here we characterized the transport of FOH, GGOH, and POH. Once incorporated, it was observed that these substances are phosphorylated, condensed into longer isoprenoid alcohols, and incorporated into proteins and dolichyl phosphates. Through proteomic and radiolabelling approaches, it was found that prenylated proteins are naturally attached to several isoprenoids including GGOH, dolichol, and POH if exogenously added. Furthermore, results suggest the presence of at least two promiscuous protein prenyltransferases in the parasite: one enzyme which can use FPP among other unidentified substrates and another enzyme that can use GGOH, POH, and dolichols among other substrates not identified here. Thus, was obtained further evidence for dolichols and other isoprenoid products attached to proteins. This study helps better understand apicoplast-targeting antimalarials mechanism of action as well as novel posttranslational modifications of proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Two bands corresponding to the groups of proteins which incorporate [3H] GGOH (band 1: 25-30 kDa; band 2: approximately 20-25 kDa), were excised from the acrylamide gel and cut into pieces of, approximately 1mm3. Then, bands were washed with 40% acetonitrile in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate. Each band was reduced with 10 mM DTT in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate and incubated for 45 min at 56 °C, alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate for 30 min at room temperature. Protein were, and digested into peptides for 16 h withby trypsin (Promega) at 1:50 (w/w) at 37 °C for 16h. The reaction was stopped by the addition of trifluoroacetic acid at 1% final concentration. Then, 40% acetonitrile and 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid were added to the gel to extract peptides. The purified peptides were eluted on a C18 resin (Thermo Scientific) [46, 47] dried under a vacuum, and stored at -20 °C for further analysis. The samples were analyzedanalysed by the Biomass - Mass Spectrometry and Proteome Discovery Facility at Centro de Facilidades à Pesquisa (CEFAP) of the Institute of Biomedical Sciences of the University of São Paulo. The samples were analyzed by an EASY-nano LC system (Proxeon Biosystems) coupled with an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides extracted from each fraction were loaded into an 18 cm silica column (100 μm internal diameter) with a 3 μm ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ reversed-phase capillary column (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany) and eluted using a gradient of 2-30% phase B (0.1% formic acid, 95% acetonitrile) for 80 minutes, reaching 95% phase B over 5 minutes and holding at 95%B for 20 minutes (one total 25 min at 300 nl/min). Mass spectra were acquired in positive mode by applying an automatic scan dependent on the acquired tandem mass spectrum (MS/MS) data. Each MS scan on the orbitrap (m/z mass range of 350-1500 and resolution 60,000) was followed by an MS/MS acquisition of the twenty most intense ions. Fragmentation was performed by collision-induced dissociation and sequenced ions were dynamically excluded for 60 s.

### Data Protocol
The raw data from MS/MS analysis were visualized by the Xcalibur v.2.1 software (Thermo Scientific) and data processing was performed using Maxquant version 1.5.3.8 for protein identification and quantification. Raw files were generated and submitted to search using the Andromeda algorithm in the P. falciparum 3D7 clone database downloaded from UNIPROT (https://www.uniprot.org/, accessed April 2021). The identified proteins were filtered to contain a single peptide; at least two identified peptides had a molecular weight compatible with the gel bands. Then, the proteins were organized according to the iBAQ for each band (Intensity-Based Absolute Quantification; the iBAQ corresponds to the sum of all peptide intensities divided by the number of observable peptides of a protein). Finally, proteins containing prenylation domains were identified on the iPreny-PseAAC website (http://app.aporc.org/iPreny-PseAAC/index.html. Last accessed in 2020) and their weight and the isoelectric point were predicted in the UNIPROT database website.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Plasmodium falciparum</i> is the etiological agent of human malaria, one of the most widespread diseases in tropical and subtropical regions. Drug resistance is one of the biggest problems in controlling the disease, which leads to the need to discover new antimalarial compounds. One of the most promissory drugs purposed is fosmidomycin, an inhibitor of the biosynthesis of isoprene units by the methylerythritol 4-phosphate (MEP) pathway, which in some cases failed in clinical studies. Once formed, isoprene units are condensed to form longer structures such as farnesyl and geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate, which are necessary for Heme O and A formation, ubiquinone, and dolichyl phosphate biosynthesis as well as for protein isoprenylation. Even though the natural substrates of polyprenyl transferases and synthases are polyprenyl pyrophosphates, it was already demonstrated that isoprenoid alcohols (polyprenols) such as farnesol (FOH) and geranylgeraniol (GGOH) can rescue parasites from fosmidomycin. This study better investigated how this rescue phenomenon occurs by performing drug-rescue assays. Similarly, to FOH and GGOH, it was observed that phytol (POH), a 20-carbon plant isoprenoid, as well as unsaponifiable lipid extracts from foods rescue parasites from the antimalarial effect of fosmidomycin. Contrarily, neither dolichols nor nonaprenol rescue parasites from fosmidomycin. Considering this, here we characterized the transport of FOH, GGOH, and POH. Once incorporated, it was observed that these substances are phosphorylated, condensed into longer isoprenoid alcohols, and incorporated into proteins and dolichyl phosphates. Through proteomic and radiolabelling approaches, it was found that prenylated proteins are naturally attached to several isoprenoids, derived from GGOH, dolichol, and POH if exogenously added. Furthermore, the results suggest the presence of at least two promiscuous protein prenyltransferases in the parasite: one enzyme which can use FPP among other unidentified substrates and another enzyme that can use GGPP, phytyl pyrophosphate (PPP), and dolichols, among other substrates not identified here. Thus, further evidence was obtained for dolichols and other isoprenoid products attached to proteins. This study helps to better understand the apicoplast-targeting antimalarial mechanism of action and a novel post-translational modification of proteins in <i>P. falciparum</i>.

### Keywords
Isoprenoid alcohols, Fosmidomycin, Plasmodium falciparum, Malaria, Geranylgeraniol, Phytol, Farnesol, Protein dolichylation, Protein prenylation, Dolichols, Isoprenoid biosynthesis

### Affiliations
University of Southampton
Department of Parasitology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences of the University of São Paulo, Av. Lineu Prestes 1374, CEP 05508-000, São Paulo, SP, Brazil. Telephone: +55 11 3091-7330 Fax: 5511 3091-7417. E-mail address: amkatzin@icb.usp.br (A. M. Katzin)

### Submitter
Veronica Santiago

### Lab Head
Dr Alejandro Miguel Katzin
Department of Parasitology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences of the University of São Paulo, Av. Lineu Prestes 1374, CEP 05508-000, São Paulo, SP, Brazil. Telephone: +55 11 3091-7330 Fax: 5511 3091-7417. E-mail address: amkatzin@icb.usp.br (A. M. Katzin)


