### Accession
PXD029422

### Title
Beauveria bassiana manipulates host plant physiology to promote growth and defense

### Description
During plant life, roots support beneficial associations with soil inhabiting microbes, mainly fungi and bacteria. Increasing evidence suggests that plant-associated microorganisms can promote plant growth and expand immune functions of the plant host. The beneficial entomopathogenic fungus Beauveria bassiana colonizes plant tissues in an asymptomatic way, triggering poorly characterized plant metabolic changes, which negatively affect both pest insects and plant pathogens. B. bassiana has an extremely broad host spectrum, including tomato (Solanum lycopersicum L.). In order to obtain a great overall snapshot of molecular events regulating tomato-B. bassiana interaction, plant proteome and hormonome changes induced over the time by the fungus have been in-depth analyzed by using a combination of high throughput profiling techniques and bioinformatics tools. The proteomics data highlighted interesting molecular pathways affected by B. bassiana related to primary and secondary metabolism and plant growth. Additionally, downregulation of a member of the endochitinase family and upregulation of calcium channel and transporter proteins suggested well-established plant-fungus symbiosis. The molecular pathways linked to protein/amino acids turn-over and to the biosynthesis of energy compounds shed some light on the strategies exploited by the plant to get the most out of the beneficial interaction in improving growth and development.

### Sample Protocol
Leaves of adult plants were harvested from two set of plant samples: i) root-colonized by B. bassiana and ii) control plants (not colonized). Leaf harvesting were performed at 4 time points and for each time point 3 biological replicates were picked-up. In total, 24 samples has been obtained. Samples preparation was performed as in Bertini et al. 2019. Grinded leaves were suspended in a lysis buffer containing 10% TCA in acetone and 10 mM DTT, left for 2h at −20°C and then centrifuged at 13500 rpm for 14 min at 4°C. Pellets were washed in acetone, containing 10 mM DTT, 2 mM EDTA and 1 mM PMSF and centrifuged again under the same conditions. The obtained pellets were dried in Speed Vac Concentrator (Savant, ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Pellet were lysed with 5 mL of 6 M UREA in 100 mM  Tris pH 8 and a Branson Digital Sonifier (1min cycle, 1 min run time, 20 sec ON, 10 sec OFF, 30% amplitude). Samples were centrifuged at 4ºC, 15 min, 15000g and the pellet was discarded. Samples (20 µg) were reduced with dithiothreitol (30 nmol, 37 ºC, 60 min) and alkylated in the dark with iodoacetamide (60 nmol, 25 ºC, 30 min). The resulting protein extract was first diluted to 2M urea with 200 mM ammonium bicarbonate for digestion with endoproteinase LysC (1:100 w:w, 37ºC, o/n, Wako, cat # 129-02541), and then diluted 2-fold with 200 mM ammonium bicarbonate for trypsin digestion (1:100 w:w, 37ºC, 8h, Promega cat # V5113). After digestion, peptide mix was acidified with formic acid and desalted with a MicroSpin C18 column (The Nest Group, Inc) prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Samples were analyzed using a Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific (Proxeon), Odense, Denmark). Peptides were loaded directly onto the analytical column and were separated by reversed-phase chromatography using a 50-cm column with an inner diameter of 75 μm, packed with 2 μm C18 particles spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA).Chromatographic gradients started at 95% buffer A and 5% buffer B with a flow rate of 300 nl/min for 5 minutes and and gradually increased to 25% buffer B and 75% A in 79 min and then to 40% buffer B and 60% A in 11 min. After each analysis, the column was washed for 10 min with 100% buffer B. Buffer A: 0.1% formic acid in water. Buffer B: 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ionization mode with nanospray voltage set at 2.4 kV and source temperature at 305°C. Ultramark 1621 was used for external calibration of the FT mass analyzer prior the analyses, and an internal calibration was performed using the background polysiloxane ion signal at m/z 445.1200. The acquisition was performed in data-dependent adquisition (DDA) mode and full MS scans with 1 micro scans at resolution of 120,000 were used over a mass range of m/z 350-1400 with detection in the Orbitrap mass analyzer. Auto gain control (AGC) was set to 4E5 and charge state filtering disqualifying singly charged peptides was activated. In each cycle of data-dependent acquisition analysis, following each survey scan, the most intense ions above a threshold ion count of 10000 were selected for fragmentation. The number of selected precursor ions for fragmentation was determined by the “Top Speed” acquisition algorithm and a dynamic exclusion of 60 seconds. Fragment ion spectra were produced via high-energy collision dissociation (HCD) at normalized collision energy of 28% and they were acquired in the ion trap mass analyzer. AGC was set to 2E4, and an isolation window of 0.7 m/z and a maximum injection time of 12 ms were used. All data were acquired with Xcalibur software v4.1.31.9. Acquired spectra were analyzed using the Proteome Discoverer software suite (v2.3, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the Mascot search engine (v2.6, Matrix Science ). The data were searched against a Uniprot Solamun Lycopersicum database (as in August 2020, 34655 entries) plus a list of common contaminants and all the corresponding decoy entries. For peptide identification a precursor ion mass tolerance of 7 ppm was used for MS1 level, trypsin was chosen as enzyme, and up to three missed cleavages were allowed. The fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da for MS2 spectra. Oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation were used as variable modifications whereas carbamidomethylation on cysteines was set as a fixed modification. False discovery rate (FDR) in peptide identification was set to a maximum of 1%. Peptide quantification data were retrieved from the “Precursor ions quantifier” node from Proteome Discoverer (v2.0) using 2 ppm mass tolerance for the peptide extracted ion current (XIC). The obtained values were used to calculate protein fold-changes and their corresponding adjusted p-values.

### Publication Abstract
Plant roots can exploit beneficial associations with soil-inhabiting microbes, promoting growth and expanding the immune capacity of the host plant. In this work, we aimed to provide new information on changes occurring in tomato interacting with the beneficial fungus Beauveria bassiana. The tomato leaf proteome revealed perturbed molecular pathways during the establishment of the plant-fungus relationship. In the early stages of colonization (5-7 d), proteins related to defense responses to the fungus were down-regulated and proteins related to calcium transport were up-regulated. At later time points (12-19 d after colonization), up-regulation of molecular pathways linked to protein/amino acid turnover and to biosynthesis of energy compounds suggests beneficial interaction enhancing plant growth and development. At the later stage, the profile of leaf hormones and related compounds was also investigated, highlighting up-regulation of those related to plant growth and defense. Finally, B. bassiana colonization was found to improve plant resistance to Botrytis cinerea, impacting plant oxidative damage. Overall, our findings further expand current knowledge on the possible mechanisms underlying the beneficial role of B. bassiana in tomato plants.

### Keywords
Beauveria bassiana, Proteomics, Solanum lycopersicum l., Mass-spectrometry, Tomato leaves

### Affiliations
Head of the CRG/UPF Proteomics Unit
CNIO

### Submitter
Julia Morales Sanfrutos

### Lab Head
Dr Eduard Sabido Aguade
Head of the CRG/UPF Proteomics Unit


