### Accession
PXD021232

### Title
Cancer-cell-secreted miR-122 suppresses O-GlcNAcylation to promote muscle proteolysis

### Description
Decline in skeletal muscle mass and lower muscular strength are prognostic factors in advanced human cancers. We found that breast cancer suppressed O-linked N-acetylglucosamine (O-GlcNAc) protein modification in skeletal muscle through extracellular-vesicle-encapsulated miR-122 that targeted O-GlcNAc transferase (OGT). Specifically, O-GlcNAcylation of ryanodine receptor 1 (RYR1) Ca2+ release channel competed with NEK10-mediated phosphorylation and increased K48-linked ubiquitination and proteasomal degradation, whereas O-GlcNAcylation of sarco/endoplasmic reticulum Ca2+-ATPase (SERCA3) increased K63-linked ubiquitination and elevated protein level. Muscular protein O-GlcNAcylation was regulated by hypoxia and lactate through HIF1A-dependent OGT promoter activation, and elevated after exercise. Suppressed O-GlcNAcylation in the setting of cancer, especially through increased RYR1 protein, led to Ca2+ leak and calpain protease activation to trigger myofibrillar protein cleavage. This was associated with reduced skeletal muscle mass and contractility in tumor-bearing mice. Our findings link O-GlcNAcylation to muscular protein homeostasis and contractility, and reveal a mechanism of cancer-associated muscle dysregulation.

### Sample Protocol
To identify proteins with O-GlcNAcylation modification, 10 mg of GA from tumor-free or MDA-MB-231 tumor-bearing mice were lysed in ice-cold tissue lysis buffer. Insoluble proteins were removed by centrifugation at 18,000 g for 10 min at 4 °C, and the supernatant was incubated overnight with CTD110.6 antibody conjugated to dynabeads (Dynabeads® antibody coupling kit; Thermo Fisher Scientific). The beads were washed in PBS and subjected to peptide digestion and MS. To characterize the PTMs of RYR1, C2C12 myotubes transfected with control siRNA or siOGT were lysed in the cell lysis buffer described above, and the protein extract was immunoprecipitated by RYR1 antibody conjugated to dynabeads. Proteins on the beads were separated by SDS-PAGE, bands on the gel were visualized by silver staining (SilverQuest™ silver staining kit; Thermo Fisher Scientific), and a region of gel containing proteins of >250 kDa was cut for in-gel digestion and MS.

### Data Protocol
Peaks 8.5, mouse swissprot datbase, all possible PTM in the datbase were included in the searches.

### Publication Abstract
A decline in skeletal muscle mass and low muscular strength are prognostic factors in advanced human cancers. Here we found that breast cancer suppressed O-linked N-acetylglucosamine (O-GlcNAc) protein modification in muscle through extracellular-vesicle-encapsulated miR-122, which targets O-GlcNAc transferase (OGT). Mechanistically, O-GlcNAcylation of ryanodine receptor 1 (RYR1) competed with NEK10-mediated phosphorylation and increased K48-linked ubiquitination and proteasomal degradation; the miR-122-mediated decrease in OGT resulted in increased RYR1 abundance. We further found that muscular protein O-GlcNAcylation was regulated by hypoxia and lactate through HIF1A-dependent OGT promoter activation and was elevated after exercise. Suppressed O-GlcNAcylation in the setting of cancer, through increasing RYR1, led to higher cytosolic Ca<sup>2+</sup> and calpain protease activation, which triggered cleavage of desmin filaments and myofibrillar destruction. This was associated with reduced skeletal muscle mass and contractility in tumour-bearing mice. Our findings link O-GlcNAcylation to muscular protein homoeostasis and contractility and reveal a mechanism of cancer-associated muscle dysregulation.

### Keywords
Mouse cancer glycosylation

### Affiliations
Scientist
1Department of Pathology; University of California San Diego; La Jolla, CA 92093; USA

### Submitter
Majid Ghassemian

### Lab Head
Dr Emily Wang1
1Department of Pathology; University of California San Diego; La Jolla, CA 92093; USA


