### Accession
PXD039024

### Title
Pathogenicity of human PLA2R1-antibodies in minipigs: a pilot study

### Description
Description Primary membranous nephropathy (MN) is an autoimmune kidney disease histomorphologically defined  by subepithelial deposition of immune complexes in the glomeruli, and exhibits a high risk for end-stage kidney disease. Circulating antibodies against phospholipase A2 receptor 1 (PLA2R1) are detected in 70-80% of MN patients and correlate with treatment response and prognosis. Experimental proof that human PLA2R1-antibodies induce MN is still missing.   Methods: In passive transfer experiments, minipigs received plasma or purified IgG from patients with PLA2R1-associated MN or from healthy controls. PLA2R1-antibodies and proteinuria were monitored using Western blot, ELISA and Coomassie staining. Kidney tissues were analyzed using immunohistochemistry, immunofluorescence, electron microscopy and proteomic analyses.   Results: We show that minipigs, like humans, express PLA2R1 on podocytes. Human PLA2R1-antibodies bound to minipig PLA2R1 in-vitro and in-vivo. Passive transfer of human PLA2R1-antibodies, derived from patients with PLA2R1- associated MN, led to the development of histomorphologic characteristics of human early-stage MN in minipigs, activation of components of the complement cascade and induction of low levels of proteinuria. In the later phases of disease, development of an autologous phase of disease was observed.  Conclusions: Applying a translational approach from humans to minipigs we show that human PLA2R1-antibodies are pathogenic, although in the heterologous phase of disease only low level proteinuria developed.   Proteomic samples: Porcine glomeruli were isolated following previously published protocols known for human glomeruli, with slight modifications (Stahl et al., Kidney Int. 1984;26(1):30–34.).   A total of six samples of sieved glomeruli from porcine kidney were used.  1. untreated_negative_control   Experiment 1 (passive transfer of human PLA2R1 antibody from PLA2R1-antibody positive patient into minipigs) 2. exp_1_passive_antibody_rep1  Same experimental procedure in two animals (replicate 1) (treated with patient antibody) 3. exp_1_passive_antibody_rep2  Same experimental procedure in two animals (replicate 2)  (treated with patient antibody) 4. exp_1_passive_antibody_control  control animal for Pig A and B (treated with healthy antibody)  Experiment 2 (passive transfer of human plasma from PLA2R1-antibody positive patient into minipigs) 5. exp_2_passive_plasma  treated animal (treated with patient plasma) 6. exp_2_passive_plasma_control control animal (treated with healthy plasma)

### Sample Protocol
Glomeruli pellets were homogenised, lysed in 8 M urea, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, supplemented with 1x Halt protease inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Scientific). Samples were first homogenised at 30 Hz for 1 minute, then sonicated, reduced with 5 mM DTT and alkylated using 10 mM IAA. Overnight digestion was carried out using trypsin at 1:50 enzyme to substrate ratio at 37 °C. Tryptic peptides were acidified using formic acid and purified using in-house made stage-tips. 1 µg of protein was used for LC-MS/MS acquisition. quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer (QExactive; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled to a nano UPLC (nanoAcquity system, Waters) with an inline trap column for desalting and purification (180µm x20mm, 100 Å pore size, 5 µm particle size, Symmetry C18, Waters) followed by a 25 cm C18 reversed-phase column for peptide separation (75 µm x 200 mm, 130 Å pore size, 1.7 µm particle size, Peptide BEH C18, Waters). Peptides were separated using an 80-minute gradient with linearly increasing ACN concentration from 2% to 30% ACN in 65 minutes using a two-buffer system (buffer A: 0.1% FA in water, buffer B: 0.1% FA in ACN). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode with the top 12 ions by intensity per precursor scan (1×10^6 ions, 70,000 Resolution, 240 ms fill time) being selected for MS/MS (HCD at 25 normalized collision energy, 1 x 10^5 ions, 17,500 Resolution, 50 ms fill time) in a range of 400-1200 m/z. A dynamic precursor exclusion of 20 seconds was used.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched, quantified and normalized using MaxQuant version 1.6.17.0 with default settings for orbitraps. The match between runs (MBR) feature was disabled. Qauntification (LFQ, IBAQ) and classical normalization features were enabled. We used the UniProt sus scrofa reference proteome as database (UP000008227, downloaded in June 2021 with 49792 entries, supplemented with pig and human IgG sequences (Added uniprot entries for human IGHG, accessed June 2021, added entries for Pig, from DOI 10.1007/s00251-008-0336-9)) with enzyme specificity set to Trypsin/P, cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification (+57.021464) and methionine oxidation (+15.994914) as well as protein N-terminal acetylation (+42.010565) were as variable modifications. Data analysis was performed using Perseus software suite (V1.6.15.0).  There are two search outputs included here, as asked for during revision. 1) MQ_txt_passive.zip: featuring the search output of MaxQuant using just the six raw data files included here in this submission ('passive minipig model') 2) MQ_txt_all.zip: featuring the search output of MaxQuant using the same six raw files included here AND 2 additional raw minipig samples of an 'active model'. This search output was used for plots in the manuscript

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Glomeruli, Miniature swine, Membranous nephropathy, Complement, Pathogenecity, Kidney, Pla2r1

### Affiliations
III. Department of Medicine, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany
Zentrum für Innere Medizin, III. Medizinische Klinik und Poliklinik (Nephrologie/Rheumatologie/Endokrinologie), Universitätsklinikum Hamburg-Eppendorf (UKE), Hamburg, Germany

### Submitter
Moritz Lassé

### Lab Head
Dr Markus M. Rinschen
III. Department of Medicine, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany


