### Accession
PXD004221

### Title
Myosin VIIA 138-1 immunoaffinity purification

### Description
Through its activity in stereocilia, MYO7A (myosin VIIA) is essential for hair cell function in the inner ear. Utilizing multiple stages of immunoaffinity enrichment, we have developed a strategy that allows us to partially purify stereocilia membranes from thousands of chick inner ears and isolate low-abundance MYO7A protein complexes from those membranes. By analysis of MYO7A and co-purifying molecules with shotgun and targeted mass spectrometry, we demonstrated that MYO7A forms a complex with PDZD7, a paralog of USH1C and DFNB31, which has been shown to localize to the ankle-link region of stereocilia.

### Sample Protocol
We carried out three immunoaffinity purification experiments, each with ~500 ears worth of E19-E20 chicken inner ear enriched stereocilia membranes. Membranes were solubilized with RIPA buffer, and extracts were passed sequentially over control and anti-MYO7A (mAb 138-1) antibodies coupled to magnetic beads. Beads were eluted with SDS, and samples were processed with the eFASP method to generate peptides. One to three technical replicates for each of the experiments was carried out; peptides were separated, detected, and quantified using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
We used MaxQuant, with its built-in Andromeda search engine, to match peptides to mouse protein database entries, to assemble peptides into proteins, and the quantify those proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Stereocilia, Auditory, Hair bundle, Myosin, Pdz, Hair cell, Vestibular

### Affiliations
Oregon Hearing Research Center Oregon Health & Science University Portland  OR  97239
Oregon Hearing Research Center

### Submitter
Peter Barr-Gillespie

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Barr-Gillespie
Oregon Hearing Research Center Oregon Health & Science University Portland  OR  97239


