### Accession
PXD030582

### Title
Proteome / pYome of LYN deficient HS-5 stroma cells

### Description
LYN kinase is a tyrosine kinase, that regulates cellular homeostasis in a context specific manner. Our group could show, that its expression in the leukemic microenvironment of chronic lymphocytic leukemia contributes to disease progression (Nguyen PH et al.; Cancer Cell; 2016). To analyze the effect of LYN kinase on the leukemia supportive phenotype of the bone marrow stromal cell line HS-5, we generated single cell clones of LYN deficient cells. These cells were analyzed in a Multi-Omic approach, including quantitative, label-free proteomic analysis of the Proteome / SILAC labelled analysis of the tyrosine phosphoproteome.

### Sample Protocol
Proteome: 2.5x106 label-free HS-5 cells (2 clones per genotype) were lysed at 4°C in RIPA buffer (CellSignaling) + PhosStop phosphatase Inhibitor (Roche) + cOmplete protease inhibitor (Roche) for 1h. The protein samples were reduced with DTT and alkylated with iodoacetamide, followed by proteolytic cleavage with trypsin. The peptide mixtures were analyzed by liquid chromatography / tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) on a Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system (Dionex). pYome: HS-5 LYNWT and LYNKO cells (3 clones per genotype) were individually isotope-labelled by maintaining the cells for 6 passages in SILAC medium (LYNKO heavy-labelled and LYNWT light-labelled). Subsequently, cells were harvested, resuspended in Urea lysis buffer, mixed in a 1:1 ratio and immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen. Tyrosine-phosphorylated peptides were enriched by immuno-precipitation using the PTMscan Phospho-Tyrosine Rabbit mAb (P-Tyr-1000) kit and following the instructions of the manufacturer (Cell Signaling Technology).

### Data Protocol
Proteome: The mass spectrometric raw data was processed using the MaxQuant software (version 1.6, MPI for Biochemistry) by searching the MS/MS spectra against the Uniprot human reference proteome. Peptide and protein quantitation was conducted using the label-free quantitation module of MaxQuant (MaxLFQ) with the default software settings. A minimum ratio count of 2 peptides was required for protein quantitation and the “re-quantify” option was enabled. Subsequently, potential contaminants and reverse protein sequences were removed from dataset along with proteins with too many missing values (only proteins with intensities quantified in 3 replicates of at least one condition were kept). Normalization was performed using vsn and remaining missing values were classified in two categories as described in the MSnbase  R package for further imputation. The ones resulting from the absence of detection of a feature, despite being present at detectable concentrations were handled as missing at random (MAR) and imputed with maximum likelihood-based method (MLE) using the expectation-maximization algorithm. However, biologically relevant missing values resulting from the absence of low abundant ions (below the instrument detection limit) were classified as missing not at random (MNAR) and imputed with a left-censored approach using a deterministic minimal value (MinDet). Differentially expressed proteins were identified using limma R package under the following condition (p-adjusted ≤ 0.1; 1 ≤ log2 fold change ≤ -1). pYome: The mass spectrometric raw data was processed using the MaxQuant software (version 1.6, MPI for Biochemistry) (15) by searching the MS/MS spectra against the Uniprot human reference proteome and phosphorylation on serine, threonine and tyrosine were set as variable peptide modifications. For peptide and protein quantitation, SILAC-based quantitation was applied setting the multiplicity to 2 for double labeling (Lys+0/Arg+0 and Lys+8/Arg+10). Potential contaminants and reverse hits were filtered out. A localization probability filter of at least 75% was applied and proteins with too many missing values (SILAC ratios) were removed. Normalization factor of SILAC ratios was calculated using the median of total light and heavy intensities in each sample (less sensitive to noise). Differentially expressed proteins were identified using limma R package under the following condition (p-adjusted ≤ 0.05; 1 ≤ log2 fold change ≤ -1). Additionally, in order to check whether phosphorylation sites were already reported or not three different databases (dbPAF, qPhos and PhosphoSitePlus) were inspected.

### Publication Abstract
Microenvironmental bystander cells are essential for the progression of chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL). We have discovered previously that LYN kinase promotes the formation of a microenvironmental niche for CLL. Here we provide mechanistic evidence that LYN regulates the polarization of stromal fibroblasts to support leukemic progression. LYN is overexpressed in fibroblasts of lymph nodes of CLL patients. LYN-deficient stromal cells reduce CLL growth in vivo. LYN-deficient fibroblasts show markedly reduced leukemia feeding capacity in vitro. Multi-omics profiling reveals that LYN regulates the polarization of fibroblasts towards an inflammatory cancer-associated phenotype through modulation of cytokine secretion and extracellular matrix composition. Mechanistically, LYN deletion reduces inflammatory signaling including reduction of c-JUN expression, which in turn augments the expression of Thrombospondin-1, which binds to CD47 thereby impairing CLL viability. Together, our findings suggest that LYN is essential for rewiring fibroblasts towards a leukemia-supportive phenotype.

### Keywords
Hs-5, Lyn kinase, Bmsc, Stroma, Secretome, Multi-omics

### Affiliations
University of Cologne 
Department I for Interal Medicine 
University of Cologne Faculty of Medicine and Cologne University Hospital Department I of Internal Medicine Center for Integrated Oncology Aachen Bonn Cologne Duesseldorf Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne CECAD Center of Excellence on Cellular Stress Responsesin Aging-Associated Diseases 50931 Cologne Germany

### Submitter
Alexander F. vom Stein

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Michael Hallek
University of Cologne Faculty of Medicine and Cologne University Hospital Department I of Internal Medicine Center for Integrated Oncology Aachen Bonn Cologne Duesseldorf Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne CECAD Center of Excellence on Cellular Stress Responsesin Aging-Associated Diseases 50931 Cologne Germany


