### Accession
PXD040610

### Title
Comparative proteomics for the secretome of Vibrio proteolyticus T6SS3

### Description
Identifying the secreted effector proteins of type VI secretion system 3 (T6SS3) in the bacterium Vibrio proteolyticus.

### Sample Protocol
Vibrio proteolyticus strains, eitehr wild-type or with a deletion in tssL3 (to inactivate T6SS3) and cotaining a plasmid to express the T6SS3 regulator Ats3 upon arabinose induction, were grown overnight in MLB media (lysogeny broth containing 3% w/v NaCl) supplemented with kanamycin to maintain plasmids. The cultures were normalized to OD600 = 0.18 in 5 mL MLB supplemented with appropriate antibiotics and 0.05% (w/v) L-arabinose to induce expression from the arabinose-inducible plasmids and then grown for 5 h at 30°C. To collect secreted proteins, culture volumes equivalent to 10 OD600 units were filtered (0.22 µm), and proteins were precipitated using deoxycholate and trichloroacetic acid. Cold acetone was used to wash the protein precipitates twice. Then, samples were shipped to the Smoler Proteomics Center at the Technion, Israel, for analysis. Precipitated proteins were washed four times in 80% (v/v) cold acetone and incubated for 15 minutes at −20°C, followed by sonication. Ten µg of protein were reduced using DTT at 60ºC for 30 minutes. The proteins were then modified with 10 mM iodoacetamide in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 30 minutes at room temperature in the dark. The proteins were digested overnight at 37ºC in 2 M urea and 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate with modified trypsin (Promega) at a 1:50 (M/M) enzyme-to-substrate ratio. An additional trypsinization step was performed for four hours in 1:100 enzyme-to-substrate ratio. The tryptic peptides were desalted using C18 tips (homemade stage tips), and then dried and re-suspended in 0.1% Formic acid. The resulting tryptic peptides were resolved by reverse-phase chromatography on 0.075 X 250-mm or 0.075 X 300-mm fused silica capillaries (J&W) packed with Reprosil reversed phase 358 material (Dr Maisch GmbH, Germany). The peptides were eluted with a linear 60-minute gradient of 5 to 28%, 15 minutes gradient of 28 to 95%, and 15 minute at 95% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid in water at a flow rate of 0.15 μL/minute. Mass spectrometry was performed using a Q Exactive plus mass spectrometer (Thermo) in a positive mode using a repetitively full MS scan followed by high collision dissociation (HCD) of the 10 most dominant ions selected from the first MS scan.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry data were analyzed using MaxQuant software 1.5.2.8 for peak picking and identification using the Andromeda search engine against the relevant Vpr strain from the Uniprot database with mass tolerance of 6 ppm for the precursor masses and 20 ppm for the fragment ions. Oxidation on methionine was accepted as variable modifications, and carbamidomethyl on cysteine was accepted as static modifications. The minimal peptide length was set to seven amino acids; a maximum of two miscleavages was allowed. The data were quantified by label-free analysis using the same software. Peptide- and protein-level false discovery rates (FDRs) were filtered to 1% using target-decoy strategy. Statistical analysis of the identification and quantization results was done using Perseus 1.6.7.0 software. Intensity data were transformed to log2. Values below the threshold were replaced with 21 (on the logarithmic scale), which corresponds to the lowest intensity that was detected. A Student’s t-test with Permutation-based FDR (with 250 randomization, threshold value = 0.05) was performed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Secretion, T6ss, Effectors, Vibrio proteolyticus

### Affiliations
Department of Clinical Microbiology and Immunology, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel
Tel Aviv University

### Submitter
Dor Salomon

### Lab Head
Dr Dor Salomon
Department of Clinical Microbiology and Immunology, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel


