### Accession
PXD021553

### Title
A simplified in vivo cross-linking mass spectrometry strategy for proteome-wide studies.

### Description
Chemical cross-linking (XL) coupled to mass spectrometry (MS) has become a powerful approach to probe the structure of protein assemblies. Although most of the applications concerned purified complexes, latest developments focus on large-scale in vivo studies. Pushing in this direction, we describe a new and simplified in vivo XL-MS workflow to study the cellular interactome of living bacterial cells. It is based on in vivo labeling and involves a one-step enrichment by click-chemistry on a solid support. Our approach shows an impressive efficiency on Neisseria meningitidis, leading to the identification of about 1,800 cross-links in a single LC-MS/MS run using a benchtop high-resolution Orbitrap mass spectrometer. Highly dynamic multiprotein complexes were successfully captured and characterized in all bacterial compartments, showing the great potential and precision of our large-scale approach. Our workflow paves new avenues for the deep in vivo analysis of cellular interactomes.

### Sample Protocol
Neisseria meningitidis cross-linking. Neisseria meningitidis (Nm8013) were grown overnight on GBC plate supplemented with ferric citrate. Cells were harvested and washed 3 times with PBS. After the last centrifugation, cells were diluted twice in PBS. 20 µL of resuspended cells were mixed with 2 µmoles of NNP9. After 1 hour at 37°C, 2 nmoles of NNP9 were added again with 1 % DDM (step is repeated twice). The cross-linking reaction was stopped by addition of ammonium bicarbonate (100 mM final concentration) on ice for 15 min. Cells were lysed with 6 M urea, final concentration. Protein digestion. Cross-linked proteins were transferred into a passivated Amicon ultra 0.5mL 30 kDa. Excess of cross-linker was removed by 6 concentration-dilution cycles with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Proteins were digested overnight with a trypsin ratio 1:100 (w:w). Tryptic peptides were recovered through the filter after centrifugation.  Enrichment of labeled peptides. Photo-cleavable alkyne agarose beads (PCAB) (1 µL:10 nmoles) were mixed with the tryptic peptides, copper(II) sulfate (5:1), THPTA (25:1) and sodium ascorbate (50:1), where ratio are given in regards to NNP9 quantity. After 30 min of side rotation at room temperature, PCAB were washed 4 times with PBS and twice with 0.1 % formic acid to remove unlabeled peptides. PCAB were transferred to a 96-well plate (10 µL PCAB maximum per well) covered with 50 µL 0.1% formic acid and placed 10 min under UV and rotational mixing (500 rpm). Released peptides were pipetted and transferred into the polypropylene injection vial. Peptides eluted from PCAB were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS using an EASY-nLC™ 1200 system (Thermo-Scientific) coupled to the nanoelectrospray ion source of an Orbitrap Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo-Scientific). Peptides were loaded on an in-house packed nano-HPLC column (75 µm x 50 cm) with C18 resin (Aeris PEPTIDE XB-C18 , 1.7μm particles, 100 Å pore size, Phenomenex) and separated by reverse-phase chromatography at 250 nL/min using a 3-hour linear gradient from 8 to 30 % solvent B (80 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid) followed by a 35 min ramp up to 60 % solvent B. The Orbitrap mass spectrometer was set up in data-dependent acquisition mode. After a survey scan over the m/z range 300-1500 in the Orbitrap (resolution 60k at m/z 200), the 10 most intense precursor ions above 4.2*105 intensity with 3 to 8 charges were selected for HCD fragmentation with a normalized collision energy (NCE) set up to 26.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using MassSpec Studio V2.3 using “E-Value Generator” algorithm with PercentEValueThreshold set at 0.03 using genomic derived protein database of our Neisseria meningitidis strain NM8013, containing 2,125 protein entries. (detailed parameters are provided in parameters.xml files in supplementary). Cross-link identifications were considered true above 95 % confidence cut-off (score above 13).

### Publication Abstract
Chemical cross-linking (XL) coupled to mass spectrometry (MS) has become a powerful approach to probe the structure of protein assemblies. Although most of the applications concerned purified complexes, latest developments focus on large-scale <i>in vivo</i> studies. Pushing in this direction, we developed an advanced <i>in vivo</i> cross-linking mass spectrometry platform to study the cellular interactome of living bacterial cells. It is based on <i>in vivo</i> labeling and involves a one-step enrichment by click chemistry on a solid support. Our approach shows an impressive efficiency on <i>Neisseria meningitidis</i>, leading to the identification of about 3300 cross-links for the LC-MS/MS analysis of a biological triplicate using a benchtop high-resolution Orbitrap mass spectrometer. Highly dynamic multiprotein complexes were successfully captured and characterized in all bacterial compartments, showing the great potential and precision of our proteome-wide approach. Our workflow paves new avenues for the large-scale and nonbiased analysis of protein-protein interactions. All raw data, databases, and processing parameters are available on ProteomeXchange via PRIDE repository (data set identifier PXD021553).

### Keywords
Cross-linking, In vivo biochemistry, Click-chemistry, Mass spectrometry, Structural biology

### Affiliations
Mass Spectrometry for Biology Unit Department of Structural Biology and Chemistry Institut Pasteur, CNRS USR 2000 28 rue du Docteur Roux, 75015 Paris, France
CNRS, Pasteur

### Submitter
Martial Rey

### Lab Head
Dr Julia Chamot-Rooke
Mass Spectrometry for Biology Unit Department of Structural Biology and Chemistry Institut Pasteur, CNRS USR 2000 28 rue du Docteur Roux, 75015 Paris, France


