### Accession
PXD021891

### Title
Mapping sites of carboxymethyllysine modification on proteins reveals consequences for proteostasis and cell proliferation

### Description
Posttranslational mechanisms play a key role in modifying the abundance and function of cellular proteins. Among these, modification by advanced glycation end products (AGEs) has been shown to accumulate during aging and age-associated diseases but specific protein targets and functional consequences remain largely unexplored. Here, we devised a proteomic strategy to identify specific sites of carboxymethyllysine (CML) modification, one of the most abundant AGEs. We identified over 1000 sites of CML modification in mouse and primary human cells treated with the glycating agent glyoxal. By using quantitative proteomics, we found that protein glycation triggers a proteotoxic response and directly affects the protein degradation machinery. We show that glyoxal induces cell cycle perturbation of primary endothelial cells and that CML modification interferes with acetylation of tubulins and microtubule dynamics. Our data demonstrate the relevance of AGE modification for cellular function and pinpoints specific protein networks that might become compromised during aging.

### Sample Protocol
The human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC)(approximately 500 µg of proteins) were used as a starting material from each sample and they were thawed, ice-cold PBS was added and the equivalent of 2x lysis buffer was added to the cell suspension. Samples were sonicated in a Bioruptor Plus quickly centrifuged and a second sonication cycle was performed. The lysates were centrifuged and transferred to new tubes. Subsequently, samples were reduced using 10mM DTT and alkylated using 15mM IAA. Subsequently, proteins were acetone precipitated and digested using LysC and trypsin, as described in (Buczak et al., Nature Protocols 2020). The digested proteins were then acidified with 10% TFA and desalted using Waters Oasis® HLB µElution Plate. The eluates were dried down with the speed vacuum centrifuge and dissolved in 500 µL of IP buffer (50 mM MOPS (pH 7.3), 10 mM KPO4 (pH 7.5), 50 mM NaCl, 2.5 mM Octyl β-D-glucopyranoside (0.07 %)) to reach the concentration of 1 µg/ µL followed by sonication in a Bioruptor. 10% of the sample was kept as it is in order to use it as input.  The acetyl lysine antibody, agarose beads (Immunechem, ICP0388) were washed three time with washing buffer (20 mM MOPS (pH 7.4), 10 mM KPO4 (pH 7.5), 50 mM NaCl) before incubation with each sample-peptide for 1.5h on rotator at 750rpm (STARLAB Rotator Mixer RM Multi-1) . Samples were transferred into clearspin filtered microtubes (0.22 µm) (Dominique Dutscher SAS) and centrifuged at 4 °C for 1 min at 2000 g. The flow-through was collected and stored at -20 °C. Resins were washed first with IP buffer (three times) and followed by centrifugation as described before, then with washing buffer (three times) and finally with 5 mM Ambic(three times). Thereupon, the enriched peptides were then eluted first in basic condition using 50 mM aqueous NH3, after using 0.1 % TFA in 10 % iPrOH and finally with 0.1 % TFA. Eultions were then dried down with the speed vacuum centrifuge and reconstituted in MS buffer A (5% ACN, 0.1% formic acid), acidified with 10% trifluoroacetic acid and then desalted with Waters Oasis® PRiME HLB 96-well Plate .  Upon dried down with the speed vacuum centrifuge, samples were dissolved in MS buffer A and analyze by LC-MS/MS. Peptides were separated using the nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters) fitted with a trapping (nanoAcquity Symmetry C18, 5µm, 180 µm x 20 mm) and an analytical column (nanoAcquity BEH C18, 1.7µm, 75µm x 250mm).  The outlet of the analytical column was coupled directly to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using the Proxeon nanospray source. Solvent A was water, 0.1 % formic acid and solvent B was acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid. The samples (approx. 1 µg for DDA and 3 µg for DIA) were loaded with a constant flow of solvent A at 5 µL/min onto the trapping column.  Trapping time was 6 minutes.  Peptides were eluted via the analytical column with a constant flow of 0.3 µL/min. During the elution step, the percentage of solvent B increased in a non-linear fashion from 0 % to 40 % in 40 minutes.  Total runtime was 60 minutes, including clean-up and column re-equilibration. For data acquisition and processing of the raw data Xcalibur 4.0 (Thermo Scientific) and Tune version 2.1 were employed. For the DIA data acquisition the same gradient conditions were applied to the LC as for the DDA and the MS conditions were varied as described: Full scan MS spectra with mass range 350-1650 m/z were acquired in profile mode in the Orbitrap with resolution of 120000. The filling time was set at maximum of 20 ms with limitation of 5 x 105 ions.  DIA scans were acquired with 30 mass window segments of differing widths across the MS1 mass range with a cycle time of 3 seconds.  HCD fragmentation (30% collision energy) was applied and MS/MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 30000 over the mass range 200-2000 m/z after accumulation of 2 x 105ions or after filling time of 70 ms (whichever occurred first).  Ions were injected for all available parallelizable time).  Data were acquired in profile mode. Either DDA and DIA files were used to create the spectral library using Spectronaut Pulsar (v11, AG Biognosys)

### Data Protocol
DpD (DDA plus DIA) libraries were then created by searching both the DDA runs and the DIA runs using Spectronaut Pulsar (v10/11 Biognosys AG). The data were searched against a species specific (Homo Sapiens 160126) Swissprot database with a list of common contaminants appended. The data were searched with the following modifications: Carbamidomethyl (C) (Fixed) and Oxidation (M)/ Acetyl (Protein N-term)/ Carboxymethyl lysine (CML), Acetyl-K (Variable). A maximum of 3 missed cleavages was allowed. The library search was set to 1% false discovery rate (FDR) at both protein and peptide levels. This library contained 92,917 precursors, corresponding to 5,393 protein groups using Spectronaut protein inference for the HUVEC cells, and 83,207 precursors, corresponding to 4,653 protein groups for MEF treated for 8h and 83207 precursors, corresponding to 4720 protein groups for MEF treated for 24h. DIA data were then uploaded and searched against this spectral library using Spectronaut Professional (v.XY) and default settings. Relative quantification was performed in Spectronaut for each pairwise comparison using the replicate samples from each condition using default settings. The data (candidate table) and protein quantity data reports were then exported and further data analyses and visualization were performed with R version and R-studio (v.XY) using in-house pipelines and scripts.

### Publication Abstract
Posttranslational mechanisms play a key role in modifying the abundance and function of cellular proteins. Among these, modification by advanced glycation end products has been shown to accumulate during aging and age-associated diseases but specific protein targets and functional consequences remain largely unexplored. Here, we devise a proteomic strategy to identify sites of carboxymethyllysine modification, one of the most abundant advanced glycation end products. We identify over 1000 sites of protein carboxymethylation in mouse and primary human cells treated with the glycating agent glyoxal. By using quantitative proteomics, we find that protein glycation triggers a proteotoxic response and indirectly affects the protein degradation machinery. In primary endothelial cells, we show that glyoxal induces cell cycle perturbation and that carboxymethyllysine modification reduces acetylation of tubulins and impairs microtubule dynamics. Our data demonstrate the relevance of carboxymethyllysine modification for cellular function and pinpoint specific protein networks that might become compromised during aging.

### Keywords
Heart, Endothelial cell, Mitosis, Liver, Glyoxal, Kidney, Posttranslational modification, Advanced glycation end products, Tubulin, Microtubules, Carboxymethyllysine, Cell cycle, Aging, Mice, Acetylation, Mass spectrometry, Proteasome

### Affiliations
Leibniz Institute on Aging
Leibniz Institute on Aging – Fritz Lipmann Institute (FLI), 07745 Jena, Germany

### Submitter
Alessandro Ori

### Lab Head
Dr Alessandro Ori
Leibniz Institute on Aging – Fritz Lipmann Institute (FLI), 07745 Jena, Germany


