### Accession
PXD020952

### Title
Characterization of Plasmodium falciparum NEDD8

### Description
Here, we characterize the Plasmodium falciparum NEDD8 and demonstrate that P. falciparum cullins are NEDD8 substrates. This work lays the foundation for understanding the role of protein neddylation in malaria parasites.

### Sample Protocol
The eluates from immunoprecipitation were run on a 12% SDSPAGE gel until the protein marker completely entered into the resolving gel. The gel was stained with coomassie blue and destained. The gel slice containing the protein band was excised, washed with 800 μl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate-acetonitrile solution (7:3 v/v),followed by sequential washing with 300-800 μl of 50 mM Ammonium bicarbonate and 800 μl of acetonitrile. The gel piece was vacuum dried, resuspended in 200 µl of 10 mM DTT for 45 min at 56°C, and incubated in 200 μl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate-55 mM iodoacetamide solution for 30 min at room temperature. The gel piece was washed with 700 µl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, followed by with 700 µl of acetonitrile for 10 min. The gel piece was vacuum dried and treated with trypsin (15 ng/μl in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 1 mM CaCl2; Promega or Roche sequencing grade) at 37°C for 16 hours. The peptides were extracted with 5% formic acid-30% acetonitrile solution, the extract was vacuum dried, dissolved in 20 µl of 0.1% TFA, desalted using C18 Ziptips (Merck, ZTC18M960), and eluted with 40 µl of 50% acetonitrile-5% formic acid solution. The eluate was vacuum dried and resuspended in 11 µl of 2% formic acid. 10 µl of the sample was run on the Q Exactive HF (Thermo Fischer Scientific) to perform HCD mode fragmentation and LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were imported into the proteome discoverer v2.2 (Thermo Fischer Scientific), analysed and searched against the UniProt databases of P. falciparum 3D7 using the HT Sequest algorithm. The analysis parameters included enzyme specificity for trypsin, maximum two missed cleavages, carbidomethylation of cysteine, oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine/glutamine as variable modifications. The precursor tolerance was set to 5 ppm and fragmentation tolerance was set to 0.05 Da. The peptide spectral matches (PSM) and peptide identifications grouped into proteins were validated using Percolator algorithm of proteome discoverer and filtered to 1% FDR. The protein hits from the HN8 immunoprecipitate were compared with those from the wild type P. falciparum. Protein hits identified in test eluate sample were compared with those in the control sample (without ATP). Common proteins or proteins with a difference of at least 5 times lower peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) in the controls compared to the test samples were excluded, and proteins common to at least three biological replicates with minimum 1 unique peptide were considered.

### Publication Abstract
A variety of post-translational modifications of Plasmodium falciparum proteins, including phosphorylation and ubiquitination, are shown to have key regulatory roles during parasite development. NEDD8 is a ubiquitin-like modifier of cullin-RING E3 ubiquitin ligases, which regulates diverse cellular processes. Although neddylation is conserved in eukaryotes, it is yet to be characterized in Plasmodium and related apicomplexan parasites. We characterized P. falciparum NEDD8 (PfNEDD8) and identified cullins as its physiological substrates. PfNEDD8 is a 76 amino acid residue protein without the C-terminal tail, indicating that it can be readily conjugated. The wild type and mutant (Gly75Ala/Gly76Ala) PfNEDD8 were expressed in P. falciparum. Western blot of wild type PfNEDD8-expressing parasites indicated multiple high molecular weight conjugates, which were absent in the parasites expressing the mutant, indicating conjugation of NEDD8 through Gly76. Immunoprecipitation followed by mass spectrometry of wild type PfNEDD8-expressing parasites identified two putative cullins. Furthermore, we expressed PfNEDD8 in mutant S. cerevisiae strains that lacked endogenous NEDD8 (rub1&#x394;) or NEDD8 conjugating E2 enzyme (ubc12&#x394;). The PfNEDD8 immunoprecipitate also contained S. cerevisiae cullin cdc53, further substantiating cullins as physiological substrates of PfNEDD8. Our findings lay ground for investigation of specific roles and drug target potential of neddylation in malaria parasites.

### Keywords
Plasmodium, Neddylation, Nedd8

### Affiliations
Dr. Puran Singh Sijwali Senior Principal Scientist, CCMB, Hyderabad, India
SRF

### Submitter
Manish BHATTACHARJEE

### Lab Head
Dr Puran singh Sijwali
Dr. Puran Singh Sijwali Senior Principal Scientist, CCMB, Hyderabad, India


