### Accession
PXD007592

### Title
Proteomics-based insights into mitogen-activated protein kinase inhibitor resistance of cerebral melanoma metastases

### Description
Background MAP kinase inhibitor (MAPKi) therapy for BRAF mutated melanoma is characterized by high response rates but also development of drug resistance within a median progression-free survival (PFS) of 9 to 12 months. Understanding mechanisms of resistance and identifying effective therapeutic alternatives is one of the most important scientific challenges in melanoma. Using proteomics, we want to specifically gain insight into the pathophysiological process of cerebral metastases. Methods Cerebral metastases from melanoma patients were prepared for MS analysis by tryptic digestion. Mass spectrometric analysis was performed on a QExactive HF hybrid quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometer, equipped with a nanospray ion source, coupled with a nano HPLC system.  Results In this pilot study, we were able to identify 5,977 proteins by LC-MS analysis. Samples were classified into good and poor responders based on PFS. By evaluating these proteomic profiles according to gene ontology (GO) terms, KEGG pathways and gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA), we could characterize differences between the two distinct groups. We further detected an EMT signature, V-type proton ATPases, calcium ion binding proteins, eukaryotic translation initiation factors, cell adhesion proteins and several transporter and exchanger proteins to be significantly up-regulated in poor responding patients, whereas good responders showed an immune-activation and involvement of extracellular matrix structural constituents, among other features. Subsequently we identified the most class-discriminating proteins based on nearest shrunken centroids. Conclusions Using proteomics helped to identify already known extra-cerebral resistance mechanisms in the cerebral metastases and further discovered possible brain specific mechanisms of drug efflux, which might serve as interesting targets, especially for treatment of these types of metastases or as predictive marker.

### Sample Protocol
All Experiments were carried out according to the Declaration of Helsinki principles after approval by the ethics committee (Swissethics, Kantonale Ethikkommission Zurich, vote number 2014-0425). Cerebral melanoma metastases (n = 18) originating from surgical excisions and autopsy specimens were selected based on the clinical information and patients’ different progression-free survival (PFS) after MAPKi treatment. For subsequent data analysis patients with a PFS ≥ 8 months were classified as a good responder (n = 5), whereas patients with a PFS ≤ 3 months were classified as a poor responder (n = 13).  MS sample preparation Of each cryopreserved tissue sample, 2¬–5 mg was homogenized in 100 μl sample buffer using ultrasound. For protein denaturation urea was added to the lysates. Protein concentrations were determined according to Bradford et al. [23]. For proteomics analyses we prepared in-solution digests as previously described [24]. Briefly, 20 µg of each lysate was concentrated onto a 10 kDa MWCO filter (Pall Austria Filter GmbH, Vienna, Austria) and prewashed with LC-MS grade water (Merck Chemicals and Life Science GesmbH, Vienna, Austria). Proteins were then reduced with dithiothreitol (5 mg/ml dissolved in 8 M guanidinium hydrochloride in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer, pH 8) and alkylated with iodoacetamide (10 mg/ml in 8 M guanidinium hydrochloride in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer). After centrifugation, proteins on top of the filters were washed with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer, followed by digestion with trypsin and Lys-C for 18 hours (Trypsin/Lys-C Mix Mass Spec Grade, 0.1 µg/µl; Promega). After digestion, peptides were collected with 0.5 % trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and we performed sample clean-up with C-18 spin columns (Pierce, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Briefly, eluted peptide samples were acidified to a final concentration of 1 % TFA and loaded onto prewashed and equilibrated spin columns. After a washing step with 5 % acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.5 % TFA, peptides were eluted twice with 50 % ACN and 0.1 % TFA and once with 80 % ACN and 0.1 % TFA. Samples were finally dried and stored at –20°C until further MS analyses were performed.   LC-MS/MS analysis As described previously [24,25], dried samples were reconstituted in 5 µl 30 % formic acid (FA) containing 10 fmol each of 4 synthetic standard peptides (allowing us to monitor the quality of the chromatographic separation) and diluted with 40 µl mobile phase A (98 % H2O, 2 % ACN, 0.1 % FA). Of this solution 2.5 µl were injected into the Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano HPLC-system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were first concentrated on a 2 cm x 75 µm C18 Pepmap100 pre-column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 10 µl/min using mobile phase A. Afterwards, separation of the peptides was achieved by eluting them from the pre-column to a 50 cm x 75 µm Pepap100 analytical column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) applying a flow rate of 300 nl/min and using a gradient of 8 % to 40 % mobile phase B (80 % ACN, 20 % H2O, 0.1 % FA), over 190 minutes for the analysis of samples. The mass spectrometric analysis was performed on a QExactive HF orbitrap mass spectrometer, equipped with a nanospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific), coupled to the nano HPLC system. For detection, MS scans were performed in the range from m/z 400–1,400 at a resolution of 60,000 (at m/z = 200). MS/MS scans were performed choosing a top 12 method; HCD fragmentation was applied at 27 % normalized collision energy and analysis in the orbitrap at a resolution of 15,000 (at m/z = 200).

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria) running Mascot 2.4 (Matrix Science, UK) was used for protein identification and qualitative data analysis. Protein identification was achieved searching against the SwissProt Database (version 11/2015 with 20 193 entries) allowing a mass tolerance of 50ppm for MS spectra and 100mmu for MS/MS spectra as well as a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Furthermore, search criteria included carbamidomethylation on cysteins as fixed modification and methionine oxidation as well as N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Octenidine dihydrochloride (OCT) is a widely used antiseptic molecule, promoting skin wound healing accompanied with improved scar quality after surgical procedures. However, the mechanisms by which OCT is contributing to tissue regeneration are not yet completely clear. In this study, we have used a superficial wound model by tape stripping of ex vivo human skin. Protein profiles of wounded skin biopsies treated with OCT-containing hydrogel and the released secretome were analyzed using liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), respectively. Proteomics analysis of OCT-treated skin wounds revealed significant lower levels of key players in tissue remodeling as well as reepithelization after wounding such as pro-inflammatory cytokines (IL-8, IL-6) and matrix-metalloproteinases (MMP1, MMP2, MMP3, MMP9) when compared to controls. In addition, enzymatic activity of several released MMPs into culture supernatants was significantly lower in OCT-treated samples. Our data give insights on the mode of action based on which OCT positively influences wound healing and identified anti-inflammatory and protease-inhibitory activities of OCT.

### Keywords
Cerebral melanoma metastases, Braf mutation, Map kinase inhibitor, Melanoma, Proteomics, Drug resistance

### Affiliations
University of Vienna
University of Vienna, Faculty of Chemistry, Department of Analytical Chemistry

### Submitter
Christopher Gerner

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher Gerner
University of Vienna, Faculty of Chemistry, Department of Analytical Chemistry


