### Accession
PXD021960

### Title
IDENTIFICATION OF BIOCHEMICAL AND MOLECULAR MARKERS OF EARLY AGING AND CELLULAR STRESS IN CHILDHOOD CANCER SURVIVORS (CCS) PATIENTS

### Description
Survival rates of Childhood Cancer Survivors (CCS) have improved tremendously over the past four decades. Unfortunately, treatments are associated with increased risk for developing early onset of chronic diseases, typical of aging, and secondary cancer. Although several studies have described a phenotype of accelerated aging in CCS, the molecular mechanism underlying the “late effects” remain unknown.  Evaluating the mitochondrial metabolism in the mononuclear cells (MNC) isolated from peripheral blood of CCS, age-matched control, and healthy elderly subjects, our data demonstrate that CCS-MNC display an altered aerobic metabolism associated with a low expression of genes involved in mitochondrial biogenesis and regulation. In particular, CCS-MNC show an inefficient oxidative phosphorylation and a low level of NAD+, which determine a low energy production and a metabolic switch to lactate fermentation. The alteration of mitochondrial function is also associated with an increment of lipid peroxidation due to an unbalance among the oxidative stress production and the antioxidantdefenses activation. These biochemical alterations seem linked to the lower expression of CLUH, PGC1-, and SIRT6, which play a pivotal role in the mitochondrial biogenesis and metabolism regulation.Finally, predicting the age by a mathematical model based on the glucose metabolism parameters, CCS display an age similar to that of elderly subjects. The early aging is also confirmed by the increment of aging markers evaluated by a proteomic approach.  In conclusion, our data suggest that the early aging described in CCS patients could be due to an alteration of mitochondrial function.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were solubilized in 40 ul 2% SDC, 40 mM Chloroacetamide, 10 mM TCEP and 100 mM Tris HCl pH 8 at 95°C for 10 min and sonicated with a Ultrasonic Processor  UP200St (Hielscher), 3 cycles of 30 sec. Lysates samples were digested with 0.7 ug Trypsin and 0.3 ug LysC over night at 37 °C. Digested samples were processed by in-Stage Tip method using enclosed Stage Tip, containing 2 poly (styrene-divinylbenzene) reverse-phase sulfonate discs (SDB-RPS) [1]. Elution was performed on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC with an EASY spray column (75 μm x 50 cm, 2 μm particle size, Thermo Scientific) at a flow rate of 250 nl/min with a 180 min non-linear gradient of 6-45% solution B  (80% ACN, 20% H2O, 5% DMSO and 0.1% FA). Eluting peptides were analyzed using an Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific Instruments) in positive ionization mode. Single MS survey scans were performed in the Orbitrap, recording a mass window between 375 and 1500 m/z using a maximal ion injection time of 50 ms. The resolution was set to 100,000 and the automatic gain control was set to 1,000,000 ions. The experiments were done in data-dependent acquisition mode with alternating MS and MS/MS experiments. A maximum of 10 MS/MS experiments were triggered per MS scan.

### Data Protocol
Data processing was performed by MaxQuant2 software version 1.6.1.0. A false discovery rate was set at 0.01 for the identification of proteins and a minimum of 6 amino acids was required for peptide identification. Andromeda engine was used to search MS/MS spectra against Uniprot human database (release UP000005640_9606 August 2017). The intensity values were extracted and statistically evaluated using the ProteinGroup Table and Perseus software3 version 1.6.1.3. Algorithm MaxLFQ was chosen for the protein quantification with the activated option ‘match between runs’ to reduce the number of the missing proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Survival rates of childhood cancer patients have improved over the past four decades, although cancer treatments increase the risk of developing chronic diseases typical of aging. Thus, we aimed to identify molecular/metabolic cellular alterations responsible for early aging in childhood cancer survivors (CCS). Biochemical, proteomic, and molecular biology analyses were conducted on mononuclear cells (MNCs) isolated from peripheral blood of 196 CCS, the results being compared with those obtained on MNCs of 154 healthy subjects. CCS-MNCs showed inefficient oxidative phosphorylation associated with low energy status, and increased lipid peroxidation and lactate fermentation compared with age-matched normal controls. According to a mathematical model based on biochemical parameters, CCS-MNCs showed significantly higher metabolic ages than their real ages. The dysfunctional metabolism of CCS-MNCs is associated with lower expression levels of genes and proteins involved in mitochondrial biogenesis and metabolism regulation, such as CLUH, PGC1-alpha, and SIRT6 in CCS, not observed in the age-matched healthy or elderly subjects. In conclusion, our study identified some biochemical and molecular alterations possibly contributing to the pathophysiology of aging and metabolic deficiencies in CCS. These results identify new targets for pharmacological interventions to restore mitochondrial function, slowing down the aging-associated pathologies in CCS.

### Keywords
Aerobic metabolism; early aging; mitochondria biogenesis; metabolism modulation

### Affiliations
Gaslini Children's Hospital
IRCCS Ist. G. Gaslini

### Submitter
Andrea Petretto

### Lab Head
Dr Andrea Petretto
IRCCS Ist. G. Gaslini


