### Accession
PXD004095

### Title
MS-based proteomics of Adeonvirus type 2 infected primary human cells

### Description
To combat virus infections, which are major human killers, a deeper understanding of how viruses reprogram their hosts to create optimal production of progeny is needed. Most knowledge on the regulation of cellular gene expression during adenovirus infection is derived from studies of mRNA expression. Here, we investigated the changes in cellular protein expression during the late phase of adenovirus type 2 (Ad2) infection of primary human cells by stable isotope labeling in cell culture (SILAC) with subsequent liquid chromatography-high resolution tandem mass spectrometric (LC-MS/MS) analysis using a Q-Exactive Orbitrap instrument. Cells were in-depth evaluated 24 and 36 hours post infection (hpi) and two biological replicates were investigated using swapped labeling. In total, 2648 and 2394 proteins were quantified at 24 and 36 hpi, respectively. Among them, 659 and 645 were deregulated more than 1.6-fold at the two time points, and approximately 80% of them had sustained regulation from 24 to 36 hpi.  For the deregulated genes the change in protein expression was compared with that of RNA expression using cDNA sequencing data from the same time points of infection. The comparison revealed a surprisingly low correlation (r = 0.3). Consistency between changes in RNA and protein expression was observed for approximately 30% of the genes, whereas a majority showed either divergent or opposite expression profiles. The deregulated proteins were subjected to pathway and biological function analysis using bioinformatics tools.  A surprising observation was that proteins related to carbohydrate metabolism were up-regulated at the protein level but unchanged at the RNA level whereas histone proteins were down-regulated at the protein level but up-regulated at the RNA level. Our results show that regulation of cellular gene expression in the response to viral infection is more complex than hitherto believed and several examples of posttranscriptional regulation of gene expression were observed. The results contribute to our understanding of host cell gene regulation during infection at a deeper level.

### Sample Protocol
Human primary lung fibroblast cells (IMR-90), purchased from American Type Culture Collection (ATCC) were cultured in minimum essential medium (without lysine and arginine) (Thermo Fishcer Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) supplemented with 10% dialyzed fetal bovine serum  (Thermo Fischer Scientific), 100 U/ml penicillin and 100 µg/ml streptomycin, L-lysine (0.89 mM) and L-arginine (0.40 mM) (Sigma Aldrich, St Louis, MO, USA) in light medium or 13C15N-labeled lysine (Lys8, 0.89 mM) and 13C15N-labeled arginine (Arg10, 0.40 mM) (Silantes, Munich, Germany) in heavy medium. After six cell doublings labelled cells were either mock infected (only medium) or infected with Ad2 at a multiplicity of infection of 100 in a serum free medium for 60 min. Then the medium was replaced with fresh SILAC-labeled medium and cultured for 2, 6, 12, 24 and 36 hours before cells were collected. A biological replicate in form of a swap-labelling experiment was performed. Cells were washed with PBS and directly snap frozen on dry ice.  Collected cells were lysed in SDS buffer (4% SDS in 100 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.6) at 95°C for 3 minutes. Next, DNA was sheared by sonication and lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 16.000 g for 5 minutes. Protein concentration was determined by DC (detergent compatible) protein assay (Bio-Rad, Hercules, California, USA). For all time points, heavy and light labeled samples were mixed in a 1:1 ratio as followed: Light labeled mock sample was mixed with heavy labeled cells infected with Ad2. As a biological replicate, a SILAC swap experiment was performed by mixing light labeled cells infected with Ad2 with heavy labeled mock samples at all time points. Screening experiments were performed for all time points by filter aided sample preparation protocol (FASP) for in-solution digestion of proteins. In brief, protein disulfide bonds were reduced with 100 mM dithiothreitol at 37°C for 30 minutes prior to sample loading onto a 30 kDa centrifugal filter unit (Millipore, Merck, Germany). Next, samples were washed with urea buffer (8 M urea in 100 mM Tris/HCl pH 8.5) and alkylated with 550 mM iodoacetamide. Lys-C (protein-to-enzyme ratio 100:1) (Wako Chemicals GmbH, Osaka, Japan) was used for protein digestion at 30°C for 2 hours followed by trypsin (protein-to-enzyme ratio 100:1) (Promega Corporation, Madison, WI, USA) at 37°C over night. Resulting peptides were eluted, acidified and concentrated by stop and go extraction (STAGE) tips before analysis by LC-MS/MS. Samples harvested at 24 and 36 hpi were subjected to in-depth analysis by SDS-PAGE fractionation and in gel-digestion. Mixed samples were loaded on a 4-12% gel (NuPAGE, Bis-Tris gel, Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA) to separate proteins by molecular weight. After protein staining by Colloidal Coomassie Blue, gel lanes were cut into 10 pieces and subjected to in gel-digestion. In brief, gel pieces were washed several times with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and dehydrated with absolute ethanol. Next, protein disulfide bonds were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol and alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide. Protein digestion was performed by trypsin 12.5 ng/µL (Promega Corporation, Madison, WI, USA) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer at 37°C overnight. Resulting peptides were extracted stepwise by acetonitrile and concentrated STAGE tips before analysis by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using MaxQuant (1.4.1.2) and database searches were performed using the implemented Andromeda search engine. MS/MS spectra were correlated to the Uniprot human database (release 2014-07, 89028 entries) combined with a human adenovirus typ 2 (HAdV2) database (release 2014-08, 481 entries). False discovery rate (FDR) was calculated based on reverse sequences from the target-decoy search and an FDR of 1% was accepted for protein and peptide identification. The following parameters were used for data processing: maximum of two miss cleavages, the mass tolerance was 4.5 ppm for main search and for fragment masses it was up to 20 ppm, trypsin as digesting enzyme, carbamidomethylation of cysteines as fixed modification, oxidation of methionine, acetylation of the protein N-terminus and phosphorylation (STY) as variable modifications. For SILAC labeling, Lys8 and Arg10 were set for heavy label and two ratio counts was the minimum for protein quantification. For protein identification, only peptides with a minimum of 7 amino acids and at least one unique peptide were required. Only proteins with at least two peptides and of them at least one unique peptide were considered as identified and used for further data analysis.

### Publication Abstract
A deeper understanding of how viruses reprogram their hosts for production of progeny is needed to combat infections. Most knowledge on the regulation of cellular gene expression during adenovirus infection is derived from mRNA studies. Here, we investigated the changes in protein expression during the late phase of adenovirus type 2 (Ad2) infection of the IMR-90 cell line by stable isotope labeling in cell culture with subsequent liquid chromatography-high resolution tandem mass spectrometric analysis. Two biological replicates of samples collected at 24 and 36 h post-infection (hpi) were investigated using swapped labeling. In total, 2648 and 2394 proteins were quantified at 24 and 36 hpi, respectively. Among them, 659 and 645 were deregulated &gt;1.6-fold at the two time points. The protein expression was compared with RNA expression using cDNA sequencing data. The correlation was surprisingly low (r = 0.3), and several examples of posttranscriptional regulation were observed; e.g., proteins related to carbohydrate metabolism were up-regulated at the protein level but unchanged at the RNA level, whereas histone proteins were down-regulated at the protein level but up-regulated at the RNA level. The deregulation of cellular gene expression by adenovirus is mediated at multiple levels and more complex than hitherto believed.

### Keywords
Imr-90, Deregulation of host cell proteins, Adenovirus type 2 infection, Silac, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Uppsala University, Department of Chemistry-BMC, Science for Life Laboratory, Analytical Chemistry.
Uppsala University

### Submitter
Sara Lind

### Lab Head
Dr Sara Lind
Uppsala University, Department of Chemistry-BMC, Science for Life Laboratory, Analytical Chemistry.


