### Accession
PXD039192

### Title
Bacillus subtilis spo0A trade-off

### Description
This project is about the proteomes of wild type cells (WT) and spo0A-null strain of B. subtilis during exponential growth in mannose medium. B2 & B4 corresponds to the wild type cells (two biological replicate samples) and B6 & B8 corresponds to spo0A-null data (two biological replicate samples).

### Sample Protocol
30 ml exponential culture of B. subtilis (OD600: 0.6) was collected by centrifugation (4 °C, 8500 rpm for 5 min) in a pre-chilled 50 mL centrifuge tube (Nest Biotech). The cell pellets were then washed twice by PBS, dried by a speed vacuum concentrator (CV600, Beijing JM Technology Co., Ltd.) and stored at -80 °C freezer prior to proteomic analysis. The 4D label-free proteomic experiment was performed by Jingjie PTM Biolabs (Hang Zhou). For details: the cell pellets were first subject to ultra-sonication in lysis buffer (8 M Urea 8 M urea, 1% Triton X-100, 10 mM DTT, 1% protease inhibitor cocktail and 2 mM EDTA). The cell debris was then removed by centrifugation (4 °C,12000 g for 10 min) and the supernatant was transferred into a new centrifuge tube for measuring protein concentrations using BCA kit. Protein samples were next pelleted by 20% TCA at 4°C for 2 h and then collected with centrifugation (4500 g/min) for 5 min. The precipitates were washed for twice by pre-cooled acetone and further supplemented with 200 mM TEAB. Trypsin was then added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for digestion overnight. The solution was further reduced with 5 mM DTT for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. Finally, the peptides were desalted by C18 SPE column. Solvent A (0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile) and Solvent B (0.1% formic acid, 100% acetonitrile) were then used for the following peptides separation and UPLC procedures. The peptides were dissolved in solvent A and separated by the NanoElute UPLC system. The flow setting of UPLC was as follows: 0-43 min, 6%~22%B; 43-55 min, 22%~30%B; 55-58 min, 30%~80%B; 58-61 min, 80%B; flow rate: 450 nl/min. After UPLC separation, the peptide was set into Capillary ionization source for ionization and further analyzed by timsTOF Pro mass spectrometry system. The electrospray voltage applied was set at 1.6 to 1.8 kV. Both the original peptide ion and its secondary fragments were detected and analyzed by high-resolution TOF. The m/z scan range was 100 to 1700 for full scan. Precursors with charge states 0 to 5 were selected for fragmentation, and 10 PASEF-MS/MS scans were acquired per cycle. The dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s. 

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using MaxQuant search engine (v.1.6.15.0). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the Swiss-prot Bacillus subtilis 168 database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in first search and 5 ppm in main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification, and acetylation on protein N-terminal and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Growth and survival are key determinants of bacterial fitness. However, how resource allocation of bacteria could reconcile these two traits to maximize fitness remains poorly understood. Here, we find that the resource allocation strategy of <i>Bacillus subtilis</i> does not lead to growth maximization on various carbon sources. Survival-related pathways impose strong proteome constraints on <i>B. subtilis</i>. Knockout of a master regulator gene, <i>spo0A</i>, triggers a global resource reallocation from survival-related pathways to biosynthesis pathways, further strongly stimulating the growth of <i>B. subtilis</i>. However, the fitness of <i>spo0A</i>-null strain is severely compromised because of various disadvantageous phenotypes (e.g., abolished sporulation and enhanced cell lysis). In particular, it also exhibits a strong defect in peptide utilization, being unable to efficiently recycle nutrients from the lysed cell debris to maintain long-term viability. Our work uncovers a fitness trade-off between growth and survival that governed by Spo0A-mediated proteome allocation constraints in <i>B. subtilis</i>, further shedding light on the fundamental design principle of bacteria.

### Keywords
Spo0a-null strain; b. subtilis; mannose medium

### Affiliations
Central China Normal University
School of Life Sciences, Central China Normal University, Wuhan, Hubei province, China

### Submitter
Xiongfeng  Dai

### Lab Head
Dr Xiongfeng Dai
School of Life Sciences, Central China Normal University, Wuhan, Hubei province, China


