### Accession
PXD026086

### Title
The Human Melanoma Proteome Atlas – Defining the Molecular Pathology & Complementing the Melanoma Transcriptome

### Description
This project is an initiative to map the protein levels in malignant melanoma tumor samples, focused on in-depth histopathology coupled to proteome characterization. The protein levels and localization from this project were determined for a broad spectrum of diverse, surgically isolated melanoma tumors originating from multiple body locations. In this study, the quantitative mass-spectrometry-based proteomic analysis is interfaced with pathological tumor characterization, and associated with clinical data. All proteoforms and the generated data were identified by mass spectrometry and global proteomic experiments, from which chromosomal and sub-cellular localization was annotated within both primary and metastatic melanoma.

### Sample Protocol
For the deparaffinization of FFPE tissues, the FFPE tissue sections were incubated with 1mL of 1:50 diluted EnVision™ FLEX Target Retrieval Solution High pH (Agilent Dako) at 97˚C for 10 min (500 RPM). Incubation was followed by a brief centrifugation at 14,000 g at 4˚C for 3 min, removal of the EnVision solution and the paraffin.  For fresh-frozen tissues, the lysis buffers contained 100 mM Ambic or 100 mM Tris pH 8.6 and up to 6M Urea or 2% SDS. Lysates were generated by sonication in an ice bath using a Branson Sonifier 250 (output 4, 10% duty cycle) or using the Bioruptor plus, model UCD-300 (Dieagenode) for 40 cycles (15 seconds on and 15 seconds off) at 4°C. Samples were centrifuged at 10,000 g and 4 °C for 10 min and the supernatants were transferred into a new tube and the pellet was discarded. In the case of FFPE tissue samples, the protein extraction was performed by adding 100mM TEAB containing 25mM DTT and 10w/v% SDS pH 8. The samples were incubated at 99˚C for 1 h with shaking (500 RPM) and sonicated in the Bioruptor plus UCD-300 for 40 cycles (15 seconds on and 15 seconds off) at 4˚C, followed by centrifugation at 20,000g at 18˚C for 10 min.  For protein digestion, proteins were reduced with 10mM DTT for 1h at 37ºC and alkylated with 40 or 50mM iodoacetamide for 30min, in the dark, at RT. Proteins were digested overnight with trypsin or Lys-C and trypsin using optimized protocols including buffer exchange (Yakovleva ME et al. EuPA Open Proteomics. 2015;8:78-84.) or urea in-solution digestion (Betancourt LH et al. J Proteome Res. 2018;17(7):2556-2561.) which comprised automated sample handling (Kuras M et al. J Proteome Res. 2018;18:548-556.). SDS was removed from the samples by the MED-FASP method (Wiśniewski JR. Anal Chim Acta. 2019;1090:23-30.) or by ethanol precipitation. The later was followed by protein solubilization in 50mM Ambic with 0.5 SDC and trypsin digestion. For acetylation analysis, the samples were processed and digested which resembles an Arg-C like enzymatic hydrolysis (Gil J et al. J Biol Chem. 2017;292(44):18129-18144.). FFPE derived protein extracts were digested using the S-trap method following the manufactures’ instructions with a few modifications (Kuras M et al. J Proteome Res. 2021;20(1):1027-1039.). Through the automated Fe(III)-IMAC-based workflow, we enriched phosphorylated peptides using the Phospho Enrichment v2.0 protocol on the AssayMAP Bravo platform (Murillo JR et al. PLoS One. 2018;13(12):e0208562.). Samples were lyophilized in a vacuum concentrator and stored at -80°C until analysis by LC-MS/MS. According to manufacturer’s instructions, TMT-11 and labeled-free peptides were separated by Hig pH RP-HPLC on a Phenomenex Aeris C8 column (100 mm × 2.1 mm, 3.6-μm particles) using an Agilent 1100 HPLC system and a gradient with solvent A 20 mM ammonium formate (pH 10) and solvent B 80% ACN - 20% water containing 20 mM ammonium formate (pH 10). Labeled-free peptides were also fractionated by strong cation exchange (SCX) using Microspin columns (MA SEM HIL-SCX, 10–100μg capacity, The Nest Group) in stepwise-elution. To process the peptide desalting, enzymatic digestions were quenched by adding formic acid to a final concentration of 1%. Proteolytic peptides were desalted prior to LC-MS/MS experiments. We used C18-microcolumns (The Nest Group) or the AssayMAP Bravo platform using the peptide cleanup v2.0 protocol with C18 cartridges (Agilent, 5 µL bed volume). Peptides were eluted in 80% ACN, 0.1% TFA, dried on a Speevac, and dissolved in 0.1% formic acid or 0.1% TFA. Peptides generated by digestion with SDC protocol or on the S-traps were directly analyzed by LC-MS/MS without desalting.  For the LC-MS/MS analysis, we used two main LC-MS/MS setups: System 1 and System 2.  System 1 comprised an Easy nLC-1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Here the peptides (∼1 μg) were initially loaded onto a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100 precolumn, 75 μm i.d. × 2 cm, C18, 3 mm, 100 Å; Thermo Fisher Scientific) and then separated on an analytical column (EASY-Spray column, 75 μm i.d. × 25 cm, PepMap RSLC C18, 2 mm, 100 Å). System 2 comprised an Ultimate 3000 nLC (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). For this case, the peptides (∼1 μg) were loaded in a trap column (Acclaim1 PepMap 100 pre-column, 75 µm, 2 cm, C18, 3 mm, 100 Å) and then separated on an analytical column (EASY-Spray column 25 or 50 cm, 75 µm i.d., PepMap RSLC C18, 2 mm, 100Å). Both systems used a flow rate of 300 nL/min and a water/ACN gradient in 0.1% formic acid and samples were measured in DDA and DIA modes. The DIA-MS Spectral library was built out of DDA-LC-MS/MS analyses of samples from tissue and cultured cell origin, with spiked in iRT peptides (Biognosis). This also included the analysis of the mixture of samples previously fractionated by high pH RP-HPLC.

### Data Protocol
All raw DDA-LC-MS/MS files were analyzed with the Proteome Discoverer™ Software (Thermo Scientific) against Uniprot Human dataset to which were added Fasta format protein sequences of known driver mutations of Melanoma disease. The search engine Sequest HT was used for peptide identification. Carbamidomethylation was set as a static modification as well as TMT 6plex (+229.1629 Da) at peptide and lysine N-termini as well as lysine ε-amino for labeling experiments. Oxidation of methionine residues and acetylation at protein N-termini were selected as dynamic modifications. Precursor and fragment mass tolerance was set as 20 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively, and two missed cleavages were allowed for peptides. For the case of phosphopeptides, the ptmRS algorithm was used to score phosphorylation sites with a site probability threshold >75. The Minora node was included in the search for identification using retention time alignment and the match-between-runs features. Identification and sorting of unique peptides were carried using the neXtProt tool “Peptide uniqueness checker” (https://www.nextprot.org/tools/peptide-uniqueness-checker). For peptide and protein identification and quantitation in DIA-MS experiments, a global proteomics spectral library was generated from DDA experiments as described above. Raw files were searched in the Spectronaut X platform (Biognosis AG) against the Homo sapiens database from Uniprot containing isoforms. The following parameters were used: cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57.0215 Da) as fixed modification and methionine oxidation (+15.9949 Da), N-terminal acetylation (+42.0105 Da) as dynamic modifications. A maximum of two missed cleavages were accepted. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and for the MS/MS fragments it was set to 0.02 Da. Between 3 and 25 fragments were collected per peptide. Phosphorylation (+79.9663 Da) on serine, threonine and tyrosine were selected as variable modifications for the phosphoproteomics analysis. The phosphosite localization algorithm was set according to a previous study (Wang S et al. Proteomics. 2019;19(23):1900245.). Phosphosites with a score that was equal or higher than 0.75 were considered as Class I. Filtering was performed at a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) for all the peptides and proteins that were used to construct the spectral library.  Through bioinformatics and statistical analysis, the results from protein identification and quantification were imported into Perseus software (Tyanova S et al. Nat Methods. 2016;13(9):731-740.). Data were normalized by log2 transforming the protein intensities, and standardization was performed by subtracting individual values by the median in each sample. The proteins showing less variability across all bathes that were identified in 100% of the samples were used to correct the abundance differences between batches. To do that, individual protein intensities in each batch were subtracted by the median abundance of selected proteins in the specific batch. After correction, the median abundance for each protein across all samples was calculated and reported as the relative abundance in our melanoma proteome. The lysine acetylation stoichiometry identification and quantification were estimated as a previous study (Gil J et al. J Biol Chem. 2017;292(44):18129-18144.). All raw files were analyzed with Pview software to identify and calculate the site-specific acetylation occupancy. Also, only those peptides identified in both, Pview and Proteome Discoverer were considered for reporting their acetylation stoichiometry.   For Kinase-specific phosphorylation site prediction, all phosphopeptides sequences were edited to include “#” in front of the S, T or Y phosphorylation sites. The background database consisted of a fasta file from all identified phosphorylated proteins in this study. The software motifeR was used to align the phosphopeptide sequences with the background database, providing a uniform sequence length of 15 amino acids. The motifeR was also used to enrich phosphorylation motifs and retrieve kinase-substrate annotation. All kinases identified in the MM500 proteome and kinases predicted by the enriched motifs were visualized in the context of the human kinome superfamily using Coral (Metz KS et al. Cell Syst. 2018;7(3):347-350.e1.).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Heterogeneity, Phosphorylation, Acetylation stoichiometry, Histopathology, Proteogenomics, Driver mutations, Braf, Sub-cellular localization, Metastatic malignant melanoma, Post-translational-modification

### Affiliations
Division of Clinical Protein Science & Imaging, Department of Clinical Sciences (Lund), Department of Biomedical Engineering, Lund University, Lund, Sweden
Lund University, Faculty of Medicine

### Submitter
Yonghyo Kim

### Lab Head
Dr Gyorgy Marko-Varga
Division of Clinical Protein Science & Imaging, Department of Clinical Sciences (Lund), Department of Biomedical Engineering, Lund University, Lund, Sweden


