### Accession
PXD027158

### Title
CLUH interactome reveals its association to SPAG5 and its proximity to the translation of mitochondrial proteins

### Description
Mitochondria require thousands of proteins to fulfil their essential function in energy production and other fundamental biological processes. These proteins are mostly encoded by the nuclear genome, translated in the cytoplasm before being imported into the organelle. RNA binding proteins (RBPs) are central players in the regulation of this process by affecting mRNA translation, stability or localization. CLUH is an RBP recognizing specifically mRNAs coding for mitochondrial proteins, but its precise molecular function and interacting partners remain undiscovered in mammals. Here we reveal for the first time CLUH interactome in mammalian cells. Using both co-IP and BioID proximity-labeling approaches, we identify novel molecular partners interacting stably or transiently with CLUH in HCT116 cells and mouse embryonic stem cells. We reveal a stable RNA-independent interaction of CLUH with itself and with SPAG5 in cytosolic granular structures. More importantly, we uncover an unexpected proximity of CLUH to mitochondrial proteins and its cognate mRNAs in the cytosol. Additionally, our data highlights the importance of CLUH TPR domain for its interactions with both proteins and mRNAs. Overall, through the analysis of CLUH interactome, our study sheds a new light on CLUH molecular function by highlighting its association to the translation and subcellular localization of some mRNAs coding for mitochondrial proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Co-immunoprecipitation:  The co-immunoprecipitations were performed using µMACS HA or GFP Isolation Kit (Miltenyi Biotec) according to the manufacturer's protocol using 10x106 cells and 50 µL of antibody-coupled magnetic beads in a volume of 1 mL. Both the lysis and washes were done using the supplied Lysis Buffer supplemented with protease inhibitors (cOmplete™ Roche).  BioID proximity labeling:  The BioID experiment was carried out on HCT116 cells stably expressing BioID2-mCLUH and genome edited mESCs expressing endogenously tagged BioID2-CLUH. Cells stably expressing GFP-BioID2 fusion are used as non-specific control. The biotin labeling was performed for 24 hours in presence of 50 µM of biotin (Sigma Aldrich) in the complete culture medium. 40 million cells (4x 10-cm plates)were used per experiment. Biotinylated proteins were captured overnight at 4°C by 200 µL of streptavidin-coupled magnetic beads slurry (Streptavidin Mag Sepharose, GE Healthcare) previously washed and equilibrated. After several washes, beads are finaly washed again with 50 mM NH4HCO3 for Mass spectrometry.  TurboID proximity labeling:  HCT116 stable cell line expressing TurboID-CLUH and TurboID-GFP were grown for 30 minutes and 16 hours in presence of 50 µM of biotin (Sigma Aldrich). 20 million cells (two 10-cm plates) and 100 µL of streptavidin-coupled magnetic beads were used for each sample.  LC-MS/MS:  For mass-spectrometry analyses, proteins eluted in Laemmli buffer from immunoprecipitations and protein extracts from mitochondrial proteomes precipitated with 0.1 M ammonium acetate in 100% methanol overnight before being digested overnight with sequencing-grade porcine trypsin (Promega, Fitchburg, MA, USA). For the proximity labeling experiments, proteins were digested directly on the magnetic beads in 2 consecutive steps with sequencing grade trypsin. Peptides generated after trypsin digestion were analysed by nanoLC-MS/MS on a QExactive + mass spectrometer coupled to an EASY-nanoLC-1000 (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, USA).

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified with Mascot algorithm (Matrix Science, London, UK): the data were searched against the Swissprot updated databases with Mus musculus or Homo sapiens taxonomies using the software’s decoy strategy. Mascot identifications were imported into Proline 1.4 software (Bouyssié et al., 2020) where they were validated using the following settings: PSM score =25, Mascot pretty rank  = 1, FDR  = 1% for PSM scores, FDR  =  1% and for protein set scores. The total number of MS/MS fragmentation spectra was used to quantify each protein.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bioid, Mitochondrial proteins, Cluh, Turboid, Rna binding protein

### Affiliations
Institut de biologie moléculaire des plantes, CNRS, Université de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France
Université de Strasbourg, Plateforme Protéomique Strasbourg-Esplanade, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique

### Submitter
Johana Chicher

### Lab Head
Dr Richard Patryk Ngondo
Institut de biologie moléculaire des plantes, CNRS, Université de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France


