### Accession
PXD042293

### Title
Novel integrated computational AMP discovery approaches highlight diversity in the helminth AMP repertoire

### Description
Invertebrate antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) form the first line of defence against pathogenic microbes. Understanding AMP profiles in helminths, their importance to helminth biology, and how they shape microbial communities could reveal novel approaches for anthelmintic and/or antimicrobial development.  In this study, we employed a LC-MS/MS peptidomics pipeline to validate a novel integrated homology- and computational-based pipeline for the discovery of helminth AMPs. Our peptidomics pipeline found 60 high-confidence PSMs correlating to 15 high-confidence novel AMP-LPs within Ascaris suum body-cavity fluid supporting the need for further characterisation of these peptides and their functions within helminths.

### Sample Protocol
Adult A. suum were collected at a local abattoir (Karro Food Group Ltd., Cookstown, Northern Ireland), transported to the laboratory in saline (0.9% NaCl), and maintained in Ascaris Ringers Solution (ARS: 13.14 mM NaCl, 9.47 mM CaCl2, 7.83 mM MgCl2, 12.09 mM C4H11NO3/ Tris, 99.96 mM NaC2H3O2, 19.64 mM KCl, pH 7.8) at 37 °C until use. Ascaris suum pseudocoelomic fluid (As-PCF) was collected from ~20 female A. suum (>20cm) within 3 hours of collection as previously described [45].  A total volume of 10ml As-PCF was collected for each biological replicate (n=3).  From each 10ml biological replicate 1ml was transferred to a 2ml low-binding microcentrifuge tube (Eppendorf, UK) and placed on ice prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. As-PCF was treated with 1ml of ice-cold acidified methanol (Ac-MeOH, 90:9:1 – methanol:ultrapure water (18.2Ω):Acetic acid) as previously described [45] with minor modifications including the use of a glass Dounce homogeniser (Sigma-Aldrich, UK) to resuspend the centrifuged As-PCF pellet.  Homogenisation was performed for 60 secs and repeated until the pellet was fully resuspended in solution.  Samples were then centrifuged at 19,000g for 15 mins at 4°C and the supernatant was divided across two 2ml low-binding microcentrifuge tubes. 250μl of ultrapure water was added to each tube to reduce the methanol concentration below 60% prior to further processing.  Please note that all solvents used for LC/MS preparation and analysis were Optima Grade unless otherwise stated. As-PCF was filtered prior to LC-MS/MS as previously described [45] with minor modifications including an additional 50:50 MeOH:water wash step prior to As-PCF sample loading.  In addition, during filtration As-PCF samples were gently pipetted every 20 mins to resuspend any solids that had accumulated in the filter.  Finally, the 10kDa flowthrough was then split across two 2ml low-binding microcentrifuge tubes (~1.3ml in each tube) and dried overnight at room temperature using a vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf, UK).  As-PCF samples were resuspended in 50μl of 0.1% formic acid via sonication for 3 mins in a benchtop water bath sonicator (Fisher Scientific, UK) and vortexed for 30 secs; this was repeated until the sample was fully resuspended.  As-PCF samples were centrifuged at 16,000g for 10 mins to pellet any debris.  The supernatant was removed and placed into a fresh 2ml low-binding microcentrifuge tube.  Custom STop And Go Extraction (STAGE) tips were produced using established protocols [46].  STAGE tips were pre-treated with 50μl 80% methanol, 0.1% formic acid and centrifuged at 3000rpm for 3 mins (repeated three times).  Tips were conditioned through the addition of 50μl 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid and centrifuged at 3000rpm for 3 mins (repeated three times).  STAGE tips were then prepared for sample loading by washing with 50μl 0.1% formic acid and centrifuged at 3000rpm for 3 mins (repeated three times).  50μl of centrifuged As-PCF was loaded into a STAGE tip and centrifuged again at 3000rpm for 3 mins.  STAGE tips were then washed with 50μl 0.1% formic acid and centrifuged at 3000rpm for 3 mins (repeated ten times or until the colour was removed from the STAGE tip).  After washing, STAGE tips were transferred to a fresh 2ml low-binding microcentrifuge tube and, through the addition of 50μl 80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid and centrifugation at 3000rpm for 3 mins, peptides were eluted.  This was repeated once to ensure all peptides were eluted from the STAGE tip (final volume 100μl).  Peptide samples were dried using a vacuum concentrator at room temperature (1-2 hours) and stored at -20°C prior to LC-MS/MS analysis, or at -80°C if LC-MS/MS was delayed for more than 3-5 days. Stored peptide samples were dissolved in 9μl 3% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid.  Micro-LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out by injection of 8μl of peptide sample into a Eksigent Expert™ Nano LC system (Eksigent, Dublin, Ca) coupled to a Sciex Triple-TOF 6600 mass spectrometer (AB Sciex, Warrington, UK).  A Kinetex 2.6μm XB-C18 100 A (150mm x 0.3mm, Phenomenex, UK) column was used for chromatographic separation.  Mobile phase A consisted of 100% H2O with 0.1% formic acid.  Mobile phase B consisted of 100% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid.  Peptides were separated with a 5µl/min linear gradient of 5-25% B for 68 mins, 35-45% B for 5 mins, 80% B for 3 mins and 3 mins equilibration at 5% B.  Data were collected in positive electrospray ionisation (ESI) data-dependant mode (DDA).  The 30 most abundant ions were selected for MS/MS following a 250ms TOF-MS survey scan and 50ms MS/MS scan.  Dynamic exclusion time was set to 15s.  Selected parent ions had charged states between 2 and 4 and were fragmented by Collision-induced dissociation (CID).

### Data Protocol
MicroLC-ESI-MS raw data were analysed by PEAKS studio X (Bioinformatics solution Inc., Waterloo, ON, Canada).  The error tolerances for parent mass and fragment mass were set as 15ppm and 0.1Da, respectively.  An enzyme search with unspecific digestion was used.  Post-translational modifications were as follows: C-terminal amidation, Pyro glut–Q, Pyro-glut-E, sulfation and oxidation of methionine.  A custom prepropeptide AMP library was used in the peptide search process.  The peptide database was compiled via comprehensive in silico analyses [see above methods and 19].  Peptides were considered as high-confidence positive identifications if detected above the Peptide-Spectrum Match (PSM) 1% FDR cut-off and at least 1 unique peptide was present in at least one biological replicate.  Peptides were considered as medium and low confidence if detected above the PSM P-value <0.01 or P-value <0.05 cut offs and at least 1 unique peptide was present in at least one biological replicate. Manual validation was performed on all positively identified peptides to ensure the presence of at least three consecutive b- or y-ions in MS2 spectra were detected.

### Publication Abstract
Antimicrobial Peptides (AMPs) are immune effectors that are key components of the invertebrate innate immune system providing protection against pathogenic microbes. Parasitic helminths (phylum Nematoda and phylum Platyhelminthes) share complex interactions with their hosts and closely associated microbiota that are likely regulated by a diverse portfolio of antimicrobial immune effectors including AMPs. Knowledge of helminth AMPs has largely been derived from nematodes, whereas the flatworm AMP repertoire has not been described. This study highlights limitations in the homology-based approaches, used to identify putative nematode AMPs, for the characterisation of flatworm AMPs, and reveals that innovative algorithmic AMP prediction approaches provide an alternative strategy for novel helminth AMP discovery. The data presented here: (i) reveal that flatworms do not encode traditional lophotrochozoan AMP groups (Big Defensin, CS&#x3b1;&#x3b2; peptides and Myticalin); (ii) describe a unique integrated computational pipeline for the discovery of novel helminth AMPs; (iii) reveal &gt;16,000 putative AMP-like peptides across 127 helminth species; (iv) highlight that cysteine-rich peptides dominate helminth AMP-like peptide profiles; (v) uncover eight novel helminth AMP-like peptides with diverse antibacterial activities, and (vi) demonstrate the detection of AMP-like peptides from Ascaris suum biofluid. These data represent a significant advance in our understanding of the putative helminth AMP repertoire and underscore a potential untapped source of antimicrobial diversity which may provide opportunities for the discovery of novel antimicrobials. Further, unravelling the role of endogenous worm-derived antimicrobials and their potential to influence host-worm-microbiome interactions may be exploited for the development of unique helminth control approaches.

### Keywords
Antimicrobial peptides, Peptidomics, Helminths

### Affiliations
Microbes & Pathogen Biology, The Institute for Global Food Security, School of Biological Sciences, Queen's University Belfast, Belfast, United Kingdom
Queen's University Belfast 

### Submitter
Darrin  McKenzie 

### Lab Head
Dr Prof Angela Mousley
Microbes & Pathogen Biology, The Institute for Global Food Security, School of Biological Sciences, Queen's University Belfast, Belfast, United Kingdom


