### Accession
PXD002606

### Title
Evening Complex associated proteins in Arabidopsis by AP-MS

### Description
To determine how clock components are integrated with cellular pathways, affinity purification and mass spectrometry (AP-MS) were used to identify proteins that co-precipitate with the evening complex, which is critical regulator of clock, growth, light and flowering pathways.

### Sample Protocol
Plant extracts were incubated with anti-FLAG antibody coupled to magnetic beads. Captured proteins were eluted using 3xFLAG peptide then combined and depleted using Talon magnetic beads. The proteins binding to the magnetic beads were reduced, alkylated then digested with trypsin at 37°C overnight. The digest was dissolved in 5% ACN/0.1% formic acid and 5 µL were injected to the LC-MS/MS system. The LC-MS/MS was carried out on a LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) coupled with a U3000 RSLCnano HPLC (ThermoFisher Scientific).  The protein digests were first loaded onto a C18 trap column (PepMap100, 300 µm ID  5 mm, 5 µm particle size, 100 Å; ThermoFisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 5 µL/min. Peptide separation was carried out on a C18 column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, 15 cm × 75 μm nanoViper™, C18, 2 μm, 100 Å, ThermoFisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 0.26 L/min and the following gradient: Time = 0-4 min, 2 % B isocratic; 4-8 min, 2-10% B; 8-83 min, 10-25 % B; 83-97 min, 25-50 % B; 97-105 min, 50-98%.  Mobile phase A, 0.1 % formic acid; mobile phase B, 0.1 % formic acid in 80:20 acetonitrile:water. The Orbitrap mass analyzer was operated in positive ionization mode using collision induced dissociation (CID) to fragment the HPLC separated peptides. The mass range for the MS survey scan done using the FTMS was 300 to 2000 m/z with resolution set to 60,000 @ 400 m/z and the automatic gain control (AGC) target set to 1,000,000 ions with a maximum fill time of 10 ms. The 20 most intense signals in the survey scans were selected and fragmented in the ion trap using an isolation window of 1.5 m/z, an AGC target value of 10,000 ions, a maximum fill time of 100 ms, a normalized collision energy of 35 and activation time of 30 ms.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectra data were extracted by Proteome Discoverer (ThermoFisher Scientific; v.1.4) and converted into mgf. The database search was done using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; v.2.5.0). Mascot was set up to search the cRAP database (http://www.thegpm.org/cRAP/) and the TAIR database assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin and 2 missed cleavages. Mascot was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.80 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 15 PPM. Deamidated of asparagine and glutamine, oxidation of methionine and carbamidomethyl of cysteine were specified in Mascot as variable modifications. Scaffold (Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR; v.4.4.3) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability by the Peptide Prophet algorithm with Scaffold delta-mass correction. The Scaffold Local FDR algorithm was used and only peptides probabilities with FDR<1% were used for further analysis. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability. The Normalized Spectral Abundance Factor (NSAF) was selected for the quantitative measurement in Scaffold to estimate the protein abundance of individual proteins in samples.

### Publication Abstract
Many species possess an endogenous circadian clock to synchronize internal physiology with an oscillating external environment. In plants, the circadian clock coordinates growth, metabolism and development over daily and seasonal time scales. Many proteins in the circadian network form oscillating complexes that temporally regulate myriad processes, including signal transduction, transcription, protein degradation and post-translational modification. In Arabidopsis thaliana, a tripartite complex composed of EARLY FLOWERING 4 (ELF4), EARLY FLOWERING 3 (ELF3), and LUX ARRHYTHMO (LUX), named the evening complex, modulates daily rhythms in gene expression and growth through transcriptional regulation. However, little is known about the physical interactions that connect the circadian system to other pathways. We used affinity purification and mass spectrometry (AP-MS) methods to identify proteins that associate with the evening complex in A. thaliana. New connections within the circadian network as well as to light signaling pathways were identified, including linkages between the evening complex, TIMING OF CAB EXPRESSION1 (TOC1), TIME FOR COFFEE (TIC), all phytochromes and TANDEM ZINC KNUCKLE/PLUS3 (TZP). Coupling genetic mutation with affinity purifications tested the roles of phytochrome B (phyB), EARLY FLOWERING 4, and EARLY FLOWERING 3 as nodes connecting the evening complex to clock and light signaling pathways. These experiments establish a hierarchical association between pathways and indicate direct and indirect interactions. Specifically, the results suggested that EARLY FLOWERING 3 and phytochrome B act as hubs connecting the clock and red light signaling pathways. Finally, we characterized a clade of associated nuclear kinases that regulate circadian rhythms, growth, and flowering in A. thaliana. Coupling mass spectrometry and genetics is a powerful method to rapidly and directly identify novel components and connections within and between complex signaling pathways.

### Keywords
Circadian clock, Elf3, Arabidopsis, Elf4

### Affiliations
Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry Facility
Danforth Plant Science Center, St Louis, MO

### Submitter
Alvarez Sophie

### Lab Head
Dr Dmitri Nusinow
Danforth Plant Science Center, St Louis, MO


