### Accession
PXD029129

### Title
Proteome of neutrophils upon migration towards inflamed synovial fluid

### Description
Analysis of neutrophil proteomic alterations induced by migration towards inflamed joints in juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA). In this experiment neutrophil proteomes were investigated after migration towards JIA synovial fluid in an in vitro model of a synovial membrane, compared to neutrophils incubated in synovial fluid without migration. The migration model consisted of transwell inserts with human knee synoviocytes on the undersides and HMEC endothelial cells on the insides, placed in wells containing medium with 10 % JIA synovial fluid.

### Sample Protocol
Healthy donor neutrophils were allowed to migrate towards JIA synovial fluid in an in vitro migration model of transwell inserts covered with primary human knee synoviocytes on the undersides and HMEC endothelial cells on the insides. Inserts were placed in wells containing media and 10 % JIA synovial fluid. Neutrophils were added to transwell inserts, or as migration controls to wells without inserts, and incubated for 1h at 37 °C. Synovial fluid from three patients were used and all conditions performed in triplicates. Neutrophils in wells were collected and purified based on CD66b-expression. Collected neutrophils were lysed in RIPA with protease inhibitors, and proteins precipitated in 90 % EtOH. Proteins were treated with dithioreitol (DTT) and iodoacetamide (IAA) and trypsinated. Peptides were analyzed by LC-MS on a fusion tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), operated in the positive data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed by Proteome Discoverer version 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and peptides were identified using SEQUEST HT against UniProtKB human database (release 2019-01-24).

### Publication Abstract
Neutrophils are highly abundant in synovial fluid of rheumatic inflamed joints. In oligoarticular juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA), synovial fluid neutrophils have impaired effector functions and altered phenotype. We hypothesized that these alterations might impact the immunoregulatory interplay between neutrophils and T cells. In this study we analyzed the suppressive effect of neutrophils, isolated from blood and synovial fluid of oligoarticular JIA patients, on CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells activated by CD3/CD28 stimulation. JIA blood neutrophils suppressed T cell proliferation but synovial fluid neutrophils from several patients did not. The loss of T cell suppression was replicated in an <i>in vitro</i> transmigration assay, where healthy control neutrophils migrated into synovial fluid through transwell inserts with endothelial cells and synoviocytes. Non-migrated neutrophils suppressed proliferation of activated CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells, but migrated neutrophils had no suppressive effect. Neutrophil suppression of T cells was partly dependent on reactive oxygen species (ROS), demonstrated by impaired suppression in presence of catalase. Migrated neutrophils had reduced ROS production compared to non-migrated neutrophils. A proteomic analysis of transwell-migrated neutrophils identified alterations in proteins related to neutrophil ROS production and degranulation, and biological processes involving protein transport, cell-cell contact and inflammation. In conclusion, neutrophils in synovial fluid of children with JIA have impaired capacity to suppress activated T cells, which may be due to reduced oxidative burst and alterations in proteins related to cell-cell contact and inflammation. The lack of T cell suppression by neutrophils in synovial fluid may contribute to local inflammation and autoimmune reactions in the JIA joint.

### Keywords
Synovial fluid, Migration, Neutrophil, Juvenile idiopathic arthritis

### Affiliations
Dept of Rheumatology, Clinical Science Lund, Lund university, Sweden
Dept. of Oncology, Clinical Sciences, Lund University, 221 85 Lund, Sweden

### Submitter
Charlotte Welinder

### Lab Head
Dr Sabine Caroline Arve-Butler
Dept of Rheumatology, Clinical Science Lund, Lund university, Sweden


