### Accession
PXD036624

### Title
293T NME4 TAP-MS and TurboID-MS

### Description
To identify interacting proteins of NME4 in human cell lines, we using tandem affinity purification followed by mass spectrometry (TAP-MS) in HEK293T cells. We established stable cell line which expressing NME4 gene fused with SFB triple tags (S tag-2x Flag tag-SBP tag) or TurboID. We isolated, combined, and affinity-purified the membrane and soluble fractions using TAP. We identified proteins associated with the bait in the isolated complexes using MS and searched the uniprot human database for these proteins.

### Sample Protocol
The excised gel bands described above were cut into approximately 1-mm3 pieces, which were then subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion and dried. Samples were reconstituted in 5 μl of high-performance liquid chromatography solvent A (2.5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid). A nanoscale reverse-phase high-performance liquid chromatography capillary column was created by packing 5-μm C18 spherical silica beads into a fused silica capillary (100-μm inner diameter × ~20-cm length) using a flame-drawn tip. After the column was equilibrated, each sample was loaded onto the column using an autosampler. A gradient was formed, and peptides were eluted with increasing concentrations of solvent B (97.5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid). As peptides eluted, they were subjected to electrospray ionization and then entered into an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher, San Jose, CA). Peptides were detected, isolated, and fragmented to produce a tandem mass spectrum of specific fragment ions for each peptide.

### Data Protocol
MS peptide sequences and, hence, protein identity were determined by matching fragmentation patterns in protein databases using the Mascot software program (Matrix Science, Boston, MA). Enzyme specificity was set to partially tryptic with two missed cleavages. Modifications of the peptides included carboxyamidomethyl (cysteines, variable), oxidation (methionine, variable), phosphorylation (S, T, Y, H, variable) and acetylation (N-term, K, variable). Mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for precursor ions and fragment ions. The database searched was Uniprot (Homo sapiens). Spectral matches were filtered to contain the false-discovery rate to less than 1% at the peptide level using the target-decoy method, and protein inference was considered following the general rules with manual annotation applied when necessary. This same principle was used for protein isoforms when they were present. Generally, the longest isoform was reported.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tap-ms turboid-ms

### Affiliations
School of Life Sciences, Westlake University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China ( lab head )
westlake university

### Submitter
shaofang xie

### Lab Head
Dr Xu Li
School of Life Sciences, Westlake University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China ( lab head )


