### Accession
PXD009099

### Title
Apoplastic proteome upon powdery mildew Bgh challenge

### Description
In order to identify the key factors that are crucial for non-host resistance against Bgh and are secreted depending on SYP4-mediated membrane trafficking, we have performed apoplastic fluid preparation of a series of mutants defective in the SYP4 pathway. This project aims to identify proteomic profiles of these apoplastic fluids.

### Sample Protocol
Apoplastic protein was extracted as described before with slight modifications (Ruhe et al., 2016, Frontiers in Plant Sci). Briefly, A. thaliana 32-day-old plants growing under short-day condition were inoculated with Bgh K1 isolate and incubated for 0, 24, and 48 hours under the same condition. Shoots were collected from 12-50 plants in a glass beaker and submerged in sodium acetate buffer (pH 4.3) supplemented with 0.2 M CaCl2 and protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche). After 10 minutes of vacuum infiltration and gentle release, excessive buffer on the leaf surface was removed with a paper towel and introduced into a 20-mL syringe. Apoplastic fluid was extracted by centrifuging the syringe in a 50-mL conical tube (Eppendorf) at 1,000 g for 20 minutes and sterilized by centrifuging in a Ultrafree 0.22-m filter tube for 2 minutes at 12,000 g (Millipore). Proteins were purified and concentrated by chloroform/methanol precipitation (Wessel and Flügge, 1984). Proteins were reduced, alkylated and digested in-solution. Protein pellets were dissolved in 8 M urea, 0.1 M Tris-HCl pH 8.0. Cysteins were reduced by adding DTT to a final concentration of 5 mM and incubation for 30 min. Alkylation was subsequently performed by adding chloroacetamide to a final concentration of 14 mM and incubation for 30 min. The reaction was quenched by addition of DTT. Urea concentration was adjusted to 4 M by dilution with 0.1 M Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 1 mM CaCl2, and digested with Lys-C (1:100 enzyme-to-protein ratio) for 4 hours at room temperature. Urea concentration was further adjusted to 1 M, and trypsin digestion (1:100 enzyme-to-protein ratio) was performed over night at 37°C and stopped by addition of 1% formic acid. Digested samples were desalted with StageTips (Empore C18, 3M) as described previously. {Rappsilber, 2007 #32}.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using MaxQuant software (version 1.5.7.4, http://www.maxquant.org/) {Cox, 2008 #33} with label-free quantification (LFQ) and iBAQ enabled {Cox, 2014 #34}. MS/MS spectra were searched by the Andromeda search engine against a combined database containing the sequences from A. thaliana (TAIR10_pep_20101214; ftp://ftp.arabidopsis.org/home/tair/Proteins/TAIR10_protein_lists/) and Bgh isolate K1 (6-frame translation of the published genome sequences {Hacquard, 2013 #37;Spanu, 2010 #36} with MaxQuant; only translated polypeptide sequences with a minimum length of 20 amino acids were kept for database search). Sequences of 248 common contaminant proteins and decoy sequences were automatically added during the search. Trypsin specificity was required and a maximum of two missed cleavages allowed. Minimal peptide length was set to seven amino acids. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed, oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. Peptide-spectrum-matches and proteins were retained if they were below a false discovery rate of 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Spatiotemporal coordination of protein trafficking among organelles is essential for eukaryotic cells. The post-Golgi interface, including the trans-Golgi network (TGN), is a pivotal hub for multiple trafficking pathways. The Golgi-released independent TGN (GI-TGN) is a compartment described only in plant cells, and its cellular and physiological roles remain elusive. In Arabidopsis (<i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i>), the SYNTAXIN OF PLANTS (SYP) 4 group Qa-SNARE (soluble <i>N</i>-ethylmaleimide) membrane fusion proteins are shared components of TGN and GI-TGN and regulate secretory and vacuolar transport. Here we reveal that GI-TGNs mediate the transport of the R-SNARE VESICLE-ASSOCIATED MEMBRANE PROTEIN (VAMP) 721 to the plasma membrane. In interactions with a nonadapted powdery mildew pathogen, the SYP4 group of SNAREs is required for the dynamic relocation of VAMP721 to plant-fungus contact sites via GI-TGNs, thereby facilitating complex formation with its cognate SNARE partner PENETRATION1 to restrict pathogen entry. Furthermore, quantitative proteomic analysis of leaf apoplastic fluid revealed constitutive and pathogen-inducible secretion of cell wall-modification enzymes in a SYP4- and VAMP721-dependent manner. Hence, the GI-TGN acts as a transit compartment between the Golgi apparatus and the plasma membrane. We propose a model in which the GA-TGN matures into the GI-TGN and then into secretory vesicles by increasing the abundance of VAMP721-dependent secretory pathway components.

### Keywords
Bgh, Arabidopsis, Apoplast

### Affiliations
Protein Mass Spectrometry Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research
Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research

### Submitter
Hirofumi Nakagami

### Lab Head
Dr Hirofumi Nakagami
Protein Mass Spectrometry Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research


