### Accession
PXD013262

### Title
Oyster seed time x temperature, LC-MSMS

### Description
Oyster larvae were reared at two different temperatures (23C and 29C) over 13 days, and 40-50 larvae were sampled on days 3, 5, 7, 9, 11, and 13 for proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
Cell homogenates were prepared from flash frozen larvae by adding 500 µL of 50 mM NH4HCO3 in 6 M urea and homogenizing with a pestle directly in the microfuge tube. Samples were centrifuged at 2000 rpm for 5 minutes and supernatant (150 µL) was transferred into new tubes. Supernatants were sonicated three times each for 5 seconds, cooling samples in between sonication rounds using an ethanol/dry ice bath for 5 seconds. After sonication, sample protein concentrations were determined using a BCA assay kit (Pierce). Protein digestion was carried out by diluting 100 µg of protein from each sample with 50 mM NH4HCO3 in 6 M urea solution to a final volume of 100 uL then adding 6.6 µL of 1.5 M tris pH 8.8 and 2.5 µL 200 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride were added and samples were vortexed. Sample pH was made basic by adding sodium hydroxide (5N) dropwise and monitoring pH. After incubating samples for one hour at 37°C, 20 µL of 200 mM iodoacetamide was added, samples were vortexed, and samples were then incubated for one hour at room temperature in the dark. Next, 20 µL of 200 mM diothiothreitol was added, samples were vortexed and incubated for one hour at room temperature. 1.65 µL LysC (1:30 enzyme:protein ratio) was added to each sample, samples were vortexed and incubated for one hour at room temperature. 800 µL 25 mM NH4HCO3, 200 µL HPLC grade methanol, and 3.3 uL Trypsin (1:30 enzyme:protein ratio) were added to each sample, samples were vortexed and incubated overnight at room temperature. Samples were evaporated using a centrifugal evaporator at 4°C to near dryness and stored at -80°C. Desalting of samples was done using Macrospin columns (sample capacity 0.03-300 ug; The Nest Group, Southborough, MA) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Dried peptides were reconstituted in 100 µL 3% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid and stored at -80°C. Data-dependent acquisition was performed with technical duplicates for each sample, and samples were processed by LC−MS/MS. Briefly, the analytical column (20 cm long) was packed in house with C18 beads (Dr. Maisch HPLC, Germany, 0.3 μm) with a flow rate of 0.3 μL/min. Chromatography was carried out with an increasing ratio of acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid (solvent A):water and 0.1% formic acid (solvent B)  as previously described (Timmins-Schiffman 2017 Journal of Proteome). Quality-control standards (Pierce Peptide Retention Time Calibration mixture (PRTC) + bovine serum albumin peptides (BSA)) were analyzed throughout the experiment to ensure consistency of peptide detection and elution times. Resulting peptides were analyzed using the high resolution and accurate Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Mass Spectrometer at the University of Washington Proteomics Resource.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometer raw files were converted to .mzXML files and were searched against a protein sequence database of the C. gigas proteome (http://gigaton.sigenae.org/ngspipelines/data/dcc6581978/analysis/f78867df95/contigs.fasta.transdecoder.pep.gz) and common contaminants (contam.other, contam.human, and contam.bovin files downloaded from the crapOME (Mellacheruvu et al. Nat Methods 2013)) using Comet v. 2016.01 rev.2 (Eng et al. 2012) with parameters set according to (http://comet-ms.sourceforge.net/parameters/parameters_201601/comet.params.high-low). The Trans Proteomic Pipeline (Eng et al. 1994; Eng et al. 2008) was then used to calculate statistics associated with peptide to protein matches (p-value cut-off for peptide probability used was 0.9). We used Abacus (Fermin et al. 2011) to correlate protein inferences across samples and obtain a single protein identification for each peptide with this Abacus parameter file.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Larvae, Lc-msms, Oyster, Seed, Time series, Temperature effect

### Affiliations
University of Washington
School of Aquatic and Fishery Sciences, Roberts Lab, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA

### Submitter
Shelly Trigg

### Lab Head
Dr Steven B. Roberts
School of Aquatic and Fishery Sciences, Roberts Lab, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA


