### Accession
PXD017491

### Title
Fusidic acid resistance through changes in the dynamics of EF-G

### Description
HDX-MS was used to study the binding of FusB to EF-G

### Sample Protocol
An automated HDX robot (LEAP Technologies, Ft Lauderdale, FL, USA) interfaced to an Acquity M-Class LC and HDX manager (Waters, UK) was used to conduct HDX-MS experiments. Samples contained 8 µM of EF-GC3 or 8 µM of EF-GC3 with 10 µM FusB (in 10 mM potassium phosphate, pH 8.0, 300 mM NaCl). 30 μL of protein-containing solution was added to 135 μL deuterated buffer (10 mM potassium phosphate buffer pD 8.0, 300 mM NaCl, 82 % D2O) and incubated at 4 °C for 0.5, 2, 10, 30 or 60 min. Three replicate measurements were performed for each condition and each time point. After labelling, HDX was quenched by adding 100 μL of quench buffer (10 mM potassium phosphate, 2 M Gdn-HCl, pH 2.2) to 50 μL of the labelling reaction. 50 μL of the quenched sample was passed through immobilised pepsin and aspergillopepsin columns (Affipro, Mratín, Czech Republic) connected in series (20 °C) and the peptides were trapped on a VanGuard Pre-column [Acquity UPLC BEH C18 (1.7 μm, 2.1 mm × 5 mm, Waters, UK)] for 3 min. The peptides were separated using a C18 column (75 μm × 150 mm, Waters, UK) by gradient elution of 0–40% (v/v) acetonitrile (0.1% v/v formic acid) in H2O (0.3% v/v formic acid) over 7 min at 40 μL min−1. Peptides were detected using a Synapt G2Si mass spectrometer (Waters, UK). The mass spectrometer was operated in HDMSE mode, with dynamic range extension enabled (data independent analysis (DIA) coupled with ion mobility separation). Ion mobility was used to separate peptides prior to CID fragmentation in the transfer cell.

### Data Protocol
CID data were used for peptide identification, and uptake quantification was performed at the peptide level. Data were analysed using PLGS (v3.0.2) and DynamX (v3.0.0) software (Waters, UK). Restrictions for peptides in DynamX were as follows: minimum intensity = 1000, minimum products per amino acid = 0.3, max sequence length = 25, max ppm error = 5, file threshold = 3. The software Deuteros was used to identify peptides with statistically significant increases/decreases in deuterium uptake (applying a 99 % confidence interval) and to prepare Wood’s plots.

### Publication Abstract
Antibiotic resistance in clinically important bacteria can be mediated by target protection mechanisms, whereby a protein binds to the drug target and protects it from the inhibitory effects of the antibiotic. The most prevalent source of clinical resistance to the antibiotic fusidic acid (FA) is expression of the FusB family of proteins that bind to the drug target (Elongation factor G [EF-G]) and promote dissociation of EF-G from FA-stalled ribosome complexes. FusB binding causes changes in both the structure and conformational flexibility of EF-G, but which of these changes drives FA resistance was not understood. We present here detailed characterization of changes in the conformational flexibility of EF-G in response to FusB binding and show that these changes are responsible for conferring FA resistance. Binding of FusB to EF-G causes a significant change in the dynamics of domain III of EF-G<sub>C3</sub> that leads to an increase in a minor, more disordered state of EF-G domain III. This is sufficient to overcome the steric block of transmission of conformational changes within EF-G by which FA prevents release of EF-G from the ribosome. This study has identified an antibiotic resistance mechanism mediated by allosteric effects on the dynamics of the drug target.

### Keywords
E coli

### Affiliations
Astbury Centre for Structural Molecular Biology, School of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Faculty of Biological Sciences, University of Leeds, Leeds, UK, LS2 9JT
School of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Leeds

### Submitter
Antonio Calabrese

### Lab Head
Dr Antonio Nickolas Calabrese
Astbury Centre for Structural Molecular Biology, School of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Faculty of Biological Sciences, University of Leeds, Leeds, UK, LS2 9JT


