### Accession
PXD001645

### Title
SILAC-based quantitative proteomic analysis reveals molecular alterations in human skin keratinocytes upon chronic exposure to arsenic

### Description
Chronic exposure to arsenic is associated with dermatological and non-dermatological disorders. Consumption of arsenic contaminated drinking water results in accumulation of arsenic in liver, spleen, kidneys, lungs and gastrointestinal tract. Although, arsenic is cleared from these sites, a substantial amount of residual arsenic is left in keratin-rich tissues such as skin. Epidemiological studies on arsenic suggest the association of skin cancer upon arsenic exposure, however, the exact mechanism of arsenic induced carcinogenesis is not completely understood. We have developed a cell line-based model to understand the molecular mechanisms involved in arsenic mediated toxicity and carcinogenicity. Human skin keratinocyte cell line, HaCaT was exposed to 100nM sodium arsenite for six months. We observed an increase in the basal ROS levels in arsenic exposed cells along with the increase in anti-apoptotic proteins. SILAC-based quantitative proteomics approach resulted in the identification and quantitation of 2,181 proteins of which 39 proteins were found to be overexpressed (≥2-fold) and 56 downregulated (≤2-fold) upon chronic arsenic exposure. Our study provides comprehensive insights into the molecular basis of chronic arsenic exposure on skin.

### Sample Protocol
HaCaT cells treated with 100nM arsenic were maintained in DMEM containing lysine and arginine (12C6-arginine and 12C6-lysine) supplemented with 5% FBS, 2 mM L-glutamine, 100 U/mL penicillin and 100 μg/mL streptomycin. For SILAC adaptation the parental cells were maintained in custom made DMEM without lysine and arginine and supplemented with heavy stable isotopic forms of lysine and arginine (13C6 L-lysine and 13C6 L-arginine). Arsenic treatment was withdrawn for 24 hours prior to any experiment. Both parental and arsenic treated HaCaT cells were grown to 80% confluency for harvesting. The cells were washed with cold PBS lysed in lysis buffer (20 mM HEPES pH8.0, 9 M urea, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM β-glycerophosphate), sonicated and centrifuged at 16,000 × g at 15 °C for 20 min. Protein estimation was carried out by using BCA assay. Equal amounts of protein were mixed in a ratio of 1:1. This protein mix was subjected to trypsin digestion. The pooled lysates were reduced and alkylated followed by trypsin digestion. The peptide sample was cleaned using Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) and lyophilized. The lyophilized peptides were subjected to basic pH reverse phase liquid chromatography. The peptides were fractionated on 1290 infinity HPLC system (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA,USA) . A total of 90 fractions were collected, concatenated to 12 fractions and dried using speedvac for LC-MS analysis on the LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer interfaced with Easy nLC II (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany).

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Version 1.4.0.288) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) was used for peak list generation and database searches. Precursor mass range of 350–8000 Da and signal to noise ratio of 1.5 were the criteria used for generation of peak lists. Sequest and Mascot search algorithms were used for database searches with NCBI RefSeq 59 as reference database (containing common contaminants). Oxidation of methionine and SILAC 2-plex (13C6 L-lysine and 13C6 L-arginine) were used as dynamic modifications. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residue was used as static modification. A maximum of one missed cleavage was allowed for tryptic peptides. Mass error window of 10 ppm and 0.1 Da were allowed for precursors and fragments, respectively. Decoy database was used to calculate false discovery rate (FDR) with a cut-off of 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Chronic exposure to arsenic is associated with dermatological and nondermatological disorders. Consumption of arsenic-contaminated drinking water results in accumulation of arsenic in liver, spleen, kidneys, lungs, and gastrointestinal tract. Although arsenic is cleared from these sites, a substantial amount of residual arsenic is left in keratin-rich tissues including skin. Epidemiological studies suggest the association of skin cancer upon arsenic exposure, however, the mechanism of arsenic-induced carcinogenesis is not completely understood. We developed a cell line based model to understand the molecular mechanisms involved in arsenic-mediated toxicity and carcinogenicity. Human skin keratinocyte cell line, HaCaT, was chronically exposed to 100 nM sodium arsenite over a period of 6 months. We observed an increase in basal ROS levels in arsenic-exposed cells. SILAC-based quantitative proteomics approach resulted in identification of 2111 proteins of which 42 proteins were found to be overexpressed and 54 downregulated (twofold) upon chronic arsenic exposure. Our analysis revealed arsenic-induced overexpression of aldo-keto reductase family 1 member C2 (AKR1C2), aldo-keto reductase family 1 member C3 (AKR1C3), glutamate-cysteine ligase catalytic subunit (GCLC), and NAD(P)H dehydrogenase [quinone] 1 (NQO1) among others. We observed downregulation of several members of the plakin family including periplakin (PPL), envoplakin (EVPL), and involucrin (IVL) that are essential for terminal differentiation of keratinocytes. MRM and Western blot analysis confirmed differential expression of several candidate proteins. Our study provides insights into molecular alterations upon chronic arsenic exposure on skin.

### Keywords
Toxicity, Hacat, Sodium arsenite

### Affiliations
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905
McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland, 21205, USA

### Submitter
Akhilesh Pandey

### Lab Head
Dr Akhilesh Pandey
McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland, 21205, USA


