### Accession
PXD009794

### Title
EBS is a bivalent histone reader that regulates floral phase transition in Arabidopsis

### Description
The ability of cells to perceive and translate versatile cues into differential chromatin and transcriptional states is critical for many biological processes1-4. In plants, timely transition to a flowering state is crucial for successful reproduction5-7. EARLY BOLTING IN SHORT DAY (EBS) is a negative transcriptional regulator that prevents premature flowering in Arabidopsis8,9. Here, we revealed that bivalent bromo-adjacent homology (BAH)-plant homeodomain (PHD) reader modules of EBS bind H3K27me3 and H3K4me3, respectively. A subset of EBS-associated genes was co-enriched with H3K4me3, H3K27me3, and the Polycomb repressor complex 2 (PRC2). Interestingly, EBS adopts an auto-inhibition mode to mediate its binding preference switch between H3K27me3 and H3K4me3. This binding balance is critical because disruption of either EBS-H3K27me3 or EBS-H3K4me3 interaction induces EBS-mediated early floral transition. This study identifies a single bivalent chromatin reader capable of recognizing two antagonistic histone marks and reveals a distinct mechanism of interplay between active and repressive chromatin states.The ability of cells to perceive and translate versatile cues into differential chromatin and transcriptional states is critical for many biological processes1-4. In plants, timely transition to a flowering state is crucial for successful reproduction5-7. EARLY BOLTING IN SHORT DAY (EBS) is a negative transcriptional regulator that prevents premature flowering in Arabidopsis8,9. Here, we revealed that bivalent bromo-adjacent homology (BAH)-plant homeodomain (PHD) reader modules of EBS bind H3K27me3 and H3K4me3, respectively. A subset of EBS-associated genes was co-enriched with H3K4me3, H3K27me3, and the Polycomb repressor complex 2 (PRC2). Interestingly, EBS adopts an auto-inhibition mode to mediate its binding preference switch between H3K27me3 and H3K4me3. This binding balance is critical because disruption of either EBS-H3K27me3 or EBS-H3K4me3 interaction induces EBS-mediated early floral transition. This study identifies a single bivalent chromatin reader capable of recognizing two antagonistic histone marks and reveals a distinct mechanism of interplay between active and repressive chromatin states.v

### Sample Protocol
We performed IP-MS and found that MSI4/FVE, known to interact with CLF-PRC229, co-purified with EBS (Fig. 5a,b and Supplementary Table 5). The EBS-MSI4 interaction was independent of C-terminal loop (Fig. 5c). Each sample was analyzed by HPLC-ESI-MS/MS (nanoACQUITY, Waters and QE-HF, Thermo Fisher Scientific). HPLC separation was performed using a 100 x 365 m fused silica capillary micro-column packed with 20 cm of 1.7m-diameter, 130 Angstrom pore size, C18 beads (Waters BEH), with an emitter tip pulled to approximately 1 m using a laser puller (Sutter instruments).  Peptides were loaded on-column at a flow-rate of 400nL/minute for 30 minutes and then eluted over 80 min at a flow-rate of 300 nl/minute with a gradient of 2% to 34% acetonitrile, in 0.1% formic acid.   MS1 scans were performed between 375-1500 m/z at a resolution of 120,000, utilizing 1 microscan with a maximum injection time of 500 ms and an AGC target setting of 1x105. The top 10 most abundant ions were selected for HCD fragmentation with an HCD normalized collision energy setting of 30. The isolation window was 2.5 m/z units, the MS2 resolution was 15,000, and dynamic exclusion was enabled with a duration of 15s.

### Data Protocol
The acquired precursor MS and MS/MS spectra were searched against an arabidopsis protein database (Uniprot database, containing 37,185 sequences) using SEQUEST, within the Proteome Discoverer 1.3.0.339 software package (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  Masses for both precursor and fragment ions were treated as mono-isotopic.  Oxidized methionine (+15.995 Da) was allowed as dynamic modifications and carbamidomethylated cysteine (+57.021 Da) was searched as a static modification.  The database search permitted for up to two missed trypsin cleavages and ion masses were matched with a mass tolerance of 10 ppm for precursor masses and 0.1 Da for HCD fragments.  The output from the SEQUEST search algorithm was validated using the Percolator algorithm.  The data were filtered using a 1% false discovery rate (Rohrbough et al., 2006), based on q-Values, with a minimum of two peptide matches required for confident protein identification.

### Publication Abstract
The ability of cells to perceive and translate versatile cues into differential chromatin and transcriptional states is critical for many biological processes<sup>1-5</sup>. In plants, timely transition to a flowering state is crucial for successful reproduction<sup>6-9</sup>. EARLY BOLTING IN SHORT DAY (EBS) is a negative transcriptional regulator that prevents premature flowering in Arabidopsis thaliana<sup>10,11</sup>. We found that EBS contains bivalent bromo-adjacent homology (BAH)-plant homeodomain (PHD) reader modules that bind H3K27me3 and H3K4me3, respectively. We observed co-enrichment of a subset of EBS-associated genes with H3K4me3, H3K27me3, and Polycomb repressor complex 2 (PRC2). Notably, EBS adopted an autoinhibition mode to mediate its switch in binding preference between H3K27me3 and H3K4me3. This binding balance was critical because disruption of either EBS-H3K27me3 or EBS-H3K4me3 interaction induced early floral transition. Our results identify a bivalent chromatin reader capable of recognizing two antagonistic histone marks, and we propose a distinct mechanism of interaction between active and repressive chromatin states.

### Keywords
Chromatin, Arabidopsis, Histone

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Genetics, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA Wisconsin Institute for Discovery, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA
UW-Madison

### Submitter
Mark Scalf

### Lab Head
Dr Xuehua Zhong
Laboratory of Genetics, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA Wisconsin Institute for Discovery, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA


