### Accession
PXD037453

### Title
Tracking matricellular protein SPARC in extracellular vesicles as a non-destructive method to evaluate lipid-based antifibrotic treatments

### Description
Uncovering the complex cellular mechanisms underlying hepatic fibrogenesis could expedite the development of effective treatments and noninvasive diagnosis for liver fibrosis. The biochemical complexity of extracellular vesicles (EVs) and their role in intercellular communication make them an attractive tool to look for biomarkers as potential alternative to liver biopsies. We developed a solid set of methods to isolate and characterize EVs from differently treated human hepatic stellate cell (HSC) line LX-2, and we investigated their biological effect onto naïve LX-2, proving that EVs do play an active role in fibrogenesis. We mined our proteomic data for EV-associated proteins whose expression correlated with HSC treatment, choosing the matricellular protein SPARC as proof-of-concept for the feasibility of fluorescence nanoparticle-tracking analysis to determine an EV-based HSCs’ fibrogenic phenotype. We thus used EVs to directly evaluate the efficacy of treatment with S80, a polyenylphosphatidylcholines-rich lipid, finding that S80 reduces the relative presence of SPARC-positive EVs. Here we correlated the cellular response to lipid-based antifibrotic treatment to the relative presence of a candidate protein marker associated with the released EVs. Along with providing insights into polyenylphosphatidylcholines treatments, our findings pave the way for precise and less invasive diagnostic analyses of hepatic fibrogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
SEC-purified EVs, as well AF4-fractioned samples, were transferred to a pre-conditioned polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) membrane. First, the PVDF membrane was cut into uniform discs, and the pieces were wetted with methanol (MeOH) for 5 min. After removal of the MeOH, a solution of 0.05% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS)/5% MeOH/0.05% Dithiothreitol (DTT) was added for 5 min. Membrane pieces were placed into the bottom of the collection tubes right before EV collection with a little PBS to keep them wet. After the purification step (either by SEC or AF4), the PVDF membranes and EV-containing samples were centrifuged (3’000 x g, 1 h, RT), and the supernatant discarded. PVDF membrane pieces were dried under N2 flow for 15 min and stored at 4 °C. Comparative, shotgun proteomics was performed after reductive alkylation and trypsin digestion of the samples by the Proteomics Mass Spectrometry Core Facility (PMSCF) at the Department of Biomedical Research (DBMR) of the University of Bern. Peptides were analyzed by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (nano-LC-MS/MS) and spectra were searched by MaxQuant/Andromeda.

### Data Protocol
The Proteomics Mass Spectrometry Core Facility (PMSCF) at the Department of Biomedical Research (DBMR) of the University of Bern analyzed the peptides by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (nano-LC-MS/MS) and spectra were searched by MaxQuant/Andromeda.

### Publication Abstract
Uncovering the complex cellular mechanisms underlying hepatic fibrogenesis could expedite the development of effective treatments and noninvasive diagnosis for liver fibrosis. The biochemical complexity of extracellular vesicles (EVs) and their role in intercellular communication make them an attractive tool to look for biomarkers as potential alternative to liver biopsies. We developed a solid set of methods to isolate and characterize EVs from differently treated human hepatic stellate cell (HSC) line LX-2, and we investigated their biological effect onto na&#xef;ve LX-2, proving that EVs do play an active role in fibrogenesis. We mined our proteomic data for EV-associated proteins whose expression correlated with HSC treatment, choosing the matricellular protein SPARC as proof-of-concept for the feasibility of fluorescence nanoparticle-tracking analysis to determine an EV-based HSCs' fibrogenic phenotype. We thus used EVs to directly evaluate the efficacy of treatment with S80, a polyenylphosphatidylcholines-rich lipid, finding that S80 reduces the relative presence of SPARC-positive EVs. Here we correlated the cellular response to lipid-based antifibrotic treatment to the relative presence of a candidate protein marker associated with the released EVs. Along with providing insights into polyenylphosphatidylcholines treatments, our findings pave the way for precise and less invasive diagnostic analyses of hepatic fibrogenesis.

### Keywords
Extracellular vesicles; liver fibrosis; proteomics; sparc; hsc; essential phospholipids; nta; eaf4; polyenylphosphatidylcholines

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry, Biochemistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland
Johns Hopkins School of Medicine

### Submitter
Cristina Zivko

### Lab Head
Dr Paola Luciani
Department of Chemistry, Biochemistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland


