### Accession
PXD002734

### Title
Protein turnover during in vitro human vocal fold mucosa remodeling

### Description
We present here the first study evaluating the dynamic proteome changes in the remodeling process of decellularized tissue by reseeded cells using vocal fold mucosa as the model system.

### Sample Protocol
For heavy-labeled hVFF, protein was extracted with 150 µL of SDT solution containing 4% SDS, 0.1 M Tris-HCl (pH 7.6) and 0.1 M dithreothreitol. For intact, decellularized, and reseeded human VFM, approximately 15 mg tissue pieces were washed with ice cold PBS, then ground with disposable pellet pestles (Kimble Chase Kontes, Vineland, NJ), before 150 µL of SDT solution was added. Samples were then heated at 95 °C for 7 min. and sonicated on ice with a probe sonicator—alternating 20 seconds on and 20 seconds off for 6 min, followed by centrifugation at 20 °C for 5 min at 16,100 g.  The FASP (Filter-Aided Sample Preparation) protocol was used for SDS removal and on-filter digestion (46).  Briefly, a 30 μL aliquot of the supernatant was added to a 30K MW Vivacon 500 filter (Sartorius, Bohemia, NY), washed, alkylated, and digested with trypsin (protein:enzyme ratio of 50:1) overnight at 37 °C. Finally, the digest was collected by centrifugation. After the digestion was quenched with 10% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 0.5% TFA, samples were desalted using Sep-Pak C18 1 cc Vac Cartridges (Waters, Milford, MA), according to the manufacturer’s instruction. Eluate was dried down and reconstituted in 5% ACN and 2% FA.   Approximately 1 µg protein digest (estimated by BCA assay) of the heavy-labeled fibroblasts, or 0.05 mg tissue equivalent was injected into a Waters nanoAcquity HPLC coupled to an ESI ion-trap/orbitrap mass spectrometer (LTQ Orbitrap Velos, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA). Peptides were separated on a 100 μm inner diameter column packed with BEH C18 particles (Waters, Milford, MA), and eluted at 0.3 µL/min in 0.1% FA with a gradient of increasing ACN over 2.5 h. A heater cartridge was used to keep the capillary column at 60 °C. A full-mass scan (300-1500 m/z) was performed in the orbitrap at a resolution of 60,000. The MS1 scans were acquired in profile mode. The ten most intense peaks were selected for fragmentation by high-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) at 42% collision energy, with a resolution of 7500, and isolation width of 2.5 m/z. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a repeat count of 2 over 30 s and an exclusion duration of 120 s. Each sample had four biological replicates and the 1w to 6w samples were subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis for twice for each biological replicate.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw files were analyzed by MaxQuant (version 1.4.1.2) (47). The derived peak lists were searched with Andromeda against the Uniprot canonical protein database (Homo sapiens: 20278 sequences downloaded on December 5, 2013) supplemented with common contaminants. All biological and technical replicates for a particular sample were searched together. Precursor masses and fragment ions mass tolerances were set to 4.5 ppm and 20 ppm respectively. Static cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57.0215 Da) and up to 7 variable methionine and proline oxidation (+15.9949 Da) were specified. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% at both the peptide and the protein level was allowed. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed and a minimum of two unique peptides per protein was required. The “match between runs” function was enabled. A minimum of two unique and razor peptide ratio counts was required and only unmodified peptides were used to quantify a protein. Protein groups containing matches to proteins from the reversed database or contaminants were discarded.

### Publication Abstract
Repopulating acellular biological scaffolds with phenotypically appropriate cells is a promising approach for regenerating functional tissues and organs. Under this tissue engineering paradigm, reseeded cells are expected to remodel the scaffold by active protein synthesis and degradation; however, the rate and extent of this remodeling remain largely unknown. Here, we present a technique to measure dynamic proteome changes during in&#xa0;vitro remodeling of decellularized tissue by reseeded cells, using vocal fold mucosa as the model system. Decellularization and recellularization were optimized, and a stable isotope labeling strategy was developed to differentiate remnant proteins constituting the original scaffold from proteins newly synthesized by reseeded cells. Turnover of matrix and cellular proteins and the effects of cell-scaffold interaction were elucidated. This technique sheds new light on in&#xa0;vitro tissue remodeling and the process of tissue regeneration, and is readily applicable to other tissue and organ systems.

### Keywords
Human, Vocal fold mucosa, Silac, Orbitrap

### Affiliations
University of Wisconsin-Madison

### Submitter
Qiyao Li

### Lab Head
Dr Lloyd M Smith
University of Wisconsin-Madison


