### Accession
PXD025109

### Title
MICOS and F1FO-ATP synthase crosstalk is a fundamental property of mitochondrial cristae

### Description
Mitochondrial cristae are polymorphic invaginations of the inner membrane that are the fabric of cellular respiration. Both the Mitochondrial Contact Site and Cristae Organization System (MICOS) and the F1FO-ATP synthase are vital for sculpting cristae by opposing membrane bending forces. While MICOS promotes negative curvature at cristae junctions, dimeric F1FO-ATP synthase is crucial for positive curvature at cristae rims. Crosstalk between these two complexes has been observed in baker’s yeast, the model organism of the Opisthokonta supergroup. Here, we report that this property is conserved in Trypanosoma brucei, a member of the Discoba supergroup that separated from Opisthokonta ~2 billion years ago. Specifically, one of the paralogs of the core MICOS subunit Mic10 interacts with dimeric F1FO-ATP synthase, whereas the other core Mic60 subunit has a counteractive effect on F1FO-ATP synthase oligomerization. This is evocative of the nature of MICOS-F1FO-ATP synthase crosstalk in yeast, which is remarkable given the diversification these two complexes have undergone during almost 2 eons of independent evolution. Furthermore, we identified a highly diverged trypanosome homolog of subunit e, which is essential for the stability of F1FO-ATP synthase dimers in yeast. Just like subunit e, it is preferentially associated with dimers, interacts with Mic10 and its silencing results in severe defects to cristae and disintegration of F1FO-ATP synthase dimers. Our findings indicate that crosstalk between MICOS and dimeric F1FO-ATP synthase is a fundamental property impacting cristae shape throughout eukaryotes.

### Sample Protocol
IP of tagged proteins was adapted from published protocols (31). In brief, DSP-crosslinked mitochondrial vesicles from ~5x108 cells were solubilized in IPP50 (50 mM KCl, 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.7, 3 mM MgCl2, 10% glycerol, 1 mM phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride (PMSF), complete EDTA free protease inhibitor cocktail (Rosche)) supplemented with 1% Igepal (v/v) for 20 min on ice. After centrifugation (18,600 X g, 15 min, 4C) the supernatant was added to 1.5 mg of anti-V5 conjugated magnetic beads, previously washed thrice in 200 l of IPP50 + 1% Igepal for 5 min at RT. The solubilized mitochondria were rotated with beads for 90 min at 4C. After removal of the flow through, the beads were washed three times in IPP50 + 1% Igepal. Prior to eluting, the beads were transferred into a new tube. Elution was done in 0.1 M glycine pH 2.0 for 10 min at 70C and shaking at 1000 rpm. The eluate was neutralized with 1 M Tris pH 8.0. The elution step was repeated to achieve higher recovery. The elutes were further processed for LC-MS2 analysis or resolved by SDS-PAGE. IPs were performed in triplicate.   Triplicate eluates of co-IP proteins were processed for mass spectroscopy analysis as described elsewhere (57)(58). In brief, samples were resuspended in 100 mM TEAB containing 2% SDC. Cysteines were reduced with a final concentration of 10 mM TCEP and subsequently cleaved with 1 g trypsin overnight at 37C. After digestion, 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was added to wash twice and eluates were resuspended in 20 l TFA per 100 g of protein. A nano reversed-phased column (EASY-Spray column, 50 cm x 75 m inner diameter, PepMap C18, 2 m particles, 100 Å pore size) was used for LC/MS analysis. Mobile phase buffer A consisted of water and 0.1% formic acid. Mobile phase B consisted of acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Samples were loaded onto the trap column (Acclaim PepMap300, C18, 5 m, 300 Å Wide Pore, 300 m x 5 mm) at a flow rate of 15 l/min. The loading buffer consisted of water, 2% acetonitrile, and 0.1% TFA. Peptides were eluted using a Mobile phase B gradient from 2% to 40% over 60 min at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The peptide cations eluted were converted to gas-phase ions via electrospray ionization and analyzed on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion (Q-OT- qIT, Thermo Fisher). Full MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap with a mass range of 350-1,400 m/z, at a resolution of 120,000 at 200 m/z and with a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Tandem MS was performed by isolation at 1,5 Th with the quadrupole, HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 30, and rapid scan MS analysis in the ion trap. The MS/MS ion count target was set to 104 and the max infection time at 35 ms. Only those precursors with a charge state of 2-6 were sampled. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 45 s with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was on with a top speed mode of 2 s cycles.

### Data Protocol
Label-free quantification of the data were analyzed using the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.2.1) (59). The false discovery rates for peptides and for proteins was set to 1% with a specified minimum peptide length of seven amino acids. The Andromeda search engine was used for the MS/MS spectra against the Trypanosoma brucei database (downloaded from Uniprot, November 2018, containing 8,306 entries). Enzyme specificity was set to C-terminal Arg and Lys, alongside for cleavage at proline bonds with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Dithiomethylation of cysteine was selected as a fixed modification with N- terminal protein acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. The ‘match between runs’ feature in MaxQuant was used to transfer identification to other LC-MS/MS runs based on mass and retention time with a maximum deviation of 0.7 min. Quantifications were performed using a label-free algorithm as described recently (59). Data analysis was performed using Perseus software (version 1.6.1.3). Only proteins identified exclusively alongside a mean Log2 transformed LFQ intensity scored of >23 and found in the ATOM40 depletome (indicating proteins are imported into the mitochondria) were considered as putative interaction proteins (39) . Exclusive identification is here defined as a situation where a given protein was measured in all three replicates of bait protein pulldowns but absent in at least two out of three control replicates.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Micos, Ip

### Affiliations
Institute of Parasitology Biology Center, Czech Academy of Sciences Branišovská 31 370 05 České Budějovice CZECH REPUBLIC
Charles University

### Submitter
Karel Harant

### Lab Head
Dr Hassan Hashimi
Institute of Parasitology Biology Center, Czech Academy of Sciences Branišovská 31 370 05 České Budějovice CZECH REPUBLIC


