### Accession
PXD014165

### Title
Unbiased cell surface proteomics identifies SEMA4A as an effective immunotherapy target for myeloma

### Description
The accessibility of cell surface proteins makes them tractable for cancer immunotherapy, but identifying suitable targets remains challenging, and resistance to treatment is common. Technical difficulties precluding the use of whole cell proteomic approaches to characterize cell surface proteins include low abundance, hydrophobicity, and a lack of protease cleavage sites. Furthermore, neither whole-cell proteomic nor transcriptomic data can accurately quantify protein expression at the plasma membrane. Resistance to immunotherapies is commonly mediated by downregulation of the target protein, a particular problem when immunotherapies fail to inhibit a specific biological pathway. Here we have used plasma membrane profiling of primary human myeloma cells to identify an unprecedented number of cell surface proteins and quantify for the first time the entire cell surface proteome of a primary cancer. This approach revealed a novel therapeutic target, SEMA4A, which we potently and selectively targeted with an antibody-drug conjugate in vitro and in vivo. Reduction of SEMA4A expression resulted in marked impairment of myeloma cell growth in vitro, indicating that myeloma cells cannot downregulate SEMA4A to avoid detection. Our data therefore reveal not only a novel myeloma target but provide an exemplar of a top-down approach from the unbiased characterization of a cancer cell surface proteome to novel immunotherapeutic target.

### Sample Protocol
Intact cells were cell surface labelled with aminoxy biotin via oxime ligation to oxidised serface glycans. After capturing biotinylated proteins on straptavidin beads and strigent washing on-bead digestion was performed with trypsin. Tryptic peptides were then recovered, dried and labelled with TMT reagents. After sample pooling sampled were subjected to high pH reversed phase fractionation and the resulting 12 samples analysed by LC-MSn on an Orbitrap Fusion platform.

### Data Protocol
For TMT labelled samples data were searched by Mascot within Proteome Discoverer 2.1 in two rounds of searching. First search was against the UniProt Human reference proteome and compendium of common contaminants (GPM). The second search took all unmatched spectra from the first search and searched against the human trEMBL database. The following search parameters were used. MS1 Tol: 10 ppm, MS2 Tol: 0.6 Da. Enzyme: Trypsin (/P). MS3 spectra were used for reporter ion based quantitation with a most confident centroid tolerance of 20 ppm. PSM FDR was calculated using Mascot percolator and was controlled at 0.01% for ‘high’ confidence PSMs and 0.05% for ‘medium’ confidence PSMs. Normalisation was automated and based on total s/n in each channel. Log tranformed protein sbaundances dervied from TMT reporter s/n were used for all subsequent statistical analyses.

### Publication Abstract
The accessibility of cell surface proteins makes them tractable for targeting by cancer immunotherapy, but identifying suitable targets remains challenging. Here we describe plasma membrane profiling of primary human myeloma cells to identify an unprecedented number of cell surface proteins of a primary cancer. We used a novel approach to prioritize immunotherapy targets and identified a cell surface protein not previously implicated in myeloma, semaphorin-4A (SEMA4A). Using knock-down by short-hairpin RNA and CRISPR/nuclease-dead Cas9 (dCas9), we show that expression of SEMA4A is essential for normal myeloma cell growth in&#xa0;vitro, indicating that myeloma cells cannot downregulate the protein to avoid detection. We further show that SEMA4A would not be identified as a myeloma therapeutic target by standard CRISPR/Cas9 knockout screens because of exon skipping. Finally, we potently and selectively targeted SEMA4A with a novel antibody-drug conjugate in&#xa0;vitro and in&#xa0;vivo.

### Keywords
Plasms membrane profiling, Immunotherapy, Tmt, Myeloma

### Affiliations
Department of Haematology, University of Cambridge
University of Cambridge

### Submitter
James Williamson

### Lab Head
Dr Mike Chapman
Department of Haematology, University of Cambridge


