### Accession
PXD016263

### Title
The mitochondrial CLPXP complex supports the coordination and assembly of mitochondrial and nuclear encoded protein complexes in Arabidopsis thaliana

### Description
The mitochondrial CLPXP complex supports the coordination and assembly of mitochondrial and nuclear encoded protein complexes in Arabidopsis thaliana. Protein labeling using iTRAQ reagents and application of optimized ChaFRADIC technology to enrich N-Terminal peptides.

### Sample Protocol
In total, 12 samples corresponding to four biological replicates of each genotype i.e. WT, Clp1 and Clp2 were used and the samples were divided into two experiments as shown in the table XX. Briefly, isolated mitochondria pellet (~100 µg of protein) of each genotype and their respective biological replicates were first solubilized with 10 µL of 10% SDS containing complete mini and samples were diluted to 100 µL with 50 mM NH4HCO3 buffer, pH 7.8. Reduction of disulfide bonds was carried out with 10 mM DTT and incubation at 56°C for 30 min followed by alkylation of free thiol groups using 30 mM IAA and incubation at room temperature for 30 min in dark. Next, each sample was diluted 10-fold with ice cold EtOH in 1:10 ratio, vortexed and stored at -40°C for 60 min followed by centrifugation in a pre-cooled (4°C) centrifuge at 18,000 g for 30 min. Next, the supernatant was discarded and to each protein pellet 100 µL of ice-cold acetone were added, briefly vortexed and centrifuged as above. The supernatant was discarded and the protein pellets were dried under a laminar flow hood. Denaturation, protein labeling with isobaric tags and strong cation exchange (SCX) chromatography All sample preparation steps, such as protein denaturation, protein labeling using iTRAQ reagents (see table XX), in solution trypsin digestion, first- and second-dimension SCX chromatography (with minor changes) and heavy acetylation using trideutero N-hydroxysuccinimide acetate (d3-NHS acetate) reaction were performed similarly as previously described (Venne et al., 2015). For each experiment, 1/3rd of the iTRAQ multiplexed (or pooled) sample i.e. 200 µg were used for proteolytic digestion with trypsin and subsequent enrichment of the N-terminal peptides based on the charge-based fractional diagonal chromatography (Venne et al., 2013) method was done using a U3000 HPLC system (Thermo Scientific) with a 150×1 mm POLYSULFOETHYL A column (PolyLC, Columbia, US, 5 µm particle size, 200°A pore size) and a tertiary buffer system (Venne et al., 2015). After second dimension SCX chromatography, the five collected fractions (of each experiment) corresponding to charge states +1, +2, +3, +4 and > +4 were completely dried in a SpeedVac and resolubilized in 100 µL of 1% TFA. All fractions were desalted using Oligo R3 reversed-phase material as previously described (Venne et al., 2015). The eluates were completely dried, resolubilized in 0.1% TFA and only 1/3rd of each sample was measured on LC-MS system.

### Data Protocol
The MS raw data of each experiment were processed independently with Proteome Discoverer (PD) software version 1.4 (Thermo Scientific) using Mascot 2.6 (Matrix Science) and searched in a target/decoy mode against the TAIR10 database (May 31st 2019, 48321 target sequences). Enzyme specificity was set to semi-ArgC (for trypsin) with maximum two missed cleavage sites. A 2-step identification/quantification approach was used to retrieve information of both types of N-terminal peptides i.e. N-terminal iTRAQ label and endogenous N-acetylation. The data were first searched with iTRAQ-8plex (+304.2053 Da) as fixed modification at Lys and peptide N-termini. Second search was performed with iTRAQ 8-plex of Lys and N-terminal acetylation (+42.0105 Da) of N-termini were set as fixed modifications. For both searches, carbamidomethylation of Cys (+57.0214 Da) and oxidation (+15.9949 Da) of methionine were selected as fixed and variable modification, respectively and the vendor (AB SCIEX) provided isotope purity correction factors were implied in the reporter ions quantifier node of PD software. Mass tolerances were set to 5 ppm for MS and 0.01 Da for MS/MS. Identified peptides were filtered for high confidence Percolator setting corresponding to an FDR 1% at the PSM level and a search engine rank of 1.

### Publication Abstract
Protein homeostasis in eukaryotic organelles and their progenitor prokaryotes is regulated by a series of proteases including the caseinolytic protease (CLPP). CLPP has essential roles in chloroplast biogenesis and maintenance, but the significance of the plant mitochondrial CLPP remains unknown and factors that aid coordination of nuclear- and mitochondrial-encoded subunits for complex assembly in mitochondria await discovery. We generated knockout lines of the single gene for the mitochondrial CLP protease subunit, <i>CLPP2,</i> in Arabidopsis (<i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i>). Mutants showed a higher abundance of transcripts from mitochondrial genes encoding oxidative phosphorylation protein complexes, whereas nuclear genes encoding other subunits of the same complexes showed no change in transcript abundance. By contrast, the protein abundance of specific nuclear-encoded subunits in oxidative phosphorylation complexes I and V increased in CLPP2 knockouts, without accumulation of mitochondrial-encoded counterparts in the same complex. Complexes with subunits mainly or entirely encoded in the nucleus were unaffected. Analysis of protein import and function of complex I revealed that while function was retained, protein homeostasis was disrupted, leading to accumulation of soluble subcomplexes of nuclear-encoded subunits. Therefore, CLPP2 contributes to the mitochondrial protein degradation network through supporting coordination and homeostasis of protein complexes encoded across mitochondrial and nuclear genomes.

### Keywords
Combined omics, Rnaseq, Proteomics, Chafradic, Genome coordination, Clpxp

### Affiliations
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V. Otto-Hahn-Straße 6b 44227 Dortmund, Germany  P: +49 (0)2 31.13 92-100  F: +49 (0)2 31.13 92-200  www.isas.de
Leibniz – Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften - ISAS - e.V.

### Submitter
Laxmikanth Kollipara

### Lab Head
Dr Albert Sickmann
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V. Otto-Hahn-Straße 6b 44227 Dortmund, Germany  P: +49 (0)2 31.13 92-100  F: +49 (0)2 31.13 92-200  www.isas.de


