### Accession
PXD027006

### Title
Allotypic variation in antigen processing controls antigenic peptide generation from SARS-CoV‐2  S1 Spike Glycoprotein

### Description
Cytotoxic T-lymphocytes are critical determinants of SARS-CoV-2 infection severity and long-term immunity. A hallmark of COVID-19 is its highly variable severity and breadth of immune responses between individuals. To address the underlying mechanisms behind this phenomenon we analyzed the proteolytic processing of S1 spike glycoprotein by 10 common allotypes of ER aminopeptidase 1 (ERAP1), an intracellular enzyme that generates antigenic peptides. We utilized a systematic proteomic approach that allows the concurrent analysis of hundreds of trimming reactions.  While all ERAP1 allotypes produced optimal ligands for HLA molecules, including known SARS-CoV-2 epitopes, they presented major differences in peptide sequences produced, suggesting allotype-dependent sequence biases. Allotype 10, previously suggested to be enzymatically deficient, was rather found to be functionally distinct from other allotypes. Our findings suggest that common ERAP1 allotypes can be a major source of heterogeneity in antigen processing and through this mechanism contribute to variable immune responses to COVID-19.

### Sample Protocol
Enzymatic reaction samples were directly injected on a PepSep C18 column (250mmX 0.75mm, 1.9μm) and separated using a  gradient of Buffer A (0.1% Formic acid in water) 7% Buffer B (0.1% Formic acid in 80% Acetonitrile) to 35% for 40 min followed by an increase to 45% in 5 min and a second increase to 99% in 0.5min and then kept constant for 4.5min. The column was equilibrated for 15 min prior to the subsequent injection. A full MS was acquired using a Q Exactive HF-X Hybrid Quadropole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer, in the scan range of 350-1500m/z using 120K resolving power with an AGC of 3x 106 and max IT of 100ms, followed by MS/MS scans of the 12 most abundant ions, using 15K resolving power with an AGC of 1x 105 and max IT of 22ms and an NCE of 28 and an dynamic exclusion 0f 30 sec.

### Data Protocol
The generated raw files were processed by the Proteome Discoverer software (Thermo) (version 2.4) using a workflow for the precursor based quantification, using SequestHT with Multi Peptide Search and Percolator validation. The Minora algorithm was used for the quantification. The SPIKE_SARS2.fasta () was used as database and the search was performed in a unspecific mode eg. No-Enzyme was selected. The minimum peptide length was 6 aa long. Precursor Mass Tolerance:  10 ppm,  Fragment Mass Tolerance: 0.02 Da Fixed Value PSM Validator was employed for the validation of the peptides and only High confident PSMs were used. The result files were filtered for peptides with Xcorr values above 2.0. Modified peptides were excluded from the dataset. Statistical Analysis Three biological replicas of each haplotype were compared against the negative control reaction using the PD pipeline for pairwise ratio protein abundance calculation and the background based t-test.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sars-cov‐2  s1 spike glycoprotein, Erap1, Peptidomics, Allotypic variation

### Affiliations
Protein Analysis Laboratory
B.S.R.C. "Alexander Fleming",
Alexander Fleming Street 34
16672, Vari,
Greece
Department of Chemistry, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Panepistimiopolis Zographou, 15784, Athens, Greece

### Submitter
Martina Samiotaki

### Lab Head
Dr Efstratios Stratikos
Department of Chemistry, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Panepistimiopolis Zographou, 15784, Athens, Greece


