### Accession
PXD008963

### Title
MudPIT analyses of the proteins associated with Kelch-like protein 6 (KLHL6) in a human multiple myeloma cell line, ARP-1, and in HEK293T cells

### Description
Kelch-like protein 6 (KLHL6) is a highly conserved and uncharacterized BTB-Kelch protein with a lymphoid tissue-restricted expression pattern. To gain insight into the molecular function of KLHL6 and to understand the impact of the cancer-associated mutations, we compared the protein interactome of KLHL6(WT) to that of the cancer mutant KLHL6(L65P), a BTB-domain mutant frequently mutated in B-cell cancers. FLAG-KLHL6(WT) or FLAG-KLHL6(L65P) complexes were biochemically immunopurified from two different cell lines (HEK293T and ARP-1).

### Sample Protocol
In brief, TCA-precipitated protein eluted after FLAG-affinity purification were urea-denatured, reduced, alkylated, and digested with endoproteinase LysC followed by trypsin. The peptide mixtures were loaded onto microcapillary fused silica columns (100um i.d.), packed with C18 reverse phase (Aqua; Phenomenx), SCX (Luna; Phenomenex) and C18-RP, placed in-line with an Agilent 11000 quaternary pump, and analyzed by a 10-step MudPIT on linear ion traps.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS datasets were searched using SEQUEST (v. 27.9) against a non-redudant human protein database (NCBI, 2012-08-27) containing 160 usual contaminants. To estimate false discover rates (FDRs), the amino acid sequence of each non-redundant protein was randomized.  Peptide/spectrum matches were sorted and selected using DTASelect with the following criteria set: spectra/peptide matches were retained only if they had a DeltCn of at least 0.8, and minimum XCorr of 1.8 for singly, 2.0 for doubly, and 3.0 for triply charged spectra. Additionally, the peptides had to be minimum 7 amino acids in length and fully tryptic.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cullin-ring ubiquitin ligase (crl), Kelch-like protein 6 (klhl6), Diffuse large b-cell lymphoma (dlbcl)

### Affiliations
Proteomics
The Stowers Institute for Medical Research

### Submitter
Laurence Florens

### Lab Head
Dr Laurence Florens
The Stowers Institute for Medical Research


