### Accession
PXD033988

### Title
Proteomics study of antenatal hydronephrosis patients on amniotic fluid

### Description
In this study, we carried out a comprehensive comparative proteomic and transcriptomic analysis of exosomes in amniotic fluid supernatant and cells in amniotic fluid precipitation of severe fetal hydronephrosis patients to identify candidate biomarkers with diagnostic potential. As the investigation of mechanisms underlying those predicted target genes remain scarce, our studies also provide valuable indications for further researches exploring the role of those genes in fundamental biology or diagnosis of nephrosis.

### Sample Protocol
The protein concentration of the enriched sEVs was quantified by Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific, Product No. 23,225) according to the product manual. 10μL of each standard and sEVs enriched fraction sample was pipetted into 96-Well Plates, then 200μL of the WR was added to each well and mixed thoroughly. Then cover the plate and incubate it at 37°C for 30min. Set the absorbance to 562nm then measure the samples. A standard curve was drawing to determine the protein concentration of each sEVs samples. In the discovery phase, the 6 protein samples including severe ANH cases(n=3) and normal cases(n=3) did the Trypsin Treatment and label-free quantitative proteomics analysis. Each sample was added 3μL of 1μg/μL trypsin and 500μL of 100mM TEAB buffer and then digested at 37 °C overnight. Equal volume of 1% formic acid was mixed with digested proteins and centrifuged at 12000×g for 5min at room temperature. Load the supernatant to the C18 desalting column slightly, washed with1 mL of washing solution (0.1% formic acid, 4% acetonitrile) for three times, and then eluted twice by 0.4mL of elution buffer (0.1% formic acid, 75% acetonitrile). The eluents were combined and lyophilized. The lyophilized protein powder was dissolved in 10μL 0.1% formic acid in water (solvent A), and then injected into a homemade C18 Nano-Trap column (2cm × 75μm, 3μm). Peptides were separated in a home-made analytical column (15 cm × 150μm, 1.9μm) with a mobile phrase of 0.1% formic in 80% acetonitrile (solvent B). Sample elution was performed at a flow rate of 600nL/min by increasing the solvent B concentration from 6 to 100% over 60 min. The separated peptides were analyzed by Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher), with ion source of Nanospray Flex™ (ESI), spray voltage of 2.3 kV.

### Data Protocol
The raw data of MS detection were searched on UniProt database (http://www.uniprot.org). Carbamidomethyl was specified as fixed modifications. Oxidation of methionine and acetylation of the N-terminus were specified as variable modifications. The identified protein contains at least 1 unique peptide with FDR no more than 0.01. The proteins with a p-value < 0.05 and log2 fold change > 2 were considered differentially expressed between the two groups.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, Antenatal hydronephrosis, Amniotic fluid

### Affiliations
Department of Obstetrics, Xiangya Hospital Central South University, Changsha, China
Department of Obstetrics, Xiangya Hospital Central South University, Changsha

### Submitter
Lei Dai

### Lab Head
Dr Weishe Zhang
Department of Obstetrics, Xiangya Hospital Central South University, Changsha, China


