### Accession
PXD038520

### Title
Definitive Screening Design to Improve Data-Independent MS Analysis of Neuropeptides

### Description
A definitive screening design was used to systematically optimize a DIA workflow for crustacean neuropeptide quantitation. We were able to assess several parameters for their effect on increasing quantifiable neuropeptides and predict the optimal value for these parameters.

### Sample Protocol
Crustacean sinus glands were pooled and neuropeptides were extracted using acidified methanol and desalted via c18 seppaks. The same pooled sample was injected various times for all experiments on a Thermo Q Exactive orbitrap mass spectrometer. Data was collected via swath-MS with varying parameters for optimiaztion. For label-free quantitation, the pooled sample was dilluted in mobile phase A 2 fold, 5 fold and 10 fold.

### Data Protocol
DIA umpire was used to deconvolute the data and a homebuilt C# script was used to reassociated the raw MS1 and resultant MS2 data. PeaksX was then used to search an in-house crustacean neuropeptide database. Data was filtered to a logP value corresponding to 5%FDR of the dda data.

### Publication Abstract
Method optimization is crucial for successful mass spectrometry (MS) analysis. However, extensive method assessments, altering various parameters individually, are rarely performed due to practical limitations regarding time and sample quantity. To maximize sample space for optimization while maintaining reasonable instrumentation requirements, a definitive screening design (DSD) is leveraged for systematic optimization of data-independent acquisition (DIA) parameters to maximize crustacean neuropeptide identifications. While DSDs require several injections, a library-free methodology enables surrogate sample usage for comprehensive optimization of MS parameters to assess biomolecules from limited samples. We identified several parameters contributing significant first- or second-order effects to method performance, and the DSD model predicted ideal values to implement. These increased reproducibility and detection capabilities enabled the identification of 461 peptides, compared to 375 and 262 peptides identified through data-dependent acquisition (DDA) and a published DIA method for crustacean neuropeptides, respectively. Herein, we demonstrate a DSD optimization workflow, using standard material, not reliant on spectral libraries for the analysis of any low abundance molecules from previous samples of limited availability. This extends the DIA method to low abundance isoforms dysregulated or only detectable in disease samples, thus improving characterization of previously inaccessible biomolecules, such as neuropeptides. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD038520.

### Keywords
Library-free, Neuropeptides, Label-free quantitation, Design of experiments

### Affiliations
University of Wisconsin - Madison
University of Wisconsin-Madison, Department of Chemistry and School of Pharmacy, Madison, Wisconsin, USA

### Submitter
Ashley Phetsanthad

### Lab Head
Dr Lingjun Li
University of Wisconsin-Madison, Department of Chemistry and School of Pharmacy, Madison, Wisconsin, USA


