### Accession
PXD001189

### Title
Quantitative Phosphorylation analysis in human platelets after ADP stimulation

### Description
Human platelets were treated with 20 µM of ADP for 10, 30 and 60 s in triplicate. In  a second experiment blood donations of three donors were split again in four fractions and one was treated with 20 µM of ADP and the second and third with 20 µM of ADP for 30 s and subsequently with 2 nM of Iloprost for further 30 s and 60 s.

### Sample Protocol
Lysis and sample preparation was accomplished using FASP. 200 µg of proteins for each sample were digested with trypsin over night. Afterwards peptides were labeled with iTRAQ 4-plex and phosphopeptides enriched using TiO2 after sample pooling. For global analysis 1 % of each repliacte was fracionated using C18 material run at pH 6 resulting in 8 or 6 contatinated fractions collected minute by minute. Enriched eluates were further fractionated using a HPLC run in HILIC mode.

### Data Protocol
All fractions were either analyzed on a LTQ Velos or Q Exactive system and raw files were processed with proteome discoverer 1.3 searching MSMS spectra against a human data base using Sequest and Mascot as search algorithms.Phosphorylation site localization was perfomed by phosphoRS 2.0.

### Publication Abstract
Adenosine diphosphate (ADP) enhances platelet activation by virtually any other stimulant to complete aggregation. It binds specifically to the G-protein-coupled membrane receptors P2Y1 and P2Y12, stimulating intracellular signaling cascades, leading to integrin &#x3b1;IIb&#x3b2;3 activation, a process antagonized by endothelial prostacyclin. P2Y12 inhibitors are among the most successful antiplatelet drugs, however, show remarkable variability in efficacy. We reasoned whether a more detailed molecular understanding of ADP-induced protein phosphorylation could identify (1) critical hubs in platelet signaling toward aggregation and (2) novel molecular targets for antiplatelet treatment strategies. We applied quantitative temporal phosphoproteomics to study ADP-mediated signaling at unprecedented molecular resolution. Furthermore, to mimic the antagonistic efficacy of endothelial-derived prostacyclin, we determined how Iloprost reverses ADP-mediated signaling events. We provide temporal profiles of 4797 phosphopeptides, 608 of which showed significant regulation. Regulated proteins are implicated in well-known activating functions such as degranulation and cytoskeletal reorganization, but also in less well-understood pathways, involving ubiquitin ligases and GTPase exchange factors/GTPase-activating proteins (GEF/GAP). Our data demonstrate that ADP-triggered phosphorylation occurs predominantly within the first 10 seconds, with many short rather than sustained changes. For a set of phosphorylation sites (eg, PDE3A<sup>Ser312</sup>, CALDAG-GEFI<sup>Ser587</sup>, ENSA<sup>Ser109</sup>), we demonstrate an inverse regulation by ADP and Iloprost, suggesting that these are central modulators of platelet homeostasis. This study demonstrates an extensive spectrum of human platelet protein phosphorylation in response to ADP and Iloprost, which inversely overlap and represent major activating and inhibitory pathways.

### Keywords
Adp stimulation, Phosphorylation, Platelets

### Affiliations
Boehringer Ingelheim
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschafte - ISAS .e.V.

### Submitter
Florian Beck

### Lab Head
Dr Florian Beck
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschafte - ISAS .e.V.


