### Accession
PXD026636

### Title
Translation machinery for deliberate mistranslation of the genetic code in Bacteria

### Description
“Inaccurate” expression of the genetic code, also known as mistranslation, is an emerging paradigm in microbial studies. Growing evidence indicates that many microbial pathogens can deliberately mistranslate their genetic code to help invade a host or evade host immune responses. However, discovering new capacities for deliberate mistranslation remains a challenge because each group of pathogens typically employs a unique mistranslation mechanism. In this study, we address this problem by studying duplicated genes of aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases. Using bacterial prolyl-tRNA synthe¬tase (ProRS) genes as an example, we identify an anomalous ProRS isoform, ProRSx, and a corre¬sponding tRNA, tRNAProA, that are predominately found in plant pathogens from Streptomyces species. We then show that tRNAProA has an unusual hybrid structure that allows this tRNA to mistranslate alanine codons as proline. We finally provide biochemical, genetic, and mass-spectro-metric evidence that cells which express ProRSx and tRNAProA can translate GCU alanine codons both as alanine and proline. This dual use of alanine codons creates a hidden proteome diversity due to stochastic Ala→Pro mutations in protein sequences. Thus, we show that important plant pathogens are equipped with a tool to alter the identity of their sense codons. This finding reveals the first example of a natural tRNA synthetase/tRNA pair for dedicated mistranslation of sense codons.

### Sample Protocol
GFP-mCherry protein was affinity purified from E. coli. Samples were reduced, alkylated, digested overnight with trypsin and chymostrypsin, then lyophilized and resuspended in 0.2% TFA. Six microlitres of each sample were separated by nanoflow liquid chromatography using a Bruker NanoElute chromatography system then injected into a timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer. Liquid chromatograpny was preformed using a constant flow of 300 µl/min and a 15cm reversed-phased column with a 75 µm inner diameter filled with Reprosil C18 (PepSEP, Odense Denmark). Mobile phase A was 0.1% Formic Acid and Mobile phase B was 99.9% Acetonitrile, 0.1% Formic Acid. Peptide separation was carried out over 21 minutes as follows; linearly 5% A to 30% B over 18 minutes with an increase to 95% B over 30 seconds, and held constant for 2.5 minutes to clean the column. Trapped ion mobility separation was achieved by using an accumiation time of 100ms in the first TIMS region and ramps of the TIMS region from 0.85 V s/cm2 to 1.30 V s/cm2, with each ramp lasting 100ms.

### Data Protocol
MS Raw Files were processed using PEAKS XPro (v10.6, Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Ontario, Canada). The data was searched against a custom database containing the sfGFP sequence with the T65A mutation, in conjunction with the E. coli K12 Uniprot reviewed database. Precursor ion mass error tolerance was set to 20 ppm and fragment ion mass error tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. Semi-specific cleavage with trypsin or chymotrypsin was selected with a maximum of 3 missed cleavages. A fixed modification of carbamidomethylation (+57.02 Da) on cysteine residues were specified. Variable modifications of deamidation (+0.98 Da) on asparagine and glutamine, as well as oxidation (15.99 Da) on methionine, were specified. The false discovery rate threshold was set to 1% for the database search and only mutations supported by relative fragment ion intensities equal to or greater than 1% were considered.

### Publication Abstract
Inaccurate expression of the genetic code, also known as mistranslation, is an emerging paradigm in microbial studies. Growing evidence suggests that many microbial pathogens can deliberately mistranslate their genetic code to help invade a host or evade host immune responses. However, discovering different capacities for deliberate mistranslation remains a challenge because each group of pathogens typically employs a unique mistranslation mechanism. In this study, we address this problem by studying duplicated genes of aminoacyl-transfer RNA (tRNA) synthetases. Using bacterial prolyl-tRNA synthetase (ProRS) genes as an example, we identify an anomalous ProRS isoform, ProRSx, and a corresponding tRNA, tRNA<sup>ProA</sup>, that are predominately found in plant pathogens from <i>Streptomyces</i> species. We then show that tRNA<sup>ProA</sup> has an unusual hybrid structure that allows this tRNA to mistranslate alanine codons as proline. Finally, we provide biochemical, genetic, and mass spectrometric evidence that cells which express ProRSx and tRNA<sup>ProA</sup> can translate GCU alanine codons as both alanine and proline. This dual use of alanine codons creates a hidden proteome diversity due to stochastic Ala&#x2192;Pro mutations in protein sequences. Thus, we show that important plant pathogens are equipped with a tool to alter the identity of their sense codons. This finding reveals the initial example of a natural tRNA synthetase/tRNA pair for dedicated mistranslation of sense codons.

### Keywords
Mistranslation, Genetic code, Trna, Aminoacyl-trna synthetase

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry Department of Chemistry Yale University New Haven, CT USA
Bioinformatics Solutions Inc.

### Submitter
Kyle Hoffman

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Dieter Soll
Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry Department of Chemistry Yale University New Haven, CT USA


