### Accession
PXD018050

### Title
Barbed bone point chronology reveals an unexpected hiatus in the archaeology of Southern Scandinavia around 10,300 years BP

### Description
The extensive peat bogs of Southern Scandinavia have yielded rich Mesolithic archaeological assemblages, which has informed prehistoric studies for more than a century. Central to this has been the first recognizably Mesolithic culture, the Maglemose (c. 11,000 - 8,000 BP), first described in 1903 which has become a yardstick against which all other Early Mesolithic cultures have been compared. Despite the excellent preservation of organic material, we have for the first time conducted a combined investigation of the typology, species composition and absolute chronology of Maglemose bone points. A demonstrable and significant change in barb morphology can be directly linked to a significant paucity of finds in Southern Scandinavia around 10,300 cal BP, potentially linked to climate change. Peptide mass fingerprinting (ZooMS) reveals that the majority of bone points are made from cervids and bovines. The ribs of bovines; for instance, are more frequently utilized following the hiatus. Furthermore, the marked change in barbed bone point morphology coincides with a change in lithic technology. This change in material culture has been shown to arrive archaeologically with eastern pioneers and colonisations through Fennoscandinavia. We, therefore, propose that the Maglemose culture in Southern Scandinavia is fundamentally divided into an Early Complex (c. 11,600 - 10,300 cal BP) and a Late Complex (c. 10,300 - 8,600 cal BP): the former characterized by percussion blade production and “fine-barbed bone points” and the latter characterized by the innovations of pressure-blade production and “larger barbed bone points”. Finally, through these integrated analyses we are able to show that a single artifact type can be used as a proxy for human populations as well as inferences on potential climate changes.

### Sample Protocol
The bone points analyzed (n = 120) all derive from Southern Scandinavia (Denmark and southernmost Sweden). The bone points were, based on barb morphology and skeletal element used in their manufacture (i.e. long bone versus rib), and to some extent species, divided into two groups. We performed ZooMS on 120 bone points from Denmark and Scania in southern Sweden using protocols from: M. Buckley, M. Collins, J. Thomas-Oates, J. C. Wilson, Species identification by analysis of bone collagen using matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionisation time-of-flight mass spectrometry. Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom. 23, 3843–3854 (2009); N. L. van Doorn, H. Hollund, M. J. Collins, A novel and non-destructive approach for ZooMS analysis: ammonium bicarbonate buffer extraction. Archaeol. Anthropol. Sci. 3, 281 (2011). Mass spectrometry was conducted on a Bruker MALDI-TOF-MS/MS instrument in reflector mode to acquire spectra from 800-3500 m/z. To confirm our candidate ZooMS marker four reference samples (two from each species; Alces alces (P220, P221), Cervus elaphus (X4787, X4997)) were sequenced by nLC-MS/MS using an EASY-nLC 1200 coupled to a Q Exactive HF. The LC-MS/MS parameters were the same as previously used for palaeoproteomic samples (Mackie, M. et al. (2018) ‘Palaeoproteomic Profiling of Conservation Layers on a 14th Century Italian Wall Painting’, Angewandte Chemie , 57(25), pp. 7369–7374.), in short: MS1: 120k resolution, maximum injection time (IT) 25 ms, scan target 3E6. MS2: 60k resolution, top 10 mode, maximum IT 108 ms, minimum scan target 2E5, normalised collision energy of 28, dynamic exclusion 20 s, and isolation window of 1.2 m/z. In addition, we sequenced the tryptic peptides from four bone points, two from the Preboreal (A37811 and VHM13821) and two from the Boreal (A40894 and A42422) using an EASY-nLC 1200 coupled to a Q Exactive HF-X. The MS parameters were the same as for the HF, except for the MS2 maximum IT which was set to 118 ms.

### Data Protocol
ZooMS- The generated spectral output was converted to TXT and was analysed using the open-source software mMass v.5.5.0. The triplicate raw files were merged, and then peak picked with a S/N threshold of 4. These are provided as a zipped folder (Jensen et al 2019). LC-MS/MS- The raw files generated were then searched using the software MaxQuant against a database of mammalian collagens. MaxQuant settings were as follows: Digestion mode was set to semispecific for Trypsin, to account for possible additional hydrolytic cleavages occurring during diagenesis. Variable modifications were: oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein N-term), Deamidation (NQ), Gln ->pyro-Glu, Glu ->pyro-Glu, and Hydroxyproline. Fixed modifications were: Carbamidomethyl (C). The remaining settings were set to the program defaults, apart from Min. score for unmodified and modified peptides searches, which were both set to 60. Proteins were considered confidently identified if at least two razor+unique peptides covering distinct areas of the sequence were recovered. MS/MS spectra were assessed manually for confident identification, and peptides were searched against the NCBI database using the BLASTp tool (http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi), to determine species specificity.

### Publication Abstract
The extensive peat bogs of Southern Scandinavia have yielded rich Mesolithic archaeological assemblages, with one of the most iconic artefacts being the bone point. Although great in number they remain understudied. Here we present a combined investigation of the typology, protein-based species composition, and absolute chronology of Maglemosian bone points. The majority of the bone points are made from cervids and bovines. However, changes both in species composition and barb morphology can be directly linked to a paucity of finds lasting nearly 600&#xa0;years in Southern Scandinavia around 10,300&#xa0;cal BP. We hypothesize that this hiatus was climate-driven and forced hunter-gatherers to abandon the lakes. Furthermore, the marked change in bone points coincides with a change in lithic technology. We, therefore, propose that the Maglemose culture in Southern Scandinavia is fundamentally divided into an Early Complex and a Late Complex.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Maldi-tof, Archaeology, Palaeoproteomics, Cervids, Bone points

### Affiliations
Section for Evolutionary Genomics, GLOBE Institute, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark; McDonald Institute for Archaeological Research, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK
University of Copenhagen

### Submitter
Meaghan Mackie

### Lab Head
Dr Matthew Collins
Section for Evolutionary Genomics, GLOBE Institute, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark; McDonald Institute for Archaeological Research, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK


