### Accession
PXD017294

### Title
Effects of retene, pyrene and phenanthrene on the cardiac proteome of the rainbow trout larva

### Description
The mechanisms of cardiotoxicity of the three widespread model polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) retene, pyrene and phenanthrene were explored in rainbow trout (Oncorhyncus mykiss) early life stages. Newly hatched larvae were exposed to sublethal doses of each individual PAH causing no detectable morphometric alterations. Changes in the cardiac proteome were assessed after 7 or 14 days of exposure to each PAH.

### Sample Protocol
Rainbow trout larvae were exposed to either DMSO (0.001%), retene (RET, 32 µg.L-1), pyrene (PYR, 32 µg.L-1) and phenanthrene (PHE, 100 µg.L-1) for 7 or 14 days. The lake water in the exposure tanks was renewed daily and fresh chemicals were added to ensure constant exposure to PAHs (i.e. semi-static exposure). At the end of the exposures, all individuals were quickly and cautiously dissected under a microscope. The heart of each larva was isolated from the rest of the body using fine forceps. The hearts of the larvae from two (14 days exposure) or three (7 days exposure) different tanks per treatment were pooled together, thus each treatment consisted of four samples containing 30 or 45 hearts each.  After using the TRI Reagent (Molecular Research Center, Cincinnati, OH, USA) to isolate the aqueous phase containing the RNA, ethyl alcohol (99.5% purity) was added to the remaining organic phase and interphase to pellet the DNA. DNA was discarded and proteins were precipitated using isopropanol. After a series of successive washes using 0.3M guanidine hydrochloride (in 95% ethyl alcohol) and ethyl alcohol (99.5% purity), protein resuspension was performed using a solution of 8M urea and 2M thiourea in a 1M Tris-HCl buffer (pH 8.0).  Before the in-solution trypsin digestion, 15 µg of protein for each sample were reduced with dithiothreitol (1h at 37°C) and alkylated by iodoacetamide (1h at room temperature). Urea was diluted below 1M using 50 mM Tris-HCl. Trypsin was added in ratio 1:30 (w/w) and the samples were digested for 16h at 37°C. Digested peptides were desalted with SepPak C18 96-well plate (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) according to the instructions of the manufacturer, evaporated to dryness with SpeedVac (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and dissolved in 0.1% formic acid before MS analysis. Peptide concentrations were determined with NanoDrop (Thermo Fisher Scientific) by measuring absorbance at 280 nm. Concentrations of all samples were adjusted to 100 ng.μL-1.  The LC-ESI-MS/MS analyses were performed on a nanoflow HPLC system (Easy-nLC1200, Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to the Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nano-electrospray ionization source. Peptides were first loaded on a trapping column and subsequently separated inline on a 15 cm C18 column (75 μm x 15 cm, ReproSil-Pur 5 μm 200 Å C18-AQ, Dr. Maisch HPLC GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). The mobile phase consisted of water with 0.1% formic acid (solvent A) or acetonitrile/water (80:20 (v/v)) with 0.1% formic acid (solvent B). A linear 120 min two steps gradient was used to elute peptides (85 min from 5% to 28% B, followed by 35 min from 28% to 40% B and finally 5 min wash with 100% B). All samples were injected twice, as technical replicates.

### Data Protocol
Raw LC-ESI-MS/MS files were processed through MaxQuant 1.6.2.3 for protein identification and label-free quantification (LFQ). The search engine Andromeda, integrated to the MaxQuant environment, was used to search proteins against two RefSeq databases during two separate MaxQuant runs: one for O. mykiss and one for the Atlantic Salmon (Salmo salar). Trypsin/P was used as the digestion mode parameter, with a maximum of two missed cleavages allowed. Variable modifications were set on N-terminal acetylation, oxidation of methionine and deamidation of asparagines and glutamines. The “match between runs” parameter of MaxQuant was set on 0.7 min for the match time window and 20 min for the alignment time window.

### Publication Abstract
Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) are global contaminants of concern. Despite several decades of research, their mechanisms of toxicity are not very well understood. Early life stages of fish are particularly sensitive with the developing cardiac tissue being a main target of PAHs toxicity. The mechanisms of cardiotoxicity of the three widespread model polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) retene, pyrene and phenanthrene were explored in rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss) early life stages. Newly hatched larvae were exposed to sublethal doses of each individual PAH causing no detectable morphometric alterations. Changes in the cardiac proteome and metabolome were assessed after 7 or 14&#xa0;days of exposure to each PAH. Phase I and II enzymes regulated by the aryl hydrocarbon receptor were significantly induced by all PAHs, with retene being the most potent compound. Retene significantly altered the level of several proteins involved in key cardiac functions such as muscle contraction, cellular tight junctions or calcium homeostasis. Those findings were quite consistent with previous reports regarding the effects of retene on the cardiac transcriptome. Significant changes in proteins linked to iron and heme metabolism were observed following exposure to pyrene. While phenanthrene also altered the levels of several proteins in the cardiac tissue, no clear mechanisms or pathways could be highlighted. Due to high variability between samples, very few significant changes were detected in the cardiac metabolome overall. Slight but significant changes were still observed for pyrene and phenanthrene, suggesting possible effects on several energetic or signaling pathways. This study shows that early exposure to different PAHs can alter the expression of key proteins involved in the cardiac function, which could potentially affect negatively the fitness of the larvae and later of the juvenile fish.

### Keywords
Metabolomics, Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (pahs), Developmental toxicity, Proteomics, Cardiotoxicity, Aquatic toxicology

### Affiliations
University of Jyväskylä Department of Biological and Environmental Science
University of Jyväskylä
Department of Biological and Environmental Science

### Submitter
Cyril Rigaud

### Lab Head
Dr Eeva-Riikka Vehniäinen
University of Jyväskylä Department of Biological and Environmental Science


