### Accession
PXD015081

### Title
The host exosome biogenesis pathway is essential for human cytomegalovirus virion assembly and egress

### Description
Human Cytomegalovirus (HCMV) infects over 50% of humans, is a leading cause of congenital birth defects, and poses serious risks for immuno-compromised individuals. To expand the molecular knowledge governing virion assembly and egress, we initiated a proteomics-based investigation and identified a significant proportion of host exosome constituents in HCMV virions. Quantitative analysis of exosomes released from uninfected cells (765 proteins) revealed that over 99% of the protein cargo was subsequently integrated into virions, confirming near-complete acquisition of exosome biogenesis during infection. We confirmed VAMP3 is essential for viral trafficking and release of infectious progeny, further validating the intrinsic exploitation of the pathway by HCMV. Therefore, host exosomes serve as the molecular template for virion cargo addition, and provide an export mechanism for virion egress. Our discovery underpins future investigation of host exosome proteins as important modulators of viral maturation, and enhances the understanding of HCMV envelopment, trafficking, fusion and release.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were reduced and alkylated with 50 mM TCEP and 50 mM chloroacetamide, at 95OC for 10 minutes. Digestion was based on the FASP method with slight modification. Samples were transferred to Millipore Ultra-0.5 10 kDa centrifugal filters (Amicon), and buffer-exchanged three times into TUD buffer (0.1 M Tris-HCl, 2% (w/v) sodium deoxycholate, 8 M urea), by centrifugation at 14,000xg for 10 minutes at RT. For the final exchange, protein samples in 200 μl TUD were mixed with 200 μl of ABC DOC buffer (50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 2% (w/v) sodium deoxycholate), and centrifuged as above. 100 μl of digestion buffer (50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 0.5 μg MS grade trypsin (Pierce) was added, and incubated overnight at 37OC. Digested peptides were recovered, mixed with ethyl acetate (in 2:1 ratio), and adjusted to a final concentration of 0.5% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Following vortexing for 2 minutes, samples were centrifuged at 14,000xg for 5 minutes at RT, and the denser aqueous phase recovered. Peptides were desalted on StageTips using Empore SDB-RPS extraction discs (3M Analytical Biotechnologies). Bound peptides were washed first with a solution containing 50% (v/v) ethyl acetate, 0.5% (v/v) TFA, and a second wash with 0.5% (v/v) TFA. Finally, peptides were eluted with 5% (v/v) ammonium hydroxide, 80% (v/v) acetonitrile, concentrated to near dryness using a vacuum centrifuge (CentriVap), and FA solution (0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 2% (v/v) acetonitrile) added to achieve a final volume of 9 μl. Samples were transferred to autosampler vials for liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry analysis (LC-MS).   LC-MS was performed using an UltiMate 3000 Ultra High-performance Liquid Chromatography system coupled to Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher.Scientific). Sample peptides were trapped on an Acclaim PepMap 100 column (C18, 2 cm length, 100 μm ID, 5 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size; ThermoFisher Scientific), and subsequently loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap RSLC analytical column (C18, 50 cm length, 75 μm ID, 3 μm particle size, 100‐Å pore size; ThermoFisher Scientific). Peptides were eluted at 250 nL/min, using a linear gradient over 90 min, starting at 7.5% Buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) in Buffer A (0.1% formic acid), and ending at 37.5% Buffer B in Buffer A. The Fusion mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode with a single acquisition cycle comprising one full-scan (m/z 375-1575) in the Orbitrap (resolution of 120,000), followed by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation of the top 15 most intense precursor ions, (resolution of 30,000) using 32% collision energy. Dynamic exclusion was enabled for 15 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Raw spectral files were analysed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.0.13). Peptides spectra were searched using the Andromeda search engine built into MaxQuant, against a combined Uniprot database comprising Human (Taxon ID: 9606, 20,432 entries) and HCMV strain AD169 (Taxon ID: 10360, 193 entries) proteins. Generally, MaxQuant default search parameters were used, with limited changes. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a “fixed modification”, methionine oxidation and N terminal acetylation were set as “variable modifications”, and trypsin/P selected as the “digestion enzyme”. Peptide length was set between 7 and 25 residues with a maximum number of 2 missed cleavages allowed. “Label-free quantification (LFQ)” and “match between runs” were enabled, and protein false discovery rate set to 1 percent with a minimum number of 2 “razor and unique peptides” required for identification.

### Publication Abstract
Human Cytomegalovirus (HCMV) infects over half the world's population, is a leading cause of congenital birth defects, and poses serious risks for immuno-compromised individuals. To expand the molecular knowledge governing virion maturation, we analysed HCMV virions using proteomics, and identified a significant proportion of host exosome constituents. To validate this acquisition, we characterized exosomes released from uninfected cells, and demonstrated that over 99% of the protein cargo was subsequently incorporated into HCMV virions during infection. This suggested a common membrane origin, and utilization of host exosome machinery for virion assembly and egress. Thus, we selected a panel of exosome proteins for knock down, and confirmed that loss of 7/9 caused significantly less HCMV production. Saliently, we report that VAMP3 is essential for viral trafficking and release of infectious progeny, in various HCMV strains and cell types. Therefore, we establish that the host exosome pathway is intrinsic for HCMV maturation, and reveal new host regulators involved in viral trafficking, virion envelopment, and release. Our findings underpin future investigation of host exosome proteins as important modulators of HCMV replication with antiviral potential.

### Keywords
Exosome, Proteomics, Egress, Virion assembly, Vamp3, Extracellular vesicle, Cmv, Viral infection, Herpesvirus, Human cytomegalovirus

### Affiliations
Infection and Immunity Program Biomedicine Discovery Institute Monash University 23 Innovation Walk Clayton VIC 3800 Australia
Monash University

### Submitter
Rommel Mathias

### Lab Head
Dr Rommel Mathias
Infection and Immunity Program Biomedicine Discovery Institute Monash University 23 Innovation Walk Clayton VIC 3800 Australia


