### Accession
PXD013173

### Title
Global Proteomic Analysis of Lysine Succinylation in Zebrafish (Danio rerio)

### Description
Lysine succinylation (Ksu) is a novel identified post-translational modification that conserved from prokaryote to eukaryotes. As a kind of acylation, Ksu was reported to have different functions with others acylation at lysine residue. However, recently studies on the Ksu mainly focus on the plants and bacterial, there are still very rare studies in the vertebrate. Therefore, the biological role of succinylation remains largely unknown in mammal. In this study, we performed global Ksu mapping in Danio rerio (zebrafish) using mass spectrometry-based proteomics with enrichment of Ksu peptides by immunoprecipitation technology. As a result, we totally identified 552 Ksu sites in 164 proteins. Compared with our previous studies on lysine acetylation and crotonylation, Ksu plays a major role in a diverse metabolic process, such as carbon metabolism and tricarboxylic acid circle. In addition, we defined 5 new succinylation motifs: (su)KA, (suc)KxxxxA, (su)KxxxxL, (su)KxA, (su)KxV. In conclusion, our result provides proteome-wide database for study of Ksu in zebrafish and our bioinformatics result facilitated the understanding of the Ksu in the role of central metabolism.

### Sample Protocol
One milligram protein was used for in-solution digestion. Protein was reduced in 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 56℃ for 30 mins and alkylated in 15 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) at room temperature for 45 mins. DTT and IAA were prepared in 25 mM ammonium biocarbonate buffer (ABC). For trypsin digestion, 20 g (50:1, w/w) sequenced grade modified trypsin was added and incubated at 37℃ for 12 hours. Tryspin digestion was quenched by adding 10% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) as a final concentration of 1% (v/v) TFA. Peptide solution was desalted through C18 Sep-Pak cartridges. Lysine succinylated peptides were enriched by PTMScan® Succinyl-Lysine Motif Kit.For proteome analysis, nano-LC was coupled with a LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Generated raw MS files were searched using MaxQuant (version 1.3.0.5, http://www.maxquant.org/) against a Danio rerio database. In the parameters setting, oxidatioin and acetyle (protein N-term), and Ksu were chosen as variables modifications. Trypsin/P was chosen among digest enzymes. Zebrafish database was inputted as a fasta file downloaded from UniProt (https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000000437) [27]. Peptide sequences were searched including contamination. Protein FDR was set at 0.01. Number of threads was 10. For data arrangement, protein has “contamination +” and “reverse +” were removed from the raw file, protein “score” below 40, Ksu “localization prob” below than 75% were filtered form our result.

### Publication Abstract
Lysine succinylation (Ksu) is a novel identified post-translational modification that is conserved from prokaryotes to eukaryotes. As a kind of acylation, Ksu was reported to have different functions than other acylations at lysine residues. However, recent studies on Ksu have mainly focused on plants and bacteria. Ksu studies in vertebrates are still rare; thus, the biological function of Ksu in mammals needs to be studied further. In this study, we performed global Ksu mapping in <i>Danio rerio</i> (zebrafish) using mass spectrometry-based proteomics with the enrichment of Ksu peptides by immunoprecipitation technology. As a result, we identified 552 Ksu sites in 164 proteins. The raw data are available via ProteomeXchange with the identifier PXD013173. Compared with our previous studies on lysine acetylation and crotonylation, Ksu plays a major role in diverse metabolic processes such as carbon metabolism and the tricarboxylic acid circle. In addition, we defined five new succinylation motifs: (su)KA, (su)KxxxxA, (su)KxxxxL, (su)KxA, and (su)KxV. In conclusion, our results provide a proteome-wide database to study Ksu in zebrafish, and our bioinformatics results facilitated the understanding of the role of Ksu in central metabolism.

### Keywords
Zebrafish larvae, Lysine succinylation, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Associate Professor  College of Pharmacy, Kyungpook National University
Kyungpook National University

### Submitter
Yan Gao

### Lab Head
Dr Sangkyu Lee
Associate Professor  College of Pharmacy, Kyungpook National University


