### Accession
PXD022016

### Title
Dispensable Methanogenic Energy Metabolism in a Methanogenic Archaeon

### Description
Biogenic methane formation, methanogenesis, a key process in the global carbon cycle is the only energy metabolism known to sustain growth of the microorganisms employing it, the methanogenic archaea. All known methanogenic pathways converge at the methane-liberating step where also the terminal electron acceptor of methanogenic respiration, the heterodisulfide of coenzyme M and coenzyme B is formed. Carbon monoxide (CO) utilization of Methanosarcina acetivorans is unique in that the organism can shift from methanogenesis towards acetogenesis. Here, we show that M. acetivorans can dispense of methanogenesis for energy conservation completely. By disrupting the methanogenic pathway through targeted mutagenesis, followed by adaptive evolution, a strain capable of sustained growth by CO-dependent acetogenesis was created. Still, a minute flux through the methane-liberating reaction remained essential, which was attributed to the involvement of the heterodisulfide in at least one essential anabolic reaction. Genomic and proteomic analysis showed that substantial metabolic rewiring had occurred in the strain. Most notably, heterodisulfide reductase, the terminal respiratory oxidoreductase was eliminated to funnel the heterodisulfide towards anabolism. These results suggest that the metabolic flexibility of “methanogenic” archaea is much greater than anticipated and open avenues for probing the mechanism of energetic coupling and the crosstalk between catabolism and anabolism.

### Sample Protocol
1 ml of exponential growing cultures (OD578 between 0.4 and 0.45) were centrifuged for 10 min at 12,000 x g and 4 °C. After protein extraction and proteolytic cleavage, the peptide lysates were injected into nano high-performance liquid chromatograph (HPLC) (UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano, Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide separation was performed on a C18-reverse-phase trapping column (C18 PepMap100, 300 µm × 5 mm, particle size 5 µm, nano viper, Thermo Fischer Scientific), followed by a C18-reverse-phase analytical column (Acclaim PepMap® 100, 75 µm × 25 cm, particle size 3 µm, nanoViper, Thermo Fischer Scientific). Mass spectrometric analysis of peptides was performed on a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled with a TriVersa NanoMate (Advion, Ltd., Harlow, UK) source in LC chip coupling mode. LC gradient, ionization mode and mass spectrometry mode have been used as described (Haange et al., 2018).

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed with Proteome Discoverer (v2.2, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Search settings for the Sequest HT search engine were set to trypsin (Full), max. missed cleavage: 2, precursor mass tolerance: 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance: 0.02 Da. The raw files were searched against the protein-coding sequences of M. acetivorans. Peptides representing proteins eliminated through targeted (Hpt in all strains, MtrEDCBAFGH in MKOmtr3 and MKOmtrSF) or spontaneous mutation(s) (MA2190-MA2335 in MKOmtrSF) were discarded as they are not present in the respective strain. The false discovery rates (FDR) were determined with the node Percolator embedded in Proteome Discoverer and we set to the FDR threshold at a peptide and protein level of 0.01. Protein grouping was performed according to strict parsimony principle.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Methanosarcina acetivorans, Methanogenesis, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research GmbH - UFZ  Department of Molecular Systeme Biology Permoserstraße 15, 04318 Leipzig, Germany
Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ

### Submitter
Nico Jehmlich

### Lab Head
Dr Nico Jehmlich
Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research GmbH - UFZ  Department of Molecular Systeme Biology Permoserstraße 15, 04318 Leipzig, Germany


