### Accession
PXD009416

### Title
ATP synthase nLC-MSMS -  α-synuclein oligomers interact with ATP synthase and open the permeability transition pore in Parkinson's disease

### Description
Impact of monomeric and oligomeric α-synuclein on ATP synthase oxidation.

### Sample Protocol
Mitochondrial protein samples were either directly separated on a SDS-PAGE using LDS non-reducing sample buffer or a co-IP was performed to pull-down ATP synthase and the eluent was separated on a SDS-PAGE using LDS non-reducing sample buffer. The whole sample lines were divided into 8 equal parts, excised and destained overnight. Protein samples were reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin. Eluted peptides were separated on a 25 cm reversed-phase C18 column (75 µm, 2 µm Acclaim RSLC C18) by Easy n-LC II coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, USA). The Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid analysis was set to data-dependent acquisition (DDA) using FTMS master scan preview mode, mass range 400 – 1600 m/z at 120000 resolution, for triggering MS/MS events. FTMS data were recorded with a max injection time of 100 ms, automated gain control (AGC) at 200000, positive ion lock mass of 445.12003 m/z and orbitrap as a detector. Monoisotopic precursor selection filter and dynamic exclusion with 30 seconds duration was used. Tandem MS was performed in top-speed mode (3 s cycle time) by quadrupole isolation using HCD fragmentation with the 30% of normalized collision energy, max injection time of 70 ms, AGC at 10000 and ion trap as detector.

### Data Protocol
MS data were analyzed with SEQUEST HT search engine in Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, California, USA) against Uniprot Rattus norvegicus database (downloaded on 12th Oct 2017.). The search parameters for HCD-ITMS fragment ions used were as follows: 10 ppm precursor mass tolerances, 0.6 Da fragment mass tolerance, maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed for tryptic peptides, min/max precursor mass was set to 350/5000 Da, the peptide false discovery rate (FDR) calculated by a target–decoy approach was set to 0.01. Additionally, 12 different types of variable modifications of peptides were searched. The modifications included were as follows: carbamidomethylation of Cysteine, N-terminal carboxymethyl, C-terminal oxidation and terminal independent carbonylation (+13.97926 Da), mono-oxidation (+15.99491 Da), di-oxidation (+31.98982 Da), tri-oxidation (+47.985 Da), oxidation of His to Asn (-23.0159 Da) or Asp (-22.032 Da) and oxidation of Lysine to aminoadipic acid (+14.9632 Da). Peptides with medium (p<0.05) and high confidence (p<0.01) were used for initial filtering of data for comparative redox proteomics analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Protein aggregation causes &#x3b1;-synuclein to switch from its physiological role to a pathological toxic gain of function. Under physiological conditions, monomeric &#x3b1;-synuclein improves ATP synthase efficiency. Here, we report that aggregation of monomers generates beta sheet-rich oligomers that localise to the mitochondria in close proximity to several mitochondrial proteins including ATP synthase. Oligomeric &#x3b1;-synuclein impairs complex I-dependent respiration. Oligomers induce selective oxidation of the ATP synthase beta subunit and mitochondrial lipid peroxidation. These oxidation events increase the probability of permeability transition pore (PTP) opening, triggering mitochondrial swelling, and ultimately cell death. Notably, inhibition of oligomer-induced oxidation prevents the pathological induction of PTP. Inducible pluripotent stem cells (iPSC)-derived neurons bearing SNCA triplication, generate &#x3b1;-synuclein aggregates that interact with the ATP synthase and induce PTP opening, leading to neuronal death. This study shows how the transition of &#x3b1;-synuclein from its monomeric to oligomeric structure alters its functional consequences in Parkinson's disease.

### Keywords
Atp synthase, Nlc-msms

### Affiliations
Anti Doping Lab Qatar
ADLQ

### Submitter
Morana Jaganjac

### Lab Head
Dr Morana Jaganjac
ADLQ


