### Accession
PXD008338

### Title
Glutaminase C N-terminus phosphorylation decreases its enzymatic activity

### Description
The gene GLS generates the phosphate activated glutaminase C (GAC) isoform by alternative splicing. GAC, compared to the other isoform, kidney-type glutaminase (KGA), has been characterized as more active and particularly important for cancer cell growth. Very little is known about post-translational modifications regulating GAC function. Hereby we describe the identification of a phosphorylation on the serine 95, located at the GLS N-terminus, a domain shared by both isoforms. A GAC phosphomimetic mutant (S95D) ectopically expressed in breast cancer cells presented decreased enzymatic activity, and its expression impacted on cell’s glutamine uptake, glutamate release and intracellular glutamate levels (compared to expressing wild type GAC) without changing GAC sub-cellular localization. Curiously, replacing S95 by an alanine in the ectopically expressed GAC (S95A) increased cell proliferation and migration. Taken together, these results reveal that GAC is post-translationally regulated by phosphorylation, which impacts on cancer phenotype.

### Sample Protocol
Briefly, the eluted GAC-V5 proteins were reduced (5 mM dithiothreitol, 25 min at 56°C), alkylated (14 mM iodoacetamide, 30 min at room temperature in the dark) and digested with trypsin (Promega). The peptides were purified on StageTips C18 [23], dried down in a vacuum concentrator and reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid. An aliquot containing 100 μg of proteins in 1µL was analyzed on a LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected to nanoflow liquid chromatography (LC-MS/MS) by an EASY-nLC system (Proxeon Biosystem) through a Proxeon nanoelectrospray ion source as described by Aragão and colleagues [24]. Briefly, the peptides were separated by a 2-30% acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid using an analytical column PicoFrit Column (20 cm × ID75 μm, 5 μm particle size, New Objective), at a flow of 300 nl/min over 30 min. All instrument methods for the LTQ Orbitrap Velos were set up in the data dependent acquisition mode. The full scan MS spectra (m/z 300–1600) were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer after accumulation to a target value of 1e6. The resolution in the Orbitrap system was set to r = 60,000 and the five most intense peptide ions with charge states ≥ 2 were sequentially isolated to a target value of 50,000 and fragmented in higher-energy collisional dissociation with normalized collision energy of 40% with the resolution in the Orbitrap was set to r = 7,500 for MS/MS. Three independent biological samples were analyzed.

### Data Protocol
Protein and phosphosites identification was performed with MaxQuant v.1.3.0.3 [2] against the Human_Uniprot_release_07012015 containing CarolGLS_TAG_17092015_2 (release January 7th, 2015, 89.650 sequences, 35.610.298 residues; concatenated with GAC recombinant protein sequence) using the Andromeda search engine. Carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification, and N-terminal acetylation, oxidation of methionine, phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine as variable modifications. The search parameters were set to a maximum of 2 trypsin missed cleavage and a tolerance of 6 ppm for precursor ions and 20 ppm for fragment ions were set for protein identification. Phosphosites and phosphoprotein identifications were filtered for a maximum of 1% false discovery rate at peptide and protein levels, using reverse target-decoy database strategy with reverse peptide sequences as decoy entries. Using the application software Perseus v.1.2.7.4 [2], the list of phosphosites identified was filtered by minimum localization probability of 0.75 and reverse and contaminant entries were excluded from further analysis. Matching between runs was set and applied with a 2min window and minimum ratio count was considered as 1.

### Publication Abstract
The mitochondrial phosphate-activated glutaminase C (GAC) is produced by the alternative splicing of the GLS gene. Compared to the other GLS isoform, the kidney-type glutaminase (KGA), GAC is more enzymatically efficient and of particular importance for cancer cell growth. Although its catalytic mechanism is well understood, little is known about how post-translational modifications can impact GAC function. Here, we identified by mass spectrometry a phosphorylated serine at the GLS N-terminal domain (at position 95) and investigated its role on regulating GAC activity. The ectopic expression of the phosphomimetic mutant (GAC.S95D) in breast cancer cells, compared to wild-type GAC (GAC.WT), led to decreased glutaminase activity, glutamine uptake, glutamate release and intracellular glutamate levels, without changing GAC sub-cellular localization. Interestingly, cells expressing the GAC.S95D mutant, compared to GAC.WT, presented decreased migration and vimentin level, an epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition marker. These results reveal that GAC is post-translationally regulated by phosphorylation, which affects cellular glutamine metabolism and glutaminase-related cell phenotype.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Mapk1, Breast cancer, Metabolism, Glutaminase

### Affiliations
Brazilian Biosciences National Laboratory (LNBio), Brazilian Center for Research in Energy and Materials (CNPEM), Campinas, Sao Paulo, Brazil, Zip Code 13083-970
CNPEM

### Submitter
Adriana Franco Paes Leme

### Lab Head
Dr adriana franco paes leme
Brazilian Biosciences National Laboratory (LNBio), Brazilian Center for Research in Energy and Materials (CNPEM), Campinas, Sao Paulo, Brazil, Zip Code 13083-970


