### Accession
PXD013666

### Title
the proteomics of EspC stimulated RAW264.7 cell lines

### Description
the proteomics of EspC stimulated RAW264.7 cell lines

### Sample Protocol
RAW264.7 cells were seeded in 6 cm tissue culture plates. The cells were stimulated with or without 5 μg/mL EspC for 24 h at 37 °C and 5% CO2. The cells were harvested and re-suspended in 400 μL lysis buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 2% CHAPS, proteasome inhibitor) and then ultrasonically crushed to extract total proteins. The samples were centrifuged at 13 300 ×g for 3 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was collected, and the protein concentration was determined. Protein peptides (100 μg) from each group were labeled using the 8plex iTRAQ reagents multiplex kit (ABI, Foster City, CA, USA). After labeling and extraction efficiency evaluation, the sample groups were pooled and vacuum-dried. Each pool of mixed peptides was lyophilized and dissolved. Then, the samples were loaded onto a reverse-phase column (Luna C18, 4.6 × 150 mm; Phenomenex, Torrance, CA, USA) and eluted. The collected fractions were finally combined into 10 pools and desalted on C18 cartridges (Sigma).

### Data Protocol
The reconstituted peptides were analyzed with a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) coupled with a nano high-performance liquid chromatography system (UltiMate 3000 LC Dionex; Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptide data were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (ver. 1.4.0.288; Thermo Fisher Scientific). Protein probabilities were estimated using the Protein Prophet algorithm, and proteins with at least two unique peptides were identified. The upregulated or downregulated proteins in both replicates with relative quantification p-values < 0.05 and 1.1 fold-changes were selected as being differentially expressed in the data.

### Publication Abstract
EsxA, secreted by the ESAT-6 secretion system 1 (ESX-1) secretion system, is considered the major <i>Mycobacterium tuberculosis</i> (<i>Mtb</i>) virulence determinant. However, the roles of the individual ESX-1 substrates, such as EspC, remain unclear due to their interdependency for secretion with EsxA. Here, we validated that EspC triggered ER stress-mediated apoptosis in macrophages. The EspC-mediated ER stress was involved in pro-inflammatory cytokines generation, intracellular Ca<sub>2+</sub> release, and reactive oxygen species accumulation. Mitochondrial transmembrane potential dissipation and mitochondrial outer membrane permeabilization occurred in EspC-treated macrophages, causing apoptosis. Furthermore, ER stress-mediated apoptosis was effectively induced in EspC-overexpressing Mycobacterium smegmatis-infected macrophages and mice. EspC overexpression caused a significant increase in bacterial survival in the macrophages, spleens, and lungs, and accelerated mouse death was observed. Moreover, the increased viability of bacteria in the macrophages was significantly reduced by pretreatment with the apoptosis inhibitor. Overall, our results revealed that EspC is an essential ESX-1 protein for <i>Mtb</i>-host interactions and EspC-induced ER stress-mediated apoptosis may be employed by Mtb to establish and spread infection. Given the critical roles of the ESX systems in <i>Mtb</i> pathogenesis and immunity, our findings offer new perspectives on the complex host-pathogen interactions and mechanisms underlying ESX-1-mediated pathogenesis.

### Keywords
Mouse， macrophage， lc-msms

### Affiliations
Fudan University
State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, School of Life Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China

### Submitter
Qinglong Guo

### Lab Head
Dr Xuelian Zhang
State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, School of Life Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China


