### Accession
PXD003931

### Title
miR-125a Confers Multi-Lineage Long-Term Repopulating Stem Cell Activity to Murine and Human Hematopoietic Progenitors

### Description
Umbilical cord blood (CB) is a non-invasive, convenient and broadly used source of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) for allogeneic stem cell transplantation. However, limiting numbers of HSCs remain a major constraint for its clinical application. One feasible option would be to expand HSCs to improve therapeutic outcome, however available protocols and the molecular mechanisms governing the self-renewal of HSC are unclear. Here we show that ectopic expression of a single miRNA, miR-125a, in purified murine and human multipotent progenitors (MPP) resulted in increased self-renewal and robust long-term multi-lineage repopulation in transplanted recipient mice. Using quantitative proteomics and Western blot analysis, we identified a restricted set of miR-125a targets which revealed the involvement of the MAP kinase signaling pathway in conferring long-term repopulating capacity to multipotent progenitors in human and mice. Our findings offer the innovative potential to use MPP with enhanced self-renewal activity to augment limited sources of HSC to improve clinical protocols.

### Sample Protocol
Triplicate Lin- CB cell sample pools were thawed and plated in X-VIVO (BioWhittaker) supplemented with 20% BIT 9500 (StemCell Technologies), 2 mM L-glutamine and 100 U/mL penicillin/streptomycin (P/S). Viral particles were resuspended in the same medium and added to the cells at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 30. The mixture was then supplemented with stem cell factor (SCF) 100 ng/mL, Flt3 ligand (Flt3-L) 100 ng/mL, thrombopoietin (TPO) 20 ng/mL and interleukin 6 (IL-6) 20 ng/mL, for 4 days. Four days post viral transduction, lin- CB cells were sorted for mO+CD34+ populations. Transduced CD34+ CB cells with miR-125a (125/OE) and control vector (CTRL) were counted and washed twice with ice-cold PBS. 100,000 cells for each experimental condition, in biological triplicate, were subjected to sample preparation similar to (Kulak et al., 2014). Cells were lysed using 20 μl of lysis buffer (consisting of 6 M Guanidinium Hydrochloride, 10 mM TCEP, 40 mM CAA, 100 mM Tris pH8.5). Samples were boiled at 95C for 5 minutes, after which they were sonicated on high for 3x 10 seconds in a Bioruptor sonication water bath (Diagenode) at 4oC. Samples were diluted 1:3 with 10% Acetonitrile, 25 mM Tris pH 8.5, LysC (MS grade, Wako) was added in a 1:50 (enzyme to protein) ratio, and samples were incubated at 37C for 4hrs. Samples were further diluted to 1:10 with 10% Acetonitrile, 25 mM Tris pH 8.5, trypsin (MS grade, Promega) was added in a 1:100 (enzyme to protein) ratio and samples were incubated overnight at 37C. Enzyme activity was quenched by adding 2% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 1%. Prior to mass spectrometry analysis, the peptides were fractionated using Strong Cation Exchange (SCX) in StageTip format. For each sample, 3 discs of SCX material (3M Empore) were packed in a 200ul tip, and the SCX material activated with 80 μl of 100% Acetonitrile (HPLC grade, Sigma). The tips were equilibrated with 80 μl of 0.2% TFA, after which the samples were loaded using centrifugation at 4,000x rpm. After washing the tips twice with 100μl of 0.2% TFA, two initial fractions were eluted into clean 500μl Eppendorf tubes using 75, and 200 ammonium acetate, 20% Acetonitrile, 0.5% formic acid respectively. The final fraction was eluted using 5% ammonium hydroxide, 80% Acetonitrile. The eluted fractions were frozen on dry ice and concentrated in an Eppendorf Speedvac, and re-constituted in 1% TFA, 2% Acetonitrile for Mass Spectrometry (MS) analysis.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were analyzed using MaxQuant version 1.5.2.8 (Cox and Mann, 2008) and standard settings. Briefly, label-free quantitation (LFQ) was enabled with a requirement of 3 unique peptides per protein, and iBAQ quantitation was also enabled during the search. Variable modifications were set as Oxidation (M), Acetyl (protein N-term), Gln->pyro-Glu and Glu->pyro-Glu. Fixed modifications were set as Carbamidomethyl (C), false discovery rate was set to 1% and “match between runs” was enabled.

### Publication Abstract
Umbilical cord blood (CB) is a convenient and broadly used source of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) for allogeneic stem cell transplantation. However, limiting numbers of HSCs remain a major constraint for its clinical application. Although one feasible option would be to expand HSCs to improve&#xa0;therapeutic outcome, available protocols and the molecular mechanisms governing the self-renewal of HSCs are unclear. Here, we show that ectopic expression of a single microRNA (miRNA), miR-125a, in purified murine and human multipotent&#xa0;progenitors (MPPs) resulted in increased self-renewal and robust long-term multi-lineage repopulation in transplanted recipient mice. Using quantitative proteomics and western blot analysis, we identified a restricted set of miR-125a targets involved in conferring long-term repopulating capacity to MPPs in humans and mice. Our findings offer the innovative potential to use MPPs with enhanced self-renewal activity to augment limited sources of HSCs to improve clinical protocols.

### Keywords
Microrna, Hematopoiesis, Stem cell proteomics, Low-cell input

### Affiliations
Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, University Health Network, Toronto, ON M5G 1L7, Canada
University Health Network

### Submitter
Erwin Schoof

### Lab Head
Dr John E. Dick
Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, University Health Network, Toronto, ON M5G 1L7, Canada


