### Accession
PXD027152

### Title
High inflammatory activity in patients with multiple sclerosis induces a specific astrocyte reactive state that drives non-cell-autonomous neuronal degenerationHigh inflammatory activity in patients with multiple sclerosis induces a specific astrocyte reactive state that drives non-cell-autonomous neuronal degeneration

### Description
Astrocytes contribute to the pathogenesis of multiple sclerosis (MS); however, the mechanisms underlying the regulation of astrocytic responses remain unknown. Here we report an exhaustive molecular and functional characterization of astrocyte reactivity following exposure to cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) from MS patients classified according to the degree of inflammatory activity. We showed that mouse astrocytes exposed to CSF from patients with high inflammatory activity (MS-High) exhibited a specific pro-inflammatory reactive state that was characterized by enhanced NF-kB signalling. This reactive astrocyte state conferred a dysfunctional response through an altered pro-inflammatory secretome that drove neuronal dysfunction and impaired synaptic plasticity. SerpinE1 was identified as a potential downstream mediator of the non-cell-autonomous toxic effect on neuronal function based on its significant up-regulation in secretomes from astrocytes exposed to CSF from MS-high patients. Further, we identified chitinase 3-like 1 as a potential upstream modulator of astrocyte reactivity via activation of NF-kB signalling based on its significantly increased levels in the CSF from MS-High patients. Taken together our findings indicate that the inflammatory microenvironment in the central nervous system of MS patients can induce specific reactive astrocyte states that trigger neuronal degeneration and may ultimately contribute to disease progression.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation Samples were reduced with dithiothreitol, alkylated with iodoacetamide and with and LysC and trypsin. After digestion, the peptide mixture was desalted with a MicroSpin C18 column. Chromatographic and mass spectrometric analysis Samples were analyzed using an LTQ-Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1200 (Proxeon; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Odense, Denmark). Peptides were loaded directly onto the analytical column and were separated by reversed-phase chromatography using a 50 cm column with a 90 minute gradient.   The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ionization mode with nanospray voltage set at 2.4 kV and source temperature at 275ºC. The acquisition was performed in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode and full MS scans with 1 micro scans at resolution of 120,000 were used over a mass range of 350-1400 m/z with detection in the Orbitrap mass analyzer. In each cycle of data-dependent acquisition analysis, following each survey scan, the most intense ions above a threshold ion count of 10,000 were selected for fragmentation. The number of selected precursor ions for fragmentation was determined by the “Top Speed” acquisition algorithm and a dynamic exclusion of 60 seconds. Fragment ion spectra were produced via high-energy collision dissociation (HCD) at normalized collision energy of 28% and they were acquired in the ion trap mass analyzer. AGC was set to 2E4, and an isolation window of 0.7 m/z and a maximum injection times of 12 ms were used.

### Data Protocol
Acquired spectra were analyzed using the Proteome Discoverer software suite (v2.0; Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the Mascot search engine v2.6. CSF data was searched against Swiss-Prot Human database (February 2020), and astrocyte data against Swiss-Prot Mouse database (February 2020), plus a list of common contaminants and all the corresponding decoy entries. For peptide identification, a precursor ion mass tolerance of 7 ppm was used for MS1 level, trypsin was chosen as enzyme, and up to three missed cleavages were allowed. The fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da for MS2 spectra. Oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation were used as variable modifications whereas carbamidomethylation on cysteines was set as a fixed modification. FDR for peptide identification was set to a maximum of 5%. Peptide quantification data were retrieved from the “Precursor ion area detector” node from Proteome Discoverer using 2 ppm mass tolerance for the peptide extracted ion current (XIC). The obtained values were used to calculate protein fold-changes and their corresponding adjusted p-values. Protein changes were considered significant when adjusted p-values were below 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Multiple sclerosis, Astrocytes, Proteomics

### Affiliations
UPF
CRG, UPF

### Submitter
Eva Borràs

### Lab Head
Dr Eduard Sabido
CRG, UPF


