### Accession
PXD014759

### Title
Optimized parameter settings enhance proteome-wide formation of crosslinks on low-abundant proteins

### Description
Studies using crosslinking coupled to mass spectrometry on the proteome-wide level have spurred great interest as they facilitate structural probing of protein interactions in living cells or even organisms. Here we show, by using both an in-vitro mimic of a crowded cellular environment and eukaryotic cell lysates, that current proteome-wide crosslinking protocols have a bias for high abundant proteins. We demonstrate that this bias can be explained by kinetics that govern the formation of a crosslink between two polypeptides. We further show that optimized parameter settings, in particularly an excess of crosslinker, leadto a significant overall increase in the detection of lower abundant proteins within cellular lysates on a proteome-wide scale. Our study therefore explains the cause of a major limitation in current proteome-wide crosslinking studies and demonstrates a way forward how to address a larger part of the proteome by crosslinking

### Sample Protocol
Recombinant proteins or cell lysatse were crosslinked with either BS3 or DSSO. Proteins were digested with trypisin, peptides desalted by C18 and crosslinks were enriched by SEC. LC-MS/MS was carried out in DDA mode using a high/low strategy on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Only precursor with charge state 3-8 were considered for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Samples cross-linked with BS3 were searched by xQuest in ion-tag mode with a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm. For matching of fragment ions, tolerances of 0.2 Da for common ions and 0.3 Da for crosslink-ions were applied. DSSO crosslinked samples were searched by the Proteome Discoverer™ 2.2 (Thermo Scientific) with the XlinkX node for crosslinked peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Proteome-wide cross-linking studies have spurred great interest as they facilitate structural probing of protein interactions in living cells and organisms. However, current studies have a bias for high-abundant proteins. In this study we demonstrate both experimentally and by a kinetic model that this bias is also caused by the propensity of cross-links to preferentially form on high abundant proteins and not by the inability to detect cross-links due to limitations in current technology. We further show, by using both an in vitro mimic of a crowded cellular environment and eukaryotic cell lysates, that parameters optimized toward a pseudo first order kinetics model result in a significant increase in the detection of lower-abundant proteins on a proteome-wide scale. Our study therefore explains the cause of a major limitation in current proteome-wide cross-linking studies and demonstrates how to address a larger part of the proteome by cross-linking.

### Keywords
Reaction kinetics, Proteome-wide xl-ms

### Affiliations
Universität Konstanz
University of Konstanz, Biology departement

### Submitter
Florian Stengel

### Lab Head
Dr Florian Stengel
University of Konstanz, Biology departement


