### Accession
PXD038703

### Title
Spectrin-beta 2 facilitates the selective accumulation of GABAA receptors at somatodendritic synapses

### Description
Fast synaptic inhibition is dependent on targeting specific GABAAR subtypes to dendritic and axon initial segment (AIS) synapses. Synaptic GABAARs are typically assembled from 1-3,  and subunits. Here, we isolate distinct GABAARs from the brain and interrogate their composition using quantitative proteomics. We show that α2-containing receptors co-assemble with α1 subunits, whereas α1 receptors can form GABAARs with α1 as the sole  subunit. We demonstrate that α1 and α2 subunit-containing receptors co-purify with distinct spectrin isoforms; cytoskeletal proteins that link transmembrane proteins to the cytoskeleton. β2-spectrin was preferentially associated with α1-containing GABAARs at dendritic synapses, while β4-spectrin was associated with 2-containing GABAARs at AIS synapses. Ablating β2-spectrin expression reduced dendritic and AIS synapses containing α1 but increased the number of synapses containing α2, which altered phasic inhibition. Thus, we demonstrate a role for spectrins in the synapse-specific targeting of GABAARs, determining the efficacy of fast neuronal inhibition.

### Sample Protocol
Pierce anti-c-myc beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific) or Protein G Dynabeads (Thermo Fisher Scientific) were washed three times with phosphate buffered saline with 0.05% Tween-20 (PBS-Tween) and resuspended in PBS-Tween alone or with antibodies against the a1 subunit respectively. The antibody concentration was experimentally predetermined (Figure S1a and b). For a1 IPs, the antibody was crosslinked onto the beads by washing twice with 0.2 M triethanolamine (pH 8.2) (TEA), and then incubated for 30 min with 40 mM dimethyl pimelimidate (DMP) in TEA at room temperature. The beads were transferred to 50 mM Tris (pH 7.5) and incubated at room temperature for a further 15 min. The beads were washed three times with PBS-Tween and resuspended in solubilized plasma membranes in ice-cold Triton lysis buffer, supplemented with mini cOmplete protease inhibitor and PhosSTOP. The immunoprecipitation reaction was incubated overnight at 4°C. The beads were then washed three times with PBS-Tween and eluted either with 2x sample buffer (for SDS-PAGE) or soft elution buffer [0.2% (wt/vol) SDS, 0.1% Tween-20, 50 mM Tris–HCl, pH = 8.0] 12 (for BN-PAGE). gel bands were excised and cut into 1 mm3 pieces. They were subjected to modified in-gel trypsin digestion 42, washed and dehydrated with acetonitrile for 10 min and completely dried in a speed-vac. Gel pieces were rehydrated with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution containing 12.5 ng/μl modified sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, United States) and incubated for 45 min at 4°C. Excess trypsin solution was removed and replaced with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution and incubated at 37°C overnight. Peptides were extracted by washing with 50% acetonitrile and 1% formic acid. The extracts were dried in a speed-vac (∼1 h). The samples were stored at 4°C until analysis. Prior to analysis the samples were reconstituted in 5–10 μl of HPLC solvent A (2.5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). A nano-scale reverse-phase HPLC capillary column was created by packing 2.6 μm C18 spherical silica beads into a fused silica capillary (100 μm inner diameter × ∼30 cm length) with a flame-drawn tip 43. The column was equilibrated, and each sample was loaded via a Famos auto sampler (LC Packings, San Francisco, CA, United States) onto the column. A gradient was formed between solvent A (97.5% water, 2.5% acetonitrile, and 0.1% formic acid), and increasing concentrations of solvent B (97.5% acetonitrile, 2.5% water, and 0.1% formic acid). Acquisition time was 16–79 min. As each peptide was eluted, they were subjected to Nanospray ionization (NSI) and then entered an LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro ion-trap mass spectrometer (Thermo Finnigan, San Jose, CA, United States). MS1 was set at 70 k, with a scan range of m/z 85–2000, charge-state screening parameters +2 to +5, using a centroid acquisition mode, with a precursor ion isolation window of 2 m/z and 35% normalized collision energy. Eluting peptides were detected and the most intense were isolated using the Top 10 scan mode and fragmented by Higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD). MS2 ions were analyzed by an Orbitrap mass spectrometer with a resolution of 17.5 k and the dynamic exclusion settings; 30 s repeat duration, 60 s exclusion duration, n = 1, 10 ppm mass width, to produce a tandem mass spectrum of specific fragment ions for each peptide.

### Data Protocol
Peptide sequences were determined by matching protein or translated nucleotide databases with the acquired fragmentation pattern using the MSGF+. Raw .mzXML files were used to search the UniProt mouse reference proteome (last modified May 4th 2020, containing 21989 sequences) also containing the Thermo list of common contaminants. The search was carried out using settings for high-resolution Orbitrap mass spectrometers, tryptic digestion, no limit to enzyme missed cleavages, 20 ppm precursor mass tolerance, charge states of +2 to +5, minimum and maximum peptide lengths of 6–40 amino acids in length, respectively, and a fixed modification of standard amino acids with C + 57. Peptide identification was scored by MSGF+ Q- (PSM-level target-decoy approach) and E- (expected number of peptides in a random database) scores. These were used for quality control in the initial protein screening process for associated proteins, and phospho-modified peptide screening. The resulting .mzID files from the spectral searches were combined with mzXML files using the MSnbase package in R (accessed July 20th 2020), and used to calculate peptide counts and the quantitative measurement; spectral index normalized to global intensity (SIGI). This has previously been shown to be an effective measurement for label-free protein quantification and to normalize replicate data well. The SiGi was calculated for each protein using all the of the detected peptides for each protein. A Welch t-test was performed comparing the SiGi for each protein detected by MS that immunoprecipitated with the α1 or α2 receptors compared to the SiGi in their equivalent control. For the α1 receptor IP, the control was non-immune IgG bound to protein G Dynabeads. For the α2 receptor IP, the control was anti-myc Dynabeads in using wildtype tissue, rather than tissue from the pHα2 mouse.

### Publication Abstract
Fast synaptic inhibition is dependent on targeting specific GABA<sub>A</sub>R subtypes to dendritic and axon initial segment (AIS) synapses. Synaptic GABA<sub>A</sub>Rs are typically assembled from &#x3b1;1-3, &#x3b2; and &#x3b3; subunits. Here, we isolate distinct GABA<sub>A</sub>Rs from the brain and interrogate their composition using quantitative proteomics. We show that &#x3b1;2-containing receptors co-assemble with &#x3b1;1 subunits, whereas &#x3b1;1 receptors can form GABA<sub>A</sub>Rs with &#x3b1;1 as the sole &#x3b1; subunit. We demonstrate that &#x3b1;1 and &#x3b1;2 subunit-containing receptors co-purify with distinct spectrin isoforms; cytoskeletal proteins that link transmembrane proteins to the cytoskeleton. &#x3b2;2-spectrin was preferentially associated with &#x3b1;1-containing GABA<sub>A</sub>Rs at dendritic synapses, while &#x3b2;4-spectrin was associated with &#x3b1;2-containing GABA<sub>A</sub>Rs at AIS synapses. Ablating &#x3b2;2-spectrin expression reduced dendritic and AIS synapses containing &#x3b1;1 but increased the number of synapses containing &#x3b1;2, which altered phasic inhibition. Thus, we demonstrate a role for spectrins in the synapse-specific targeting of GABA<sub>A</sub>Rs, determining the efficacy of fast neuronal inhibition.

### Keywords
Gaba a receptors, Spectrins, Ais

### Affiliations
Tufts University
Department of Neuroscience , Tufts University

### Submitter
Joshua Smalley

### Lab Head
Dr Stephen J Moss
Department of Neuroscience , Tufts University


