### Accession
PXD024622

### Title
Proteomics as a Tool to Gain Next Level Insights into Biopolymer Modifications

### Description
The distribution of introduced photo-crosslinkable moieties onto a protein can affect a biomaterial’s crosslinking behavior, and therefore also the mechanical and biological properties. However, this information is also vital when developing biomaterials for tissue engineering and regenerative medicine applications. In the present work, photo-crosslinkable moieties have been introduced on the primary amine groups of: (i) a recombinant collagen peptide (RCPhC1) with a known amino acid (AA) sequence, and (ii) bovine skin collagen (COL BS) with an unknown AA sequence. The degree of substitution (DS) was quantified with two standard techniques: an ortho-phthalic dialdehyde (OPA) assay and 1H-NMR spectroscopy. However, neither of both provides information on the type and exact location of the modified AAs. Therefore, for the first time, proteomic analysis was evaluated herein as a tool to identify functionalized AAs as well as the exact position of the photo-crosslinkable moieties along the AA sequence, thereby enabling an in-depth, unprecedented characterization of functionalized biopolymers. Moreover, our strategy also enabled to visualize the spatial distribution of the modifications within the overall structure of the protein. Proteomics has proven to provide unprecedented insight in the distribution of photo-crosslinkable moieties along the protein backbone, undoubtedly contributing to superior biomaterial design in the future.

### Sample Protocol
Different collagens were dissolved in ultrapure water at 1 mg.mL-1 The samples were prepared using a modified eFASP methods for label free quantification. Liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) protein analyses were performed on an Orbitrap Q Exactive plus Mass Spectrometer hyphenated to a U3000 RSLC Microfluidic high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) System (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA)  Different collagens were dissolved in water at 5 mg mL-1 in Eppendorf. ollagens were separated on one-dimensional SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. SDS-polyacrylamide gel was performed using standard methods on the Invitrogen SureCast™ system. The protein bands were excised from the gel and digested with trypsin. LC-MS/MS protein analysis was performed on an Orbitrap Q Exactive plus Mass Spectrometer hyphenated to a U3000 RSLC Microfluidic HPLC System

### Data Protocol
The raw data from LC-MS/MS were processed by Proteome Discoverer version 2.2 (ThermoFisher Scientific) with a SEQUEST search engine against all entries of Swiss-Prot database (563,552 sequences, version UniProtKB 2020_05) or Bos taurus database from Swiss-Prot (37,512 sequences, version June 29, 2020) or home-made collagen sequences containing 3 sequences (i.e. recombinant collagen, collagen α1(I) chain P02453, collagen α2(I) chain P02465). The quantification was done with Minora node.

### Publication Abstract
The distribution of photo-crosslinkable moieties onto a protein backbone can affect a biomaterial's crosslinking behavior, and therefore also its mechanical and biological properties. A profound insight in this respect is essential for biomaterials exploited in tissue engineering and regenerative medicine. In the present work, photo-crosslinkable moieties have been introduced on the primary amine groups of: (i) a recombinant collagen peptide (RCPhC1) with a known amino acid (AA) sequence, and (ii) bovine skin collagen (COL BS) with an unknown AA sequence. The degree of substitution (DS) was quantified with two conventional techniques: an <i>ortho</i>-phthalic dialdehyde (OPA) assay and <sup>1</sup>H NMR spectroscopy. However, neither of both provides information on the exact type and location of the modified AAs. Therefore, for the first time, proteomic analysis was evaluated herein as a tool to identify functionalized AAs as well as the exact position of photo-crosslinkable moieties along the AA sequence, thereby enabling an in-depth, unprecedented characterization of functionalized photo-crosslinkable biopolymers. Moreover, our strategy enabled to visualize the spatial distribution of the modifications within the overall structure of the protein. Proteomics has proven to provide unprecedented insight in the distribution of photo-crosslinkable moieties along the protein backbone, undoubtedly contributing to superior functional biomaterial design to serve regenerative medicine.

### Keywords
Biomaterial characterization, Localization of functionalizations, Proteomics, 3d modeling of proteins, (photo-crosslinkable) biomaterials, Chemical modifications

### Affiliations
Univ. Lille, CNRS, USR 3290, MSAP, Miniaturisation pour la Synthèse l'Analyse et la Protéomique, F-59 000 Lille, France
MSAP USR 3290

### Submitter
BRAY FABRICE

### Lab Head
Dr Ahmed Mazzah
Univ. Lille, CNRS, USR 3290, MSAP, Miniaturisation pour la Synthèse l'Analyse et la Protéomique, F-59 000 Lille, France


