### Accession
PXD019869

### Title
Matrisome of neonatal mouse dermal fibroblasts

### Description
The goal of this project is to compare the protein composition of the extracellular matrices (ECMs) deposited in vitro by wild type, heterozygous, or SPAG17 KO neonatal mouse dermal fibroblasts.

### Sample Protocol
Extracellular matrices (ECMs) produced and assembled by mouse dermal fibroblasts in vitro were decellularized using a decellularization buffer (0.5% Triton-X100, 20 mM ammonium hydroxide) according to previously published protocol (Franco-Barraza, J et al., Curr Protoc Cell Biol, 2016, 71:10.9.1-10.9.34).  ECM proteins were further solubilized using 8M urea and 10mM DTT, deglycosylated and digested into peptides using Lys-C and trypsin following an established protocol (Naba et al., Mol Cell Prot 2012; Naba et al., JoVE, 2015).   Approximately 300 ng of desalted peptides were analyzed at the University of Illinois Mass Spectrometry core facility on a Thermo Fisher Orbitrap Velos Pro coupled with Agilent NanoLC system (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA). The LC columns (15 cm x 75 um ID, Zorbax 300SB-C18) were purchased from Agilent. Samples were analyzed with a 120-min linear gradient (0-35% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid) and data were acquired in a data-dependent manner, in which MS/MS fragmentation was performed on the top 10 intense peaks of every full MS scan. Full MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer over m/z 350-1800 range with resolution 30,000 (m/z 400). The target value was 1.00E+06. The ten most intense peaks with charge state >= 2 were fragmented in the HCD collision cell with normalized collision energy of 35%, these peaks were then excluded for 30 s after 2 counts within a mass window of 10 ppm. Tandem mass spectrum was acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer with a resolution of 7,500. The target value was 5.00E+04. The ion selection threshold was 5,000 counts, and the maximum allowed ion accumulation times were 500 ms for full scans and 250 ms for HCD.

### Data Protocol
RAW files were converted into. mgf files using MSConvert (ProteoWizard). Database search was carried out using Mascot server version 2.6.2 (from Matrix Science; human database containing 20,365 reviewed entries).  Mascot search parameters were: 10 ppm mass tolerance for precursor ions; 100 mmu for fragment-ion mass tolerance; two missed cleavages of trypsin; fixed modification was carbamidomethylation of cysteine; and variable modifications were oxidized methionine, deamidation of asparagine, pyro-glutamic acid modification at N-terminal glutamine, and hydroxylation of lysine and proline. Only peptides with a Mascot score >= 25 and an isolation interference <= 30 were included in the data analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Systemic sclerosis (SSc) is a clinically heterogeneous fibrotic disease with no effective treatment. Myofibroblasts are responsible for unresolving synchronous skin and internal organ fibrosis in SSc, but the drivers of sustained myofibroblast activation remain poorly understood. Using unbiased transcriptome analysis of skin biopsies, we identified the downregulation of SPAG17 in multiple independent cohorts of patients with SSc, and by orthogonal approaches, we observed a significant negative correlation between SPAG17 and fibrotic gene expression. Fibroblasts and endothelial cells explanted from SSc skin biopsies showed reduced chromatin accessibility at the SPAG17 locus. Remarkably, mice lacking Spag17 showed spontaneous skin fibrosis with increased dermal thickness, collagen deposition and stiffness, and altered collagen fiber alignment. Knockdown of SPAG17 in human and mouse fibroblasts and microvascular endothelial cells was accompanied by spontaneous myofibroblast transformation and markedly heightened sensitivity to profibrotic stimuli. These responses were accompanied by constitutive TGF-&#x3b2; pathway activation. Thus, we discovered impaired expression of SPAG17 in SSc and identified, to our knowledge, a previously unreported cell-intrinsic role for SPAG17 in the negative regulation of fibrotic responses. These findings shed fresh light on the pathogenesis of SSc and may inform the search for innovative therapies for SSc and other fibrotic conditions through SPAG17 signaling.

### Keywords
Spag17, Fibrosis, Skin, Matrisome, Fibroblast, Ecm

### Affiliations
Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University of Illinois at Chicago
University of Illinois at Chicago

### Submitter
George Chlipala

### Lab Head
Dr Alexandra Naba
Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University of Illinois at Chicago


