### Accession
PXD013449

### Title
Cerebrospinal fluid 20 μg protein digest mixed-mode fractionation 11 fractions

### Description
A CSF fractionation experiment was conducted, where trypsin digested 20 µg un-depleted CSF peptides were separated into eleven fractions and analysed using an QExactive HF, resulting in 1194 identified proteins.

### Sample Protocol
We tested the identification of CSF proteins from a 20 µg un-depleted CSF sample (pool 3) subjected to peptide fractionation into 11 fractions following trypsin digestion. Peptide fractionation was performed by mixed mode reversed phase-anion exchange chromatography (MM) on a Promix MP column (MP10.250.0530, 1.0 × 250 mm, 5 μm, 300 Å, Sielc Technologies).

### Data Protocol
All raw files were converted to mgf using ProteoWizard and searched using X! Tandem, MyriMatch and MS Amanda via SearchGUI (v2.1.3) against the homo sapiens complement of the UniProt/SwissProt reviewed database downloaded October 2015 (20 196 entries) with the reversed version of every sequence added as decoys. The search settings were: carbamidomethylation of C; oxidation of M as variable modification; trypsin as enzyme with a maximum of two missed cleavages; precursor charge 2−5; peptide length 6−30; precursor mass tolerance 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance 0.005 Dalton. All other settings were left as the defaults. The search engine results were combined and assembled in PeptideShaker (v1.1.2). Hits were thresholded to retain only the best scoring until a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was reached, estimated using the distribution of target and decoy hits.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Cerebrospinal fluid

### Affiliations
PROBE
Proteomics unit (PROBE), The Department of Biomedicine, University of Bergen, Norway

### Submitter
Astrid Guldbrandsen

### Lab Head
Dr Frode S. Berven
Proteomics unit (PROBE), The Department of Biomedicine, University of Bergen, Norway


