### Accession
PXD005169

### Title
Mycobacterium tuberculosis Infection Manipulates the Glycosylation Machinery and the N-Glycoproteome of Human Macrophages and their Microparticles

### Description
Tuberculosis (TB) remains a prevalent and lethal infectious disease. The glycobiology associated with Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection of frontline alveolar macrophages is still unresolved. Herein, we investigated the regulation of protein N-glycosylation in human macrophages and their secreted microparticles (MPs) used for intercellular communication upon M. tb infection. LC-MS/MS-based proteomics and glycomics were performed to monitor the regulation of glycosylation enzymes and receptors and the N-glycome in in vitro-differentiated macrophages and in isolated MPs upon M. tb infection. Infection promoted a dramatic regulation of the macrophage proteome. Most notably, significant infection-dependent down-regulation (4-26 fold) of 11 lysosomal exoglycosidases e.g. β-galactosidase, β-hexosaminidases and α-/β-mannosidases was observed. Relative weak infection-driven transcriptional regulation of these exoglycosidases and a stronger augmentation of the extracellular hexosaminidase activity demonstrated that the lysosome-centric changes may originate predominantly from infection-induced secretion of the lysosomal content. The macrophages showed heterogeneous N-glycan profiles and displayed significant up-regulation of complex-type glycosylation and concomitant down-regulation of paucimannosylation upon infection. Complementary intact N-glycopeptide analysis supported a subcellular-specific manipulation of the glycosylation machinery and altered glycosylation patterns of lysosomal N-glycoproteins within infected macrophages. Interestingly, the corresponding macrophage-derived MPs displayed unique N-glycome and proteome signatures supporting a preferential packaging from plasma membranes. The MPs were devoid of infection-dependent N-glycosylation signatures, but interestingly displayed increased levels of the glyco-initiating oligosaccharyltransferase complex and associated α-glucosidases that correlated with increased formation, N-glycan precursor levels and N-glycan density of infected MPs. In conclusion, this system-wide study provides new insight into the host- and pathogen-driven N-glycoproteome manipulation of macrophages in TB.

### Sample Protocol
MP isolation: culture supernatants were collected and centrifuged at 524 × g for 10 min at 4°C to remove cellular debris. Supernatants were collected and centrifuged at 3,270 × g for 30 min at 4°C to remove free bacteria, before being further centrifuged at 27,000 × g for 2 h at 4°C with low brake to pellet MPs. The MP pellet was washed with PBS and pelleted by centrifugation at 27,000 × g for 2 h at 4°C.  Protein isolation: MPs were lyzed in a RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% w/v SDS, 0.5% w/v sodium-deoxycholate, 1% v/v Triton X-100) supplemented with complete protease inhibitor cocktail and 1 mM PMSF by incubation for 30 min at 4°C, centrifuged at 18,000 x g for 30 min at 4°C and stored at -20°C. Macrophages were lyzed in the same RIPA buffer supplemented with the same protease inhibitors (5 x 107 cells/ml) for 30 min at 4°C. The protein complement was crudely isolated by centrifugation (18,000 x g) for 30 min at 4°C and stored at -20°C. Sample prep for N-glycans: Isolated protein fractions were reduced (5 mM DTT) for 10 min at 70°C and alkylated (10 mM IAA) for 30 min at 25°C in the dark, then immobilized on a methanol-activated PVDF membrane. After overnight drying, the membrane-bound proteins were incubated with 2.5 U PNGase F for 16 h at 37°C to ensure complete release of the conjugated N-glycans. Released N-glycans were incubated with 100 mM ammonium acetate (pH 5) for 1 h at room temperature and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Reduction of N-glycans was performed with 20 µl 1 M sodium borohydride in 50 mM potassium hydroxide for 3 h at 50°C. Reduced samples were quenched with 2 µl glacial acetic acid and desalted on columns of AG 50W X8 cation exchange resin packed on top of ZipTip C18 columns as described. The desalted N-glycans were dried by vacuum centrifugation and residual borate was removed by repeated cycles of methanol addition and evaporation in a vacuum centrifuge. Further desalting was performed on small home-made columns packed with porous graphitized carbon (PGC) resin on top of ZipTip C18 columns. The purified N-glycans were eluted with 40% (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN) containing 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid, dried and stored at -80°C if not analyzed immediately.  Proteomics analysis: Protein isolates (~50 µg) of the lysate and MP fractions were reduced and alkylated and loaded on a 4-12% Bis-Tris SDS polyacrylamide gel for electrophoresis at 200 V for 20 min. The gel was fixed in 40% (v/v) ethanol and 10% (v/v) acetic acid for 1 h, stained overnight with Coomassie Blue G250 and then destained in water. In-gel trypsin digestions of all samples were performed by cutting each of the lanes into five equal sized gel fractions and further sliced into 1 mm pieces. The five gel fractions from each sample were analyzed individually. The gel pieces were destained with 50% (v/v) ACN in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, then dehydrated in 100% ACN and dried. Porcine trypsin was added at a weight ratio of 1:30 to digest the proteins overnight at 37C. The tryptic peptides were extracted, dried and stored at -80C until used for LC-MS/MS analysis. LC-MS/MS of N-glycans: The purified N-glycan alditols were injected onto a PGC LC column and analyzed in an ESI-MS/MS 3D ion trap mass spectrometer. Separation was performed for 85 min over a linear gradient of 0-45% (v/v) ACN/10 mM ammonium bicarbonate at a constant flow rate of 2 µl/min. Data were acquired in negative ion polarity mode with three scan events at a scan speed of 8,100 m/z/s. MS full scans (m/z 400-2,200) were followed by data-dependent MS/MS after isolation and resonance activation CID fragmentation of the top two most intense precursor ions with an absolute intensity threshold >30,000 and a relative intensity threshold >5% relative to the base peak.  LC-MS/MS of peptides: The isolated proteins were analyzed using a Q-Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer. Peptides were separated on a custom-made RP LC column packed with Halo C18 resin. The flow rate was kept constant at 300 nL/min and the column was equilibrated in solvent A consisting of 0.1% (v/v) aqueous formic acid prior to sample injection. Peptides were separated over 60 min where a linear gradient increasing from 0-50% of solvent B consisting of 100% (v/v) ACN were applied over the first 50 min, then a linear increase to 85% solvent B over 2 min and then solvent B was maintained at 85% for 8 min. MS full scans were acquired with a resolution of 35,000 (at m/z 200) in positive polarity ion mode over a m/z 350–2,000 range and an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 1×106. The top 10 most intense precursor ions were selected for MS/MS in each full scan, isolated, and fragmented using HCD fragmentation at 17,500 resolution (at m/z 200) with the following settings: collision energy: 30%; AGC target: 2×105; isolation window: m/z 3.0; and dynamic exclusion enabled. Precursors with unassigned charge states or singly charged ions were ignored for the MS/MS selection.

### Data Protocol
Analysis of N-glycome data: LC-MS/MS raw data files of the N-glycome were viewed and manually analyzed using Data Analysis v4.0 (Bruker Daltonics). Monoisotopic masses were derived after deconvolution and searched for possible N-glycan monosaccharide compositions using GlycoMod (http://web.expasy.org/glycomod/). The monosaccharide compositions were subsequently verified manually by de novo sequencing of the corresponding CID-MS/MS spectra and by the absolute and relative PGC-LC retention time according to the established elution order of N-glycans. The distribution of the observed N-glycans was calculated using their relative abundances as measured by the relative peak areas of their corresponding extracted ion chromatograms (EICs) of all the observed N-glycan charge states as a percentage (mean ± SD, n = 3) out of the total glycome. The N-glycans were grouped according to their glycan type and other features and their relative abundances statistically evaluated using student’s T-tests across samples.  Analysis of the proteome and intact glycopeptide data: Peak lists were extracted from the Q-Exactive raw data by Mascot Daemon/extract_msn (Matrix Science, Thermo), using the default parameters. All MS/MS data were submitted to an in-house Mascot server (v2.4.0) and X! Tandem (version CYCLONE (2010.12.01.1)) and searched against the human proteome database (Homo sapiens, 20,203 reviewed entries in UniProtKB, released March 2015), by selecting trypsin as the proteolytic enzyme and a single missed cleavage for Mascot or two missed cleavages for X! Tandem. Separate searches against M. tb and “All species” proteome databases were also performed. Mass tolerances of 0.020 Da and 20 ppm were selected for product and precursor ions, respectively. For both database searches, deamidation of N-terminal Gln, oxidation of Met, carbamidomethylation and propionamide of Cys were set as variable modiﬁcations. Additional variable modifications specified in X! Tandem included Glu→pyro-Glu of the N-terminus, ammonia-loss of the N-terminus and Gln→pyroGlu of the N-terminus. Scaffold (version 4.4.1) was used to validate MS/MS-based peptide and protein identification. Peptide identifications were accepted if they exceeded speciﬁc database search engine thresholds. Mascot identiﬁcation required that ion scores were greater than both associated identity scores and 30, 40, and 50 for, doubly, triply, and quadruply charged peptides, respectively. X! Tandem identiﬁcations required at least –Log (expect scores) scores of greater than 4.0. The protein identiﬁcations were only accepted if they contained at least two identiﬁed non-redundant peptides. Homologous proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing signiﬁcant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters. Proteins were annotated with GO terms from gene_association.goa_human (downloaded July, 2013). Relative label-free quantitation analysis was performed to determine differentially expressed proteins based on spectral counting. The spectra count of each identified protein in a sample was normalized on the total sum of spectral counts of all identified proteins in the sample. The normalized values were used for calculating fold change between M. tb-infected and uninfected samples, with P values calculated by Fisher’s exact test and adjusted after Benjamini-Hochberg multiple testing correction. Protein expressions were considered to be significantly differentiated if fold change was greater or equal to ±2 and P < 0.05. Functional pathway analyses were performed using publicly-available DAVID Functional Annotation Tool (v6.8) and aided by the use of Ingenuity Pathway Analysis and the KEGG pathway analysis tools. For the intact glycopeptide analysis, raw data files from the Q-Exactive Orbitrap analyses were converted to mgf using Proteome Discoverer v1.4 (Thermo Fisher) and the glycopeptide-containing HCD-MS/MS spectra were extracted using an in-house filtering tool isolating specifically oxonium (GlcNAc) ion-containing fragment spectra (m/z 204.08). The extracted data were searched for N-glycopeptides using ByonicTM v2.6 (Protein Metrics Inc.) against the entire human proteome (Homo sapiens, 20,198 reviewed entries in UniProtKB, release September 2015) and against the common mammalian N-glycome (309 monosaccharide compositions, default N-glycome database in Byonic). The following search criteria were used: mass tolerances of 10 and 20 ppm for the precursor and product ions, respectively and a maximum of two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation was chosen as a fixed Cys modification; Met oxidation and Asn/Gln deamidation were variable modifications. Only confidently identified glycopeptides were accepted by using a Byonic score >100. The glycopeptide-based quantitation of the glycan types (expressed as a mean ± SD, n = 3) was performed using spectral counting.

### Publication Abstract
Immunopeptidomics, the study of peptide antigens presented on the cell surface by the major histocompatibility complex (MHC), offers insights into how our immune system recognises self/non-self in health and disease. We recently discovered that hyper-processed (remodelled) <i>N</i>-glycans are dominant features decorating viral spike immunopeptides presented via MHC-class II (MHC-II) molecules by dendritic cells pulsed with SARS-CoV-2 spike protein, but it remains unknown if endogenous immunopeptides also undergo <i>N</i>-glycan remodelling. Taking a multi-omics approach, we here interrogate published MHC-II immunopeptidomics datasets of cultured monocyte-like (THP-1) and breast cancer-derived (MDA-MB-231) cell lines for overlooked <i>N</i>-glycosylated peptide antigens, which we compare to their source proteins in the cellular glycoproteome using proteomics and <i>N</i>-glycomics data from matching cell lines. Hyper-processed chitobiose core and paucimannosidic <i>N-</i>glycans alongside under-processed oligomannosidic <i>N</i>-glycans were found to prevalently modify MHC-II-bound immunopeptides isolated from both THP-1 and MDA-MB-231, while complex/hybrid-type <i>N</i>-glycans were (near-)absent in the immunopeptidome as supported further by new <i>N</i>-glycomics data generated from isolated MHC-II-bound peptides derived from MDA-MB-231 cells. Contrastingly, the cellular proteomics and <i>N</i>-glycomics data from both cell lines revealed conventional <i>N</i>-glycosylation rich in complex/hybrid-type <i>N</i>-glycans, which, together with the identification of key lysosomal glycosidases, suggest that MHC-II peptide antigen processing is accompanied by extensive <i>N</i>-glycan trimming. <i>N</i>-glycan remodelling appeared particularly dramatic for cell surface-located glycoproteins while less remodelling was observed for lysosomal-resident glycoproteins. Collectively, our findings indicate that both under- and hyper-processed <i>N</i>-glycans are prevalent features of endogenous MHC-II immunopeptides, an observation that demands further investigation to enable a better molecular-level understanding of immune surveillance.

### Keywords
Tuberculosis, Glycoproteome, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Exoglycosidase, Glycomics, Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Microparticle, Glycoprofiling, N-glycosylation, Macrophage

### Affiliations
Macquarie University
Department of Chemistry and Biomolecular Sciences  Macquarie University Sydney, NSW 2109 Australia

### Submitter
Ling Lee

### Lab Head
Dr Morten Thaysen-Andersen
Department of Chemistry and Biomolecular Sciences  Macquarie University Sydney, NSW 2109 Australia


