### Accession
PXD017988

### Title
Identification of interactors of Sth1 in Candida albicans

### Description
Regulation of gene expression programs is crucial for the survival of microbial pathogens in host environments and for their ability to cause disease. Here we investigated the epigenetic regulator RSC (Remodels the Structure of Chromatin) in the most prevalent human fungal pathogen Candida albicans. To precisely determine the composition of the CaRSC complex, we immunopurified Myc-tagged Sth1, the core catalytic subunit of the CaRSC complex encoded by C3_02490C and identified its physical interactors using high-resolution tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Wild-type cells expressing untagged Sth1 served as negative control, and all immunoprecipitation experiments were analyzed in biological triplicates. No antibody controls for immunopurification were also analysed.

### Sample Protocol
Overnight culture of wild-type and STH1-MYC tagged strains in wild type and rsc4 mutant backgrounds were adjusted to 0.2 OD in YPD. Approximately 2 X 109 mid-log-phase cells were harvested. The frozen cell pellets were resuspended in lysis buffer (20 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 2 mM magnesium chloride, 250 mM sodium chloride, 0.1% Triton X-100 and freshly prepared protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche)) and lysed by bead-beating for 10 cycles of 30 seconds with intermittent cooling on ice. Lysates were precleared using Protein G-conjugated Dynabeads (Invitrogen, 10003D). Anti-Myc antibody (9E10, mouse monoclonal) was added to the lysate at a final concentration of 10 µg/ml and incubated at 4°C with rotation. After 2 hours, Protein G-coupled Dynabeads were added and further incubated for 2 hours at 4°C. The beads were once washed using lysis buffer followed by four washes with wash buffer (20 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 2 mM magnesium chloride, 200 mM sodium chloride) at 4°C. Acidic elution with 0.2 M glycine pH 2.5 was performed at room temperature and the eluate was neutralized with 1 M Tris pH 8. The eluted proteins were reduced with 10 mM tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP) and cysteine-alkylated with 40 mM chloroacetamide (CAA) before overnight digestion with sequencing grade trypsin (Trypsin Gold, Promega). The mixture was acidified with formic acid to inactivate trypsin and desalted using ziptips packed with C18 resin (Agilent Technologies). Trypsin-digested samples were dried in a SpeedVac and reconstituted in Mass Spectrometry Sample Loading Buffer (0.1% formic acid spiked with 10 pmole iRT (indexed retention time) peptides, Biognosys) for LC-MS/MS analysis. The peptides were separated on Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLC Ultra High Performance Liquid Chromatography system (Thermo Fischer Scientific) by injecting 6 µl sample onto an Acclaim PepMap RSLC analytical column (75 μm wide, 50 cm long, nanoViper C18 with 2 μm particle size and 100 Å pore size ( Thermo Fischer Scientific)) using a 158 min in-house gradient protocol. Mass spectra were acquired in a data-dependent mode on a QExactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected in-line to the LC system. Up to twelve most abundant precursor ions were isolated from a survey scan of 375–1600 m/z at 70,000 resolution for fragmentation in an HCD (High energy Collisional Dissociation) cell. MS2 scans were performed at a resolution of 17,500 with a scan range of 200-2000 m/z and dynamic exclusion of 15 s to minimize repeated selection of precursor ions for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw files were analyzed with MaxQuant (1.6.0.16) using the built-in Andromeda search engine to identify and quantify proteins. Searches were performed against the C. albicans proteome database downloaded from UniProt (May 2017 with 6040 entries) and appended with the iRT peptide sequences. The following settings have been used: trypsin for enzyme specificity with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages, cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification, methionine oxidation and protein-N terminal acetylation as variable modifications, minimum peptide length set to 7, and maximum peptide mass to 6000 Da. The peptides and proteins were identified with a false discovery rate of 0.01. Label-free quantification of proteins was performed using razor peptides considering at least 2 peptides for pair-wise comparison of a protein between two samples. Perseus (1.6.0.7) was used to statistically analyze the MaxQuant output data based on the ProteinGroups text file using the following workflow: proteins identified as reversed, potential contaminants or identified by only site have been removed. The LFQ intensities were log2 transformed and imputed to replace missing values from normal distribution. We utilized the volcano plot function which uses a two-sample t-test to estimate if the mean LFQ intensities of the two groups were significantly different. The threshold for identifying significant interactors is represented by the parabola, defined by a combination of permutation-based FDR and S0, representing a minimum fold change (when S0 is set to 0, FDR alone determines the difference between the two groups). An excel file (Sample annotation.xls) has been included with annotation details of raw files used for AP-MS analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Regulation of gene expression programs is crucial for the survival of microbial pathogens in host environments and for their ability to cause disease. Here we investigated the epigenetic regulator RSC (Remodels the Structure of Chromatin) in the most prevalent human fungal pathogen Candida albicans. Biochemical analysis showed that CaRSC comprises 13 subunits and contains two novel non-essential members, which we named Nri1 and Nri2 (Novel RSC Interactors) that are exclusive to the CTG clade of Saccharomycotina. Genetic analysis showed distinct essentiality of C. albicans RSC subunits compared to model fungal species suggesting functional and structural divergence of RSC functions in this fungal pathogen. Transcriptomic and proteomic profiling of a conditional mutant of the essential catalytic subunit gene STH1 demonstrated global roles of RSC in C. albicans biology, with the majority of growth-related processes affected, as well as mis-regulation of genes involved in morphotype switching, host-pathogen interaction and adaptive fitness. We further assessed the functions of non-essential CaRSC subunits, showing that the novel subunit Nri1 and the bromodomain subunit Rsc4 play roles in filamentation and stress responses; and also interacted at the genetic level to regulate cell viability. Consistent with these roles, Rsc4 is required for full virulence of C. albicans in the murine model of systemic infection. Taken together, our data builds the first comprehensive study of the composition and roles of RSC in C. albicans, showing both conserved and distinct features compared to model fungal systems. The study illuminates how C. albicans uses RSC-dependent transcriptional regulation to respond to environmental signals and drive survival fitness and virulence in mammals.

### Keywords
Candida albicans, Ap-ms, Rsc, Sth1

### Affiliations
IIT Bombay and Monash University
Chromosome and Plasmid Segregation Lab, Department of Biosciences and Bioengineering, IIT Bombay, Mumbai, India

### Submitter
Vinutha K B

### Lab Head
Dr Santanu Kumar Ghosh
Chromosome and Plasmid Segregation Lab, Department of Biosciences and Bioengineering, IIT Bombay, Mumbai, India


