### Accession
PXD002803

### Title
Direct glycan structure determination of intact N-linked glycopeptides by low-energy collision-induced association tandem mass spectrometry and predicted spectral library searching

### Description
Intact glycopeptide MS analysis to reveal site-specific protein glycosylation is an important frontier of proteomics. However, computational tools for analyzing MS/MS spectra of intact glycopeptides are still limited and not well-integrated into existing workflows. In this work, a novel computational tool which combines the spectral library building/searching tool, SpectraST (Lam et al. Nat. Methods 2008, 5, 873-875), and the glycopeptide fragmentation prediction tool, MassAnalyzer (Zhang et al. Anal. Chem. 2010, 82, 10194-10202) for intact glycopeptide analysis has been developed. Specifically, this tool enables the determination of the glycan structure directly from low-energy collision-induced dissociation (CID) spectra of intact glycopeptides. Given a list of possible glycopeptide sequences as input, a sample-specific spectral library of MassAnalyzer- predicted spectra is built using SpectraST. Glycan identification from CID spectra is achieved by spectral library searching against this library, in which both m/z and intensity information of the possible fragmentation ions are taken into consideration for improved accuracy. We validated our method using a standard glycoprotein, human transferrin, and evaluated its potential to be used in site-specific glycosylation profiling of glycoprotein datasets from LC/MS. For maximum usability, SpectraST is developed as part of the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (TPP), a freely available and open-source software suite for MS data analysis

### Sample Protocol
Human transferrin were thermally denatured and quenched the denaturation process by incubating in ice-water bath. The resulting glycoproteins were digested using sequencing-grade modified trypsin overnight at 37°C. The digestion solution was treated with 10mM dithiothreitol (DTT) to reduce disulfide bonds. The free thiol-groups were alkylated by 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) at room temperature for 30 min in the dark. The access amount of IAA was quenched by treating the digestion solution with 10 mM DTT at room temperature for 25 min. Glycopeptides were enriched by hydrophilic affinity interaction using cellulose microcrystalline. Dried glycoprotein digest was dissolved in 100 µL binding solution (1-butanol/ethanol/water = 4:1:1, v/v/v) and then incubated with 0.3-0.5 mg cellulose microcrystalline for 45 min with gentle shaking. Cellulose microcrystalline was washed twice with the binding solution and then incubated with the elution solution (ethanol/water = 1:1, v/v) for 30 min. The recovered solution phase containing the enriched glycopeptides was dried using a SpeedVac concentrator. The enriched glycopeptides were separated by C18 reversed phase liquid chromatography (Thermo Accela LC with a trap column (Zorbax X300 SB-C18, 5 x 0.3 mm, 5 μm particle size) and a separation column (Thermo Bio-Basic-18, 150 x 0.1 mm, 300 Ǻ pore size, 5 μm particle size)), which was further ionized by nanopspray-ESI. MS and MS/MS spectra were acquired on a linear ion trap mass spectrometer, LTQ Velos (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA). We employed data-dependent acquisition: the most intense 5 precursor peaks were isolated for CID MS/MS scans Raw data files from the MS instruments were converted to mzXML files by msconvert under ProteoWizard (v3.0.6965) for spectral library searching.

### Data Protocol
There are 524 glycans including four types of N-linked glycans: complex, hybrid, high-mannose and trimannosylated core that can be considered by the glycopeptide fragmentation prediction tool, MassAnalyzer. The protein sequences obtained from UniProtKB (2013) 49 were digested in silico (trypsin specificity) by using the program digestdb in Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (TPP) 50, 51 and filtered by the following criteria: (1) mass range = [300, 4000] Daltons (2) maximum number missed cleavage = 1 and (3) containing the potential N-linked glycosylation sites with Asn-Xaa-Ser/Thr (NXS/T) motif (Xaa can be any amino acid except proline) to obtain all possible glycopeptides. For each peptide candidate, 524 N-glycan structures (compatible with MassAnalyzer) and 6 charge states (from 2+ to 7+) were considered; the corresponding CID fragmentation spectra were predicted using MassAnalyzer. The predicted spectra of N-linked glycopeptides were imported into a spectral library using SpectraST.

### Publication Abstract
Intact glycopeptide MS analysis to reveal site-specific protein glycosylation is an important frontier of proteomics. However, computational tools for analyzing MS/MS spectra of intact glycopeptides are still limited and not well-integrated into existing workflows. In this work, a new computational tool which combines the spectral library building/searching tool, SpectraST (Lam et&#xa0;al. Nat. Methods2008, 5, 873-875), and the glycopeptide fragmentation prediction tool, MassAnalyzer (Zhang et&#xa0;al. Anal. Chem.2010, 82, 10194-10202) for intact glycopeptide analysis has been developed. Specifically, this tool enables the determination of the glycan structure directly from low-energy collision-induced dissociation (CID) spectra of intact glycopeptides. Given a list of possible glycopeptide sequences as input, a sample-specific spectral library of MassAnalyzer-predicted spectra is built using SpectraST. Glycan identification from CID spectra is achieved by spectral library searching against this library, in which both m/z and intensity information of the possible fragmentation ions are taken into consideration for improved accuracy. We validated our method using a standard glycoprotein, human transferrin, and evaluated its potential to be used in site-specific glycosylation profiling of glycoprotein datasets from LC-MS/MS. In addition, we further applied our method to reveal, for the first time, the site-specific N-glycosylation profile of recombinant human acetylcholinesterase expressed in HEK293&#xa0;cells. For maximum usability, SpectraST is developed as part of the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (TPP), a freely available and open-source software suite for MS data analysis.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Glycopeptide

### Affiliations
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
Johns Hopkins University

### Submitter
Yingwei Hu

### Lab Head
Dr Henry LAM
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology


