### Accession
PXD020087

### Title
Quantitative phosphoproteomics uncovers dysregulated kinase networks in Alzheimer’s disease

### Description
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a form of dementia characterized by amyloid-β plaques and Tau neurofibrillary tangles that progressively disrupt neural circuits in the brain. Using mass spectrometry, we performed a combined analysis of the tyrosine, serine, and threonine phosphoproteome, and proteome of post-mortem brain tissue from AD patients and aged matched controls. We used a data-centric approach to identify co-correlated signaling networks associated with cellular and pathological changes. We identified two independent pathology clusters that were associated with Tau and oligodendrocyte pathologies. We observed phosphorylation sites on known Tau-kinases as well as other novel signaling factors that were associated with these clusters. Together, these results build a map of pathology-associated phosphorylation signaling activation events occurring in AD.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen tissues for proteomics analysis were transferred into 3 mL ice-cold 8M Urea and immediately homogenized to denature proteins and preserve physiological signaling. Lysates were then centrifuged at 4000xg for 30 minutes to clear lysates of lipids and then assayed by BCA to determine protein concentration. Lysates were then treated with 10 mM DTT for 1 hour at 56°C, followed by 55 mM iodoacetamide for 1 hour at room temperature, rotating in the dark. Samples were diluted by adding 8 mL Ammonium Acetate pH 8.9 and then digested at room temperature overnight on a rotator with trypsin at a 1:50 ratio of trypsin to total protein mass. This reaction was quenched with 1 mL 99.99% Acetic Acid and samples were desalted using Sep-Pak Plus cartridges. Peptides were then dried to half volume in a speed-vac and post-cleanup concentrations were determined using a colorimetric peptide assay. Peptides were then divided into 130 μg aliquots that were snap-frozen and lyophilized. Peptides were then labeled with 10-plex isobaric Tandem Mass Tags (TMT) using a reduced volume protocol. Labeled peptide samples were then dried down in a speed-vac overnight.  Tyrosine phosphorylated peptides were enriched by a two-step process consisting of an immunoprecipitation (IP) with multiple pan-specific anti-phosphotyrosine antibodies (4G10, PT66) followed by immobilized metal affinity chromatography (IMAC) using hand-packed micro-columns as well as with commercial IMAC spin-columns. IP supernatants were subjected to a second round of IP enrichment with anti-MAPK-CDK phospho substrate antibody followed by IMAC cleanup using commercial spin-columns. Small amounts of each IP supernatant were diluted in 0.1% acetic acid for global protein expression profiling. IP supernatants were then divided across 80 fractions using high pH reverse phase chromatography on a ZORBAX C18 column. Fractions were concatenated into 20 tubes and dried down. Each fraction was then enriched using commercial Fe-NTA columns. Small amounts of each fraction were diluted in 0.1% acetic acid for deep proteome profiling.  For commercial spin-columns, Thermo High-Select Fe-NTA columns were washed twice with 200 μL Binding/Wash Buffer and beads were resuspended in 25 μL Binding/Wash Buffer. Peptides were eluted from IP beads using two rounds of 10 min washes with 25 μL 0.2% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) using the same pipette tip to transfer eluates directly onto Fe-NTA beads. Phosphopeptides were incubated with beads for 30 minutes with gentle tapping. Beads were then washed twice with 200 μL Binding/Wash Buffer, and once with 200 μL LC-MS water. Phosphopeptides were eluted into BSA-coated microcentrifuge tubes using two 20 μL washes of Phosphopeptide Elution Buffer. Samples were brought down to 1-5 μL volume by speed-vac for ~20 minutes and then 10 μL 0.1% acetic acid with 2% acetonitrile was added. Samples were loaded directly onto a hand-packed, BSA-conditioned 10 cm analytical column with 5 μm C18 beads. Columns were rinsed with 0.1% acetic acid to remove excess salts and then analyzed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spec (LC-MS/MS) on QExactive HF-X Orbitrap mass spectrometer. For LC analysis, Agilent 1100 Series HPLCs were operated at 0.2 mL/min flow rates with a pressure-restricted T-junction to attain nanoliter flow rates. Peptides were eluted with increasing concentrations of buffer B (70% acetonitrile, 0.1% acetic acid) using the gradient settings: 0-13% (10 min), 13-42% (95 min), 42-60% (10 min), 60-100% (7 min), 100% hold (6 min), 100-0% (2 min). Global phosphoproteome and proteome fractions were analyzed using an EASY-nLC nano-flow UHPLC. Fractions were eluted using the gradient settings: 0-10% (10 min), 10-30% (100 min), 30-40% (14 min), 40-60% (5 min), 60-100% (2 min), hold 100% (10 min), 100-0% 2 min. Peptides were ionized by electrospray ionization (ESI) at 1 - 3 kV.  Peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS on a QExactive Plus and QExactive HF-X Orbitrap mass spectrometer operating in data-dependent mode acquiring MS scans and HCD MS/MS fragmentation spectra. Ions with charge >1 were dynamically selected for fragmentation using a top-20 untargeted method with an exclusion time of 30s and ion isolation window of 0.4 Da. The maximum injection time and ACG targets were set to 50 ms and 3e6 respectively. MS scans were captured with resolution = 60,000 and MS2 scans with resolution = 45,000. Peptides were fragmented with the HCD normalized collision energy set to 33%. Protein expression profiling was performed on LTQ Orbitrap or QExactive Plus instruments.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification and quantification was performed using Proteome Discoverer and MASCOT. Raw files were searched against the ‘SwissProt_2020_02.fasta’ for tryptic peptides from Homo sapiens with ≤2 missed cleavages. Precursor and fragment ions were matched with a 10 ppm and 20 mmu mass tolerances respectively. Variable modifications were included for phosphorylation (Ser, Thr, Tyr), oxidation (Met), and TMT 10plex (Lys, N-term) and fix modifications were set for carbamidomethyl (Cys). False discovery rates for peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were estimated using the Percolator module and PTM localizations were calculated using ptmRS. ptmRS operated with a peak depth of 15. For pTyr analyses, a diagnostic ion of 216.04 with a peak depth of 15 was used. For MAPK/CDK substrate, pSer/pThr, and proteome analyses, a neutral loss of 98 (-H3PO4) was included for pSer/pThr ions.  Searched .msf files were then imported into Python and processed using pyproteome (https://github.com/white-lab/pyproteome). PTMs were localized using a ptmRS confidence cutoff of 0.75. PSMs were filtered for ion score ≥15, isolation interference ≤30, median TMT signal ≥1500, and Percolator FDR ≤1e-2. TMT quantification data was then normalized using a iterative fitting procedure based on the CONSTrained STANdardization algorithm. In this procedure, the matrix of filtered TMT quantification values was iteratively adjusted such that rows were mean-centered around 1 and columns were mode-centered around 1. Mode centers were calculated by fitting a gaussian KDE distribution (scipy.stats.kde.gaussian_kde) to column intensities and finding the max value of each probability density function. Duplicate PSMs were then grouped for final quantification using a weighted mean function: TMT*(1-(isolation inference)/100) for the TMT intensities and isolation interference value quantified by Proteome Discoverer for each PSM.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics; alzheimer's disease

### Affiliations
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Department of Biological Engineering, Koch Institute of Integrative Cancer Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA (lab head)

### Submitter
Nader Morshed

### Lab Head
Dr Forest Michael White
Department of Biological Engineering, Koch Institute of Integrative Cancer Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA (lab head)


