### Accession
PXD001292

### Title
Comprehensive phosphoproteome analysis unravels the core signaling network that initiates the earliest synapse pathology in preclinical Alzheimer's disease brain

### Description
Using a high-end mass spectrometry, we screened phosphoproteins and phosphopeptides in four types of Alzheimer's disease (AD) mouse models and human AD postmortem brains. We identified commonly changed phosphoproteins in multiple models and also determined phosphoproteins related to initiation of Abeta deposition in the mouse brain. We put the proteins on experimentally verified protein-protein interaction databases. Surprisingly most of the core phosphoproteins were directly connected, and they formed a functional network linked to synaptic spine formation. The change of the core network started at a preclinical stage even before histological Abeta deposition. Systems biology analyses suggested phosphorylation of MARCKS by over-activated kinases including PKCs and CaMKs initiates synapse pathology.

### Sample Protocol
Mouse brains PS1 transgenic mice expressing the exon 9 deletion mutant (PSEN1dE9) under the control of the mouse PrP promoter; PS2 transgenic mice expressing human mutant PS2 (N141I) under the control of a ubiquitous CMV early enhancer and the chicken beta-actin promoter; mice transgenic for the human double-mutant APP695 (KM670/671NL; Swedish type) inserted into a hamster PrP cosmid vector by replacing the PrP gene with the mutant APP; 5xFAD transgenic mice expressing the mutant human APP695 with Swedish (KM670/671NL), Florida (I716V), and London (V717I) triple mutations, as well as human PS1 harboring double mutations (M146L and L285V) under the mouse Thy1 promoter; and transgenic mice for the human mutant Tau protein under the control of the mouse PrP promoter were used. Their backgrounds were C57BL/6J, C57BL/6J, C57/B6XSJL/F1, C57/B6XSJL/F1, and C57/B6XC3H/F1, respectively. Mass analysis was performed with brain tissues from male mice at 1, 3, or 6 months of age.  Preparation of phosphorylated proteins and peptides Cerebral cortices were collected from mice within 5 min after their sacrifice by deep euthanasia with ethyl ether. Cerebral cortices were frozen in liquid nitrogen immediately and kept until use. The cortical tissue was lysed in cold lysis buffer containing 2% SDS, 1 mM DTT, and 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH7.5) and homogenized using 20 strokes of a Dounce glass homogenizer on ice. The ratio of lysis buffer to tissue was 10 volumes (uL) to 1 weight (mg). Subsequently, the lysate was incubated at 100°C for 15 min. The crude extract was centrifuged at 16,000xg at 4°C for 10 min. The supernatant was diluted to a one-tenth concentration with water and filtered through a 0.22 um filter. The flow-through was concentrated to 10-fold using an Amicon Ultra 3K filter (Millipore, Ireland). The concentration of proteins was measured using the BCA Protein Assay Reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., USA). Sample aliquots (200 uL) containing 1.5 mg of protein were added to 100 uL of 1M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) (pH8.5), 3 uL of 10% SDS, and 30 uL of 50 mM tris-2-carboxyethyl phosphine (TCEP), followed by incubation for 1 h at 60°C. Cysteine residues were blocked with 10mM methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS) for 10 min at 25°C. Then, samples were digested with trypsin (mass analysis grade) (10:1 protein/enzyme, w/w) in 80 mM CaCl2 for 24 h at 37°C.  Phosphopeptides were enriched using the Titansphere Phos-Tio Kit (GL Sciences Inc., Japan), and desalted using a Sep-Pak Light C18 cartridge column (Waters Corporation, USA), according to the manufacturer's instructions. The sample aliquots were dried and dissolved with 25 uL of 100 mM TEAB (pH 8.5). The phosphopeptides in each individual sample were labeled separately using the iTRAQ Reagent multiplex assay kit (AB SCIEX Ins.) for 2 h at 25°C, according to the manufacturer's instructions. The labeled phosphopeptide pools were then mixed together. The aliquots obtained were dried and then redissolved in 1 mL of 0.1% formic acid.  2D LC MS/MS analysis The labeled phosphopeptide samples were subjected to Strong Cation Exchange (SCX) chromatography using a TSK gel SP-5PW column (TOSOH, Japan) on a Prominence UFLC system (Shimadzu, Japan). The flow rate was 1.0 mL/min with solution A (10 mM KH2PO4 (pH 3.0), 25% acetonitrile). Elution was performed with solution B (10 mM KH2PO4 (pH 3.0), 25% acetonitrile, 1M KCl) in a gradient ranging from 0 to 50%. The elution fractions were dried and dissolved in 100 uL of 0.1% formic acid.  Each fraction was analyzed using a DiNa Nano-Flow LC system (KYA Technologies Corporation, Japan) at the flow rate was 300 nL/min. For the Nano-LC, samples were loaded onto a 0.1 mm x 100 mm C18 column with solution C (2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) and eluted with a gradient of 0-50% solution D (80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid). The ion spray voltage to apply sample from Nano-LC to Triple TOF 5600 System (AB SCIEX Ins.) was set at 2.3 kV. The Information-Dependent Acquisition (IDA) setting was 4001250 m/z with two to five charges. The Analyst TF1.5 software (AB SCIEX Ins.) was used to identify each peptide. The quantification of each peptide was based on the TOF-MS electric current detected during the LC-separated peptide peak, adjusted to the charge/peptide ratio. The signals were analyzed by Analyst TF (version 1.5) (AB SCIEX Ins.) and processed by ProteinPilot software (version 4).

### Data Protocol
Acquisition and analysis of mass spectrum data of peptides were performed by Analyst TF (version 1.5) (AB SCIEX Ins.). Using the results we searched corresponding proteins from database of mouse and human protein sequences (UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot, downloaded from http://www.uniprot.org on June 22, 2010) by ProteinPilot (version 4) (AB SCIEX Ins.) that employs Paragon algorithm. Tolerance for the search of peptides by ProteinPilot were set to 0.05 Da for the MS and 0.10 Da for the MS/MS analyses, respectively. “Phosphorylation emphasis” was set at sample description, and “biological modifications” was set at processing specification of ProteinPilot. The confidence score was used to evaluate the quality of identified peptides, and identified proteins were grouped by the ProGroup algorithm (AB SCIEX Ins.) to exclude redundancy. The threshold for protein detection was set at 95% confidence in ProteinPilot, and proteins with more than 95% confidence were accepted as identified proteins.  False discovery rate (FDR) was calculated by ProteinPilot. Target-decoy search strategy were employed and all protein sequences in fasta were downloaded from UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot (http://www.uniprot.org/downloads) as target and their reverse sequences were generated as decoy. With peptide sequences identified in our mass analysis, we searched the target and decoy databases and calculated false positive (FP = 2 x passing decoy assignments) and true positive (TP = total passing assignment – number of FP). FDR was calculated by FP / (TP + FP).  Quantification of proteins was performed through analysis of iTRAQ reporter groups in MS/MS spectrum that are generated upon fragmentation in the mass spectrometer. In quantification of peptides and proteins, bias correction that assumes the total signal amount of each iTRAQ should be equal was employed to normalize signals different iTRAQ reporters. In quantification of peptides and proteins, bias correction option was used to normalize different iTRAQ signals.  Peptide ratio, the ratio between reporter signals in AD models and that of control samples, was calculated also after bias correction. Then protein ratio (average ratio) was deduced by weighted average of peptide ratios corresponding to the protein, where peptide ratios were differentially weighted based on error factors, after bias correction. The detailed formulas to calculate these values were described in the manual from ABSCIEX. In brief, after excluding peptides without iTRAQ label, those sharing MS/MS, and those having a low intensity, log values of iTRAQ ratios corresponding to a peptide were summed. 10 to the power of the sum value was divided by Bias. The result was treated as quantity of the peptide.  Protein quantities in AD sample were compared with that in control sample using the peptide ratio. Student t-value was calculated from weighted average of log peptide ratio, its standard error, and log bias. Then the p-value was calculated together with a post-hoc test in ProteinPilot to exclude multiple hypothesis testing issues. The p-values of three samples provided from this test were integrated by inverse normal method. Phosphoproteins were judged changed, when the integrated p-value was less than 0.05.   The results in peptide summary and protein summary of ProteinPilot were imported to Excel files for further data analyses. Quantity of a phophopeptide fragment was calculated as the geometric mean of signal intensities of multiple MS/MS fragments including the phosphorylation site. Difference between AD group and control group was tested by student's t-test.  We compared changed phosphoproteins among different AD models and selected the commonly changed proteins in hypothesis free- or Abeta aggregation-linked approach.

### Publication Abstract
Using a high-end mass spectrometry, we screened phosphoproteins and phosphopeptides in four types of Alzheimer's disease (AD) mouse models and human AD postmortem brains. We identified commonly changed phosphoproteins in multiple models and also determined phosphoproteins related to initiation of amyloid beta (A&#x3b2;) deposition in the mouse brain. After confirming these proteins were also changed in and human AD brains, we put the proteins on experimentally verified protein-protein interaction databases. Surprisingly, most of the core phosphoproteins were directly connected, and they formed a functional network linked to synaptic spine formation. The change of the core network started at a preclinical stage even before histological A&#x3b2; deposition. Systems biology analyses suggested that phosphorylation of myristoylated alanine-rich C-kinase substrate (MARCKS) by overactivated kinases including protein kinases C and calmodulin-dependent kinases initiates synapse pathology. Two-photon microscopic observation revealed recovery of abnormal spine formation in the AD model mice by targeting a core protein MARCKS or by inhibiting candidate kinases, supporting our hypothesis formulated based on phosphoproteome analysis.

### Keywords
Preclinical alzheimer's disease, Signaling network, Phosphoproteome, Camks, Kinases, Pkcs

### Affiliations
Tokyo Medical and Dental University
Department of Neuropathology, Medical Research institute and Center for Brain Integration Research, Tokyo Medical and Dental University

### Submitter
Hidenori Homma

### Lab Head
Dr Hitoshi Okazawa
Department of Neuropathology, Medical Research institute and Center for Brain Integration Research, Tokyo Medical and Dental University


