### Accession
PXD007510

### Title
Metaproteomics of the marine gutless oligochaete Olavius algarvensis and its symbionts to determine stable isotope fingerprints using Direct Protein-SIF

### Description
We developed a method that allows measuring the stable carbon isotope composition of individual species in microbial communities using metaproteomics. We call this methods “Direct Protein-SIF”. We validated and tested the method extensively using pure cultures (PXD006762) and mock communities (PXD006118, https://www.ebi.ac.uk/pride/archive/projects/PXD006118).  As a case study we applied Direct Protein-SIF to the Olavius algarvensis symbiosis. Olavius algarvensis is a marine worm that lives in shallow-water sediments off the coast of Elba, Italy. The worm has no digestive and excretory system, instead it harbors five bacterial symbionts that fulfill its nutritional and waste recycling needs (http://www.pnas.org/content/109/19/E1173.short). For this project we generated metaproteomes of 14 O. algarvensis individuals. A total of 18 LC-MS/MS runs were generated. For Direct Protein-SIF the data from all runs was combined. In this submission we are including the Direct Protein-SIF specific isotope pattern file as well as the .mzML files and PSM file required as input for the Direct Protein-SIF software (Calis-p). In addition to the Olavius algarvensis samples a protein reference material (MKH files) was measured. The respective .raw files and isotopic pattern files are available through project PXD006762 (see publication for details on how the reference material is used to calibrate the method).

### Sample Protocol
Samples were lysed in SDT-lysis buffer (4% (w/v) SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6, 0.1 M DTT). SDT lysis buffer was added in a >1:10 sample/buffer ratio to individual worms. Samples were incubated at 95° C for 10 minutes followed by pelleting of debris for 5 min at 21,000 x g. We prepared tryptic digests following the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol described by Wisniewski et al.  (2009, Nat. Meth. 6(5)). In brief, 30 µl of the cleared lysate were mixed with 200 µl of UA solution (8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris/HCl pH 8.5) in a 10 kDa MWCO 500 µl centrifugal filter unit (VWR International) and centrifuged at 14,000 x g for 40 min. 200 µl of UA solution were added again and centrifugal filter spun at 14,000 x g for 40 min. 100 µl of IAA solution (0.05 M iodoacetamide in UA solution) were added to the filter and incubated at 22° C for 20 min. The IAA solution was removed by centrifugation and the filter was washed three times by adding 100 µl of UA solution and then centrifuging. The buffer on the filter was then changed to ABC (50 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate), by washing the filter three times with 100 µl of ABC. 1 to 2 µg of MS grade trypsin (Thermo Scientific Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA) in 40 µl of ABC were added to the filter and filters incubated over night in a wet chamber at 37° C. The next day, peptides were eluted by centrifugation at 14,000 x g for 20 min, followed by addition of 50 µl of 0.5 M NaCl and again centrifugation. Peptides were desalted using C18 spin columns (Thermo Scientific Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA) or Sep-Pak C18 Plus Light Cartridges (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Approximate peptide concentrations were determined using the Pierce Micro BCA assay (Thermo Scientific Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Samples were analyzed by 1D-LC-MS/MS. One wash run and one blank run were done between samples to reduce carry over. For the 1D-LC-MS/MS runs, 0.8 to 4 µg of peptide were loaded onto a 2 cm, 75 µm ID C18 Acclaim® PepMap 100 pre-column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using an EASY-nLC 1000 Liquid Chromatograph (Thermo Fisher Scientific) set up in 2-column mode. The pre-column was connected to a 50 cm x 75 µm analytical EASY-Spray column packed with PepMap RSLC C18, 2µm material (Thermo Fisher Scientific), which was heated to 35° C via the integrated heating module. The analytical column was connected via an Easy-Spray source to a Q Exactive Plus hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on the analytical column at a flow rate of 225 nl/min using a 460 (or 260) min gradient going from buffer A (0.2% formic acid, 5% acetonitrile) to 20% buffer B (0.2% formic acid in acetonitrile) in 354 min, then from 20 to 35% B in 71 min and ending with 35 min at 100% B. Eluting peptides were ionized with electrospray ionization (ESI) and analyzed in the Q Exactive Plus as described by Petersen et al. (2016, Nat. Microb. 2(16195)). Briefly, full scans were acquired in the Orbitrap at 70,000 resolution. MS/MS scans of the 15 most abundant precursor ions were acquired in the Orbitrap at 17,500 resolution. The mass (m/z) 445.12003 was used as lock mass as described by Olsen et al. (Mol Cell Proteomics 2005, 4:2010-2021) with the modification that lock mass was detected in the full scan rather than by separate SIM scan injection. Lock mass use was set to “best”. Ions with charge state +1 were excluded from MS/MS analysis. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 sec.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification a protein sequence database was created using an existing Olavius algarvensis host and symbiont protein database from project PXD003626 (ftp://massive.ucsd.edu/MSV000079512/sequence/). To this database we added additional symbiont protein sequences from recently sequenced metagenomes and the cRAP protein sequence database (http://www.thegpm.org/crap/) containing protein sequences of common laboratory contaminants. The new database was submitted with this PRIDE project. MS/MS spectra were searched against the database using the Sequest HT node in Proteome Discoverer version 2.0.0.802 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and peptide-spectral matches (PSMs) were filtered using the Percolator node as described by Petersen et al. (Nature Microbiology 2016, 2:16195). The FidoCT node in Proteome Discoverer was used for protein inference and to restrict the protein-level FDR to below 5% (FidoCT q-value <0.05). Proteins with a FidoCT q-value of <0.01 were classified as high confidence identifications and proteins with a FidoCT q-value of 0.01-0.05 were classified as medium confidence identifications. The table with PSMs was exported from Proteome Discoverer and used as input for Direct Protein-SIF (see publication for details).

### Publication Abstract
Measurements of stable carbon isotope ratios (&#x3b4;<sup>13</sup>C) are widely used in biology to address questions regarding food sources and metabolic pathways used by organisms. The analysis of these so-called stable isotope fingerprints (SIFs) for microbes involved in biogeochemical cycling and microbiota of plants and animals has led to major discoveries in environmental microbiology. Currently, obtaining SIFs for microbial communities is challenging as the available methods either only provide low taxonomic resolution, such as the use of lipid biomarkers, or are limited in throughput, such as nanoscale secondary ion MS imaging of single cells. Here we present "direct protein-SIF" and the Calis-p software package (https://sourceforge.net/projects/calis-p/), which enable high-throughput measurements of accurate &#x3b4;<sup>13</sup>C values for individual species within a microbial community. We benchmark the method using 20 pure culture microorganisms and show that the method reproducibly provides SIF values consistent with gold-standard bulk measurements performed with an isotope ratio mass spectrometer. Using mock community samples, we demonstrate that SIF values can also be obtained for individual species within a microbial community. Finally, a case study of an obligate bacteria-animal symbiosis shows that direct protein-SIF confirms previous physiological hypotheses and can provide unexpected insights into the symbionts' metabolism. This confirms the usefulness of this approach to accurately determine &#x3b4;<sup>13</sup>C values for different species in microbial community samples.

### Keywords
Symbiosis, Protein-sif, Metaproteomics, Stable isotopes, Stable carbon isotope fingerprinting, Lc-ms/ms, Metaproteome, Symbiont, P-sif

### Affiliations
North Carolina State University
North Carolina State University at Raleigh

### Submitter
Manuel Kleiner

### Lab Head
Dr Manuel Kleiner
North Carolina State University at Raleigh


