### Accession
PXD036952

### Title
Saccharomyces cerevisiae WT and PMR1 gene knockout whole cell LC-ESI-MS/MS

### Description
Characterization of Saccharomyces cerevisiae whole cell proteome comparing WT and PMR1 knockout cells grown for 24 h on synthetic minimal medium containing glucose as carbon source (shaking at 140 rpm, 28ºC)

### Sample Protocol
The cell pellets were lysed by 4 % SDS lysis buffer and bead milling (Precellys lysing kit VK05). Briefly, beads were combined with 1 ml of re-suspended yeast cells and shaken 8 times at 30 hz for 4 min with a 1 min rest in between. Proteins were digested and prepared for mass spectrometry analysis using a modified version of the SP3 protein clean up and digestion protocol (Moggridge et al., 2018). Peptides were labelled with TMT10plex reagent according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Thermo Scientific). Each sample was separated using a Thermo Scientific Dionex nano LC-system in a 4 hr 6-40 % ACN gradient coupled to Thermo Scientific High Field QExactive.

### Data Protocol
The software Proteome Discoverer vs. 1.4 including Sequest-Percolator for improved identification was used to search the Saccharomyces cerevisiae Uniprot database for protein identification, limited to a false discovery rate of 1%. Quantified MS data were processed using the R package DeqMS as described in the vignette available at DOI: 10.18129/B9.bioc.DEqMS

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Yeast, Lc-ms/ms, Pmr1, Whole cell

### Affiliations
Dept. Oncology Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, and Scilifelab, Stockholm, Sweden
Karolinska Institutet

### Submitter
Georgios Mermelekas

### Lab Head
Dr Janne Lehtiö
Dept. Oncology Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, and Scilifelab, Stockholm, Sweden


