### Accession
PXD025225

### Title
Temporal proteomics of p97/VCP inhibition

### Description
To facilitate the development of p97 inhibitors as potential therapeutic agents and help define their clinical application, it is necessary to dissect the mechanism of action (MOA) of p97 inhibitors and compare them with proteasome inhibitors. Moreover, identifying specific cellular markers is critical for both the drug discovery and development process, to help validate candidate drugs and quantify their effect. In this study, we performed proteomic analysis and systematically compared p97 shRNA knockdown (KD), and three p97 inhibitors, with the proteasome inhibitor MG132 in HCT116 colon cancer cells. Through proteomic analyses we uncover the specific molecular mechanism by which p97 inhibition is distinct from proteasome inhibition, potentially relevant to understanding the efficacious effects of the former in solid tumors.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were harvested and spun down to remove the supernatant. LC-MS samples were prepared using the Thermo EasyPep Mini MS Sample Prep Kit. LC-MS/MS experiments were performed by loading 1 μg sample onto an EASY-nLC 1000 connected to an Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid mass spectrometer. Peptides were separated on an Aurora UHPLC Column (25 cm x 75 µm, 1.6 µm C18) with a flow rate of 0.4 μL/min and for a total duration of 131 min.

### Data Protocol
Proteomic analysis was performed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4 software, the Uniprot human database and SequestHT with Percolator validation.

### Publication Abstract
Targeting protein quality control (PQC) pathways using proteasome or p97/VCP inhibition can effectively treat blood tumors. However, in solid tumors, only p97/VCP inhibitors are effective. To probe this difference in efficacy, we tracked HCT116 colon cancer cells using temporal proteomics to define the cellular and molecular responses to proteasome and p97 inhibition. Proteins involved in general PQC pathways were similarly upregulated by both treatments, suggesting that the proteotoxic stress caused by inhibitors does not explain the differential therapeutic effectiveness. Unexpectedly, proteins specifically dysregulated by two p97 inhibitors are involved in cell cycle control. Indeed, eleven cell cycle proteins were downregulated by&#xa0;p97 inhibition but not by proteasome inhibition. Western blot analysis validated the degradation of cyclin&#xa0;D1 and Securin, which depends on proteasome but not on p97. Differing regulation of cell cycle proteins by p97 and the proteasome may, therefore, explain the therapeutic efficacy of p97 inhibitors in colon cancer.

### Keywords
Proteasome inhibitor, P97 inhibitor, Proteomic, Hct116

### Affiliations
BBE, Tsui-Fen Chou's lab, Caltech, USA
Caltech

### Submitter
Feng Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Feng Wang
BBE, Tsui-Fen Chou's lab, Caltech, USA


