### Accession
PXD013253

### Title
Secretomic analyses of Ruminiclostridium papyrosolvens reveal its enzymatic basis for lignocellulose degradation

### Description
Efficient biotechnological conversion of lignocellulosic biomass to valuable products, such as transportation biofuels, is ecologically attractive, yet requires substantially improved mechanistic understanding and optimization to become economically feasible. Cellulolytic clostridia, such as Ruminiclostridium papyrosolvens (previously Clostridium papyrosolvens), produce a wide variety of CAZymes including extracellular multi-enzyme complexes-cellulosomes with different specificities for enhanced cellulosic biomass degradation. Identification of the secretory components, especially CAZymes, during bacterial growth on lignocellulose and their influence on its catalytic capabilities provide insight into construction of potent cellulase systems of cell factories tuned or optimized for the targeted substrate by matching the type and abundance of enzymes and corresponding transporters.

### Sample Protocol
Cultures grown on various carbon sources were harvested at the end of the exponential growth stage. The cultures were centrifuged (12,000 g, 4°C, 30 min), and the supernatants filtered through a 0.22 μm PES membrane ( Jinteng, Tianjin, China) to obtain a cell-free fraction. The cell-free supernatants were concentrated 100-fold using an ultrafiltration device containing a 10-kDa-cutoff membrane (Millipore, Germany). Protein concentrations were measured by the BCA assay (Sangon Biotech, Shanghai, China). The isolated samples were boiled for 5 min at 100°C and loaded onto 12.5% SDS-PAGE. Proteins 471 were visualized with a coomassie brilliant blue (CBB-G250) stain as described by Dyballa and Metzger.  For the proteome assay, samples (50 μg per lane) were allowed to run 2cm beyond the stacking gel of SDS-PAGE. Protein bands were excised from the 476 gels, cut into small cubes (ca. 1 x 1 mm3), and destained according to Schluesener and colleagues [45]. Gel pieces were dried by incubation with 100% acetonitrile for 10 min at room temperature and then incubated with 50 mM DTT in 25 mM NH4HCO3 (30min at 60 °C) to reduce proteins disulfide bonds. The gel pieces were dried again with acetonitrile, and proteins were alkylated treating the gel pieces with 50 mM iodoacetamide in 25 mM NH4HCO3 (1 h at room temperature in darkness). And then gel pieces were dried in a SpeedVac, trypsin (Sequencing grade modified; Promega, Madison, USA) solution (12.5 ng/ml in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.6) was added until gel pieces were immersed completely in digestion solution (~200μl). The protein digestion was performed over night at 37°C with tempered shaker. After digestion and peptide extraction from gel pieces, the samples were centrifuged and supernatants were transferred to new 1.5 ml tubes. The recovered peptides were dried using a SpeedVac and stored at room temperature. Prior to MS analysis peptides were resuspended in 20 μl of 0.1% formic acid. Each measurement was performed with 8μl of sample. An UPLC HSS T3 column (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) and an UPLC Symmetry C18 trapping column (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) for LC as well as a PicoTip Emitter 493 (SilicaTip, 10 mm i.d., New Objective, Woburn, MA, USA) were used in combination with the nanoACQUITY gradient UPLC pump system (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) coupled to a LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Waltham, MA, USA). The peptides were eluted with a 105-min gradient of 2% to 85% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 400 nL/min (0–5 min: 2%; 5–10 min: 2–5%; 10–71 min: 5–30%; 72–77 min: 85%; 77–105 min: 2%). The LTQ Orbitrap Elite was operated via instrument method files of Xcalibur (Rev. 2.1.0) in positive ion mode. The linear ion trap and Orbitrap were operated in parallel, i.e. during a full MS scan on the Orbitrap in the range of 150–2000 m/z at a resolution of 240,000 MS/MS spectra of the 20 most intense precursors were detected in the ion trap using the rapid scan mode. The relative collision energy for collision-induced dissociation (CID) was set to 35%. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a repeat count of 1 and 45 s exclusion duration window. Singly charged and ions of unknown charge state were rejected from MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was performed by Andromeda search engine [46] embedded in MaxQuant [47] searching against the complete proteome database (GCF_000175795.2) of R. papyrosolvens DSM2782 according to genome annotation in NCBI database (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/). The mass tolerance for centroid match was set to 8 ppm; the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set to 0.4 Da. The PSM false discovery rate (FDR) and Protein FDR were determined with MaxQuant and the q-value was set to 1% [48]. For protein quantification, the “Label free quantification” function in MaxQuant was used.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics, Physiology and metabolic engineering, Bacterial genetics, Ms2

### Affiliations
Ruhr-Universität Bochum LS Biochemie der Pflanzen Universitätsstraße 150 44780 Bochum
Ruhr-University Bochum

### Submitter
Mohamed El Hajjami

### Lab Head
Dr You Wuxin
Ruhr-Universität Bochum LS Biochemie der Pflanzen Universitätsstraße 150 44780 Bochum


