### Accession
PXD041952

### Title
suppression of PPARGC1A causes collateral sensitivity to HMGCR-inhibitor within BRAFi-treatement resistant melanoma

### Description
We aimed to identify the potential proteins as a collateral vulnerability within PGC1a-suppressed BRAF-inhibitor resistant melanomas, and the potential mechanisms behind this including their abundancy and cellular distribution.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics was performed as previously described 26. parental or chronic treated BRAF inhibitor resistant K029A cells (1 X 107 cells) were treated with pitavastatin (1µM; 24h), and subsequently trypsin treated and collected by centrifugation. Cell pellets were solubilized in the lysis buffer (8 M Urea/100 mM HEPES pH8.5) reduced with 5 mM TCEP at 60°C for 30 minutes, alkylated with 14 mM iodoacetamide for 45 minutes in dark, and precipitated using methanol chloroform at the ratio as (sample: methanol: chloroform: H2O; 1: 3: 1: 2.5). Samples were centrifuged (4000g; 10min) and pellets were three times with cold methanol. Extracted proteins were resuspended in 200mM EPPS buffer and digested with Lys-C (1:100 protease-to-protein ratio) (3h; 37°C) following trypsin digestion (1:100 protease-to-protein ratio) at 37° C overnight. Peptides were quantified by microBCA reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and TMT labeled (6-8M excess). Formic acid was added to a final concentration of 1% and peptides were clean up using a 50 mg Seppak column. Eluted peptides were dried down and resuspended in 5% ACN/5% formic acid buffer. Ratios were checked by HPLC, and samples fractionated. Fractions were resuspended in 1% formic acid and cleaned up using C18-membrane stage tips. Samples were dried down and MS analysis was performed as previously described.

### Data Protocol
Data processing and MS2 spectra assignment A compendium of in-house software was used to convert .raw files to mzXML format, as well as to correct monoisotopic m/z measurements and erroneous charge state assignments. Assignment of MS/MS spectra was performed using the Sequest algorithm. A protein sequence database containing Human Uniprot database (downloaded 11/2015) as well as known contaminants such as human keratins and reverse protein sequences were appended. Sequest searches were performed using a 20 ppm precursor ion tolerance, requiring trypsin protease specificity, while allowing up to two missed cleavages. TMT tags on peptide N termini/lysine residues (+229.162932 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.02146 Da) were set as static modifications while methionine oxidation (+15.99492 Da) was set as variable modifications. An MS2 spectra assignment false discovery rate (FDR) of less than 1% was achieved by applying the target-decoy database search strategy and filtered using an in-house linear discrimination analysis algorithm with the following peptide ion and MS2 spectra metrics: XCorr, peptide ion mass accuracy, charge state, peptide length and missed-cleavages. Peptides were further filtered a 1% protein-level false discovery rate for the final dataset. Calculation of TMT reporter ion intensities For quantification, a 0.03 m/z (6-plex TMT) window centered on the theoretical m/z value of each reporter ion, with the maximum signal intensity from the theoretical m/z value was recorded. Reporter ion intensities were adjusted based on the overlap of isotopic envelopes of all reporter ions as per manufacturer specifications. Total signal to noise values for all peptides were summed for each TMT channel (300 minimum) and all values were normalized to account for variance in sample handling.

### Publication Abstract
While targeted treatment against BRAF(V600E) improve survival for melanoma patients, many will see their cancer recur. Here we provide data indicating that epigenetic suppression of PGC1&#x3b1; defines an aggressive subset of chronic BRAF-inhibitor treated melanomas. A metabolism-centered pharmacological screen further identifies statins (HMGCR inhibitors) as a collateral vulnerability within PGC1&#x3b1;-suppressed BRAF-inhibitor resistant melanomas. Lower PGC1&#x3b1; levels mechanistically causes reduced RAB6B and RAB27A expression, whereby their combined re-expression reverses statin vulnerability. BRAF-inhibitor resistant cells with reduced PGC1&#x3b1; have increased integrin-FAK signaling and improved extracellular matrix detached survival cues that helps explain their increased metastatic ability. Statin treatment blocks cell growth by lowering RAB6B and RAB27A prenylation that reduces their membrane association and affects integrin localization and downstream signaling required for growth. These results suggest that chronic adaptation to BRAF-targeted treatments drive novel collateral metabolic vulnerabilities, and that HMGCR inhibitors may offer a strategy to treat melanomas recurring with suppressed PGC1&#x3b1; expression.

### Keywords
Melanoma statin ppargc1a statin

### Affiliations
Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute Department of CellBiology, Harvard Medical School
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute/Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Haopeng Xiao

### Lab Head
Dr Pere Puigserver
Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute Department of CellBiology, Harvard Medical School


