### Accession
PXD022950

### Title
Improved sensitivity of immunopeptidomics by leveraging available large-scale pan-HLA spectral libraries and data-independent acquisition

### Description
Mass spectrometry is the state-of-the-art methodology for capturing the breadth and depth of the immunopeptidome across HLA allotypes and cell types. The majority of studies in the immunopeptidomics field are discovery-driven and data-dependent tandem mass spectrometry acquisition is commonly used, as it generates high quality references of peptide fingerprints. However, DDA suffers from the stochastic selection of abundant ions that leads to lower sensitivity and reproducibility. In contrast, in data-independent acquisition, the fragmentation and acquisition of all fragment ions from a predefined list of precursor isolation windows yields a comprehensive map for a given sample. Because often the amount of HLA peptides eluted from biological samples, is typically not sufficient for acquiring both meaningful DDA data necessary for generating comprehensive spectral libraries and DIA MS measurements, the implementation of DIA in the immunopeptidomics translational research domain has remained limited. We implemented a DIA immunopeptidomics workflow and assessed its sensitivity and accuracy by matching DIA data against libraries with growing complexity - from sample-specific libraries to libraries combining from two to forty different immunopeptidomics samples. Matching DIA immunopeptidomics data against complex pan-HLA spectral library resulted in a two-fold increase in peptide identification compared with sample-specific library and in a three-fold increase compared with DDA measurements, yet with no detrimental effect on the specificity. We concluded that a comprehensive pan-HLA library for DIA approach is highly advantageous for the clinical Immunopeptidomics where low amount of biological sample is available for immunopeptidomics.

### Sample Protocol
Purification of HLA binding peptides We performed HLA immunoaffinity purification according to our previously established protocols (25, 42). W6/32 monoclonal antibodies were purified from the supernatants of HB95 (ATCC® HB-95™) using protein-A sepharose 4B (Pro-A) beads (Invitrogen), and antibodies were then cross-linked to Pro-A beads. Cells were lysed with PBS containing 0.25% sodium deoxycholate (Sigma Aldrich), 0.2 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma Aldrich), 1 mM EDTA, a 1:200 protease inhibitors cocktail (Sigma Aldrich), 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonylfluoride (Roche), and 1% octyl-beta-D glucopyranoside (Sigma Alrich) at 4°C for 1 hour. The lysates were cleared by centrifugation in a table-top centrifuge (Eppendorf) at 4°C for 50 min at 21,191 x g. We employed the Waters Positive Pressure-96 Processor (Waters) and 96-well single-use micro-plates with 3 µm glass fibers and 10 µm polypropylene membranes (Seahorse Bioscience, ref no: 360063). The lysates were passed through a plate containing pan HLA-I antibody-crosslinked beads at 4°C. The beads in the plates were then washed with varying concentrations of salts using the processor. Finally, the beads were washed twice with 2 mL of 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8. Sep-Pak tC18 100 mg Sorbent 96-well plates (Waters, ref no: 186002321) were used for the purification and concentration of HLA-I peptides. The C18 sorbents were conditioned, and the HLA complexes and bound peptides were directly eluted from the affinity plate with 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA; Sigma-Aldrich). After washing the C18 sorbents with 2 mL of 0.1% TFA, HLA-I peptides were eluted with 28% acetonitrile (ACN; Sigma Aldrich) in 0.1% TFA. Recovered HLA-I peptides were dried using vacuum centrifugation (Concentrator plus, Eppendorf) and stored at -20°C.  LC-MS/MS DDA and DIA analyses The LC-MS/MS system consisted of an Easy-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) hyphenated to a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on a 450 mm analytical column (8 µm tip, 75 µm inner diameter, PicoTipTMEmitter, New Objective) packed with ReproSil-Pur C18 (1.9 µm particles, 120 Å pore size, Dr. Maisch GmbH). The separation was performed at a flow rate of 250 nL/min by a gradient of 0.1% formic acid (FA) in 80% ACN (solvent B) in 0.1% FA in water (solvent A). HLA-I peptides were analyzed by the following gradient: 0–5 min (5% B); 5-85 min (5-35% B); 85-100 min (35-60 % B); 100-105 min (60-95% B); 105-110 min (95% B); 110-115 min (95-2% B) and 115-125 min (2% B).  Two different parameters were used to acquire DDA data respectively for sample-specific (recent data) and the combined, mixed and BigLib libraries that composed of old data. For DDA measurements, full MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap from m/z = 300-1650 with a resolution of 60,000 (m/z = 200) and an ion accumulation time of 80 ms. The auto gain control (AGC) was set to 3e6 ions. MS/MS spectra were acquired in a data-dependent manner on the 10 most abundant precursor ions (and 20 for sample-specific) with a resolution of 15,000 (m/z = 200) and 30,000 for sample-specific, an ion accumulation time of 120 ms and an isolation window of 1.2 m/z. The AGC was set to 2e5 ions, the dynamic exclusion was set to 20 s, and a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 27 was used for fragmentation. No fragmentation was performed for HLA-I peptides with assigned precursor ion charge states of four and above and the peptide match option was disabled. For DIA measurements, the cycle of acquisitions consists of a full MS scan from 300-1650 m/z (R = 60,000 and ion accumulation time of 60 ms) and 22 DIA MS/MS scans in the orbitrap (Supplementary Table 3). For each DIA MS/MS scan, a resolution of 30,000, an AGC of 3e6 and a ramping normalized collision energy (NCE = 25.5, 27 and 30) were used. The maximum ion accumulation was set to auto and the overlap between consecutive MS/MS scans was 1 m/z.

### Data Protocol
DDA and DIA data analyses We employed the MaxQuant computational platform version 1.6.10.43 (43) to search the peak lists against the UniProt databases (Human 42,148 entries, March 2017) and a file containing 246 frequently observed contaminants. The default settings were used except the following parameters: enzyme specificity was set to ‘unspecific’, methionine oxidation and Protein N-term acetylation were set as a variable modifications and no fixed modification was set, PSM FDR was set to 0.01 with no protein FDR. The initial allowed mass deviation of the precursor ion was set to 6 ppm and the maximum fragment mass deviation was set to 20 ppm.  The spectral library for each sample was generated using results from MaxQuant discovery search for each experiment (sample-specific, combined, mixed and BigLib) by uploading mqpar.xml, msms.txt, evidence.txt and fastA files into Spectronaut (14.6.2) software from Biognosys, Schlieren, Switzerland. The default settings were used except the following parameters. For the mass tolerance, the calibration search was set to ‘dynamic’ and a correction factor of 1 was used for MS1 and MS2.  For identification, a FDR threshold of 0.01 and unspecific digestion rule were used in agreement with MaxQuant search.  For spectral library filtering, only peptide with a length larger than 3 a.a with at least 3 best fragments (up to 6) were considered. A deep learning assisted iRT regression and a R-square of 0.8 were respectively used for iRT reference strategy and correlation score. The selection of fragment ions based on intensity was used. For identification, the library was matched against JY, 0D5P and RA957 DIA MS/MS data with q-value cut-off of 0.1 and 1 respectively for precursor and protein (44). MS1 and MS2 data were extracted using maximum intensity strategy within the given mass tolerance. A dynamic mass tolerance and a correction factor of 1 was used for both MS1 and MS2. The quantification was done at MS2 level, using at least 3 fragments. A global normalization per run was used for cross run normalization based on the median.  For data export from Spectronaut, a peptide-centered export was used. Briefly, columns corresponding to PG. Genes, PG. UNiProtIDs, PG. ProteinNames, PEP. Stripped Sequences, E.G Precurosr ID, EG. ModifiedSequence, PEP. Quantity, EG. Q value, EG. ApexRT, EG. Score and FG. ShapeQualityScore were exported for further investigation. From this export, reverse hits and contaminant peptides were removed in agreement with MQ search prior to data analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Mass spectrometry (MS) is the state-of-the-art methodology for capturing the breadth and depth of the immunopeptidome across human leukocyte antigen (HLA) allotypes and cell types. The majority of studies in the immunopeptidomics field are discovery driven. Hence, data-dependent tandem MS (MS/MS) acquisition (DDA) is widely used, as it generates high-quality references of peptide fingerprints. However, DDA suffers from the stochastic selection of abundant ions that impairs sensitivity and reproducibility. In contrast, in data-independent acquisition (DIA), the systematic fragmentation and acquisition of all fragment ions within given isolation m/z windows yield a comprehensive map for a given sample. However, many DIA approaches commonly require generating comprehensive DDA-based spectrum libraries, which can become impractical for studying noncanonical and personalized neoantigens. Because the amount of HLA peptides eluted from biological samples such as small tissue biopsies is typically not sufficient for acquiring both meaningful DDA data necessary for generating comprehensive spectral libraries and DIA MS measurements, the implementation of DIA in the immunopeptidomics translational research domain has remained limited. We implemented a DIA immunopeptidomics workflow and assessed its sensitivity and accuracy by matching DIA data against libraries with growing complexity-from sample-specific libraries to libraries combining 2 to 40 different immunopeptidomics samples. Analyzing DIA immunopeptidomics data against a complex multi-HLA spectral library resulted in a two-fold increase in peptide identification compared with sample-specific library and in a three-fold increase compared with DDA measurements, yet with no detrimental effect on the specificity. Furthermore, we demonstrated the implementation of DIA for sensitive personalized neoantigen discovery through the analysis of DIA data with predicted MS/MS spectra of clinically relevant HLA ligands. We conclude that a comprehensive multi-HLA library for DIA&#xa0;approach in combination with MS/MS prediction is highly advantageous for clinical immunopeptidomics, especially when low amounts of biological samples are available.

### Keywords
Pan-hla, Immunopeptidomics, Dia

### Affiliations
UNIL/CHUV
Department of oncology UNIL CHUV Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research Lausanne Centre de recherche Agora Rue du Bugnon 25A CH-1011 Lausanne Switzerland

### Submitter
Michal Bassani-Sternberg

### Lab Head
Dr Michal Bassani-Sternberg
Department of oncology UNIL CHUV Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research Lausanne Centre de recherche Agora Rue du Bugnon 25A CH-1011 Lausanne Switzerland


