### Accession
PXD040275

### Title
Therapeutic TNF Inhibitors Exhibit Differential Levels of Efficacy in Accelerating Cutaneous Wound Healing

### Description
Adalimumab is the only FDA- and EMA-approved treatment for moderate-to-severe hidradenitis suppurativa (HS), suggesting that the mechanism of action of adalimumab is distinct in HS and may contribute to improved wound healing. We have demonstrated that adalimumab, but neither etanercept nor certolizumab-pegol, induces a wound healing profile in vitro, which may underlie the differences in efficacy between various anti-TNF agents. To examine and compare the efficacy of therapeutic TNF inhibitors in chronic cutaneous wound healing in vivo, a human TNF knock-in Leprdb/db mouse model was established. The vehicle group exhibited severe impairments in cutaneous wound healing. In contrast, adalimumab significantly accelerated healing, confirmed by both histologic assessment and a unique healing transcriptional profile. Moreover, adalimumab and infliximab showed similar levels of efficacy, but golimumab was less effective, along with etanercept and certolizumab-pegol. In line with histologic assessments, proteomics analyses from healing wounds exposed to various TNF inhibitors revealed distinct and differential wound healing signatures that may underlie the differential efficacy of therapeutic inhibitors in accelerating chronic wound healing.

### Sample Protocol
For proteomics analysis, the skin punches were processed following S-Trap mini spin column digestion protocol (ProtiFiTM). Briefly, the proteins were extracted by SDS solubilization buffer (5% SDS, 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate, TEAB, pH 7.55) along with extensive sonication with Bioruptor® Pico (1 min on, 30 secs off, 15 cycles) at 4 °C. Furthermore, an overnight extraction at 4 °C was applied to extensive skin protein extraction. The resulting protein extracts were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 30min at 60 °C, and free cysteines were alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAM) for 30 min at room temperature in dark. After acidification with 12% phosphoric acid, the samples were diluted with S-Trap binding buffer (90% methanol, MeOH, 100 mM TEAB, pH 7.1), maintaining a 1:7 v/v ratio of SDS lysis buffer to binding buffer, and then loaded to 96-well mini-S-Trap plate for tryptic digestion (enzyme: protein ratio at 1:30, overnight at 37°C). The eluted peptides were then reconstituted with 30 μL 2% MeOH with 0.1% TFA for DropQuant UV measurement and SWATH-MS analysis. The quantitative proteomics platform used in this study is the SWATH DIA label-free proteomics (Shen et al., 2022, Wang et al., 2021). To build the study-specific peptide spectral library, a pooled peptide sample (~6.5 mg) was generated by combining study samples from all groups and fractionated by strong anion exchange (SAX) followed by high-pH reverse-phase HPLC with an XBridge C18, 4.6 × 150 mm analytical column (Waters, Milford, MA). A total of 60 fractions were generated (5 fractions from SAX, each of which was further fractionated to 96 fractions with an online reverse-phase HPLC fraction collector and concatenated pooling down to 12 fractions). 3 μg peptides (containing iRT peptide standards, Biognosys) from each of the 60 fractions were injected into LC-MS in the data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. The LC instrumentation employed the micro-flow Dionex RSLC 3000 system (ThermoFisher, San Jose) coupled with nanoEase M/Z Peptide CSH C18 Column (130Å, 1.7 μm, 300 μm X 150 mm). Mobile phase A is 0.1% formic acid and 2% DMSO in deionized water, and mobile phase B is 0.1% formic acid and 2% DMSO in acetonitrile. A 73 min-gradient method containing the curve module was used to separate the peptide samples from 1% to 7% of mobile phase B in the first 5 min at flow rate of 3.1 μL/min (curve from 5-6), 7%-32.5% of mobile phase B in 57 min at 3.1 μL/min (curve of 6), 32.5%- 57% mobile phase B in 0.2min at 3.1 μL/min (curve from 6-5), 57%-95% B in 3.8min at 4.0 μL/min (curve of 5). The column was washed with 95% B and equilibrated at 1% B before the next injection. The MS acquisition was performed on a Triple TOF 6600 mass spectrometer (AB Sciex). MS1 spectra were collected at the range of 400-1,500 m/z for 250 ms. The top 50 precursors were selected for fragmentation, the product ion MS range was from 100 to 1,800 m/z in the High-Sensitivity mode. Precursors with 2 to 5 charges were selected for fragmentation, with exclusion for 30 secs after 1 occurrence. For SWATH-MS acquisition, 4 μg digested peptide (containing iRT) was injected in the Data Independent Acquisition (DIA) mode. A full MS1 scan was performed in the range of 360 to 1,500 m/z in positive ion mode. A total of 200 variable precursor isolation windows were determined using “SWATH Variable Window Calculator” Excel plug-in tool provided by SCIEX. Consecutive precursor isolation windows had 1 amu overlap. The maximum accumulation time was 33 ms for MS1 scans and 34 ms for MS2 scans, resulting in an MS cycle time of 6.6 secs. Rolling collision energy was used to determine the collision energy for each window.

### Data Protocol
A hybrid spectral library from DDA data of the 60 fractions from a pooled sample and DIA data of 79 experimental samples were generated by Spectronaut (version 14.8.201029.47784, Biognosys) against Uniprot/Swissprot protein database of mouse (downloaded on Jan. 12, 2021) with added iRT sequences. Search parameters were set as follows: maximum of 2 missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation of cysteines as fixed modification, oxidation of methionine and acetylation on protein N-terminal as variable modifications, minimum peptide length was 7 and maximum peptide length was 52, peptide FDR, protein FDR and PSM FDR were all set to 1%. The quantitative SWATH-MS data was analyzed by DIA-NN version 15.0 (Demichev et al., 2020) with the hybrid spectral library using default software settings. The “limma” R package (Ritchie et al., 2015) was used to perform differential expression analysis for proteomic data. The differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were characterized by P-values of less than 0.05 and greater than 1.5-fold difference (|logFC| > 0.58) in protein abundances. Over-representation analysis (ORA) of pathways in the DEPs was performed using “WebGestaltR” R package (Liao et al., 2019) against the Gene Ontology (GO) terms of biological processes.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Wound healing, Mouse, Proteomics, Lcms

### Affiliations
AbbVie Bioresearch Center

### Submitter
Liang Jin

### Lab Head
Dr Yu Tian
AbbVie Bioresearch Center


