### Accession
PXD040532

### Title
Harvesting secreted proteins from cell lines after 24 hours hypoxia

### Description
Cancers are often associated with hypoxia and metabolic reprogramming, resulting in enhanced tumor progression. Here, we aimed to study breast cancer hypoxia responses, focusing on secreted proteins from low-grade (luminal-like) and high-grade (basal-like) cell lines before and after hypoxia.

### Sample Protocol
Conditioned media samples were concentrated using 3 kDa Amicon® Ultra-15 Centrifugal Filter Units (Merck, Kenilworth, NJ, USA) and lysophilized using a vacuum concentrator. The protein pellet was dissolved in urea solution and protein concentration was estimated using QubitTM Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). 10 µg protein from each sample was trypsinized using an in-solution protein digestion protocol. After digestion, all samples were desalted using Oasis HLB µElution plates (Waters, Milford, MA, USA), and lysophilized. Prior to mass spectrometry analysis, samples were dissolved in 5% formic acid/5% acetonitrile. Mass spectrometry data were collected using the Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) coupled with a Proxeon 1200 Liquid Chromatograph (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on a 100 μm inner diameter microcapillary column packed with ~25 cm of Accucore C18 resin (2.6 μm, 150 Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific). We loaded ~1 μg onto the column. Peptides were separated using a 90min gradient of 3 to 25% acetonitrile in 0.125% formic acid with a flow rate of 520 nL/min. The scan sequence began with an Orbitrap MS1 spectrum with the following parameters: resolution 120,000, scan range 350−1350 Th, automatic gain control (AGC) target “standard”, maximum injection time “auto”, RF lens setting 40%, and centroid spectrum data type. We selected the top twenty precursors for MS2 analysis which consisted of HCD high-energy collision dissociation with the following parameters: resolution 15,000, AGC was set at “standard”, maximum injection time “auto”, isolation window 1.2 Th, normalized collision energy (NCE) 28, and centroid spectrum data type. In addition, unassigned and singly charged species were excluded from MS2 analysis and dynamic exclusion was set to 90 s.

### Data Protocol
The raw data was processed using the FragPipe (v16.0) proteomics pipeline software, wherein peptide identification was performed with MSFragger (v3.3) with precursor and fragment mass tolerance in peak matching was set to 20 PPM. Peptide validation was performed with Percolator (v3.05), and protein inference was done by ProteinProphet from the Philosopher toolkit (v4.0.0). MS1 quantification was performed using IonQuant (v1.7.5) with the “Match between runs” option enabled. MaxLFQ protein intensity algorithm selected were selected, and intensities were normalized between experiments. Mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) tolerance were set to 10 ppm.

### Publication Abstract
An electroreductive strategy for radical hydroxyl fluorosulfonylation of alkenes with sulfuryl chlorofluoride and molecular oxygen from air is described. This mild protocol displays excellent functional group compatibility, broad scope, and good scalability, providing convenient access to diverse &#x3b2;-hydroxy sulfonyl fluorides. These &#x3b2;-hydroxy sulfonyl fluoride products can be further converted to valuable aliphatic sulfonyl fluorides, &#x3b2;-keto sulfonyl fluorides, and &#x3b2;-alkenyl sulfonyl fluorides. Further, some of these products showed excellent inhibitory activity against Botrytis cinerea or Bursaphelenchus xylophilus, which could be useful for potent agrochemical discovery. Preliminary mechanistic studies indicate that this transformation is achieved through rapid O<sub>2</sub> interception by the alkyl radical and subsequent reduction of the peroxy radical, which outcompete other side reactions such as chlorine atom transfer, hydrogen atom transfer, and Russell fragmentation.

### Keywords
Cell lines, Hypoxia, Breast cancer, Basal-like, Luminal-like

### Affiliations
CCBIO, Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway
University of Bergen

### Submitter
Kenneth Finne

### Lab Head
Dr Lars A. Akslen
CCBIO, Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway


