### Accession
PXD013401

### Title
Functions of the FtsH1/3 complex in the nutrient stress response of Synechocystis

### Description
FtsH zinc metalloproteinases are membrane-intrinsic and occur in bacteria, chloroplasts, and mitochondria. They are involved in diverse cellular processes including protein quality control and regulation. The cyanobacterium Synechocystis possesses four FtsH homologs, designated FtsH1-4 which function as both homo- and hetero-oligomeric complexes. For example, the FtsH1/3 complex is known to have a critical role in iron homeostasis. This project is aimed at the investigation of the involvement of the FtsH1/3 complex in cyanobacterial responses to nitrogen, phosphate and inorganic carbon starvation. By proteomic comparisons of the effects of these nutrient stresses in WT and an FtsH1-down mutant, we demonstrate significant differences in the abundances of transcription factors that complement the responses to nutrient stress at the transcriptome level. We propose a mechanism of epistatic regulation of stress-response gene expression by FtsH1/3 complex-mediated degradation of suppressor transcription factors.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed in the presence of 2% SDS, 60 mM DTT and 0.5 vol 0.1 mm silica/zirconia beads by 4 cycles of heating to 95 C for 90 s and vortexing for 30 s. Proteins were extracted from the lysates by precipitation using a 2-D clean-up kit (GE Healthcare) and the resultant pellets dissolved at 5 µg/µL in 8 M urea, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5. The proteins were reduced with 5 mM TCEP at 37 C for 30 min and S-alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide at RT in the dark for 30 min. Protein digestion was performed with (1:25 w/w) endoproteinase Lys-C/trypsin mixture (Promega) for 2 h at 37 C. After 8.5-fold dilution with 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5, 10 mM CaCl2 the digestion was continued overnight at 37 C. Proteolysis was stopped by the addition of 0.5% TFA and the resultant peptides were desalted using C18 spin columns (Thermo Scientific) then dried in a vacuum centrifuge. For analysis by nanoLC-MS/MS the peptides were dissolved in 0.1% TFA, 3% ACN and 400 ng injected onto a Q Exactive HF quadrupole-Orbitrap system coupled to a Dionex RSLCnano LC (Thermo Scientific) delivering the following gradient profile: 97% solvent A (0.1% FA) to 10% solvent B (0.08% FA, 80% ACN) over 5 min, 10% to 50% solvent B over 3 h at 300 nL/min. The MS was programmed for data-dependent acquisition with profile full-scan MS (120 000 resolution) and up to 10 centroid product ion scans (30 000 resolution) per cycle.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified by searching a Synechocystis PCC 6803 proteome database (http://genome.annotation.jp/cyanobase/Synechocystis/genes.faa, downloaded on 29/01/2016) using MaxQuant (v. 1.6.0.16) with the intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) option selected and all other parameters as per default. Protein identifications and associated iBAQ intensities were processed using Perseus (v. 1.6.0.7). Normalisation was by the sum of intra-analysis iBAQ intensities and transformation was log(2).

### Publication Abstract
The membrane-embedded FtsH proteases found in bacteria, chloroplasts, and mitochondria are involved in diverse cellular processes including protein quality control and regulation. The genome of the model cyanobacterium <i>Synechocystis</i> sp PCC 6803 encodes four FtsH homologs designated FtsH1 to FtsH4. The FtsH3 homolog is present in two hetero-oligomeric complexes: FtsH2/3, which is responsible for photosystem II quality control, and the essential FtsH1/3 complex, which helps maintain Fe homeostasis by regulating the level of the transcription factor Fur. To gain a more comprehensive insight into the physiological roles of FtsH hetero-complexes, we performed genome-wide expression profiling and global proteomic analyses of <i>Synechocystis</i> mutants conditionally depleted of FtsH3 or FtsH1 grown under various nutrient conditions. We show that the lack of FtsH1/3 leads to a drastic reduction in the transcriptional response to nutrient stress of not only Fur but also the Pho, NdhR, and NtcA regulons. In addition, this effect is accompanied by the accumulation of the respective transcription factors. Thus, the FtsH1/3 complex is of critical importance for acclimation to iron, phosphate, carbon, and nitrogen starvation in <i>Synechocystis.</i>plantcell;31/12/2912/FX1F1fx1.

### Keywords
Ftsh, Transcription factors, Nutrient stress, Synechocystis

### Affiliations
School of Biosciences, University of Sheffield
Centre Algatech, Institute of Microbiology, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, 6 Novohradská 237, Třeboň, 379 81, Czech Republic

### Submitter
Philip Jackson

### Lab Head
Dr Joseph Komenda
Centre Algatech, Institute of Microbiology, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, 6 Novohradská 237, Třeboň, 379 81, Czech Republic


