### Accession
PXD030002

### Title
Responses of macrophages to repeated exposures to different forms of amorphous silica

### Description
Synthetic amorphous silica (SAS) is a nanomaterial used in a wide variety of applications, including the use as a food additive. Two types of SAS are commonly employed as a powder additive, precipitated silica and fumed silica. Numerous studies have investigated the effects of synthetic amorphous silica on mammalian cells. However, most of them have used an exposure scheme based on a single dose of SAS. In this study, we have used instead a repeated 10-days exposure scheme, closer to the occupational exposure encountered in daily life. As a biological model we have used the murine macrophage cell line J774A.1, as macrophages are very important innate immune cells in the response to particulate materials. In order to get a better appraisal of the macrophage responses to this repeated exposure to SAS, we have used proteomics as a wide-scale approach. Furthermore, some of the biological pathways detected as modulated by the exposure to SAS by the proteomic experiments have been validated through targeted experiments. Overall, proteomics showed that precipitated SAS induced a more important macrophage response than fumed SAS at equal dose. Nevertheless, validation experiments showed that most of the responses detected by proteomics are indeed adaptive, as the cellular homeostasis appeared to be maintained at the end of the exposure. For example, the intracellular glutathione levels or the mitochondrial transmembrane potential at the end of the 10 days exposure were similar for SAS-exposed cells and for unexposed cells. Nevertheless, important functions of macrophages such as phagocytosis, TNF and interleukin-6 secretion were up-modulated after exposure, as was the expression of important membrane proteins such as the scavenger receptor or the MAC-1 receptor. These results suggest that repeated exposure to low doses of SAS slightly modulates the immune functions of macrophages, which may alter the homeostasis of the immune system.

### Sample Protocol
Murine macrophage cells (J774A.1 cell one) were first grow to confluence in 75cm2 culture flasks. The cells were then exposed to 2µg/ml/day amorphous silica for 10 days in complete culture medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, with a culture media change every 2 days.  Two different commercial amorphous silicas were used: a precipitated silica (prepared by a wet route) and a fumed silica (prepared by a pyrolytic route), both showing a specific surface area of ca. 200 m2/g. Both silicas were resuspended in pure water before use, and sterilized by pasteurization at 80°C for 18 hours. The silica suspensions were homogenized by vortexing and sonication for 10 minutes in a sonicating bath before each use. After the 10 days exposure scheme was complete, the culture medium was removed, the cell layers rinsed with medium without serum then with a buffered balanced salt solution (PBS) then scraped in a  a buffered balanced salt solution and collected by centrifugation.  Protein extraction and quantification The cell pellets were lysed in 10 volumes of lysis solution (7M urea, 2M Thiourea, 40g/l CHAPS, 15 mM spermine base, 15 mM spermine tetrahydrochloride, 10 mM Tris (carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride).  Lysis was let to proceed for 30 minutes at 20-25°C. The nucleic acids were then sedimented by centrifugation (15,000 g , 15 minutes). The protein-containing supernatants were collected and the protein concentration was measured by a dye-binding assay (Bradford type). The samples were kept frozen at -20°C until use.  Sample preparation for shotgun proteomics The samples were included into polyacrylamide gel plugs. First, a sample dilution solution (8M urea in 200mM Tris HCl, pH 8) was prepared. Then, the dye solution (0.5 mM methylene blue in sample dilution solution) was prepared. The other initiator solutions consisted in a 1 M solution of sodium toluene sulfinate in water and in a saturated water solution of diphenyliodonium chloride. The ready-to-use polyacrylamide solution consisted of 1.2 ml of a commercial 40% acrylamide/bis solution (37.5/1) to which 100 µl of diphenyliodonium chloride solution, 100 µl of sodium toluene sulfinate solution and 100 µl of water were added. Protein samples (20 µg each) were first diluted to a 10 µl final volume with sample dilution solution in a 500 µl conical microtube (Eppendorf). To this solution, 5 µl of dye solution then 5 µl of acrylamide solution were added and mixed by pipetting. 100 µl of water-saturated butanol were then layered on top of the samples, and polymerization was carried out under a 1500 lumen 2700K LED lamp for 2 hours, during which the initially blue gel solution discolored. At the end of the polymerization period, the butanol was removed, and the gel plugs were fixed for 2x1 hr with 200 µl of 30% ethanol 2 % phosphoric acid, followed by a 30 minutes wash in 30% ethanol. The fixed gel plugs were then stored at -20°C until use.  The gel plugs were washed twice with 50 µL of 25 mM ammonium hydrogen carbonate (NH4HCO3) and 50 µL of acetonitrile. The cysteine residues were reduced by 50 µL of 10 mM dithiothreitol at 57°C and alkylated by 50 µL of 55 mM iodoacetamide. After dehydration with acetonitrile, the proteins were cleaved in gel with 20 µL of 15 ng/µL of modified porcine trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) in 25 mM NH4HCO3. The digestion was performed overnight at room temperature. The generated peptides were extracted with 40 µL of 60% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. Acetonitrile was evaporated under vacuum and samples were resuspended with 30 µL of 0.1% formic acid in order to obtain a final concentration of 500 ng/µL.  NanoLC-MS/MS analysis was performed using a nanoACQUITY Ultra-Performance-LC (Waters Corporation, Milford, USA) coupled to a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). A volume equivalent to 600 ng of sample was loaded. Raw data were converted into mgf files using the MSConvert tool from ProteomeWizard (v3.0.6090; http://proteowizard.sourceforge.net/).

### Data Protocol
For protein identification, the MS/MS data were interpreted using a local Mascot server with MASCOT 2.6.2 algorithm (Matrix Science, London, UK) against an in-house database containing all Mus musculus and Rattus norvegicus entries from UniProtKB/SwissProt (version 2019_10, 25,156 sequences) and the corresponding 25,156 reverse entries. The database was generated using the database toolbox from Mass Spectrometry Data Analysis (MSDA, publicly available from https://msda.unistra.fr). Spectra were searched with a mass tolerance of 10 ppm for MS and 0.05 Da for MS/MS data, allowing a maximum of one trypsin missed cleavage. Trypsin was specified as enzyme. Acetylation of protein n-termini, carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues and oxidation of methionine residues were specified as variable modifications. Identification results were imported into Proline software (http://proline.profiproteomics.fr/) for validation. Peptide Spectrum Matches (PSM) with pretty rank equal to one were retained. False Discovery Rate was then optimized to be below 1% at PSM level using Mascot Adjusted E-value and below 1% at Protein Level using Mascot Mudpit score. Peptides Abundances were extracted thanks to Proline software version 2.0 (http://proline.profiproteomics.fr/) using a m/z tolerance of 10 ppm. Alignment of the LC-MS runs was performed using Loess smoothing. Cross Assignment was performed between all runs. Protein Abundances were computed by sum of peptides abundances (normalized using the median). Proteins were considered as significantly different if their U value in the Mann-Whitney U test was ≤2 in the control vs. sample comparison.

### Publication Abstract
Synthetic amorphous silica (SAS) is a nanomaterial used in a wide variety of applications, including the use as a food additive. Two types of SAS are commonly employed as a powder additive, precipitated silica and fumed silica. Numerous studies have investigated the effects of synthetic amorphous silica on mammalian cells. However, most of them have used an exposure scheme based on a single dose of SAS. In this study, we have used instead a repeated 10-day exposure scheme in an effort to better simulate the occupational exposure encountered in daily life by consumers and workers. As a biological model, we have used the murine macrophage cell line J774A.1, as macrophages are very important innate immune cells in the response to particulate materials. In order to obtain a better appraisal of the macrophage responses to this repeated exposure to SAS, we have used proteomics as a wide-scale approach. Furthermore, some of the biological pathways detected as modulated by the exposure to SAS by the proteomic experiments have been validated through targeted experiments. Overall, proteomics showed that precipitated SAS induced a more important macrophage response than fumed SAS at equal dose. Nevertheless, validation experiments showed that most of the responses detected by proteomics are indeed adaptive, as the cellular homeostasis appeared to be maintained at the end of the exposure. For example, the intracellular glutathione levels or the mitochondrial transmembrane potential at the end of the 10 days exposure were similar for SAS-exposed cells and for unexposed cells. Similarly, no gross lysosomal damage was observed after repeated exposure to SAS. Nevertheless, important functions of macrophages such as phagocytosis, TNF&#x3b1;, and interleukin-6 secretion were up-modulated after exposure, as was the expression of important membrane proteins such as the scavenger receptors, MHC-II, or the MAC-1 receptor. These results suggest that repeated exposure to low doses of SAS slightly modulates the immune functions of macrophages, which may alter the homeostasis of the immune system.

### Keywords
Mouse, Lc-ms/ms, Macrophage

### Affiliations
LSMBO
Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse BioOrganique (LSMBO), Université de Strasbourg,CNRS, IPHC UMR 7178, 67087 Strasbourg,France

### Submitter
Hélène Diemer

### Lab Head
Dr Sarah Cianferani
Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse BioOrganique (LSMBO), Université de Strasbourg,CNRS, IPHC UMR 7178, 67087 Strasbourg,France


