### Accession
PXD024645

### Title
AKT and AMPK site-specific phosphorylation on TBC1D4 biological activity

### Description
TBC1D4 is a 160 kDa multi-domain containing RabGAP (Rab GTPase-activating protein) and a downstream target of the insulin and contraction-activated kinases AKT and AMPK. While phosphorylation of TBC1D4 has been linked to GLUT4 translocation from storage vesicles (GSVs) to the cell surface, its impact on TBC1D4 enzymatic function is not well understood as previous studies mostly investigated the truncated GAP domain lacking the phosphorylation sites. In the present study, we expressed and purified recombinant full-length TBC1D4 using the baculovirus system. Size exclusion chromatography and co-immunoprecipitation experiments revealed that full-length TBC1D4 forms oligomers of ~600 kDa. Moreover, full-length TBC1D4 displayed similar substrate specificity but had a markedly higher specific GAP activity towards Rab10 compared to the truncated GAP domain. Using high-resolution mass spectrometry, we mapped 19 Ser/Thr phosphorylation sites in TBC1D4.

### Sample Protocol
For MS analysis of partial digest samples, resulting peptides from in-gel digest were reconstituted in 1% TFA (v/v) supplemented with iRT peptides (Biognosys) and separated by liquid chromatography (Ultimate 3000, ThermoFisher Scientific) using an EASYspray ion source equipped to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). Peptides were trapped and desalted on an Acclaim PepMap C18-LC-column (2 cm; 164535 ThermoFisher Scientific) and subsequently separated via EASY-spray C18 column (50 cm; ES803 ThermoFisher Scientific) using the following gradient: Peptides were loaded with a flow rate of 6 µl/min, to the trap column (loading buffer: (0.1% TFA (v/v)). After 4 min, trap column was switched into nano-flow (300 nl/min) and peptides were eluted through the separation column with buffer A (0.1% FA (v/v)) using a linear gradient 4-34% buffer B (0.1% FA, 80% ACN (v/v)) for 30 min, followed by a 5 min increase to 50% buffer B, a 1 min increase to 90% buffer B and a 10 min wash with buffer B at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Column temperature was set to 40°C. MS data were acquired with data-dependent (DDA) scan methods using an Orbitrap for fullscans (MS1), resolution of 120,000, scan range 350-1600 m/z, AGC target of 4.0e5. For MS2 the TOP20 precursors with an intensity threshold of 5e3 and a charge state from 2-7 were fragmented with HCD (higher-energy C-trap dissociation, collision energy 32%) and detected in the ion-trap with rapid scan rate mode, an AGC target of 1e4 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry raw files were analyzed with Proteome DiscovererTM 2.3 software (ThermoFisher Scientific). HTsequest search was done against FASTA files (SwissProt Mus musculus (TaxID=10090, version 2017-10-25, 25097 sequences), a general contaminants list (245 sequences) and His-tagged TBC1D4 sequence), enzyme was set to trypsin with maximum 2 missed cleavage sites allowed, and for HCD fragmentation b and y Ions were selected with a fragment mass tolerance of 0.6 Da. Precursor mass tolerance 10 ppm. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification. N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were allowed as variable modifications. The fixed value PSM Validator (max delta Cn: 0.05) were applied. Only high confident peptides were annotated to proteins. To define robust assignment of protein fragment sequences, identified peptides were filtered according to PSM counts. Only peptides, identified with at least 5 peptide spectrum matches (PSM’s) were considered to compose protein fragments.

### Publication Abstract
TBC1D4 is a 160&#xa0;kDa multidomain Rab GTPase-activating protein (RabGAP) and a downstream target of the insulin- and contraction-activated kinases AKT and AMPK. Phosphorylation of TBC1D4 has been linked to translocation of GLUT4 from storage vesicles (GSVs) to the cell surface. However, its impact on enzymatic activity is not well understood, as previous studies mostly investigated the truncated GAP domain lacking the known phosphorylation sites. In the present study, we expressed and purified recombinant full-length TBC1D4 using a baculovirus system. Size-exclusion chromatography and coimmunoprecipitation experiments revealed that full-length TBC1D4 forms oligomers of &#x223c;600&#xa0;kDa. Compared with the truncated GAP domain, full-length TBC1D4 displayed similar substrate specificity, but had a markedly higher specific GAP activity toward Rab10. Using high-resolution mass spectrometry, we mapped 19 Ser/Thr phosphorylation sites in TBC1D4. We determined Michaelis-Menten kinetics using in&#xa0;vitro phosphorylation assays with purified kinases and stable isotope-labeled &#x3b3;-[<sup>18</sup>O<sub>4</sub>]-ATP. These data revealed that Ser<sup>324</sup> (K<sub>M</sub> &#x223c;6&#xa0;&#x3bc;M) and Thr<sup>649</sup> (K<sub>M</sub> &#x223c;25&#xa0;&#x3bc;M) were preferential sites for phosphorylation by AKT, whereas Ser<sup>348</sup>, Ser<sup>577</sup>, Ser<sup>595</sup> (K<sub>M</sub> &#x223c;10&#xa0;&#x3bc;M), Ser<sup>711</sup> (K<sub>M</sub> &#x223c;79&#xa0;&#x3bc;M), and Ser<sup>764</sup> were found to be preferred targets for AMPK. Phosphorylation of TBC1D4 by AKT or AMPK did not alter the intrinsic RabGAP activity, but did disrupt interaction with insulin-regulated aminopeptidase (IRAP), a resident protein of GSVs implicated in GLUT4 trafficking. These findings provide evidence that insulin and contraction may regulate TBC1D4 function primarily by disrupting the recruitment of the RabGAP to GLUT4 vesicles.

### Keywords
Partial digest, Lc-msms, Tbc1d4

### Affiliations
German Diabetes Center
Institute for Clinical Biochemistry and Pathobiochemistry
Prof. Dr. Hadi Al-Hasani Director: Institut für Klinische Biochemie und Pathobiochemie   Deutsches Diabetes-Zentrum (DDZ) Leibniz-Zentrum für Diabetes-Forschung an der Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf Auf´m Hennekamp 65 40225 Düsseldorf

### Submitter
Stefan Lehr

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Hadi Al-Hasani
Prof. Dr. Hadi Al-Hasani Director: Institut für Klinische Biochemie und Pathobiochemie   Deutsches Diabetes-Zentrum (DDZ) Leibniz-Zentrum für Diabetes-Forschung an der Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf Auf´m Hennekamp 65 40225 Düsseldorf


