### Accession
PXD025327

### Title
In vitro reconstitution of Sgk3 activation by phosphatidylinositol-3-phosphate

### Description
Serum- and glucocorticoid-regulated kinase 3 (Sgk3) is activated by the phospholipid 19 phosphatidylinositol-3-phosphate (PI3P) downstream of growth factor signaling and 20 by Vps34-mediated PI3P production during autophagy. Upregulation of Sgk3 activity 21 has been linked to a number of human cancers due to its overlapping substrate 22 specificity with Akt. Here, we show that Sgk3 is regulated by a combination of 23 phosphorylation and allosteric activation by PI3P. We demonstrate that Sgk3 is 24 specifically activated by PI3P and that PI3P binding induces large conformational 25 changes in Sgk3. Using Vps34 and liposomes containing phosphatidylinositol, we 26 reconstitute Sgk3 signaling via Vps34-mediated PI3P synthesis in vitro. In addition to 27 defining the mechanism of Sgk3 activation by PI3P, our findings open up potential 28 therapeutic avenues in allosteric inhibitor development to target Sgk3 in cancer.

### Sample Protocol
HDX reactions were conducted in a final reaction volume of 25 μL with a final Sgk3 concentration of 13 μM (for both FL and PX Sgk3). Prior to the addition of deuterated solvent, 1.5 μL of FL or PX Sgk3 was allowed to incubate with either 2 μL of 5 mM 0% PI3P vesicles or 2 μL 5 mM 5% PI3P vesciles. After the two minute incubation period, 21.5 μL D2O buffer (20mM pH 7 HEPES, 100mM NaCl, 0.5 mM TCEP, 94% D2O) was added with a final %D2O of 81.5% (v/v). The reaction was allowed to proceed for 3s, 30s, 300s, or 3000s at 18°C before being quenched with ice cold acidic quench buffer. All conditions and timepoints were created and run in triplicate. Samples were flash frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C until injection onto the ultra-performance liquid chromatography system for proteolytic cleavage, peptide separation, and injection onto a QTOF for mass analysis. Protein samples were rapidly thawed and injected onto an integrated fluidics system containing a HDx-3 PAL liquid handling robot and climate-controlled chromatography system (LEAP Technologies), a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system, as well as an Impact HD QTOF Mass spectrometer (Bruker). The protein was run over either one immobilized pepsin column at at 10C (Trajan; ProDx protease column, 2.1 mm x 30 mm PDX.PP01-F32) at 200 mL/min for 3 minutes. The resulting peptides were collected and desalted on a C18 trap column (Acquity UPLC BEH C18 1.7mm column (2.1 x 5 mm); Waters 186003975). The trap was subsequently eluted in line with a C18 reverse-phase separation column (Acquity 1.7 mm particle, 100 x 1 mm 2 C18 UPLC column, Waters 186002352), using a gradient of 5-36% B (Buffer A 0.1% formic acid; Buffer B 100% acetonitrile) over 16 minutes. Mass spectrometry experiments acquired over a mass range from 150 to 2200 m/z using an electrospray ionization source operated at a temperature of 200C and a spray voltage of 4.5 kV.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified from the non-deuterated samples of FL and PX Sgk3 using data- dependent acquisition following tandem MS/MS experiments (0.5 s precursor scan from 150- 2000 m/z; twelve 0.25 s fragment scans from 150-2000 m/z). MS/MS datasets were analysed using PEAKS7 (PEAKS), and peptide identification was carried out by using a false discovery based approach, with a threshold set to 1% using a database of purified proteins and known contaminants. The search parameters were set with a precursor tolerance of 20 ppm, fragment mass error 0.02 Da, charge states from 1-8, leading to a selection criterion of peptides that had a -10logP score of 21.4. HD-Examiner Software (Sierra Analytics) was used to automatically calculate the level of deuterium incorporation into each peptide. All peptides were manually inspected for correct charge state, correct retention time, appropriate selection of isotopic distribution, etc. Deuteration levels were calculated using the centroid of the experimental isotope clusters. Results are presented as relative levels of deuterium incorporation and the only control for back exchange was the level of deuterium present in the buffer (81.5%). Differences in exchange in a peptide were considered significant if they met all three of the following criteria: : 7% change in exchange, 0.5 Da difference in exchange, and a p value &lt;0.01 using a two tailed student t-test. All compared samples were set within the same experiment.

### Publication Abstract
Serum- and glucocorticoid-regulated kinase 3 (Sgk3) is a serine/threonine protein kinase activated by the phospholipid phosphatidylinositol 3-phosphate (PI3P) downstream of growth factor signaling via class I phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) signaling and by class III PI3K/Vps34-mediated PI3P production on endosomes. Upregulation of Sgk3 activity has recently been linked to a number of human cancers; however, the precise mechanism of activation of Sgk3 is unknown. Here, we use a wide range of cell biological, biochemical, and biophysical techniques, including hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry, to investigate the mechanism of activation of Sgk3 by PI3P. We show that Sgk3 is regulated by a combination of phosphorylation and allosteric activation. We demonstrate that binding of Sgk3 to PI3P via its regulatory phox homology (PX) domain induces large conformational changes in Sgk3 associated with its activation and that the PI3P-binding pocket of the PX domain of Sgk3 is sequestered in its inactive conformation. Finally, we reconstitute Sgk3 activation via Vps34-mediated PI3P synthesis on phosphatidylinositol liposomes in&#xa0;vitro. In addition to identifying the mechanism of Sgk3 activation by PI3P, our findings open up potential therapeutic avenues in allosteric inhibitor development to target Sgk3 in cancer.

### Keywords
Hdx-ms, Pi3p, Kinase, Sgk3

### Affiliations
University of Victoria

### Submitter
John Burke

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. John E Burke
University of Victoria


