### Accession
PXD016748

### Title
grape leaves polyphenols inhibit breast cancer malignancy

### Description
We tested the inhibitory effects of hydroalcoholic extracts from grape leaves in breast cancer malignancy using MCF-7 and SKBR-3 cell lines.

### Sample Protocol
50ug of total proteins were extracted from control and 400ug/mL Vermentino hydroalcoholic and water extract treated samples in SKBR-3 and MCF-7 cell lines and were denatured in a solution of 100 mmol/L TRIS-HCL, pH 8, and 8 mol/L urea. Samples then were ultrasonicated for 10 minutes in 10-second repeating on/off intervals of 10 seconds on and 10 seconds off (QSonica, Newtown, CT), and centrifuged at 16,000 × g for 10 minutes at 4°C to remove insoluble pellets. The soluble fraction then was reduced with dithiothreitol (15 mM) for 1 hour at room temperature and alkylated with iodoacetamide (15 mmol/L) for 30 minutes at room temperature in the dark. Then, 50μg protein was diluted to a final concentration of 2 mol/L urea with 100 mmol/L TRIS-HCL, pH 8, and digested overnight on a shaker at 37°C in 3 μg of trypsin/Lys-C mix (Promega, Madison, WI). Samples were de-salted and cleaned using HLB plates (Oasis HLB 30 μm, 5 mg sorbent; Waters).

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS was performed on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 NanoLC connected to an Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Fisher) equipped with an EasySpray ion source. The mobile phase A comprised 0.1% aqueous formic acid and mobile phase B comprised 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. Peptides were loaded onto the analytical column (PepMap RSLC C18 2 μm, 100 Å, 50 μm i.d. × 15 cm) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min using a linear AB gradient composed of 2%–25% A for 185 minutes, 25%–90% B for 5 minutes, then an isocratic hold at 90% for 5 minutes with re-equilibrating at 2% A for 10 minutes. The temperature was set to 40°C for both columns. Nano-source capillary temperature was set to 275°C and spray voltage was set to 2 kV. MS1 scans were acquired in the Orbitrap Elite at a resolution of 60,000 full width at half maximum with an automated gain control target of 1 × 106 ions over a maximum of 500 ms. MS2 spectra were acquired for the top 15 ions from each MS1 scan in normal scan mode in the ion trap with a target setting of 1 × 104 ions, an accumulation time of 100 ms, and an isolation width of 2 daltons. Normalized collision energy was set to 35% and 1 microscan was acquired for each spectra. The raw MS files were converted to mzXML using MSConvert and searched against the Swiss-Prot reviewed human FASTA database using the COMET, X! Tandem native, and X! Tandem k-score search algorithms. Precursor and fragment mass tolerance for all of these search algorithms were set to 10ppm. Cysteine carbamidomethyl was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine was set as a variable modification for all search algorithms and a maximum of two missed cleavages for all tryptic peptides was allowed Target-decoy modeling of peptide spectral matches was performed with peptide prophet and peptides with a probability score of > 95% from the entire experimental dataset were imported into Skyline software (4) to establish a library for quantification of precursor extracted ion intensities (XICs). Precursor XICs from each experimental file were extracted against the Skyline library, and peptide XICs with isotope dot product scores>0.8 and a minimum of 2 prototypic peptides per protein were filtered for final statistical analysis of proteomic differences (5). Normalization of raw peptide intensities and protein level abundance inference was calculated using the linear mixed effects model built into the open sources MSSTATs (v3.2.2) software suite

### Publication Abstract
Existing therapeutic strategies for breast cancer are limited by tumor recurrence and drug-resistance. Antioxidant plant-derived compounds such as flavonoids reduce adverse outcomes and have been identified as a potential source of antineoplastic agent with less undesirable side effects. Here, we describe the novel regulation of fatty-acid synthase (FASN), the key enzyme in de novo fatty-acid synthesis, whereby <i>Vitis vinifera</i> L. cv Vermentino leaf hydroalcoholic extract lowers its protein stability that is regulated by small ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO)ylation. The phenolic compounds characterization was performed by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS), whereas mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS), Western blotting/co-immunoprecipitation (Co-IP) and RT-PCR, 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT), clonogenicity assays, and FACS analysis were used to measure the expression of targets and tumorigenicity. Vermentino extract exhibits antitumorigenic effects, and we went on to determine that FASN and ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme 9 (UBC9), the sole E2 enzyme required for SUMOylation, were significantly reduced. Moreover, FASN was found SUMOylated in human breast cancer tissues and cell lines, and lack of SUMOylation caused by SUMO2 silencing reduced FASN protein stability. These results suggest that SUMOylation protects FASN against proteasomal degradation and may exert oncogenic activity through alteration of lipid metabolism, whereas Vermentino extract inhibits these effects which supports the additional validation of the therapeutic value of this compound in breast cancer.

### Keywords
Polyphenols, Breast cancer

### Affiliations
cedars-sinai medical center
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center

### Submitter
maria tomasi

### Lab Head
Dr Maria Lauda Tomasi
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center


