### Accession
PXD036691

### Title
The effects of silencing PTX3 oin the proteome of human endothelial cells

### Description
The human long pentraxin PTX3 has complex regulatory roles at the crossroad of innate immunity, inflammation, and tissue repair. PTX3 can be produced by various cell types, including vascular endothelial cells (ECs), in response to pro-inflammatory cytokines or bacterial molecules. But PTX3 has also been involved in the regulation of cardiovascular biology, even if contrasting results have been so far provided in both preclinical and clinical research. Therefore, we compared the proteomic profiles of human ECs isolated from umbilical cords (Human Umbilical Vein ECs, HUVECs), and we identified 19 proteins more abundant in the proteome of control ECs and 23 proteins more expressed in PTX3 silenced cells.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were dissolved in 25 mmol/L NH4HCO3 containing 0.1% RapiGest (Wa-ters Corporation), sonicated, and centrifuged at 13,000g for 10 min. After 15 min of incu-bation at 80°C, proteins were reduced with 5 mmol/L DTT at 60°C for 15 min, and car-bamidomethylated with 10 mmol/L iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the darkness. Digestion has been performed with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) (1 µg every 50 µg of proteins) overnight at 37°C. After digestion, 2% TFA was added to hydrolyze RapiGest and inactivate trypsin. Tryptic peptides were used for label-free mass spectrometry analysis, LC-MSE, performed on a hybrid quadrupole-time of flight mass spectrometer (SYNAPT-XS) coupled with an UPLC Mclass system and equipped with a nanosource (Waters Corporation). Samples were injected into a Symmetry C18 nanoACQUITY trap column, 100 Å, 5 μm, 180 μm×2 cm (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, USA) and subsequently directed to the analytical column HSS T3 C18, 100 Å, 1.7 μm, 75 μm×150 mm (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, USA), for elution at a flow rate of 300 nL/min by increasing the organic solvent B concentration from 3 to 40 % over 90 min, using 0.1%v/v formic acid in water as reversed phase solvent A, and 0.1 %v/v formic acid in Acetonitrile as reversed phase solvent B. All of the analyses were made in triplicate. analysed by LC-MSE as previously detailed (Brioschi 2014, https://doi.org/10.1007/s00216-014-7724-9), with some modification in ion mobility–enhanced data-independent acquisition (IMS-DIA). In particular, in the low-energy MS mode, the data were collected at constant collision energy of 6 eV, while in high energy mode, fragmentation was obtained by applying drift time–specific collision energies( Distler 2016, https://doi.org/10.1038/nprot.2016.042).

### Data Protocol
Statistical analysis has been performed by means of Progenesis QIP v 4.1 (Nonlinear Dynamics) using a Uniprot human protein sequence database (v2020-7)for protein identification.

### Publication Abstract
The human long pentraxin PTX3 has complex regulatory roles at the crossroad of innate immunity, inflammation, and tissue repair. PTX3 can be produced by various cell types, including vascular endothelial cells (ECs), in response to pro-inflammatory cytokines or bacterial molecules. PTX3 has also been involved in the regulation of cardiovascular biology, even if ambiguous results have been so far provided in both preclinical and clinical research. In this study, we compared the proteomic profiles of human ECs (human umbilical vein ECs, HUVECs), focusing on differentially expressed proteins between the control and PTX3-silenced ECs. We identified 19 proteins that were more abundant in the proteome of control ECs and 23 proteins that were more expressed in PTX3-silenced cells. Among the latter, proteins with multifunctional roles in angiogenesis, oxidative stress, and inflammation were found, and were further validated by assessing their mRNAs with RT-qPCR. Nevertheless, the knock down of PTX3 did not affect in vitro angiogenesis. On the contrary, the lack of the protein induced an increase in pro-inflammatory markers and a shift to the more oxidative profile of PTX3-deficient ECs. Altogether, our results support the idea of a protective function for PTX3 in the control of endothelial homeostasis, and more generally, in cardiovascular biology.

### Keywords
Label-free mass spectrometry, Ptx3, Endothelial cells

### Affiliations
Unit of functional proteomic, metabolomi and network analysis, Centro Cardiologico Monzino IRCCS, Milan, Italy
Unit of Proteomics- Centro Cardiologico Monzino IRCCS

### Submitter
Maura Brioschi

### Lab Head
Dr Cristina Banfi
Unit of functional proteomic, metabolomi and network analysis, Centro Cardiologico Monzino IRCCS, Milan, Italy


