### Accession
PXD040334

### Title
Exploring the selectivity and engineering potential of an NRPS condensation domain involved in the biosynthesis of the thermophilic siderophore fuscachelin

### Description
Condensation (C) domains are the key component linking different monomers together, typically forming peptide bonds and occasionally ester bonds, during the nonribosomal peptide synthetase (NRPS). While A domains have been well characterised due to their role in selectivity of the monomers and functioning as a gate keeper in the NRPS biosynthesis, C domains have been a subject of debate as they have not demonstrated signs of “A-domain like” side chain selectivity of its acceptor side. Here, we report our biochemical and structural characterisation of the selectivity of the fuscachelin C3-domain showing that it is not broadly flexible for monomers at the acceptor site, suggesting the need to consider C-domain mutation regarding future NRPS engineering.

### Sample Protocol
PCP-domain loading. All proteins containing PCP-domains were expressed and purified in their apo form, which were converted into the loaded holo form using the phosphopantetheinyl transferase Sfp (R4-4 mutant) and desired peptidyl-CoAs. For the tripeptidyl-CoA loading - the loading reaction utilised a 1 : 2 : 0.1 molar ratio of the PCP domain, peptidyl-CoA and Sfp (R4-4 mutant), respectively. Peptidyl-CoA (200 μM) was loaded onto PCP-containing construct (100 μM), for 1 h at 30 °C via the activity of Sfp (10 μM) in PCP-loading buffer (50 mM HEPES, pH 7.0; 50 mM NaCl; 10 mM MgCl2). For aminoacyl-CoA loading – the desired aminoacyl-CoA (200 μM), PCP-containing construct (100 μM), and Sfp (R4-4 mutant, 10 μM) were mixed in PCP-loading buffer. The reaction was incubated for 1 hour at 30 °C. Following the loading reaction, remaining peptidyl-CoA/ substrate pantetheine analogue was removed by three sequential concentration / dilution steps (Amicon® Ultra-0.5 mL centrifugal filters, 50 kDa MWCO, Merck-Millipore) using PCP-loading buffer. Enzyme Activity Assays. Assays were performed in three steps: (1) peptide loading of the PCP contained proteins; (2) in vitro reconstitution of NRPS activity; and (3) cleavage of the elongated peptides from the PCP2-C3-SpyCatcher-SpyTag-PCP construct.  (1) All proteins containing PCP-domains were expressed and purified in their apo form, which were converted into the loaded holo form using the phosphopantetheinyl transferase Sfp (R4-4 mutant) and desired peptidyl-CoAs. [5] The loading reaction utilised a 1 : 2 : 0.1 molar ratio of the PCP domain, peptidyl-/aminoacyl-CoA and Sfp (R4-4 mutant), respectively. Peptidyl-CoA (200 μM) was loaded onto PCP-containing construct (100 μM), for 1 h at 30 °C via the activity of Sfp (10 μM) in PCP-loading buffer (50 mM HEPES, pH 7.0; 50 mM NaCl; 10 mM MgCl2). Following the loading reaction, remaining peptidyl-CoA was removed by three sequential concentration / dilution steps (Amicon® Ultra-0.5 mL centrifugal filters, 50 kDa MWCO, Merck-Millipore) using PCP-loading buffer.  (2) Peptide loaded PCP2-C3 Spy-Catcher constructs were incubated with unloaded PCP3 Spy-tag construct (both 100 µM) for 10 min at 30 °C, followed by loading of the desired aminoacyl-CoA on the PCP3 as described above. The reaction was then incubated for an additional 1 h at 30 °C to allow for the condensation reaction to occur.  (3) For thioether tethered amino acid loaded PCP3 substrates, reaction mixtures were directly analysed using nano LC ESI MS. For thioester tethered amino acid loaded PCP3 substrates, substrates were chemically cleaved by an addition of a 40% methylamine solution in water (0.5 M) to liberate the methylamide peptides; reaction mixtures were incubated for 15 min at room temperature. For thioester tethered hydroxy acid loaded PCP3 substrates, 15μL of 1M solutions of sodium mercaptoethylsulphonate (MESNa) and cysteamine.HCl were added to offload the substrates via transthioesterification; the mixtures were incubated for 20 min at room temperature. After chemical cleavage, 850 μL of 0.1% FA in water was added into the reaction to adjust the pH to ~7. Purification was performed using solid phase extraction (SPE) column (Bond Elut Plexa 30 mg/mL, Agilent Technologies) that had been activated with 0.1% FA in MeOH (1 mL) and equilibrated with 0.1% FA in water (1 mL). The neutralised reaction mixture was applied to the equilibrate SPE column via gravity flow, washed with 0.1% FA in water (1 mL) and eluted with 1 mL of 0.1% FA in ACN / H2O (50:50). Samples were then dried by freeze dryer at -50 °C and analysed by HRMS.

### Data Protocol
PPant Ejection. Mass spectrometry measurements were performed on a MicroTOFq mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics) coupled online to a 1200 series capillary/nano-LC (Agilent Technologies) via a Bruker nano ESI sprayer. Proteins were separated on a 150 mm reverse-phase column (ZORBAX 300SB-C18, 3.5 µm, 0.075 x 150 mm; Agilent Technologies) after binding to a trap column (ZORBAX 300SB-C18, 5 µm, 0.30 x 5 mm cartridges; Agilent Technologies). Elution was performed on-line with a gradient from 4% MeCN to 60% MeCN in 0.1% FA over 30 min at 300 nL / min. Proteins greater than 20 kDa were separated on a MabPac SEC-1 5 µm 300 Å 50 x 4 mm (Thermo Scientific) column with an isocratic gradient of 50% MeCN, 0.05% TFA and 0.05% FA at a flow rate of 50 µL / minute. The protein is eluted over a 20-minute run-time monitored by UV detection at 254 nm. After 20 minutes the flow path is switched to infuse Low concentration Tune mix (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA) to calibrate the spectrum post acquisition. The eluent is nebulized and ionized using the Bruker electrospray source with a capillary voltage of 4500 V dry gas at 180 °C, flow rate of 4 L / minute and nebulizer gas pressure at 0.6 bar. MSMS spectra were acquired by manual selection of isolation mass and isolation width with a collision energy of 32. The spectra were extracted and deconvoluted using Data explorer software version 3.4 build 192 (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany). HRMS and MS2 Measurement. High resolution mass spectrometry measurements were performed on an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled online to a nano-LC (Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano; Thermo Scientific) via a nanospray source. Peptides were separated on a 50 cm reverse-phase column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, 75 μm × 50 cm, nanoViper, C18, 2 μm, 100 Å; Thermo Scientific) after binding to a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 100 μm × 2 cm, nanoViper, C18, 5 μm, 100 Å; Thermo Scientific). Elution was performed on-line with a gradient from 6% MeCN to 30% MeCN in 0.1% formic acid over 30 min at 250 nL min−1. Full scan MS was performed in the Orbitrap at 60 000 nominal resolution, with targeted MS2 scans of peptides of interest acquired at 15 000 nominal resolution in the Orbitrap using HCD with stepped collision energy (24 ± 5% NCE). Raw data was manually analysed in XCalibur QualBrowser (Thermo Scientific), with extracted ion chromatograms to the predicted species generated with 6 ppm mass tolerance. Predicted MS2 fragments were generated with MS-Product (ProteinProspector v5.22.1, UCSF) and manually assigned to spectra.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nonribosomal peptide; biosynthesis; condensation domain; peptidyl carrier protein; biocatalysis; depsipeptide

### Affiliations
Monash 
(Monash University). Y. T. Candace Ho: yee.ho@monash.edu (Monash University)

### Submitter
Joel Steele

### Lab Head
Dr Max Cryle
(Monash University). Y. T. Candace Ho: yee.ho@monash.edu (Monash University)


