### Accession
PXD022846

### Title
Analysis of mouse colon using LC-MS

### Description
The colon tissues of mice in the blank group, model group and crocin treated group were analyzed, and corresponding differentially expressed proteins were identified from statistical analysis of standardized quantitative results. GO and KEGG analysis were performed to determine the protein interaction.

### Sample Protocol
A protein sample solution was obtained from the colon of mice, quantified by using a bicinchoninic aci kit, and then hydrolyzed with lyase, the resulting peptide samples were detached and then analyzed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
The results were processed using MaxQuant (1.5.6.0). The UNIPROT database was used to obtain protein sequences, and the protein sequences and their respective reverse bait sequences were used in the MaxQuant search. Corresponding differentially expressed proteins were identified from statistical analysis of standardized quantitative results. Proteins with different expression folds (ratio A/B > 1.5 or ratio A/B < 0.66) were defined as significantly different. Finally, GO and KEGG pathway analyses were performed to determine protein interactions.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Mouse, Colon

### Affiliations
School of Life Sciences, Jilin University
School of Life Sciences, Jilin University, Changchun City, Jilin Province, P. R. China

### Submitter
Di Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Di Wang
School of Life Sciences, Jilin University, Changchun City, Jilin Province, P. R. China


