### Accession
PXD019609

### Title
PML Nuclear Bodies are stress-responsive sumoylation/degradation compartments regulating KAP1 silencing function in embryonic stem cells

### Description
PML drives the assembly of PML Nuclear Bodies (NBs), where it recruits many serendipitously-identified proteins, including the SUMO-E2 enzyme UBC9. Interferons, arsenic or oxidative stress, all enhance NB-formation. Here demonstrate that PML is required for efficient basal sumoylation in mouse embryonic stem cells (mESCs) and immediate stress-responsive sumoylation in mouse liver or Acute Promyelocytic Leukemia (APL). Biochemically, PML NBs confer an oxidation-protective environment for the redox-sensitive UBC9 activity, which, together with enzyme/target concentration/immobilization, favors processive SUMO2/3 conjugation. Accordingly, PML-facilitated sumoylation is accompanied by ubiquitination and degradation of some targets. In vivo proteomic analysis of SUMO2 conjugates in APL identified therapy-responsive targets, among which the prominent KAP1 complex of epigenetic regulators. In mESCs, PML is required for SUMO-dependent KAP1 repressive activity and for the resulting silencing of transposable elements and 2-cell-like genes. The ES status is further regulated by a PML-facilitated repressive sumoylation of the Dppa2 zygote genome activation driver. These findings establish the biochemical function of PML NBs in vivo and unveiling an unsuspected epigenetic control of key ESC targets by PML.

### Sample Protocol
Cells expressing His10-SUMO2 were washed and collected in PBS. SUMO2 conjugates were purified as described in Hendriks and Vertegaal 2016. All the experiments were performed on an EASY-nLC 1000 system (Proxeon, Odense, Denmark) connected to a Q-Exactive Orbitrap (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany) through a nano-electrospray ion source. The Q-Exactive was coupled to a 15 cm analytical column with an inner-diameter of 75 μm, in-house packed with 1.9 μm C18-AQ beads (Reprospher-DE, Pur, Dr. Manish, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany).  The gradient length was 120 minutes from 2% to 95% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 200 nL/minute. For the samples from cohort 2 and 3, two technical repeats were performed operating the mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode with a top 5 method. Full-scan MS spectra were acquired at a target value of 3 x 106 and a resolution of 70,000, and the Higher-Collisional Dissociation (HCD) tandem mass spectra (MS/MS) were recorded at a target value of 1 x 105 and with a resolution of 17,500 with a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 25%. The maximum MS1 and MS2 injection times were 20 ms and 250 ms, respectively. The precursor ion masses of scanned ions were dynamically excluded (DE) from MS/MS analysis for 20 sec. Ions with charge 1, and greater than 6 were excluded from triggering MS2 analysis. For the cohort 1, the mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode with a top 7 method, two independent technical repeats were performed. Full-scan MS spectra were acquired at a target value of 3 x 106 and a resolution of 70,000, and the Higher-Collisional Dissociation (HCD) tandem mass spectra (MS/MS) were recorded at a target value of 1 x 105 and with a resolution of 35,000 with a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 25%. The maximum MS1 and MS2 injection times were 20 ms and 120 ms, respectively. The precursor ion masses of scanned ions were dynamically excluded (DE) from MS/MS analysis for 60 sec. Ions with charge 1, and greater than 6 were excluded from triggering MS2 analysis.

### Data Protocol
All RAW data were analysed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30) according to Tyanova et al. (Tyanova, Temu et al. 2016) . We performed the search against an in silico digested UniProt reference proteome for Mus musculus (24 March 2016) and the PML-RARA protein. Database searches were performed with Trypsin/P, allowing four missed cleavages. Oxidation (M) and Acetyl (Protein N-term) were allowed as variable modifications with a maximum number of 5. Match between runs was performed with 0.7 min match time window and 20 min alignment time window. The maximum peptide mass was set to 5000. Label Free Quantification was performed using the MaxLFQ approach, not allowing Fast LFQ (Cox, Hein et al. 2014). Instrument type was set to Orbitrap.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Kap1-trim28-tif1b, Pml nuclear bodies, Acute promyelocytic leukemia, Arsenic, Dppa2, Sumoylation, Embryonic stem cells, Transposable elements, Stress

### Affiliations
Andalusian Center for Regenerative Medicine and Cell Biology, CABIMER, University of Seville
Cell and Chemical Biology Leiden University Medical Center

### Submitter
Román González-Prieto

### Lab Head
Dr Alfred C.O. Vertegaal
Cell and Chemical Biology Leiden University Medical Center


