### Accession
PXD016639

### Title
Integrative Threading of the DNA-PKcs Disordered Region with Crosslinking Restraints

### Description
Integrative structure modelling was applied to understand how auto-phosphorylation of the ABCDE cluster in DNA-PKcs can occur. We used crosslinking restraints to assign sequence to structurally unassigned helices in DNA-PKcs s in the largely disordered region containing the ABCDE cluster. Our final model positions the ABCDE cluster at the end of the second helices, suggesting that phosphorylation occurs through trans-auto-phosphorylation, or through a large conformational change in the disordered region for cis-auto-phosphorylation.

### Sample Protocol
Full length human DNA-PKcs was crosslinked with disuccinimidyl suberate (DSS), disuccinimidyl glutarate (DSG), and Bis(succinimidyl)penta(ethylene glycol) (BS(PEG)5). For DSS and DSG experiments, crosslinking was conducted at 37°C for 30 minutes with shaking. For BS(PEG)5 experiments crosslinking was conducted at 30°C for 30 minutes with shaking. Crosslinking was quenched by adding ammonium bicarbonate. To increase sampling, various crosslinker concentrations were used.  Cross-linked samples were digested overnight with trypsin. To enrich for crosslinked peptides, samples were separated on a Superdex Peptide PC 3.2/30 size exclusion column. Samples were reconstituted and run on a nanoLC-Orbitrap Velos in data-dependent acquisition mode. Peptides were separated on a 10cm x 75um self-packed C18 column (New Objective Picofrit, Aeris Peptide XB 3.6um beads), with a 30 minute gradient at 300nL/min.

### Data Protocol
Crosslinked peptides were identified using the crosslinking module of Mass Spec Studio (V2). The only protein searched was DNA-PKcs. Search parameters included mass range 400-2000 m/z, trypsin cleavage, charge state +3-7, peptide length 3-50 amino acids, MS and MS2 tolerance ±10pm, and a percent E value threshold of 10.

### Publication Abstract
X-ray crystallography and electron microscopy maps resolved to 3-8&#x202f;&#xc5; are generally sufficient for tracing the path of the polypeptide chain in space, while often insufficient for unambiguously registering the sequence on the path (i.e., threading). Frequently, however, additional information is available from other biophysical experiments, physical principles, statistical analyses, and other prior models. Here, we formulate an integrative approach for sequence assignment to a partial backbone model as an optimization problem, which requires three main components: the representation of the system, the scoring function, and the optimization method. The method is implemented in the open source Integrative Modeling Platform (IMP) (https://integrativemodeling.org), allowing a number of different terms in the scoring function. We apply this method to localizing the sequence assignment within a 199-residue disordered region of three structured and sequence unassigned helices in the DNA-PKcs crystallographic structure, using chemical crosslinks, hydrogen deuterium exchange, and sequence connectivity. The resulting ensemble of threading models provides two major solutions, one of which suggests that the crucial ABCDE cluster of phosphorylation sites cannot undergo intra-molecular autophosphorylation without a conformational rearrangement. The ensemble of solutions embodies the most accurate and precise sequence threading given the available information.

### Keywords
Dna-pkcs, Crosslinking-ms, Integrative modelling

### Affiliations
Biochemistry & Molecular Biology Cumming School of Medicine University of Calgary, Canada
University of Calgary

### Submitter
Morgan Hepburn

### Lab Head
Dr David C. Schriemer
Biochemistry & Molecular Biology Cumming School of Medicine University of Calgary, Canada


