### Accession
PXD003355

### Title
Adaptive mechanisms of Aspergillus fumigatus’conidia to nutrient restriction

### Description
Aspergillus fumigatus, a common airborne fungus, has been reported as one of the most frequent agents of human fungal infections. However, A. fumigatus conidia atmospheric resistance and longevity, and their aging mechanism are unknown. Therefore, the main purpose of this work is to clarify the main processes associated with conidial adaptation to nutrient limitation, similar to those found in their atmospheric transport. To that a time course evaluation of the changes in the proteome and in the ultrastructure of A. fumigatus’ conidia subjected to limiting nutrient conditions were performed, allowing a comprehensive characterization of conidia cells behavior and, revealing possible targets for the development of new antifungal medicines and improve infection control strategies. In the proposed work, a total of 712 proteins were identified and compared in the A. fumigatus conidia, with 387 proteins presenting significant differences among the considered conditions. These 387 proteins were then grouped into clusters according to similarities in their dynamic profile (relative levels) among the three points in time analyzed, and four completely distinct profiles can be observed. According with the proteomics changes, it was observed that the conidia go from a highly active metabolic state to a dormant state, and culminate in a cell autolysis state revealed by increased levels of hydrolytic enzymes. The proteomics alterations observed were further corroborate with the structural results, where it was observed changes in mitochondria, nucleus, and plasma membrane ultrastructure, consistent with an apoptotic process. Altogether the results indicate that the changes in protein levels anticipated those in cell morphology, clearly highlighting the need for further studies that may lead to significant improvement in infection control strategies. Additionally, a total of 28 proteins were identified with one acetylated peptide. Among them, it was possible to quantify the acetylation levels in 21 proteins with 11 presenting a statistical meaningful difference between the tested time points. Furthermore, from the proteins evaluated, all except the protein Histone H3, presented N-terminal acetylation. In the case of the Histone H3, the modification was observed at the lysine 56. In general, the proteins regulated by acetylation quantified in our study could be grouped into four distinct groups and although only some of the proteins have a statistical meaningful variation between the experimental time points, those proteins are spread along the different groups. Moreover, statistical variation if observed for all the proteins belonging to the group of proteins that have higher acetylation levels at time 15 minutes. In conclusion, this work presents a comprehensive characterization of the proteomics changes associated with the adaptive mechanism of Aspergillus fumigatus’ conidia to nutrient restriction, raveling some on the main pathways associated with such capacity. Furthermore, this proteomic characterization is associated with the conidia’s ultrastructural evaluation allowing to link the changes observed at the proteome level with the respective phenotype. Finally, it was also presented an evaluation of the levels of the protein acetylation, one of the principal regulatory PTMs in eukaryotes. Therefore, the present study may be an important dataset to be used as a tool to understand and identified potential targets associated with conidia resistance, and therefore improving infection control strategies.

### Sample Protocol
Strains and growth conditions One A. fumigatus strain, from an in-house collection previously stored in 20 % (v/v) glycerol at -80 ºC, was grown on Sabouraud Dextrose Agar (SDA; Diagnostici Liofilchem) slants at 37 ºC, for three, 15 and 30 days. These different points in time were selected since they correspond to relevant points in time for the changes in A. fumigatus survival rates as observed in previous works. At these  selected points in time, conidia were harvest by suspension in saline solution (0.9 % NaCl), mycelial contaminations were separated by filtration through a 40 µm nylon cell strainer (BD Biosciences, San Jose, USA), and the cell concentration was adjusted to 2×106 conidia per mL Sample preparation for Mass Spectrometry (MS) analysis  Protein extraction from the same amount of A. fumigatus’ conidia was achieved by boiling the samples in Laemmli buffer containing SDS and DTT followed by a centrifugation step (14 000×g for 5 min) to remove insoluble material. The soluble proteins were alkylated with acrylamide and subjected to in-gel digestion following the short-GeLC approach. Briefly, samples were loaded into a “4–20% TGX Stain-Free Gel” (Bio-Rad), followed by partial electrophoretic separation (SDS-PAGE). Proteins were subsequently visualized with Colloidal Coomassie Blue staining, and gel lanes were sliced into two parts of equal size, and further sliced into small pieces, for independent processing. Gel pieces were destained, dehydrated, and rehydrated with 70 µL of trypsin (0.01 µg/µL in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate) followed by an overnight digestion (room temperature). Digested peptides were extracted from the gel, by sequential incubation with acetonitrile (ACN) solutions in 1 % formic acid (FA) (30 %, 50 %, and 98 % organic content) and the peptide mixtures were dried, and desalted using OMIX tips with C18 stationary phase (Agilent Technologies). Finally, peptides were re-suspended in the proper mobile phase (2 % ACN in 0.1 % FA) for LC-MS/MS analysis. To monitor samples loss during sample preparation and for retention time adjustments, samples were spiked with 1 µL of recombinant green fluorescent protein (malE-GFP) (1.84 µg/µL) before digestion. Samples were analyzed on a Triple TOFTM 5600 System (ABSciex®) through information-dependent acquisition (IDA) followed by SWATH acquisition. Peptides were resolved by LC (nanoLC Ultra 2D, Eksigent®) on MicroLC column ChromXPTM C18CL (300 μm ID × 15 cm length, 3 μm particles, 120 Å pore size, Eksigent®) at 5 μL/min , and eluted into the mass spectrometer with an ACN linear gradient in 0.1 % FA (2 % to 35 % ACN, for 45 min), using an electrospray ionization source (DuoSprayTM Source, ABSciex). Pooled mixtures of the biological replicates (one pool per each part of the gel) were analyzed in IDA mode, to generate peptide fragmentation spectra for further protein identification and library creation. For IDA, the mass spectrometer was set to scan full spectra (350-1250 m/z), for 250 ms, followed by up to 30 MS/MS scans (100–1500 m/z). Candidate ions with a charge state between +2 and +5, and counts per second above a minimum threshold of 70 were isolated for fragmentation. One MS/MS spectra was collected for 100 ms, before adding those precursor ions to the exclusion list for 15 seconds (mass spectrometer operated by Analyst® TF 1.6, ABSciex®). The rolling collision was used with a collision energy spread of 5. To improve sample coverage, an additional IDA experiment was done for each pool, using an exclusion list of the previously identified peptides. For quantitative analysis, the peptide mixtures were combined into a single sample per biological replicate. The SWATH setup was essentially as previously described [16]. The mass spectrometer was operated in a looped product ion mode and specifically tuned to allow a quadrupole resolution of 25 m/z mass selection. Using an isolation width of 26 m/z (containing 1 m/z for the window overlap), a set of 30 overlapping windows was constructed, covering the precursor mass range of 350–1100 m/z. A 50 ms survey scan (350-1500 m/z) was acquired at the beginning of each cycle, and SWATH-MS/MS spectra were collected from 100-1500 m/z for 100 ms resulting in a cycle time of 3.1 s. Collision energy for each window was determined according to the calculation for a charge +2 ion-centered upon the window with a collision energy spread of 15.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification/Library generation Peptide identification and library generation (“proteome library”) were performed with Protein PilotTM software (v5.0, ABSciex®), using the following parameters: (1) search against a database composed of a unreviewed A. fumigatus database (TrEMBL) from UniProtKB (released in January 2015) and malE-GFP sequence; (2) fixed modification: acrylamide alkylation; (3) and trypsin digestion. An independent False Discovery Rate (FDR) analysis, using the target-decoy approach provided by Protein PilotTM, was used to assess the quality of identifications. Identified proteins with peptides reaching a 5% local FDR were considered as positive identifications. SWATH processing was based on a specific library of precursor masses, and fragment ions form the IDA experiments. For protein acetylation analysis, peptide identification was done has described above but considering biological modifications as variable modifications. In this case, peptide library for SWATH analysis (“acetylation library”) was composed by a list of precursors masses and the respective fragments ions of all the acetylated peptides identified (peptides reaching a 5% local FDR) and for the internal standard (malE-GFP). SWATH data processing Data processing was performed using SWATHTM processing plug-in for PeakViewTM (v2.0.01, ABSciex®). Briefly, peptides were automatically selected from the library (“proteome library”) using the following criteria: (1) unique peptides for specific targeted protein were ranked by intensity of the precursor ion from the IDA, estimated by Protein PilotTM; and (2) peptides with biological modifications and/or shared between different protein entries/isoforms were excluded. A maximum of fifteen peptides were used per protein, and SWATHTM quantitation was attempted for all proteins considered as positive identifications. Peptides were confirmed by finding and scoring peak groups that are a set of fragment ions for the peptide. Up to five target fragment ions were automatically selected and peak groups were scored as previously described. Peak group confidence threshold was determined based on an FDR analysis. Peptides within 1% FDR threshold (in at least two of the three biological replicates) were retained. Peak areas of the target fragment ions of those peptides were extracted across experiments, using an extracted-ion chromatogram (XIC) window of 3 min and 20 mDa XIC width. Protein levels were estimated by summing all peptide transitions for a given protein. Two steps of data normalization were done: (1) protein levels were normalized for the internal standard levels; followed by (2) the normalization for the total intensity of a group of invariable proteins (p-values > 0.05 using an ANOVA). SWATH analysis of acetylation, was done using the library composed by the acetylated peptides, and the data processing was similar to the described above with the following adaptation: (1) the modified peptides were not excluded and no limit of peptides was established. Peptide/protein modification levels were calculated by summing all the peptide transitions, and the same two steps of normalization described above was applied. Finally the modification levels were normalized for the total levels of the respective protein, to determine the fraction of the protein content is modified. Clustering of Profiles and Comparative Analyses Clustering analysis and complementary heat maps were done using GPRroX (version 1.1.15). Clustering was performed using the unsupervised clustering fuzzy c-means algorithm implemented in the Mfuzz package, which is a soft clustering algorithm, noise-robust and well-fitted to the protein profile data. Clustering was presented to trace the proteomics’ profile of the conidia over the time course (using the normalized protein levels). Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment analysis was performed for each cluster within the FungiFun (2.2.8 BETA), with the following criteria: (1) against A. fumigatus A1163 species; (2) using a Hypergeometric distribution with Benjamini-Hochberg adjustment (FDR correction) and a cut-off of 0.05 p-value. Additionally, specific cellular components ontologies were analyzed using UniProt.  Statistical analysis (ANOVA) was performed in InfernoRDN (version 1.1.5581.33355) using the log2 transformed values. Statistical significance was considered for p-values<0.05. Data normality was accessed by a combinatory analysis of histograms and Q–Q plots obtained in InfernoRDN. Correlation analysis in combination with heat maps were used to identified and excluded less correlated replicates. Comparison among experimental conditions was performed by Tukey HSD or Dunnett’s T3 post hos tests depending on if the homogeneity of variances is observed or not, respectively. Homogeneity of variances was tested using Leven’s test. Both post hoc and the Leven’s tests were performed in IBM®SPSS® Statistics Version 22.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics changes; aspergillus fumigatus’conidia; swath-ms; acetylation

### Affiliations
​Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology – University of Coimbra
Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology – University of Coimbra

### Submitter
Sandra Anjo

### Lab Head
Dr Bruno Manadas
Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology – University of Coimbra


