### Accession
PXD038012

### Title
Testis-specific serine kinase 3 is required for sperm morphogenesis and male fertility

### Description
TSSK3 is expressed in elongating sperm and localizes to the sperm tail. To define the essential roles of TSSK3 in vivo and elucidate the mechanisms causing the phenotype, we conducted phosphoproteomics using purified germ cells from Tssk3 HET and KO testes.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for deep-scale phosphoproteomic profiling was performed as described previously with minor modifications. Briefly, samples were lysed with 8 M Urea lysis buffer, reduced/alkylated with dithiothreitol/iodoacetamide and digested using LysC and trypsin enzyme. The peptides were desalted using Sep-Pak Vav 1cc C18 cartridges (Water WAT054955) and dried in a speed vac. The peptides (120 µg per sample) were labeled with TMT10plex Label Reagent Set (Thermo Scientific 90110) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Offline fractioantion was carried out to generate 96 fractions pooled to 24 fractions for proteome and 12 fractions for phosphoproteome. Sample preparation for deep-scale phosphoproteomic profiling was performed as described previously,33 with minor modifications. Briefly, samples were lysed with 8 M Urea lysis buffer, reduced/alkylated with dithiothreitol/iodoacetamide and digested using LysC and trypsin enzyme. The peptides were desalted using Sep-Pak Vav 1cc C18 cartridges (Water WAT054955) and dried in a speed vac. The peptides (120 µg per sample) were labeled with TMT10plex Label Reagent Set (Thermo Scientific 90110) according to the manufacturer’s protocol.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were converted to mzML using MSConvert.34 Precursor ion intensities were derived from the area under each elution curve and reporter ions intensities were extracted, using MASIC. Raw spectra were searched with MSFragger (v3.2) with mass calibration enabled. Peptide validation was performed using semi-supervised learning procedure in Percolator as implemented in MokaPot. The gene product inference and iBAQ-based quantification were carried out using the gpGrouper algorithm to calculate peptide peak area (MS1) based expression estimates.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Teratozoospermia, Oligozoospermia, Proteomics, Knockout mouse, Oligoteratozoospermia

### Affiliations
Center for Drug Discovery, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX Department of Pathology & Immunology, BCM, Houston, TX
Baylor College of Medicine

### Submitter
Antrix Jain

### Lab Head
Dr Martin M. Matzuk
Center for Drug Discovery, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX Department of Pathology & Immunology, BCM, Houston, TX


