### Accession
PXD038798

### Title
Structural insights into p300 regulation and acetylation-dependent genome organisation

### Description
Histone modifications are deposited by chromatin modifying enzymes and read out by proteins that recognize the modified state. BRD4-NUT is an oncogenic fusion protein of the acetyl lysine reader BRD4 that binds to the acetylase p300 and enables formation of long-range intra- and interchromosomal interactions. We here examine how acetylation reading and writing enable formation of such interactions. We show that NUT contains an acidic transcriptional activation domain that binds to the TAZ2 domain of p300. We use NMR to investigate the structure of the complex and found that the TAZ2 domain has an autoinhibitory role for p300. NUT-TAZ2 interaction or mutations found in cancer that interfere with autoinhibition by TAZ2 allosterically activate p300. p300 activation results in a self-organizing, acetylation-dependent feed-forward reaction that enables long-range interactions by bromodomain multivalent acetyl-lysine binding. We discuss the implications for chromatin organisation, gene regulation and dysregulation in disease.

### Sample Protocol
For the identification and quantification of histone acetylation following in vitro HAT assays, we followed the previously published procedure. In brief, reconstituted NCPs were incubated with 100M acetyl-CoA, or in addition purified p300s (340-2,094) or the p300 core domain (1,043-1,666) for 30 min at 30°C. HPLC-MS/MS was used to quantify site specific H2A, H2B, H3 and H4 acetylation by label-free quantification. Histones were in-gel digested by trypsin (1:20, Promega Corp., Madison, WI, USA) for 16.5h in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma-Aldrich, Inc., St. Louis, MO, USA) buffer. To make sure loading amounts are consistent among different samples, equal amounts of proteins were subjected to digestion by trypsin. The resulting tryptic peptide were desalted and loaded onto a home-made column packed with 12 cm length × 3 μm ID C18 resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Beim Bruckle, Germany). LC-MS/MS was performed on an Orbitrap Exploris™ 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc., Waltham, MA, USA) coupled with an EASY-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc., Waltham, MA, USA). Mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid in water, and mobile phase B was 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (v/v). The eluting flow rate was 0.3 μL/min. Samples were separated and eluted with a gradient of 5% to 35% mobile phase B in A over 20 min. Under the positive-ion mode, full-scan mass spectra were acquired over the m/z range from 300 to 1,400 using the Orbitrap mass analyzer with mass resolution of 60,000. MS/MS fragmentation is performed in a data-dependent mode, of which the 15 most intense ions are selected for MS/MS analysis at a resolution of 15,000 using collision mode of HCD. Other important parameters: isolation window, 2.0 m/z units; default charge, 2+; normalized collision energy, 30%; maximum IT, auto; AGC target, standard; dynamic exclusion, exclude after 2 times within 20s.

### Data Protocol
Database search and label-free quantification were performed by Proteome Discoverer 2.5. MS/MS spectra were searched against the reverse-concatenated non-redundant FASTA Saccharomyces cerevisiae database compiled from the UNIPROT database with incorporation of the reconstituted histone sequences. Six variable modifications (-131.040 Da for N-terminus methionine loss, +15.995 Da for methionine oxidation, +42.011 Da for lysine and N-terminal acetylation, +14.01565 Da for lysine and arginine monomethylation) were used for database search. All other parameters were set as default including 10 ppm and 0.02 Da for the precursor and fragmentation tolerances, respectively. After peptide-spectra matching, 1% FDR was applied to assembly and select high-confidence identifications as default. The peptide intensities were normalized and scaled for label-free quantification. Normalization was performed according to the abundances of all peptides. The peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) for all acetylated histone peptides were manually verified as described160. Two technical replicate experiments were done.

### Publication Abstract
Histone modifications are deposited by chromatin modifying enzymes and read out by proteins that recognize the modified state. BRD4-NUT is an oncogenic fusion protein of the acetyl lysine reader BRD4 that binds to the acetylase p300 and enables formation of long-range intra- and interchromosomal interactions. We here examine how acetylation reading and writing enable formation of such interactions. We show that NUT contains an acidic transcriptional activation domain that binds to the TAZ2 domain of p300. We use NMR to investigate the structure of the complex and found that the TAZ2 domain has an autoinhibitory role for p300. NUT-TAZ2 interaction or mutations found in cancer that interfere with autoinhibition by TAZ2 allosterically activate p300. p300 activation results in a self-organizing, acetylation-dependent feed-forward reaction that enables long-range interactions by bromodomain multivalent acetyl-lysine binding. We discuss the implications for chromatin organisation, gene regulation and dysregulation in disease.

### Keywords
P300, Nucleosome, Acetylation

### Affiliations
University of Leicester

### Submitter
Daniel Panne

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Panne
University of Leicester


