### Accession
PXD001194

### Title
PROMIS-Quan: a novel proteomic method for plasma biomarker quantification

### Description
Unbiased proteomic analysis of plasma samples holds the promise to reveal clinically invaluable disease biomarkers. However the tremendous dynamic range of the plasma proteome has so far hampered the identification of such low abundant markers. To overcome this challenge we analyzed the plasma microparticle proteome, and reached an unprecedented depth of over 3,000 plasma proteins in single runs. To add a quantitative dimension, we developed PROMIS-Quan – PROteomics of MIcroparticles with Super-SILAC Quantification, a novel mass spectrometry-based technology for plasma microparticle proteome quantification. PROMIS-Quan enables a two-step relative and absolute SILAC quantification. First, plasma microparticle proteomes are quantified relative to a super-SILAC mix composed of cell lines from distinct origins. Next, the absolute amounts of selected proteins of interest are quantified relative to the super-SILAC mix. We applied PROMIS-Quan to prostate cancer and compared plasma microparticle samples of healthy individuals and prostate cancer patients. We identified in total 5,374 plasma-microparticle proteins, and revealed a predictive signature of 3 proteins that were elevated in the patient-derived plasma microparticles. Finally, PROMIS-Quan enabled determination of the absolute quantitative changes in prostate specific antigen (PSA) upon treatment. We propose PROMIS-Quan as an innovative platform for biomarker discovery, validation and quantification in both the biomedical research and in the clinical worlds.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma was separated from the blood samples by centrifugation at 1,500 x g for 10 min at 4°C followed by a second centrifugation of the supernatant and storage of the plasma supernatant at -80°C. For the isolation of microparticles, plasma samples were thawed on ice to avoid lysis of the microparticles before their separation from the plasma sample, and then centrifuged at 4,000 rpm for 20 min at 4°C. Supernatants were diluted 2-fold in ice-cold PBS and centrifuged at 20,000 x g at 4°C for 1 h.  Pellets were washed with ice-cold PBS and centrifuged again at 20,000 x g at 4°C for 1 h. Solubilization of the microparticle pellets was done in lysis buffer containing 6 M urea, 2 M thiourea in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Each microparticle sample from the healthy donors was extracted from approximately 3 ml of plasma. Microparticles from prostate cancer patients and the healthy controls of that experiment were extracted from 0.5 ml of plasma. Preparation of Super-SILAC Mix: SILAC labeling was performed by culturing MDA-MB-231, HeLa, HepG2, RKO and U2OS cells in SILAC-DMEM, namely DMEM devoid of the natural lysine and arginine and supplemented with 13C615N2-lysine, 13C615N4-arginine, and with dialyzed FBS and antibiotics. LNCaP and Jurkat cells were labeled in SILAC-RPMI with the same supplements. Labeled amino acids were purchased from Cambridge Isotope Laboratories. Cells were cultured for more than 10 doublings in the SILAC medium to attain complete labeling, and the incorporation was examined by separate LC MS/MS analyses. Lysate super-SILAC mix was obtained by lysing cell pellets in 6 M urea, 2 M thiourea in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. For both secretome and CLMP extraction, cells were cultured in SILAC serum-free medium for 48 hr, followed by centrifugation at 4,000 rpm for 20 min at room temperature. The supernatants for secretome samples were diluted 1:1 in 8M urea prior to trypsin digestion. For CLMP extraction, medium was diluted 2-fold in ice-cold PBS followed by high-speed centrifugation (1h at 20,000 g at room temperature). Microparticle pellets were then solubilized in 6 M urea, 2 M thiourea in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Bradford protein determination was used in preliminary experiments, and showed that 1 ml of plasma results in approximately 10 µg of microparticle proteins. Combination of the super-SILAC and the microparticle proteins (1:1 ratio) was based on this calculation.  Trypsin Digestion and LC-MS/MS Analysis: All samples (microparticle proteins with or without the super-SILAC standards, PSA calibration curve samples) were reduced with 1 mM DTT, followed by alkylation with 5 mM iodoacetamide and subsequent 3h digestion with endoproteinase Lys-C (Wako Chemicals; 1:100 enzyme to protein ratio). Lysates were diluted 4-fold in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and digested overnight with sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega; 1:50 enzyme to protein ratio). The resulting peptides were acidified with TFA and subsequently purified on C-18 stageTips (30). LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on the EASY-nLC1000 UHPLC system (Thermo Scientific) coupled to the Q-Exactive or Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometers (Thermo Scientific) (31) via the EASY-Spray ionization source. Peptides were loaded onto 75µm i.d. x 50 cm long EASY-spray PepMap columns (Thermo Scientific) packed with 2µm C18 particles 100 Å pore size, using 4 h gradients at a flow rate of 300 nl/min with buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and separated using a 7-28% buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). MS data were acquired in a data-dependent mode, using a top-10 method. MS spectra were acquired at 70,000 resolution, m/z range of 300-1700 Th, a target value of 3E+06 ions and a maximal injection time of 20 ms. MS/MS spectra were acquired after HCD fragmentation, with normalized collision energy (NCE) of 25 at 17,500 resolution a target value of 1E+05 ions and maximal injection time of 100 ms. Comparison of super-SILAC types was performed with 5E+05 ions and maximal injection time of 60 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set to 20 or 30 sec. All MS measurements were done in the positive ion mode..

### Data Protocol
Computational analysis: Raw MS files were analyzed with MaxQuant (32) (versions 1.5.0.36 and 1.4.3.2) and the Andromeda search engine (33) integrated into the same versions. MS/MS spectra were searched against the UniprotKB database version Nov2014 including 140,992 entries, a decoy database in which all sequences were reversed and each lysine and arginine were swapped with their preceding amino acid, and a list of common contaminants (247 entries). Search included tryptic peptides with the variable modifications N-terminal acetylation (+42.0106 Da) and methionine oxidation (+15.99491 Da) and the fixed modification of carbamidomethyl cysteine (+57.02146 Da). Maximal number of miscleavages was set to 2 and maximal number of modifications was set to 5. MaxQuant analysis included two search engine steps. The first was used for mass recalibration, and was initiated with a peptide mass tolerance of 20 ppm. The main database search peptide initial mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm, and mass tolerance for the fragment ions was set to 20 ppm. Database results were filtered to have a maximal FDR of 0.01 on both the peptide and the protein levels. The minimal peptide length was 7 amino acids and a minimum number of peptides per protein was set to 1. The 'second peptide search' option was enabled to allow identification of two co-fragmented peptides. For protein assembly, all proteins that cannot be distinguished based on their identified peptides were assembled into a single protein group. Analysis of SILAC experiments included Lys-8 and Arg-10 as the heavy labels, and enabled the re-quantify option. For SILAC ratios determination a minimum of two ratio counts between SILAC peptide pairs was required. The ‘match between runs’ option was enabled only in the prostate cancer analysis and PSA calibration curve, for transfer of identification between separate LC-MS/MS runs based on their accurate mass and retention time, with a 1 min match window after retention time alignment. Data analysis was performed on the proteinGroups.txt file after filtration of the proteins that were identified in the reverse database, proteins that were identified only based on their variable modifications and potential contaminants (without excluding potential plasma proteins, such as albumin, hepatocyte growth factor activator, keratins and thrombospondin).

### Publication Abstract
Unbiased proteomic analysis of plasma samples holds the promise to reveal clinically invaluable disease biomarkers. However, the tremendous dynamic range of the plasma proteome has so far hampered the identification of such low abundant markers. To overcome this challenge we analyzed the plasma microparticle proteome, and reached an unprecedented depth of over 3000 plasma proteins in single runs. To add a quantitative dimension, we developed PROMIS-Quan-PROteomics of MIcroparticles with Super-Stable Isotope Labeling with Amino Acids in Cell Culture (SILAC) Quantification, a novel mass spectrometry-based technology for plasma microparticle proteome quantification. PROMIS-Quan enables a two-step relative and absolute SILAC quantification. First, plasma microparticle proteomes are quantified relative to a super-SILAC mix composed of cell lines from distinct origins. Next, the absolute amounts of selected proteins of interest are quantified relative to the super-SILAC mix. We applied PROMIS-Quan to prostate cancer and compared plasma microparticle samples of healthy individuals and prostate cancer patients. We identified in total 5374 plasma-microparticle proteins, and revealed a predictive signature of three proteins that were elevated in the patient-derived plasma microparticles. Finally, PROMIS-Quan enabled determination of the absolute quantitative changes in prostate specific antigen (PSA) upon treatment. We propose PROMIS-Quan as an innovative platform for biomarker discovery, validation, and quantification in both the biomedical research and in the clinical worlds.

### Keywords
Plasma, Super-silac, Biomarkers, Microparticles

### Affiliations
Weizmann Institute of Science
Tel Aviv University

### Submitter
Tamar Geiger

### Lab Head
Dr Tamar Geiger
Tel Aviv University


