### Accession
PXD044766

### Title
Adenylyl cyclase 8, calmodulin - absolute quantification

### Description
The aim of this experiment was to absolutely quantify adenylyl cyclase 8 (AC8) and the co-purified interactor calmodulin (CaM) to assess their stoichiometry.

### Sample Protocol
2x10 ug of AC8 were digested with ProtiFi S-Trap micro columns according to the manufacturer's protocol. Peptides were dried in a vacuum centrifuge and resuspended in 50 uL 5% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% formic acid (FA) in water.   Heavy labeled AQUA peptides (4 for AC8, 3 for CaM) were custom synthesized and ordered from Thermo Fisher Scientific. The AQUA peptides were mixed with a bovine serum albumin (BSA) background mix (100 fmol/uL), iRT peptides (Biognosys), 5% ACN and 0.1% FA in water. Standard mixes of heavy labeled peptides were prepared at 500 fmol/uL, 50 fmol/uL, 5 fmol/uL, 500 amol/uL, 50 amol/uL, 5 amol/uL and 500 zmol/uL. The samples were diluted 1:4 in 5% ACN, 0.1% FA with the addition of AC8 AQUA peptides at ca. 500 fmol/uL and CaM peptides at ca. 500 amol/uL, iRT peptides and BSA background.   1 or 0.5 uL of the sample peptide mix were separated on a Vanquish Neo UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, equipped with a 40 cm x 0.75 um (inner diameter) column, packed in-house with 1.9 um C18 beads (Dr. Maisch Reprosil-Pur 12) over a 30 minute linear gradient from 7-35% B (A: 0.1% FA, B: 80% ACN, 0.1% FA), at 300 nL/min and 50°C. The samples were analyzed on an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) method. MS1 spectra were acquired with a scan range between 150 and 2000 m/z at an Orbitrap resolution of 30,000. RF lens was set to 50%, the AGC target was set to "Standard". The injection times were lowered for iRT peptides (22 ms), otherwise 118 ms were used. The Orbitrap resolution for iRT peptdes was set to 15,000 and 60,000 for target peptides.

### Data Protocol
The data was analyzed in Skyline, exported and further analyzed in R. Calibration curves were produced and the absolute amounts of AC8 and CaM were calculated.

### Publication Abstract
Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease is a chronic liver abnormality that exhibits high variability and can lead to liver cancer in advanced stages. Hepatic ablation of SIRT6 results in fatty liver disease, yet the potential mechanism of SIRT6 deficiency, particularly in relation to downstream mediators for NAFLD, remains elusive. Here we identify Serpina12 as a key gene regulated by Sirt6 that plays a crucial function in energy homeostasis. Specifically, Sirt6 suppresses Serpina12 expression through histone deacetylation at its promoter region, after which the transcription factor, Cebp&#x3b1;, binds to and regulates its expression. Sirt6 deficiency results in an increased expression of Serpina12 in hepatocytes, which enhances insulin signaling and promotes lipid accumulation. Importantly, CRISPR-Cas9 mediated Serpina12 knockout in the liver ameliorated fatty liver disease caused by Sirt6 ablation. Finally, we demonstrate that Sirt6 functions as a tumor suppressor in the liver, and consequently, deletion of Sirt6 in the liver leads to not only the spontaneous development of tumors but also enhanced tumorigenesis in response to DEN treatment or under conditions of obesity.

### Keywords
Membrane protein, Purified protein, Absolute quantification, Prm

### Affiliations
ETH Zurich
Institute of Molecular Biology and Biophysics, Department of Biology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland; Laboratory of Biomolecular Research, Division of Biology and Chemistry, Paul Scherrer Institute, Villigen, Switzerland

### Submitter
Dina Schuster

### Lab Head
Dr Volodymyr M. Korkhov
Institute of Molecular Biology and Biophysics, Department of Biology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland; Laboratory of Biomolecular Research, Division of Biology and Chemistry, Paul Scherrer Institute, Villigen, Switzerland


