### Accession
PXD026930

### Title
Impact of Alanyl-tRNA Synthetase Editing Deficiency in Yeast

### Description
Aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases (aaRSs) are essential enzymes that provide the ribosome with aminoacyl-tRNA substrates for protein synthesis. Mutations in aaRSs lead to various neurological disorders in humans. Many aaRSs utilize editing to prevent error propagation during translation. Editing defects in alanyl-tRNA synthetase (AlaRS) cause neurodegeneration and cardioproteinopathy in mice and is associated with microcephaly in human patients. The cellular impact of AlaRS editing deficiency in eukaryotes remains unclear. Here we use yeast as a model organism to systematically investigate the physiological role of AlaRS editing. Our RNA sequencing and quantitative proteomics analyses reveal that AlaRS editing defects surprisingly activate the general amino acid control pathway and attenuate the heatshock response. We have confirmed these results with reporter and growth assays. In addition, AlaRS editing defects downregulate carbon metabolism and attenuate protein synthesis. Supplying yeast cells with extra carbon source partially rescues the heat sensitivity caused by AlaRS editing deficiency. These findings are in stark contrast with the cellular effects caused by editing deficiency in other aaRSs. Our study therefore highlights the idiosyncratic role of AlaRS editing compared with other aaRSs and provides a model for the physiological impact caused by the lack of AlaRS editing.

### Sample Protocol
To determine heat induced differential expression among WT/C719A/G906D, a label free quantitative proteomics was performed. Three biological samples for all strains were prepared and analyzed. log phase WT/C719A/G906D cell culture were incubated at 30 °C and 37 °C for 2 hours, then 2 ml cell pellets were fast frozen in liquid nitrogen. 18 samples protein extraction, trypsin digestion and LC-MS/MS analysis performed by Creative Proteomics (New York, USA). The resulting MS/MS data were processed using MaxQuant software. 1.5fold difference of label-free quantitation (LFQ) intensity and p value < 0.05 were considered significant. The identified differentially expressed proteins were enriched by Gene Ontology (GO) annotation and KEGG pathway analyses using metascape.    2.2 Sample Preparation 1) Add an appropriate amount of lysis buffer, and ultrasonically lyse. Centrifuge and transfer the supernatant to a new EP tube. 2) Using BCA to determine protein concentration 3) Transfer 60 μg of sample to a new EP tube. After reduced by 10 mM DTT at 56°C for 1 h and alkylated by 20 mM IAA at room temperature in dark for 1h. 3) Add trypsin to the sample in a ratio of 1:50, and the solution was incubated at 37°C overnight. 4) Lyophilize the extracted peptides to near dryness. Resuspend peptides in 20 μL of 0.1% formic acid before LC-MS/MS analysis. 2.3 Nano LC-MS/MS Analysis 2.3.1 nanoLC Nanoflow UPLC: Ultimate 3000 nano UHPLC system (ThermoFisher Scientific, USA); Nanocolumn: trapping column (PepMap C18, 100Å , 100 μm×2 cm, 5μm) and an analytical column (PepMap C18, 100Å, 75 μm×50 cm, 2μm); Loaded sample volume: 1 μg Mobile phase: A: 0.1% formic acid in water; B: 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile. Total flow rate: 250 nL/min LC linear gradient: a linear gradient from 2 to 8% buffer B in 3 min, from 8% to 20% buffer B in 56 min, from 20% to 40% buffer B in 37 min, then from 40% to 90% buffer B in 4 min. 2.3.2 Mass spectrometry The full scan was performed between 300–1,650 m/z at the resolution 60,000 at 200 m/z, the automatic gain control target for the full scan was set to 3e6. The MS/MS scan was operated in Top 20 mode using the following settings: resolution 15,000 at 200 m/z; automatic gain control target 1e5; maximum injection time 19ms; normalized collision energy at 28%; isolation window of 1.4 Th; charge sate exclusion: unassigned, 1, > 6; dynamic exclusion 30 s.

### Data Protocol
The six raw MS files were analyzed and searched against yeast protein database based on the species of the samples using Maxquant (1.6.2.6). The parameters were set as follows: the protein modifications were carbamidomethylation (C) (fixed), oxidation (M) (variable); the enzyme specificity was set to trypsin; the maximum missed cleavages were set to 2; the precursor ion mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm, and MS/MS tolerance was 0.6 Da. Only high confident identified peptides were chosen for downstream protein identification analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Label-free quantitative proteomics, Yeast alars variants

### Affiliations
University of Maryland
Department of Cell Biology and Molecular Genetics University of Maryland

### Submitter
Jiqiang Ling

### Lab Head
Dr Jiqiang Ling
Department of Cell Biology and Molecular Genetics University of Maryland


