### Accession
PXD011855

### Title
Identification of a chondroitin sulfate linkage region trisaccharide

### Description
Here, using LC-MS/MS, we describe for the first time a linkage region trisaccharide comprising [-GlcUA-Gal-Xyl-O-] as an alternative point of entry for glycosaminoglycan (GAG) biosynthesis. The trisaccharide was identified in the proteoglycan bikunin from urine of human healthy donors present as a disulfated pentasaccharide, [deltaHexUA-GalNAc(S)-GlcUA-Gal(S)-Xyl-O-] after chondroitinase ABC degradation. Furthermore, it was identified in chondroitin sulfate primed on xylosides isolated from human cell lines, present as the corresponding disulfated pentasaccharide after chondroitinase ABC degradation.

### Sample Protocol
For preparation of xyloside-primed GAGs, CCD-1095Sk cells and HCC70 cells (ATCC) were incubated with 100 uM XylNap for 48 h in serum-free DME/F-12 medium (Sigma). Subsequently, XylNap-primed GAGs were isolated from the culture media using diethylaminoethanol weak anion-exchange chromatography (Sigma), octyl-Sepharose affinity chromatography (Sigma), ethanol precipitation, and finally size-exclusion HPLC where they were collected based on fluorescence (ex/em 229/342 nm). The purified XylNap-primed GAGs were then degraded enzymatically using chondroitinase ABC (Seikagaku; 100 mU enzyme/15 ug of GAGs in 100 uL of 50 mM NH4OAc, pH 8.0) at 37 °C for 16 h. After heat inactivation of the enzymes and centrifugation of the samples, the supernatants were freeze-dried. Enzymatically degraded xyloside-primed GAGs were analyzed on an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer coupled to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RS chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with an in-house–made flow split. The samples were separated using an Acquity BEH C18 column (300 Å pore size, 1.7 um particle size, 300 um x 150 mm column dimensions; Waters) under stepwise isocratic elution at approximately 2 ul/min flow. The following elution profile was used: 100% A-solvent (5 mM di-n-butylamine and 8 mM AcOH in H2O) for 13 min, at 30% B-solvent (5 mM di-n-butylamine and 8 mM AcOH in 70% MeOH) for 15 min, then at 60% B for 10 min, and at 100% B for 19 min. The electrospray source was operated in negative ionization mode at 3.5 kV. Precursor ion mass spectra were recorded at 60,000 resolution in the m/z range 215–2000. The 10 most intense precursor ions were selected with an isolation window of 5.0 m/z units without a dynamic exclusion, fragmented using HCD at the NCE of 70% and 80%, and the MS2 spectra were recorded at a resolution of 15,000 with the first mass 100; precursor ions with unassigned charge states were rejected. For preparation of CS glycopeptides from urine samples, 8 mL urine samples from two de-identified healthy individuals were supplemented to contain 0.01% SDS and desalted with PD-10 columns (GE Healthcare) using 0.01% SDS in water for the elution. A second PD-10 desalting step was then performed to remove the SDS. After lyophilization, the samples were subjected to Protease Max in-solution trypsin digestion according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Promega). DTT and iodoacetamide were used for peptide alkylation. The digests were diluted to 10 mL in 50 mM sodium acetate, 0.2 M NaCl, pH 4.0 and loaded onto strong anion-exchange spin columns (Q-mini H, Vivapure). The samples were washed (50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.2 M NaCl, pH 8.0) and subsequently eluted in three steps in 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0 with increasing concentrations of NaCl (0.4 M, 0.8 M, and 1.6 M NaCl). The three fractions were desalted using PD-10 columns, lyophilized, and the CS degraded using 1 mU chondroitinase ABC in 10 uL 55 mM sodium acetate, pH 8.0 at 37 °C for 3 h. The samples were desalted with C18 spin columns (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and dried. The use of de-identified human samples for method development is in agreement with Swedish law and was formally permitted by the head of the Laboratory of Clinical Chemistry, Sahlgrenska University Hospital. Glycopeptides were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid instrument interfaced to Easy nanoLC1000 chromatography (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For separation, an in-house constructed pre-column and analytical column set up (45 mm x 0.100 mm I.D and 250 mm x 0.075 mm I.D., respectively) packed with 3 um Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ particles (Dr. Maisch, Germany) were used. The gradient was run at 200 nL/min with 7-37 % B-solvent (acetonitrile in 0.2% formic acid) over 70 min and then up to 80% B-solvent during 10 min. A-solvent was 0.2 % formic acid. The spray voltage was 1.8 kV in positive ion mode and MS scans were set at 120,000 resolution at m/z 200 with a mass range of m/z 600-2000. MS/MS was performed in data-dependent mode where the most abundant ions with z ≥ 2 from each precursor scan were subjected to higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) each at normalized collision energies (NCEs) of 20, 30, and 40% during 3 s. An isolation window of 2.5 m/z units was implemented and the resolution of fragment ions was set to 30,000. Sodium ion-pairing experiments were performed as described. A stock solution of sodium acetate:formic acid (1:1) at 1.0 M was used to prepare a final concentration of 100 mM sodium ions in the MS-vials and LC-MS/MS was acquired using the same settings as stated above.

### Data Protocol
The glycomics files were manually interpreted using the Xcalibur software (Thermo Fisher Scientific), whereas the glycopeptide files were analyzed using both manual interpretation and Mascot searching with Mascot Distiller (version 2.6.1.0) and an in-house Mascot server (version 2.5.1). The Mascot search employed the Swissprot database and the criteria comprised 'trypsin' as enzyme specificity, allowing for up to two missed cleavages. The peptide tolerance was 5 ppm and the fragment tolerance 20 ppm. The search included variable linkage region pentasaccharide modifications as predicted after chondroitinase ABC degradation; [HexUA(-H2O)-HexNAc-HexUA-Hex-pentose-] without (C31H45NO25, 831.2281 u), with one (C31H45NO28S, 911.1849 u), or with two (C31H45NO31S2, 991.1417 u) sulfate groups, including neutral loss of the corresponding glycan modifications. The disulfated linkage region hexasaccharide (C37H55NO36S2, 1153.1945 u) and sialylated core 1 (Neu5Ac-Hex-HexNAc, 656.2276 u) modifications were also used in the Mascot searching.

### Publication Abstract
It is generally accepted that the biosynthesis of chondroitin sulfate and heparan sulfate is proceeding from a common linkage region tetrasaccharide comprising GlcA-Gal-Gal-Xyl-O-. The linkage region can undergo various modifications such as sulfation, phosphorylation and sialylation, and as the methods for studying glycosaminoglycan structure have been developed and refined, the number of discovered modifications has increased. Previous studies on the linkage region and the glycosyltransferases involved in the biosynthesis suggest that variants of the linkage region tetrasaccharide may also be possible. Here, using LC-MS/MS, we describe a non-canonical linkage region trisaccharide comprising GlcA-Gal-Xyl-O-. The trisaccharide was identified as a minor constituent in the proteoglycan bikunin from urine of human healthy donors present as a disulfated pentasaccharide, &#x394;HexA-GalNAc(S)-GlcA-Gal(S)-Xyl-O-, after chondroitinase ABC degradation. Furthermore, it was present as the corresponding disulfated pentasaccharide after chondroitinase ABC degradation in chondroitin sulfate primed on xylosides isolated from human cell lines. This linkage region trisaccharide may serve as an alternative point of entry for glycosaminoglycan biosynthesis.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Bikunin, Negative ionisation mode, Hcd, Glycosaminoglycan, Chondroitin sulfate, Orbitrap

### Affiliations
Proteomics Core Facility, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden
Professor, Department of Clinical Chemistry and Transfusion Medicine, Sahlgrenska Academy at the University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden

### Submitter
Egor Vorontsov

### Lab Head
Dr Göran Larson
Professor, Department of Clinical Chemistry and Transfusion Medicine, Sahlgrenska Academy at the University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden


