### Accession
PXD024124

### Title
Lung proteomic biomarkers associated with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease

### Description
Identifying protein biomarkers for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) has been challenging. Most previous studies have utilized individual proteins or pre-selected protein panels measured in blood samples. To identify COPD protein biomarkers by applying comprehensive mass spectrometry proteomics in lung tissue samples. We utilized mass spectrometry proteomic approaches to identify protein biomarkers from 152 lung tissue samples representing COPD cases and controls.

### Sample Protocol
Protein was extracted from the 152 lung tissue samples through mechanical shearing with a Precellys 24 homogenizer using Ceramic 2.8 mm PowerBead Tubes (Qiagen Cat No. 13114-50), followed by cryolysis, in 50 mM Tris + 5% Sodium Dodecyl Sulfate (SDS) buffer. Protein quantity was measured using bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA assay), and 300 µg of protein from each sample was reduced with 5 mM Dithiothreitol, alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide, and digested with trypsin (Promega, USA, Gold Cat No. V5280), following SDS removal with an S-Trap Mini (Protifi, NY, USA). All chemicals are from Millipore-Sigma unless otherwise noted.  Each sample was analyzed in triplicate using Data Dependent Analysis (DDA) by high resolution nano LC-MS/MS (456 total LC-MS/MS runs). For each run, 1 µg of digested protein per sample was loaded onto a 2 cm Acclaim PepMap 100 trap column (75 um ID, C18 3 µm, (Thermo-Fisher Scientific USA)). The samples were analyzed using nano reverse-phase chromatography with a 50 cm fused silica column (PicoFrit 75 µm ID, New Objective) packed with ReproSil Pur 1.9 µm C18 (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany). Peptide elution was performed using an Easy nLC-1000 system (Thermo-Fisher Scientific). Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water, and mobile phase B consisted of 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. A two hour gradient elution was performed from 5% to 35% mobile phase B, followed by a 15 minute wash at 80% mobile phase B, and a 20 minute column re-equilibration at 5% mobile phase B. The flow rate was set at 300 nl/min and the column was heated at 60°C using a microtubing heater (MonoSLEEVE, Analytical Sales & Services Inc, USA). Mass spectra were acquired on a QExactive-HF (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, USA) mass spectrometer operated in top-15 DDA mode with dynamic exclusion. The precursor scan range was from 375-1375 m/z at 60,000 resolution and 3e6 target AGC with a 50 ms maximum injection time. A 1.8 m/z selection window was used to acquire MS/MS spectra at 15,000 resolution, an AGC target of 1e5, 100 ms maximum injection time, and fragmented using HCD with a normalized collision energy of 27. Dynamic exclusion was set to 20 seconds, with peptide match set to preferred and isotope exclusion turned on. Charge exclusion was set to 1 and greater than 5.

### Data Protocol
The raw mass spectra files were converted to mzML format using MSConvert from Proteowizard and analyzed using the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline. The analysis pipeline consisted of database searching with Comet against the homo sapiens UniProt reviewed proteome (downloaded March 11, 2016) and shuffled decoy sequences. Comet parameters included a fixed modification of +57.021464 Da on cysteine and a variable modification of +15.994915 Da on methionine. A precursor tolerance of 25 ppm was set, with a fragment bin tolerance of 0.2 and fragment bin offset of 0. Complete enzymatic cleavage with up to 2 missed cleavages was set. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were validated using PeptideProphet and iProphet.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human copd chronic obstructive pulmonary disease shotgun ms/ms

### Affiliations
Institute for Systems Biology

### Submitter
Michael Hoopmann

### Lab Head
Dr Robert L. Mortiz
Institute for Systems Biology


