### Accession
PXD000779

### Title
Primary mouse embryonic palatal mesenchyme LC-MS/MS

### Description
To identify proteins phosphorylated by Akt downstream of PI3K-mediated PDGFRalpha signaling, we immunoprecipitated Akt phosphorylation substrates from PDGF-AA-treated primary mouse embryonic palatal mesenchyme (MEPM) lysates and analyzed the peptides by nano LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Purified protein complexes generated from three biological replicates (A-C) of each treatment were resolved using Tris-HCl 8-16% linear gradient SDS-PAGE, followed by brief staining with SimplyBlue SafeStain (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA) and excision of the separated protein bands. In situ trypsin digestion of polypeptides in each gel slice was performed as described previously (Sebastiaan Winkler et al., 2002). The tryptic peptides were purified using a 2 ul bed volume of Poros 50 R2 reversed-phase beads (Applied Biosystems, Carlsbad, CA, USA) packed in Eppendorf gel-loading tips (Erdjument-Bromage et al. 1998). The purified peptides were diluted to 0.1% formic acid and subjected to nano liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (nano LC-MS/MS) analysis as follows. Peptide mixtures (in 20 ul) were loaded onto a trapping guard column (0.3 x 5 mm Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 cartridge; LC Packings Inc, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) using an Eksigent nano MDLC system (Eksigent Technologies, Inc., Dublin, CA, USA) at a flow rate of 20 ul/min. After washing, the flow was reversed through the guard column and the peptides eluted with a 5-45% acetonitrile gradient over 85 min at a flow rate of 200 nl/min, onto and over a 75 μM x 15 cm fused silica capillary PepMap 100 C18 column (LC Packings Inc). The eluent was directed to a 75 μM (with 10 μM orifice) fused silica nano-electrospray needle (New Objective, Woburn, MA, USA). The electrospray ionization needle was set at 1800 V. A linear ion quadrupole trap-Orbitrap hybrid analyzer (LTQ-Orbitrap, Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc, San Jose, CA, USA) was operated in automatic, data-dependent MS/MS acquisition mode with one MS full scan (450-2000 m/z) in the Orbitrap analyzer at 60,000 mass resolution and up to five concurrent MS/MS scans in the LTQ for the five most intense peaks selected from each survey scan. Survey scans were acquired in profile mode and MS/MS scans were acquired in centroid mode. The collision energy was automatically adjusted in accordance with the experimental mass (m/z) value of the precursor ions selected for MS/MS. Minimum ion intensity of 2000 counts was required to trigger an MS/MS spectrum; dynamic exclusion duration was set at 60 s.

### Data Protocol
Initial peptide/protein identifications from the LC-MS/MS data were performed using the Mascot search engine (version 2.3.02; Matrix Science, www.matrixscience.com) with the rodent segment of the UniProt protein database (25,897 sequences; European Bioinformatics Institute, Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics and Protein Information Resource). The search parameters were as follows: (i) two missed cleavage tryptic sites were allowed; (ii) precursor ion mass tolerance = 10 ppm; (iii) fragment ion mass tolerance = 0.8 Da; and (iv) variable protein modifications were allowed for methionine oxidation, cysteine acrylamide derivatization and protein Nterminal acetylation. MudPit scoring was typically applied using significance threshold score p<0.01. Decoy database search was always activated and, in general, for merged LS-MS/MS analysis of a gel lane with p<0.01, false discovery rate averaged around 1%. Scaffold (version 3.5.1; Proteome Software, Inc., Portland, OR, USA) was used to further validate and cross-tabulate the tandem mass spectrometry-based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide and protein probabilities were set at 95% with a minimum peptide requirement of 1. After removing common contaminants that were not differentially detected, proteins were filtered based on three criteria: 1) quantitative spectral counts that differed by at least 20 percent between untreated and PDGF-AA-treated samples; 2) the presence of an Akt consensus sequence (or proven non-consensus sequence); 3) expression of the transcript encoding the protein in unstimulated MEPM cells, as determined by an RNA sequencing experiment performed in the Soriano laboratory (unpublished data).

### Publication Abstract
Previous studies have identified phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) as the main downstream effector of PDGFR&#x3b1; signaling during murine skeletal development. Autophosphorylation mutant knock-in embryos in which PDGFR&#x3b1; is unable to bind PI3K (Pdgfra(PI3K/PI3K)) exhibit skeletal defects affecting the palatal shelves, shoulder girdle, vertebrae, and sternum. To identify proteins phosphorylated by Akt downstream from PI3K-mediated PDGFR&#x3b1; signaling, we immunoprecipitated Akt phosphorylation substrates from PDGF-AA-treated primary mouse embryonic palatal mesenchyme (MEPM) lysates and analyzed the peptides by nanoliquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (nano-LC-MS/MS). Our analysis generated a list of 56 proteins, including 10 that regulate cell survival and proliferation. We demonstrate that MEPM cell survival is impaired in the presence of a PI3K inhibitor and that Pdgfra(PI3K/PI3K)-derived MEPMs do not proliferate in response to PDGF-AA treatment. Several of the identified Akt phosphorylation targets, including Ybox1, mediate cell survival through regulation of p53. We show that Ybox1 binds both the Trp53 promoter and the p53 protein and that expression of Trp53 is significantly decreased upon PDGF-AA treatment in MEPMs. Finally, we demonstrate that introduction of a Trp53-null allele attenuates the vertebral defects found in Pdgfra(PI3K/PI3K) neonates. Our findings identify p53 as a novel effector downstream from PI3K-engaged PDGFR&#x3b1; signaling that regulates survival and proliferation during skeletal development in vivo.

### Keywords
Mouse, Lc-ms/ms, Primary embryonic palatal mesenchyme

### Affiliations
Department of Developmental and Regenerative Biology Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai United States of America
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai

### Submitter
Katherine Fantauzzo

### Lab Head
Dr Philippe Soriano
Department of Developmental and Regenerative Biology Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai United States of America


