### Accession
PXD032913

### Title
Phosphoproteomics reveals rewiring of the insulin 
signaling network and multi-nodal defects in insulin 
resistance

### Description
Here we employed phosphoproteomics to delineate insulin signal transduction in adipocyte cells and adipose tissue. Across a range of insults triggering insulin resistance, we observed marked rewiring of the insulin signaling network. This included both attenuated insulin-responsive phosphorylation, and the emergence of phosphorylation uniquely insulin-regulated in insulin resistance. Identifying dysregulated phosphosites common to multiple insults revealed subnetworks containing novel regulators of insulin action, such as MARK2/3, and causal drivers of insulin resistance. The presence of several GSK3 substrates among these phosphosites led us to establish a pipeline for identifying context-specific kinase substrates. This revealed widespread dysregulation of GSK3 signaling. Pharmacological inhibition of GSK3 partially reversed insulin resistance in cells and tissue explants. These data highlight that insulin resistance is multi-nodal signaling defect that includes dysregulated GSK3 activity.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were processed according to the EasyPhos workflow (PMID 30190555). Detailed sample processing protocols are provided in the associated manuscript.

### Data Protocol
Detailed data processing protocols are provided in the associated manuscript.

### Publication Abstract
Disorder is a pervasive characteristic of natural systems, offering a wealth of non-repeating patterns. In this study, we present a novel storage method that harnesses naturally-occurring random structures to store an arbitrary pattern in a memory device. This method, the Stochastic Emergent Storage (SES), builds upon the concept of emergent archetypes, where a training set of imperfect examples (prototypes) is employed to instantiate an archetype in a Hopfield-like network through emergent processes. We demonstrate this non-Hebbian paradigm in the photonic domain by utilizing random transmission matrices, which govern light scattering in a white-paint turbid medium, as prototypes. Through the implementation of programmable hardware, we successfully realize and experimentally validate the capability to store an arbitrary archetype and perform classification at the speed of light. Leveraging the vast number of modes excited by mesoscopic diffusion, our approach enables the simultaneous storage of thousands of memories without requiring any additional fabrication efforts. Similar to a content addressable memory, all stored memories can be collectively assessed against a given pattern to identify the matching element. Furthermore, by organizing memories spatially into distinct classes, they become features within a higher-level categorical (deeper) optical classification layer.

### Keywords
Post-translational modification, Adipocyte, Adipose, Phosphorylation, Phosphoproteomics, Insulin signalling, Tissue, Signal transduction, Gsk3, Proteomics, Fat, Insulin resistance, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
The University of Sydney, Australia
Murdoch Children's Research Institute

### Submitter
Sean Humphrey

### Lab Head
Dr Sean Humphrey
The University of Sydney, Australia


