### Accession
PXD033373

### Title
Label-free whole cell proteomics for oncogene cell lines

### Description
Label-free whole cell proteomics was performed for the following cell lines: LHS-PREC engineered to overexpress MYC or EV; P4936 overexpressing MYC on a tetracycline-repressible promotor; MCF10A cells expressing signal transduction oncogenes AKT, BRAF, EGFR, HER2, KRAS, MEK; KP4 and PSN1 PDAC cell lines vs HPDE normal pancreatic cell; PDX-derived osteosarcoma cell lines with MYC amplification vs hFOB cell

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were lysed by boiling in 6M GdnHCl. Proteins were digested with trypsin, desalted, separated using C18 reverse phase chromatography, and analyzed using a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched and quantified using MaxQuant v1.6.7.

### Publication Abstract
Since the discovery of oncogenes, there has been tremendous interest to understand their mechanistic basis and to develop broadly actionable therapeutics. Some of the most frequently activated oncogenes driving diverse cancers are c-MYC, EGFR, HER2, AKT, KRAS, BRAF, and MEK. Using a reductionist approach, we explored how cellular proteomes are remodeled in isogenic cell lines engineered with or without these driver oncogenes. The most striking discovery for all oncogenic models was the systematic downregulation of scores of antiviral proteins regulated by type 1 interferon. These findings extended to cancer cell lines and patient-derived xenograft models of highly refractory pancreatic cancer and osteosarcoma driven by KRAS and MYC oncogenes. The oncogenes reduced basal expression of and autocrine stimulation by type 1 interferon causing remarkable convergence on common phenotypic and functional profiles. In particular, there was dramatically lower expression of dsRNA sensors including DDX58 (RIG-I) and OAS proteins, which resulted in attenuated functional responses when the oncogenic cells were treated with the dsRNA mimetic, polyI:C, and increased susceptibility to infection with an RNA virus shown using SARS-CoV-2. Our reductionist approach provides molecular and functional insights connected to immune evasion hallmarks in cancers and suggests therapeutic opportunities.

### Keywords
Mek, Pdac, Osteosarcoma, Myc, Braf, Kras, Akt, Egfr, Her2

### Affiliations
University of California, San Francisco

### Submitter
Paige Solomon

### Lab Head
Dr Jim Wells
University of California, San Francisco


