### Accession
PXD031825

### Title
Co-immunoprecipitation of proteins with WT HIV-1 IN, K258R HIV-IN, and K258/264/266/273R

### Description
Co-IP of HIV-1 integrase proteins - WT, K258R and K258/264/266/273R. Integrase proteins were cloned into a mammalian expression vector (pJET). All proteins had an N-terminal HA-tag used for IP. As a negative control, cells were transfected with an empty HA vector. Co-IPs were done in HEK293T cells.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed with NP-40 lysis buffer. Adequate, comparable expression of WT and mutant IN proteins was confirmed via Western Blot. Cell lysates were mixed with BSA blocked HA-coated magnetic beads (Pierce) and rotated overnight at 4 degrees Celsius. Beads were washed 3x with lysis buffer followed by 2x PBS washes and sent for MS.

### Data Protocol
MS results were filtered by number of peptides detected bound to IN protein vs. an empty HA vector control. Only proteins with 5+ spectral counts were considered. Proteins were considered enriched when there was a minimum of 5-fold more unique spectral counts detected in the IN immunoprecipitation vs. the control precipitation.

### Publication Abstract
Retroviruses utilize the viral integrase (IN) protein to integrate a DNA copy of their genome into host chromosomal DNA. HIV-1 integration sites are highly biased towards actively transcribed genes, likely mediated by binding of the IN protein to specific host factors, particularly LEDGF, located at these gene regions. We here report a substantial redirection of integration site distribution induced by a single point mutation in HIV-1 IN. Viruses carrying the K258R IN mutation exhibit a high frequency of integrations into centromeric alpha satellite repeat sequences, as assessed by deep sequencing, a more than 10-fold increase over wild-type. Quantitative PCR and in situ immunofluorescence assays confirm this bias of the K258R mutant virus for integration into centromeric DNA. Immunoprecipitation studies identify host factors binding to IN that may account for the observed bias for integration into centromeres. Centromeric integration events are known to be enriched in the latent reservoir of infected memory T cells, as well as in elite controllers who limit viral replication without intervention. The K258R point mutation in HIV-1 IN is also present in databases of latent proviruses found in patients, and may reflect an unappreciated aspect of the establishment of viral latency.

### Keywords
K258r, Hiv-1

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY   Department of Microiology and Immunology Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY
Columbia University Medical Center

### Submitter
Shelby Winans

### Lab Head
Dr Stephen P. Goff
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY   Department of Microiology and Immunology Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY


