### Accession
PXD005722

### Title
LC-MS/MS IP_DDR1 - Determine the relative abundance of proteins that associate with DDR1 when cells with different expression levels of DDR1 and lacking beta 1 integrins are cultured on collagen or on fibronectin

### Description
Determine the relative abundance of proteins that associate with DDR1 when cells with different expression levels of DDR1 and lacking beta 1 integrins are cultured on collagen or on fibronectin

### Sample Protocol
Samples were analyzed on a Orbitrap analyzer (Q-Exactive, ThermoFisher, San Jose, CA) outfitted with a nanospray source and EASY-nLC nano-LC system (ThermoFisher, San Jose, CA).  Lyophilized peptide mixtures were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid and loaded onto a 75μm x 50 cm PepMax RSLC EASY-Spray column filled with 2μM C18 beads (ThermoFisher San, Jose CA) at a pressure of 800 Bar. Peptides were eluted over 120 min at a rate of 250nl/min using a stepwise gradient (0%-4% Acetonitrile containing 0.1% Formic Acid over 2 minutes; 4%-28% Acetontirile containing 0.1% Formic Acid over 226 minutes, 28%-95% Acetonitrile containing 0.1% Formic Acid over 2 minutes, constant 95% Acetonitrile containing 0.1% Formic Acid for 10 minutes).  Peptides were introduced by nano-electrospray into the Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo-Fisher).  The instrument method consisted of one MS full scan (525–1600 m/z) in the Orbitrap mass analyzer with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 1e6, maximum ion injection time of 120 ms and a resolution of 35 000 followed by 15 data-dependent MS/MS scans with a resolution of 35,000, an AGC target of 1e6, maximum ion time of 120ms, and one microscan. The intensity threshold to trigger a MS/MS scan was set to an underfill ratio of 1.0%.  Fragmentation occurred in the HCD trap with normalized collision energy set to 27. The dynamic exclusion was applied using a setting of 20 seconds.

### Data Protocol
DATABASE SEARCHING-- Tandem mass spectra were extracted, charge state deconvoluted and deisotoped by XCalibur version 2.2. All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Sequest (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA; version 1.4.1.14) and X! Tandem (The GPM, thegpm.org; version CYCLONE (2010.12.01.1)). Sequest was set up to search Uniprot_Mouse_Nov_18_2015.fasta (unknown version, 74993 entries) assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin. X! Tandem was set up to search the Uniprot_Mouse_Nov_18_2015 database (unknown version, 77779 entries) also assuming trypsin. Sequest and X! Tandem were searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.020 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 PPM. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine and TMT6plex of lysine and the n-terminus were specified in Sequest and X! Tandem as fixed modifications. Glu->pyro-Glu of the n-terminus, ammonia-loss of the n-terminus, gln->pyro-Glu of the n-terminus and oxidation of methionine were specified in X! Tandem as variable modifications. Oxidation of methionine was specified in Sequest as a variable modification.   CRITERIA FOR PROTEIN IDENTIFICATION-- Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.6.1, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability. Peptide Probabilities from X! Tandem were assigned by the Peptide Prophet algorithm (Keller, A et al Anal. Chem. 2002;74(20):5383-92) with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Peptide Probabilities from Sequest were assigned by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability and contained at least 1 identified peptide.  Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii, Al et al Anal. Chem. 2003;75(17):4646-58). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Collagen, Fibronectin, Ddr1

### Affiliations
University of Toronto

### Submitter
Nuno Coelho

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher McCulloch
University of Toronto


