### Accession
PXD002193

### Title
Bovine tissue and blood contamination from bullets by LC-MS/MS

### Description
We have measured the proteomes of different major bovine organs in multiple replicate. Before the actual sample preparation, organs were penetrated with metal bullets experimentally. The biological material on these projectiles was then "on-surface" digested using trypsin and analyzed using LC-MS/MS. Further experiments have been done testing the influence of different metal types, shooting and the contamination with human blood.

### Sample Protocol
Bullets were covered with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution containing 10 % RapiGest SF Surfactant (Waters, UK). Subsequently, dithiothreitol was added (3 mM final concentration) and incubated for 15 min at 60 °C followed by the addition of iodacetamide (10 mM final concentration) and incubation for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Finally, the bullet sample was incubated in its supernatant liquid with trypsin (Sigma Aldrich, Germany) for a minimum of 14 h at 37 °C to perform limited proteolysis. The reaction was stopped by applying trifluoracetic acid to a final concentration of 5%. The samples were centrifuged (5 min at 16,000 g), and the supernatant was recovered and processed using StageTips (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany) according to the manufacturer's protocol. The resulting peptide solution was lyophilized and stored at -20 °C until analysis.  Peptides were analyzed by nano HPLC (Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano Dionex/Thermo Fisher Scientific) using an Acclaim PepMapRSLC C18 (75 um x 25 cm, 2 um, 100 A…) column coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) applying an 180 min linear solvent gradient ranging from 5 to 60 % acetonitrile in water at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Precursor ions were recorded in the Orbitrap mass analyzer at a resolution of 60,000. For each survey scan, the ten most abundant ions were selected for collision-induced dissociation (CID). Finally, MS/MS spectra were recorded in the linear ion trap (LTQ).

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified using Mascot (Matrix Science, UK) in version 2.3. The Scaffold software, version 3.6.5 (Proteome Software Inc., USA), was used for inspection of identification results. After data conversion with Proteowizard, the quantitative data was processed using OpenMS/TOPP in version 1.11 for peak picking, feature finding, map alignment, and feature linking.

### Publication Abstract
Standard forensic procedures to examine bullets after an exchange of fire include a mechanical or ballistic reconstruction of the event. While this is routine to identify which projectile hit a subject by DNA analysis of biological material on the surface of the projectile, it is rather difficult to determine which projectile caused the lethal injury--often the crucial point with regard to legal proceedings. With respect to fundamental law it is the duty of the public authority to make every endeavor to solve every homicide case. To improve forensic examinations, we present a forensic proteomic method to investigate biological material from a projectile's surface and determine the tissues traversed by it. To obtain a range of relevant samples, different major bovine organs were penetrated with projectiles experimentally. After tryptic "on-surface" digestion, mass-spectrometry-based proteome analysis, and statistical data analysis, we were able to achieve a cross-validated organ classification accuracy of &gt;99%. Different types of anticipated external variables exhibited no prominent influence on the findings. In addition, shooting experiments were performed to validate the results. Finally, we show that these concepts could be applied to a real case of murder to substantially improve the forensic reconstruction.

### Keywords
Projectile forensics bos taurus bovine organs kidney liver lung muscle heart human blood

### Affiliations
University Hospital Tuebingen
Institute for Experimental Ophthalmology Medical Proteome Center University Hospital Tuebingen Naegelestrasse 5 D-72074 Tuebingen Germany

### Submitter
Sascha Dammeier

### Lab Head
Dr Sascha Dammeier
Institute for Experimental Ophthalmology Medical Proteome Center University Hospital Tuebingen Naegelestrasse 5 D-72074 Tuebingen Germany


