### Accession
PXD004874

### Title
The bulk cell density as decisive parameter and simple method for mesendodermal patterning of human pluripotent stem cells

### Description
We showed that the relation of pluripotent stem cell count to culture volume influences cardiomyogenic differentiation by affecting the concentration of secreted proteins that function as paracrine factors

### Sample Protocol
Secreted proteins were precipitated from cell culture supernatants applying a carrier-assisted trichloroacetic acid precipitation and subsequently separated by SDS-PAGE. Each gel lane was cut into small pieces that were subjected to tryptic digestion according to standard procedures. Peptides were extracted, separated and analysed by reversed-phase chromatography using a nano-flow ultra-highpressure liquid chromatography system (RSLC, Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled online to an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For RSLC, peptides were trapped on a trapping column (3 µm C18 particle, 2 cm length, 75 µm inner diameter, Acclaim PepMap, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated using a reversed-phase separating column (2 µm C18 particle, 50 cm length, 75 µm inner diameter Acclaim PepMap, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide elution was performed with a multi-step binary gradient: linear gradient of buffer B (80% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) in buffer A (0.1% formic acid) from 4% to 25% in 115 min, 25% to 50% in 25 min, 50% to 90% in 5 min, 90% B for 10 min and switched to 4% B within 30 min for reconditioning of the column at a flow rate of 250 ml/min and a column temperature of 45°C. For MS, overview scans were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 (m/z = 400) in the mass range of m/z 300 – 1600 and the 10 most intensive 2- and 3-fold charged ions were fragmented by collision-induced fragmentation at an activation time of 10 ms and an activation Q of 0.250 in the LTQ. Fragment ion spectra were recorded in the LTQ at a normal scan rate and stored as centroid m/z pairs.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed with the MaxQuant proteomics software suit version 1.4.1.2. Peak lists were searched against the human uniprot protein sequence database (uniprot-homo+sapiens) downloaded on 09/07/2015 at www.uniprot.org  at a false discovery rate of 1%. Proteins marked as “only identified by site”, “reverse” or “contaminant” were removed from MaxQuant output files. Quantitative comparison between different samples was performed based on label-free quantification (LFQ) intensities calculated by MaxQuant.

### Publication Abstract
In vitro differentiation of human pluripotent stem cells (hPSCs) recapitulates early aspects of human embryogenesis, but the underlying processes are poorly understood and controlled. Here we show that modulating the bulk cell density (BCD: cell number per culture volume) deterministically alters anteroposterior patterning of primitive streak (PS)-like priming. The BCD in conjunction with the chemical WNT pathway activator CHIR99021 results in distinct paracrine microenvironments codifying hPSCs towards definitive endoderm, precardiac or presomitic mesoderm within the first 24&#x2009;h of differentiation, respectively. Global gene expression and secretome analysis reveals that TGF&#xdf; superfamily members, antagonist of Nodal signalling LEFTY1 and CER1, are paracrine determinants restricting PS progression. These data result in a tangible model disclosing how hPSC-released factors deflect CHIR99021-induced lineage commitment over time. By demonstrating a decisive, functional role of the BCD, we show its utility as a method to control lineage-specific differentiation. Furthermore, these findings have profound consequences for inter-experimental comparability, reproducibility, bioprocess optimization and scale-up.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, Cardiomyocytes, Secretome

### Affiliations
Hannover Medical School
Institute for Cellular Chemistry, Hannover Medical School, Germany

### Submitter
Falk Büttner

### Lab Head
Dr Rita Gerardy-Schahn
Institute for Cellular Chemistry, Hannover Medical School, Germany


