### Accession
PXD021828

### Title
Bortezomib abrogates temozolomide-induced autophagic flux and kills glioblastoma cells through an ATG5 and ATG7 dependent pathway

### Description
Glioblastoma (GBM) carries a dismal prognosis largely due to acquired resistance to the standard treatment, which incorporates the chemotherapy temozolomide (TMZ). Inhibiting the proteasomal pathway is an emerging strategy, where combination treatments are under clinical investigation. We hypothesized that pre-treatment of GBM with bortezomib (BTZ) might sensitize glioblastoma to TMZ by abolishing autophagy survival signals to augment DNA damage and apoptosis. P3 patient-derived GBM cells as well as the tumor cell lines U87, HF66, A172 and T98G were investigated for clonogenic survival after single or combined treatment with TMZ and BTZ in vitro. Change in autophagic flux was examined after experimental treatments in conjunction with inhibitors of autophagy or downregulation of autophagy-related genes -5 and -7 (ATG5 and ATG7, respectively). Autophagic flux was increased in TMZ-resistant P3 and T98G cells as indicated by diminished levels of the autophagy markers LC3A/B-II and increased STX17, higher protein degradation and no formation of p62 bodies nor induction of apoptosis. In contrast, BTZ treatment attenuated ULK1 mRNA, total and phosphorylated protein, and accumulated LC3A/B-II, p62 and autophagosomes analogously to Baf1 and chloroquine autophagy inhibitors. These autophagosomes did not fuse with lysosomes, indicated by attenuated STX17 expression and reduced degradation of long-lived proteins, which culminated in enhanced caspase-3/8 dependent apoptosis. BTZ synergistically enhanced TMZ efficacy, attenuated tumor cell proliferation, triggered ATM/Chk2 DNA damage signalling to further augment caspase-3/8 mediated apoptosis in the TMZ resistant P3 and T98G GBM cells. Genetic or chemical inhibition of autophagy (with CRISPR-CAs9 ATG5, ATG7 shRNA, MRT68921 or VPS34-IN1) abrogated BTZ efficacy and rescued BTZ+ TMZ treated GBM cells from death. We conclude that Bortezomib ameliorates temozolomide resistance through ATG5/7-dependent abrogated autophagic flux and may be amenable in combination treatment regimens for TMZ refractory GBM patients.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of conditional media: One T75 flask of each tumor cell line were grown to sub confluence in their respective media. The fully supplemented media was removed and cells were washed with five times PBS. Then cell medium  without supplements was added for 1 hour. The cells were washed additionally five  times with PBS, before incubation for 24 hours in media without supplements. The media was then collected , centrifuged for 5 min at 2000g to remove cell debris, following with a sterile filtration (pore size: 0.22 μm, Millipore). The CM was concentrated by ultra-filtration using a centrifugal filter device “Amicon Ultra-15” (Millipore) with centrifugation  at 4000 × g for 30 minutes. Protein concentration was measured by using the Qubit Protein Assay.    Trypsin digestion of conditioned medium: The CM samples containing 10 ug of protein was buffered with 50mM Tris/1mM CaCl, reduced with 20 mM DTT (7min at 95˚C), alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide (1h at RT, (dark), and digested overnight at 37°C with 1:50 enzyme: substrate ratio of sequencing grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI). Following digestion, samples were acidified with formic acid and desalted using HLB Oasis SPE cartridges (Waters, Milford, MA). Samples were eluted with 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid, followed by 100% methanol, and concentrated (speedvac). Peptides were stored at -80°C until use.

### Data Protocol
Data processing. MS raw files were analyzed by the MaxQuant software (Version 1.6.1.0), and peak lists were searched against the human SwissProt FASTA database (version May 2019), and a common contaminants database by the Andromeda search engine. As variable modification, methionine oxidation was used and as fixed modification cysteine carbamidomethylation was used. False discovery rate was set to 0.01 for proteins and peptides (minimum length of six amino acids) and was determined by searching a reverse database. Trypsin was set as digestion protease, and a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed in the database search. Peptide identification was performed with an allowed MS mass deviation tolerance of 20 ppm, and MS/MS fragment ions could deviate by up to 0.5 Da. For accurate intensity-based label-free quantification in MaxQuant [MaxLFQ [29]], the type of label was “2″ for LFQ with a minimum ratio count of “2″. Match bewteen runs was used.

### Publication Abstract
<b>Introduction:</b> Glioblastoma (GBM) is invariably resistant to temozolomide (TMZ) chemotherapy. Inhibiting the proteasomal pathway is an emerging strategy to accumulate damaged proteins and inhibit their lysosomal degradation. We hypothesized that pre-treatment of glioblastoma with bortezomib (BTZ) might sensitize glioblastoma to temozolomide by abolishing autophagy survival signals to augment DNA damage and apoptosis. <b>Methods:</b> P3 patient-derived glioblastoma cells, as well as the tumour cell lines U87, HF66, A172, and T98G were investigated for clonogenic survival after single or combined treatment with temozolomide and bortezomib <i>in vitro</i>. We investigated the requirement of functional autophagy machinery by utilizing pharmacological inhibitors or CRISPR-Cas9 knockout (KO) of autophagy-related genes -5 and -7 (ATG5 and ATG7) in glioblastoma cells and monitored changes in autophagic flux after temozolomide and/or bortezomib treatments. P3 wild-type and P3 <i>ATG5-/- (ATG5 KO)</i> cells were implanted orthotopically into NOD-SCID mice to assess the efficacy of bortezomib and temozolomide combination therapy with and without functional autophagy machinery. <b>Results:</b> The chemo-resistant glioblastoma cells increased autophagic flux during temozolomide treatment as indicated by increased degradation of long-lived proteins, diminished expression of autophagy markers LC3A/B-II and p62 (SQSTM1), increased co-localisation of LC3A/B-II with STX17, augmented and no induction of apoptosis. In contrast, bortezomib treatment abrogated autophagic flux indicated by the accumulation of LC3A/B-II and p62 (SQSTM1) positive autophagosomes that did not fuse with lysosomes and thus reduced the degradation of long-lived proteins. Bortezomib synergistically enhanced temozolomide efficacy by attenuating cell proliferation, increased DNA double-strand breaks, and apoptosis in an autophagy-dependent manner. Abolishing autophagy in <i>ATG5</i> KOs reversed the bortezomib-induced toxicity, rescued glioblastoma cell death and reduced animal survival. <b>Discussion:</b> We conclude that bortezomib abrogates temozolomide induced autophagy flux through an ATG5 dependent pathway.

### Keywords
Bortezomib abrogates temozolomide-induced autophagic flux and kills glioblastoma cells through an atg5 and atg7 dependent pathway

### Affiliations
Institute of biomedicine, University of BErgen
University of Bergen, Department of Clinical Science, Norway

### Submitter
Even Birkeland

### Lab Head
Dr Martha Chekenya
University of Bergen, Department of Clinical Science, Norway


