### Accession
PXD002318

### Title
Multiple sclerosis resaerch: EAE and cuprizone mouse brain TMT and label-free proteomics

### Description
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a chronic inflammatory demyelinating disease of the central nervous system, and in this study we used quantitative proteomics to compare the brain proteomes of two MS mouse models, the immune-mediated experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (acute and recovery phase) and cuprizone (late de-/remyelination) with that of corresponding control mice. Proteomics using LC-MS with TMT-labeling and label-free quantification resulted in the quantification of 3664 and 2582 proteins (including protein groups), respectively, a total of 4375 different proteins. Differences between the disease model mice and the controls were revealed and protein candidates were discovered and translated to human disease.

### Sample Protocol
Female C57Bl/6 mice (injected with EAE or fed with cuprizone and controls), the brains samples and the frontal part lysed by sonication in (50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer containing 8 M urea, 30 μl/ml complete mini protease inhibitor cocktail, 1 mM heat-activated sodium vanadate and 10 mM NaF). Samples were prepared for TMT and label-free as described under and applied to a biphasic acetonitrile gradient on a nanoViper column (Dionex) on an Ultimate NCS-3500RS (Dionex) coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro. Control animals (n=11), cuprizone (n=5), EAE16 days (n=6) and EAE 32days (n=12).  TMT:  Equal amounts of protein from the individual brain samples representing the same condition were pooled, trypsinized and TMT-labeled: CTR-CPZ (pool of N=5) = TMT130, CTR-EAE (pool of N=6) = TMT127, CPZ-42d (pool of N=5) = TMT126, EAE-16d (pool of N=6) = TMT128 and EAE-32d (pool of N=6) = TMT129. The labeled samples were then combined, dried and reconstituted in buffer A (20 mM ammonium formate, 3% ACN), loaded onto a Sielc Promix column (MP-10.250.0530, 1.0 × 250 mm, 5 μm, 300Å, Sielc Technologies, Prospect Heights, Illinois) using an Agilent 1260 LC system with Chemstation Rev. B0.4.0 (Agilent Technologies, Palo Alto, CA) using 85% A for 10 min at a flow rate of 50 μl/min. The peptides were eluted using a gradient of 15% - 60% buffer B (2 mM ammonium formate, 80% ACN, pH 3.0) over 35 min, 60%-100% B over 10 min and held constant for 5 min. The sample was fractionated into 60 fractions in a 96-well plate, one fraction (approximately 58.5 µl) was collected every 1.16 min until 70 min. Peptides were lyophilized and reconstituted in 0.1% FA prior to LC-MS. Mixed-mode fractions 1-3 were pooled and fractions 7-9 were pooled, while fractions 4 to 6 containing excessive TMT reagents were excluded, resulting in a total of 53 fractions plus the unfractionated sample. The samples (0.5 µg) were subjected to LC-MS (120 min, 15 cm column).  Label-free: The individual mouse brain lysates from EAE-16d (N=6), EAE-32d (N=12), CTR-EAE (N=5), CPZ (N=5) and CTR-CPZ (N=5) were trypsinized in-solution and samples (2.5 µg) were subjected to LC-MS (220 min, 50 cm column).

### Data Protocol
TMT: Proteome Discoverer version 1.4.1.14 (Thermo Scientific) was used for quantification and identification of the TMT data. MS Amanda and SEQUEST were used as search engines and the Swissprot database Mus musculus (with canonical sequence data in FASTA version 27.03.14) was used. The enzyme was set to trypsin and the max missed cleavages to 2. The precursor mass tolerance was 10 ppm with accepted precursor charges from +2 to +7, and the fragment mass tolerance was 0.05 Da. Carbamidomethyl of C, TMT6plex on K and TMT6plex on any N-terminus were set to fixed modifications. Oxidation of M was set to variable modification. The perculator was used with target FDR strict 0.01 and relaxed 0.05. The method “Most Confident Centroid” without Quan Value Corrections (recommended in the PD v1.4 manual) and an integration tolerance of 1000 ppm were used for quantification of the TMT peaks in the HCD spectra.  Label-free: Progenesis LC-MS was used for label-free quantification and a generated mgf file was searched against the UniProt database Mus musculus using SearchGUI v1.8.9 (Vaudel et al., 2011) (The search criteria were: trypsin as the protease with one miss-cleavages accepted, fixed carbamidomethylation on cystein, variable oxidation on methionine, precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 0.7 and X!Tandem (version Cyclone) as the search engine), the search result and associated spectra were combined and assigned to proteins in PeptideShaker v0.17.3 (Vaudel et al. 2015) at 1% FDR. The results were imported back into Progenesis. The protein abundances reported from Progenesis were based on the sum of the normalized abundance of the identified unique peptides.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Brain, Mus musculus, Orbitrap velos, Tmt, Label-free

### Affiliations
Institute of Marine Research
Proteomics Unit at University of Bergen

### Submitter
Eystein Oveland

### Lab Head
Dr Frode S. Berven
Proteomics Unit at University of Bergen


