### Accession
PXD046521

### Title
Time-dependent proteomic signatures associated with embry-ogenic callus induction in Carica papaya L.

### Description
The cost of Carica papaya production through seed-based propagation is increased by sex segregation, making in vitro techniques a more appealing option for clonal propagation. Inducing embryogenic callus with 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid (2,4-D) hold the potential to large-scale cloning, although the molecular mechanisms underlying this process are still not well understood. In this study, we performed a temporal analysis in the proteome of C. papaya callus to identify the key players involved in embryogenic differentiation. Mature zygotic embryos were used as explants and treated with 20 μM 2,4-D to induce embryogenic callus. Total proteins were extracted at 0, 7, 14, and 21 days (T0, T7, T14, and T21), and 1407 proteins were identified using bottom-up proteomic approach. Comparative proteomics revealed 957 differentially accumulated proteins (DAPs) (p<0.05 and log2FC >0.585 or <-0.585) in at least one comparison between the analyzed induction times points. The clustering analysis revealed four clusters with distinct patterns of protein accumulation throughout the embryogenic callus induction treatment. The cluster 1 contains 386 DAPs that accumulated at all analyzed times after treatment with 2,4-D. In contrast, cluster 2 contains 165 DAPs that decrease in abundance during the induction. The cluster 3 contains 251 proteins that are most abundant just after the start of incubation in 2,4-D (T7) and cluster 4 grouped 155 proteins that accumulate after callus formation. Functional analysis revealed that proteins involved with reserve storage and seed maturation were more abundant in the explant at T0 and decreased as callus formation progressed. Biological processes involving carbohydrate and amino acid metabolism, aerobic respiration, and protein catabolic processes were enriched after induction treatment. Regulatory proteins, including histone deacetylase (HDT3) and argonaute 1, were more abundant after the start of induction treatment with 2,4-D, suggesting their role in acquisition of embryogenic competence. Predicted protein-protein networks revealed the regulatory role of proteins 14.3.3 accumulated during callus induction and the association of proteins involved in oxidative phosphorylation, hormone response, and SAM metabolism. Our findings emphasize the modulation of the proteome at different stages during embryogenic callus initiation and identify regulatory proteins that might be involved with the activation of this process.

### Sample Protocol
Plant material and callus induction Zygotic embryos from seeds extracted from mature fruits of papaya cv ‘Golden’ were used as a source of explant. Initially, the fruits were washed under running water, transferred to a sterile environment and kept immersed in 70% ethanol for 1 min. Later, the fruits were kept immersed in 0.75% sodium hypochlorite, and washed three times with autoclaved distilled water. The fruits were then opened, and the seeds extracted. Using a scalpel and tweezers, the seeds were dissected and the zygotic embryos were carefully separated from the cotyledons and placed in Petri dishes containing callus induction culture medium.  The culture medium for callus induction contained Murashige and Skoog (MS) salts and vitamins (Phytotechnology Lab, KS, USA) [1], 30 g.L-1 of sucrose (Vetec), 20 μM of 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid (Sigma-Aldrich), pH adjusted to 5.8, and 2 g.L-1 of Phytagel® (Sigma-Aldrich). Before solidifying in Pettri dishes, the culture medium was sterilized by autoclaving at 121 °C for 15 min [2]. The explants were maintained in darkness at 25 °C up to 21 days for callus induction. Samples of the explants were collected for proteomic analysis at 0 day (zygotic embryos, before contact with callus induction culture medium containing 2,4-D), 7 days in callus induction culture medium, 14 days in callus induction culture medium, and 21 days in callus induction culture medium. Thus, the four treatments were named T0, T7, T14 and T21, respectively.  Protein extraction and digestion Three biological replicates (each biological replicate constituted by a pool of 25 explants) were collected from each treatment and macerated in 1.5 mL microtubes until a powder. Following, 375 μL extraction buffer constituted of 7 M urea (GE Healthcare), 2 M thiourea (GE Healthcare), 2% Triton X-100 (GE Healthcare), 1% dithiothreitol (GE Healthcare), and 1 mM phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride (Sigma-Aldrich) was added to the sample powder to protein extraction. The supernatants were collected, and the protein concentration of samples were estimated using the 2-D Quant Kit (Cytiva). Following, 100 μg of protein from each biological replicate was precipitated using a methanol/chloroform method to remove any interfering compounds from the samples according to Nanjo, et al. [3]. The samples were then resuspended in a solution consisting of 7 M urea and 2 M thiourea. Later, the samples were digested in the 1:100 enzyme:protein proportion (V5111, Promega) using Microcon-30 kDa filter (Millipore) with the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) methodology described in Wiśniewski, et al. [4] with modificatios [2]. Lastly, the peptides were vacuum-dried and solubilized in 0.7 μg.μL-1 in 95 % water and 5 % acetonitrile plus 0.1 % formic acid in mass spectrometry (MS)-grade (Sigma-Aldrich). The peptide concentration was estimated by measuring A205nm using a NanoDrop 2000c spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Proteomics analysis A nanoAcquity UPLC M-class (Waters, Manchester, UK) coupled to a Synapt G2-Si HDMS mass spectrometer (Waters, Manchester, UK) with an electrospray ionization (ESI)-MS/MS source was used. An amount of 2 μg of peptides was loaded onto a c18 trap column (100Å, 5 µm, 180 µm x 20 mm, 2D; Waters) at 5 μL min-1 for 3 min and then onto a HSS T3 analytical reversed-phase column (100Å, 1.8 µm, 75 µm x 150 mm; Waters) at 400 nL min-1 heated to 45 °C. For peptide elution, a binary gradient was used, with mobile phase A consisting of water and 0.1% formic acid and mobile phase B consisting of acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Gradient elution was started with 5% B, which was then increased to 40% B until 92 min and from 40 to 99% B until 96 min, after which it was maintained at 99% until 100 min, posteriorly decreased to 5% B until 102 min, and maintained at 5% B until the end of the run at 118.00 min.  The mass spectrometer has been set up in positive, resolution mode (V mode), and data-independent acquisition (DIA) mode, at 35,000 FWHM, with ion mobility (HDMSE) wave velocity program starting at 800 m s-1 and ending at 500 m s-1. The transfer collision energy increased from 25 to 55 V in high-energy mode, the cone voltage was 40 V, and capillary voltage was 2800 V. The pressure of the nano-flow gas was 0.5 bar, the purge gas flow rate was 150 L.h-1, and the source temperature was 100 ºC. For the time-of-flight (TOF) parameters, the scan time was set to 0.5 s in continuous mode, with a mass range of 50 to 2000 Da. Human [Glu1]-fibrinopeptide B at 100 fmol.μL-1 was used as an external standard, and lock mass acquisition was performed every 30 s. Mass spectra were subsequently acquired by using MassLynx 4.1 software (Waters, Manchester, UK).  Proteomics data analysis The proteomics MS/MS spectra processing and database search were performed using ProteinLynx Global SERVER (PLGS) software v.3.02 (Waters), against the Carica papaya ASGPBv0.4 protein bank from Phytozome (https://phytozome.jgi.doe.gov). The label-free quantification analyses were performed using the TOP3 quantification approach, followed by the multidimensional normalization process implemented within ISOQuant software v.1.7 [5]. The threshold parameters for intensity, energy, peptides, fragments, and modifications are described in our previous work [6].

### Publication Abstract
Sex segregation increases the cost of <i>Carica papaya</i> production through seed-based propagation. Therefore, in vitro techniques are an attractive option for clonal propagation, especially of hermaphroditic plants. Here, we performed a temporal analysis of the proteome of <i>C. papaya</i> calli aiming to identify the key players involved in embryogenic callus formation. Mature zygotic embryos used as explants were treated with 20 &#x3bc;M 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid to induce embryogenic callus. Total proteins were extracted from explants at 0 (zygotic embryo) and after 7, 14, and 21 days of induction. A total of 1407 proteins were identified using a bottom-up proteomic approach. The clustering analysis revealed four distinct patterns of protein accumulation throughout callus induction. Proteins related to seed maturation and storage are abundant in the explant before induction, decreasing as callus formation progresses. Carbohydrate and amino acid metabolisms, aerobic respiration, and protein catabolic processes were enriched throughout days of callus induction. Protein kinases associated with auxin responses, such as SKP1-like proteins 1B, accumulated in response to callus induction. Additionally, regulatory proteins, including histone deacetylase (HD2C) and argonaute 1 (AGO1), were more abundant at 7 days, suggesting their role in the acquisition of embryogenic competence. Predicted protein-protein networks revealed the regulatory role of proteins 14-3-3 accumulated during callus induction and the association of proteins involved in oxidative phosphorylation and hormone response. Our findings emphasize the modulation of the proteome during embryogenic callus initiation and identify regulatory proteins that might be involved in the activation of this process.

### Keywords
Bottom-up proteomics; carica papaya; embryogenic callus; somatic embryos; time-series analysis.

### Affiliations
Laboratório de Biotecnologia, Centro de Biociências e Biotecnologia (CBB), Universidade Estadual do Norte Fluminense Darcy Ribeiro (UENF), Av. Alberto Lamego, Campos dos Goytacazes, RJ, Brazil. Unidade de Biologia Integrativa, Setor de Genômica e Proteômica, UENF, Campos dos Goytacazes, RJ, Brazil.
UNIVERSIDADE ESTADUAL DO NORTE FLUMINENSE

### Submitter
Vanildo Silveira

### Lab Head
Dr Vanildo Silveira
Laboratório de Biotecnologia, Centro de Biociências e Biotecnologia (CBB), Universidade Estadual do Norte Fluminense Darcy Ribeiro (UENF), Av. Alberto Lamego, Campos dos Goytacazes, RJ, Brazil. Unidade de Biologia Integrativa, Setor de Genômica e Proteômica, UENF, Campos dos Goytacazes, RJ, Brazil.


