### Accession
PXD007575

### Title
Multiplexed thiol reactivity profiling for target discovery of electrophilic natural products

### Description
Electrophilic groups, such as Michael acceptors, expoxides, are common motifs in natural products (NPs). Electrophilic NPs can act through covalent modification of cysteinyl thiols on functional proteins, and exhibit potent cytotoxicity and anti-inflammatory/cancer activities. Here we describe a new chemoproteomic strategy, termed multiplexed thiol reactivity profiling (MTRP), and its use in target discovery of electrophilic NPs. We demonstrate the utility of MTRP by identifying cellular targets of gambogic acid, an electrophilic NP that is currently under evaluation in clinical trials as anticancer agent. Moreover, MTRP enables simultaneous comparison of seven structurally diversified -unsaturated -lactones, which provides insights into the relative proteomic reactivity and target preference of diverse structural scaffolds coupled to a common electrophilic motif and reveals various potential druggable targets with liganded cysteines. We anticipate that this new method for thiol reactivity profiling in a multiplexed manner will find broad application in redox biology and drug discovery.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples from HeLa or U2OS cells were labeled with 100 M IPM probe for 1h at room temperature with light protection. The labeling reactions were stopped by adding DTT (Final concentration=10 mM) and incubated at 75°C for another 15 min. The lysate was further incubated with 40 mM iodoacetamide at RT for 30 min in the dark. The reactions were quenched by protein precipitation, which was performed with a methanol-chloroform system (aqueous phase/methanol/chloroform, 4:4:1, v/v/v) as described previously (Yang et al., 2015). In brief, proteins were collected at the aqueous/organic phase interface as a solid disk after centrifugation at 1,400 g for 20 min at 4°C. Liquid layers were discarded and the protein was washed twice in methanol/chloroform (1:1, v/v), followed by centrifugation at 16,000 x g for 10 min at 4 °C to repellet the protein. The protein pellets were resuspended with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate containing 0.2 M urea. For a typical MTRP experiment, each of the control and compound-treated proteome samples (2 mg protein/mL in 125 L volume) were first digested with sequencing grade trypsin at a 1:50 (enzyme/substrate) ratio overnight at 37°C. A secondary digestion was performed by adding additional trypsin to a 1:100 (enzyme/substrate) ratio, followed by incubation at 37°C for additional 4 h. The tryptic digests were tried under vacuum with centrifugation, resuspended with 30 L dissolution buffer (0.5 M triethylammonium Bicarbonate, TEAB, pH 8.5), and labeled with pre-dissolved 8-plex iTRAQ reagents (To each iTRAQ vial, add 50 L isopropanol). After 2h reaction at RT, 8-plex iTRAQ-labeled samples were mixed and dried by under vacuum with centrifugation. The dried peptide mixtures were then dissolved and desalted with HLB extraction cartridges as previously described. The desalted tryptic digests were reconstituted in a solution containing 30% acetonitrile (ACN). CuAAC reaction was performed in the presence of 1 mM Azido-UV-biotin, 10 mM sodium ascorbate, 1 mM TBTA, and 10 mM CuSO4. Samples were allowed to react at room temperature for 2 h in the dark with rotation. The excess biotin reagents were removed by strong cation exchange (SCX), as previously described (Yang et al., 2015). In brief, the sample was diluted into SCX loading buffer (5 mM KH2PO4, 25% acetonitrile, pH 3.0), passed through the SCX spin columns, and washed with several column volumes of loading buffer. The retained peptides were eluted with SCX loading buffer containing 0.4 M NaCl. Eluent was diluted 10X with 50 mM sodium acetate buffer (NaAc, pH 4.5) and then allowed to interact with pre-washed streptavidin sepharose for 2 h at room temperature. Streptavidin sepharose then was washed with 50 mM NaAc, 50 mM NaAc containing 2 M NaCl, and water twice each with votexing and/or rotation to remove non-specific binding peptides, and resuspended in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate. The suspension of streptavidin sepharose was transferred to several thin-walled borosilicate glass tubes, irradiated with 365 nm UV light for 2h at room temperature with stirring. The supernatant was collected, concentrated under vacuum, and desalted with HLB extraction cartridges as previously described (Yang et al., 2015). The desalting peptides were evaporated to dryness and stored at -20°C until analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were converted to mzML format using Proteowizard (Kessner et al., 2008). The mzML files were searched against a decoy protein database consisting of forward and reversed Homo sapiens uniprot canonical database (Dec 2, 2016, 20,130 entries) using MS-GF+ algorithm (Kim and Pevzner, 2014). Precursor ion mass tolerance and fragmentation tolerance were both set as 10 ppm for the database search. The maximum number of modiﬁcations and missed cleavages allowed per peptide was three and three, respectively. 8-plex iTRAQ tags (+304.2054 Da) on the peptide N-terminus and lysine residues were search as static modifications Different modifications of methionine oxidation (+ 15.9949 Da), iodoacetamide alkylation (+57.0214 Da), and IPM-triazohexanoic acid (+252.1222 Da) were searched as variable modifications. Spectral identification mzID files generated from the MS-GF+ search was imported into IDPicker 3 software for protein assembly (Holman et al., 2012). The maximum Q value of peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) was set as 1 % and each peptide should be identified by at least two spectra in MTRP experiments for each cell line. These stringent filters result in a final false-positive rate below 1% for peptides and their corresponding proteins groups. For peptide-level quantifications, spectra from mzML files were embedded into IDPicker software to extract peak intensity of 8-plex iTRAQ report ions at 20 ppm mass tolerance. Quantitation results were obtained from at least two biological replicates.

### Publication Abstract
Electrophilic groups, such as Michael acceptors, expoxides, are common motifs in natural products (NPs). Electrophilic NPs can act through covalent modification of cysteinyl thiols on functional proteins, and exhibit potent cytotoxicity and anti-inflammatory/cancer activities. Here we describe a new chemoproteomic strategy, termed multiplexed thiol reactivity profiling (MTRP), and its use in target discovery of electrophilic NPs. We demonstrate the utility of MTRP by identifying cellular targets of gambogic acid, an electrophilic NP that is currently under evaluation in clinical trials as anticancer agent. Moreover, MTRP enables simultaneous comparison of seven structurally diversified &#x3b1;,&#x3b2;-unsaturated &#x3b3;-lactones, which provides insights into the relative proteomic reactivity and target preference of diverse structural scaffolds coupled to a common electrophilic motif and reveals various potential druggable targets with liganded cysteines. We anticipate that this new method for thiol reactivity profiling in a multiplexed manner will find broad application in redox biology and drug discovery.

### Keywords
Mtrp;natural products;chemoproteomics

### Affiliations
National Center for Protein Science Beijing
National Center for Protein Sciences, Beijing

### Submitter
Jing Yang

### Lab Head
Dr Jing Yang
National Center for Protein Science Beijing


