### Accession
PXD040661

### Title
PROTEOMIC ANALYSIS OF DYSFUNCTIONAL LIVER SINUSOIDAL ENDOTHELIAL CELLS REVEALS  SUBSTANTIAL DIFFERENCES IN MOST COMMON EXPERIMENTAL MODELS OF CHRONIC LIVER  DISEASES.

### Description
Molecular markers of dedifferentiation of dysfunctional liver sinusoidal endothelial cells (LSEC),  have not been fully elucidated. We aimed at deciphering the molecular profile of dysfunctional  LSEC in different pathological scenarios. Flow cytometry was used to sort CD11bˉ/CD32b+  and  CD11bˉ/CD32bˉLSEC from three rat models of liver disease (bile duct ligation-BDL, inhaled  carbon tetrachloride-CCl4 and high fat glucose/fructose diet-HFGFD). Full proteomic profile was  performed applying nano-scale liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (nLC-MS)  and analyzed with PEAKS software. The percentage of CD32bˉ LSEC varied across groups,  suggesting different capillarization processes. Both CD32+  and CD32bˉLSEC from models are  different from control LSEC but differently expressed proteins in CD32bˉLSEC are significantly  higher. Heatmaps evidenced specific protein expression patterns for each model. Analysis of  biological significance comparing dysfunctional CD32bˉLSEC with specialized CD32b+  LSEC from  controls showed central similarities represented by 45 common downregulated proteins  involved in the suppression of the endocytic machinery and 63 common upregulated proteins  associated with the actin-dependent cytoskeleton reorganization. In summary, substantial  differences but also similarities in dysfunctional LSEC from the three most common models of  liver disease were found, supporting the idea that LSEC may harbor different protein expression  profiles according to the etiology or disease stage.

### Sample Protocol
The samples of sorted CD32b+ and CD32bˉ LSEC were shipped in dry ice to the  Proteomics platform of CIC-BioGUNE (Derio, Spain) to obtain their full proteomic profile  by performing a label-free relative protein quantification through nLC MS/MS. Cells  were lysed in a buffer containing 7M Urea 2M Thiourea and 4% CHAPS, and the protein  obtained was digested with trypsin using the SP3 method (single-pot solid-phaseenhanced sample preparation). The resulting peptides were loaded onto an Evosep One  chromatograph (30 SPD protocol) coupled on-line to a timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer  (Bruker), that uses parallel accumulation serial fragmentation (PASEF) acquisition to  provide extremely high speed and sensitivity.

### Data Protocol
The data obtained were then processed  with PEAKS software (Biofinformatics Solutions Inc); this software identifies proteins  and performs an intensity-based quantification of proteins. Proteins identified with at  least two different peptides (one of them being unique) at a False Discovery rate  (FDR)<1% were considered for further analyses. Proteins were regarded as differentially  28  abundant with a ratio ≥ 1.5 (overexpressed) or ≤ 0,67 (under-expressed). Then, further  refinement was accomplished by filtering through the p-value from a paired Student’s  t-test < 0.05. Perseus software (free from Max Plank Institute, Munich) was used for the  differential protein abundance analyses. Principal Component Analysis (PCA) and heatmaps  for data visualization were performed using Clustvis software  (http://biit.cs.ut.ee/clustvis/). Further details are available in the Supplementary  Material.

### Publication Abstract
Molecular markers of dedifferentiation of dysfunctional liver sinusoidal endothelial cells (LSEC) have not been fully elucidated. We aimed at deciphering the molecular profile of dysfunctional LSEC in different pathological scenarios. Flow cytometry was used to sort CD11b<sup>-</sup>/CD32b<sup>+</sup> and CD11b<sup>-</sup>/CD32b<sup>-</sup> LSEC from three rat models of liver disease (bile duct ligation-BDL; inhaled carbon tetrachloride-CCl4; and high fat glucose/fructose diet-HFGFD). A full proteomic profile was performed applying nano-scale liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (nLC-MS) and analyzed with PEAKS software. The percentage of CD32b<sup>-</sup> LSEC varied across groups, suggesting different capillarization processes. Both CD32<sup>+</sup> and CD32b<sup>-</sup> LSEC from models are different from control LSEC, but differently expressed proteins in CD32b<sup>-</sup> LSEC are significantly higher. Heatmaps evidenced specific protein expression patterns for each model. Analysis of biological significance comparing dysfunctional CD32b<sup>-</sup> LSEC with specialized CD32b<sup>+</sup> LSEC from controls showed central similarities represented by 45 common down-regulated proteins involved in the suppression of the endocytic machinery and 63 common up-regulated proteins associated with the actin-dependent cytoskeleton reorganization. In summary; substantial differences but also similarities in dysfunctional LSEC from the three most common models of liver disease were found, supporting the idea that LSEC may harbor different protein expression profiles according to the etiology or disease stage.

### Keywords
Liver sinusoidal endothelial cells, Animal models, Proteomics, Endothelial dysfunction, Chronic liver disease

### Affiliations
Proteomics Service CIC bioGUNE, Bizakaia Tech. Park Build. 800 48160 Derio Spain
Proteomics Platform CIC bioGUNE

### Submitter
Mikel Azkargorta

### Lab Head
Dr Felix Elortza
Proteomics Service CIC bioGUNE, Bizakaia Tech. Park Build. 800 48160 Derio Spain


