### Accession
PXD027774

### Title
Hydra vulgaris extracellular vesicles

### Description
Recent body of evidence demonstrates that extracellular vesicles (EVs) represent the first language of cell-cell communication emerged during evolution. In aquatic environments, transferring signals between cells by EVs offer protection against degradation, allowing delivering of chemical information in high local concentrations to the target cells. The packaging of multiple signals, including those of hydrophobic nature, ensures target cells to receive the same EV-conveyed messages, and the coordination of a variety of physiological processes across cells of a single organisms, or at the population level, i.e. mediating the population´s response to changing environmental conditions. Here, we purified EVs from the medium of the freshwater invertebrate Hydra vulgaris, and the molecular profiling by proteomic and transcriptomic analyses revealed multiple markers of the exosome EV subtype. Moreover, positive and negative regulators of the Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway, the major developmental pathway acting in body axial patterning, were identified. Functional analysis on amputated polyps revealed EV ability to interfere with both head and foot regeneration, suggesting an active role in setting up tissue gradients and oro-aboral polarity through delivery of short and long-distance signals. Our results open the path to unravel EV biogenesis and function in all cnidarian species, tracing back the origin of the cell-cell, cross-species or cross-kingdom communication in aquatic ecosystems

### Sample Protocol
For EV collection, 250 polyps were placed in 10 mL of Hydra solution in 6 cm Petri dishes. After 4 days starvation, Hydra conditioned medium was collected and centrifuged using a Beckman Coulter Avanti J-25 centrifuge (rotor JA-25.15) at 10,000g for 30 min to remove tissue patches and at 20,000g for 30 min to pellet any cellular debris. The resulting supernatant was then centrifuged at 74,200g for 150 min at 4 °C and the pelleted EVs were washed in Hydra solution, followed by one last centrifugation. Pelleted EVs were resuspended in either PBS or Hydra solution.In solution digestion- Samples were evaporated and resuspended in 10 μl of denaturing buffer (6 M urea, 100 mM Tris buffer pH 7.8). Next, cysteins were reduced with 1.5 μl DTT (200 mM) for 30 min at 37 ºC and alkylated with 6 μl of iodoacetamide (200 mM) for 30 min in the dark. Unreacted iodoacetamide were consumed adding 6 μl of the reducing agent (200 mM DTT) for 30 min at room temperature. Samples were diluted with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate to a final concentration less than 1M of urea.  Digestion was carried out overnight with the enzyme trypsin (Gold Trypsin, Promega) at 37 °C and a 1:10 ratio (enzyme/protein). Reaction was stopped adding concentrated formic acid (Sigma). Samples were evaporated, resuspended in 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid and filtered through 0.45 μm filters. Protein identification was performed on a nano-LC system (Tempo MDLC, Eksigent, Dublin, CA, USA) coupled to a hybrid triple quadrupole/linear ion trap mass spectrometer (4000 QTRAP, Sciex). After precolumn desalting, tryptic digests (1 μg) were separated on a C18 column (Acclaim PepMap100, 75 μm id, 15 cm, 3 μm particle size, Thermo Scientific, USA) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min and a 120 min linear gradient from 5 to 35% ACN in 0.1% formic acid. The mass spectrometer was interfaced with a nanospray source equipped with uncoated fused silica emitter tip (20 μm inner diameter, 10 μm tip, NewObjective, Woburn, MA) and was operated in the positive ion mode. MS source parameters were as follows: capillary voltage 2800 V, source temperature 150 °C, declustering potential (DP) 85 V, curtain and ion source gas (nitrogen) 20 psi, and collision gas (nitrogen) high

### Data Protocol
Analyses were performed using an information dependent acquisition (IDA) method with the following steps: single enhanced mass spectra (EMS, 400–1400 m/z) from which the 8 most intense peaks were subjected to an enhanced product ion [EPI (MS/MS)] scan. Proteins were identified with the search engine Mascot (v2.3 MatrixScience, UK) using NCBIprot database of Hydra (29584 sequences). Search parameters used were: missed cleavages 1, fixed modifications carbamidomethyl (cysteines), variable modification oxidation (methionine) and peptide and fragment mass tolerance 0.5 and 0.3 Da, respectively. Only proteins with an overall Mascot score higher than 32 and at least 2 matching spectra were considered in the final list.

### Publication Abstract
Recent body of evidence demonstrates that extracellular vesicles (EVs) represent the first language of cell-cell communication emerged during evolution. In aquatic environments, transferring signals between cells by EVs offers protection against degradation, allowing delivering of chemical information in high local concentrations to the target cells. The packaging of multiple signals, including those of hydrophobic nature, ensures target cells to receive the same EV-conveyed messages, and the coordination of a variety of physiological processes across cells of a single organisms, or at the population level, i.e., mediating the population's response to changing environmental conditions. Here, we purified EVs from the medium of the freshwater invertebrate <i>Hydra vulgaris</i>, and the molecular profiling by proteomic and transcriptomic analyses revealed multiple markers of the exosome EV subtype, from structural proteins to stress induced messages promoting cell survival. Moreover, positive and negative regulators of the Wnt/&#x3b2;-catenin signaling pathway, the major developmental pathway acting in body axial patterning, were identified. Functional analysis on amputated polyps revealed EV ability to modulate both head and foot regeneration, suggesting bioactivity of the EV cargo and opening new perspectives on the mechanisms of developmental signalling. Our results open the path to unravel EV biogenesis and function in all cnidarian species, tracing back the origin of the cell-cell, cross-species or cross-kingdom communication in aquatic ecosystems.

### Keywords
Hydra vulgaris, Extracellular vesicles, Lc-esi-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Investigador Ramon y Cajal, grupo Bionanosurf, Instituto de nanociencia y materiales de ARagón (Zaragoza, España)
Instituto de Nanociencia y Materiales de ARagón

### Submitter
Maria Moros

### Lab Head
Dr Maria Moros
Investigador Ramon y Cajal, grupo Bionanosurf, Instituto de nanociencia y materiales de ARagón (Zaragoza, España)


