### Accession
PXD008980

### Title
Time-resolved proteomics of Adenovirus infected cells

### Description
To combat virus infections, which are major human killers, a deeper understanding of how viruses reprogram their hosts to create optimal production of progeny is needed. Most knowledge on the regulation of cellular gene expression during adenovirus infection is derived from studies of mRNA expression. Here, we investigated the changes in cellular protein expression during the early phase of adenovirus type 2 (Ad2) infection of primary human cells by stable isotope labeling in cell culture (SILAC) with subsequent liquid chromatography-high resolution tandem mass spectrometric (LC-MS/MS) analysis using a Q-Exactive Orbitrap instrument. Cells were in-depth evaluated 6 and 12 hours post infection (hpi) and two biological replicates were investigated using swapped labeling. In total, 2027 and 2150 proteins were quantified at 6 and 12 hpi, respectively. Among them, 431 and 544 were deregulated more than 1.5-fold at the two time points.  For the deregulated proteins the change in protein expression was compared with that of late phase of infection (see PXD004095). Pathway analysis showed that De novo purine and pyrimidine biosynthesis, Glycolysis and Cytoskeletal regulation by Rho GTPase pathways are activated early during the infection, while the inactivation of the Integrin signalling pathway starts between 6 and 12 hpi. The transcription factor MYC was predicted to be activated with time, and the phosphopeptide analysis revealed the up-regulation of phosphosites related with glycolysis or cytoskeletal reorganization. These results complement the previous knowledge obtained from transcriptomic data, and show novel and specific aspects of how adenovirus influence host cell gene expression at the protein level.The results contribute to our understanding of host cell gene regulation during infection at a deeper level.

### Sample Protocol
Human primary lung fibroblast cells (IMR-90), purchased from American Type Culture Collection (ATCC) were cultured in minimum essential medium (without lysine and arginine) (Thermo Fishcer Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) supplemented with 10% dialyzed fetal bovine serum  (Thermo Fischer Scientific), 100 U/ml penicillin and 100 µg/ml streptomycin, L-lysine (0.89 mM) and L-arginine (0.40 mM) (Sigma Aldrich, St Louis, MO, USA) in light medium or 13C15N-labeled lysine (Lys8, 0.89 mM) and 13C15N-labeled arginine (Arg10, 0.40 mM) (Silantes, Munich, Germany) in heavy medium. After six cell doublings labelled cells were either mock infected (only medium) or infected with Ad2 at a multiplicity of infection of 100 in a serum free medium for 60 min. Then the medium was replaced with fresh SILAC-labeled medium and cultured for  6 and 12 hours before cells were collected. A biological replicate in form of a swap-labelling experiment was performed. Cells were washed with PBS and directly snap frozen on dry ice.  Collected cells were lysed in SDS buffer (4% SDS in 100 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.6) at 95°C for 3 minutes. Next, DNA was sheared by sonication and lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 16.000 g for 5 minutes. Protein concentration was determined by DC (detergent compatible) protein assay (Bio-Rad, Hercules, California, USA). For all time points, heavy and light labeled samples were mixed in a 1:1 ratio as followed: Light labeled mock sample was mixed with heavy labeled cells infected with Ad2. As a biological replicate, a SILAC swap experiment was performed by mixing light labeled cells infected with Ad2 with heavy labeled mock samples at all time points. Samples were subjected to in-depth analysis by SDS-PAGE fractionation and in gel-digestion. Mixed samples were loaded on a 4-12% gel (NuPAGE, Bis-Tris gel, Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA) to separate proteins by molecular weight. After protein staining by Colloidal Coomassie Blue, gel lanes were cut into 10 pieces and subjected to in gel-digestion. In brief, gel pieces were washed several times with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and dehydrated with absolute ethanol. Next, protein disulfide bonds were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol and alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide. Protein digestion was performed by trypsin 12.5 ng/µL (Promega Corporation, Madison, WI, USA) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer at 37°C overnight. Resulting peptides were extracted stepwise by acetonitrile and concentrated STAGE tips before analysis by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
The raw data from 6 and 12 hpi, and the previously published raw data from 24 and 36 hpi (PRIDE Accession number: PXD004095), were processed together using MaxQuant (1.4.1.2) and database searches were performed using the implemented Andromeda search engine. MS/MS spectra were correlated to the Uniprot human database (release 2017–02, 156787 entries) combined with a human adenovirus type 2 database (release 2017–02, 560 entries). False discovery rate (FDR) was calculated based on reverse sequences from the target-decoy search and an FDR of 1% was accepted for protein and peptide identification. For data processing, only peptides with a minimum of 7 amino acids and two maximum miss cleavages were accepted, and the mass tolerance was 4.5 ppm for main search and 20 ppm for fragment masses. Trypsin was selected as digesting enzyme, carbamidomethylation of cysteines as fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine, acetylation of the protein N-terminus and phosphorylation (STY) as variable modifications. For protein identification, at least one unique peptide and two peptides were required. For SILAC labelling quantification, Lys8 and Arg10 were set for heavy label and two ratio counts was the minimum.

### Publication Abstract
Viral infections cause large problems in the world and deeper understanding of the disease mechanisms is needed. Here we present an analytical strategy to investigate the host cell protein changes during human adenovirus type 2 (HAdV-C2 or Ad2) infection of lung fibroblasts by stable isotope labelling of amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) and nanoLC-MS/MS. This work focuses on early phase of infection (6 and 12 h post-infection (hpi)) but the data is combined with previously published late phase (24 and 36 hpi) proteomics data to produce a time series covering the complete infection. As many as 2169 proteins were quantitatively monitored from 6 to 36 hpi, while some proteins were time-specific. After applying different filter criteria, 2027 and 2150 proteins were quantified at 6 and 12 hpi and among them, 431 and 544 were significantly altered at the two time points. Pathway analysis showed that the De novo purine and pyrimidine biosynthesis, Glycolysis and Cytoskeletal regulation by Rho GTPase pathways were activated early during infection while inactivation of the Integrin signalling pathway started between 6 and 12 hpi. Moreover, upstream regulator analysis predicted MYC to be activated with time of infection and protein and RNA data for genes controlled by this transcription factor showed good correlation, which validated the use of protein data for this prediction. Among the identified phosphorylation sites, a group related to glycolysis and cytoskeletal reorganization were up-regulated during infection. The results show specific aspects on how the host cell proteins, the final products in the genetic information flow, are influenced by Ad2 infection, which would be overlooked if only knowledge derived from mRNA data is considered.

### Keywords
Imr-90, Adenovirus type 2 infection, Deregulation of host cell proteins, Silac., Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Uppsala University, Department of Chemistry-BMC, Analytical Chemistry
Uppsala University

### Submitter
Sara Lind

### Lab Head
Dr Sara Lind
Uppsala University, Department of Chemistry-BMC, Analytical Chemistry


