### Accession
PXD018085

### Title
Quantification of oxidized proteins in wild type and Nox2 deficient mouse dorsal root ganglia

### Description
Here we studied the NOX2 dependent redox-proteome in dorsal root ganglia in mice. The overall goal was to assess the degree of NOX2-dependent changes in oxidised proteins following exposure to enriched enviroment and sciatic nerve axotomy in dorsal root ganglia.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were thawed on ice, centrifuged for 30 min with 16000 x g and washed with 10 % TCA and 5 % TCA, respectively. Pellets were resuspended in 200 μl NEM-DAB (8 M Urea, 5 mM EDTA, 0.5% SDS, 50 mM Tris/HCL, pH 8.5, 50x molar excess NEM) and incubated at 850 rpm for 1 hour at 22°C in the dark. Proteins were precipitated by ice-cold acetone, collected by centrifugation, washed, resuspended in 100 μl DTT-DAB (8 M Urea, 5 mM EDTA, 0.5% SDS, 50 mM Tris/HCL, pH 8.5, 3 mM DTT) and incubated at 850 rpm for 5 minutes at 22°C in the dark followed by addition of 100 μl BIAM-DAB (8 M Urea, 5 mM EDTA, 0.5% SDS, 50 mM Tris/HCL, pH 8.5, 50x molar excess BIAM) and incubated at 850 rpm for 1 hour at 22°C in the dark. Proteins were precipitated by ice-cold acetone overnight at -20°C, collected by centrifugation, washed and resuspended in 100 μl lysis buffer (5 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris/HCL pH 8.5, 1% Triton-X-100, 1% SDS) for 30 minutes on ice.  200 µg of proteins were affinity purified using agarose streptavidin beads overnight at 4°C on a wheel. After washing beads were resuspended in 20 µl 6M GdmCl, 50 mM Tris/HCl, pH 8.5 and incubated at 95°C for 5 min. Sample were diluted with 25 mM Tris/HCl, pH 8.5, 10% acetonitrile to obtain a final GdmCl concentration of 0.6 M. Proteins were digested with 1 µg Trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega) overnight at 37°C under gentle agitation. Digestion was stopped by adding trifluoroacetic acid to a final concentration of 0.5 %. Peptides were loaded on multi-stop-and-go tip (StageTip) containing three C18 and three SCX-disks. Purification and elution of peptides was performed as described in Kulak and Mann (2014). Peptides were eluted in wells of microtiter plates and peptides were dried and resolved in 1% acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid. Liquid chromatography / mass spectrometry (LC/MS) was performed on Thermo Scientific™ Q Exactive Plus equipped with an ultra-high performance liquid chromatography unit (Thermo Scientific Dionex Ultimate 3000) and a Nanospray Flex Ion-Source (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded on a C18 reversed-phase precolumn (Thermo Scientific) followed by separation on a with 2.4 µm Reprosil C18 resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH) in-house packed picotip emitter tip (diameter 100 µm, 15 cm from New Objectives) using a gradient from 4% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid to 40 % eluent B (99% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) for 30 min and a second gradient to 60% B for 5 min with a flow rate 400 nl/min.   MS data were recorded by data dependent acquisition. The full MS scan range was 300 to 2000 m/z with resolution of 70000, and an automatic gain control (AGC) value of 3E6 total ion counts with a maximal ion injection time of 160 ms. Only higher charged ions (2+) were selected for MS/MS scans with a resolution of 17500, an isolation window of 2 m/z and an automatic gain control value set to 1E5 ions with a maximal ion injection time of 150 ms. MS1-Data were acquired in profile mode.

### Data Protocol
MS Data were analyzed by MaxQuant (v1.6.1.0) [Cox and Mann, 2008] using default settings. Proteins were identified using reviewed mouse reference proteome database UniProtKB with 52538 entries, released in 2/2018. The enzyme specificity was set to Trypsin. Acetylation (+42.01) at N-terminus and oxidation of methionine (+15.99), Biotin-Iodoacetamid (+414.19) and N-ethylmaleimide (+125.05) on cysteines were selected as variable modifications.  False discovery rate (FDR) for the identification protein and peptides was 1%. Label free quantification (LFQ) values were recorded. Kulak NA, Pichler G, Paron I, Nagaraj N, Mann M. Minimal, encapsulated proteomic-sample processing applied to copy-number estimation in eukaryotic cells. Nat Methods. 2014 Mar;11(3):319-24.  Cox J, Mann M. MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat Biotechnol 26, 1367-1372 (2008).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Redox proteomics, Drg, Nox2

### Affiliations
Department of Brain Sciences, Division of Neuroscience, Imperial College London, London, UK
Functional Proteomics, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main , Germany

### Submitter
Ilka Wittig

### Lab Head
Dr Simone Di Giovanni
Department of Brain Sciences, Division of Neuroscience, Imperial College London, London, UK


