### Accession
PXD003748

### Title
RNA polymerase III interactome

### Description
Many regulatory proteins and complexes have been identified which influence transcription by RNA polymerase (pol) II with a fine precision. In comparison, only a few regulatory proteins are known for pol III, which transcribes mostly house-keeping and non-coding RNAs. Yet, pol III transcription is precisely regulated under various stress conditions like starvation. We used proteomic approaches and pol III transcription complex components TFIIIC (Tfc6), pol III (Rpc128) and TFIIIB (Brf1) as baits to find identify the potential interactors through mass spectrometry-based proteomics. A large number of proteins were found in the interactome, which includes known chromatin modifiers, factors and regulators of transcription by pol I and pol II.

### Sample Protocol
Yeast cells individually expressing FLAG-tagged Rpc128, Brf1 and Tfc1 were grown at 300C in YEPD media. Cells grown under the nutrient -enriched or –deprived conditions were harvested. Cells were lysed mechanically by vortexing with glass beads in lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES [pH 7.5], 150 mM NaCl, 2mM MgCl2, 0.5mM EDTA, 0.1% NP-40, 10% glycerol). Lysates were centrifuged at 10000xg for 10 min and supernatant was treated with DNaseI before incubating with IgG sepharose beads at 40C for 2 hrs for pre-clearing. Cleared lysates were incubated with IgG sepharose beads for mock and anti-FLAG M2 agarose beads for immunoprecipitation (IP) at 40C for 3 hrs. Beads were washed with lysis buffer and affinity purified proteins were released from the beads by FLAG peptide elution. 1/10th volume of eluate was resolved on 10% SDS-PAGE and visualized by silver staining for checking IP. Eluates were boiled, loaded on 10% SDS-PAGE and allowed to stack by stopping the run when tracking dye entered 0.5 cm in resolving gel. Gel was stained with coomassie brilliant blue R-250 and gel area containing protein was cut into 1mm3 pieces to process for Trypsin digestion. Resulting peptides were analysed by online nanoLC-MS/MS (UltiMate 3000 and LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro, Thermo Scientific) using a 120-min gradient.

### Data Protocol
Peptides and proteins were identified through concomitant searches against Uniprot (Saccharomyces cerevisiae S288C taxonomy, January 2014 version), homemade classical contaminants database and the corresponding reversed databases using Mascot (version 2.4). The IRMa software (version 1.31.1) (36) was used to filter the results: conservation of rank 1 peptides, peptide identification FDR < 1% (as calculated on peptide scores by employing the reverse database strategy), and minimum of 1 specific peptide per identified protein group. Filtered results were uploaded into a relational mass spectrometry identification database before performing a compilation, grouping and comparison of the protein groups from the different samples using a homemade tool (hEIDI, version 1.14.3).

### Publication Abstract
Eukaryotic transcription is a highly regulated fundamental life process. A large number of regulatory proteins and complexes, many of them with sequence-specific DNA-binding activity are known to influence transcription by RNA polymerase (pol) II with a fine precision. In comparison, only a few regulatory proteins are known for pol III, which transcribes genes encoding small, stable, non-translated RNAs. The pol III transcription is precisely regulated under various stress conditions. We used pol III transcription complex (TC) components TFIIIC (Tfc6), pol III (Rpc128) and TFIIIB (Brf1) as baits and mass spectrometry to identify their potential interactors in vivo. A large interactome constituting chromatin modifiers, regulators and factors of transcription by pol I and pol II supports the possibility of a crosstalk between the three transcription machineries. The association of proteins and complexes involved in various basic life processes like ribogenesis, RNA processing, protein folding and degradation, DNA damage response, replication and transcription underscores the possibility of the pol III TC serving as a signaling hub for communication between the transcription and other cellular physiological activities under normal growth conditions. We also found an equally large number of proteins and complexes interacting with the TC under nutrient starvation condition, of which at least 25% were non-identical under the two conditions. The data reveal the possibility of a large number of signaling cues for pol III transcription against adverse conditions, necessary for an efficient co-ordination of various cellular functions.

### Keywords
Nanolc-ms/ms, Rna polymerase iii, Co-ips, S. cerevisiae

### Affiliations
EDyP

### Submitter
Yohann Couté

### Lab Head
Dr Virginie Brun
EDyP


