### Accession
PXD020124

### Title
PKCγ-mediated phosphorylation of CRMP2 regulates dendritic outgrowth in cerebellar Purkinje cells

### Description
The signalling protein PKCγ is a major regulator of Purkinje cell development and synaptic function. We have shown previously that increased PKCγ activity impairs dendritic development of cerebellar Purkinje cells. Mutations in the protein kinase Cγ gene (PRKCG) cause spinocerebellar ataxia type 14 (SCA14). In a transgenic mouse model of SCA14 expressing the human S361G mutation, Purkinje cell dendritic development is impaired in cerebellar slice cultures similar to pharmacological activation of PKC. The mechanisms of PKCγ-driven inhibition of dendritic growth are still unclear. Using immunoprecipitation-coupled mass spectrometry analysis we have identified Collapsin Response Mediator Protein 2 (CRMP2) as a protein interacting with constitutive active PKCγ(S361G) and confirmed the interaction with the Duolink™ proximity ligation assay. We show that in cerebellar slice cultures from PKCγ(S361G)- mice, phosphorylation of CRMP2 at the known PKC target site Thr555 is increased in Purkinje cells confirming phosphorylation of CRMP2 by PKCγ. miRNA-mediated CRMP2 knockdown decreased Purkinje cell dendritic outgrowth in dissociated cerebellar cultures as did the transfection of CRMP2 mutants with a modified Thr555 site. In contrast, dendritic development was normal after wildtype CRMP2 overexpression. In a novel knock-in mouse expressing only the phospho-defective T555A-mutant CRMP2, Purkinje cell dendritic development was reduced in dissociated cultures. This reduction could be rescued by transfecting wildtype CRMP2 but only partially by the phospho-mimetic T555D-mutant. Our findings establish CRMP2 as an important target of PKCγ phosphorylation in Purkinje cells mediating its control of dendritic development. Dynamic regulation of CRMP2 phosphorylation via PKCγ is required for its correct function.

### Sample Protocol
Eluted proteins were dissolved in 50 l lysis buffer (2% Sodium-deoxycholate, 0.1 M ammoniumbicarbonate). Proteins were reduced with 5 mM TCEP for 10 min at 95°C, alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark at room temperature. Sample were diluted with 0.1M ammoniumbicarbonate solution to a final concentration of 1% sodium deoxycholate before digestion with trypsin (Promega) at 37°C over night (protein to trypsin ratio: 50:1). After digestion, the samples were supplemented with TFA to a final concentration of 0.5% and HCl to a final concentration of 50 mM. Precipitated sodium deoxycholate was removed by centrifugation (15 minutes at 4°C at 14,000 rpm). Then, peptides were desalted on C18 reversed phase spin columns according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Macrospin, Harvard Apparatus), dried under vacuum and stored at -80°C until further processing.

### Data Protocol
For label-free quantification, the generated raw files were imported into the Progenesis QI software (Nonlinear Dynamics (Waters), Version 2.0) and analyzed using the default parameter settings. MS/MS-data were exported directly from Progenesis QI in mgf format and searched against a decoy database the forward and reverse sequences of the predicted proteome from mus musculus (UniProt, download date: 16/11/2015, total of 33,984 entries) using MASCOT (version 2.4.1). The search criteria were set as follows: full tryptic specificity was required (cleavage after lysine or arginine residues); 3 missed cleavages were allowed; carbamidomethylation (C) was set as fixed modification; oxidation (M) as variable modification. The mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.6 Da for fragment ions. Results from the database search were imported into Progenesis QI and the final peptide measurement list containing the peak areas of all identified peptides, respectively, was exported. This list was further processed and statically analyzed using our in-house developed SafeQuant R script (PMID:23017020). The peptide and protein false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% using the number of reverse hits in the dataset.

### Publication Abstract
The signalling protein PKC&#x3b3; is a major regulator of Purkinje cell development and synaptic function. We have shown previously that increased PKC&#x3b3; activity impairs dendritic development of cerebellar Purkinje cells. Mutations in the protein kinase C&#x3b3; gene (PRKCG) cause spinocerebellar ataxia type 14 (SCA14). In a transgenic mouse model of SCA14 expressing the human S361G mutation, Purkinje cell dendritic development is impaired in cerebellar slice cultures similar to pharmacological activation of PKC. The mechanisms of PKC&#x3b3;-driven inhibition of dendritic growth are still unclear. Using immunoprecipitation-coupled mass spectrometry analysis, we have identified collapsin response mediator protein 2 (CRMP2) as a protein interacting with constitutive active PKC&#x3b3;(S361G) and confirmed the interaction with the Duolink&#x2122; proximity ligation assay. We show that in cerebellar slice cultures from PKC&#x3b3;(S361G)-mice, phosphorylation of CRMP2 at the known PKC target site Thr555 is increased in Purkinje cells confirming phosphorylation of CRMP2 by PKC&#x3b3;. miRNA-mediated CRMP2 knockdown decreased Purkinje cell dendritic outgrowth in dissociated cerebellar cultures as did the transfection of CRMP2 mutants with a modified Thr555 site. In contrast, dendritic development was normal after wild-type CRMP2 overexpression. In a novel knock-in mouse expressing only the phospho-defective T555A-mutant CRMP2, Purkinje cell dendritic development was reduced in dissociated cultures. This reduction could be rescued by transfecting wild-type CRMP2 but only partially by the phospho-mimetic T555D-mutant. Our findings establish CRMP2 as an important target of PKC&#x3b3; phosphorylation in Purkinje cells mediating its control of dendritic development. Dynamic regulation of CRMP2 phosphorylation via PKC&#x3b3; is required for its correct function.

### Keywords
Lc-ms

### Affiliations
Biozentrum, Univresity of Basel, Switzerland
Proteomics Core Facility

### Submitter
Alexander Schmidt

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Schmidt
Biozentrum, Univresity of Basel, Switzerland


