### Accession
PXD001443

### Title
Proteomics analysis of dorsal striatum reveals changes in synaptosomal proteins following ethamphetamine self-administration in rats

### Description
Methamphetamine is a widely abused, highly addictive drug. Regulation of synaptic proteins within the brain’s reward pathway modulates addiction behaviours, the progression of drug addiction and long-term changes in brain structure and function that result from drug use. Therefore, using large scale proteomics studies we aim to identify global protein expression changes within the dorsal striatum, a key brain region involved in the modulation of addiction. We performed LC-MS/MS analyses on rat striatal synaptosomes following 30 days of methamphetamine self-administration (2 hours/day) and 14 days abstinence. We identified a total of 84 differentially-expressed proteins with known roles in neuroprotection, neuroplasticity, cell cytoskeleton, energy regulation and synaptic vesicles. We identify significant expression changes in stress-induced phosphoprotein and protein Tppp, which have not previously been associated with addiction. In addition, we confirm the role of amphiphysin and phosphatidylethanolamine binding protein in addiction. This approach has provided new insight into the effects of methamphetamine self-administration on synaptic protein expression in a key brain region associated with addiction, showing a large set of differentially-expressed proteins that persist into abstinence.

### Sample Protocol
The study design isolated dorsal striatum synaptosomes from control (n=8) or methamphetamine self-administration (n=7) rats. Proteins were subsequently extracted and analysed using LC-MS/MS, to compare between the two treatments.  Methamphetamine self-administration Male Sprague-Dawley rats (Rattus norvegicus, 300-350 g) were housed individually in temperature (19-21oC) and humidity (55%) controlled hanging polycarbonate cages on a 12 hour light/dark cycle. Animals had ad libitum access to food and water except during self-administration. Experiments were carried out in accordance with Victoria University of Wellington Animal Ethics Committee guidelines. Animals were deeply anaesthetised with Ketamine (90 mg/kg, I.P.) and Xylazine (9 mg/kg, I.P.), fitted with chronic indwelling jugular catheters and assigned to control or methamphetamine self-administration groups. Rats received training for methamphetamine in standard operant chambers 5 days post-surgery (Med Associates, ENV-001, St Albans, Vermont, USA) using previously reported methods [1]. Active lever depression lead to a 12 s, 0.1 mL infusion of methamphetamine-HCl (BDG Synthesis, Wellington, NZ, 0.1 mg/kg/infusion) dissolved in sterile heparinised (3 U/mL) physiological saline concurrent with light illumination above the active lever. Control animals received heparinised saline infusions upon depression of the active lever. Once on a fixed ratio-5 (FR-5) schedule, rats had daily 2 hour sessions for 6 days/week for 20 days followed by 14 days abstinence [2]. Responses were recorded using Med Associates software (MED-PC IV, version 4.2). Rats were euthanised, brains rapidly removed and dStr rapidly dissected using an acrylic stereotaxic brain matrixes block (Alto, AgnTho’sAB, Sweden) and coordinates from Paxinos and Watson [3].  Synaptosome purification Synaptosome purification was performed using methods previously described [18]. Briefly, Percoll (pH 7.4, GE Healthcare, Auckland, NZ) gradients were mixed with 50 mM DTT (Merck Ltd, NZ) and gradient buffer (1.28 M sucrose, 20 mM Tris, 4 mM EDTA, pH 7.4) to make 23%, 10% and 3% solutions in 10.4 mL polycarbonate tubes (Cat# 355651, 10.4 mL, Beckman Coulter, Palo Alto, CA, USA).  The dStr from both sides of the rat brain were combined and homogenised in a glass-teflon homogeniser (10 strokes) (Wheaton Scientific, NJ, USA) in gradient buffer (9 mL/g). Homogenates were centrifuged at 1,000 x g for 10 min (4oC), the supernatant (S1) was removed and diluted to 4-5 mg/mL and layered onto the 3% Percoll layer. Samples were centrifuged at 30,000 x g for 5 min at maximum speed (4oC) (Beckman Coulter OptimaTM L-100 XP Ultracentrifuge). The synaptosome fraction at the 23%/10% interface was removed, diluted in gradient buffer and centrifuged at 20,000 x g for 30 min (4oC). Synaptosome pellets were immediately removed and stored at -80oC until further use.  Protein extraction The synaptosome pellet was dissolved in lysis buffer (40 mM Tris, 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% w/v CHAPS, and 1% protease inhibitor cocktail, P8340, Sigma-Aldrich), incubated for 60 min (4oC) with shaking, centrifuged at 15,000 x g (10 min, 4oC) and supernatants collected, protein concentrations measured using the Bradford method and stored at -20oC.    Protein digestion Protein samples were pooled into control or methamphetamine groups for LC-MS/MS as performed previously [4]. Briefly, proteins of equal amount (µg) from each individual were pooled (n=6). A 20 mg pooled aliquot was precipitated using a Protein Precipitation Kit (Calbiochem, Germany), re-dissolved in 50 μl of buffer (8 M urea, 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.5), reduced and alkylated as previously described [5]. Proteins were diluted 3-fold with 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5, and digested with trypsin at an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:50 (wt/wt, modified sequencing grade, Roche Diagnostics, NZ) in the presence of 1 mM CaCl2 for 16 hours (37oC). Formic acid was added (4% final concentration) and the resulting tryptic peptides purified with OMIX C18 tips (Agilent Technologies Inc, USA) and eluted into 10 μl of 70% ACN, 0.1% formic acid solution. The eluted peptides were dried and reconstructed in 0.1% formic acid enabling triplicate LC MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS spectra were searched using the Rattus norvegicus protein database (Uniprot Knowledgebase; 37,173 entries, downloaded November 2012) using Proteome Discoverer (PD, version 1.2.0.208, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The search allowed carboxyamidomethylation of C as a fixed modification. The dynamic side chain modifications were Oxidation on M, Carbamylation on K, Acetylation on K, Deamidation on N, Q and R, Phosphorylation on R, S, T and Y, N-terminal Carbamylation and Sulfation on S, T and Y. Missed tryptic cleavage sites was 2, mass tolerance was 0.80 Da for fragment and 10.0 ppm for parent ions in monoisotopic mode. A positive identification was a peptide with high confidence and at least one peptide at rank 1 matched to a protein with the top score. The FDR was <1% using a decoy database strategy. The PD search result files (.msf) were uploaded into Scaffold (version 4.3.2, Proteome Software Inc., USA) for protein identification and label-free quantitation based on spectral counts. The three LC-MS/MS replicates of each sample were combined in Scaffold and the total number of MS/MS spectra were calculated [6]. The in-built spectral count normalisation function of Scaffold was used to calculate the fold changes of protein abundances between control and methamphetamine. Proteins detected with ≥95% probability (Protein FDR=0.1%) assigned by ProteinProphet [7] containing at least one peptide that were detected with ≥95% probability (Peptide FDR=0.6%) assigned by PeptideProphet [8] were considered positive identifications and quantified. A protein was considered significantly differentially-expressed if p≤0.05 by Fisher’s Exact Test [6] and the fold change was ≥ ±1.2.   References: [6] Zhang, B., N.C. Verberkmoes, M.A. Langston, E. Uberbacher, et al., Detecting differential and correlated protein expression in label-free shotgun proteomics. Journal of Proteome Research, 2006. 5: p. 2909-2918. [7]  Nesvizhskii, A.I., A. Keller, E. Kolker, and R. Aebersold, A statistical model for identifying proteins by tandem mass spectrometry. Analytical Chemistry, 2003. 75(17): p. 4646-4658. [8]  Keller, A., A.I. Nesvizhskii, E. Kolker, and R. Aebersold, Empirical statistical model to estimate the accuracy of peptide identifications made by MS/MS and database search. Analytical Chemistry, 2002. 74(20): p. 5383-5392.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Synaptosome, Rat, Lc-ms/ms, Shotgun proteomics

### Affiliations
Centre for Biodiscovery
School of Biological Sciences Victoria University of Wellington

### Submitter
Danyl Mclauchlan

### Lab Head
Dr Lifeng Peng
School of Biological Sciences Victoria University of Wellington


