### Accession
PXD044828

### Title
Effects of Triclosan and its alternatives on LPS-stimulated THP-1 macrophages

### Description
In this study, the effects of Triclosan (TCS) and its alternatives, including Benzalkonium chloride (BAM), Benzethonium chloride (BEC), Chloroxylenol (CEO), Chlorhexidine (CHX) and Cetylpyridinium chloride (CPC), were investigated in THP-1 macrophages. For this purpose, untargeted proteomics was applied.

### Sample Protocol
THP-1 macrophages were exposed to both LPS (100 ng/ml) and Triclosan or its alternatives with their corresponding effect concentration (IC10-value) for 4 h, 16 h or 24 h, respectively. Cells treated with LPS only served as controls to study the effects of the antimicrobials, while cells treated with neither LPS nor microbials served as controls for the LPS effects. A paramagnetic bead approach with tandem mass tag (TMTpro-16plex) labeling was applied for sample preparation. This resulted in two fractions that were analyzed on a nano-UPLC system (Ultimate 3000, Dionex, USA) coupled online to the mass spectrometer (QExactive HF, Thermo Scientific, USA) via a chip-based electrospray ionization source (Nanomate, Advion, USA).

### Data Protocol
The raw data obtained were processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.5 and UniprotKB entries (reference proteome, including reviewed and unreviewed entries) of Homo Sapiens (March 4, 2022). This workflow resulted in TMT mix-internal fold changes (treatment vs control), which were used for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Since European regulators restricted the use of bacteriocidic triclosan (TCS), alternatives for TCS are emerging. Recently, TCS has been shown to reprogram immune metabolism, trigger the NLRP3 inflammasome, and subsequently the release of IL-1&#x3b2; in human macrophages, but data on substitutes is scarce. Hence, we aimed to examine the effects of TCS compared to its alternatives at the molecular level in human macrophages. LPS-stimulated THP-1 macrophages were exposed to TCS or its substitutes, including benzalkonium chloride, benzethonium chloride, chloroxylenol, chlorhexidine (CHX) and cetylpyridinium chloride, with the inhibitory concentration (IC<sub>10</sub>-value) of cell viability to decipher their mode of action. TCS induced the release of the pro-inflammatory cytokine TNF and high level of IL-1&#x3b2;, suggesting the activation of the NLRP3-inflammasome, which was confirmed by non-apparent IL-1&#x3b2; under the NLRP3-inhibitor MCC950 treatment d. While IL-6 release was reduced in all treatments, the alternative CHX completely abolished the release of all investigated cytokines. To unravel the underlying molecular mechanisms, we used untargeted LC-MS/MS-based proteomics. TCS and CHX showed the strongest cellular response at the protein and signalling pathway level, whereby pathways related to metabolism, translation, cellular stress and migration were mainly affected but to different proposed modes of action. TCS inhibited mitochondrial electron transfer and affected phagocytosis. In contrast, in CHX-treated cells, the translation was arrested due to stress conditions, resulting in the formation of stress granules. Mitochondrial (e.g. ATP5F1D, ATP5PB, UQCRQ) and ribosomal (e.g. RPL10, RPL35, RPS23) proteins were revealed as putative key drivers. Furthermore, we have demonstrated the formation of podosomes by CHX, potentially involved in ECM degradation. Our results exhibit modulation of the immune response in macrophages by TCS and its substitutes and illuminated underlying molecular effects. These results illustrate critical processes involved in the modulation of macrophages' immune response by TCS and its alternatives, providing information essential for hazard assessment.

### Keywords
Thp-1, Bec, Chx, Tcs, Cpc, Lc-ms/ms, Proteome, Ceo, Bam

### Affiliations
Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research GmbH - UFZ
Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ

### Submitter
Stefanie Raps

### Lab Head
Dr Kristin Schubert
Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ


