### Accession
PXD008818

### Title
Short term optical defocus perturbs normal developmental shifts in retina/RPE protein abundance

### Description
Myopia (short-sightedness) affects approximately 1.4 billion people worldwide, many of whom will become blind from secondary ophthalmic conditions. The pathophysiology of myopia has been investigated by rearing young animals with monocular negative lenses or occluders that stimulate excessive ocular growth. Although a wide range of gene and protein expression changes have been identified in these myopia models, how these expression responses vary across different ocular growth conditions (including normal ocular development and hyperopia induced by positive lenses) remains poorly understood. Accordingly, this study has examined the trajectory of protein pathway expression shifts during normal development, and lens-induced myopia and hyperopia, in the widely used chick model.

### Sample Protocol
Retina/RPE samples were re-suspended in digestion buffer (8 M urea, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 10 mM DTT) and incubated for 5 hours. Samples were centrifuged, and the soluble fraction was used for protein concentration determination. Each sample (50µg protein) was adjusted to 100µl with digestion buffer, and 55mM iodoacetamide was then added to alkylate thiol groups for 35 minutes. The preparation was diluted to 1M urea with 25mM ammonium bicarbonate, and trypsin was added to a 5µM final concentration for overnight digests. The digests were acidified with 1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and the peptides desalted on SDB-XC Empore StageTips (3M Company, St. Paul, MN). Peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% TFA and 2% acetonitrile (ACN), loaded onto trapping columns (C18 PepMap 100 µm ID × 2 cm, Thermo-Fisher Scientific , San Jose, CA) at 5µl/min for 6 min, and washed for 6 minutes before switching the pre-column in line with the analytical column (VYDAC, Grace Pty. Ltd., Columbia, MD). The separation of peptides was performed at 300nl/min using a non-linear ACN gradient of buffer A (0.1% formic acid, 2% ACN) and buffer B (0.1% formic acid, 80% ACN), starting at 5% buffer B to 55% over 120 minutes. Data were collected on an Orbitrap Elite (Thermo-Fisher Scientific) in Data Dependent Acquisition mode using m/z 300–1500 as MS scan range. Collision-induced dissociation (CID) MS/MS spectra were collected for the 20 most intense ions per MS scan.

### Data Protocol
Identification and label-free quantification of proteins was performed on the raw output files from LC–ESI-MS/MS using MaxQuant (Version 1.5.1.6; [97, 98]) and the Andromeda search engine (September 2016 Gallus gallus Uniprot FASTA database). Peptides with a minimum of seven amino-acid length were considered, and the required FDR was set to 1% at the peptide and protein level. Protein group intensity values were normalized using the MaxLFQ algorithm [98] and log base 2 transformed. Flagged protein groups and protein groups with >40% missing values in any condition were filtered from the results. The remaining missing values imputed using a QRLIC/SVD approach (imputeLCMD R package v2.0) [99], and the data were then normalized using the LIMMA Cyclic Loess function (R package v3.30.12) [100]. Finally, to enable the use of curated human Reactome Gene Matrix Transposed (GMT) files for pathway analyses and comparison to the catalog of past findings collated in our previous publication [101], high confidence human orthologs for each Uniprot Accession in the dataset were identified using InParanoid (v.8.0) [102].

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lfq, Proteomics, Myopia, Mass spectrometry, Chiken

### Affiliations
La Trobe University
Department of Biochemistry and Genetics, La Trobe Institute for Molecular Sciences, La Trobe University, Melbourne, VIC, Australia

### Submitter
Pierre Faou

### Lab Head
Dr Pierre Faou
Department of Biochemistry and Genetics, La Trobe Institute for Molecular Sciences, La Trobe University, Melbourne, VIC, Australia


