### Accession
PXD003662

### Title
Multiple pathways for aerobic and arsenate respiration of Melioribacter roseus, a metabolically versatile bacterium representing of Ignavibacteriae phylum

### Description
Melioribacter roseus is one of two cultured representatives of the phylum Ignavibacteriae. It could grow by fermentation of sugars and peptides, by aerobic respiration or by dissimilatory reduction of arsenate, nitrite or Fe(III) on fermentable and non-fermentable substrates, what allows this bacterium to adapt to fluctuating environmental conditions. Primary genome analysis highlighted key determinants of electron transport chains, providing important insights into the ability of M. roseus to use a range of electron acceptors. Complete set of genes for proton-translocating membrane complexes I and II, alternative complex III (ACIII) and seven terminal oxidoreductases was found in the M. roseus genome. Among those three different cytochrome oxidases and two different molybdopterin oxidoreductases have been proposed to determine two most active respiratory processes performed by M. roseus – aerobic respiration and dissimilatory arsenate reduction, respectively.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction and trypsin digestion: Cell pellet was treated with 5 μl of 10% RapiGest SF (Waters) and 1 μl nuclease mix (GE Healthcare) for 30 min at 4 °C. Resuspended in 45 μl of 100 mM NH4HCO3, vortex and heated at 100 °C for 5 min. After cooling to room temperature insoluble material was removed by centrifugation at 15000 g for 5 min. Supernatant was separated and protein concentration was determined by Bradford (Bradford Protein Assay Kit, BioRad). In supernatant protein disulfide bonds were reduced with 10 mM DTT (BioRad) in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate at 60°C for 30 min, subsequently alkylated with 30 mM iodoacetamide (BioRad) in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate at room temperature and in dark for 30 min and 10 mM DTT (BioRad) in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate was added iteratively. Upon alkylated trypsin (Trypsin Gold, Mass Spectrometry Grade, Promega) was added to supernatant in ratio trypsin : protein equal 1 : 50 and incubated at 37°C for night. For inactivation of trypsin activity and degradation of the acid-labile surfactant stock solution of trifluoroacetic acid (Sigma) (final concentration in sample 0,5%) was added to digest, incubated at 37°C for 45 min and centrifugated at 15000 g for 10 min for removing of surfactant. Hydrolyzate was desalted using a Discovery DSC-18 Tube (Supelco) according to the manufacturer protocol. Peptides were eluted with 700 µL 75% ACN, 0.1% TFA, dried in a SpeedVac (Labconco) and resuspended in 3% ACN, 0.1% TFA to the final concentration of 5 µg/µL.  LC-MS analysis: Analysis was performed on a TripleTOF 5600+ mass-spectrometer with a NanoSpray III ion source (ABSciex, Canada) coupled to a NanoLC Ultra 2D+ nano-HPLC system (Eksigent). The HPLC system was configured in a trap-elute mode. For a sample loading buffer and buffer A, the mix of 98.9% water, 1% methanol, 0.1% formic acid (v/v) was used. Buffer B was 99.9% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid (v/v). Samples were loaded on a trap column Chrom XP C18 3 m 120 Å 350 m*0.5 mm (Eksigent, Dublin, CA) at a flow rate of 3.5 ul/min over 10 min and eluted through the separation column 3C18-CL-120 (3 m 120 Å) 75 m*150 mm (Eksigent, Dublin, CA) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The gradient was from 5 to 40% of buffer B in 120 min. The column and the precolumn were regenerated between runs by washing with 95% of buffer B for 7 min and equilibrated with 5% of buffer B for 25 min. Between the samples to ensure the absence of carryover both the column and the precolumn were thoroughly washed with a blank injection trap-elute gradient that included five 7 minute 5-95-95-5%B waves followed by 25 min 5%B equilibration. Mass spectra were acquired in a positive ion mode. Information-dependent mass-spectrometer experiment included 1 survey MS1 scan followed by 50 dependent MS2 scans. MS1 acquisition parameters were as follows: mass range for analysis and subsequent ion selection for MS2 analysis was 300-1250 m/z, signal accumulation time was 250 ms. Ions for MS2 analysis were selected on the basis of intensity with the threshold of 400 cps and the charge state from 2 to 5. MS2 acquisition parameters were as follows: resolution of quadrupole was set to UNIT (0.7 Da), measurement mass range was 200-1800 m/z, optimization of ion beam focus was to obtain maximal sensitivity, signal accumulation time was 50 ms for each parent ion. Collision activated dissociation was performed with nitrogen gas with collision energy ramping from 25 to 55 V within 50 ms signal accumulation time. Analyzed parent ions were sent to dynamic exclusion list for 15 sec in order to get the next MS2 spectra of the same compound around its chromatographic peak apex (minimum peak width throughout the gradient was about 30 s).

### Data Protocol
The raw LC/MS-MS datasets (.wiff file format) were converted to Mascot Generic Format (.mgf file format) using AB SCIEX MS Data Converter (version 1.3). Proteins were identified with the Mascot search engine (version 2.5.1) against Melioribacter roseus str. P3M sequence database (RefSeq: NC_018178, which contains 2840 amino acid sequences). The Mascot searches were performed with the following parameters: tryptic-specific peptides, maximum of one missed cleavages, a peptide charge state limited to 1+,2+ and 3+, a peptide mass tolerance of 10 ppm, a fragment mass tolerance of 0.5 Da, variable modifications caused by Oxidation(M) and Carbamidomethylation(C). The FDR was calculated using the decoy database analysis with Mascot. Individual ions score higher than 11 indicate identity or extensive homology with p < 0.05 and FDR < 1%.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Melioribacter roseus</i>, a representative of recently proposed Ignavibacteriae phylum, is a metabolically versatile thermophilic bacterium, inhabiting subsurface biosphere of the West-Siberian megabasin and capable of growing on various substrates and electron acceptors. Genomic analysis followed by inhibitor studies and membrane potential measurements of aerobically grown <i>M. roseus</i> cells revealed the activity of aerobic respiratory electron transfer chain comprised of respiratory complexes I and IV, and an alternative complex III. Phylogeny reconstruction revealed that oxygen reductases belonged to atypical <i>cc(o/b)o<sub>3</sub></i> -type and canonical <i>cbb<sub>3</sub></i> -type cytochrome oxidases. Also, two molybdoenzymes of <i>M. roseus</i> were affiliated either with Ttr or Psr/Phs clades, but not with typical respiratory arsenate reductases of the Arr clade. Expression profiling, both at transcripts and protein level, allowed us to assign the role of the terminal respiratory oxidase under atmospheric oxygen concentration for the <i>cc(o/b)o<sub>3</sub></i> cytochrome oxidase, previously proposed to serve for oxygen detoxification only. Transcriptomic analysis revealed the involvement of both molybdoenzymes of <i>M. roseus</i> in As(V) respiration, yet differences in the genomic context of their gene clusters allow to hypothesize about their distinct roles in arsenate metabolism with the 'Psr/Phs'-type molybdoenzyme being the most probable candidate respiratory arsenate reductase. Basing on multi-omics data, the pathways for aerobic and arsenate respiration were proposed. Our results start to bridge the vigorously increasing gap between homology-based predictions and experimentally verified metabolic processes, what is especially important for understudied microorganisms of novel lineages from deep subsurface environments of Eurasia, which remained separated from the rest of the biosphere for several geological periods.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Melioribacter roseus

### Affiliations
Research Institute of Physical Chemical Medicine
PhD, Federal Research and Clinical Centre of Physical-Chemical Medicine

### Submitter
Ilya Altukhov

### Lab Head
Dr Gleb Fisunov
PhD, Federal Research and Clinical Centre of Physical-Chemical Medicine


