### Accession
PXD013934

### Title
Dysregulation of phophoproteins in hepatocellular carcinoma revealed by the quantitative analysis of phosphoproteome

### Description
Hepatocellular carcinoma is one of the most frequently diagnosed cancers in the world. Post-translational modifications (PTMs) play an essential role during cancer development. Phosphorylation is an important PTMs. To identify the modifications of phosphorylation in HCC, a multiplexed tandem mass tag (TMT) approach combined with LC−MS/MS was used. A total of 4,780 phosphorylated sites distributed on 2,209 proteins were identified and quantified, including 74 and 459 phosphorylated up-regulated and down-regulated proteins, respectively. Bio-informatic analysis revealed the differences and commonalities between HCC and normal tissues. Gene ontology enrichment analysis provided the information on biological processes, molecular functions, cellular components, and sub-cellular localizations. Protein domains enrichment of differentially expressed proteins were analyzed by InterPro database. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) enrichment analysis revealed the pathways that could potentially be involved in HCC. Integrative analysis of the functions, pathways, motifs of phosphorylated peptides, protein domains and protein interactions could establish a profile of phosphoproteome of HCC, which may contribute to identify new biomarkers for diagnosis and prognosis for HCC and novel therapeutic targets for HCC treatment.Hepatocellular carcinoma is one of the most frequently diagnosed cancers in the world. Post-translational modifications (PTMs) play an essential role during cancer development. Phosphorylation is an important PTMs. To identify the modifications of phosphorylation in HCC, a multiplexed tandem mass tag (TMT) approach combined with LC−MS/MS was used. A total of 4,780 phosphorylated sites distributed on 2,209 proteins were identified and quantified, including 74 and 459 phosphorylated up-regulated and down-regulated proteins, respectively. Bio-informatic analysis revealed the differences and commonalities between HCC and normal tissues. Gene ontology enrichment analysis provided the information on biological processes, molecular functions, cellular components, and sub-cellular localizations. Protein domains enrichment of differentially expressed proteins were analyzed by InterPro database. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) enrichment analysis revealed the pathways that could potentially be involved in HCC. Integrative analysis of the functions, pathways, motifs of phosphorylated peptides, protein domains and protein interactions could establish a profile of phosphoproteome of HCC, which may contribute to identify new biomarkers for diagnosis and prognosis for HCC and novel therapeutic targets for HCC treatment.

### Sample Protocol
2.1 Protein sample preparation Patients with HCC (n=4) were enrolled and their tumor and adjacent nontumoral tissues samples were collected. The diagnosis of HCC was based on the histological results of liver surgical resections. All patients were given written informed consent while this study was approved by the Ethics Committee of Zhengzhou University. To successfully extract proteins from liver tissues, the sample was first ground by liquid nitrogen and was subsequently transferred to a 5-mL centrifuge tube. Then, the lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, 1% phosphatase inhibitor cocktails) was added at the ratio of 4:1 to the tissue. Afterward, the lysate was sonicated three times using a high intensity sonotrode set (Scientz) at 4 ℃ and then was centrifuged at 12,000 g for 10 min. The supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was determined by using a BCA protein assay kit. 2.2 Protein digestion and peptide labeling  Disulfide bonds of protein were reduced with dithiothreitol at a final concentration of 5 mM for 30 min at 56 °C. Protein was alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in the dark. Protein solutions were then diluted with 100 mM TEAB buffer to urea concentration less than 2M. Trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to protein mass ratio and the sample was incubated overnight at 37 ℃. Then a second aliquot of trypsin was added at 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for 4 h at 37 ℃. The digested peptides were desalted using Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and were lyophilized in a vacuum centrifuge. Lyophilized peptides were reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB buffer and were labeled using a tandem mass tags (TMT) kit according to manufacturer’s instructions. TMT reagents were dissolved in acetonitrile and then were added into each sample. The labeling reaction was last for 2 h at room temperature. The labeled peptides were pooled and desalted, followed by lyophilized in a vacuum centrifuge.  2.3 Phosphopeptide enrichment The phosphopeptides were fractionated using high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Thermo Betasil C18 column (5 mm particles, 10 mm ID, 250 mm length). Fractionated peptides were first suspended in loading buffer (50% acetonitrile, 6% trifluoroacetic acid) and then incubated with pre-treated IMAC microspheres. Phosphopeptide-bound IMAC microspheres were washed once with the loading buffer followed by three times with the washing buffer (30% acetonitrile, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid). Afterward, phosphopeptides were eluted with 10% ammonium hydroxide, desalted with C18 ZipTips and dried by vacuum centrifugation for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
2.6 Bioinformatic analysis The UniProt-GOA database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/) was used to detect the significantly enriched (Gene Ontology) GO terms. While some identified phosphoproteins were not annotated by UniProt-GOA database, the InterProScan software based on protein sequence alignment method would be used. Then the identified phosphoproteins were automatically assembled to three categories of biological process, cellular component and molecular function. Wolfpsort software was used to predict subcellular localization. InterPro database was used to analyze the functional domains of differentially expressed proteins. Pathway enrichment analysis was conducted using KEGG database. A two-tailed Fisher’s exact test was used to filter the enrichment result to a corrected p-value < 0.05. The protein-protein interaction (PPI) network was obtained by using a Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes/Proteins (STRING) (http://www.string-db.org/) database. To determine the significance of the differentially expressed phosphoproteins against all identified phosphoproteins, a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test was used in each category and a corrected p-value < 0.05 was considered significant. Motifs of the phosphorylated sites for serines, threonines and tyrosines were analyzed by Motif-X. Peptide sequences were centered on each phosphorylation site and extended to10 amino acids upstream and downstream of the site. The minimum occurrence was set to 20 and significance was set to 0.000001.

### Publication Abstract
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the most frequently diagnosed types of cancer in the world. Post-translational modifications, such as phosphorylation, serve an essential role during cancer development. To identify aberrant phosphorylation in HCC, a multiplexed tandem mass tag approach combined with liquid chromatography tandem-mass spectrometry was used in the present study. The results are available via ProteomeXchange (identifier no. PXD013934). A total of 4,780 phosphorylated sites distributed on 2,209 proteins were identified and quantified, including 74 and 459 phosphorylated upregulated and downregulated proteins, respectively. Bioinformatic analysis revealed differences and similarities between HCC and normal tissues. Gene Ontology enrichment analysis provided information on biological processes, molecular functions, cellular components and sub-cellular localizations. Protein domains enrichment of differentially expressed proteins was analyzed using InterPro database. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes enrichment analysis revealed pathways that may potentially be involved in HCC. Integrative analysis of the functions, pathways, motifs of phosphorylated peptides, protein domains and protein interactions established a profile of the phosphoproteome of HCC, which may contribute to identify novel biomarkers for the diagnosis and prognosis of HCC, as well as novel therapeutic targets for HCC treatment.

### Keywords
Phophoproteins, Lc−ms/ms, Hepatocellular carcinoma

### Affiliations
PTM Biolabs lnc.
Henan Academy of Medical and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, Henan, China.

### Submitter
xiaomei li

### Lab Head
Dr Jintao Zhang
Henan Academy of Medical and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, Henan, China.


