### Accession
PXD015026

### Title
A spiked human proteomic dataset from human osteogenic differentiated BMSCs and ASCs for use as a spectral library, for modelling pathways as well as protein mapping

### Description
This article describes a mass spectrometry data set generated from osteogenic differentiated bone marrow stromal cells (BMSCs) and adipose tissue derived stromal cells (ASCs) of a 24-year old healthy donor spiked with iRT peptides. Cells have been identified via FACS-Analysis positive for CD90 and CD105 and negative for CD14, CD34, CD45 and CD11b and tri-lineage differentiation. Obtaining a sufficient amount of high-quality tissue is the key limiting factor for establishing a region-specific spectral library. Hence, combining existing spectral libraries for data-independent acquisition analysis (DIA) can overcome this major limitation. Moreover, these data can be used to map region-specific proteins and to model region-specific pathways. Both can improve our understanding of the functioning in greater depth. In addition, these data can also be used to determine the optimal settings for measuring proteins and peptides of interest. To create the specific spectral library, the tissue was first homogenized and then fractionated via different types of SDS gel electrophoresis, resulting in 11 fractions. These fractions were analysed by nanoHPLC-ESI-MS/MS, resulting in 24 data files.

### Sample Protocol
Human primary cell culture - Specimen from subcutaneous fat and spongious iliac bone of a healthy, non smoking, 24 year old male patient were taken during an autologous bone transplantation procedure. Cell Isolation was performed according to modified standard protocols.1,2 Adipose tissue was washed four times with prewarmed DPBS (PAN Biotech, Germany) and transferred onto a petri dish. Blood vessels and connective tissue were carefully removed before the tissue was minced into small pieces using sterile scissors. The tissue sample was transferred into a 50 mL falcon tube and weighed. 5 mL of collagenase IV (1mg/ml, Cell Systems, Germany) per gram of tissue material were used for digestion. The falcon tube was placed on a heated shaker and incubated between for 1 hour at 37°C and 330 rpm. Thereafter, the reaction was stopped by adding 25 mL of base medium (DMEM/HAM's F-12[PAN Biotech, Germany, 10% fetal bovine serum, 1% Penicillin/Streptomycin). Spongious bone was washed multiple times with base medium, the wash fractions were collected and combined.  Cell suspensions of each source were then filtered through a 100 µm cell strainer and centrifuged at 1400 rpm for 5 min at room temperature (Megafuge 1.0, Heraeus, Germany). The cell sediment was resuspended in cold red blood cell (RBC) lysis buffer (900 mL Milli-Q-water , 8 g ammonium chloride, 0,8 g sodium hydrogen carbonate, 0,4 g EDTA ) and incubated on ice. The lysis was stopped after 8 min by addition of base medium. The cells were centrifuged at 1400 rpm for 5 min at room temperature (Megafuge 1.0, Heraeus, Germany). The cell sediment was resuspended in base medium and cell concentration was measured using the CASY® Cell Counter (OLS OMNI Life Science, Bremen). The cells were then plated in cell culture flasks according to their amount  (106 cells per T-75 flask) and maintained in an incubator at 37 °C and 5% CO2. 48 hours after plating, non-adherent cells were washed off with prewarmed DPBS (PAN Biotech, Germany). Fresh base medium was added and changed thereafter every 2 to 3 days. Cells of passage three were used for osteogenic differentiation. For this, cells were washed and detached using 0.05% Trypsin/EDTA (Trypsin: PAA Laboratories, Germany; EDTA: Sigma-Aldrich, Germany). The cell suspension was centrifuged at 1400 rpm for 5 min at room temperature and the cell sediment was resuspended in base medium. The cells were plated in a density of 2 x 105 cells per 10 cm culture dish. Then, the osteogenic differentiation was induced by culturing the cells in the osteogenic differentiation medium consisting of the base medium, 10 mM β-glycerophosphate, 10 nM dexamethason and 250 µM ascorbic acid for 21 days. Afterwards, the cells were washed and detached using a cell scraper in presence of DPBS. The cells were collected and centrifuged at 900 rpm for 5 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was aspirated and the samples were stored at -80 °C. Sample preparation – The homogenization of the BMSC as well as the ASC sample was performed as described previously . In short, per 100 mg cells, 400 µL precooled RIPA buffer (cell signalling, Germany) was added as well as 0.35 g glass beads (Ø 1.25 – 1.65 nm; Ø 0.25 – 0.5 nm; Carl Roth, Germany). The cell samples were homogenized by sonication (Potter S. Homogenizer, B. Braun, Germany), supernatants transferred to a new reaction tube and again sonicated in an ice-cold ultrasonic bath (BANDELIN electronic GmbH & Co. KG, Germany) for 10 sec for a total of six times. For discarding insoluble fragments the samples were centrifuged at 16.000g for 15 min at 4 °C (centrifuge 5415R, Eppendorf GmbH, Germany), the supernatant transferred to a new reaction tube, aliquoted and stored at -80 °C. The protein concentration was determined by Bradford assay (Sigma-Aldrich, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Before gel electrophoresis 40 µg cell lysate were displaced with 4 x concentrated LDS sample buffer (pH 8.5, 26.5 mM Tris HCl, 35.25 mM Tris base, 2% LDS, 10% glycerol, 0.055 mM Coomassie blue G250 and 0.045 mM phenol red) and vortexed. To reduce disulphide bridges and denaturation, 2 mM DTT was added and the samples incubated for 10 min at 350 rpm and 90 °C in a thermomixer (Thermomixer comfort, Eppendorf GmbH). To remove insoluble components, the sample was again centrifuged for 4 min at 5.000g at room temperature (centrifuge 5415R, Eppendorf GmbH).

### Data Protocol
Complete SDS gel electrophoresis – The gel electrophoresis was performed as described by Guntermann et al. For this, 60 µg of protein per lane was loaded on a NuPAGETM 4-12% Bis-tris gel (Fisher Scientific, Germany). Two technical replicates were performed for the BMSC sample as well as the ASC sample. Gel staining – Gels were stained with Coomassie blue (SimpleBlueTM SafeStain, Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Trypsin in-gel digestion and peptide extraction – Lanes on the NuPAGETM 4-12% Bis-tris gel were cut into 12 single bands and each single band transferred into a glass vial. The in-gel digestion and peptide extraction was performed as described previously by Guntermann et al. In short, gel pieces were incubated for 10 min in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (solution A) (Sigma-Aldrich) followed by incubation with 50% (v/v) 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate with 50% (v/v) 100% acetonitrile (solution B) (Merck KGaA, Germany). The gel pieces were again incubated for in solution A, the ammonium bicarbonate buffer discarded, each glass vial filled with 50 µL of 10 mM dithiothreitol (AppliChem GmbH, Germany), followed by incubation for 1 hour at 350 rpm and 56 °C. Afterwards the dithiothreitol solution was discarded and each glass vial filled with 50 µL of 50 mM iodoacetamide (Merck KGaA). The gel pieces were incubated for 45 min at room temperature in the dark, then the iodoacetamide solution was discarded, and the destaining protocol continued with solution B for 10 min. At last, the gel pieces were again washed in solution A for 10 min, afterwards in solution B for 10 min followed by discarding solution B.  For peptide extraction gel pieces were dried in a vacuum concentrator (RVC2-25CD plus, Martin Christ Gefriertrocknungsanlagen, Germany), resuspended in 6 µL of trypsin solution (0.012 µg/µL, Promega Corp., Germany) and incubated overnight. The trypsin digest was stopped, and peptides eluted by incubation for 15 min in 30 µL of a 1:1 solution containing 100% acetonitrile and 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (Merck KGaA) in an ice-cold ultrasonic bath. This step was repeated for in total two times.  Form the resulting peptide extract 4 µL were transferred to a new glass vial, dried in a vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf GmbH) followed by resuspending in 15 µL of 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid. Afterwards, one injection volume of iRT peptides (Biognosys, Switzerland) was added. nanoHPLC settings and mass spectrometry settings – NanoHPLC settings as well as mass spectrometry settings were as decribed by Guntermann et al.

### Publication Abstract
This article describes a mass spectrometry data set generated from osteogenic differentiated bone marrow stromal cells (BMSCs) and adipose tissue derived stromal cells (ASCs) of a 24-year old healthy donor. Before osteogenic differentiation and performing mass spectrometric measurements cells have been characterized as mesenchymal stromal cells via FACS-analysis positive for CD90 and CD105 and negative for CD14, CD34, CD45 and CD11b and tri-lineage differentiation. After osteogenic differentiation, both cell types were homogenized and then fractionated by SDS gel electrophoresis, resulting in 12 fractions. The proteins underwent an in-gel digestion, spiked with iRT peptides and analysed by nanoHPLC-ESI-MS/MS, resulting in 24 data files. The data files generated from the described workflow are hosted in the public repository ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD015026. The presented data set can be used as a spectral library for analysis of key proteins in the context of osteogenic differentiation of mesenchymal stromal cells for regenerative applications. Moreover, these data can be used to perform comparative proteomic analysis of different mesenchymal stromal cells or stem cells upon osteogenic differentiation. In addition, these data can also be used to determine the optimal settings for measuring proteins and peptides of interest.

### Keywords
Data-independent acquisition analysis, Osteogenic differentiated mesenchymal stem cells, Nanohplc-esi-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Medizinisches Proteom-Center
Medizinische Proteom-Center  44801 Bochum, Germany

### Submitter
Annika Guntermann

### Lab Head
Dr Caroline May
Medizinische Proteom-Center  44801 Bochum, Germany


