### Accession
PXD009876

### Title
Proteome analysis indicates participation of the dorsal hippocampal formation in conditioned lick suppression

### Description
Memory formation is an essential function for survival and cognitive flexibility that involves both synaptic and systems consolidation. The latter is an intricate process requiring integrated signalling inputs into complex neural networks over time. The purpose of the present study was to identify proteins and pathways affected by memory formation induced by the conditioned lick suppression paradigm, as well as to investigate the role of the dHF in the transfer of memory to a more permanent mode in other brain areas. To evaluate the acquisition of fear memory, a protocol of conditioned suppression of an ongoing behaviour was conducted for either 8 or 46 days. Two or 40 days after conditioning, the animals were subjected to a retention test and were then euthanized after 24 hours for dHF harvesting. There were 1,165 proteins identified and 265 quantified. The analysis of the fear memory performed on post-conditioning day 2 showed an upregulation of 5 proteins and a downregulation of 11 proteins. Additionally, an analysis on post-conditioning day 40 showed that 8 proteins were upregulated, and 32 proteins were downregulated. Integrated pathway analysis of the proteomics data indicated changes in the myelin sheath, neuron generation and differentiation, regulation of neurogenesis and synaptic vesicle transport, axonal development and the growth cone. Altogether, the current findings provide further support for the role of the dHF in conditioned lick suppression memory and novel insights into the molecular changes that are correlated with the transfer of memory from the dHF to other cortical areas, which may be a target for cognitive enhancers.

### Sample Protocol
Twenty-four hours after the retention test ended (days 9 or 47), the animals were euthanized by decapitation and the dHF was rapidly removed. Sample preparation was performed as described previously 32, with minor modifications. Briefly, the tissue was homogenized in 1 mL of extraction buffer (8 M urea, 75 mM sodium chloride, 50 mM Tris, 5 mM EDTA) containing Halt™ Protease and Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Sample lysates were centrifuged (14,000 rpm/30 min), and the supernatants were stored at -80 ºC until analysis. The protein concentrations of the supernatants were determined using the DC™ Protein Assay (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer´s recommendations and bovine albumin as standard. Aliquots of 1.0 mg of protein were dialyzed with Amicon® Ultra-4 3K Centrifugal Filter Devices (Merck-Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany) against 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and the protein concentration was determined again. One hundred micrograms of concentrated protein were incubated sequentially with 0.2% RapiGest (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) (30 min at 80 ºC), 100 mM DTT (30 min at 60 ºC) and 300 mM iodoacetamide (30 min at room temperature in the dark). Digestion was performed overnight at 37 ºC with trypsin (Promega, Fitchburg, WI, USA) at a 1:100 enzyme/protein ratio. Digested samples were incubated with 5% trifluoroacetic acid (90 min at 37 ºC). For the liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) analysis of the dHF, samples (six biological replicates per group, three technical replicates per sample) were injected onto a trap column (C18 trap column Symmetry 180 m x 20 mm, Waters) and resolved in an analytical column (C18 BEH 75 µm x 200 mm, 1.7 mm, Waters) using a capillary UPLC system (nanoAcquity, Waters, USA). The elution gradient (7-35% buffer B, 105 minutes, 275 nL/min) was generated with buffers A (0.1% formic acid in water) and B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile). Resolved samples were delivered to a Synapt HDMS G2 mass spectrometer (Waters, USA). The data were acquired in the HDMSE mode, switching from low (4 eV) to high (ramped from 19 to 45 eV) collision energy. External calibration was performed every 30 s using Glu-fibrinopeptide B (Waters).

### Data Protocol
The sample spectra were compared to the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database (www.uniprot.org, 7,996 sequences) using ProteinLynx Global Server software (version 3.0.1, Waters). The search parameters used were as follows: carbamidomethylation of cysteines as fixed modification, oxidation of methionine, N-terminal acetylation, glutamine and asparagine deamidation as variable modifications, up to two missed cleavage sites were allowed for trypsin digestion, and automatic fragment and peptide mass tolerance. For protein identification (a minimum of three fragment ions per peptide, six fragment ions per protein and two peptides per protein), a false discovery rate of 1% was adopted. The sum of the intensities of the three most intense peptides of each protein was used for label-free relative quantitation 33,34. Only proteins identified in at least two of the three technical replicates and four of the six biological replicates were included in the statistical analysis. Moreover, when a protein was not detected in any of the 18 replicates of either one or two groups (indicating that the intensities were below the detection limit), it was included in the analysis only if it was present in at least five replicates of the other group(s). The sum of all the protein intensities of each sample was used for normalization.

### Publication Abstract
Our previous behavioral and molecular data indicate a central role of the dorsal hippocampal formation (dHF) in recent conditioned lick suppression memory. The purpose of this study was to investigate the role of the dHF in recent and remote memory of conditioned lick suppression employing proteomic analysis. Two or 40 days after conditioning, the rats were subjected to a retention test and were then euthanized after 24 hr for dHF collection. We identified 1,165 proteins and quantified 265 proteins. Upregulation of five proteins and downregulation of 21 proteins were found on postconditioning Day 2. Additionally, four proteins were upregulated and 21 proteins were downregulated on postconditioning Day 40. Integrated pathway analysis of the proteomics data indicated changes in the myelin sheath, neuron generation and differentiation, regulation of neurogenesis and synaptic vesicle transport, axonal development, and the growth cone. Our findings provide further support for the role of the dHF in conditioned lick suppression memory and novel insights into the molecular changes that are correlated with recent and remote memory in the dHF, which may be a target for cognitive enhancers. (PsycInfo Database Record (c) 2023 APA, all rights reserved).

### Keywords
Conditioned fear, Lc-msms, Memory, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Federal University of sao Paulo Department of Biological Science Cellular and Behavioural Pharmacology Laboratory
Universidade Federal de São Paulo

### Submitter
Renan Gaiardo

### Lab Head
Dr Suzete Maria Cerutti
Federal University of sao Paulo Department of Biological Science Cellular and Behavioural Pharmacology Laboratory


