### Accession
PXD003514

### Title
SILAC-based quantitative Nox4-Co-immunoprecipitation

### Description
Within the family of NADPH oxidases, Nox4 is unique as it is predominantly localized in the endoplasmic reticulum, has constitutive activity and generates H2O2. We hypothesize that these features are consequences of a so far unidentified Nox4-interacting protein.  Interacting proteins were screened by quantitative SILAC-Co-immunoprecipitation in HEK293 cells stably overexpressing Nox4. By this technique, several interacting proteins were identified with calnexin showing the most robust interaction.

### Sample Protocol
For quantitative SILAC-based Nox4-Co-IP (qCo-IP) HEK293 cells were grown in normal or heavy labeled SILAC medium (100 mg/l 12C14N arginine/12C14N lysine or 13C-arginine/13C15N lysine). Control cells were labelled with heavy amino acids for forward experiments and cells overexpressing Nox4 were labelled with heavy amino acids for reverse experiments. Medium consists of DMEM without lysine, arginine and glutamine (280001200, SILANTES), supplemented with 8% dialyzed FCS, L glutamine (2 mM), L-proline (200 mg/l), glucose (4.5 g/l), sodium pyruvate (1 mM), 1% penicillin/streptomycin. Cells were lyzed with either TRIS/HCl pH 7.5 buffered 1% digitonin (preparation A). For total membrane preparation the cells were harvested in homogenization (HM) buffer, nuclei were removed (3000×g for 10 min) and 100000×g total membrane (20 min, 4 °C) pellets were solubilized with  digitonin (6 g/g protein) in solubilization buffer A (50 mM NaCl, 50 mM imidazole/HCl pH 7.0, 2 mM 6-aminohexanoic acid, 1 mM EDTA) (preparation B). Samples were used for Nox4 qCo-IP with magnetic protein G beads (Invitrogen). Samples were incubated with Nox4 antibody (1.5 µl,) for at least 90 min at 4 °C followed by incubation for additional 90 min with Protein A/G sepharose beads (GE Healthcare). Beads were washed with lysis buffer three times, incubated for 5 min at 95 °C with Laemmli buffer and subjected to SDS-PAGE and Western Blot analysis. Additionally, the Nox4 antibody was covalently linked to the beads with 20 mM dimethyl pimelimidate dihydrochloride (DMP, Sigma) in 0.2 M triethanolamine pH 8.2 (TEA, Sigma). Light and heavy labeled samples were combined and fractionated by SDS-PAGE. SDS gel was fixed in 50% (v/v) methanol, stained with Coomassie, cut into 8 slices and digested with Trypsin. The gel pieces were destained in 60% Methanol, 50 mM ammoniumbicarbonate (ABC). Solutions were removed by centrifugation for 2 min at 600×g. Proteins were reduced in 10 mM DTT, 50 mM ABC for 1 hour at 56°C and alkylated for 45 min in 30 mM iodoactamid. Samples were digested for 16 hours with trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega) at 37°C in 50  mM ABC, 0.01% Protease Max (Promega) and 1 mM CaCl2. Peptides were eluted in 30% acetonitrile and 3% formic acid, centrifuged into a fresh 96 well plate, dried in speed vac and resolved in 1% acetonitrile and 0.5% formic acid.   Liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry (LC/MS) was performed on Thermo Scientific™ Q Exactive Plus coupled to an ultra-high performance liquid chromatography unit (Thermo Scientific Dionex Ultimate 3000) via a Nanospray Flex Ion-Source (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded on a C18 reversed-phase precolumn (Zorbax 300SB-C18, Agilent Technologies) followed by separation on in-house packed 2.2 µm Reprosil Gold C18 resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH) picotip emitter tip (diameter 75 µm, 12 cm long, New Objectives) using a gradient from mobile phase A (4% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) to 45 % mobile phase B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) for 60 min with a flow rate of 250 nl/min. Each run was finished by washout with 95% B for 5 min and column equilibration for 10 min with 99% A. MS data were recorded by data dependent Top10 acquisition (selecting the ten most abundant precursor ions in positive mode for high energy collision dissociation fragmentation (HCD)). The Full MS scan range was 250 to 2000 m/z with resolution of 70000 at m/z 200, and an automatic gain control (AGC) value of 3*106 total ion counts with a maximal ion injection time of 160 ms. Only higher charged ions (2+) were selected for MS/MS scans with a resolution of 17500, an isolation window of 2 m/z and an automatic gain control value set to 1*105 ions with a maximal ion injection time of 150 ms. Following fragmentation event all selected ions were excluded in a time frame of 30s. Data were acquired in centroid mode by Xcalibur software. The LC Unit was controlled by Chromeleon Xpress software. The performance of both units LC and MS was integrated by DCMSLink.

### Data Protocol
Xcalibur raw files were analyzed by MaxQuant (v1.5.2.8) and searched against human proteome database UniProtKB with 68506 entries, released in 4/2015. The enzyme specificity was set to Trypsin, missed cleavages were limited to 2 and the minimum peptide length was seven amino acids. Following variable modifications were selected: at N-terminus acetylation (+42.01), oxidation of methionine (+15.99), deamidation on asparagine and glutamine (-0.98) and Carbamidomethylation (+57.02) on cysteines. False discovery rate (FDR) for protein and peptides was 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Within the family of NADPH oxidases, NOX4 is unique as it is predominantly localized in the endoplasmic reticulum, has constitutive activity, and generates hydrogen peroxide (H2O2). We hypothesize that these features are consequences of a so far unidentified NOX4-interacting protein. Two-dimensional blue native (BN) electrophorese combined with SDS-PAGE yielded NOX4 to reside in macromolecular complexes. Interacting proteins were screened by quantitative SILAC (stable isotope labeling of amino acids in cell culture) co-immunoprecipitation (Co-IP) in HEK293 cells stably overexpressing NOX4. By this technique, several interacting proteins were identified with calnexin showing the most robust interaction. Calnexin also resided in NOX4-containing complexes as demonstrated by complexome profiling from BN-PAGE. The calnexin NOX4 interaction could be confirmed by reverse Co-IP and proximity ligation assay, whereas NOX1, NOX2, or NOX5 did not interact with calnexin. Calnexin deficiency as studied in mouse embryonic fibroblasts from calnexin(-/-)mice or in response to calnexin shRNA reduced cellular NOX4 protein expression and reactive oxygen species formation. Our results suggest that endogenous NOX4 forms macromolecular complexes with calnexin, which are needed for the proper maturation, processing, and function of NOX4 in the endoplasmic reticulum.

### Keywords
Co-immunoprecipitation, Lc-msms, Macromolecular complexes, Silac

### Affiliations
Institut für Kardiovaskuläre Physiologie, Goethe-Universität, Frankfurt am Main, Germany
Functional Proteomics, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main , Germany

### Submitter
Ilka Wittig

### Lab Head
Dr Ralf Brandes
Institut für Kardiovaskuläre Physiologie, Goethe-Universität, Frankfurt am Main, Germany


