### Accession
PXD005080

### Title
Identification of novel glycoproteins expressed on human macrophage surface using glycoproteomics

### Description
Prostate cancer is a leading cause of cancer-related deaths of men in the U.S.  While localized disease is highly treatable by surgical resection and radiation, cancer that has metastasized remains incurable.  Immune cells that primarily scavenge debris, promote prostate cancer angiogenesis and wound repair are M2 Macrophages. They are phenotypically similar to M2 tumor-associated macrophages (M2-TAMs) have been reported to associate with solid tumors and aide in proliferation, metastasis, and resistance to therapy. As an invasive species within the tumor microenvironment, this makes M2-TAMs an ideal therapeutic target in prostate cancer. To identify novel surface antigens expressed on M2-macrophages, we developed a novel method of creating homogenous populations of human macrophages from human CD14+ monocytes in vitro.  These homogenous M1 macrophages secrete pro-inflammatory cytokines and our M2 macrophages secrete anti-inflammatory cytokines as well as Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor (VEGF). To identify enriched surface glycoproteins, we then performed solid-phase extraction of N-linked glycopeptides (SPEG) followed by liquid chromatography-tandem Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) on our homogenous macrophage populations. We discovered novel glycoproteins that are enriched exclusively on human M2-macrophages relative to human M1 macrophages and human CD14+ monocytes. Lastly, we determined if these surface antigens, found enriched on M2 macrophages, were also expressed in human metastatic castrate-resistant prostate cancer (mCRPC) tissues. Using mCRPC tissues from rapid autopsies, we were able to determine M2-macrophage infiltration by using immunohistochemistry and flow cytometry. These findings highlight the presence of macrophage infiltration in human mCRPC but also surface antigens that could be used for prognosis of localized disease and for targeting strategies.

### Sample Protocol
Protein and Peptide Extraction from Macrophage cell types for Proteomic Analysis Cell pellets from three 10 cm dishes were collected and washed twice with 1X PBS. Thereafter, cells were denatured in 1mL of 8 M Urea and 0.4 M NH4HCO3 and sonicated thoroughly. The protein concentration was measured using a BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Scientific Rockford, IL). The proteins were then reduced by incubating in 10 mM Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine for 1 hour and alkylated in 10 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 30 minutes in the dark. The sample was diluted and sequence grade trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich. St. Louis, MO) was added at a 1:40 enzyme/protein ratio and incubated overnight at 37°C. The completion of protein digestion was assessed by SDS-PAGE and silver staining. The peptides were desalted by a C18 cartridge according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Isolation of N-linked glycosite-containing peptides The solid phase extraction of glycopeptides (SPEG) method has been described previously (25, 26). Briefly, the glycopeptides were oxidized by incubating with 10 mM sodium periodate in 60% ACN (v/v) 0.1% TFA (v/v) at RT for 1 hour in the dark. Sodium sulphite was added at a final concentration of 60 mM to quench the oxidation reaction. The samples were then mixed with 50 µl of (50% slurry) hydrazide support prewashed with 1 mL of deionised water. The mixture was incubated with gentle shaking at RT overnight for the coupling reaction. The glycopeptide conjugated hydrazide beads were sequentially washed with 800 µl of 50% ACN (v/v) 0.1% TFA (v/v), then 1.5 M NaCl and water, three times/solution to remove non-coupled peptides. Finally, the beads were washed with 200 µl of 1X G7 buffer twice and incubated with 3 µl of PNGase F in 50 µl of 1X G7 buffer at 37 C overnight. To specifically release N-linked glycosite-containing peptides, which were desalted by a C18 cartridge, they were dried in a speed-vac and re-suspended in 40 µl of 0.1% formic acid prior to mass spectrometric MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification Proteins were identified using SEQUEST in Proteome Discoverer software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, version 1.4). A NCBI human database containing 53,918 protein entries was used (28). The precursor mass tolerance was set at 20 ppm and the MS/MS tolerance at 0.06 Da. Parameters of the search were modified as follows: oxidized methionines (add Met with 15.995 Da), a (PNGase F-catalyzed) conversion of Asn to Asp (add Asn with 0.984 Da) and Cys modification (add cysteine with 57 Da). A maximum of two missed tryptic cleavage sites were allowed. Percolator node in SEQUEST in Proteome Discoverer was used to filter protein identification at 1% false-discovery rate (FDR). Only peptides with at least 2 spectral counts were reported and used for quantification. The label-free, semi-quantitative differential expression analysis of the identified protein was conducted using SIEVE software (Thermo Scientific, version 2.0). The raw files were imported into SIEVE and the chromatograms were aligned. Frame parameters were set as follows: frame for all MS2 peak, retention time from 0 to 120 mins, m/z from 350 to 1800, frame time retention time width 2.5 mins and frame m/z width 10 ppm. After framing, the Proteome Discoverer result files were imported with a 1% FDR. The integrated intensity (peak area) of glycosite-containing peptides was calculated and normalized by the TIC of each sample and used to calculate a p-value.

### Publication Abstract
Prostate cancer is a leading cause of cancer-related deaths of men in the United States. Whereas the localized disease is highly treatable by surgical resection and radiation, cancer that has metastasized remains incurable. Immune cells that primarily scavenge debris and promote prostate cancer angiogenesis and wound repair are M2 macrophages. They are phenotypically similar to M2 tumor-associated macrophages (M2-TAMs) and have been reported to associate with solid tumors and aide in proliferation, metastasis, and resistance to therapy. As an invasive species within the tumor microenvironment, this makes M2-TAMs an ideal therapeutic target in prostate cancer. To identify novel surface glycoproteins expressed on M2 macrophages, we developed a novel method of creating homogeneous populations of human macrophages from human CD14<sup>+</sup> monocytes <i>in vitro</i> These homogeneous M1 macrophages secrete pro-inflammatory cytokines, and our M2 macrophages secrete anti-inflammatory cytokines as well as vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). To identify enriched surface glycoproteins, we then performed solid-phase extraction of <i>N</i>-linked glycopeptides followed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) on our homogeneous macrophage populations. We discovered five novel peptides that are enriched exclusively on human M2 macrophages relative to human M1 macrophages and human CD14<sup>+</sup> monocytes. Finally, we determined whether these surface glycoproteins, found enriched on M2 macrophages, were also expressed in human metastatic castrate-resistant prostate cancer (mCRPC) tissues. Using mCRPC tissues from rapid autopsies, we were able to determine M2 macrophage infiltration by using immunohistochemistry and flow cytometry. These findings highlight the presence of macrophage infiltration in human mCRPC but also surface glycoproteins that could be used for prognosis of localized disease and for targeting strategies.

### Keywords
Macrophage glycoproteome, Human, Glycoproteomics, Prostate cancer

### Affiliations
Johns Hopkins University
Johns Hopkins University, School of Medicine, Department of Pathology

### Submitter
Weiming Yang

### Lab Head
Dr Hui Zhang
Johns Hopkins University, School of Medicine, Department of Pathology


