### Accession
PXD012522

### Title
Biopearling: Chains of interconnected outer membrane vesicles in a marine flavobacterium

### Description
Large surface-to-volume ratios provide optimal nutrient uptake conditions for small microorganisms in oligotrophic habitats. The surface area can be increased with appendages. Here we describe chains of interconnecting vesicles protruding from cells of the flavobacterial strain Hel3_A1_48 originating from coastal free-living bacterioplankton. The chains were up to 10 µm long, had vesicles with a single membrane and a size of 80-100 nm by 50-80 nm, and emanated from the outer membrane. Cells extruded membrane tubes in the exponential phase, whereas vesicle chains dominated on cells in the stationary growth phase. This indicated a formation by pearling, which describes a physical morphogenic process: membrane tubes are protruding from liposomes and transform into chains of interconnected vesicles. Proteomes of whole cell membranes and of detached vesicles were dominated by outer membrane proteins including the type IX secretion system and surface-attached peptidases, glycoside hydrolases and endonucleases. Imported fluorescein-labeled laminarin was present in the periplasm of the cells and in the lumen of protruding vesicle chains. The appendages thus provide degradative enzymes on their surfaces and storage volume in the periplasmic extension, which seems to contribute to the high abundance of the Formosa-affiliated bacteria during laminarin utilization shortly after algal blooms.

### Sample Protocol
Triplicate cultures of Formosa strain Hel3_A1_48 grown in 250mL cell culture bottles with slow shaking (10 rpm) on an orbital-shaker were harvested in the exponential or stationary growth phase. Vesicles were prepared as described by Kulkarni & Jagannadham [25]. Cells for the membrane preparation were pelleted with 4 390x g for 10 min. After removal of cell debris with 27 440x g for 15 min (Beckman 70.1 Ti, Beckman Coulter, Brea, USA), the supernatant was filtered through a 0.2 µm syringe filter. The vesicles in the filtrate were pelleted with 142 019x g for 2 h (70.1 Ti rotor). The vesicle pellet was suspended in 100 mM KCl, 50 mM Tris, pH 7.5, frozen rapidly in liquid nitrogen and kept at - 80 °C. The membrane preparation started with the lysis of cell pellets in 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 10 mM EDTA (TE) by sonication on ice (3 x 30 s at 30% intensity). Unbroken cells were removed at 8 000x g for 10 min. Membranes in the supernatant were pelleted at 105 000x g for 1 h (Beckman 50.2 Ti rotor). Pellets were frozen in liquid nitrogen and kept at - 80 °C. Pellets were resuspended in 500 µL TE buffer and homogenized using a pistil. After quantification with a Nanoquant assay (Roth, Karlsruhe, Germany) 25 µg protein per sample was separated on a SDS-PAGE lane. The Coomassie-stained separation lane was cut into 10 equal-sized pieces, which were destained by repeated washing (200 mM NH4HCO3 and 30% (v/v) acetonitrile at 37 °C for 30 min). Proteins were in-gel digested for 16 h using trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA). Peptides were eluted in an ultrasonic bath for 15 min and desalted using ZipTip columns (C18, Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Peptide samples were separated by reversed phase C18 column chromatography on a nano ACQUITY-UPLC (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, USA) as described by Otto et al. [26]. Mass spectrometry (MS) and MS/MS data were recorded using an online-coupled LTQ-Orbitrap Classic mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Waltham, MA, USA).

### Data Protocol
We searched MS spectra against a target-decoy protein database including sequences of strain Hel3_A1_48 (CP017259, [27]) and of common laboratory contaminants using the Sorcerer-Sequest platform (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA; v 27.11) and Scaffold 4 [28]. The FDR (false discovery rate) on peptide and protein level was set to 0.01 (1%). Only proteins with a minimum of two peptide identifications were considered identified. We used only proteins that were detected in at least 2 out of 3 biological replicates. Contaminants were removed. TSC (total spectral count) values were normalized to protein size by division by the molecular weight of the detected protein. The normalized spectral abundance factor (NSAF%, Florens et al., 2006) values were obtained by dividing the normalized TSCs by the sum of all TSCs for one replicate, giving the relative proportion of each protein as compared to all proteins in the sample. These NSAF% values, i.e., the respective share of an individual protein relative to all proteins in the same sample, will be referred to as “relative protein abundance” in the following. Then an average of the NSAF% values of the replicates was calculated.

### Publication Abstract
Large surface-to-volume ratios provide optimal nutrient uptake conditions for small microorganisms in oligotrophic habitats. The surface area can be increased with appendages. Here, we describe chains of interconnecting vesicles protruding from cells of strain Hel3_A1_48, affiliating with <i>Formosa</i> spp. within the <i>Flavobacteriia</i> and originating from coastal free-living bacterioplankton. The chains were up to 10 &#x3bc;m long and had vesicles emanating from the outer membrane with a single membrane and a size of 80 to 100&#x2009;nm by 50 to 80&#x2009;nm. Cells extruded membrane tubes in the exponential phase, whereas vesicle chains dominated on cells in the stationary growth phase. This formation is known as pearling, a physical morphogenic process in which membrane tubes protrude from liposomes and transform into chains of interconnected vesicles. Proteomes of whole-cell membranes and of detached vesicles were dominated by outer membrane proteins, including the type IX secretion system and surface-attached peptidases, glycoside hydrolases, and endonucleases. Fluorescein-labeled laminarin stained the cells and the vesicle chains. Thus, the appendages provide binding domains and degradative enzymes on their surfaces and probably storage volume in the vesicle lumen. Both may contribute to the high abundance of these <i>Formosa</i>-affiliated bacteria during laminarin utilization shortly after spring algal blooms.<b>IMPORTANCE</b> Microorganisms produce membrane vesicles. One synthesis pathway seems to be pearling that describes the physical formation of vesicle chains from phospholipid vesicles via extended tubes. Bacteria with vesicle chains had been observed as well as bacteria with tubes, but pearling was so far not observed. Here, we report the observation of, initially, tubes and then vesicle chains during the growth of a flavobacterium, suggesting biopearling of vesicle chains. The flavobacterium is abundant during spring bacterioplankton blooms developing after algal blooms and has a special set of enzymes for laminarin, the major storage polysaccharide of microalgae. We demonstrated with fluorescently labeled laminarin that the vesicle chains bind laminarin or contain laminarin-derived compounds. Proteomic analyses revealed surface-attached degradative enzymes on the outer membrane vesicles. We conclude that the large surface area and the lumen of vesicle chains may contribute to the ecological success of this marine bacterium.

### Keywords
Algal blooms, Outer membrane vesicles, Flavobacteria, Biopearling, Formosa

### Affiliations
Universität Greifswald Institut für Pharmazie, AG Pharmazeutische Biotechnologie Greifswald, Germany
University of Greifswald

### Submitter
Stephanie Markert

### Lab Head
Dr Stephanie Markert
Universität Greifswald Institut für Pharmazie, AG Pharmazeutische Biotechnologie Greifswald, Germany


