### Accession
PXD018975

### Title
Cortical actin tension regulates secretory protein trafficking  and the endoplasmic reticulum stress response

### Description
We used proximity-based biotinylation assay cells to isolate candidate plasma membrane-associated proteins whose localization are sensitive to cortical tension level. Using membrane-targeting ascorbate peroxidase (APEX2-CAAX) as a bait, we mapped the proteomic landscape at the cell cortex under high and low cortical tension conditions.

### Sample Protocol
In 2D condition, MCF10A stably expressing farnesylated APEX2 (APEX-CAAX) were cultured in Lysine- and Arginine-free DMEM/F12 media supplemented with dialyzed horse serum, EGF, insulin, cholera toxin, hydrocortisone, and light Lysine and Arginine. In reduced cortical tension condition, MCF10A stably expressing APEX-CAAX were cultured as described in 2D conditions, except that the heavy isotope K8 Lysine and R10 Argine were used. Cells were labeled in SILAC media for at least 8 passages prior to biotinylation assay.    MCF10A were pre-incubated with biotin-phenol overnight prior to biotinylation labeling. Cells were either treated with DMSO or 10uM blebbistatin for 2hr prior to proximity labeing reaction. Cells were incubated with H2O2 for 1 min, then washed three times with quenching solution and lysed directly in 2% SDS in 100mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0. The lysate was diluted to 0.2% SDS and trichloroacetic acid (TCA) is added to a final concentration of 20% and incubated overnight at 4C. Precipitated protein was pelleted by centrifugation at 13,000 g for 30 min. Pellets were washed with ice-cold 100% acetone, centrifuged again at 13,000 g for 30 min and air dried briefly. Pellets were triturated in 8M guanidine HCl, 100mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0 and incubated at room temperature for 1 hour.     Subsequently, light and heavy labeled samples were mixed in equal proportion and the combined samples were diluted to 2.5M GdnHCl. Biotinylated proteins were captured on 100ul of packed high capacity neutravidin sepharose beads overnight at 4C, then washed five times with 2.5M GdnHCl, 100mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0.    Beads were then resuspended in 1M guanidine-HCl, 1mM CaCl2, and 100mM Tris pH 8.0, to approximately 200 μL of slurry, with ~50% volume occupancy by the beads. The samples were reduced with 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine and free thiols were alkylated with 40 mM 2-chloroacetamide in 100 mM Tris pH 8.0. Beads were heated to 80° C for 5 min to denature proteins then kept at room temperature for 45 min in the dark for protein reduction and alkylation. After alkylation, 5 μg of MS-grade trypsin dissolved in 5 μL 50 mM acetic acid was added to proteins on beads, and proteins were digested at room temperature for 20 h, in microcentrifuge tubes rotating on a rotisserie rack. The eluate was transferred to a new tube, acidified to a final concentration of 0.5% TFA (pH < 3) and desalted with SOLA C18 solid phase extraction cartridges.  Peptides were eluted from the C18 SPE in 30 μL 50% acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.1% formic acid (FA) and then dried in a Genevac EZ-2.  Dried peptides were resuspended in 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in a bath sonicator for 5 min to a concentration of 0.2 μg/μL before MS analysis.    1 µg SILAC-labeled peptides were submitted for nano-LC-MS/MS analysis, using an 83 min reversed phase curved gradient (2.4 – 32% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid with a concave curve number 7 in Chromeleon) with a 15 cm Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 analytical column (2 μm beads, 75 μm i.d., Fisher, DX164534), running at 200 nL/min on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano pump, in-line with a hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher). The method includes 13 min segment for the sample to load at 500 nL/min 2.4% ACN, 0.1% FA before the gradient and MS acquisiting begins and a 6 minute 80% ACN, 0.08% FA wash step at 500 nL/min after the gradient. For the MS analysis, a data dependent method with a parent ion scan at a resolving power of 70,000 and a top 15 method was used for each replicate, selecting the top 15 most intense peaks for MS/MS using HCD fragmentation (normalized collision energy 27). Dynamic exclusion was activated such that parent ions are excluded from MS/MS fragmentation for 20 s after initial selection.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification and quantification, RAW files were analyzed by Maxquant using default settings.  The recorded spectra from two independent biological replicates were searched against the human reference proteome from UniProt (downloaded 2017-11-15, with 71,544 entries in SwissProt/TrEMBL) using MaxQuant, version 1.6.2.1. Search parameters allowed 2 missed tryptic cleavages. Oxidation of methionine, phosphorylation of serine/threonine/tyrosines, and N-terminal acetylation were allowed as variable modifications, while carbamidomethylation of cysteines was selected as a constant modification and a threshold peptide spectrum match (PSM) false discovery rate (FDR) and protein FDR of 1% was allowed. Quantification of SILAC ratios was performed by Maxquant on the MS1 level and the resulting ratios for all replicates were compared using statistical tools found in the Perseus statistical analysis package.  Proteins with ratio quantification in only one replicate were removed. Statistical significance was determined by applying a one-sample, two-sided Student T-test to the replicates.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms, Mcf10a, Apex

### Affiliations
University of California, San Francisco, Department of Laboratory Medicine
UCSF

### Submitter
Hector Huang

### Lab Head
Dr Arun P. Wiita
University of California, San Francisco, Department of Laboratory Medicine


