### Accession
PXD003860

### Title
Impact of cathepsin A on the murine cardiac proteome

### Description
Cathepsin A (CTSA) is a lysosomal carboxypeptidase present at the cell surface and secreted outside the cell. Additionally, CTSA binds to β-galactosidase and neuraminidase 1 to protect them from degradation. CTSA has gained attention as a drug target for the treatment of cardiac hypertrophy and heart failure. Here we investigated the impact of CTSA on the murine cardiac proteome in a mouse model of cardiomyocyte-specific human CTSA overexpression, using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry in conjunction with an isotopic dimethyl labeling strategy. Statistical analysis by linear models for microarray data (limma) found > 300 significantly affected proteins; thus establishing CTSA as a key modulator of the cardiac proteome. CTSA strongly impaired the balance of the proteolytic system by up-regulating several proteases whilst down-regulating numerous protease inhibitors. Moreover, cardiomyocyte-specific human CTSA overexpression strongly reduced the levels of numerous proteins that are involved in the oxidative stress response.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of tissue samples for proteomic analysis In hCTSA-tg and wild-type mice, hearts were rapidly removed during general anesthesia by intraperitoneal injection of pentobarbital (100mg/kg i.p.), trimmed free from non-cardiac tissues and weighed. Snap frozen fresh whole mouse hearts (150-200 mg) were lysed in 500 µl of homogenization buffer (100 mM Na-acetate, 5 mM EDTA, 1 mM dithiothreitol, 0.01 mM trans-epoxysuccinyl-L-leucylamido(4-guanidino)butane (E64), 1 mM phenyl-methanesulfonyl fluoride, 0.05 % Brij, pH 5.5) using an Ultra-Turrax and centrifuged at 1000 g for 15 min at 4 °C. Protein concentrations were determined via the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific).  Quantitative proteome comparison For proteome comparison, the whole heart from hCTSA-tg and wild-type mice were prepared. Sample preparation was performed as described previously (Tholen et al., Cell Mol Life Sci 2014). Briefly, proteins were precipitated with trichloroacetic acid (TCA), solubilized, trypsinized, reduced, and alkylated. Samples were then labeled with 20 mM either formaldehyde light [d(0)12 C] or heavy [d(2)13 C] in the presence of 20 mM sodium cyanoborohydride. After quenching the reaction with glycine, samples were combined in pairs in 1:1 ratio. Following desalting by C18 solid phase extraction (Sep-Pak C18 Plus Light Cartridge, Waters, Frankfurt, Germany), samples (ca. 300 μg) were fractionated by strong cation exchange chromatography and analyzed by liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS). LC-MS/MS analysis For mass spectrometry analysis, a Q-Exactive plus system (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) was used, coupled to an Easy nanoLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific) with a flow rate of 300 nl/min each. Buffer A was 0.5% formic acid, and buffer B was 0.5% formic acid in 100% acetonitrile (water and acetonitrile were at least HPLC gradient grade quality). A gradient of increasing organic proportion was used for peptide separation (5–40% acetonitrile in 80 min). The analytical column was an Acclaim PepMap column (Thermo Scientific), 2 μm particle sizes, 100 Å pore sizes, length 150 mm, I.D. 50 μM. The mass spectrometer operated in data dependent mode with a top 10 method at a mass range of 300–2000.

### Data Protocol
MS files were analyzed by MaxQuant version 1.3.0.5 with the Uniprot mouse database downloaded on October 2014, counting 43393 entries. The sequence of human cathepsin A was included in the search database. MaxQuant analysis included an initial search with a precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm for mass recalibration. In the main Andromeda search precursor mass and fragment mass were searched with initial mass tolerance of 6 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively. The search included variable modifications of methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation, and fixed modification of carbamidomethyl cysteine. Minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and two miscleavages were allowed. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.05 for peptide and protein identifications in individual analyses; however we only considered proteins that were identified in all three replicates. For comparison between samples we used a labeling scheme based on multiplicity two: dimethLys0/dimethNter0 (light label); dimethLys6/dimethNter6 (heavy label). A minimum of two ratio counts were used to determine the normalized protein intensity.  Files obtained by MaxQuant were further processed using RStudio v.0.99.446 as an IDE for R (R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria) as previously described (Gomez-Auli et al., Biochimie 2015). Briefly, reverse and potential contaminants entries were removed and only proteins identified in all three replicates were considered. Overlap of identified proteins was determined using R and BioVenn 2007. Ratios were log2 transformed, normalized by centering and scaling and a linear model was fitted using the limma package (Ritchie et al., Nucleic Acids Res 2015) followed by a moderated-t-test. Proteins with an altered abundance were considered by having a log2 fold change of more/less than 50% and a p-value ≤ 0.01. Average Fc are expressed ± SEM (n=3). Protein entries were manually inspected for their Gene Ontology (GO) molecular function and biological process, and classified accordingly into relevant functional categories. Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (QIAGEN) was used for enrichment analysis; STRING (Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes/Proteins) was used to annotate functional interaction of proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Cathepsin A (CTSA) is a lysosomal carboxypeptidase present at the cell surface and secreted outside the cell. Additionally, CTSA binds to &#x3b2;-galactosidase and neuraminidase 1 to protect them from degradation. CTSA has gained attention as a drug target for the treatment of cardiac hypertrophy and heart failure. Here, we investigated the impact of CTSA on the murine cardiac proteome in a mouse model of cardiomyocyte-specific human CTSA overexpression using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry in conjunction with an isotopic dimethyl labeling strategy. We identified up to 2000 proteins in each of three biological replicates. Statistical analysis by linear models for microarray data (limma) found &gt;300 significantly affected proteins (moderated p-value &#x2264;0.01), thus establishing CTSA as a key modulator of the cardiac proteome. CTSA strongly impaired the balance of the proteolytic system by upregulating several proteases such as cathepsin B, cathepsin D, and cathepsin Z while down-regulating numerous protease inhibitors. Moreover, cardiomyocyte-specific human CTSA overexpression strongly reduced the levels of numerous antioxidative stress proteins, i.e., peroxiredoxins and protein deglycase DJ-1. In vitro, using cultured rat cardiomyocytes, ectopic overexpression of CTSA resulted in accumulation of reactive oxygen species. Collectively, our proteomic and functional data strengthen an association of CTSA with the cellular oxidative stress response.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Transgenic mouse, Cathepsin a

### Affiliations
University of Freiburg
Institute of Molecular Medicine and Cell Research, University of Freiburg, Stefan Meier Strasse 17, 79104, Freiburg, Germany

### Submitter
Oliver Schilling

### Lab Head
Dr Oliver Schilling
Institute of Molecular Medicine and Cell Research, University of Freiburg, Stefan Meier Strasse 17, 79104, Freiburg, Germany


