### Accession
PXD003894

### Title
AP-4 cargo -  Identification of cargo for adaptor protein complexes AP-3 and AP-4 by sucrose gradient profiling

### Description
Identificatoin of cargo protein of AP-4 using metabolic labeling in label-swap experiments

### Sample Protocol
For in-solution digest the proteins (5 µg) of each organelle-enriched fraction were denatured using 6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, pH 8.0. After reduction in 0.5 M DTT and alkylation of cysteine residues by 2.5 mM iodoacetamide, proteins were digested for 3 h by LysC (Wako, Japan) at room temperature. The solution was then diluted fourfold with 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0 followed by overnight digestion with trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega) at 37 °C under continuous shaking at 350 rpm. Finally, digested peptides were desalted over C18 STAGE-tips and vacuum-dried. For mass spectrometric analysis samples were resuspended in resuspension buffer (0.2 % v/v TFA, 5% v/v acetonitrile). Sucrose gradient interphases were also used for phosphopeptide enrichments as described (42). Tryptic peptide mixtures were analysed by LC-MS/MS using nanoflow HPLC (Proxeon Biosystems, Denmark) and a hybrid quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive Plus, Thermo Scientific) as a mass analyser. Peptides were eluted from a 75 µm x 50 cm C18 analytical column (PepMap® RSLC C18, Thermo Scientific) on a gradient using 0.5 % acetic acid as aqueous phase and 0.5 % acetic acid in 80% acetonitrile as organic phase. The flow rate was set to 250 nL per minute. Peptides were eluted on a linear gradient running from 4 to 64 % acetonitrile in 240 minutes. Spectra were using information-dependent acquisition of fragmentation spectra of multiple charged peptides within the m/z range of 300 – 1600. Up to twelve data-dependent MS/MS spectra were acquired for each full-scan spectrum acquired at 70,000 full-width half-maximum resolution. Fragment spectra were acquired at a resolution of 35,000.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and ion intensity quantitation was carried out by MaxQuant version 1.4.1.2 (30). Spectra were matched against the Arabidopsis proteome (TAIR10, 35386 entries) using Andromeda (43). In the search process, carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification; oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation was set as variable modifications. Phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine was additionally used as a variable modification in data analysis of the phosphopeptide enrichment samples. Mass tolerance for the database search was set to 10 ppm on full scans and 0.5 Da for fragment ions. Multiplicity was set to 1. Retention time matching between runs was chosen within a time window of two minutes, and “match unidentified features” option was selected. Peptide false discovery rate (FDR) and protein FDR were set to 0.01. Hits to known contaminants (e.g. keratins) and reverse hits identified by MaxQuant were excluded from further analysis. Spectra of identified phosphopeptides were submitted to the PhosPhAt database (25). In all cases, for further data mining of subcellular locations and functions, we used the “leading razor protein” as a single protein inferred from identified peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Intracellular vesicle trafficking is a fundamental process in eukaryotic cells. It enables cellular polarity and exchange of proteins between subcellular compartments such as the plasma membrane or the vacuole. Adaptor protein complexes participate in the vesicle formation by specific selection of the transported cargo. We investigated the role of the adaptor protein complex 3 (AP-3) and adaptor protein complex 4 (AP-4) in this selection process by screening for AP-3 and AP-4 dependent cargo proteins. Specific cargo proteins are expected to be mis-targeted in knock-out mutants of adaptor protein complex components. Thus, we screened for altered distribution profiles across a density gradient of membrane proteins in wild type versus ap-3&#x3b2; and ap-4&#x3b2; knock-out mutants. In ap-3&#x3b2; mutants, especially proteins with transport functions, such as aquaporins and plasma membrane ATPase, as well as vesicle trafficking proteins showed differential protein distribution profiles across the density gradient. In the ap-4&#x3b2; mutant aquaporins but also proteins from lipid metabolism were differentially distributed. These proteins also showed differential phosphorylation patterns in ap-3&#x3b2; and ap-4&#x3b2; compared with wild type. Other proteins, such as receptor kinases were depleted from the AP-3 mutant membrane system, possibly because of degradation after mis-targeting. In AP-4 mutants, membrane fractions were depleted for cytochrome P450 proteins, cell wall proteins and receptor kinases. Analysis of water transport capacity in wild type and mutant mesophyll cells confirmed aquaporins as cargo proteins of AP-3 and AP-4. The combination of organelle density gradients with proteome analysis turned out as a suitable experimental strategy for large-scale analyses of protein trafficking.

### Keywords
Adaptor protein complex 4

### Affiliations
Department of Plant Systems Biology University of Hohenheim 70593 Germany
Universität Hohenheim

### Submitter
Waltraud Schulze

### Lab Head
Dr Waltraud Schulze
Department of Plant Systems Biology University of Hohenheim 70593 Germany


