### Accession
PXD034924

### Title
Histone modifications associated with the histone chaperone DAXX

### Description
A multitude of histone chaperones is required to protect histones from their biosynthesis to DNA deposition. They cooperate through the formation of co-chaperone complexes, but the crosstalk between nucleosome assembly pathways is unclear. Using explorative interactomics approaches, we map the organization of the histone H3-H4 chaperones network and define the interplay between histone chaperones systems. We identify and validate a panel of novel histone (PTM) dependent complexes. We show DAXX acts separately from the rest of the network, recruiting heterochromatin factors and promoting lysine 9 tri-methylated new histone H3.3 prior to deposition onto DNA. With its functionality, DAXX provides a molecular mechanism for de novo heterochromatin assembly.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were acid extracted in order to enrich for histone proteins. The enriched fractions were resuspended in Lämmli buffer and separated by a 14-20% gradient SDS-PAGE, stained with Coomassie Blue. Protein bands in the molecular weight range of histones (15-23 kDa) were excised as single band/fraction. Gel slices were destained in 50% acetonitrile/50mM ammonium bicarbonate. Lysine residues were chemically modified by propionylation for 30 min at RT with 2.5% propionic anhydride (Sigma) in ammonium bicarbonate, pH 7.5. Subsequently, proteins were digested with 200ng of trypsin (Promega) in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate overnight and the supernatant was desalted by C18-Stagetips (reversed-phase resin) and carbon Top-Tips (Glygen) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. After desalting, the eluent was speed vacuumed until dryness and stored at -20°C until MS analysis.  Peptides were re-suspended in 17 μl of 0.1% TFA. A total of 5.0 μl were injected into a nano-HPLC device (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a gradient from 4% B to 90% B (solvent A 0.1% FA in water, solvent B 80% ACN, 0.1% FA in water) over 90 min at a flow rate of 300 nl/min in a C18 UHPCL column (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Data was acquired in positive mode using a Q Exactive HF spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) to identify and quantify specific N-terminal peptides of histone H3 and histone H4 proteins and their PTMs. MS1 spectra were acquired in the m/z range 250-1600 with resolution 60,000 at m/z 400 (AGC target of 3x106). MS2 spectra were acquired with resolution 15,000 to a target value of 2x105, maximum IT 60ms, isolation 2 window 0.7 m/z and fragmented at 27% normalized collision energy. Typical mass spectrometric conditions were: spray voltage, 1.5kV; no sheath and auxiliary gas flow; heated capillary temperature, 250°C.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched with the Skyline software version 21.1 against histone H3 and H4 peptides and their respective PTMs with a precursor mass tolerance of 5 ppm. The elution boundaries of +1, +2, +3 and +4 charged peaks were validated and the Total Area MS1 under the first 4 isotopomers was extracted and used for relative quantification and comparison between experimental groups. The Total Area MS1 of co-eluting isobaric peptides (i.e., H3K36me3 and H3K27me2K36me1) was resolved using their unique MS2 fragment ions. Relative abundances of PTMs were calculated peptide sequence based.

### Publication Abstract
A multitude of histone chaperones are required to support histones from their biosynthesis until DNA deposition. They cooperate through the formation of histone co-chaperone complexes, but the crosstalk between nucleosome assembly pathways remains enigmatic. Using exploratory interactomics, we define the interplay between human histone H3-H4 chaperones in the histone chaperone network. We identify previously uncharacterized histone-dependent complexes and predict the structure of the ASF1 and SPT2 co-chaperone complex, expanding the role of ASF1 in histone dynamics. We show that DAXX provides a unique functionality to the histone chaperone network, recruiting histone methyltransferases to promote H3K9me3 catalysis on new histone H3.3-H4 prior to deposition onto DNA. Hereby, DAXX provides a molecular mechanism for de novo H3K9me3 deposition and heterochromatin assembly. Collectively, our findings provide a framework for understanding how cells orchestrate histone supply and employ targeted deposition of modified histones to underpin specialized chromatin states.

### Keywords
H3.3, Histones, Ptms, Daxx

### Affiliations
EpiQMAx GmbH
Novo Nordisk Center for Protein Research (CPR), Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark. Biotech Research and Innovation Centre (BRIC), Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.

### Submitter
Victor Solis

### Lab Head
Dr Anja Groth
Novo Nordisk Center for Protein Research (CPR), Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark. Biotech Research and Innovation Centre (BRIC), Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.


