### Accession
PXD044740

### Title
Phosphoproteomic analysis of IL-2 MSA and IL-12 MSA combination on T cell signaling

### Description
Engineered cytokine-based approaches for immunotherapy of cancer are poised to enter the clinic, with IL-12 being at the forefront. However, little is known about potential mechanisms of resistance to cytokine therapies. We found that orthotopic murine lung tumors were resistant to systemically delivered IL-12 fused to murine serum albumin (MSA, IL12-MSA) due to low IL-12R expression on tumor-reactive CD8+ T cells. IL2-MSA increased binding of IL12-MSA by tumor-reactive CD8+ T cells, and combined administration of IL12-MSA and IL2-MSA led to enhanced tumor-reactive CD8+ T cell effector differentiation, decreased numbers of tumor-infiltrating CD4+ regulatory T (Treg) cells, and increased survival of lung tumor-bearing mice. Predictably, the combination of IL-2 and IL-12 at therapeutic doses led to significant dose-limiting toxicity. Administering IL-12 and IL-2 analogs with preferential binding to cells expressing IL12rb1 and CD25, respectively, led to a significant extension of survival in mice with lung tumors while abrogating dose-limiting toxicity. These findings suggest that IL-12 and IL-2 represent a rational approach to combination cytokine therapy whose dose-limiting toxicity can be overcome with engineered cytokine variants.

### Sample Protocol
Sample Processing for Mass Spectrometry Analysis Live CD8+ T cells were isolated from expanded splenocytes using a dead cell removal kit (Miltenyi 130-090-101) and a CD8+ T cell isolation kit (Miltenyi 130-104-075), following the manufacturer’s instructions. Approximately 12x106 CD8+ T cells were resuspended in 500 uL of serum free RPMI-1640 per condition. CD8+ T cells were rested for precisely 20 minutes in serum free medium at 37 degrees C before being stimulated with either 3x10-4 ug IL2-MSA, 3x10-4 ug IL12-MSA, or the combination. After precisely 5 minutes of stimulation, cells were lysed with a 1:1 ratio of 8M urea. Lysates were sonicated at 30% amplitude for 10 seconds, cleared by centrifugation at 5,000  g for 5 minutes at 4C, and protein concentration was measured by bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA; Pierce). Proteins were reduced with 10 mmol/L dithiothreitol for 1 hour at 56C, alkylated with 55 mmol/L iodoacetamide for 1 hour at room temperature, protected from light, and diluted 4-fold with 100 mmol/L ammonium acetate, pH 8.9. Proteins were digested with sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega) at an enzyme tosubstrate ratio of 1:50 overnight at room temperature. Enzymatic activity was quenched by acidifying with glacial acetic acid to 10% of the final solution volume, and peptides were desalted using C18 solid-phase extraction cartridges (Sep-Pak Plus Short, Waters). Peptides were eluted with aqueous 40% acetonitrile in 0.1% acetic acid and dried using vacuum centrifugation. Protein concentration was again measured by BCA to account for variation in sample processing.Samples for TMT-labeled analyses were lyophilized in 150 mg aliquots and resuspended in 50 mmol/L HEPES (pH 8.5). TMT 6-plex (0.4 mg;Thermo Scientific) was resuspended in 15 uL of anhydrous acetonitrile and subsequently added to each sample, followed by a 1-hour incubation at room temperature. Reactions were quenched with the addition of hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 0.3%, pooled, dried by vacuum centrifugation, and stored at - 80 C prior to analysis.  Tyrosine Phosphorylated Peptide Enrichment Lyophilized tryptic peptide aliquots were resuspended in 400 mL of immunoprecipitation (IP) buffer (100 mmol/L Tris-HCl, 0.3% NP-40, pH 7.4) The peptide mixture was incubated with 60 uL protein G agarose bead slurry (Calbiochem) conjugated to an antibody cocktail containing 24 ug 4G10 (Millipore), 12 ug PT66 (Sigma) overnight at 4C .Beads were washed once with IP buffer, 3 times with 100 mmol/L Tri-HCl,pH 7.4, and eluted in 2 rounds of 25 uL 0.2% TFA. Phosphopeptides were further enriched using High-Select Fe-NTA Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit (Thermo Scientific) following manufacturer’s instructions with minor adjustments. Modifications include reducing the peptide volume initially added to the Fe-NTA column (50 uL) and reducing the elution volume to 2 rounds of 20-uL elutions. Peptide elutions were dried down using vacuum centrifugation to <2 uL total volume and resuspended in 5% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid for a total volume of 10 uL. Samples were loaded directly onto an in-house packed analytic capillary column [50 μm inner diameter (ID) × 10 cm] packed with 5 μm C18 beads (YMC gel, ODS-AQ, AQ12S05).  LC/MS-MS Analysis LC/MS-MS of pTyr peptides were carried out on an Agilent 1260 LC coupled to a Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated using a 140-minute gradient with 70% acetonitrile in 0.2 mol/L acetic acid at flow rate of 0.2 mL/minute with approximate split flow at 20 nL/minute. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition with following settings for MS1 scans: m/z range: 380 to 2,000; resolution: 60,000; AGC target: 3 × 10^6; maximum injection time (maxIT): 50 ms. The top 15 abundant ions were isolated and fragmented by higher energy collision dissociation with following settings: resolution: 60,000; AGC target: 1 × 10^5; maxIT: 250 ms; isolation width: 0.4 m/z, collisional energy (CE): 33%, dynamic exclusion: 50 seconds. Crude peptide analysis was performed on a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer to correct for small variation in peptide loadings for each of the TMT channels. Approximately 30 ng of the supernatant from pTyr IP was loaded onto an in-house packed precolumn (100 μm ID × 10 cm) packed with 10 μm C18 beads (YMC gel, ODS-A, AA12S11) and analyzed with a 70-minute LC gradient. MS1 scans were performed at following settings: m/z range: 350 to 1,800; resolution: 70,000; AGC target: 1 × 10^6; maxIT: 100 ms. The top 10 abundant ions were isolated and fragmented with CE of 33% at a resolution of 35,000.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed with Proteome Discoverer version 3.0 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, RRID:SCR_014477) and searched against the human SwissProt database using Mascot version 2.4 (Matrix Science, RRID:SCR_014322). MS-MS spectra were searched with mass tolerance of 10 ppm for precursor ions and 20 mmu for fragment ions. Cysteine carbamidomethylation, TMT-labeled lysine, and TMT-labeled peptide N-termini were set as fixed modifications. Oxidation of methionine and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine were searched as dynamic modifications. TMT reporter quantification was extracted and isotope corrected in Proteome Discoverer. Peptide spectrum matches (PSM) were filtered according to following parameters: rank = 1, search engine rank = 1, mascot ion score > 20. Peptides with missing values across any channel were filtered out. Phosphorylation sites were localized with ptmRS module (21) with 216.04 added as a diagnostic mass for pTyr immonium ion (22). PSMs with >95% localization probability for all phosphorylation sites were included for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Engineered cytokine-based approaches for immunotherapy of cancer are poised to enter the clinic, with IL-12 being at the forefront. However, little is known about potential mechanisms of resistance to cytokine therapies. We found that orthotopic murine lung tumors were resistant to systemically delivered IL-12 fused to murine serum albumin (MSA, IL12-MSA) because of low IL-12 receptor (IL-12R) expression on tumor-reactive CD8+ T cells. IL2-MSA increased binding of IL12-MSA by tumor-reactive CD8+ T cells, and combined administration of IL12-MSA and IL2-MSA led to enhanced tumor-reactive CD8+ T cell effector differentiation, decreased numbers of tumor-infiltrating CD4+ regulatory T cells, and increased survival of lung tumor-bearing mice. Predictably, the combination of IL-2 and IL-12 at therapeutic doses led to significant dose-limiting toxicity. Administering IL-12 and IL-2 analogs with preferential binding to cells expressing Il12rb1 and CD25, respectively, led to a significant extension of survival in mice with lung tumors while abrogating dose-limiting toxicity. These findings suggest that IL-12 and IL-2 represent a rational approach to combination cytokine therapy whose dose-limiting toxicity can be overcome with engineered cytokine variants.

### Keywords
Signaling, T cell, Cytokine

### Affiliations
Massachussetts Institute of Technology
Professor, Bioengineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology

### Submitter
Alicia Dsouza

### Lab Head
Dr Forest White
Professor, Bioengineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology


