### Accession
PXD004541

### Title
CETSA proteomics to investigate drug binding in BJ Ras Sv40 cells treated with MTH1 inhibitors.

### Description
Previously, we showed cancer cells rely on the MTH1 protein to prevent incorporation of otherwise deadly oxidative nucleotides into DNA and we developed MTH1 inhibitors which selectively kill cancer cells. Recently, several new and potent inhibitors of MTH1 were demonstrated to be non-toxic to cancer cells, challenging the utility of MTH1 inhibition as a target for cancer treatment. Here, we demonstrate that these recently described MTH1 inhibitors, which fail to kill cancer cells, also fail to introduce the toxic oxidized nucleotides into DNA. We further describe a new MTH1 inhibitor TH1579, an analogue of TH588, which is a potent, selective MTH1 inhibitor with good oral availability and demonstrates excellent pharmacokinetic and anti-cancer properties in vivo. Furthermore, we describe TH1579 as a best-in-class MTH1 inhibitor, which we expect to be useful in order to test the MTH1 inhibitor concept. Cellular thermal shift assay (CETSA) combined with basic reversed phase (bRP) separation and LC-MS was used to study drug binding in BJ Ras Sv40 cells treated with the MTH1 inhibitor TH1579.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins from the supernatants of the thermal shift assay experiments were denatured and reduced by 0.1% (w/v) SDS and 5 mM TCEP in 50mM TEAB pH 8.5. Alkylation was done by chloroacetamide, and digestion was done by a first round of LysC followed by two rounds of trypsin. CETSA was performed in combination with TMT10plex isobaric tags. Tryptic peptides from the proteins in supernatants collected from temperature steps 37C, 41C, 44C, 47C, 50C, 53C, 56C, 59C, 63C and 67C were labeled respectively with TMT channels 126, 127N, 127C, 128N, 128C, 129N, 129C, 130N, 130C and 131. Control CETSA experiments and TH1579 treated CETSA experiments were performed in duplicates totaling 4 TMT sets (DMSO1, DMSO2 and Drug1, Drug2). 200ug of peptide mixture from each set were fractionated by bRP (basic reversed phase) into 96 fractions, which were concatenated to 12 fractions in the customary interleaved manner. Each sample was analyzed on a HF Q-Exactive Orbitrap connected to a Dionex UHPLC system. The UHPLC was equipped with a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 75 μm x 2 cm, nanoviper, C18, 3 μm, 100 Å; Thermo) and an analytical column (PepMapRSLC C18, 2 μm, 100 Å, 75 μm x 50 cm; Thermo). Mobile‐phase buffers for nLC separation consisted of 0.1% FA in water (solvent A) and 80% ACN/0.1% FA (solvent B). The peptides were eluted during a 2 h gradient and directly sprayed into the mass spectrometer. The flow rate was set at 250 nL/min, and the LC gradient was as follows: 3-6% solvent B within 3 min, 6-35% solvent B within 117 min, 35–47% solvent B within 5 min, 47-100% solvent B within 5 min and 100% B for 8 min and 1% solvent B for 5 min. Nano spray was achieved with an applied voltage of 1.8 kV. The mass spectrometer was programmed in a data‐dependent acquisition mode (top 10 most intense peaks) and was configured to perform a Fourier transform survey scan from 370 to 1,600 m/z (resolution 60,000), AGC target 3e6, maximum injection time 250 ms. MS2 scans were acquired on the 10 most-abundant MS1 ions of charge state 2–7 using a Quadrupole isolation window of 1 m/z for higher energy collision dissociation HCD fragmentation. Collision energy was set at 34%; resolution = 30.000; Automatic gain control (AGC) target 2e5, maximum injection time 200 ms; dynamic exclusion 15s.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS data was searched using Sequest/Percolator under the software platform Proteome Discoverer (PD) 1.4 against the uniprot human reference proteome database (42128 entries) downloaded from uniprot.org on 2015-05-28. Oxidation of Methionine was used as dynamic modification, and carbamidomethylation of cysteine, and TMT6plex on peptide N-terminus and on Lysines used as static modifications. Isobaric tag based quantitative analysis was done using the "Reporter Ions Quantifier" node in PD.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Human, Proteomics, Bj ras sv40 cells, Cetsa

### Affiliations
Dept. Oncology Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, and ScilifeLab, Stockholm, Sweden
Clinical Proteomics Unit, Dep. of Oncology-Pathology

### Submitter
Rui Branca

### Lab Head
Dr Janne Lehtiö
Dept. Oncology Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, and ScilifeLab, Stockholm, Sweden


