### Accession
PXD003645

### Title
Flagellin (FliC) phosphorylation affects Type 2 protease secretion and biofilm dispersal in Pseudomonas aeruginosa PAO1

### Description
Protein phosphorylation has a major role in controlling the life-cycle and infection stages of bacteria. Proteome-wide occurrence of S/T/Y phosphorylation has been reported for many prokaryotic systems. Previously, we reported the phosphoproteome of Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Pseudomonas putida. In this study, we show the role of S/T phosphorylation of one motility protein, FliC, in regulating multiple surface-associated phenomena of Pseudomonas aeruginosa PAO1. The absence of phosphorylation in the conserved T27 and S28 residues of flagellin FliC, interestingly, did not affect swimming motility, but affected the secretome of type 2 secretion system (T2SS) and biofilm formation of PAO1. Flagellin phosphomutants had increased levels and activities of type 2 secretome proteins. This occurs by a possible mechanism affecting the secretion efficiency of T2SS machinery. Flagellin phosphomutants also formed reduced biofilm at 24h and had delayed biofilm dispersal under static and dynamic flow conditions, respectively. The levels of type 2 secretome and biofilm formation under static conditions had an inverse correlation. Hence, increase in the levels of type 2 secretome was accompanied by reduced biofilm formation in the flagellin phosphomutants. Altogether, we found a system of phosphorylation that co-ordinately regulates surface related processes such as proteases secretion by T2SS, biofilm formation and dispersal.

### Sample Protocol
10 μg of purified protein was dissolved and denatured in 8M urea followed by protein reduction (10 mM dithiothreitol) and alkylation (50 mM iodoacetamide) at room temperature. Alkylated proteins were digested with Lys-C (1:50, w/w) (Wako) for 3 h and then diluted 4 times with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate for overnight trypsin (Promega) digestion at room temperature. The resulting peptide mixture was acidified with TFA and desalted with a SDB-XC solid-phase extraction cartridge. Briefly, a homemade 10 μL C8-StageTip packed with 0.5 mg of titania beads was equilibrated with 80% acetonitrile (ACN) with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and 300 mg/mL lactic acid as a selectivity enhancer (solution A). The tryptic samples diluted with an equal amount of solution A were loaded onto StageTip. After successive washes with solution A and 80% ACN with 0.1% TFA (Solution B), phosphopeptides were eluted with 0.5 % piperidine. The eluent was acidified with TFA and desalted with SDB-XC StageTips. After desalting, phosphopeptides were resuspended in 0.5% TFA, 4 % ACN and subjected to nanoliquid chromatography (nanoLC)−MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The peak list of each raw MS spectrum was generated as previously described ( Large-scale comparative phosphoproteomics identifies conserved phosphorylation sites in plants.). Peptide identification was performed by Mascot ver 2.4 (Matrix Science, London, UK) against a composite target−decoy protein sequence database containing 4,316 proteins for Pseudomonas aerogenosa. The search criteria used in this study were as follows: trypsin specificity allowing up to 2 missed cleavages; fixed modification of carbamidomethyl (C); and variable modifications of oxidation (M), acetylation (protein N-term), and phosphorylation (ST) and (Y). The precursor mass tolerance was set at 20 ppm, and the fragment ion tolerance was set at 0.1 Da. Peptides were considered identified if the Mascot score yielded a confidence limit above 95% based on the significance threshold (p < 0.05) and if at least three successive y- or b-ions with an additional two and more y-, b-, and/or precursor-origin neutral loss ions were observed, based on the error-tolerant peptide sequence tag concept (Error-tolerant identification of peptides in sequence databases by peptide sequence tags. Analytical chemistry 66, 4390-4399 (1994)).

### Publication Abstract
Protein phosphorylation has a major role in controlling the life-cycle and infection stages of bacteria. Proteome-wide occurrence of S/T/Y phosphorylation has been reported for many prokaryotic systems. Previously, we reported the phosphoproteome of Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Pseudomonas putida. In this study, we show the role of S/T phosphorylation of one motility protein, FliC, in regulating multiple surface-associated phenomena of P. aeruginosa PAO1. This is the first report of occurrence of phosphorylation in the flagellar protein, flagellin FliC in its highly conserved N-terminal NDO domain across several Gram negative bacteria. This phosphorylation is likely a well-regulated phenomenon as it is growth phase dependent in planktonic cells. The absence of phosphorylation in the conserved T27 and S28 residues of FliC, interestingly, did not affect swimming motility, but affected the secretome of type 2 secretion system (T2SS) and biofilm formation of PAO1. FliC phosphomutants had increased levels and activities of type 2 secretome proteins. The secretion efficiency of T2SS machinery is associated with flagellin phosphorylation. FliC phosphomutants also formed reduced biofilms at 24 h under static conditions and had delayed biofilm dispersal under dynamic flow conditions, respectively. The levels of type 2 secretome and biofilm formation under static conditions had an inverse correlation. Hence, increase in type 2 secretome levels was accompanied by reduced biofilm formation in the FliC phosphomutants. As T2SS is involved in nutrient acquisition and biofilm dispersal during survival and spread of P. aeruginosa, we propose that FliC phosphorylation has a role in ecological adaptation of this opportunistic environmental pathogen. Altogether, we found a system of phosphorylation that affects key surface related processes such as proteases secretion by T2SS, biofilm formation and dispersal.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Lc-msms, Flagellin

### Affiliations
Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kyoto University
Department of Microbiology, College of Medicine, National Taiwan Unversity

### Submitter
Miao-Hsia Lin

### Lab Head
Dr Miao-Hsia Lin
Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kyoto University


