### Accession
PXD000180

### Title
Bartonella henselae mutant label-free analysis

### Description
We prepared 6 different mutants of the VirB proteins in B. henselae in triplicates and run 2h gradient 1D-LC-MS analysis. Relative quantification was carried out by the Progenesis LC-MS software

### Sample Protocol
Whole Cell Lysis: 109 cells were lysed in 50 ml lysis buffer (8M urea, 0.1% RapiGest, 0.1M ammoniumbicarbonate) and disrupted by two cycles of sonication for 20 seconds (Hielscher Ultrasonicator). Protein concentration was determined by BCA assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a small sample aliquot. Lys-C/Trypsin Protein Digestion: Lysates were reduced with 5 mM TCEP for 60 min at 37°C, alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark and quenched with 12.5 mM N-acetyl-cysteine. Proteins were digested by addition of Lys-C (Wako) for 4 h at 37°C (protein to Lys-C ration 100:1), diluted to a final urea concentration of 1.5 M with 100 mM ammoniumbicarbonate buffer and further digested by addition of trypsin (Promega) and incubation at 37°C for more than 15 h (protein to trypsin ratio: 50:1). After digestion, the samples were supplemented with TFA to a final concentration of 0.5% and HCl to a final concentration of 50 mM. Peptides were desalted on C18 reversed phase spin columns according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Microspin, Harvard Apparatus), dried under vacuum and stored at -80°C until further processing.

### Data Protocol
For label-free quantification, the generated raw files were imported into the Progenesis LC-MS software (Nonlinear Dynamics, Version 4.0) and analyzed using the default parameter settings. MS/MS-data were exported directly from Progenesis LC-MS in mgf format and searched against a decoy database the forward and reverse sequences of the predicted proteome from B. henselae (Omasits et al., submitted) using MASCOT. The search criteria were set as follows: full tryptic specificity was required (cleavage after lysine or arginine residues); 3 missed cleavages were allowed; carbamidomethylation (C) was set as fixed modification; oxidation (M) as variable modification. The mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.6 Da for fragment ions. Results from the database search were imported into Progenesis and the peptide false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% using the number of reverse hits in the dataset. The final protein lists containing the summed peak areas of all identified peptides for each protein, respectively, were exported from Progenesis LC-MS and further statically analyzed using an in-house developed R script (SafeQuant) (Glatter et al., JPR, 2012).

### Publication Abstract
The co-ordinated expression of virulence factors is a critical process for any bacterial pathogen to colonize its host. Here we investigated the mechanisms of niche adaptation of the zoonotic pathogen Bartonella henselae by combining genetic approaches and shotgun proteomics. We demonstrated that expression of the VirB/D4 type IV secretion system (T4SS) and its secreted effector proteins require the alternative sigma factor RpoH1, which levels are controlled by the stringent response (SR) components DksA and SpoT. The RpoH1-dependent activation requires an active BatR/BatS two-component system (TCS) while BatR expression is controlled by RpoH1 and the SR components. Deletion of spoT results in a strong attenuation of VirB/D4 T4SS expression whereas dksA, rpoH1 or batR deletion fully abolishes its activity. In contrast to their activating effect on the VirB/D4 T4SS, which is critical at the early stage of host infection, SpoT and DksA negatively regulate the Trw T4SS, which mediates host-specific erythrocyte infection at a later stage of the colonization process. Our findings support a model where the SR signalling and the physiological pH-induced BatR/BatS TCS conjointly control the spatiotemporal expression of B.&#x2009;henselae adaptation factors during host infection.

### Keywords
Label-free quantification, B. henselae

### Affiliations
Proteomics Core Facility
Proteomics Core Facility, Biozentrum, University of Basel, Klingelbergstrasse 50/70, CH-4056 Basel / Switzerland

### Submitter
Alexander Schmidt

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Schmidt
Proteomics Core Facility, Biozentrum, University of Basel, Klingelbergstrasse 50/70, CH-4056 Basel / Switzerland


