### Accession
PXD028683

### Title
Class I HDAC overexpression promotes temozolomide resistance in glioma cells by regulating RAD18 expression

### Description
Overexpression of histone deacetylases (HDACs) in cancer commonly causes resistance to genotoxic based therapies. Here we report on the novel mechanism whereby overexpressed class I HDACs increase the resistance of glioblastoma cells to the SN1 methylating agent temozolomide (TMZ). The chemotherapeutic TMZ triggers the activation of the DNA damage response (DDR) in resistant glioma cells, leading to DNA lesion bypass and cellular survival. Mass spectrometry analysis revealed that the catalytic activity of class I HDACs stimulates the expression of the E3 ubiquitin ligase RAD18. Furthermore, the data show that RAD18 is part of the O6-methylguanine-induced DDR as TMZ induces the formation of RAD18 foci at sites of DNA damage. Downregulation of RAD18 by HDAC inhibition prevents glioma cells from activating the DDR upon TMZ exposure. Lastly, RAD18 or O6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase (MGMT) overexpression abolishes the sensitization effect of HDAC inhibition on TMZ-exposed glioma cells. Our study describes the mechanism whereby class I HDAC overexpression in glioma cells causes resistance to TMZ treatment. HDACs accomplish this by promoting the bypass of O6-methylguanine DNA lesions via enhancing RAD18 expression. It also provides a treatment option with HDAC inhibition to undermine this mechanism.

### Sample Protocol
Mass spectrometry was performed by separating peptides by nanoflow liquid chromatography on an EASY-nLC 1000 system (Thermo) coupled to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo).

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was done using MaxQuant with the integrated Andromeda search engine.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
IMB, Ackermannweg 4, 55128 Mainz
Quantitative Proteomics
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB)

### Submitter
F Butter

### Lab Head
Dr Falk Butter
IMB, Ackermannweg 4, 55128 Mainz


