### Accession
PXD037983

### Title
Regioselective Protein Oxidative Cleavage Enabled by an Enzyme-like Recognition of an Inorganic Metal Oxo Cluster Ligand

### Description
Metal-catalyzed oxidation reactions (MCO) is one of the most applicable methods to induce protein oxidative modifications (e.g., protein oxidation, protein oxidative cleavage and crosslinking), which are essential techniques for many applications in biotechnology and redox proteomics. However, a suitable ligand is needed to assure high stability and enhance the metal catalytic efficiency in order to induce these oxidative modifications in a selective manner. Herein, we report the influence of the polyoxometalates (POMs) as inorganic ligands on the catalytic efficiency of Cu ions to induce oxidative cleavage of a protein. In the presence of ascorbic acid as (Asc), the Cu-substituted POM (Cu-POM), α2-K8P2W17O61(Cu2+.OH2), (CuWD), cleaved hen egg white lysozyme (HEWL), a protein consisting of 129 amino acids, producing only four peptide fragments. Analyzing the intact protein, in absence and presence of CuWD/Asc, and the peptide four peptide fragments via nLC-MS/MS revealed that CuWD/Asc induced oxidative modifications and cleavage at and/or near CuWD/HEWL binding sites

### Sample Protocol
After SDS-PAGE and Coomassie Brilliant Blue staining and scanning (figure), gel bands were excised and in-gel digested with trypsin using the method described by Shevchenko et al. (Shevchenko et al., 2006). The proteins were digested with proteomics-grade porcine trypsin at a ratio of 1:30. Peptides from in-gel digestions, were chromatographically separated using an UltiMate™ 3000 RSLC nano liquid chromatographic system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) with 2-column set up: a trap column C18, 50mm and analytical column PepMap (C18, 15 cm × 75 μm, 3 μm particles, and 100 Å pore size). The mobile phases were (A) water (MS-grade) with 0.1% formic acid and (B) acetonitrile (MS-grade) with 0.1% formic acid. The gradient program was as follows: 0–0.5 min 95% A, 0.5–10 min 95-66% A, 10–15 min -66-0% A, 15–20 min 0% A, 20–23 min 5% A, with flow rate of 0.25 μL/min. This nLC system was coupled with Orbitrap Exploris 240 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) high resolution mass spectrometer equipped with heated electrospray ionization source. Spray was generated with an integrated column emitter, with tip voltage set at 2.2 kV, capillary voltage 6 V and capillary temperature of 275 °C. A high-resolution full Fourier-Transform Mass Spectrometry (FTMS) profile spectrum and MS/MS spectra of top 50 ions (scan range 200–3000 m/z, resolving power 60 000, 1 microscan) was acquired using Xcalibur (4.4) software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with the precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm.

### Data Protocol
Identification of protein and PTMs was performed using the PEAKS Studio X Pro software program (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, ON, Canada). Signature MS/MS spectra were searched using PEAKS DB and PEAKS PTM algorithms against a database consisting of a UniProtKB (tremble and reviewed) subfamily Gallus Gallus (taxon identifier 9031, 30 501, downloaded on August 17, 2021 from http://www.uniprot.org/) and cRAP (the common Repository of Adventitious Proteins) database (downloaded on August 17, 2021 from http://www.thegpm.org/crap/). Oxidation (Met) and deamidation (Gln, Asn) were considered as variables, with carbamidomethylation (Cys) set as fixed in the PEAKS DB algorithm. In the PEAKS PTM algorithm, an PTM search was undertaken using a list of 313 PTM items. Up to two missed trypsin cleavages with non-specific cleavages at both ends of a peptide were allowed. Mass tolerances were set to ±10 ppm for parent ions and ± 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Protein filters were as follows: protein −10 lgP ≥ 20, proteins unique peptides ≥ 1, and “A” Score for confident PTMs identification of at least 50. Peptide filters were as follows: false discovery rate for peptide-spectrum matches < 0.5%; therefore, the resulting false discovery rate of the peptide sequence was lower than 1%. When identifying peptides with the PEAKS Studio X pro software package, all trypsin-derived peptides were taken into account, together with peptides generated by hydrolysis catalyzed by  an enzyme of unknown specificity, to obtain all semi-tryptic peptides.All semi-tryptic  peptides were extracted and overlapped with the peptides found in the control in order to find peptides generated only by the action of CuWD/Asc.

### Publication Abstract
Oxidative modifications of proteins are key to many applications in biotechnology. Metal-catalyzed oxidation reactions efficiently oxidize proteins but with low selectivity, and are highly dependent on the protein surface residues to direct the reaction. Herein, we demonstrate that discrete inorganic ligands such as polyoxometalates enable an efficient and selective protein oxidative&#xa0;cleavage. In the presence of ascorbate (1&#x2009;mM), the Cu-substituted polyoxometalate K<sub>8</sub>[Cu<sup>2+</sup>(H<sub>2</sub>O)(&#x3b1;<sub>2</sub>-P<sub>2</sub>W<sub>17</sub>O<sub>61</sub>)], (Cu<sup>II</sup>WD, 0.05&#x2009;mM) selectively cleave hen egg white lysozyme under physiological conditions (pH =7.5, 37&#x2009;&#xb0;C) producing only four bands in the gel electropherogram (12.7, 11, 10, and 5&#x2009;kDa). Liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry analysis reveals a regioselective cleavage in the vicinity of crystallographic Cu<sup>II</sup>WD/lysozyme interaction sites. Mechanistically, polyoxometalate is critical to position the Cu at the protein surface and limit the generation of oxidative species to the proximity of binding sites. Ultimately, this study outlines the potential of discrete, designable metal oxo clusters as catalysts for the selective modification of proteins through radical mechanisms under non-denaturing conditions.

### Keywords
Hen egg white lysosime, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
University of Belgade - Faculty of Chemistry
PhD Professor of Biochemistry & Corresponding member ofSerbian Academy of Sciences and Arts University of Belgrade-Faculty of Chemistry, Center of Excellence for Molecular Food Sciences and Department of Biochemistry, Studentski trg 12-16, 11 000 Belgrade, Serbia. Professor of Food Chemistry Department of Environmental Technology, Food Technology and Molecular Biotechnology, Ghent University Global Campus, Yeonsu-Gu, 21985 Incheon, Republic of Korea

### Submitter
Tamara Vasovic

### Lab Head
Dr Tanja Ćirković Veličković
PhD Professor of Biochemistry & Corresponding member ofSerbian Academy of Sciences and Arts University of Belgrade-Faculty of Chemistry, Center of Excellence for Molecular Food Sciences and Department of Biochemistry, Studentski trg 12-16, 11 000 Belgrade, Serbia. Professor of Food Chemistry Department of Environmental Technology, Food Technology and Molecular Biotechnology, Ghent University Global Campus, Yeonsu-Gu, 21985 Incheon, Republic of Korea


