### Accession
PXD016469

### Title
Protein ADP-ribosylation, phosphorylation, and interactome dynamics in macrophage activation.

### Description
The innate immune response relies on efficient, robust and fast protein signaling networks to relay information related to pathogen or viral detection. This communication is mediated primarily through protein-protein interactions and post-translational modifications (PTMs), events which are best characterized by mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics. This in-depth study uses MS to identify changes in protein signaling networks of Lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-stimulated human and mouse macrophages, at the level of single PTMs (via phosphorylation and ADP-ribosylation site ID) and protein complexes (via size exclusion chromatography and immunoprecipitation). The result is a curated meta-database of 6,475 proteins including 2,311 ADP-ribosylated proteins and 2,284 phosphoproteins present in LPS-stimulated macrophages. Follow up studies characterized the ASK protein complex – which appeared to dissociate upon LPS stimulation – and a complex which formed upon LPS stimulation and contained the poly(ADP-ribosyl) transferase PARP9 protein.

### Sample Protocol
DB1: Raw264.7, THP-1, primary mouse bone marrow derived macrophages (BMDM), or primary human monocyte derived macrophages (hMDM) were stimulated with LPS for 0, 5, 15, 30, or 60 minutes and then lysed in 8 M urea with appropriate inhibitors. Lysate was cleared, quantified, and digested by trypsin and snake venom phosphodiesterase (SVP). Phospho- and pR- peptides were enriched by IMAC. DB2: hMDM cells were stimulated with LPS for 0, 5, or 30 minutes and then lysed in 8 M urea with inhibitors. Lysate was cleared, quantified, and digested with trypsin and SVP. Peptides were dimethyl labeled and enriched by IMAC. DB3: THP1 cells were stimulated with LPS for 0 or 30 minutes and lysed in a native lysis buffer, cleared, quantified, and loaded onto an SEC column. Fractions were digested with trypsin and peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS. DB4: U937 cells were treated with PJ34 and/or LPS (0, 5’, or 30’) before lysis in 8 native lysis buffer and resolution by SEC. A high molecular weight and a low molecular weight sample fraction was digested by trypsin and SVP and phospho- and pR- peptides were enriched by IMAC.  ASK2 & PARP9 IPs: U937 cells expressing recombinant ASK2-HA-V5 were treated with vehicle, PJ34, and/or LPS (30’) and lysed in a mass spec compatible RIPA buffer and quantified. anti-V5 or anti-PARP9 antibody was used to enrich the bait protein, and tryptic in-solution digestion was performed. Peptides were analyzed directly, or subjected to SVP digestion before IMAC enrichment to identify phospho- and pR-peptides. All samples were analyzed on orbitraps, either the Velos Pro (with HCD and CID fragmentation) or the Q-Exactive HF (with HCD fragmentation), following C18 separation on 15-30cm long, in-house packed columns.

### Data Protocol
All samples were analyzed using the MaxQuant platform, with default settings and PTM searches (phosphorylation or phosphoribosylation) as appropriate.

### Publication Abstract
We have used mass spectrometry (MS) to characterize protein signaling in lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-stimulated macrophages from human blood, human THP1 cells, mouse bone marrow, and mouse Raw264.7 cells. Protein ADP-ribosylation was truncated down to phosphoribose, allowing for enrichment and identification of the resulting phosphoribosylated peptides alongside phosphopeptides. Size exclusion chromatography-MS (SEC-MS) was used to separate proteoforms by size; protein complexes were then identified by weighted correlation network analysis (WGCNA) based on their correlated movement into or out of SEC fractions following stimulation, presenting an analysis method for SEC-MS that does not rely on established databases. We highlight two modules of interest: one linked to the apoptosis signal-regulating kinase (ASK) signalosome and the other containing poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase 9 (PARP9). Finally, PARP inhibition was used to perturb the characterized systems, demonstrating the importance of ADP-ribosylation for the global interactome. All post-translational modification (PTM) and interactome data have been aggregated into a meta-database of 6729 proteins, with ADP-ribosylation characterized on 2905 proteins and phosphorylation characterized on 2669 proteins. This database-titled MAPCD, for <u>M</u>acrophage <u>A</u>DP-ribosylation, <u>P</u>hosphorylation, and <u>C</u>omplex <u>D</u>ynamics-serves as an invaluable resource for studying crosstalk between the ADP-ribosylome, phosphoproteome, and interactome.

### Keywords
Adp-ribosylation, Sec, Size exclusion chromatography, Phosphorylation, Imac, Interactome, Ask2, Parp, Lps, Macrophage, Parp9

### Affiliations
Functional Cellular Networks Section Laboratory of Immune System Biology National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases National Institutes of Health
National Institutes of Health

### Submitter
Casey Daniels

### Lab Head
Dr Aleksandra Nita-Lazar
Functional Cellular Networks Section Laboratory of Immune System Biology National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases National Institutes of Health


