### Accession
PXD006802

### Title
OxSWATH applied to the redox characterization of secretomes under oxidative stress conditions

### Description
Most of the redox proteomics strategies are focused on the identification and relative quantification of cysteine oxidation changes without considering the variation in the total levels of the proteins. However, the regulation of protein synthesis and protein degradation are also associated with many of the regulatory mechanisms of the cells, being therefore important to consider the changes in total protein levels in the Post Translational Modifications (PTMs) focused analyses, such as cysteine redox characterization. This aspect was only address in the cysTMTRAQ method, which combines two types of isobaric tags in the same experiment leading to a considerable increase in the costs of the analysis. Therefore, a novel integrative approach combining the SWATH-MS method with differential alkylation using non-isotopically labeled alkylating reagents (oxSWATH) is presented, thus integrating the information regarding relative cysteine oxidation with the comparative analysis of the total protein levels in a cost effective highthrouput approach.  The proposed method was tested using a redox regulated protein, and further applied to a comparative analysis of secretomes obtained under control or oxidative stress conditions to strengthen the importance of considering the changes in protein total levels. OxSWATH allowed to determine the relative proportion of reduced and reversible oxidized oxoforms of the proteins, and by considering total protein levels, to determine the total levels of each fraction, which are then used for comparative analysis. This approach can be an important tool in redox centered approaches, being able to not only analyze the overall reduce/reversible oxidized state of proteins but able to be further applied in the characterization of the different oxoforms of the individual cysteines. Moreover, since samples are acquired in SWATH-MS mode, besides the redox centered analysis, a generic differential protein expression analysis can be also performed, allowing a truly comprehensive evaluation of proteomics changes upon oxidative stimulus.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa cells were seeded at 12⨯103 cell/cm2 in 148 cm2 plates in a total of 4 plates per replicate. After 48 hours in culture (37 ᵒC with 5 % of CO2/95 % air and 95% humidity) the culture medium (DMEM medium with 10 % FBS) was discarded and cells were washed twice with warm PBS to remove the remaining FBS. Then, the culture medium was changed to DMEM without FBS (control condition) or to a solution of 1 mM of H2O2 in DMEM without FBS (stress condition) for 40 min, after which the medium was changed again to DMEM without FBS. The condition media were collected 24 h after the stimulation. The collected media were centrifuged at 290 xg, for 5 min at 4°C to remove cell debris. A recombinant protein (MBP-GFP) was added to the media after collection, to be used as internal standard in the quantitative analysis. Each condition was performed in a total of four replicates. The conditioned medium of each sample was split into three parts, one of them to be immediately subjected to the alkylation step using iodoacetamide (to block the reduced cysteines– R1) while the other two parts were subjected to reduction with DTT prior to the alkylation step (R2 and R3). All the reactions, except the alkylation with iodoacetamide in R1, were performed after the concentration of the media to 600 µL using the cut-off filters of 5 kDa (Vivaspin20, Sartorius). Prior to media concentration, acetonitrile was added to all samples to a final concentration of 20 % (v/v) to promote protein denaturation, and iodoacetamide was added to the R1 part at a final concentration of 66 mM. After the concentration of the medium, cysteines were reduced by the addition of DTT to a final concentration of 11 mM and alkylated with 66 mM of IAM (R2), 6 % (v/v) of Acrylamide in R3 and 12 % (v/v) of acrylamide in R1. All the reactions were performed in an ultrasonic bath (USC 1200 THD & THD/HF) at maximum power for 45 min. After the differential alkylation, the concentrated conditioned media (also known as secretomes) were precipitated using Trichloroacetic acid (TCA) – Acetone. Pellets were re-suspended in 2× Laemmli buffer, aided by ultrasonication and denaturation at 95°C for 5min.  The secretomes were subjected to in gel digestion using the short GeLC approach. Seventy microliters of each sample were used for SWATH-MS analysis, and 20 µL of each replicate were combined to create representative pools of each group of samples to be used for protein identification. A total of 6 pools were built and subjected to the short-GeLC approach. The peptides of each digested pooled sample were separated by high pH Reverse Phase Chromatography as presented in Silva et al. and the 28 collected fractions throughout the chromatographic run were joined into 6 samples per pool. Samples were analyzed on an AB Sciex® 5600 TripleTOF in two modes: information-dependent acquisition (IDA) for protein identification and library generation, and SWATH acquisition for quantitative analysis. Peptide separation was performed using liquid chromatography (nanoLC Ultra 2D, Eksigent®) on a MicroLC ChromXPTM C18CL reverse phase column (300 μm × 15 cm, 3 μm, 120 Å, Eksigent®) at 5 µL/min with a multistep gradient: 0-2 min linear gradient from 5 to 10 %, 2-45 min linear gradient from 10 % to 30 %, and 45-46 min to 35 % of acetonitrile in 0.1 % FA. Peptides were eluted into the mass spectrometer using an electrospray ionization source (DuoSpray™ Source, AB Sciex®) with a 50 μm internal diameter (ID) stainless steel emitter (AB Sciex®). IDA experiments were performed for each fraction of the representative pooled samples. The mass spectrometer was set to scanning full spectra (350-1250 m/z) for 250ms, followed by up to 100 MS/MS scans (100–1500 m/z from a dynamic accumulation time – minimum 30 ms for precursor above the intensity threshold of 1000 – in order to maintain a cycle time of 3.3 s). Candidate ions with a charge state between +2 and +5 and counts above a minimum threshold of 10 counts per second were isolated for fragmentation and one MS/MS spectra was collected before adding those ions to the exclusion list for 25 seconds (mass spectrometer operated by Analyst® TF 1.7, AB Sciex®). Rolling collision was used with a collision energy spread of 5. The SWATH-MS setup was designed specifically for the samples to be analyzed (Supplementary Tables S2). A set of 60 windows of variable width (containing 1 m/z for the window overlap) was constructed covering the precursor mass range of 350-1250 m/z. A 200 ms survey scan (350-1250 m/z) was acquired at the beginning of each cycle for instrument calibration and SWATH MS/MS spectra were collected from 100–1500 m/z for 50 ms resulting in a cycle time of 3.25 s, which is compatible with the acquisition of at least 8 points per chromatographic peak. The collision energy for each window was determined according to the calculation for a charge +2 ion centered upon the window with a collision energy spread of 15.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was obtained using ProteinPilotTM software (v5.0, AB Sciex®) by searching against a database composed by the Homo sapiens database from SwissProt (released at February 2015) and the sequences of the recombinant protein (MALE-GFP) used as internal standard (IS). The searches were performed with the following parameters: trypsin digestion; and iodoacetamide or acrylamide as cysteine alkylating reagent, for R2 and R3 samples, respectively; and a special focus option for gel based approaches. The files acquired from control and stress conditions were combined into a single search per reaction of alkylation. An independent FDR analysis, using the target-decoy approach provided by ProteinPilotTM, was used to assess the quality of the identifications. Positive identifications were considered when identified proteins and peptides reached a 5 % local FDR. A specific library of precursor masses and fragment ions was obtained from each identification file using the SWATHTM processing plug-in for PeakViewTM (v2.0.01, AB Sciex®). The libraries were exported as text files to be manually adapted to the redoxomics analysis. For each library, the peptides containing alkylated cysteines were isolated and further combined with the peptides from the internal standard, this step generates cysteine specific libraries. In addition, another library is created using only peptides without cysteines, to be used to determine the total levels of the proteins.  Up to 15 peptides were chosen per protein for the determination of the protein total levels, and all the peptides containing cysteines were used in the case of the cysteine specific libraries. For each peptides, up to 5 target fragment ions (corresponding to a peak group) were automatically selected and scored. Peak group confidence threshold was determined based on a FDR analysis using the target-decoy approach and the peptide that met the 1% FDR threshold in all the replicates (in the case of IS), or at least three replicates were retained for posterior analysis. The peak areas of the target fragment ions of those peptides were extracted across the experiment using a 4 min XIC window. The retention time was adjusted using the IS peptides.  Total protein levels were estimated by summing all the transitions from all the peptides without cysteine, and for each protein the levels of its cysteine alkylated peptides were determined by summing all the transitions of that group of peptides. Peptides alkylated with iodoacetamide and acrylamide were analyzed in separate.  Differential secretome analysis was performed using the results from the total levels of the proteins. Protein total levels were normalized for the values of the internal standard, and the normalized values of the three reactions were combined into a single value per replicate. The proteins altered between the two conditions were identified by an ANOVA test performed in InfernoRDN (version 1.1.5581.33355) using the log10 transformed values, and statistical significant differences were considered for p-values < 0.05. Data normality was accessed by the analysis of Q–Q plots obtained in InfernoRDN. The iodoacetamide alkylated peptides are used to determine the reduced fraction of a give protein, and the acrylamide alkylated peptides  are used to determine the reversible oxidized levels of the proteins. The levels of the cysteine alkylated peptides are firstly normalized to the total levels of the correspondent proteins within the same reaction of alkylation, i.e., the values calculated from the R1 are compared with the protein total levels in R1. The normalized values are used to determine the relative proportion of the reduced fraction by calculating the ratio between the IAM-alkylated peptides in R1 and the IAM-alkylated peptides in R2 (correspondent to the total amount of free available cysteines). To determine the levels of the reversible oxidized fraction, a similar ratio is performed but using the Acry-alkylated peptides from R1 and the Acry-alkylated peptides from R3. The combination of these two values should be closer to 1, therefore values smaller than one may be an indication of irreversible oxidations. To determine the total levels (in arbitrary units) of each fraction, the relative proportions obtained in each replicate are multiplied by the correspondent protein total levels in R1 reaction.  Comparative redoxomics analysis of the secretome was performed using the results from the reduced and reversible oxidized fractions, both the relative and the total proportions. In the case of the total levels, data was further normalized using the internal standard to accommodate potential sample processing errors. The proteins altered between the two experimental conditions (control vs stress) were identified as indicated above for the differential proteome analysis of the secretome. The analysis was repeated for each type of results related to the oxidative state of the secreted proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Most of the redox proteomics strategies are focused on the identification and relative quantification of cysteine oxidation without considering the variation in the total levels of the proteins. However, protein synthesis and protein degradation also belong to the regulatory mechanisms of the cells, being therefore important to consider the changes in total protein levels in PTMs-focused analyses, such as cysteine redox characterization. Therefore, a novel integrative approach combining the SWATH-MS method with differential alkylation using a combination of commonly available alkylating reagents (oxSWATH) is presented, by which it is possible to integrate the information regarding relative cysteine oxidation with the analysis of the total protein levels in a cost-effective high-throughput approach. The proposed method was tested using a redox-regulated protein and further applied to a comparative analysis of secretomes obtained from cells cultured under control or oxidative stress conditions to strengthen the importance of considering the overall proteome changes. Using the OxSWATH method it was possible to determine both the relative proportion of reduced and reversible oxidized oxoforms, as well as the total levels of each oxoform by taking into consideration the total levels of the protein. Therefore, using OxSWATH the comparative analyses can be performed at two different levels by considering the relative proportion or the total levels at both peptide and protein level. Moreover, since samples are acquired in SWATH-MS mode, besides the redox centered analysis, a generic differential protein expression analysis can also be performed, allowing a truly comprehensive evaluation of proteomics changes upon the oxidative stimulus. Data are available via ProteomeXchange and SWATHAtlas with the identifiers PXD006802, PXD006802, and PASS01210.

### Keywords
Redoxomics; cysteine oxidation; swath-ms; differential alkylation; secretome; dj-1

### Affiliations
​Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology – University of Coimbra
Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology – University of Coimbra

### Submitter
Sandra Anjo

### Lab Head
Dr Bruno Manadas
Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology – University of Coimbra


