### Accession
PXD018987

### Title
Arabidopsis mTERF9 protein promotes chloroplast ribosomal assembly and translation by establishing ribonucleoprotein interactions in vivo

### Description
The mitochondrial transcription termination factor proteins are nuclear-encoded nucleic acid binders defined by degenerate tandem helical-repeats of ~30 amino acids. They are found in metazoans and plants where they localize in organelles. In higher plants, the mTERF family comprises ~30 members and several of these have been linked to plant development and response to abiotic stress. However, knowledge of the molecular basis underlying these physiological effects is scare. We show that the Arabidopsis mTERF9 protein, promotes the accumulation of the 16S rRNA and the formation of the 23S rRNA first hidden break in chloroplasts, and co-immunoprecipitates with the 16S rRNA. Furthermore, mTERF9 is found in large complexes containing ribosomes and polysomes in chloroplasts. The analysis of the in vivo mTERF9 protein interactome identified many ribosomal proteins whose assembly into 70S ribosomes is compromised in the null mterf9 mutant. mTERF9 additionally interacts with putative ribosome biogenesis factors and CPN60 chaperonins. Yeast protein interaction assays revealed that mTERF9 has the capacity to directly interact with these proteins. Our data demonstrate that mTERF9 integrates protein-protein and protein-RNA interactions to promote chloroplast ribosomal assembly and translation. Besides extending our knowledge of mTERF molecular functions in plants, these findings provide important insight into the chloroplast ribosome biogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extracts were prepared as described in a previous study (Méteignier et al., 2020). Briefly, each sample was precipitated overnight with 5 volumes of cold 0.1 M ammonium acetate in 100% methanol. After washing twice the protein pellets with cold 0.1 M ammonium acetate in 80% methanol, proteins were further resuspended in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Proteins were further reduced (5mM dithiothreitol, 10 min, 95°C) and alkylated (10mM iodoacetamide, 30 min, RT, in the dark). After a quenching step (5 mM dithiothreitol), proteins were digested overnight with 200ng of sequencing-grade porcine trypsin (Promega, Fitchburg, MA, USA).  The resulting vacuum-dried peptides were resuspended in water containing 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (solvent A). The peptide mixtures were analyzed using an Easy-nanoLC-1000 system coupled to a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) operating in positive mode with a nanoelectrospray source. 5µL of each sample were loaded on a C-18 precolumn (75 μm ID × 20 mm nanoViper, 3µm Acclaim PepMap; Thermo-Fisher Scientific) at 800 bars in solvent A. After desalting and concentration, the pre-column was switched online with the analytical C18 analytical column (75 μm ID × 25 cm nanoViper, 3µm Acclaim PepMap; Thermo-Fisher Scientific) equilibrated in solvent A: solvent B (95:5; v/v). Peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 300 nL/min using a gradient from 5% B to 20% B in 120 min, from 20% B to 32% B in 15min, from 32% B to 95% B in 1min and 95% B to 95% B during 24min. The Q-Exactive Plus was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode (DDA) with Xcalibur software (Thermo-Fisher Scientific). Survey MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 70K at 200 m/z (mass range 350-1250), with a maximum injection time at 100ms and an automatic gain control (AGC) set at 3e6. Up to 10 of the most intense multiply charged ions (≥2) were selected for HCD fragmentation with a normalized collision energy set at 27, at 17.5K resolution, with a maximum injection time at 100ms and AGC set at 1e3. A dynamic exclusion time of 10 s was applied during the peak selection process. Raw files were finally transformed into mgf files using Proteome Discoverer software (v2.0, Thermo-Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
MS datasets generated by the mass spectrometer were searched against the Arabidopsis thaliana TAIR database with a decoy strategy (release TAIRv10, 27282 forward protein sequences). We used the Mascot algorithm (version 2.5.1, Matrix Science) to perform the database search with a decoy strategy. Mascot search parameters were as follows: carbamidomethylation of cysteine, N-terminal protein acetylation, oxidation of methionine and phosphorylation of serine / threonine / tyrosine were set as variable modifications; tryptic specificity with proline restriction and up to three missed cleavages was used. The mass tolerances in MS and MS/MS were set to 10ppm and 0.02Da respectively, and the instrument configuration was specified as “ESI-Trap”. The resulting .dat Mascot files were then imported into Proline v1.4 package (http://proline.profiproteomics.fr/) for further post-processing. Proteins were validated on Mascot pretty rank equal to 1, minimal Mascot score of 25, 1% FDR on both peptide spectrum matches (PSM) and protein sets (based on score). The total number of MS/MS fragmentation spectra was used to relatively quantify each protein (Spectral Count relative quantification). Proline was further used to align the Spectral Count values across all samples using the “Compare with SC” tool.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mterf, Ribosome, Rna, Chloroplast

### Affiliations
Institut de Biologie Moléculaire des Plantes, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS), Université de Strasbourg, 12 rue du Général Zimmer, 67084 Strasbourg, France.
CNRS, IBMC, FRC1589

### Submitter
Lauriane Kuhn

### Lab Head
Dr Kamel Hammani
Institut de Biologie Moléculaire des Plantes, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS), Université de Strasbourg, 12 rue du Général Zimmer, 67084 Strasbourg, France.


