### Accession
PXD001934

### Title
Cdc42 controls DC-maturation -  Cdc42-dependent actin dynamics controls maturation and secretory activity of dendritic cells

### Description
Cell division cycle 42 (Cdc42) is a member of the Rho GTPase family and has pivotal functions in actin organization, cell migration and proliferation. Cdc42 has been shown to regulate antigen (Ag)-uptake in immature dendritic cells (DC) and controls their migration from tissues to lymph nodes. Previous reports demonstrated that Cdc42 is inactivated upon DC-maturation to avoid continued Ag-acquisition. To further study the molecular mechanisms of DC-control by Cdc42, we used bone marrow-derived DCs from Cdc42-deficient mice. We show that Cdc42-deficient DCs are phenotypically mature without additional maturation stimuli, as they upregulate CD86 from intracellular storages to the cell surface. They also accumulate invariant chain (Ii)-MHC class II complexes at the cell surface, which cannot efficiently present peptide Ag for priming of Ag-specific CD4 T cells. Lack of Cdc42 in immature DCs does not allow MHC class II maturation, as lysosomal Cathepsins are lost into the supernatant and Ii-MHC class II complexes cannot mature. Therefore Cdc42-deficient DCs are "pseudomature" and lose most functional hallmarks of antigen-presenting cells. Our results propose that Cdc42 keeps DCs in an immature state, while downregulation of Cdc42-activity during maturation facilitates generation of CD86+MHCII+ mature DCs.

### Sample Protocol
Quantitative proteomics was performed for two biological replicates. In brief, approximately 20x106 cells were lysed. Lysates were centrifuged at 10,000xg to remove insoluble cellular debris. Upon addition of five volumes of 8 M urea, one fifth of the cell lysate was subjected to filter-aided sample preparation with LysC and trypsin (Promega, Germany) and fractionated into 5 fractions (pH 3, 5, 6, 8, 11) using StageTip-based SAX fractionation. Fractions were measured on a LC-MS/MS set-up coupling a Proxeon Easy nLCII (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with in-house packed 15 cm columns (75 µm ID; ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 2.4 µm, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany) to an LTQ Velos Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, USA). Peptides were separated using a 192 min binary gradient of acetonitrile in water and 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. A TOP14 method was used for data dependent peptide fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis including label-free quantification was performed using the MaxQuant software suite (version 1.5.2.8). Protein identification was performed by the integrated Andromeda algorithm searching a reviewed murine database of UniProt including also isoforms (download: 01.09.2015, 24,732 entries) using standard settings of MaxQuant. The false discovery rate for peptide spectrum matches and proteins was adjusted to 1% by using a target and decoy strategy (reverse concatenated database). Two unique peptides per protein were required for label-free quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Cell division cycle 42 (Cdc42) is a member of the Rho guanosine triphosphatase family and has pivotal functions in actin organization, cell migration, and proliferation. To further study the molecular mechanisms of dendritic cell (DC) regulation by Cdc42, we used Cdc42-deficient DCs. Cdc42 deficiency renders DCs phenotypically mature as they up-regulate the co-stimulatory molecule CD86 from intracellular storages to the cell surface. Cdc42 knockout DCs also accumulate high amounts of invariant chain-major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II complexes at the cell surface, which cannot efficiently present peptide antigens (Ag's) for priming of Ag-specific CD4 T cells. Proteome analyses showed a significant reduction in lysosomal MHC class II-processing proteins, such as cathepsins, which are lost from DCs by enhanced secretion. As these effects on DCs can be mimicked by chemical actin disruption, our results propose that Cdc42 control of actin dynamics keeps DCs in an immature state, and cessation of Cdc42 activity during DC maturation facilitates secretion as well as rapid up-regulation of intracellular molecules to the cell surface.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Dendritic cells, Label-free, Cdc42

### Affiliations
Institute for Immunology Ludwig-Maximilians-University D-80336 Munich Germany
DZNE Munich Neuroproteomics

### Submitter
Stephan Mueller

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Brocker
Institute for Immunology Ludwig-Maximilians-University D-80336 Munich Germany


