### Accession
PXD018212

### Title
Structure-function Relationships in Human Tendons: Interfascicular Matrix Specialisation in the Achilles Tendon C4PR_LIV

### Description
Tendon is a highly aligned connective tissue, in which the macro-structure consists of collagen-rich fascicles surrounded by interfascicular matrix (IFM). In a series of recent studies in equine tissue, we have demonstrated specialisation of tendon composition, structure and mechanics to achieve the tendon’s functional requirements, specifically reporting extensive specialisation of the IFM region in the energy storing superficial digital flexor tendon. We have also demonstrated loss of functional specialisms with ageing, leading to a hypothesised new paradigm for tendinopathy, focused on the importance of the IFM. However, to date, there have been no studies focused on structure-function specialisation or the IFM in functionally distinct human tendons. Here, we compare the positional anterior tibialis tendon and energy storing Achilles tendon, performing a detailed analysis of the composition and mechanical properties of both fascicle and IFM regions, to test the hypothesis that the IFM in the energy storing Achilles tendon has specialised composition and mechanical properties, and that these specialisations are lost with ageing. We demonstrate that the IFM is specialised in the energy storing Achilles tendon, with greater elasticity and fatigue resistance than in the positional anterior tibialis tendon. While there were few age-related alterations in mechanics, we did identify age-related alterations in the IFM proteome of the Achilles tendon specifically, which is predicted to be regulated by TGF-beta signalling and may be responsible for the trend towards decreased fatigue resistance observed in the Achilles IFM with ageing.

### Sample Protocol
Five paired achilles (AT) and anterior tibialis tendons(ATT)were processed from middle-aged and old human donors. Laser capture microdissection (LCM)was used to collect approx 1.5mm2 of IFM or fascicle from 8 micrometre longitudinal sections. The samples were subjected to in-solution tryptic digestion and analyses by high resolution LC-MSMS.

### Data Protocol
Fascicle and IFM proteins were identified in each tendon type and age group using Peaks Software version 8.5 (Bioinformatics Solutions, Canada) searching against the UniProt human reviewed database using a peptide mass tolerance of 10ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 0.01Da, fixed modification carbamidomethylation, variable modification methionine oxidation and hydroxylation/oxidation. Search results were filtered with an FDR of 1% with a minimum of 2 unique peptides per protein required for protein identification, with a confidence score of >20(-10lgP>20).Label-free quantification was performed separately for the IFM and fascicles from each tendon and age group. Protein abundances were normalised for collected laser-capture area and differentially abundant proteins between groups identified using a fold change greater than 2 and p<0.05 (Peaks adjusted p values).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Structure-function, Fascicles; interfascicularmatrix; mechanical testing; mass spectrometry; ageing

### Affiliations
University of Liverpool
Institute of Bioengineering, School of Engineering and Materials Science, Queen Mary University of London, Mile End Road, London, E1 4NS.

### Submitter
Deborah Simpson

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Hazel Screen
Institute of Bioengineering, School of Engineering and Materials Science, Queen Mary University of London, Mile End Road, London, E1 4NS.


