### Accession
PXD021034

### Title
Mitochondrial fatty acid synthesis coordinates oxidative metabolism in mammalian mitochondria

### Description
Cells harbor two systems for fatty acid synthesis, one in the cytoplasm (catalyzed by fatty acid synthase, FASN) and one in the mitochondria (mtFAS). In contrast to FASN, mtFAS is poorly characterized, especially in higher eukaryotes, with the major product(s), metabolic roles, and cellular function(s) being essentially unknown. Here we show that hypomorphic mtFAS mutant mouse skeletal myoblast cell lines display a severe loss of electron transport chain (ETC) complexes and exhibit compensatory metabolic activities including reductive carboxylation. This effect on ETC complexes appears to be independent of protein lipoylation, the best characterized function of mtFAS, as mutants lacking lipoylation have an intact ETC. Finally, mtFAS impairment blocks the differentiation of skeletal myoblasts in vitro. Together, these data suggest that ETC activity in mammals is profoundly controlled by mtFAS function, thereby connecting anabolic fatty acid synthesis with the oxidation of carbon fuels.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were processed using the SL-TMT protocol as described previously (Navarrete-Perea et al., 2018). Specifically, mitochondrial pellets were resuspended in 200 µL of lysis buffer (8M urea, 200mM EPPS pH 8.5 plus 1X cOmplete protease and phosphatase inhibitor) and syringe lysed (10 times with 21-gauge needle). Following a BCA assay to estimate protein concentration, all lysates were reduced (20 min with 5mM TCEP at room temperature), alkylated (20 min with 10mM iodoacetamide, at room temperature in the dark), and quenched (20 min with 10mM DTT, at room temperature in the dark). Proteins were precipitated by chloroform methanol precipitation, as described previously (Paulo and Gygi, 2015). Precipitated proteins were resuspended in 200mM EPPS pH 8.5 (~1mg/ml) and digested first with LysC (Wako) for 3 hours at 37°C shaking on a vortexer (speed =50%) followed by a 6 hour trypsin digestion at 37°C (sequencing grade, Pierce). Both enzymes were added in the presence of beads and at a 1:100 protease-to-peptide ratio. Following digestion, the samples were centrifuged as above and held to the magnet for 2 min. Digested peptides were simply transferred into a new tube. The beads were then washed with 50 µL of 0.2M EPPS pH8.5, which was combined with the initial elution. We added a final volume of 30% acetonitrile to the eluted peptides and labelled the 50 µg of peptide with 100 µg of TMT directly into the digestion mixture. To check mixing ratios, 2 µg of each sample were pooled, desalted, and analyzed by mass spectrometry. Using normalization factors calculated from this “label check,” samples were mixed 1:1 across all 11 channels and desalted using a 50 mg Sep-Pak solid phase extraction column. The approximately 300 µg of peptide were fractionated with basic pH reversed-phase (BPRP) HPLC, collected in a 96-well plate and combined down to 24 fractions prior to desalting and subsequent LC-MS/MS processing (Paulo, 2014; Paulo and Gygi, 2017).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric data were collected on an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer coupled to a Proxeon NanoLC-1000 UHPLC. The 100 µm capillary column was packed with 35 cm of Accucore 150 resin (2.6 μm, 150Å; ThermoFisher Scientific). The SPS-MS3 method use used to reduce ion interferences that may result in ratio compression (Gygi et al., 2019; Paulo et al., 2016). Peptides in each fraction were separated using a 150 min gradient from ~5 to 35% acetonitrile. The scan sequence began with an MS1 spectrum (Orbitrap analysis, resolution 120,000, 350−1400 Th, automatic gain control (AGC) target 5E5, maximum injection time 100 ms). The top ten precursors were then selected for MS2/MS3 analysis. MS2 analysis consisted of collision-induced dissociation (CID), quadrupole ion trap analysis, automatic gain control (AGC) 2E4, NCE (normalized collision energy) 35, q-value 0.25, maximum injection time 120 ms), and isolation window at 0.7. Following acquisition of each MS2 spectrum, we collected an MS3 spectrum in which multiple MS2 fragment ions are captured in the MS3 precursor population using isolation waveforms with multiple frequency notches. MS3 precursors were fragmented by HCD and analyzed using the Orbitrap (NCE 65, AGC 1.5E5, maximum injection time 150 ms, resolution was 50,000 at 400 Th). Spectra were converted to mzXML via MSconvert (Chambers et al., 2012). Database searching included all entries from the Mus musculus Database (UniProt; August 2017). The database was concatenated with one composed of all protein sequences for that database in the reversed order. Searches were performed using a 50-ppm precursor ion tolerance for total protein level profiling. The product ion tolerance was set to 0.9 Da. These wide mass tolerance windows were chosen to maximize sensitivity in conjunction with SEQUEST searches and linear discriminant analysis (Beausoleil et al., 2006; Huttlin et al., 2010). TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+229.163 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) was set as a variable modification. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) (Elias and Gygi, 2007, 2010). PSM filtering was performed using a linear discriminant analysis, as described previously (Huttlin et al., 2010) and then assembled further to a final protein-level FDR of 1% (Elias and Gygi, 2007). Proteins were quantified by summing reporter ion counts across all matching PSMs, also as described previously (McAlister et al., 2012). Reporter ion intensities were adjusted to correct for the isotopic impurities of the different TMT reagents according to manufacturer specifications. The signal-to-noise (S/N) measurements of peptides assigned to each protein were summed and these values were normalized so that the sum of the signal for all proteins in each channel was equivalent to account for equal protein loading. Finally, each protein abundance measurement was scaled, such that the summed signal-to-noise for that protein across all channels equals 100, thereby generating a relative abundance (RA) measurement.

### Publication Abstract
Cells harbor two systems for fatty acid synthesis, one in the cytoplasm (catalyzed by fatty acid synthase, FASN) and one in the mitochondria (mtFAS). In contrast to FASN, mtFAS is poorly characterized, especially in higher eukaryotes, with the major product(s), metabolic roles, and cellular function(s) being essentially unknown. Here we show that hypomorphic mtFAS mutant mouse skeletal myoblast cell lines display a severe loss of electron transport chain (ETC) complexes and exhibit compensatory metabolic activities including reductive carboxylation. This effect on ETC complexes appears to be independent of protein lipoylation, the best characterized function of mtFAS, as mutants lacking lipoylation have an intact ETC. Finally, mtFAS impairment blocks the differentiation of skeletal myoblasts in vitro. Together, these data suggest that ETC activity in mammals is profoundly controlled by mtFAS function, thereby connecting anabolic fatty acid synthesis with the oxidation of carbon fuels.

### Keywords
Electron transport chain, Mitochondria, Lipoylation tca cycle, Muscle, Oxphos, Metabolism, Respiration, Fatty acid synthesis, Reductive carboxylation

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School
Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA

### Submitter
Joao Paulo

### Lab Head
Dr Steven P. Gygi
Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA


