### Accession
PXD034081

### Title
Translatome proteomics of primary human FLT3-ITD+ AML cells treated with FLT3 inhibitors quizartinib, crenolanib, gilteritinib

### Description
Primary human AML cells (newly diagnosed, prior to treatment initation) was obtained from donor after consent and AML blasts were isolated by standard Ficoll centrifugation. Cells were treated ex vivo with DMSO vehicle control or 10 nM FLT3 inhibitors quizartinib, crenolanib, gilteritinib for 6 hours in SILAC medium and processed for LC/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Data were acquired in centroid mode on a QExactive HF mass spectrometer hyphenated to an Easy nLC 1200 nano HPLC system using a nanoFlex ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) applying a spray voltage of 2.3 kV. Peptides were separated on a self-made, 35 cm long, 75 µm ID fused-silica column, packed in-house with 1.9 µM C18 particles (ReproSil-Pur, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany) and heated to 50 °C using an integrated column oven (Sonation, Biberach, Germany). HPLC solvents consisted of 0.1 % formic acid in water (buffer A) and 0.1 % formic acid, 80 % acetonitrile in water (buffer B). Each peptide fraction was eluted by a non-linear gradient from 5 %–30 % B over 90 min, followed by a stepwise increase to 95 % B in 6 min, which was held for another 9 min. Full scan MS spectra (350–1400 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200, a maximum injection time of 100 ms and an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 3x106. The 20 most intense precursors per full scan with a charge state between 2 and 6 were isolated using a 1 Th window and fragmented using higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD, normalized collision energy (NCE) of 35%). MS/MS spectra were acquired with a resolution of 45,000 at m/z 200, a maximum injection time of 86 ms and an AGC target value of 1x105. Dynamic exclusion was set to 20 s to limit repeated sequencing of previously acquired precursors.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer (PD) 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Spectra were selected using default settings. Database searches were performed using SequestHT node in PD against trypsin-digested Homo sapiens SwissProt database (TaxID:9606, version 2018-11-21) with static modifications set as TMTpro (N-terminal, +304.2071), and carbamidomethyl (Cys, +57.021464). Dynamic modifications were set as methionine oxidation (Met, +15.995), acetylation (protein N-terminus, +42.0.11), methionine loss (protein N-terminus, -131.040), methionine loss with acetylation (protein N-terminus, -89.030), TMTpro (Lys, +304.2071), TMTpro+K8 (Lys, +312.221) and Arg10 (Arg, +10.008). After search, identifications were validated using a concatenated target-decoy strategy and FDR was estimated using q-values calculated by Percolator, applying 1 % and 5 % cut-offs for high and medium confidence hits. Only high-confidence hits were accepted for further analysis. Consensus workflow for reporter ion quantification was performed with default settings, except the minimal signal-to-noise ratio was set to 5. Results were exported as Excel files for further processing.

### Publication Abstract
Internal tandem duplications (ITD) in the receptor tyrosine kinase FLT3 occur in 25 % of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) patients, drive leukemia progression and confer a poor prognosis. Primary resistance to FLT3 kinase inhibitors (FLT3i) quizartinib, crenolanib and gilteritinib is a frequent clinical challenge and occurs in the absence of identifiable genetic causes. This suggests that adaptive cellular mechanisms mediate primary resistance to on-target FLT3i therapy. Here, we systematically investigated acute cellular responses to on-target therapy with multiple FLT3i in FLT3-ITD&#x2009;+&#x2009;AML using recently developed functional translatome proteomics (measuring changes in the nascent proteome) with phosphoproteomics. This pinpointed AKT-mTORC1-ULK1-dependent autophagy as a dominant resistance mechanism to on-target FLT3i therapy. FLT3i induced autophagy in a concentration- and time-dependent manner specifically in FLT3-ITD&#x2009;+&#x2009;cells in vitro and in primary human AML cells ex vivo. Pharmacological or genetic inhibition of autophagy increased the sensitivity to FLT3-targeted therapy in cell lines, patient-derived xenografts and primary AML cells ex vivo. In mice xenografted with FLT3-ITD&#x2009;+&#x2009;AML cells, co-treatment with oral FLT3 and autophagy inhibitors synergistically impaired leukemia progression and extended overall survival. Our findings identify a molecular mechanism responsible for primary FLT3i treatment resistance and demonstrate the pre-clinical efficacy of a rational combination treatment strategy targeting both FLT3 and autophagy induction.

### Keywords
Aml, Translatome, Flt3, Crenolanib, Quizartinib, Gilteritinib

### Affiliations
Institute of Biochemistry II, Faculty of Medicine, Goethe University, Frankfurt, Germany
Department of Medicine, Hematology/Oncology, University Hospital Frankfurt, Goethe University, Frankfurt, Germany & Institute of Biochemistry II, Faculty of Medicine, Goethe University, Frankfurt, Germany

### Submitter
Sebastian Koschade

### Lab Head
Dr Christian Münch
Institute of Biochemistry II, Faculty of Medicine, Goethe University, Frankfurt, Germany


