### Accession
PXD036025

### Title
Proteogenomic analysis of lung adenocarcinoma reveals tumor heterogeneity, survival determinants and therapeutically-relevant pathways

### Description
To characterize the etiology of lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD) in the United States, we performed deep proteogenomic profiling of 87 tumors integrating whole genome sequencing, transcriptome sequencing, proteomics and phosphoproteomics by mass spectrometry and reverse phase protein arrays. Somatic genome signature analysis revealed three subtypes including a structurally altered subtype enriched with former smokers, genomic inversions and deletions and TP53 alteration, a transition-high subtype enriched with never-smokers, and a transversion-high enriched with current smokers. We discovered that within-tumor correlations of RNA expression and protein expression were associated with tumor purity, grade, immune cell heterogeneity, and expression subtype. We detected and independently validated RNA and protein expression signatures predicting patient survival. A greater number of proteins than RNA transcripts had association with patient survival. Integrative analysis characterized three expression subtypes with divergent mutations, proteomic regulatory networks and therapeutic vulnerabilities. This proteogenomic characterization provides a new foundation for molecularly-informed medicine in LUAD.

### Sample Protocol
Whole lung adenocarcinoma tissue representations (cancer and stroma combined) were collected using laser microdissection from frozen thin tissue sections (8 µm) on polyethylene naphthalate membrane slides; mean tissue area collected per sample = 87 ± 4 mm2. Samples were collected into 50 µL of liquid chromatography (LC)-mass spectrometry (MS)-grade water in MicroTubes (Pressure Biosciences, Inc) and underwent pressure-assisted lysis and digestion with trypsin using pressure cycling technology on a barocycler (2320EXT Pressure BioSciences, Inc). Peptide digests were transferred to 0.5 mL microcentrifuge tubes, vacuum dried, resuspended in 100 mM TEAB, pH 8.0 and the peptide concentration of each digest was determined using the bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA assay); mean peptide yield = 0.9 ± 0.2 µg/mm2. Forty micrograms of peptide from each sample, along with a reference sample assembled by pooling equivalent amounts of peptide digests from individual patient samples, were aliquoted into a final volume of 100 µL of 100 mM TEAB and labeled with tandem-mass tag (TMT) isobaric labels (TMT11plex™ Isobaric Label Reagent Set, ThermoFisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Each TMT-11 multiplex set of samples was loaded onto a C-18 trap column in 10 mM NH4HCO3 (pH 8.0) and fractionated by bRPLC into 96 fractions through development of a linear gradient of acetonitrile (0.69% acetonitrile/min) on a 1260 Infinity II liquid chromatographer (Agilent). Concatenated fractions (36 pooled samples representing 10% of the entire peptide sample) were generated for global LC-MS/MS analysis. The remaining 90% of peptides were pooled into 12 fractions for serial phosphopeptide enrichment by metal affinity chromatography (TiO2 and Fe-IMAC). TMT fractions were analyzed by LC-MS/MS employing a nanoflow LC system (EASY-nLC 1200, Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled online with an Orbitrap Q-Exactive HFX MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific). In brief, each sample (5 µL) was loaded on a nanoflow high-performance LC system outfitted with a reversed-phase trap column (AcclaimTM PepMapTM 100 C18, 2 cm length, nanoViper Trap column, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a heated (50 °C) reversed-phase analytical column (AcclaimTM PepMapTM RSLC C18, 2 µm, 100 Å, 75 µm × 500 mm, nanoViper, Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected online with an Orbitrap mass spectrometer. Peptides were eluted by developing a linear gradient of 2% mobile phase B (95% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid) to 32% mobile phase B within 120 min at a constant flow rate of 250 nL/min. High-resolution (R=60,000 at m/z 200) broadband (m/z 400-1600) mass spectra (MS) were acquired, from which the top 12 most intense molecular ions in each MS scan were selected for high-energy collisional dissociation (HCD, normalized collision energy of 38%) acquisition in the Orbitrap at high resolution (R=50,000 at m/z 200). Monoisotopic precursor selection mode was set to “Peptide,” and MS1 peptide molecular ions selected for HCD were restricted to z = +2, +3 and +4. The radio frequency (RF) lens was set to 30%, and both MS1 and MS2 spectra were collected in profile mode. Dynamic exclusion (t=20 sec at a mass tolerance=10 ppm) was enabled to minimize redundant selection of peptide molecular ions for HCD.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identifications were generated by searching LC-MS/MS data against a publicly available, non-redundant human proteome database (Swiss-Prot, Homo sapiens [http://www.uniprot.org/, downloaded 12/01/2017]) appended with porcine trypsin using Mascot (Matrix Science) and Proteome Discoverer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) software using the following parameters: precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, fragment ion tolerance of 0.05 Da, a maximum of two tryptic miscleavages, static modification for TMT reporter ion tags (229.1629 Da) on N-termini and lysyl residues, and dynamic modifications for oxidation (15.9949 Da) on methionine residues, as well as phosphorylation (79.9663 Da) on seryl, threonyl or tyrosyl residues for phosphoproteome analyses. The resulting peptide spectral matches (PSMs) were filtered using an FDR <1.0% (q-value <0.01), as determined by Percolator node of Proteome Discoverer. Phosphoproteome search results were further analyzed by the ptmRS node within Proteome Discoverer as a additional confidence measure. TMT reporter ion intensities were extracted using Proteome Discoverer at a mass tolerance of 20 ppm, and PSMs lacking a TMT reporter ion signal in TMT channel m/z 126 (pooled study reference), PSMs lacking TMT reporter ion intensity in all TMT channels, or PSMs exhibiting an isolation interference of ≥50% were excluded from downstream analyses. Log2-transformed TMT reporter ion ratios corresponding to individual patient tissue samples were calculated for each PSM against the pooled reference standard. Log2-transformed PSM abundance distributions were normalized by calculating the mode-centered z-score transformation for each channel in the TMT-11 multiplex as follows: normalized PSM (Log2Ratio) = [PSM (Log2Ratio) – ModeCenter PSM (Log2Ratio) / σ PSM (Log2Ratio). For global protein-level abundance, the abundances of proteins identified by a unique PSM (i.e. in which a PSM maps uniquely to a single protein accession) were determined by calculating the median log2-transformed abundance ratios of all such PSMs. The abundances of PSMs mapping to multiple proteins (i.e. “multi-mapper” PSMs) were compared to mapped unique protein abundances using a mean-squared-error approach to assign them to unique proteins based on comparative abundance analyses. Multi-mapper PSMs were assigned to the corresponding unique protein accessions exhibiting the smallest difference in relative abundance levels comparatively and candidates not identified by a unique PSM were excluded from downstream analyses. Protein-level abundance was calculated from normalized, median log2-transformed TMT reporter ion ratio abundances from a minimum of two PSMs corresponding to a single protein accession. Normalized log2-transformed protein-level abundances for each TMT-11 multiplex were merged, and protein-level abundances for proteins not quantified in all patient samples, but in ≥50%, were imputed using a k-nearest neighbor (k-NN) strategy adapted from using the pamr (Prediction Analysis for Microarrays) R package. The abundances of phosphorylated (phospho)-PSMs were assembled at the level of discrete phosphosites that map to a unique protein using a tiered strategy aimed at defining high- and low-confidence phospho-PSMs. First, TMT reporter ion intensities were processed for phospho-PSMs as described above to calculate normalized, log2-transformed abundance ratios of phospho-PSMs for a given patient sample. The number and amino acid positions of phosphosites that were identified in the database search for a given phospho-PSM were compared with phosphosite positions predicted by the ptmRS algorithm. A high-confidence phospho-PSM was determined when all phosphosites identified by database search also exhibited >50% probability of being the “best” predicted phosphosite for a given phospho-PSM. A low-confidence phospho-PSM was determined when any phosphosite identified by database search was not predicted as a phosphosite or exhibited <50% probability of being predicted as the “best” phosphosite. Low-confidence phospho-PSM candidates were further prioritized using a tiered strategy in which unique phosphosite variants identified for the same phospho-PSM event were selected based on the highest ptmRS probability score that exhibited the lowest search engine rank in the TMT-11 patient sample plex with the greatest number of total PSMs. Normalized log2-transformed protein-specific phosphosite abundances were determined by calculating the median abundance of phospho-PSMs exhibiting the same phosphosite as well as methionine oxidation state. Phosphosites quantified redundantly as both low- and high-confidence versions were further filtered to prioritize only high-confidence phosphosites for downstream analyses. For phosphosites co-identified in companion global proteomic data, median log2-transformed, protein-specific phosphosite abundances were also normalized to the total protein abundance quantified in global proteome analyses.

### Publication Abstract
We present a deep proteogenomic profiling study of 87 lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD) tumors from the United States, integrating whole-genome sequencing, transcriptome sequencing, proteomics and phosphoproteomics by mass spectrometry, and reverse-phase protein arrays. We identify three subtypes from somatic genome signature analysis, including a transition-high subtype enriched with never smokers, a transversion-high subtype enriched with current smokers, and a structurally altered subtype enriched with former smokers, TP53 alterations, and genome-wide structural alterations. We show that within-tumor correlations of RNA and protein expression associate with tumor purity and immune cell profiles. We detect and independently validate expression signatures of RNA and protein that predict patient survival. Additionally, among co-measured genes, we found that protein expression is more often associated with patient survival than RNA. Finally, integrative analysis characterizes three expression subtypes with divergent mutations, proteomic regulatory networks, and therapeutic vulnerabilities. This proteogenomic characterization provides a foundation for molecularly informed medicine in LUAD.

### Keywords
Apollo, Lung adenocarcinoma

### Affiliations
Inova Health System
Women's Health Integrated Research Center, Gynecologic Cancer Center of Excellence, Gynecologic Surgery and Obstetrics, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, MD, USA

### Submitter
Thomas Conrads

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas P Conrads, PhD
Women's Health Integrated Research Center, Gynecologic Cancer Center of Excellence, Gynecologic Surgery and Obstetrics, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, MD, USA


