### Accession
PXD031125

### Title
Hypoxia reveals the new function of Foxn1 in keratinocytes antioxidant defense system

### Description
Skin exposed to environmental threats including injuries and oxidative stress developed an efficient but not fully recognized systems of repair and antioxidant protection. In this project we provide evidence that Foxn1 in keratinocytes regulates elements of electron transport chain and participates in thioredoxin system (Txn2, Txnrd3, Srxn1) induction, particularly under hypoxic environment. It is shown that Foxn1 in keratinocytes upregulate glutathione thioredoxin reductase 3 (Txnrd3) protein, and high levels of Txnrd3 mRNA were detected in injured skin of Foxn1+/+ mice. It also shown that Foxn1 strongly downregulate CCN2 protein participating in reconstruction of the epidermis after injury. As in vitro assay revealed that Foxn1 controls keratinocytes migration stimulating it under normoxia and suppressing under hypoxia. Keratinocytes overexpressing Foxn1 and exposed to hypoxia showed reduced ability to promote angiogenesis by downregulation of Vegfa. In conclusion, this study showed a new mechanism in which Foxn1, along with hypoxia, participates in the activation of antioxidant defense and controls functional properties of keratinocytes.

### Sample Protocol
Keratinocytes collection and preparation for proteomics analysis Keratinocytes transduced with Ad-Foxn1 or Ad-GFP and cocultured for 24 h with DFs under normoxia and hypoxia conditions (n = 3, total n=6 animals) were washed with cold PBS. Then lysis buffer: 2% SDS, 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.55) with protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich Co., St. Louis, MO) was added and the cells were incubated 10 min on ice. Adherent keratinocytes were scraped off from the dish with plastic cell scraper and the cell suspension was transferred into a pre-cooled microcentrifuge tube for further sonication. The cell lysates were incubated 45 min on ice and centrifuged at 10 000 x g for 15 min at 4°C. The supernatant was transferred to new tubes and the protein concentrations was measured using the standard Bradford protocol. Cell lysates were stored frozen at -80°C for further experiments.  Protein digestion  Proteins isolated from keratinocytes and conditioned medium samples were thawed and DNA was sheered by 5 min probe sonication with 30 s on/off cycles. Samples were clarified by centrifugation. Proteins from the conditioned medium samples and from cell lysate samples were taken for trypsin digestion with S-Trap micro columns (Protifi, USA). Volume of samples was adjusted to 150 µl with 2% SDS in 100 mM triethylamonium bicarbonate (TEAB), pH 7.1. Conditioned media and cell lysate samples were reduced with 1,4-dithiotreitol (DTT), in 100 mM TEAB, and incubated at 37 °C for 1 hour. Samples were alkylated with iodoacetamide (IAA) in 100 mM TEAB. Samples were incubated at room temperature for 1 hour. Reaction was quenched by addition of DTT. Aqueous phosphoric acid was added to all samples for a final concentration of 1.2%. Six times volume of 90% methanol in 100 mM TEAB, pH 7.1, was added to all samples. Samples were loaded on S-Trap micro columns and centrifuged at 4000 g until all sample had passed through the column. This was repeated once. Captured proteins were washed four times with 150 µl of 90% MeOH in 100 mM TEAB, pH 7.1. Proteins were digested in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution containing sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega, USA) respectively. Samples were incubated for 2 h at 47 °C. Peptides were eluted in three steps. Each step was followed by centrifugation at 4000 g. First 40 μl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution was added and the solution was incubated for 30 min before peptide elution. Then 40 μl of 0.2% aqueous formic acid was added to samples and finally hydrophobic peptides were eluted with 35 μl of 50% acetonitrile containing 0.2% formic acid. Recovered peptides were evaporated to dryness in a SpeedVac.   Before mass spectrometry (MS) analysis the digested peptides were re-constituted to 0.1% of formic acid. For retention time calibration, samples were spiked with iRT-peptides (Biognosys AG, Switzerland) in a ratio 1:60 for dermal fibroblast cell lysate samples and in a ratio 1:40 for all the other samples. For MS analysis 400 ng of peptides from each conditioned media sample and 500 ng peptides of each cell lysate sample were taken.  Protein analysis by LC-MS/MS method  Relative protein quantitation was determined by data independent acquisition (DIA) MS method. The LC-MS/MS analyses were performed on a nanoflow HPLC system (Easy-nLC1200, Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a nano-electrospray ionization source. Peptides were first loaded on a trapping column and subsequently separated inline on a 15 cm C18 column (75 μm x 15 cm, ReproSil- Pur 5 μm 200 A C18-AQ, Dr. Maisch HPLC GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). The mobile phase consisted of water with 0.1% formic acid (solvent A) and acetonitrile/water (80:20 (v/v)) with 0.1% formic acid (solvent B). Peptides were eluted with a linear 2-step gradient. For conditioned media samples an 80 min gradient was used. First a 60 min step from 5% to 21% of solvent B   followed by 20 min step from 21% to 36% of solvent B and a wash with 100% of solvent B at the end of the method was used. For more complex cell lysate samples 120 min gradient was used (90 min from 5% to 21% of solvent B, 30 min from 21% to 36% of solvent B, followed by wash stage with 100% of solvent B). MS data was acquired automatically by Thermo Xcalibur 4.1. software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). A DIA duty cycle contained one full scan (400–1000 m/z) and 40 DIA MS/MS scans covering the mass range of 400–1000 m/z with variable isolation widths.

### Data Protocol
Data processing was carried out by Spectronaut 14.3. software (Biognosys AG, Switzerland). A library-free directDIA analysis was performed with a FASTA file of Mus musculus, (SwissProt, 5.12.2019).  Carbamidomethyl (C) was used as fixed modification, and acetyl (protein N-term) and oxidation (M) as variable modification. The p-value was calculated as the inverse cumulative distribution function of the decoy distribution for a given discriminant score (Spectronaut Cscore). Protein and precursor identification q-value (multiple testing corrected p-value) cutoff was set to 0.01. Quantification was based on peak area and it was carried out on MS2-level. Proteins with a q-value below or equal to 0.05 and an absolute log2 ratio above 0.58 were considered as significantly differentially expressed.

### Publication Abstract
Skin exposed to environmental threats, including injuries and oxidative stress, develops an efficient but not fully recognized system of repair and antioxidant protection. Here, using mass spectrometry analysis (LC-MS/MS), followed by in vitro and in vivo experiments, we provided evidence that Foxn1 in keratinocytes regulates elements of the electron transport chain and participates in the thioredoxin system (Txn2, Txnrd3, and Srxn1) induction, particularly in a hypoxic environment. We first showed that Foxn1 in keratinocytes upregulates glutathione thioredoxin reductase 3 (Txnrd3) protein expression, and high levels of Txnrd3 mRNA were detected in injured skin of Foxn1<sup>+/+</sup> mice. We also showed that Foxn1 strongly downregulated the Ccn2 protein expression, participating in epidermal reconstruction after injury. An in vitro assay revealed that Foxn1 controls keratinocyte migration, stimulating it under normoxia and suppressing it under hypoxia. Keratinocytes overexpressing Foxn1 and exposed to hypoxia displayed a reduced ability to promote angiogenesis by downregulating Vegfa expression. In conclusion, this study showed a new mechanism in which Foxn1, along with hypoxia, participates in the activation of antioxidant defense and controls the functional properties of keratinocytes.

### Keywords
Thioredoxin system, Hypoxia, Skin, Keratinosytes, Foxn1

### Affiliations
Turku Bioscience Centre
Institute of Animal Reproduction and Food Research, Polish Academy of Sciences in Olsztyn, Poland

### Submitter
Mirva Pääkkönen

### Lab Head
Dr Barbara Gawrońska-Kozak
Institute of Animal Reproduction and Food Research, Polish Academy of Sciences in Olsztyn, Poland


