### Accession
PXD018981

### Title
Structure of the full kinetoplastids mitoribosome and insight on its large subunit maturation

### Description
Kinetoplastids are unicellular eukaryotic parasites responsible for human pathologies such as Chagas disease, sleeping sickness or Leishmaniasis1. They possess a single large mitochondrion, essential for the parasite survival2. In kinetoplastids mitochondrion, most of the molecular machineries and gene expression processes have significantly diverged and specialized, with the most extreme case being their mitochondrial ribosomes3. These large complexes are in charge of translating the few essential mRNAs encoded by mitochondrial genomes4,5. Structural studies performed in Trypanosoma brucei already highlighted the numerous peculiarities of these mitoribosomes and the maturation of their small subunit3,6. However, several important aspects mainly related to the large subunit remain elusive, such as the structure and maturation of its ribosomal RNA3. Here, we present a cryo-electron microscopy study of the protozoans Leishmania tarentolae and Trypanosoma cruzi mitoribosomes. For both species, we obtained the structure of their mature mitoribosomes, complete rRNA of the large subunit as well as previously unidentified ribosomal proteins. Most importantly, we introduce the structure of an LSU assembly intermediate in presence of 16 identified maturation factors. These maturation factors act both on the intersubunit and solvent sides of the LSU, where they refold and chemically modify the rRNA and prevent early translation before full maturation of the LSU.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were precipitated overnight (5 volumes of cold 0.1 M ammonium acetate in 100% methanol) and further digested with sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega, Fitchburg, MA, USA). Each sample was analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS on a QExactive+ mass spectrometer coupled to an EASY-nanoLC-1000 (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, USA).

### Data Protocol
Data were searched against the UniprotKB database with a decoy strategy (54060 forward protein sequences in T.cruzi taxonomy, 8536 forward protein sequences in L.major taxonomy). Peptides and proteins were identified with Mascot algorithm (version 2.5.1, Matrix Science, London, UK) and data were further imported into Proline v1.4 software. Proteins were validated on Mascot pretty rank equal to 1, and 1% FDR on both peptide spectrum matches (PSM score) and protein sets (Protein Set score).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Kinetoplastids, Mitochondria, Trypanosoma, Ribosome, Leishmania, Mitoribosome

### Affiliations
Institut Européen de Chimie et Biologie (IECB), U1212 Inserm, Université de Bordeaux, 2 rue R. Escarpit, F-33600 Pessac, France
CNRS, IBMC, FRC1589

### Submitter
Lauriane Kuhn

### Lab Head
Dr Florent Waltz
Institut Européen de Chimie et Biologie (IECB), U1212 Inserm, Université de Bordeaux, 2 rue R. Escarpit, F-33600 Pessac, France


