### Accession
PXD002895

### Title
Standard Pressure LC-MS/MS Using 1.9um C18 Particles Column at Room Temperature

### Description
Although the benefits of reduction of the size of reversed phase particles are established to provide increased sequencing depth and improved chromatography in LCMS experiments, the wide-scale adoption of optimally sized small particles in reversed-phase columns has been hampered by the necessity for specialized equipment such as ultra-high pressure liquid chromatography or a customized column heating apparatus.  Here, we introduce a new strategy to routinely fabricate a 50 cm-long, 1.9 µm particle C18 column and extensively characterize the performance of this column. This column was packed under 100 Bar and routinely utilized on a standard quarternary HPLC at pressures below 300 Bar. Expanding the depth of sequencing of peptides that show a statistically significant quantitative change arising from a biological stimulation is critical. Compared with traditional C18 columns packed with 3 µm particles, the column with the 1.9 µm particles operated with a standard HPLC could detect 330% more peptides with statistically significant changes from differentially stimulated T cells. This improved column fabrication methodology provides an inexpensive improvement for single-run LC-MS/MS analysis to optimize sequencing depth, dynamic range, sensitivity, and reproducibility. This study also highlights the importance of the statistical analysis of quantitative proteomic data instead of a sole focus on peptide spectrum match yields.

### Sample Protocol
Jurkat E6 cells were with or without CD3/4 stimulation. Whole cell lysate underwent trypsin digest, Sep-pak, TiO2 enrichment. The samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS (HPLC: Agilent, MS: Q Exactive) with an in-house fabricated column.

### Data Protocol
Data was searched against with UniProt human-specific database using MASCOT v 2.4. Msconvert from ProteoWizard (v. 3.0.5047), using default parameters and with the MS2Deisotope filter on, was employed to create peak lists for Mascot. Mascot database searches were performed with the following parameters: trypsin enzyme cleavage specificity, 2 possible missed cleavages, 10 ppm mass tolerance for precursor ions, 20 mmu mass tolerance for fragment ions. Search parameters permitted variable modification of methionine oxidation (+15.9949 Da), and static modification of carbamidomethylation (+57.0215 Da) on cysteine.

### Publication Abstract
Expanding the sequencing depth of the peptides with a statistically significant quantitative change derived from a biological stimulation is critical. Here we demonstrate that optimization of LC gradient and analytical column construction can reveal over 30,000 unique peptides and 23,000 phosphopeptides at high confidence. The quantitative reproducibility of different analytical workflows was evaluated by comparing the phosphoproteome of CD3/4 stimulated and unstimulated T-cells as a model system. A fritless, 50cm-long column packed with 1.9&#x3bc;m particles operated with a standard pressure HPLC significantly improved the sequencing depth 51% and decreased the selected ion chromatogram peak spreading. Most importantly, under the optimal workflow we observed an improvement of over 300% in detection of significantly changed phosphopeptides in the stimulated cells compared with the other workflows. The discovery power of the optimized column configuration was illustrated by identification of significantly altered phosphopeptides harboring novel sites from proteins previously established as important in T cell signaling including A-Raf, B-Raf, c-Myc, CARMA1, Fyn, ITK, LAT, NFAT1/2/3, PKC&#x3b1;, PLC&#x3b3;1/2, RAF1, and SOS1. Taken together, our results reveal the analytical power of optimized chromatography using sub 2&#x3bc;m particles for the analysis of the T cell phosphoproteome to reveal a vast landscape of significantly altered phosphorylation changes in response to T cell receptor stimulation.

### Keywords
Single-run proteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Fritless column, Jurkat

### Affiliations
Brown University
Department of Molecular Biology, Cell Biology, and Biochemistry, Brown University, USA

### Submitter
Zhuo Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Arthur Salomon
Department of Molecular Biology, Cell Biology, and Biochemistry, Brown University, USA


