### Accession
PXD014156

### Title
Using Proteomics for an Insight into the Performance of Activated Sludge

### Description
The performance of a lab-scale wastewater treatment plant during the start-up phase was investigated. A period of varying pH resulted in the loss of ammonium removal efficiency together with a decrease in the specific autotrophic oxygen uptake rate (OUR). From the OUR, it was inferred that the ammonium oxidizing bacteria (AOB) were inhibited by the fluctuation in the pH values. However, OUR alone could not provide the information as to how the AOB were affected at the molecular level. To gain a better insight, shotgun proteomic method was used in this work to quantify the total proteins in the system. Label-free quantification (LFQ) showed that during the time of poor ammonium removal, the marker enzyme hydroxylamine oxidase found in Nitrosomonas sp. was at the lowest LFQ intensity. Based on these results, proteomics has the potential to be used as a monitoring tool. Nevertheless, there are still some restrictions when measuring activated sludge using proteomic method such as the availability of a suitable proteomic database. In this paper, we describe our experience of using publicly available database for identification of activated sludge proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation and clean-up for LC-MS. For LC/MS proteomics analysis, activated sludge samples were washed three times with PBS. 1 g of washed pellet was resuspended with 3 ml of lysis buffer consisting of PBS (2 mM Na3.PO4, 4 mM NaH2PO4, 9 mM NaCl, 1 mM KCl, adjusted to pH 7 (Frølund,1996 )), 1 tablet cOmplete™ EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche, Germany) and 1 mM Na-EDTA. The suspension was sonified for 5 min on ice and the lysate cleared by centrifugation (18000 rpm, 15 min). After determining the protein concentration using the Bradford method (Bradford, 1976), the lysate is stored at -20°C until further analysis. For LC-MS a volume corresponding to 15 µg of protein was precipitated using the methanol/chloroform extraction method (Wessel and Flügge, 1983). The protein pellet was subsequently resuspended in 8M Urea and proteins were then reduced with dithiothreitol, alkylated with iodoacetamide and digested with LysC (Wako, 37°C, 3h)  and after dilution of the Urea concentration to below 1 M Urea with Trypsin (Promega, 37°C, 16h). Finally, the acidified tryptic digests were desalted on home-made 2 disc C18 StageTips as described (Rappsilber et al., 2007). After elution from the StageTips, samples were dried using a vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf) and the peptides were taken up in 10 µL 0.1 % formic acid solution.  LC-MS/MS settings. Experiments were performed on an Orbitrap Elite instrument (Thermo) (Michalski et al., 2012) that was coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 liquid chromatography (LC) system (Thermo). The LC was operated in the one-column mode. The analytical column was a fused silica capillary (75 µm × 32 cm) with an integrated PicoFrit emitter (New Objective) packed in-house with Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 1.9 µm resin (Dr. Maisch). The analytical column was encased by a column oven (Sonation) and attached to a nanospray flex ion source (Thermo). The column oven temperature was adjusted to 45 °C during data acquisition. The LC was equipped with two mobile phases: solvent A (0.1% formic acid, FA, in water) and solvent B (0.1% FA in acetonitrile, ACN). All solvents were of UPLC grade (Sigma). Peptides were directly loaded onto the analytical column with a maximum flow rate that would not exceed the set pressure limit of 980 bar (usually around 0.6-1.0 µL/min). Peptides were subsequently separated on the analytical column by running a 140 min gradient of solvent A and solvent B (start with 7% B; gradient 7% to 35% B for 120 min; gradient 35% to 100% B for 10 min and 100% B for 10 min) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated using Xcalibur software (version 2.2 SP1.48). The mass spectrometer was set in the positive ion mode. Precursor ion scanning was performed in the Orbitrap analyzer (FTMS; Fourier Transform Mass Spectrometry) in the scan range of m/z 300-1800 and at a resolution of 60000 with the internal lock mass option turned on (lock mass was 445.120025 m/z, polysiloxane; Olsen et al. 2005). Product ion spectra were recorded in a data-dependent fashion in the ion trap (ITMS) in a variable scan range and at a rapid scan rate. The ionization potential (spray voltage) was set to 1.8 kV. Peptides were analyzed using a repeating cycle consisting of a full precursor ion scan (3.0 × 106 ions or 50 ms) followed by 15 product ion scans (1.0 × 104 ions or 50 ms) where peptides are isolated based on their intensity in the full survey scan (threshold of 500 counts) for tandem mass spectrum (MS2) generation that permits peptide sequencing and identification. Collision-induced dissociation (CID) energy was set to 35% for the generation of MS2 spectra. During MS2 data acquisition dynamic ion exclusion was set to 120 seconds with a maximum list of excluded ions consisting of 500 members and a repeat count of one. Ion injection time prediction, preview mode for the FTMS, monoisotopic precursor selection and charge state screening were enabled. Only charge states higher than 1 were considered for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Peptide and Protein Identification using MaxQuant RAW spectra were submitted to an Andromeda (Cox et al., 2011) search in MaxQuant (1.5.3.30) using the default settings (Cox et al., 2008). Label-free quantification and match-between-runs were activated (Cox et al. 2014). The MS/MS spectra data were searched against the clustered amino acid sequence of metagenome 4463936.3 (Albertsen et al., 2012) downloaded from the MG RAST server (Meyer et al., 2008) (initial file name: mgm4463936.3.550.cluster.aa90.faa, renamed for internal use: ACE_0237_WWTP_mgm4463936.3_29_11_16.fasta; 297317 entries). All searches included a contaminants database search (as implemented in MaxQuant, 245 entries). The contaminants database contains known MS contaminants and was included to estimate the level of contamination. Andromeda searches allowed oxidation of methionine residues (16 Da) and acetylation of the protein N-terminus (42 Da) as dynamic modifications and the static modification of cysteine (57 Da, alkylation with iodoacetamide). Enzyme specificity was set to “Trypsin/P (semispecific)” with two missed cleavages allowed. The instrument type in Andromeda searches was set to Orbitrap and the precursor mass tolerance was set to ±20 ppm (first search) and ±4.5 ppm (main search). The MS/MS match tolerance was set to ±0.5 Da. The peptide spectrum match FDR and the protein FDR were set to 0.01 (based on target-decoy approach). Minimum peptide length was 7 amino acids. For protein quantification unique and razor peptides were allowed. Modified peptides were allowed for quantification. The minimum score for modified peptides was 40. Label-free protein quantification was switched on, and unique and razor peptides were considered for quantification with a minimum ratio count of 2. Retention times were recalibrated based on the built-in nonlinear time-rescaling algorithm. MS/MS identifications were transferred between LC-MS/MS runs with the “match between runs” option in which the maximal match time window was set to 0.7 min and the alignment time window set to 20 min. The quantification is based on the “value at maximum” of the extracted ion current. At least two quantitation events were required for a quantifiable protein. Further analysis and filtering of the results was done in Perseus v1.5.5.1. (Tyanova et al., 2016). Comparison of protein group quantities (relative quantification) between different MS runs is based solely on the LFQ’s as calculated by MaxQuant (MaxLFQ algorithm; Cox et al., 2014).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Activated sludge, Respirometry, Proteomics, Nitrification, Label-free quantification

### Affiliations
University Duisburg-Essen
Analytics Core Facility Essen (ACE), Chemische Biologie, Universität Duisburg-Essen, ZMB, Germany

### Submitter
Farnusch Kaschani

### Lab Head
Dr Farnusch Kaschani
Analytics Core Facility Essen (ACE), Chemische Biologie, Universität Duisburg-Essen, ZMB, Germany


