### Accession
PXD018672

### Title
Molecular connection between the TUTase URT1 and decapping activators

### Description
Uridylation is a widespread modification destabilizing eukaryotic mRNAs. Yet, molecular mechanisms underlying TUTase-mediated mRNA degradation remain mostly unresolved. Here, we report that the Arabidopsis TUTase URT1 participates in a molecular network connecting several translational repressors/decapping activators including DECAPPING 5 (DCP5), the Arabidopsis ortholog of human LSM14 and yeast Scd6. A conserved Helical Leucine-rich Motif (HLM) within an intrinsically disordered region of URT1 binds to the LSm domain of DCP5. This interaction connects URT1 to additional decay factors like DDX6/Dhh1-like RNA helicases. The combination of in planta and in vitro analyses supports a model that explains how URT1 reduces the accumulation of oligo(A)-tailed mRNAs: first, by connecting decapping factors and second, because 3’ terminal uridines can intrinsically hinder deadenylation. Importantly, preventing the accumulation of excessively deadenylated mRNAs in Arabidopsis avoids the biogenesis of illegitimate siRNAs that silence endogenous mRNAs and perturb plant growth and development.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitation (IP) experiments were performed with or without a prior step of protein crosslinking in plants expressing tagged URT1 or m1URT1 (myc or YFP). Plants were selected by testing crude flower extracts by western blots using anti-GFP (Anti-GFP-HRP, Miltenyi Biotec) or anti-c-myc antibodies (monoclonal c-myc antibody Roche®).  For IPs without crosslinking step, about 300 mg of flower buds or seedlings were ground in 1.5 ml of ice-cold lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 50 mM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100), protease inhibitors (cOmplete™, EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, Roche®). After removal of cell debris by centrifugation (two times 10 min, 16000×g, 4 °C) the cleared supernatants were incubated for 30 min with 50 µl of magnetic microbeads coupled to anti-c-myc antibodies (Miltenyi, catalogue number). Beads were loaded on magnetized µMACS separation columns equilibrated with lysis buffer, and washed four times with 200 µl of washing buffer (20 mM Tris HCl pH 7.5, 0.1 % Triton X-100). Samples were eluted in 100 µl of pre-warmed elution buffer (50 mM Tris HCl pH 6.8, 50 mM DTT, 1% SDS, 1 mM EDTA, 0.005% bleu de bromophenol, 10 % glycerol). Negative control IPs were performed under the exact same condition with Col-0 plants.  For IPs with crosslinking step, 300 mg of flower buds were ground directly in 2.25 ml of ice-cold lysis buffer during 10 min (50 mM Tris, 50 mM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100, protease inhibitors (cOmplete™, EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, Roche®), 0.375 % formaldehyde (Thermo-Fisher Scientific). A quenching step were done by adding glycine at a final concentration of 200 mM during 5 min. After removal of cell debris by centrifugation (two times 15 min, 10000×g, 4 °C), the cleared supernatants were incubated for 45 min with 50 µl of magnetic microbeads coupled to anti-c-myc antibodies or anti-GFP antibodies (Miltenyi). Beads magnetic capture and washing steps were done according to the manufacturer's instructions, with the exception of the washing 1 solution composition (50 mM Tris HCl pH 7.5, 50 mM NaCl, 0.1% Triton X-100, (cOmplete™, EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, Roche®). Samples were eluted in 100 µl of pre-warmed elution buffer (50 mM Tris HCl pH 6.8, 50 mM DTT, 1 % SDS, 1 mM EDTA, 0.005 % bleu de bromophenol, 10 % glycerol). Negative control IPs were performed with beads coupled to anti-c-myc and anti-GFP antibodies in Col-0 plants or in plants expressing the GFP alone. Additional control IPs in GFP-BPM6 expressing plants (Chico et al. 2020) were also included to improve the stringency of the analysis and improve the identification of contaminant proteins. BPM6 (AT3G43700) acts as an adaptor for Cullin3-based E3 ubiquitin ligases and has no function related to RNA metabolism.

### Data Protocol
Eluted proteins were digested with sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega) and analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS. For IPs with prior crosslinking step (Figure 2A and F), digested proteins were analyzed on a QExactive+ mass spectrometer coupled to an EASY-nanoLC-1000 (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, USA) as described in (Chicois et al., 2018). For IPs without prior crosslinking step (Figure 2B), digested proteins were analyzed on a TT5600 mass spectrometer (Sciex, USA) coupled to an Eksigent Ultra2D-plus nanoHPLC as described in (Bouchoucha et al., 2019). IP data were searched against the TAIR 10 database with a decoy strategy. Peptides were identified with Mascot algorithm (version 2.5, Matrix Science, London, UK) and data were imported into Proline 1.4 software (http://proline.profiproteomics.fr/). Proteins were validated on Mascot pretty rank equal to 1, and 1% FDR on both peptide spectrum matches (PSM score) and protein sets (Protein Set score).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rna degradation, Deadenylation, Decapping, Arabidopsis, Tutase, Uridylation

### Affiliations
CNRS, IBMC, FRC1589
Institut de biologie moléculaire des plantes, CNRS, Université de Strasbourg, 12 rue Zimmer, 67000 Strasbourg, France

### Submitter
Lauriane Kuhn

### Lab Head
Dr Hélène Zuber
Institut de biologie moléculaire des plantes, CNRS, Université de Strasbourg, 12 rue Zimmer, 67000 Strasbourg, France


