### Accession
PXD018025

### Title
Testing serum specificity for bacterial antigens in a mouse model of spontaneous colitis

### Description
Identification of bacterial antigens within cecal bacterial lysate was performed by using serum antibodies from control and DC-LMP1/CD40 animals for immunoprecipitation followed by label-free liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Serum antibodies were coupled to beads and incubated with cecal bacterial lysate to bind target proteins. Upon immunoprecipitation, on-beads digestion of proteins followed by LC-MS/MS was performed. The resulting peak intensities were used for intensity-based quantification (iBAQ). Proteins identified with a fold change > 2 and a p-value < 0.05 were considered for further analyses.

### Sample Protocol
50 μl protein G beads (Dynabeads Protein G, Invitrogen, Cat: 10004D) were coupled with 2.5 μg serum IgG from Ctr or DC-LMP1/CD40 mice for 10 min at room temperature. 1600 μg cecal bacterial lysate was added to the coated beads for 30 min at room temperature and the complex was washed three times with PBS/Tween 0.02 % followed by additional 3 rounds of washing with 50 mM NH4HCO3. Samples were stored at -20°C until LC-MS/MS was performed by the Protein Analysis Unit (Biomedical Center, LMU Munich). Beads were incubated with 100 μl of a 10 ng μl-1 trypsin solution in 1 M Urea and 50 mM NH4HCO3 for 30 min at 25°C for trypsin digestion. The supernatant was collected, beads washed twice with 50 mM NH4HCO3 and all three supernatants collected together and incubated overnight at 25°C at 800 rpm after addition of dithiothreitol to 1 mM. Iodoacetamide was added to a final concentration of 27 mM and samples were incubated at 25°C for 30 min in the dark. 1 μl of 1 M dithiothreitol was added to the samples and incubated for 10 min to quench the iodoacetamide. Finally, 2.5 μl of trifluoroacetic acid was added and the samples were subsequently desalted using C18 Stage tips. Samples were evaporated to dryness, resuspended in 15 μl of 0.1 % formic acid solution and injected in an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo), separated in a 15-cm analytical column (75 μm ID home-packed with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 2.4 μm from Dr. Maisch) with a 50 min gradient from 5 to 60 % acetonitrile in 0.1 % formic acid. The effluent from the HPLC was directly electrosprayed into a Qexactive HF (Thermo) operated in data dependent mode to automatically switch between full scan MS and MS/MS acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (from m/z 375 - 1600) were acquired with resolution R = 60,000 at m/z 400 (AGC target of 3 x 106). The 10 most intense peptide ions with charge states between 2 and 5 were sequentially isolated to a target value of 1 x 105, and fragmented at 27 % normalized collision energy. Typical mass spectrometric conditions were: spray voltage, 1.5 kV; no sheath and auxiliary gas flow; heated capillary temperature, 250.C; ion selection threshold, 33,000 counts.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant 1.5.2.8 was used to identify proteins and quantify by iBAQ with the following parameters: Database, uniprot_proteomes_Bacteria_151113.fasta; MS tol, 10 ppm; MS/MS tol, 0.5 Da; Peptide FDR, 0.1; Protein FDR, 0.01 Min. peptide Length, 5; Variable modifications, Oxidation (M); Fixed modifications, Carbamidomethyl (C); Peptides for protein quantitation, razor and unique; Min. peptides, 1; Min. ratio count, 2. Identified proteins were considered as interaction partners if their MaxQuant iBAQ values were greater than log2 2-fold enrichment and p-value 0.05 (ANOVA) when compared to the control.

### Publication Abstract
Gut microbiota and the immune system are in constant exchange shaping both host immunity and microbial communities. Here, improper immune regulation can cause inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) and colitis. Antibody therapies blocking signaling through the CD40-CD40L axis showed promising results as these molecules are deregulated in certain IBD patients. To better understand the mechanism, we used transgenic DC-LMP1/CD40 animals with a constitutive CD40-signal in CD11c<sup>+</sup> cells, causing a lack of intestinal CD103<sup>+</sup> dendritic cells (DCs) and failure to induce regulatory T (iTreg) cells. These mice rapidly develop spontaneous fatal colitis, accompanied by dysbiosis and increased inflammatory IL-17<sup>+</sup>IFN-&#x3b3;<sup>+</sup> Th17/Th1 and IFN-&#x3b3; <sup>+</sup> Th1 cells. In the present study, we analyzed the impact of the microbiota on disease development and detected elevated IgA- and IgG-levels in sera from DC-LMP1/CD40 animals. Their serum antibodies specifically bound intestinal bacteria, and by proteome analysis, we identified a 60 kDa chaperonin GroEL (Hsp60) from <i>Helicobacter hepaticus</i> (<i>Hh</i>) as the main specific antigen targeted in the absence of iTregs. When re-derived to a different <i>Hh</i>-free specific-pathogen-free (SPF) microbiota, mice showed few signs of disease, normal microbiota, and no fatality. Upon recolonization of mice with <i>Hh</i>, the disease developed rapidly. Thus, the present work identifies GroEL/Hsp60 as a major <i>Hh</i>-antigen and its role in disease onset, progression, and outcome in this colitis model. Our results highlight the importance of CD103<sup>+</sup> DC- and iTreg-mediated immune tolerance to specific pathobionts to maintain healthy intestinal balance.

### Keywords
Helicobacter hepaticus, Spontaneous colitis

### Affiliations
Biomedical Center-LMU
Institute for Immunology, BioMedical Center, Faculty of Medicine, LMU Munich, 82152 Munich, Germany

### Submitter
Ignasi Forne

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Thomas Brocker
Institute for Immunology, BioMedical Center, Faculty of Medicine, LMU Munich, 82152 Munich, Germany


