### Accession
PXD002294

### Title
Updating the Proteome of the uncultivable hemotrophic Mycoplasma suis in experimentally infected pigs

### Description
Mycoplasma suis belongs to the hemotrophic mycoplasma (HM) that are associated with acute and chronic anemia in a wide range of livestock and wild animals. The inability to culture HMs in vitro has hindered their characterization at the molecular level. Although genome sequences of eight HMs are available, there is only one study based on genome sequenced data on the proteomic level for HMs, namely M. suis. In the present work, the proteome of M. suis strain KI_3806 during acute infection was extended significantly by applying three different protein extraction methods, 1D SDS-PAGE and LC-MS/MS. A total of 404 of the 795 M. suis KI_3806 proteins (50.8%) of all encoded proteins were identified. Data analysis revealed the expression of 83.7% of the predicted ORFs with assigned functions but also highlights the expression of 179 of 523 (34.2%) hypothetical proteins with unknown functions. Computational analyses identified expressed membrane-associated hypothetical proteins that might be involved in adhesion or host-pathogen interaction. Furthermore, analyses of the expressed transporters indicated the existence of a hexose-6-phosphate-transporter and an ECF transporter. In conclusion, our proteome study provides a further step toward the elucidation of the unique life cycle of M. suis and the establishment of an in vitro culture.

### Sample Protocol
The proteins of the three fractions were separated according to standard methods using a 1D SDS-PAGE (4-20% gradient gel; BIO-RAD, Hercules, CA, USA). Gels were stained with Coomassie G-250. Representative gels are shown in Figure S2 (supplemental material). Gel lanes were excised in 10 pieces and digested with trypsin as follows: gel pieces were dehydrated in 100% ACN between each of the following steps: proteins were washed twice in 50 mM NH4HCO3 and reduced in 10 mM DTT for 30 min at 60°C and once carbamidomethylated/alkylated in 50 mM NH4HCO3 and 50 mM iodoacetamide for 60 min in the dark at room temperature. Modified sequencing-grade trypsin in 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5 (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) was added in a ratio of 1:10 (trypsin/sample) and samples were incubated overnight at 37°C.  After digestion, peptides were extracted from the gel using twice ACN, 5% (v/v) acetic acid and twice ACN. Peptide-containing supernatants were pooled and dried at 30°C using a Speedvac concentrator (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany). Samples were dissolved in wash buffer (5% (v/v) ACN, 0.1% acetic acid) and desalted using C18 ZipTips (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA), then vacuum-dried (as described above) and stored at -20°C.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was analyzed using Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Spectra were searched using the SEQUEST algorithm in a database containing protein sequences of M. suis KI_3806, Sus scrofa and common contaminations (41.797 entries). The following search parameters were used: enzyme type, trypsin (KR); peptide tolerance, 10 ppm; tolerance for fragment ions, 0.6 D; b- and y-ion series; variable modification, methionine (15.99 Da) and carbamidomethylation (57.03 Da); a maximum of three modifications per peptide were allowed. The percolator node was used to filter peptide identifications based on a fixed false discovery rate of 1% depending on a target-decoy approach. Protein identifications were accepted if they contained at least two identified unique peptides in two out of three biological samples. Proteins that contained identical peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped together.  Using RPSBLAST, COG classifications were assigned to all M. suis proteins. A maximal e-value of 10-5 was defined by using the bioinformatics pipelines Prophane (www.prophane.de). Proteins, which could not be assigned by RPSBLAST to COG classifications, were manual assigned using HMMER3 functional predictions based on Hidden Markov Model profiles provided by TIGRFAMs and PFAMs. After computational assignments of protein functions, assignments were carefully checked, completed and manually curated. Based on the functional assignments, protein identifications were illustrated using Voronoi tree maps. Additionally, RAST (Rapid Annotation using Subsystem Technology) and PATRIC (www.patricbrc.org) annotations were considered to complement functional assignments. Subcellular localizations of proteins were predicted by the PSORTb 3.0 tool. Transmembrane helices within a protein sequences were analyzed with the TMHMM 2.0 tool. Analysis of lipoproteins was performed using LipoP 1.0 software and LIPO CBU (http://services.cbu.uib.no/tools/lipo).

### Publication Abstract
Mycoplasma suis belongs to the hemotrophic mycoplasmas that are associated with acute and chronic anemia in a wide range of livestock and wild animals. The inability to culture M. suis in vitro has hindered its characterization at the molecular level. Since the publication of M. suis genome sequences in 2011 only one proteome study has been published. Aim of the presented study was to significantly extend the proteome coverage of M. suis strain KI_3806 during acute infection by applying three different protein extraction methods followed by 1D SDS-PAGE and LC-MS/MS. A total of 404 of 795 M. suis KI_3806 proteins (50.8%) were identified. Data analysis revealed the expression of 83.7% of the predicted ORFs with assigned functions but also highlights the expression of 179 of 523 (34.2%) hypothetical proteins with unknown functions. Computational analyses identified expressed membrane-associated hypothetical proteins that might be involved in adhesion or host-pathogen interaction. Furthermore, analyses of the expressed proteins indicated the existence of a hexose-6-phosphate-transporter and an ECF transporter. In conclusion, our proteome study provides a further step toward the elucidation of the unique life cycle of M. suis and the establishment of an in vitro culture. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD002294 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD002294).

### Keywords
Mycoplasma suis

### Affiliations
Environmental and Animal Health, Universtity of Hohenheim, Germany
University of Greifswald

### Submitter
Christian Lassek

### Lab Head
Dr Ludwig E. Hölzle
Environmental and Animal Health, Universtity of Hohenheim, Germany


