### Accession
PXD000053

### Title
Lotus japonicus phosphopeptide

### Description
Phosphopeptides were purified using Titansphere. Before MS analysis, phosphopeptides were desalted using StageTips with C18 Empore disk membranes. Phosphopeptides were analysed by Orbitrap MS.The obtained MS and MS/MS spectra data were searched against Kazusa DNA Research Institute published lotus EST database using the MASCOT program (FDR<1%).

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
In this study, we report the first dataset of phosphoproteins of the seeds of a model plant, Lotus japonicus. This dataset might be useful in studying the regulatory mechanisms of seed germination in legume plants. By proteomic analysis of seeds following water absorption, we identified a total of 721 phosphopeptides derived from 343 phosphoproteins in cotyledons, and 931 phosphopeptides from 473 phosphoproteins in hypocotyls. Kinase-specific prediction analyses revealed that different kinases were activated in cotyledons and hypocotyls. In particular, many peptides containing ATM-kinase target motifs, X-X-pS/pT-Q-X-X, were detected in cotyledons. Moreover, by real-time RT-PCR analysis, we found that expression of a homolog of ATM kinase is upregulated specifically in cotyledons, suggesting that this ATM-kinase homolog plays a significant role in cell proliferation in the cotyledons of L. japonicus seeds. The data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD000053 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD000053).

### Keywords
Phosphopeptide

### Affiliations
Advanced medical research center

### Submitter
Yoko Ino

### Lab Head


