### Accession
PXD006888

### Title
Cardiac Metabolic Deregulation Induced by the Tyrosine Kinase Receptor Inhibitor Sunitinib is rescued by Endothelin Receptor Antagonism

### Description
The growing field of cardio-oncology addresses the side effects of cancer treatment on the cardiovascular system. Here, we explored the cardiotoxicity of the antiangiogenic therapy, sunitinib, in the mouse heart from a diagnostic and therapeutic perspective. We showed that sunitinib induces an anaerobic switch of cellular metabolism within the myocardium which is associated with the development of myocardial fibrosis and reduced left ventricular ejection fraction as demonstrated by echocardiography. The capacity of positron emission tomography with [18F]fluorodeoxyglucose to detect the changes in cardiac metabolism caused by sunitinib was dependent on fasting status and duration of treatment. Pan proteomic analysis in the myocardium showed that sunitinib induced (i) an early metabolic switch with enhanced glycolysis and reduced oxidative phosphorylation, and (ii) a metabolic failure to use glucose as energy substrate, similar to the insulin resistance found in type 2 diabetes. Co-administration of macitentan, the endothelin receptor antagonist, to sunitinib-treated animals prevented both metabolic defects, restored glucose uptake and cardiac function, and prevented myocardial fibrosis. These results support the endothelin system in mediating the cardiotoxic effects of sunitinib and endothelin receptor antagonism as a potential therapeutic approach to prevent cardiotoxicity. Furthermore, metabolic and functional imaging can monitor the cardiotoxic effects and the benefits of endothelin antagonism in a theranostic approach.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue sample preparation Frozen mouse hearts were individually ground under liquid nitrogen to yield a fine powder using apestle and mortar. The tissue powder was weighted and solubilized in lysis buffer (4% SDS, 100mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0). Protein extracts were clarified by centrifugation at 21,000×G, 1 hour, 4°C. Protein concentration of the supernatant was determined using bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA, Pierce). Peptides were prepared by Filter Aided Separation method (FASP) essentially as described (ref 66). Briefly, 50μg of proteins from whole lysates were diluted to 100μL in solubilization buffer (50 mM Tris/HCl, pH8.5, SDS 2%, 20mM TCEP, 50 mM chloroacetamide) and heated for 5 min at 95°C. After cooling to room temperature, extracts were diluted with 300μL Tris Urea buffer (Urea 8M, Tris/HCl 50mM (pH 8.5) and transferred onto 30kDa centrifuged filters and prepared for digestion as described (66). Proteins were digested during 14h at 37°C with μg trypsin (Promega) and peptides were desalted on C18 StageTips (67). After drying, peptides were solubilized in 2% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and fractionated by strong cationic exchange (SCX) StageTips, mainly as described (Kulak et al., 2014) except that fractions 1 and 2 were pooled in most experiments.  Mass spectrometry analysis : Mass spectrometry analyses were performed on a Dionex U3000 RSLC nano-LC- system coupled to either a Q-Exactive or a LTQ Orbitrap-Velos mass spectrometer, all from Thermo Fisher Scientific. After drying, peptides from SCX StageTip fractions were solubilized in 10 μL of 0.1% TFA containing 2% acetonitrile (ACN). One μL was loaded, concentrated and washed for 3min on a C18 reverse phase precolumn (3μm particle size, 100 Å pore size, 75 μm inner diameter, 2 cm length, Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on a C18 reverse phase resin (2 μm particle size, 100Å pore size, 75μm inner diameter, 25cm length from Dionex) with a 3-hour gradient starting from 99% of solvent A containing 0.1% formic acid in H2O and ending in 40% of solvent B containing 80% acetonitrile, 0.085% formic acid in H2O. The mass spectrometer acquired data throughout the elution process and operated in a data-dependent scheme with full MS scans acquired with the Orbitrap, followed by up to 10 MS/MS HCD fragmentations in the Q-Exactive (Thermo Fisher) on the most abundant ions detected. Settings were essentially as in (68) with slight modifications: the recurrent loop of the 10 most intense nLC-eluting peptides were HCD-fragmented between each full scan (data dependent mode). Resolution was set to 70,000 for full scans at AGC target 1,10e6 within 60ms MIIT. The MS scans spanned from 350 to 1500m/z. Precursor selection window was set at 2Th, and MS/MS scan resolution was set at 17,500 with AGC target 1,10e5 within 60ms MIIT. HCD Normalized Collision Energy (NCE) was set at 27%. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30s duration. Spectra were recorded in profile mode. The mass spectrometry data were analyzed using Maxquant version 1,5,2,8 (ref69). The database used was a concatenation of human sequences from the Uniprot-Swissprot database (Uniprot, release 2015-02) and a list of contaminant sequences from Maxquant. The enzyme specificity was trypsin. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 4.5ppm and the fragment mass tolerance to 20ppm for Q-Exactive data. Carbamidomethylation of cysteins was set as constant modification and acetylation of protein N-terminus and oxidation of methionines were set as variable modification. Second peptide  search was allowed and minimal length of peptides was set at 7 amino acids. False discovery rate (FDR) was kept below 1% on both peptides and proteins. Label-free protein quantification (LFQ) was done using both unique and razor peptides. At least 2 such peptides were required for LFQ. The “match between runs” (MBR) option was allowed with a match time 0.7 min window and an alignment time window of 20min. For analysis, LFQ results from MaxQuant were imported into the Perseus software (version 1.5.1.6). Reverse and contaminant proteins were excluded from analysis. Contaminating proteins from culture medium, essentially coming from added serum, such as immunoglobulins or transferrin were also removed from the protein list. Protein copy numbers per cell were then calculated using the “Protein ruler” plugin of Perseus by standardization on total histone MS signal as described (ref70).

### Data Protocol
Modeling with Ingenuity® and Pathway Studio® We used ingenuity pathway analysis (Ingenuity Systems, Redwood City, CA) and Pathway Studio (https://www.pathwaystudio.com/) to study pathways deregulated by sunitinib as already described (71). For both, data from proteomic were classified according to the fold change and p-value compared to reference group (i.e: vehicle) using a paired t.test and only significant deregulated proteins were enter in the software. Briefly, these software create hypothetical networks (including several proteins) to highlight networks that are significantly (p <0.05) different compared to a reference group (i.e: vehicle group or sunitinib + macitentan group). Those networks were assigned to a biological function(s), pathway(s) and/or disease(s) using the Ingenuity Pathways Knowledge Base, Pathway Studio database and the scientific literature. Statistical analysis Statistical analysis and data comparison for proteomics data were done using either Perseus or Excel software to classify the data using the two tailed Student t.test. In modeling software, p-value cutoff was 0.05 calculated with right-tailed Fisher Exact Test (Ingenuity®) and with Mann-Whitney U-test (Pathway Studio®). Data are expressed as mean ± SEM. Analyses were performed with Graphpad Prism (7.00). Unpaired and paired t tests were used to compare two data sets, one-way ANOVA was used to compare three data sets, and two-way ANOVA was used to compare three groups followed across time.

### Publication Abstract
The growing field of cardio-oncology addresses the side effects of cancer treatment on the cardiovascular system. Here, we explored the cardiotoxicity of the antiangiogenic therapy, sunitinib, in the mouse heart from a diagnostic and therapeutic perspective. We showed that sunitinib induces an anaerobic switch of cellular metabolism within the myocardium which is associated with the development of myocardial fibrosis and reduced left ventricular ejection fraction as demonstrated by echocardiography. The capacity of positron emission tomography with [<sup>18</sup>F]fluorodeoxyglucose to detect the changes in cardiac metabolism caused by sunitinib was dependent on fasting status and duration of treatment. Pan proteomic analysis in the myocardium showed that sunitinib induced <i>(i)</i> an early metabolic switch with enhanced glycolysis and reduced oxidative phosphorylation, and <i>(ii)</i> a metabolic failure to use glucose as energy substrate, similar to the insulin resistance found in type 2 diabetes. Co-administration of the endothelin receptor antagonist, macitentan, to sunitinib-treated animals prevented both metabolic defects, restored glucose uptake and cardiac function, and prevented myocardial fibrosis. These results support the endothelin system in mediating the cardiotoxic effects of sunitinib and endothelin receptor antagonism as a potential therapeutic approach to prevent cardiotoxicity. Furthermore, metabolic and functional imaging can monitor the cardiotoxic effects and the benefits of endothelin antagonism in a theranostic approach.

### Keywords
Sunitinib, Macitentan, Endothelin, Echocardiography, Cardio-oncology, Cardiotoxicity, Positron emission tomography

### Affiliations
Paris Cardiovascular Research Center (PARCC); INSERM UMR970; Université Paris Descartes; Paris, France
ICO Angers

### Submitter
François GUILLONNEAU

### Lab Head
Dr Bertrand Tavitian
Paris Cardiovascular Research Center (PARCC); INSERM UMR970; Université Paris Descartes; Paris, France


