### Accession
PXD046488

### Title
Global Analysis of Lysine Lactylation of Germinated Seeds in Wheat

### Description
Protein lactylation is a newly discovered posttranslational modification (PTM) and involved in multiple biological processes both in mammalian cells and rice grains. However, the function of lysine lactylation remains unexplored in wheat. In this study, we performed the first comparative proteomes and lysine lactylomes during seed germination of wheat. In total, 8,000 proteins and 927 lactylated sites in 394 proteins were identified at 0 and 12 hour after imbibition (HAI). Functional enrichment analysis showed that glycolysis and the TCA cycle related proteins were significantly enriched, and more differentially lactylated proteins were enriched in up-regulated lactylated proteins at 12 HAI vs 0 HAI through KEGG pathway and protein domain enrichment analysis compared to down-regulated lactylated proteins. Meanwhile, ten particularly preferred amino acids near lactylation sites were found in the embryos of germinated seeds: AA*KlaT, A***KlaD********A, KlaA**T****K, K******A*Kla, K*Kla********K, KlaA******A, Kla*A, KD****Kla, K********Kla and KlaG. These results supplied a comprehensive profile of lysine lactylation of wheat and indicated that protein lysine lactylation played important functions in several biological processes.

### Sample Protocol
QiMin 23, the common wheat variety (Triticum aestivum L.), was used in the study. The seeds were washed three times in distilled water and then imbibed in a dark growth chamber at 21°C. The embryos of 0, 6, 12, 24 and 48 h after imbibition (HAI) were collected respectively with three biological replicates, and then were snap-frozen for 1 minute with liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C for further western blotting, proteome or acetylome analysis. Proteins of QiMin 23 embryos were extracted with a modified phenol isolation proto-col. In brief, embryos were ground into fine powder in liquid nitrogen and homog-enized in lysis buffer (0.5 M Tris 8.0, 1 M sucrose, 50 mM ascorbic acid, 0.1 M KCl, 1 % NaDOC, 1 % NP40, 10 mM EDTA, 10 mM DTT, and 1 % protease inhibitor cocktail; the final pH was 8.0). The resulting solution was sonicated on ice for 30 min and then added equal volume of tris-saturated phenol (pH 8.0). The remaining debris were depleted by centrifugation for 10 min at 16 000g. Next, the supernatant was added to four volumes of precipitation buffer (methanol with 0.1 M ammonium acetate, precooled at -20 ℃ before use) and stored at -20 ℃ overnight. The pellet was collected though centrifugation at 16,000 g for 10 min and then was rinsed with cold methanol for three times. Add 0.4 mL lysis buffer to the final protein pellet and the protein concentration was estimated with 2D Quant kit (GE Healthcare).

### Data Protocol
The obtained MS/MS raw data of lactylated peptides were processed by MaxQuant with integrated Andromeda search engine (v.1.5.2.8). The tandem mass spectra were searched against UniProt_Triticum database (146,090 sequences, released March, 2015) concatenated with reverse decoy database. The parameters in MaxQuant were performed according to Zhang et al. The minimum peptide length was set to 7. All the other parameters in MaxQuant were set as default values. The site localization probability was set as >0.75.

### Publication Abstract
Protein lactylation is a newly discovered posttranslational modification (PTM) and is involved in multiple biological processes, both in mammalian cells and rice grains. However, the function of lysine lactylation remains unexplored in wheat. In this study, we performed the first comparative proteomes and lysine lactylomes during seed germination of wheat. In total, 8000 proteins and 927 lactylated sites in 394 proteins were identified at 0 and 12 h after imbibition (HAI). Functional enrichment analysis showed that glycolysis- and TCA-cycle-related proteins were significantly enriched, and more differentially lactylated proteins were enriched in up-regulated lactylated proteins at 12 HAI vs. 0 HAI through the KEGG pathway and protein domain enrichment analysis compared to down-regulated lactylated proteins. Meanwhile, ten particularly preferred amino acids near lactylation sites were found in the embryos of germinated seeds: AA*K<sup>la</sup>T, A***K<sup>la</sup>D********A, K<sup>la</sup>A**T****K, K******A*K<sup>la</sup>, K*K<sup>la</sup>********K, K<sup>la</sup>A******A, K<sup>la</sup>*A, KD****K<sup>la</sup>, K********K<sup>la</sup> and K<sup>la</sup>G. These results supplied a comprehensive profile of lysine lactylation of wheat and indicated that protein lysine lactylation played important functions in several biological processes.

### Keywords
Posttranslational modification; lactylome; seed germination; wheat

### Affiliations
College of Agronomy, Qingdao Agricultural University, Qingdao Shandong, China
Micrometer Biotech

### Submitter
Xianliang Ma

### Lab Head
Dr Weiwei Guo
College of Agronomy, Qingdao Agricultural University, Qingdao Shandong, China


