### Accession
PXD002966

### Title
OXIPEP: mass spectrometry strategy to characterize protein carbonylation.

### Description
Here we describe a peptide-centric approach (OXIPEP), where carbonylated residues within proteins are derivatized with biotin-hydrazide, enriched and identified by mass spectrometry.  The strength of the method lies in an improved protocol for elution of biotinylated peptides from monomeric avidin resin using hot water (95C) and increased sensitivity achieved by reduction of sample losses during sample preparation and chromatographic steps.  For the first time advanced bioinformatics analysis utilising diagnostic biotin fragment ions is used to facilitate semi-automatic in silico evaluation of biotin labelling and to increase the reliability of carbonyl peptide identification.

### Sample Protocol
MCO-BSA - BSA that had been subjected to metal-catalyzed oxidation and untreated randomised human plasma sample have been treated with biotin-lc-hydrazide to label carbonylated amino acids. Subsequently proteins were digested and the resulting peptide mixture was subjected to avidin affinity purification to isolated biotinylated-carbonylated peptides. Samples were analysed using nLC-MS/MS on LTQ Orbitrap XL or qExactive HF mass spectrometers.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were analysed using Proteome Discoverer v1.4 (Thermo Scientific) and an in-house MASCOT server (v2.3.02, Matrix Science Ltd.). Database searches were performed with the following parameters: tryptic or semi-tryptic digestion with up to three missed trypsin cleavages, precursor mass tolerance of 6 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 0.8 Da, carbamidomethylation of cysteines (+57.02146 Da) as fixed modification and oxidation (+15.99492 Da) of methionine as variable modification. The biotin-tagged samples were searched including the following variable modifications labelled with biotin-lc-hydrazide tag: aminoadipic semialdehyde (K) (+354.17256 Da), glutamic semialdehyde (R) (+312.15076 Da), glutamic semialdehyde (P) (+371.19911 Da), 2-amino-3-ketobutyric acid (T) (+353.18855 Da), decarboxylation of Glu and Asp (E, D) (+325.19363 Da), aspartate semialdehyde (M)(+323.19574 Da) and +14 Da carbonylation of LVKIEAQ (+369.18346 Da).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Protein carbonylation, Human plasma, Biotin-hydrazide, Bovine serum albumine

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark, Denmark
University of Southern Denmark

### Submitter
Adelina Rogowska-Wrzesinska

### Lab Head
Dr Ole N. Jensen
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark, Denmark


