### Accession
PXD034780

### Title
The role of IRE1-XBP1 in RSV-mediated extracellular matrix production

### Description
This study is to examine the role of IRE1-XBP1 in regulation the activation of hexosamine biosynthetic pathway and N-glycosylation of extracellular matrix in RSV infection

### Sample Protocol
The proteins were digested with trypsin and the N-glycosylated peptides were enriched with lectins and analyzed with LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry data were analyzed with MaxQuant software.

### Publication Abstract
Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) causes severe lower respiratory tract infections (LRTI) associated with decreased pulmonary function, asthma, and allergy. Recently, we demonstrated that RSV induces the hexosamine biosynthetic pathway via the unfolded protein response (UPR), which is a pathway controlling protein glycosylation and secretion of the extracellular matrix (ECM). Because the presence of matrix metalloproteinases and matricellular growth factors (TGF) is associated with severe LRTI, we studied the effect of RSV on ECM remodeling and found that RSV enhances the deposition of fibronectin-rich ECM by small airway epithelial cells in a manner highly dependent on the inositol requiring kinase (IRE1&#x3b1;)-XBP1 arm of the UPR. To understand this effect comprehensively, we applied pharmacoproteomics to understand the effect of the UPR on N-glycosylation and ECM secretion in RSV infection. We observe that RSV induces N-glycosylation and the secretion of proteins related to ECM organization, secretion, or proteins integral to plasma membranes, such as integrins, laminins, collagens, and ECM-modifying enzymes, in an IRE1&#x3b1;-XBP1 dependent manner. Using a murine paramyxovirus model that activates the UPR in vivo, we validate the IRE1&#x3b1;-XBP1-dependent secretion of ECM to alveolar space. This study extends understanding of the IRE1&#x3b1;-XBP1 pathway in regulating N-glycosylation coupled to structural remodeling of the epithelial basement membrane in RSV infection.

### Keywords
Rsv, Hexosamine biosynthetic pathway, Innate immunity, Unfolded protein response

### Affiliations
University of Texas Medical Branch

### Submitter
Yingxin Zhao

### Lab Head
Dr Yingxin Zhao
University of Texas Medical Branch


