### Accession
PXD012284

### Title
Common and distinct pathophysiological processes associated to ileal and colonic ulcers in Crohn’s disease

### Description
Based on genetic risk factors and natural history, Crohn’s disease (CD) can be separated in two entities, an ileal and a colonic disease. Protein based-approaches are needed to elucidate whether such subphenotypes are related to distinct pathophysiological processes. In this work, we compared the proteome of ulcer edge to the one of paired control tissue in ileum and colon of CD patients. We revealed that ileal and colonic ulcer edge can be distinguished by a differential distribution of epithelial–mesenchymal transition proteins, neutrophil degranulation proteins and ribosomal proteins. In ileal and colonic ulcer edge, we found a quasi-systematic increase of the proteins implicated in the pathway of protein processing in endoplasmic reticulum and a quasi-systematic decrease of mitochondrial proteins. Our study provides for the first time protein-based evidences showing partly distinct pathophysiological processes associated to ileal and colonic ulcer edge in CD. This could constitute a first step toward the development of gut segment-specific diagnostic markers and therapeutics.

### Sample Protocol
Biopsies (~5 mg) were combined with 60 mg of beads (Diagenode, Belgium) and lysed by sonication on a Bioruptor® (Diagenode, 5 C°, high power, 15 cycles of 30s/30s ON/OFF) in 300 µl of a pH 7.4 RIPA buffer [4% (w/v) SDS, 1 mM DTT, 25 mM HEPES, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM NaF, 1 mM Na3VO4, 25 mM sodium β-glycerophosphate and 4% (v/v) protease inhibitor cocktail EDTA free 25× (Roche Applied Science, Germany)]. Homogenates were centrifuged at 15,000 g for 10 min at room temperature. The supernatants were immediately stored at -80 C° until further analysis. The protein concentration was determined using the RCDC Protein Assay Kit (BioRad, USA) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Twenty micrograms of total protein was precipitated using the 2D-clean up assay (GE Healthcare, USA). Then, proteins were digested with the Trypsin/Lys-C Mix Mass Spec Grade (Promega, USA) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Finally, 3.5 µg of the resulting peptide mixtures were purified on ZipTip C18 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA), dried in a vacuum centrifuge and stored at -20 C°. Just before analysis, dried samples (3.5 µg) were solubilized in 15.75 µl of a pH 10 solution containing 100 mM ammonium formate and MPDSmix (MassPREP™ Digestion Standard Mixture, Waters, USA). These standards contain four non-human proteins digested: bovine serum albumin (BSA, P02769), yeast enolase (ENO1, P00924), rabbit glycogen phosphorylase b (GPB, P00489) and yeast alcohol dehydrogenase 1 (ADH1, P00330). To control the quality of the system, two different concentrations of MPDSmix (MPDSmix 1 and MPDSmix 2) were spiked in U and C samples. The following molar ratios (U/C) were expected: 1.00 (ADH1), 0.38 (GBP), 1.66 (ENO1), 8.96 (BSA).

### Data Protocol
Identifications and quantifications of proteins were obtained using the MaxQuant software Version 1.5.5.1. Proteins were searched in the Uniprot-human database (20237 reviewed entries, release 2017_09) enriched with the sequences of the 4 MPDSmix proteins. The following settings were used for protein identification: trypsin as digestion enzyme, a maximal number of miscleavages equal to 2, a minimal peptide length of 7 amino acids, carbamidomethylation of cysteines as fixed modification, methionine oxidation as variable modification, a minimal number of peptide/protein equal to 2, a minimal number of unique peptide/protein equal to 1, precursor mass tolerance of 4.5 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 0.5 Da, false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% for peptide spectrum matches and proteins. Data normalization was performed using the MaxQuant label-free quantification (LFQ) algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics, Ulcer, Colon, Ileum, Crohn’s disease

### Affiliations
GIGA-R - Translational Gastroenterology, Liège University
Laboratory of Translational Gastroenterology, GIGA-institute, University of Liège, 4000 Liège, Belgium  Hepato-Gastroenterology and Digestive Oncology Department, Liège University Hospital CHU, 4000 Liège, Belgium

### Submitter
nicolas Pierre

### Lab Head
Dr Edouard Louis
Laboratory of Translational Gastroenterology, GIGA-institute, University of Liège, 4000 Liège, Belgium  Hepato-Gastroenterology and Digestive Oncology Department, Liège University Hospital CHU, 4000 Liège, Belgium


