### Accession
PXD013646

### Title
Arabidopsis thaliana non aqueous fractionation LC-MS/MS analysis of genotypes Ler (Landsberg erecta) and gin2-1 (glucose insensitive (hexokinase 1)) time series analysis under normal, chilling temperature and highlight+heat.

### Description
Plant cells are characterized by a high degree of compartmentalization and a diverse proteome and metabolome. Only a very limited number of studies has addressed combined subcellular proteomics and metabolomics which strongly limits biochemical and physiological interpretation of large-scale omics data. Our study presents a methodological combination of non-aqueous fractionation, shotgun proteomics, enzyme kinetics and metabolomics to reveal subcellular diurnal dynamics of plant metabolism. Subcellular marker protein sets were identified and enzymatically validated to resolve metabolism in a 4-compartment model comprising chloroplasts, cytosol, vacuole and mitochondria. These marker sets are now available for future studies which aim to monitor subcellular metabolome and proteome dynamics. Comparing subcellular dynamics in wild type plants and (hexokinase) HXK1-deficient gin2-1 mutants revealed a strong impact of HXK1 activity on metabolome dynamics in multiple compartments. Glucose accumulation in the cytosol of gin2-1 was accompanied by diminished vacuolar glucose levels. Subcellular dynamics of pyruvate, succinate and fumarate concentrations were significantly affected in gin2-1 which coincided with differential mitochondrial proteome dynamics. Lowered mitochondrial glycine and serine concentrations in gin2-1 together with reduced abundance of photorespiratory proteins indicated an effect of the gin2-1 mutation on photorespiratory capacity. Our findings highlight the necessity to resolve plant metabolism to a subcellular level in order to provide a causal relationship between metabolites, proteins and metabolic pathway regulation. --- In an attempt to draw a full picture of abiotic stress responses a complete set of time resolved, compartmentalized metabolomics and proteomics data under different stress conditions was generated. To investigate interactions of stress responses with primary metabolism, the gin2-1 mutant, was compared to its wildtype Landsberg erecta (Ler) under high irradiance and at low temperature. Chlorophyll fluorescence parameters proved the well-known sensitivity of the gin2-1 mutant to high irradiance. Dynamics of subcellular metabolite redistribution upon stress were delayed in gin2-1, and this correlated with massive reduction in proteins belonging to the ATP producing electron transport chain. Evidence for compounds specifically protecting compartments, e.g. maltose in plastids and myo-inositol in mitochondria, was obtained in Ler, but gin2-1 failed to respond or responded only slowly to high irradiance, while no delay was obtained in the cold. Whole-cell concentrations of the amino acids glycine, and serine, provided strong evidence for an important role of the photorespiratory pathway during stress exposure and may contribute to the slow growth of the gin2-1 mutant under high irradiance.

### Sample Protocol
Non-aqueous fractionation  Non-aqueous fractionation was performed as described earlier (Nägele and Heyer, 2013, Hoermiller et al., 2017). Briefly, approximately 100-150 mg of freeze-dried leaf tissue was suspended in 10 ml heptane- tetrachlorethylene ρ=1.34 g cm-3 and sonified for 5 s with pauses of 15 s over a time course of 12 min (BransonSonifier 250, output control 4; Branson, USA). The sonified suspension was passed through a nylon gauze with 30 µm pore size and centrifuged afterwards. The pellet was suspended in heptane-tetrachlorethylene and loaded on a linear gradient of heptane-tetrachlorethylene (ρ=1.34 g cm-3) to tetrachlorethylene (ρ=1.6 g cm-3). After ultracentrifugation for 3h at 100000g, the gradient was fractionated into 9 fractions that were divided into five sub-fractions and dried under vacuum.  Extraction and Protein Analysis via LC-MS/MS Dried pellets from fractionated gradients were solubilized in 8 M urea 50 mM Hepes KOH (pH=7.8) on ice. Samples were precipitated in acetone with 0.5% beta-mercaptoethanol. Afterwards pellets were washed 2 times with methanol and acetone, and again solubilized in 8 M urea, 50 mM Hepes KOH (pH=7.8). Bio-Rad Bradford-assay and BSA as standard were used to determine protein concentrations. Equal amounts of protein (15 µg) were reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT) at a concentration of 5 mM for 45 minutes at 37 °C, and alkylated at a concentration of 10 mM with iodacetamid and incubated dark for 60 minutes at 23 °C. Alkylation was stopped by increasing DTT concentration to 10 mM and dark incubation for 15 minutes. Samples were diluted 2-fold by 20 % acetonitrile (ACN) and 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AmBic), proteins were predigested with Lys-C (1:1000 w:w, Sigma-Aldrich) at 30 °C for 2.5 hours in the dark. Samples were diluted 2-fold to 2 M urea by 10 % ACN, 25 mM AmBic, 10 mM CaCl2 and digested with sequencing grade modified trypsine (Poroszyme, immobilized trypsin; 1:100 v:w) for 12 hours. Digested proteins were acidified with formic acid (pH ~ 3.0), desalted with C18 materials (Agilent, Bond Elut SPEC) and dried in a vacuum concentrator (ScanVac, LaboGene). Peptides were dissolved in 2 % ACN, 0.1 % formic acid and the same amount of total protein was loaded and separated on a PepMap RSLC 75 μm, 50 cm column (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Waltham, USA). Flowrate was set to 300 nl/min with 2 % to 40 % in 90 minutes of mobile phase B (mobile phase A: 0.1 % formic acid (FA) in water [v/v]; mobile phase B: 0.1 % FA in 90 % ACN [v/v]). The run ended with 60 minutes of equilibration. Subsequently, mobile phase B was set from 40 % to 90 % for one minute and held stable at 90 % for 5 minutes, followed by a continuous decrease to 2 %. MS analysis was performed with an Orbitrap Elite instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Waltham, USA) in positive mode and full scan in FT with a resolution of 60.000 in profile mode. Precursor masses ranged between 360-1800 m/z. MS/MS was executed in the linear ion trap with CID fragmentation for the 20 most intense ions, by a minimal signal threshold of 500 counts. Prediction of ion injection time was enabled (5*10² ions for up to 10 ms). Dynamic exclusion was enabled with repeat count 1 and repeat duration of 30 seconds. Exclusion list size was set to 500 and exclusion duration to 30 seconds. Excluded mass was set to +/- 10ppm relative to reference mass, early expiration enabled with 1 count and s/n threshold of 2.0.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification as well as protein quantification was performed by the software MaxQuant (http://www.maxquant.org) and implemented algorithms of version 1.5.5.1 (Cox and Mann, 2008) against the TAIR10 (www.arabidopsis.org) protein database (Lamesch et al., 2012). Protein analysis for label free quantification was done with main settings as recommended and a false discovery rate of 0.01. A maximum of 2 missed cleavages was applied. Maximal 5 variable modifications per peptide were allowed for N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification due to previous methylation. Identification rules for proteins were set strictly by a requirement of minimum of 2 peptides and 2 minimum razor + unique peptides. Advanced identification mode was exerted with second peptides search and match between runs, the match window was set to 0.7 minutes and alignment time window to 20 minutes. MaxQuant LFQ protein output was normalized to total protein amount per fraction. Whole gradients were additionally normalized to inserted dry weight. If possible, outliers were dissmissed.

### Publication Abstract
Plant cells are characterized by a high degree of compartmentalization and a diverse proteome and metabolome. Only a very limited number of studies has addressed combined subcellular proteomics and metabolomics which strongly limits biochemical and physiological interpretation of large-scale 'omics data. Our study presents a methodological combination of nonaqueous fractionation, shotgun proteomics, enzyme activities and metabolomics to reveal subcellular diurnal dynamics of plant metabolism. Subcellular marker protein sets were identified and enzymatically validated to resolve metabolism in a four-compartment model comprising chloroplasts, cytosol, vacuole and mitochondria. These marker sets are now available for future studies that aim to monitor subcellular metabolome and proteome dynamics. Comparing subcellular dynamics in wild type plants and HXK1-deficient gin2-1 mutants revealed a strong impact of HXK1 activity on metabolome dynamics in multiple compartments. Glucose accumulation in the cytosol of gin2-1 was accompanied by diminished vacuolar glucose levels. Subcellular dynamics of pyruvate, succinate and fumarate amounts were significantly affected in gin2-1 and coincided with differential mitochondrial proteome dynamics. Lowered mitochondrial glycine and serine amounts in gin2-1 together with reduced abundance of photorespiratory proteins indicated an effect of the gin2-1 mutation on photorespiratory capacity. Our findings highlight the necessity to resolve plant metabolism to a subcellular level to provide a causal relationship between metabolites, proteins and metabolic pathway regulation.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Hexokinase 1, Highlight, Cold, Photorespiration, Non aqueous fractionation, Time series, Gin2-1, Subcellular protein marker, Subcellular analysis

### Affiliations
LMU Munich
Ludwig Maximilians Universität München/ Munich - Germany Department Biology I Plant Evolutionary Cell Biology Großhaderner Str. 2-4 82152 Planegg-Martinsried Germany

### Submitter
Lisa Fürtauer

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Nägele
Ludwig Maximilians Universität München/ Munich - Germany Department Biology I Plant Evolutionary Cell Biology Großhaderner Str. 2-4 82152 Planegg-Martinsried Germany


