### Accession
PXD024415

### Title
Discovery of Non-Canonical Peptides Derived from Novel Small Open Reading Frames as MHC-I Epitopes

### Description
Immunopeptides that are translated in cells and presented at the cell surface by major histocompatibility complex (MHC) mole-cules are important epitopes in basic Immunology and translational cancer immunotherapy. While most of the reported immuno-peptides are derived from protein coding sequence, the non-canonical peptides translated from “non-coding” regions are emerging and have attracted much attention in recent years.  However, sensitive and accurate identification of such peptides remains a challenging task. Here we report an optimized approach integrating Ribo-seq and mass spectrometry to identify hundreds of non-canonical MHC-binding peptides. Three pipelines for analyzing Ribo-seq data were compared to generate  small open reading frame (sORF) databases. Meanwhile, we have also combined bottom-up and de novo searching in proteomics data analysis and identified more immunopeptides. 7902 canonical and 308  non-canonical immunopeptides have been identified with selected ones vigorously validated. The present study provides a handy solution for identifying non-canonical MHC epitopes. The novel im-munopeptides  resolving mechanisms of cancer antigen presentation, as well as applications in cancer immunotherapies.

### Sample Protocol
MHC-I peptidomes were obtained from established cell lines as described previously.28 In brief, cell pellets were dissociat-ed with lysis buffer with 0.25% sodium deoxycholate, 1% n-octyl glucoside, 100 mM PMSF, 0.2 mM iodoacetamide and protease inhibitors cocktail in Gibco's Dulbecco's phosphate-buffered saline (DPBS) . Lysate were further cleared by 50 min centrifugation at 17,000 g at 4 °C. The supernatant was purified with W6/32 antibody covalent-ly bound to Protein-A Sepharose CL-4B beads . Beads were then washed with buffer A (150 mM NaCl, 20 mM Tris HCl) and 400 mM NaCl, 20 mM Tris HCl. The MHC-I complex was eluted with 1% TFA. Eluate was then loaded on Sep-Pak tC18 cartridges (Waters, 100 mg) and wash with 0.1% TFA and 2% ACN in 0.1% TFA, sequentially. The peptides were separated from MHC-I complexes on the tC18 cartridges by eluting with 28% ACN in 0.1% TFA and dried using vacuum centrifugation.

### Data Protocol
PEAKS (Studio 10.5) was used to conduct de novo sequenc-ing and peptide annotations. 10 ppm and 0.2 Da were set as error tolerances for the precursor ions and the fragment ions, respectively. No enzyme was selected. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine was set as a variable modification. The maximum number of modifications was two. The DDA data were searched against the sequence generated by the PRICE, sORF, riboTISH, and swiss-prot database (UniProtKB-SwissProt, Jan-2020) using MaxQuant (1.6.17.0). The common parameters were set as below: no contaminants database included; the MS/MS match tolerance was set as 20ppm; The digestion mode was set as unspecific; The varia-ble modifications include the Oxidation (M), Acetyl (protein N-term), and Carbamidomethyl (C); the FDR was set as 1% level.

### Publication Abstract
MHC-I peptides are a group of important immunopeptides presented by major histocompatibility complex (MHC) on the cell surface for immune recognition. The majority of reported MHC-I peptides are derived from protein coding sequences, and noncanonical peptides translated from small open reading frames (sORF) are largely unknown due to the lack of accurate and sensitive detection methods. Herein we report an efficient approach that implements complementary bioinformatic strategies to improve the identification of noncanonical MHC-I peptides. In a database search strategy, noncanonical immunopeptides mapping was optimized by combining three complementary pipelines to construct predicted sORF databases from Ribo-seq data. In a <i>de novo</i> peptide sequencing strategy, MS data search results were filtered against sORF databases to pin down additional noncanonical immunopeptides. In total, 308 noncanonical immunopeptides were identified from two tumor cell lines with selected ones vigorously validated. Our approach is a handy solution to identify noncanonical MHC peptides with Ribo-seq and MS data. Meanwhile, the novel noncanonical immunopeptides identified with this method could shed insights on fundamental immunology as well as cancer immunotherapies.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Ribotish, Price, Sorf, Mhc-i, Non-canonical peptides

### Affiliations
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
Zhao lab, Department of Applied Biology and Chemical Technology(ABCT)

### Submitter
Yuanliang Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Zhao Qian
Zhao lab, Department of Applied Biology and Chemical Technology(ABCT)


