### Accession
PXD008465

### Title
Peptidomic analysis of pancreatic neurodendocrine tumours (Glucagonoma)

### Description
A peptidomic analysis of plasma from patients with well characterised pancreatic neuroendocrine tumours (PNET) was performed. A nano LC-MS analysis identified a number of peptides from the glucagon gene, which were idenfiried in a previous case study using multiple immunoassays. Peptides to other proteins involved in peptide secretion were also identified. Plasma from a second glucagonoma patient was analysed using a high flow approach, and this identified similar peptides to the nano analysis. In order to demonstrate the potential clinical application of LC-MS to characterising neuroendocrine tumours, a large cohort of plasma samples were analysed to demonstrate the ability of this approach to identify glucagonoma patients, and differentiate from a single insulinoma patient

### Sample Protocol
Plasma was precipitated using an acetonitrile based extraction method. For nano LC-MS analysis, 50uL of sample was precipitated with 300uL of 80% ACN with or without formic acid. The supernatant was dried and transferred to a fresh plate and evaporated. The residue was reconstituted and extracted through SPE (waters HLB prime u-elution plate) the eluant was diluted and analysed by LC-MS. The high flow rate analysis involved a larger plasma extaction volume (250 uL)

### Data Protocol
For peptidomics analysis, LC-MS data was searched against the human swissprot database using PEAKS 8.5, with no digest setting, and precursor and product ion tollerances of 10 ppm and 0.05 Da. A FDR setting of 1% was used, however for proteins of particular interest, peptides with confidence values lower than the 1% cut off were investigated.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pancreatic neuroendocrine tumour, Glucagonoma, Plasma peptidomics

### Affiliations
Metabolic Research Laboratories, University of Cambridge
University of Cambridge

### Submitter
Richard Kay

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Fiona Gribble
Metabolic Research Laboratories, University of Cambridge


