### Accession
PXD001404

### Title
Off-line high pH reversed-phase fractionation for in-depth phosphoproteomics

### Description
In this study we provide a detailed analysis of the physicochemical characteristics of phosphopeptides, which have been fractionated by off-line high pH chromatography (HpH) before subsequent titanium dioxide (TiO2) enrichment and LC-MS/MS analysis. Our results demonstrate that HpH is superior to standard strong-cation exchange (SCX) fractionation in total number of phosphopeptides detected when analyzing the same number of fractions by identical 70 minutes LC-MS/MS gradients

### Sample Protocol
NIH/3T3 cells were lysed using RIPA buffer and protein lysates digested with Lys-C and Trypsin. Peptides were then desalted on a C18 Sep-Pak catridge. Peptides were fractionated using strong cation exchange and high pH reveresed-phase fractionation for a total of 14 fractions each. Each fraction was enriched using titanium dioxide metal oxide affinity chromatography (MOAC). All samples were analyzed using Thermo Fisher Q-Exactive Orbitrap or Q-Exactive Orbitrap Plus mass spectrometer coupled to a Easy-nLC 1000 liquid chromatography system using a data dependent aquisition methods.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant 1.4.1.4 with Andromeda search engine was used to analyze all LC/MS/MS data. HCD spectra was search against an in-silico tryptic digest of mus musculus proteins from the Uniprot sequence database (v. april 2014). For phosphopeptide identification, variable modifications such as acetyl (protein n-term, methionine oxidation, phosphorylation (STY), glutamine cyclization to pyroglutamate was used. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, maxium 3 missed cleavages were allowed. MS1 precursors were matched to 4.5 ppm tolerance, 20 ppm for fragment spectra. All PSM were filtered to 1% FDR, modified peptides required length of 7 and Andromeda score of 40 to be considered a positive hit.

### Publication Abstract
Protein phosphorylation is an important post-translational modification (PTM) involved in embryonic development, adult homeostasis, and disease. Over the past decade, several advances have been made in liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS)-based technologies to identify thousands of phosphorylation sites. However, in-depth phosphoproteomics often require off-line enrichment and fractionation techniques. In this study, we provide a detailed analysis of the physicochemical characteristics of phosphopeptides, which have been fractionated by off-line high-pH chromatography (HpH) before subsequent titanium dioxide (TiO2) enrichment and LC-MS/MS analysis. Our results demonstrate that HpH is superior to standard strong-cation exchange (SCX) fractionation in the total number of phosphopeptides detected when analyzing the same number of fractions by identical LC-MS/MS gradients. From 14 HpH fractions, we routinely identified over 30,000 unique phosphopeptide variants, which is more than twice the number of that obtained from SCX fractionation. HpH chromatography displayed an exceptional ability to fractionate singly phosphorylated peptides, with minor benefits for doubly phosphorylated peptides over that with SCX. Further optimizations in the pooling and concatenation strategy increased the total number of multiphosphorylated peptides detected after HpH fractionation. In conclusion, we provide a basic framework and resource for performing in-depth phosphoproteome studies utilizing off-line basic reversed-phased fractionation. Raw data is available at ProteomeXchange (PXD001404).

### Keywords
['Phosphoproteomics; high ph reversed-phase; phosphorylation; peptides;  enrichment; fractionation; titanium dioxide; orbitrap']

### Affiliations
['Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research Faculty of Health & Medical Sciences University of Copenhagen Blegdamsvej 3B  DK-2200 Copenhagen N Denmark', 'Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, University of Copenhagen']

### Submitter
['Tanveer Batth']

### Lab Head
[{'title': 'Dr', 'affiliation': 'Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research Faculty of Health & Medical Sciences University of Copenhagen Blegdamsvej 3B  DK-2200 Copenhagen N Denmark', 'email': 'jesper.olsen@cpr.ku.dk', 'country': '', 'orcid': '', 'name': 'Jesper V. Olsen', 'id': '11780100'}]

### SDRF
characteristics[organism]: ['Mus musculus']
characteristics[organism part]: ['embryo']
characteristics[disease]: ['not available']
characteristics[cell type]: ['fibroblast']
comment[label]: ['AC=MS:1002038;NT=label free sample']
comment[instrument]: ['AC=MS:1001911;NT=Q Exactive']
comment[modification parameters]: ['NT=Gln->pyro-Glu; MT=variable;TA=Q;AC=UNIMOD:28;PP=Any N-term']
comment[modification parameters].1: ['NT=Oxidation;MT=variable;TA=M;AC=UNIMOD:35']
comment[modification parameters].2: ['NT=Acetyl;AC=UNIMOD:1;PP=Protein N-term;MT=variable']
comment[modification parameters].3: ['NT=Phospho;MT=variable;TA=S,T,Y;AC=UNIMOD:21']
comment[Fractionation method]: ['NT=High-pH reversed-phase chromatography (hpHRP);AC=PRIDE:0000564'
 'NT=Strong cation-exchange chromatography;AC=PRIDE:0000561']

