### Accession
PXD024195

### Title
Complementary Proteome and Glycoproteome Access Revealed Through Comparative Analysis of Reversed Phase and Porous Graphitic Carbon Chromatography

### Description
Aided by improvements in instrumental and analytical techniques, rigorous connections have been drawn between glycoprotein expression, modification heterogeneity, and a variety of human illnesses. These illnesses, such as various forms of cancer, are often associated with poor prognoses, prompting the need for more comprehensive characterization of the glycoproteome. Instrumental advancements, optimal and nascent dissociation techniques, and computational strategies present the largest area of glycoprotein profiling innovation, often neglecting potential benefits provided by alternative chromatography techniques. Porous graphitic carbon (PGC) represents a separation regime that has gained significant interest in glycomics research due to its mobile phase flexibility, increased retention of polar analytes and improved structural elucidation at higher temperatures. PGC has yet to be systematically compared against or in tandem with standard reversed phase liquid chromatography (RPLC) in high-throughput bottom-up glycoproteomics experiments, leaving the potential benefits unexplored. Performing comparative analysis of single and biphasic separation regimes at a range of column temperatures illustrates the advantages for each method. PGC separation is shown to selectively retain shorter, more hydrophilic glycopeptide species, imparting higher average charge, and exhibiting greater microheterogeneity coverage for identified glycosites. Additionally, we demonstrate that liquid-phase separation of glycopeptide isomers may be achieved when in both single and biphasic PGC separation, providing a means towards facile, multiplex glycopeptide characterization. Beyond this, we demonstrate how utilization of multiple separation regimes and column temperatures can aid in profiling the glycoproteome in tumorigenic and aggressive prostate cancer cells.

### Sample Protocol
As membrane proteins are known to be heavily glycosylated (cite) and of topical interest to cancer related studies (cite), a filter-aided sample-preparation (FASP) strategy was chosen to extract and digest proteins from PANC1, NT1, and T10 cell lines. This method is described in detail in the supplemental methods. Briefly, cells were resuspended in and washed with PBS, spinning at 14,000 rcf between washes. Cells were then resuspended in lysis buffer (8M Urea, protease inhibitor, 20mM HEPES) and lysed using via ultrasonication. Cell debris was removed and proteins were reduced and alkylated with centrifuge filtering between each step. Proteins were digested with trypsin (1:50) overnight at 37°C and desalted via reverse phase desalting cartridges. Volume was reduced in vacuum and concentration of peptides was estimated via Pierce Peptide Assay. Bovine fetuin, bovine ribonuclease B, and bovine a1-Acid Glycoprotein were reconstituted in ultrapure water. Concentration were estimated via Pierce BCA Assay and two 500mg aliquots of each protein were dried to completion under vacuum. Urea, DTT, and IAA were prepared at concentrations of 8M, 100mM, and 200mM concentrations, respectively, with 50mM tris-HCl. Dried protein was reconstituted in 100µL Urea and mixed at room temperature for 5 minutes. DTT was added to yield 2:5 DTT:protein ratio (26.32µL), mixed briefly and incubated for 1 hour at room temperature. IAA was then added to yield a 2:3 IAA:protein ratio (42.67µL), mixed and incubated at room temperature for 30 minutes in the dark. Excess IAA was quenched by addition of DTT, mixed and left to stand for 5 minutes. Solutions were then diluted to lower urea concentration to 0.9M and mixed 1:50 with trypsin. Proteins were digested overnight at 37°C and desalted via reverse phase desalting cartridges. The enrichment procedure has been reviewed and described previously, with the workflow detailed again in the supplemental information. Briefly, 200µL pipette tips were blocked with 3mg sterile cotton, and loaded with a hydrated polyhydroxyethyl-A resin. Weight of beads is adjusted according to the amount of peptide in use. Peptide mixture was added and allowed to bind through repeated centrifugation. Non-specific peptides were washed away using 80% ACN + 0.1% TFA with enriched glycopeptides eluted in 90% water + 5% FA. Prior to analysis glycopeptides were dried under vacuum and resuspended in LC/MS-grade water.

### Data Protocol
Preliminary results from analysis of PANC1 cell lysate digest were identified in PEAKS X (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc.) searching against the Uniprot reviewed human proteome. Glycopeptide data was annotated via Byonic (Protein Metrics). Standard glycopeptides were run against a custom database of Uniprot protein sequences while NT1 and T10 were searched against the same human proteome. The parameters used for PEAKS X and Byonic searching are described in the supplemental information.

### Publication Abstract
Continual developments in instrumental and analytical techniques have aided in establishing rigorous connections between protein glycosylation and human illness. These illnesses, such as various forms of cancer, are often associated with poor prognoses, prompting the need for more comprehensive characterization of the glycoproteome. While innovative instrumental and computational strategies have largely benefited glycoproteomic analyses, less attention is given to benefits gained through alternative, optimized chromatographic techniques. Porous graphitic carbon (PGC) chromatography has gained considerable interest in glycomics research due to its mobile phase flexibility, increased retention of polar analytes, and improved structural elucidation at higher temperatures. PGC has yet to be systematically compared against or in tandem with standard reversed phase liquid chromatography (RPLC) in high-throughput bottom-up glycoproteomic experiments, leaving the potential benefits unexplored. Performing comparative analysis of single and biphasic separation regimes at a range of column temperatures illustrates complementary advantages for each method. PGC separation is shown to selectively retain shorter, more hydrophilic glycopeptide species, imparting higher average charge, and exhibiting greater microheterogeneity coverage for identified glycosites. Additionally, we demonstrate that liquid-phase separation of glycopeptide isomers may be achieved through both single and biphasic PGC separations, providing a means towards facile, multidimensional glycopeptide characterization. Beyond this, we demonstrate how utilization of multiple separation regimes and column temperatures can aid in profiling the glycoproteome in tumorigenic and aggressive prostate cancer cells. RAW MS proteomic and glycoproteomic datasets have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD024196 (10.6019/PXD024196) and PXD024195, respectively.

### Keywords
Glycoproteomics, Proteomics, Mass spectrometry, Glycopeptides

### Affiliations
University of Wisconsin - Madison
University of Wisconsin-Madison

### Submitter
Daniel Delafield

### Lab Head
Dr Lingjun Li
University of Wisconsin-Madison


