### Accession
PXD006637

### Title
In vivo Brain GPCR Signaling Elucidated by Phosphoproteomics

### Description
Obtaining a systems view of G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) signaling in its native environment is the key in development of GPCR therapeutics with fewer side effects. Using the kappa opioid receptor (KOR) as model GPCR, we employed high-throughput phosphoproteomics to investigate downstream signaling induced by structurally diverse agonists in five mouse brain-regions. Through quantification of 50,000 different phosphosites, this approach yielded a systems view of KOR in vivo signaling, revealing novel mechanisms of drug action. Pathway-selective agonists elicited differential dynamic phosphorylation of synaptic proteins, linking GPCR signaling to modulation of brain functions. We also discovered enrichment of mTOR pathway in agonists associated with aversion, a side effect. Consequently, mTOR inhibition during KOR activation abolished aversion, while preserving therapeutic analgesic and anticonvulsant effects. Our results establish high-throughput phosphoproteomics as a general strategy to investigate GPCR in vivo signaling, enabling prediction and modulation of behavioral outcomes.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen brain tissues were transferred into "lysing matrix D" tubes, which contains 1.4mm ceramic beads (MP biomedicals), with 400μl lysis buffer (100mM Tris pH 8.5, 4% SDS). Samples were then lysed using Fastprep 24 (MP biomedicals) at speed 4m/s. The samples were then spun down at the top speed for 90 minutes. Frozen cell samples were processed in the sample buffer. After heating for 10 min at 95 °C, cold acetone was added to each tube to induce protein precipitation to reach 4:1 (acetone: sample v/v). Protein precipitates were re-dissolved into 500μl of the resuspension buffer (100mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC), 100mM Tri pH 8.5, 10% 2,2,2-trifluoroethanol (TFE), 10mM tris(2-carboyehtyl)phosphine(TCEP), 40mM 2-choloroacetamide (CAA)). After incubation at 50 °C for 10 min, samples were transferred into a 96-deep well plate (DWP), from which the protein concentration was determined using the BCA assay. From then on, all the following steps were conducted in parallel. The EasyPhos protocol was then applied to the samples as described previously1. Briefly, samples were treated with trypsin and LysC at 100:1 (protein:enzyme w/w) with agitation (2000 r.p.m.) at 37 °C. 150 μl 3.2M KCl, 55 μl 150mM kH2PO4, 800 μl Acetonitrile (ACN), 95 μl trifluoroacetic (TFA) was added to each sample. Digested peptides were enriched with TiO2 beads at (10:1 beads:protein w/w) at 40 °C for 5 min at 2000 r.p.m.. Afterwards, the phosphopeptide containing TiO2 beads were further washed with 4ml wash buffer (60% ACN, 1% TFA), and treated with elution buffer (40% ACN, 15% NH4OH). Eluted phosphopeptides were concentrated in a SpeedVac for 15 min at 45 °C, during which process the volatile salts such as NH4OH and ABC are removed. The samples were then desalted using StageTips loaded with SDB-RPS discs, and again concentrated in a SpeedVac until dry. 6 μl MS loading buffer (2% ACN, 0.3% TFA) was added to the samples, which were then sonicated for 5 min in a bath sonicator. HPLC chromatography and MS measurements: Samples were load into the EASY-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Fischer Scientific) coupled to the MS (Q Exactive HF, Thermo Fischer Scientific). An in-house packed 50cm C18 column, with 1.9 μM ReproSil particles (Dr. Maisch GmbH) and self-made nanospray ion source, was connected to the EASY-nLC 1000 system, and nested inside a homemade column oven that is maintained at 50 °C. Peptides were introduced onto the column with buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and eluted with a 140 min gradient of 5-25% of Buffer B (60% ACN, 0.1% formic acid), both at a flowrate of 300 nl/min. The standard data-dependent acquisition (TopN) MS method was used. One full scan (300-1600, m/z, R = 60,000 at 200 m/z) at a target of 3e6 ions was first performed. This was followed by 10 data-dependent MS/MS scans after higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) (target 1e5 ions, max ion fill time 120 ms, isolation window 1.6 m/z, normalized collision energy (NCE) 27%, underfill ratio 40%, R=15,000 at 200m/z). Dynamic exclusion of 60s and apex trigger (4 to 7 s) were enabled.

### Data Protocol
Bioinformatic work-flow and data analysis The raw MS spectra were processed using MaxQuant version 1.5.5.2 (ref 2). A false-discovery rate (FDR) < 0.01 at the level of peptide-spectrum matching, protein assembly and modifications identification were used. FDR of protein, peptide identification was calculated through a target-decoy approach using the reverse database. This step was performed in the Andromeda search engine3 integrated in the MaxQuant environment. Searches were performed using the Mouse UniProt FASTA database (September 2014). In addition to the default setting of "variable modification", phospho (STY) was selected to allow bioinformatic identification of phosphopeptides. The "match between runs" (MBR) feature was turned on with a matching window of 1 min. Quantification of phosphopeptides was enabled using the default setting in MaxQuant. Briefly, the maximum point of the extracted ion chromatogram (XIC) was used. The further bio-informatics analysis was conducted in Perseus (version 1.5.2.17)(ref 4), Microsoft Excel, and R statistical computing software. Annotations were extracted from Gene Ontology (GO)(ref 5), Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG). The synaptic proteins are annotated based on the synaptome database (http://metamoodics.org/SynaptomeDB/) (ref6). The kinase-substrate is based on the phosphositeplus database (phosphosite.org) (ref7). Interaction network analysis was performed using the web-based the string database (string-db.org), using the active data source of "Experiments" and "Database " and the biogrid interaction data depository (https://thebiogrid.org/). Cytoscape (version 3.3.0) and its plugin jActiveModules were used to analyze the architecture of subnetworks and to visualize the interaction data8. Most pair-wise t-tests was conducted using Welch's t test formula in the Perseus environment unless stated otherwise. The multiple sample comparison was performed using analysis of variance (ANOVA) with post hoc Dunnett's test using the "multicomp" package in R. Both annotation enrichment analyses, the Fischer's exact test and "annotation matrix", were performed inside the Perseus environment. Data normalization was also performed in the Perseus environment. Briefly, after valid value filtering (at least one valid value in each group), a median subtract was performed. This is under the assumption that the majority of phosphoproteome is unperturbed by the ligand stimulation. Furthermore, in case that a batch effect is observed i.e. experiments were measured in separate MS sessions, PCA component subtraction normalization was performed. The component in PCA that is correlated with the batch effect is removed by multiplying the each sample with own normalization factor. Interaction network analysis After normalization, data was subjected to statistical tests. For instance, a pair-wise Welch's t-test was performed on U-50 and saline samples to determine U-50 regulated sites in each brain region after 5 min stimulation. The proteins, which carry the significantly regulated sites, were used as input to interaction analysis using either the String database or the Cytoscape plugin "jActiveModule" 8. In the jActiveModule analysis, Biogrid mouse interaction network was also used as an input. The jActiveModule analysis was originally designed to find the highly-connected modules or subnetworks, which exhibit similar response to the experimental condition. We further designated the response as changes in the phosphorylation level in our experiments. The consensus network between these two approaches in each brain region was chosen and shown. Categorical enrichment analysis Fischer's exact test was performed to reveal the annotations and pathways that are significantly enriched in the regulated group in each brain region. It yields the p-value, which indicates the degree of significance, and enrichment factor, which indicates the level of enrichment in comparison to the background. The “annotation matrix” algorithm described previously was also used to identify cellular mechanism, which harbor large-scale dynamic phosphorylation alteration. We reason that multiple dynamic phosphorylation perturbation on proteins, which belong to the same cellular mechanism, are likely to occur if the pathway were to be activated downstream. Therefore, we performed nonparametric Mann-Whitney U test between phosphosites carry the same annotation against the background.

### Publication Abstract
A systems view of G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) signaling in its native environment is central to the development of GPCR therapeutics with fewer side effects. Using the kappa opioid receptor (KOR) as a model, we employed high-throughput phosphoproteomics to investigate signaling induced by structurally diverse agonists in five mouse brain regions. Quantification of 50,000 different phosphosites provided a systems view of KOR in vivo signaling, revealing novel mechanisms of drug action. Thus, we discovered enrichment of the mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway by U-50,488H, an agonist causing aversion, which is a typical KOR-mediated side effect. Consequently, mTOR inhibition during KOR activation abolished aversion while preserving beneficial antinociceptive and anticonvulsant effects. Our results establish high-throughput phosphoproteomics as a general strategy to investigate GPCR in vivo signaling, enabling prediction and modulation of behavioral outcomes.

### Keywords
Gpcr brain phosphoproteomics

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry
Max-Planck-Institute of Biochemistry

### Submitter
Jeffrey Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Max-Planck-Institute of Biochemistry


