### Accession
PXD000020

### Title
The metabolic regulation of sporulation and parasporal crystal formation in Bacillus thuringiensis revealed by transcriptomics and proteomics

### Description
Proteomics on B. thuringiensis CT_43 cells in GYS medium. Two biological replicate cell samples were collected at time points of 7 h, 9 h, 13 h and 22 h, respectively. The crude proteins were purified using the ReadyPrep 2-D Cleanup Kit, underwent the reductive alkylation, tryptically digested, and were labeled with 8-plex iTRAQ reagents as follows: 7 h-1, 113; 7 h-2, 114; 9 h-1, 115; 9 h-2, 116; 13 h-1, 117; 13 h-2, 118; 22 h-1, 119; and 22 h-2, 121. The labeled samples were pooled and resolved into 12 fractions, which were loaded onto LC-MSMS.

### Sample Protocol
CT-43 cells were grown at 28 °C with shaking at 200 rpm in liquid GYS medium (12), comprised of (NH4)2SO4, 2 g; MgSO4·7H2O, 0.3 g; ZnSO4·7H2O, 0.005 g; MnSO4·4H2O, 0.05 g; CaCl2, 0.08 g; CuSO4·5H2O, 0.005g; FeSO4·7H2O, 0.0005g; K2HPO4, 0.5g; glucose, 1.0 g; and yeast extract 2.0 g/L (pH 7.4). Two biological replicate cell samples were collected by centrifugation (6000 × g, 5 min, 4 °C) at 7 h, 9 h, 13 h, and 22 h. Each sample was divided into two parts for whole-genome transcriptomics and proteomics analyses.

### Data Protocol
The reads of each sample were mapped to reference genome using BlastN with a threshold e value of 0.00001 and the “-F F” parameter (13), which allowed mapping of reads to the genome with up to two mismatches. Reads mapped to rRNA and reads not mapped under these parameters were excluded from further analysis. The number of reads mapped to each gene was recorded. Firstly, the read number of each gene was transformed into RPKM (Reads Per Kilo bases per Million reads) (14), and then differently expressed genes were identified by the DEGseq package using the MARS (MA-plot-based method with Random Sampling model) method (15). We used FDR ≤ 0.001 and an absolute value of log2Ratio ≥ 1 as the threshold to judge the significance of gene expression difference.

### Publication Abstract
Bacillus thuringiensis is a well-known entomopathogenic bacterium used worldwide as an environmentally compatible biopesticide. During sporulation, B. thuringiensis accumulates a large number of parasporal crystals consisting of insecticidal crystal proteins (ICPs) that can account for nearly 20-30% of the cell's dry weight. However, the metabolic regulation mechanisms of ICP synthesis remain to be elucidated. In this study, the combined efforts in transcriptomics and proteomics mainly uncovered the following 6 metabolic regulation mechanisms: (1) proteases and the amino acid metabolism (particularly, the branched-chain amino acids) became more active during sporulation; (2) stored poly-&#x3b2;-hydroxybutyrate and acetoin, together with some low-quality substances provided considerable carbon and energy sources for sporulation and parasporal crystal formation; (3) the pentose phosphate shunt demonstrated an interesting regulation mechanism involving gluconate when CT-43 cells were grown in GYS medium; (4) the tricarboxylic acid cycle was significantly modified during sporulation; (5) an obvious increase in the quantitative levels of enzymes and cytochromes involved in energy production via the electron transport system was observed; (6) most F0F1-ATPase subunits were remarkably up-regulated during sporulation. This study, for the first time, systematically reveals the metabolic regulation mechanisms involved in the supply of amino acids, carbon substances, and energy for B. thuringiensis spore and parasporal crystal formation at both the transcriptional and translational levels.

### Keywords
Bacillus thuringiensis lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, College of Life Science and Technology, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, Hubei 430070, PRC
Huazhong Agricultural University

### Submitter
Jieping Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Jin He
State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, College of Life Science and Technology, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, Hubei 430070, PRC


