### Accession
PXD038553

### Title
Comparative Proteomics Analysis of Exosomes Identifies Key Pathways and Protein Markers Related to Breast Cancer Me-tastasis

### Description
The proteomics analysis of circulating exosomes derived from cancer cells represents a promising approach to the elucidation of cell-cell communication and the discovery of putative biomarker candidates for cancer diagnosis and treatment. Nonetheless, the proteome of exosomes derived from cell lines with different metastatic capabilities still warrants further investigation. Here, we present a comprehensive quantitative proteomics investigation of exosomes isolated from im-mortalized mammary epithelial cells and matched tumor lines with different metastatic potential, in an attempt to discover exosome markers specific to breast cancer (BC) metastasis. A total of 2,135 unique proteins were quantified with a high confidence level from 20 isolated exosome samples, including 94 of the TOP 100 exosome markers archived by ExoCarta, e.g., CD9, HSPa8, and PDCD6IP. Moreover, 344 altered proteins were observed, among which several metastasis-specific markers, including CATW, MRS2, SDCB2, RTN4, and RAD23B, were also identified. Notably, the abundance of these metastasis-specific corresponds well with the overall survival of BC patients in clinical settings. Together, these data provide a valuable dataset for BC exosome proteomics in-vestigation and prominently facilitate the elucidation of the molecular mechanisms underlying primary tumor development and progression.

### Sample Protocol
EpH4-Ev, a non-tumorigenic mouse mammary epithelial cell line, was selected as the baseline control for proteomics comparison. In addition, four derived tumorigenic cell lines were also employed in the study, including EpH4-Ev, EpH4-B-MEKDD 116 and EpH4-1424 (primary tumor cells); EpH4-1424.1 (kidney metastasis cells) and EpH4-1424.2 (lung metastasis cells) These cell lines are frequently adopted in the investigation of the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), as well as metastasis. Exosomes were isolated via an efficient and robust multi-step centrifugation procedure and subjected to a surfactant cocktail (SC)-aided extrac-tion/precipitation/on-pellet digestion (SEPOD) protocol for exhaustive and reproducible protein digestion.The derived peptides were analyzed by using a trapping nano liquid chromatography (LC)-Orbitrap mass spectrometry (MS) system, which features a selective peptide delivery strategy and long-column, long-gradient nano LC separation to maximize the sensitivity of the LC-MS.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS raw files were analyzed by using the UHR-IonStar data-processing pipeline in an in-house-developed R-shiny APP to generate the quantification results. The list of Mus musculus and Homo sapiens exosome proteins were subset from two well-established extracellular vesicle/exosome databases, Vesiclepedia and ExoCarta. The gene ontology and KEGG pathway analysis was performed by the Database for Annota-tion, Visualization, and Integrated Discovery (DAVID) Bioinformatics Resources 6.8 (https://david.abcc.ncifcrf.gov). RPA was performed using the Reactome Pathway Data-base (https://reactome.org/). GO terms and KEGG/Reactome pathways with p-values < 0.05 after the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure were exported and manually curated. The identification of associations between the exosome proteins identified and human diseas-es was performed by DisGeNet (https://www.disgenet.org). A protein-protein interaction network was established by STRINGDB (https://string-db.org/). A survival analysis of se-lected proteins was accomplished using gene expression profiling interactive analysis (GEPIA; http://gepia.cancer-pku.cn). The plotting of figures was performed via GraphPad Prism and the ggplot2 package in R.

### Publication Abstract
Proteomics analysis of circulating exosomes derived from cancer cells represents a promising approach to the elucidation of cell-cell communication and the discovery of putative biomarker candidates for cancer diagnosis and treatment. Nonetheless, the proteome of exosomes derived from cell lines with different metastatic capabilities still warrants further investigation. Here, we present a comprehensive quantitative proteomics investigation of exosomes isolated from immortalized mammary epithelial cells and matched tumor lines with different metastatic potentials in an attempt to discover exosome markers specific to breast cancer (BC) metastasis. A total of 2135 unique proteins were quantified with a high confidence level from 20 isolated exosome samples, including 94 of the TOP 100 exosome markers archived by ExoCarta. Moreover, 348 altered proteins were observed, among which several metastasis-specific markers, including cathepsin W (CATW), magnesium transporter MRS2 (MRS2), syntenin-2 (SDCB2), reticulon-4 (RTN), and UV excision repair protein RAD23 homolog (RAD23B), were also identified. Notably, the abundance of these metastasis-specific markers corresponds well with the overall survival of BC patients in clinical settings. Together, these data provide a valuable dataset for BC exosome proteomics investigation and prominently facilitate the elucidation of the molecular mechanisms underlying primary tumor development and progression.

### Keywords
Exosomes; breast cancer; metastasis; quantitative proteomics; label-free quantification; ionstar

### Affiliations
University at Buffalo
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, State University of New York at Buffalo

### Submitter
Shichen Shen

### Lab Head
Dr Jun Qu
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, State University of New York at Buffalo


