### Accession
PXD035447

### Title
Mass spectrometry-based analysis on the impact of iron status and whole blood donation on the global plasma proteome

### Description
Blood donation is generally considered to be safe, however to ensure blood donor health it is important to monitor the impact of a whole blood donation.   Study design and methods   Here, we used quantitative mass spectrometry to assess the global plasma proteomic impact of longitudinal whole blood donation in 5 new and 4 regular donors over a period of 180 days as well as the effect on iron status, by selecting 78 donors based on high levels of ferritin and hemoglobin.     The majority of plasma proteins were stable between whole blood donors and demonstrated a low coefficient of variation, irrespective to iron status or donors status (new or regular). Longitudinal analysis showed limited differences between the plasma proteomes of regular and new upon a whole blood donation, apart from a consistent and significant short-term decrease in fibronectin. Plasma protein levels measured with MS highly correlated with blood count and lipid parameters, validating our MS-approach. Based on protein co-expression, we observed protein complexes of diverse biological processes, platelet and neutrophil signatures, complement and immune responses with a highly correlating cluster of IGHM, IGJ and CD5L. We showed higher inter- than intra-individual variation, most notably of immunoglobulins and allelic variants for alpha-1 antitrypsin.     Overall, this study shows that whole blood donation has limited impact for both new and regular donors apart from short-term decreases in fibronectin and that varying iron statuses do not affect the global plasma proteome. We showed that individual specific signatures were reflected on the plasma proteome as well as detection of allelic variants

### Sample Protocol
Plasma was diluted 1:20 with 100 mM TRIS pH 8.0 and 2.86 μl was mixed with 10 μl 1% Sodium Deoxy Cholate (BioWORLD, USA), 10mMTris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA), 40mM Chloroacetamide (Sigma Aldrich, Germany), 100mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0 (Life Technologies, UK), and boiled at 95°C for 5 minutes. Proteins were digested overnight at room temperature with 250 ng MS-grade trypsin (Promega) in 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0. Peptides were purified using C18 cartridges on the AssayMAP Bravo platform (Agilent technologies) using the manufacturer provided protocol. The eluate was completely dried using a SpeedVac centrifuge at 45°C (Eppendorf, Concentrator plus), resuspended in 12 μl 2% v/v acetonitrile, 0.1% v/v trifluoroacetic acid, (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Peptides were then subjected to LC‐MS/MS analysis. For each sample 3 μl was injected for MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Tryptic peptides were separated by nanoscale C18 reverse phase chromatography coupled on line to an Orbitrap Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) via a nanoelectrospray ion source (Nanospray Flex Ion Source, Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded on a 20 cm 75–360 µm inner-outer diameter fused silica emitter (New Objective) packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 1.9 μm resin (Dr Maisch GmbH). The column was installed on a Dionex Ultimate3000 RSLC nanoSystem (Thermo Scientific) using a titanium Tee union formatted for 360 μm outer diameter columns (IDEX) and a liquid junction. The column temperature was kept at 40°C by a PRSO-V2 column oven (Sonation Lab solutions). The spray voltage was set to 2.15 kV. Buffer A was composed of 0.1% formic acid and buffer B of 0.1 % formic acid, 80% acetonitrile. Peptides were loaded for 17 min at 300 nl /min at 5% buffer B, equilibrated for 5 minutes at 5% buffer B (17-22 min) and eluted by increasing buffer B from 5-27.5% (22-122 min) and 27.5-40% (122-132 min), followed by a 5-minute wash to 95% and a 6 min regeneration to 5%. Survey scans of peptide precursors from 375 to 1500 m/z were performed at 120K resolution (at 200 m/z) with a 4x105 ion count target. Tandem mass spectrometry was performed by isolation with the quadrupole with isolation window 0.7, HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 30, and rapid scan mass spectrometry analysis in the ion trap. The MS2 ion count target was set to 3x104 and the max injection time was 20 ms. Only those precursors with charge state 2–7 were sampled for MS2. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 30 s with a 10-ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on. The instrument was run in top speed mode with 3 s cycles.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Massspectrometry, Whole blood donors, Proteomics, Plasma profiling

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Hematology, Sanquin Research, Amsterdam
department molecular hematology

### Submitter
Arie Hoogendijk

### Lab Head
Dr M van den Biggelaar
department molecular hematology


