### Accession
PXD001943

### Title
Shotgun proteomic analysis of embryonic axis of soybean seeds during germination under salt stress

### Description
Salinity is one of the main environmental stresses worldwide limiting soybean growth and yield. Seed imbibition and radical emergence are generally less affected by salinity in soybean. Towards unraveling the mechanisms underlying salt tolerance in soybean at germination stage, a comprehensive quantitative proteomic analysis of proteins from soybean embryonic axis during germination sensu stricto (GSS) under saline conditions was performed. Application of 100 and 200 mmol L-1 NaCl at GSS was significantly accompanied by the change in abundance (>2-fold) of 97 and 75 proteins, respectively. Most of these proteins were involved in three major functions, namely stress response and defense, protein turnover and protection and primary metabolism. Our results pave the way towards the identification of suitable biomarkers useful for improving salt tolerance in soybean.

### Sample Protocol
Soybean seeds have been germinated under different salt stress conditions, then the embryonic axis tissue was ground into a fine powder by a mortar and pestle using liquid nitrogen. The powder (100 mg) was suspended in 500 μL of cold extraction buffer. The supernatant (400 µL) was transferred to a new centrifuge tube, and four volumes of cold acetone with 0.07% (v/v) β-mercaptoethanol were added and incubated at −20°C overnight. The insoluble fraction was pelleted by centrifugation at 18000 RCF for 45 min at 4 °C. The supernatants were discarded and the protein pellet was slowly dried and solubilized in 8 mol L-1 urea, 50 mmol L-1 NH4HCO3 (pH 8.5) and 10 mmol L-1 DTT. Proteins were quantified by Bradford assay using BSA standard. Protein samples were reduced, alkylated, and digested with trypsin as previously described.19 After digestion and off-line desalting each sample was re-constituted with 0.1% (v/v) HCOOH aqueous solution and stored at −80°C until analysis.

### Data Protocol
All raw files were analyzed together using the software MaxQuant (version 1.5.1.2). The derived peak list was searched with the built-in Andromeda search engine20 against the reference proteome of Glycine Max downloaded from Uniprot (http://www.uniprot.org/) on 11-2013 (64675 sequences) and a file containing 247 frequently observed contaminants such as human keratins. Strict trypsin specificity was required allowing up to 2 missed cleavages.The minimum required peptide length was set to 6 amino acids. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification and N-acetylation of proteins N-termini and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications. As no labeling was performed, multiplicity was set to 1. Mass deviations of 4.5 ppm and 0.5 Da were allowed for parent and fragment ions, respectively. Peptide spectrum match and protein identifications were filtered using a target-decoy approach at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. The second peptide feature was enabled. The match between runs option was also enabled with a match time window of 0.7 min and an alignment time window of 20 min. Protein identifications were accepted if determined by a minimum of two peptides, with at least one of them being uniquely assignable to the corresponding sequence, and found in at least six out of nine LC-MS/MS runs. Relative, label-free quantification of proteins was done using the MaxLFQ algorithm21 integrated into MaxQuant, and with the following parameters: minimum ratio count was set to 2, the FastLFQ option was enabled, LFQ minimum number of neighbors was set to 3 and the LFQ average number of neighbors to 6.

### Publication Abstract
Seed imbibition and radicle emergence are generally less affected by salinity in soybean than in other crop plants. In order to unveil the mechanisms underlying this remarkable salt tolerance of soybean at seed germination, a comparative label-free shotgun proteomic analysis of embryonic axes exposed to salinity during germination sensu stricto (GSS) was conducted. The results revealed that the application of 100 and 200 mmol/L NaCl stress was accompanied by significant changes (&gt;2-fold, P&lt;0.05) of 97 and 75 proteins, respectively. Most of these salt-responsive proteins (70%) were classified into three major functional categories: disease/defense response, protein destination and storage and primary metabolism. The involvement of these proteins in salt tolerance of soybean was discussed, and some of them were suggested to be potential salt-tolerant proteins. Furthermore, our results suggest that the cross-protection against aldehydes, oxidative as well as osmotic stress, is the major adaptive response to salinity in soybean.

### Keywords
Salt tolerance, Gel-free proteomics, Biomarkers, Embryonic axis, Glycine max (l.) merrill, Label-free quantification

### Affiliations
university la Sapienza, Roma
Department of Chemistry, Sapienza Università di Roma, Piazzale Aldo Moro 5, 00185 Rome, Italy

### Submitter
Riccardo Zenezini Chiozzi

### Lab Head
Dr Aldo Laganà
Department of Chemistry, Sapienza Università di Roma, Piazzale Aldo Moro 5, 00185 Rome, Italy


