### Accession
PXD029039

### Title
Well-plate uFASP for proteomic analysis of single pancreatic islets

### Description
Filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) is widely used in bottom-up proteomics for tryptic digestion. However, the sample recovery yield of this method is limited by the amount of starting material. While ~100 ng of digested protein sample is sufficient for thorough protein identification, proteomic information gets lost after digestion of samples with a protein content < 10 µg due to incomplete peptide recovery from the filter. By reducing the filter area as well as the volumes of all reagents, we developed and optimized a well-plate µFASP device and protocol that is suitable for ~1 µg protein sample. In 1 µg of HeLa digest, we identified 1295 ± 10 proteins with our method followed by analysis with liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry. In contrast, only 524 ± 5 proteins were identified with the standard FASP protocol while 1395 ± 4 proteins were identified in 20 µg after standard FASP as a benchmark. Furthermore, we used our method to conduct a combined peptidomic and proteo-mic study of single islets of Langerhans. Here, we separated neuropeptides from single islets as effluents from a ⌀ 1 mm molecular cut-off filter and digested the remaining on-filter proteins for bottom-up proteomic analysis. Our results indicate inter-islet heterogeneity for expression of proteins involved in glucose catabolism, pancreatic hormone processing and secreted peptide hormones.  We consider our method to provide a useful tool for proteomic characterization of samples where biological material is scarce.

### Sample Protocol
For protein purification and tryptic digestion, different amounts of total protein (20, 10, 5, 1, 0.5 µg) were transferred onto centrifugal filter units (Microcon-30 kDa; Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) and processed as reported previous-ly.15 Briefly, washing with a buffer containing 8 M urea and 100 mM Tris (pH 8.5) was followed by the reduction with 8 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and the alkylation with 50 mM iodoacetamide (IAA). Excess IAA was removed with 8 mM DTT. After washing the filter with NH4HCO3 three times trypsin was added (enzyme-protein-ratio 1:50 (w/w)) and the samples were incubated in a wet chamber at 37 °C for 16 h. Resulting peptides were washed from the filter by adding 50 mM NH4HCO3 twice. Each time followed by centrifugation at 14000 g for 10 min.  Before drying the samples at 45 °C trifluoroacetic acid was added to a final concentration of 1 % (v/v). Afterwards, the samples were reconstituted in 3 % acetonitrile and 0.1 % formic acid in water to a final concen-tration of 150 ng protein/ µL.   Sample preparation with µFASP Filter membranes (molecular cut off 30 kDa, Hydrosart, Sartorius Stedim Biotech GmbH, Göttingen, Germany) were inserted into the µFASP plate by using a biopsy punch. The plate with mounted filters was installed on a 96 well plate, immediately wetted with1 µL 1 % formic acid and centrifu-gated at 500 g for 3 min (Fig. 1A, S1D). HeLa cell lysate with different amounts of protein (5, 2.5, 1, 0.5, 0.3 µg) was loaded onto the filter followed by another centrifugation (500 g, 3 min). The volumes pipetted onto the filters during the following steps were always 1 µL. Each step was followed by centrifugation at 500 g for 3 min. After washing the filters with a buffer containing 8 M urea and 100 mM Tris (pH 8.5), DTT (8 mM) was added and the whole device incubated at 37 °C for 15 min. For alkylation, the samples were incubated with 50 mM IAA at room temperature for 20 min and then again with 8 mM DTT at 37 °C for 15 min. Each of these steps was followed by washing the filters twice with the urea-Tris buffer. Before adding trypsin (enzyme-protein-ratio 1:50 (w/w)) the filters were washed with 50 mM NH4HCO3 three times and the plate with the filters was put on a new well plate. After 16 h of incubation at 37 °C in a wet chamber and centrifugation at 500 g for 3 min the filters were washed with 50 mM NH4HCO3 twice and the tryptic peptides were collected in the 96 well plate by cen-trifugation at 500 g 5 min each. A solution of 3 % acetoni-trile and 0.1 % formic acid in water was added to a final protein concentration of 150 ng/ µL. Single islets of Langerhans were separated in 2 µL medium into PCR tubes. 2 µL of lysis buffer were added and the samples were lyzed by freezing-thawing them twice. The lysates were transferred in two portions onto the activated FASP plate. The flow through from the loading and the first washing step with urea buffer was collected and injected directly into the LC–MS system. Then it was proceeded according to the protocol described above (Fig. 1B). For in solution digestion, the same reagents as described before were used. First 1 µL DTT was added followed by an incubation at 37 °C for 15 min and then 1 µL IAA. After 20 min incubating at room temperature trypsin was added (enzyme-protein-ratio 1:50 (w/w)). The incubation at 37 °C overnight was stopped by adding 50 mM NH4HCO3 and trifluoroacetic acid (final concentration of 1 % (v/v)). After-wards the samples were dried and reconstituted in 2.7 µL of a solution containing 3 % acetonitrile and 0.1 % formic acid in water.  Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry For tryptic peptide analysis, a nanoAcquity UPLC system equipped with a C18, 5 µm, 180 µm x 20 mm trap column and a HSS-T3 C18 1.8 µm, 75 µm x 250 mm analytical column was coupled to a Synapt G2 Si HDMS mass spec-trometer with an electrospray ionization source (Waters Corporation, Manchester, UK). Mobile phase A contained 0.1 % formic acid and 3 % dimethyl sulfoxide in water and mobile phase B 0.1 % formic acid and 3 % dimethyl sulfox-ide in acetonitrile. 300 ng of protein were injected in trap-ping mode. The peptides were separated at 40 °C with a gradient run from 3–40 % (v/v) mobile phase B at a flow rate of 0.3 µL/min over 120 min. Via the reference channel a lock mass solution composed of [Glu1]-fibrinopeptide B (0.1 µM) and leu-enkephalin (1 uM) was introduced every 60 s. Peptides analysis was performed in positive ionization mode using the UDMSE approach. Reproducibility and stability of the method was controlled with a commercially available HeLa digest (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA).

### Data Protocol
ProteinLynx Global Server (version 3.0.3, Waters Corporation, Milford, MA) was used for data processing. The HeLa samples were searched with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 against a randomized UniProt human database (Uni-ProtKB version 14/01/2020) with carbamidomethyl cysteine set as a fixed modification, acetyl lysine, C-terminal ami-dation, asparagine deamidation, glutamine deamidation and methionine oxidation as variable modification and trypsin as digest reagent. One missed cleavage was allowed. Minimum peptide matches per protein were 2, and minimum ion matches per peptide and protein were 1 and 3, respectively. The islet digests were searched with the same parameter but without any modification settings against a randomized mouse database (UniProtKB version 14/01/2020). Both, tryptic digests of islets and collected flow through samples, were additionally searched against the SwePEP database.  Identified proteins inferred from bottom-up proteomic analysis in PLGS were quantitated with the TOP3 method ob-tained directly from ISOQuant 1.83. Identified peptide hormone products from intact peptidomic analysis were quantitated with the iBAQ method. Briefly, intensities for all peptide products quantitated with ISOQuant and assigned to a preprohormone in the SwePEP database were imported to R.  The data was filtered where only quantitated peptide sequences matching with prohor-mone processing annotated in UniProt were retained. The peptide product intensities were then obtained as the mean of all intensities for the retained and matching peptides per peptide product.

### Publication Abstract
Filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) is widely used in bottom-up proteomics for tryptic digestion. However, the sample recovery yield of this method is limited by the amount of the starting material. While &#x223c;100 ng of digested protein is sufficient for thorough protein identification, proteomic information gets lost with a protein content &lt;10 &#x3bc;g due to incomplete peptide recovery from the filter. We developed and optimized a flexible well-plate &#x3bc;FASP device and protocol that is suitable for an &#x223c;1 &#x3bc;g protein sample. In 1 &#x3bc;g of HeLa digest, we identified 1295 &#xb1; 10 proteins with &#x3bc;FASP followed by analysis with liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry. In contrast, only 524 &#xb1; 5 proteins were identified with the standard FASP protocol, while 1395 &#xb1; 4 proteins were identified in 20 &#x3bc;g after standard FASP as a benchmark. Furthermore, we conducted a combined peptidomic and proteomic study of single pancreatic islets with well-plate &#x3bc;FASP. Here, we separated neuropeptides and digested the remaining on-filter proteins for bottom-up proteomic analysis. Our results indicate inter-islet heterogeneity for the expression of proteins involved in glucose catabolism, pancreatic hormone processing, and secreted peptide hormones. We consider our method to provide a useful tool for proteomic characterization of samples where the biological material is scarce. All proteomic data are available under DOI: 10.6019/PXD029039.

### Keywords
Method development, Fasp, Islets of langerhans

### Affiliations
Department of Pharmaceutical Biosciences, Uppsala University
Uppsala University

### Submitter
Erik Jansson

### Lab Head
Dr Erik Jansson
Department of Pharmaceutical Biosciences, Uppsala University


