### Accession
PXD032076

### Title
Identification of carcinogenesis and tumor progression processes in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma using high-throughput proteomics

### Description
Pancreatic adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is an aggressive disease with an overall 5 year-survival rate of just 5%. A better understanding of both the carcinogenesis processes and the mechanisms of progression of PDAC disease is mandatory. For this, proteomics data from FFPE samples of 173 primary tumor, normal tissue, preneoplastic lesions (PanIN), or lymph node metastases were analyzed from a Systems Biology perspective. Protein expression data was analyzed using probabilistic graphical models, allowing functional characterization. Functional node activities were calculated as the mean of expression of those proteins related to the main function of each node. Comparisons between groups were done using linear mixed models.

### Sample Protocol
FFPE sections were deparaffined in xylene and washed twice in absolute ethanol. Proteins isolates were prepared in 2% of SDS. Protein quantity was measured using MicroBCA Protein Assay Kit (Pierce-Thermo Scientific). Finally, 10 µg of each protein extract were digested with trypsin (1:50) and SDS was eliminated from the lysates using Detergent Removal Spin Columns (Pierce). Before mass-spectrometry experiments, samples were desalted using ZipTips (Millipore), dried, and resolubilized in 15 µL of a 0.1% formic acid and 3% acetonitrile solution. Peptides were acidified to perform a stage-tip cleanup using two Empore reversed-phase extraction disks (3M) (13). Digests were dried in a SpeedVac and stored at −20°C until LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptides were re-solubilized in 20 µl of 3% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid and 1 µl of indexed retention time (iRT)-peptides (Biognosys) were spiked in each sample for MS analysis. For the DDA analysis and subsequent spectral library generation, a small volume of each sample was taken and combined into a total of 10 pooled samples. Mass spectrometry analysis was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a Digital PicoView source (New Objective) and coupled to a M-Class UPLC (Waters). Solvent composition of the two channels was 0.1% formic acid for channel A and 0.1% formic acid, 99.9% acetonitrile for channel B. For each sample 2 μl of peptides were loaded on a commercial MZ Symmetry C18 Trap Column (100Å, 5 µm, 180 µm x 20 mm, Waters) followed by nanoEase MZ C18 HSS T3 Column (100Å, 1.8 µm, 75 µm x 250 mm, Waters). The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. After an initial hold at 5% B for 3 min, a gradient from 5 to 22% B in 109 min and 32% B in 8 min was applied. The column was washed with 95% B for 5 min and afterwards the column was re-equilibrated to starting conditions for additional 10 min. For library generation using the pooled samples, the mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode (DDA) acquiring a full-scan MS spectra (350−1’500 m/z) at a resolution of 120’000 at 200 m/z after accumulation to a target value of 400’000. Data-dependent MS/MS were recorded in the Orbitrap using quadrupole isolation with a window of 1.4 Da and HCD fragmentation with 30% fragmentation energy. Orbitrap resolution was set to 30’000, maximum injection time to 54 ms with a target value of 50’000, and the cycle time was set to 3 s. Charge state screening was enabled. Singly, unassigned, and charge states higher than seven were rejected. Precursor masses previously selected for MS/MS measurement were excluded from further selection for 25 s. For quantitative analysis of individual samples, the mass spectrometer was operated in data-independent mode (DIA). DIA scans covered a range from 400 to 1100 m/z in windows of 20 m/z. The resolution of the DIA windows was set to 30000, with an AGC target value of 50’000, the maximum injection time set to Dynamic and a fixed normalized collision energy (NCE) of 30. Each instrument cycle was completed by a full MS scan monitoring 350 to 2000 m/z at a resolution of 120000.

### Data Protocol
A hybrid spectral library was generated using the Pulsar search engine and spectral library generation functionality in Spectronaut (14.0.200601.47784, Biognosys) applying the default parameter settings to DDA and DIA runs. Spectra were searched against a canonical SwissProt database for human and common protein contaminants (NCBI taxonomy ID9606, release date 20190709). Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification, while methionine oxidation and N-terminal protein acetylation were set as variable modifications. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin/P allowing a minimal peptide length of 7 amino acids and a maximum of two missed-cleavages. Precursor and fragment tolerance was set to Dynamic, respectively for the initial search. The maximum false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 for peptides and 0.01 for proteins. Protein quantification was performed in Spectronaut using the default settings. The quantitative data were extracted using the BGS Factory Report (default) and used for follow-up analyses. Stringent filtering of the extracted feature groups by the Spectronaut reported q-Value was applied. For precursor fragment groups we required a per run q-value at most 0.05 and a per experiment q-value of at most 0.01. The q-value sparse mode was used in combination with a global imputing strategy. To perform statistical modeling, fragment intensities were aggregated into precursor and peptide intensities. Proteomics data was transformed into log2. At least 75% of valid values in at least one group (non-tumor tissue, PanIN, primary tumor, and lymph nodes) was applied as quality criterion. Then, missing values were imputed to a normal distribution using Perseus software.

### Publication Abstract
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is an aggressive disease with an overall 5-year survival rate of just 5%. A better understanding of the carcinogenesis processes and the mechanisms of the progression of PDAC is mandatory. Fifty-two PDAC patients treated with surgery and adjuvant therapy, with available primary tumors, normal tissue, preneoplastic lesions (PanIN), and/or lymph node metastases, were selected for the study. Proteins were extracted from small punches and analyzed by LC-MS/MS using data-independent acquisition. Proteomics data were analyzed using probabilistic graphical models, allowing functional characterization. Comparisons between groups were made using linear mixed models. Three proteomic tumor subtypes were defined. T1 (32% of patients) was related to adhesion, T2 (34%) had metabolic features, and T3 (34%) presented high splicing and nucleoplasm activity. These proteomics subtypes were validated in the PDAC TCGA cohort. Relevant biological processes related to carcinogenesis and tumor progression were studied in each subtype. Carcinogenesis in the T1 subtype seems to be related to an increase of adhesion and complement activation node activity, whereas tumor progression seems to be related to nucleoplasm and translation nodes. Regarding the T2 subtype, it seems that metabolism and, especially, mitochondria act as the motor of cancer development. T3 analyses point out that nucleoplasm, mitochondria and metabolism, and extracellular matrix nodes could be involved in T3 tumor carcinogenesis. The identified processes were different among proteomics subtypes, suggesting that the molecular motor of the disease is different in each subtype. These differences can have implications for the development of future tailored therapeutic approaches for each PDAC proteomics subtype.

### Keywords
Linear mixed model, Pdac, Ffpe, Lymph node, Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma, Huamn, Metastasis

### Affiliations
Medical Oncology Service, Hospital Universitario La Paz-IdiPAZ, Madrid
ETH

### Submitter
Antje Dittmann

### Lab Head
Dr Jamie Feliu
Medical Oncology Service, Hospital Universitario La Paz-IdiPAZ, Madrid


