### Accession
PXD019789

### Title
Root isoprene formation alters lateral root development Maja Miloradovic van Doorn

### Description
Isoprene is a C5 volatile organic compound, which can protect aboveground plant tissue from abiotic stress such as short-term high temperatures and accumulation of reactive oxygen species (ROS). Here, we uncover new roles for isoprene in the plant belowground tissues. By analyzing Populus x canescens isoprene synthase (PcISPS) promoter reporter plants, we discovered PcISPS promoter activity in certain regions of the roots including the vascular tissue, the differentiation zone and the root cap. Treatment of roots with auxin or salt increased PcISPS promoter activity at these sites, especially in the developing lateral roots (LR). Transgenic, isoprene non-emitting poplar roots revealed an accumulation of O2 - in the same root regions where PcISPS promoter activity was localized. Absence of isoprene emission, moreover, increased the formation of LRs. Inhibition of NAD(P)H oxidase activity suppressed LR development, suggesting the involvement of ROS in this process. The analysis of the fine root proteome revealed a constitutive shift in the amount of several redox balance, signaling and development related proteins, such as superoxide dismutase, various peroxidases and linoleate 9S-lipoxygenase, in isoprene non-emitting poplar roots. Together our results indicate for isoprene a ROS-related function, eventually co-regulating the plant-internal signaling network and development processes in root tissue. This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

### Sample Protocol
For proteomics analysis 50 mg of frozen, homogenized, grinded root tissue was dissolved in 500 μl of 1x Laemmli buffer (240 mM Tris-HCl, pH 6.8; 8% w/v SDS, 40% v/v glycerol, 0.08% w/v bromphenolblue, 20% v/v β-mercaptoethanol) and incubated at 95 °C for 5 min. After centrifugation (14,000 x g for 10 min) supernatant was separated and protein content was determined using the Bradford assay (Bradford, 1976). Aliquots that contained at least 10 μg of protein in 50 μl of solution were prepared for further analysis for liquid chromatography – tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Eight ± two independent, biological replicates were analyzed for IE and NE plants. Each 10 μg of root extract were digested with a modified Filter-Aided Sample Prep (FASP) procedure (Wiśniewski, Zougman, Nagaraj & Mann, 2009; Grosche et al., 2015). Briefly, the proteins were diluted, reduced and alkylated (using dithiothreitol and indole-3-acetic acid). Then the proteins were centrifuged through a 30-kD cutoff filter device (PALL), and washedthree times  (once with UA buffer (8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH8.5) and twice with 50 mM ammoniumbicarbonate). The proteins were digested for 2 h at room temperature using 1 mg of Lys-C (WakoChemicals) and for 16h at 37°C using 2mg of trypsin (Promega). The further details have been described in Vanzo et al. (2016).

### Data Protocol
For mass spectrometric analysis the samples were thawed and centrifuged (14,000 x g, 5 min, 4°C). LC-MS/MS analysis was performed as described previously on Ultimate 3,000 nano  RSLC coupled to a LTQ OrbitrapXL (Thermo Fischer Scientific, Hauck et al., 2010; Merl, Ueffing, Hauck & von Toerne, 2012). Every sample was automatically injected and loaded onto the C18 trap column. After 5 min, the peptides were eluted and separated on the analytical column (75 µm i.d. x 25 cm, Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 3 µm, 100A, Dionex) by a linear 135min acetonitrile gradient from 4 to 30% at 300 nl min-1 flow rate. From the MS pre-scan, the 10 most abundant peptide ions were fragmented by collision induced dissociation in the linear ion trap if they showed an intensity of at least 200 counts and if they were at least doubly charged. During fragmentation a high-resolution (60,000 full-width half maximum) MS spectrum was acquired in the Orbitrap with a mass range from 300 to 1500 Da and a dynamic exclusion of 60 sec. The acquired spectra were loaded to the Progenesis QI for proteomics software (version 2.0, Nonlinear Dynamics, part of Waters) for label free quantification and analyzed as described previously (Hauck et al., 2010; Merl et al., 2012). Features with only one charge or more than eight charges were excluded. The raw abundances of the remaining features were normalized to allow correction for factors resulting from experimental variation. All MS/MS spectra were exported as Mascot generic file (mgf) and used for peptide identification with Mascot (version2.5.1) in  the Populus trichocarpa protein database (30197159 residues, 73016 sequences). Search parameters were: 10 ppm peptide mass and 0.6 Da MS/MS tolerance, one missed cleavage allowed, carbamidomethylation of cysteins was set as fixed modification, methionine oxidation and asparagine or glutamine deamidation were allowed as variable modifications. A Mascot-integrated decoy database search calculated a false discovery rate of 1.36% when searches were performed with a mascot percolator score cut-off of 13 and a significance threshold P=0.05. Peptide assignments were re-imported into the Progenesis QI software. After summing up the abundances of all unique peptides allocated to each protein, the identification and quantification results were exported. The annotation and functional classification were achieved by using several databases. Firstly, the list of primary IDs identified by Mascot was exported into Phytozome v12.1.6 (Goodstein et al., 2012) using the Biomart tool. The Arabidopsis reference genome was chosen as a template and poplar genes were blast searched against potential matching Arabidopsis genes, resulting in a list of Arabidopsis orthologs and GO terms. Subsequently, the list of gene ID was exported in PopGenIE (The Populus Genome Integrative Explorer) to confirm previously predicted functions (Sundell et al., 2015). The PPDB (The Plant Proteome Database) was used to allocate in MapMan BIN categories (Thimm et al., 2004; Usadel et al., 2009).

### Publication Abstract
Isoprene is a C5 volatile organic compound, which can protect aboveground plant tissue from abiotic stress such as short-term high temperatures and accumulation of reactive oxygen species (ROS). Here, we uncover new roles for isoprene in the plant belowground tissues. By analysing Populus x canescens isoprene synthase (PcISPS) promoter reporter plants, we discovered PcISPS promoter activity in certain regions of the roots including the vascular tissue, the differentiation zone and the root cap. Treatment of roots with auxin or salt increased PcISPS promoter activity at these sites, especially in the developing lateral roots (LR). Transgenic, isoprene non-emitting poplar roots revealed an accumulation of O<sub>2</sub><sup>-</sup> in the same root regions where PcISPS promoter activity was localized. Absence of isoprene emission, moreover, increased the formation of LRs. Inhibition of NAD(P)H oxidase activity suppressed LR development, suggesting the involvement of ROS in this process. The analysis of the fine root proteome revealed a constitutive shift in the amount of several redox balance, signalling and development related proteins, such as superoxide dismutase, various peroxidases and linoleate 9S-lipoxygenase, in isoprene non-emitting poplar roots. Together our results indicate for isoprene a ROS-related function, eventually co-regulating the plant-internal signalling network and development processes in root tissue.

### Keywords
Populus x canescens; ros; voc; isoprene; isoprene promoter; lateral roots; poplar; reactive oxygen species; roots; volatile organic compounds.

### Affiliations
Helmholtz Zentrum München, Research Unit Environmental Simulation, Institute of Biochemical Plant Pathology, Ingolstädter Landstr. 1, 85764 Neuherberg, Germany
HMGU Core Facility Proteomics

### Submitter
Ann-Christine König

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Jörg-Peter Schnitzler
Helmholtz Zentrum München, Research Unit Environmental Simulation, Institute of Biochemical Plant Pathology, Ingolstädter Landstr. 1, 85764 Neuherberg, Germany


