### Accession
PXD011218

### Title
Haloferax volcanii Proteome Response to Deletion of a Rhomboid Protease Gene

### Description
Rhomboids are conserved intramembrane serine proteases involved in cell signaling processes. Their role in prokaryotes is scarcely known and remains to be investigated in Archaea. We previously constructed a rhomboid homologue deletion mutant (ΔrhoII) in Haloferax volcanii, which showed reduced motility, increased novobiocin sensitivity, and an Nglycosylation defect. To address the impact of rhoII deletion on H. volcanii physiology, the proteomes of mutant and parental strains were compared by shotgun proteomics. A total of 1847 proteins were identified (45.8% of H. volcanii predicted proteome), from which 103 differed in amount. Additionally, the mutant strain evidenced 99 proteins with altered electrophoretic migration, which suggested differential post-translational processing/modification. Integral membrane proteins that evidenced variations in concentration, electrophoretic migration, or semitryptic cleavage in the mutant were considered as potential RhoII targets. These included a PrsW protease homologue (which was less stable in the mutant strain), a predicted halocyanin, and six integral membrane proteins potentially related to the mutant glycosylation (S-layer glycoprotein, Agl15) and cell adhesion/motility (flagellin1, HVO_1153, PilA1, and PibD) defects. This study investigated for the first time the impact of a rhomboid protease on the whole proteome of an organism.

### Sample Protocol
Strains and Growth Conditions H. volcanii H26 (DS70 ΔpyrE2) and MIG1 were grown in MGM 18% at 42 °C and 150 rpm. H. volcanii cultures were grown up to exponential (OD600 0.5) and stationary phase (OD600 1.5), and cells were harvested by centrifugation (10000 × g 10 min, 4 °C). Culture medium was centrifuged under the same conditions, and the supernatant was passed through a 0.22 μm nitrocellulose filter and precipitated with TCA 10% (v/v). Precipitated proteins were washed twice with 80% (v/v) acetone and left to dry 30 min at room temperature.   Cell Fractionation Cell pellets were suspended in 50 mM HCl-Tris, 2 M NaCl (pH 7.5), and disrupted by ultrasound (3 × 30 s, 80 W). Lysates were clarified (17000 × g for 20 min at 4 °C), and membranes were pelleted by centrifugation (100000 × g for 1 h at 4 °C). The membranes were washed with the same buffer and both, supernatant (cytoplasmic fraction) and membranes, were centrifuged for 30 min in the same conditions. To remove remaining salts, cytoplasm and membrane proteins were precipitated overnight with 100% acetone at 4 °C followed by centrifugation (17000 × g for 20 min at 4 °C). The precipitated proteins were washed twice with 80% (v/v) and once with 100% acetone and left to dry for 30 min at room temperature. All samples were suspended in 1× SDS-PAGE loading buffer containing 0.1% (w/v) SDS and 0.1 M DTT, incubated for 10 min at 70 °C, and conserved at −20 °C until use.  SDS-PAGE Samples (30 μg per lane) were loaded onto 10% (w/v) polyacrylamide gels containing 0.1% SDS. The gels were run at room temperature (20 mA) until samples passed the stacking gel and all proteins were concentrated into one protein band in the separation gel. For the PROTOMAP assay, samples were allowed to run 2 cm beyond the stacking gel. Proteins were visualized with a Coomassie brilliant blue (CBBG250) stain.  In-Gel Tryptic Digestion Protein bands were excised from the gels and cut into small cubes (ca. 1 × 1 mm2), which were completely destained according to Schluesener and colleagues. In the case of PROTOMAP assay, each lane was divided in four 0.5 cm sections, which were treated separately in the same manner. Gel pieces were dried by incubation with 100% acetonitrile for 10 min at room temperature and then incubated with 50 mM DTT in 25 mM NH4HCO3 (30 min at 60 °C) to reduce proteins disulfide bonds. The gel pieces were dried again with acetonitrile, and proteins were alkylated treating the gel pieces with 50 mM iodoacetamide in 25 mM NH4HCO3 (1 h at room temperature in darkness). After washing (with destaining solution) and drying the gel pieces in a SpeedVac, trypsin solution (12.5 ng mL−1 in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.6) was added. Protein digestion and peptide elution were performed according to Cerletti et al. (2015). The extracted peptides were dried using a SpeedVac and stored at −20 °C. Before MS analysis, peptides were resuspended in 20 μL of buffer A (0.1% formic acid in water) with 2% (v/v) acetonitrile by sonication for 10 min and transferred to LC−MS grade glass vials. Each measurement was performed with 8 μL of sample.  One-Dimensional nLC−ESI−MS/MS An UPLC HSS T3 column (1.8 μm, 75 μm × 150 mm) and an UPLC Symmetry C18 trapping column (5 μm, 180 μm × 20 mm) for LC as well as a PicoTip Emitter were used in combination with the nanoACQUITY gradient UPLC pump system (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) coupled to a LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer. For elution of the peptides, a linear gradient with increasing concentration of buffer B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) from 1% to 40% within 165 min was applied, followed by a linear gradient from 40% to 99% acetonitrile concentration within 15 min (0−5 min, 1% buffer B; 5−10 min, 5% buffer B; 10−165 min, 40% buffer B; 165−180 min, 99% buffer B; 180−195 min, 1% buffer B) at a flow rate of 400 nL min−5 and a spray voltage of 1.5−1.8 kV. The column was re-equilibrated at 1% buffer B within 15min. The analytical column oven was set to 55 °C, and the heated desolvation capillary was set to 275 °C. The LTQ Orbitrap Elite via instrument method files of Xcalibur (Rev. 2.1.0) in positive ion mode. The linear ion trap and Orbitrap were operated in parallel, that is, during a full MS scan on the Orbitrap in the range of 150−2000 m/z at a resolution of 240 000 MS/MS spectra of the 20 most intense precursors, from most intense to least intense, were detected in the ion trap. The relative collision energy for collision-induced dissociation (CID) was set to 35%. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a repeat count of 1 and 60 s exclusion duration window. Singly charged and ions of unknown charge state were rejected from MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was performed by SEQUEST and MS Amanda algorithms embedded in Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Electron) searching against the complete proteome database of H. volcanii DS2 containing 4035 entries exported from the Halolex database on September 24, 2013. The mass tolerance for precursor ions and fragment ions was set to 6 ppm and 0.4 Da, respectively. Only tryptic peptides with up to two missed cleavages were accepted. As static peptide modification the carbamidomethylation of cysteine and as variable peptide modification the oxidation of methionine as well as the conversion of glutamine (Gln) to pyro-glutamate (pyro-glu) at any N-terminus were admitted. The false discovery rate (FDR) was determined with the percolator validation in Proteome Discoverer 1.4 and the q-value was set to 1%. For protein identification, the mass spec format-(msf)-files were filtered with peptide confidence “high” and two different peptides per protein. Additionally, protein grouping options were enabled as default, which means consider only PSMs (peptide scoring mass spectrum matches) with confidence at least “medium” and consider only PSMs with delta CN better than 0.15.

### Publication Abstract
While many aspects of archaeal cell biology remain relatively unexplored, systems biology approaches like mass spectrometry (MS) based proteomics offer an opportunity for rapid advances. Unfortunately, the enormous amount of MS data generated often remains incompletely analyzed due to a lack of sophisticated bioinformatic tools and field-specific biological expertise for data interpretation. Here we present the initiation of the Archaeal Proteome Project (ArcPP), a community-based effort to comprehensively analyze archaeal proteomes. Starting with the model archaeon Haloferax volcanii, we reanalyze MS datasets from various strains and culture conditions. Optimized peptide spectrum matching, with strict control of false discovery rates, facilitates identifying&#x2009;&gt;&#x2009;72% of the reference proteome, with a median protein sequence coverage of 51%. These analyses, together with expert knowledge in diverse aspects of cell biology, provide meaningful insights into processes such as N-terminal protein maturation, N-glycosylation, and metabolism. Altogether, ArcPP serves as an invaluable blueprint for comprehensive prokaryotic proteomics.

### Keywords
Rhomboid protease, Protease substrate, Haloferax volcanii, Archaea, Shotgun proteomics

### Affiliations
Universidad Nacional de Mar del Plata
Instituto de Investigaciones Biológicas, Universidad Nacional de Mar del Plata (UNMDP), CONICET, Mar del Plata (7600), Argentina

### Submitter
Micaela Cerletti

### Lab Head
Dr Rosana Esther De Castro
Instituto de Investigaciones Biológicas, Universidad Nacional de Mar del Plata (UNMDP), CONICET, Mar del Plata (7600), Argentina


