### Accession
PXD014859

### Title
Global proteomics profile of Yeast during cysteine treatment

### Description
Cell requires optimal amount of nutrients for the synthesis of macromolecules like lipid, protein and nucleotides. There is a very limited knowledge about how cells maintain homeostasis in excess nutrients. By using Yeast as a model system we have shown that some aminoacids are toxic at higher concentration. We have chosen cysteine as a physiologically relevant example and using proteomics approach we delineated the altered pathways/ metabolic processes .We found that cysteine alters proteins mainly involved in amino acid metabolism, energy metabolism and proteins involved in translation.

### Sample Protocol
Cells with and without cysteine treatment were harvested and washed three times with sterile water. As mentioned previously, lysis was done by bead beating method  using lysis buffer containing 10mM Tris-HCl (pH 8), 140mM NaCl, 1.5mM MgCl2, 0.5% NP40 and Protease inhibitor cocktail. Isolated protein was then buffer exchanged with 0.5 M Triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.5) using a 3 kDa cutoff centrifugal filter (Amicon, Millipore). Protein was then estimated using Bradford’s reagent (Sigma, USA). Buffer exchanged proteins from different groups were digesting using trypsin as mentioned previously. Briefly, sixty micrograms of protein from each sample was reduced with 25mM DTT for 30 minutes at 56°C and the cysteine’s were blocked by 55mM IAA at room temperature for 15-20 minutes. This was followed by digestion with modified trypsin added in the ratio of 1:10 ratio (trypsin to protein) and incubated at 37°C for 16 hrs. In the 4-plex experiment the proteins digests from cells treated with and without cysteine for 12 hrs were used

### Data Protocol
The raw files in the format of “.wiff” containing the spectra of MS and MS/MS were submitted to  Protein Pilot v4.0 software (AB Sciex) for protein identification and relative quantification. Paragon Algorithm was used in a “Thorough ID” search mode against the Uniprot-Saccharomyces cerevisiae reference dataset (6643 protein sequences). The parameter for identification search includes:  IAA as cysteine blocking agent, 4-plex N-terminal iTRAQ labelling, trypsin digestion with two missed cleavages. Global protein level 1% FDR was considered for protein identification

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cysteine, Yeast, Lc-msms

### Affiliations
CSIR-IGIB
CSIR-Institute of Genomics and Integrative Biology

### Submitter
Rahul Chakraborty

### Lab Head
Dr shantanu sengupta
CSIR-Institute of Genomics and Integrative Biology


