### Accession
PXD040160

### Title
Neutrophil-derived reactive agents induce a transient SpeB negative phenotype in Streptococcus pyogenes

### Description
Streptococcus pyogenes (group A streptococci; GAS) is the main causative pathogen of monomicrobial necrotizing soft tissue infections (NSTIs). To resist immuno-clearance, GAS adapt their genetic information and/or phenotype to the surrounding environment. Hyper-virulent streptococcal pyrogenic exotoxin B (SpeB) negative variants caused by covRS mutations are enriched during infection. A key driving force for this process is the bacterial Sda1 DNase. Here, we identify another strategy resulting in SpeB-negative variants, namely reversible abrogation of SpeB secretion triggered by neutrophil effector molecules. Analysis of NSTI patient tissue biopsies revealed that tissue inflammation, neutrophil influx, and degranulation positively correlate with increasing frequency of SpeB-negative GAS clones. Using single colony proteomics, we show that GAS isolated directly from tissue express but do not secrete SpeB. Once the tissue pressure is lifted, GAS regain SpeB secreting function. Neutrophils were identified as the main immune cells responsible for the observed phenotype. Subsequent analyses identified hydrogen peroxide and hypochlorous acid as reactive agents driving this phenotypic GAS adaptation to the tissue environment. SpeB-negative GAS show improved survival within neutrophils and induce increased degranulation. Our findings provide new information about GAS fitness and heterogeneity in the soft tissue milieu and provide new potential targets for therapeutic intervention in NSTIs.

### Sample Protocol
Single SpeB+ and/or SpeB- colonies, as assessed by casein agar assay, were transferred into tubes containing 200 μl 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) lysis buffer and 100 μl Lysing matrix B (MP Biomedicals). Bacteria were disrupted by bead beating (6 m/s, 5×20 s; 60 s ice incubation between the cycles) via FastPrep-24 5G (MP Biomedicals). Protein-containing supernatant was separated from bacterial debris via centrifugation (10 min, 10,000×g, 4°C). Protein concentrations were determined using BCA-assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific). 2.5 μg of total protein was reduced (5 mM Tris(2 carboxyethyl)phosphin [TCEP]; 45 min; 65°C), alkylated (10 mM iodoacetamide [IAA]; 15 min; room temperature; dark), and an in-solution digest with 250 ng of trypsin was performed (18 h; 37°C). Samples were concentrated and desalted via ZipTips (C18; Millipore), dried, and stored at -80°C until further use. Neutrophil secretome profiling: 500 μl neutrophil supernatant was reduced with TCEP (5 mM, 45 min, 65°C) and alkylated with IAA (10 mM, 20 min, room temperature, dark). Five microliters of SP3 beads (hydrophobic: Sera-Mag Speedbeads carboxylate-modified particles [GE Healthcare]; hydrophilic: Speedbead magnetic carboxylate-modified particles [GE Healthcare]) were added to the sample and acetonitrile added to a final concentration of 70% (v/v) and incubated in a thermomixer (5 min, 24 °C, 900 rpm). Tubes were placed in a magnetic rack to collect the beads and the supernatant was removed. Beads were washed with 80% (v/v) ethanol twice and air dried. Proteins were digested by adding 25 μl digestion buffer (50 mM TEAB) containing 100 ng of trypsin followed by 30 s sonication in a water bath to disaggregate the beads and an incubation at 37°C for 18 h. Beads were removed by centrifugation (20,000 g, 1 min) and by placing the tubes in a magnetic rack to transfer the supernatant to a glass vial. The supernatants were dried by vacuum centrifugation and peptides were reconstituted in 12 μl 0.1% acetic acid in water containing iRT peptides

### Data Protocol
Single colony samples: MaxQuant version 1.6.10.43 and ncbi genome assembly data base id=233599 (M1GAS) and id=299846 (MGAS315) were used for protein identification. The minimal number of unique peptides per protein group was set to 2 to be considered as identified. Oxidation (M) was considered as a variable and carbamidomethyl (C) as a fixed modification. Data were analyzed using Perseus version 1.6.10.43. Quantitative values were log 2 transformed and the resulting values were filtered based on the following criteria: only identified by site, reverse, potential contamination, quantified in at least 75% of biological replicates per group. Differential expression of bacterial proteins was determined via Student ́s t test with Benjamini-Hochberg FDR correction. Proteins were considered to be significantly differentially expressed if q-value was <0.01 and log 2 fold change was ≥1. The principle component analysis (PCA) of the scaled data was carried out using the ClustVis web tool.  Neutrophil secretome profiling: MaxQuant version 1.6.17.0 and ncbi genome assembly data base id=233599 (M1GAS) and UniProt human reference proteome (downloaded 20190715) were used for protein identification. The minimal number of unique peptides per protein group was set to 2 to be considered as identified. Oxidation (M) was considered as a variable and carbamidomethyl (C) as a fixed modification. Data were analyzed using Perseus version 1.6.14.0. Quantitative values were log2 transformed and the resulting values were filtered based on the following criteria: only identified by site, reverse, potential contamination, quantified in at least 4 of 5 biological replicates per group. LFQ intensities were normalized to the intensity of the spiked iRT. Differential expression of bacterial proteins was determined via Student ́s t test with Benjamini-Hochberg FDR correction. Proteins were considered to be significantly differentially expressed if p-value was <0.05 and log2 fold change was ≥1.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Necrotizing soft tissue infections, Neutrophils, Streptococcus pyogenes, Speb

### Affiliations
University of Greifswald, Center for Functional Genomics of Microbes, Institute of Microbiology, Department of Microbial Proteomics
Department of Microbial Proteomics, Institute of Microbiology, University of Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany

### Submitter
Thomas Sura

### Lab Head
Dr Doerte Becher
Department of Microbial Proteomics, Institute of Microbiology, University of Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany


