### Accession
PXD036773

### Title
Identification and evaluation of oxidative phosphorylation-related genes regulated by METTL3 in gastric cancer based on proteomics and m6A methylomes

### Description
METTL3-mediated RNA N6-methyladenosine (m6A) is the most prevalent modification participates in tumor initiation and progression via regulating expression of their target genes in cancers. However, its role in tumor cell metabolism remains poorly appreciated. In this study, we conducted a multi-omics analysis including m6A microarray and quantitative proteomics to explore the potential effect and mechanism of METTL3 on the metabolism in gastric cancer cells. Our results found that significant alterations in the protein and m6A modification profile which induced by METTL3 overexpression in GC cells. Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment results showed that down-regulated proteins were significantly enriched in intracellular mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS), and the Protein-Protein Interaction (PPI) network analysis found that these differentially expressed proteins were significantly associated with OXPHOS. Subsequently, a prognostic model constructed based on the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) and Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) databases, and the high-risk group showed a worse prognosis in GC patients. Meanwhile, the Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) showed a significant enrichment in the energy metabolism signaling pathway. Then, combined with the results of the m6A microarray analysis, the intersection molecules of DEPs and differential methylation genes (DMGs) were significantly correlated with the genes involved in OXPHOS. Besides, there were also significant differences in prognosis and GSEA enrichment between the two clusters of GC patients classified according to consensus clustering algorithm. Finally, we focused on highly expressed, highly methylated molecules regulated by METTL3 and identified three (AVEN, DAZAP2, DNAJB1) genes that were significantly associated with poor prognosis in patients with GC. These results indicated that METTL3-regulated DEPs in GC cells were significantly associated with OXPHOS. After combined with m6A microarray analysis, the results suggested that these proteins might be involved in cell energy metabolism through m6A modifications thus influencing the prognosis of GC patients. Overall, our study revealed that METTL3 involved in cell metabolism through an m6A-dependent mechanism in GC cells, and indicated a potential biomarker for prognostic prediction in GC.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from control and overexpressed METTL3 in BGC-823 cells, respectively.

### Data Protocol
The tandem analysis of the high-precision mass spectrometer was performed by Novogene Technology Co., Ltd. (Beijing, China). The protein quantitation results were statistically analyzed by T-test. The proteins whose quantitation significantly different between experimental and control groups (p<0.05 and fold-change ≥ 1.2) were defined as DEPs.

### Publication Abstract
METTL3-mediated RNA N6-methyladenosine (m6A) is the most prevalent modification that participates in tumor initiation and progression <i>via</i> governing the expression of their target genes in cancers. However, its role in tumor cell metabolism remains poorly characterized. In this study, m6A microarray and quantitative proteomics were employed to explore the potential effect and mechanism of METTL3 on the metabolism in GC cells. Our results showed that METTL3 induced significant alterations in the protein and m6A modification profile in GC cells. Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment indicated that down-regulated proteins were significantly enriched in intracellular mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS). Moreover, the protein-protein Interaction (PPI) network analysis found that these differentially expressed proteins were significantly associated with OXPHOS. A prognostic model was subsequently constructed based on the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) and the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) databases, and the high-risk group exhibited a worse prognosis in GC patients. Meanwhile, Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) demonstrated significant enrichment in the energy metabolism signaling pathway. Then, combined with the results of the m6A microarray analysis, the intersection molecules of DEPs and differential methylation genes (DMGs) were significantly correlated with the molecules of OXPHOS. Besides, there were significant differences in prognosis and GSEA enrichment between the two clusters of GC patients classified according to the consensus clustering algorithm. Finally, highly expressed and highly methylated molecules regulated by METTL3 were analyzed and three (AVEN, DAZAP2, DNAJB1) genes were identified to be significantly associated with poor prognosis in GC patients. These results signified that METTL3-regulated DEPs in GC cells were significantly associated with OXPHOS. After combined with m6A microarray analysis, the results suggested that these proteins might be implicated in cell energy metabolism through m6A modifications thus influencing the prognosis of GC patients. Overall, our study revealed that METTL3 is involved in cell metabolism through an m6A-dependent mechanism in GC cells, and indicated a potential biomarker for prognostic prediction in GC.

### Keywords
Prognosis, Oxidative phosphorylation, Mettl3, M6a, Gastric cancer

### Affiliations
Bengbu medical college

### Submitter
Gui Peng

### Lab Head
Dr Wu HZ
Bengbu medical college


