### Accession
PXD041141

### Title
SETD5 regulates the OGT-catalyzed O-GlcNAcylation of RNA polymerase II, which is involved in the stemness of colorectal cancer cells

### Description
The dosage-dependent recruitment of RNA polymerase II (Pol II) at the promoters of genes related to neurodevelopment and stem cell maintenance is required for transcription by the fine-tuned expression of SET-domain-containing protein 5 (SETD5). Pol II O-GlcNAcylation by O-GlcNAc transferase (OGT) is critical for preinitiation complex formation and transcription cycling. SETD5 dysregulation has been linked to stem cell-like properties in some cancer types; however, the role of SETD5 in cancer cell stemness has not yet been determined. We here show that aberrant SETD5 overexpression induces stemness in colorectal cancer (CRC) cells. SETD5 overexpression causes the upregulation of PI3K-AKT pathway-related genes and cancer stem cell (CSC) markers such as CD133, Kruppel-like factor 4 (KLF4), and estrogen-related receptor beta (ESRRB), leading to the gain of stem cell-like phenotypes. Our findings also revealed a functional relationship between SETD5, OGT, and Pol II. OGT-catalyzed Pol II glycosylation depends on SETD5, and the SETD5-Pol II interaction weakens in OGT-depleted cells, suggesting a SETD5-OGT-Pol II interdependence. SETD5 deficiency reduces Pol II occupancy at PI3K-AKT pathway-related genes and CD133 promoters, suggesting a role for SETD5-mediated Pol II recruitment in gene regulation. Moreover, the SETD5 depletion nullified the SETD5-induced stemness of CRC cells and Pol II O-GlcNAcylation. These findings support the hypothesis that SETD5 mediates OGT-catalyzed O-GlcNAcylation of RNA Pol II, which is involved in cancer cell stemness gain via CSC marker gene upregulation.

### Sample Protocol
Flag tagged SETD5 transfected in HEK293 with OGT co-transfection and ThiaMet-G treatment for hyper-O-GlcNAcylation condition. SETD5 were enriched by immuno-precipitation with anti-FLAG followed by separation by SDS-PAGE and it was stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue reagent. SDS-PAGE gel fraction for SETD5 was cut and subjected to in-gel tryptic digestion. Destaining of the target protein fraction was performed in 50% (v/v) ACN in 25 mM NH4HCO3. Next, the fraction was reduced by 20 mM DTT at 60 °C for 1 h and alkylated by 55 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 45 min without light. The fraction was digested by trypsin at 37 °C for overnight. Peptides were extracted by 50% (v/v) ACN in 5% (v/v) FA and 80% (v/v) in 5% (v/v). The extracted peptide samples by in-gel digestion were suspended in 20 µl of solvent A (0.1% formic acid prepared in water, Optima LC/MS grade, ThermoFisher Scientific). The peptides were seperated in PepMapTM RSLC C18 column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) with linear gradient of 2 to 38% Solvent B (0.1% FA in ACN) over 65 minutes and at flow rate of 300 nl/min. The sample was analyzed by Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA), interfaced with Easy nanoLC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). The spray voltage was set to 1.8 kV. The temperature of the heated capillary was set at 275°C. A data-dependent mode with one full MS scan followed by twenty MS/MS scans and a dynamic exclusion time of 20 seconds was used in the operation of the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer. In MS/MS scans, peptides were fragmented using higher energy collision dissociation (HCD). If oxonium product ions (m/z 204.0867, 138.0545) were observed in the HCD spectra, the peptides were fragmented with electron transfer/higher energy collision dissociation (EThcD) in a subsequent scan on the same precursor ion selected for HCD. The full scans were acquired at 300 to 1400 m/z. First mass of HCD and EThcD MS/MS scans were 120 and 110 m/z. The resolutions of full MS scans and MS/MS scans (HCD and EThcD) were 120,000 and 300,000. In full scans, the advanced gain control target was 4 × 105 and maximum injection time was 100 ms. In MS/MS scans, the advanced gain control target was 5 × 104, maximum injection time was 54 ms, and the isolation window was set to 1.6 m/z. In EthcD MS/MS scans, the advanced gain control target was 8.5 × 104, maximum injection time was 54 ms, and the isolation window was set to 1.6 m/z. HCD collision energy was set to 28%. ETD reaction time was 50ms and supplemental activation(SA) collision energy was 20%.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were compared with a Uniprot human database (released entry no. 173,324) using SEQUEST HT search engine in Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Trypsin was selected as the proteolytic enzyme with a maximum allowance of up to two missed cleavages. The carbamidomethyl of cysteine was considered a fixed modification, and variable modification was set for oxidation of methionine and O-GlcNAcylation of serine and threonine with maximum three PTMs at one peptide. Weight of b, y ions was set to 0.5 and weight of c, z ions was set to 1, relatively. Peptides were identified with >=95% confidence and filtered at a 1% false-discovery rate (FDR).

### Publication Abstract
A water-soluble nickel complex based on amino-&#x3b2;-CD was developed using a facile method and exhibits excellent catalytic performance in the Suzuki reaction in water. This synthesized complex has been characterized using UV-Vis, AAS, TGA, and FT-IR techniques. The easily synthesized novel supramolecular catalysts have been applied as a green and eco-friendly catalyst in the Suzuki coupling for preparing diverse biaryls. This result indicates that using 2.5 mol% of nickel, K<sub>2</sub>CO<sub>3</sub> as the best base, and water as the green solvent are the best reaction conditions. This new catalyst features easy handling, low-cost, mild, and simple protocol. The use of low-cost and accessibility of the reagents, modest conditions, and good yields of products are notable characteristics of this method. Using aqueous media with this catalyst as a proper catalyst makes the presented process a fascinating method compared to most reports. Under mild reaction conditions, this green Ni(II)-&#x3b2;-CD catalyst displayed recyclable behavior seven times with minor loss in its catalytic activity.

### Keywords
Setd5, Colorectal cancer, O-glcnac

### Affiliations
Seoul nation University
Department of Systems Biology, College of Life Science and Biotechnology, Yonsei University, Seoul 03722, Republic of Korea

### Submitter
HanByeol Kim

### Lab Head
Dr Yeun Kyu Jang
Department of Systems Biology, College of Life Science and Biotechnology, Yonsei University, Seoul 03722, Republic of Korea


