### Accession
PXD038483

### Title
Targeting mitochondria in the aged vasculature with SS-31, a proteomic study of brain microvessels.

### Description
Functional decline and structural alterations of the brain microvasculature are associated with cognitive impairment and development of dementias such as Alzheimer’s disease during aging. Although mechanisms of leading to microvascular changes during aging are not clear, the loss of mitochondria and reduced efficiency of remaining mitochondria appear to play a major role. While pharmacological agents which target mitochondria such as SS-31 have been shown to be effective in beneficial during aging and diseases, the full extent on mitochondrial- and non-mitochondrial proteins in the brain microvasculature has not been examined. We tested the hypothesis that attenuation of aging-associated changes in the brain microvascular proteome via targeting mitochondria represents a therapeutic option in the aging brain. We used male, aged (>18 months) C57Bl6/J mice treated with a mitochondria-targeted tetrapeptide, SS-31 or vehicle saline. Baseline cerebral blood flow (CBF) was determined using laser speckle imaging during the two-week treatment period. Then, isolated cortical microvessels (MVs), composed of end arterioles, capillaries, and venules, were used for Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid mass spectrometry. Baseline CBF was similar between the groups, whereas bioinformatic analysis revealed substantial differences in protein abundance of cortical MVs between SS-31 and vehicle groups. Specifically, we identified 6,266 proteins in our data set from which 12% were mitochondrial or mitochondria associated. 107 of these proteins were significantly differentially expressed between the treatment and vehicle groups, and were associated with the oxidative phosphorylation, metabolism, antioxidant defense system, or mitochondrial dynamics. Administration of SS-31 also affected many non-mitochondrial proteins. Our findings suggest that mitochondria in the microvasculature represent a therapeutic target in the aging brain, and widespread changes in the proteome may underlie the mechanisms of rejuvenating actions of SS-31 in the aging phenotype.

### Sample Protocol
Animals  Aged (18 months and older) male C57BL/6J mice were obtained (n = 10; #000664) from The Jackson Laboratory. Mice were housed in the vivarium at Tulane University, in accordance with Guidelines of the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of Tulane University, and the National Institutes of Health Office of Laboratory Animal Welfare, with standard light and dark cycles, and free access to food and water. Experiments were carried out according to the Animal Research: Reporting in Vivo Experiments (ARRIVE) guidelines. Mice were randomly assigned to either drug (SS-31) or vehicle (saline) groups. Mice in the treatment group received daily i.p. injection of saline-dissolved and sterile filtered 10 mg/kg of SS-31 (#S9803, Selleck Chemicals LLC, Houston, TX) for 14 days (Fig. 1). The dose was chosen based on reported improvement of neurovascular coupling, spatial working memory, motor skill learning in old mice compared with vehicle treated animals. Mice in the vehicle group were injected with equivalent amount of saline as SS-31 based on animal weight for 14 days Microvessel isolation (MVs) At the end of the treatment, mice were transcardially perfused via cold PBS, and the brain was removed. Cortices were removed, and homogenized, then cortical MVs were isolated via gradient centrifugation and size-filtering steps as described by us (Cikic S, 2021; Chandra PK, 2021), and others (Sure VN, 2018; Lee YK, 2019). The clarity of MVs isolates, composed of end arterioles, capillaries, and venules, were monitored under light microscopy. Previous studies have documented the composition of the MVs and the lack of contaminating neurons and astroglia via immunostaining. Microvessels were sonicated in 1% SDS, then protein concentration was determined using BCA Protein assay (Cikic S, 2021), and sent for proteomics and bioinformatics analysis to the University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences Proteomics and Bioinformatics core.   Proteomics CME bHPLC TMT Methods – Orbitrap Eclipse Reduced, alkylated, and chloroform/methanol extraction purified MVs samples were digested using sequencing grade trypsin (Promega). The tandem mass tag 10-plex isobaric labeled (Thermo) resulting proteins were combined into one sample group, then separated into 46 fractions on a 100 x 1.0 mm Acquity BEH C18 column (Waters) using an UltiMate 3000 UHPLC system (Thermo) with a 50 min gradient from 99:1 to 60:40 buffer A:B ratio under basic pH conditions, then consolidated into 18 super-fractions. Reverse phase XSelect CSH C18 2.5 um resin (Waters) on an in-line 150 x 0.075 mm column using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo) was used to further separate each super-fraction. The eluted peptides were ionized by a 2.4 kV electrospray then subjected to mass spectrometric analysis on an Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo) using multi-notch MS3 parameters. FTMS analyzer in top-speed profile mode at a resolution of 120,000 over a range of 375 to 1500 m/z was used to obtain MS data. CID activation with normalized collision energy of 31.0 was followed by MS/MS data acquisition using the ion trap analyzer in centroid mode and normal mass range. Then synchronous precursor selection, up to 10 MS/MS precursors selected for HCD activation with normalized collision energy of 55.0, was followed by acquisition of MS3 reporter ion data using the FTMS analyzer in profile mode at a resolution of 50,000 over a range of 100-500 m/z. Buffer A containing 0.1% formic acid and 0.5% acetonitrile, and Buffer B containing 0.1% formic acid and 99.9% acetonitrile, used for offline separation, were adjusted to pH 10 using ammonium hydroxide.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics data was analyzed by the UAMS Bioinformatics core as described below. MaxQuant, quantitative proteomics software (Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry version 2.0.3.0) was used to analyze the mass spectrometry data with the following settings: parent ion tolerance of 3 ppm, a fragment ion tolerance of 0.5 Da, a reporter ion tolerance of 0.001 Da, trypsin enzyme with 2 missed cleavages, variable modifications including oxidation on M, Acetyl on Protein N-term, and fixed modification of Carbamidomethyl on C against the UniProt Mus musculus database (March 2021). Criteria for accepting identified proteins was set to less than 1.0% false discovery rate. Protein Prophet algorithm was used to assign protein probabilities (cite). ProteiNorm was used to quality check protein abundance data distribution via evaluating eight normalization methods (cite), including log2 normalization (Log2), median normalization (Median), mean normalization (Mean), variance stabilizing normalization (VSN) cite, quantile normalization (Quantile) cite, cyclic loess normalization (Cyclic Loess) cite, global robust linear regression normalization (RLR) cite, and global intensity normalization (Global Intensity) cite (cite Graw et all). Total intensity, Pooled intragroup Coefficient of Variation (PCV), Pooled intragroup Median Absolute Deviation (PMAD), Pooled intragroup estimate of variance (PEV), intragroup correlation, sample correlation heatmap (Pearson), and log2-ratio distributions were used to evaluate the individual performance of these methods and the VSN normalization method was selected. Linear Models for Microarray Data (limma) with empirical Bayes (eBayes) smoothing to the standard errors34 was used for the statistical analysis of the normalized data. Proteins with a p-value < 0.05 and a fold change > 2 were considered significant. Ensemble of Gene Set Enrichment Analyses (EGSEA) Bioconductor package and Qiagen’s Ingenuity Pathway Analysis36 was used to identify important protein networks and pathways based on the significant proteins. VolcaNoseR was used to create volcano plots (cite).

### Publication Abstract
Cognitive impairment and dementias during aging such as Alzheimer's disease are linked to functional decline and structural alterations of the brain microvasculature. Although mechanisms leading to microvascular changes during aging are not clear, loss of mitochondria, and reduced efficiency of remaining mitochondria appear to play a major role. Pharmacological agents, such as SS-31, which target mitochondria have been shown to be effective during aging and diseases; however, the benefit to mitochondrial- and non-mitochondrial proteins&#xa0;in the brain microvasculature has not been examined. We tested whether attenuation of aging-associated changes in the brain microvascular proteome via targeting mitochondria represents a therapeutic option for the aging brain. We used aged male (&gt;&#x2009;18&#xa0;months) C57Bl6/J mice treated with a mitochondria-targeted tetrapeptide, SS-31, or vehicle saline. Cerebral blood flow (CBF) was determined using laser speckle imaging during a 2-week treatment period. Then, isolated cortical microvessels (MVs) composed of end arterioles, capillaries, and venules were used for Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid mass spectrometry. CBF was similar among the groups, whereas bioinformatic analysis revealed substantial differences in protein abundance of cortical MVs between SS-31 and vehicle. We identified 6267 proteins, of which 12% were mitochondria-associated. Of this 12%, 107 were significantly differentially expressed and were associated with oxidative phosphorylation, metabolism, the antioxidant defense system, or mitochondrial dynamics. Administration of SS-31 affected many non-mitochondrial proteins. Our findings suggest that mitochondria in the microvasculature represent a therapeutic target in the aging brain, and widespread changes in the proteome may underlie the rejuvenating actions of SS-31 in aging.

### Keywords
Brain, Mitochondria, Microvessels, Tmt

### Affiliations
UAMS
Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, Tulane University, New Orleans, LA

### Submitter
Stephanie Byrum

### Lab Head
Dr Ibolya Rutkai
Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, Tulane University, New Orleans, LA


