### Accession
PXD041266

### Title
Repurposing cinacalcet suppresses multi-drug resistant Staphylococcus aureus by disruption of cell membrane and inhibits biofilm by targeting IcaR

### Description
Multi-drug resistant Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus) infections continously threaten public health. The rapid escalation in morbidity and mortality rates associated with methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA) infections necessitates the urgent development of novel antimicrobial agents. Our study reveals that the FDA-approved drug cinacalcet (CNA) effectively functions as an antibacterial and anti-biofilm agent against S. aureus without detectable resistance. It evidently improved survival rate of mice infected with clinical multi-resistant S. aureus in a pneumonia model. Subsequent proteomic and biochemical experiments suggest that the primary antibacterial mechanism involves membrane structure disruption, ATP content reduction, and reactive oxygen species (ROS) production. Concurrently, LiP-SMap combined with biochemical validation indicates that CNA inhibits biofilm formation by targeting IcaR, a negative regulator of icaADBC, thereby enhancing its binding capacity to the ica operator DNA and subsequently suppressing extracellular polysaccharide formation. Importantly, compared to vancomycin, CNA demonstrates stronger biofilm bacterial clearance in a mouse thigh infection model. Collectively, our findings propose that CNA can be repurposed as a potential therapeutic agent for treating multidrug-resistant S. aureus infections and their associated biofilms.

### Sample Protocol
Lip-SMap was performed to identify drug targets as described previously64. Cell lysate from S. aureus was mixed with CNA or DMSO, subjected to limited proteolysis with Pronase, and then completely digested with trypsin into peptides for mass spectrometry evaluation. Peptides were freeze-dried in a vacuum pump and then desalted according to the method used by MonoTip C18 tips (GL Sciences, Tokyo, Japan).  MRSA strains cultured to an OD600 of 0.4 and treated with 2× MIC CNA or 1% DMSO in medium for 2 h. Protein extraction, digestion and desalting were performed as previously described

### Data Protocol
After desalting, the samples were lyophilized and reconstituted with a loading buffer and analyzed using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Data were processed using Spectronaut software (Omicsolution Co., Ltd., Shanghai, China) to determine CNA targets.Raw data were processed with a Spectronaut 11 (Biognosys AG, Switzerland). Search parameter settings and differential protein analysis methods were consistent with previous studies58.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mutidrug-resistance; s. aureus; cinacalcet; icar; membrane

### Affiliations
MOE Key Laboratory of Tumor Molecular Biology and Key Laboratory of Functional Protein Research of Guangdong Higher Education Institutes, Institute of Life and Health Engineering, College of Life Science and Technology, Jinan University, Guangzhou, China
MOE Key Laboratory of Tumor Molecular Biology and Key Laboratory of Functional Protein Research of Guangdong Higher Education Institutes, Institute of Life and Health Engineering, Jinan University

### Submitter
Zuye  Fang

### Lab Head
Dr Xuesong Sun
MOE Key Laboratory of Tumor Molecular Biology and Key Laboratory of Functional Protein Research of Guangdong Higher Education Institutes, Institute of Life and Health Engineering, College of Life Science and Technology, Jinan University, Guangzhou, China


