### Accession
PXD002950

### Title
Plasma-derived extracellular vesicles contain predictive biomarkers and potential therapeutic targets for myocardial ischemic injury

### Description
Myocardial infarction (MI), an undesirable clinical outcome of coronary artery disease (CAD), triggers a potent inflammatory response via the release of circulatory mediators, including extracellular vesicles (EVs) by damaged cardiac cells, which is necessary for myocardial healing. However, when in excess, causes pathological tissue remodeling and eventual heart failure. Timely repression of MI-induced inflammatory response are critical to prevent and minimize cardiac tissue injuries, nonetheless, progression in this aspect remains clinically challenging. The well documentation on the ability of EVs to trigger a functional response with the delivery of bioactive cargos carried within, have made them clinically attractive as diagnostic biomarkers and drug vectors for therapeutic interventions. Using label-free quantitative proteomics approach, we compared the protein cargo of plasma EVs between patients with (MI) and from control patients with stable angina (NMI). We report, for the first time, the expression proteomics profiling on 252 plasma EV proteins that were modulated with >1.2-fold in myocardial injury. We identified a panel of six strongly up-regulated biomarkers with significant potential for clinical applications; these reflected post-infarct pathways of complement activation (Complement C1q subcomponent subunit A [C1QA], ~3.23-fold change, p = 0.012; Complement C5 [C5], ~1.27-fold change, p = 0.087), lipoprotein metabolism (Apoliporotein D [APOD], ~1.86-fold change, p = 0.033; Apolipoprotein C-III [APOCC3], ~2.63-fold change, p = 0.029) and platelet activation (Platelet glycoprotein Ib alpha chain [GP1BA], ~9.18-fold change, p < 0.0001; Platelet basic protein [PPBP], ~4.72-fold change, p = 0.027). The data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD002950. This novel biomarker panel was successfully validated in a separate cohort of 43 individual angina patients using Luminex analysis of the representative EV proteins C1QA (p = 0.005) and C5 (p = 0.0021), which act as critical regulators of complement activity in MI. We further present that all EV-derived fibrinogen components detected were paradoxically down-regulated in MI, suggesting that a compensatory mechanism may suppress post-infarct coagulation pathways, and indicating potential for therapeutic targeting of this mechanism in MI. Taken together, these data urge the further development of novel EV-based diagnostic and therapeutic strategies to benefit patients with CAD.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic sample preparation was conducted according to a previously described method that minimizes experimentally-induced deamidation (35, 36), with some minor modifications. Briefly, the EV-enriched pelletwas solubilized in 8 M urea and 50 mM ammonium acetate (pH 6.0) lysis buffer. Plasma protein concentration was determined using the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Approximately 200 µg of proteins were reduced using 20 mMdithiothreitol (DTT) for 3 h at 30°C before being alkylated in the dark with 55mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 1h at room temperature. The concentration of urea was diluted to less than 1 M using 50 mM ammonium acetate buffer (pH 6.0) prior to tryptic digestion in order to ensure adequateenzyme activity. Proteins were enzymatically digestedovernight at 37°Cusing sequencing-grade trypsin (1:100 w/w, trypsin to protein; Promega, Madison, WI). The tryptic peptides werethendesalted using a Sep-Pak C18 cartridge (Waters, Milford, MA) and dried in a vacuum concentrator. Vacuum-dried desalted peptides were reconstituted in 200 µL mobile phase A (90% ACN containing 0.1% HAc) and fractionated using a PolyWAX LP weak anion-exchange column (4.6 × 200 mm, 5 μm, 300Å; PolyLC, Columbia, MD) on a Prominence UFLC system (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan). The UV spectra of the peptides were collected at 280 nm. Mobile phase A and mobile phase B (30% ACN, 0.1% FA) were used to establish the 60 min gradient; starting with 3 min of 100% A, 17 min of 0–8% B, 25 min of 8–45% B, 10 min of 45–100% B, followed by 5 min at 100% B (constant flow rate 1 mL/min).Forty separate fractions were collected, combined into 15 pooled fractions, and then vacuum-dried. Dried peptides were reconstituted in 3% ACN, 0.1% FA for LC-MS/MS analysis. The fractionated peptides were separated and analyzed on a LC-MS/MS system equipped with anUltimate 3000 RSLC nano-HPLC system (Dionex, Amsterdam, NL) and coupled to an online LTQ-FT Ultra linear ion trap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific Inc., Bremen, Germany). Approximately2μg of peptides from each fraction were injected via the Dionexautosampler, concentrated into a Zorbax peptide trap column (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA), and subsequently separated in a capillary column (75 μm × 10 cm) packed with C18 AQ (5 μm, 300Å; BrukerMichrom Billerica, MA) at a flow rate of 300nL/min. Mobile phase A (0.1% FA in HPLC water) and mobile phase B (0.1% FA in ACN) were used to establish the 60 min gradient; starting with 1 min of 5–8% B, 44 min of 8–32% B, 7 min of 32–55% B, 1 min of 55–90% B and 2 min of 90% B, followed by re-equilibration in 5% B for 5 min. The samples were ionized using an electrospray potential of 1.5 kV in an ADVANCE™ CaptiveSpray™ Source (Bruker-Michrom). The LTQ-FT Ultra was set to perform data acquisition in the positive ion mode. A full MS scan (350–1600 m/z range) was acquired in the FT-ICR cell at a resolution of 100,000 and a maximum ion accumulation time of 1000 ms. The automatic gain control (AGC) target for FT was set at 1 × 106, and precursor ion charge state screening was activated. The linear ion trap was used to collect peptides and measure the fragments generated by collision activated dissociation (CAD). The default AGC setting was used in the linear ion trap (full MS target 3.0 × 104, MSn 1 × 104). The 10 most intense ions above a 500 count threshold were selected for MS2 fragmentation byCAD, which was performed concurrently with a maximum ion accumulation time of 200 ms.Dynamic exclusion was activated for this process (60sexclusion duration, repeat count 1).For CAD, the activation Q was set at 0.25, activation time was 30 ms, isolation width (m/z) was 2.0, and normalized collision energy was 35%.

### Data Protocol
MS data analysis was performed using Thermo Scientific™ Proteome Discoverer™ (PD) 1.4 software, connected toan in-house Mascot server(V 2.4.1, Matrix Science, Boston, MA).Protein identification was performed by querying the MS/MS spectra against the Uniprot Human database (Released on 11/29/2013, 88, 421 sequences, 35,070,517 residues). An automatic target-decoy search strategy was used in combination with Percolator to score peptide spectral matches for estimation of false discovery rate (FDR).Only peptides identified with strict spectral FDR of < 1% (q-value < 0.01) were considered in this study. The search was restricted to a maximumof2 missed trypsin cleavages; peptide precursor mass tolerances of 10 ppm; and 0.8 Da mass tolerance for fragment ions. Carbamidomethylation (+57.021 Da) of cysteine residues was fixed as a static peptide modification, oxidation (+15.995 Da) of methionine residues and deamidation (+0.984 Da) of asparagine and glutamine residues were set as dynamic peptide modifications. Calculation of area under the curve (AUC) for each precursor ion peak was conducted using the event detector and precursor ion area detector algorithm (embedded in PD 1.4) with amass precisionsetting of 2 ppm. To maximize accuracy, protein and peptide relative quantities were calculated based on the average area ofthe three most abundant unique peptides per protein. Searched results were exported to a tab-delimited file for further analyses. The reported ratio of MI/NMI ofratio foreach protein was computed usingby dividingthe PD-calculated MI protein area divided by the PD-calculated NMI protein area. A  (both calculated in PD).Modulated protein expression was defined as  ≥1.2-fold change in expression level [cut-off was set and a fold change of 1.2 and 0.83 indicates up-regulated and down-regulated proteins respectively.].Relative expression ratios offorproteins of interest were extracted and p-values were determined byusingunpaired Student’s t-test. Atests (p-value <<0.05 was used to indicate statistical significance.considered significant).The standalone open access tool FunRich V2.1.2 (37), an open access standalone tool was used for plasma EV to assess the functional enrichment and to interactiondetermine the network analyses. interactions in the plasma EV proteome. Two biological replicates were performed to increase the reliability and achieve adequate predictive power for global quantitative proteomics profiling. Scatter dot plots were generated and analyzed using GraphPad Prism V 6.0 (Graphpad Software, San Diego, CA). Variance was assessed by F test. Statistically significant differences between numeric variables between MI-cases and NMI-cases were determined using parametric analyses and unpaired student's t-tests with Welch’s correction, to minimize type I statistical error in unequal sample sizes. P-values < 0.05 were considered as statistically significant, and data are presented as mean ± standard deviation (SD), to show the variation among the duplicate experiments.

### Publication Abstract
Myocardial infarction (MI) triggers a potent inflammatory response via the release of circulatory mediators, including extracellular vesicles (EVs) by damaged cardiac cells, necessary for myocardial healing. Timely repression of inflammatory response are critical to prevent and minimize cardiac tissue injuries, nonetheless, progression in this aspect remains challenging. The ability of EVs to trigger a functional response upon delivery of carried bioactive cargos, have made them clinically attractive diagnostic biomarkers and vectors for therapeutic interventions. Using label-free quantitative proteomics approach, we compared the protein cargo of plasma EVs between patients with MI and from patients with stable angina (NMI). We report, for the first time, the proteomics profiling on 252 EV proteins that were modulated with &gt;1.2-fold after MI. We identified six up-regulated biomarkers with potential for clinical applications; these reflected post-infarct pathways of complement activation (Complement C1q subcomponent subunit A (C1QA), 3.23-fold change, p = 0.012; Complement C5 (C5), 1.27-fold change, p = 0.087), lipoprotein metabolism (Apoliporotein D (APOD), 1.86-fold change, p = 0.033; Apolipoprotein C-III (APOCC3), 2.63-fold change, p = 0.029) and platelet activation (Platelet glycoprotein Ib alpha chain (GP1BA), 9.18-fold change, p &lt; 0.0001; Platelet basic protein (PPBP), 4.72-fold change, p = 0.027). The data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD002950. This novel biomarker panel was validated in 43 patients using antibody-based assays (C1QA (p = 0.005); C5 (p = 0.0047), APOD (p = 0.0267); APOC3 (p = 0.0064); GP1BA (p = 0.0031); PPBP (p = 0.0465)). We further present that EV-derived fibrinogen components were paradoxically down-regulated in MI, suggesting that a compensatory mechanism may suppress post-infarct coagulation pathways, indicating potential for therapeutic targeting of this mechanism in MI. Taken together, these data demonstrated that plasma EVs contain novel diagnostic biomarkers and therapeutic targets that can be further developed for clinical use to benefit patients with coronary artery diseases (CADs).

### Keywords
Cardiovascular disease; exosomes; label-free quantification; plasma or serum analysis; biomarker: diagnostic; extracellular vesicles

### Affiliations
Nanyang Technological University
Associate Professor  Director of Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry Facility  School of Biological Sciences Nanyang Technological University  60 Nanyang Drive, Singapore 637551  Tel: (65) 6514-1006;  Fax: (65) 6791-3856  Email: sksze@ntu.edu.sg  Web: http://proteomics.sbs.ntu.edu.sg/

### Submitter
Esther Cheow

### Lab Head
Dr Newman Siu Kwan SZE
Associate Professor  Director of Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry Facility  School of Biological Sciences Nanyang Technological University  60 Nanyang Drive, Singapore 637551  Tel: (65) 6514-1006;  Fax: (65) 6791-3856  Email: sksze@ntu.edu.sg  Web: http://proteomics.sbs.ntu.edu.sg/


