### Accession
PXD003489

### Title
SILAC-based proteomic profiling of the human colon cancer cell line LS 180 in response to exogenous galectin-4

### Description
Galectins constitute a family of ß-galactoside binding proteins that translate sugar-encoded signals of cell surface glycoconjugates into biological effects. The expression pattern of different human galectins changes during tissue development and is altered at sites of inflammation and tumor. Galectins have been known to be involved in colorectal cancer development, progression and metastasis. Galectin-4 has already been reported to function as tumor suppressor in this type of malignancy. However, its detailed impact on the tumor phenotype is still unknown. Our previous work indicates that galectin-4 inhibits cell proliferation and induces morphological changes in analyzed human colon cancer cell lines, including LS 180.

### Sample Protocol
For detailed characterization of galectin-4 associated proteomic changes in LS 180 SILAC-based proteomics was applied. Cells were labeled with light (L-[12C6,14N4] arginine (R0); L-[12C6,14N2] lysine (K0)) or heavy (L-[13C6, 15N4] arginine (R10); L-[13C6, 15N2] lysine (K8)) forms. After amino acids incorporation ‘heavy’ labeled cells were treated with recombinant humanGal-4 (50 µg/ml medium) for 72 h. Described SILAC experiment was performed in triplicate. Light and heavy protein lysates were mixed in 1:1 ratio according to their protein concentration and separated by SDS-PAGE. Proteins were visualized by sensitive Coomassie Staining and each lane was sliced into 27 sections. After in-gel tryptic digestion and peptide extraction  nanoLC ESI-MS/MS analysis was conducted. To this end tryptic peptide mixtures were separated using a nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters GmbH, Eschborn, Germany). A C18 trap column (180 μm ×20 mm) with a particle size of 5 μm was used (Waters GmbH). Liquid chromatography separation was performed on a BEH130 C18 main-column (100 μ m × 100 mm) with a particle size of 1.7 μ m (Waters GmbH) at a flow rate of 0.4 μl/min. Peptides from each gel slice were separated by a 1 h gradient consisting of 1% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in water (A) and 0.1% formic acid in 99.9% acetonitrile (B) set as follows: from 0 to 4% B in 1 min, from 4 to 40% B in 39 min, from 40 to 60% B in 5 min, from 60 to 85% B in 0.1 min, 6 min at 85% B,  from 85 to 0% B in 0.1 min, and 9 min at 0% B . The nanoUPLC system was coupled online to an LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Data were acquired by scan cycles of one FTMS scan with a resolution of 60000 at m/z 400 and a range from 300 to 2000 m/z in parallel with six MS/MS scans in the ion trap of the most abundant precursor ions.

### Data Protocol
The MS files were processed with the MaxQuant software version 1.5.3.8 and searched with Andromeda search engine against the human SwissProt database (download: 2016.04.01, 20 199 entries). Enzyme specificity was set to that of trypsin, allowing for cleavage N-terminal of proline residues and up to two missed cleavage sites. The minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids was required. Carbamidomethylation (C) was set as fixed modification, whereas oxidation (M), a deamidation (NQ) and protein N-terminal acetylation were considered as variable modifications. No labeling or double SILAC labeling was defined accordingly with maximum 3 labeled amino acids. Mass tolerances were defined for precursor and fragmented ions as follows: MS first search – 20 ppm, MS main search – 6 ppm and MS/MS – 0.5 Da. The false discovery rates (FDRs) at the protein and peptide level were set to 1%. SILAC-based quantification was based on unique and razor peptides only, and a minimum of two ratio counts was required. Peptide ratios were calculated and normalized for each arginine- and/or lysine-containing peptide as described (Cox, J., and Mann, M. (2008) Nat. Biotechnol. 26, 1367–1372).

### Publication Abstract
Endogenous lectins have the capacity to translate glycan-encoded information on the cell surface into effects on cell growth. As test cases to examine changes in protein presence associated with tumor growth inhibition, we applied SILAC-based proteomics on human colon carcinoma cells treated with galectin-4 (Gal-4). The five tested lines-LS 180, Vaco 432, Colo 205, CX 1, and HCT 116-responded with differentiation and reduced proliferation to Gal-4 binding. In proteomic analysis (mass spectral data deposited with PRIDE, PXD003489), 2654 proteins were quantified, of which 190 were down-regulated and 115 were up-regulated (&gt;2-fold). 1D annotation analysis of the results indicated down-regulation of DNA replication-associated processes, while protein presence for secretory and transport functions appeared increased. The strongest induction was found for CALB2 (calretinin; &#x223c;24-fold), TGM2 (protein-glutamine &#x3b3;-glutamyltransferase 2; &#x223c;11-fold), S100A3 (&#x223c;10-fold), and GSN (gelsolin; 9.5-fold), and the most pronounced decreases were seen for CDKN2A (tumor suppressor ARF; &#x223c;6-fold), EPCAM (epithelial cell adhesion molecule; &#x223c;6-fold), UBE2C (ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme E2 C; &#x223c;5-fold), KIF2C (kinesin-like protein KIF2C; 5-fold), and LMNB1 (lamin-B1; &#x223c;5-fold). The presence of the common proliferation marker Ki-67 was diminished about 4-fold. By tracing significant alterations of protein expression likely relevant for the observed phenotypic effects, the capacity of a galectin to affect the proteome of human colon cancer cells at multiple sites is revealed.

### Keywords
Human, Colon cancer, Lc-msms, Ls 180, Galectin-4, Silac

### Affiliations
Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Heidelberg
Department of Applied Tumor Biology, Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Heidelberg, Germany

### Submitter
Malwina Michalak

### Lab Head
Dr Jürgen Kopitz
Department of Applied Tumor Biology, Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Heidelberg, Germany


