### Accession
PXD010811

### Title
The majority of viral peptides displayed on class I MHC are immunogenic during infection

### Description
CD8+ T cells are essential effectors in anti-viral immunity, recognising short virus-derived peptides presented by MHC class I (pMHCI) on the surface of infected cells. However, the fraction of viral pMHCI on infected cells that are immunogenic has not been shown for any virus. To approach this fundamental question, we used peptide sequencing by high-resolution mass spectrometry to identify nearly 200 vaccinia virus pMHCI presented on infected mouse cells. Next, we screened each peptide for immunogenicity in multiple virus-infected mice, revealing a wide range of immunogenicities. A surprisingly high fraction (>80%) of pMHCI were immunogenic at least one infected animal and around half of these were dominant, which we define as being immunogenic across more than half of the mice screened. The high number of peptides found to be immunogenic and the variability in immunogenicity across mice give us new insight into the specificity of anti-viral CD8+ T cell responses.

### Sample Protocol
DC2.4 cells were infected with vaccinia virus (strain WR) for 6hrs. Subsequently, peptide-MHC molecules (H-2Kb/Db) were captured using antibodies Y-3 and 28-14-8S. Peptides were eluted with 10% acetic acid, fractionated by RP-HPLC and then concentrated using a vacuum centrifuge. Samples were analysed on a 5600+ TripleTOF (SCIEX) mass spectrometer, with an on-line Eksigent nanoLC. Data were acquired in IDA/DDA mode, fragmenting the top 20 most intense precursor ions per cycle. Each sample was run twice, with the second run utilising an exclusion list from the first run.

### Data Protocol
Acquired data were analysed by ProteinPilot (SCIEX) v4.5.

### Publication Abstract
CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells are essential effectors in antiviral immunity, recognizing short virus-derived peptides presented by MHC class I (pMHCI) on the surface of infected cells. However, the fraction of viral pMHCI on infected cells that are immunogenic has not been shown for any virus. To approach this fundamental question, we used peptide sequencing by high-resolution mass spectrometry to identify more than 170 vaccinia virus pMHCI presented on infected mouse cells. Next, we screened each peptide for immunogenicity in multiple virus-infected mice, revealing a wide range of immunogenicities. A surprisingly high fraction (&gt;80%) of pMHCI were immunogenic in at least one infected mouse, and nearly 40% were immunogenic across more than half of the mice screened. The high number of peptides found to be immunogenic and the distribution of responses across mice give us insight into the specificity of antiviral CD8<sup>+</sup> T cell responses.

### Keywords
Vaccinia virus, Mouse, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Monash University
Infection and Immunity Program, Biomedicine Discovery Institute & Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria 3800, Australia

### Submitter
Nathan Croft

### Lab Head
Dr Anthony Purcell
Infection and Immunity Program, Biomedicine Discovery Institute & Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria 3800, Australia


