### Accession
PXD018854

### Title
Comparison of protein and peptide fractionation approaches in protein identification and quantification from Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Description
Proteomics is a high-throughput technology which has been developed with the aim of investigating the maximum number of proteins in cells in a given experiment. However, protein discovery and data generation vary in depth and coverage when different technical strategies are selected. In this study, three different sample preparation approaches, and peptide or protein fractionation methods, were applied to identify and quantify proteins from log-phase yeast lysate: sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE), filter-aided sample preparation coupled with gas phase fractionation (FASP-GPF), and FASP - high pH reversed phase fractionation (HpH). Fractions were initially analyzed and compared using nanoflow liquid chromatography – tandem mass spectrometry (nanoLC-MS/MS) employing data dependent acquisition on a linear ion trap instrument.  The number of fractions and analytical replicates was adjusted so that each experiment used a similar amount of mass spectrometric instrument time. A second set of experiments was performed using a Q Exactive Orbitrap instrument, comparing FASP-GPF, SDS-PAGE and FASP-HpH. Compared with results from the linear ion trap mass spectrometer, the use of a Q Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer enabled a small increase in protein identifications, and a very large increase in peptide identifications. This shows that the main advantage of using the higher resolution instrument is in increased proteome coverage. A total of 1035, 1357 and 2134 proteins were separately identified by FASP-GPF, SDS-PAGE, and FASP-HpH. Combining results from the Orbitrap experiments, there were a total of 2269 proteins found, with 94% of them identified using the FASP-HpH method. Therefore, the FASP-HpH method is the optimal choice among these approaches, when applied to this type of sample.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture Saccharomyces cerevisiae BY4741 single colonies were selected from a YPD plate (1% Yeast extract, 2% peptone, 2% dextrose, and 2% agar) using sterile pipette tips. Cells were separately dissociated into three tubes with 10 mL YPD medium (1% Yeast extract, 2% peptone, and 2% dextrose) by pipetting up and down. Samples were cultured overnight on a shaking incubator (30°C, 200 rpm). 100 μL cells were transferred and cultured in 250 mL flask with 100 mL YPD medium. Cells were harvested prior to stationary phase by the centrifugation at 4℃ (2500 rpm, 10 min) and then washed twice with pre-cooled Milli-Q water. Samples were stored at -20℃ until protein extraction. Three biological replicate cell cultures were grown and harvested for each subsequent experiment involving different sample preparation and fractionation method comparisons.  Protein extraction Yeast cells were pre-treated with 2 M lithium acetate, and then with 0.4 M NaOH for 5 min on ice. Cell pellets were re-suspended with 100 L SDS-PAGE sample buffer and heated to 100℃ for 5 min. Lysates were centrifuged at 13,000 rpm for 10 min to clear cellular debris. The supernatant was carefully transferred to a fresh tube and then precipitated to remove interfering agents using methanol/chloroform (sample: methanol: chloroform: water = 1:4:1:3). Protein pellets were dissolved in 8 M urea/100 mM Tris-HCl buffer (pH 8.0) and the concentration was quantified with bicinchoninic acid (BCA) protein assay kit (Pierce, Rockford, LI, USA) with bovine serum albumin as standards.  In-gel digestion 100 μg aliquots of protein were mixed with 2x SDS sample buffer and heated at 95℃ for 10 min. The mixture was loaded onto Bio-Rad 10% TGX mini gels and separated at 120 V for 65 min. Gels were stained with colloidal Coomassie blue G-250 for 40 min and then de-stained with Milli-Q water overnight. Individual gel lanes from each biological sample were separately sliced into 8, 16 and 32 equal sized pieces and finely chopped, with three replicates performed of each fractionation regime. Gel pieces were washed once with 100 mM NH4HCO3, and twice with 50% ACN/50 mM NH4HCO3 (10 min), and then dehydrated with 100% ACN (5 min). Samples were air-dried and reduced with 50 μL of 10 mM DTT in 100 mM NH4HCO3 for 45 min at room temperature. DTT was removed and then followed with alkylation in dark for 45 min by adding 50 μL of 55 mM iodoacetamide in 100 mM NH4HCO3. After alkylation, gels were briefly washed once with 100 mM NH4HCO3 (5 min), twice with 50% ACN/50 mM NH4HCO3 (5 min), then dehydrated with 100% ACN (5 min). Samples were air-dried, and trypsin was added to the sample for equilibration at 4℃ for 60 min before digestion at 37℃ over-night. Peptides were extracted from gel pieces using 50% ACN/2% formic acid for 30 min, and the peptide extraction was repeated twice. Tryptic peptides were combined and evaporated to dryness in a vacuum centrifuge and reconstituted with 10 μL of 1% formic acid.  FASP-based in solution digestion Proteins were reduced in 200 μL of 50% Trifluoroethanol (TFE)/100 mM NH4HCO3/50 mM DTT for 60 min, and then concentrated to 20 μL in Amicon 10K Ultra 0.5 mL ultrafiltration devices (Millipore) by centrifugation at 13,000 rpm for 30 min. 200 μL of 50% TFE/100 mM NH4HCO3 /60 mM iodoacetamide was added to the mixture and proteins were alkylated in the dark for 45 min. Reagents were removed by  centrifugation at  13,000 rpm for 30 min. Concentrated proteins were washed three times with addition of 200 μL of 50% TFE/100 μM NH4HCO3 and centrifugation at 13,000 rpm for 30 min. Proteins were digested in 300 μL of 20% ACN/100 mM NH4HCO3 buffer with 2 μg trypsin (Promega) and incubated at 37 ℃ overnight in the ultrafiltration device. Tryptic peptides were centrifuged into new ultrafiltration receptacles. This process was followed by another two rinses using 150 μL of 50% ACN/2% formic acid. Extracts were combined and evaporated to dryness in a vacuum centrifuge and re-constituted with 160 μL of 1% formic acid.  High pH reversed phase fractionation  Aliquots of 100 μg of tryptic peptides were prepared and resuspended in 300 μL of 0.1% Trifluoroacetic acid, prior to loading onto the pre-conditioned spin column from the Pierce high pH reversed-phase peptide fractionation kit (Thermo Fisher, CA, USA). Peptides were separated according to the manufacturer’s instructions; after sample was washed once with water by low speed centrifugation (3000 g, 2 min), a step gradient of eight increasing ACN concentrations in triethylamine (5%, 7.5%, 10%, 12.5%, 15%, 17.5%, 20%, and 50%) was applied to the column to elute bound peptides into eight different fractions by centrifugation (3000 rpm, 2min). Each fraction was then dried in a vacuum centrifuge and reconstituted with 20 μL of 1% formic acid, allowing for each fraction to be analyzed in duplicate using 10 μL aliquots, in order to equalize for analysis time in comparisons with the other methods examined.

### Data Protocol
Peptide to spectrum matching  Raw files from all experiments were converted to mzXML format using readWbatch, and peptide to spectrum matching was performed using the X!Tandem algorithm. Fractions were processed sequentially and then merged for each sample replicate. Non-redundant output files were generated for protein identifications with log (e) values less than -1. MS/MS spectra were searched against a S. cerevisiae ENSEMBL protein sequence database (6800 sequence entries), supplemented with common human and trypsin peptide contaminants, and additional searching was performed against a reversed sequence database to allow evaluation of the false discovery rate (FDR). Search parameters included MS and MS/MS tolerances of ± 4 Da and ± 0.4 Da, respectively. Criteria for searching included carbamidomethylation (C) as complete modification, acetylation (N) and oxidation (M) as potential modification, with fully tryptic cleavage sites.   Statistical and bioinformatic analysis Low stringency search data from peptide to spectrum matching outputs from X! Tandem for individual replicates was transformed into high stringency data by combining three biological replicates into a single list of reproducibly identified proteins using Scrappy and PeptideWitch. The criteria for a reproducibly identified protein was that a protein must be present in all three replicates, with a minimum peptide spectral count criteria of five. Using these criteria, protein FDR in all experiments in this study was less than 2%, and peptide FDR was less than 0.3%, indicating that no further filtering was required.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Yeast, Sds-page, High ph reversed phase fractionation, Fasp, Proteome, Gpf

### Affiliations
Macquarie University
Biomolecular Discovery Lab, Department of Molecular Sciences, Macquarie University, NSW, 2109, Australia

### Submitter
Liting Deng

### Lab Head
Dr Paul A. Haynes
Biomolecular Discovery Lab, Department of Molecular Sciences, Macquarie University, NSW, 2109, Australia


