### Accession
PXD006298

### Title
TMT-FASP-LC-MS analysis of human pediatric omental biopsies

### Description
Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is exceedingly severe in patients with chronic kidney disease (CKD) and further aggravated by peritoneal dialysis (PD), exposing the patients to excessive amounts of intraperitoneal glucose. Children are devoid of pre-existing CVD and give insight into specific uremia and PD induced pathomechanisms.  Fat surrounded omental arterioles beyond PD fluid penetration level were microdissected from uremic children at time of first PD catheter insertion (n=8), children on PD (n=5), and age and gender matched non-uremic children as controls (n=6). Adjacent sections of 4 arterioles per patient were used for proteomic analyses.

### Sample Protocol
Approval was obtained from local ethical committees, written informed consent from patient and parents. The study was performed according to the Declaration of Helsinki and registered at www.clinicaltrials.gov (NCT01893710). Omental specimens obtained during surgery were instantaneously frozen with liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C. Arterioles macroscopically located within fat tissue and microscopically at least 1mm distant from the surface were microdissected, Elastica van Gieson (EvG) stained and analyzed by histomorphometry. EvG stainings were used as templates for microdissection of arterioles from cresol violet stained neighboring section. 100µm thick slides were cut on Leica cryotome CM1950 and 40 deep frozen arteriolar rings per patient microdissected using Leica S8 APO stereo microscope and needle.  For proteomic analyses, 30 arteriolar rings per patient were microdissected and lysed in DIGE buffer (30 mM Tris, pH 8.5, 7M urea, 2M thiourea, 4% 3-[(3-Cholamidopropyl) dimethylammonio]-1-propanesulfonate (CHAPS), 1 mM EDTA, 1 tablet of Complete Protease Inhibitor (Roche, Basel, Switzerland) and 1 tablet of phosphatase inhibitor (PhosSTOP, Roche) per 100 ml. The resulting lysates were stored at -80°C until further processing. SDS Page gel was run for quality control and quantification of protein content. Proteomic analysis was performed using high-performance liquid chromatography coupled to mass spectrometry (LC-MS). In brief, filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) was performed according to the procedure described by Wisniewski et al. [Wisniewski et al., Nat Methods 2009]. TMT 10-plex labeling was performed according to the instructions provided by the manufacturer. Pooled samples were concentrated and desalted with C18 microspin columns (5−60μg, The Nest Group, Southborough, MA). Eluates were dried in a vacuum concentrator and reconstituted in 2 mM ammonia formate buffer, pH 10 before fractionation at basic pH. Two-dimensional liquid chromatography was performed by reverse-phase chromatography at high pH on an offline Agilent 1200 series HPLC collecting 20 time-based fractions, as previously described [Maurer et al., J Proteome Res 2014; Bennett et al., J Proteomics 2011]. Fractions were analyzed at low pH on an Agilent 1200 series nanoHPLC coupled directly to a Q Exactive™ mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, Waltham, MA).

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw MS data ﬁles were processed and searched against the human SwissProt database (downloaded on 29 Jan 2017) with the Andromeda search engine using MaxQuant [Tyanova et al., Nat Protoc 2016]. One missed tryptic cleavage site was allowed. Carbamidomethyl cysteine, N-terminal, and lysine-modiﬁed TMT 10-plex were set as ﬁxed modiﬁcations, and oxidized methionine was set as a variable modiﬁcation. Protein ratios were calculated based on unique and razor peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is the leading cause of increased mortality in patients with CKD and is further aggravated by peritoneal dialysis (PD). Children are devoid of preexisting CVD and provide unique insight into specific uremia- and PD-induced pathomechanisms of CVD. We obtained peritoneal specimens from children with stage 5 CKD at time of PD catheter insertion (CKD5 group), children with established PD (PD group), and age-matched nonuremic controls (<i>n</i>=6/group). We microdissected omental arterioles from tissue layers not directly exposed to PD fluid and used adjacent sections of four arterioles per patient for transcriptomic and proteomic analyses. Findings were validated in omental and parietal arterioles from independent pediatric control (<i>n</i>=5), CKD5 (<i>n</i>=15), and PD (<i>n</i>=15) cohorts. Transcriptomic analysis revealed differential gene expression in control versus CKD5 arterioles and in CKD5 versus PD arterioles. Gene ontology analyses revealed activation of metabolic processes in CKD5 arterioles and of inflammatory, immunologic, and stress-response cascades in PD arterioles. PD arterioles exhibited particular upregulation of the complement system and respective regulatory pathways, with concordant findings at the proteomic level. In the validation cohorts, PD specimens had the highest abundance of omental and parietal arteriolar C1q, C3d, terminal complement complex, and phosphorylated SMAD2/3, a downstream effector of TGF-<i>&#x3b2;</i> Furthermore, in the PD parietal arterioles, C1q and terminal complement complex abundance correlated with the level of dialytic glucose exposure, abundance of phosphorylated SMAD2/3, and degree of vasculopathy. We conclude that PD fluids activate arteriolar complement and TGF-<i>&#x3b2;</i> signaling, which quantitatively correlate with the severity of arteriolar vasculopathy.

### Keywords
Human, Microdissection, Arterioles, Fasp, Omentum, Tmt, Uremia, Peritoneal dialysis

### Affiliations
Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Medical University of Vienna, Austria
Medical University of Vienna

### Submitter
Klaus Kratochwill

### Lab Head
Dr Klaus Kratochwill
Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Medical University of Vienna, Austria


