### Accession
PXD007686

### Title
Comparative proteomics of dying and surviving cancer cells improves the identification of drug targets and sheds light on cell life/death decisions

### Description
Chemotherapeutics cause the detachment and death of adherent cancer cells. When studying the proteome changes to determine the protein target and mechanism of action of anticancer drugs, the still-attached cells are normally used, while the detached cells are usually ignored. Here we tested the hypothesis that proteomes of detached cells contain valuable information and therefore separately analyzed the proteomes of detached and attached HCT-116, A375 and RKO cells obtained 48 h after treatment with 5-fluorouracil, methotrexate and paclitaxel. Combined proteome data provided a more accurate identification of drug targets. Six proteins consistently up- or down-regulated in the detached vs attached cells regardless of the drug and cell type were targeted by siRNA. Knocking down USP11, CTTN, ACAA2 and EIF4H had anti-proliferative effects, targeting UHRF1 additionally sensitized the cells to the anticancer drugs, while knocking down RNF-40 increased cell survival against the treatments. Therefore, these proteins are likely to be involved in general cell death and survival decisions. Adding detached cells to the analysis could become a standard practice in expression proteomics of drug-treated cells.

### Sample Protocol
Digestion was performed according to our previously published workflow with slight modifications. Lysis buffer consisting of 3% sodium deoxycholate (SDC) in Ambic buffer was added at the volume 4 times exceeding that of the cell pellet. After incubation at 80 °C for 10 min, samples were sonicated for 1.5 min (30% amplitude, 3s/3s on/off pulses) with a Branson sonicator. The protein concentration was measured using Pierce BCA protein assay (Thermo). The extracted proteins were reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT) to the final concentration of 15 mM (60 °C for 20 min) and alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) (room temperature for 30 min in the dark). SDC solution was diluted to concentration of 1.5% and mass spectrometry grade Lysyl endopeptidase (Wako Pure Chemical Industries) was added at a ratio of 1:100 LysC to protein. Samples were incubated for 6 h, and thereafter diluted to 0.5% SDC. Modified sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) was then added at a ratio of 1:100 trypsin to protein followed by overnight incubation. Subsequently, acetic acid was added to the final concentration of 5% and samples were left for 30 min at room temperature. The precipitates were removed by centrifugation at 20,000 g over 15 min at room temperature. The supernatants were taken and cleaned using StageTips (Thermo) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Samples were dried using SpeedVac centrifugal evaporator and prior to LC-MS/MS analysis, 0.1% formic acid solution (Fluka) was added to the samples to achieve the concentration of 0.2 µg/µL. Proteins digests (1 µg) were analyzed in a randomized order by LC-MS/MS. Samples were loaded onto a 50 cm column (EASY-Spray, 75 µm internal diameter (ID), PepMap C18, 2 µm beads, 100 Å pore size) connected to an Easy-nLC 1000 pump (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with buffer A (0.1% formic acid in water) and eluted with a 120-min gradient reaching from 2% to 30% of buffer B (98% ACN, 0.1% FA, 2% H2O) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. Mass spectra were acquired with an Orbitrap Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in the data-dependent mode at a nominal resolution of 17,500, in the m/z range from 375 to 1700. Peptide fragmentation was performed via higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) with energy set at 28 NCE. The ion selection abundance threshold was set at 0.1% with exclusion of singly-charged ions.

### Data Protocol
The raw data from mass spectrometry were analyzed by MaxQuant, version 1.5.3.8. The Andromeda search engine searched MS/MS data against the International Protein Index database (human version 2014_02, 89054 entries). Cysteine carbamidomethylation was used as a fixed modification, while N,Q-deamidation and methionine oxidation were selected as variable modifications. Trypsin/P and LysC/P were selected. No more than two missed cleavages were allowed. A 1% false discovery rate was used as a filter at both protein and peptide levels. For all other parameters, the default settings were used. Label-free quantification of peptides and proteins was performed.

### Publication Abstract
Chemotherapeutics cause the detachment and death of adherent cancer cells. When studying the proteome changes to determine the protein target and mechanism of action of anticancer drugs, the still-attached cells are normally used, whereas the detached cells are usually ignored. To test the hypothesis that proteomes of detached cells contain valuable information, we separately analyzed the proteomes of detached and attached HCT-116, A375, and RKO cells treated for 48 h with 5-fluorouracil, methotrexate and paclitaxel. Individually, the proteomic data on attached and detached cells had comparable performance in target and drug mechanism deconvolution, whereas the combined data significantly improved the target ranking for paclitaxel. Comparative analysis of attached <i>versus</i> detached proteomes provided further insight into cell life and death decision making. Six proteins consistently up- or downregulated in the detached <i>versus</i> attached cells regardless of the drug and cell type were discovered; their role in cell death/survival was tested by silencing them with siRNA. Knocking down USP11, CTTN, ACAA2, and EIF4H had anti-proliferative effects, affecting UHRF1 additionally sensitized the cells to the anticancer drugs, while knocking down RNF-40 increased cell survival against the treatments. Therefore, adding detached cells to the expression proteomics analysis of drug-treated cells can significantly increase the analytical value of the approach. The data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD007686.

### Keywords
Drug mechanism, Chemotherapeutic, Cell death, Mass spectrometry, Survival

### Affiliations
Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden

### Submitter
Amir Ata Saei 

### Lab Head
Dr Roman Zubarev
Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden


