### Accession
PXD019391

### Title
Deciphering the function of Angiomotin in trophoblast cells

### Description
Trophectoderm-specific expression of Angiomotin (AMOT) in pre-implantation embryos followed by its unique expression in the post-implantation ectoplacental cone that harbors the trophoblast stem cell niche prompted our investigation on the function of AMOT in trophoblast cells. Using the in vitro trophoblast stem cell culture model, we established differentiation dependent up-regulation of AMOT expression in trophoblast cells. To understand the function of AMOT in trophoblast cells mass spectrometry-based proteomic analysis was employed to identify the AMOT interactome within the trophoblast proteome. This approach utilized immunoprecipitation of endogenous AMOT followed by fractionation on SDS-PAGE and subsequently subjecting the tryptic digested excised gel bands to mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
The immunoprecipitates were resolved by 10% (w/v) SDS polyacrylamide gel. Staining was done using Coomassie staining solution (0.1% Coomassie Brilliant Blue R-250, 50% methanol, 10% glacial acetic acid). The visible bands were excised out and in-gel digestion was performed. The mass spectrometric analysis was performed using TripleTOF 5600 (SCIEX).

### Data Protocol
All datasets (.wiff files) converted to .mgf file format. For NSAF values, datasets were analyzed using Andromeda in SearchGUI (version 3.3.3) with default engine-specific settings. The identification settings were as follows: enzyme: trypsin, specific, 2 missed cleavages; precursor charges +2 to +5; precursor mass tolerances 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerances 0.5 Da; fixed modifications: carbamidomethylation of C; variable modifications: Deamidation of N and Q, oxidation of M. The peptides and proteins were inferred from the spectrum identification results using Peptide Shaker (version 1.16.27). Peptide Spectrum Matches (PSMs), peptides, and proteins were validated at a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) estimated using the decoy hit distribution. The emPAIs was calculated from Mascot (version 2.3.02). The identification settings were as follows: enzyme: trypsin, maximum missed cleavages 2; peptide mass tolerances 0.5 Da, fragment mass tolerances 0.2 Da; fixed modifications: carbamidomethylation of C; variable modifications: oxidation of M. The protein score and significance threshold for peptide matches were set to ˃ 30 and p˂ 0.05 respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Enrichment of angiomotin (AMOT) in the ectoplacental cone of E7.5 murine placenta prompted our investigation on the role of AMOT in trophoblast differentiation. We show here that AMOT levels increased in mouse placenta during gestation and also upon induction of differentiation in trophoblast stem cell ex&#x2009;vivo. Proteomic data unravelling AMOT-interactome in trophoblast cells indicated a majority of AMOT interactors to be involved in protein translation. In-depth analysis of AMOT-interactome led to identification of eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4A (eIF4A) as the most plausible AMOT interactor. Loss of function of AMOT enhanced, whereas, gain in function resulted in decline of global protein synthesis in trophoblast cells. Bioinformatics analysis evaluating the potential energy of AMOT-eIF4A binding suggested a strong AMOT-eIF4A interaction using a distinct groove encompassing amino acid residue positions 238 to 255 of AMOT. Co-immunoprecipitation of AMOT with eIF4A reaffirmed AMOT-eIF4A association in trophoblast cells. Deletion of 238 to 255 amino acids of AMOT resulted in abrogation of AMOT-eIF4A interaction. In addition, 238 to 255 amino acid deletion of AMOT was ineffective in eliciting AMOT's function in reducing global protein synthesis. Interestingly, AMOT-dependent sequestration of eIF4A dampened its loading to the m<sup>7</sup> -GTP cap and hindered its interaction with eIF4G. Furthermore, enhanced AMOT expression in placenta was associated with intrauterine growth restriction in both rats and humans. These results not only highlight a hitherto unknown novel function of AMOT in trophoblast cells but also have broad biological implications as AMOT might be an inbuilt switch to check protein synthesis in developmentally indispensable trophoblast cells.

### Keywords
Angiomotin, Exponentially modified protein abundance index (empai), Normalized spectral abundance factor (nsaf), In-gel digestion

### Affiliations
Regional Centre for Biotechnology
Associate Professor Regional Centre for Biotechnology

### Submitter
Tushar Maiti

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Tushar Kanti Maiti
Associate Professor Regional Centre for Biotechnology


