### Accession
PXD041183

### Title
MHZ9 binding proteins identified by MHZ9-GFP IP-MS

### Description
Results from the analysis of MHZ9 interaction protein candidates by using immunoprecipitation-mass spectrometry (IP-MS).

### Sample Protocol
The 2-d-old etiolated 35S::GFP-MHZ9 transgenic rice seedlings were treated with 10 μL/L of ethylene for 8 h. The wild type (Nipponbare) rice seedlings under the same condition was used as negative control.The total proteins were isolated by IP buffer [50 mM TRIS (pH 7.4), 150 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA, 0.5% NP-40, 50 μM MG132, 2 mM PMSF, 2% (v/v) protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma)]. The samples were incubated on ice for 15 min with vortexing every 5 minute. The samples were then centrifuged at 13,000 g for 10 min at 4ºC twice. The supernatants were mixed with 25 μL equilibrated GFP-Trap_A (gta-20, Chromotek) beads or with anti-c-Myc affinity gel (E6654, Sigma-Aldrich). After incubation with rotation for 1 h at 4ºC, the beads were washed 3 times with washing buffer [10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4), 150 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA, 50 μM MG132, 2 mM PMSF, 1× complete protease inhibitor (Roche)]. Then the beads were harvested by centrifuging at 2,500 g for 2 min at 4ºC. The beads were mixed with 40 μL of 2×SDS-PAGE loading buffer and heated at 65ºC for 5 min. The supernatants were harvested for MS.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) that was coupled to Easy nLC (Proxeon Biosystems, now Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 120 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode. MS data was acquired using a data-dependent top10 method dynamically choosing the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (300–1800 m/z) for HCD fragmentation. Automatic gain control (AGC) target was set to 3e6, and maximum inject time to 10 ms. Dynamic exclusion duration was 40.0 s. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200 and resolution for HCD spectra was set to 17,500 at m/z 200, and isolation width was 2 m/z. Normalized collision energy was 30 eV and the underfill ratio, which specifies the minimum percentage of the target value likely to be reached at maximum fill time, was defined as 0.1%. The instrument was run with peptide recognition mode enabled. Data Analysis. The MS/MS spectra were searched using Mascot 2.2 (Matrix Science) against the uniprot_Oryza_sativa_168248_20180102.fasta. For protein identification, the following options were used: peptide mass tolerance = 20 ppm; MS/MS tolerance = 0.1 Da; enzyme = trypsin; missed cleavage = 2; fixed modification: carbamidomethyl (C); variable modification: oxidation (M); score cutoff = 20; minimum number of unique peptides for protein identification is 1. For identification of mononucleotide-peptide in XRNAX-IP-MS, the mass shifts were set as 324.18, 347.22, 323.2, 363.22 Dalton for uridine monophosphate (U), adenosine monophosphate (A), cytidine monophosphate (C), guanosine monophosphate (G), respectively.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Oryza_sativa, Q exactive mass spectrometer (thermo scientific)

### Affiliations
Institute of Genetics and Developmental Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
State Key Lab of Plant Genomics Institute of Genetics and Developmental Biology Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China Chaoyang District, Beichen West Road, Campus #1, No. 2

### Submitter
Yi-Hua Huang

### Lab Head
Dr Jin-Song Zhang
State Key Lab of Plant Genomics Institute of Genetics and Developmental Biology Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China Chaoyang District, Beichen West Road, Campus #1, No. 2


