### Accession
PXD037329

### Title
H2O2 induced oxidative stress may trigger cellular senescence in retinal photoreceptor cells through modulation of ECM-receptor interaction, oxidative phosphorylation and spliceosome pathways

### Description
Photoreceptor cells are highly susceptible to oxidative stress induced damage due to their high metabolic rate. Oxidative stress plays a key role in driving pathological events in several different ocular diseases which lead to retinal degeneration and ultimately blindness. A growing number of studies have been performed to understand downstream events caused by ROS induced oxidative stress in photoreceptor cells; however, the underlying mechanisms of ROS toxicity are not fully understood. Therefore, to shed light on the ROS induced downstream pathological events, we employed a tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling-based quantitative mass-spectrometric approach to determine proteome changes in 661W photoreceptor cells following oxidative stress induction via application of different concentrations of H2O2 at different time points. Overall, 5920 proteins were identified and quantified and 450 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were identified, which were altered in a dose and time dependent manner in all treatment groups compared to the control group. These proteins were involved in several biological pathways including spliceosome and ribosome response, activated glutathione metabolism, decreased ECM-receptor interaction, oxidative phosphorylation, abnormally regulated lysosome, apoptosis, and ribosome biogenesis. Our results highlighted ECM-receptor interaction, oxidative phosphorylation and spliceosome pathways as the major targets of oxidative stress that might mediate vascular dysfunction and cellular senescence.

### Sample Protocol
/Cell culture and treatments/_The cells were cultured in the DMEM medium containing 10% (v/v) fetal bovine serum (FBS), 1% (v/v) penicillin/streptomycin (Thermo Fisher). Cultures were maintained at 37 °C under a humidified atmosphere of 5% CO2, as previously described. The cells were treated with two different concentrations of H2O2 (Sigma),10 mM and 50 mM, then samples were separately collected at different times of exposure; after 0.5 h in treatments with 10 mM H2O2, and after 6 h and 12 h in treatment with 50 mM H2O2. Therefore, there were four distinct sampling points including control (CTRL), concentration 1 (C1) (10 mM, 0.5 h), concentration 2 (C2) (50 mM, 6 h), and concentration 3 (C3) (50 mM, 12 h). Three biological replicates were prepared for each specific condition. Cells were stored at -20℃ until protein extraction. /Protein sample preparation/_Protein samples were prepared as described previously. Briefly, cells were solubilized in cold lysis buffer (20mM HEPES, pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1% Triton x-100, 1 mM EDTA) containing protease inhibitor under sonication. Lysates were centrifuged for 15 min at 13,000 rpm at 4℃ and supernatant was collected, reduced with dithiothreitol (20 mM) for 30 min, and alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark at room temperature. Additional 40 mM DTT was added for 15 min to quenched the alkylation reaction. Protein precipitation and contaminant removal was performed using chloroform -methanol extraction. Samples were air-dried for evaporation of the remaining methanol and then resuspended in 650 μL HEPES buffer (pH = 8.8). Total protein quantities were measured using a BCA Protein Assay kit (Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA). An aliquot of 150 μg of proteins was digested using trypsin (protein: enzyme = 50:1) at 37℃ overnight. Digestion was stopped by placing samples on the ice, followed by the measurement of peptide concentration using the Micro BCA assay kit (Pierce, Rockford, USA). /TMT labeling, LC-MS/MS analysis/_An aliquot of 60 μg peptides from each sample was labelled with 0.25 mg of TMT reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific)at room temperature for one hour with occasional vor-texing. To quench the reaction, 8 μL of 5% fresh hydroxylamine was added to each sample then incubated at room temperature for 15 min with additional vortexing. Af-ter reaction, ten labeled samples were pooled followed by drying with vacuum cen-trifugation. The labeled peptides were reconstituted in 1% formic acid and desalted using Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (Waters, Milford, MA, USA). Fractionation was per-formed using a high pH reversed-phase peptide fractionation kit (Thermo Fisher Sci-entific), and then peptides were consolidated into 16 fractions. Fractions were dried and resuspended in 1% formic acid then desalted using SDB-RPS (3M- Empore) Stage Tips. Peptides were identified and quantified using a Q Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) coupled to an EASY-nLC1000 nanoflow HPLC system (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA).

### Data Protocol
Peptide to spectrum matching was performed using Mascot against the Mus musculus SwissProt database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/swissprot/) using parameters as described in our previous studies. Analyses of identified proteins were performed using the TMTPrepPro R package. All protein ratios with respect to the control reference (label-126) were extracted and combined across runs. Two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) was employed to identify differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) in all conditions; and pairwise comparisons (Student’s t-test) of each treatment to control were also performed. To examine whether the H2O2 treatment groups and controls were well separated from each other, DEPs based on ANOVA comparison (log-transformed ratios) were clustered. In pair-wise comparisons, the ratio of the TMT label detected in each specific treatment to control was used to obtain the relative quantitation of protein under H2O2 treatments compared to control. The overall fold changes were calculated as geometric means of the respective ratios. Proteins were considered as DEPs if they met the following criteria: fold change was greater than 1.20 (up-regulated) or less than 0.833 (down-regulated), with p-value less than 0.05. Finally, the identified DEPs were subjected to further bioinformatics analyses including Gene Ontology (GO) and path-way enrichment analysis using the online tool String.

### Publication Abstract
Photoreceptor cells are highly susceptible to oxidative-stress-induced damage due to their high metabolic rate. Oxidative stress plays a key role in driving pathological events in several different ocular diseases, which lead to retinal degeneration and ultimately blindness. A growing number of studies have been performed to understand downstream events caused by ROS induced oxidative stress in photoreceptor cells; however, the underlying mechanisms of ROS toxicity are not fully understood. To shed light on ROS induced downstream pathological events, we employed a tandem mass tag (TMT) labelling-based quantitative mass-spectrometric approach to determine proteome changes in 661W photoreceptor cells following oxidative stress induction via the application of different concentrations of H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> at different time points. Overall, 5920 proteins were identified and quantified, and 450 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were identified, which were altered in a dose and time dependent manner in all treatment groups compared to the control group. These proteins were involved in several biological pathways, including spliceosome and ribosome response, activated glutathione metabolism, decreased ECM-receptor interaction, oxidative phosphorylation, abnormally regulated lysosome, apoptosis, and ribosome biogenesis. Our results highlighted ECM receptor interaction, oxidative phosphorylation and spliceosome pathways as the major targets of oxidative stress that might mediate vascular dysfunction and cellular senescence.

### Keywords
Proteomics; photoreceptor; oxidative stress; retina; ecm receptor interaction signaling pathway; cellular senescence.

### Affiliations
School of Natural Sciences,Faculty of Science and Engineering, Macquarie University
Macquarie University

### Submitter
Liting Deng

### Lab Head
Dr Paul A. Haynes
School of Natural Sciences,Faculty of Science and Engineering, Macquarie University


