### Accession
PXD008802

### Title
Proline hydroxylation of collagens in prolyl 4-hydroxylase mutant mice

### Description
Collagen from the skin of wild type and prolyl 4-hydroxylase mutant mice was extracted and proline hydroxylation of the collagen-derived peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
To extract collagen, skin punches were minced and incubated in 0.5 M acetic acid overnight at 4 °C. The tissue was minced further by vigorous shaking with stainless steel beads using TissueLyser LT (Qiagen) for 3 x 30 s, 50 Hz. After this, pepsin soluble collagen fraction was obtained by adding 1 mg/ml  pepsin for  one week with constant mixing at 4 °C  and collecting the supernatant after centrifugation at  13 000 g for 30 min. Collagen was precipitated by adding 5 M NaCl in 0.05 M Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, to a final concentration of 0.7 M. Collagen containing pellet was obtained after overnight incubation at 4 °C followed by 21 000 g centrifugation for 20 min. The pellet was washed by resuspension in 4 M NaCl and overnight incubation at 4 °C, followed by 21 000 g centrifugation for 20 min. The wash was repeated once and the final collagen pellet was suspended in 0.1 M acetic acid. The collagen samples were vacuum-dried and dissolved in 6 M urea in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate. The cysteines were reduced in 10 mM dithiotreitol at 37Â°C for 1 h and alkylated in 40 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 30 min. The solution was diluted to 1:10 with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and the proteins were digested with 0.5 µg trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) per 10 µg of protein at 37°C overnight. The peptides were desalted by StageTips, vacuum dried, dissolved in 1% formic acid and loaded on a nanoflow HPLC system (Easy-nLC1000, Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to the Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nano-electrospray ionization source.  The peptides were first loaded on a trapping column and subsequently separated inline on a 15 cm C18 column (75 µm x 15 cm, Magic 5 µm 200 Å C18, Michrom BioResources Inc., Sacramento, CA, USA) The mobile phase consisted of water/acetonitrile (98:2 (v/v)) with 0.2% formic acid (solvent A) and acetonitrile/water (95:5 (v/v)) with 0.2% formic acid (solvent B). The peptides were separated with a 10 min gradient from 5 to 35 % of solvent B. Before the end of the run, the percentage of solvent B was raised to 100 % in 2 min and kept there for 8 min. Data dependent acquisition was enabled and higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) of the top 5 ions from the survey scan over the mass-to-charge (m/z) range 300-2000 with dynamic exclusion time of 10 s was performed in each cycle. Two repeated runs per sample were performed.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were searched against mouse Swissprot sequences (release 2014_08) with Proteome Discoverer software, version 1.4. (Thermo Fischer Scientific) using Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, version 2.4) allowing for 5 ppm peptide mass tolerance and 0.02 Da fragment mass tolerance. Carbamidomethyl (C) as a fixed modification, and oxidation (M, K, P) as dynamic modifications were included. Maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Decoy database search using reversed human SwissProt sequences was used to assess false discovery rate. Only the peptides with false discovery rate < 0.05 and determined as "rank 1" by Proteome Discoverer software were accepted for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Collagens are the most abundant extracellular matrix proteins in vertebrates and have a characteristic triple-helix structure. Hydroxylation of proline residues is critical for helix stability, and diminished prolyl hydroxylase activity causes wide-spread defects in connective tissues. Still, the role of proline hydroxylation in the binding of collagen receptors such as integrins is unclear. Here, we isolated skin collagen from genetically modified mice having reduced prolyl 4-hydroxylase activity. At room temperature, the reduced proline hydroxylation did not affect interactions with the recombinant integrin &#x3b1;2I domain, but at 37 &#xb0;C, collagen hydroxylation correlated with the avidity of &#x3b1;2I domain binding. Of note, LC-MS/MS analysis of isolated skin collagens revealed no major changes in the hydroxyproline content of the main integrin-binding sites. Thus, the disrupted &#x3b1;2I domain binding at physiological temperatures was most likely due to structural destabilization of the collagenous helix. Integrin &#x3b1;2I binding to the triple-helical GFPGER motif was slightly weaker than to GFOGER (O = hydroxyproline). This phenomenon was more prominent when &#x3b1;1 integrin was tested. Integrin &#x3b1;1&#x3b2;1 expressed on CHO cells and recombinant &#x3b1;1I domain showed remarkably slower binding velocity and weaker avidity to GFPGER when compared with GFOGER. Structural modeling revealed the critical interaction between Arg-218 in &#x3b1;1I and the hydroxyproline residue in the integrin-binding motif. The role of Arg-218 was further validated by testing a variant R218D &#x3b1;1I domain in solid-phase binding assays. Thus, our results show that the lack of proline hydroxylation in collagen can affect integrin binding by a direct mechanism and via structural destabilization of the triple helix.

### Keywords
Mouse, Collagen prolyl 4-hydroxylase

### Affiliations
University of Turku
Department of Biochemistry University of Turku Turku, FINLAND

### Submitter
Pekka Rappu

### Lab Head
Dr Jyrki Heino
Department of Biochemistry University of Turku Turku, FINLAND


