### Accession
PXD009384

### Title
Deep proteomic analysis of murine erythroid differentiation

### Description
Erythropoiesis is a tightly controlled process. Although human and murine erythropoiesis are grossly similar, several aspects of these processes present significant differences. We have performed a label free quantification of proteins expressed during murine erythroid differentiation of primary cells with the aim to compare human and murine differentiations. Furthermore, we also analyzed the proteome of three murine cell lines, MEDEP, G1ER and Friend cells, to determine their similarities with the proteome of primary cells.

### Sample Protocol
We used the label free quantitative proteomic approach. Peptides were prepared from whole-cell lysates, using the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method with a trypsic digestion. Peptides from each sample were prefractionated by strong cationic exchange (SCX) StageTips. Each fraction was analyzed by nLC-MS-MS using an Ultimate 3000 Rapid Separation liquid chromatographic system coupled to an Orbitrap Q-exactive mass spectrometer (from Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on a C18 reverse phase analytical column (2 µm particle size, 100 A˚ pore size, 75 µm internal diameter, 25 cm length) with a 3h gradient from 99% solution A (0.1% formic acid in H2O) to 40% solution B (80% ACN, 0.085% formic acid). The Orbitrap Q-exactive mass spectrometer acquired data throughout the elution process and operated in a data dependent scheme with full MS scans acquired with the orbitrap, followed by stepped HCD MS/MS fragmentations.The MS1 scans spanned from 350 to 1500 Th with 1.106 AGC target, 60ms MIIT and resolution of 70 000. HCD fragmentations were performed on the 10 most abundant ions with a dynamic exclusion time of 30 s. Precursor selection window was set at 2Th. HCD Normalized Collision Energy (NCE) was set at 27% and MS/MS scan resolution was set at 17,500 with AGC target 1.105 and 60ms MIIT. Spectra were recorded in profile mode. WT = Primary cells.

### Data Protocol
Label free quantitative proteomic analysis was performed using Maxquant version 1.5.8.5 (Cox et al, 2014 ). The database used was a concatenation of murine sequences from the Uniprot-Swissprot database (Uniprot, release 2017-05) and the list of contaminant sequences from Maxquant that was incremented in our laboratory for frequently observed contaminant proteins. Cystein carbamidomethylation was set as constant modification and acetylation of protein N-terminus and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications. A maximum of two missed tryptic digestion was allowed. Second peptide search and the “match between runs” options were allowed with a match time window of 1 min and an alignment time of 30 min. False discovery rate (FDR) was kept below 1% on both peptides and proteins. Label-free protein quantification (LFQ) was done using both unique and razor peptides with at least 2 peptide ratio required for LFQ.

### Publication Abstract
Murine-based cellular models have provided and continue to provide many useful insights into the fundamental mechanisms of erythropoiesis, as well as insights into the pathophysiology of inherited and acquired red cell disorders. Although detailed information on many aspects of these cell models is available, comprehensive proteomic data are lacking. This is a critical knowledge gap, as proteins are effectors of most biologic processes. To address this critical unmet need, proteomes of the murine cell lines Friend erythroleukemia (MEL), GATA1 erythroid (G1ER), and embryonic stem cell-derived erythroid progenitor (MEDEP) and proteomes of cultured murine marrow-derived erythroblasts at different stages of terminal erythroid differentiation were analyzed. The proteomes of MEDEP cells and primary murine erythroid cells were most similar, whereas those of MEL and G1ER cells were more distantly related. We demonstrated that the overall cellular content of histones does not decrease during terminal differentiation, despite strong chromatin condensation. Comparison of murine and human proteomes throughout terminal erythroid differentiation revealed that many noted transcriptomic changes were significantly dampened at the proteome level, especially at the end of the terminal differentiation process. Analysis of the early events associated with induction of terminal differentiation in MEDEP cells revealed divergent alterations in associated transcriptomes and proteomes. These proteomic data are powerful and valuable tools for the study of fundamental mechanisms of normal and disordered erythropoiesis and will be of broad interest to a wide range of investigators for making the appropriate choice of various cell lines to study inherited and acquired diseases of the erythrocyte.

### Keywords
Erythropoiesis, Label free quantification, Mouse, Erythroid differentiation, Murine, Erythroblast

### Affiliations
Institut Cochin, INSERM U1016, CNRS UMR8104, Plateforme de proteomique 3P5, Paris Descartes University
Plateforme Proteomique 3P5, Université Paris Descartes, Inserm U1016, Institut Cochin, Cnrs UMR8104,  France

### Submitter
Emilie-Fleur GAUTIER

### Lab Head
Dr Patrick MAYEUX
Institut Cochin, INSERM U1016, CNRS UMR8104, Plateforme de proteomique 3P5, Paris Descartes University


