### Accession
PXD015356

### Title
QUANTITATIVE SUBCELLULAR PROTEOMICS OF THE ORBITOFRONTAL CORTEX OF SCHIZOPHRENIA PATIENTS

### Description
Schizophrenia is a chronic disease characterized by the impairment of mental functions with a marked social dysfunction. A proteomic approach using iTRAQ labeling and selected reaction monitoring, applied to the characterization of mitochondria (MIT), crude nuclear fraction (NUC) and cytoplasm (CYT), can allow the observation of dynamic changes in cell compartments providing valuable insights concerning schizophrenia physiopathology. Mass spectrometry analyses of the orbitofrontal cortex from 12 schizophrenia patients and 8 healthy controls identified  655 protein groups in MIT fraction, 1500 in NUC and 1591 in CYT. We found 166 groups of proteins dysregulated among all enriched cellular fractions. Through the quantitative proteomic analysis, we detect as the main biological pathways those related to calcium and glutamate imbalance, cell signaling disruption of CREB activation, axon guidance and proteins involved in the activation of NF-kB signaling along with the increase of complement proteins C3. Based on our data analysis, we suggest the activation of NF-kB as a possible pathway that links the deregulation of glutamate, calcium, apoptosis and the activation of the immune system in schizophrenia patients

### Sample Protocol
1. Brain samples :The OFC postmortem tissues were collected from 12 schizophrenia patients at the State Mental Hospital in Wiesloch, Germany. Patients were diagnosed as residual schizophrenia (295.6) according to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-IV) criteria18. The OFC control samples were collected from eight individuals at the Institute of Neuropathology, Heidelberg University, in Heidelberg, Germany. All assessments, postmortem evaluations and procedures were approved by the ethics committee of the Faculty of Medicine, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany.   2. Subcellular enrichment: For nuclear enrichment, fifty milligrams of OFC tissue were homogenized in Buffer A pH 7.4 (0.32M sucrose, 4mM HEPES and protease cocktail inhibitor tablets and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail I and II). The homogenate was centrifuged at 1.000g for 10 min, 4oC obtaining the P1: crude nuclei. For mitochondria and cytoplasm enrichment, thirty milligrams of intact OFC brain tissue was incubated for 15 min on ice with 180µl of 250-STM buffer (250 mM Sucrose, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7,4, 5 mM MgCl2, Mini protease inhibitor and phosphatase inhibitor). The homogenate was centrifugated at 800g for 15 min 4°C, obtaining the supernatant Cyt 1. The pellet was resuspended in 640µl 250-STM buffer, centrifuging at 800g, 15 min, 4°C. All supernatants were combined and centrifugated at 6.000g, 15 min, 4°C. The last supernatant was collected as CYT fraction and saved to -80°C until its use. The pellet (PM) was resuspended in 250 µl of 250-STM buffer and centrifuged at 6.000g, 15 min, 4°C. PM was resuspended in 250µl Hepes buffer (10 mM Hepes, (pH 7,9 / Mini protease inhibitor and phosphatase inhibitor and incubated at 4°C for 30 min. The enriched mitochondria were loaded on a sucrose gradient containing 1,75ml of 50% sucrose, 1,75 ml of 36% sucrose and 0,75 ml of 20% sucrose centrifuging at 25.000rpm, 4°C, 60 min. Mitochondrial fraction was transferred to a new tube, filling in with Hepes buffer until 2 ml and centrifuged at 17.200g, 20 min, 4°C. the pellet was saved to -80°C until use.  Protein extraction was made according to Saia-Cereda and collaborators protocol (2016). Subcellular enrichment was evaluated using western blot.   3. Enzymatic digestion: The samples were reduced with 5 mM TCEP for 1 hour at 30 oC, alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 minutes at room temperature followed by dilution (1:10) with 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) pH 8 and digestion with trypsin (1:50) for 18 hours at 35 o C. The samples were cleaning in C18 MacroSpin Columns. The peptides were dried in Speed Vac and resuspended in 30 µl of TEAB 20 mM for Qubit® assay quantification.  4. Isobaric tag labeling with iTRAQ and strong cation exchange (SCX): The peptides from each subcellular fraction were labeled according to Núñez and collaborators protocol (2017). The organization of 4-plex iTRAQ was made up as follows: three channels (114, 115 and 116) were labeled with patients’ samples and one channel (117) containing the pool of 8 control samples. SCX chromatography was made in MacroSpin Columns (Harvard Apparatus) using different concentration of KCl for peptides elution. Samples were desalted in C18 MacroSpin columns, dried and suspended in 0.1% formic acid.  5. Mass spectrometry analyses: Peptides (2 μg) were analyzed in technical triplicate by nLC Proxeon EASY-II system using a gradient of three hours. Data acquisition was carried out under a stream atmosphere provided by 5% ammonium hydroxide. The chromatographic system was coupled on-line to an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer. For Full MS scan was used the Orbitrap analyzer (resolution of 60.000). We selected the ten most intense ions for fragmentation. MS2 spectra acquisition was made in the Orbitrap (resolution of 7.500) with higher-energy collision dissociation (collision energy of 40).  6. SRM Analysis: SRM analysis was performed in an EASYII-nano-LC during 60 min.   The data were acquired in a positive mode (SRM mode) in the TSQ Quantiva mass spectrometer. The first and third quadrupoles were set up with a resolution of 0.7 (FWHM) using a cycle time of 2 s. The precursor ions fragmentation was carried out with Argon gas with a CID gas pressure of 1.5 mTorr using normalized collision energy for each peptide in a range of 10-30. SRM results were analyzed with Skyline v. 4.2 software using a public NIST library of peptide ion fragmentation spectra from Peptide Atlas. For data normalization, we use as global standard (Sequence: AVLDLFEETSNIGSK). For quantification analysis, we consider at least three transitions per peptides, two peptides per protein family (dotp: >0.7). For proteins with more than one monitored peptide, the sum of normalized areas of all peptides were used for the statistical analyses. The statistically significant variations were evaluated with ANOVA test followed by Tukey HSD all-pairwise (p-value < 0.05).

### Data Protocol
1. Mass spectra analysis: Raw data was analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 2.1 software against the human database from neXProt (12/02/2019) using a target-decoy strategy ( 0.01 of FDR). The search space was full-tryptic considering two missed cleavages for trypsin. The precursor mass tolerance and fragment mass tolerance were 10 ppm and 0.1 Da respectively. As fixed modification was included the carbamidomethylation of cysteine. Methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation and iTRAQ modifications (K, Y, and N-terminal) were considered as dynamic modifications.  2. Statistical evaluation of the data: Data analyses were performed in the InfernoRDN program using unique peptides. For data normalization was applied to the Central Tendency and the absolute deviation of the adjusted median. Grubbs test, with a minimum of three peptides and p-value <0.05, was used as a parameter to group the peptides in their corresponding protein. Robust estimators such as the median and median absolute deviation were used to calculate the z-score and the p-value associated with a 95% confidence level, determining the statistically significant variations in the relative abundance of proteins. Also, InfernoRDN was used for the principal component analysis (PCA) of the different subcellular fractions.   3. Biological and functional analysis: Subcellular localization protein assignment was made using UniProt. Comparative analyses of data were performed in Venny 2.1 program. The biological function was analyzed by Reactome Pathways, together with the STRING 10.5 software (considering high-confidence interactions) and KEGG program.

### Publication Abstract
Schizophrenia is a chronic disease characterized by the impairment of mental functions with a marked social dysfunction. A quantitative proteomic approach using iTRAQ labeling and SRM, applied to the characterization of mitochondria (MIT), crude nuclear fraction (NUC), and cytoplasm (CYT), can allow the observation of dynamic changes in cell compartments providing valuable insights concerning schizophrenia physiopathology. Mass spectrometry analyses of the orbitofrontal cortex from 12 schizophrenia patients and 8 healthy controls identified 655 protein groups in the MIT fraction, 1500 in NUC, and 1591 in CYT. We found 166 groups of proteins dysregulated among all enriched cellular fractions. Through the quantitative proteomic analysis, we detect as the main biological pathways those related to calcium and glutamate imbalance, cell signaling disruption of CREB activation, axon guidance, and proteins involved in the activation of NF-kB signaling along with the increase of complement protein C3. Based on our data analysis, we suggest the activation of NF-kB as a possible pathway that links the deregulation of glutamate, calcium, apoptosis, and the activation of the immune system in schizophrenia patients. All MS data are available in the ProteomeXchange Repository under the identifier PXD015356 and PXD014350.

### Keywords
Quantification, Proteomics, Schizophrenia, Cellular fractions

### Affiliations
Federal University of Rio de Janeiro
UFRJ

### Submitter
Proteomics Unit

### Lab Head
Dr Fabio nogueira
Federal University of Rio de Janeiro


