### Accession
PXD031229

### Title
Knockdown of DHRS7 in LNCaP cells

### Description
Knockdown of DHRS7 in the prostate cancer cell line LNCaP was performed for 24h, 36h, and 48h using siRNA.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were digested by trypsin and LysC. Peptide complexity was reduced by an initial chromatography and every 6th fraction was pooled together. All pools were injected three times as technical replicates (2 μL injection volume). The mobile phase was solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) and B (80% ACN/0.1% formic acid). An EASY-nLC 1200 system, set to 0.25 μL/min, provided a linear gradient of solvent B: 0% for 5 min, from 0% to 35% over 155 min, to 100% over 5 min, followed by 15 min at 100%. The column was connected to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos instrument. The eluting peptides were ionized at 1.9 kV and the instrument was operated in data dependent mode with a cycle time of 3 s. Precursor scans in the Orbitrap had a scan range of 400 – 1600 m/z at a resolution of 120,000, with a maximum injection time of 100 ms. The data-dependent MS2 scans were done in the linear ion trap of the instrument and was set to allow for the maximal number of MS2 scans to be collected, with an injection time of 35 ms. The monoisotopic precursor selection (MIPS) mode was set to “Peptide”, the intensity threshold to 5000, and the dynamic exclusion duration to 60 s. Only peptides with a charge state of 2 – 7 were included in the analysis.

### Data Protocol
Data obtained from the LC-MS/MS were searched against the SwissProt database using the Mascot and Sequest HT search engines of Proteome Discoverer 2.2. Precursor and fragment mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively. The peptide modifications methionine-oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were set to dynamic and cysteine-carbamidomethylation to static. Confidence of peptide matches was set to 1% false discovery rate. Relative protein quantification was done using the Minora Feature Detector.

### Publication Abstract
Prostate cancer (PCa), one of the most common malignancies in men, typically responds to initial treatment, but resistance to therapy often leads to metastases and death. The dehydrogenase/reductase 7 (DHRS7, SDR34C1) is an "orphan" enzyme without known physiological function. DHRS7 was previously found to be decreased in higher-stage PCa, and siRNA-mediated knockdown increased the aggressiveness of LNCaP cells. To further explore the role of DHRS7 in PCa, we analyzed the proteome of LNCaP cells following <i>DHRS7</i> knockdown to assess potentially altered pathways. Although DHRS7 is able to inactivate 5&#x3b1;-dihydrotestosterone, <i>DHRS7</i> knockdown did not affect androgen receptor (AR) target gene expression, and its effect on PCa cells seems to be androgen-independent. Importantly, proteome analyses revealed increased expression of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), which was confirmed by RT-qPCR and Western blotting. Comparison of AR-positive LNCaP with AR-negative PC-3 and DU145 PCa cell lines revealed a negative correlation between DHRS7 and EGFR expression. Conversely, <i>EGFR</i> knockdown enhanced DHRS7 expression in these cells. Importantly, analysis of patient samples revealed a negative correlation between DHRS7 and EGFR expression, both at the mRNA and protein levels, and DHRS7 expression correlated positively with patient survival rates. These results suggest a protective role for DHRS7 in PCa.

### Keywords
Lncap, Knockdown, Sirna, Dhrs7

### Affiliations
University of Basel
University of Basel, Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Molecular and Systems Toxicology

### Submitter
Simon Stuecheli

### Lab Head
Dr Alex Odermatt
University of Basel, Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Molecular and Systems Toxicology


