### Accession
PXD022650

### Title
i.e. RFX8 mediates DDX24 transcription in human hepatocellular carcinoma

### Description
Accumulating evidence suggests that DEAD-box proteins are essential in RNA metabolism and play pivotal roles in cancer progression. However, the mechanisms underlying how DDX24 drives hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) remain largely unknown. In this study, we demonstrated that DDX24 was an oncogene and identified RFX8 as a DDX24 promoter-binding protein that transcriptionally upregulated DDX24 expression.

### Sample Protocol
The DDX24 promoter binding proteins were identified by streptavidin-agarose pulldown assay. Briefly, 200 ug nuclear proteins was extracted from different HCC cell lines and incubated at 4°C overnight with 2 μg biotin-labeled double-stranded DNA probes corresponding to nucleotides -745 to +61 of the DDX24 promoter region and 20 μl streptavidin-agarose beads. The mixture was centrifuged to pulldown the DNA-protein complex, after which an SDS-PAGE gel was used to separate the proteins, and silver staining was used to detect the proteins after electrophoretic separation. Candidate protein bands were then trypsinized and digested the with MS-grade trypsin solution. Finally, the digested peptides from the candidate proteins were analyzed by MALDI-TOF/TOF mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) that was coupled to Easy nLC (Proxeon Biosystems, now Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 60/120/240 min (determined by project proposal). The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode. MS data was acquired using a data-dependent top10 method dynamically choosing the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (300–1800 m/z) for HCD fragmentation. Automatic gain control (AGC) target was set to 3e6, and maximum inject time to 10 ms. Dynamic exclusion duration was 40.0 s. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200 and resolution for HCD spectra was set to 17,500 at m/z 200, and isolation width was 2 m/z.. Normalized collision energy was 30 eV and the underfill ratio, which specifies the minimum percentage of the target value likely to be reached at maximum fill time, was defined as 0.1%. The instrument was run with peptide recognition mode enabled. MS/MS spectra were searched using MASCOT engine (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.4) against the UniProtKB Escherichia coli database (2585998 total entries, downloaded 06/07/12). For protein identification, the following options were used. Peptide mass tolerance=20 ppm, MS/MS tolerance=0.1 Da, Enzyme=Trypsin, Missed cleavage=2, Fixed modification: Carbamidomethyl (C), Variable modification：Oxidation(M).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
I.e. rfx8, Human hepatocellular carcinoma, Ddx24

### Affiliations
the fifth affiliated hospital of sun yat-sen university 
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Biomedical Imaging and Guangdong Provincial Engineering Research Center of Molecular Imaging, The Fifth Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University, Zhuhai

### Submitter
hairun gan

### Lab Head
Dr Tianze Liu
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Biomedical Imaging and Guangdong Provincial Engineering Research Center of Molecular Imaging, The Fifth Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University, Zhuhai


