### Accession
PXD024838

### Title
Proteomic analysis of exosomes isolated from S. Typhimurium-infected macrophages.

### Description
Exosomes derived from S. Typhimurium-infected RAW264.7 macrophages (24 and 48 hpi) were isolated by differential ultracentrifugation. Equal protein samples in triplicates were subjected to protein extraction and separation by SDS-PAGE. Protein bands excised from each lane were reduced, alkylated, and digested with trypsin. Peptide pools were desalted by C18 columns and analyzed by liquid chromatography-Orbitrap Fusion tandem mass spectrometry

### Sample Protocol
Exosomes were isolated from uninfected macrophages, and S. Typhimurium-infected RAW 264.7 macrophages [multiplicity of infection (MOI) was 5:1, and the samples were collected 0, 24, and 48 hours post-infection (hpi)]. Exosomes (triplicate samples) were lysed by NP-40 lysis buffer (0.5% NP-40, 0.15 M NaCl, 0.02 M CaCl2 * H2O, 0.05 M Tris, pH7.4), and subsequently boiled at 98ºC for 5 minutes. Protein concentration was determined by bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay. An equal amount of protein 25 µg per sample was used, and three replicates of exosomes per sample type were separated by sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE). The entire lane per sample was excised by scalpel and diced into one mm2-cubes, followed by in-gel trypsin digestion performed exactly as we did previously (2, 3). The peptide samples were then analyzed by 250-mm Ultrahigh-Performance Liquid Chromatography (UHPLC) coupled to Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The liquid chromatography was performed using the Thermo EASY nano-LC system, where 20-mm C16 pre-column (Thermo Scientific) was used to rid of impurities, after which the samples were separated by using a reversed-phase C18 analytical column with the 100Å pore (Thermo Scientific, Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 LC Column). For the chromatography, the following solvents were used: solvent A (0.1% formic acid), 2–40% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid), and 105-minute acetonitrile gradient was used was the separation phase, followed by 14 minutes wash with 98% solvent B, and finally column equilibration with 2% solvent A. The LC system was interfaced directly with Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). MS data were acquired at 120K resolution by Orbitrap detector at a scan range of 350-2000 m/z. For MS/MS analysis, ions were isolated by a quadrupole, prioritizing the most intense ions and injecting ions for all available parallelizable time. Once ions were selected for fragmentation, the masses of these precursor ions were then excluded for 36 s. Fragmentation was done by using collision-induced dissociation (CID), at a collision energy of 35% and activation time of 10 ms, where the AGC target of 10000. The MS/MS data were detected by the ion trap.

### Data Protocol
Proteomic data analysis Tandem mass spectra were extracted, charge state deconvoluted, and deisotoped by Proteome Discoverer (Thermo Scientific) version 2.1. All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Sequest (Thermo Fisher Scientific, version 2.1.1.21) and X! Tandem (version CYCLONE 2010.12.01.1). Sequest was set up to search FASTA mouse, and Salmonella Typhimurium Uniprot database containing a common list of contaminants database (56,604 entries) assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin. Sequest and X! Tandem were both searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 1.00 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 ppm (parts-per-million). Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified in Sequest and X! Tandem as a fixed modification. Deamidation of asparagine, oxidation of methionine and acetyl of the n-terminus were specified in Sequest as variable modifications. Scaffold (version 8.1, Proteome Software Inc.) was used to validate MS/MS-based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they were established at greater than 95.0% probability by the Scaffold Local FDR (false discovery rate) algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability and contained at least two identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to protein groups, and only the top hit was reported. The reported peptide false discovery rate (FDR) was 0.35%, and the protein FDR was 3.3%. The weighted spectral count was used for protein quantification. The spectral counts of peptides were normalized based on the total count in each run. The fold change was calculated from the spectral count of proteins from exosomes derived from infected cells in comparison to exosomes from uninfected cells. A Fisher exact test was used to calculate statistical significance and a P-value of <0.05 indicated proteins with statistically significant changes in abundance.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Salmonella, Exosomes, Macrophage

### Affiliations
University of Florida

### Submitter
Mariola Edelmann

### Lab Head
Dr Mariola J Edelmann
University of Florida


