### Accession
PXD015669

### Title
DirectMS1: MS/MS-free identification of 1000 proteins of cellular proteomes in 5 minutes

### Description
Proteome characterization relies heavily on tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) and is thus associated with instrumentation complexity, lengthy analysis time, and limited duty-cycle. It was always tempting to implement approaches which do not require MS/MS, yet, they were constantly failing in achieving  meaningful depth of quantitative proteome coverage within short experimental times, which is particular important for clinical or biomarker discovery applications. Here, we report on the first successful attempt to develop a truly MS/MS-free and label-free method for bottom-up proteomics. We demonstrate identification of 1000 protein groups for a standard HeLa cell line digest using 5-minute LC gradients. The amount of loaded sample was varied in a range from 1 ng to 500 ng, and the method demonstrated 10-fold higher sensitivity compared with the standard MS/MS-based approach. Due to significantly higher sequence coverage obtained by the developed method, it outperforms all popular MS/MS-based label-free quantitation approaches

### Sample Protocol
Development of the method and its evaluation were performed using Thermo Scientific Pierce™ HeLa Protein Digest Standard (P/N 88328) derived from HeLa S3 cell line. For the quantitation part of the study a wild-type yeast (strain BY4741, Euroscarf, Germany) with 6 spiked-in proteins of different molecular weights and sequence lengths was used. The concentrations of 5 of these proteins (see Supplemental Table S1) were varied in a range from 1 fM to 100 fM, while the sixth protein, BSA, was spiked into the yeast proteome at the concentration of 500 fM in all mixtures.  Yeast cells were handled in the following way: aliquot of approximately 107cells were resuspended in 100 μL of lysis buffer (0.1 % w/v ProteaseMAX Surfactant (Promega, USA) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 10 % v/v ACN). The cells were then incubated in a shaker for 1h at 550 rpm at room temperature. Cells were lysed using ultrasonic homogenizer BandelinSonopuls HD2070 (Bandelin Electronic, Berlin, Germany) by sonication for 2 minutes at each 30, 60, 80 % amplitudes on ice. The supernatant was collected after centrifugation at 13 000 rpm for 10 min at room temperature (Centrifuge 5415R; Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany). Total protein concentration was measured using BCA assay. Protein extracts were reduced in 10 mM DTT at 56 ºC for 20 min and alkylated in 10 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 30 min in dark. Then, samples were digested overnight at 37 ºC using trypsin protease (Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin, Promega, Madison, WI, USA) added at the ratio of 1:50 w/w. Enzymatic digestion was terminated by the addition of acetic acid (5 % w/v). After the reaction was stopped, the samples were shaken (550 rpm) for 25 min at room temperature followed by centrifugation at 13 000 rpm for 10 min at 20 ºC (Centrifuge 5415R; Eppendorf, Germany). Then the supernatant was dried in SpeedVac at 45 ºC. Peptides were stored at −80 ºC until the LC-MS/MS analysis. Before the LC-MS/MS analysis, the samples were desalted using Oasis cartridges for solid phase extraction (Oasis HLB, 1 cc, 10 mg, 30 µm particle size, Waters). Then, the peptide concentration for each sample was measured using the BCA assay. Six spike proteins were mixed according to ratios in Table S1, then mixes were reduced in 10 mM DTT at 56 ºC for 20 min and alkylated in 10 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 30 min in the dark. Proteins were digested overnight using trypsin protease (Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin, Promega, Madison, WI, USA) in 1:50 w/w ratio. Then, protein digests were spiked to 1 ug yeast for one LC-MS/MS injection.  LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using Orbitrap Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer coupled with UltiMate 3000 LC system. Mass spectrometry measurements were performed either in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode with ”Top15” setting for MS/MS spectra, or in MS1-only mode of acquisition. By default, the Full MS scans were acquired from m/z 375 to 1500 at a resolution of 60k at m/z 200 with a target of 3·106 charges for the automated gain control (AGC), 1 microscan and 200 ms maximum injection time. For higher-energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) MS/MS scans, the normalized collision energy was set to 30, the resolution was 15k at m/z 200. Precursor ions were isolated in a 1.4 Th window and accumulated for a maximum of 30 ms or until the AGC target of 2·105 ions was reached. Precursors of charge states from 2+ to 7+ were scheduled for fragmentation. Previously targeted precursors were dynamically excluded from fragmentation for 4 s. Short gradient LC method was adopted from the following technical note provided by the vendor (https://assets.thermofisher.com/TFS-Assets/CMD/Technical-Notes/tn-72827-lc-ms-tandem-capillary-flow-tn72827-en.pdf) with minor changes. Trap column µ-Precolumn C18 PepMap100 (5 µm, 300 µm, i.d. 5 mm, 100 Å) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) and self-packed analytical column (Inertsil 3 µm, 75 µm i.d.,  15 cm length) were employed for separation. Mobile phases were as follows: (A) 0.1 % FA in water; (B) 80 % ACN, 0.1 % FA in water. Loading solvent was 0.05 % TFA in water. The gradient was from 5 % to 35 % phase B in 4.8 min at 1.5 µL/min. Total method time was 7.3 min.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were converted to mzML format using ProteoWizzard (v. 3.0.5533). MS1 spectra were processed by ms1searchpy (v. 1.1.2) algorithm. ms1searchpy uses Dinosaur (v. 1.1.3) for feature detection and ELUDE (v. 3.02.1) for retention time prediction. The parameters for MS1 search engine were the following: 5 ppm precursor mass accuracy, 0 missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification, minimal peptide length of six amino acids, 1 to 5 charge states, minimal 2 visible 13C isotopic peaks in the isotopic envelope detected in at least 3 scans were allowed for identifying a peptide feature. IdentiPy (v. 0.2) and MaxQuant (v. 1.6.5.0) search engines were used for MS/MS-based searches. The parameters for MS/MS search engines were the following: 10 ppm precursor mass accuracy, 0.05 Da fragment mass accuracy, 2 missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification, minimal peptide length of six amino acids. DeMix algorithm32 for chimeric spectra processing was integrated into IdentiPy search engine for increasing the search efficiency. IdentiPy search result files were postprocessed using Scavager (v. 0.1.9).

### Publication Abstract
Proteome characterization relies heavily on tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) and is thus associated with instrumentation complexity, lengthy analysis time, and limited duty cycle. It was always tempting to implement approaches that do not require MS/MS, yet they were constantly failing to achieve a meaningful depth of quantitative proteome coverage within short experimental times, which is particularly important for clinical or biomarker-discovery applications. Here, we report on the first successful attempt to develop a truly MS/MS-free method, DirectMS1, for bottom-up proteomics. The method is compared with the standard MS/MS-based data-dependent acquisition approach for proteome-wide analysis using 5 min LC gradients. Specifically, we demonstrate identification of 1&#x202f;000 protein groups for a standard HeLa cell line digest. The amount of loaded sample was varied in a range from 1 to 500 ng, and the method demonstrated 10-fold higher sensitivity. Combined with the recently introduced <i>Diffacto</i> approach for relative protein quantification, DirectMS1 outperforms most popular MS/MS-based label-free quantitation approaches because of significantly higher protein sequence coverage.

### Keywords
Hela, Dda, Protein identification, Yeast, Qexactive hf, Ms1-only, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
V. L. Talrose Institute for Energy Problems of Chemical Physics, N. N. Semenov Federal Research Center of Chemical Physics, Russian Academy of Sciences, 119334 Moscow, Russia
INEP CP RAS

### Submitter
Mark Ivanov

### Lab Head
Dr Mikhail Vladimirovich Gorshkov
V. L. Talrose Institute for Energy Problems of Chemical Physics, N. N. Semenov Federal Research Center of Chemical Physics, Russian Academy of Sciences, 119334 Moscow, Russia


