### Accession
PXD035574

### Title
Structural insightsStructural insights into regulation of the PEAK3 pseudokinase scaffold  by 14-3-3  into regulation of the PEAK3 pseudokinase scaffold  by 14-3-3

### Description
The three members of the PEAK family of pseudokinases  (PEAK1, PEAK2, and PEAK3) are molecular scaffolds that have recently emerged as important nodes in signaling pathways that control cell migration, morphology, and proliferation, and are increasingly found mis-regulated in human cancers. While no structures of PEAK3 have been solved to date, crystal structures of the PEAK1 and PEAK2 pseudokinase domains revealed their dimeric organization. It remains unclear how dimerization plays a role in PEAK scaffolding functions as no structures of PEAK family members in complex with their binding partners have been solved. Here, we report the cryo-EM structure of the PEAK3 pseudokinase, also adopting a dimeric state, and in complex with an endogenous 14-3-3 heterodimer purified from mammalian cells. Our structure reveals an asymmetric binding mode between PEAK3 and 14-3-3 stabilized by one pseudokinase domain and the Split HElical Dimerization (SHED) domain of the PEAK3 dimer. The binding interface is comprised of a canonical primary interaction involving two phosphorylated 14-3-3 consensus binding sites located in the N-terminal domains of the PEAK3 monomers docked in the conserved amphipathic grooves of the 14-3-3 dimer, and a unique secondary interaction between 14-3-3 and PEAK3 that has not been observed in any previous structures of 14-3-3/client complexes. Disruption of these interactions results in the relocation of PEAK3 to the nucleus and changes its cellular interactome. Lastly, we identify Protein Kinase D as the regulator of PEAK3/14-3-3 binding, providing a mechanism by which the diverse functions of the PEAK3 scaffold might be fine-tuned in cells.

### Sample Protocol
For AP-MS experiments, samples were resuspended in 15 μl of MS loading buffer (1% formic acid) and 2 μl was separated by a reversed-phase gradient over a nanoflow 75 μm internal diameter × 25 cm long picotip column packed with 1.9 μM C18 particles (Dr. Maisch). Peptides were directly injected over the course of a 75 min acquisition into a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data were searched against the Uniprot canonical isoforms of the human proteome using the default settings in MaxQuant (version 1.6.12.0), with a match-between-runs enabled46. Peptides and proteins were filtered to 1% FDR in MaxQuant, and identified proteins were then subjected to PPI scoring. To quantify changes in interactions between WT and mutant baits, we used a label-free quantification approach in which statistical analysis was performed using MSstats47 from within the artMS Bioconductor R package. PPI scoring. Protein spectral intensities as determined by MaxQuant search results were used for PPI confidence scoring by SAINTexpress (version 3.6.1) (37). For SAINTexpress, control samples in which bait protein was not transduced were used. Candidate PPIs were filtered to those that displayed a SAINTexpress BFDR <0.05.

### Publication Abstract
PEAK pseudokinases are molecular scaffolds which dimerize to regulate cell migration, morphology, and proliferation, as well as cancer progression. The mechanistic role dimerization plays in PEAK scaffolding remains unclear, as there are no structures of PEAKs in complex with their interactors. Here, we report the cryo-EM structure of dimeric PEAK3 in complex with an endogenous 14-3-3 heterodimer. Our structure reveals an asymmetric binding mode between PEAK3 and 14-3-3 stabilized by one pseudokinase domain and the SHED domain of the PEAK3 dimer. The binding interface contains a canonical phosphosite-dependent primary interaction and a unique secondary interaction not observed in previous structures of 14-3-3/client complexes. Additionally, we show that PKD regulates PEAK3/14-3-3 binding, which when prevented leads to PEAK3 nuclear enrichment and distinct protein-protein interactions. Altogether, our data demonstrate that PEAK3 dimerization forms an unusual secondary interface for 14-3-3 binding, facilitating 14-3-3 regulation of PEAK3 localization and interactome diversity.

### Keywords
Human, Peak3, Ap-ms, Lc-msms

### Affiliations
UCSF
University of California San Francisco

### Submitter
Antoine Forget

### Lab Head
Dr Nevan Krogan
UCSF


