### Accession
PXD030303

### Title
Identification of disease biomarkers and potential endocrine factors in CoQ deficiency

### Description
4-Hydroxybenzoic acid (4-HB) is the natural precursor for CoQ biosynthesis. Hydroxybenzoic acids derivatives (HBAs) have been recently used for the experimental treatment of primary CoQ deficiency. However, the mechanisms of these therapeutic effects remain obscure. In this study, we performed an analysis in plasma to evaluate the effect of supplementation with-resorcylic acid (-RA) or vanillic acid (VA), two HBAs potentially useful for the treatment of Coenzyme Q (CoQ) deficiencies, in an animal model of mitochondrial encephalopathy due to CoQ deficiency. The results help in the identification of potential biomarkers and/or endocrine factors that contribute to the pathophysiologic characteristics of the disease and its response to treatments, supporting important scientific and medical impacts for the use of -RA or VA in the treatment of CoQ deficiency.

### Sample Protocol
Both Coq9+/+ mice and Coq9 +/+ mice under 1% of β‐RA or VA supplementation at 3 months of age were sacrificed and the plasma was extracted in EDTA tubes. The most abundant proteins were removed using the Multiple Affinity Removal Spin Cartridge Mouse 3 (Agilent, 5188-5289). The cells were lysed by the addition of 5 µl of lysis buffer (1% SDC, 10 mM TCEP, 100 mM TRIS, 40 mM chloroacetamide at pH 8.5) for up to 20 µg of protein. Samples were boiled for 5 minutes at 95ºC to denature all the proteins and then sonicated for 15 min with pulses of 30s on and 30s off (Bioruptor, model ACD-200, Diagenode). The pelleted cell debris was discarded after centrifugation at full speed for 10 min and the supernatant was digested overnight at 37ºC with LysC (Wako) in an enzyme/protein ratio of 1:75 (w/w) and with trypsin (Sigma) at 1:50 (w/w). Protease activity was quenched with formic acid (FA) to a final concentration of 2% FA. Samples were then centrifuged at 20,000g for 20 minutes to eliminate the insoluble SDC, and loaded on an OASIS HLB (Waters) 96-well plate. Samples were washed with 0.1% FA, eluted with a 50/50 ACN and 0.1% FA, dried by SpeedVac (Eppendorf, Germany), and resuspended in 2% formic acid prior to MS analysis. All samples with the QC and 7 high-pH fractions were acquired using an UHPLC 1290 system (Agilent Technologies; Santa Clara, USA) coupled on-line to an Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific; Bremen, Germany). Peptides were first trapped (Dr. Maisch Reprosil C18, 3 μm, 2 cm × 100 μm) prior to separation on an analytical column (Agilent Poroshell EC-C18, 2.7 μm, 50 cm × 75 μm). Trapping was performed for 5 min in solvent A (0.1% v/v formic acid in water), and the gradient was as follows: 13% – 44% solvent B (0.1% v/v formic acid in 80% v/v ACN) in 95 min, 44– 100% B in 2 min, then the column was cleaned for 4 minutes and equilibrated for 10 min (flow was passively split to approximately 200 nL/min). The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode. Full-scan MS spectra from m/z 375-1600 Th were acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 60,000 after accumulation to a target value of 3E6 with a maximum injection time of 20 ms. The 15 most abundant ions were fragmented with a dynamic exclusion of 24 sec. HCD fragmentation spectra (MS/MS) were acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 30,000 after accumulation to a target value of 1E5 with an isolation window of 1.4 Th and maximum injection time 50 ms.

### Data Protocol
All raw files were analyzed by MaxQuant v1.6.10 software using the integrated Andromeda Search engine and searched against the mouse UniProt Reference Proteome (November 2019 release with 55412 protein sequences) with common contaminants. Trypsin was specified as the enzyme allowing up to two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as fixed modification and protein N-terminal acetylation, oxidation of methionine, and deamidation of asparagine were considered variable modifications. We used all the default setting and activated the “Match between runs” (time window of 0.7 min and alignment time window of 20 min) and LFQ with standard parameters. The files generated by MaxQuant were open from Perseus for the preliminary data analysis: the LFQ data were first transformed in log2, then identifications present in at least N (3/5) biological replicates were kept for further analysis; missing values were then imputed using the standard settings of Perseus

### Publication Abstract
Defects in Coenzyme Q (CoQ) metabolism have been associated with primary mitochondrial disorders, neurodegenerative diseases and metabolic conditions. The consequences of CoQ deficiency have not been fully addressed, and effective treatment remains challenging. Here, we use mice with primary CoQ deficiency (Coq9<sup>R239X</sup>), and we demonstrate that CoQ deficiency profoundly alters the Q-junction, leading to extensive changes in the mitochondrial proteome and metabolism in the kidneys and, to a lesser extent, in the brain. CoQ deficiency also induces reactive gliosis, which mediates a neuroinflammatory response, both of which lead to an encephalopathic phenotype. Importantly, treatment with either vanillic acid (VA) or &#x3b2;-resorcylic acid (&#x3b2;-RA), two analogs of the natural precursor for CoQ biosynthesis, partially restores CoQ metabolism, particularly in the kidneys, and induces profound normalization of the mitochondrial proteome and metabolism, ultimately leading to reductions in gliosis, neuroinflammation and spongiosis and, consequently, reversing the phenotype. Together, these results provide key mechanistic insights into defects in CoQ metabolism and identify potential disease biomarkers. Furthermore, our findings clearly indicate that the use of analogs of the CoQ biosynthetic precursor is a promising alternative therapy for primary CoQ deficiency and has potential for use in the treatment of more common neurodegenerative and metabolic diseases that are associated with secondary CoQ deficiency.

### Keywords
Vanillic acid; -resorcylic acid; 2, 4-dihydroxybenzoic acid; plasma; mitochondria; c57bl/6

### Affiliations
Departamento de Fisiología, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de Granada, 18016 Granada, Spain
University of Granada

### Submitter
Agustín Hidalgo Gutiérrez

### Lab Head
Dr Luis Carlos López
Departamento de Fisiología, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de Granada, 18016 Granada, Spain


