### Accession
PXD032820

### Title
A high confidence Physcomitrium patens plasmodesmata proteome

### Description
Cells of multicellular organisms exchange nutrients, building blocks and information. In animals this exchange happens via gap junctions, in plants via plasmodesmata (PD). PD have striking properties with a large range of molecules from ions, to metabolites and synthetic dyes,  RNA and proteins up to 40 kDa being translocated, ranging. PD are hard to characterize due to deep embedding into cell walls and presence of several membranes. Previous studies of the protein composition of PD of angiosperms identified large lists of proteins, few were validated. Here, we developed a probabilistic scoring approach in iteration with systematic localization on a large scale to define a high-confidence PD proteome of Physcomitrium patens. Conservation of targeting allowed us to validate 100s of proteins in tobacco. We developed a PD Score based on protein enrichment during PD preparation and significantly enriched protein features of known PD proteins from literature. PD scoring was iteratively improved by extensive validation of PD candidate protein localizations. As a result we establish a high confidence PD proteome from Physcomitrium patens comprising close to 300 proteins which together with the bona fide PD proteins from literature are made available in the public PDDB database. Conservation in localization strengthens the reliability of plant proteome and provides a basis for exploring the evolution of this important organelle. Glycolyl hydrolase family 17 proteins are presented as example of an abundant PD protein family with representatives across an evolutionary scale.

### Sample Protocol
Cell wall fraction and plasmodesmata fraction preparation – Two gram of starting material was homogenized in a glass potter grinder with 10ml ice-cold extraction buffer (50 mM Tris-MES pH 7.5, 330 mM mannitol, 100 mM KCl, 1 mM EDTA, 5 mM DTT, 1 mM PMSF, 0.5%v/v Protease inhibitor cocktail (P9599, Sigma-Aldrich)). The homogenate was centrifuged for 20 minutes at 8000 × g at 4 °C. The pellet that containing cell wall and some tissue debris was then ground into fine powder in liquid nitrogen, and transferred into 10 ml ice-cold extraction buffer (100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 10 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, 1% Triton X-100, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS, 10% glycerol, 0.5% v/v protease inhibitor (P9599, Sigma-Aldrich)) to further eliminated organelle contaminations {Kraner, 2017 #4476}. The sample was fully mixed and incubated for 20 min on ice, then it was centrifuged with a swing-out rotor for 15 min, 1500 x g at 4 °C and the supernatant was discarded. To reduce the soluble protein contamination, the pellet was re-ground in liquid nitrogen and taken to the ice-incubation and centrifugation steps again. Then the pellet was washed with 10 ml wash buffer (100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol, 0.1% Triton X-100) and and centrifugation for 10 min, at 1500 x g at 4 °C. After the last washing step with 10 ml ice-cold Milli-Q water, the cell wall fraction was collected and solubilized in 1ml resuspension buffer. To enrich the plasmodesmata fraction, the cell wall pellet was subjected into 10 ml cell wall digestion buffer (10 mM MES-KOH, pH 5.5, 4.4% mannitol, 0.7% w/v of Driselase (D8037, Sigma-Aldrich)) and digested for 1.5 h at 37 °C, 100 rpm shaking. To remove the undigested cell wall fragment, the sample was centrifuged at 7500 x g for 15 min at 4°C. The supernatant was taken to ultracentrifugation (No. 344059, Beckman), 110,000 x g for 1 h at 4°C. The pellet was washed with ice-cold TBS buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 140 mM NaCl, 2.5 mM KCl) and resuspended in a minimal volume of resuspension buffer.  Protein clean-up, trypsin digestion and peptide desalting – The single-pot, solid-phase-enhanced sample-preparation (SP3) technology {Hughes, 2019 #4800} follow-up with trypsin digestion was applied to get rid of the detergent in samples for proteomics. Reduction of disulfide bridges was obtained by an excess of DTT (6.5mM) and alkylation of free cysteines was done by  iodoacetamide (27 mM). SpeedBead Magnetic Carboxylate Modified Particles (SP3 beads, 45152105050250 / 65152105050250, GE Healthcare) were pre-washed by Milli-Q water. After adjusting concentration of the SP3 beads to 50µg/µl in Milli-Q water, they were added into the protein sample according to a ratio of 1:10 protein:beads. 50% Ethanol was then introduced in the sample for binding induction. After incubating 15 min at 24°C, 1,000 rpm shaking, the beads were washed three times by 80% Ethanal and subjected to trypsin digestion buffer (100 mM Ammonium bicarbonate, trypsin (trypsin: protein ratio 1:100, V5113, Promega) for 12-14 h at 37°C. Digested proteins were acidified to pH 2 using TFA and were then desalted over C18 STAGE tips {Rappsilber, 2003 #1348}. LC-MS/MS analysis of peptides – Peptide mixtures were analyzed by nanoflow Easy-nLC (Thermo Scientific) and Orbitrap hybrid mass spectrometer (Q-exactive HF, Thermo Scientific). Peptides were eluted from a 75 µm x 25 cm analytical C18 column (PepMan, Thermo Scientific) on a linear gradient running from 5% to 90% acetonitrile for 70 min. Proteins were identified based on the information-dependent acquisition of fragmentation spectra of multiple charged peptides. Up to ten data-dependent MS/MS spectra were acquired for each full-scan spectrum acquired at 60,000 full-width half-maximum (FWHM) resolution.

### Data Protocol
Peptide and protein identification – Protein identification and ion intensity quantitation was carried out by MaxQuant version 2.0.3.0 {Cox, 2008 #2378}. Spectra were matched against the Physcomitrium patens proteome (Ppatens_318_v3.3.protein.fasta, 87533 entries) using Andromeda {Cox, 2011 #2911}. Thereby, carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification; oxidation of methionine as well as phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine were set as variable modifications. Mass tolerance for the database search was set to 20 ppm on full scans and 0.5 Da for fragment ions. Multiplicity was set to 1. For label-free quantitation, retention time matching between runs was chosen within a time window of two minutes. Peptide false discovery rate (FDR) and protein FDR were set to 0.01, while site FDR was set to 0.05. Hits to contaminants (e.g. keratins) and reverse hits identified by MaxQuant were excluded from further analysis. R-script was appliying for bioinfomatic scoring.

### Publication Abstract
Plasmodesmata (PD) facilitate movement of molecules between plant cells. Regulation of this movement is still not understood. Plasmodesmata are hard to study, being deeply embedded within cell walls and incorporating several membrane types. Thus, structure and protein composition of PD remain enigmatic. Previous studies of PD protein composition identified protein lists with few validations, making functional conclusions difficult. We developed a PD scoring approach in iteration with large-scale systematic localization, defining a high-confidence PD proteome of Physcomitrium patens (HC300). HC300, together with bona fide PD proteins from literature, were placed in Pddb. About 65% of proteins in HC300 were not previously PD-localized. Callose-degrading glycolyl hydrolase family 17 (GHL17) is an abundant protein family with representatives across evolutionary scale. Among GHL17s, we exclusively found members of one phylogenetic clade with PD localization and orthologs occur only in species with developed PD. Phylogenetic comparison was expanded to xyloglucan endotransglucosylases/hydrolases and Exordium-like proteins, which also diversified into PD-localized and non-PD-localized members on distinct phylogenetic clades. Our high-confidence PD proteome HC300 provides insights into diversification of large protein families. Iterative and systematic large-scale localization across plant species strengthens the reliability of HC300 as basis for exploring structure, function, and evolution of this important organelle.

### Keywords
Proteome, Physcomitrium patens, Plasmodesmata

### Affiliations
Department of Plant Systems Biology, University of Hohenheim, 70593 Stuttgart, Germany
University of Hohenheim

### Submitter
Lin Xi

### Lab Head
Dr Waltraud X. Schulze
Department of Plant Systems Biology, University of Hohenheim, 70593 Stuttgart, Germany


