### Accession
PXD022183

### Title
Endothelial pathomechanisms in response to in vivo peritoneal dialysis fluid exposure

### Description
Loss of ultrafiltration capacity in peritoneal dialysis (PD) patients is often associated with peritoneal vascular changes, manifest as diabetes-like vasculopathy and angiogenesis. The endothelial monolayer lining the vessel lumen controls vessel barrier function and thereby influences peritoneal substrate transport and ultrafiltration.  In this study, we first characterized the response to conventional PD fluids of endothelial cells isolated from peritoneal biopsies of children undergoing PD.  9 omental biopsies from the pediatric biopsy biobank (mean age 5.7 years) were included in this study. PD patients were treated with conventional PD fluid (mean PD vintage 12.5 months). Age-matched controls (n=5) with normal renal function undergoing elective surgery were also included. In patients on PD, the biopsy sampling site was at least 5 cm away from the PD catheter entry site. Written informed consent was obtained from parents, and from patients as appropriate. The study was performed according to the Declaration of Helsinki and registered at www.clinicaltrials.gov (NCT01893710). The study was part of the International Pediatric Dialysis Network (IPDN; www.pedpd.org). Patients with a BMI of >35 kg/m2 and with chronic inflammatory diseases were excluded.  Specimens obtained during surgery were instantaneously frozen with liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C. Arterioles macroscopically located within fat tissue and microscopically at least 1mm distant from the peritoneal surface were micro-dissected. Elastica van Gieson stainings of the arteriolar elastic lamina were used as templates for microdissection of arterioles from cresol violet–stained neighboring sections. 100 µm thick tissue slices were cut with a cryotome and 30 deep-frozen arteriolar rings per patient were micro-dissected using a stereo microscope and a microneedle. Arteriolar rings were lysed in 100 µl lysis buffer (30 mM Tris, pH 8.5, 7M urea, 2M thiourea, 4% 3-[(3-Cholamidopropyl) dimethylammonio]-1-propanesulfonate (CHAPS), 1 mM EDTA, 1 tablet of Complete Protease Inhibitor (Roche, Basel, Switzerland) and 1 tablet of phosphatase inhibitor (PhosSTOP, Roche) per 100 ml). The resulting lysates were stored at -80°C until further processing. Total protein concentration was determined with the 2D-Quant kit (GE). Quality control and verification of protein concentrations was performed by SDS-PAGE. We investigated the molecular mechanisms of endothelial cell pathology during in vivo and in vitro PD fluid exposure by proteomic and bioinformatic analysis of the endothelial cell response to hyperglycemic stress, integrating current understanding of PD-related cellular injury and stress responses (Bender et al., Nephrol Dial Transplant, 2011, doi:10.1093/ndt/gfq484; Kratochwill et al., BioMed research international, 2015, doi:10.1155/2015/628158; Kratochwill et al., J Proteome Res, 2009, doi:10.1021/pr800916s; Lechner et al., J Proteome Res, 2010, doi:10.1021/pr9011574).

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic analysis was performed using high-performance liquid chromatography coupled to mass spectrometry (LC-MS). In brief, filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) was performed according to the procedure described by Wisniewski et al. [Wisniewski et al., Nat Methods 2009]. TMT 10-plex labeling was performed according to the instructions provided by the manufacturer. Pooled samples were concentrated and desalted with C18 macrospin columns (30−300μg, The Nest Group, Southborough, MA). Eluates were dried in a vacuum concentrator and reconstituted in 20 mM ammonia formate buffer, pH 10 before fractionation at basic pH. Two-dimensional liquid chromatography was performed by reverse-phase chromatography at high pH on an offline Agilent 1200 series HPLC collecting 12 time-based fractions, as previously described [Bennett et al., J Proteomics 2011]. Fractions were analyzed at low pH on a Dionex U3000 coupled directly to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, Waltham, MA). In brief, the analyses were performed in a data-dependent acquisition mode using a top-15 high-energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) method for peptide identiﬁcation and relative quantitation of TMT reporter ions.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw MS data files were processed and analyzed using ProteomeDiscoverer (v2.2.0.388, Thermo). SequestHT was used as search engine and following parameters were chosen: database: Homo sapiens (SwissProt, v2017-10-25); enzyme: trypsin; max. missed cleavage sites: 2; static modifications: TMT6plex (K) and carbamidomethyl (C); dynamic modifications: oxidation (M), TMT6plex (peptide N-terminus) and acetyl (protein N-terminus); precursor mass tolerance: 10 ppm; fragment mass tolerance: 0.6 Da. For reporter ion quantification the most intense m/z in a 20 ppm window around the theoretical m/z was used. Correction of isotopic impurities for reporter ion intensities was applied. Only unique peptides were used for quantification, which was based on S/N values with an average S/N threshold of 10. Normalization was based on total peptide amount and scaling mode on all average. Only peptides and proteins with FDR <0.01 are reported and single peptide IDs were excluded from the dataset.

### Publication Abstract
Long-term clinical outcome of peritoneal dialysis (PD) depends on adequate removal of small solutes and water. The peritoneal endothelium represents the key barrier and peritoneal transport dysfunction is associated with vascular changes. Alanyl-glutamine (AlaGln) has been shown to counteract PD-induced deteriorations but the effect on vascular changes has not yet been elucidated. Using multiplexed proteomic and bioinformatic analyses we investigated the molecular mechanisms of vascular pathology in-vitro (primary human umbilical vein endothelial cells, HUVEC) and ex-vivo (arterioles of patients undergoing PD) following exposure to PD-fluid. An overlap of 1813 proteins (40%) of over 3100 proteins was identified in both sample types. PD-fluid treatment significantly altered 378 in endothelial cells and 192 in arterioles. The HUVEC proteome resembles the arteriolar proteome with expected sample specific differences of mainly immune system processes only present in arterioles and extracellular region proteins primarily found in HUVEC. AlaGln-addition to PD-fluid revealed 359 differentially abundant proteins and restored the molecular process landscape altered by PD fluid. This study provides evidence on validity and inherent limitations of studying endothelial pathomechanisms in-vitro compared to vascular ex-vivo findings. AlaGln could reduce PD-associated vasculopathy by reducing endothelial cellular damage, restoring perturbed abundances of pathologically important proteins and enriching protective processes.

### Keywords
Tmt, Dialysis, Human arterioles

### Affiliations
Medical University of Vienna

### Submitter
Klaus Kratochwill

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Klaus Kratochwill
Medical University of Vienna


