### Accession
PXD002304

### Title
MManassantin A iTRAQ-SPROX Drug Mode-of-Action

### Description
Manassantin A is a natural product that has been isolated from the perennial herb Saururus chinensis Baill and the aquatic plant Saururus cernuus.  Manassantin A has been shown to possess potent hypoxia inducible factor 1 alpha (HIF-1α) inhibitory activity in a cell-based assay screen of thousands of natural products.  Manassantin A holds promise as an anti-cancer drug since it has been shown to selectively target tumor cells over normal cells. Due to the complex biological pathways involved in cancer and hypoxia, it is difficult to determine the mode-of-action by which manassantin A inhibits HIF-1.  While some of the biological activities of manassantin A have been discovered in various cell-based activity assays, the molecular basis of manassantin A’s biological activities is not well characterized.  The proteins in a hypoxic MDA-MB-231 cell lysate were screened for interactions with manassantin A using large scale experiments to uncover novel manassantin A interactions that lead to the drug’s HIF-1 inhibition and anti-cancer activity. Two energetics-based approaches were utilized in this manassantin A mode-of-action study: iTRAQ-SPROX and SILAC-Pulse Proteolysis.  In these energetics-based approaches, protein stability is measured using the chemical denaturant dependence of either a methionine oxidation reaction (iTRAQ-SPROX) or a thermolysin protease digest (SILAC-Pulse Proteolysis).  Using boh of these techniques, the stability of proteins in the absence and presence of excess manassantin A was monitored to assess ligand-induced protein stability changes.

### Sample Protocol
For each iTRAQ-SPROX experiment, two hypoxic MDA-MB-231 protein pellets were lysed in 20 mM phosphate buffer, pH 7.4 with 1X house-made protease inhibitor cocktail with 1.0 mM Zirconia beads on a Disrupter Genie for 20 sec with 1 min on ice in between for a total of 20 cycles. The house-made protease inhibitor cocktail contained Pepstatin A, Leupeptin, E-64, Bestatin, and AEBSF at concentrations of 0.2 mM, 0.4 mM, 0.3 mM, 1 mM, and 20 mM, respectively.  The lysate was clarified by centrifugation at 14,000 rcf for 10 min at 4 °C.  The concentration of protein in the lysate was determined using a Bradford Assay, and found to be ~5-6 µg/µL in each experiment.   The lysate was aliquoted into two 207 µL portions. A 23 µL aliquot of a 3 mM manassantin A sample prepared in DMSO was added to one portion of the cell lysate to create the (+) manassantin A sample, and 23 µL of DMSO was added to the other portion of the cell lysate to create the (-) Control sample.  The (+) and (-) manassantin A samples were equilibrated for 1.5 hr at RT before 25 µL aliquots of the (-) or (+) manassantin A samples were diluted into 20 µL of GdmCl-containing buffers prepared in 20 mM phosphate buffer, pH 7.4. The final [GdmCl] in each buffer was 0.5, 1.0, 1.3, 1.5, 1.7, 2.0, 2.5, and 3.0 M and the final [manassantin A] was 120 µM. The protein samples in the GdmCl-containing buffers were equilibrated for 1.5 hr at RT before the methionine oxidation reaction was initiated with the addition of 5 µL of 9.8 M H2O2. The oxidation reactions were quenched with 1 mL of 300 mM methionine after 3 min. The [GdmCl] in each sample was normalized to 0.14 M. The proteins in each sample were precipitated by the addition of 250 µL of 100 % TCA (wt/vol) and incubated on ice overnight. The samples were centrifuged at 8,000 rcf for 30 min at 4 °C, and the supernatant was decanted. The protein pellets were washed four times with 300 µL of ice-cold Ethanol, and the protein pellets were dried in a fume hood. The protein pellets were dissolved in 35 µL of 0.5 M TEAB with 0.1 % final concentration of SDS. The samples were vortexed, heated at 60 °C, and sonicated for 10 min at a time, for 2-3 cycles. The disulfide bonds were reduced with a final concentration of 5 mM TCEP for 1 hr at 60 °C. The free cysteine residues were alkylated with a final concentration of 10 mM MMTS for 10 min at RT. The proteins were digested with 1.0 µL of 1 mg/mL trypsin at 37 °C for 16 hr. The 0.5, 1.0, 1.3, 1.5, 1.7, 2.0, 2.5, and 3.0 M (-) and (+) manassantin A samples were labeled with the 113, 114, 115, 116, 117, 118, 119, and 121 tags, respectively, according to the manufacturer’s protocol with the exception that 0.5 (instead of 1.0) units of each tag was used in the labeling reaction.  After the labeling reaction, 10 µL of each sample was combined within a set, (-) or (+), and cleaned with C18 resin to create the non-enriched samples. A separate 30 µL portion of each sample within a set, (-) or (+), was combined and placed on a Speed Vac concentrator to reduce the volume to ~50 µL.  The (-) and (+) combined samples were then subjected to methionine enrichment procedure using a commercially available Pi3™ - Methionine Reagent kit according to the manufacturer’s protocol.  The iTRAQ-SPROX samples were analyzed on an Orbitrap Elite ETD mass spectrometer equipped with an Easy-nLC 1000 system. The trapping column was a 100 µm x 2 cm Integrafrit column (New Objective) packed with 200 Å Magic C18 AQ 5 µm material (Michrom). The column was a 75 µm x 25 cm PicoFrit column (New Objective) packed with 100 Å Magic C18 AQ 5 µm material (Michrom). The flow rate was set to 400 nl/min. Solvent A consisted of 0.1 % formic acid in H2O and solvent B was 0.1 % formic acid in acetonitrile. The LC gradient increased from 5 to 7 % B over 2 min, 7 to 35 % B over 90 min, 35 to 50 % B over 1 min, was isocratic at 50 % B for 9 min, increased from 50 to 95 % B over 1 min, and finally isocratic at 95 % B for 8 min. Product ion scans (resolution 15,000) were collected for the 10 most intense peaks in a given precursor scan (resolution 60,000) with an intensity threshold of 5,000. The dynamic exclusion window of a given m/z ratio was set at 1 scan in 0.75 min and the precursor isolation width was 1.2 m/z. The scan range for the precursor scan was 400-1,800 m/z and 100-2,000 m/z for the product ion scan.  Collision induced dissociation was achieved using HCD with a normalized collision energy of 40 % and an HCD activation time of 0.1 ms.

### Data Protocol
Peak lists were extracted from the raw LC-MS/MS data files and the data were searched against the SEQUEST database using Proteome Discoverer.  The enzyme was set as trypsin, and up to 2 missed cleavages were permitted.  The following modifications were used: fixed modification of MMTS on cysteine, fixed modification of iTRAQ® 8-Plex on N-terminus and lysine residues, and variable modification of oxidation on methionine residues.  The mass tolerances for precursor and fragment ions were set to 10 ppm and 0.8 Da, respectively.  The identified peptide sequences and their corresponding iTRAQ reporter ion intensities were exported into Excel along with the filename, identification, score, charge state, modifications, isolation purity, retention time, protein accession number, and protein name.  Only peptides with high quality quantitative data (i.e., iTRAQ reporter ion intensities at m/z 113-121 that summed to >1,000) and peptides with High and Medium Confidence (i.e., false discovery rates (FDR) <1 % and 5 %, respectively) were used in subsequent analyses. The average iTRAQ intensity for the 113-121 tags was calculated, and the individual iTRAQ intensities for each tag (113-121) were divided by the average iTRAQ intensity for that peptide to generate N1 normalization factors. The N1 normalized iTRAQ intensities for the non-methionine-containing peptides were averaged for each iTRAQ tag to generate a set of N2 normalization factors.  The N1 normalized iTRAQ data for the methionine-containing peptides were divided by the N2 normalization factors. The normalized iTRAQ reporter ion intensities were used to generate chemical denaturation data sets for the peptides identified in the (-) Control and (+) manassantin A samples.  In each experiment a set of hit peptides with normalized iTRAQ® reporter ion differences that resulted in transition midpoint shifts of >0.5 M were identified by a visual inspection of the data.  All the peptides with significant transition midpoint shifts (i.e., shifts >0.5 M) and consistent retention times (i.e., within 5 min) in the manassantin A experiments were labeled as hits.

### Publication Abstract
Manassantin A is a natural product that has been shown to have anticancer activity in cell-based assays, but has a largely unknown mode-of-action. Described here is the use of two different energetics-based approaches to identify protein targets of manassantin A. Using the stability of proteins from rates of oxidation technique with an isobaric mass tagging strategy (iTRAQ-SPROX) and the pulse proteolysis technique with a stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture strategy (SILAC-PP), over 1000 proteins in a MDA-MB-231 cell lysate grown under hypoxic conditions were assayed for manassantin A interactions (both direct and indirect). A total of 28 protein hits were identified with manassantin A-induced thermodynamic stability changes. Two of the protein hits (filamin A and elongation factor 1&#x3b1;) were identified using both experimental approaches. The remaining 26 hit proteins were only assayed in either the iTRAQ-SPROX or the SILAC-PP experiment. The 28 potential protein targets of manassantin A identified here provide new experimental avenues along which to explore the molecular basis of manassantin A's mode of action. The current work also represents the first application iTRAQ-SPROX and SILAC-PP to the large-scale analysis of protein-ligand binding interactions involving a potential anticancer drug with an unknown mode-of-action.

### Keywords
Stability of proteins from rates of oxidation (sprox), Protein-ligand binding interactions, Drug mode-of-action, Mda-mb-231, Itraq, Manassantin a

### Affiliations
Duke University
Duke

### Submitter
Michelle Geer

### Lab Head
Dr Michael C. Fitzgerald
Duke University


