### Accession
PXD001778

### Title
Quantitative Proteomics Reveals Metabolic Differences in Homing and Non-Homing Glioma Stem Cell Xenografts and Stromal Cells

### Description
Glioblastoma is the most common and most devastating adult primary brain tumor. Despite aggressive multimodal therapy, the median survival is approximately one year after diagnosis. In recent years bone marrow-derived human mesenchymal stem cells (BM-hMSCs) have shown promise as cell-based delivery vehicles for anti-glioma therapeutics. This is largely due to their innate ability to migrate towards gliomas. Several studies have successfully demonstrated their use as delivery vehicles for anti-glioma agents. However, it is now evident that BM-hMSCs demonstrate variable tropism towards gliomas based on a clinically relevant glioma stem cell (GSC) model of GBM. In this study, we compared the proteomic profile of cancer and stromal cell populations in GSC xenografts that attract BM-hMSCs (‘attractors’) with those to do not (‘non-attractors’) in order to identify cell-signaling pathways that may modulate BM-hMSCs homing followed by targeted transcriptomic analysis of human gene sets related to glioma biology. We identified lower protein expression of fatty acid metabolism and glucose-dependent metabolic pathways in attractors. While transcriptomic analysis suggested that N-linked glycosylation was increased. Conversely, glucose metabolic pathways, including oxidative phosphorylation, were increased in the stromal cells present in attractors. The results presented here provide the first evidence for glucose metabolism, reactive oxidative species and lipid-mediated tumor inflammatory response, and N-linked glycosylation in the homing of BM-hMSC to GSC xenografts. Reciprocal expression of these pathways in the stromal cell population may suggest microenvironment cross-talk. Our studies provide new insights on the signaling correlates underlying the differential homing capacity of BM-hMSCs to GSC xenografts.

### Sample Protocol
Xenograft brain whole cell lysates (100 ug) were precipitated with the 2D Clean-Up Kit (GE Healthcare, Piscataway, NJ). Samples were resuspended in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8) with sonication for 5 min. Samples were reduced with 10 mM DTT for 1 h at room temperature and alkylated with 5 mM IAA for 1 h at room temperature in the dark. Proteins were digested overnight with trypsin 1:50 (w/w) at 37°C. Each individual sample was dissolved in 0.1% FA/5% ACN (v/v) and run consecutively in a block-randomized fashion (www.random.org) (Oberg & Vitek 2009). Chromatographic separations were performed with a nano-LC chromatography system (Easy-nLC 1000, Thermo Scientific). Samples were loaded on a C18 trap column 100 μm ID x 2 cm (New Objective) and eluted from a PicoFrit® (75 μm ID x 15 μm tip) column packed with 10 cm ProteoPep II (5 μm, 300Å, C18, New Objective) with the following gradient at 250 nL/min: 5% solvent B for 5 min; 35% B over 139 min; 95% B over 26 min followed by isocratic at 95% B for 10 min. Mobile phases were 0.1% formic acid in water (A) and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (B). The instrument was operated in positive ion mode for data-dependent analyses (DDA) automatically switching between survey scans (MS) at m/z 350-2000 acquired in the Orbitrap (60,000 at m/z 400) in profile mode, and MS/MS scans in the Orbitrap in centroid mode. For each sample, the five most abundant precursor ions above a 10,000 count threshold were selected from each survey scan (MS) for HCD fragmentation (isolation width 4.0 Da, default charge state of 4, normalized collision energy 30%, activation Q 0.250, and activation time 0.1 s). Ion injection times for the MS and MS/MS scans were 500 ms each. The automatic gain control targets for the Orbitrap were 1 x 106 for the MS scans and 2 x 105 for MS/MS scans. Dynamic exclusion (±10 ppm relative to precursor ion m/z) was enabled with a repeat count of 1, maximal exclusion list size of 500, and an exclusion duration of 60 s. Monoisotopic precursor selection (MIPS) was enabled, and unassigned and singly charged ions were rejected.

### Data Protocol
All peptides listed as having shared or group accessions, or listed with multiple accessions were removed from the list. Next, all post-translational modifications except carbamidomethylation of cysteine and oxidation of methionine were removed. All protein identifications required a minimum of two unique peptides. Finally mouse and human proteins were sorted and separated for separate analysis. Proteins identified as exogenous contaminations such keratin was eliminated. A total of two tables of peptide intensities (human WCL and mouse WCL) were imported into custom SAS scripts for analysis. In all cases, the intensity of each peptide ion species was standardized across all measure of that peptide species. Proteins without at least two peptides were excluded from further analysis. Missing values were assumed to be missing at random and were excluded from the analysis. All calculations were done using SAS Procedures mixed with restricted maximum likelihood estimations (SAS Institute, Cary NC), and type 3 sums of squares (where appropriate). A random effects model was used to partition variation in the peptide intensities between treatment levels (attractors and non-attractors), the three biological replicates, and the three analytical replicates. Next, a hierarchical linear model was used to test for differences in mean intensity between the attractors and non-attractors, while allowing each biological replicate to have its own overall mean. The p-values from each analysis were corrected for multiple testing with a FDR (q) of < 0.05 considered significant (Benjamini-Hochberg 1995). Next, the same model was run on the log base 2 converted raw intensities. The differences in estimated mean between attractor and non-attractor in these tests were taken as an estimate of the overall fold change within the treatment. The q-value reported throughout the text is the instantaneous q value (q_inst; Supplemental Tables 1 and 2), which is the FDR if the given protein were taken as the least significant protein differentially expressed. Positive fold change values are indicative of an increase in protein expression in attractors relative to non-attractors and negative fold change values are indicative of a decrease in protein expression in attractors relative to non-attractors. The Perseus software (version 1.5.16) was used for visualization the data (Cox & Mann 2013) and the Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery (DAVID version 6.7) for interrogation of enriched (Huang et al 2009a, 2009b) KEGG pathways (Kanehisa et al., 2000; Kanehisa et al., 2014) with a false discovery rate (FDR) of < 10% using Benjamini-Hochberg p-value correction (q-value) (Benjamini & Hochberg 1995).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Fatty acid metabolism glycolysis, Transcriptomics, Glioblastoma, Pentose phosphate pathway, Glycosylation, Mass spectrometry, Cancer proteomics, Bone marrow-derived human mesenchymal stem cells (bm-hmscs)

### Affiliations
UTMB Department of Pharmacology & Toxicology
Washington University 

### Submitter
Norelle Wildburger

### Lab Head
Dr Carol L. Nilsson
UTMB Department of Pharmacology & Toxicology


