### Accession
PXD032303

### Title
Reanalysis of dataset PXD005780: “Relating human gut metagenome and metaproteome”

### Description
This project contains raw data, intermediate files and results is a re-analysis of the publicly available dataset from the PRIDE dataset PXD005780. The RAW files were processed using ThermoRawFileParser, SearchGUI and PeptideShaker through standard settings (see ‘Data Processing Protocol’). This reanalysis work is part of the MetaPUF (MetaProteomics with Unknown Function) project, which is a collaboration between EMBL-EBI and the University of Luxembourg. The dataset was selected with the following conditions: 1. It has been made publicly available in PRIDE and focuses on metaproteomics of the human gut; 2. The corresponding metagenomics assemblies were also available from ENA (European Nucleotide Archive) or MGnify. The processed peptide reports for each sample are available to view at the contig level on the MGnify website. In total, the reanalysis identified 15,417 unique proteins from 15 samples.

### Sample Protocol
All samples and mass spectrometry data used in this analysis were obtained from the submitter of the original study deposited in the PRIDE database.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed with ThermoRawFileParser to convert the RAW files to spectral files in mgf format, we then used SearchGUI (version 3.3.20) to configure and run proteomics searches to identify peptides and proteins, where we used both search engines X!Tandem and MSGF+, and the databases required for the searches were generated by the MGnify team based on the Metagenomic assemblies the original author uploaded to ENA. The database then was concatenated with the UniProt Human Reference Proteome (release-2019_05, including isoforms, 95,915 sequences) and common lab contaminants (cRAP, 105 protein sequences). Finally, we used PeptideShaker (version 1.16.45) to post-process and combine the proteomic identification results obtained by both search engines and to obtain the significant PSMs, peptides and proteins. For the parameters, Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, while oxidation of methionine (M) as variable modifications. Minimum peptide length was set to 5 amino acids, maximum peptide length was set to 50 amino acids, and peptides were allowed to have a maximum of two missed-cleavages. For these raw files, the precursor mass tolerance was set to the value of 10 ppm for the first search. Fragment mass tolerances were set to 0.02 Da. All other mass tolerance settings were kept at default values. And the false-discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 at peptide spectrum match (PSM), peptide and protein levels.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Metaproteomics, Data integration, Reanalysis

### Affiliations
European Molecular Biology Laboratory, European Bioinformatics Institute (EMBL-EBI), Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge CB10 1SD, UK
EMBL-EBI

### Submitter
Shengbo Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Juan Antonio Vizcaino
European Molecular Biology Laboratory, European Bioinformatics Institute (EMBL-EBI), Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge CB10 1SD, UK


