### Accession
PXD042617

### Title
Integrative proteomics highlight presynaptic alterations and c-Jun misactivation as convergent pathomechanisms in ALS

### Description
Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) is a fatal neurodegenerative disease mainly affecting upper and lower motoneurons. Several functionally heterogeneous genes have been associated with the familial form of this disorder (fALS), depicting an extremely complex pathogenic landscape. This heterogeneity has limited the identification of an effective therapy, and this bleak prognosis will only improve with a greater understanding of convergent disease mechanisms. Recent evidence from human post-mortem material and diverse model systems has highlighted the synapse as a crucial structure actively involved in disease progression, suggesting that synaptic aberrations might represent a shared pathological feature across the ALS spectrum. To test this hypothesis, we performed the first comprehensive analysis of the synaptic proteome from post-mortem spinal cord and human iPSC-derived motoneurons carrying mutations in the major ALS genes. This integrated approach highlighted perturbations in the molecular machinery controlling vesicle release as a shared pathomechanism in ALS. Mechanistically, phosphoproteomic analysis linked the presynaptic vesicular phenotype to an accumulation of cytotoxic protein aggregates and to the pro-apoptotic activation of the transcription factor c-Jun, providing detailed insights into the shared pathobiochemistry in ALS. Notably, sub-chronic treatment of our iPSC-derived motoneurons with the fatty acid docosahexaenoic acid exerted a neuroprotective effect by efficiently rescuing the alterations revealed by our multidisciplinary approach. Together, this study provides strong evidence for the central and convergent role played by the synaptic microenvironment within the ALS spinal cord and highlights a potential therapeutic target that counteracts degeneration in a heterogeneous cohort of human motoneuron cultures.

### Sample Protocol
.To prepare synaptically-enriched fractions (SNS), fresh frozen human cervical spinal cord tissue was homogenized using glass homogenizers on ice with homogenization buffer (25mM HEPES (pH 7.5), 120mM NaCl, 5mM KCl, 1mM MgCl2, 2mM CaCl2) with the addition of protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Roche #11,836,153,001, Thermo Scientific #A32959). The homogenized tissue was filtered using 80µm nylon filter, resulting in a total homogenate sample (TH), which was partially aliquoted and stored on dry ice. A 5µm filter (Millipore, SLSV025LS) was then used to filter the remainder of the TH and the sample underwent a 5 min centrifugation at 1000 x g. The pellets generated went through a series of washes in homogenization buffer and disposal of supernatant before the final pellet was weighed and resuspended in protein extraction buffer (100mM Tris–HCL Buffer (pH 7.6) 4% SDS with 1% protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche #11,836,153,001)) in a 1:5 dilution in relation to pellet weight. Further sample homogenisation by hand occurred before final centrifugation at 17,000 x g at 4°C for 20 min, from which the pellet was disposed of and supernatant collected as the extracted synaptoneurosome (SNS) proteome. Micro BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific #23,235) was then used to determine protein concentration of the samples for further experiments. Extracted SNS protein (25µg) from each individual case was pooled based on stratification of the presence of C9orf72 repeat expansion, TDP43 pathology and control. This pooling resulted in 3 representative groups, each consisting of 10 individual cases, for proteomic analysis (pool 1 – control (n=10), pool 2 - ALS-C9orf72 (n=10), pool 3 – sporadic ALS with TDP43 pathology (n=10)).  100 µg of total protein per group, obtained from post-mortem spinal cord samples, was processed using S-trap mini protocol (Protifi). Processing of 3 sample repeats yielded: pool 1 - 90µg of protein, pool 2 - 155µg of protein and pool 3 - 96µg of protein) and the equivalent of 40µg peptides was used for each TMT channel. Samples were digested using trypsin at 1:50 dilution at 37°C overnight in 150µl TEAB (final concentration 100nM). Centrifugation at 4000g for 30s in 160µl of 50mM TEAB eluted peptides from S-trap mini spin column. Further centrifugations were performed in 160µl of 2% aqueous formic acid and finally 160µl of 50% acetonitrile/0.2% formic acid. Tryptic peptides from each sample eluate produced were pooled, dried and then quantified with Pierce Quantitative fluorometric Peptide Assay (Thermo Scientific).  A TMTsixplex™ Isobaric Label Reagent Set (90061) Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation kit (Thermo Scientific, #84,868) was used to label samples with TMT following manufacturer’s protocol. Desalted tryptic peptides for each sample were dissolved in 100µl of 100mM TEAB, then the 6 TMT labels were dissolved in anhydrous acetonitrile, added to the different samples and incubated for 1 hour at room temperature. Labeling reaction was stopped with 8µl of 5% hydroxylamine per sample. Following TMT labeling, samples were mixed, desalted and dried in speed-vac at 30°C. Samples were then re-dissolved with 200µl of ammonium formate (NH4HCO2) (10mM, pH 9.5) and peptides were fractionated using High pH RP Chromatography. Two technical replicates were generated using the 3 pooled samples giving the 6-plex set up for TMT labelling.

### Data Protocol
MS data were processed using default parameters of the MaxQuant software (1.6.2.10). Extracted peak lists were submitted to database search using the Andromeda search engine to query a target-decoy (database of Homo sapiens (SiwwProt subset, 96,817 entries, downloaded on 11th of December 2019) and 285 commonly observed contaminants. Prior to sny bioinformatics analyses, mass spectrometry with less than two unique peptides was removed from the dataset (565 IDs). Similarly, proteins that were not identified in all samples were also excluded from the dataset (30 IDs). Following these data filtering steps, the dataset was analysed ready containing 5497 protein IDs. The reporter intensity value of each protein was log2 transformed and group median corrected to account for minor loading variables. An average of technical replicates per protein were counted for each group, then sALS and C9+ve group were normalized to the control group providing the fold change value for each protein

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Synapse, Spinal cord, Proteomics, Hipsc, Als, Motoneuron

### Affiliations
Univeristy of Dundee, School of Medicine, Division of Cellular and Systems Medicine
University of Dundee

### Submitter
Zsofia Laszlo

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Chis Henstridge
Univeristy of Dundee, School of Medicine, Division of Cellular and Systems Medicine


