### Accession
PXD009371

### Title
fission yeast prolyl hydroxylome

### Description
To discover the fission yeast prolyl hydroyxlome. Five biological replicates of WT and Ofd1D cells were cultured. The whole cell lysates were analysed by TMT mass spectrometry for prolyl hydroxylation

### Sample Protocol
Five biological replicates of S. pombe WT and ofd1Δ cells were cultured in 400 ml EMM medium (Edinburgh minimal medium plus 75 mg/l leucine, histidine, adenine, uracil, and 30 mg/l lysine) to OD600 = 0.7. Cells were harvested by spinning at 4,000 xg for 5 min. Cell pellets were resuspended in 10 ml cold lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1x EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail) before lysing using an Avestin Emulsiflex C3 high pressure homogenizer. NP-40 was added to the crude lysate to 0.1% (v/v) final concentration and rotated at 4ºC for 30 min. The crude lysate was centrifuged at 20,000 xg for 30 min. The supernatant was collected and protein concentration determined by Pierce BCA Protein Assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Proteins (200 μg) from each of the 10 samples were TCA precipitated and washed by acetone twice.  Precipitated protein extracts (200 μg for each sample) were re-solubilized in 200 µl of 100 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) pH 8.5 and reduced with 10 µl of 200 mM TCEP then alkylated with 10 µl of 375 mM iodoacetamide in the dark for 30 min. Reduced and alkylated proteins were digested overnight at 37ºC by adding 10 μg of Trypsin/LysC mixture (V5071, Promega) in 100 mM TEAB. The next morning, 10 μl of 10% (v/v) TFA was added and samples were evaporated to dryness in a speedvac. Peptides were re-solubilized in 200 μl of 100 mM TEAB and divided into four 50 μg aliquots.  Individual samples (50 μg) were labeled with a unique isobaric mass tag reagent (TMT 10-plex, Thermo) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Both pairing and labeling order of TMT reagent and peptide sample were randomized. Briefly, TMT-10plex reagents (0.8 mg vials) were allowed to come to room temperature before adding 41 μl of anhydrous acetonitrile, then briefly vortexed and centrifuged. The entire TMT reagent vial was added to the 50 μg peptide sample and reacted at room temperature for 1 hr. 5% (v/v) hydroxylamine (8 μl) was then added to quench the reaction. The 10 TMT-labeled samples were then combined and vacuum centrifuged to dryness. The combined sample of TMT-labeled peptides was resuspended in 2 ml of 10 mM TEAB and separated into 84 fractions at 250 μl/min using a 0-90% acetonitrile gradient in 10 mM TEAB on a 150 mm x 2.1 mm ID Waters XBridge 5 μm C18 using an Agilent 1200 capillary HPLC in normal flow mode and Agilent 1260 micro-fraction collector. The 84 fractions were concatenated into 24 fractions by combining all odd rows of each column 1 through 12 into 12 fractions and all even rows of each column into another 12 fractions.

### Data Protocol
MS data were searched against the S. pombe RefSeq2014 database in Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using Mascot alone and Mascot run through the MS2-processor node. All peptides were searched with a 20 ppm tolerance MS and 0.03 for MS2 and filtered at a 1% FDR. Dynamic modification was chosen for carbamidomethyl C, oxidation M, deamidation of N and Q, hydroxylation of P, dihydroxylation of P, TMT 6-plex for N-term and K.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Fission yeast, Prolyl hydroxylation, 2-oxoglutarate oxygenase

### Affiliations
Professor of the Department of Cell Biology and Associate Dean for Graduate Biomedical Education
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine

### Submitter
He Gu

### Lab Head
Dr Peter J. Espenshade
Professor of the Department of Cell Biology and Associate Dean for Graduate Biomedical Education


