### Accession
PXD007791

### Title
Cell Surface Expression with FK866

### Description
Maintenance of NAD+ levels by mitochondrial complex I, the NAD+ salvage pathway, and other routes is an important factor in of neurodegenerative disease and cancer. Both the production of NAD+ and the metabolic enzymes that require it as a redox cofactor or substrate differ widely in abundance across cell types and conditions. Disruption in the NAD+ supply thus exerts different effects depending on the cellular NAD+ requirements existing in the cell. Pharmacological depletion of NAD+ is actively being pursued in cancer and other diseases but these effects are not fully understood. Here, we combine quantitative proteomics and metabolomics to understand the consequences of disrupting cellular NAD+ levels and find that inhibiting the NAD+ salvage pathway depletes serine biosynthesis from glucose by impeding the NAD+-dependent protein 3-phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase (PHGDH). Importantly, breast cancers that depend on PHGDH are exquisitely sensitive to blocking the NAD+ salvage pathway. PHGDH, and the rate-limiting enzyme of NAD+ salvage are also correlated in public tumor proteome and transcript datasets. These findings are immediately translatable to the pharmacological inhibition of NAMPT in PHGDH-dependent cancers.

### Sample Protocol
As previously described (Weekes et al., 2012), cells (~1e7) were rinsed twice with PBS (pH 7.4), then cell surface proteins were biotinylated in the dark at 4°C for 2 hrs with a biotinylation reaction mixture containing 1 mM sodium periodate (Sigma #311448), 100 μM aminoxy-biotin (Biotium #90113), and 10 mM aniline (Sigma #242284) in ice-cold PBS (pH 6.7). The reaction was quenched with 1mM glycerol, then cells were washed twice with PBS (pH 7.4) and were harvested by scraping in lysis buffer containing 1% Triton X-100, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM iodoacetamide, 10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6 and 1 tablet of protease inhibitor (Sigma #11836170001) per 10 mL lysis buffer. Lysates were centrifuged 3 times at 12,000 x g for 10 mins. Biotinylated proteins were enriched by incubating with 150 uL of streptavidin-agarose resin (Thermo Fisher #20347) for 2 hrs followed by washing 4x (1.5 mL each) with lysis buffer, 4x with PBS, 0.5% SDS (5 mL each), then incubated with 100 mM DTT (500 uL). Resin was further washed 4x with 6M Urea, 100 mM Tris/HCl pH 8.5 (2 mL each), and 3x with HPLC-grade water (2 mL each). All washes were performed on Polyprep columns (BioRad #731550). Proteins were digested on-resin overnight with 100 mM HEPES, pH 8.5 (70 uL) containing 2 ug trypsin at 37°C. The next day, the peptide mixture was made up to 30% acetonitrile, labeled with TMT10 reagents (Thermo Fisher #90110), quenched with 0.5% hydroxylamine (Sigma #159417), mixed equally, and desalted using a 200 mg solid phase C18 extraction cartridge (Waters #WAT054945). Peptides were fractionated using an Onyx, 4.6 mm x 100 mm, monolithic C18 column (Phenomenex #CH0-7643). A gradient of 5 to 40% acetonitrile (10 mM ammonium formate, pH 8) was applied at a flow rate of 1 mL/min using an AKTA pure FPLC system (GE Healthcare). Fractions were collected every 0.4 min beginning at 10 min then combined to 6 fractions, which were lyophilized and desalted using home-made Stage-tips packed with Empore C18 extraction material (Sigma #66883-U) as previously described (Juri Rappsilber et al., 2003), then lyophilized and subjected to LC-SPS-MS3.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data files were converted to mzXML using a modified version of ReadW.exe. MS2 spectra were searched against the human Uniprot database (downloaded August, 2011) using Sequest (Ver28) (Eng et al., 1994) with TMT as a fixed modification (+229.162932) on lysine residues and peptide N-termini, and carbamidomethylation (15.99492) as a fixed modification on cysteine. The allowable precursor mass tolerance was 10 ppm and product ion mass tolerance was 1 Da. False positive rates were controlled using the target-decoy approach (Elias and Gygi, 2007) with a concatenated reversed database employing linear discriminant analysis to distinguish correct and incorrect peptide identifications based on XCorr, ΔCN, peptide length, and charge state. Peptides were grouped into proteins and their multiplied linear discriminant analysis probabilities were used to sort proteins and filter to a 1% maximum false discovery rate. The sum of all reporter ion S/N values for peptides matching each protein was used for protein quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
NAD<sup>+</sup> is a key metabolic redox cofactor that is regenerated from nicotinamide through the NAD<sup>+</sup> salvage pathway. Here, we find that inhibiting the NAD<sup>+</sup> salvage pathway depletes serine biosynthesis from&#xa0;glucose by impeding the NAD<sup>+</sup>-dependent protein, 3-phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase (PHGDH). Importantly, we find that PHGDH<sup>high</sup> breast cancer cell lines are exquisitely sensitive to inhibition of the NAD<sup>+</sup> salvage pathway. Further, we find that PHGDH protein levels and those of the rate-limiting enzyme of NAD<sup>+</sup> salvage, NAMPT, correlate in ER-negative, basal-like breast cancers. Although NAD<sup>+</sup> salvage pathway inhibitors are actively being pursued in cancer treatment, their efficacy has been poor, and our findings suggest that they may be effective for PHGDH-dependent cancers.

### Keywords
Ttmt, Fk866, Cell surface

### Affiliations
Mass Spectrometry
Dalhousie University

### Submitter
Patrick Murphy

### Lab Head
Dr Shashi Gujar
Dalhousie University


