### Accession
PXD021926

### Title
A novel enzyme-mediated method for covalent surface modification of extracellular vesicles to achieve targeted drug delivery

### Description
Natural extracellular vesicles (EVs) are ideal drug carriers due to their remarkable biocompatibility. Their delivery specificity can be achieved by the conjugation of targeting ligands. However, existing methods to engineer target-specific EVs are tedious or inefficient, having to compromise between harsh chemical treatments or transient interactions. Here, we describe a novel method for the covalent conjugation of EVs with high copy numbers of targeting moieties using protein ligases. Conjugation of EVs with either an epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)-targeting peptide or anti-EGFR nanobody facilitates their accumulation in EGFR-positive cancer cells, both in vitro and in vivo. Systemic delivery of paclitaxel by EGFR-targeting EVs at a low dose significantly increases drug efficacy in a xenografted mouse model of EGFR-positive lung cancer. The method is also applicable to the conjugation of EVs with peptides and nanobodies targeting other receptors, such as HER2 and SIRP alpha, and the conjugated EVs can deliver RNA in addition to small molecules, supporting the versatile application of EVs in cancer therapies. This simple, yet efficient and versatile method for the stable surface modification of EVs bypasses the need for genetic and chemical modifications, thus facilitating safe and specific delivery of therapeutic payloads to target cells.

### Sample Protocol
Biotin pull-down samples or RBCEV protein extracts were separated on a 12% NuPAGE Bis-Tris gel (Invitrogen) for 10 min (LFQ) at 170 V in 1× MOPS buffer (Thermo). The gel was fixed using the Colloidal Blue Staining Kit (Thermo). For in-gel digestion, samples were destained in destaining buffer (25 mM ammonium bicarbonate; 50% ethanol), reduced in 10 mM DTT for 1h at 56°C followed by alkylation with 55mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) for 45 min in the dark. Tryptic digest was performed in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer with 2 μg trypsin (Promega) at 37°C overnight. Peptides were desalted on StageTips and analysed by nanoflow liquid chromatography on an EASY-nLC 1200 system coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo). Peptides were separated on a C18-reversed phase PicoFrit column (25 cm long, 75 μm inner diameter; New Objective) packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 μm resin (Dr Maisch). The column was mounted on an Easy Flex Nano Source and temperature controlled by a column oven (Sonation) at 40°C. A 105-min gradient (biotin pull-down) or a 215-min gradient (RBCEV proteomes) from 2 to 40% acetonitrile in 0.5% formic acid at a flow of 225 nl/min. Spray voltage was set to 2.2 kV. The Q Exactive HF was operated with a TOP20 MS/MS spectra acquisition method per MS full scan. MS scans were conducted with 60,000 resolution at a maximum injection time of 20 ms and MS/MS scans with 15,000 resolution at a maximum injection time of 50 ms.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were processed with MaxQuant version 1.5.2.8 with preset standard settings for LFQ samples and the match between runs option was activated for the biotin pull-down samples. The quantification was based on unique peptides only. Carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification while methionine oxidation and protein N-acetylation were considered as variable modifications. Search results were filtered with a false discovery rate of 0.01. Known contaminants, proteins groups only identified by site, and reverse hits of the MaxQuant results were removed and only proteins were kept that were quantified by LFQ intensity.

### Publication Abstract
Natural extracellular vesicles (EVs) are ideal drug carriers due to their remarkable biocompatibility. Their delivery specificity can be achieved by the conjugation of targeting ligands. However, existing methods to engineer target-specific EVs are tedious or inefficient, having to compromise between harsh chemical treatments and transient interactions. Here, we describe a novel method for the covalent conjugation of EVs with high copy numbers of targeting moieties using protein ligases. Conjugation of EVs with either an epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)-targeting peptide or anti-EGFR nanobody facilitates their accumulation in EGFR-positive cancer cells, both <i>in vitro</i> and <i>in vivo</i>. Systemic delivery of paclitaxel by EGFR-targeting EVs at a low dose significantly increases drug efficacy in a xenografted mouse model of EGFR-positive lung cancer. The method is also applicable to the conjugation of EVs with peptides and nanobodies targeting other receptors, such as HER2 and SIRP alpha, and the conjugated EVs can deliver RNA in addition to small molecules, supporting the versatile application of EVs in cancer therapies. This simple, yet efficient and versatile method for the stable surface modification of EVs bypasses the need for genetic and chemical modifications, thus facilitating safe and specific delivery of therapeutic payloads to target cells.

### Keywords
Extracellular vesicles, Drug delivery, Rbcevs

### Affiliations
Cancer Science Institute of Singapore (CSI), National University of Singapore (NUS)
Cancer Science Institute of Singapore

### Submitter
Dennis Kappei

### Lab Head
Dr Dennis Kappei
Cancer Science Institute of Singapore (CSI), National University of Singapore (NUS)


