### Accession
PXD034342

### Title
Human mitochondria require mtRF1 for translation termination at non-canonical stop codons

### Description
Mitochondrial translation system highly diverged from its bacterial counterpart. This includes deviation from the universal genetic code, with AGA and AGG having no cognate tRNAs in human mitochondria. Their locations at the end of COX1 and ND6 open reading frames, respectively, suggests they function as stop codons. However, while canonical stop codons, UAA and UAG, are recognized by mtRF1a in mitochondria, the release mechanism at AGA and AGG remains a debated issue. Here, we show that upon the loss of another member of the mitochondrial release factor family, mtRF1, mitoribosomes accumulate specifically at AGA and AGG codons. Stalling of mitoribosomes alters COX1 transcript and protein levels, but not ND6 production. Finally, we set up an in vitro reconstituted mitochondrial translation system, which confirms the specific release activity of mtRF1 on AGA and AGG codons. Together, our study uncovers the mechanism of translation termination in mitochondria and provides first insights into the consequences of its failure.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation      50 µg of mitochondria from HEK WT, mtRF1 KO1 and mtRF1 KO2 cells were resuspended in 100 µl 6 M guanidine hydrochloride in 100 mM Tris pH 8.0. For complete denaturation of proteins, samples were sonicated two times for 5 min (10 s on/ 10 s off). Afterwards, samples were centrifuged at max. speed for 10 min and supernatants were transferred to new tubes. Proteins were reduced by a final DTT concentration of 5 mM for 30 min at 55 °C and consecutively cooled down on ice. Next, proteins were alkylated at RT in the dark for 15 min by adding chloroacetamide in a final concentration of 15 mM. During alkylation samples were quantified by BCA assay. Alkylation was stopped by adding 10x 50 mM Tris pH8 buffer. Proteins were digested by trypsin (1:50 w/w) ON at 37 °C. Peptides were purified by Pierce Peptide Desalting Spin columns (Thermo Fisher) according to manufacturer’s protocol. Four micrograms of desalted peptides were dried out and reconstituted in 9 µL of 0.1 M TEAB. Tandem mass tag (TMTpro, Thermo Fisher) labeling was carried out according to manufacturer’s instruction with the following changes: 0.5 mg of TMTPro reagent was resuspended with 33 µL of anhydrous ACN.  Seven microliters of TMTPro reagent in ACN was added to 9 µL of clean peptide in 0.1 M TEAB. The final ACN concentration was 43.75 % and the ratio of peptides to TMTPro reagent was 1:20. After 60 min of incubation the reaction was quenched with 2 µL of 5 % hydroxylamine. Labelled peptides were pooled, dried, re-suspended in 200 µL of 0.1 % formic acid (FA), split into two equal parts, and desalted using home-made STAGE tips (Li et al. 2021). One of the two parts was fractionated on a 1 mm x 150 mm ACQUITY column, packed with 130 Å, 1.7 µm C18 particles (Waters), using an Ultimate 3000 UHPLC (Thermo Fisher). Peptides were separated at a flow of 30 µL/min with an 88 min segmented gradient from 1 % to 50 % buffer B for 85 min and from 50 % to 95 % buffer B for 3 min (buffer A: 5 % ACN, 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC); buffer B: 80 % ACN, 10 mM ABC). Fractions were collected every three min, and fractions were pooled in two passes (1 + 17, 2 + 18 … etc.) and dried in a vacuum centrifuge (Eppendorf).      LC-MS/MS       Dried fractions were resuspended in 0.1 % formic acid (FA) and separated on a 50 cm, 75 µm Acclaim PepMap column (Thermo Fisher, Product No. 164942) and analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). Synchronous precursor selection based MS3 was used for the acquisition of the TMTPro reporter ion signals. Peptide separations were performed on an EASY-nLC1200 using a 90 min linear gradient from 6 % to 31 % buffer (buffer A: 0.1 % FA; buffer B: 0.1 % FA, 80 % CAN). The analytical column was operated at 50 °C.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics data was analyzed using MaxQuant, version 1.6.17.0 (Cox and Mann 2008). The isotope purity correction factors, provided by the manufacturer, were included in the analysis. Differential expression analysis was performed using limma, version 3.34.9 (Ritchie et al. 2015) in R, version 3.4.3 (“R Core Team (2017) R A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing. - References - Scientific Research Publishing” n.d.).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Translation, Mtrf1, Tmt

### Affiliations
Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Division of Molecular Metabolism, Karolinska Institutet, Biomedicum, 171 65 Solna, Sweden. Max Planck Institute Biology of Ageing - Karolinska Institutet Laboratory, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. 
Max Planck Institute for Biology of Aging

### Submitter
Ilian  Atanassov

### Lab Head
Dr Joanna Rorbach
Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Division of Molecular Metabolism, Karolinska Institutet, Biomedicum, 171 65 Solna, Sweden. Max Planck Institute Biology of Ageing - Karolinska Institutet Laboratory, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. 


