### Accession
PXD033056

### Title
Proteome integral solubility alteration assay combined with multi-criteria decision-making analysis for developing adverse outcome pathways

### Description
To simplify chemical risk assessment, the adverse outcome pathway (AOP) method has arisen as a framework to predict the impact of chemical exposure on human and environmental health. The development of this predictive tool requires knowledge of the molecular interaction between chemicals and protein targets. Here, we demonstrate that the identification and selection of a target candidate to develop adverse outcome pathways can be obtained by applying high-throughput identification of chemical targets by proteome integral solubility alteration (PISA) assay, followed by selecting the priority target candidate by an analytical hierarchy process. From 8 identified protein targets for TCDD from a soluble proteome extracted from hepatocytes, we selected the priority target for developing AOPs. Our combined methodologies provide identification of a molecular initiating event, essential knowledge to link molecular interaction to impact on health. The identification of chemical targets following a systematic analysis of chemical protein interaction by proteomics increases the high-throughput and reduces the traditional bias. The target selection eliminates conflicting criteria by applying a multiple-criteria decision-making analysis.

### Sample Protocol
The bioactive compound analyzed in this study and the corresponding highest tested concentration were: 25 nM 2,3,7,8 tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD). HepG2 cells were resuspended in ice-cold PBS and lysed in ice bath by sonication. The insoluble parts were sedimented by centrifugation at 100,000 g for 60 min at 4 °C. The soluble proteome was used to perform the 2D PISA assay, as described in Gaetani et al. 2019 with some modifications. Briefly, the soluble proteome and the studied chemical were incubated in ten different concentrations. Control samples were incubated in the presence of the vehicle of the compound, dimethyl sulfoxide. Ten specific temperatures were selected for the thermal assay. Aliquots containing 10 μg of protein (one for each of the temperatures in the entire range covered in the thermal shift assay) were independently heated at the corresponding temperature for 3 min, followed by 3 min at room temperature. For each concentration, aliquots of all temperature points were pooled and centrifuged at 100,000 g for 20 min at 4 °C, to remove the proteins that had an alteration in solubility after the thermal shift assay. Supernatants from intermediate concentrations were combined. The collection of soluble fractions in the supernatants from the three groups (control – 0 %, intermediate concentrations, and highest –  100 %) were processed using a general bottom-up proteomics workflow and the purified peptides were analyzed by label-free nano liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry analysis (nLC-MS/MS). Three biological replicates were performed for each experiment. The samples were digested following the FASP method. Peptides were desalted by reverse phase chromatography in C18 top tips using acetonitrile (ACN; 60% v/v) with FA (0.1% v/v) for elution, and vacuum dried to be stored at -80 °C till further analysis. Peptides were analyzed in a QExactive quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Samples were separated using an EASY nLC 1200 system (Thermo Scientific) and tryptic peptides were injected into a pre-column (Acclaim PepMap 100 Å, 75 um × 2 cm) and peptide separation was performed using an EASY-Spray C18 reversed-phase nano LC column (PepMap RSLC C18, 2 um, 100 Å, 75 um × 25 cm).

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer (v2.1, Thermo Fischer Scientific) was used for protein identification and quantification. The MS/MS spectra (. raw files) were searched by Sequest HT against the Human database from Uniprot (UP000005640; 95,959 entries). A maximum of 2 tryptic cleavages were allowed, the precursor and fragment mass tolerance were 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. Peptides with a false discovery rate (FDR) of less than 0.01 and validation based on q-value were used as identified. The minimum peptide length considered was 6 and the FDR was set to 0.1. Proteins were quantified using the average of top three peptide MS1-areas, yielding raw protein abundances. Common contaminants like human keratin and bovine trypsin were also included in the database during the searches for minimizing false identifications.

### Publication Abstract
The impact of exposure to multiple chemicals raises concerns for human and environmental health. The adverse outcome pathway method offers a framework to support mechanism-based assessment in environmental health starting by describing which mechanisms are triggered upon interaction with different stressors. The identification of the molecular initiating event and the molecular interaction between a chemical and a protein target is still a challenge for the development of adverse outcome pathways. The cellular response to chemical exposure studied with omics could not directly identify the protein targets. However, recent mass spectrometry-based methods are offering a proteome-wide identification of protein targets interacting with s but unrevealing a molecular initiating event from a set of targets is still dependent on available knowledge. Here, we directly coupled the target identification findings from the proteome integral solubility alteration assay with an analytical hierarchy process for the prediction of a prioritized molecular initiating event. We demonstrate the applicability of this combination of methodologies with a test compound (TCDD), and it could be further studied and integrated into AOPs. From the eight protein targets identified by the proteome integral solubility alteration assay after analyzing 2824 human hepatic proteins, the analytical hierarchy process can select the most suitable protein for an AOP. Our combined method solves the missing links between high-throughput target identification and prediction of the molecular initiating event. We anticipate its utility to decipher new molecular initiating events and support more sustainable methodologies to gain time and resources in chemical assessment.

### Keywords
Hepatocytes, Proteome integral solubility alteration assay, Tcdd, Hepg2, Bioactive compound, Analytical hierarchy process, Pollutants

### Affiliations
Linköping University
Department of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences, Cell Biology, Medical Faculty, Linköping University. Sweden

### Submitter
Veronica Lizano-Fallas

### Lab Head
Dr Susana Cristobal
Department of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences, Cell Biology, Medical Faculty, Linköping University. Sweden


