### Accession
PXD012425

### Title
Searching for new members of the SLX4 complex and for SLX4-complex members that are SUMOylated in vitro

### Description
The project was initially aimed at identifying new members of the SLX4 complex as well as members of the complex that are SUMOylated in vitro. The project was also aimed at assessing whether SUMOylation may change the compositon of the complex by reducing complex association of SUMOylated partners. YFP-SLX4 complexes were immunopurified from Hela Flp-In TRex cells producing full length YFP-SLX4 using a GFP nanobody. The YFP-SLX4 pull down was used in an ex vivo/in vitro SUMO-ligation assay as described in Guervilly et al. 2015. After the SUMO-ligation reaction, beads were washed 5 times with 50 mM Tris-HCl [pH 8.0] buffer, allowing for the removal of SUMOylated proteins that associate less efficiently with SLX4, or other members of the complex. SLX4 and proteins remaining associated with SLX4 after the successive washes were eluted directly in NuPAGE LDS sample buffer (Invitrogen) for 5 min at 95˚C.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extracts were loaded on NuPAGE™ 4–12% Bis–Tris acrylamide gels according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Migration was stopped as soon as proteins stacked in a single band. Gel were stained with Imperial Blue (Pierce), and protein containing bands were cut from the gel, reduced, alkylated in presence of iodoacetamide and digested with high sequencing grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) before mass spectrometry analysis. Extracted peptides were injected in 2 or 3 technical replicates and identified in liquid chromatography (Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific)) coupled with an LTQ-Velos-Orbitrap spectrometer.  One microliters corresponding to 1/10th of whole sample were injected in duplicate on the system. After pre-concentration and washing of the sample on a Dionex Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 column (2 cm × 100 μm i.d. 100 A, 5 μm particle size), peptides were separated on a Dionex Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 column (15 cm × 75 μm i.d., 100 A, 2 µm particle size) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min a two steps linear gradient (4-20% acetonitrile/H20; 0.1 % formic acid for 90 min and 20-45-45% acetonitrile/H20; 0.1 % formic acid for 30 min. The separation of the peptides was monitored by a UV detector (absorption at 214 nm). The nanospray source for peptides ionisation was set at 1.4 kV and the capillary temperature at 275 °C. All samples were measured in a data dependent acquisition mode. Each run was preceded by a blank MS run in order to monitor system background. The peptide masses are measured in a survey full scan (scan range 300-1700 m/z, with 30 K FWHM resolution at m/z=400, target AGC value of 1.00×10E6 and maximum injection time of 500 ms). In parallel to the high-resolution full scan in the Orbitrap, the data-dependent CID scans of the 10 most intense precursor ions were fragmented and measured in the linear ion trap (normalized collision energy of 35 %, activation time of 10 ms, target AGC value of 1.00×10E4, maximum injection time 100 ms, isolation window 2 Da). Parent masses obtained in Orbitrap analyser were automatically calibrated on 445.1200 locked mass. The fragment ion masses are measured in the linear ion trap to have a maximum sensitivity and the maximum amount of MS/MS data. Dynamic exclusion was implemented with a repeat count of 1 and exclusion duration of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw files generated from mass spectrometry analysis were processed with Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo fisher Scientific). This software was used to search data via in-house Mascot server (version 2.4.1; Matrix Science Inc., London, UK) against the Human database subset (20,413 entries) of the SwissProt database (version 2018.11). Database search were done using the following settings: a maximum of two trypsin miscleavage allowed, methionine oxidation and N terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications, and cysteine carbamido-methylation as fixed modification. A peptide mass tolerance of 6 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.8 Da were allowed for search analysis. Only peptides with higher Mascot threshold (identity) were selected. False discovery rate was set to 1% for protein identification. Protein abundance was measured using both approaches. First a spectral counting approach based on the number of peptide-to-spectrum matching (PSM) events and then a Top3 method available in Proteome Discoverer software.

### Publication Abstract
The SLX4 tumor suppressor is a scaffold that plays a pivotal role in several aspects of genome protection, including homologous recombination, interstrand DNA crosslink repair and the maintenance of common fragile sites and telomeres. Here, we unravel an unexpected direct interaction between SLX4 and the DNA helicase RTEL1, which, until now, were viewed as having independent and antagonistic functions. We identify cancer and Hoyeraal-Hreidarsson syndrome-associated mutations in SLX4 and RTEL1, respectively, that abolish SLX4-RTEL1 complex formation. We show that both proteins are recruited to nascent DNA, tightly co-localize with active RNA pol II, and that SLX4, in complex with RTEL1, promotes FANCD2/RNA pol II co-localization. Importantly, disrupting the SLX4-RTEL1 interaction leads to DNA replication defects in unstressed cells, which are rescued by inhibiting transcription. Our data demonstrate that SLX4 and RTEL1 interact to prevent replication-transcription conflicts and provide evidence that this is independent of the nuclease scaffold function of SLX4.

### Keywords
Interactome, Slx4 scaffold, Protein sumoylation

### Affiliations
Marseille Proteomic, Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Marseille, Inserm UMR1068, CNRS UMR7258, Aix Marseille Université U105, Institut Paoli Calmettes, 27 Boulevard Leï Roure CS30059 13273 Marseille Cedex 09 France 
Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Marseille, CRCM Inserm UMR1068, CNRS UMR7258, Aix Marseille Université U105, Institut Paoli Calmettes France

### Submitter
AUDEBERT Stephane

### Lab Head
Dr Marseille proteomics ; CRCM ; Gaillard PH lab
Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Marseille, CRCM Inserm UMR1068, CNRS UMR7258, Aix Marseille Université U105, Institut Paoli Calmettes France


