### Accession
PXD015794

### Title
Identification of chloroplast envelope proteins with critical importance for cold acclimation

### Description
Differential proteome analysis allowed to identify envelope proteins critical for cold acclimation and frost tolerance in Arabidopsis thaliana.

### Sample Protocol
The envelope membrane isolation procedure can be divided into two steps: a) isolation of intact chloroplasts and b) enrichment of envelope membranes from these chloroplasts using a sucrose step gradient. Enrichment of envelope membranes was carried with modifications according to a given protocol (Ferro et al., 2003) MS analysis was performed on a high-resolution LC-MS system (Eksigent nanoLC425 coupled to a Triple-TOF 6600, AB Sciex) in information dependent acquisition (IDA) mode. The HPLC separation was performed in trap-elution mode using a Symmetry C18 (5µm particle, 0.18 x 20mm, Waters, Eschborn, Germany) for trapping and a self-packed analytical column (75µm x 150mm, 3µm particle ReproSil-PurC18-AQ, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbruch, Germany) for separation. A constant flow of 300 nl/ min was employed and the gradient ramped within 108 min from 2% to 33% of HPLC buffer B (buffer A: 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid; buffer B: 90% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid), then within 12 min to 50% buffer B, followed by washing and equilibration steps, according. The mass spectrometer as was run in IDA mode recording 1 survey scan (250 ms, 350-1500 m/z) and fragment spectra (70 ms, 100-1400 m/z) of the 25 most intense parent ions (charge state >2, intensity >300cps, exclusion for 15 s after one occurrence) resulting in a cycle time of 2 s.

### Data Protocol
Identification and quantification of the proteins were performed using MaxQuant v. 1.6.0.16 (Cox and Mann, 2008). Spectra were matched against the ensemble plants release 43  of the Arabidopsis thaliana Tair10 genome release. The peptide database was constructed considering methionine oxidation and acetylation of protein N-termini as variable modifications and cabamido-methylation of cysteines as a fixed modification. False discovery rate (FDR) thresholds for peptide spectrum matches and protein identification were set to 1%. Protein quantification was carried out using the match-between-runs feature and the MaxQuant Label free Quantification (LFQ) algorithm (Cox et al., 2014).

### Publication Abstract
The ability of plants to withstand cold temperatures relies on their photosynthetic activity. Thus, the chloroplast is of utmost importance for cold acclimation and acquisition of freezing tolerance. During cold acclimation, the properties of the chloroplast change markedly. To provide the most comprehensive view of the protein repertoire of the chloroplast envelope, we analyzed this membrane system in Arabidopsis (<i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i>) using mass spectrometry-based proteomics. Profiling chloroplast envelope membranes was achieved by a cross comparison of protein intensities across the plastid and the enriched membrane fraction under both normal and cold conditions. We used multivariable logistic regression to model the probabilities for the classification of an envelope localization. In total, we identified 38 envelope membrane intrinsic or associated proteins exhibiting altered abundance after cold acclimation. These proteins comprise several solute carriers, such as the ATP/ADP antiporter nucleotide transporter2 (NTT2; substantially increased abundance) or the maltose exporter MEX1 (substantially decreased abundance). Remarkably, analysis of the frost recovery of <i>ntt</i> loss-of-function and <i>mex1</i> overexpressor mutants confirmed that the comparative proteome is well suited to identify key factors involved in cold acclimation and acquisition of freezing tolerance. Moreover, for proteins with known physiological function, we propose scenarios explaining their possible roles in cold acclimation. Furthermore, spatial proteomics introduces an additional layer of complexity and enables the identification of proteins differentially localized at the envelope membrane under the changing environmental regime.

### Keywords
Mex1, Proteomics, Shotgun proteomics, Envelope, Chloroplast, Ntt

### Affiliations
University Kaiserslautern Plant Physiology
TU KL - CSB

### Submitter
David Zimmer

### Lab Head
Dr Ekkehard Neuhaus
University Kaiserslautern Plant Physiology


