### Accession
PXD007151

### Title
Global proteomic analysis of changes in the Caenorhabditis elegans proteome during Klebsiella pneumoniae infection

### Description
In this study, the changes in the global proteomics of C. elegans were analyzed by proteomics approach. The nematodes were exposed to K. pneumoniae for different time-points (12, 24 and 36 h) and the changes in the regulation were analyzed by employing mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
The samples were then flash frozen in lysis buffer [7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% CHAPS, and 30 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5 and protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma)] and stored at -86 °C. When required, the samples were homogenized on ice for 1 min by employing sonicator. The total protein were immobilized in IPG strip and subjected to IEF using Ettan™ IPGphor 3 isoelectric focusing system. The differentially regulated protein spots were subjected to reduction and alkylation by DTT and iodoacetamide, respectively. After in-gel digestion, the peptide extracts were pooled together and concentrated by using speed Vac. The peptides were dissolved in MS grade water and were desalted using ZipTipC 18 pipet tips (Millipore). About 0.5 μl of α-Cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid was mixed with equal volume of desalted samples and allowed to dry for 4-6 h and characterized by mass spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
Data processing protocol The MALDI TOF/TOF analysis was performed using MALDI-TOF/TOF analyzer (AXIMA Performance, SHIMADZU BIOTECH) in a positive reflectron ion mode. With peptide mass fingerprint (PMF) and MALDI TOF/TOF, the proteins were identified against the all entries of C. elegans database using the MASCOT (Matrix Science Version 2.2) as a search engine. During search, the carbamidomethylation and oxidation was set as fixed and variable modifications, respectively. In the MASCOT search, the mass tolerance of 1.2 Da with one missed cleavage per peptide was allowed in all searches. Proteins with constant hit against different mass tolerance and significant scores were considered.

### Publication Abstract
The enterobacterium, <i>Klebsiella pneumoniae</i> invades the intestinal epithelium of humans by interfering with multiple host cell response. To uncover a system-level overview of host response during infection, we analyzed the global dynamics of protein profiling in <i>Caenorhabditis elegans</i> using quantitative proteomics approach. Comparison of protein samples of nematodes exposed to <i>K. pneumoniae</i> for 12, 24, and 36 h by 2DE revealed several changes in host proteome. A total of 266 host-encoded proteins were identified by 2DE MALDI-MS/MS and LC-MS/MS and the interacting partners of the identified proteins were predicted by STRING 10.0 analysis. In order to understand the interacting partners of regulatory proteins with similar or close pI ranges, a liquid IEF was performed and the isolated fractions containing proteins were identified by LC-MS/MS. Functional bioinformatics analysis on identified proteins deciphered that they were mostly related to the metabolism, dauer formation, apoptosis, endocytosis, signal transduction, translation, developmental, and reproduction process. Gene enrichment analysis suggested that the metabolic process as the most overrepresented pathway regulated against <i>K. pneumoniae</i> infection. The dauer-like formation in infected <i>C. elegans</i> along with intestinal atrophy and ROS during the physiological analysis indicated that the regulation of metabolic pathway is probably through the involvement of mTOR. Immunoblot analysis supported the above notion that the <i>K. pneumoniae</i> infection induced protein mis-folding in host by involving PI3Kinase/AKT-1/mTOR mediated pathway. Furthermore, the susceptibility of <i>pdi-2, akt-1</i>, and <i>mTOR C. elegans</i> mutants confirmed the role and involvement of PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway in mediating protein mis-folding which appear to be translating the vulnerability of host defense toward <i>K. pneumoniae</i> infection.

### Keywords
Caenorhabditis elegans, Ms, Proteomics, Klebsiella pneumoniae

### Affiliations
Alagappa university
Department of Biotechnology, Science Campus, Alagappa University, Karaikudi-630003, Tamil Nadu, India

### Submitter
Arumugam Kamaladevi

### Lab Head
Dr Krishnaswamy Balamurugan
Department of Biotechnology, Science Campus, Alagappa University, Karaikudi-630003, Tamil Nadu, India


