### Accession
PXD012869

### Title
Investigation of the protein profile of silkworm (Bombyx mori) pupae reared on a well-calibrated artificial diet compared to mulberry leaf diet

### Description
Background. Silkworm pupae (SWP) is the main by-product of the sericulture industry with an interesting nutritional profile, especially in terms of proteins. In consideration of its possible use as a food or food ingredient in Western countries, a comparative proteomic experiment has been performed to investigate the differences of the protein profile of male and female SWP reared on mulberry leaves or on an artificial diet.  Methods. The nutritional profile of lyophilized SWP in terms of dry matter and ash was evaluated according to the AOAC procedures, the total nitrogen content was determined by a nitrogen analyzer and the SWP gross energy value was measured using an adiabatic calorimetric bomb. The comparative proteomic analysis was performed on male and female SWP reared on mulberry leaves or on the artificial diet. Proteins were separated by Bidimensional Electrophoresis (2DE) and, after a multivariate statistical analysis, the differentially expressed proteins were identified by LC-MS/MS.  Results. The comparative proteomic approach highlighted 47 SWP proteins differentially expressed comparing diet and gender. PCA analysis showed that 7 proteins were more effective in discriminating the sex and 5 were more effective in discriminating the diet type. In spite of the above mentioned differences in the SWP protein profile, no strong alteration of the pupa physiological traits have been demonstrated, suggesting a general SWP flexibility to adapt to a well-balanced artificial diet. Differences in lipid transport and metabolism were found among the experimental groups, that might have a relevant effect on the timing, on hormone secretion and, in turn, on insect voltinism. This aspect may also affect silk production, as univoltine strains are the most productive. Although this is a preliminary study, the proteomic data may offer a contribution in understanding also the influence of gender and farming strategy on the allergen profile of B. mori, when used as food or as a food ingredient. Since female silkworm pupae reared on mulberry leaves seemed to contain lower levels of known allergens than those reared in the other experimental conditions, we speculated that these findings may help when farming B. mori for food production purposes. However, these results need to be supported by further characterization of the allergenic potential of B. mori.

### Sample Protocol
The protein spots selected as being differentially expressed, excised from fresh 2DE gels, were destained overnight with 40% ethanol/50 mM NH4HCO3, washed three times with 25 mM NH4CO3 and three times with acetonitrile (ANC) and then dried in Eppendorf Concentrator 5301 (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany). The proteins were in-gel digested with 75 ng/µl of sequencing-grade, modified porcine trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, the USA). The peptide digests were desalted on a Discovery® DSC-18 solid phase extraction (SPE) 96-well Plate (25 mg/well) (Sigma-Aldrich Inc., St. Louis, MO, USA), prior to mass spectrometry analysis. The LC-MS/MS analyses were performed by means of a micro-LC Eksigent Technologies (Dublin, the USA) system, which included a micro LC200 Eksigent pump with a 5-50 µL flow module and a programmable autosampler CTC PAL with a Peltier unit (1.0-45.0°C). The stationary phase was a Halo Fused C18 column (0.5 x 100 mm, 2.7 µm; Eksigent Technologies Dublin, USA). The mobile phase was a mixture of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water (A) and 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in acetonitrile (B), and it was eluting at a flow-rate of 15.0 µL min-1 and at an increasing concentration of solvent B, that is, from 2% to 40 % in 30 minutes. The injection volume was 4.0 µL. The oven temperature was set at 40°C. The LC system was interfaced with a 5600+ Triple TOFTM system (AB Sciex, Concord, Canada), equipped with DuoSprayTM Ion Source and a CDS (Calibrant Delivery System). The mass spectrometer worked in data dependent acquisition mode (DDA). Peptide profiling was performed using a 100–1300 Da mass range (TOF scan with an accumulation time of 100.0 ms), followed by an MS/MS product ion scan from 200 to 1250 Da (accumulation time of 5.0 ms) with the abundance threshold set at 30 cps (35 candidate ions can be monitored per cycle). The ion source parameters were set in electrospray positive mode as follows: curtain gas (N2) at 25 psig, nebulizer gas GAS1 at 25 psig and GAS2 at 20 psig, ion spray floating voltage (ISFV) at 5000 V, source temperature at 450 °C and declustering potential at 25 V (Cvijetic et al., 2017),(Martinotti et al., 2016).

### Data Protocol
The DDA files were searched using Mascot v. 2.4 (Matrix Science Inc., Boston, USA). Trypsin was specified as a digestion enzyme with 2 missed cleavages. The instrument was set at ESI-QUAD-TOF, and the following modifications were allowed for the search: carbamidomethylcysteins as  fixed modification and oxidized methionine as variable modification. A search tolerance of 50 ppm was specified for the peptide mass tolerance, and 0.1 Da for the MS/MS tolerance. The peptide charges searched for were set at 2+, 3+ and 4+, and the search was performed on monoisotopic mass. The unreviewed UniProt Swiss-Prot Bombyx mori database (version 2017.06.21, containing 18320 sequence entries) was used. Only proteins with at least four peptides with a peptide score > peptide identity were considered for identification purposes.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Bombyx mori

### Affiliations
University of Eastern Piedmont Department of Sciences and Technological Innovation, University of Piemonte Orientale, Italy ( lab head )
University of Eastern Piedmont 

### Submitter
Marcello Manfredi

### Lab Head
Dr Marcello Manfredi
University of Eastern Piedmont Department of Sciences and Technological Innovation, University of Piemonte Orientale, Italy ( lab head )


