### Accession
PXD037833

### Title
Exposure of Aspergillus fumigatus to Klebsiella pneumoniae culture filtrate inhibits  growth and stimulates gliotoxin production.

### Description
Aspergillus fumigatus is an opportunistic fungal pathogen of the lungs resulting in both chronic and acute infection. The fungus interacts with numerous bacteria that compose the microflora of the lung including Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Klebsiella pneumoniae, both common isolates from Cystic fibrosis sputum.  It is well documented that bacterial and fungal interactions both physically and through production of secreted products which can alter the growth and virulence of other species. The interaction with P. aeruginosa has been characterised previously indicating decreased growth and increased gliotoxin production in the presence of cells and the opposite when only exposed to culture filtrate. In our analysis exposure of cell free culture filtrate inhibited fungal growth and increased gliotoxin production. This was supported with proteomic analysis indicating reduction in 1,3-beta-glucanosyltransferase (-3.97 fold), methyl sterol monooxygenase erg25B (-2.9 fold) and Calcium/calmodulin dependent protein kinase (-4.2 fold) involved in fungal development. Coupled with increased expression of Glutathione S-transferase gliG (6.17 fold), non-ribosomal peptide synthase gliP (3.67 fold), O-methyltransferase gliM (3.5 fold), Gamma-glutamyl acyltransferase gliK (2.89 fold) and thioredoxin reductase gliT (2.33 fold) involved in Gliotoxin production indicate a possible shift towards secondary metabolism. Qualitative proteomic analysis of the bacterial supernatant also elucidates possible mechanisms for these alterations including physical interaction by Outer membrane protein A, High-affinity zinc uptake system protein ZnuA and Iron uptake system component EfeO reducing essential nutrient availability, enzymatic activity including Periplasmic serine endoprotease DegP-like and redox active proteins including Alkyl hydroperoxide reductase C. These proteomic alterations to the fungus could have implications for the severity of virulence in the context of coinfection and may impact disease progression.

### Sample Protocol
Flasks of A. fumigatus, control and klebsiella spiked were grown for 72 hours at 37°C in Czapek-Dox media with the Klebsiella group being supplemented at 24 hours with cell free supernatant and the control with PBS (n=3 per group). Hyphae were harvested by filtration, snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and ground to a fine dust in a mortar using a pestle. Lysis buffer [8 M urea, 2 M thiourea, and 0.1 M Tris-HCl (pH 8.0) dissolved in HPLC-grade dH2O], supplemented with protease inhibitors [aprotinin, leupeptin, pepstatin A, TLCK (10µgml−1) and PMSF (1mM/ml)] was added (4 ml/g of hyphae). The lysates were sonicated (Bandelin Senopuls), three times for 10 seconds at 50% power. The cell lysate was subjected to centrifugation (Eppendorf Centrifuge 5418) for 8 min at 14500g to pellet cellular debris. The protein concentration was quantified by the Bradford method and samples (100µg) were subjected to overnight acetone precipitation. Samples were subjected to centrifugation at 14,500g for 10 minutes to pellet proteins, acetone was removed, and the pellet was resuspended in 25 µl sample resuspension buffer (8 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 0.1 M Tris-HCl (pH 8.0) dissolved in HPLC-grade dH2O). A 2 µl aliquot was removed from each sample to quantify by the Qubit quantification system (Invitrogen). Ammonium bicarbonate (125 µl, 50mM) was added to the remaining samples which were subjected to reduction by addition of 1µl 0.5 M dithiothreitol and incubated at 56 °C for 20 minutes, followed by alkylation with 0.55 M iodoacetamide at room temperature, in the dark for 15 minutes. Proteins were digested by addition of 1 µl Sequence Grade Trypsin (Promega) (0.5µg/µl) supplemented with 1µl Protease Max Surfactant Trypsin Enhancer (Promega 1% w/v) and incubated at 37 °C for 18 hours. Digestion was quenched by addition of 1 µl TFA incubated at room temperature for 5 minutes. Samples were subjected to centrifugation at 14,500g for 10 minutes prior to clean-up using C18 spin columns (Pierce). The eluted peptides were dried using a SpeedyVac concentrator (Thermo Scientific Savant DNA120) and resuspended in 2%(v/v) acetonitrile and 0.05%(v/v) TFA aided by sonication for 5 minutes. The samples were centrifuged to pellet any debris at 14,500g for 5 minutes and 2ul from each sample was loaded onto the Mass spectrometer. Purified peptide extracts (750ng protein) were loaded onto a Q Exactive Mass Spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) using a 133-min reverse-phase gradient as per previous methods (Margalit et al., 2020). Raw MS/MS data files were processed through the Andromeda search engine in MaxQuant software v.1.6.3.4 110 using a Neosartorya fumigata reference proteome obtained from a UniProt-SWISS-PROT database to identify proteins (9647 entries, downloaded July 2022). Search parameters were followed as described (Margalit et al., 2020).

### Data Protocol
Perseus v.1.6.15.0 (www.maxquant.net/) was used for analysis, processing and visualisation of data. Normalized LFQ intensity values were used as the quantitative measurement of protein abundance. The data matrix generated was filtered to remove contaminants and peptides were identified by site. LFQ intensity values were log2 transformed and each sample was assigned to its corresponding group (Wildtype and Klebsiella spiked). Proteins not found in all replicates in at least one group were omitted from further analysis. A data-imputation step was conducted to replace missing values with values that simulate signals of low-abundance proteins chosen randomly from a distribution specified by a downshift of 1.8 times the mean standard deviation of all measured values and a width of 0.3 times this standard deviation. Principle component analysis (PCA) was plotted using normalised intensity values. The proteins identified were then defined using a Perseus annotation file (downloaded July 2022) to assign extract terms for biological process, molecular function and Kyoto Encyclopaedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) name. To visualize differences between two samples, pairwise Student’s t-tests were performed for all using a cut-off of P<0.05 on the post-imputated dataset. Volcano plots were generated by plotting the Log2 fold change on the x axis against the log p values on the y axis for each pairwise comparison. Statistically significant and differentially abundant (SSDA) proteins (ANOVA, p < 0.05) with a relative fold-change greater than ± 1.5 were retained for analysis. SSDA proteins were z-score normalised and then used for hierarchical clustering to produce a heat map. Identified SSDAs could then be assessed using Uniprot codes generated by Perseus to gain insight into the effect secreted K. pneumoniae products impact fungal development.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Aspergillus fumigatus</i> is an opportunistic fungal pathogen capable of inducing chronic and acute infection in susceptible patients. <i>A. fumigatus</i> interacts with numerous bacteria that compose the microbiota of the lung, including <i>Pseudomonas aeruginosa</i> and <i>Klebsiella pneumoniae</i>, both of which are common isolates from cystic fibrosis sputum. Exposure of <i>A. fumigatus</i> to <i>K. pneumoniae</i> culture filtrate reduced fungal growth and increased gliotoxin production. Qualitative proteomic analysis of the <i>K. pneumoniae</i> culture filtrate identified proteins associated with metal sequestering, enzymatic degradation and redox activity, which may impact fungal growth and development. Quantitative proteomic analysis of <i>A. fumigatus</i> following exposure to <i>K. pneumoniae</i> culture filtrate (25% <i>v</i>/<i>v</i>) for 24 h revealed a reduced abundance of 1,3-beta-glucanosyltransferase (-3.97 fold), methyl sterol monooxygenase erg25B (-2.9 fold) and calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase (-4.2 fold) involved in fungal development, and increased abundance of glutathione S-transferase GliG (+6.17 fold), non-ribosomal peptide synthase GliP (+3.67 fold), O-methyltransferase GliM (+3.5 fold), gamma-glutamyl acyltransferase GliK (+2.89 fold) and thioredoxin reductase GliT (+2.33 fold) involved in gliotoxin production. These results reveal that exposure of <i>A. fumigatus</i> to <i>K. pneumoniae</i> in vivo could exacerbate infection and negatively impact patient prognosis.

### Keywords
Klebsiella, Aspergillus, Polymicrobial interaction, Proteomics, Gliotoxin

### Affiliations
Medical Mycology Laboratory, Department of Biology, Maynooth University
Maynooth Univeristy 

### Submitter
Aaron Curtis

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Kevin Kavanagh
Medical Mycology Laboratory, Department of Biology, Maynooth University


