### Accession
PXD024316

### Title
ACONITASE 3 is post-translationally controlled in response to mitochondrial stress signals in Arabidopsis

### Description
Mitochondria are tightly embedded within metabolic and regulatory networks that optimize plant performance upon environmental challenges. The best-known mitochondrial retrograde signaling pathway involves stress-induced activation of the transcription factor ANAC017, which mediates the onset of protective responses upon stress-induced mitochondrial dysfunction in Arabidopsis. Post-translational control of the elicited responses, in contrast, remains poorly understood. Previous studies linked protein phosphatase 2A subunit PP2A-B’γ, a key negative regulator of stress responses, with reversible phosphorylation of ACONITASE 3 (ACO3). Here we report on ACO3 and its phosphorylation at Ser91 as regulatory components induced by mitochondrial dysfunction. Targeted mass spectrometry-based proteomics revealed that the abundance and phosphorylation of ACO3 increased under stress, and that this required signaling through ANAC017. Phosphomimetic mutation at ACO3-Ser91 and the accumulation of ACO3S91D-YFP, in turn, promoted the expression of stress related genes and ACO3 function associated with plant tolerance against UV-B or antimycin A-induced mitochondrial dysfunction. These findings positioned ACO3 both as a target and modulator of mitochondrial dysfunction signaling, critical in the attainment of stress tolerance in Arabidopsis leaves.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples from 4-week-old Arabidopsis rosettes growth in 8/16 hour light/dark period under 120 μmol photons m-2s-1 at 23oC and 50% relative humidity untreated or treated with UV-B with Philips Broadband ultraviolet-B lamp (TL20W/12 RS, Philips) at an irradiance of 1.5 W m-2 for 45 minutes coinciding with the light period midday (i.e. 4 hours into the light period) and collected 24 hours after. Protein was isolated by grinding the leaf material in 50 mM HEPES KOH pH 7.8, 10 mM MgCl2 supplemented with protease (Complete-Mini, Roche) and phosphatase (PhosSTOP, Roche) inhibitor cocktails. Protein was isolated by grinding the leaf material in 50 mM HEPES KOH pH 7.8, 10 mM MgCl2 supplemented with protease (Complete-Mini, Roche) and phosphatase (PhosSTOP, Roche) inhibitor cocktails. Samples consisting of 25 µg of protein were prepared for MS analysis as described in Trotta et al., 2019. The trypsin-digested samples were first spiked with iRT peptides (Biognosys) according to the manufacturer´s instructions and analyzed in Data Dependent Acquisition (DDA) mode, selecting the top 20 most intense precursors in each scan (m/z 300 – 2000) for higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation with an exclusion window of 12 seconds. The analysis was performed in a nanoflow HPLC system (EasyNanoLC1000, Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a 20 x 0.1 mm i.d. pre-column combined with a 150 mm x 75 µm i.d. analytical column, both packed with 5 µm Reprosil C18-bonded silica (Dr Maisch GmbH) and injection to an electrospray ionization (ESI) source coupled to a Q‐Exactive (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer. The mobile phase consisted of water/acetonitrile (ACN) (98:2 (v/v)) with 0.1% formic acid (FA) (v/v) (solvent A) or ACN/water (80:20 (v/v)) with 0.1% FA (v/v) (solvent B) at a flow rate of 300 nL min−1. The peptides were separated by a three-step elution gradient: from 3% to 43% solvent B in 45 minutes, followed by an increase to 100% in 5 minutes and 10 minutes of 100% solvent B. In parallel, foliar extracts consisting of 100 µg of protein were separated on a 10% SDS-PAGE gel and a protein band migrating at the Arabidopsis aconitases molecular weight (100 kDa) was excised and processed and analyzed by MS in the same way.

### Data Protocol
Tandem MS spectra were searched in Proteome Discoverer 2.3 (Thermo Scientific) with a non-redundant Arabidopsis proteome (TAIR10, www.arabidopsis.org) appended with the most common contaminants using Mascot (v. 2.7; Matrix Science). Monoisotopic mass, a maximum of two missed cleavages, 10 ppm precursor mass tolerance, 0.02 Da fragment mass tolerance and charge ≥ 2 + were the settings used for the searches. Additionally, methionine oxidation and serine, threonine and tyrosine phosphorylation were considered as variable modifications and cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed. Identification confidence was validated through PhosphoRS filter and Decoy Database Search using 0.01% (strict) and 0.05% (relaxed) false discovery rate (FDR) confidence thresholds. These data were used for construction of a reference library for the performance of label-free quantification of ACO1, ACO2 and ACO3 by PRM. Three proteotypic peptides per protein were selected from the reference library avoiding peptides with potential post-translational modifications (PTMs). PRM analysis was performed in a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using the same elution gradient described above. These data were used for construction of a reference library for the performance of label-free quantification of Arabidopsis aconitases(ACONITASE 1 (ACO1, AT4G35830), ACONITASE 2 (ACO2, AT4G26970) and ACONITASE 3 (ACO3, AT2G05710))by parallel reaction monitoring (PRM).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Post-translational regulation, Aconitase, Mitochondrial dysfunction response

### Affiliations
2Organismal and Evolutionary Biology Research Programme, Faculty of Biological and Environmental Sciences, University of Helsinki, FI-00014 Helsinki, Finland Department of Agricultural Sciences, Faculty of Agriculture and Forestry, University of Helsinki, FI-00014 Helsinki, Finland
University of Turku

### Submitter
Jesús Pascual 

### Lab Head
Dr Saijaliisa Kangasjärvi
2Organismal and Evolutionary Biology Research Programme, Faculty of Biological and Environmental Sciences, University of Helsinki, FI-00014 Helsinki, Finland Department of Agricultural Sciences, Faculty of Agriculture and Forestry, University of Helsinki, FI-00014 Helsinki, Finland


