### Accession
PXD013979

### Title
Rapid and culture free identification of Francisella in hare carcasses by high-resolution mass spectrometry

### Description
Zoonotic pathogens that can be transmitted via food to humans have a high potential for large-scale emergencies, comprising severe effects on public health, critical infrastructures, and the economy. In this context, the development of laboratory methods to rapidly detect zoonotic bacteria in the food supply chain, including high-resolution mass spectrometry are needed. In this work, an optimized sample preparation method for liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) based proteome profiling was established for Francisella isolates and a cluster analysis, as well as a phylogenetic tree, was calculated to shed light on evolutionary relationships. Furthermore, this method was applied to tissues of infected hare carcasses from Germany. Even though the non-informative data outnumbered by a manifold the information of the zoonotic pathogen in the resulting proteome profiles, the standardized evaluation of MS data within an established automated analysis pipeline identified F. tularensis and thus is in principle an applicable method to monitor food supply chains.

### Sample Protocol
Comparison of LC-MS sample preparation protocols for F. tularensis The trichloroacetic acid (TCA) extraction protocol:  The samples were prepared according to the TCA protocol as reported previously. In brief, 40 µg protein of each sample was pelleted for 10 min at 21,130 x g and resuspended in 0.5 mL 20% TCA (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) solution in water. After incubation for 24 hours at -20°C, the samples were thawed and pelleted for 10 min at 21,130 x g at 4°C. The pellets were washed twice in 200 µL ice-cold (-20°C) acetone (VWR, Radnor, PA), the supernatant was discarded and the pellets were dried under the fume hood. The dried pellets were resuspended for 1 hour at 60°C and 400 rpm in 100 µL lysis buffer containing 6 M urea (GE Healthcare, Chicago, IL), 14.3 mM 2-mercaptoethanol (Roth, Karlsruhe, Germany) in 50 mM Tris/HCl (pH 8.5), followed by an ultrasonic treatment until complete resuspension of the pellets. 20 µL of each protein lysate was digested in a total volume of 150 µL - containing 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma-Aldrich) in water, 400 ng trypsin (Roche, Basel, Switzerland) and 400 ng Lys C (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA) - for 4 hours at 37°C and 300 rpm. The peptides were desalted by C18 solid phase tips (Thermo Scientific) for subsequent LC-MS analysis. iST kit (PreOmics, Martinsried, Germany):  The iST kit (PreOmics) was used according to the manufacturer´s protocol (pelleted cells & precipitated protein, v. 2.5). For this purpose, 8 µg of each sample was pelleted for 10 min at 21,130 x g and the digestion was performed for 4 hours. Proteome profiling of Francisella isolates For every strain, 30 µg protein was processed according to the above-mentioned iST kit and about 1 µg of the digest was injected for nano-LC-MS analysis. Sample preparation of hare tissues 10 mg of each tissue was homogenized under denaturing conditions with a FastPrep (twice for 60 s, 6,5 m x s-1; MP Biomedicals, Santa Ana, CA) in a buffer containing 1% (w/v) sodium deoxycholate, 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride and 40 mM 2-chloroacetamide in 100 mM Tris/HCl (pH 8.5) (all purchased from Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO). Following homogenization, the samples were centrifuged for 1 min (4°C, 150 x g) and subsequently boiled for 10 min at 95°C and 1,000 rpm in a Thermo Mixer (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany). The samples were transferred into new tubes and sonicated for 2 minutes twice (UP200St, Hielscher Ultrasonics, Teltow, Germany). For each replicate, a total protein amount of 30 µg was digested with the iST kit (PreOmics) according to the manufacturer´s protocol with the modification that the lysis was performed using the FastPrep. In order to reduce sample complexity, a three-step fractionation was carried out. The first fraction was eluted with 100 µL SDB-RPSx1 (100 mM ammonium formate, (AF, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Dallas, TX), 40% ACN, and 0.5% FA in water), the second fraction with 100 µL SDB-RPSx2 (150 mM AF, 60% ACN, and 0.5% FA in water), and the third fraction was eluted with the elution buffer from the iST kit for 3 minutes at 3,800 x g each. All eluates were dried in a vacuum concentrator and dissolved in 60 µl 5% ACN, 2% FA, briefly vortexed and sonicated in a water bath for 2 minutes. After centrifugation for 5 minutes at 16,000 x g, 6 µL per fraction was injected for nano-LC-MS analysis. For further information see the method part of our manuscript.

### Data Protocol
Comparison of LC-MS sample preparation protocols for F. tularensis The RAW MS data were processed with the MaxQuant software (v.1.5.3.30) to search against a F. tularensis database obtained from UniProtKB with 19,197 entries, released in 10/2017. Mass spectra were searched by MaxQuant default settings for the iST protocol and no fixed modifications for the TCA protocol. For further information see the method part of our manuscript.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phylogenetic analysis, Proteome profiling, High-resolution mass spectrometry, Detection of pathogens, Francisella tularensis

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics
Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics,  Mass Spectrometry Facility

### Submitter
Natalie Witt

### Lab Head
Dr David Meierhofer
Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics,  Mass Spectrometry Facility


