### Accession
PXD022969

### Title
Mycobacterium tuberculosis H2S functions as a sink to modulate central metabolism, bioenergetics, and drug susceptibility

### Description
H2S is a potent gasotransmitter in eukaryotes and bacteria.  Host-derived H2S was shown to profoundly alter M. tuberculosis (Mtb) energy metabolism and growth.  However, compelling evidence for endogenous production of H2S and its role in Mtb physiology is lacking.  We show that multi-drug-resistant and drug-susceptible clinical Mtb strains produce H2S, whereas H2S production in non-pathogenic M. smegmatis is barely detectable.  We identified Rv3684 (Cds1) as an H2S-producing enzyme in Mtb and show that cds1 disruption reduces, but does not eliminate H2S production, suggesting the involvement of multiple genes in H2S production.  We identified endogenous H2S to be an effector molecule that maintains bioenergetic homeostasis by regulating respiration.  Importantly, H2S plays a key role in central metabolism by modulating the balance between oxidative phosphorylation and glycolysis, and functions as a sink to recycle sulfur atoms back to cysteine to maintain sulfur homeostasis.  Lastly, Mtb-generated H2S regulates redox homeostasis and susceptibility to the anti-TB drugs clofazimine and rifampicin.  These findings reveal previously unknown facets of Mtb physiology and have implications for routine laboratory culturing, understanding drug susceptibility, and improved diagnostics.

### Sample Protocol
The entire Bi2S3 stained protein band was excised from the gel, rinsed with water and cut into approximately 1 mm x 4mm pieces using a sterile scalpel.  The gel slices were then rinsed with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution and collectively transferred into a sterile Eppendorf® LoBind 1.5 ml microcentrifuge tube.  500 µl of acetonitrile (ACN) was added and the sample was incubated on ice for 10 min.  The sample was then briefly centrifuged, the acetonitrile removed and 100 µl of 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) solution was added to rehydrate the gel pieces and reduce the proteins.  The sample was incubated in 10 mM DTT solution at 56 °C for 30 min, removed, cooled to room temperature and then 500 µl of ACN was added and the sample was incubated on ice for 10 min.  The sample was then centrifuged and the supernatant removed, then 100 µl of 55 mM iodoacetamide solution was added and the sample was incubated at room temperature for 30 min in the dark to facilitate protein alkylation.  Following alkylation, 500 µl of ACN was added and the sample was incubated on ice for 10 min.  All solution was then removed and 200 µl of trypsin (Promega, sequence grade) solution at a concentration of 13 ng/ml was added to the gel slices, the sample was mixed gently and incubated at 4 °C for 2 h to allow the gel slices to re-hydrate and slow diffusion of trypsin into the polyacrylamide gel matrix.  The samples were incubated in the trypsin solution at 37 °C, overnight (18-24 h) for optimum in-gel protein digestion.  The resulting peptides were extracted by adding 400 µl of 5% formic acid/acetonitrile (1:2, v/v) solution to the sample followed by 15 min incubation at 37 °C on a shaking heating block set at 450 rpm.  The sample was briefly centrifuged, the solution transferred to a sterile Eppendorf® LoBind microcentrifuge tube, and the sample dried using a SpeedVac concentrator (Labconco, USA) set at 40 °C.  The dried, extracted peptides were then reconstituted in 50 µl of 5% formic acid solution, transferred to a glass vial and 1 µl of sample was injected for nano-LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The peptide digests were analyzed using a Thermo Q Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer coupled to a Dionex UltiMate 3000 UPLC system.  The tryptic peptides were maintained at 6 °C in the autosampler and were separated on a 15 cm nano capillary column (ID 75 μM) packed in the laboratory with Supelco 3.5 μM C18 stationary phase.  A 45 min gradient from 1% acetonitrile, 99% water/0.1% formic acid, to 50% acetonitrile/water, 0.1% formic acid, flow rate 300 nl/min, was used for the analysis.  Peptide fragment mass spectra were acquired using a full MS, data dependent MS2 Top 10 method.  The MS RAW files were processed using Thermo Scientific™ Proteome Discoverer™ 2.2 software and SEQUEST™ peak-finding search engine application to compare the mass spectra to the Mtb FASTA database to identify relevant proteins and peptides.  The method was set to consider carbamidomethyl modifications and methionine oxidation.  The protein candidates were then screened for pyridoxal phosphate binding domains and potential roles in sulfur metabolism.  A targeted method was constructed using the 5 strongest peptide fragment ions for the most likely candidate, Rv3684/Cds1, and the samples re-analyzed using this method to confirm the presence of this protein.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, H2s

### Affiliations
Africa Health Research Institute
1. Africa Health Research Institute, Durban, South Africa 2. 3Department of Microbiology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA 3. Center for AIDS Research and Center for Free Radical Biology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA

### Submitter
Tafara Kunota

### Lab Head
Dr Adrie J.C. Steyn
1. Africa Health Research Institute, Durban, South Africa 2. 3Department of Microbiology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA 3. Center for AIDS Research and Center for Free Radical Biology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA


