### Accession
PXD005200

### Title
Comprehensive and at copy number resolution analysis of the red blood cells proteome unravels unexpected membrane transporters

### Description
Red blood cells (RBC) are the most abundant cell type in human body that are responsible not only for tissue transport of oxygen and carbon dioxide, but also for a range of other functions. RBC and, in particular, their plasma membrane have been extensively studied for many years. These investigations led to composite models of RBC membrane organization. During the past decade proteomic studies extended our knowledge on RBC composition, however these studies were, at their best, able to provide only semiquantitative insights. Here we report a large scale proteomic investigation of RBCs and their ‘white ghost’ membrane fraction. Our in depth analysis resulted in identification of 2,650 proteins of which we consistently quantified 990 proteins in the RBC membrane. We quantified 41 membrane transporter proteins spanning 5 orders of magnitude dynamic range. Some of these, including the drug transporter ABCA7 and choline transporters SLC44A1 and SLC44A2 were previously not reported for the RBC membrane. Comparison of protein copy number values assessed by proteomics showed a good correlation with literature data, however abundances of few proteins were not consistent with the classical references. Since we validated our data by a targeted analysis using labelled standards we suggest to consider some older reference data from a variety of biochemical approaches as inaccurate. Our study provide the first comprehensive and quantitative analysis of the RBCs which may have implications for studying erythrocyte structure, functions and disease.

### Sample Protocol
Sample aliquots containing 100 g total protein were processed using the MED FASP method.  The proteins were first overnight cleaved either using endoproteinase ArgC, or GluC, or LysC and in the second step digested with trypsin for 2h. The enzyme to protein ration was 1:50. Digestion with LysC and trypsin were carried out in 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5. For the cleavage with ArgC the buffer was supplemented with 10 mM MgCl2. The digestion with GluC was carried out in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate. All reactions were conducted at 37C. Aliquots containing 10 µg total peptide were concentrated to a volume of ~5 µL and were stored frozen at -20 C until mass spectrometric analysis.

### Data Protocol
The MS data were analyzed using MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3.14). Protein abundances were calculated from the spectral raw intensities using the 'Total Protein Approach".

### Publication Abstract
Red blood cells (RBCs) are the most abundant cell type in the human body. RBCs and, in particular, their plasma membrane composition have been extensively studied for many years. During the past decade proteomics studies have extended our knowledge on RBC composition; however, these studies did not provide quantitative insights. Here we report a large-scale proteomics investigation of RBCs and their "white ghost" membrane fraction. Samples were processed using the multienzyme digestion filter-aided sample preparation (MED-FASP) and analyzed using Q-Exactive mass spectrometer. Protein abundances were computed using the total protein approach (TPA). The validation of the data with stable isotope-labeled peptide-based protein quantification followed. Our in-depth analysis resulted in the identification of 2650 proteins, of which 1890 occurred at more than 100 copies per cell. We quantified 41 membrane transporter proteins spanning an abundance range of five orders of magnitude. Some of these, including the drug transporter ABCA7 and choline transporters SLC44A1 and SLC44A2, have not previously been identified in RBC membranes. Comparison of protein copy numbers assessed by proteomics showed a good correlation with literature data; however, abundances of several proteins were not consistent with the classical references. Because we validated our findings by a targeted analysis using labeled standards, our data suggest that some older reference data from a variety of biochemical approaches are inaccurate. Our study provides the first "in-depth" quantitative analysis of the RBC proteome and will promote future studies of erythrocyte structure, functions, and disease.

### Keywords
Fasp, Human red blood cell, "total protein approach"

### Affiliations
Max-Planck-Institute of Biochemistry Martinsried, Germany
Proteomics

### Submitter
Jacek Wisniewski

### Lab Head
Dr Jacek R Wisniewski
Max-Planck-Institute of Biochemistry Martinsried, Germany


