### Accession
PXD029029

### Title
Citrullinated epitopes identified on tumor MHC class II by peptide elution stimulate both regulatory and Th1 responses and require careful selection for optimal tumor therapy

### Description
In this manuscript, we outline the identification of citrullinated peptide epitopes presented on the surface of tumor cells that can be targeted for tumor therapy. Peptide elution from MHC is a useful tool in the identification of novel targets and has been used by many in immunotherapy strategies. Here we describe the identification of post-translationally modified citrullinated peptides through elution from MHC class II molecules.

### Sample Protocol
Tumors were dissociated and homogenized in lysis buffer consisting of 10 mM CHAPS (Panreac AppliChem) and one cOmpleteTM protease inhibitor cocktail tablet (Roche) in PBS. HLA-DP4 molecules were isolated from disaggregated tumor samples through immunoaffinity purification employing the pan-HLA-II-specific antibody Tü39 produced in house covalently linked to CNBr-activated sepharose (Sigma-Aldrich). The tumor lysate was passed over the affinity columns cyclically overnight at 4°C. Peptides were eluted with 0.2% TFA and subsequently separated from HLA molecular remnants by ultracentrifugation employing 10 kDa Amicon filter units (Merck Millipore). The eluate volume was reduced to approximately 50 μl by lyophilization, and the reduced peptide solution was purified and desalted in five times using ZipTipipette tips with C18 resin and 0.6 μl bed volume (Merck Millipore) and eluted in 32.5% ACN/0.2% TFA. Peptide fragments were then concentrated by vacuum centrifugation and supplemented with 1% ACN/0.05% TFA for mass spectrometric analysis. Peptides were separated by reversed-phase liquid chromatography (nanoUHPLC, UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano; Dionex) and analyzed in an online-coupled LTQ Orbitrap XL (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer. Three technical replicates, 5 μl each, per sample were injected onto a 75 μm x 2cm trapping column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC; Dionex) at 4 μl/min for 10 min. Peptide separation was performed at 50˚C and a flow rate of 175 nl/min on a 50 μm x 25 cm separation column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC; Dionex), applying a gradient ranging from 3 to 30% solvent B over the course of 90 min (solvent A: 99% H2O, 1% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid; solvent B: 20% H2O, 80% acetonitrile and 0.04% formic acid). Eluting peptides were analyzed on an LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer using a top five CID (collision-induced dissociation) fragmentation method. The mass range was limited to 300–1500 m/z with charge states 2+ and 5+ selected for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
MS data analysis was performed using the Sequest search algorithm embedded in the Proteome discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher). Fragment spectra were searched against the murine proteome as comprised in the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database (www.uniprot.org released 29.05.2015) followed by FDR estimation using the percolator algorithm (5% threshold). No cleavage specificity was selected, and methionine oxidation and arginine deamination (citrullination) were set as dynamic modifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Citrullinated epitopes, Mhc class ii, T cell responses

### Affiliations
Scancell Limited, Biodiscovery Institute, University Park, Science Road, Nottingham NG7 2RD.  University of Nottingham, Biodiscovery Institute, Division of Cancer and Stem Cells, University Park, Science Road, Nottingham NG7 2RD.
University of Tübingen, Interfaculty Institute for Cell Biology, Department of Immunology

### Submitter
Ana Marcu

### Lab Head
Dr Lindy G Durrant
Scancell Limited, Biodiscovery Institute, University Park, Science Road, Nottingham NG7 2RD.  University of Nottingham, Biodiscovery Institute, Division of Cancer and Stem Cells, University Park, Science Road, Nottingham NG7 2RD.


