### Accession
PXD001439

### Title
Mariprofundus ferrooxydans proteomic profile - membrane

### Description
A proteomic analysis of a redox active membrane fraction (doublet at >200 kDa) of Mariprofundus ferrooxydans, a chemolithoautotrophic, neutrophilic, iron-oxidizing Zetaproteobacterium.

### Sample Protocol
Cultures (total of 8 Liters) were harvested at late log phase by following the protocol in Barco and Edwards (2014). The cell-separation protocol is then followed per Barco and Edwards (2014) to remove stalks from cells. The pellet containing cells is resuspended in 5 mL of 0.5M NaCl/40mM Tris-Base buffer at pH 8.5 and sonicated for 10 cycles of 30 seconds pulses followed by 30 seconds of cooling using a Branson 450 Digital Sonifier (Branson Ultrasonics) to lyse the cells. The resulting protein extract was centrifuged at 14,000 x g for 10 minutes at 4 degrees C to pellet cell debris. The supernatant was loaded in 13 x 51 mm, thinwall, polyallomer tubes and centrifuged at 100,000 x g for two hours at 4 degrees C to fractionate between soluble (supernatant) and membrane proteins (pellet). The reddish pellet containing the membrane fraction was washed with 0.5M NaCl/40mM Tris-Base buffer for two additional ultracentrifugation cycles and was subsequently resuspended in 1 mL of 0.5% Ultrol Grade, n-Dodecyl-beta-D-maltoside to solubilize proteins.

### Data Protocol
Excised bands were trypsin-digested and submitted for LC-MS/MS analysis which involved a Thermo LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer equipped with an Eksigent Nanoliquid Chromatography 1-D plus system. The resulting MS/MS spectra were searched against the proteomes of Mariprofundus ferrooxydans strains PV-1 (Uniprot database) and M34 (IMG database) using Proteome Discoverer SEQUEST Daemon search engine.

### Publication Abstract
Microaerophilic, neutrophilic, iron-oxidizing bacteria (FeOB) grow via the oxidation of reduced Fe(II) at or near neutral pH, in the presence of oxygen, making them relevant in numerous environments with elevated Fe(II) concentrations. However, the biochemical mechanisms for Fe(II) oxidation by these neutrophilic FeOB are unknown, and genetic markers for this process are unavailable. In the ocean, microaerophilic microorganisms in the genus Mariprofundus of the class Zetaproteobacteria are the only organisms known to chemolithoautotrophically oxidize Fe and concurrently biomineralize it in the form of twisted stalks of iron oxyhydroxides. The aim of this study was to identify highly expressed proteins associated with the electron transport chain of microaerophilic, neutrophilic FeOB. To this end, Mariprofundus ferrooxydans PV-1 was cultivated, and its proteins were extracted, assayed for redox activity, and analyzed via liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry for identification of peptides. The results indicate that a cytochrome c4, cbb3-type cytochrome oxidase subunits, and an outer membrane cytochrome c were among the most highly expressed proteins and suggest an involvement in the process of aerobic, neutrophilic bacterial Fe oxidation. Proteins associated with alternative complex III, phosphate transport, carbon fixation, and biofilm formation were abundant, consistent with the lifestyle of Mariprofundus.

### Keywords
Iron oxidation autotrophic neutrophilic zetaproteobacteria

### Affiliations
University of Southern California
University of Southern California, Department of Biological Sciences, Marine Biology Program

### Submitter
Roman Barco

### Lab Head
Dr Katrina J. Edwards
University of Southern California, Department of Biological Sciences, Marine Biology Program


