### Accession
PXD005021

### Title
Human immunoglobulin heavy gamma chain polymorphisms: molecular confirmation of proteomic assessment

### Description
Immunoglobulin G (IgG) proteins are known for the huge diversity of the variable domains of their heavy and light chains, aimed at protecting each individual against foreign antigens. The IgG also harbor specific polymorphism concentrated in the CH2 and CH3-CHS constant regions located on the Fc fragment of their heavy chains. But this individual particularity relies only on a few amino acids among which some could make accurate sequence determination a challenge for mass spectrometry-based techniques. The purpose of the study was to bring a molecular validation of proteomic results by the sequencing of encoding DNA fragments. It was performed using ten individual samples (DNA and sera) selected on the basis of their Gm (gamma marker) allotype polymorphism in order to cover the main immunoglobulin heavy gamma (IGHG) gene diversity. Gm allotypes, reflecting part of this diversity, were determined by a serological method. On its side, the IGH locus comprises four functional IGHG genes totalizing 34 alleles and encoding the four IgG subclasses. The genomic study focused on the nucleotide polymorphism of the CH2 and CH3-CHS exons and of the intron. Despite strong sequence identity, four pairs of specific gene amplification primers could be designed. Additional primers were identified to perform the subsequent sequencing. The nucleotide sequences obtained were first assigned to a specific IGHG gene, and then IGHG alleles were deduced using a home-made decision tree reading of the nucleotide sequences. IGHG amino acid (AA) alleles were determined by mass spectrometry. Identical results were found at 95% between alleles identified by proteomics and those deduced from genomics. These results validate the proteomic approach which could be used for diagnostic purposes, namely for a mother-and-child differential IGHG detection in a context of suspicion of congenital infection.

### Sample Protocol
Samples collection: Plasma and corresponding DNA samples were obtained from a study on human genetic determinants of malaria that was performed in 2006-2007 in the south of Benin by the UMR 216. This study was conducted among 155 schoolchildren belonging mainly to the Fon ethnic group, and for the purpose of the present study, samples from 10 children were selected on the basis of their Gm allotype polymorphism, determined by a serological method.  Blood was collected into 5 mL EDTA Vacutainer® tubes and after centrifugation, plasma samples and isolated peripheral buffy coat were frozen at -20°C. Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood buffy-coats using the QIAamp DNA Blood Mini Kit (Qiagen GmbH, Hilden, Germany) (Brucato 2010).  Serological determination of G1m and G3m allotypes: Gm allotypes for G1m (1, 2, 3, 17) and G3m (5, 6, 10, 11, 13, 14, 15, 16, 21, 24, 28) determinants (Lefranc 2012) were analyzed in plasma samples by a qualitative standard hemagglutination inhibition method (Field 1989). Whereas G3m28 is a marker of the gamma 3 chains in Caucasian and Asian populations, Gm28 is often present on the gamma 1 chains in African populations (van Loghem 1982). In brief, human blood group O Rh (D) erythrocytes were coated with anti-Rh (D) antibodies of known Gm allotypes. Plasma sample and reagent monospecific anti-allotype antibodies were added. Plasma containing IgG with a particular Gm allotype inhibited hemagglutination by the corresponding reagent anti-allotype antibody, whereas plasma sample that was negative for this allotype did not.   Mass spectrometry (MS) analysis of IGHG tryptic peptides: Sample preparation: For each sample, total IgG was purified by injecting 200 µl of plasma into a Protein G column (Protein G Sepharose HP SpinTrap, GE Healthcare, France) which presents high affinity for the Fc fragment of all IgG subclasses. Following manufacturer’s instructions, antibody binding was performed at neutral pH, elution was performed by lowering the pH, and the eluted material was collected in neutralization buffer to preserve the integrity of acid-labile IgG. Dithiothreitol (DTT, 20 mM final) was added to 47 µl of purified samples for 30 minutes at 56°C in order to disrupt disulfide bonds. Proteolysis was performed by incubation with trypsin (Promega, France, 10 ng/µl final) for 3 hours at 37°C, and stopped with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, Pierce, France, 0.5% final).   Bottom-up LC-MS/MS analysis: Peptides were concentrated and separated by nano High-Performance Liquid Chromatography (nHPLC) hyphenated with an orbitrap mass spectrometer. 4µl of each sample were then analyzed in LC-MS/MS. Analyzes were realized using an RSLC Ultimate 3000 Rapid Separation liquid chromatographic system coupled to a hybrid Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Briefly, peptides were loaded and washed on a C18 reverse phase precolumn (3 µm particle size, 100 Angström pore size, 75 µm i.d., 2 cm length). The loading buffer contained 98% H2O, 2% ACN and 0.1% TFA. Peptides were then separated on a C18 reverse phase resin (2 µm particle size, 100 Angström pore size, 75 µm i.d.,15 cm length) with a 35 min “effective” gradient from 99% A (0.1% formic acid and 100% H2O) to 40% B (80% ACN, 0.085% formic acid and 20% H2O). The mass spectrometer acquired data throughout the elution process and operated in a data dependent scheme with full MS scans acquired in the orbitrap analyzer, followed by up to 15 MS/MS HCD spectra on the most abundant ions detected in the MS scan. Mass spectrometer settings were: full MS (AGC: 3.10e6, resolution: 70,000, m/z range 400-2000, maximum ion injection time: 100 ms); MS/MS (Normalised Collision Energy: 30, resolution: 17500, intensity threshold: 2.10e4, isolation window: 4.0 m/z, dynamic exclusion time setting: 12 s, AGC Target: 1.10e5 and maximum injection time: 100 ms). The fragmentation was permitted for precursor with a charge state of 2 to 4 excluding isotopes. The software used to generate .mgf files was Proteome discoverer 1.3.

### Data Protocol
3 FASTA-formatted protein databases were used in combination in order to assign a majority of fragmentation spectra despite a risk of IGHG entries redundance beetween the databases : 1- the Homo sapiens entries from the SwissProt database release 2016-02, 20,273  sequences, 2- the 2014 IMGT® IGHG allele http://www.imgt.org) (60 sequences; 20,789 residues), and 3- the individual databases of IGHG CH1,2,3 sequences from the 10 patients incorporated in this study supplied in supp data (59 sequences; 12,788 residues). Extracted peptides’ fragment masses lists were compared to the above databases using Mascot search engine 2.5.1 (Matrixscience). The following settings were applied: mass tolerances were 4 ppm for precursors and 10 mmu for fragments, a significance threshold score corresponding to p < 0.05 was applied to filter identifications but a minimum individual peptide Mascot score value of 25 excluded poorly annotated spectra. Based on these criteria, a non-targeted (bottom up) analysis of the samples was performed. In order to avoid possible ambiguities, the following restrictive conditions were applied: trypsin proteolysis’ specificity without missed cleavage, methionine partial modification by oxidation, assignment of each peptide to a unique IgG subclass and mass-to-charge (m/z) states of +2 and +3 retained. Under these conditions false positive rates were usually under 1%. Mascot searches resulted in protein groups sharing several peptides but showing specific peptides demonstrating thei presence. Class- allotype- and isotypes-specific peptide information were carefully collected.

### Publication Abstract
Immunoglobulin G (IgG) proteins are known for the huge diversity of the variable domains of their heavy and light chains, aimed at protecting each individual against foreign antigens. The IgG also harbor specific polymorphism concentrated in the CH2 and CH3-CHS constant regions located on the Fc fragment of their heavy chains. But this individual particularity relies only on a few amino acids among which some could make accurate sequence determination a challenge for mass spectrometry-based techniques.The purpose of the study was to bring a molecular validation of proteomic results by the sequencing of encoding DNA fragments. It was performed using ten individual samples (DNA and sera) selected on the basis of their Gm (gamma marker) allotype polymorphism in order to cover the main immunoglobulin heavy gamma (IGHG) gene diversity. Gm allotypes, reflecting part of this diversity, were determined by a serological method. On its side, the IGH locus comprises four functional IGHG genes totalizing 34 alleles and encoding the four IgG subclasses. The genomic study focused on the nucleotide polymorphism of the CH2 and CH3-CHS exons and of the intron. Despite strong sequence identity, four pairs of specific gene amplification primers could be designed. Additional primers were identified to perform the subsequent sequencing. The nucleotide sequences obtained were first assigned to a specific IGHG gene, and then IGHG alleles were deduced using a home-made decision tree reading of the nucleotide sequences. IGHG amino acid (AA) alleles were determined by mass spectrometry. Identical results were found at 95% between alleles identified by proteomics and those deduced from genomics. These results validate the proteomic approach which could be used for diagnostic purposes, namely for a mother-and-child differential IGHG detection in a context of suspicion of congenital infection.

### Keywords
Allele, Allotype, Imgt, Fc fragment, Newborn, Parasitic infection, Igg, Serological diagnosis, Mass spectrometry, Ighg

### Affiliations
UMR 216 “Mère et enfant face aux infections tropicales” Institut de Recherche pour le Développement / Université Paris Descartes, Faculté de Pharmacie, Paris, France.
ICO Angers

### Submitter
François GUILLONNEAU

### Lab Head
Dr Florence MIGOT-NABIAS
UMR 216 “Mère et enfant face aux infections tropicales” Institut de Recherche pour le Développement / Université Paris Descartes, Faculté de Pharmacie, Paris, France.


