### Accession
PXD029741

### Title
Proteomic study at low and optimum temperature in Pseudomonas sp. Lz4W using LC-MSMS

### Description
Proteomic analysis of an Antarctic bacterium Pseudomonas sp. Lz4W by tandem mass spectrometry to unveil the process of cold adaptation. Comparative whole proteome analysis was performed at Low and optimum temperature.

### Sample Protocol
Sample processing: Bacterial cells were grown and harvested at 4°C and 22°C, in early log phase, at 0.6 O.D600, by pelleting the culture, using eppendorf centrifuge -5801R at 8000 rpm for 20 minutes. Cell were re-suspended in lysis buffer (20mM Tris-Cl pH 8, 150mM NaCl and 2mM EDTA) along with PMSF, protease inhibitor cocktail and lysozyme. Sonication (3-5 cycles of 30 sec ON and 30 sec OFF, at medium frequency) was also performed using diagenode’s bioruptor plus sonication system, after incubation for enzymatic lysis. Cell debris was removed and supernatant was taken as whole cell Extract (WCE). Reduction and alkylation of cystine disulfide bond was performed by incubating the WCE with DTT and iodoacetamide at room temperature for 1 hr in dark. WCE was further fractionated into two fractions by ultracentrifugation using Beckman’s table top ultracentrifuge with TLA100.3 rotor, at 100,000Xg for 1 hour, supernatant as soluble fraction and pellet as insoluble fraction. Protein from the two fractions were run on SDS-PAGE and the gel band were subjected to in gel digestion. Proteomics grade, porcine pancreas purified trypsin from sigma was used for the digestion of protein. Tryptic digested peptides were extracted in 50% acetonitrile and 5% trifluoroacetic acid and were vacuum dried. Extracted peptides were desalted by using C18 resin based Zip-Tips. PepMapTM RSLC C18 column (75µm X 15 cm) with particle size 3µm and pore size of 100Ǻ was used for the separation of peptides on the basis of their hydrophobicity.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analysed using sequestHT in proteome discoverer for the spectra range of 350-5000 Da. Precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 0.6 Da was allowed. Mass spectra was analysed against Database of Pseudomonas sp Lz4W (BioProject: PRJNA170013 GeneBank Assembly Accession: GCA_000346225.2 Assembly name: ASM34622v2 Updated on 2017/12/07). During the search, Oxidation of methionine (15.99 Da) was kept as dynamic modification and carbamidomethylation of cysteine (57.02 Da) was kept as static modification. Label free quantification was performed using event detector and precursor ion area detector node in the work flow.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Low temperature 4°c, Optimum temperature 22°c, In-soluble fraction, Soluble fraction

### Affiliations
University of Hyderabad

### Submitter
Medicharla V. Jagannadham

### Lab Head
Dr Medicharla V. Jagannadham
University of Hyderabad


