### Accession
PXD012699

### Title
Establishment of a metaproteomics pipeline for marine particle associated microbial communities

### Description
Marine snow plays a central role in carbon cycling. It consists of organic particles and particle-associated (PA) microbMarine snow plays a central role in carbon cycling. It consists of organic particles and particle-associated (PA) microbial communities that are embedded in a sugary matrix. Metaproteomic analysis offers the unique opportunity to gain unprecedented insight into the microbial community composition and biomolecular activity of environmental samples. In order to realize this potential for marine PA microbial communities, new methods of protein extraction must be developed. In this study, we used 1D-SDS-PAGEs and LC-MS/MS to compare the efficiency of six established protein extraction protocols for their applicability of metaproteomic analyses of the PA microbial community in the North Sea. A combination of SDS-buffer extraction and bead beating resulted in the greatest number of identified protein groups. As expected, a metagenomic database of the same environmental sample increased the number of protein identification by approximately 50%. To demonstrate the application of our established protocol, particulate bacterioplankton samples collected during spring phytoplankton bloom in 2009 near the island Helgoland, were analysed by a GeLC-MS/MS-based metaproteomic approach. Our results indicated that there are only slight differences in the taxonomical distribution between free-living (FL) and PA bacteria but that the abundance of protein groups involved in polysaccharide degradation, motility and particle specific stress (oxygen limitation, nutrient limitation, heavy metal stress) is higher in the PA fractions. ial communities that are embedded in a sugary matrix. Metaproteomic analysis offers the unique opportunity to gain unprecedented insight into the microbial community composition and biomolecular activity of environmental samples. In order to realize this potential for marine PA microbial communities, new methods of protein extraction must be developed. In this study, we used 1D-SDS-PAGEs and LC-MS/MS to compare the efficiency of six established protein extraction protocols for the their applicability of metaproteomic analyses of the PA microbial community in the North Sea. A combination of SDS-buffer extraction and bead beating resulted in the greatest number of identified protein groups. As expected, a metagenomic database of the same environmental sample increased the number of protein identification by approximately 50%. To demonstrate the application of our established protocol, particulate bacterioplankton samples collected during spring phytoplankton bloom in 2009 near the island Helgoland, were analysed by a GeLC-MS/MS-based metaproteomic approach. Our results indicated that there are only slight differences in the taxonomical distribution between free-living (FL) and PA bacteria but that the abundance of protein groups involved in polysaccharide degradation, motility and particle specific stress (oxygen limitation, nutrient limitation, heavy metal stress) is higher in the PA fractions.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for the metaproteomic analysis was initiated by cutting the filters into thirds and subsequently into small pieces. The filter pieces of one thrid were transferred into 15 ml falcon tubes and mixed with 4 ml lysis buffer (0.1 M DTT, 0.01 M EDTA, 10% Glycerol (v/v), 1.7 mM PMSF, 5% SDS (w/v), 0.05 M Tris/HCl, pH 6.8) and 2 ml glass beads (0.1 – 0.11 mm diameter). The cells on the filter pieces were subsequently disrupted 4 x 30 s with 6.5 m/s via beat beating with a Fast Prep™-24 (MP Biomedicals, Eschwege, Germany). To remove the cell debris and the glass beads the samples were centrifuged for 20 min at 12 500 x g at 4 °C and the supernatant was transferred into new tubes. The glass beads were washed with 3 ml lysis buffer and vigorously shaken. This was repeated until the beads were colourless (2-4 x). Proteins enriched in the pooled supernatants were precipitated with 1:4 acetone at – 20 °C over night. Precipitated proteins were centrifuged for 20 min at 12 500 x g at 4 °C and the resulting protein pellets washed with ice-cold acetone and the pellets were combined. The resulting protein pellet was air-dried and resolved shaking in 200 µl of 8 M urea and 2 M thiourea containing buffer. The protein concentration was determined as described above and 30 µg of protein was loaded on a 1D-SDS-Page in 5 replicates. The above described protocol was followed. The protein lanes were cut into 20 gel pieces and the samples were treated according to the above described protocols for the MS-sample preparation.For the determination of the protein concentration the Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit (ThermoFisher Scientific) was used. The protein extracts were prepared with the Compat-Able™ Protein Assay Preparation Reagent Kit (ThermoFisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s guidelines.30 µg protein amount (separated into five replicates) or 30 µl protein extract was mixed with 4x SDS sample buffer (20% glycerol, 100 mM Tris/HCl, 10% (w/v) SDS, 5% β-mercaptoethanol, 0.8% bromphenol blue, pH 6.8) and loaded on TGX precast 4-20% gels (Biorad; Germany, Munich). Samples were separated by electrophoresis at a voltage of 150 V for 45 minutes. After fixation (10% acetic acid. 40% ethanol, 30 minutes) the gel was stained with Coomassie and imaged.The protein lanes were cut into 20 equal pieces and washed with a buffer containing 50 mM ammoniumbicarbonate and 30% (v/v) acetonitrile. For the tryptic digestion, the gel pieces were dried in a speedvac (Concentrator 5301; Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany) and re-swollen with 2 ng/ml trypsin solution (sequencing grade trypsin, Promega, Madisson WI, USA) followed by an overnight digestion at 37 °C. After the digestion the gel pieces were covered with water and the peptides were eluted from the gel in an ultrasonic bath. The eluted peptides in solution were desalted with C18 Millipore® ZipTip columns (Millipore, Billerica, USA) according to the manufacturer’s guidelines.For the analysis of the phosphorylated peptides, samples were measured online by LC - ESI -mass spectrometry using an Easy-LC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with self packed analytical columns (100 μm × 20 cm) containing C18 material and coupled to a LTQ Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Fisher Scientific). A 100 min gradient, using 0.1% (v/v) acetic acid as buffer A and 99.9% (v/v) ACN with 0.1% (v/v) acetic acid as buffer B was used, applying a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Full Scan at a resolution of 60,000, recorded in the Orbitrap analyzer, was followed by the analysis of the 20 most intense precursor ions (in the LTQ analyzer) according to data-dependent MS/MS mode.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometric data was subsequently subjected to database searching via Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.6.0). Mascot was set up to search the respectively stated database (02_plus_3_POMPU_nr97_fw_cont_20181015 database (1 463 571 entries), MIMAS_forward_reverse_all_contaminants database (1 579 724 entries); Uniprot_DoS_complete_20170829 database (2 638 314 entries) or NCBIprot_20171030 database (136 216 794 entries) assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin. Mascot was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.80 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 ppm. Oxidation of methionine was specified in Mascot as a variable modification. Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.8.7, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability by the Peptide Prophet algorithm (Keller et al., 2002) with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability and contained at least one identified peptide. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii et al., 2003). Proteins that contained similar peptides could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Peptides that were only found in one of the replicated were taken out of the following data analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Marine snow, Metaproteomics, Spring phytoplankton bloom

### Affiliations
University of Greifswald, Institute of Microbiology
university of Greifswald, institute of microbiology, department of microbial physiology and molecular biology

### Submitter
Daniela Zuehlke

### Lab Head
Dr Katharina Riedel
university of Greifswald, institute of microbiology, department of microbial physiology and molecular biology


