### Accession
PXD046692

### Title
A helicase-independent role of DHX15 promotes MYC stability and acute leukemia cell survival

### Description
DHX15 has been implicated in RNA splicing and ribosome biogenesis, primarily functioning as an RNA helicase. To systematically assess the cellular role of DHX15, we conducted proteomic analysis to investigate the landscape of DHX15 interactome, and identified MYC as a binding partner. DHX15 co-localizes with MYC in cells and directly interacts with MYC in vitro. Importantly, DHX15 contributes to MYC protein stability at the post-translational level and independent of its RNA binding capacity. Mechanistic investigation reveals that DHX15 interferes the interaction between MYC and FBXW7, thereby preventing MYC polyubiquitylation and proteasomal degradation. Consequently, abrogation of DHX15 drastically inhibits MYC-mediated transcriptional output. While DHX15 depletion blocks T-cell development and leukemia cell survival as we recently reported, overexpression of MYC significantly rescues the phenotypic defects. These findings shed new light on the essential role of DHX15 in mammalian cells and suggest that maintaining sufficient MYC expression is a significant contributor to DHX15-mediated cellular functions.

### Sample Protocol
Total cellular proteins extracted from CUTLL1 cells were subjected to immunoprecipitation using human DHX15 antibody (sc-271686, Santa Cruz). DHX15 and associated proteins were washed, and eluted with 0.2 M glycine pH 2.0. Eluted proteins were precipitated with acetone and digested with trypsin.

### Data Protocol
The resulting peptides were desalted with the C18 Stage tips (Thermo Fisher Scientific), loaded onto an EASY-nanoLC system and analyzed in an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer equipped with the FAIMS Pro interface (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Mass spectrometry resolutions were set to 60,000 and mass range was set to 350-1500. Raw files were processed with Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Publication Abstract
DHX15 has been implicated in RNA splicing and ribosome biogenesis, primarily functioning as an RNA helicase. To systematically assess the cellular role of DHX15, we conducted proteomic analysis to investigate the landscape of DHX15 interactome, and identified MYC as a binding partner. DHX15 co-localizes with MYC in cells and directly interacts with MYC <i>in&#xa0;vitro</i>. Importantly, DHX15 contributes to MYC protein stability at the post-translational level and independent of its RNA binding capacity. Mechanistic investigation reveals that DHX15 interferes the interaction between MYC and FBXW7, thereby preventing MYC polyubiquitylation and proteasomal degradation. Consequently, the abrogation of DHX15 drastically inhibits MYC-mediated transcriptional output. While <i>DHX15</i> depletion blocks T&#xa0;cell development and leukemia cell survival as we recently reported, overexpression of MYC significantly rescues the phenotypic defects. These findings shed light on the essential role of DHX15 in mammalian cells and suggest that maintaining sufficient MYC expression is a significant contributor to DHX15-mediated cellular functions.

### Keywords
Leukemia, Myc, Dhx15, Protein stability, Rna helicase

### Affiliations
Frontier Science Center for Immunology and Metabolism, Medical Research Institute, Wuhan University, Wuhan, Hubei 430071, China
Wuhan  university

### Submitter
Qilong Li

### Lab Head
Dr qilong li
Frontier Science Center for Immunology and Metabolism, Medical Research Institute, Wuhan University, Wuhan, Hubei 430071, China


