### Accession
PXD046638

### Title
Combining metabolic flux analysis with proteomics to shed light on the metabolic flexibility: the case of Desulfovibrio vulgaris Hildenborough

### Description
Desulfovibrio vulgaris Hildenborough is a gram-negative anaerobic bacterium belonging to the sulfate-reducing bacteria, a group of microbes that can perform dissimilatory sulfate reduction coupled to the oxidation of various substrates as carbon and energy sources. In the absence of sulfate, they can also ferment organic acids in syntrophy with methanogens. They exhibit high metabolic diversity switching from one energy mode to another depending on nutrients availability in the environments. Hence, they play a central role in shaping ecosystems. Despite, intensive efforts to study D. vulgaris energy metabolism at the genomic, biochemical and ecological level, bioenergetics in this microorganism remains far from being fully understood. Alternatively, few metabolic models were also proposed to explain D. vulgaris bioenergetics. However, they appeared to be not easily adaptable to various environmental conditions. To lift off these limitations, here we constructed a new transparent and robust metabolic model of D. vulgaris bioenergetics by combining whole-cell proteomic analysis with modeling approaches (Flux Balance Analysis). The iDvu71 model showed over 0.95 correlation with experimental data. Further simulations allowed a detailed description of D. vulgaris metabolism in various conditions of growth. Altogether, the simulations run in this study highlighted the sulfate-to-lactate consumption ratio as a pivotal factor in D. vulgaris energy metabolism. In particular, the impact on the hydrogen/formate balance and biomass synthesis is discussed. Overall, this study provides a novel insight into D. vulgaris metabolic flexibility.

### Sample Protocol
D. vulgaris Hildenborough growth condition: Pure cultures of D. vulgaris Hildenborough were typically grown at 37 °C under anaerobic conditions to mid-exponential phase in Hungate tubes in Starkey (SKY) medium containing 0.5 g L-1 K2HPO4; 2 g L-1 NH4Cl; 2 g L-1 MgSO4, 7·H2O; 4 g L-1 Na2SO4; 1 g L-1 yeast extract (Difco laboratories), 3 6 g.L-1 sodium lactate (adapted from Starkey, R. L. 1948. Characteristics and cultivation of sulfate reducing bacteria. J. Am. Water Works Assoc. 40:1291-1298); 1 mL L-1 trace elements (10.75 g L-1  MgO; 2 g L-1  CaCO3; 6.2 g L-1  FeSO4, 7·H2O; 1.44 g L-1  ZnSO4, 7·H2O; 0.84 g L-1  MnSO4, 7·H2O; 0.25 g L-1  CuSO4, 5·H2O; 0.9 g L-1  CoSO4, 7·H2O; 0.06 g L-1  BO3H3; 1 g L-1  Mo7O24(NH4)6, 4·H2O; 0.04 g L-1  Ni(NO3)2, 6·H2O; 0.02 g L-1  Na2SeO3 adapted from  doi.org/10.1128/aem.46.5.1152-1156.1983, 0.0001 % β-Mercaptoethanol  and buffered to pH 7.2 with NaCl. For proteomic analysis, DvH were grown in 1 L Duran bottle containing 700 mL SKY medium.Samples preparation and global proteomic analysis Samples for proteomic analysis were obtained by harvesting 1 L cell culture by centrifugation at 3000 x g for 20 min. The cell pellet (0.46 g wet weight) was resuspended with 10 mmol L-1 Tris/HCl pH 7.6, 5 mmol ethylenediaminetetraacetate (EDTA) (buffer A) supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail (SigmaFast tablets) and cells were broken by three passages through a cell disruptor (Constant system Ltd., Northants, UK) at 1.6 Kbar. Unbroken cells and cell debris were removed by centrifugation at 12,000 x g, 4 °C, for 15min, soluble and membrane fractions were separated by ultracentrifugation at 150,000 x g, 4°C for 45 min. Proteins (10 mg mL-1) from the membrane fractions were solubilized in buffer A, supplemented with 10 % (v/v) glycerol and 1 % (w/v) n-Dodecyl-β-D-maltoside (DDM) at 4 °C for 1 hour. Unsolubilized proteins were removed by ultracentrifugation as described previously. The total proteins in the soluble and membrane fractions were identified by shotgun proteomics as described in doi.org/10.3390/life13030627. Briefly, samples (40 μg) were loaded on a denaturing stacking gel (5 % acrylamide), ran for approximately 10 min at 25 mA and 250 V, then stained with Coomassie blue. The protein band visible in the stacking gel was cut out from the gel and stored at −20 °C before LC-MS/MS analysis. Stacking gels for soluble and membrane protein fractions were performed in triplicate, digested, analyzed on a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) and data processed by Proteome Discoverer (ThermoFisher, version: 2.4.1.15) as previously described according to Prioretti et al (2023, doi.org/10.3390/life13030627), except some minor modifications such as digestion performed with Trypsin/Lys C protease (Promega).

### Data Protocol
The spectra were processed by Proteome Discoverer software (ThermoFisher, version: 2.4.1.15) using the Sequest HT algorithm with the search following settings: Desulfovibrio vulgaris Hildenborough (taxonomy ID 882)  from Uniprot (version 2021-02-04); trypsin enzyme (maximum 2 missed cleavages); fixed modification: carbamidomethyl (Cys); variable modification: oxidation (Met); mass values specific for monoisotopic; precursor mass tolerance: ± 10 ppm; fragment mass tolerance: ± 0.02 Da. Peptide validation was based on score threshold  at maximum Delta Cn 0.05. Proteins were identified if minimum 2 unique peptide sequences more than 6 amino acids passed the high confidence filter. For each replicate, results from soluble and membrane fractions were then combined as a single file Raw data  For Membrane fractions :  005_PI_Mb1 for “ sample 1” in SDRF file 009_PI_M1 for “sample 2” in SDRF file 009_PI_M2 for “sample 3” in SDRF file For soluble fractions :  005_PI_sol1 for “sample 4” in SDRF file 009_PI_ S1  for “sample 5” in SDRF file 009_PI_ S2  for “sample 6” in SDRF file Processed data: Data from 005_PI_Mb1 for “ sample 1” and 005_PI_sol1 for “sample 4” were combined as COMBINE_005_PI_Mb1&Sol1 (as Replicate 1) Data from 009_PI_M1 for “sample 2”  and 009_PI_ S1  for “sample 5” were combined as COMBINE_009_PI_S1&M1 (as Replicate 2) Data from 009_PI_M2 for “sample 3” and 009_PI_ S2  for “sample 6” were combined as COMBINE_009_PI_S2&M2 (as Replicate 3)

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sulfate respiration, Flux balance analysis, Proteomic, Hydrogen metabolism, Metabolic model, Desulfovibrio vulgaris hildenborough, Metabolic flexibility, Formate metabolism

### Affiliations
CNRS
Proteomic Platform of Institut de Microbiologie de la Mediterranee CNRS FR 3479 Marseille Proteomique

### Submitter
Regine Lebrun

### Lab Head
Dr Lebrun Regine
Proteomic Platform of Institut de Microbiologie de la Mediterranee CNRS FR 3479 Marseille Proteomique


