### Accession
PXD032217

### Title
Effects of hypoxia on antigen presentation and T cell-based immune recognition of HPV16-transformed cells

### Description
Attempts to develop a therapeutic vaccine against human papillomavirus (HPV)-induced malignancies have not been clinically successful to date. One reason may be the hypoxic microenvironment present in most tumors, including cervical cancer. Hypoxia dysregulates the levels of human leukocyte antigen (HLA) class I molecules in different tumor entities, impacts function of cytotoxic T cells, and leads to decreased protein levels of the oncoproteins E6 and E7 in HPV-transformed cells. Therefore, we investigated the effect of hypoxia on the presentation of HPV16 E6- and E7-derived epitopes in cervical cancer cells and its effect on epitope-specific T cell cytotoxicity. Hypoxia induced downregulation of E7 protein levels in all analyzed cell lines, as assessed by Western blotting. However, contrary to previous reports, no perturbation of antigen presentation machinery (APM) components and HLA-A2 surface expression upon hypoxia treatment was detected by mass spectrometry and flow cytometry, respectively. Cytotoxicity assays performed in hypoxic conditions showed differential effects on the specific killing of HPV16-positive cervical cancer cells by epitope-specific CD8+ T cell lines in a donor- and peptide-specific manner. Effects of hypoxia on the expression of PD-L1 were ruled out by flow cytometry analysis. Altogether, our results suggest an intact APM, and cytotoxicity despite the decreased expression of E6 and E7, suggesting that successful immunotherapies can be developed for HPV-induced cervical cancer, especially if combined with hypoxia-alleviating measures.

### Sample Protocol
Lysates prepared from controls and HPV16-transformed cell lines using RIPA lysis buffer wereprocessed for LC-MS/MS analysis with SP3.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant software was used for data analysis using an organism specific database extracted from Uniprot.org under default settings (27). Peptide and protein level identification FDR cutoffs were 0.01 each. Match between runs option was enabled to transfer peptide identifications across Raw files based on accurate retention time and m/z. The MaxLFQ algorithm was used for quantification using a label free quantification method (28). A minimum of 2 quantified peptides per protein was required for protein quantification. The R-package limma was used for statistical analysis (29). Protein groups with non-zero intensity values in 70% of the samples of at least one of the conditions were used for statistical analysis. For imputation of missing values, the setup with a down-shift of 1.8 standard deviation (SD) and a width of 0.3 SD was adapted from the default parameters of the Perseus software package (30). The p-values were adjusted with the Benjamini-Hochberg method for FDR to adjust for multiple testing (31).

### Publication Abstract
Attempts to develop a therapeutic vaccine against human papillomavirus (HPV)-induced malignancies have mostly not been clinically successful to date. One reason may be the hypoxic microenvironment present in most tumors, including cervical cancer. Hypoxia dysregulates the levels of human leukocyte antigen (HLA) class I molecules in different tumor entities, impacts the function of cytotoxic T cells, and leads to decreased protein levels of the oncoproteins E6 and E7 in HPV-transformed cells. Therefore, we investigated the effect of hypoxia on the presentation of HPV16 E6- and E7-derived epitopes in cervical cancer cells and its effect on epitope-specific T cell cytotoxicity. Hypoxia induced downregulation of E7 protein levels in all analyzed cell lines, as assessed by Western blotting. However, contrary to previous reports, no perturbation of antigen processing and presentation machinery (APM) components and HLA-A2 surface expression upon hypoxia treatment was detected by mass spectrometry and flow cytometry, respectively. Cytotoxicity assays performed in hypoxic conditions showed differential effects on the specific killing of HPV16-positive cervical cancer cells by epitope-specific CD8<sup>+</sup> T&#xa0;cell lines in a donor- and peptide-specific manner. Effects of hypoxia on the expression of PD-L1 were ruled out by flow cytometry analysis. Altogether, our results under hypoxia show a decreased expression of E6 and E7, but an intact APM, and epitope- and donor-dependent effects on T cell cytotoxicity towards HPV16-positive target cells. This suggests that successful immunotherapies can be developed for hypoxic HPV-induced cervical cancer, with careful choice of target epitopes, and ideally in combination with hypoxia-alleviating measures.

### Keywords
Cytotoxic cd8+ t cells, Antigen presentation machinery (apm), Hpv16

### Affiliations
DKFZ F130 Division of Immunotherapy and Immunoprevention
DKFZ

### Submitter
Sophia Foehr

### Lab Head
Dr Angelika Riemer
DKFZ F130 Division of Immunotherapy and Immunoprevention


