### Accession
PXD011162

### Title
Hepatomasys

### Description
Metabolic alterations can serve as targets for diagnosis and therapy of cancer. Due to the highly complex regulation of cellular metabolism, definite identification of metabolic pathway alterations remains challenging and requires sophisticated experimentation. Here, we applied a comprehensive kinetic model of the central carbon metabolism (CCM) to characterize metabolic reprogramming in murine liver cancer. We show that relative differences of protein abundances of metabolic enzymes obtained by mass spectrometry can be used to scale maximal enzyme capacities. Model simulations predicted tumor-specific alterations of various components of the CCM, a selected number of which were subsequently verified by in vitro and in vivo experiments. Furthermore, we demonstrate the ability of the kinetic model to identify metabolic pathways whose inhibition results in selective tumor cell killing. Our systems biology approach establishes that combining cellular experimentation with computer simulations of physiology-based metabolic models enables a comprehensive understanding of deregulated energetics in cancer.

### Sample Protocol
Murine liver samples were immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen and resuspended in a urea buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM TrisHCl, pH 8.25) containing 100 µl of zirconium beads for protein extraction. Samples were homogenized on a Precellys 24 device (Bertin Technologies) for two cycles, 10 seconds at 6,000 rpm. After centrifugation to remove beads and tissue debris, protein concentration was measured by Bradford colorimetric assay and 100 µg were taken for protein digestion. Leftover samples were frozen at -80°C. The disulfide bridges of proteins were reduced in DTT 2 mM for 30 minutes at 25°C and successively free cysteines alkylated in iodoacetamide 11 mM for 20 minutes at room temperature in the dark. LysC digestion was then performed by adding 5 µg of LysC (Wako Chemicals) to the sample and incubating it for 18 hours under gentle shaking at 30°C. After LysC digestion, the samples were diluted 3 times with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution, 7 µl of immobilized trypsin (Applied Biosystems) were added and samples were incubated 4 hours under rotation at 30°C. 18 µg of the resulting peptide mixtures were desalted on STAGE Tips and the eluates dried and reconstituted to 20 µl of 0.5 % acetic acid in water. 5 µl were injected in duplicate on a UPLC system (Eksigent Technologies, USA) coupled to a LTQ Velos Orbitrap (Thermo, USA), using a 240 minutes gradient ranging from 5% to 45% of solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid; solvent A = 5 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid). For the chromatographic separation 30 cm long capillary (75 µm inner diameter) was packed with 1.9 µm C18 beads (Reprosil-AQ, Dr. Maisch HPLC, Germany). On one end of the capillary nanospray tip was generated using a laser puller, allowing fretless packing. The nanospray source was operated with a spay voltage of 2.1 kV and an ion transfer tube temperature of 260°C. Data were acquired in data dependent mode, with one survey MS scan in the Orbitrap mass analyzer (60,000 resolution at 400 m/z) followed by up to 20 MS/MS scans in the ion trap on the most intense ions. Once selected for fragmentation, ions were excluded from further selection for 30 seconds, in order to increase new sequencing events.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics raw data were analyzed using the MaxQuant proteomics pipeline v1.4.1.2 and the built in the Andromeda search engine with the mouse Uniprot database (24,552 protein entries) and a common contaminants database (247 protein entries). Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was chosen as fixed modification, oxidation of methionine and acetylation of N-terminus were chosen as variable modifications. Two missed cleavage sites were allowed and peptide tolerance was set to 7 ppm. The search engine peptide assignments were filtered at 1% FDR at both the peptide and protein level. The ‘match between runs’ feature was not enabled, ‘second peptide’ feature was enabled, while other parameters were left as default.  For protein quantification LFQ intensities calculated by MaxQuant were used. The minimum LFQ ratio count was set to 2 and a MS/MS spectrum was always required for LFQ comparison of the precursor ion intensities; only unique and unmodified peptides were used for LFQ quantification, in order to keep the LFQ calculation isoform specific.  Before comprehensive data analysis, data quality was evaluated using the in-house developed quality control software PTXQC.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Liver cancer, Hepatocellular carcinoma, Shotgun proteomics, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Berlin Institute for Medical Systems Biology at the Max Delbrueck Centrum for Molecular Medicine
Berlin Institute for Medical System Biology @  Max-Delbrück-Center for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Association  Robert-Rössle-Straße 10, 13125 Berlin, Germany

### Submitter
Guido Mastrobuoni

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan Kempa
Berlin Institute for Medical System Biology @  Max-Delbrück-Center for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Association  Robert-Rössle-Straße 10, 13125 Berlin, Germany


