### Accession
PXD028363

### Title
TMT-based quantitative proteomic profiling of human monocytes derived macrophage and foam cell

### Description
Background: Cardiovascular diseases remain the leading cause of morbidity and mortality worldwide, most of which are caused by atherosclerosis. Discerning processes that participate in macrophage-to-foam cell formation are critical for understanding the basic mechanisms underlying atherosclerosis. To explore the molecular mechanisms of foam cell formation, the differentially expressed proteins were identified.  Methods: In this paper, human monocytes, macrophage colony-stimulating factor induced macrophages, and oxidized low-density lipoprotein induced foam cells were cultured, and tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling combined with mass spectrometry (MS) were performed to find associations between foam cell transformation and proteome profiles.  Results: Totally, 5146 quantifiable proteins were identified, among which 1515 and 182 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were found in macrophage/monocyte and foam cell/macrophage, respectively, using a cutoff of 1.5-fold change. Subcellular localization analysis revealed that downregulated DEPs of macrophages/monocytes were mostly located in the nucleus and upregulated DEPs of foam cells/macrophages mostly located in the plasma membrane and extracellular. Functional analysis of DEPs demonstrated that cholesterol metabolism related proteins were upregulated in foam cells, whereas the immune response-related proteins were downregulated in foam cells. The protein-interaction network showed that the DEPs with the highest interaction intensity between macrophages and foam cells were mainly concentrated in lysosomes and the endoplasmic reticulum.  Conclusions: This study for the first time to perform quantitative proteomic investigation by TMT labeling and LC-MS/MS to identify differentially expressed proteins in human monocyte, macrophage, and foam cell. The results confirmed cholesterol metabolism was upregulated in foam cells, while immune response was suppressed, which suggested that foam cells were not the population that promote inflammation. In addition, KEGG enrichment analysis and protein-protein interaction indicated that the differentially expressed proteins locating in the endoplasmic reticulum and lysosomes may be key targets to regulate foam cell formation. These data provide a basis for identifying the potential proteins associated with the molecular mechanism involved in the transformation of macrophages to foam cells.

### Sample Protocol
We isolated PBMCs from whole blood and cultured them in vitro to obtain monocytes, macrophages, and foam cells induced by M-CSF and ox-LDL. Before testing by mass spectrometry, the samples were identified with the corresponding specific antibodies. Monocytes were purified with CD14 microbeads as CD14 is a surface marker for monocytes. Macrophages were identified by flow cytometry using CD11b antibody. The results showed that the CD11b+ population increased from 29.9% to 73.1% after M-CSF induction. Moreover, the macrophages in the samples were adherent cells. Macrophages phagocytose lipids to form foam cells. As shown in the results, induced by ox-LDL, the cells were stained with oil red O and presented with red lipid droplets.

### Data Protocol
Protein extraction and digestion The cell samples were sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail). The remaining debris was removed by centrifuga-tion at 12,000 × g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the supernatant was collected, and the protein concentration was determined using a BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in the dark. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to a urea concentration of less than 2 M. Finally, trypsin was added at a 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h digestion. TMT labeling and HPLC fractionation After trypsin digestion, the peptides were desalted using a Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex, CA, USA) and vacuum-dried. The peptide was reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed ac-cording to the manufacturer’s protocol for the TMT kit. The tryptic peptides were fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using a Thermo Betasil C18 column (5 μm particles, 10 mm ID, 250 mm length). LC-MS/MS analysis The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A) and directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15 cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The gradient comprised an increase from 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 26 min, 23% to 35% in 8 min, and climbing to 80% in 3 min, then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28, and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with a 15.0 s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4. The fixed first mass was set to 100 m/z.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Atherosclerosis; macrophage; foam cell; proteome

### Affiliations
Xi'an Jiaotong University
Xi’an Jiaotong University

### Submitter
Yali Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Enqi Liu
Xi’an Jiaotong University


