### Accession
PXD005102

### Title
Space mice re-adaption -  Re-adaption on Earth after Spaceflights Affects the Mouse Liver Proteome

### Description
Harsh environmental conditions including microgravity and radiation during prolonged spaceflights are known to alter hepatic metabolism. Our studies have focused on the analysis of possible changes in metabolic pathways in livers of mice which experienced 30 days of spaceflight with and without an additional re-adaption period of 7 days compared to control mice on Earth. Utilizing shotgun mass spectrometry and label-free quantification, we performed proteomic profiling to investigate mice livers from the spaceflight project “Bion-M 1”. No significant alterations in protein levels were observed between control mice liver and spaceflight mice which is possibly caused by insufficient fold change detection combined with high variances within the groups. In contrast, our results show that more than a third of the quantified protein levels are altered comparing the liver proteome of mice with and without re-adaption time after their spaceflight. Proteins related to amino acid metabolism showed higher levels after re-adaption, which may indicate higher rates of gluconeogenesis. Members of the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor pathway reconstitute their level after 7 days due to a decrease in fold change, which indicates decreased signs of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease. Moreover, bile acid secretion regenerates on Earth due to reconstitution of related transmembrane proteins and elevated levels of the drug-metabolising enzymes belonging to the CYP superfamily decrease 7 days after the spaceflight. Thus, our study demonstrates reconstitution of pharmacological response and early signs of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease recover within 7 days, whereas glucose uptake should be monitored due to alterations in gluconeogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
20 mg of each mouse liver (male C57/BL6 mice, 4-5 months old)were washed with PBS, homogenized in 200 μl lysis buffer (4% SDS in 0.1 M Tris-HCl pH 8.5) and centrifuged at 3 000g at 4°C for 5 min. Protein content was measured according to the BCA method. A total protein amount of 100 μg for each sample was used for tryptic digestion according to the common FASP protocol. Briefly, detergents in the samples were exchanged with 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5) using Microcon filters (10 kDa cut off, Millipore, USA). Protein disulfid bridges were reduced with 100 mM 1,4-dithiothreitol in 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5), alkylation of thiols was performed with 55 mM iodacetamide in 8 M urea/100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5). Tryptic digestion with a trypsin (Sequencing Grade Modified, Promega, USA) to protein ratio of 1:100 was carried out over night at 37°C in a 50 mM tetraethylammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.5) followed by an additional digestion step under the same conditions with 2 h duration. We separated 2 μg peptides for each sample with high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC, Ultimate 3000 Nano LC System, Thermo Scientific, USA) in a 15 cm long C18 column with a diameter of 75 μm (Acclaim® PepMap™ RSLC, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). The peptides were eluted with a gradient from 5–35 % buffer B (80 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid) over 115 min at a flow rate of 0.3 μl/min. Total run time including 15 min to reach 99 % buffer B, flushing 10 min with 99 % buffer B and 15 min re-equilibration to buffer A (0.1 % formic acid) amounted 155 mins. Further analysis was performed with a Q Exacitve HF mass spectrometer (Q ExactiveTM HF Hybrid Quadrupole-OrbitrapTM Mass spectrometer, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Mass spectra were acquired at a resolution of 60 000 (MS) and 15 000 (MS/MS) in a range of 400–1 500 m/z (MS) and 200 – 2 000 m/z (MS/MS). An isolation threshold of 67 000 was determined for precursors selection and up to top 25 precursors were chosen for fragmentation with high-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) at 25 V and 100 ms activation time. Precursors with a charged state of +1 were rejected and all measured precursors were excluded from measurement for 20 s. 2 – 4 technical runs were measured for each sample.

### Data Protocol
The obtained raw data were processed using the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.5.1) with the built-in search engine Andromeda.  Protein sequences of the complete mouse proteome provided by Uniprot (August 2016) was used for protein identification with Andromeda. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as fixed modification and protein N-terminal acetylation as well as oxidation of methionines was set as variable modification for the peptide search. A maximum mass deviation of 4.5 ppm was allowed for precursors identification and 20 ppm were set as match tolerance for fragment identification (acquisition in Orbitrap). Up to two missed cleavages were allowed for trypsin digestion. The software option “Match between runs” was enabled and features within a time window of 0.7 min were used to match between runs. The false discovery rates (FDR) for peptide and protein identifications were set to 1 %. Only unique peptides were used for Label-free quantification according to the method described by Cox et al. 2014. The obtained LFQ intensities were filtered and statistically analyzed using the Perseus environment. Protein groups identified only by peptides with modified sites, contaminant matches and matches to the reverse data base were removed. Proteins identified by at least two unique peptides were determined as identified, whereas only proteins identified with three unique peptides were used for quantification. Solely protein groups that were at least once quantified in each group were included in our observations. The LFQ intensities were transformed by log2(x) and missing LFQ intensity values (NaN) were replaced using low LFQ intensity values from the normal distribution(width=0.3, down shift=1.8).Unpaired Student’s t-tests were used to compare two groups, whereas the ANOVA test was used for multiple-sample testing. To introduce an artificial variance for small variance values, the constant S0 was set to 0.1 for all statistical tests. A permutation-based FDR of 5 % was used for truncation of all tests results. Additionally, only proteins with a probability for significant protein abundance changes of p-value < 0.05 were used for fold change visualization in the presented tables.

### Publication Abstract
Harsh environmental conditions including microgravity and radiation during prolonged spaceflights are known to alter hepatic metabolism. Our studies have focused on the analysis of possible changes in metabolic pathways in the livers of mice from spaceflight project "Bion-M 1". Mice experienced 30 days of spaceflight with and without an additional re-adaption period of seven days compared to control mice on Earth. To investigate mice livers we have performed proteomic profiling utilizing shotgun mass spectrometry followed by label-free quantification. Proteomic data analysis provided 12,206 unique peptides and 1,086 identified proteins. Label-free quantification using MaxQuant software followed by multiple sample statistical testing (ANOVA) revealed 218 up-regulated and 224 down-regulated proteins in the post-flight compared to the other groups. Proteins related to amino acid metabolism showed higher levels after re-adaption, which may indicate higher rates of gluconeogenesis. Members of the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor pathway reconstitute their level after seven days based on a decreased level in comparison with the flight group, which indicates diminished liver lipotoxicity. Moreover, bile acid secretion may regenerate on Earth due to reconstitution of related transmembrane proteins and CYP superfamily proteins elevated levels seven days after the spaceflight. Thus, our study demonstrates reconstitution of pharmacological response and decreased liver lipotoxicity within seven days, whereas glucose uptake should be monitored due to alterations in gluconeogenesis.

### Keywords
Spaceflight, Liver, Re-adaption, Mice, Metabolism

### Affiliations
Signatope GmbH, Markwiesenstr. 55 72770 Reutlingen
Department of Proteomic Research and Mass Spectrometry, Laboratory of Systems Biology, Institute of Biomedical Chemistry, Moscow, Russia

### Submitter
Viktoria Anselm

### Lab Head
Dr Victor Zgoda
Department of Proteomic Research and Mass Spectrometry, Laboratory of Systems Biology, Institute of Biomedical Chemistry, Moscow, Russia


