### Accession
PXD019692

### Title
A novel USP30 inhibitor recapitulates genetic loss of USP30 and sets the trigger for PINK1-PARKIN amplification of mitochondrial ubiquitylation

### Description
The mitochondrial deubiquitylase USP30 negatively regulates the selective autophagy of damaged mitochondria. It has been proposed as an actionable target to alleviate the loss of function of the mitophagy pathway governed by the Parkinson’s Disease associated genes PINK1 and PRKN. We present the characterisation of a N-cyano pyrrolidine derived compound, FT3967385, with high selectivity for USP30. The compound is well tolerated with no loss of total mitochondrial mass. We demonstrate that ubiquitylation of TOM20, a component of the outer mitochondrial membrane import machinery that directly interacts with USP30, represents a robust biomarker for both USP30 loss and inhibition. We have conducted proteomics analyses on a SHSY5Y neuroblastoma cell line model to directly compare the effects of genetic loss of USP30 with selective inhibition in an unbiased fashion. We have thereby identified a subset of ubiquitylation events consequent to mitochondrial depolarisation, that are USP30 sensitive. Within responsive elements of the ubiquitylome, several components of the outer mitochondrial membrane transport (TOM) complex are most prominent. Thus, our data support a model whereby USP30 can regulate the availability of ubiquitin at the specific site of mitochondrial PINK1 accumulation following membrane depolarisation. In this model, USP30 deubiquitylation of TOM complex components dampens the trigger that unleashes the Parkin-dependent amplification of mitochondrial ubiquitylation leading to mitophagy. Accordingly PINK1 generation of phospho-Ser65 Ubiquitin proceeds more rapidly and to a greater extent in cells either lacking USP30 or subject to USP30 inhibition.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC labelled USP30 KO/ WT SHSY5Y cells were processed for LC-MS/MS by reduction, alkylation and digestion with trypsin. The digested sample was partially used for ubiquitylome enrichment using immuno-precipitation method and the remaining was used for high-pH reverse-phase fractionation. The samples were then analysed on an Orbitrap instrument (Orbitrap Q Exactive HF / Orbitrap Fusion Lumos).  Parameters for the fractionation: Off-line high-pH reverse-phase pre-fractionation was performed on the digested material and eluted peptides were concatenated down to 10 fractions. Briefly, digested material was fractionated using the loading pump of a Dionex Ultimate 3000 HPLC with an automated fraction collector and a XBridge BEH C18 XP column (3 × 150 mm, 2.5 μm pore size, Waters no. 186006710) over a 100 min gradient using basic pH reverse-phase buffers (A: water, pH 10 with ammonium hydroxide; B: 90% acetonitrile, pH 10 with ammonium hydroxide). The gradient consisted of a 12 min wash with 1% B, then increasing to 35% B over 60 min, with a further increase to 95% B in 8 min, followed by a 10 min wash at 95% B and a 10 min re-equilibration at 1% B, all at a flow rate of 200 μL/min with fractions collected every 2 min throughout the run. 100 μL of the fractions was dried and resuspended in 20 μL of 2% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid for analysis by LC–MS/MS. Fractions were loaded on the LC–MS/MS following concatenation of 50 fractions into 10, combining fractions in a 10-fraction interval (F1 + F11 + F21 + F31 + F41… to F10 + F20 + F30 + F40 + F50). Orbitrap Q Exactive HF LC-MS/MS parameters: Peptide fractions were analysed by nano-UPLC-MS/MS using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano UPLC with EASY spray column (75 μm x 500 mm, 2 μm particle size, Thermo Scientific) with a 60 minute gradient of 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in 5% DMSO to 35% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in 5% DMSO at a flow rate of ~250nl/min. MS data was acquired with an Orbitrap Q Exactive HF instrument in which survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 60.000 @ 200m/z and the 20 most abundant precursors were selected for HCD fragmentation with a normalised collision energy of 28.  Orbitrap Fusion Lumos LC-MS/MS parameters: Samples were analysed by LC-MS/MS on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 connected to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos. Peptides were separated using 60 minute linear gradient from 2 – 35 % acetonitrile in 5 % DMSO, 0.1 % formic acid at a flow rate of 250 nL/min on a 50 cm EASY spray column (75 μm x 500 mm, 2 μm particle size, Thermo Scientific). MS1 scans were acquired at a resolution of 120,000 between 400 – 1,500 m/z with an AGC target of 4x105. Selected precursors were fragmented using HCD at a normalised collision energy of 28 %, an AGC target of 4x103, a maximum injection time of 35 ms, a maximum duty cycle of 1 second and a dynamic exclusion window of 60 seconds. MS/MS spectra were acquired in the ion trap using the rapid scan mode.

### Data Protocol
All raw MS files from the biological replicates of the SILAC-proteome experiments were processed with the MaxQuant software suite; version 1.6.7.0  using the Uniprot database (retrieved in July 2019) and the default settings (65). Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, whereas oxidation, phospho(STY), GlyGly (K) and acetyl N terminal were considered as variable modifications. Data was requantified.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Deubiquitylase, Ubiquitylome, Mitophagy, Usp30, Dub inhibitor, Parkinson’s disease

### Affiliations
University of Liverpool
Cellular and Molecular Physiology, Institute of Translational Medicine, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK

### Submitter
Emma Rusilowicz-Jones

### Lab Head
Dr Michael J Clague
Cellular and Molecular Physiology, Institute of Translational Medicine, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK


