### Accession
PXD038571

### Title
Mycelial nutrient transfer promotes bacterial co-metabolic organochlorine pesticide degradation in nutrient-deprived environments

### Description
Biotransformation of soil organochlorine pesticides (OCP) is often impeded by a lack of nutrients relevant for bacterial growth and/or co-metabolic OCP biotransformation. By providing space-filling mycelia, fungi promote contaminant biodegradation by facilitating bacterial dispersal and the mobilization and release of nutrients in the mycosphere. We here tested whether mycelial nutrient transfer from nutrient-rich to nutrient-deprived areas facilitates bacterial OCP degradation in a nutrient-deficient habitat. The legacy pesticide hexachlorocyclohexane (HCH), a non-HCH-degrading fungus (Fusarium equiseti K3), and a co-metabolically HCH-degrading bacterium (Sphingobium sp. S8) isolated from the same HCH-contaminated soil were used in spatially structured model ecosystems. Using 13C-labelled fungal biomass and protein-based stable isotope probing (protein-SIP), we traced the incorporation of 13C fungal metabolites into bacterial proteins while simultaneously determining the biotransformation of the HCH isomers. The relative isotope abundance (RIA, 7.1 – 14.2%), labeling ratio (LR, 0.13 – 0.35), and the shape of isotopic mass distribution profiles of bacterial peptides indicated the transfer of 13C-labeled fungal metabolites into bacterial proteins. Distinct 13C incorporation into the haloalkane dehalogenase (linB) and 2,5-dichloro-2,5-cyclohexadiene-1,4-diol dehydrogenase (LinC), as key enzymes in metabolic HCH degradation, underpin the role of mycelial nutrient transport and fungal-bacterial interactions for co-metabolic bacterial HCH degradation in heterogeneous habitats. Nutrient uptake from mycelia increased HCH removal by twofold as compared to bacterial monocultures. Fungal-bacterial interactions hence may play an important role in the co-metabolic biotransformation of OCP or recalcitrant micropollutants (MPs).

### Sample Protocol
The ascomycete Fusarium equiseti K3 was isolated from HCH-contaminated soil collected from a former obsolete pesticide store in Kitengela, Kenya (GPS: 01.49 S, 37.048E) and its draft genome sequence. The fungus was not found to degrade HCH (see below). Fungal pre-cultures were cultivated at 25 ⁰C on potato dextrose agar (PDA; BD Difco, USA) prior to the transfer to 13C glucose/glucose-containing minimum salt medium (MSM) agar. The HCH degrading bacterium Sphingobium sp. S8 was isolated from the same soil as the fungus and its draft genome sequence. The bacterium was cultivated on Luria-Bertani (LB) (DSMZ medium 381) agar medium treated with γ-HCH (97%; Sigma) to a final concentration of 100 µg mL-1. To prepare the inoculum of the S8 strain, a 72-h old culture (OD600 ~1.5) of strain S8 in LB medium was centrifuged at 12 000 g at 15 °C for 10 min, the cell pellet washed twice with MSM medium, and resuspended in the same medium to a concentration of 7.2 x108 cells mL-1. After harvest, patch 2 was transferred to sterile 10 mL glass tubes containing 2 mL of 1x PBS buffer pH 7.4, the tubes vortexed for 1 min and then sonicated (3 times for 30 s with 1 min pause each time) in a sonication bath (SONOREX SUPER RK 255 H, BANDELIN, Germany) at 35kHz ultrasound wave. The cell suspension was then transferred into 2 mL tubes and centrifuged at 16 000 g and 4 °C (Eppendorf, Germany) to pellet the cells. The cells were lysed in 50 µL lysis buffer (10 mM Tris; 5 mM EDTA; 0.29% NaCl; and 0.4% SDS) and processed as previously described (40). A Bradford assay was used to estimate protein concentrations. For the SDS-PAGE, 75 µg of protein was precipitated with an equal volume of 20% trichloroacetic acid (TCA, Sigma) for 16 h at 4 °C. The proteins were then separated in a 12% acrylamide gel using the HoeferTM mini–Vertical Electrophoresis system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) and the Laemmli-buffer system (40). The protein bands were visualized by staining the gel in colloidal Coomassie Brilliant blue G-250 (Roth, Kassel, Germany). Protein bands were excised from the gel and subjected to in-gel tryptic digestion. Tryptic peptides of all gel slices were then extracted for LC-MS/MS analysis. After tryptic digestion of the samples, the resulting peptides were subjected to a shotgun proteomics workflow (nanoLC-MS/MS). Briefly, peptide lysate was injected into a nanoLC system (UltiMate 3 000, Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were first trapped for 3 min on a C18-reverse phase trapping column (Acclaim PepMap® 100, 75 µm x 2 cm, particle size 3 µM, nanoViper, Thermo Fisher Scientific), followed by separation on a C18-reverse phase analytical column (Acclaim PepMap® 100, 75 µm x 25 cm, particle size 3 µM, nanoViper, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a solvent flow-rate of 300 nL/min and a column temperature of 35 °C. Eluting peptides were ionized by a nano ion source (Advion, TriVersa Nanomate, Ithaca, NY, USA) and analyzed at the Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer (v1.4.1.14, Thermo Scientific) was used for protein identification and the acquired MS/MS spectra were searched with the SequestHT algorithm against the UniProt reference proteome of Sphingobium sp. and Fusarium equiseti. Trypsin served as cleavage enzyme, allowing a maximum of two miss cleavages. The precursor mass tolerance (MS) was set to 10 ppm, and the fragment mass tolerance (MS/MS) was 0.05 Da. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was considered as fixed and oxidation of methionine was set as dynamic modification. Peptide spectrum matches (PSM`s) were validated using percolator with a false discover rate (FDR) <1% and quality filtered for XCorr ≥2.25 [for charge state +2] and ≥2.5 [for charge state +3]. Identified proteins were grouped by applying the strict parsimony principle. Identification of 13C-labeled peptides and quantification of 13C incorporation was done by comparing measured and expected isotopologue patterns, chromatographic retention time, and fragmentation patterns using MetaProSIP. Proteome data from the genomes of Sphingobium sp. S8 and Fusarium equiseti K3 were used as a decoy input file in the MetaProSIP pipeline. Data was evaluated by calculating the relative isotope abundance (RIA) and the labeling ratio (LR) of the labeled peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Biotransformation of soil organochlorine pesticides (OCP) is often impeded by a lack of nutrients relevant for bacterial growth and/or co-metabolic OCP biotransformation. By providing space-filling mycelia, fungi promote contaminant biodegradation by facilitating bacterial dispersal and the mobilization and release of nutrients in the mycosphere. We here tested whether mycelial nutrient transfer from nutrient-rich to nutrient-deprived areas facilitates bacterial OCP degradation in a nutrient-deficient habitat. The legacy pesticide hexachlorocyclohexane (HCH), a non-HCH-degrading fungus (Fusarium equiseti K3), and a co-metabolically HCH-degrading bacterium (Sphingobium sp. S8) isolated from the same HCH-contaminated soil were used in spatially structured model ecosystems. Using <sup>13</sup>C-labeled fungal biomass and protein-based stable isotope probing (protein-SIP), we traced the incorporation of <sup>13</sup>C fungal metabolites into bacterial proteins while simultaneously determining the biotransformation of the HCH isomers. The relative isotope abundance (RIA, 7.1-14.2%), labeling ratio (LR, 0.13-0.35), and the shape of isotopic mass distribution profiles of bacterial peptides indicated the transfer of <sup>13</sup>C-labeled fungal metabolites into bacterial proteins. Distinct <sup>13</sup>C incorporation into the haloalkane dehalogenase (linB) and 2,5-dichloro-2,5-cyclohexadiene-1,4-diol dehydrogenase (LinC), as key enzymes in metabolic HCH degradation, underpin the role of mycelial nutrient transport and fungal-bacterial interactions for co-metabolic bacterial HCH degradation in heterogeneous habitats. Nutrient uptake from mycelia increased HCH removal by twofold as compared to bacterial monocultures. Fungal-bacterial interactions hence may play an important role in the co-metabolic biotransformation of OCP or recalcitrant micropollutants (MPs).

### Keywords
Nutrient transport, Biotransformation, Protein-sip, Pesticides, Mycelia, Fungal-bacterial interactions

### Affiliations
Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ GmbH Department of Molecular Systems Biology Permoserstrasse 15 04318 Leipzig, Germany
Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ

### Submitter
Nico Jehmlich

### Lab Head
Dr Nico Jehmlich
Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ GmbH Department of Molecular Systems Biology Permoserstrasse 15 04318 Leipzig, Germany


