### Accession
PXD034641

### Title
Effect of iron-limitation, elevated temperature and florfenicol antibiotics on the subcellular proteomes and the vesiculation of the fish pathogen Aeromonas salmonicida

### Description
Here we analyzed the proteomic response of the important Gram-negative fish pathogen A. salmonicida to iron-limitation, the antibiotic florfenicol and an elevated incubation temperature. Proteins of different subcellular fractions (cytosol, inner membrane, outer membrane, extracellular and outer membrane vesicles) were enriched and analyzed.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of cytosolic, inner membrane, and outer membrane protein fractions  Bacterial cell pellets were resuspended in TE buffer, and cells were disrupted via sonication in 5 cycles at -0.55 W in 0.7 s intervals for 1 min on ice. The total energy input was 0.7 kJ. Afterward, the cell extract was centrifuged for 10 min at 15,000 x g and 4 °C, and the supernatant was transferred into a new reaction tube and ultracentrifuged at 100,000 x g for 1 h at 4 °C. The supernatant contained the cytosolic proteins referred to as “Cyt”. The pellet was washed with HEPES and ultracentrifuged again. Afterward, the pellet was resuspended in 1 % (w/v) n-Lauroylsarcosine in 10 mM HEPES and incubated for 30 min at 37° C under shaking and ultracentrifuged for 1 h at 100,000 x g and 4° C subsequently. The supernatant contained the proteins of the inner membrane, referred to as “IM”. The pellet was washed in 10 mM HEPES (pH 7.4) and ultracentrifuged for 1 h at 100,000 x g at 4° C. The pellet contained the proteins of the outer membrane, referred to as “OM”. Prepared fractions were stored at -20 °C.  Preparation of OMV protein fraction  The filtered supernatant was concentrated ~20-fold using tangential flow filtra-tion with a nominal molecular weight cut-off of 100 kDa and ultracentrifuged afterward at 100,000 x g for 3 h and 4 °C. The pellet was washed in PBS and ultracentrifuged again for 3 h at 100,000 x g and 4 °. The outer membrane vesicle containing pellet was resuspended in PBS and the fraction is re-ferred to as “OMV” and was stored at -20 °C.  S-Trap protein digestion and peptide fractionation  The S-Trap protein digest was performed according to the manufacturer’s protocol (ProtiFi) with minor modifications. Briefly, 20 µg of protein, determined by BCA assay according to manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Fisher Scientific), of the Cyt, IM, OM, and OMV fraction was mixed 1:1 with 2x lysis buffer. Afterward, proteins were reduced in 20 mM DTT for 10 min at 95 °C and alkylated in 40 mM IAA for 30 min in the dark. Samples were acidified by the ad-dition of phosphoric acid to a final concentration of 1.2% and diluted 1:7 with S-Trap binding buffer. The proteins were digested with 1:50 trypsin in 50 mM TEAB for 3 h at 47 °C in S-Trap microcolumns and the pep-tides were eluted from the columns using 50 mM TEAB, followed by 0.1% aqueous ace-tic acid, and 60% acetonitrile containing 0.1% acetic acid. The peptides were dried us-ing a vacuum centrifuge. To reduce the sample complexity of the samples, basic reverse-phase peptide frac-tionation was performed as described previously. In short, peptides were loaded onto in-house packed C18 micro spin columns and eluted in eight frac-tions with increasing acetonitrile concentrations ranging from 5 to 50% in a high-pH solution (0.1% triethylamine). The eluates of fractions 1 & 5, 2 & 6, 3 & 7 and 4 & 8 were pooled. Peptides were dried using a vacuum centrifuge, resuspended in 20 µl 0.1% acetic acid, and stored at -20 °C until LC-MS/MS measurement.  Preparation of the extracellular protein fraction and in-gel digestion Extracellular proteins were enriched by using StrataClean affinity beads (Agilent) as described before. In brief, 20 µl of primed StrataClean beads were incubated with 10 ml of filtered bacterial culture supernatant in an over-head shaker overnight at 4 °C. On the next day, the bead suspension was centrifuged for 45 min at 10,000 x g and 4 °C. Afterward, the pellet was dried using a vacuum cen-trifuge, and the proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE. The separation was performed with 130 V until the solvent front traveled for roughly 3 cm. The gel was fixated, Coo-massie-stained, the lanes cut in three pieces of equal size, and tryptically digested. The dried peptides were resuspended in 10 µl Aq. dest. and desalinated using C18 ZipTips according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Merck Millipore). Afterward, peptides were resuspended in 20 µl 0.1% acetic acid and stored at -20 °C until LC-MS/MS measure-ment.  Mass spectrometry data acquisition and analysis Tryptic peptides of the subcellular fractions were separated on an Easy nLC 1200 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a reverse-phase C18 column and a column oven set to 45 °C. Peptides were loaded with 22 µl of buffer A at 400 bar and subsequently eluted with a non-linear 100 min gradient (OM, Extra, and OMV fraction) or non-linear 180 min gradient (Cyt and IM fraction) from 1 to 99% buffer B at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min. Eluting peptides were measured in an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer in data-dependent mode. The MS1 scan was recorded in the orbitrap with a mass window of 300 - 1,700 m/z and a resolution of 60,000. The 20 most intense precursor ions (ions with an unassigned charge or a charge of 1 were ex-cluded) were selected for CID fragmentation with a collision energy of 35%. The resulting MS/MS spectra were measured by the linear ion trap.

### Data Protocol
The resulting *.raw-files were searched with MaxQuant software (version 2.0.1.0) against the UniProt proteome of the A. salmonicida subsp. salmonicida strain M22710-11 (ID UP000232113, 4182 entries, download 25th June 2021) as the stored UniProt proteome of the used A. salmonicida subsp. salm-onicida strain JF2267 (ID UP000186585) was marked to be redundant to the proteome of the M22710-11 strain at UniProt. For detection of contaminations, the cRAP con-taminants list was used. The search was performed with a maximum of two missed cleavages, oxidation (M) and acetylation (protein N-term) as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation (C) as a fixed modification. Proteins were identified with a minimum of 2 peptides per protein group, with at least one unique peptide. Match between runs was enabled in between biological replicates. For protein quantification, unique and razor peptides were used and the label-free quantification (LFQ) calcula-tion was performed separately for each of the enriched subcellular fractions. The resulting data were analyzed with Perseus software (version 1.6.15.0). Data were filtered based on hits against the re-verse database, identified by site and the contamination list of MaxQuant. LFQ intensities were log2 transformed.

### Publication Abstract
We analyzed the proteomic response of the Gram-negative fish pathogen <i>A. salmonicida</i> to iron limitation, an elevated incubation temperature, and the antibiotic florfenicol. Proteins from different subcellular fractions (cytosol, inner membrane, outer membrane, extracellular and outer membrane vesicles) were enriched and analyzed. We identified several iron-regulated proteins that were not reported in the literature for <i>A. salmonicida</i> before. We could also show that hemolysin, an oxidative-stress-resistance chaperone, a putative hemin receptor, an M36 peptidase, and an uncharacterized protein were significantly higher in abundance not only under iron limitation but also with an elevated incubation temperature. This may indicate that these proteins involved in the infection process of <i>A. salmonicida</i> are induced by both factors. The analysis of the outer membrane vesicles (OMVs) with and without applied stresses revealed significant differences in the proteomes. OMVs were smaller and contained more cytoplasmic proteins after antibiotic treatment. After cultivation with low iron availability, several iron-regulated proteins were found in the OMVs, indicating that <i>A. salmonicida</i> OMVs potentially have a function in iron acquisition, as reported for other bacteria. The presence of iron-regulated transporters further indicates that OMVs obtained from 'stressed' bacteria might be suitable vaccine candidates that induce a protective anti-virulence immune response.

### Keywords
Antibiotic, Subcellular fractionation, Florfenicol, Proteomics, Aeromonas salmonicida; iron limitation; temperature, Outer membrane vesicles

### Affiliations
Institute of Microbiology, Department of Microbial Proteomics, Center for Functional Genomics of Microbes, University of Greifswald
Institute of Microbiology, Department of Microbial Proteomics, Center for Functional Genomics of Microbes, University of Greifswald, 17489 Greifswald, Germany

### Submitter
Tobias Kroniger

### Lab Head
Dr Dörte Becher
Institute of Microbiology, Department of Microbial Proteomics, Center for Functional Genomics of Microbes, University of Greifswald, 17489 Greifswald, Germany


