### Accession
PXD028461

### Title
Phosphorylation Mapping of Atg13 in Response to Atg1 Activity and Rapamycin Treatment in Budding Yeast

### Description
We performed phosphorylation site mapping on of budding yeast Atg13 applying a quantitative mass spectrometry-based proteomics approach based on stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture (SILAC). We determined changes in the Atg13 phosphorylation pattern in response of inhibition of kinase Atg1 and starvation conditions (using rapamycin), respectively. To do so, Atg13 was tandem purified via a histidine-biotin (HB) tag from cells growing at the respective experimental condition. Different stimulus-dependent PTM profiles of Atg13 have been identified.

### Sample Protocol
Stable isotope labeling using amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) (Ong et al., 2002) was achieved as described previously (Reiter et al., 2012). Histidin-biotin (HB) (Reiter et al., 2012) tandem affinity tag fusions of Atg13 were expressed S.cerevisiae wildtype and atg1 cells, respectively. Cells were grown to mid-logarithmic phase (OD600 nm = 1.0) and treated with rapamycin for 45min, harvested by filtration, and deep frozen in liquid N2. HB tandem affinity purifications, in-solution digestion with trypsin and enrichment of phosphorylated peptides using TiO2 was performed as described previously (Reiter et al., 2012).  Trypsinized peptides were analyzed on a reversed-phase nano-high-performance LC-MS system (Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano-flow chromatography system, Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled with an electrospray ionization interface (Proxeon Biosystems). Peptides were separated applying an increasing organic solvent (acetonitrile) gradient from 2.5% to 40% in 0.1% formic acid (running time 80min). The capillary temperature was set to 275°C. MS analysis was performed using a Linear Trap Quadrupole Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, with a mass range of 350-2000 m/z with lock mass activated, at a resolution of 60,000 at 200 m/z and an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 3E6. The 12 most intense ions were selected for fragmentation in the collision-induced dissociation mode.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using the SEQUEST algorithm (Proteome Discoverer 1.3) using the Saccharomyces Genome Database (SGD) (version February 2011) along with contaminants derived from common laboratory contaminants database (MQ). Fixed modifications included carbamidomethylation of cysteine. Protein N-terminal acetylation, deamidation, oxidation of methionine, phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine, and heavy labels of arginine and lysine (Arg6, Lys6) were set as variable. Enzyme specificity was set to “Trypsin/P” and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages per peptide was allowed. For the assignment of phosphorylation sites we integrated the tool phosphoRS into the Proteome Discoverer pipeline, and considered 75% phosphorylation probability as an adequate threshold for phosphorylation site assignment. We performed the SEQUEST analysis against the SGD database, as well as a decoy database (reversed sequences) and calculated an empirical FDR < 1% at the level of peptide spectrum matches (PSMs). Separately, we calculated an FDR at peptide and protein level as well (FDR < 1%). Potential arginine-to-proline conversion was corrected by calculating a factor based on the SILAC ratio biases observed for peptide groups that are differential in the number of prolines. SILAC Heavy-to-Light ratios were accordingly corrected and log2-transformed.

### Publication Abstract
Autophagy is initiated by the assembly of multiple autophagy-related proteins that form the phagophore assembly site where autophagosomes are formed. Atg13 is essential early in this process, and a hub of extensive phosphorylation. How these multiple phosphorylations contribute to autophagy initiation, however, is not well understood. Here we comprehensively analyze the role of phosphorylation events on Atg13 during nutrient-rich conditions and nitrogen starvation. We identify and functionally characterize 48 in vivo phosphorylation sites on Atg13. By generating reciprocal mutants, which mimic the dephosphorylated active and phosphorylated inactive state of Atg13, we observe that disrupting the dynamic regulation of Atg13 leads to insufficient or excessive autophagy, which are both detrimental to cell survival. We furthermore demonstrate an involvement of Atg11 in bulk autophagy even during nitrogen starvation, where it contributes together with Atg1 to the multivalency that drives phase separation of the phagophore assembly site. These findings reveal the importance of post-translational regulation on Atg13 early during autophagy initiation, which provides additional layers of regulation to control bulk autophagy activity and integrate cellular signals.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Quantitative proteomics, Autophagy, Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Affiliations
Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Albert-Ludwigs-University of Freiburg
Mass Spectrometry Facility, Max Perutz Labs Vienna, University of Vienna, Vienna Biocenter, Dr.-Bohr-Gasse 7, 1030 Vienna

### Submitter
Wolfgang Reiter

### Lab Head
Dr Claudine Kraft
Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Albert-Ludwigs-University of Freiburg


