### Accession
PXD020749

### Title
Affinity purification of biotinylated AtACINUS and Mass Spectrometric analysis to identify PTMs on AtACINUS

### Description
AtACINUS protein is involved in regulation of alternative transcription and splicing (AS). Previously we have identified O-GlcNAcylation and phosphorylation sites on AtACINUS using LWAC and IMAC enrichment (Xu et al., 2017). To identify more modification sites, we have created AtACINUS-YFP-TurboID/acinus-2pinin transgenic lines and pulled down AtACINUS using streptavidin beads to identify post-translational modifications on AtACINUS.

### Sample Protocol
The AtACINUS-YFP-TurboID/acinus-2pinin seedlings were grown for two weeks at 21°C with 24 hours light vertically on Hogland medium (1.34g/L Hogland’s No2 salt mixture without nitrogen, 6g/L phytoblend and 1g/L KNO3, pH5.8), treated with 0 or 50 µmmol/L biotin for 3 hours. AtACINUS-YFP-Turbo proteins was affinity purified with streptavidin beads as previously described (Mair et al., 2019) using a modified extraction buffer (50 mmol/L Tris pH 7.5, 150 mmol/L NaCl, 0.1% (w/v) SDS, 1% (v/v) Triton-X-100, 0.5% (w/v) Na-deoxycholate, 1 mmol/L EGTA, 1 mmol/L DTT, 1x Complete protease inhibitor cocktail, 1 mmol/L PMSF and 20 µmol/L  PUGNAC and 1 x PhosphoStop). The ratio of extraction buffer to ground plant tissues was 1 mL to 1 g. After on-bead tryptic digestion, the samples were analyzed as described above in the label-free IP-MS section on a Q-Exactive HF instrument.  The peptide mixtures were desalted using C18 ZipTips (Millipore) and analyzed on a Q-Exactive HF hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) equipped with an Easy LC 1200 UPLC liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher).  Peptides were separated using analytical column ES803 (Thermo Fisher). The flow rate was 300nL/min and a 120-min gradient was used. Peptides were eluted by a gradient from 3 to 28% solvent B (80% (v/v) acetonitrile/0.1% (v/v) formic acid) over 100 mins and from 28 to 44% solvent B over 20 mins, followed by short wash at 90% solvent B. Precursor scan was from mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) 375 to1600 and top 20 most intense multiply charged precursor were selection for fragmentation. Peptides were fragmented with higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) with normalized collision energy (NCE) 27.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectrometry peak lists were extracted using an in-house script PAVA, and data were searched using Protein Prospector against the Arabidopsis Information Resource (TAIR10) database, to which reverse sequence versions were concatenated (a total of 35,386 entries) to allow estimation of a false discovery rate (FDR). Carbamidomethylcysteine was searched as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. Data were searched with a 10 ppm tolerance for precursor ion and 20 ppm for fragment ions. Peptide and protein FDRs were set as 0.01 and 0.05.  Carbamidomethylcysteine was searched as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. After first step search, a second search was performed by allowing additional modifications together with manual checking: O-GlcNAcylation modification on S/T and neutral loss, O-fucosylation on S/T and neutral loss, phosphorylation on S/T and biotinylation on lysine.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Plant, Phosphorylation, Seedling, Co-immunoprecipitation, O-fucosylation, Ip-ms, Arabidopsis thaliana atacinus, Lc-ms/ms, Acinus, O-glcnacylation

### Affiliations
Carnegie Institution at Stanford
Carnegie Mass Spec Facility

### Submitter
Shouling Xu

### Lab Head
Dr SHOULING XU
Carnegie Mass Spec Facility


