### Accession
PXD027465

### Title
The consequences of reciprocally exchanging the genomic sites of Integration Host Factor (IHF) subunit production for subunit stoichiometry and bacterial physiology in Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium

### Description
Integration host factor (IHF) is a heterodimeric nucleoid-associated protein that plays roles in bacterial nucleoid architecture and genome-wide gene regulation. The ihfA and ihfB genes that encode the subunits are located 350 kilobase pairs apart, in the Right replichore of the Salmonella chromosome. IHF is composed of one IhfA and one IhfB subunit. Despite this 1:1 stoichiometry, mass spectrometry revealed that IhfB is produced in 2-fold excess over IhfA. Results from several studies suggest that a gene's location on the bacterial chromosome is an important factor in establishing the appropriate spatiotemporal expression pattern of that gene and its influence on physiology. We re-engineered Salmonella to exchange reciprocally the protein-coding regions of ihfA and ihfB, such that each relocated protein-encoding region was driven by the expression signals of the other's gene. Mass spectrometry showed that in this 'rewired' strain, IhfA is produced in excess over IhfB, correlating with enhanced stability of the hybrid ihfB-ihfA mRNA that was expressed from the ihfB promoter.  Nevertheless, the rewired strain grew at a similar rate to the wild type, had identical cell morphology, and was similar in competitive fitness. However, it was less motile than the wild type, had growth-phase-specific reductions in SPI-1 and SPI-2 gene expression and was engulfed at a higher rate by RAW macrophage. Our data show that while exchanging the physical locations of its ihf genes and the rewiring of their regulatory circuitry are well tolerated in Salmonella, genes involved in the production of type 3 secretion systems exhibit dysregulation that accompanies altered phenotypes.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial pellets were collected at 7 h - growth stage at which IHF is most highly expressed. The pellets were resuspended in 8M urea and sonicated, followed by reduction and alkylation. Trypsin was used as a digesting enzyme. Proteins were cleaned up using ZipTipC18. Complex trypsin-digested peptide mix was separated by 1 h HPLC gradient using reverse phase C18 columns on an Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLC followed by a run on Q-Exactive mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Output RAW files were analysed using MaxQuant. Label Free Quantification (Fast LFQ) mode was selected in group-specific parameters and iBAQ quantification was added in global parameters. The search was performed using the Andromeda peptide search engine integrated into the MaxQuant. Further statistical analysis was performed with Perseus.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Salmonella enterica serovar typhimurium; integration host factor; ihf; nucleoid-associated protein; lc-msms; stoichiometry

### Affiliations
Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland
Trinity College Dublin

### Submitter
German Pozdeev

### Lab Head
Dr Charles James Dorman
Trinity College Dublin


