### Accession
PXD017434

### Title
RasGRP1 is a Causal Factor in the Development of L-DOPA-induced dyskinesia in Parkinson Disease

### Description
The therapeutic benefits of L–3,4–dihydroxyphenylalanine (L-DOPA) in Parkinson’s disease (PD) patients severely diminishes with the onset of L-DOPA-induced dyskinesia (LID), a debilitating motor side effect. LID is mainly due to altered dopaminergic signaling in the striatum, a brain region that controls motor and cognitive functions. However, the molecular mechanisms that promote LID remain unclear. Here, we have reported that increased striatal RasGRP1 (also known as CalDAG-GEF-II) is instrumentally linked to the development of LID in a 6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA) lesioned mouse model of PD. L-DOPA treatment rapidly upregulated RasGRP1 in the dopamine-1 receptor positive neurons in the dorsal striatum. RasGRP1 deleted mice (RasGRP1–/–) had drastically diminished LID, and RasGRP1–/– mice did not interfere with the therapeutic benefits of L-DOPA. In terms of its mechanism, RasGRP1 mediated L-DOPA-induced extracellular regulated kinase (ERK), the mammalian target of rapamycin kinase (mTOR) and the cAMP/PKA pathway. RasGRP1 bind directly with and acts 2 as a guanine nucleotide exchange (GEF) for Ras-homolog-enriched in the brain (Rheb), a potent activator of mTOR, both in vitro and in the intact striatum. High-resolution tandem mass tag mass spectrometry analysis of striatal tissue revealed significant targets, such as phosphodiesterase 10a (Pde10a), Pde2a, catechol-o-methyltransferase (Comt), and glutamate decarboxylase 1 and 2 (Gad1 and Gad2), as downstream regulators of RasGRP1 that are linked to LID vulnerability. Moreover, we found that RASGRP1 protein is also upregulated predominantly in the striatum of MPTP-lesioned macaque treated with L-DOPA, emphasizing the translational potential of this protein. Collectively, the findings of this study demonstrated that RasGRP1 is a major regulator of LID in the dorsal striatum. Pharmacological or gene-depletion strategies targeting RasGRP1 may offer novel therapeutic opportunities for preventing LID in PD patients.

### Sample Protocol
Striatum from WT (n = 3) and RasGRP1-KO (n = 3) (see scheme Fig 5A) was isolated after LDOPA treatment were lysed in RIPA buffer precipitated with ice cold acetone overnight and protein resolubilized with 100 μL 6M urea/50 mM TrisHCl, pH 8.0. The protein was subsequently reduced for 45min at 55oC using 3 μL of 0.5 M dithiothreitol (DTT), and then alkylated the dark for 30min using 6 μL of 0.55 M iodoacetamide (IAA). Following reduction an alkylation, protein was once again precipitated with ice cold acetone overnight. The protein pellet was resolubilized with 150 μL TEAB and digestion was performed overnight at 37oC with 6ug trypsin (Promega). Following the digestion, the peptides were quantified using the PierceTM quantitative colorimetric peptide assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). 100 μg of peptides per sample were subsequently labelled with varying TMT labels according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) and pooled. The pooled plexed samples (400 μg total) were dried under vacuum, resolubilized in 1% TFA and then desalted using OASIS HLB 1cc solid phase extraction cartridges (Waters, Milldford, MA) and then dried once again using vacuum. TMT-labeled phosphopeptides for mass spectrometry were enriched using the High-Select™ Fe-NTA Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit from Thermo Fisher Scientific according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The TMT-labelled non-phoshopeptide complement was cleaned upfor mass spectrometry using a C18 ZipTip according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Millipore, Billerica, MA). For mass spectrometry, dried TMT-labelled peptides (phoshopeptides and nonphosphopeptides) were reconstituted in 5 μL of 0.1% formic acid and on-line eluted into a Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) from an Acclaim PepMapTM RSLC nano Viper analytical column (75-μm ID × 15 cm, Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) using a gradient of 5-25% solvent B (80/20 acetonitrile/water, 0.1% formic acid) in 180 min, followed by 25-44% solvent B in 60 min, 44-80% solvent B in 0.1 min, a 5 min hold of 80% solvent B, a return to 5% solvent B in 0.1 min, and finally a 20 min hold of solvent B. All flow rates were 300 nL/min delivered using a nEasy-LC1000 nano liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). Solvent A consisted of water and 0.1% formic acid. Ions were created at 2.0 kV using the Nanospray FlexTM ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). A synchronous precursor selection (SPS)-MS3 mass spectrometry method was used by scanning between 380-2000 m/z at a resolution of 120,000 for MS1 in the Orbitrap mass analyzer, and performing CID at top speed in the linear ion trap of peptide monoisotopic ions with charge 2-8, using a quadrupole isolation of 0.7 m/z and a CID energy of 35%. The top 10 MS2 ions in the ion trap between 400-1200 m/z were then chosen for HCD at 65% energy and detection in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 60,000 and an AGC target of 1E5 and an injection time of 120 msec (MS3).

### Data Protocol
Quantitative analysis of the TMT experiments was performed simultaneously to protein identification using Proteome Discoverer 2.3 software. The precursor and fragment ion mass tolerances were set to 10 ppm, 0.2 Da, respectively), enzyme was Trypsin with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages and Uniprot Mouse proteome FASTA file was used in SEQUEST searches. The impurity correction factors obtained from Thermo Fisher Scientific for each kit was included in the search and quantification. The following settings were used to search the phosphor enriched data; dynamic modifications; Oxidation / +15.995Da (M), Deamidated / +0.984 Da (N,Q), Phospho / +79.966 Da (S, T, Y) and static modifications of TMT6plex / +229.163 Da (NTerminus,K), Carbamidomethyl +57.021 (C). Only unique+ Razor peptides were considered for quantification purposes. Percolator feature of Proteome Discoverer 2.3 was used to set a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01. IMP-ptmRS node was used to calculate probability values for each putative phosphorylation site. Total Peptide Abundance normalization method was used to adjust for loading bias and Protein Abundance Based method was used to calculate the protein level ratios. Co-isolation threshold and SPS Mass Matches threshold were set to 50 and 65, respectively. After normal log (In) transformation of the raw ion counts, each channel was divided with reference sample (WT intact). The resulting list of proteins were further filtered by removing proteins that were not quantified in all plexes. Proteins passing this cut off value were exported to JMP (SAS) 13.2.1 for data cleaning and statistical analysis. The non-enriched (aka total) dataset was analyzed in the same fashion except for omission phosphorylation in SEQUEST search and phosphoRS node in PD workflow. Proteins (including the ones identified by a single peptide) were only included in subsequent analyses if they met the following requirement: the peptides must be quantified in all samples of a given treatment group. Finally, we used one-way ANOVA where Category was fixed effect, to identify proteins that are regulated across comparison groups (Category). The multiple testing correction as per Benjamini Hochberg (B-H) was applied to identify a “top tier” of significant proteins and limit identification of false positives with a False Discovery Rate (FDR) of 10 percent. P values <0.1 were considered statistically significant. The significantly regulated proteins were further interrogated to identify the different treatment group by using Tukey HCD

### Publication Abstract
The therapeutic effects of l-3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine (l-DOPA) in patients with Parkinson's disease (PD) severely diminishes with the onset of abnormal involuntary movement, l-DOPA-induced dyskinesia (LID). However, the molecular mechanisms that promote LID remain unclear. Here, we demonstrated that RasGRP1 [(guanine nucleotide exchange factor (GEF)] controls the development of LID. l-DOPA treatment rapidly up-regulated RasGRP1 in the striatum of mouse and macaque model of PD. The lack of RasGRP1 in mice (<i>RasGRP1<sup>-/-</sup></i> ) dramatically diminished LID without interfering with the therapeutic effects of l-DOPA. Besides acting as a GEF for Ras homolog enriched in the brain (Rheb), the activator of the mammalian target of rapamycin kinase (mTOR), RasGRP1 promotes l-DOPA-induced extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) and the mTOR signaling in the striatum. High-resolution tandem mass spectrometry analysis revealed multiple RasGRP1 downstream targets linked to LID vulnerability. Collectively, the study demonstrated that RasGRP1 is a critical striatal regulator of LID.

### Keywords
Parkinson disease, Rasgrp1, Dyskinesia

### Affiliations
Associate Professor, Neuroscience, The Scripps Research Institute Florida
The scripps research institute

### Submitter
gogce crynen

### Lab Head
Dr Srinivasa Subramaniam
Associate Professor, Neuroscience, The Scripps Research Institute Florida


