### Accession
PXD020133

### Title
CaMKK2 Inactivation by cAMP-PKA Signaling and 14-3-3 Adaptor Proteins

### Description
The calcium-calmodulin (Ca2+-CaM) dependent protein kinase kinase-2 (CaMKK2) is activated by increases in intracellular Ca2+ and is a key regulator of cellular and wholebody energy metabolism. CaMKK2 inhibition protects against prostate cancer, hepatocellular carcinoma and metabolic derangements induced by a high-fat diet, therefore elucidating the intracellular mechanisms that inactivate CaMKK2 has important therapeutic implications. Here we show that stimulation of cyclic AMP (cAMP)-dependent protein kinase (PKA) signaling in cells inactivates CaMKK2 by phosphorylation of three conserved serine residues. PKA-dependent phosphorylation of Ser495 directly impairs Ca2+-CaM activation, whereas phosphorylation of Ser100 and Ser511 mediate recruitment of 14-3-3 adaptor proteins that hold CaMKK2 in the inactivated state by preventing dephosphorylation of phospho-Ser495. We also report the crystal structure of 14-3-3z bound to a synthetic diphosphorylated peptide that reveals how the canonical (Ser511) and non-canonical (Ser100) 14-3-3 consensus sites on CaMKK2 co-operate to bind 14-3-3 proteins. Our findings provide a detailed mechanistic insight into how cAMP-PKA signaling inactivates CaMKK2 and reveals a pathway to inhibit CaMKK2 with potential for treating human diseases.

### Sample Protocol
To identify PKA phosphorylation of CaMKK2 in cells, COS7 cells were grown in Dulbecco Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum at 37°C with 5% CO2. Cells were transfected at 60% confluency using FuGene HD (Promega) with 2 μg of pcDNA3(-) plasmid (per 10 cm culture plate) containing N-terminal Flag-tagged human CaMKK2. After 48 hrs, transfected cells were treated with forskolin and IBMX (or DMSO vehicle control) and harvested by rinsing with ice-cold phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), followed by rapid lysis in situ using 1 ml of lysis buffer (50 mM Tris.HCl [pH 7.4], 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM NaF, 1 mM NaPPi, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, 1 mM DTT, 1% [v/v] Triton X-100) containing Complete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche Applied Science). Insoluble debris was removed by centrifugation and total protein content was quantified using the Bradford assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Expressed recombinant Flag-CaMKK2 was eluted from anti-Flag M2 agarose beads (Sigma) using an equal volume of 1 mg/ml Flag-peptide in 50 mM Tris.HCl [pH7.6], 150 mM NaCl, 10 % [v/v] glycerol.  Eluted CaMKK2 was pH adjusted using 50 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) solution, reduced with 10 mM TCEP for 45 min at 37°C and alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. The samples were then digested with trypsin [1:50, w/w] overnight at 37°C. Digested tryptic peptides were cleaned up using Oasis HBL solid phase extraction (SPE) cartridges (Waters) and freeze-dried overnight. Dried tryptic peptides were resuspended in 0.1% [v/v] formic acid and analysed by LC-MS/MS using a Q-Exactive plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) fitted with nanoflow reversed-phase-HPLC (Ultimate 3000 RSLC, Dionex). The nano-LC system was equipped with an Acclaim Pepmap nano-trap column (Dionex – C18, 100 Å, 75 μm × 2 cm) and an Acclaim Pepmap RSLC analytical column (Dionex – C18, 100 Å, 75 μm × 50 cm). Typically for each LC-MS/MS experiment, 5 μl of the peptide mix was loaded onto the enrichment (trap) column at an isocratic flow of 5 μl/min of 3% [v/v] acetonitrile containing 0.1% [v/v] formic acid for 6 min before the enrichment column is switched in-line with the analytical column. The eluents used for the LC were 0.1% [v/v] formic acid (solvent A) and 100% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid [v/v] (solvent B). The gradient used was 3% B to 25% B for 23 min, 25% B to 40% B in 2 min, 40% B to 80% B in 2 min and maintained at 85% B for the final 2 min before equilibration for 9 min at 3% B prior to the next analysis. All spectra were acquired in positive mode with full scan MS spectra scanning from m/z 375-1400 at 70000 resolution.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric raw data were searched using Mascot search algorithm against human SwissProt database. Trypsin was selected as the used enzyme with 2 missed cleavage allowed. MS tolerance was set to 10 ppm and MSMS tolerance at 0.2 Da. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, whereas oxidation of methionine, phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine were searched as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
The calcium-calmodulin-dependent protein kinase kinase-2 (CaMKK2) is a key regulator of cellular and whole-body energy metabolism. It is known to be activated by increases in intracellular Ca<sup>2+</sup>, but the mechanisms by which it is inactivated are less clear. CaMKK2 inhibition protects against prostate cancer, hepatocellular carcinoma, and metabolic derangements induced by a high-fat diet; therefore, elucidating the intracellular mechanisms that inactivate CaMKK2 has important therapeutic implications. Here we show that stimulation of cAMP-dependent protein kinase A (PKA) signaling in cells inactivates CaMKK2 by phosphorylation of three conserved serine residues. PKA-dependent phosphorylation of Ser<sup>495</sup> directly impairs calcium-calmodulin activation, whereas phosphorylation of Ser<sup>100</sup> and Ser<sup>511</sup> mediate recruitment of 14-3-3 adaptor proteins that hold CaMKK2 in the inactivated state by preventing dephosphorylation of phospho-Ser<sup>495</sup> We also report the crystal structure of 14-3-3&#x3b6; bound to a synthetic diphosphorylated peptide that reveals how the canonical (Ser<sup>511</sup>) and noncanonical (Ser<sup>100</sup>) 14-3-3 consensus sites on CaMKK2 cooperate to bind 14-3-3 proteins. Our findings provide detailed molecular insights into how cAMP-PKA signaling inactivates CaMKK2 and reveals a pathway to inhibit CaMKK2 with potential for treating human diseases.

### Keywords
Protein kinase a (pka), 14-3-3 adaptor proteins, Calcium-calmodulin (ca2+-cam) dependent protein kinase kinase-2 (camkk2), Cyclic amp (camp)

### Affiliations
St Vincent's Institute of Medical Research (SVI)
Protein Chemistry and Metabolism Unit St Vincent's Institute of Medical Research (SVI) 9 Princes Street Fitzroy, Victoria 3065 Australia

### Submitter
Ashfaqul Hoque

### Lab Head
Dr John W Scott
Protein Chemistry and Metabolism Unit St Vincent's Institute of Medical Research (SVI) 9 Princes Street Fitzroy, Victoria 3065 Australia


