### Accession
PXD037164

### Title
Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma extracelular vesicles proteome LC-MS

### Description
Monitoring of changes in the proteomic composition of extracellular vesicles produced by head and neck squamous cell carcinoma cells after exposure to agents affecting autophagic and lysosomal processes. LC-MS analysis of phosphatidylserine-positive budding EVs.

### Sample Protocol
The EVs samples were diluted using SDT buffer (4% SDS, 0.1M DTT, 0.1M Tris/HCl, pH 7.6; SDT buffer:EVs ratio 1:1) and incubated in a thermomixer (Eppendorf ThermoMixer® C, 20 min, 95°C, 1000 rpm). After that, samples were centrifuged (15 min, 20,000 x g) and the supernatant was further processed using filter-aided sample preparation (FASP, 30kDa cut-off cartridges) as described elsewhere 23 using 0.5 μg of trypsin (sequencing grade; Promega). The resulting peptides were cleared from any residual SDS using liquid-liquid extraction step using ethyl acetate 24 and transferred into the LC-MS vial. The resulting peptides were analysed by nanoElute system (Bruker) connected to timsTOF Pro spectrometer (Bruker) using 68 min long non-linear gradient and diaPASEF acquisition mode.

### Data Protocol
DiaPASEF data were processed in DIA-NN (version 1.8) in library-free mode. The library was build for the precursors range of 350-1050 m/z and fragments range of 100-1700 m/z using the modified cRAP database (based on http://www.thegpm.org/crap/) and UniProtKB protein database for Homo sapiens  (ftp://ftp.uniprot.org/pub/databases/uniprot/current_release/knowledgebase/reference_proteomes/Eukaryota/UP000005640/UP000005640_9606.fasta.gz; version 2021/06, number of protein sequences: 20,600). Protein inference was set to Isoform IDs. The DIA-NN algorithm parameters for the main search were set according to the test search run with Unrelated runs checkbox checked and were as follows: MS2 accuracy 11ppm, MS2 accuracy 15.8ppm, scan window 16. Pipeline files as well as DIA-NN generated files from the library generation, test and the main search are provided as a zip files.

### Publication Abstract
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are important mediators of intercellular communication in the tumour microenvironment. Many studies suggest that cancer cells release higher amounts of EVs exposing phosphatidylserine (PS) at the surface. There are lots of interconnections between EVs biogenesis and autophagy machinery. Modulation of autophagy can probably affect not only the quantity of EVs but also their content, which can deeply influence the resulting pro-tumourigenic or anticancer effect of autophagy modulators. In this study, we found that autophagy modulators autophinib, CPD18, EACC, bafilomycin A1 (BAFA1), 3-hydroxychloroquine (HCQ), rapamycin, NVP-BEZ235, Torin1, and starvation significantly alter the composition of the protein content of phosphatidylserine-positive EVs (PS-EVs) produced by cancer cells. The greatest impact had HCQ, BAFA1, CPD18, and starvation. The most abundant proteins in PS-EVs were proteins typical for extracellular exosomes, cytosol, cytoplasm, and cell surface involved in cell adhesion and angiogenesis. PS-EVs protein content involved mitochondrial proteins and signalling molecules such as SQSTM1 and TGF&#x3b2;1 pro-protein. Interestingly, PS-EVs contained no commonly determined cytokines, such as IL-6, IL-8, GRO-&#x3b1;, MCP-1, RANTES, and GM-CSF, which indicates that secretion of these cytokines is not predominantly mediated through PS-EVs. Nevertheless, the altered protein content of PS-EVs can still participate in the modulation of the fibroblast metabolism and phenotype as p21 was accumulated in fibroblasts influenced by EVs derived from CPD18-treated FaDu cells. The altered protein content of PS-EVs (data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD037164) also provides information about the cellular compartments and processes that are affected by the applied autophagy modulators. Video Abstract.

### Keywords
Extracelular vesicles, Inhibitors, Head and neck cancer, Inductors., Autophagy

### Affiliations
Proteomics Core Facility and Research Group Proteomics
CEITEC-MU
Masaryk University
Brno, Czech Republic
Proteomics Core Facility and Research Group Proteomics, CEITEC-MU, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic

### Submitter
David Potesil

### Lab Head
Dr Zbynek Zdrahal
Proteomics Core Facility and Research Group Proteomics, CEITEC-MU, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic


