### Accession
PXD002552

### Title
Ubiquitinome UPS -  Quantitative proteomics reveals extensive changes in the ubiquitinome after perturbation of the proteasome by targeted dsRNA mediated subunit knockdown in Drosophila

### Description
In eukaryotic cells, short-lived, regulatory and misfolded or denatured proteins are degraded by the ubiquitin–proteasome system (UPS), a highly regulated mechanism including the active marking of proteins for proteasomal degradation by ubiquitin. The UPS is critical in regulating proteostasis and dysfunctioning of this system has been implicated in diseases such as cancer and neurodegenerative disorders. We have investigated the effects of proteasome malfunctioning in Drosophila by monitoring the global proteome and ubiquitinome using SILAC proteomics. The proteasome was inactivated by either chemical inhibitors or by dsRNA mediated knockdown of specific proteasome subunit constituents. Upon proteasome perturbation both the global proteome and the ubiquitinome were remodeled to a great extent, albeit that the overall impact on the ubiquitinome was much more dramatic. The abundances of ~10% of all observable proteins were increased as a result of both de novo synthesis and of accumulation of ubiquitinated proteins. In the ubiquitinome analysis ~14,000 diGly peptides were identified and most of these could also be quantified. The far majority of diGly peptides showed increased levels, indicating that the pool of ubiquitinated proteins is highly dynamic. Interestingly, because of the high level of detail the ubiquitination dynamics of individual proteins could be explored. Several examples (e.g., Rps3 and H2B) will be discussed, in which different target lysine residues show either increased or decreased ubiquitination on the same protein, suggesting the occurrence of simultaneous and possibly functionally different ubiquitination events. In conclusion, the combination of quantitative proteomic methods with dsRNA mediated knockdown of individual subunits of the 26S proteasome offers a powerful tool to study the dynamics of the (modified) proteome upon perturbation of the UPS. This strategy opens up new avenues for the dissection of the mode of action of this cellular machinery, both under proteostasis and proteotoxic conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Protein digestion and fractionation: Protein lysates were reduced with 10 mM dithiotreitol (DTT) for 1 h at room temperature followed by alkylation with 55 mM chloroacetamide (CAM) for 1 h in the dark. The mixture was diluted four times with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer before the addition of CaCl2 (1 mM final concentration). Proteins were digested with sequencing grade trypsin (1:100 (w:w), Roche) overnight at room temperature. Alternatively, proteins were digested with LysC (1:100 (w:w), Wako Chemicals) for 1 h at room temperature before trypsinization. Protein digests were desalted using a Sep-Pak tC18 Vac cartridge (Waters) and eluted with 80% acetonitrile (AcN). Tryptic peptides were fractionated by HILIC on an Agilent 1100 HPLC system using a 5 µm particle size 4.6 x 250 mm TSKgel amide-80 column (Tosoh Biosciences). 200 µg of tryptic digest in 80% AcN was loaded onto the column. Peptides were eluted using a non-linear gradient from 80% B (100% AcN) to 100% A (20 mM ammonium formate in water) with a flow of 1 ml/min. Sixteen 6 ml fractions were collected, lyophilized and pooled into 8 final fractions. Each fraction was then analyzed by nanoflow LC-MS/MS as described below.  DiGly peptide enrichment: DiGly-modified peptides were enriched by immunoprecipitation using PTMScan® ubiquitin remnant motif (K-Ɛ-GG) antibody bead conjugate (Cell Signaling Technology), essentially according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Unbound peptides were removed by washing and the captured peptides were eluted with a low pH buffer. Eluted peptides were analyzed by nanoflow LC-MS/MS as described below.  Nanoflow LC-MS/MS:  was performed on an EASY-nLC system (Thermo) coupled to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo), operating in positive mode and equipped with a nanospray source. Peptide mixtures were trapped on a ReproSil C18 reversed phase column (Dr Maisch GmbH; column dimensions 1.5 cm × 100 µm, packed in-house) at a flow rate of 8 µl/min. Peptide separation was performed on ReproSil C18 reversed phase column (Dr Maisch GmbH; column dimensions 15 cm × 50 µm, packed in-house) using a linear gradient from 0 to 80% B (A = 0.1% FA; B = 80% (v/v) AcN, 0.1 % FA) in 70 or 120 min and at a constant flow rate of 250 nl/min. The column eluent was directly sprayed into the ESI source of the mass spectrometer. Mass spectra were acquired in continuum mode; fragmentation of the peptides was performed in data-dependent mode by HCD.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis: Mass spectrometric raw data were analyzed using the MaxQuant software suite (version 1.5.2.8 (49, 50)) for identification and relative quantification of proteins. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 for proteins and peptides and a minimum peptide length of 6 amino acids were required. The Andromeda search engine was used to search the MS/MS spectra against the Drosophila melanogaster Uniprot database (release DROME_2014_10.fasta, containing 23,336 entries) concatenated with the reversed versions of all sequences and a contaminant database listing typical background proteins and supplemented with several known Drosophila viral proteins. A maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. The precursor mass tolerance and fragment mass tolerance were set to 15 ppm and 20 mmu, respectively, for Q Exactive spectra. The maximum precursor ion charge state used for searching was 7 and the enzyme specificity was set to trypsin. Further modifications were cysteine carbamidomethylation (fixed) as well as protein methionine oxidation, Lys ubiquitination and STY phosphorylation (variable). Heavy-to-light (H:L) ratios were calculated by MaxQuant and the minimum ratio count was set to 1, while peptide spectra for proteins quantified with a ratio count of 1 were checked manually. Only proteins that were identified and quantified both in the forward and reverse assays and with consistent ratios, were taken into account for further analysis. For label free quantitation (LFQ), the minimal ratio count was set to 1 and iBAQ log fit and match between run were used. Protein sets were further analyzed with Perseus (version 1.5.0.15), the gene ontology (GO) software DAVID (version 6.7, available from http://david.abcc.ncifcrf.gov/, (51)) and in-house developed software (52). Two-sided two-sample t-test were performed in Perseus (53) using 250 randomizations and further settings FDR=0.05 and S0=0.5. Hierarchical clustering was performed using the following settings: row tree: distance Euclidian; linkage: average; number of clusters: 300; column tree: distance Euclidian; linkage:  average; number of clusters: 300.

### Publication Abstract
The ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS), a highly regulated mechanism including the active marking of proteins by ubiquitin to be degraded, is critical in regulating proteostasis. Dysfunctioning of the UPS has been implicated in diseases such as cancer and neurodegenerative disorders. Here we investigate the effects of proteasome malfunctioning on global proteome and ubiquitinome dynamics using SILAC proteomics in Drosophila S2 cells. dsRNA-mediated knockdown of specific proteasome target subunits is used to inactivate the proteasome. Upon this perturbation, both the global proteome and the ubiquitinome become modified to a great extent, with the overall impact on the ubiquitinome being the most dramatic. The abundances of &#x223c;10% of all proteins are increased, while the abundances of the far majority of over 14&#x202f;000 detected diGly peptides are increased, suggesting that the pool of ubiquitinated proteins is highly dynamic. Remarkably, several proteins show heterogeneous ubiquitination dynamics, with different lysine residues on the same protein showing either increased or decreased ubiquitination. This suggests the occurrence of simultaneous and functionally different ubiquitination events. This strategy offers a powerful tool to study the response of the ubiquitinome upon interruption of normal UPS activity by targeted interference and opens up new avenues for the dissection of the mode of action of individual components of the proteasome. Because this is to our knowledge the first comprehensive ubiquitinome screen upon proteasome malfunctioning in a fruit fly cell system, this data set will serve as a valuable repository for the Drosophila community.

### Keywords
Digly, Ubiquitinome, Lc-ms/ms, Silac, Proteasome

### Affiliations
Proteomics Center, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Jeroen Demmers

### Lab Head
Dr Jeroen Demmers
Proteomics Center, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands


