### Accession
PXD000704

### Title
Glycoprotein Signatures for Aggressive Prostate Cancer via SWATH mass spectrometry

### Description
The identification of biomarkers indicating the level of aggressiveness of prostate cancer (PCa) addresses an urgent clinical need to minimize the general over-treatment of patients with non-aggressive PCa, which account for the majority of PCa cases. In this study we combined N-glycopeptide isolation and SWATH-MS towards the molecular characterization of tumor malignancy and aggressiveness.   Here, we isolated formerly N-linked glycopeptides from normal prostate (n=10), non-aggressive (n=22), aggressive (n=16) and metastatic PCa (n=25) tumor tissues and analyzed the samples by SWATH-MS, an emerging data independent mass spectrometric acquisition method that generates a single MS file containing fragment ion spectra of all ionized species of a sample. The resulting datasets were searched using a targeted data analysis strategy where a priori spectral reference library representing known N-glycosites of the human proteome was used to identify groups of signals in the SWATH-MS data. On-average we identified 1430 N-glycosites from each SWATH map of which 1057 were quantified across all samples. The 220 glycoproteins that showed significant quantitative changes associated diverse biological processes with the level of PCa aggressiveness and metastasis and indicated functional relationships with common PCa genomic mutations.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted using cell lysis buffer (50 mM Tris, pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% SDS, 0.5% Na Deoxycholate, 1% Triton X-100). BCA assay was performed and 100 μg of total protein mass per specimen was used to extract formerly N-linked glycopeptides by the SPEG procedure. Briefly, the proteins were alkylated and digested into peptides which were cleaned up by C18 chromatography prior to SPEG. The peptides were treated with sodium periodate to oxidize the glycan moieties of glycopeptides and purified again by reversed phase chromatography. The sample was then conjugated to the Affi-gel Hydrazine resin (Bio-Rad) overnight. The unbound peptides were removed by an extensive washing procedure. N-linked glycopeptides were released via PNGase F. Finally de-glycopeptides were used for downstream MS analysis. To generate a SWATH spectral library and to quantify the glycopeptides from each tissue group, equal amounts of peptide samples from each tissue group were pooled together and analyzed by LC-MS/MS. In addition, small-scale sample pools (from 5 individual samples each) were generated for non-aggressive, aggressive and metastatic prostate tumors.

### Data Protocol
For shotgun: Profile-mode .wiff files from shotgun data acquisition were converted to mzML files in centroided format using the AB Sciex Data Converter v.1.3 and then further converted to mzXML files using MSConvert v.3.04.238. The MS2 spectra were queried against the canonical SwissProt complete proteome database for human (Nov. 2012) appended with common contaminants and reversed sequence decoys (40,951 protein sequences including decoys). The SEQUEST database search through Sorcerer PE version 4.2 included the following criteria: static modifications of 57.02146 Da for cysteines, variable modifications of 15.99491 Da for methionine oxidations, and modifications of 0.98406 Da for asparagines (formerly N-glycosylated asparagines are converted to aspartic acids by PNGase F release). The mass tolerances mono-isotopic parent and fragment ion were set to be 50 p.p.m; semi-tryptic peptides and peptides with up to two missed cleavages were allowed. The identified peptides were processed and analyzed through Trans-Proteomic Pipeline 4.5.2 (TPP) and search results were validated using the PeptideProphet score. N-glycosylation motif information was used in PeptideProphet.  For SWATH: As descried previously, the SWATH targeted data analysis was carried out using OpenSWATH (http://www.openswath.org/) running on an internal computing cluster. OpenSWATH automatically integrates peak group extraction and a decoy scoring system using mProphet to estimate FDR.

### Publication Abstract
The identification of biomarkers indicating the level of aggressiveness of prostate cancer (PCa) will address the urgent clinical need to minimize the general overtreatment of patients with non-aggressive PCa, who account for the majority of PCa cases. Here, we isolated formerly N-linked glycopeptides from normal prostate (n = 10) and from non-aggressive (n = 24), aggressive (n = 16), and metastatic (n = 25) PCa tumor tissues and analyzed the samples using SWATH mass spectrometry, an emerging data-independent acquisition method that generates a single file containing fragment ion spectra of all ionized species of a sample. The resulting datasets were searched using a targeted data analysis strategy in which an a priori spectral reference library representing known N-glycosites of the human proteome was used to identify groups of signals in the SWATH mass spectrometry data. On average we identified 1430 N-glycosites from each sample. Out of those, 220 glycoproteins showed significant quantitative changes associated with diverse biological processes involved in PCa aggressiveness and metastasis and indicated functional relationships. Two glycoproteins, N-acylethanolamine acid amidase and protein tyrosine kinase 7, that were significantly associated with aggressive PCa in the initial sample cohort were further validated in an independent set of patient tissues using tissue microarray analysis. The results suggest that N-acylethanolamine acid amidase and protein tyrosine kinase 7 may be used as potential tissue biomarkers to avoid overtreatment of non-aggressive PCa.

### Keywords
Human, Glycoproteome, Swath, Prostate

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich

### Submitter
Yansheng Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Ruedi Aebersold
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich


