### Accession
PXD007115

### Title
Proteome Turnover in Bloodstream and Procyclic form Trypanosoma brucei Measured by Quantitative Proteomics

### Description
Cellular proteins vary significantly in both abundance and turnover rates. These parameters depend upon their rates of synthesis and degradation and it is useful to have look-up data on protein turnover rates when, for example, designing genetic knock-down experiments or assessing the potential usefulness of covalent enzyme inhibitors. Little is known about the nature and regulation of protein turnover in Trypanosoma brucei, the etiological agent human and animal African trypanosomiasis.

### Sample Protocol
Tryptic peptides were prepared using the FASP method [12] with minor modifications. Briefly, BSF and PCF samples were defrosted, vortexed, reduced with 100 mM DTT by heating at 50 ˚C for 20 min and combined 1:1 to the corresponding R10K8 labelled BSF or PCF lysate. Samples were mixed with 8M urea in 0.1M Tris-HCl pH 8.5, placed inside spin filters (Vivacon 500, 10,000 MWCO) and washed with this buffer as described in the original protocol. Alkylation was performed using 50 mM iodoacetamide (freshly prepared) in the same buffer for 20 min at room temperature in the dark. Further washes with 8M urea buffer, followed by washes with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer, were performed as in the original protocol. Digestion with trypsin (trypsin modified, sequencing grade, Roche) was performed with enzyme protein ratio 1:100 overnight at 37 ˚C inside a humid chamber. Tryptic peptides were eluted by centrifugation into low binding Eppendorf tubes. Spin filters were washed with 50 L 0.5M NaCl, combined with the first eluate and acidified with 10 L 10% TFA, then further diluted with 400 L of 0.1% TFA, desalted using C18-RP microspin silica columns (Nest group, USA) and freeze dried.

### Data Protocol
Data was processed using MaxQuant version 1.5.8.3 which incorporates the Andromeda search engine [13]. Proteins were identified by searching a protein sequence database containing T. brucei brucei 927 annotated proteins (Version 32, downloaded from TriTrypDB [14], http://www.tritrypdb.org/) supplemented with frequently observed contaminants (porcine trypsin, bovine serum albumins and human keratins) and the Tb427.BES40.22 VSG protein as internal control. Search parameters specified an MS tolerance of 5 ppm, an MS/MS tolerance at 0.5 Da and full trypsin specificity, allowing for up to three missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation were allowed as variable modifications. Peptides were required to be at least 6 amino acids in length, and false discovery rates (FDRs) of 0.01 were calculated at the level of peptides, proteins and modification sites based on the number of hits against the reversed sequence database. A minimum of two peptides were quantified for each protein.

### Publication Abstract
<b>Background</b>: Cellular proteins vary significantly in both abundance and turnover rates. These parameters depend upon their rates of synthesis and degradation and it is useful to have access to data on protein turnover rates when, for example, designing genetic knock-down experiments or assessing the potential usefulness of covalent enzyme inhibitors. Little is known about the nature and regulation of protein turnover in <i>Trypanosoma brucei</i>, the etiological agent of human and animal African trypanosomiasis. <b>Methods</b>: To establish baseline data on <i>T.</i> <i>brucei</i> proteome turnover, a Stable Isotope Labelling with Amino acids in Cell culture (SILAC)-based mass spectrometry analysis was performed to reveal the synthesis and degradation profiles for thousands of proteins in the bloodstream and procyclic forms of this parasite. <b>Results</b>: This analysis revealed a slower average turnover rate of the procyclic form proteome relative to the bloodstream proteome. As expected, many of the proteins with the fastest turnover rates have functions in the cell cycle and in the regulation of cytokinesis in both bloodstream and procyclic forms. Moreover, the cellular localization of <i>T. brucei</i> proteins correlates with their turnover, with mitochondrial and glycosomal proteins exhibiting slower than average turnover rates. <b>Conclusions</b>: The intention of this study is to provide the trypanosome research community with a resource for protein turnover data for any protein or group of proteins. To this end, bioinformatic analyses of these data are made available via an open-access web resource with data visualization functions.

### Keywords
Trypanosoma, Procyclic, Turnover, Proteomics, Bloodstream

### Affiliations
Regius Professor of Life Sciences Wellcome Centre for Anti-Infectives Research School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee  Dundee DD1 5EH
Dundee University

### Submitter
Michele Tinti

### Lab Head
Dr Sir Michael Ferguson
Regius Professor of Life Sciences Wellcome Centre for Anti-Infectives Research School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee  Dundee DD1 5EH


