### Accession
PXD035151

### Title
Search for host factors located in the vicinity of the cytoplasmic tails of the mumps virus glycoproteins

### Description
Mumps virus (MuV) is the etiological agent of mumps, a disease characterized by painful swelling of the parotid glands and often accompanied by severe complications. To understand the molecular mechanism of MuV infection, a functional analysis of the involved host factors is required. However, little is known about the host factors involved in MuV infection, especially those involved in the late stage of infection. In this project, we introduced the N-terminal and C-terminal fragments of split-TurboID into the cytoplasmic domains of hemagglutinin-neuraminidase and fusion proteins, respectively, and confirmed reconstitution and functional ligase activity of split-TurboID. Following affinity purification and mass spectrometry, 641 proteins were identified as being significantly enriched in the split-TurboID-expressing cells.

### Sample Protocol
For biotin labeling of transfected cells, the cells were treated with 50 M biotin (Nacalai Tesque) for 12 h. The cells were washed twice with cold PBS, lysed in cell lysis buffer, and processed for immunoprecipitation and immunoblotting. For enrichment of biotinylated proteins, the cell lysate was incubated overnight with streptavidin-coated magnetic beads (Dynabeads MyOne Streptavidin C1, Thermo Fisher Scientific) on a rotator at 4 ºC. The beads were then washed with cell lysis buffer three times and processed for immunoblotting.  For mass spectrometry analysis, cells were labeled with biotin as described above and then lysed with lysis buffer 1 (50 mM Tris-HCl [pH 7.4], 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, 0.5% deoxycholate [DOC], 2 mM MgCl2, 20 U benzonase, and protease inhibitor cocktail). After being incubated at 4 °C for 5 min, the cell lysate was mixed with an equal volume of lysis buffer 2 (50 mM Tris-HCl [pH 7.4], 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, 0.5% DOC, 2 mM TCEP, 0.2% SDS, and 2 mM EDTA) and further incubated at 4 °C for 5 min. After the cell debris was removed by centrifugation at 15,000 rpm for 10 min at 4 °C, the resulting supernatant was immunoprecipitated using NanoLink streptavidin magnetic beads (TriLink, San Diego, CA, USA). The beads were washed with wash buffers 1 to 4 in order (wash buffer 1: 50 mM Tris-HCl [pH 7.4] and 2% SDS; wash buffer 2: 20 mM Tris-HCl [pH 7.4], 500 mM NaCl, 1% Triton-X100, 0.1% DOC, and 1 mM EDTA; wash buffer 3: 10 mM Tris-HCl [pH 7.4], 250 mM LiCl, 1% NP-40, 0.1% DOC, and 1 mM EDTA; and wash buffer 4: 50 mM Tris-HCl [pH 7.4] and 0.1% Triton-X100). The beads were then incubated at 100 ºC for 5 min in elution buffer (5 mM biotin, 20 mM Tris-HCl [pH 7.4], 150 mM NaCl, 2% SDS, and 5 mM TCEP). A final concentration of 10 mM iodoacetamide was added to the eluted sample, and alkylation treatment was performed at room temperature for 30 min. The biotinylated proteins were precipitated with acetone, and the resulting precipitates were re-dissolved in digestion buffer (100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 0.05% decyl β-D-glucopyranoside, and 7 M guanidine hydrochloride) and treated with lysyl endopeptidase (Fuji Film Wako Chemicals, Osaka, Japan) at 37 °C for 3 h. These samples were further digested with Trypsin TPCK (Sigma) at 37 °C for 12 h and then centrifuged at 15,000 rpm for 1 min. The resulting supernatant was subjected to liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data sets were analyzed by Proteome Discoverer 2.2 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide identification was performed using the SEQUEST algorithm with Swiss-Prot (Human: 20,386 entries) as the protein database. The tolerances were specified as 10 ppm and 0.02 Da for precursor and fragment ions, respectively. Trypsin was selected as the digestion enzyme, and up to 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Oxidation (M), biotinylation (K), carbamidomethylation (C) and protein N-terminal acetylation were added as modifications. For protein quantification, a label-free quantification method using precursor ions was used.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Split-turboid, Glycoprotein, Mumps virus, Proximity labeling

### Affiliations
Robotic Biology Institute Inc. Scientific support team
Department of Virology III, National Institute of Infectious Diseases

### Submitter
tomohisa hatta

### Lab Head
Dr Hiroshi Katoh
Department of Virology III, National Institute of Infectious Diseases


