### Accession
PXD030723

### Title
Proteomic profiling of idiopathic Parkinson’s disease primary patient cells by SWATH-MS

### Description
We performed Sequential Window Acquisition of all THeoretical Mass Spectra (SWATH-MS) on primary patient olfactory neuroepithelial derived cells (ONS) from both idiopathic PD (iPD) and healthy controls and identified 228 differentially quantified proteins. Reactome pathway analysis revealed that the “Neutrophil degranulation and XBP1(S) activates chaperone genes pathways” were the most affected, indicating disruption of the secretory pathway. Upon closer inspection we identified that proteins associated with the endoplasmic reticulum and the secretory pathways were the most abundantly changed, in particular proteins associated with the unfolded protein response (UPR). In order to validate this finding, we performed qRT-PCR analysis on patient ONS subjected to ER stressors and confirmed that the iPD patient cells had elevated UPR responses, in particular to tunicamycin mediated ER stress.

### Sample Protocol
Cell line pellets were resuspended in 500 uL 8 M urea, 50 mM NH4HCO3, pH 7.8 and sonicated on ice. The lysate was centrifuged and the protein content of the supernatant determined using a BCA assay. Lysate (500 ug) was then reduced (4 mM DTT), 30 min at 21°C to avoid carbamylation due to urea and alkylated (12 mM iodoacetamide), 50 min at 21°C in the dark.  Samples were digested with Lys-C (Wako) for 4 hrs at room temperature. Next they were diluted with 50 mM NH4HCO3, pH 7.8 to give a concentration of 1 M urea, trypsin (Promega) was added and digestion performed overnight at 21°C. Samples were subjected to SPE using 1 mL 3M Empore C18 SPE cartridges, lysophilised and resuspended in 0.5% (v/v) formic acid.

### Data Protocol
Data was analysed using PeakView (2.2.0.11391) and MS/MS (ALL) with SWATH (2.0.0.2003) with the following settings; 20 peptides petr protein, 6 transitions per peptide, 99% peptide confidence, 1% FDR, exclude modified peptides, use 8 min RT window and 75 ppm width. Data was output from PeakView in the form of a spreadsheet for further analysis.  The FDR threshold was set at 1% at the peptide level, with normalisation at the peptide level using Normalyzer⁠, LOESS normalisation was used for the analysis. Peptides were rolled up using InfernoRDN⁠ and the R-rollup unction. An ANOVA was performed with InfernoRDN and multiple-test correction performed with SGoF+.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Parkinson's, Lc-ms/ms, Swath

### Affiliations
Children's Medical Research Institute

### Submitter
Peter Hains

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Hains
Children's Medical Research Institute


