### Accession
PXD037317

### Title
Breast cancer cell MCF7+CYP1B1-AS1 LC-MS/MS

### Description
Long non-coding Rnas (lncRNAs) can act as oncogenes or tumor suppressors to regulate cancer development. We found that CYP1B1-AS1 was down-regulated in breast cancer tissues and correlated with the prognosis of patients. Lentiviral vectors were used to overexpress CYP1B1-AS1 in MCF7 cells, and the target proteins bound to CYP1B1-AS1 were detected by pulldown assay and mass spectrometry. The function of CYP1B1-AS1 is unknown. Our study revealed the molecular mechanism of CYP1B1-AS1 inhibiting breast cancer proliferation in breast cancer, and provided a new strategy for the treatment of breast cancer targeting lncRNA.

### Sample Protocol
Experiments were performed using the Pierce Magnetic RNA-Protein Pull-Down Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Sense and antisense CYP1B1-AS1 were amplified and labeled with desthiobiotin, then incubated with streptavidin magnetic beads to isolate proteins interacting with sense or antisense CYP1B1-AS1, all according to the manufacturer's instructions.

### Data Protocol
The pull-down protein solution was detected with a high-performance liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometer (LC-MS/MS) system consisting of an L-3000 high performance liquid chromatography system (RIGOL, Beijing, China) and an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cyp1b1-as1, Mcf7

### Affiliations
Department of Clinical Laboratory, The Affiliated Cancer Hospital of Nanjing Medical University & Jiangsu Cancer Hospital & Jiangsu Institute of Cancer Research,  Nanjing,  China.
 Jiangsu Cancer Hospital

### Submitter
li tang

### Lab Head
Dr Feng Yan
Department of Clinical Laboratory, The Affiliated Cancer Hospital of Nanjing Medical University & Jiangsu Cancer Hospital & Jiangsu Institute of Cancer Research,  Nanjing,  China.


