### Accession
PXD022353

### Title
Proteomics of Pseudomonas putida PaW85 TruA and RluA deficient strains

### Description
Understanding the proteomic changes in Pseudomonas putida caused by the lack of pseudouridine synthases TruA or RluA.

### Sample Protocol
Three independent cultures of each P. putida strain (wt, ΔtruA, ΔrluA) were grown overnight in glc+CAA media. Cells were diluted into fresh glc+CAA media to OD~0.1, cells were harvested in mid-log phased (OD580~1.0). Label-free quantification of whole cell proteome was performed by LC-MS/MS with LTQ Orbitrap XL (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Agilent 1200 nanoflow LC via nanoelectrospray ion source (Proxeon).

### Data Protocol
Data was analysed using Maxquant (1.6.1.0) and Perseus (1.5.4.1) software. Detailed Maxquant search parameters in file "parameters_26.02.2019.txt". In Perseus only proteins that were identified in all the biological replicates (3) were quantified.

### Publication Abstract
Pseudouridines are known to be important for optimal translation. In this study we demonstrate an unexpected link between pseudouridylation of tRNA and mutation frequency in <i>Pseudomonas</i> species. We observed that the lack of pseudouridylation activity of pseudouridine synthases TruA or RluA elevates the mutation frequency in <i>Pseudomonas putida</i> 3 to 5-fold. The absence of TruA but not RluA elevates mutation frequency also in <i>Pseudomonas aeruginosa</i>. Based on the results of genetic studies and analysis of proteome data, the mutagenic effect of the pseudouridylation deficiency cannot be ascribed to the involvement of error-prone DNA polymerases or malfunctioning of DNA repair pathways. In addition, although the deficiency in TruA-dependent pseudouridylation made <i>P. putida</i> cells more sensitive to antimicrobial compounds that may cause oxidative stress and DNA damage, cultivation of bacteria in the presence of reactive oxygen species (ROS)-scavenging compounds did not eliminate the mutator phenotype. Thus, the elevated mutation frequency in the absence of tRNA pseudouridylation could be the result of a more specific response or, alternatively, of a cumulative effect of several small effects disturbing distinct cellular functions, which remain undetected when studied independently. This work suggests that pseudouridines link the translation machinery to mutation frequency.

### Keywords
Rlua, Trua, Pseudomonas putida

### Affiliations
University of Tartu
University of Tartu, Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Department of Genetics

### Submitter
Karl Jürgenstein

### Lab Head
Dr Maia Kivisaar
University of Tartu, Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Department of Genetics


