### Accession
PXD005721

### Title
Associating Growth Conditions with Cellular Components (AG3C) in E. coli

### Description
This project makes in depth measurements of protein and rna gene expression of E. coli under various environmental conditions including glycerol, lactate, gluconate, NaCl and MgSO4.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were processed according to the methods described in PMID: 26275208

### Data Protocol
Data was processed according to the methods described in PMID: 26275208  Many samples have multiple technical replicates labeled (1a or 1b for ms preparation 1 injection a or b). These technical replicates are averaged in the final analysis. MS searches were run using comet, MSGF+, and XTandem search engines using a E. coli Rel606 proteome as reference, reversing the protein sequences to serve as decoys, and adding standard contaminates to the database. The three searches were then combined using the MSblender software. Search result files for all three search engines are included in the submission.

### Publication Abstract
Modern systems biology requires extensive, carefully curated measurements of cellular components in response to different environmental conditions. While high-throughput methods have made transcriptomics and proteomics datasets widely accessible and relatively economical to generate, systematic measurements of both mRNA and protein abundances under a wide range of different conditions are still relatively rare. Here we present a detailed, genome-wide transcriptomics and proteomics dataset of E. coli grown under 34 different conditions. Additionally, we provide measurements of doubling times and in-vivo metabolic fluxes through the central carbon metabolism. We manipulate concentrations of sodium and magnesium in the growth media, and we consider four different carbon sources glucose, gluconate, lactate, and glycerol. Moreover, samples are taken both in exponential and stationary phase, and we include two extensive time-courses, with multiple samples taken between 3&#x2009;hours and 2 weeks. We find that exponential-phase samples systematically differ from stationary-phase samples, in particular at the level of mRNA. Regulatory responses to different carbon sources or salt stresses are more moderate, but we find numerous differentially expressed genes for growth on gluconate and under salt and magnesium stress. Our data set provides a rich resource for future computational modeling of E. coli gene regulation, transcription, and translation.

### Keywords
Gluconate, Mgso4, Lactate, Salt stress nacl, Multi-omic comparative dataset., Glycerol, Protein expression, Physiology, E. coli, Growth curve

### Affiliations
University of Texas
University of Texas Austin

### Submitter
John Houser

### Lab Head
Dr Claus Wilke
University of Texas Austin


