### Accession
PXD018744

### Title
Multilayered proteomics uncovers Notch/PKC targeting to overcome resistance to Notch inhibition in acute lymphoblastic leukemia

### Description
NOTCH1 is a crucial oncogenic driver in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL), making it an attractive therapeutic target. However, the success of targeted therapy using γ-secretase inhibitors (GSIs), small molecules blocking Notch cleavage and subsequent activation, has been limited due to toxicity and development of resistance, thus restricting their clinical efficacy. Here we systematically compare GSI resistant and sensitive cell states by quantitative mass spectrometry-based phosphoproteomics, using complementary models of resistance, including T-ALL patient-derived xenografts (PDX) models. Our datasets reveal common mechanisms of GSI resistance, including a distinct kinase signature that involves protein kinase C delta (PKCδ). We demonstrate that the PKC inhibitor sotrastaurin enhances the anti-leukemic activity of GSI in PDX models and completely abrogates the development of acquired GSI resistance “in-vitro”. Overall, we highlight the potential of proteomics to dissect alterations in cellular signaling and identify druggable pathways in cancer.

### Sample Protocol
Dataset-1 & Dataset-2 Cells were lysed in hot GndCl buffer. Proteins were digested with lysC and trypsin in solution over-night. Peptides were cleaned up on C18 (Sep-pack) and TMT-labeled. For proteome analysis, 120 ug of peptides were resuspended in 5 mM ABC and fractionated in 46 fractions through offline High pH reversed phase HPLC fractionation. For phosphoproteome analysis, phosphopeptides were enriched by titansphere chromatography, using titanium dioxide beads, and subjected to Offline High pH reversed phase HPLC fractionation (12 fractions). Samples were analyzed on an Easy-nLC 1000 (Proxeon) coupled to a Q-Exactive HF-X MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Dataset-3 Samples were lysed in hot SDS buffer. Proteins were digested with lysC and trypsin after aggregation of magnetic ammine beads (PAC method). For proteome analysis, peptides were directly loaded on evotips (Evosep) for MS analysis. For phosphoproteome analysis, 50-250 µg of peptide were used for phospho-enrichment with magnetic Ti-IMAC HP beads. Phosphopeptides were loaded on evotips for MS analysis. Sample were analyzed as single-shot on the Evosep One system, interfaced online with an Orbitrap Exploris 480 MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
DDA raw LC-MS/MS files were processed using the MaxQuant software, with Andromeda search engine against the human Swissprot database. DIA raw files were processed with Spectronaut version 14 (Biognosys), using a library-free approach (directDIA). The FASTA file used was the human Swissport database. Most of the bioinformatics analysis has been performed using the Perseus software.

### Publication Abstract
Notch1 is a crucial oncogenic driver in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL), making it an attractive therapeutic target. However, the success of targeted therapy using &#x3b3;-secretase inhibitors (GSIs), small molecules blocking Notch cleavage and subsequent activation, has been limited due to development of resistance, thus restricting its clinical efficacy. Here, we systematically compare GSI resistant and sensitive cell states by quantitative mass spectrometry-based phosphoproteomics, using complementary models of resistance, including T-ALL patient-derived xenografts (PDX) models. Our datasets reveal common mechanisms of GSI resistance, including a distinct kinase signature that involves protein kinase C delta. We demonstrate that the PKC inhibitor sotrastaurin enhances the anti-leukemic activity of GSI in PDX models and completely abrogates the development of acquired GSI resistance in vitro. Overall, we highlight the potential of proteomics to dissect alterations in cellular signaling and identify druggable pathways in cancer.

### Keywords
Notch signaling, Proteomics, Pkcδ, Drug resistance, T-all

### Affiliations
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center For Protein Research, Copenhagen University, Copenhagen
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research Proteomics Program University of Copenhagen Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences Blegdamsvej 3b DK-2200 Copenhagen Denmark

### Submitter
Giulia Franciosa

### Lab Head
Dr Jesper Velgaard Olsen
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research Proteomics Program University of Copenhagen Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences Blegdamsvej 3b DK-2200 Copenhagen Denmark


