### Accession
PXD018048

### Title
HepG2 GalNAc-T1/2 Bump-and-hole secretome glycopeptide data

### Description
Engineered GalNAc-T glycosyltransferases were used to incorporate a chemically modified GalNAC analog into the secretome of HepG2 cells. The chemical modification included a bioorthogonal alkyne tag that allowed for introduction of a clickable, acid-cleavable biotin-picolyl-azide. Glycoproteins were enriched using Streptavidin, and on-bead digestion yielded solid phase-bound glycopeptides that were released with acid. Glycopeptides were analysed.

### Sample Protocol
HepG2-T1-KO and HepG2-T2-KO cells (from Katrine Schjoldager and Hans Wandall, University of Copenhagen) stably transfected with engineered human AGX1 F383A and WT-GalNAc-T1, T1 (I238A/L295A), WT-T2, or T2 (I253A/L310A) were seeded into one 10 cm dish per treatment, using 8 mL growth medium without hygromycin B. Cells were directly induced with 0.5 µg/mL Dox. After 24 h, cells were Dox-induced again and fed with either caged GalNAc-1-phosphate analog 5 (25 µM) or DMSO vehicle. After another 24 h, the medium was aspirated, and cells were washed with pre-warmed serum-free low-Glc DMEM. Serum-free medium was added, cells were treated with Dox again, and either GalNAc-1-phosphate analog 5 or DMSO vehicle again. Cells were incubated for 20 h. Conditioned supernatant was collected and centrifuged for 5 min at 3000 g. The supernatant was concentrated to 2 mL using an Amicon Ultra-15 centrifuge filter (3 kDa MWCO, Millipore). Samples were stored at -80 °C until further use. Samples were treated with PNGase F (Promega, 5 µL of a 1:10 dilution in PBS) and incubated for 4 h at 37 °C. Samples were then treated in that order with 600 µM BTTAA, 300 µM CuSO4, 2.5 mM sodium ascorbate, 2.5 mM aminoguanidinium chloride, and 50 µM biotin-DADPS-picolyl azide for 3 h at r.t. Samples were transferred into 15 mL Falcon tubes and treated with 5 mL cold (-20 °C) methanol. Samples were left at -80 °C overnight, when a white precipitate had formed. Samples were centrifuged (3700 g, 20 min, 4 °C), the supernatant was discarded, and pellets were washed with 5 mL methanol twice, with centrifugation each time. The supernatant was removed and the pellet air-dried. Samples were treated with 250 µL 0.1% (w/v) Rapigest. Samples were sonicated in a water bath for 25 min and centrifuged (3700 g, 5 min, 4 °C). The supernatants were transferred to a fresh tube, and pellets were treated with 250 µL 6 M urea in PBS. Samples were sonicated and centrifuged again, the pellets treated with 250 µL PBS, sonicated and centrifuged again. All supernatants from solubilization steps were combined, and samples were diluted with PBS to 2 mL. Protein concentration was determined by BCA. Beads (UltraLink PLUS Streptavidin, 100 µL slurry) were washed with PBS twice in low-bind tubes (Eppendorf) and treated with the protein solutions. Samples were incubated for 16 h at room temperature under rotation. Beads were washed sequentially with 0.1% RapiGest in PBS (2x), 6 M urea in PBS (3x), and PBS (3x), and resuspended in PBS (200 µL). Beads were treated with 100 mM DTT (Thermo Fisher) in PBS (10 µL), and incubated at r.t. while shaking (950 rpm) for 30 min. Then, 500 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma Aldrich) in PBS (4 µL) was added and samples were shaken for another 30 min in the dark. Harvested and washed 3x with PBS and 50 mM ABC in LC/MS-grade water. Beads were resuspended in ABC buffer (200 µL), treated with RapiGest to a final concentration of 0.05% (w/v), and trypsin (0.5 µg in 1 µL ABC buffer). Samples were shaken at 37 °C for 2-3 h, and another 0.5 µg trypsin was added. The reactions were shaken overnight at 37 °C. The beads were harvested, washed with ABC (200 µL) and with LC-MS grade water (3x200 µL). Supernatants were discarded, and the beads were treated with 2% (v/v) formic acid in water (150 µL). Samples were shaken at r.t. for 30 min, and the cleavage step was repeated. The beads were washed with water (100 µL) and 1:1 MeCN/2% aq. FA (100 µL). All supernatants were combined for each sample, centrifuged (18000 g, 5 min, room temperature) and concentrated by Speedvac. Samples were dissolved in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water and used for mass spectrometry. Samples were analyzed by online nanoflow LC-MS/MS using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer coupled to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 HPLC. A portion of the sample (6.5 µL out of 8 µL) was loaded via autosampler isocratically onto a C18 nano pre-column using 0.1% formic acid in water (“Solvent A”). For pre-concentration and desalting, the column was washed with 2% ACN and 0.1% formic acid in water (“loading pump solvent”). Subsequently, the C18 nano pre-column was switched in line with the C18 nano separation column (75 µm x 250 mm EASYSpray (Thermo Fisher) containing 2 µm C18 beads) for gradient elution. The column was held at 40 °C using a column heater in the EASY-Spray ionization source (Thermo Fisher). The samples were eluted at a constant flow rate of 0.3 µL/min using a 90 minute gradient and a 140 minute instrument method. The gradient profile was as follows (min:% solvent B, 2% formic acid in acetonitrile) 0:3, 3:3, 93:35, 103:42, 104:95, 109:95, 110:3, 140:3.

### Data Protocol
The instrument method used an MS1 resolution of 60,000 at FWHM 400 m/z, an AGC target of 3e5, and a mass range from 300 to 1,500 m/z. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a repeat count of 3, repeat duration of 10 s, exclusion duration of 10 s. Only charge states 2-6 were selected for fragmentation. MS2s were generated at top speed for 3 s. HCD was performed on all selected precursor masses with the following parameters: isolation window of 2 m/z, 28-30% collision energy, orbitrap (resolution of 30,000) detection, and an AGC target of 1e4 ions. ETD was performed if (a) the precursor mass was between 300-1000 m/z and (b) 2 of 10 glyco and/or fingerprint ions (126.055, 138.055, 144.07, 168.065, 186.076, 204.086, 274.092, 292.103; 491.2241, 330.1554) were present at +/- 0.1 m/z and greater than 5% relative intensity. ETD parameters were as follows: calibrated charge-dependent ETD times, 2e5 reagent target, precursor AGC target 1e4. Data evaluation was performed with ByonicTM (Protein Metrics, Cupertino, USA). For protein IDs, Uniprot human proteome (downloaded June 26, 2016) was used as a reference database. Search parameters included semi-specific cleavage specificity at the C-terminal site of R and K, with two missed cleavages allowed. Mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm for MS1s, 0.1 Da for HCD MS2s, and 0.35 Da for ETD MS2s. Methionine oxidation (common 2), asparagine deamidation (common 2), and N-terminal acetylation (rare 1) were set as variable modifications with a total common max of 3, rare max of 1. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification. Peptide hits were filtered using a 1% FDR. Additionally, a cut-off value of Log Prob = 5 was set for protein hits. For glycopeptide analysis, search parameters included semi-specific cleavage specificity at the C-terminal site of R and K, with two missed cleavages allowed. Mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm for MS1s, 0.1 Da for HCD MS2s, and 0.35 Da for ETD MS2s. Methionine oxidation (common 2), asparagine deamidation (common 2), and N-terminal acetylation (rare 1) were set as variable modifications with a total common max of 2, rare max of 1. O-glycans were also set as variable modifications (common 2), using a custom database, whereby HexNAc, HexNAc-NeuAc, HexNAc-Hex, HexNAc-Hex-NeuAc, and HexNAc-Hex-NeuAc2 were searched with an additional 287.1371 m/z to account for the chemical modification. HCD was used to confirm that the peptides were glycosylated, whereas ETD spectra were used for site-localization of glycosylation sites. All spectra with these modifications were manually annotated.

### Publication Abstract
Studying posttranslational modifications classically relies on experimental strategies that oversimplify the complex biosynthetic machineries of living cells. Protein glycosylation contributes to essential biological processes, but correlating glycan structure, underlying protein, and disease-relevant biosynthetic regulation is currently elusive. Here, we engineer living cells to tag glycans with editable chemical functionalities while providing information on biosynthesis, physiological context, and glycan fine structure. We introduce a non-natural substrate biosynthetic pathway and use engineered glycosyltransferases to incorporate chemically tagged sugars into the cell surface glycome of the living cell. We apply the strategy to a particularly redundant yet disease-relevant human glycosyltransferase family, the polypeptide N-acetylgalactosaminyl transferases. This approach bestows a gain-of-chemical-functionality modification on cells, where the products of individual glycosyltransferases can be selectively characterized or manipulated to understand glycan contribution to major physiological processes.

### Keywords
Human, Galnac-t, Glycopeptide, Liver, Bioorthogonal, Hepg2, Click, Secretome

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry, Imperial College London, UK; Chemical Glycobiology Laboratory, The Francis Crick Institute, London
Imperial College London, The Francis Crick Institute

### Submitter
Benjamin Schumann

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin Schumann
Department of Chemistry, Imperial College London, UK; Chemical Glycobiology Laboratory, The Francis Crick Institute, London


