### Accession
PXD010073

### Title
Affinify Purification of EZH2 and phosphodeficient EZH2 identifies phosphorylation dependent interactions of EZH2

### Description
Overexpression of EZH2 in estrogen receptor negative (ER-) breast cancer promotes metastasis. EZH2 has been mainly studied as the catalytic component of the Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2) that mediates gene repression by trimethylating histone H3 at lysine 27 (H3K27me3). However, how EZH2 drives metastasis despite the low H3K27me3 levels observed in ER- breast cancer is unknown. We have shown that in human invasive carcinomas and distant metastases, cytoplasmic EZH2 phosphorylated at T367 is significantly associated with ER- disease and low H3K27me3 levels. Here, we explore the interactome of EZH2 and of a phosphodeficient mutant EZH2_T367A. We identified novel interactors of EZH2, and identified interactions that are dependent on the phosphorylation and cellular localization of EZH2 that may play a role in EZH2 dependent metastatic progression.

### Sample Protocol
MDA-MB-231 knockdown rescue cells expressing FLAG-EZH2 or FLAG-T367A were washed three times with PBS, harvested, and lysed in Pierce IP Lysis Buffer (#87797) containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Thermo Scientific #1861281) and immunoprecipitated with anti-FLAG antibody beads (Sigma M8823). Control samples were cells expressing empty vector that were lysed and processed as the test sampls. On-bead digestion followed by LC-MS/MS analysis was performed following the protocol optimized at the Proteomics Resource Facility at the University of Michigan. Briefly, the beads were resuspended in 50 ml of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer (pH ~8). Upon reduction (10 mM DTT) and alkylation (65 mM 2-chloroacetamide) of the cysteines, proteins were digested with 500 ng of sequencing grade, modified trypsin (Promega). Resulting peptides were resolved on a nano-capillary reverse phase column (Acclaim PepMap C18, 2 micron, 50 cm, ThermoScientific) using 0.1% formic acid/acetonitrile gradient at 300 nl min-1 585 (2-25% acetonitrile in 105 min; 25-40% in 20 min, followed by a 90% acetonitrile wash for 10 min and a further 25 min re-equilibration with 2% acetonitrile) and directly introduced in to Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose CA). MS1 scans were acquired at 120K resolution. Data-dependent high-energy C-trap dissociation MS/MS spectra were acquired with top speed option (3 sec) following each MS1 scan (relative CE ~28%)

### Data Protocol
Proteins were  identified by searching the data against Homo sapiens database (UniProtKB, v2014-4-13) using Proteome Discoverer (v2.1, Thermo Scientific).  Search parameters included MS1 mass tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment tolerance of 0.1Da; two missed cleavageswere allowed; carbamidimethylation   of   cysteine   was   considered   fixed   modification   and   oxidation   of methionine; deamidation of aspergine and glutamine; phosphorylation of Serine, Threonine and Tyrosine   were   considered   as variable  modifications. Percolator algorithm was used for discriminating between correct and incorrect identification and peptides/proteins with <1% FDR (false discovery rate) were retained for further analysis. Interactions with EZH2 and mutant EZH2 were scored using empirical fold-change scores (FC) and significance analysis of interactome (SAINT) probabilities for each interaction 601  calculated using the CRAPome resource21. To calculate the FC scores (the primary FC-A score)  602 and SAINT probabilities (using SAINTexpress 50), the three FLAG-IP replicates of cells expressing only the empty vector were used as negative controls. Replicates were combined in FC scoring and in SAINT probability calculation using average values of the three biological replicates. Briefly, the FC scores represent the increase (or decrease) in protein abundances (estimated using MS/MS spectral counts) in bait IPs relative to the control samples. SAINT calculates the probability that an interaction is a true positive using a model where true-positive and  false-positive  interactions  for  each  bait  are  modeled  statistically  as  distinct  Poisson distributions. A value of 1 indicates a high probability of a bona-fide interaction.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Cellular localization, Interactome, Affinity purification, Ezh2

### Affiliations
University of Michigan
Department of Pathology, University of Michigan

### Submitter
James Ropa

### Lab Head
Dr Celina Kleer
Department of Pathology, University of Michigan


