### Accession
PXD001004

### Title
Identification of LMTK3 protein by LC/MS/MS Analysis of 1D SDS PAGE Gel Bands

### Description
Identification of LMTK3 by LC/MS/MS. A plasmid encoding for full-length LMTK3 was overexpressed in MCF-7 breast cancer cells. Following antibody detection by WB, two bands of interest were seen at around 200 kDa and 150 kDa on the blotting membrane. Colloidal Coomassie (CCBB) staining was performed on a separate gel, to which the Western blot was aligned with the gel markers and a region of gel corresponding to the bands of interest were excised, trypsin digested and analysed by LC/MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
In-gel reduction, alkylation and digestion with trypsin were performed. Trypsin digestion was carried out O/N. Peptides were extracted from the gel pieces and resolved by reversed phase chromatography. The extract was pooled with the initial supernatant and lyophilised prior to LC/MS/MS. Chromatographic separations were performed using an EASY NanoLC system. The MS/MS analyses were conducted using collision energy profiles based on the mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) and the peptide’s charge state.

### Data Protocol
MS data was processed in peak lists with Proteome Discoverer v1.3 and parameters:  MS survey– Precursor mass Min 350 Da; Max 10000 Da.  MS/MS–ITMS in MS2 with CID fragmentation Peak lists were searched against Uniprot using Mascot v2.2 using parameters:  Ion mass tolerance: Precursor 10ppm-Fragment 0.8Da Tryptic digest with up to 3 missed cleavages Variable modifications:Acetyl (Protein N-term), Carbamidomethylation (C), Gln->pyro-glu (N-term Q) and Oxidation(M).  Target FDR0.01(Strict)–0.05(Relaxed)

### Publication Abstract
Lemur tyrosine kinase 3 (LMTK3) is associated with cell proliferation and endocrine resistance in breast cancer. We found that, in cultured breast cancer cell lines, LMTK3 promotes the development of a metastatic phenotype by inducing the expression of genes encoding integrin subunits. Invasive behavior in various breast cancer cell lines positively correlated with the abundance of LMTK3. Overexpression of LMTK3 in a breast cancer cell line with low endogenous LMTK3 abundance promoted actin cytoskeleton remodeling, focal adhesion formation, and adhesion to collagen and fibronectin in culture. Using SILAC (stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture) proteomic analysis, we found that LMTK3 increased the abundance of integrin subunits &#x3b1;5 and &#x3b2;1, encoded by ITGA5 and ITGB1. This effect depended on the CDC42 Rho family guanosine triphosphatase, which was in turn activated by the interaction between LMTK3 and growth factor receptor-bound protein 2 (GRB2), an adaptor protein that mediates receptor tyrosine kinase-induced activation of RAS and downstream signaling. Knockdown of GRB2 suppressed LMTK3-induced CDC42 activation, blocked ITGA5 and ITGB1 expression promoted by the transcription factor serum response factor (SRF), and reduced invasive activity. Furthermore, abundance of LMTK3 positively correlated with that of the integrin &#x3b2;1 subunit in breast cancer patient's tumors. Our findings suggest a role for LMTK3 in promoting integrin activity during breast cancer progression and metastasis.

### Keywords
Lmtk3, Silac, Breast cancer, Integrin b1, Grb2

### Affiliations
Division of Surgery and Cancer Imperial College, London
Imperial College

### Submitter
Georgios Giamas

### Lab Head
Dr Georgios Giamas
Division of Surgery and Cancer Imperial College, London


