### Accession
PXD025029

### Title
A disease-linked lncRNA mutation in RNase MRP inhibits ribosome synthesis

### Description
Mutations in the human RMRP gene cause Cartilage Hair Hypoplasia (CHH), an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by skeletal abnormalities and impaired T-cell activation. RMRP encodes a non-coding RNA, which forms the core of the RNase MRP ribonucleoprotein complex. In budding yeast, RMRP cleaves a specific site in the pre-ribosomal RNA (pre-rRNA) during ribosome synthesis. CRISPR-mediated disruption of RMRP in human cells lines caused growth arrest, with pre-rRNA accumulation. Here, we analyzed disease-relevant primary cells, showing that mutations in RMRP impair mouse T cell activation and delay pre-rRNA processing. Analysis of pre-rRNA processing in patient-derived human fibroblasts with CHH-linked mutations showed a similar pattern of processing delay. Human cells engineered with the most common CHH mutation (70AG in RMRP) show specifically impaired pre-rRNA processing, resulting in reduced mature rRNA and a reduced ratio of cytosolic to mitochondrial ribosomes. Moreover, the 70AG mutation caused a reduction in intact RNase MRP complexes. Together, these results indicate that CHH is a ribosomopathy, and the first human disorder of rRNA processing to be described.

### Sample Protocol
K562 were grown for 10 divisions in SILAC RPMI (Thermo Fischer; cat. 88365) supplemented with 10% dialysed FBS (Gibco; cat. 26400044) and 50 µg/L each of lysine and arginine. For "light" cultures, these amino acids were obtained from Sigma. For "heavy" cultures, 13C6-lysine and 13C6-arginine were obtained from Cambridge Isotope Laboratories (cat. CLM-226 and CLM-2247, respectively).  Cells were grown to a density of 0.5 - 0.8 x 106 cells / mL, with minimum 90% viability as determined by Trypan blue exclusion (Invitrogen; cat. T10282) using a Countess automated cell counter. 25 mL aliquots of culture were transferred to a custom quartz dish, and cross-linked with 400 mJ/cm2 of UVC using a Vari-X-Link device (McKellar et al, 2020). Enough aliquots were cross-linked to create a sample containing 50 x 106 cells. After cross-linking, cells were pelleted, washed with ice-cold PBS, and frozen at -80 oC. RNA-associated proteins were purified following a modified version of the published TRAPP protocol, where silica columns were used in place of silica beads (Shchepachev et al., 2019). Proteins were digested on the column with 0.25 µg of Trypsin/Lys-C protease mix (Promega; cat. V5071), and peptides eluted for mass spectrometry. Samples were acquired by the Proteomics Facility at the Wellcome Centre for Cell Biology, University of Edinburgh, on a Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK).

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed by the MaxQuant software platform, version 1.6.1, searching against the UniProt reference proteome set. Further analysis used custom scripts. A paper describing this modified TRAPP protocol is in preparation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Protein-rna interaction; rna-binding sites; uv crosslinking; mass spectrometry; genetic disease; cartilage hair hypoplasia; ribosome synthesis; t cell activation

### Affiliations
WCCB, University of Edinburgh

### Submitter
Nic Robertson

### Lab Head
Dr David Tollervey
WCCB, University of Edinburgh


