### Accession
PXD036428

### Title
Deregulated Expression of the 14q32 miRNA Cluster in Clear Cell Renal Cell Carcinomas

### Description
Clear cell renal cell carcinomas (ccRCC) are characterized by arm-wide chromosomal alterations. Loss at 14q is associated with disease aggressiveness in ccRCC, which responds poorly to chemotherapeutics. The 14q locus contains one of the largest miRNA clusters in the human genome; however, little is known about the contribution of these miRNAs to ccRCC pathogenesis. In this regard, we investigated the expression pattern of selected miRNAs at the 14q32 locus in TCGA kidney tumors and in ccRCC cell lines. We validated that the miRNA cluster is downregulated in ccRCC (and cell lines) as well as in papillary kidney tumors relative to normal kidney tissues and primary renal proximal tubule epithelial (RPTEC) cells. We demonstrated that agents modulating expression of DNMT1 (e.g., 5-Aza-deoxycytidine) could modulate miRNA expression in ccRCC cell lines. Lysophosphatidic acid (LPA, a Lysophospholipid mediator elevated in ccRCC) not only increased labile iron content but also modulated expression of 14q32 miRNAs. Through an overexpression approach targeting a subset of 14q32 miRNAs (specifically at subcluster A: miR-431, miR-432, miR-127, and miR-433) in 769-P cells, we uncovered changes in cellular viability and claudin-1, a tight junction marker. A global proteomic approach was implemented using these miRNA overexpressing cell lines which uncovered ATXN2 as a highly downregulated target, which has a role in chronic kidney disease pathogenesis. Collectively, these findings support a contribution of miRNAs at 14q32 in ccRCC pathogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
769-P cells were seeded at 250,000 cells/well in 6-well plates. Following overnight adherence, cells were next transfected using Fugene HD with the following miRNA mimics: negative control mimic (Ambion, #4464059) or a combination of hsa-miR-433-3p (Ambion, MH10774), hsa-miR-431-5p (Ambion, MH10091), hsa-miR-432-5p (Ambion, MH10941), and hsa-miR-127-3p (Ambion, MH10400). Dissolution of lyophilized mimics were prepared and aliquoted according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Protein lysates and RNA were collected at 48 hours post-transfection. Transfected and control samples were processed for mass spectrometry using an iST kit (PreOmics GmbH) per manufacturer’s instructions and reagents, with the slight modification of digesting the sample before loading it onto the cartridge[26]. Samples were separated on a nanoElute (Bruker) nanoflow ultra-high performance liquid chromatography (UHPLC) system and analyzed in-line by LC-MS/MS on a trapped ion mobility spectrometry (TIMS)-QTOF instrument (timsTOF Pro, Bruker). A CaptiveSpray ion source with column oven heated to 50°C was utilized for the Aurora series 2 UHPLC reverse-phase C18 column (25 cm × 75 µm i.d., 1.6 µm C18, IonOpticks). Mobile phases A (0.1% formic acid in water) and B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) were used in a 90-minute gradient of 2-25% B, resulting in a total run time of 120 minutes including a ramp up to 37-80% B to clean the column and prepare for the next sample. The timsTOF Pro was set to the default DIA-PASEF scan mode spanning 400-1201 m/z within an ion mobility range of 0.6- 1.43 1/K0 [V⋅s/cm2], corresponding to an estimated 1.80 s cycle time. Collision energy and DIA-PASEF windows were 20 eV for a base of 0.85 1/K0 [V⋅s/cm2] and 59 eV for 1.30 1/K0 [V⋅s/cm2]. Calibration of m/z as well as ion mobility was performed linearly using three ions at 622, 922, and 1222 m/z (Agilent).

### Data Protocol
DIA data were analyzed in library-free mode [i.e., in silico library generated from the Uniprot Homo Sapiens database (UP000005640, 78,120 entries)] using DIA-NN (v. 1.8).  Label free quantification (LFQ) with match-between-runs (MBR) with an FDR of 1% was performed using the single pass mode neural network classifier, genes as the protein inference, robust LC (high precision) as the quantification strategy, cross-run normalization that is RT-dependent, and smart profiling library generation.

### Publication Abstract
Clear cell renal cell carcinomas (ccRCC) are characterized by arm-wide chromosomal alterations. Loss at 14q is associated with disease aggressiveness in ccRCC, which responds poorly to chemotherapeutics. The 14q locus contains one of the largest miRNA clusters in the human genome; however, little is known about the contribution of these miRNAs to ccRCC pathogenesis. In this regard, we investigated the expression pattern of selected miRNAs at the 14q32 locus in TCGA kidney tumors and in ccRCC cell lines. We demonstrated that the miRNA cluster is downregulated in ccRCC (and cell lines) as well as in papillary kidney tumors relative to normal kidney tissues (and primary renal proximal tubule epithelial (RPTEC) cells). We demonstrated that agents modulating expression of DNMT1 (e.g., 5-Aza-deoxycytidine) could modulate 14q32 miRNA expression in ccRCC cell lines. Lysophosphatidic acid (LPA, a lysophospholipid mediator elevated in ccRCC) not only increased labile iron content but also modulated expression of a 14q32 miRNA. Through an overexpression approach targeting a subset of 14q32 miRNAs (specifically at subcluster A: miR-431-5p, miR-432-5p, miR-127-3p, and miR-433-3p) in 769-P cells, we uncovered changes in cellular viability and claudin-1, a tight junction marker. A global proteomic approach was implemented using these miRNA overexpressing cell lines which uncovered ATXN2 as a highly downregulated target. Collectively, these findings support a contribution of miRNAs at 14q32 in ccRCC pathogenesis.

### Keywords
Dnmt1, Timstof pro, Atxn2, Q-tof, 14q32, Iron, Lpa, Ccrcc, Dia, Claudin-1

### Affiliations
CMMB, University of South Florida
University of South Florida

### Submitter
Stanley Stevens

### Lab Head
Dr Stanley Stevens, Jr.
CMMB, University of South Florida


