### Accession
PXD021623

### Title
Acute depletion of the ARID1A subunit of SWI/SNF complexes reveals distinct pathways for EP300 dependent activation and repression of transcription.

### Description
The ARID1A subunit of the SWI/SNF chromatin remodelling complex is one of the most frequently mutated tumour suppressors. Here, a degron system is applied to detect rapid loss of chromatin accessibility at thousands of loci that frequently include binding sites for pluripotency transcription factors where ARID1A acts to generate accessible mini domains of nucleosomes.  At a subset of these locations, the histone acetyltransferase EP300 dissociates and histone H3K27 acetylation decreases.  Genes adjacent to these sites are frequently downregulated. Remarkably, dissociation of EP300 in the absence of chromatin changes is linked to rapid transcriptional upregulation. Sites where EP300 exhibits co-repressor activity are enriched for MLL3-4, BRD4 and RNA polymerase. A few genes directly affected by these pathways are associated with cancer and pluripotency pathways that come to dominate the chronic ARID1A phenotype. This suggests a handful of upstream regulators drive adaption and represent new sites for intervention in ARID1A driven diseases.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitation-mass spectrometry mESC pellets fresh or snap frozen were used for immunoprecipitation.  2 µg antibody (EP300 – Abcam 14984, ARID1A - HPA005456 Sigma-Aldrich, SMARCA4 – Abcam 110641) was DMP-crosslinked to Dynabeads Protein A (Invitrogen). Cells were lysed on ice in buffer containing 50 mM Tris HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5% C7BzO and protease inhibitors. 750 µg of protein lysate was incubated with crosslinked beads for 4 h at 4 °C. Immunoprecipitations were washed with 50 mM Tris HCl pH 7.5, 750 mM NaCl and eluted in 7.5% SDS, 10 mM TCEP, 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer pH 8.5 (TEAB). Alkylation was performed for 15 min with 20 mM iodoacetamide at 25°C in the dark and proteins were cleaned up using the SP3 (VWR, Sera‐Mag Speed Beads 1:1, CAT# 09‐981‐121, 09‐981‐123, rinsed with water). SP3 beads mix (20 µg/µl) was added to the immunoprecipitation (1 µg/µl). Sample was acidified to pH 2-3 using 10% formic acid and bound to beads with one volume 100% acetonitrile. Beads were rinsed twice with 70% ethanol followed once by 100% acetonitrile. Elution was performed in 50 mM TEAB and digestion with 1 µg trypsin (Pierce) per sample overnight at 37 °C. SP3 beads were not removed for peptide clean up. Resulting peptides were bound to the SP3 beads by addition of one volume acetonitrile and washed twice with 100% acetonitrile.  After drying, elution was performed using 2% DMSO in water and peptides were vacuum dried. Data dependent acquisition was carried out on the Orbitrap Velos in collision-induced dissociation (CID) mode.   TMT-labelling proteomics  Total proteome profiling of mESC before (0 hours) and after 2 hours depletion of ARID1A was performed by 10-plex Tandem Mass Tag (TMT)-labelling. Cell pellets were washed with ice cold PBS and re-dissolved in 200 μL of urea buffer (8 M urea in 100 mM TEAB) and mixed at room temperature for 15 minutes. Cellular DNA was sheared using universal nuclease (Pierce) at 37°C for 15 minutes. The proteins were reduced using 25 mM TCEP for 30 minutes at room temperature, then alkylated in the dark for 30 minutes using 50 mM iodoacetamide. Total protein was quantified using the EZQ assay (Invitrogen). Lysates were digested with lysyl endopeptidase, Lys-C (Wako), enzyme to substrate ratio of 1:50 (w/w), in 100 mM TEAB overnight at 37°C, followed by digestion with trypsin (Pierce) at the same concentration overnight at 37°C. Digestion was stopped by acidification with 1% TFA (final). Peptides were desalted using C18 Sep-Pak cartridges (Waters) following manufacturer’s instructions. The dried peptides were re-dissolved in 50 μL 100 mM TEAB and the concentration was measured using a fluorescent assay (CBQCA Protein Quantitation Kit, Invitrogen). 100 μg of peptides were labelled with a different TMT tag (0.8 mg TMT10plex label reagent (ThermoFisher) dissolved in 41 μL of dry acetonitrile), for 2 hours at room temperature. After incubation, the labelling reaction was quenched using 8 μL 5% hydroxylamine for 30 min. The samples were mixed at equimolar ratios and vacuum dried.  The TMT samples were fractionated and analysed by MRC Unit, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee. Fractionation was performed by pH reverse-phase (RP) chromatography. Peptides were separated into 96 fractions that were concatenated into 30 fractions and run on a Lumos Mass Spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
IP-MS:.  The data were processed using MaxQuant (v.1.5.0.25). The t-test differences between means for protein abundance of cells with and without ARID1A depletion were calculated using LFQ intensities and plotted versus log10 P values determined by two-tailed t-test (Perseus Software, v.1.6.1.3). TMT: The data was processed and analysed using MaxQuant (v. 1.6.6.0) and Perseus (v. 1 .6.3.2).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ip-ms, Tmt, Mesc, Arid1a

### Affiliations
Dundee University, School of Life Sciences
University of Dundee

### Submitter
Nicola Wiechens

### Lab Head
Dr Tom Owen-Hughes
Dundee University, School of Life Sciences


