### Accession
PXD013446

### Title
Novel functions of the ubiquitin-independent proteasome system in regulating Xenopus germline development

### Description
In most species, early germline development occurs in the absence of transcription with germline determinants subject to complex translational and post-translational regulations. Here, we report for the first time that early germline development is influenced by dynamic regulation of the proteasome system, previously thought to be ubiquitously expressed and to serve ‘housekeeping’ roles in controlling protein homeostasis. We show that proteasomes are present in a gradient with highest levels in the animal hemisphere but extending into the vegetal hemisphere of Xenopus oocytes. This distribution changes dramatically during the oocyte-to-embryo transition, with proteasomes becoming enriched in and restricted to the animal hemisphere and therefore separated from vegetally localized germline determinants. We identify Dead-end1 (Dnd1), a master regulator of vertebrate germline development, as a novel substrate of the ubiquitin-independent proteasomes. In the oocyte, ubiquitin-independent proteasomal degradation acts together with translational repression to prevent premature accumulation of Dnd1 protein. In the embryo, artificially increasing ubiquitin-independent proteasomal degradation in the vegetal pole interferes with germline development. Our work thus reveals novel inhibitory functions and spatial regulation of the ubiquitin-independent proteasome during vertebrate germline development.

### Sample Protocol
Micropipettes were fabricated in-house and utilized for localized sample (cytoplasm) collection from X. laevis embryos as per the protocol published in literature (Saha-Shah et al., 2015). Briefly, micropipettes were utilized to puncture the embryonic membrane and collect nanoliter volumes of cytoplasm via pressure actuation from the animal and vegetal hemispheres of individual embryos 1 h post-fertilization. The samples from animal and vegetal hemispheres were prepared separately for bottom-up mass spectrometry following standard protocols. The standard protocol includes treatment of the sample with dithiothreitol to reduce the proteins followed by alkylation of newly reduced thiols using iodoacetamide and finally digestion of the proteins to peptides using trypsin. The peptides were de-salted using c-18 stage tips prior to LC-MS/MS. An UltimateTM 3000 RSLCnano System nano liquid chromatography system was coupled to a Q-Exactive HF-X Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) for proteomic data acquisition. Proteomic data analysis was performed using Spectronaut 10 (Biognosys) software. The mass spectrometry data was searched using Xenbase protein FASTA file (downloaded on September 2017). Proteomics data from five replicates or embryos were used in this study. Details of this method will be published separately in a manuscript under review (Saha-Shah et al., 2015).

### Data Protocol
Peptide abundances from LC-MS/MS data were log2 transformed, normalized by the average of the peptide abundance within each sample and finally raised to the power of 2 to reverse the initial log2 transformation. Protein abundance was obtained by averaging all detected peptides corresponding to a protein. Fig. 6D plots the average of protein abundance across all conditions and replicates in the y-axis against log2 of protein abundance ratio between animal and vegetal hemispheres. All proteins were quantified with at least two peptides. Raw LC-MS files can be found in PRIDE.

### Publication Abstract
In most species, early germline development occurs in the absence of transcription with germline determinants subject to complex translational and post-translational regulations. Here, we report for the first time that early germline development is influenced by dynamic regulation of the proteasome system, previously thought to be ubiquitously expressed and to serve 'housekeeping' roles in controlling protein homeostasis. We show that proteasomes are present in a gradient with the highest levels in the animal hemisphere and extending into the vegetal hemisphere of <i>Xenopus</i> oocytes. This distribution changes dramatically during the oocyte-to-embryo transition, with proteasomes becoming enriched in and restricted to the animal hemisphere and therefore separated from vegetally localized germline determinants. We identify Dead-end1 (Dnd1), a master regulator of vertebrate germline development, as a novel substrate of the ubiquitin-independent proteasomes. In the oocyte, ubiquitin-independent proteasomal degradation acts together with translational repression to prevent premature accumulation of Dnd1 protein. In the embryo, artificially increasing ubiquitin-independent proteasomal degradation in the vegetal pole interferes with germline development. Our work thus reveals novel inhibitory functions and spatial regulation of the ubiquitin-independent proteasome during vertebrate germline development.

### Keywords
Xenopus, Germline development, Dnd1, Oocyte-to-embryo transition, Ubiquitin-independent proteasome

### Affiliations
UPenn
Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine

### Submitter
Zuo-Fei Yuan

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin A. Garcia
Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine


