### Accession
PXD038674

### Title
Tumor-educated platelet extracellular vesicles: proteomic profiling

### Description
To characterize proteomic signatures of platelet-derived medium-size EVs(mEVs) EVs of Colorectal cancer patients vs. healthy subjects (HS) matched for sex and age

### Sample Protocol
Assessment of platelet-derived mEV proteins by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) Samples were prepared as previously described [Parsons MEM, Szklanna PB, Guerrero JA, Wynne K, Dervin F, O'Connell K, Allen S, Egan K, Bennett C, McGuigan C, Gheveart C, Ní Áinle F, Maguire PB. Platelet Releasate Proteome Profiling Reveals a Core Set of Proteins with Low Variance between Healthy Adults. Proteomics. 2018 Aug;18(15):e1800219]. For each sample, 30 g proteins were precipitated with 95% acetone (4:1 acetone: sample volume) overnight. As previously reported, LC-MS/MS analysis of proteins was performed [Parsons MEM, Szklanna PB, Guerrero JA, Wynne K, Dervin F, O'Connell K, Allen S, Egan K, Bennett C, McGuigan C, Gheveart C, Ní Áinle F, Maguire PB. Platelet Releasate Proteome Profiling Reveals a Core Set of Proteins with Low Variance between Healthy Adults. Proteomics. 2018 Aug;18(15):e1800219]. Briefly, dried protein pellets were resuspended in 8 M Urea/ 25 mM Tris–HCl, pH 8.2, at 37°C with gentle agitation. Disulfide bonds were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and protected with 15 mM iodoacetamide. Proteins were first digested with Lys-C (1:100; Promega, Madison, WI, US), followed by digestion with trypsin (1:100; Promega). Peptides were purified using ZipTipC18 pipette tips according to manufacturer instructions (Millipore, Billerica, MA, US) and resuspended 1% formic acid. Approximately 5 g of purified peptides were injected for LC-MS/MS analysis using an Ultimate3000 nano-LC system coupled to a hybrid quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive, Thermo Fisher Scientific, US). Peptides were separated by an increasing acetonitrile gradient from 2 to 33 % in a linear LC gradient of 40 min on a C18 reverse phase chromatography column packed with 2.4 mm particle size, 300 Å pore size C18 material (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) to a length of 120 mm in a column with a 75 mmID, using a flow rate of 250 nl/min. All data were acquired with the mass spectrometer operating in an automatic data-dependent acquisition mode (DDA, shotgun).

### Data Protocol
All data were acquired with the mass spectrometer operating in an automatic data-dependent acquisition mode (DDA, shotgun).  A full MS service scan at a resolution of 70,000, AGC target 3e6 and a range of m/z 350–1600 was followed by up to 12 subsequent MS/MS scan with a resolution of 17,500, AGC target 2e4, isolation window m/z 1.6 and a first fix mass of m/z 100. Dynamic exclusion was set to 40 s. Raw MS files were analyzed by MaxQuant (MQ) version 1.5.0.30. MS/MS spectra were searched against a human FASTA (August 2016). MQ analysis was performed with the false discovery rate (FDR) set to 0.01 for peptide/protein identification. LFQ-intensities were assigned by comparing the area under the curve (AUC) of the signal intensity for any given peptide. Downstream analysis of proteomic data was performed by Perseus software (version 1.6.0.7). STRING was also used to generate protein-protein interaction networks, and the KEGG pathway enrichment analysis tool in the PANTHER classification system was also applied to these networks. The DAVID (v2022q2) was also used to understand the biological meaning behind the changes of proteins between platelet-derived mEVs from CRC patients and HS.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Platelet-derived extracellular vesicles, Colorectal cancer

### Affiliations
University "G. D'Annunzio", Chieti,Italy
University "G. D'Annunzio" di Chieti

### Submitter
Paola Patrignani

### Lab Head
Dr Paola Patrignani
University "G. D'Annunzio", Chieti,Italy


