### Accession
PXD048453

### Title
The Secretome of Macrophages Has a Differential Impact on Spinal Cord Injury Recovery According to the Polarization Protocol

### Description
The inflammatory response after spinal cord injury (SCI) is an important contributor to secondary damage. Infiltrating macrophages can acquire a spectrum of activation states, however, the microenvironment at the SCI site favors macrophage polarization into a pro-inflammatory phenotype, which is one of the reasons why macrophage transplantation has failed. In this study, we investigated the therapeutic potential of the macrophage secretome for SCI recovery. We investigated the effect of the secretome in vitro using peripheral and CNS-derived neurons and human neural stem cells. Moreover, we perform a pre-clinical trial using a SCI compression mice model and analyzed the recovery of motor, sensory and autonomic functions. Instead of transplanting the cells, we injected the paracrine factors and extracellular vesicles that they secrete, avoiding the loss of the phenotype of the transplanted cells due to local environmental cues. We demonstrated that different macrophage phenotypes have a distinct effect on neuronal growth and survival, namely, the alternative activation with IL-10 and TGF-β1 (M(IL-10+TGF-β1)) promotes significant axonal regeneration. We also observed that systemic injection of soluble factors and extracellular vesicles derived from M(IL-10+TGF-β1) macrophages promotes significant functional recovery after compressive SCI and leads to higher survival of spinal cord neurons. Additionally, the M(IL-10+TGF-β1) secretome supported the recovery of bladder function and decreased microglial activation, astrogliosis and fibrotic scar in the spinal cord. Proteomic analysis of the M(IL-10+TGF-β1)-derived secretome identified clusters of proteins involved in axon extension, dendritic spine maintenance, cell polarity establishment, and regulation of astrocytic activation. Overall, our results demonstrated that macrophages-derived soluble factors and extracellular vesicles might be a promising therapy for SCI with possible clinical applications.

### Sample Protocol
The secretome was first concentrated (×100) using ultracentrifugation with falcons with 5 kDa cut-off filter (Vivaspin, GE Healthcare). A protein precipitation step using TCA to a final concentration of 20% was performed, and protein pellets were re-suspended in 35μL of Laemmli sample buffer. Protein extracts from each sample were separated by SDS-PAGE for approximately 16 min at 110 V (Short-GeLC Approach)and stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue G-250. Each lane was divided into three separate gel fractions for a destaining step using a solution of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate with 30% acetonitrile, followed by overnight protein digestion with trypsin. Peptide extraction from the gel was performed using solutions containing different percentages of acetonitrile (30, 50, and 98%) with 1% of formic acid. For protein identification, each fraction was analyzed separately, and for protein quantification, fractions from each sample were combined, and a single analysis per sample was performed by LC-MS/MS. Samples were analyzed on a NanoLC™ 425 System (Eksigent) coupled to a Triple TOF™ 6600 mass spectrometer (Sciex) and the ionization source (ESI DuoSpray™ Source). The chromatographic separation was performed on a Triart C18 Capillary Column 1/32" (12 nm, S-3μm, 150 x 0.3 mm, YMC) and using a Triart C18 Capillary Guard Column (0.5 × 5 mm, 3 μm, 12nm, YMC) at 50°C. The flow rate was set to 5 μL/min, and mobile phases A and B were 5% DMSO plus 0.1% formic acid in water and 5% DMSO plus 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile, respectively. The LC program was performed as follows: 5 – 30% of B (0 - 50 min), 30 – 98% of B (50 - 52 min), 98% of B (52 - 54 min), 98 - 5% of B (54 - 56 min), and 5% of B (56 - 65 min). The ionization source was operated in the positive mode set to an ion spray voltage of 5500 V, 25 psi for nebulizer gas 1 (GS1), 10 psi for nebulizer gas 2 (GS2), 25 psi for the curtain gas (CUR), and source temperature (TEM) at 100°C. For data-dependent acquisition (DDA) experiments, the mass spectrometer was set to scanning full spectra (m/z 350-2250) for 250 ms, followed by up to100 MS/MS scans (m/z 100 – 1500). Candidate ions with a charge state between +1 and +5 and counts above the minimum threshold of 10 counts per second were isolated for fragmentation, and one MS/MS spectrum was collected before adding those ions to the exclusion list for 15 s (mass spectrometer operated by Analyst® TF 1.8.1, Sciex®). The rolling collision enErgy was used with a collision enErgy spread of 5. For SWATH experiments, the mass spectrometer was operated in a looped product ion mode and specifically tuned to a set of 42 overlapping windows, covering the precursor mass range of 350-1400 m/z. A 50 ms survey scan (350-2250 m/z) was acquired at the beginning of each cycle, and SWATH-MS/MS spectra were collected from 100-2250 m/z for 50 ms, resulting in a cycle time of 2.2 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was performed using the ProteinPilot™ software (v5.0.2, Sciex) for each sample. The paragon method parameters were as follows: searched against the reviewed Mus musculus database from SwissProt, cysteine alkylation by acrylamide, digestion by trypsin, and gel-based ID. An independent False Discovery Rate (FDR) analysis using the target-decoy approach provided by Protein Pilot™, was performed to assess the quality of the identifications. SWATH data processing was performed using SWATHTM processing plug-in for PeakViewTM (v2.0.01, Sciex®). Relative protein quantification was performed in all samples using information from the Ion-Library search. Quantification results were obtained for peptides with less than 1% of FDR for at least one of the samples by calculating the sum of up to five fragments/peptides. Relative peptide peak areas were normalized to the internal standard peak areas. Protein quantities were obtained by the sum of up to 15 peptides/proteins. Protein–protein interactions and network analysis was constructed using the online STRING database (https://string-db.org) version 11.5, depicting both functional and physical protein associations with a medium confidence level (0.4), and organized into clusters through k means clustering method. All identified proteins were then subjected to an over-representation analysis using the ConsensusPathDB. From a total of 368 proteins identified using LC-MS/MS, we focused the analysis on those that presented higher concentrations (fold changes of 2 or higher) between the two groups. These proteins were then grouped by function using the UniProt database and a heat map of their concentration was plotted with a cut off of 5 (ratios higher than 5 were color-expressed as 5).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Spinal cord injury; macrophages; secretome; proteomics, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology, University of Coimbra
- Life and Health Sciences Research Institute (ICVS), School of Medicine, University of Minho, Portugal - ICVS/3B’s Associate Lab, PT Government Associated Lab, Portugal

### Submitter
Vera Mendes

### Lab Head
Dr Nuno Silva
- Life and Health Sciences Research Institute (ICVS), School of Medicine, University of Minho, Portugal - ICVS/3B’s Associate Lab, PT Government Associated Lab, Portugal


