### Accession
PXD028918

### Title
FAT10 is phosphorylated by IKKβ to inhibit the antiviral type-I interferon response

### Description
Type-I interferon (IFN-I) secretion provides a rapid host defense against infection with RNA-viruses. Upon entry into the host cell, the viral RNA triggers the activation of both RIG-I and TLR3 signaling pathways, ultimately leading to the production of type-I interferons. Since an exaggerated IFNa/b response can cause severe tissue damage, these pathways are tightly regulated. One of the factors that keep the type 1 IFN response in check is the ubiquitin-like modifier FAT10. FAT10 is expressed upon synergistic stimulation with TNFα and IFNγ, and it targets covalently FAT10-linked substrate proteins for proteasomal degradation. However, the mechanism how FAT10 modulates IFN-I secretion remains to be fully elucidated. Here, we found that FAT10 is phosphorylated by Ikb kinase b (IKKβ) upon TNFα stimulation and during Influenza Virus infection on several serine and threonine residues. FAT10 phosphorylation increases the binding of FAT10 to the TRAF3-deubiquitylase OTUB1 and its FAT10-mediated activation. Consistently, FAT10 phosphorylation results in a low ubiquitylation state of TRAF3 which is unable to maintain IRF3 phosphorylation and downstream induction of type 1 IFNs. Taken together, we reveal a mechanism how the TNF-induced phosphorylation of FAT10 limits the production of tissue destructive IFN-I in inflammation.

### Sample Protocol
Endogenously or tagged FAT10 affinity purified samples, were separated by SDS-PAGE and Coomassie stained bands (corresponding to FAT10 protein) were cut out. Proteins were reduced, alkylated and digested in-gel with endoproteinase trypsin. Peptides were extracted and phosphopeptides were enriched by TiO2 chromatography as described by Oellerich et al., (SLP-65 phosphorylation dynamics reveals a functional basis for signal integration by receptor-proximal adaptor proteins. Oellerich T, Grønborg M, Neumann K, Hsiao HH, Urlaub H, Wienands J. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2009 Jul;8(7):1738-50. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M800567-MCP200. Epub 2009 Apr 16.). In brief, peptides were dissolved with 20 μl of 200-mg 2,5-dihydroxybenzoic acid (DHB; Sigma-Aldrich) in 80% acetonitrile (ACN), 5% trifluoroacetic acid and loaded onto a TiO2 column. The column was washed three times with 20 μl of 200-mg DHB in 80% ACN, 5% trifluoroacetic acid and five times with 20 μl of 80% ACN, 5% trifluoroacetic acid. The column was then incubated three times with 20 μl of 0.3 normal (N) NH4OH, pH ≥ 10.5, to elute phosphopeptides. LC-MS analysis of phosphopeptides was performed under standard conditions on an Orbitrap HF (ThermoFisherScientific) working in data-dependent acquisition mode using top 15 method. MS was coupled to an UltiMate LC system (ThermoFisherScientific) equipped with C18 trap column packed in-house (1.5 cm, 360-μm outer diameter, 150-μm inner diameter, Nucleosil 100-5 C18; MACHEREY-NAGEL, GmbH & Co. KG) and an analytical C18 capillary self-made column (30 cm, 360-μm outer diameter, 75 μm-inner diameter, Nucleosil 100-5 C18). Flow rate was 300 nL/min, with a gradient from 8 to 40%  acetonitrile in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid for 40 min.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed with MaxQuant software (version 1.5.2.8) and searched against Uniprot database (taxonomy human, 22.01.2014, 155143 entries) with phosphorylation at serine, threonine, and tyrosine residues and methionine oxidation as variable modifications, and cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification.

### Publication Abstract
IFN-I secretion provides a rapid host defense against infection with RNA viruses. Within the host cell, viral RNA triggers the activation of the RIG-I signaling pathway, leading to the production of IFN-I. Because an exaggerated IFN-I response causes severe tissue damage, RIG-I signaling is tightly regulated. One of the factors that control the IFN-I response is the ubiquitin-like modifier FAT10, which is induced by TNF and IFN&#x3b3; and targets covalently FAT10-linked proteins for proteasomal degradation. However, the mechanism of how FAT10 modulates IFN-I secretion remains to be fully elucidated. Here, we provide strong evidence that FAT10 is phosphorylated by I&#x3ba;B kinase &#x3b2; (IKK&#x3b2;) upon TNF stimulation and during influenza A virus infection on several serine and threonine residues. FAT10 phosphorylation increases the binding of FAT10 to the TRAF3-deubiquitylase OTUB1 and its FAT10-mediated activation. Consequently, FAT10 phosphorylation results in a low ubiquitylation state of TRAF3, which is unable to maintain interferon regulatory factor 3 phosphorylation and downstream induction of IFN-I. Taken together, we reveal a mechanism of how phosphorylation of FAT10 limits the production of tissue-destructive IFN-I in inflammation.

### Keywords
Fat10, Phosphorylation, Ubd, Ubiquitin d

### Affiliations
Max-Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, 37077 Goettingen, Germany University Clinical Center Goettingen, 37075 Goettingen, Germany
MPI Biophysical Chemistry

### Submitter
Ivan Silbern

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Henning Urlaub
Max-Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, 37077 Goettingen, Germany University Clinical Center Goettingen, 37075 Goettingen, Germany


