### Accession
PXD018114

### Title
Characterization of HEK293 secretome by LC-MS/MS

### Description
Characterization of the extracellular environment of produced VLPs and coproduced extracellular vesicles (EVs)by quantitative proteomics approach. Three conditions were studied: non-transfected, transfected with an empty plasmid as control and with a plasmid coding for HIV-1 Gag polyprotein.

### Sample Protocol
The cell line used in this work is a serum-free suspension-adapted HEK 293 cell line (HEK293SF-3F6).Transfections were carried out using the plasmid contained a gene coding for HIV-Gag protein fused to eGFP (Gag::eGFP). VLP containing supernatants were recovered by cell culture centrifugation at 1000×g for 5 min.Protein extraction was performed from ultracentrifuged supernatants using extraction buffer (100 mM Tris-HCl pH=8.8, 2mM EDTA, 4% SDS, 50mM DTT). Protein digestion was performed using sequencing grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) and the filter-assisted sample preparation technology (FASP, Expedeon, San Diego, CA, USA). and the resulting peptides were subjected to TMT-10 plex labelling (AB Sciex, Framingham, MA, USA), joined and desalted. TMT-labeled peptides were fractionated using High pH reversed-phase peptide fractionation kit (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) according to manufacturer’s instructions into 5 fractions. The tryptic peptide mixtures were subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis on a nano-HPLC Easy nLC 1000 liquid chromatograph (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) coupled to a QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was performed over the raw files using the SEQUEST HT algorithm integrated in the Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo Finnigan). MS/MS scans were matched against a human database (UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot 2017_10 Release). TMT reporter ion intensities were extracted from MS/MS spectra. For the comparative analysis of the protein abundance changes we applied Weighted Scan- Peptide-Protein (WSPP) statistical workflow (Navarro et al., 2014), using SanXoT package (Trevisan-Herraz et al., 2019).

### Publication Abstract
Vaccine therapies based on virus-like particles (VLPs) are currently in the spotlight due to their potential for generating high immunogenic responses while presenting fewer side effects than conventional vaccines. These self-assembled nanostructures resemble the native conformation of the virus but lack genetic material. They are becoming a promising platform for vaccine candidates against several diseases due to the ability of modifying their membrane with antigens from different viruses. The coproduction of extracellular vesicles (EVs) when producing VLPs is a key phenomenon currently still under study. In order to characterize this extracellular environment, a quantitative proteomics approach has been carried out. Three conditions were studied: non-transfected, transfected with an empty plasmid as control, and transfected with a plasmid coding for HIV-1 Gag polyprotein. A shift in EV biogenesis has been detected upon transfection, changing the production from large to small EVs. Another remarkable trait found was the presence of DNA being secreted within vesicles smaller than 200 nm. Studying the protein profile of these biological nanocarriers, it was observed that EVs were reflecting an overall energy homeostasis disruption via mitochondrial protein deregulation. Also, immunomodulatory proteins like ITGB1, ENO3, and PRDX5 were identified and quantified in VLP and EV fractions. These findings provide insight on the nature of the VLP extracellular environment defining the characteristics and protein profile of EVs, with potential to develop new downstream separation strategies or using them as adjuvants in viral therapies.

### Keywords
Separation downstream processes, Hiv, Immunomodulation, Microvesicles, Vlp, Exosomes, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Cardiovascular Proteomics, Centro Nacional Investigaciones Cardiovasculares (CNIC), Spain
Vascular Biology and Inflammation

### Submitter
Inmaculada Jorge

### Lab Head
Dr Jesús Vázquez Cobos
Laboratory of Cardiovascular Proteomics, Centro Nacional Investigaciones Cardiovasculares (CNIC), Spain


