### Accession
PXD026038

### Title
iTRAQ-based quantitative proteomics suggests mitophagy involvement after Rice black-streaked dwarf virus acquisition in insect vector small brown planthopper Laodelphax striatellus Fallén

### Description
Plant virus triggers numerous responses in its insect vectors. Using the iTRAQ-based quantitative proteomics analysis. Early responses of the insect vector small brown planthopper (Laodelphax striatellus Fallén, SBPH) after acquiring Rice black-streaked dwarf virus (RBSDV) at 3 days and 5 days post first access to disease plants (padp), respectively, were revealed. A total of 582 differentially abundant proteins (DAPs) in SBPH with a fold change > 1.500 or <0.667 (p-value<0.05) were identified. The proteomic analysis in SBPH at 3 days padp revealed 106 high abundant proteins and 193 low abundant proteins, while 5 days padp revealed 214 high abundant proteins and 182 low abundant proteins. Among them, 51 high abundant proteins and 42 low abundant proteins were consistently differentially abundant at both 3 days and 5 days padp.

### Sample Protocol
Two independent biological repeats with 3 replicates for each of the experiment were conducted. Proteins were extracted from the 6 replicates individually. A total of 100 mg hypothermic anesthetized SBPH individuals from each group in each replicate was pooled, frozen with liquid nitrogen and crushed with a sterile glass grinder in 0.5 mL lysis buffer (0.7 M sucrose, 0.5 M Tris-HCl pH 7.0, 30 mM HCl; 50 mM EDTA; 0.1 M KCl and 40 mM DTT). The lysate was mixed with 0.5 mL Tris-buffered phenol (pH 8.0) by vortexing, followed by shaking for 30 min. The mixture was centrifuged at 5000 ×g for 10 min at 4 ℃. The upper layer of phenol was collected and mixed with five volumes of 0.1 M ammonium acetate methanol (w/v, 100 %) and incubated at -20 ℃ overnight. Protein precipitates were collected by centrifugation at 5000 ×g for 20 min at 4 ℃, followed by two times of washing with five volumes of 80 % acetone with 10 mM DTT, stored at -20 ℃ for 15 min and centrifuged at 5000 ×g for 20 min at 4 ℃. After discard of the supernatant, the washed precipitates were lyophilized and re-dissolved in 150 µL UA (8M urea, 0.1 M Tris-HCl pH 8.5, 10 mM DTT) at 37 ℃ for 1 h. The extracted protein was quantified with Bradford’s method (Bio-Rad, USA) and a solution of 30 ug of protein was mixed with the 15 µL of 1 M IAA buffer (1 M iodoacetamide, 8 M urea, 0.1 M Tris-HCl pH 8.5) and incubated at 25 ℃ for 1 h in the dark. The protein solution was replaced with 100 µL UA solution in two rounds of concentration in 10 kDa concentrator for 20 min at 12000 ×g at 4 ℃. The UA solution was then replaced with 100 µL dissolution buffer (from the iTRAQ kit) by three rounds of concentration in the 10 kDa concentrator. The protein was digested in the concentrator with 2 µg of Trypsin in a total volume of 40 uL for 16 h at 37 ℃, followed by addition of 1 µg of Trypsin to the solution. The digested peptide solution was concentrated for 20 min at 12000 ×g at 4 ℃ and mixed with 40 uL dissolution buffer for another round of concentration. The sample preparation, iTRAQ labelling and LC-MS/MS analysis was conducted accordingly

### Data Protocol
Identification of proteins and relative iTRAQ quantification were accomplished using ProteinPilot 5.0 software Revision 4769 (AB SCIEX), which used the Paragon database search algorithm (5.0.0.0.4767) and the integrated false discovery rate (FDR) analysis function [34,35]. The user defined search parameters in ProteinPilot were used for the MS/MS spectra: (a) Sample type: iTRAQ 4-Plex (peptide labeled); (b) Cysteine alkylation: MMTS; (c) Digestion: Trypsin; (d) Instrument, TripleTOF 5600 (e) Special factors: None; (f) Search effort: Throughout; (g) ID focus: Biological modification (h) FDR analysis: Yes; (i) Background correction: yes; and (j) User modified parameter files: Yes.

### Publication Abstract
Plant viruses trigger numerous responses in their insect vectors. Using iTRAQ-based quantitative proteomics analysis, early responses of the insect vector, the small brown planthopper (Laodelphax striatellus Fall&#xe9;n, SBPH), after acquiring Rice black-streaked dwarf virus (RBSDV) at 3&#xa0;days and 5&#xa0;days post first access to diseased plants (padp) were revealed. A total of 582 differentially abundant proteins (DAPs) in SBPH with a fold change &gt;1.500 or &lt;0.667 (p-value&#xa0;&lt;&#xa0;0.05) were identified. The proteomic analysis in SBPH at 3&#xa0;days padp revealed 106 highly abundant proteins and 193 of low abundance, while 5&#xa0;days padp revealed 214 highly abundant proteins and 182 of low abundance. Among them, 51 highly abundant proteins and 42 of low abundance were shown consistently at both 3&#xa0;days and 5&#xa0;days padp. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) analysis mapping and Gene Ontology (GO) term classification suggested impairment of mitochondria in SBPH after RBSDV acquisition, and the 77 out of 582 differentially abundant SBPH proteins analyzed by the STRING program revealed the interaction network of the mitochondrial DAPs, showing an overall down-regulation of mitochondrial proteins including the electron transport chain proteins and mitochondrial ribosome proteins. The high abundance of Parkin at 5&#xa0;days padp suggests that activation of mitophagy induced degradation of mitochondria occurred. Further verification of autophagy/mitophagy-related genes by reverse-transcription quantitative RT-PCR (RT-qPCR) in SBPH after RBSDV acquisition showed up-regulation of the autophagy receptors Optineurin (OPTN), Sequestosome-1 (SQSTM1, also known as p62) and Tax1-binding protein 1 (TAX1BP1) which targets ubiquitinated damaged mitochondria during mitophagy. The phosphorylation of the three autophagy receptors may be up-regulated through an increase of transcription level TRAF-associated NF&#x3ba;B activator (TANK)-binding kinase 1 (TBK1). As a result, an overall reduction in the abundance of mitochondrial proteins was observed and the selective autophagic degradation was up-regulated through increased transcription level of OPTN, p62/SQSTM1, TAX1BP1 and TBK1. Therefore, acquisition of RBSDV associated with up-regulated autophagy and selective mitochondrial degradation in SBPH suggest prevention of mitochondrial-mediated apoptosis and extension of the vector life span. BIOLOGICAL SIGNIFICANCE: RBSDV causes severe yield loss in rice plants. RBSDV is transmitted efficiently only through SBPH. It is important to understand how RBSDV infects SBPH in a persistent, circulative and propagative manner. However, there has been no study on the interaction between RBSDV and SBPH at the early acquisition stage using a proteomics approach. In this study, we combined iTRAQ technique and LC-MS/MS to analyze the vector proteomics at both the initial and latent infection stages after RBSDV acquisition and verified the results by RT-qPCR. Our results revealed that significantly low DAPs were involved in various pathways, including biosynthesis of secondary metabolites, ribosomes, carbon metabolism, biosynthesis of amino acids and TCA cycle. Further clustering of the DAPs revealed significant changes in SBPH mitochondria, including decreased proteins in mitochondrial ribosomes and electron transport chain complex I, II and V. On the other hand, there was a high abundance of Parkin, suggesting the occurrence of mitochondria damage and subsequent Parkin-mediated mitophagy for clearance of impaired mitochondria. Moreover, the decreased level of PMPCB in terms of gene expression and protein abundance suggested decreased PINK1 turnover, promoting Parkin/PINK1-mediated mitophagy. Further analysis on autophagy/mitophagy-related gene transcription level indicated up-regulation of OPTN, p62/SQSTM1, TAX1BP1 and TBK1, promoting selective autophagy in SBPH after RBSDV acquisition. These findings provided new insights into the effects of RBSDV on SBPH after early acquisition by selective degradation of mitochondria, especially on reprogramming of energy metabolism and decreased mitochondria biogenesis, to prevent apoptosis and prolong the life span of SBPH post virus acquisition.

### Keywords
Tobacco, Rice black-streaked dwarf virus, Itraq

### Affiliations
National University of Singapore
Department of Biological Sciences, National University of Singapore, Singapore 119543, Singapore

### Submitter
Prem Prakash Das

### Lab Head
Dr Sek-Man Wong
Department of Biological Sciences, National University of Singapore, Singapore 119543, Singapore


