### Accession
PXD035121

### Title
Cardiac perilipin 5 promotes physiological cardioprotective hypertrophy through increased calcium handling and cardiomyocyte contractility

### Description
: The adult heart develops hypertrophy to reduce ventricular wall stress and maintain cardiac function in response to an increased workload. Although pathological hypertrophy generally progresses to heart failure, physiological hypertrophy may be cardioprotective. Cardiac-specific overexpression of the lipid-droplet protein perilipin 5 (Plin5) promotes cardiac hypertrophy, but it is unclear if this response is beneficial. We analyzed human RNA-sequencing data from the left ventricle and showed that cardiac PLIN5 expression correlates with upregulation of cardiac contraction-related processes. To investigate how elevated cardiac Plin5 levels affect cardiac contractility, we generated mice with cardiac-specific overexpression of Plin5 (MHC-Plin5 mice). These mice displayed increased left ventricular mass and cardiomyocyte size but preserved heart function. Quantitative proteomics identified sarcoplasmic/endoplasmic reticulum Ca2+ ATPase 2 (SERCA2) as a Plin5-interacting protein. Phosphorylation of phospholamban, the master regulator of SERCA2, was increased in MHC-Plin5 versus wild-type cardiomyocytes. Live imaging showed increases in intracellular Ca2+ release during contraction, Ca2+ removal during relaxation, and SERCA2 function in MHC-Plin5 versus wild-type cardiomyocytes. These results identify a role for Plin5 in improving cardiac contractility through enhanced Ca2+ signaling.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic analysis and relative quantification Sample preparation The samples were reduced with DL-dithiothreitol (DTT, 100 mM) at 60°C for 30 min and then processed according to the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method modified from (Wisniewski JR et. al. Nat Methods. 2009 May;6(5):359-62). In short, reduced samples were transferred onto Microcon-30kDa centrifugal filters (Merck) washed repeatedly with 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) and once with digestion buffer (0.5 % sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 50 mM TEAB). The reduced cysteine side chains were alkylated with 10 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS) in digestion buffer for 30 min at room temperature and the samples were then repeatedly washed with digestion buffer. Samples were digested with trypsin (0.3 µg, Pierce MS grade Trypsin, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 37°C overnight and an additional portion of trypsin (0.3 µg) was added and incubated for another 3 hours. The peptides were collected by centrifugation and isobaric labeling was performed using Tandem Mass Tag (TMT-10plex) reagents (Thermo Fischer Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The labelled samples were combined into one pooled sample, acetonitrile evaporated using vacuum centrifugation and the sample was purified using High Protein and Peptide Recovery Detergent Removal Spin Column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer instructions. SDC was removed by acidification with 10% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and subsequent centrifugation. The supernatants were purified using Pierce peptide desalting spin columns (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The purified peptide samples were dried on Speedvac and reconstituted in 3% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid for the LC-MS/MS analysis.  NanoLC-MS analysis and database matching Samples were analysed on an orbitrap Fusion™ Tribrid™ spectrometer interfaced with an Easy-nLC1200 nanoflow liquid chromatography system (both Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were trapped on an Acclaim Pepmap 100 C18 trap column (100 μm x 2 cm, particle size 5 μm, Thermo Fischer Scientific) and separated on an in-house packed analytical column (75 μm x 35 cm, particle size 3 μm, Reprosil-Pur C18, Dr. Maisch) from 5% to 12% B over 5 min, 12% to 35% B over 70 min followed by an increase to 100% B for 5 min, and 100% B for 10 min at a flow of 300 nL/min. Solvent A was 0.2% formic acid and solvent B was 80% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid. MS scans were performed at 120 000 resolution, m/z range 375-1375. MS/MS analysis was performed in a data-dependent, with top speed cycle of 3 s for the most intense doubly or multiply charged precursor ions. Precursor ions were isolated in the quadrupole with a 0.7 m/z isolation window, with dynamic exclusion set to 10 ppm and duration of 60 seconds. Isolated precursor ions were subjected to collision induced dissociation (CID) at 35 collision energy with a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Produced MS2 fragment ions were detected in the ion trap followed by multinotch (simultaneous) isolation of the top 10 most abundant fragment ions for further fragmentation (MS3) by higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) at 65% and detection in the Orbitrap at 50 000 resolutions, m/z range 100-500.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using Proteome Discoverer version 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The raw file was matched against the Swissprot mouse database (Mars 2020) using Mascot 2.5.1 (Matrix Science, London, United Kingdom) as a database search engine with peptide tolerance of 5 ppm and fragment ion tolerance of 0.6 Da. Tryptic peptides were accepted with zero missed cleavage, mono-oxidation on methionine was set as a variable modification, methylthiolation on cysteine and TMT-6 reagent modification on lysine and peptide N-terminus were set as a fixed modification. Percolator was used for PSM validation with the strict FDR threshold of 1%. Reporter ion intensities were quantified in MS3 spectra at 0.003 Da mass tolerance using the S/N values as abundances and normalized on the total protein abundance within the Proteome Discoverer 2.4 workflow. Only the values for the unique peptides were used for

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Perilipin 5; mhc-plin5; physiological hypertrophy; calcium signaling; serca2.

### Affiliations
Gothenburg University
Wallenberg Laboratory, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, 413 45 Gothenburg, SWEDEN

### Submitter
Johannes Fuchs

### Lab Head
Dr Malin C. Levin
Wallenberg Laboratory, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, 413 45 Gothenburg, SWEDEN


