### Accession
PXD015320

### Title
Proteostasis network alteration in lysosomal storage disorders: insights from the mouse model of Krabbe diseaseProteostasis network alteration in lysosomal storage disorders: insights from the mouse model of Krabbe diseaseProteostasis network alteration in lysosomal storage disorders: insights from the mouse model of Krabbe disease

### Description
Krabbe disease is characterized by widespread demyelination due to cell death by apoptosis, mainly in oligodendrocytes and Schwann cells. In this study, we highlight that in the brain of 6 days old twitcher mice (model of Krabbe disease) there is evidence of impairment in protein synthesis and degradation, as well as in cytoskeleton remodeling, with a lamin meshwork disaggregation and clear evidence of apoptosis, also demonstrated in oligodendrocytes.  Even if further studies are needed to address the mechanisms behind this pathology, this study provide interesting insights on the early onset of Krabbe disease that may be useful for developing of innovative pharmacological treatment.

### Sample Protocol
Detected spot differences were successively identified by peptide mass fingerprinting on an Ultraflex III MALDI-TOF/TOF mass spectrometer (Bruker Corporation, Billerica, MA, United States). Protein spots from SYPRO Ruby stained gels were mechanically excised by Ettan Spot Picker (GE Healthcare), destained in 2.5 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 50% acetonitrile (ACN), and dehydrated in acetonitrile. The spots were rehydrated by trypsin solution for protein digestion performed overnight at 37°C. 1.25 μL of each digested protein was spotted onto the MALDI target and allowed to dry. Then 0.75 μL of matrix solution (a solution of 5mg/ml alpha-ciano 4 hydroxy cynnamic acid in 50%v /v Acetonitrile and 0.5% v/v trifluoroacetic acid) was applied to the dried sample, which was dried again.

### Data Protocol
Mass fingerprinting searching was carried out using Mascot (Matrix Science Ltd., London, UK, http://www.matrixscience.com) on-line-available software. Mass fingerprinting search was carried out in Swiss-Prot/TrEMBL and NCBInr databases, taxonomy was limited to Mus musculus, mass tolerance was 100 ppm, and the acceptable number of missed cleavage sites was set at one. Alkylation of cysteine by carbamidomethylation was assumed and oxidation of methionine was considered as a possible modification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lamin meshwork disaggregation, Er stress, Cytoskeleton remodelling, Krabbe disease, Twitcher

### Affiliations
Functional Proteomics Lab. Life Science Dpt. Siena University Via Aldo Moro, 2 53100 Siena Italy
University of Siena

### Submitter
Claudia Landi

### Lab Head
Dr Luca Bini
Functional Proteomics Lab. Life Science Dpt. Siena University Via Aldo Moro, 2 53100 Siena Italy


