### Accession
PXD021770

### Title
Identification of proximal SUMO-dependent interactors using SUMO-ID

### Description
Proximity-dependent labelling (PL) methods are based on promiscuous labeling enzymes that produce reactive molecules that covalently bind neighbor proteins. Labeled proteins can be then purified and identified using affinity-purification coupled to mass spectrometry methods39. Proximity-dependent biotin identification (BioID)40 uses a promiscuously active Escherichia coli biotin ligase (BirA*) generated by a point mutation (R118G) to biotinylate lysines in nearby proteins within an estimated range of 10 nm41. By fusing BirA* to specific proteins, BioID efficiently identifies interactors at physiological levels in living cells42, 43. It has been extensively used in the Ub field, for instance, to identify substrates of E3 ligases44-46. Recently, a more efficient version of BioID, termed TurboID, has been developed47. TurboID can proximally biotinylate in 10 minutes to the same levels as BioID does in 18 hours, thus making it more suitable for transient protein-protein interaction (PPI) detection. Several studies have developed split-versions and applied “protein fragment complementation” (PCA) to BioID and TurboID, where proximal biotinylation is dependent on the proximity of the fusion partners, opening new opportunities for spatial and temporal identification of complex-dependent interactomes48-50.  To study how SUMOylation and SUMO-SIM interactions can lead to other roles and fates for particular substrates poses particular challenges. SUMOylation occurs transiently and often in a small percentage of a given substrate. Modified proteins can be readily deSUMOylated and SUMO can be recycled and passed to other substrates. SUMO-SIM interactions are also difficult to analyze due to their weak affinity (Kd ranging from 1-100 µM). To overcome those technical issues, we developed SUMO-ID, a new strategy based on Split-TurboID to identify SUMO- interactors of specific substrates dependent on SUMO conjugation or interaction. Using PML as a model, we demonstrate that SUMO-ID can enrich for factors that depend on PML-SUMO interaction. Importantly, those are represented among proximal interactors of PML identified using full-length TurboID. We also applied SUMO-ID to a less-characterized SUMO substrate, Spalt like transcription factor 1 (SALL1), and identified both known and novel interactors that depend on intact SUMOylation sites in SALL1. SUMO-ID is thus a powerful tool to study transient and dynamic SUMO-dependent interaction events.

### Sample Protocol
In gel digestion:  Gel lanes were sliced into 3 pieces as accurately as possible to guarantee reproducibility. The slices were subsequently washed in milli-Q water. Reduction and alkylation were performed using ditiothreitol (10 mM DTT in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate) at 56 ºC for 20 min, followed by iodoacetamide (50 mM chloroacetamide in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate) for another 20 min in the dark. Gel pieces were dried and incubated with trypsin (12.5 µg/ml in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate) for 20 min on ice. After rehydration, the trypsin supernatant was discarded; Gel pieces were hydrated with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and incubated overnight at 37ºC. After digestion, acidic peptides were cleaned with TFA 0.1% and dried out in a RVC2 25 speedvac concentrator (Christ). Peptides were resuspended in 10 µl 0.1% FA and sonicated for 5 min prior to analysis.  Mass spectrometry analysis:  Samples were analyzed in a novel hybrid trapped ion mobility spectrometry – quadrupole time of flight mass spectrometer (timsTOF Pro with PASEF, Bruker Daltonics) coupled online to a nanoElute liquid chromatograph (Bruker). This mass spectrometer takes advantage of a novel scan mode termed parallel accumulation – serial fragmentation (PASEF), which multiplies the sequencing speed without any loss in sensitivity [Meier 2015] and has been proven to provide outstanding analytical speed and sensibility for proteomics analyses [Meier 2018]. Sample (200ng) was directly loaded in a 15 cm Bruker nanoelute FIFTEEN C18 analytical column (Bruker) and resolved at 400 nl/min with a 100 min gradient. Column was heated to 50ºC using an oven.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were analyzed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.14 and 1.6.17) 88 matching to a human proteome (Uniprot filtered reviewed H. sapiens proteome, UP000005640) with a maximum of 4 missed cleavages. Label-Free Quantification was enabled with default values except for a minimum ratio count set to 1. Biotinylation on Lysine and on protein N-term was included as a variable modification for SALL1 SUMO-ID data, and biotinylated peptides were set to be included for quantification. Matching between runs and matching unidentified features were enabled.

### Publication Abstract
The fast dynamics and reversibility of posttranslational modifications by the ubiquitin family pose significant challenges for research. Here we present SUMO-ID, a technology that merges proximity biotinylation by TurboID and protein-fragment complementation to find SUMO-dependent interactors of proteins of interest. We develop an optimized split-TurboID version and show SUMO interaction-dependent labelling of proteins proximal to PML and RANGAP1. SUMO-dependent interactors of PML are involved in transcription, DNA damage, stress response and SUMO modification and are highly enriched in SUMO Interacting Motifs, but may only represent a subset of the total PML proximal proteome. Likewise, SUMO-ID also allow us to identify interactors of SUMOylated SALL1, a less characterized SUMO substrate. Furthermore, using TP53 as a substrate, we identify SUMO1, SUMO2 and Ubiquitin preferential interactors. Thus, SUMO-ID is a powerful tool that allows to study the consequences of SUMO-dependent interactions, and may further unravel the complexity of the ubiquitin code.

### Keywords
Bioid, Sumo, Protein-protein interaction, Pml, Turboid

### Affiliations
Proteomics Service CIC bioGUNE Bizkaia Tech. Park Build. 800 Derio 48160 Spain
Proteomics Platform CIC bioGUNE

### Submitter
Mikel Azkargorta

### Lab Head
Dr Felix Elortza
Proteomics Service CIC bioGUNE Bizkaia Tech. Park Build. 800 Derio 48160 Spain


