### Accession
PXD041254

### Title
Alternative mRNA splicing controls functions of the human H3K27 demethylase UTX/KDM6A

### Description
The UTX/KDM6A gene encodes the UTX histone H3K27 demethylase, which plays an important role in mammalian development and is frequently mutated in cancers and particularly, in urothelial cancers. Using BioID technique, we explored the interactome of different UTX isoforms.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa FlpIn/TREx cells carrying the doxycycline-inducible GFP-UTX allele were treated for 48 h with 1 µg/ml doxycycline. GFP expression was verified using immunoblotting using GFP (JL-8, Clontech) and alpha-tubulin (CP06, Calbiochem) antibodies. Nuclear and cytoplasmic extracts were prepared for GFP-affinity purification coupled to mass spectrometry analyses as described before. In brief, about 300 million cells were harvested after induction with 1 ug/mL doxycycline for 48h, washed twice with PBS (Gibco, #10010-015), was resuspended in 5 volumes of cold Buffer A (10 mM Hepes-KOH pH 7.9, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 10 mM KCl), and incubated for 10 min on ice. The cells were pelleted and resuspended in 2 volumes of Buffer A supplemented with 1 µM DTT, 0.5 % NP-40 and cOmplete proteinase inhibitor (CPI, Roche, #11836145001, referred to as buffer A complete, hereafter). To separate nuclear and cytoplasmic lysates, the cells were then homogenized in a Dounce homogenizer, on ice. The nuclear fraction was pelleted by centrifugation at 3,300 g for 15 minutes at 4˚C. The supernatant was further cleared from debris by centrifugation at 16,000 g and 4°C for 1 h, and further processed as cytoplasmic fraction. The nuclear pellet was then washed out of the cytoplasmic carryover by adding 10× volume buffer A complete and centrifugation at 3,300 g for 5 minutes. The pellet was then resuspended and gently agitated in high salt Buffer B (420 mM NaCl, 20 mM Hepes-KOH pH 7.9, 20% v/v glycerol, 2 mM MgCl2, 0.2 mM EDTA, 0.1 % NP40, 1x CPI, 0.5 mM DTT) at 4°C for 1.5 h. Subsequently, the supernatant representing the nuclear extract was obtained by centrifugation at 16,000 g and 4°C for 1 h. After Bradford protein measurement, 1 mg of nuclear and 2 mg of the cytoplasmic fraction were used for GFP or control pulldowns as described before. GFP-coated agarose beads (Chromotek) or control agarose beads (Chromotek) were added to the protein lysates in three replicates each and rotated overnight at 4°C in binding buffer (20 mM Hepes-KOH pH 7.9, 300 mM NaCl, 20% glycerol, 2 mM MgCl2, 0.2 mM EDTA, 0.1% NP-40, 0.5 mM DTT and 1x CPI). Thereafter, the beads were washed twice with the binding buffer containing 0.5% NP-40, twice with PBS containing 0.5% NP-40, and twice with PBS. On-bead digestion of bound proteins was performed overnight in elution buffer (100 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 2 M urea, 10 mM DTT) with 0.1 µg/ml of trypsin at RT and eluted tryptic peptides were bound to C18 stage tips (ThermoFischer, USA) prior to mass spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
Samples were injected and analyzed by nanoflow-LC-MS/MS a Q-ExactivePlus or Lumos mass spectrometer, coupled to an Easy nano-LC 1000 HPLC (ThermoFischer) in tandem mass spectrometry mode with 90 min total analysis time. The flow rate of 300 nl/min, buffer A, 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid and buffer B, 0.1 % formic acid in 80 % acetonitrile was used. A gradient of increasing organic proportion in combination with a reversed phase C18 separating column (2 µm particle size, 100 Ǻ pore size, 15 cm length, 50 µm i.d., Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used. Each MS scan were followed by a maximum of 10 MS/MS scans in the data-dependent mode. Blank samples of 10% formic acid were run for 45 min between the GFP and agarose control samples, in order to avoid carry-over. The outcome raw files were analyzed with MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3.30). Data were aligned to Uniprot human FASTA database. Volcano plots were generated using Perseus (MQ package, version 1.5.4.0). Contaminants, reverse peptides, and protein identification based on only one replication were filtered from raw data. Label-free quantification (LFQ) values were transformed to the log2 scale to generate the normal distribution of the data. Quality was checked by generating the unsupervised clustering of replicates and predicted proteins that were depicted as a heatmap for manual inspection. Scatter plots of the hits were also generated based on the Spearman's correlation coefficient of the LFQ values to quality check the correlation between the GFP condition of each experiment. Imputation of the missing values was then performed on the normally distributed data (width= 0.3 and shift= 1.8). The significantly different proteins between GFP and agarose control pulldown proteins were calculated using a two-tailed Student's t-test using 1% FDR. The constant value of 1 was kept for the threshold of significance (S0=1). Intensity Based Absolute Quantification (iBAQ) values were used to calculate the stoichiometry as the subsequent relative protein abundance estimation. The iBAQ values for each replication of the GFP pulldown were subtracted by the mean of the values from agarose bead control pulldowns. The abundance of nucelar interactors was normalized based on the PAXIP1 subunit of the MLL3 and MLL4 complexes.

### Publication Abstract
The UTX/KDM6A histone H3K27 demethylase plays an important role in development and is frequently mutated in cancers such as urothelial cancer. Despite many studies on UTX proteins, variations in mRNA splicing have been overlooked. Using Nanopore sequencing, we present a comprehensive analysis of UTX/KDM6A splicing events in human cell lines and in tissue samples from bladder cancer cases and normal epithelia. We found that the central region of UTX mRNAs encoded by exons 12 to 17 undergoes extensive alternative splicing. Up to half of all stable mRNAs (8-48% in bladder tissues and 18-58% in cell lines) are represented by the UTX canonical isoform lacking exon 14 encoding a nuclear localization sequence, and hence exon 14-containing UTX isoforms exclusively localize to the nucleus, unlike the cytonuclear localization of the canonical isoform. Chromatin association was also higher for exon-14-containing isoforms compared to the canonical UTX. Using quantitative mass spectrometry, we found that all UTX isoforms integrated into the MLL3 and MLL4, PR-DUB and MiDAC complexes. Interestingly, one of the novel UTX isoforms, which lacks exons 14 and 16, fails to interact with PR-DUB and MiDAC complex members. In conclusion, UTX mRNAs undergo extensive alternative splicing, which controls the subcellular localization of UTX and its interactions with other chromatin regulatory complexes.

### Keywords
Kdm6a, Isoforms, Bladder cancer

### Affiliations
German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), partner site Freiburg
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ)
Foundation under Public Law
c/o Department of Urology
Zentrale Klinische Forschung (ZKF)
Medical Center-University of Freiburg
Breisacher Str. 66, 79106 Freiburg, Germany
German cancer research center (DKFZ), Germany

### Submitter
Marc Timmers

### Lab Head
Dr Marc Timmers
German cancer research center (DKFZ), Germany


