### Accession
PXD026054

### Title
Ubiquitinome profiling reveals in vivo UBE2D3 targets and implicates UBE2D3 in protein quality control and H2B monoubiquitination

### Description
Ubiquitination has crucial roles in many cellular processes and dysregulation of ubiquitin machinery enzymes can result in various forms of pathogenesis. Cells only have a limited set of E2 ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes to support the ubiquitination of many cellular targets. As individual E2 enzymes have many different substrates and interactions between E2 enzymes and their substrates can be transient, it is challenging to define all in vivo substrates of an individual E2 and the cellular processes it affects. Particularly challenging in this respect is UBE2D3, a very promiscuous E2 enzyme that affects a broad range of processes. Here, we set out to identify in vivo targets of UBE2D3 by using SILAC-based quantitative ubiquitin diGly proteomics to study global proteome and ubiquitinome changes associated with UBE2D3 depletion. UBE2D3 depletion changed the global proteome, with proteins from metabolic pathways, in particular retinol metabolism, being the most affected. However, the impact of UBE2D3 depletion on the ubiquitinome was much more prominent and, interestingly, identified pathways related to mRNA translation as top pathways being affected. Indeed, we find that ubiquitination of the ribosomal proteins RPS10 and RPS20, critical for ribosome-associated protein quality control (RQC), is dependent on UBE2D3. Moreover, we find that UBE2D3 limits monoubiquitination of histone H2B at lysine 120, mediated by the E3 ligase RNF20. This identifies UBE2D3 as a potential regulator of the diverse and critical cellular processes that are controlled by H2B monoubiquitination. Collectively, our findings show that depletion of an E2 ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme in combination with quantitative diGly-based ubiquitinome profiling is a powerful tool to identify new in vivo E2 substrates, as we have done here for UBE2D3. Together with our identification of RQC factors and H2B as novel in vivo targets of UBE2D3, our work provides an important resource for further studies on the in vivo functions of UBE2D3.

### Sample Protocol
UBE2D3-TULIP 2 samples were prepared as previously described (1), UBE2D3 wild type and C85A mutant were cloned in the TULIP2 and TULIP2DGG plasmids by Gateway® cloning (Thermo Fisher Scientific). TULIP2 constructs were introduced in Hela cells by lentiviral transduction and positive clones were selected on 3mg/mL puromycin.  Five 15cm diameter plates of HELA cells were grown up to 60-80% confluency and the expression of UBE2D3-TULIP2 constructs was induced with 1mg/mL doxycycline for 24h and treated or not for 5 h proteasome inhibitor MG132 (Sigma Aldrich) 10µM. Next, washed twice with ice-cold PBS, scraped and lysed in 10 mL Guanidinium buffer (6M guanidine-HCl, 0.1M Sodium Phosphate, 10 mM TRIS, pH 7.8). Samples were homogenized at room temperature by sonication using a tip sonicator (Q125 Sonicator, QSonica, Newtown, USA).  Protein concentration was determined by using BiCinchoninic Acid (BCA) Protein Assay Reagent (Thermo Scientific) and  equalized accordingly.  Once equalized, lysates were supplemented with 5 mM β-mercaptoethanol and 50 mM Imidazole pH 7.8. 100 μL of nickel-nitrilotriacetic acid-agarose (Ni-NTA) beads (QIAGEN), were equilibrated with Guanidinium buffer supplemented with 5 mM β-mercaptoethanol and 50 mM Imidazole pH 7.8, added to the cell lysates and incubated overnight at 4°C under rotation. Next, Ni-NTA beads were transferred with Wash buffer 1 (6 M Guanidine-HCl, 0.1 M Sodium Phosphate, 10 mM TRIS, 10 mM Imidazole, 5 mM β-mercaptoethanol, 0.2% Triton X-100, pH 7.8) to an Eppendorf LoBind tube (Eppendorf) and sequentially washed with Wash buffer 2 (8 M Urea, 0.1 M Sodium Phosphate, 10 mM TRIS, 10 mM imidazole, 5 mM β-mercaptoethanol, pH 8),  Wash buffer 3 (8 M urea, 0.1 M Sodium Phosphate, 10 mM TRIS, 10 mM imidazole, 5 mM β-mercaptoethanol, pH 6.3) and twice with Wash buffer 4 (8 M urea, 0.1 M Sodium Phosphate, 10 mM TRIS, 5 mM β-mercaptoethanol, pH 6.3). In every wash step, beads were allowed to equilibrate with the buffer for 15 min under rotation. Ni-NTA beads were resuspended in one bead-volume of elution buffer without imidazole (7 M urea, 0.1 M Sodium Phosphate and 10 mM TRIS pH 7.0) and incubated with 375 ng of rLys-C (Promega) for 5h at 37 °C on a shaker at 1400rpm. Subsequently, 4 volumes 50mM ammonium bicarbonate were added to the samples  and a second digestion using 500 ng Trypsin (Promega) was done overnight at 37°C and 1400rpm for a complete digestion. Resulting peptides were purified and desalted using C-18 StageTips (2). Mass Spectrometry Data acquisition (UBE2D3-TULIP2) UBE2D3 samples were analyzed in an Orbitrap Exploris 480 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer coupled to an Ultimate 3000 UHPLC (Dionex). Digested peptides were separated using a 50 cm long fused silica emitter (FS360-75-15-N-5-C50, New Objective, Massachusetts, US) in-house packed with 1.9 µm C18-AQ beads (Reprospher-DE, Pur, Dr. Maisch, Ammerburch-Entringen, Germany) and heated to 50ºC in a Column Oven for ESI/Nano Spray (Sonation, Germany). Peptides were separated by liquid chromatography using a gradient from 2% to 32% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid for 100 min followed by column re-conditioning for 20 minutes. A Lock Mass of 445.12003 (polysiloxane) was used for internal calibration.  Data was acquired in a Data Dependent Acquisition (DDA) mode with a TopSpeed method with cycle time of 3 s with a scan range of 300-1600 m/z and resolutions of 60,000 and 30,000 for MS1 and MS2, respectively. For MS2, an isolation window of 1.6 m/z and and an HCD collision energy of 28% was applied. Precursors with a charge of 1 and higher than 6 were excluded from triggering MS2 as well as previously analyzed precursors with a dynamic exclusion window of 30s.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data was analyzed using MaxQuant v1.6.14.0 according to (3) with the following modifications: Maximum missed cleavages by trypsin was set to 4. Searches were performed against an in silico digested database from the human proteome including isoforms and canonical proteins (Uniprot, 8th June 2020) plus GFP protein. Oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein N-term), GlyGly (K) and Phospho (STY) were set as variable modifications with a maximum of 3. Carbamidomethyl (C) was disabled as fixed modification. Label-free quantification was activated not enabling Fast LFQ. The match between runs feature was activated with default parameters.

### Publication Abstract
Ubiquitination has crucial roles in many cellular processes, and dysregulation of ubiquitin machinery enzymes can result in various forms of pathogenesis. Cells only have a limited set of ubiquitin-conjugating (E2) enzymes to support the ubiquitination of many cellular targets. As individual E2 enzymes have many different substrates and interactions between E2 enzymes and their substrates can be transient, it is challenging to define all in&#xa0;vivo substrates of an individual E2 and the cellular processes it affects. Particularly challenging in this respect is UBE2D3, an E2 enzyme with promiscuous activity in&#xa0;vitro but less defined roles in&#xa0;vivo. Here, we set out to identify in&#xa0;vivo targets of UBE2D3 by using stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture-based and label-free quantitative ubiquitin diGly proteomics to study global proteome and ubiquitinome changes associated with UBE2D3 depletion. UBE2D3 depletion changed the global proteome, with the levels of proteins from metabolic pathways, in particular retinol metabolism, being the most affected. However, the impact of UBE2D3 depletion on the ubiquitinome was much more prominent. Interestingly, molecular pathways related to mRNA translation were the most affected. Indeed, we find that ubiquitination of the ribosomal proteins RPS10 and RPS20, critical for ribosome-associated protein quality control, is dependent on UBE2D3. We show by Targets of Ubiquitin Ligases Identified by Proteomics 2 methodology that RPS10 and RPS20 are direct targets of UBE2D3 and demonstrate that the catalytic activity of UBE2D3 is required to ubiquitinate RPS10 in&#xa0;vivo. In addition, our data suggest that UBE2D3 acts at multiple levels in autophagic protein quality control. Collectively, our findings show that depletion of an E2 enzyme in combination with quantitative diGly-based ubiquitinome profiling is a powerful tool to identify new in&#xa0;vivo E2 substrates, as we have done here for UBE2D3. Our work provides an important resource for further studies on the in&#xa0;vivo functions of UBE2D3.

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Ube2d3

### Affiliations
Andalusian Center for Regenerative Medicine and Cell Biology, CABIMER, University of Seville
Cell and Chemical Biology Leiden University Medical Center

### Submitter
Román González-Prieto

### Lab Head
Dr Román González-Prieto
Cell and Chemical Biology Leiden University Medical Center


