### Accession
PXD029009

### Title
A proteomic survival predictor for COVID-19 patients in intensive care

### Description
Global healthcare systems are challenged by the COVID-19 pandemic. There is a need to optimize allocation of treatment and resources in intensive care, as clinically established risk assessments such as SOFA and APACHE II scores show only limited performance for predicting the survival of severely ill COVID-19 patients. Comprehensively capturing the host physiology, we speculated that proteomics in combination with new data-driven analysis strategies could produce a new generation of prognostic discriminators. We studied two independent cohorts of patients with severe COVID-19 who required intensive care and invasive mechanical ventilation. SOFA score, Charlson comorbidity index and APACHE II score were poor predictors of survival. Instead, using plasma proteomes quantifying 302 plasma protein groups at 387 timepoints in 57 critically ill patients on invasive mechanical ventilation, we found 14 proteins that showed trajectories different between survivors and non-survivors. A proteomic predictor trained on single samples obtained at the first time point at maximum treatment level (i.e. WHO grade 7) and weeks before the outcome, achieved accurate classification of survivors (AUROC 0.81, n=49). We tested the established predictor on an independent validation cohort (AUROC of 1.0, n=24). The majority of proteins with high relevance in the prediction model belong to the coagulation system and complement cascade. Our study demonstrates that predictors derived from plasma protein levels have the potential to substantially outperform current prognostic markers in intensive care.

### Sample Protocol
Semi-automated sample preparation was performed in 96-well format, using previously prepared stock solution plates stored at -80°C. Briefly, 5μl of thawed plasma samples were transferred to the pre-made denaturation/reduction stock solution plates (50 μl 8M Urea, 100mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) + 5 µl 50mM dithiothreitol). The plates were incubated at 30°C for 60 minutes. 5μl was then transferred from the iodoacetamide stock solution plate (100mM) to the sample plate and incubated in the dark at 23°C for 30 minutes before dilution with 100mM ABC buffer (340μl). 220μl of this solution was transferred to the pre-made trypsin stock solution plate (12.5μl, 0.1μg/μl) and incubated at 37°C for 17 h. The trypsin/total protein ratio was approximately ~1/100. The digestion was quenched by addition of formic acid (10% v/v, 25μl). The digestion mixture was cleaned-up using C18 96-well plates (BioPureSPE Macro 96-Well, 100mg PROTO C18, The Nest Group) and redissolved in 50μl 0.1% formic acid. Each 96-well plate contained 8 plasma and 4 serum sample preparation controls, and the acquisition workflow included a pooled quality control sample every ~10 injections. Liquid chromatography was performed using the Agilent 1290 Infinity II system coupled to a TripleTOF 6600 mass spectrometer (SCIEX) equipped with IonDrive Turbo V Source (Sciex). A total of 5μl was injected, and the peptides were separated in reversed phase mode using a C18 ZORBAX Rapid Resolution High Definition (RRHD) column 2.1mm x 50mm, 1.8μm particles. A linear gradient was applied which ramps from 1% B to 40% B in 5 minutes (Buffer A: 0.1% FA; Buffer B: ACN/0.1% FA) with a flow rate of 800μl/min. For washing the column, the organic solvent was increased to 80% B in 0.5 minutes and was kept for 0.2 minutes at this composition before going back to 1% B in 0.1 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in the high sensitivity mode. The DIA/SWATH method consisted of an MS1 scan from m/z 100 to m/z 1500 (20ms accumulation time) and 25 MS2 scans (25ms accumulation time) with variable precursor isolation width covering the mass range from m/z 450 to m/z 850. An IonDrive Turbo V Source (Sciex) was used with ion source gas 1 (nebulizer gas), ion source gas 2 (heater gas) and curtain gas set to 50, 40 and 25, respectively. The source temperature was set to 450 and the ion spray voltage to 5500V.

### Data Protocol
Patients included in this analysis are a sub-cohort of the Pa-COVID-19 study conducted at Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, a prospective observational cohort study on the pathophysiology of COVID-19 as described previously (Thibeault et al., Infection 2021, Kurth et al., Infection 2020). All patients with PCR-confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection that progressed to critical disease (WHO grade 7, i.e. invasive mechanical ventilation and additional organ support), were eligible for inclusion.  Statistical testing and machine learning were performed on proteomic and diagnostic data published in Demichev et al., Cell Syst. 2021, please see also PXD025752.

### Publication Abstract
Global healthcare systems are challenged by the COVID-19 pandemic. There is a need to optimize allocation of treatment and resources in intensive care, as clinically established risk assessments such as SOFA and APACHE II scores show only limited performance for predicting the survival of severely ill COVID-19 patients. Additional tools are also needed to monitor treatment, including experimental therapies in clinical trials. Comprehensively capturing human physiology, we speculated that proteomics in combination with new data-driven analysis strategies could produce a new generation of prognostic discriminators. We studied two independent cohorts of patients with severe COVID-19 who required intensive care and invasive mechanical ventilation. SOFA score, Charlson comorbidity index, and APACHE II score showed limited performance in predicting the COVID-19 outcome. Instead, the quantification of 321 plasma protein groups at 349 timepoints in 50 critically ill patients receiving invasive mechanical ventilation revealed 14 proteins that showed trajectories different between survivors and non-survivors. A predictor trained on proteomic measurements obtained at the first time point at maximum treatment level (i.e. WHO grade 7), which was weeks before the outcome, achieved accurate classification of survivors (AUROC 0.81). We tested the established predictor on an independent validation cohort (AUROC 1.0). The majority of proteins with high relevance in the prediction model belong to the coagulation system and complement cascade. Our study demonstrates that plasma proteomics can give rise to prognostic predictors substantially outperforming current prognostic markers in intensive care.

### Keywords
Plasma, Covid-19, Scanningswath, Sars-cov2

### Affiliations
Core  Facility -High-Throughput  Mass  Spectrometry,  Charité -Universitätsmedizin Berlin,  corporate  member  of  Freie  Universität  Berlin,  Humboldt-Universität  zu  Berlin and Berlin Institute of Health (BIH), Berlin, Germany
Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Department of Biochemistry, 10117 Berlin, Germany; The Francis Crick Institute, Molecular Biology of Metabolism Laboratory, London NW11AT, UK

### Submitter
Michael Mülleder

### Lab Head
Dr Markus Ralser
Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Department of Biochemistry, 10117 Berlin, Germany; The Francis Crick Institute, Molecular Biology of Metabolism Laboratory, London NW11AT, UK


