### Accession
PXD003935

### Title
Profiling of Human Circulating Plasma Microparticle Associated Proteins by DDA and DIA

### Description
Cells of the vascular system release spherical vesicles, called microparticles (MP), in the size range of 0.1-1μm induced by a variety of stress factors resulting in variable MP concentrations between health and disease. Furthermore, MP have intercellular communication/signaling properties and interfere with inflammation and coagulation pathways. Today’s most used analytical technology for MP characterization, flow cytometry, is lacking sensitivity and specificity, which might have led to the publication of contradicting results in the past. We propose the use of nano-liquid chromatography coupled to two-stage mass spectrometry as a non-biased tool for quantitative MP proteome analysis. Using aliquots of 250 μL platelet-free plasma (PFP) from one individual donor, we achieved excellent inter-assay CV’s of 2.7 ± 1.7% (mean ± 1 S.D.) on individual peptide intensities across 27 data-dependent nanoLC-MS/MS runs performed over a period of 3.5 months. With quantitative proteomics, we show that MP composition between twelve volunteers were remarkably stable. MP protein composition is clearly distinguishable from whole cell lysates and we propose that this trait should be used as a quality criterion of MP purity. Furthermore, MP were damaged by freezing PFP. The damage was articulated by a loss of cytoplasm proteins, encompassing a specific set of proteins involved in regulating dynamic structures of the cytoskeleton, and thrombin activation leading to MP clotting. On the other hand, plasma membrane protein composition (cell markers) was not affected. Finally, we show that multiplexed data-independent acquisition can be used for relative quantification of target proteins using Skyline software.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of platelet-free plasma (PFP) by two different centrifugation steps. Isolation of MP by centrifugation at 16'000g followed by three washing steps with PBS. Lysis of MP in urea buffer followed by a two steps of protein digestion using LysC and trypsin. Shotgun analysis by nanoLC-MS/MS using three replicate injections of each sample on a QExactive Orbitrap instrument. For deep MP proteome sequencing, MP from a pool of twelve PFP samples were separated by SDS-PAGE. The lane was cut into 12 bands (fractions), which were in-gel digested and analyzed individually by nanoLC-MS/MS as described above. The data-independent acquisition (DIA) data was acquired with 1 full MS scan from 390 to 1010 m/z at resolution followed by 10 MS2 scans, isolating three randomly combined 10 m/z ion packages (MSX3) covering the mass range from 400 to 1000 m/z, followed by another full MS scan.

### Data Protocol
DDA data of all in-solution digested MP samples were processed with MaxQuant/Andromeda version 1.5.0.0 (MQ) searching against the forward and reversed SwissProt human protein database (Release 2013_09 and 2015_12) with the following parameters: Mass error tolerance for parent ions of 10 ppm and fragment ions of 20 ppm, trypsin cleavage mode (no P rule) with 2 missed cleavages, static carbamidomethylation on Cys, variable oxidation on Met and acetylation of protein N-termini. For the samples of the twelve volunteers carbamoylation on Lys, and the freezer study samples phosphorylation on Ser, Thr, Tyr were also included as optional modifications. Based on reversed database peptide spectrum matches a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) was set for acceptance of peptide spectrum matches (PSM), peptides and proteins. The top3 peptide feature intensities of each protein group and LC-MS/MS run were summed to form the protein group “top3” intensity followed by group-wise median normalization. Data from the in-gel digested MP pool was interpreted with MaxQuant (v1.5.0.0), EasyProt v2.3 build 747, and SearchGUI (v1.21.0) / PeptideShaker (v0.34.0) [Vaudel 2015] using Amanda, X!Tandem, Myrimatch, and msgf+ as search engines, respectively, against SwissProt human protein database, release 2013_09, mass error tolerance for parent ions of 10 ppm and fragment ions of 0.02 Da, trypsin cleavage mode with 3 missed cleavages, static carbamidomethylation on Cys, and variable oxidation. Peptide sequences accepted at a 1% PSM false discovery rate were exported from each search engine. The QExactive data was transformed to Mascot generic files with ProteomeDiscoverer v1.4 using the decharging and deconvolution option for the SearchGUI data interpretation. Peptides confirmed by at least three search engines, or peptides with at least one other peptide with different sequence matching to the same protein, were accepted as true positives. All MaxQuant peptide identifications at 1% FDR were used to build a spectrum library within Skyline. The protein intensities of 78 target proteins were extracted from the DIA MSX3 data using the three most intense peptides on MS1 and MS2 level. For MS2 intensities, 5 to 10 fragment ions were considered. Correctness of extracted chromatographic peaks were evaluated by mProphet (1% FDR) followed by manual validation. An untargeted protein quantification was carried out with DIA-Umpire software using Comet and X!Tandem for interpretation of extracted mgf’s followed by PSM validation within the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (TPP). The DDA data of the SDS-PAGE fractions and the twelve in-solution digests of isolated MP from 400 µL PFP aliquots were interpreted with Comet and X!Tandem in order to build a TraML spectral library within TPP applying a 5% protein. The six most intense fragment ions were summed to peptide MS2 intensities. As with Skyline data, the top3 peptides on MS1 and MS2 level of each protein were summed to the protein intensity.

### Publication Abstract
Cells of the vascular system release spherical vesicles, called microparticles, in the size range of 0.1-1 &#x3bc;m induced by a variety of stress factors resulting in variable concentrations between health and disease. Furthermore, microparticles have intercellular communication/signaling properties and interfere with inflammation and coagulation pathways. Today's most used analytical technology for microparticle characterization, flow cytometry, is lacking sensitivity and specificity, which might have led to the publication of contradicting results in the past.We propose the use of nano-liquid chromatography two-stage mass spectrometry as a nonbiased tool for quantitative MP proteome analysis.For this, we developed an improved microparticle isolation protocol and quantified the microparticle protein composition of twelve healthy volunteers with a label-free, data-dependent and independent proteomics approach on a quadrupole orbitrap instrument.Using aliquots of 250 &#x3bc;l platelet-free plasma from one individual donor, we achieved excellent reproducibility with an interassay coefficient of variation of 2.7 &#xb1; 1.7% (mean &#xb1; 1 standard deviation) on individual peptide intensities across 27 acquisitions performed over a period of 3.5 months. We show that the microparticle proteome between twelve healthy volunteers were remarkably similar, and that it is clearly distinguishable from whole cell and platelet lysates. We propose the use of the proteome profile shown in this work as a quality criterion for microparticle purity in proteomics studies. Furthermore, one freeze thaw cycle damaged the microparticle integrity, articulated by a loss of cytoplasm proteins, encompassing a specific set of proteins involved in regulating dynamic structures of the cytoskeleton, and thrombin activation leading to MP clotting. On the other hand, plasma membrane protein composition was unaffected. Finally, we show that multiplexed data-independent acquisition can be used for relative quantification of target proteins using Skyline software. Mass spectrometry data are available via ProteomeXchange (identifier PXD003935) and panoramaweb.org (https://panoramaweb.org/labkey/N1OHMk.url).

### Keywords
Human, Plasma, Relative quantification, Microparticles

### Affiliations
University of Bern, Department of Clinical Research, Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry Core Facility, 3010 Bern, Switzerland
University of Bern

### Submitter
Manfred Heller

### Lab Head
Dr Manfred Heller
University of Bern, Department of Clinical Research, Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry Core Facility, 3010 Bern, Switzerland


