### Accession
PXD013584

### Title
CEH-60/PBX regulates vitellogenesis and cuticle formation through interaction with UNC-62/MEIS in Caenorhabditis elegans

### Description
The onset of sexual maturity involves dramatic changes in physiology and gene expression in many animals. A textbook example is the production of enormous amounts of yolk proteins destined for the nascent oocytes, termed vitellogenesis. We previously identified the rapidly evolving PBC-class Hox-cofactor CEH-60/PBX as necessary for abundant vit transcription in C. elegans. Differential proteomics data shows that all vitellogenin proteins are indeed drastically downregulated in ceh-60 mutant animals and suggest an additional role for CEH-60’s involvement cuticle structure, innate immunity and stress response.

### Sample Protocol
Six populations of young adult animals were sampled per condition. Samples were labelled with a TMTsixplex isobaric labelling set (Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Briefly, worms were lysed using RIPA buffer containing protease and phosphatase inhibitor. Protein homogenate was then sonicated for 30 seconds on ice and centrifuged at 14000 g for 15 minutes. Protein concentration was determined using a BCA assay (Thermo Scientific)  and  100 μg of protein extract per sample was prepared for protein digestion as noted in the manufacturer’s manual and digested with 2.5 µL trypsin per sample overnight at 37°C. Peptide digests were labelled with TMT Label Reagent, after which the reaction was quenched with 8 µL 5% hydroxylamine. Pooled samples for each set comprising three wild type and three mutant samples were prepared in a 1:1:1:1:1:1 protein concentration ratio and stored at -80°C. Each pooled sample was separated into 10 fractions by reverse phase liquid chromatography coupled on-line to a C18 analytical column and an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) set up in MS/MS mode and equipped with a Nanospray Ion Source (Thermo Scientific). Full scan spectra were followed by a maximum of five dual collision-induced dissociation (CID)/high-energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) tandem mass spectra.

### Data Protocol
Mixed HCD/CID spectra were analysed in MaxQuant’s Andromeda search engine using 6plex TMT as internal labels with a reporter mass tolerance of 0.003 Da, Oxidation(M) and Acetyl as variable modifications and carbaminomethyl(C) as fixed modification with a maximum of 5 modifications per peptide. Default Orbitrap instrument settings were used and identified peptides were mapped to the UniProt C. elegans reference proteome (https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000001940). All other global parameters were used as default, except that match between runs was enabled. Data analysis and normalization was performed using R and Perseus to filter out peptides with valid measurement for at least 4 out of 12 channels and without all 6 of either 6-plex channels being empty and proteins for which at least 2 unique peptides were identified. Data normalization was performed by using internal reference sampling and correcting for sample loading.

### Publication Abstract
The onset of sexual maturity involves dramatic changes in physiology and gene expression in many animals. These include abundant yolk protein production in egg-laying species, an energetically costly process under extensive transcriptional control. Here, we used the model organism Caenorhabditis elegans to provide evidence for the spatiotemporally defined interaction of two evolutionarily conserved transcription factors, CEH-60/PBX and UNC-62/MEIS, acting as a gateway to yolk protein production. Via proteomics, bimolecular fluorescence complementation (BiFC), and biochemical and functional readouts, we show that this interaction occurs in the intestine of animals at the onset of sexual maturity and suffices to support the reproductive program. Our electron micrographs and functional assays provide evidence that intestinal PBX/MEIS cooperation drives another process that depends on lipid mobilization: the formation of an impermeable epicuticle. Without this lipid-rich protective layer, mutant animals are hypersensitive to exogenous oxidative stress and are poor partners for mating. Dedicated communication between the hypodermis and intestine in C. elegans likely supports these physiological outcomes, and we propose a fundamental role for the conserved PBX/MEIS interaction in multicellular signaling networks that rely on lipid homeostasis.

### Keywords
Caenorhabditis elegans, Ceh-60, Vitellogenesis, Collagen, Cuticle, Tmt, Yolk proteins

### Affiliations
Department of Biology, KU Leuven (University of Leuven), Belgium ( lab head )
KU Leuven

### Submitter
Pieter Van de Walle

### Lab Head
Dr Liesbet Temmerman
Department of Biology, KU Leuven (University of Leuven), Belgium ( lab head )


