### Accession
PXD005939

### Title
The effect of entomopathogenic fungal culture filtrate on the immune response of the greater wax moth, Galleria mellonella.

### Description
Galleria mellonella is a well-established model species regularly employed in the study of the insect immune response at cellular and humoral levels to investigate fungal pathogenesis and biocontrol agents. A cellular and proteomic analysis of the effect of culture filtrate of three EPF species on the immune system of G. mellonella was performed.

### Sample Protocol
EPF were cultured in Sabouraud Dextrose liquid medium (Oxoid) for 48 h, 72 h and 96 h in a shaking incubator at 25°C and 250 rpm. After each time point the culture was filtered through 0.45 µm syringe filters and then through 0.2µm syringe filters (Sartstedt). Larvae were injected with 20 µl of culture filtrate or Sabouraud dextrose (controls) and incubated for 48h at 20°C. Five larvae per treatment were bled into a pre-chilled 1.5 ml centrifuge tube and spun at 1,500 x g for 5 min at 4°C. Samples were diluted in PBS and a Bradford assay was carried out. Protein (100 µg) was removed to a pre-chilled 1.5 ml centrifuge tube and ice cold 100 % acetone was added at ratio of 1:3 (sample: acetone). Protein was precipitated at -20°C. The sample was centrifuged at 13,000 x g for 10 min and the protein pellet was resuspended in 100 µl of resuspension buffer (6M urea, 2M thiourea, 5mM calcium chloride). Protein (75 μg) was reduced with dithiotreitol (200 mM) and alkylated with iodoacetamide (1 M). Samples were digested with sequence grade trypsin (Promega, Ireland) at a trypsin:protein ratio of 1:40, overnight at 37 °C. Four replicate samples were prepared for each treatment.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification from the MS/MS data was performed using the Andromeda search engine in MaxQuant (version 1.2.2.5; http://maxquant.org/) to correlate the data against a 6-frame translation of the EST contigs for G. mellonella (Vogel et al. 2011). The following search parameters were used: first search peptide tolerance of 20 ppm, second search peptide tolerance 4.5 ppm with cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification and N-acetylation of protein and oxidation of methionine as variable modifications and a maximum of 2 missed cleavage sites allowed. Results processing, statistical analyses and graphics generation were conducted using Perseus v. 1.5.0.31. Label free quantification (LFQ) intensities were log2-transformed and t-tests comparing EPF treated larvae with controls were performed using a p-value of 0.05. Proteins were kept in the analysis if they were found all 4 replicates in at least one group. Principal component analysis (PCA) was used to emphasize variation and visualize strong patterns in the data.

### Publication Abstract
Galleria mellonella is a well-established model species regularly employed in the study of the insect immune response at cellular and humoral levels to investigate fungal pathogenesis and biocontrol agents. A cellular and proteomic analysis of the effect of culture filtrate of three entomopathogenic fungi (EPF) species on the immune system of G. mellonella was performed. Treatment with Beauveria caledonica and Metarhizium anisopliae 96h culture filtrate facilitated a significantly increased yeast cell density in larvae (3-fold and 3.8-fold, respectively). Larvae co-injected with either M. anisopliae or B. caledonica culture filtrate and Candida albicans showed significantly increased mortality. The same was not seen for larvae injected with Beauveria bassiana filtrate. Together these results suggest that B. caledonica and M. anisopliae filtrate are modulating the insect immune system allowing a subsequent pathogen to proliferate. B. caledonica and M. anisopliae culture filtrates impact upon the larval prophenoloxidase (ProPO) cascade (e.g. ProPO activating factor 3 and proPO activating enzyme 3 were increased in abundance relative to controls), while B. bassiana treated larvae displayed higher abundances of alpha-esterase when compared to control larvae (2.4-fold greater) and larvae treated with M. anisopliae and B. caledonica. Treatment with EPF culture filtrate had a significant effect on antimicrobial peptide abundances particularly in M. anisopliae treated larvae where cecropin-D precursor, hemolin and gloverin were differentially abundant in comparison to controls. Differences in proteomic profiles for different treatments may reflect or even partially explain the differences in their immunomodulatory potential. Screening EPF for their ability to modulate the insect immune response represents a means of assessing EPF for use as biocontrol agents, particularly if the goal is to use them in combination with other control agents. Additionally EPF represent a valuable resource pool in our search for natural products with insect immunomodulatory and biocontrol properties.

### Keywords
Immune response, Prophenoloxidase, Proteomics, Entomopathogenic fungi, Antimicrobial peptide, Biocontrol

### Affiliations
aDepartment of Biology; Maynooth University; County Kildare, Ireland
Biology

### Submitter
James Carolan

### Lab Head
Dr Jim Carolan
aDepartment of Biology; Maynooth University; County Kildare, Ireland


