### Accession
PXD022425

### Title
Universal antimicrobial resistance detection from clinical bacterial isolates using proteomics

### Description
Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) is an increasing challenge for therapy and management of bacterial infections. Currently, antimicrobial resistance detection relies on phenotypic assays, which are performed independently of species identification. On the contrary, phenotypic prediction from molecular data using genomics is gaining interest in clinical microbiology and might become a serious alternative in the future. Although, in general protein analysis should be superior to genomics for phenotypic prediction, no untargeted proteomics workflow specifically related to AMR detection has been proposed so far.  In this study, we present a universal proteomics workflow to detect the bacterial species and antimicrobial resistance related proteins in the absence of secondary antibiotic cultivation in less than 4 h from a primary culture. The method was validated using a sample cohort of 7 bacterial species and 11 AMR determinants represented by 13 protein isoforms which resulted in a sensitivity of 92 % (100 % with vancomycin inference) and a specificity of 100 % with respect to AMR determinants. This proof-of concept study demonstrates the high potential of untargeted proteomics for clinical microbiology.

### Sample Protocol
Bacteria were prepared for mass spectrometry by filter-aided Sample Preparation by Easy Extraction and Digestion (fa-SPEED) as described previously (Doellinger et al, 2020b). In brief, bacterial cells were harvested using an inoculating loop, washed twice with PBS and pelleted for 5 min at 5,000 x g. Pellets were resuspended in trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) (Optima® LC/MS, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Schwerte, Germany) (sample/TFA 1:4 (v/v) and incubated at 70°C for 3 min. Samples were neutralized with 2M TrisBase using 10 x volume of TFA and further incubated at 95°C for 5 min after adding Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) to a final concentration of 10 mM and 2-chloroacetamide (CAA) to a final concentration of 40 mM. Protein concentrations were determined by turbidity measurements at 360 nm (1 AU = 0.67 µg/µL) using the NanoPhotometer® NP80 (Implen, Westlake Village, California, USA). Note, that the turbidity values are instrument dependent, for further details see Doellinger et. al 2020 (Doellinger et al., 2020b). 40 µg proteins were mixed with acetone (Uvasol® for spectroscopy, Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) to obtain a final concentration of 80 % acetone (v/v) and pipetted on an Ultrafree-MC PTFE membrane 0.2 µm filter (Merck Millipore, Burlington, Massachusetts, USA). The filter was incubated for 2 min at room temperature and was then centrifuged at 5000 x g for 1 min. The samples were washed successively with 200 µL 80% acetone, 180 µL acetone and 180 µL n-pentane for 1 min at 5000 x g each. The filter was then dried for 2 min under a fume hood to remove all remaining solvents. Afterwards 40 μl digestion buffer (1:10 diluted Rapid Digest buffer (Promega, Fitchburg, WI, USA) in water) containing Rapid Digestion Trypsin (Promega) using a protein/enzyme (w/w) ratio of 10:1 was added. The filter was incubated for 15 min in a thermomixer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) at 70°C covered by a beaker filled with 70 °C hot water. After digestion samples were spun down for 1 min at 5000 x g. The eluted peptide solution was acidified with 10 µl 10% TFA to a pH of ~2. Concentration was measured with the NanoPhotometer® NP80 (Implen, Westlake Village, California, USA). All samples were diluted with 0.1 % TFA to obtain a final peptide concentration of 0.25 µg/µl and stored at -80°C.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified using DIA-NN (v1.76) (Demichev et al, 2018). Samples were analyzed separately for each species in an unbatched manner in conjunction with the unrelated run option. Spectral libraries were predicted using the deep-learning algorithm implemented in DIA-NN with strict trypsin specificity (KR not P) in the m/z range of 350 – 1,150 for all peptides consisting of 7-30 amino acids of the sample-specific background database and either the full or whitelist version of CARD. Cysteine residues were assumed to be carbamidomythlated and protein N-terminal methionine’s were removed. The mass spectra were analyzed using fixed mass tolerances of 10 ppm for MS1 and 20 ppm for MS² spectra. Retention time profiling was disabled. The false discovery rate was set to 1 % for precursor identifications and proteins were grouped according to their respective genes.

### Publication Abstract
Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) poses an increasing challenge for therapy and clinical management of bacterial infections. Currently, antimicrobial resistance detection relies on phenotypic assays, which are performed independently from species identification. Sequencing-based approaches are possible alternatives for AMR detection, although the analysis of proteins should be superior to gene or transcript sequencing for phenotype prediction as the actual resistance to antibiotics is almost exclusively mediated by proteins. In this proof-of-concept study, we present an unbiased proteomics workflow for detecting both bacterial species and AMR-related proteins in the absence of secondary antibiotic cultivation within &lt;4 h from a primary culture. The workflow was designed to meet the needs in clinical microbiology. It introduces a new data analysis concept for bacterial proteomics, and a software (rawDIAtect) for the prediction and reporting of AMR from peptide identifications. The method was validated using a sample cohort of 7 bacterial species and 11 AMR determinants represented by 13 protein isoforms, which resulted in a sensitivity of 98% and a specificity of 100%.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Carbapenemases, Proteomics, Amr, Bacteria, Esbl, Mass spectrometry, Mcr, Antibiotic resistance mechanism, Data-independent acquisition

### Affiliations
Peter Lasch, Centre for Biological Threats and Special Pathogens,  Proteomics and Spectroscopy (ZBS6),  Berlin, Germany
Robert Koch-Institut, ZBS6

### Submitter
Christian Blumenscheitc

### Lab Head
Dr Robert Koch-Institute
Peter Lasch, Centre for Biological Threats and Special Pathogens,  Proteomics and Spectroscopy (ZBS6),  Berlin, Germany


