### Accession
PXD005957

### Title
Screening for micropeptides in HUVEC with tryptic digestion, part 2

### Description
Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNA) are transcribed but not translated ribonucleic acids with various functions. We analyzed a so far unreported lncRNAn 342419, which we named MANTIS. A search for micropeptides after overexpression of MANTIS in Human Umbilical Vein Endothelial Cells (HUVEC) with subsequent LC-MS/MS with trypsination showed that none of the micropeptides found had any similarity to potential MANTIS ORFs.

### Sample Protocol
Plasmid overexpression in HUVECs for searching small peptides was performed with the Neon electroporation system (Invitrogen) with the following plasmids: pcDNA3.1+MANTIS (MT) and pcDNA3.1+ (empty vector, CT) . Pellets of transfected HUVECs were resuspended in 50 µL 6M Guanidine hydrochloride (GdmCl), 50 mM Tris/HCl, pH 8.5, 10 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP) and incubated at 95°C for 5 min. Reduced thiols were alkylated with 40 mM chloroacetamide and samples were diluted with 25 mM Tris/HCl, pH 8.5, 10% acetonitrile to obtain a final GdmCl concentration of 0.6 M. Protein lysate was added to a 30 kDa cut-off filter unit and centrifuged. The flow through was digested with 1 µg trypsin (Promega, sequencing grade) overnight at 37 °C. Digestion was stopped by adding TFA to a final concentration of 0.5 %.Acidified peptides were loaded on multi-stop-and-go tip (StageTip) containing six C18-disks. Purification and elution of peptides was performed as described. Peptides were eluted in wells of microtiter plates and peptides were dried and resolved in 1% acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid analyzed by LC/MS. LC/MS was performed on Thermo Scientific™ Q Exactive Plus coupled to an ultra-high performance liquid chromatography unit (Thermo Scientific Dionex Ultimate 3000) via a Nanospray Flex Ion-Source (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded on a C18 reversed-phase precolumn (Zorbax 300SB-C18, Agilent Technologies) followed by separation on in-house packed 2.4 µm Reprosil C18 resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH) picotip emitter tip (internal diameter 100 µm, internal diameter of the tip 10 µm, 15 cm long, New Objectives) with a flow rate of 400 nL/min using a gradient from mobile phase A (4% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) to 40% mobile phase B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) for 60 min with an additional gradient to 80% B for another 30 min. Mass spectrometry (MS) data were recorded by data dependent Top10 acquisition (selecting the ten most abundant precursor ions in positive mode for high energy collision dissociation fragmentation (HCD)). The Full MS scan range was 300 to 2500 m/z with resolution of 70000 at m/z 200, and an automatic gain control (AGC) value of 3*106 total ion counts with a maximal ion injection time of 250 ms. Only higher charged ions (2+) were selected for MS/MS scans with a resolution of 17500, an isolation window of 2 m/z and an automatic gain control value set to 1*105 ions with a maximal ion injection time of 150 ms. Full MS and MS/MS data were acquired in profile mode by Xcalibur software.

### Data Protocol
X calibur Raw files were analyzed by proteomics software Max Quant (1.5.2.8). For experiments with tryptic digestion the enzyme specificity was set to trypsin; missed cleavages were limited to 2. Acetylation of N-terminus (+42.01), carbamidomethylation (+57.02) and oxidation of methionine (+15.99) were selected as modification. Human reference proteome set from Uniprot (68506 entries, Download 8th April 2015) was supplemented with in silico predicted MANTIS ORFs, green fluorescent protein and ORFs for identification of peptides and proteins smaller than 30 kDa in empty vector and MANTIS overexpressing HUVECs. False discovery rate (FDR) for identification was 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Sphingosine-1-Phosphate (S1P) is a potent signaling lipid. The effects of S1P are mediated by the five S1P receptors (S1PR). In the endothelium S1PR1 is the predominant receptor and thus S1PR1 abundance limits S1P signaling. Recently, lncRNAs were identified as a novel class of molecules regulating gene expression. Interestingly, the lncRNA NONHSAT004848 (LISPR1, Long intergenic noncoding RNA antisense to S1PR1), is closely positioned to the S1P1 receptors gene and in part shares its promoter region. We hypothesize that LISPR1 controls endothelial S1PR1 expression and thus S1P-induced signaling in endothelial cells. In vitro transcription and translation as well as coding potential assessment showed that LISPR1 is indeed noncoding. LISPR1 was localized in both cytoplasm and nucleus and harbored a PolyA tail at the 3'end. In human umbilical vein endothelial cells, as well as human lung tissue, qRT-PCR and RNA-Seq revealed high expression of LISPR1. S1PR1 and LISPR1 were downregulated in human pulmonary diseases such as COPD. LISPR1 but also S1PR1 were induced by inflammation, shear stress and statins. Knockdown of LISPR1 attenuated endothelial S1P-induced migration and spheroid outgrowth of endothelial cells. LISPR1 knockdown decreased S1PR1 expression, which was paralleled by an increase of the binding of the transcriptional repressor ZNF354C to the S1PR1 promoter and a reduction of the recruitment of RNA Polymerase II to the S1PR1 5'end. This resulted in attenuated S1PR1 expression and attenuated S1P downstream signaling. Collectively, the disease relevant lncRNA LISPR1 acts as a novel regulatory unit important for S1PR1 expression and endothelial cell function.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Micropeptides, Lncrna

### Affiliations
Institut für Kardiovaskuläre Physiologie, Goethe-Universität, Frankfurt am Main, Germany
Functional Proteomics, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main , Germany

### Submitter
Ilka Wittig

### Lab Head
Dr Ralf P. Brandes
Institut für Kardiovaskuläre Physiologie, Goethe-Universität, Frankfurt am Main, Germany


