### Accession
PXD021758

### Title
TRIM9 and TRIM67 interactome using the BioID approach

### Description
TRIM9 and TRIM67 are two brain enriched E3 uiquitin ligases that are critical to neuronal form and function both during embryonic development and in adult-born neurons. TRIM9 and TRIM67 interact with cytoskeletal and exocytic proteins, but the full interactome is not known.Using the BioID approach we have identified potential TRIM9 aand TRIM67 interaction partners.

### Sample Protocol
E15.5 cortical neurons from wildtype and Trim9-/- or Trim67-/- E15.5 litters were dissociated and plated on PDL (Sigma)coated tissue culture dishes. Approximately 40 hours post-plating neurons were infected with HSV (MOI = 1.0) carrying either the negative control Myc-BirA*, Myc-BirA*TRIM9∆RING, or Myc-BirA*TRIM67∆RING. 6 hrs post-infection, cultures were supplemented with 50 μM Biotin for 24 hrs. After incubation, cells were lysed using RIPA buffer (150 mM NaCl, 25 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 0.1% SDS, 1.0% NP-40, 0.25% Deoxycholic acid, 2 mM EDTA, 10% glycerol, protease and phosphatase inhibitors). Lysates were treated with 0.5 ml Benzonase/ml lysate with end-to-end rotation for 1 hr at 4°C. Lysates were cleared by centrifugation, 16,000xg for 30 min at 4°C. Biotinylated proteins were enriched using Streptavidin-conjugated Sepharose beads (GE Healthcare Life Sciences). Beads were washed once with RIPA buffer, two consecutive washes with TAP lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES (pH 8.0), 10% glycerol, 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM EDTA, and 0.1% NP-40) and three consecutive washes with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Enriched proteins were digested with 2.5 μg trypsin at 37°C for 16 hrs. Peptides were eluted using the RapiGEST SF Surfactant protocol (Waters). Eluted peptides were desalted using C18 columns followed by an ethyl acetate cleanup. Peptides were then stored at -20°C until analysis by mass spectrometry. Reverse-phase nano-high-performance liquid chromatography (nano-HPLC) coupled with a nanoACQUITY ultraperformance liquid chromatography (UPLC) system (Waters Corporation; Milford, MA) was used to separate trypsinized peptides. Trapping and separation of peptides were performed in a 2 cm column (Pepmap 100; 3-m particle size and 100-Å pore size), and a 25-cm EASYspray analytical column (75-m inside diameter [i.d.], 2.0-m C18 particle size, and 100-Å pore size) at 300 nL/min and 35°C, respectively. Analysis of a 150-min. gradient of 2% to 25% buffer B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The ion source was operated at 2.4kV and the ion transfer tube was set to 300°C. Full MS scans (350-2000 m/z) were analyzed in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000 and 1e6 AGC target. The MS2 spectra were collected using a 1.6 m/z isolation width and were analyzed either by the Orbitrap or the linear ion trap depending on peak charge and intensity using a 3 s TopSpeed CHOPIN method. 32 Orbitrap MS2 scans were acquired at 7500 resolution, with a 5e4 AGC, and 22 ms maximum injection time after HCD fragmentation with a normalized energy of 30%. Rapid linear ion trap MS2 scans were acquired using an 4e3 AGC, 250 ms maximum injection time after CID 30 fragmentation. Precursor ions were chosen based on intensity thresholds (>1e3) from the full scan as well as on charge states (2-7) with a 30-s dynamic exclusion window. Polysiloxane 371.10124 was used as the lock mass.

### Data Protocol
all raw mass spectrometry data were searched using MaxQuant version 1.5.7.4. Search parameters were as follows: UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot mouse canonical sequence database (downloaded 1 Feb 2017), static carbamidomethyl cysteine modification, specific trypsin digestion with up to two missed cleavages, variable protein N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation, match between runs, and label-free quantification (LFQ) with a minimum ratio count of 2.

### Publication Abstract
TRIM9 and TRIM67 are neuronally enriched E3 ubiquitin ligases essential for appropriate morphogenesis of cortical and hippocampal neurons and fidelitous responses to the axon guidance cue netrin-1. Deletion of murine <i>Trim9</i> or <i>Trim67</i> results in neuroanatomical defects and striking behavioral deficits, particularly in spatial learning and memory. TRIM9 and TRIM67 interact with cytoskeletal and exocytic proteins, but the full interactome is not known. Here we performed the unbiased proximity-dependent biotin identification (BioID) approach to define TRIM9 and TRIM67 protein-protein proximity network in developing cortical neurons and identified putative neuronal TRIM interaction partners. Candidates included cytoskeletal regulators, cytosolic protein transporters, exocytosis and endocytosis regulators, and proteins necessary for synaptic regulation. A subset of high-priority candidates was validated, including Myo16, Coro1A, MAP1B, ExoC1, GRIP1, PRG-1, and KIF1A. For a subset of validated candidates, we utilized total internal reflection fluorescence microscopy to demonstrate dynamic colocalization with TRIM proteins at the axonal periphery, including at the tips of filopodia. Further analysis demonstrated that the RNA interference-based knockdown of the unconventional myosin Myo16 in cortical neurons altered growth cone filopodia density and axonal branching patterns in a TRIM9- and netrin-1-dependent manner. Future analysis of other validated candidates will likely identify novel proteins and mechanisms by which TRIM9 and TRIM67 regulate neuronal form and function. [Media: see text].

### Keywords
Embryonic cortical neurons, Orbitrap fusion lumos

### Affiliations
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill
Cell Biology and Physiology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA

### Submitter
Stephanie Gupton

### Lab Head
Dr Stephanie L. Gupton
Cell Biology and Physiology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA


