### Accession
PXD028127

### Title
Genetic analysis of E3 ubiquitin ligases using CRISPR-Cas9 in primary T cells identifies TRAF2 and UHRF1 as regulators of HIV infection and latency reversal

### Description
During the course of HIV infection, host ubiquitination pathways are both attempting to fight off infection and are being hijacked by the virus in an attempt to optimally infect our cells. In order to more fully understand the role ubiquitination plays in HIV infection, we first defined the set of ubiquitin ligases expressed in primary CD4+ T cells using mass spectrometry. Out of the approximately 380 total ligases, we identified 116 that were expressed, and proceeded to delete them individually in primary CD4+ cells using an arrayed CRISPR/Cas9 approach.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for global abundance proteomic analysis of primary CD4+ T cells Primary activated CD4+ T cells from three healthy human donors were further activated by anti-CD2/anti-CD3/anti-CD28 beads (Miltenyi Biotech T cell activation/expansion kit, human) at a 1:1 bead:cell ratio. Cells were kept in culture and fed with media every 2-3 days until the culture reached >4 million cells. Cells were pelleted by centrifugation at 400g for 5 min and washed 3 times with PBS. After the last wash, cell pellets were resuspended in 100ul of lysis buffer (8M urea, 0.1M ABC pH 8, 150mM NaCl, 1 mini-cOmplete protease inhibitor, 1 PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor brought to 10ml with H2O) and frozen at -80°C. Samples were thawed on ice and lysed by probe sonication in three pulses of 20% amplitude for 15 seconds. Lysates were clarified by centrifugation at 16,100x g at 4˚C for 30 min. Protein concentration was measured by Bradford assay (Thermo) and 0.16 mg of total protein was reduced with 4 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) for 30 min at room temperature and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Excess iodoacetamide was quenched with 10 mM 1,4-dithiothreitol (DTT) for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. The samples were diluted four-fold in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.0, to final urea concentration of 2 M. Samples were incubated with 4μg of sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega) and incubated at room temperature with rotation for 18 hr. The digests were acidified by addition of 10% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 0.3% trifluoroacetic acid (pH ~2). Insoluble material was removed by centrifugation at 16,000 g for 10 min. Peptides were desalted using UltraMicroSpin C18 columns (The Nest Group). The columns were activated with 200 uLml of 80% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% TFA, and equilibrated 3 times with 200 uLof 0.1% TFA. Peptide samples were applied to the columns, and the columns were washed 3 times with 200 uL of 0.1% TFA. Peptides were eluted with 140 uL of 50% ACN, 0.25% formic acid and lyophilized. The samples were fractionated using the Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo cat. no. 84828) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Samples were dissolved in 0.1% TFA, bound to the column, and washed with water. Any peptides not binding to the column (flow-through) or eluted during the water wash (column wash) were also analyzed by MS. Eight fractions per sample were then eluted by a stepwise gradient of acetonitrile (5, 7.5, 10, 12.5, 15, 17.5, 20, and 50% acetonitrile) in 0.1% triethylamine. All samples were lyophilized prior to MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry analysis for global abundance proteomics of primary CD4+ T cells Fractionated samples were resuspended in 4% formic acid, 4% acetonitrile solution, separated by reversed-phase HPLC using a Thermo Easy n1200 LC (Thermo Scientific) using an in house packed integrafrit column (360 µm O.D. x 75 µm I.D.) packed with 25 cm of 1.8 µm Reprosil C18 particles (Dr. Maisch-GMBL). Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% FA in water and mobile phase B consisted of 80% acetonitrile (ACN)/0.1% FA. Peptides were separated at flow rate 300nL/minute by the following 2hr gradient: 8% to 18% B over 52 minutes; 18-38% B over 56 minutes; and 10 min at 88% B. Eluting peptides were analyzed by an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Data was collected in positive ion mode with MS1 detection in profile mode in the orbitrap using 120,000 resolution, 350-1350 m/z scan range, 25 ms maximum injection, and an AGC target of 5e5. MS2 fragmentation was performed on charge states from 2-5, MIPS mode = peptide, with a 40s dynamic exclusion after a single selection, and 10ppm +/- mass tolerance. MS2 data was collected in centroid mode at a turbo scan rate in the ion trap with HCD (32% normalized collision energy), 15ms maximum injection time, 2e4 AGC, 0.7mz quadrupole isolation window, and 120 m/z first mass.  All raw MS data were searched with MaxQuant (v 1.6.2.6) against the human proteome (Uniprot canonical protein sequences downloaded March 21, 2018).  Peptides and proteins were filtered to 1% false discovery rate. MaxQuant default parameters were used with the exception that label-free quantification was turned on, with match between runs set to 0.7 min.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
E3 ligase, Hiv

### Affiliations
UCSF
UCSF, San Francisco, CA

### Submitter
Danielle Swaney

### Lab Head
Dr Nevan Krogan
UCSF, San Francisco, CA


