### Accession
PXD010858

### Title
Proteomics study of THP-1 monocytic cells exposed to surface modified-gold nanoparticles

### Description
A proteome comparison was performed to assess the responses of human monocytic cells (THP-1) to gold-nanoparticles (Au-NPs) of two different diameter sizes (5 or 20 nm) with different surface functional groups, i.e., alkylammonium bromide, alkyl sodium carboxylate, or poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG)-terminated thiolate Au-NPs.

### Sample Protocol
Undifferentiated THP.1 cells (1 million cells per condition) were exposed to the 6 Au NPs at different doses. High doses were chosen in order to see a response at the proteomic level, and to benchmark against other existing proteomics data. Thus, a 24 h time point and an EC50 dose were implemented. The doses inducing 50% of cell death for Au-5-NH2 (EC50= 35 µg/mL) and Au-20-NH2 (EC50= 15 µg/mL) were determined using the AlamrBlue cell viability assay. The EC50 values for the 4 other NPs were not determined (EC50> 100 µg/mL). In this pilot study, cells were exposed: (1) to the three Au-5(-NH2/-COOH/-PEG) NPs at a concentration of 35 µg/mL (corresponding to the individual EC50 dose for the set of 5 nm size NPs), (2) to the three Au-20(-NH2/-COOH/-PEG) NPs at a concentration of 15 µg/mL (corresponding to the individual EC50 dose for the set of 20 nm size NPs) or (3) to all the Au-5 and Au-20 (-NH2/-COOH/-PEG) at a concentration of 25 µg/mL (corresponding to the average EC50 dose). Staurosporine (4 µM), lipopolysaccharide (LPS) (100 ng/mL) and culture media were used as positive controls for cell death, immune activation and negative control, respectively. At the end of the incubation, the cells were collected in 1.5 mL collection tubes, rinsed with 300 µL of PBS and centrifuged, 1200 rpm, 5 min, RT. Cells were further washed twice with 1 mL PBS (RT) and pelleted at 1200 rpm, 5 min, RT. PBS was removed and pellet were frozen at -80C until protein extraction. The cell pellets were lysed in buffer containing 8M urea with probe sonicator, followed by centrifugation for 20 min at 20,800×g and 8°C. The supernatant was collected and the proteins were reduced (dithiothreitol) and alkylated (iodoacetamide), and digested with trypsin. The peptides were analyzed using a nanoflow HPLC combined with Q Exactive Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were processed by Raw2MGF to generate mg files. The files were merged to a single file and used to search a concatenated (forward and reverse) human complete proteome database with the Mascot search engine. The resulting search results (i.e. the “.dat” file) were then used together with Quanti (Lyutvinskiy et al. MCP, 2013), a program for label free quantification, to quantify the identified proteins. After normalization, the proteins were finally compared using Student’s t-test (adjusted for multiple testing using false discovery rate, FDR).

### Publication Abstract
Systems biology is increasingly being applied in nanosafety research for observing and predicting the biological perturbations inflicted by exposure to nanoparticles (NPs). In the present study, we used a combined transcriptomics and proteomics approach to assess the responses of human monocytic cells to Au-NPs of two different sizes with three different surface functional groups, i.e., alkyl ammonium bromide, alkyl sodium carboxylate, or poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG)-terminated Au-NPs. Cytotoxicity screening using THP-1 cells revealed a pronounced cytotoxicity for the ammonium-terminated Au-NPs, while no cell death was seen after exposure to the carboxylated or PEG-modified Au-NPs. Moreover, Au-NR3+ NPs, but not the Au-COOH NPs, were found to trigger dose-dependent lethality in vivo in the model organism, Caenorhabditis elegans. RNA sequencing combined with mass spectrometry-based proteomics predicted that the ammonium-modified Au-NPs elicited mitochondrial dysfunction. The latter results were validated by using an array of assays to monitor mitochondrial function. Au-NR3+ NPs were localized in mitochondria of THP-1 cells. Moreover, the cationic Au-NPs triggered autophagy in macrophage-like RFP-GFP-LC3 reporter cells, and cell death was aggravated upon inhibition of autophagy. Taken together, these studies have disclosed mitochondria-dependent effects of cationic Au-NPs resulting in the rapid demise of the cells.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Thp-1 monocytes, Gold-nanoparticles

### Affiliations
Department of Medicine, Solna, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden
Dept. Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Div. Chemistry I, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden

### Submitter
Jimmy Ytterberg

### Lab Head
Dr Roman A. Zubarev
Dept. Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Div. Chemistry I, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden


