### Accession
PXD025299

### Title
Semi-automated Glycoproteomic Data Analysis of LC-MS data using GlycopeptideGraphMS in Lead and Process Development of Biologics

### Description
The glycosylation of antibody-based proteins is vital in conferring the right therapeutic outcomes of the patient. Despite this, significant infrastructure is required to analyse biologic glycosylation in various unit operations from biologic development, process development to QA/QC in bio-manufacturing.  The simplified mass spectrometers offer ease of operation as well as the portability of method development across various operations. Furthermore, data analysis would need to have a degree of automation to relay information back to the manufacturing line. We set out to investigate the applicability of using a semiautomated data analysis workflow to investigate glycosylation in different biologic development test cases. The workflow involves data acquisition using a BioAccord LC-MS system with a data-analytical tool called GlycopeptideGraphMS along with Progenesis QI to semi-automate glycoproteomic characterisation and quantitation in complex LC-MS1 data of a glycoproteomic analysis. Data analysis which involved identifying glycopeptides and their quantitative glycosylation was performed in 30 minutes with minimal user intervention. To demonstrate the effectiveness of the antibody and biologic glycopeptide assignment in various scenarios akin to biologic development activities, we demonstrate the effectiveness in the filtering of IgG1 and IgG2 subclasses from human serum IgG as well as innovator drugs trastuzumab and adalimumab and glycoforms by virtue of their glycosylation pattern. We demonstrate a high correlation between conventional released glycan analysis with fluorescent tagging and glycopeptide assignment derived from GraphMS. GraphMS workflow was then used to monitor the glycoform of our in-house trastuzumab biosimilar produced in fed-batch cultures, and it offers valuable insights into the effect of culture media changes on bioprocess and biologic characterisation. The demonstrated utility of GraphMS to semi-automate quantitation and qualitative identification of glycopeptides proves to be an easy and scalable data analysis method that can complement emerging multi-attribute monitoring (MAM) analytical toolsets in bioprocess environments.

### Sample Protocol
Proteolytic digestion of antibodies Proteolytic digestion of antibody was performed using the single-pot, solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation (SP3) technology as described previously (Hughes et al., 2019). Briefly, 20 μg of dried antibody was denatured in 15 μL of 8M Urea (dissolved in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate), followed by 30 min incubation at 60 °C with 10 μL of Dithiothreitol (DTT, dissolved in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate). 10 μL of 150 mM iodoacetamide (dissolved in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate) was then added to the sample and incubated at room temperature in the dark for 30 min. 15 μL of DTT was added to quench the alkylation. One hundred micrograms (100 μg) of Sera-Mag SpeedBead carboxylate-modified magnetic particles (GE Healthcare, USA) were added to the sample, followed by pure acetonitrile (ACN) to give a final concentration of 70% ACN. The sample was incubated at room temperature for 10 min to allow protein binding. The supernatant was removed after placing the tube on a magnetic rack, followed by three washes with 80% ACN. Mass Spectrometry grade trypsin/Lys-C mix (dissolved in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, Promega Corporation, USA) in a 1:20 trypsin/LysC:protein ratio was added to the sample and incubated at 37 °C for 16 h. The supernatant was collected, and digested glycopeptides were dried and reconstituted in LCMS grade water for LC-MS analysis.  LC-MS of tryptic digested glycopeptides Five micrograms (5 μg) of tryptic digested antibody were analysed on a BioAccord LC-MS system (Waters Corporation, USA). The system configuration includes an ACQUITY UPLC I-Class PLUS with an ACQUITY RDa detector (a compact time-of-flight mass detector) controlled by the compliance-ready UNIFI Scientific Information System software platform (Waters Corporation, USA). Samples were separated using an ACQUITY UPLC Peptide BEH C18 column (130 Å, 1.7 μm, 2.1 mm x 100 mm, Waters Corporation, USA) at 65 °C and 250 μL/min, with a 60 min gradient from 1% to 40% of 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (mobile phase B). 0.1% formic acid in LCMS water was used as mobile phase A. The RDa mass detector was operated in positive electrospray ionisation full scan with fragmentation acquisition mode (MSe) at 2 Hz acquisition rate with a mass range of 400-2000 m/z.  The capillary voltage was set at 1.2 kV, cone voltage at 30 V, and the desolvation temperature was kept at 350 ˚C. Leucine Enkephalin (Waters Corporation, USA) was used as the LockSpray compound for real-time mass correction.

### Data Protocol
BioAccord LC-MS system data preprocessing Data obtained from the BioAccord LC-MS system were exported as .uep file using the UNIFI Scientific Information System (Waters Corporation, USA). LCMS features from the data were extracted, deconvoluted, and exported as a .csv file listing each feature with its retention time, neutral mass, and intensity using Progenesis QI software (Waters Corporation, USA). As the smallest glycopeptide (EEQYNSTYR or EEQFNSTFR with HexNAc) has a neutral mass of 1359.594, data points with a neutral mass lower than that were removed from the list.  GraphMS analysis Preprocessed .csv file was analysed using GraphMS software for glycopeptide identification as described previously (Choo et al., 2019). GraphMS plotted LC-MS features (neutral mass vs retention time) into the nodes of a graph network. GraphMS’s algorithm then detected nodes that have a neutral mass difference that matched a predefined list of masses of Hex, HexNAc, Fuc, HexHexNAc, and NeuAc. Pairs of nodes were selected within a defined retention time window (30 s for Hex, HexNAc, Fuc, and NeuAc; 50 s for HexHexNAc; 500 s for NeuAc). These identified nodes with proximate retention time were clustered into subgraphs and connected by graph theoretic edges. Glycan composition and peptide of the reference node of each subgraph was manually assigned if it matches the modified ‘N-glycan 309 mammalian no sodium’ database .The database was modified by adding the neutral mass of peptides to the neutral mass of glycans to form a list of glycopeptide neutral mass (for example, the neutral mass of EEQYN[+N4H3]STYR (2486.981)is the sum of the mass of EEQYNSTYR (1188.505) and N4H3 (1298.476)), GraphMS then automatically identified the remaining nodes that are connected to the reference node by tracing the path of known monosaccharide mass additions or subtractions. Intensity of glycan and glycosylation attributes are presented as relative abundance in percentage (intensity of a glycan (or sum of glycan with attribute of interest) / sum of intensity x 100%). The output of GraphMS consists of an excel spreadsheet that has a list of assigned glycans composition and intensities which corresponds to abundance.

### Publication Abstract
The glycosylation of antibody-based proteins is vital in translating the right therapeutic outcomes of the patient. Despite this, significant infrastructure is required to analyse biologic glycosylation in various unit operations from biologic development, process development to QA/QC in bio-manufacturing. Simplified mass spectrometers offer ease of operation as well as the portability of method development across various operations. Furthermore, data analysis would need to have a degree of automation to relay information back to the manufacturing line. We set out to investigate the applicability of using a semiautomated data analysis workflow to investigate glycosylation in different biologic development test cases. The workflow involves data acquisition using a BioAccord LC-MS system with a data-analytical tool called GlycopeptideGraphMS along with Progenesis QI to semi-automate glycoproteomic characterisation and quantitation with a LC-MS1 dataset of a glycopeptides and peptides. Data analysis which involved identifying glycopeptides and their quantitative glycosylation was performed in 30&#xa0;min with minimal user intervention. To demonstrate the effectiveness of the antibody and biologic glycopeptide assignment in various scenarios akin to biologic development activities, we demonstrate the effectiveness in the filtering of IgG1 and IgG2 subclasses from human serum IgG as well as innovator drugs trastuzumab and adalimumab and glycoforms by virtue of their glycosylation pattern. We demonstrate a high correlation between conventional released glycan analysis with fluorescent tagging and glycopeptide assignment derived from GraphMS. GraphMS workflow was then used to monitor the glycoform of our in-house trastuzumab biosimilar produced in fed-batch cultures. The demonstrated utility of GraphMS to semi-automate quantitation and qualitative identification of glycopeptides proves to be an easy data analysis method that can complement emerging multi-attribute monitoring (MAM) analytical toolsets in bioprocess environments.

### Keywords
Bioaccord, Biologics, Igg, Process development, Graphms, Adalimumab, Trastuzumab, Glycoproteomic

### Affiliations
GlycoAnalytics Group Bioprocessing Technology Institute Agency for Science, Technology, and Research (A*STAR) Singapore
Bioprocessing Technology Institute, Agency for Science, Technology, and Research (A*STAR)

### Submitter
Kuin Tian Pang

### Lab Head
Dr Terry Nguyen-Khuong
GlycoAnalytics Group Bioprocessing Technology Institute Agency for Science, Technology, and Research (A*STAR) Singapore


