### Accession
PXD000448

### Title
E-cadherin interactome complexity and robustness resolved by quantitative proteomics

### Description
E-cadherin-mediated cell-cell adhesion and signaling plays an essential role in development and maintenance of healthy epithelial tissues. Adhesiveness mediated by E-cadherin is conferred by its extracellular cadherin domains and is regulated by an assembly of adaptors and enzymes associated with its cytoplasmic tail. Here, we used proximity biotinylation and quantitative proteomics to identify 561 proteins in the vicinity of E-cadherin’s cytoplasmic tail. Isolation of E-cadherin-mediated adhesion plaques from a cell-glass interface added positional context to the proteomic results. Moreover, using expression of GFP-tagged fusion proteins, we determine the subcellular localization of 83 of the E-cadherin proximal proteins, and identify 24 novel adherens junction components. We employed a structure-informed database of protein-protein interactions to construct a comprehensive E-cadherin interactome, containing 82 known and 419 previously uncharacterized proteins. Finally, we found that calcium chelation did not disrupt most protein interactions with E-cadherin, suggesting that most E-cadherin interactions are independent of cell-cell adhesion.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were separated on 4-12% gradient NuPAGE Novex Bis-Tris gel, in-gel digested with trypsin, and peptides concentrated and desalted on StageTips. Peptides were analyzed by EASY-nLC system coupled on line to a linear trap quadrupole (LTQ)-Orbitrap Elite via a nanoelectrospray ion source. Chromatographic peptide separation was done in a 20 cm fused silica emitter packed in house with reversed-phase ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 1.9 μm resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH) and eluted with a flow of 200 nl/min from 5% to 60% solvent (80% ACN, in water, 0.5% acetic acid) over 110 min. The full scan MS spectra were acquired with a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 400 Th and target value of 1,000,000 charges in the Orbitrap. The top 10 most intense ions were sequentially isolated for fragmentation using high-energy collision dissociation (HCD) at the MSn target value of 40,000 charges and recorded in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 15,000 at m/z 400 Th. All data were acquired with Xcalibur software.

### Data Protocol
The MS RAW files were processed with the MaxQuant software version 1.3.8.2 and searched with Andromeda search engine against the human UniProt database (release-2013 05, 88,847 entries). To search parent mass and fragment ions, an initial mass deviation of 4 and 20 ppm, respectively, was required. Trypsin enzyme specificity and only peptides with a minimum length of 7 amino acids were selected. A maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation (Cys) was set as fixed modification. Oxidation (Met) and N-acetylation were considered as variable modifications. For identification of proteins and peptides we required a maximum of 1% FDR. Scores were calculated in MaxQuant as described previously. The reverse and common contaminants hits (as reported in MaxQuant) were removed from MaxQuant output.  Proteins were quantified according to the MaxQuant label-free quantification algorithm. In order to perform Welsh test analysis between samples, the missing LFQ intensity values were replaced using the “Imputation, replace missing values from normal distribution” feature available in the MaxQuant module Perseus. Unique and razor (= most likely belonging to the protein group) peptides were used for protein quantification and we required proteins being quantified with a minimum of two ratio counts. The two BirA* E-cadherin interactomes (Control and EGTA) contained the following proteins: i) Proteins not quantified at all in the cells without BirA* E-cadherin and quantified in minimum three of the four replicate experiments of BirA* expressing cells treated or not with EGTA. ii) Proteins identified and quantified in at least three replicate experiments of the BirA* non-treated cells or EGTA-treated cells, and that were differentially enriched compared to non-BirA* cells. Enriched proteins were selected by applying a single tailed Welch test controlled for multiple hypothesis testing by permutation-based FDR (5%). For the estimated total abundance of the E-cadhesome proteins, the iBAQ intensity value implemented in MaxQuant software (=Intensity/number of theoretical tryptic peptides) was used. The iBAQ intensity of each protein was calculated as the sum of all measured iBAQ intensities in the analyzed samples (excluding samples from non-BirA* cells). For each protein the estimated abundance was calculated as (iBAQprotein/sumiBAQE-cadhesome)*100.

### Publication Abstract
E-cadherin-mediated cell-cell adhesion and signaling plays an essential role in development and maintenance of healthy epithelial tissues. Adhesiveness mediated by E-cadherin is conferred by its extracellular cadherin domains and is regulated by an assembly of intracellular adaptors and enzymes associated with its cytoplasmic tail. We used proximity biotinylation and quantitative proteomics to identify 561 proteins in the vicinity of the cytoplasmic tail of E-cadherin. In addition, we used proteomics to identify proteins associated with E-cadherin-containing adhesion plaques from a cell-glass interface, which enabled the assignment of cellular localization to putative E-cadherin-interacting proteins. Moreover, by tagging identified proteins with GFP (green fluorescent protein), we determined the subcellular localization of 83 putative E-cadherin-proximal proteins and identified 24 proteins that were previously uncharacterized as part of adherens junctions. We constructed and characterized a comprehensive E-cadherin interaction network of 79 published and 394 previously uncharacterized proteins using a structure-informed database of protein-protein interactions. Finally, we found that calcium chelation, which disrupts the interaction of the extracellular E-cadherin domains, did not disrupt most intracellular protein interactions with E-cadherin, suggesting that the E-cadherin intracellular interactome is predominantly independent of cell-cell adhesion.

### Keywords
E-cadherin; silac; label-free; interactome; cancer

### Affiliations
Vascular Proteomics Lab, Cancer Research UK Beatson Institute
Tumour Microenvironment & Proteomics

### Submitter
Sara Zanivan

### Lab Head
Dr Sara Zanivan
Vascular Proteomics Lab, Cancer Research UK Beatson Institute


