### Accession
PXD046315

### Title
Rauvolfia tetraphylla latex proteome

### Description
Monoterpene indole alkaloids (MIAs) are a structurally diverse family of specialized metabolites mainly produced in Gentianales to cope with environmental challenges. Due to their pharmacological properties, the biosynthetic modalities of several MIA types have been elucidated but not that of the yohimbanes. Here, we combine transcriptomics and genome sequencing of Rauvolfia tetraphylla with machine learning to discover the unexpected multiple actors of this natural product's synthesis. We identify a medium chain dehydrogenase/reductase (MDR) that produces a mixture of four diastereomers of yohimbanes including the well-known yohimbine and rauwolscine. In addition to this multifunctional yohimbane synthase (YOS), an MDR synthesizing mainly heteroyohimbanes and the short chain dehydrogenase vitrosamine synthase also display a yohimbane synthase side activity. Lastly, we establish that the combination of geissoschizine synthase with at least three other MDRs also produces a yohimbane mixture thus shedding light on the complex mechanisms evolved for the synthesis of these plant bioactives.

### Sample Protocol
Proteome analysis of R. tetraphylla latex and leaves  Leaves from three-months-old plants were manually cut to allow the latex to pour out. The latex was collected with a pipette tip and immediately dissolved in the protein precipitation buffer according to [92]. Briefly, around 100 µL of leaf latex was diluted in 100 µL of SDS extraction buffer (2% SDS, 60 mM DTT, 40 mM Tris-HCl pH 6.8). Once vortexed, the samples were heated at 100° for 5 min, proteins were precipitated by adding half the volume of trichloroacetic acid/acetone 1:1 with 60 mM DTT and incubating at -20° for 1h30. Samples were centrifuged at 16000 g for 20 min at 4° and the dried pellet was washed three times with ice-cold 80% acetone supplemented with 60 mM DTT. The dried Speed-vac pellet was resuspended in 50 µL of Laemmli buffer. Proteins from the corresponding leaves were also extracted after leaf grinding in the described extraction buffer. Proteins were separated on the denaturing 10% acrylamide gel and analyzed with Colloidal Comassie Blue (CCB) under sterile conditions [93]. 1-cm large strips were cut off the gel and sent to the PAPPSO Platform (INRAE Moulon) for in gel digestion, LC MS/MS analysis and peptide identifications.   Protein in gel digestion Gel pieces were washed thrice by successive separate baths of 10% acetic acid, 40% ethanol and 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate and ACN. Proteins were reduced for 30 min with 10 mM dithiothreitol, 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate at 56 °C and alkylated in the dark with 55 mM iodoacetamide, 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 45 min at room temperature. The gel pieces were washed by successive separate baths of 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate and ACN. Digestion was subsequently performed overnight at 37°C with 125 ng of modified trypsin (Promega) dissolved in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. The peptides were extracted successively with 0,5% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and 50% ACN and then with ACN. Peptide extracts were dried in a vacuum centrifuge.  LC-MS/MS analysis of peptides Peptide samples were solubilized in a buffer of 2% CH3CN, 0.1% formic acid. Liquid chromatography was performed on a NanoLC Ultra system (Eksigent, Dublin, CA, USA). Samples were loaded at 7.5 μl min−1 on a C18 precolumn (5 μm, 100 μm i.d. × 2 cm length; NanoSeparations) connected to a separating BIOSPHERE C18 column (3 μm, 75 μm i.d. × 300 mm length; NanoSeparations). Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid in water and solvent B was 0.1% formic acid in CH3CN. Peptide separation was achieved using a linear gradient from 5 to 35% solvent B for 28 min at 300 nl min−1. Including the regeneration and the equilibration steps, a single run took 45 min. Eluted peptides were analyzed with a Q Exactive™ Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a nanoelectrospray interface. Ionization was performed with a 1.3 kV spray voltage applied to an uncoated capillary probe (10 μm i.d., New Objective). The Xcalibur interface was used to monitor data-dependent acquisition of peptide ions. This included a full MS scan covering a mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) of 350 to 1,400 with a resolution of 70,000 and an MS/MS step (normalized collision energy, 27%; resolution, 17 500). The MS/MS step was reiterated for the eight major ions detected during the full MS scan. Dynamic exclusion was set to 50 sec. Only doubly and triply charged precursor ions were subjected to MS/MS fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Identification of peptides  A database searches were performed using X!Tandem Alanine (Release 2017.2.1.4) (http://www.thegpm.org/TANDEM). Enzymatic cleavage was described to be due to trypsin digestion with one possible misscleavage. Cys carboxyamidomethylation was set as static modification whereas Met oxidation, N-ter deamidation and N-ter acetylation were set as variable modifications. Identifications were performed using a user-supplied database and an internal database of standard contaminants (trypsin, keratins, BSA). Identified proteins were filtered and grouped using X!TandemPipeline v0.2.38 (http://pappso.inrae.fr/bioinfo/i2masschroq/) [94]. Data filtering was achieved according to a peptide E value smaller than 0.01 with a minimum of 2 peptides to identify a protein.

### Publication Abstract
Monoterpene indole alkaloids (MIAs) are a structurally diverse family of specialized metabolites mainly produced in Gentianales to cope with environmental challenges. Due to their pharmacological properties, the biosynthetic modalities of several MIA types have been elucidated but not that of the yohimbanes. Here, we combine metabolomics, proteomics, transcriptomics and genome sequencing of Rauvolfia tetraphylla with machine learning to discover the unexpected multiple actors of this natural product synthesis. We identify a medium chain dehydrogenase/reductase (MDR) that produces a mixture of four diastereomers of yohimbanes including the well-known yohimbine and rauwolscine. In addition to this multifunctional yohimbane synthase (YOS), an MDR synthesizing mainly heteroyohimbanes and the short chain dehydrogenase vitrosamine synthase also display a yohimbane synthase side activity. Lastly, we establish that the combination of geissoschizine synthase with at least three other MDRs also produces a yohimbane mixture thus shedding light on the complex mechanisms evolved for the synthesis of these plant bioactives.

### Keywords
Alkaloid, Yohimbane, Yohimbine, Medium chain dehydrogenase/reductase, Rauwolscine, Geissoschizine

### Affiliations
EA2106 Biomolécules et Biotechnologies Végétales, Université de Tours
Biomolécules et Biotechnologies Végétales, EA2106, Université de Tours, 37200 Tours, France

### Submitter
Clément Cuello

### Lab Head
Dr Vincent Courdavault
Biomolécules et Biotechnologies Végétales, EA2106, Université de Tours, 37200 Tours, France


