### Accession
PXD007528

### Title
Global ion suppression limits the potential of mass spectrometry based phosphoproteomics

### Description
Mass spectrometry-based proteomics has become the method of choice to pinpoint and monitor thousands of post-translational modifications, predominately phosphorylation sites, in cellular signaling studies. Critical for achieving this analytical depth is the enrichment for phosphorylated peptides prior to LC-MS analysis. Despite the high prevalence of this modification, the numbers of identified phosphopeptides are lower than those achieved for unmodified peptides, and the cause for this still remains controversial. Here we introduce an effective phosphatase protocol that considerably improves global ionization efficiency and therefore overall sensitivity and coverage of standard phosphoproteomics studies. We demonstrate the power of our method on the model system of Salmonella-infected macrophages by extending the current quantitative picture of immune signaling pathways involved in infection.

### Sample Protocol
BMDMs were seeded in 6-well plates and infected with S. Typhimurium ΔorgA as indicated above. At the indicated time points, the plates were put on ice and the BMDMs washed twice with ice-cold 1x phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). 80 μl urea lysis buffer (8 M urea (AppliChem), 0.1 M Ammoniumbicarbonate (Sigma), 1x PhosSTOP (Roche)) was added to each well and incubated on ice for 10 min. For HeLa cell preparation, 107 cells were lysed in 200 µl urea lysis buffer. Samples were vortexed, sonicated at 4°C (Hielscher), shaked for 5 min on a thermomixer (Eppendorf) at room temperature and centrifuged for 20 min at 4°C full speed. Supernatants were collected and protein concentration was measured with BCA Protein Assay kit (Invitrogen). Per sample, 2 mg of protein mass were used, 1.9 mg were employed for phosphopeptide enrichment and 100 µg for protein quantification by TMT. At first, disulfide bonds were reduced with tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) at a final concentration of 10 mM at 37°C for 1 hour. Free thiols were alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAM, Sigma) at room temperature for 30 minutes in the dark and access of IAM were quenched by adding excess of N-acetylcysteine. Samples were incubated for 4 h with Lys-C endopeptidase (1:200 w/w), diluted with 0.1 M ammoniumbicarbonate to a final urea concentration of 1.6 M and digested overnight at 37°C with sequencing-grade modified trypsin (Promega) at a protein-to-enzyme ratio of 50:1. Subsequently, peptides were desalted on a C18 Sep-Pak cartridge (VAC 3cc, 500 mg, Waters) according to the manufacturer’s instructions, split in peptide aliquots of 1.9 and 0.1 mg, dried under vacuum and stored at -80°C until further use.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw-files were imported into the Progenesis QI software (v2.0, Nonlinear Dynamics Limited), which was used to extract peptide precursor ion intensities across all samples applying the default parameters. The generated mgf-files were searched using MASCOT against a decoy database (consisting of forward and reverse protein sequences) of the predicted proteome from mus musculus (UniProt, download date: 2016/11/6, total 33984 entries) and homo sapiens (UniProt, download date: 2015/06/29, total 41158 entries) including known contaminants such as porcine trypsin, human keratins and high abundant bovine serum proteins (Uniprot). The search criteria were set as follows: full tryptic specificity was required (cleavage after lysine or arginine residues, unless followed by proline); 3 missed cleavages were allowed; carbamidomethylation (C) was set as fixed modification; oxidation (M) and phosphorylation (STY) were applied as variable modifications; mass tolerance of 10 ppm (precursor) and 0.6 (CID, ion trap) and 0.02 Da (HCD, orbitrap) (fragments). The database search results were filtered using the ion score to set the false discovery rate (FDR) to 1% on the peptide and protein level, respectively, based on the number of reverse protein sequence hits in the datasets. The relative quantitative data obtained were normalized and statistically analyzed using an in-house script37. Localization confidence was determined using Ascore39 as implemented in Scaffold-PTM (version 2.1.3, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR).

### Publication Abstract
Mass spectrometry based proteomics has become the method of choice for pinpointing and monitoring thousands of post-translational modifications, predominately phosphorylation sites, in cellular signaling studies. Critical for achieving this analytical depth is the enrichment of phosphorylated peptides prior to liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (MS) analysis. Despite the high prevalence of this modification, the numbers of identified phosphopeptides lag behind those achieved for unmodified peptides, and the cause for this still remains controversial. Here, we use an effective phosphatase protocol that considerably improves global ionization efficiency and, therefore, the overall sensitivity and coverage of standard phosphoproteomics studies. We demonstrate the power of our method on the model system of Salmonella-infected macrophages by extending the current quantitative picture of immune signaling pathways involved in infection. In combination with sensitive, label-free targeted MS for phosphorylation site validation, our approach is ideally suited to exploring cellular phosphorylation based signaling networks in high detail.

### Keywords
Infection, Ion supression, Phosphoproteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Tmt, Macrophages

### Affiliations
Biozentrum, University of Basel, Klinglebergstrasse 50/70, CH-4056 Basel
Proteomics Core Facility

### Submitter
Alexander Schmidt

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Schmidt
Biozentrum, University of Basel, Klinglebergstrasse 50/70, CH-4056 Basel


