### Accession
PXD038360

### Title
Mouse heart proteomic analysis of CYLD-binding proteins

### Description
The peptide sequences identified by mass spectrometry in the proteins immunoprecipitated from the mouse ventricular lysate with the anti-CYLD antibody.

### Sample Protocol
To identify CYLD-binding proteins, the anti-CYLD antibody (#8462, Cell Signaling Technology) was used to immunoprecipitate endogenous CYLD from the mouse ventricular lysate, and the immunoprecipitated proteins were subjected to mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
A Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a gel-based LC-MS approach were used for the analysis.

### Publication Abstract
During heart maturation, gap junctions assemble into hemichannels and polarize to the intercalated disc at cell borders to mediate electrical impulse conduction. However, the molecular mechanism underpinning cardiac gap junction assembly remains elusive. Herein, we demonstrate an important role for the deubiquitinating enzyme cylindromatosis (CYLD) in this process. Depletion of CYLD in mice impairs the formation of cardiac gap junctions, accelerates cardiac fibrosis, and increases heart failure. Mechanistically, CYLD interacts with plakoglobin and removes lysine 63-linked polyubiquitin chains from plakoglobin. The deubiquitination of&#xa0;plakoglobin enhances its interaction with the desmoplakin/end-binding protein 1 complex localized at&#xa0;the microtubule plus end, thereby promoting microtubule-dependent transport of connexin 43 (Cx43), a&#xa0;key component of gap junctions, to the cell membrane. These findings establish CYLD as a critical player&#xa0;in regulating gap junction assembly and have important implications in heart development and diseases.

### Keywords
Heart, Mouse

### Affiliations
Shandong Normal University

### Submitter
Wei Xie

### Lab Head
Dr Jun Zhou
Shandong Normal University


