### Accession
PXD038552

### Title
Retinal proteome analysis reveals region-specific change in the rabbit myopia model

### Description
Uncovering region-specific change in myopic retina can provide the clue for explaining the pathogenesis of myopia progression. After imposing form deprivation myopia (FDM) on the right eye of  6-week-old rabbits, we investigated the proteome profile of each retinal region (central, mid periphery, and far periphery retina) using high-resolution, accurate mass (HRAM) mass spectrometry. Protein expression was analyzed with gene ontology and network analysis compared to the control, the left eyes. Among total 2065 proteins detected from whole retinal samples, 249 differentially-expressed proteins (DEPs) were identified: 164 DEPs in far periphery; 39 DEPs in mid periphery; 83 DEPs in central retina. In network analysis, far periphery retina showed the most significant connectivity between DEPs. Regulation of coagulation was the most significant biological process in up-regulated DEPs in far periphery retina. Proteasome was the most significant KEGG pathway in down-regulated DEPs in central retina. Antithrombin-III, fibrinogen gamma chain, and fibrinogen beta chain were identified as biomarkers for myopia progression, which were up-regulated in far periphery retina. Proteomic analysis in this study suggested that the oxidative stress can be the main pathogenesis of myopia progression and the far periphery retina played a role as the key responder.

### Sample Protocol
100μg Proteins from pooled retinal tissues (n = 3 for each experimental group) were digested into peptides by in-solution digestion. Briely, 8 M urea in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA) was added intoeachpooled retinal tissues, and the mixture was homogenized using a disposable homogenizer (BiomesherII, Optima, Japan) until tissue was no longer lumps. The samples were then briefly vortexed and sonicated for ten seconds, storing on ice to prevent overheating during sonication. Samples were incubated for 20 min at room temperature (RT) and then centrifuged at 14,000 rpm for 15min. Protein concentration of the supernatant was determined in triplicate using the micro BCA protein assay according to the manufacturer’s protocol (ThermoScientific, USA), Then, 10 mM DTT (Dithiothreitol, Sigma) for reduction and 30 mM IAA (Iodoacetamide, Sigma) for alkylation were used to denature the proteins. Trypsin was added to the samples (1:50 = trypsin:sample) and incubated at 37 °C overnight. The activated trypsin reaction was quenched with 0.4% TFA (Trifluoroacetic acid, Thermo), and peptides were desalted with a C18 Harvard macro spin column. The resultant peptides were dried and stored at −80 °C.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched using the MaxLFQ algorithm integrated in the MaxQuant software (v. 1.6.17.0) (3) against the Uniprot rabbit proteome database(downloaded June 2021) . Protein identification was performed using at least one unique peptide and only unique peptides, including modified by carbamidomethylation of cysteine, N-acetylation and oxidation of methionine A false discovery rate (FDR) cutoff of 1% was applied at the peptide spectrum match (PSM) and protein levels. All LFQ intensities were log2 transformed to to reduce the effect of outliers. To remove biological and technical biases, sum normalization was performed the data using the protein relative abundance and proteins that display missing value in at least one group were filtered out to improve confidence level..  Statistical and bioinformatics analysis for proteomics data were conducted based on the normalized protein abundance using MetaboAnalyst software version. 5.0, a web-based software for quantitative data analysis. Clustering analysis including principal component analysis (PCA) and hierarchical clustering using “Euclidean distances” and “ward” linkage was presented to show the variance and differences among samples. Proteins with expression greater than±2-fold change and less than 0.05 P value from Student’s t-test in LFQ intensity were classified to differentially expressed proteins(DEPs).

### Publication Abstract
Uncovering region-specific changes in the myopic retina can provide clues to the pathogenesis of myopia progression. After imposing form deprivation myopia in the right eye of 6-week-old rabbits, we investigated the proteome profile of each retinal region (central, mid-periphery, and far-periphery retina), using accurate high-resolution mass spectrometry. Protein expression was analyzed using gene ontology and network analysis compared with that of the control, the left eyes. Among 2065 proteins detected from whole retinal samples, 249 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were identified: 164 DEPs in the far-periphery, 39 in the mid-periphery, and 83 in the central retina. In network analysis, the far-periphery retina showed the most significant connectivity between DEPs. The regulation of coagulation was the most significant biological process in upregulated DEPs in the far-periphery retina. Proteasome was the most significant <i>Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes</i> pathway in downregulated DEPs in the central retina. Antithrombin-III, fibrinogen gamma chain, and fibrinogen beta chain were identified as hub proteins for myopia progression, which were upregulated in the far-periphery retina. Proteomic analysis in this study suggested that oxidative stress can be the primary pathogenesis of myopia progression and that the far-periphery retina plays a role as the key responder.

### Keywords
Myopia, Rabbit, Lc-ms/ms, Retina

### Affiliations
Yonsei University College of Medicine
Department of Ophthalmology, Yongin Severance Hospital, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Yongin, Korea

### Submitter
Chae Eun Moon

### Lab Head
Dr Yuri Seo
Department of Ophthalmology, Yongin Severance Hospital, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Yongin, Korea


