### Accession
PXD004302

### Title
Characterization of sialylated N- and O-glycopeptides from complex proteomes on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer by Isotope Targeted Glycoproteomics (IsoTaG). Application to azido and alkynyl sugars

### Description
Protein glycosylation is a post-translational modification (PTM) responsible for many aspects of proteomic diversity and biological regulation. Correlation of the intact glycoform to the protein attachment site is a critical step to assign functional roles to specific glycoproteins. Isotope targeted glycoproteomics (IsoTaG) is a mass-independent mass spectrometry method to characterize intact, metabolically labeled glycopeptides from complex proteomes. IsoTaG was applied to conditioned media from PC-3 cells labeled with alkynyl or azido sugars to reveal the sialylated glycoproteome. Analysis on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer resulted in characterization of 699 intact glycopeptides from 192 glycoproteins. These intact glycopeptides represent a total of eight sialylated glycoforms across 126 Nand 576 O-glycopeptides. IsoTaG is an effective platform for identification of intact glycopeptides labeled by alkynyl or azido-glycans and will facilitate further studies on the role of the glycoproteome in biology.

### Sample Protocol
PC-3 cells were metabolically labeled with an azido sugar or alkynyl sugar metabolite and their conditioned media was collected.  Isotope targeted proteomics was performed by click chemistry with a cleavable biotin probe followed by affinity enrichment, on bead digestion, and cleavage of the retained glycopeptide from the bead.  Glycopeptides were additionally isotopically recoded for facile recognition and mass-independent mass spectrometry assignment of the intact glycopeptide.

### Data Protocol
The raw data was processed using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and searched against the human-specific SwissProt-reviewed database downloaded on April 29, 2016. Indexed databases for tryptic digests were created allowing for up to three missed cleavages, one fixed modification (carboxyamidomethylcysteine, +57.021 Da), and variable modifications (methionine oxidation, +15.995 Da; and others as described below). Precursor ion mass tolerance for spectra acquired using the Orbitrap were set to 10 ppm. The fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm. The SEQUEST HT search engine was used to assign nonconjugated peptides from on-bead tryptic digests. Protein assignments at a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) were considered enriched if they were found exclusively in labeled samples or over four peptide identifications greater in labeled samples than in the DMSO control (Figure S2). Samples with intact glycopeptides were searched with the Byonic search algorithm v2.8.2 as a node in Proteome Discoverer 1.4. Example glycoform input files are provided in the Supporting Information for Ac4ManNAl, Ac4ManNAz, and Ac4FucAl glycoforms, respectively. Following a search against the SwissProt human proteome, a search against the pool of enriched glycoproteins was performed. Glycopeptide assignments were aggregated and a minimum of two separate assignments at 5% false discovery rate (FDR) to the same underlying peptide was used as a cutoff for further analysis. The DMSO control sample was searched separately against each of the glycoform input files and no intact glycopeptide assignments were reported. Assignments of all spectra in Ac4FucAl-labeled samples were validated by manual inspection for the precursor isotope pattern and expected glycan fragments.

### Publication Abstract
Protein glycosylation is a post-translational modification (PTM) responsible for many aspects of proteomic diversity and biological regulation. Assignment of intact glycan structures to specific protein attachment sites is a critical step towards elucidating the function encoded in the glycome. Previously, we developed isotope-targeted glycoproteomics (IsoTaG) as a mass-independent mass spectrometry method to characterize azide-labeled intact glycopeptides from complex proteomes. Here, we extend the IsoTaG approach with the use of alkynyl sugars as metabolic labels and employ new probes in analysis of the sialylated glycoproteome from PC-3 cells. Using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer, we identified 699 intact glycopeptides from 192 glycoproteins. These intact glycopeptides represent a total of eight sialylated glycan structures across 126 N- and 576 O-glycopeptides. IsoTaG is therefore an effective platform for identification of intact glycopeptides labeled by alkynyl or azido sugars and will facilitate further studies of the glycoproteome.

### Keywords
Glycoproteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Tissue culture, Metabolic labeling

### Affiliations
Harvard University
Bertozzi Lab  Department of Chemistry 380 Roth Way MC: 5080 Stanford CA 94305-4401

### Submitter
Christina Woo

### Lab Head
Dr Christina Woo
Bertozzi Lab  Department of Chemistry 380 Roth Way MC: 5080 Stanford CA 94305-4401


