### Accession
PXD036655

### Title
Beta cell dysfunction and dedifferentiation induced by Bone Morphogenetic Protein (BMP)-2 is associated with histone modifications and decreased NeuroD1 chromatin binding

### Description
Insufficient insulin secretion is a hallmark of type 2 diabetes and has been attributed to beta cell identity loss characterized by a decreased expression of several key beta cell genes. The pro-inflammatory factor BMP-2 is upregulated in islets of Langerhans from diabetic individuals and acts as an inhibitor of beta cell function and proliferation. Exposure to BMP-2 induces expression of Id1-4, Hes-1 and Hey-1, transcriptional regulators associated with loss of differentiation.  The aim of this study was to investigate the mechanism of BMP-2 induced beta cell dysfunction and identity loss.  Mouse islets exposed to BMP-2 for 10 days showed impaired insulin secretion and beta cell proliferation. BMP-2-induced beta cell dysfunction was associated with decreased expression of beta cell specific identity and proliferation markers such as Ins1, Ucn3 and Ki67 but increased expression of Id1-4, Hes-1 and Hey-1. BMP-2 regulated mRNA expression significantly correlated with corresponding protein expression. BMP-2 induced gene expression changes were associated with a predominant reduction in the H3K27ac mark and a decrease in NeuroD1 chromatin binding activity.  These results show that BMP-2-induced beta cell dysfunction is associated with epigenetic changes, predominantly a reduction in H3K27ac and a decrease in NeuroD1 DNA binding resulting in altered beta cell gene expression.

### Sample Protocol
150 intact mouse islets pr condition (n=5) were collected and washed x3 in Phosphatase buffer saline (PBS). Islets for the proteomics workflow were lysed, reduced and pre-digested in 10 µl lysis buffer (6 M Urea, 2 M Thiourea, 10 mM DTT) (Sigma) and 1 µg Lys-C (Wako) supplemented with PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor (Roche) for 2 h, at RT. Then lysates were diluted 10 times using 20 mM Triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEAB; pH adjusted to 8) and tip-sonicated for 2x10 sec on ice at 60% amplitude. Then, samples were alkylated by 20 mM Iodacetamide for 20 min in the dark before digestion with 2% (w/w) trypsin (Sigma) overnight (ON) at 30C. A total of 100 µg tryptic peptides from each sample were labeled with TMT10 plex according to the manufactures protocol (Controls: TMT126-TMT128C; BMP-2: TMT129N-TMT131). After labeling, the samples were mixed in 1:1 ratio and the sample was dried by vacuum centrifugation.  The lyophilized sample was re-solubilized in 0.1% TFA and an aliquot corresponding to 100 µg peptide was desalted using a micro Oligo R3 (Applied Biosystems) Reversed phase column as described previously (REF ). The desalted peptide sample was dried by vacuum centrifugation. Hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography (HILIC) The peptide sample were subjected to fractionation using HILIC. Briefly, these samples were resuspended in 90% ACN, 0.1% TFA (Solvent B) and loaded onto a 450 µM OD x 320 µM ID x 17 cm micro-capillary column packed with TSK Amide-80 resin material (Tosoh Bioscience) using an Agilent 1200 Series HPLC (Agilent). Peptides were separated using a gradient from 100-60 % Solvent B (Solvent A: 0.1% TFA) running for 30 min at a flow-rate of 6 µL/min. Fractions were collected every 1 min and combined into 13 final fractions based on the UV chromatogram and subsequently dried by vacuum centrifugation. Reversed-phase nanoLC-ESI-MS/MS The samples were re-suspended in 0.1% TFA and loaded onto an EASY-nLC system (Thermo Scientific). The samples were loaded onto a two-column system containing a 3 cm pre-column and a 17 cm analytic column both consisting of fused silica capillary (75 μm inner diameter) packed with ReproSil – Pur C18 AQ 3 μm reversed-phase material (Dr. Maisch). The peptides were loaded onto the pre-column in buffer A (0.1% Formic acid (FA)). The peptides were eluted with an organic solvent gradient from 1% buffer B (95% ACN, 0.1% FA) to 7% buffer B at a constant flow rate of 250 nl/min for 3 min and then up to 28% buffer B for 55 min, up to 40% buffer B in 3 min and finally to 95% buffer B in 3 min. The nanoLC was online connected to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Fisher Scientific) operated at positive ion mode with data-dependent acquisition. The Lumos acquired the full MS scan with an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 1x106 ions and a maximum fill time of 50ms. Each MS scan was acquired at high-resolution (120,000 full width half maximum (FWHM)) at m/z 200 in the Orbitrap with a mass range of 400-1600 Da. The Lumos was set to one full MS per 3 second to allow for maximum amount of precursor ions to be selected for fragmentation in these 3 seconds. The most abundant peptide ions were selected from the MS for higher energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) fragmentation (normalized collision energy: 40V). Fragmentation was performed at high resolution (50,000 FWHM) for a target of 1x105 and a maximum injection time of 100ms using an isolation window of 1.2 m/z and a dynamic exclusion of 20 sec. All raw data were viewed in Xcalibur v3.0 (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
All LC-MSMS raw data files were searched using Proteome Discoverer version 2.1. The raw data were searched in PD using a workflow where the raw data were first subjected to database searching using an in-house Mascot server (Version 2.2.04, Matrix Science Ltd., London, UK) and then the spectra that did not yield a high confident identification was further searched using Sequest HT. The searches had the following criteria: database, SwissProt mouse protein database (updated 2017-10) for the Mascot search and uniprot mouse (version 17.07.2017; 75193 sequences) for the Sequest HT search; enzyme, trypsin; maximum missed cleavages, 2; fixed modifications, TMT6plex (N-terminal), TMT6plex (K) and Carbamidomethyl (C). The TMT10 plex reporter ion signals were quantified using S/N and they were normalized to the total S/N in the PD program. After database search the protein with normalized abundances were extracted and the proteins with 2 or more identified peptides were used for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Insufficient insulin secretion is a hallmark of type 2 diabetes and has been attributed to beta cell identity loss characterized by decreased expression of several key beta cell genes. The pro-inflammatory factor BMP-2 is upregulated in islets of Langerhans from individuals with diabetes and acts as an inhibitor of beta cell function and proliferation. Exposure to BMP-2 induces expression of Id1-4, Hes-1, and Hey-1 which are transcriptional regulators associated with loss of differentiation. The aim of this study was to investigate the mechanism by which BMP-2 induces beta cell dysfunction and loss of cell maturity. Mouse islets exposed to BMP-2 for 10 days showed impaired glucose-stimulated insulin secretion and beta cell proliferation. BMP-2-induced beta cell dysfunction was associated with decreased expression of cell maturity and proliferation markers specific to the beta cell such as Ins1, Ucn3, and Ki67 and increased expression of Id1-4, Hes-1, and Hey-1. The top 30 most regulated proteins significantly correlated with corresponding mRNA expression. BMP-2-induced gene expression changes were associated with a predominant reduction in acetylation of H3K27 and a decrease in NeuroD1 chromatin binding activity. These results show that BMP-2 induces loss of beta cell maturity and suggest that remodeling of H3K27ac and decreased NeuroD1 DNA binding activity participate in the effect of BMP-2 on beta cell dysfunction.

### Keywords
Rna, Proteomics, Histone, Bmp-2

### Affiliations
University of Southern Denmark
Department of Biomedical Science, University of Copenhagen, Denmark

### Submitter
Martin R. Larsen

### Lab Head
Dr Nils Billestrup
Department of Biomedical Science, University of Copenhagen, Denmark


