### Accession
PXD016633

### Title
Mouse Th17 T cells, IL-23 stimulated

### Description
Interleukin 23 (IL-23) triggers pathogenic features in pro-inflammatory, IL-17-secreting T cells (Th17 and Tγδ17) that play a key role in the development of inflammatory diseases. However, the IL-23 signaling cascade remains largely undefined. Here we used quantitative phosphoproteomics to characterize IL-23 signaling in primary murine Th17 cells. We quantified 6,888 phosphorylation sites in Th17 cells, and found 168 phosphorylations regulated upom IL-23 stimulation. IL-23 increased the phosphorylation of the myosin regulatory light chain (RLC), an actomyosin contractibility marker, in Th17 and Tγδ cells. IL-23-induced RLC phosphorylation required JAK2 and ROCK catalytic activity, and the study of the IL-23/ROCK axis revealed an unexpected role of IL-23 in the migration of Tγδ17 and Th17 cells. Moreover, pharmacological inhibition of ROCK reduced Tγδ17 recruitment to inflamed skin upon challenge with inflammatory agent Imiquimod. This work: i) provides new insights into phosphorylation networks that control Th17 cells, ii) widely expands the current knowledge on IL-23 signaling, and iii) contributes to the increasing list of immune cells subsets characterized by global phosphoproteomic approaches.

### Sample Protocol
Sample Preparation. Th17 cultures were stimulated with IL-23 (10ng/ml for 30 min). Cells were pelleted, washed twice in ice-cold HBSS and lysed at 50x106 cells/ml in 8 M urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8 plus protease/ phosphatase inhibitors. Lysates were vigorously shaken for 15 min/RT, sonicated and shaken for additional 15 min/RT. The protein lysates were then reduced (10 mM DTT), alkylated (50 mM iodoacetamide) and digested ON/37°C with trypsin (1:80 trypsin:protein, w/w). Digested proteins were desalted using C18 Sep-Pak cartridges and subjected to dimethyl labeling. Dimethyl labeling. Dimethyl labeling was performed on C18 Sep-Pak cartridges following on-column labeling protocol. 4.5 ml of 50 mM sodium phosphate buffer pH 7.5 (1 ml 50 mM NaH2PO4 + 3.5 ml 50 mM Na2HPO4), mixed with 250 l 4% formaldehyde (v/v) and 250 l of 0.6 M cyanoborohydride (NaBH3CN), was used per sample/label. Control condition=light formaldehyde (CH2O), IL-23-stimulated= intermediate formaldehyde (CD2O). Differentially labeled eluates were mixed at a 1:1 ratio and fractionated by hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography (HILIC).  Hydrophilic Liquid Interaction Chromatography (HILIC) and Phosphopeptide enrichment. Three biological replicates (dimethyl labeled and mixed 1:1) were fractionated using Ultimate 3000 HPLC (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a 4.6 × 250- mm TSKgel Amide-80 5-μm particle column (Tosoh Biosciences). HILIC buffer A, 0.1% TFA; HILIC buffer B, 99.9% ACN, 0.1% TFA. Samples were resuspended in 80% HILIC buffer B and injected onto the HILIC column. Elution gradient: 80% B/20 minutes, 80% B to 60% B in 40 minutes and 0% B/10 minutes at a flow rate of 0.4 ml/minute. 16 fractions were collected per biological replicate and subjected to phosphopeptide enrichment using titanium dioxide (TiO2). TiO2 spheres were prepared at 50 mg/ml, and 25 l (1.25 mg TiO2) were added to each sample fraction, incubated for 10 min/RT. Samples were washed and eluted with 200 μl 0.4 M NH4OH followed with 200 μl 0.2 M NH4OH/50% acetonitrile. LC-MS. Phosphopeptide samples were resuspended in 1% formic acid and separated by nanoscale C18 reverse-phase liquid chromatography (Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano system, Thermo Scientific). The buffers used for chromatography were: HPLC Buffer A (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid), HPLC Buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.08% formic acid) and HPLC Buffer C (0.1% formic acid). Samples were washed onto the column with HPLC Buffer C and eluted with the following buffer gradient: 2% B (0-3 minutes), 2- 40% B (3-128 minutes), 40-98% B (128-130 minutes), 98% B (130-150 minutes), 98-2% B (150-151 minutes), and equilibrated in 2% B (151-180 minutes) at a flow rate of 0.3 μl/minute. The eluting peptide solution was automatically electrosprayed into the coupled Linear Trap Quadrupole (LTQ)- Orbitrap mass spectrometer (LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro; Thermo Scientific) using an Easy-Spray nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Scientific). The mass spectrometers were operated in positive ion mode and were used in data-dependent acquisition modes. A full scan (FT-MS) was acquired at a target value of 1,000,000 ions with resolution R = 60,000 over a mass range of 335-1800 atomic mass unit (amu). The fifteen most intense ions were selected for fragmentation in the LTQ Orbitrap Velos. Fragmentation in the LTQ was induced by collision-induced dissociation (CID) with a target value of 10,000 ions. For accurate mass measurement, the "lock mass" function (lock mass = 445.120024 Da) was enabled for MS scan modes. To improve the fragmentation of phosphopeptides, the multistage activation algorithm in the Xcalibur software was enabled for each MS/MS spectrum using the neutral loss values of 97.98, 48.99, 32.66 and 24.49 m/z units. Former target ions selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 45 seconds. General mass spectrometric conditions were as follows: spray voltage, 1.8-2.5 kV; no sheath and auxiliary gas flow; ion transfer tube temperature, 250 °C; normalized collision energy (35%) using wide band activation mode for MS2. The isolation width was set to 2 amu for IT-MS/MS. Ion selection thresholds were 5000 counts for MS2. An activation of q = 0.25 and activation time of 10 ms were applied in MS2 acquisitions. The fill time for FTMS was set to 500 ms and for ITMS to 100 ms.

### Data Protocol
Data processing. Raw mass spectrometry data were processed in MaxQuant version 1.5.8.3 using the following search parameters: a MS tolerance of 20 ppm, MS/MS tolerance of 0.5 Da and full trypsin specificity. Two missed cleavages were permitted. Protein N-terminal acetylation, oxidation of methionine, glutamine to pyroglutamate conversion, deamidation (NQ) and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine were set as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. The minimum peptide length for identification was set to 6 amino acids. The match between run function was enabled. Proteins were mapped to the Uniprot/Swiss-Prot mouse protein database (retrieved on July 6th, 2017), containing 16,894 mouse complete proteome entries. False discovery rates (FDRs) of 0.01 were based on hits against a reversed sequence database and calculated at the level of peptides, proteins and modification sites. Prior to statistical analysis, the outputs from MaxQuant were filtered to remove known contaminants and reverse sequences. The distribution of differential dimethyl labeling ratios was normalized within MaxQuant at the peptide level so that the median of log2 ratios is zero.

### Publication Abstract
Interleukin 23 (IL-23) triggers pathogenic features in pro-inflammatory, IL-17-secreting T cells (Th17 and T&#x3b3;&#x3b4;17) that play a key role in the development of inflammatory diseases. However, the IL-23 signaling cascade remains largely undefined. Here, we used quantitative phosphoproteomics to characterize IL-23 signaling in primary murine Th17 cells. We quantified 6,888 phosphorylation sites in Th17 cells and found 168 phosphorylations regulated upon IL-23 stimulation. IL-23 increased the phosphorylation of the myosin regulatory light chain (RLC), an actomyosin contractibility marker, in Th17 and T&#x3b3;&#x3b4;17 cells. IL-23-induced RLC phosphorylation required Janus kinase 2 (JAK2) and Rho-associated protein kinase (ROCK) catalytic activity, and further study of the IL-23/ROCK connection revealed an unexpected role of IL-23 in the migration of T&#x3b3;&#x3b4;17 and Th17 cells through ROCK activation. In addition, pharmacological inhibition of ROCK reduced T&#x3b3;&#x3b4;17 recruitment to inflamed skin upon challenge with inflammatory agent Imiquimod. This work (i) provides new insights into phosphorylation networks that control Th17 cells, (ii) widely expands the current knowledge on IL-23 signaling, and (iii) contributes to the increasing list of immune cells subsets characterized by global phosphoproteomic approaches.

### Keywords
Mouse, T lymphocyte, Th17, Il-23

### Affiliations
María N. Navarro Interactions With The Environment Program. Immune System Development and Function Unit. Centro de Biología Molecular "Severo Ochoa" Lab. 126 C/Nicolás Cabrera, 1. 28049 Madrid. Spain Tlf.: (+34) 911964453 email: marian.navarro@cbm.csic.es
Centro de Biología Molecular "Severo Ochoa"

### Submitter
Maria Navarro

### Lab Head
Dr Maria N. Navarro
María N. Navarro Interactions With The Environment Program. Immune System Development and Function Unit. Centro de Biología Molecular "Severo Ochoa" Lab. 126 C/Nicolás Cabrera, 1. 28049 Madrid. Spain Tlf.: (+34) 911964453 email: marian.navarro@cbm.csic.es


