### Accession
PXD038315

### Title
Interaction between Lactiplantibacillus plantarum RX-8 and Wickerhamomyces anomalus Y-5 under co-culture by proteomics analysis

### Description
In present study, it was found that the co-culture of Wickerhamomyces anomalus Y-5 and L. plantarum RX-8 could enhance bacteriocin production. To analyze the interaction between W. anomalus Y-5 and L. plantarum RX-8, a quantitative proteomic approach was used to analyze and compare the proteome in L. plantarum RX-8 and W. anomalus Y-5 under mono-culture and co-culture. In total, 339 differently expressed proteins (DEPs) were screened in comparison of L. plantarum RX-8 under mono-culture and co-culture, 645 proteins of W. anomalus Y-5 changed in mono-culture and co-culture. The Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) enrichment analysis indicated that DEPs participated in various metabolic pathways such as PTS system, glycolysis, galactose metabolism, glutamate, aspartate, arginine and cysteine metabolism etc. These pathways were related to inducing mechanism on improving bacteriocin production by co-culture. Quantitative proteomic analysis-based strategies can therefore provide further evidence for new regulated targets to improve the production of bacteriocins.

### Sample Protocol
Samples of L. plantarum RX-8 and W. anomalus Y-5 in co-culture and mono-culture at 24h centrifuged at 10000 rpm for 10 min at 4°C. After removing the supernatant, cells were immediately cleaned by PBS twice and frozen in liquid nitrogen for 10 min, then stored at −80°C. Each sample was biologically duplicated three times and backed up. The samples suspended in a lysis buffer [8M urea, 50mM Tris8.0, 1% NP40, 1% NaDOC (sodium deoxycholate), 5mM DTT (dithiothreitol), 2mM EDTA, 30 mM NAM (nicotinamide), 3um TSA (trichostatin A), 1% protease inhibitor Cocktail (Sigma, P8215, for use with fungal extracts)]. After sonicated on ice, supernatant was collected by centrifugation at 4℃ for 10min at 20000g, and total protein was determined with BCA kit (Micrometer Biotech). Protein of equal amount was reduced with 5 mM DTT for 45 min at 30°C, alkylated with 30 mM iodoacetamide for 1 h at room temperature in darkness, and then precipitated with ice-cold acetone. The precipitate was washed thrice with acetone, suspended in 0.1M TEAB (triethylammonium bicarbonate) and digested with 1/25 trypsin (Promega) for 12h at 37℃. The digestion was stopped with 1% TFA (trifluoroacetic acid), and the resulting peptide was cleaned with Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex, Torrance, CA, USA) and vaccum-dried in Scanvac maxi-beta (Labogene, Alleroed, Denmark).

### Data Protocol
The MS files were searched using MaxQuant v.1.5.2.8 (https://www.maxquant.org/). The UniProt/Swiss-Prot reviewed database containing L. plantarum RX-8 and W. anomalus Y-5 proteins (NCBI_Clostridium_cellulovorans743B, version 30,102,017, 4278 sequence entries) was adopted. Mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Trypsin was selected for enzyme specificity and two missed cleavage was allowed. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine, TMT 6-plex tag of Lys and peptide N-terminal was specified as fixed modification, oxidation on Met and TMT 6-plex tag on Tyr was specified as variable modification. Decoy (reverse) database was searched against to estimate FDR. The calculating results were revalued by algorithm percolator, and Peptide-Spectrum Match with P<0.05 and e<0.05 were accepted. For quantation, a protein must have at least two unique peptides above identity. The protein ratio type was median, the normalization method was median.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Microorganism interaction, Lactic acid bacteria, Inducing mechanism, Bacteriocin, Co-culture

### Affiliations
Beijing Advance Innovation Center for Food Nutrition and Human Health, Beijing Laboratory of Food Quality and Safety, Beijing Engineering and Technology Research Center of Food Additives, Beijing Technology and Business University (BTBU), Beijing 100048, China
Micrometer Biotech

### Submitter
Xianliang Ma

### Lab Head
Dr Rong Nie
Beijing Advance Innovation Center for Food Nutrition and Human Health, Beijing Laboratory of Food Quality and Safety, Beijing Engineering and Technology Research Center of Food Additives, Beijing Technology and Business University (BTBU), Beijing 100048, China


