### Accession
PXD010658

### Title
Human Granulosa Cells Proteome

### Description
Human granulosa cells are follicular cells surrounding the oocyte. Human granulosa cells are retrieved during in vitro fertilization a process where patients undergo hormonal stimulation including FSH and LH/hCG stimulation. Under the influence of the luteinizing hormone (LH) a process called luteinization they differentiate to luteal cells and contribute to the corpus luteum. Therefore, this cellular system is a good model for human corpus luteum (CL). To study processes within the human CL, IVF-derived GCs from patients were cultured for two to five days and then analyzed with mass spectrometry based shotgun proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
2.5 µg of digest (Lys-C and trypsin) dissolved in 0.1 % formic acid (FA) were separated on an Ultimate 3000 RS system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, California, USA). Peptide samples were first trapped on a C18 trap column (µ-Precolumn, C18 PepMap 100, 5 µm, Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) at a flow rate of 30 µL/min and separated on a C18 nano-flow column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, 2 µm, 75 µm x 50 cm) at a flow rate of 0.2 µL/min using the following consecutive gradients: 5 to 25 % B for 285 min and 25 to 50 % B for 30 min (A: 0.1 % FA in water, B: 0.1 % FA in acetonitrile). Electrospray ionization was done with an uncoated SilicaTip (FS360-20-10-N-20-C15; New Objective, Woburn, MA) and a needle voltage of 2.3 kV. For MS data acquisition, a data dependent top 70 CID method was performed on a 5600+ mass spectrometer (Sciex, Concord, Canada).

### Data Protocol
MS raw data (*.wiff) was processed with MaxQuant (1.5.8.3) using default settings with some exceptions: match between runs feature enabled and label free quantification feature enabled with a minimum ratio count of 1. The fasta file was retrieved from uniprot.com on 17th June, 2017. Only the human protein subset of Swiss-Prot was used.

### Publication Abstract
The corpus luteum (CL) is a transient endocrine organ, yet molecular mechanisms resulting in its demise are not well known. The presence of phosphorylated mixed lineage kinase domain-like pseudokinase pMLKL(T357/S358) in human and nonhuman primate CL samples (<i>Macaca mulatta</i> and <i>Callithrix jacchus</i>) implied that necroptosis of luteal cells may be involved. In <i>M. mulatta</i> CL, pMLKL positive staining became detectable only from the mid-late luteal phase onwards, pointing to necroptosis during regression of the CL. Cell death, including necroptosis, was previously observed in cultures of human luteal granulosa cells (GCs), an apt model for the study of the human CL. To explore mechanisms of necroptotic cell death in GCs during culture, we performed a proteomic analysis. The levels of 50 proteins were significantly altered after 5 days of culture. Interconnectivity analysis and immunocytochemistry implicated specifically the ceramide salvage pathway to be enhanced. <i>M. mulatta</i> CL transcriptome analysis indicated in vivo relevance. Perturbing endogenous ceramide generation by fumonisin B1 (FB1) and addition of soluble ceramide (C2-CER) yielded opposite actions on viability of GCs and therefore supported the significance of the ceramide pathway. Morphological changes indicated necrotic cell death in the C2-CER treated group. Studies with the pan caspase blocker zVAD-fmk or the necroptosis blocker necrosulfonamid (NSA) further supported that C2-CER induced necroptosis. Our data pinpoint necroptosis in a physiological process, namely CL regression. This raises the possibility that the primate CL could be rescued by pharmacological inhibition of necroptosis or by interaction with ceramide metabolism.

### Keywords
Human granulosa cells, Maxquant, Human reproduction, Bottom-up, Corpus luteum, Lc-ms/ms, Shotgun proteomics, Luteal cells

### Affiliations
Genzentrum der LMU München
Thomas Fröhlich, Laboratory for Functional Genome Analysis LAFUGA, Gene Center, LMU München, Feodor-Lynen-Strasse 25, 81377 Munich, Germany

### Submitter
Jan Bernd Stöckl

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Fröhlich
Thomas Fröhlich, Laboratory for Functional Genome Analysis LAFUGA, Gene Center, LMU München, Feodor-Lynen-Strasse 25, 81377 Munich, Germany


