### Accession
PXD012207

### Title
Glioblastoma  serum biomarkers identification by iTRAQ

### Description
Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most aggressive form of astrocytoma and is difficult to diagnose at early stage. In this study, our goal is to find and validate biomarkers for GBM through serum proteome expression profiling, which would assist in the early diagnosis, and management of GBMs. In the discovery phase, we performed shotgun proteomics of control and GBM pooled serum samples using untargeted 4-plex iTRAQ (isobaric Tags for Relative and Absolute Quantitation) mass spectrometry to identify candidate biomarkers with differential abundance The two candidates, S100A8 and S100A9 were prioritized for verification based on their maximal abundance in GBM serum in our discovery phase.

### Sample Protocol
A pool of 10 serum samples from GBM patient (GBM pooled sera) and 10 serum samples from healthy individual (control pooled sera), all age and gender matched (average control age=49.5 years, average GBM age =53.1 years, p=0.11, see below), was examined for differential expression of proteins. In order to remove high abundant proteins (HAP) from sera, which could mask the detection of low abundant proteins (LAP), both, control pooled sera  and GBM pooled sera, separately, were subjected to depletion by affinity chromatography using MARS HU-14 column (4.6×100 mm; Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA). The terminology LAP refers to serum depleted of only fourteen high abundant proteins against which antibodies are present in the column. Flow-through fraction was collected as LAP. Buffer exchange and desalting was performed for LAP using 500mM TEAB buffer (Sigma) and 3kDa cut off centricon (Millipore) as per the manufacturer’s instruction. Silver staining was performed to visualize the depletion of HAP. To perform iTRAQ labelling, equal amount of LAP protein extract from GBM and control samples was separately subjected to tryptic digestion as per manufactures protocol in duplicates (Applied Biosystems iTRAQ Reagent Four-Plex Kit protocol). Briefly, 50 µg of LAP from control pooled sera and GBM pooled sera were reduced alkylated and tryptic digested for 18 hours at 37°C.  iTRAQ reagents 114 and 115 were used to label two control duplicate samples and iTRAQ reagents 116 and 117 were used to label two GBM duplicate samples. iTRAQ labelled peptides from all four samples were mixed together, vacuum dried and were subjected to isoelectric point (PI) based fractionation using 3100 OFFGEL Fractionator kit (Agilent Technologies, Böblingen, Germany) with a setup of 24-well and an IPG strip of 24 cm, 3-10 linear pH range using manufacturer’s protocol. Before electrofocusing, iTRAQ mixed sample was desalted using C18 spin columns (89873, Pierce).  24 fractions obtained after off-gel fractionation were pooled into 12 fractions. The pooling of fractions was done such that all fractions should be having approximately equivalent representation of number of peptides. To aid to this decision of fraction pooling, theoretical digestion of 1929 proteins reported in human plasma proteome1 was performed and the theoretical PI of the obtained peptides was calculated using EXPASY tool (http://web.expasy.org/peptide_mass/). Thus, all the peptides were binned into 24 fractions where they are expected to be present theoretically as per their PI. After doing this exercise, fractions with lesser peptides were pooled together, and fractions with higher number of peptides were left as single fraction. This exercise helped us to bring down the number of samples to be analysed from 24 to 12 with logic of equivalent peptide representation in all fractions. These 12 fractions were subjected to LC-MS/MS and the data was obtained.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification and quantitation, individual and merged analysis with raw files of 12 fractions was performed using Proteome Discoverer version 1.4.0.288 (Thermo Scientific). Database search was carried out against the NCBI human RefSeq database using the SEQUEST search algorithm. The search parameters used were as follows: 1) precursor mass tolerance=12ppm, 2) fragment mass tolerance=0.8 Da, 3) fixed modification of iTRAQ4plex / +144.102 Da at peptide N-Terminus (any N-Terminus), 4) dynamic modification of N-Terminal Acetyl / +42.011 Da (Any N-Terminus), iTRAQ4plex / +144.102 Da (K), Carbamidomethyl / +57.021 Da (C), Oxidation / +15.995 Da (M), Phospho / +79.966 Da (S, T), Carbamyl / +43.006 Da (K), Deamidated / +0.984 Da (N), 5) maximum missed cleavage sites=3, 6) enzyme=trypsin. Unique peptides only and 1% false discovery rate (FDR) criteria were used for peptide filtering. Relative quantification of proteins was performed based on the relative intensities of reporter ions generated during MS/MS fragmentation of peptides. Final ratios (116/114 and 117/115) were obtained and average of the technical duplicates was used to plot the graph. For ratio calculation only unique peptides were used.

### Publication Abstract
Despite advances in biology and treatment modalities, the prognosis of glioblastoma (GBM) remains poor. Serum reflects disease macroenvironment and thus provides a less invasive means to diagnose and monitor a diseased condition. By employing 4-plex iTRAQ methodology, we identified 40 proteins with differential abundance in GBM sera. The high abundance of serum S100A8/S100A9 was verified by multiple reaction monitoring (MRM). ELISA and MRM-based quantitation showed a significant positive correlation. Further, an integrated investigation using stromal, tumor purity and cell type scores demonstrated an enrichment of myeloid cell lineage in the GBM tumor microenvironment. Transcript levels of S100A8/S100A9 were found to be independent poor prognostic indicators in GBM. Medium levels of pre-operative and three-month post-operative follow-up serum S100A8 levels predicted poor prognosis in GBM patients who lived beyond median survival. In vitro experiments showed that recombinant S100A8/S100A9 proteins promoted integrin signalling dependent glioma cell migration and invasion up to a threshold level of concentrations. Thus, we have discovered GBM serum marker by iTRAQ and verified by MRM. We also demonstrate interplay between tumor micro and macroenvironment and identified S100A8 as a potential marker with diagnostic and prognostic value in GBM.

### Keywords
Human, Gbm, Glioblastoma, Serum, Itraq

### Affiliations
Professor at Department of Microbiology and Cell Biology, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India
Research Associate

### Submitter
Anjali Arora

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Kumaraval Somasundaram
Professor at Department of Microbiology and Cell Biology, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India


