### Accession
PXD010178

### Title
Enhanced validation of antibodies for research applications

### Description
There is a need for standardized validation methods for antibody specificity and selectivity. Recently, five alternative validation “pillars" were proposed to explore the specificity of research antibodies using methods with no need for prior knowledge about the protein target. Here, we show that these principles can be used in a streamlined manner for enhanced validation of research antibodies in Western blot applications. More than 6,000 antibodies were validated with at least one of these strategies involving orthogonal methods, genetic knockdown, recombinant expression, independent antibodies and migration capture mass spectrometry analysis. The results show a path forward for efforts to validate antibodies in an application-specific manner suitable for both providers and users.

### Sample Protocol
Protein lysates from the two cell lines (RT4 and U-251) were prepared in Laemmli Sample Buffer ((BioRad Laboratories), 50 mM DTT) to a concentration of 1.5 mg protein per ml lysate and heated to 95 °C for 5 min. Approximately 45 µg of protein was loaded, in triplicates, on a precast 4-20 % Criterion TGX StainFree Gel (BioRad Laboratories), together with PageRuler Plus Prestained Protein Ladder (Thermo Scientific), and run according to the manufacturer's recommendation. The gel was rinsed in water (3x5 min), stained using GelCode Blue Stain Reagent (Thermo Scientific) for 1 h and destained through washing in water (2x1 h). Lanes were excised in bands. The in gel digestion was performed as previously described by Shevchenko et al. (http://www.nature.com/nprot/journal/v1/n6/pdf/nprot.2006.468.pdf) with some changes to the original protocol as outlined below. Briefly, gel pieces were shrunk in 100 % ACN and reduced by 10 mM DTT for 30 minutes at 56 °C. Alkylation was performed by addition of 55 mM 2-choloroacetamide and incubated in dark for 20 minutes. Trypsin digestion was performed over night at 37 °C after addition of trypsin (13 ng/µl in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 10 % ACN (vol/vol)). Peptides were extracted by addition of 100 µl of extraction buffer (1:2 (vol/vol) 5 % formic acid/ACN) and dried down by vacuum centrifugation prior LC-MS/MS analysis. Each sample was analyzed on a Bruker Impact II (Bruker Daltonics, Germany) connected to a Dionex UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The UHPLC was equipped with a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 75 µm x 2 cm, nanoviper, C18, 3 µm, 100 Å; Thermo Fisher Scientific) and an analytical column (PepMap RSLC C18, 2 µm, 100 Å, 75 µm x 50 cm; Thermo Fisher Scientific). Mobile-phase buffers for nLC separation consisted of 5 % ACN/0.1 % FA in water (solvent A) and 95 % ACN/0.1 % FA (solvent B). The peptides were eluted during a 2 h gradient and directly sprayed into the mass spectrometer. The flow rate was set at 400 nl/min, and the LC gradient was as follows: 4 % solvent B within 5 min, 4-32 % solvent B within 90 min, 32-95 % solvent B within 1 min, 100 % B for 10 min and down to 2 % solvent B within 1 min following equilibration at 2 % solvent B for 13 min. Nano spray was achieved with an applied voltage of 1.6 kV using a Captive Spray source (Bruker Daltonics, Germany) connected to a NanoBooster filled with 100 % ACN. The mass spectrometer was programmed in a data-dependent acquisition mode (cycle time set to 3 s) and was configured to perform a survey scan from 150 to 2,200 m/z (1 Hz). MS2 scans were acquired in dynamic mode (2,500 cts = 8Hz to 25,000 cts = 32Hz) of ions with charge state between 2 and 5 with a smart exclusion (5x) set to 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Intensities for label free-MS quantification was performed by analyzing the raw data by MaxQuant (version 1.5.7.0). Andromeda was used to search the MS/MS data against the Ensembl Homo sapiens database (version 88.38, using all protein coding transcripts from the primary assembly) complemented with a list of common contaminants and concatenated with the reversed version of all sequences. Trypsin/P was chosen as cleavage specificity allowing two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation (C) was set as a fixed modification, while oxidation (M) was used as variable modification. Data filtering was carried out using the following parameters: peptide and protein FDRs were set to 1 %, minimum peptide length was set to 7. The reverse and common contaminant hits were removed from MaxQuant output.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Western blot, Rt4, Lc-msms, Sds-page, U251

### Affiliations
KTH Royal Institute of Technology: Stockholm, Stockholm, Sweden School of Engineering Sciences in Chemistry, Biotechnology and Health
KTH Royal Institute of Technology

### Submitter
Andreas Hober

### Lab Head
Dr Mathias Uhlen
KTH Royal Institute of Technology: Stockholm, Stockholm, Sweden School of Engineering Sciences in Chemistry, Biotechnology and Health


