### Accession
PXD008780

### Title
Functional Response of Polar Bacterial Communities under Variable Organic Inputs Revealed with Metaproteomic, 16S rRNA and Organic Compositional Analysis

### Description
Organic matter recycling in marine systems is largely driven by microbial processes, particularly in the Arctic where primary production and inputs can be temporally offset from upper trophic level consumption. This study followed bacterial dynamics in the chlorophyll maximum of the Bering Strait and sediment-water interface of the Chukchi Sea using metaproteomic and 16S rRNA methods to measure cellular function and taxonomic composition under low and high marine-derived particulate organic matter (POM) treatments at 0°C. Parallel analysis of major organic components (lipids and amino acids) allowed a comparison of microbial-POM interactions. Over the 10 day experimental period, bacteria under both treatments showed rapid community responses and changes in proteomic expression, accompanied by small changes in the concentration and distributions of organic components.  In the Bering Strait community, protein translation was an important immediate cellular response under both POM scenarios while specific metabolic processes were more distinct between treatments. For example, under both conditions, evidence for carboxylic acid metabolism increased at day 6 while carbohydrate utilization as an energy source showed unique patterns as the experiments progressed. With POM additions to the Bering Strait community, nitrogen transport and regulation went up, including nitrogen fixation and ammonia assimilation, by day 6. In addition, a number of vitamin enzymatic cofactors were enriched by this day, providing evidence for an increase in C1 metabolism at that time. Low POM conditions stimulated the cycling and synthesis of amino acids, which was not as pronounced under the high POM treatment. In the Chukchi Sea community, nitrate reduction and substrate-specific transporter activity was statistically higher than in the Bering Strait, especially under low POM conditions. Taxonomic inference revealed that a wide range of bacterial classes were associated with the shifting cellular functions, but that Alphaproteobacteria, Gammaproteobacteria and Flavobacteria controlled most of these protein abundances. Activities of all classes were highly variable, with less dominant bacterial groups exhibiting a particularly strong degree of niche separation.

### Sample Protocol
Seawater was collected in August of 2013 via high volume Niskin (10 L General Oceanics equipped with CTD sensors) casts from the chlorophyll maximum in the Bering Strait (BSt-initial) (7 m, 65° 43.44” N, 168° 57.42” W) and from the bottom waters of the Chukchi Sea (CS-initial) (55.5 m, 72° 47.624” N, 164° 53.89” W) as described in May et al. (2016). Water was collected from different depths at each station in order to target free-living bacterial communities that may be phylogenetically distinct. Upon collection, water was filtered by sequential size fractionation through 10.0 µm and 1.0 µm filters to isolate the free-living bacteria from eukaryotic grazers and large particles before incubation. For metagenomic analysis of the initial bacterial communities, a total of 7 L of 1.0 µm prefiltered water from each station was collected in 1 L aliquots onto 0.2 µm polycarbonate (PC) filters (Whatman Nuclepore), immediately frozen in liquid N2 and stored at -80 ºC until shore based analysis. To examine bacterial community response to organic amendments, 100 L of 1.0 µm prefiltered seawater from the Bering Strait and Chukchi Sea was split into two, 50 L shipboard incubations for ten days at 0 ºC in the dark. The first 50 L of seawater from each station was supplemented with native particulate organic matter (POM) between 5.0-10.0 µm in size, collected and concentrated from the chlorophyll maximum of the Bering Strait. Before addition, the POM was frozen to kill cells and encourage phytoplankton cell lysis and release of bioavailable dissolved organic matter (DOM) to the bacterial community.  The second 50 L vessel from each station had no POM added to examine bacterial response to incubation conditions and residual DOM, thus acting as a control. Subamples from each station and each treatment were collected on day 1 (d1), day 6 (d6) and day 10 (d10) of the incubation experiments. Metaproteomic samples were collected onto 0.2 µm PC filters in triplicate, flash frozen in liquid N2 and stored at -80°C. While these experimental treatments are common practice, there are well known limitations. The goal for these incubations was not to mimic in situ field conditions, per se, but more importantly to track functional responses by the native microbial communities to OM inputs over time. Filters collected from BSt-initial and CS-initial for bacterial community metagenome analysis were extracted following the protocol in Wright et al. (2009). The extraction method, plus library preparation and sequencing were identical to methods described in May et al. (2016) and Timmins-Schiffman et al. (2016). Briefly, DNA was sheared to < 1 kb and desalted prior to library preparation and quality control confirmation. Sequencing of libraries from each station was completed on a one lane Illumina HiSeq 2500 (Illumina, San Diego, CA) and assembled into one combined metagenomics database using MOCAT (Kultima et al., 2012).   Metaproteomic sample preparation and liquid chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) methods are detailed in Timmins-Schiffman et al. (2016). In addition, samples from the Chukchi Sea incubation experiments were prepared and analyzed alongside the Bering Strait samples. Briefly, cells were lysed and removed from filters using a probe sonicator (Branson Ultrasonics 250, Danbury, CT) followed by flash-freezing in liquid nitrogen. Proteins within each sample were extracted and desalted (Nunn et al., 2015) prior to analysis with LC-MS/MS (nanoAcquity UPLC (Waters Corp, Milford, MA)-Q-Exactive-HF (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA)). Each sample was injected two times, returning LC-MS/MS technical replicates.

### Data Protocol
All database searches were performed using Comet (Eng et al., 2012) version 2015.01 rev. 2, using a concatenated decoy database in which peptide sequences were reversed but C-terminal amino acids were left in place. Search parameters included a static modification for cysteine carbamidomethylation (57.021464) and a variable modification for methionine oxidation (15.9949). Enzyme specificity was trypsin, with three missed cleavages allowed. Parent ion mass tolerance was set to 10ppm around five isotopic peaks, and fragment ion binning was 0.02, with offset 0.0.  Comet results for technical replicates were combined prior to further analysis. To determine the full set of peptides for comparison, as described previously (Granholm et al., 2013), after each unique peptide was associated with its top-scoring spectrum irrespective of charge state, we used the Percolator algorithm (Käll et al., 2007; Granholm et al., 2013) to apply the widely-accepted target-decoy search strategy to estimate the false discovery rate (FDR) associated with a given set of accepted peptide sequences. In this context, the FDR is defined as the proportion of the accepted peptide spectral matches (PSMs) that are not responsible for generating observed spectra. All peptides accepted at FDR 0.01 in at least one sample were used for comparison (Elias and Gygi, 2007). Peptide quantitation was performed using spectral counting. Percolator was used to determine the set of peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) accepted at FDR 0.01 in each sample, and PSMs were summarized by peptide sequence.

### Publication Abstract
We examined metaproteome profiles from two Arctic microbiomes during 10-day shipboard incubations to directly track early functional and taxonomic responses to a simulated algal bloom and an oligotrophic control. Using a novel peptide-based enrichment analysis, significant changes (p-value&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.01) in biological and molecular functions associated with carbon and nitrogen recycling were observed. Within the first day under both organic matter conditions, Bering Strait surface microbiomes increased protein synthesis, carbohydrate degradation, and cellular redox processes while decreasing C1 metabolism. Taxonomic assignments revealed that the core microbiome collectively responded to algal substrates by assimilating carbon before select taxa utilize and metabolize nitrogen intracellularly. Incubations of Chukchi Sea bottom water microbiomes showed similar, but delayed functional responses to identical treatments. Although 24 functional terms were shared between experimental treatments, the timing, and degree of the remaining responses were highly variable, showing that organic matter perturbation directs community functionality prior to alterations to the taxonomic distribution at the microbiome class level. The dynamic responses of these two oceanic microbial communities have important implications for timing and magnitude of responses to organic perturbations within the Arctic Ocean and how community-level functions may forecast biogeochemical gradients in oceans.

### Keywords
Metagenomics, Organic matter, Metaproteomics, Bacteria, Arctic

### Affiliations
University of Washington Department of Genome Sciences
University of Washington

### Submitter
Emma Timmins-Schiffman

### Lab Head
Dr Brook L. Nunn
University of Washington Department of Genome Sciences


