### Accession
PXD025073

### Title
Quantitative consequences of protein carriers in immunopeptidomics and tyrosine phosphorylation MS2 analyses

### Description
Evaluating the impact of a carrier proteome on data quality and quantity in multiplexed pTyr and MHC analyses.

### Sample Protocol
pMHCs were isolated from SKMEL5 cells with immunoprecipitation using a pan-specific anti-HLA-ABC antibody (W6/32), and peptides further isolated by size exclusion filtration. Samples were labeled with TMT, combined, and analyzed via discovery LC-MS/MS. pTyr samples were lysed, reduced, alkylated, digested with trypsin into peptides, and labeled with TMT. Tyrosine phosphorylated peptides were isolated using two-step enrichment (anti-pTyr immunoprecipitation with 4G10 and PT-66 antibodies and IMAC), and analyzed via discovery LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
All data was searched using Proteome Discoverer 2.5 and Mascot 2.4. MHC peptides were filtered according to the following criteria: Search engine rank = 1, ion score >=14, q-value <= 0.05, isolation interference <= 30%. pTyr peptides were filtered according to the following criteria: >= 1 phosphorylated tyrosine, search engine rank = 1, ion score >= 17, isolation interference <= 35%, ptmRS site localization >= 95%.

### Publication Abstract
Utilizing a protein carrier in combination with isobaric labeling to "boost" the signal of other low-level samples in multiplexed analyses has emerged as an attractive strategy to enhance data quantity while minimizing protein input in mass spectrometry analyses. Recent applications of this approach include pMHC profiling and tyrosine phosphoproteomics, two applications that are often limited by large sample requirements. While including a protein carrier has been shown to increase the number of identifiable peptides in both applications, the impact of a protein carrier on quantitative accuracy remains to be thoroughly explored, particularly in relevant biological contexts where samples exhibit dynamic changes in abundance across peptides. Here, we describe two sets of analyses comparing MS<sup>2</sup>-based quantitation using a 20&#xd7; protein carrier in pMHC analyses and a high (~100&#xd7;) and low (~9&#xd7;) protein carrier in pTyr analyses, using CDK4/6 inhibitors and EGF stimulation to drive dynamic changes in the immunopeptidome and phosphoproteome, respectively. In both applications, inclusion of a protein carrier resulted in an increased number of MHC peptide or phosphopeptide identifications, as expected. At the same time, quantitative accuracy was adversely affected by the presence of the protein carrier, altering interpretation of the underlying biological response to perturbation. Moreover, for tyrosine phosphoproteomics, the presence of high levels of protein carrier led to a large number of missing values for endogenous phosphopeptides, leading to fewer quantifiable peptides relative to the "no-boost" condition. These data highlight the unique limitations and future experimental considerations for both analysis types and provide a framework for assessing quantitative accuracy in protein carrier experiments moving forward.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Lc-ms/ms, Mhc

### Affiliations
Department of Biological Engineering, MIT
MIT

### Submitter
Lauren Stopfer

### Lab Head
Dr Forest White
Department of Biological Engineering, MIT


