### Accession
PXD022376

### Title
AP-qMS of retron proteins in Salmonella enterica

### Description
We performed affinity purification coupled to quantitative mass spectrometry (AP-qMS) for proteins belonging to retrons of Salmonella enterica. We quantified the proteome of rcaT point mutants in Salmonella enterica. We quantified the proteome of phage P1vir in E. coli.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were FLAG tagged in different in different genetic backgrounds and enriched with anti-FLAG antibody. Protein samples were then processed with a modified SP3 protocol, digested using trypsin and labeled with TMT. Shotgun proteomics using a Q-Exactive Orbitrap was then performed.

### Data Protocol
TMT quantification was used, by using the isobarquant python package (Franken et al., Nat Protoc (2015)), and Mascot 2.4 was used for protein identification. Search parameters: trypsin, missed cleavages 3, peptide tolerance 10ppm, 0.02Da for MS/MS tolerance. Fixed modifications were carbamidomethyl on cysteines and TMT10plex on lysine. Variable modifications included acetylation on protein N-terminus, oxidation of methionine and TMT10plex on peptide N-termini. The R programming language was used to analyze the output data.

### Publication Abstract
Retrons are prokaryotic genetic retroelements encoding a reverse transcriptase that produces multi-copy single-stranded DNA<sup>1</sup> (msDNA). Despite decades of research on the biosynthesis of msDNA<sup>2</sup>, the function and physiological roles of retrons have remained unknown. Here we show that Retron-Sen2 of Salmonella&#xa0;enterica serovar&#xa0;Typhimurium encodes an accessory toxin protein, STM14_4640, which we renamed as RcaT. RcaT is neutralized by the reverse transcriptase-msDNA antitoxin complex, and becomes active upon perturbation of msDNA biosynthesis. The reverse transcriptase is required for binding to RcaT, and the msDNA is required for the antitoxin activity. The highly prevalent RcaT-containing retron family constitutes a&#xa0;new type of tripartite DNA-containing toxin-antitoxin system. To understand the physiological roles of such toxin-antitoxin systems, we developed toxin activation-inhibition conjugation (TAC-TIC), a high-throughput reverse genetics approach that identifies the molecular triggers and blockers of toxin-antitoxin systems. By applying TAC-TIC to Retron-Sen2, we identified multiple trigger and blocker proteins of phage origin. We demonstrate that phage-related triggers directly modify the msDNA, thereby activating RcaT and inhibiting bacterial growth. By contrast, prophage proteins circumvent retrons by directly blocking RcaT. Consistently, retron toxin-antitoxin systems act as abortive infection anti-phage defence systems, in line with recent reports<sup>3,4</sup>. Thus, RcaT retrons are tripartite DNA-regulated toxin-antitoxin systems, which use the reverse transcriptase-msDNA complex both as an antitoxin and as a sensor of phage protein activities.

### Keywords
Salmonella enterica, Ap-qms, Retron

### Affiliations
European Molecular Biology Laboratory

### Submitter
Andre Mateus

### Lab Head
Dr Athanasios Typas
European Molecular Biology Laboratory


