### Accession
PXD014836

### Title
Uncoupling of PARP1 Trapping and Inhibition Using Selective PARP1 Degradation

### Description
PARP1 inhibitors (PARPi) are known to kill tumor cells via two mechanisms (i.e., PARP1 catalytic inhibition vs. PARP1 trapping). The relative contribution of these two pathways in mediating the cytotoxicity of PARPi, however, is incompletely understood. Here we designed a series of small molecule PARP degraders. Treatment with one such compound iRucaparib (1) results in highly efficient and specific PARP1 degradation. iRucaparib blocks the enzymatic activity of PARP1 in vitro, and PARP1-mediated PARylation signaling in intact cells. This strategy mimics PARP1 genetic depletion, which enables the pharmacological decoupling of PARP1 inhibition from PARP1 trapping. Finally, by depleting PARP1, iRucaparib protects muscle cells and primary cardiomyocytes from DNA damage-induced energy crisis and cell death. In summary, these compounds represent “non-trapping” PARP1 degraders that block both the catalytic activity and scaffolding effects of PARP1, providing an ideal approach for the amelioration of the various pathological conditions caused by PARP1 hyperactivation.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were left untreated (DMSO) or treated with the indicated conditions for 24 hrs. Two biological replicate samples were prepared for each treatment condition. Cells were washed with cold PBS and lysed using the SDS lysis buffer. Protein concentrations were determined by the BCA assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For each sample, 500 μg of protein was used for the subsequent TMT experiments. The labeling scheme was as following: 126 for DMSO-1, 127 for DMSO-2, 128 for iRucaparib-TP3-1, 129 for iRucaparib-TP3-2, 130 for iRucaparib-TP3+Rucaparib-1 and 131 for iRucaparib-TP3+Rucaparib-2.   For the TMT experiments, proteins were reduced with 2 mM DTT for 10 min and alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in dark. Proteins were then extracted using methanol-chloroform precipitation. Protein pellets were dissolved in 400 L 8 M Urea buffer (8 M urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 10 mM EDTA, pH 7.5) and were digested by Lys-C (Wako, at a 1:100 enzyme/protein ratio) for 2 hrs at RT. The urea concentration was then reduced to 2 M using freshly made 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution. Proteins were subsequently digested with trypsin (Thermo Fisher Scientific, at 1:100 enzyme/protein ratio) overnight at RT. Peptides were desalted with Oasis HLB cartridges (Waters) and resuspended in 200 mM HEPES (pH 8.5) to a final concentration of 1 g/L. For each sample, 100 μg of peptides were reacted with the corresponding amine-based TMT six-plex reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 1 hour. The reactions were quenched with 5% hydroxylamine solution and were combined.  Samples were desalted and fractioned by bRPLC (basic pH reversed phase HPLC) on a ZORBAX 300 Extend-C18 column (Narrow Bore RR 2.1 mm x 100 mm, 3.5 μm particle size, 300 Ǻ pore size). Buffer A is (10 mM Ammonium Formate in H2O, pH 10.0). Gradient was developed at a flow rate of 0.2 mL/min from 0% to 70% buffer B (1 mM Ammonium Formate, pH 10.0, 90% ACN). Seventeen fractions were collected, which were lyophilized, desalted and analyzed by LC-MS/MS as described previously. Briefly, peptides were separated on a hand-pulled fused silica microcapillary column (75 μm × 15 cm, packed with Magic C18AQ, Michrom Bioresources). A 75 min linear gradient was developed ranging from 7% to 32% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid at 300 nL/min to elute the peptides (Thermo EASY-nLC system). Samples were then analyzed on an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a top 15 HCD (higher-energy collisional dissociation) method.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched against a composite database of the human or Rat UniProt protein database (02-04-2014) and its reversed complement using the Sequest (Rev28) algorithm. Search parameters allowed for a static modification of 57.02146 Da on cystine (Carbamidomethyl), a variable modiﬁcation of 15.994915 Da on methionine (oxidation), and a static modification of TMT labels (229.16293 Da) on peptide N-terminus and lysine. For TMT quantification, a 0.03 Th window was scanned around the theoretical m/z of each reporter ion (126:126.127725; 127:127.124760; 128:128.134433; 129:129.131468; 130:130.141141; 131:131.138176). The maximum intensity of each reporter ion was extracted. For each reporter ion channel, the observed signal-to-noise ratio was summed across all quantified proteins and was normalized.

### Publication Abstract
PARP1 inhibitors (PARPi) are known to kill tumor cells via two mechanisms (PARP1 catalytic inhibition and PARP1 trapping). The relative contribution of these two pathways in mediating the cytotoxicity of PARPi, however, is not well understood. Here we designed a series of small molecule PARP degraders. Treatment with one such compound iRucaparib-AP6 results in highly efficient and specific PARP1 degradation. iRucaparib-AP6 blocks the enzymatic activity of PARP1 in vitro, and PARP1-mediated poly-ADP-ribosylation signaling in intact cells. This strategy mimics PARP1 genetic depletion, which enables the pharmacological decoupling of PARP1 inhibition from PARP1 trapping. Finally, by depleting PARP1, iRucaparib-AP6 protects muscle cells and primary cardiomyocytes from DNA-damage-induced energy crisis and cell death. In summary, these compounds represent 'non-trapping' PARP1 degraders that block both the catalytic activity and scaffolding effects of PARP1, providing an ideal approach for the amelioration of the various pathological conditions caused by PARP1 hyperactivation.

### Keywords
Parp1 degradation, Irucaparib-tp3, Hela cell

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas
UT Southwestern Medical Center

### Submitter
Shuai Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Yonghao Yu
Department of Biochemistry, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas


