### Accession
PXD009309

### Title
Human RPE LC-MSMS

### Description
AMD is a complex disorder related to environmental factors and genetic polymorphisms. We explored the interplay between the two factors by comparing the differences between HTRA1/ARMS2 high-risk and low-risk AMD alleles after exposure to smokers’ serum using iTRAQ-based proteomics. Primary human retinal pigment epithelial (hRPE) cells were obtained from donor eyes and screened for ARMS2/HTRA1 AMD risk genotypes, wild type allele as control. A gene ontology annotation analysis and KEGG metabolic pathway analysis were employed to obtain a global functional view of differentially expressed (DE) proteins. Significant DE proteins were screened and validated by real-time PCR, immunofluorescence and western blot. The relationship between HTRA1 and caveolin-1 protein was explored by HTRA1-overexpressing lentivirus-transduced ARPE-19 cells. A total of 400 DE proteins were detected for the high-risk allele after cigarette sera stimulation, which was much higher than the low-risk allele. The caveolin-1 protein was significantly up-regulated when HTRA1-overexpressing cells were exposed to smokers’ serum and the smoking effect was stronger than AMD high-risk allele. There were interplays between AMD high-risk allele and cigarette smoking. Smokers’ sera also accelerated the phagocytosis of hRPE cells. In addition, caveolin-1 may play an important role in the disease process, but its molecular mechanism requires further study.

### Sample Protocol
Allele-specific RPE cells obtained from low-risk allele donor or high-risk allele donor were exposed to conditioned medium containing 20% smokers’ sera or non-smokers’ sera for 7 days and then were processed using iTRAQ-based LC-MS/MS. Biological replicates were prepared and the average were used for analysis . Protein was extracted from each sample using RIPA buffer containing 1 mM PMSF. A Bradford protein assay kit was used to measure protein concentrations. iTRAQ reagents, which can differentiate cells from each of the experimental conditions, were then added to the solutions in the following manner: iTRAQ reagent 114 to sample LN1, 113 to LN2, 116 to LS1, 115 to LS2, 118 to HN1, 117 to HN2, 121 to HS1 and 119 to HS2 and iTRAQ-labelled peptide samples were fractionated and then subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Thermo Fisher Proteome Discoverer software 1.3/1.4 was applied to process the raw data files and perform database searches. Protein identification was performed against the UniProt 2016 human database using the Mascot search engine (version 2.3.01). A threshold of confidence >95% and a local false discovery (FDR) of <1% were set for protein identification. A P value <0.05 was required for relative quantification. A functional analysis of Gene Ontology (GO) annotations was performed using the DAVID online tool (Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery, version 6.7), for the categories of biological process (BP), molecular function (MF), and cellular component (CC). Annotations were considered significant with an FDR-adjusted P value <0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, Rpe, Retinal

### Affiliations
Tianjin Medical University Eye Hospital, Tianjin Medical University Ophthalmology Research Institute，Tianjin,300384
Tianjin medical university eye hosipital

### Submitter
Bincui Cai

### Lab Head
Dr Xiaorong Li
Tianjin Medical University Eye Hospital, Tianjin Medical University Ophthalmology Research Institute，Tianjin,300384


