### Accession
PXD023755

### Title
Proteomic analysis of B. cenocepacia H111 delta pglL strains

### Description
LFQ analysis of B. cenocepacia strain H111 strains to assess the impact of the loss of pglL (I35_RS13570)

### Sample Protocol
B. cenocepacia H111 strains were overnight on LB plates. Plates were flooded with 5 ml of pre-chilled sterile phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and colonies removed with a cell scraper. Cells were washed 3 times in PBS and collected by centrifugation at 10,000 x g at 4˚C then snap frozen. Frozen whole cell samples were resuspended in 4% SDS, 100 mM Tris pH 8.0, 20 mM DTT and boiled at 95˚C with shaking at 2000 rpm for 10 minutes. Samples were then clarified by centrifugation at 17,000 x g for 10 minutes, the supernatant collected, and protein concentration determined by bicinchoninic acid assay (Thermo Scientific Pierce).  200 μg of protein from each strain was acetone precipitated by mixing 4 volumes of ice-cold acetone with one volume of sample. Samples were precipitated overnight at -20˚C and then centrifuged at 16,000 x g for 10 minutes at 0˚C. The precipitated protein pellets were then resuspended in 80% ice-cold acetone and precipitated at -20˚C. for an additional 4 hours. Samples were spun down at 17,000 x g for 10 minutes at 0˚C to collect precipitated protein, the supernatant discarded, and excess acetone evaporated at 65˚C for 5 minutes.   Dried protein pellets of H111 strains were resuspended in 6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 40 mM NH4HCO3 and reduced / alkylated prior to digestion with Lys-C (1/200 w/w) then trypsin (1/50 w/w) overnight. Digested samples were acidified to a final concentration of 0.5% formic acid and desalted with home-made high-capacity StageTips composed on 5 mg Empore™ C18 material (3M, Maplewood, Minnesota) and 5 mg of OLIGO R3 reverse phase resin (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Bound peptides were eluted with Buffer B (80% ACN, 0.1% FA), dried and stored at -20˚C.

### Data Protocol
Purified H111 proteome samples were resuspended in Buffer A* (2% ACN, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid) and separated using a two-column chromatography set up comprising a PepMap100 C18 20 mm x 75 μm trap and a PepMap C18 500mm x 75μm analytical column (Thermo Scientific). Samples were concentrated onto the trap column at 5 μl/minute with Buffer A (2% ACN, 0.1%FA) for 5 minutes and infused into an Orbitrap Elite™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) at 300 nl/minute via the analytical column using an Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLC (Thermo Scientific). The peptides were separated using an 125-minute gradient altering the buffer composition from 1% buffer B to 23% B over 95 minutes, then from 23% B to 40% B over 10 minutes, then from 40% B to 100% B over 5 minutes, the composition was held at 100% B for 5 minutes, and then dropped to 3% B over 2 minutes and held at 3% B for another 8 minutes. The Orbitrap Elite™ was operated in a data-dependent mode automatically switching between the acquisition of a single Orbitrap MS scan (60,000 resolution) followed by 20 data-dependent CID MS-MS events (AGC target of 2 x 104 with a maximum injection time of 80 ms, NCE 30) with 30 seconds dynamic exclusion enabled.   The MS datasets was processed using MaxQuant (v1.5.5.1 (47)). Database searching was carried out against the H111 proteome (41) (Uniprot accession: UP000245426, 6,930 proteins) and B. cenocepacia strain J2315 (Uniprot accession: UP000001035, 6,993 proteins) to enable the matching of J2315 gene accession.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lfq, Burkholderia, Bacterial proteome

### Affiliations
University of Melbourne
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Melbourne at the Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity, Melbourne 3000, Australia

### Submitter
Nichollas Scott

### Lab Head
Dr Nichollas Scott
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Melbourne at the Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity, Melbourne 3000, Australia


