### Accession
PXD015788

### Title
The Mitochondrial Glutathione Peroxidase 3 (OsGPX3) regulates ABA responses in rice plants

### Description
We demonstrate that the mitochondrial isoform of rice GPX (OsGPX3) is involved in the responses to the phytohormone abscisic acid (ABA) and in epigenetic modifications. Silenced plants for OsGPX3 present important changes in the accumulation of proteins related to these processes.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction was performed as previously described by Neilson et al., (2014) with modifications.  Two hundred milligrams of control or ABA-treated leaf material were ground to powder in liquid nitrogen and 2 mL of extraction buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM Tris–HCl, pH 8.5, and 1 % SDS) was added for homogenization and was subjected to probe sonication on water for 3 × 20-s pulses.  After centrifugation at 17,000 × g, 10 min, 4 ◦C, the supernatant was submitted to protein precipitation adding cold 100% trichloroacetic acid (TCA) in a fresh tube to a final concentration of 25% (v/v). The solution was briefly vortexed, and proteins were precipitated overnight at −20 °C. After centrifugation at 17,000 × g, 10 min, 4 ◦C, the supernatant was discarded, and the precipitate washed (3x) with 850 µL of cold acetone and centrifuged as above. For protein digestion, 50 μg of protein of each sample was reduced with dithiothreitol at a final concentration of 10 mM for 1 h at 30 °C, followed by iodoacetamide alkylation at 40 mM final concentration for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Samples were diluted with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate to 1 M urea concentration and after trypsin addition (1:50, w/w, Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin, V5111, Promega), samples were incubated at 35 °C for 18 h.

### Data Protocol
Bioinformatic analyses were guided by the steps described in the PatternLab for  v.4.0 (PL40) protocol (Carvalho et al., 2015). This software is freely available at http://www.patternlabforproteomics.org.  The Oryza sativa database was downloaded from Uniprot database February 2017 and a target-decoy database was generated using PatternLab to include a reversed version of each sequence found in the database plus those from 127 common mass spectrometry contaminants. The Comet search engine (Eng et al., 2013) found in PatternLab (4.0.0.84) was used for searching spectra against Uniprot’s database. The searches were performed with the following parameters: trypsin digestion with two missed cleavage allowed, accepted semi-tryptic peptide candidates within a 40-ppm tolerance from the measured precursor m/z, considered fixed carbamidomethyl modification of cysteine and variable modification of oxidized methionine and S-glutathionylation cysteine. The Search Engine Processor (SEPro), built into PatternLab 4.0, was used for converging to a list of identifications with < 1% of false discovery rate (FDR) at the protein level, as previously described (Carvalho et al., 2012). Briefly, the identifications were grouped by charge state (2 + and ≥ 3 +), and then by tryptic status, resulting in four distinct subgroups. For each group, the XCorr, DeltaCN, DeltaPPM, and Peaks Matched values were used to generate a Bayesian discriminator. The identifications were sorted in non-decreasing order according to the discriminator score. A cutoff score was established to accept a false-discovery rate (FDR) of 1% at the peptide level based on the number of labeled decoys. This procedure was independently performed on each data subset, resulting in an FDR that was independent of charge state or tryptic status. Additionally, a minimum sequence length of six amino-acid residues was required. Results were post-processed to only accept peptide spectrum match (PSMs) with < 15 ppm from the global identification average. One-hit wonders (i.e., proteins identified with only one mass spectrum) with the peptide having an XCorr of < 1.8 were discarded. This last filter led to FDRs, now at the protein level, to be lower than 1% for all search results.

### Publication Abstract
Different environmental conditions can lead plants to a condition termed oxidative stress, which is characterized by a disruption in the equilibrium between the production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and antioxidant defenses. Glutathione peroxidase (GPX), an enzyme that acts as a peroxide scavenger in different organisms, has been identified as an important component in the signaling pathway during the developmental process and in stress responses in plants and yeast. Here, we demonstrate that the mitochondrial isoform of rice (Oryza sativa L. ssp. Japonica cv. Nipponbare) OsGPX3 is induced after treatment with the phytohormone abscisic acid (ABA) and is involved in its responses and in epigenetic modifications. Plants that have been silenced for OsGPX3 (gpx3i) present substantial changes in the accumulation of proteins related to these processes. These plants also have several altered ABA responses, such as germination, ROS accumulation, stomatal closure, and dark-induced senescence. This study is the first to demonstrate that OsGPX3 plays a role in ABA signaling and corroborate that redox homeostasis enzymes can act in different and complex pathways in plant cells. SIGNIFICANCE: This work proposes the mitochondrial glutathione peroxidase (OsGPX3) as a novel ABA regulatory pathway component. Our results suggest that this antioxidant enzyme is involved in ABA-responses, highlighting the complex pathways that these proteins can participate beyond the regulation of cellular redox status.

### Keywords
Oryza sativa; glutathione peroxidase; proteomic; label-free; abscisic acid

### Affiliations
Federal University of Rio de Janeiro
UFRJ

### Submitter
Proteomics Unit

### Lab Head
Dr Fabio nogueira
Federal University of Rio de Janeiro


