### Accession
PXD012296

### Title
Validation of N-terminal Labeling Mass Spectrometry for Characterization of Partially Hydrolyzed Gluten Proteins

### Description
Gluten, a group of proteins found in wheat, barley, and rye, is the trigger of celiac disease, an immune disorder which affects about 1% of people worldwide. The toxicity of partially hydrolyzed gluten (PHG) in fermented products such as beer is unknown due to the significant analytical challenges in PHG detection. In this project, an N-terminal labeling mass spectrometry method, terminal amine isotopic labeling of substrates (TAILS), was optimized for the in-depth analysis of PHG and validated using a test protease (trypsin) with known cleavage specificities. Gluten N-termini in test and control groups were labeled with heavy and light formaldehyde, respectively. Trypsin-generated and native N-termini were confirmed by showing an MS1 peak area Log2 H:L with and without a significant difference (p < 0.01) from zero, respectively. Using the strategy, all abundant theoretical protease generated peptides in alpha/beta gliadins and gamma gliadins were identified. The validation indicated that the strategy can identify multiple protease cleavage sites in gluten and be used in subsequent analysis of yeast cleavage patterns in beer throughout brewing. This strategy can be further applied to characterize a broader partially hydrolyzed allergens in foods and provide reference for their safety assessment to both industry and regulatory authorities.

### Sample Protocol
Two 0.5 mg aliquots of isolated gliadin were each reconstituted with 125 L of 50 mM HEPES buffer (pH = 7.8), reduced with 10 mM DTT at 60 °C for 30 min, and alkylated with 15 mM IAA at RT in dark for 30 min. One aliquot, the test sample, was digested with trypsin (1:100 w/w, enzyme:substrate) at 37°C for 4 hours to obtain a partial hydrolysis, and the other aliquot, the control sample, received no trypsin digestion. IAA in both samples was quenched with 15 mM DTT at RT for 25 min. Then samples were denatured with 4 M GuHCl at 65 °C for 15 min. Proteins in test and control samples were then labeled with heavy and light formaldehyde, respectively, following the conditions described above. To ensure complete labeling, 20 mM formaldehyde and 10 mM NaBH3CN were added at the end of labeling and incubated at 37 °C for another 2 hours. Dimethylation reagents were quenched with 100 mM Tris (pH = 6.8) at 37 °C for 1 hour. The test and control samples were then combined, and the labeling reagent was removed by a buffer exchange with 50 mM HEPES using 3 kDa cut-off spin filters (Millipore Sigma, MA) according to manufacturer’s instructions. In original TAILS protocol47, an acetone/methanol precipitation was used to remove labeling reagents but was not employed in gluten analysis since substantial PHG sample loss was observed during preliminary precipitation trial (Figure S-3). After the buffer exchange, chymotrypsin was added at 1:100 (w/w enzyme:substrate) and incubated at 25°C overnight to generate peptides of a size more suitable for LC-MS/MS. Then a free amine-binding high-molecular-weight dendritic polyglycerol aldehyde polymer (HPG-ALD polymer, Flintbox) (The university of British Columbia - UBC, Canada) was added at 1:5 (w/w, peptide:polymer) for the negative selection of dimethyl labeled peptides following manufacturer’s instructions. Then the polymer was removed using 10 kDa cut-off spin filters (Millipore Sigma, MA) and samples were desalted with C18 spin columns. The desalted peptides were dried and reconstituted with 0.1% FA in H2O with 3% ACN for LC-MS/MS analysis. The experiment was conducted in eight digestion replicates, each with three injection replicates (from a single preparation of isolated gliadin, n = 24 in total).

### Data Protocol
A SEQUEST HT search against the Triticum aestivum protein sequence database (UniProt, 136,866 sequences, Aug11st, 2017) containing the common Repository of Adventitious Proteins (cRAP) sequences was performed with Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (PD) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA). A precursor mass ranged from 350 Da to 5000 Da with maximum 2 missed cleavages were allowed and the precursor and product ion mass tolerances were ±10 ppm and ±0.02 Da, respectively. The enzymatic cleavage site was set as chymotrypsin (FWY/not P) and chymotrypsin semi-C (only C termini resulted by the cleavage of FWY/not P) for discovery and N-terminal labeling MS data processing, respectively. Fixed modifications included Cys carbamidomethylation and variable modifications included Met oxidation and Asn/Gln deamidation. Additional fixed modifications for the N-terminal labeling MS data processing, light (+28.031 Da) and heavy (+34.063 Da) dimethylation (peptide/protein N-termini and Lys), were searched separately and reported in the same output file. Peptides identified with a False Discovery Rate (FDR) less than 0.01 across all replicates were used as high confidence peptides and imported to the Skyline 4.1.0 (MacCoss Lab, WA) for a calculation of the Log2 heavy: light ratio (Log2 H:L) of the peptide MS1 peak area. Peak areas of the same peptide from different charge states and variable modifications were summed.

### Publication Abstract
Gluten, a group of proteins found in wheat, barley, and rye, is the trigger of celiac disease, an immune disorder that affects about 1% of people worldwide. The toxicity of partially hydrolyzed gluten (PHG) in fermented products is less well understood due to the significant analytical challenges in PHG characterization. In this project, an N-terminal labeling mass spectrometry method, terminal amine isotopic labeling of substrates (TAILS), was optimized for the in-depth analysis of PHG and validated using a test protease (trypsin) with known cleavage specificity. Gluten N-termini in test and control groups were labeled with heavy and light formaldehyde, respectively. Trypsin-generated neo N-termini were identified by exhibiting an MS1 Log2 H:L peak area ratio with a significant difference (p&#x202f;&lt;&#x202f;.01) from zero and native N-termini with no significant difference from zero (p&#x202f;&gt;&#x202f;.01). Using this strategy, all abundant, theoretical, test protease-generated peptides in exemplar alpha/beta gliadins and gamma gliadins were identified. SIGNIFICANCE: This study is the first study that modified and evaluated TAILS analysis for the analysis of partially hydrolyzed gluten proteins. The evaluation indicated that the TAILS analysis could be modified and expanded to the identification of multiple protease cleavage sites in gluten proteins and is worth further evaluation as a novel strategy for the analysis of natural hydrolysis of gluten in food processes. This strategy also may be further applied to characterize a broader range of partially hydrolyzed allergens in foods and provide reference for their safety assessment to both industry and regulatory authorities.

### Keywords
Hydrolyzed gluten; gluten; mass spectrometry; n-terminal labeling; tails

### Affiliations
UNL
Food Allergy Research and Resource Program, Department of Food Science and Technology, Food Innovation Center, 1901 North 21st Street, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, NE 68588

### Submitter
Wanying Cao

### Lab Head
Dr Melanie L. Downs
Food Allergy Research and Resource Program, Department of Food Science and Technology, Food Innovation Center, 1901 North 21st Street, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, NE 68588


