### Accession
PXD023778

### Title
Proteomic Analysis of the human Myocardium in non-hypertrophic control and hypertrophy patients

### Description
To explore the pathogenesis of myocardial hypertrophy, Proteomic Analysis was performed to identify the differentially expressed proteins in the human myocardial tissues of non-hypertrophic control and myocardial hypertrophy patients. We used echocardiography to detect the thickness of the ventricular septum in patients undergoing heart valve replacement surgery .The thickness of the ventricular septum over 11mm is defined as myocardial hypertrophy of patients, those less than or equal to 11mm were considered as non-hypertrophic controls. We collected a total of 6 cases of non-hypertrophic controls and 6 cases of myocardial hypertrophy patients' myocardial tissues, and Proteomic Analysis was performed by mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Human hypertrophic heart tissues and non-hypertrophic heart tissues were shred and lysed for 30min in ice-cold protein extraction buffer which consisted of 8 M urea, 50 mM NaCl, 25 mM Tris, pH 8.2, 1% (v/v) EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail. We centrifuged Lysates at 20000g for 30 minutes, and protein content was measured by Bradford assay. Cysteine residues were reduced by 5mM DTT for 25 minutes at 56°C followed by alkylated in 14mM iodoacetamide for 30 minutes at room temperature in the dark. Samples were diluted with 25 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.2, and digested overnight at 37°C with trypsin. After digestion, peptide mixtures were desalted using a SepPak tC18 cartridge (Waters) and then lyophilized. Equilibrate the TMT Label Reagents to room temperature, every aliquot was resuspended in 41 μl of anhydrous acetonitrile, and we added 42 μl of the TMT Label Reagent to the 20 μg peptides dissolved in 200 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB). After 60 min of reaction at room temperature, 8 μl of 5% hydroxylamine was added in each tube, and incubated for 15 minutes. The aliquots were then combined and the pooled sample was evaporated under vacuum.

### Data Protocol
False discovery rate (FDR) corrected P value (FDRq) ≤0.05 was used for identification of peptides, proteins, and sites in MaxQuant. Proteins with fold-change greater or equal to 1.3 and adjusted p-value less than 0.05 (FDR<0.05) were considered differentially expressed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Heart, Myocardium, Proteome, Mass spectrometry, Hypertrophy

### Affiliations
Nanjing Medical University
Key Laboratory of Targeted Intervention of Cardiovascular Disease, Collaborative Innovation Center for Cardiovascular Disease Translational Medicine, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China

### Submitter
Yan Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Yong Ji
Nanjing Medical University


