### Accession
PXD024444

### Title
Multiomics assessment in  Enchytraeus crypticus  exposed to Ag (nano)materials (Ag NM300K and AgNO 3 )

### Description
Silver nanomaterials (AgNMs) are broadly used in many products and also rate among the most studied nanoscaled materials. Their ecotoxicological impact in soil invertebrates has been covered, mostly using standard testing, where endpoints like survival and reproduction are assessed. The underlying molecular mechanisms have been assessed to a much less extent. Hence, we here assessed differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) and metabolites (DEMs) by high-throughput (HTP) techniques (HPLC-MS/MS with tandem mass tags for proteome analysis, as well as reversed-phase (RP)- or hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography (HILIC) with mass spectrometric detection for metabolome analysis. The standard soil model Enchytraeus crypticus was exposed to Ag NM300K and soluble AgNO3, at the reproduction EC20 and EC50, in a time series of 0, 7, and 14 days. The impact was clearly larger after 14 days. Ag NM300K caused more upregulated DEPs/DEMs, and more so at the EC20, compared to the EC50, whereas AgNO3 caused a dose response increase of DEPs/DEMs. Similar pathways were activated, although often via opposite regulation (up vs down) of DEPs hence dissimilar mechanisms underlie the apical impact. Affected pathways include e.g. energy metabolism transport proteins, detoxifying enzymes, histidine (e.g. neurotransmission by gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA)) and lipid metabolism. Uniquely affected by AgNO3 were catalase, malate dehydrogenase and ATP-citrate synthase, and by Ag NM300K were heat shock proteins (HSP70) and ferritin. The gene expression-based data in Adverse Outcome Pathway (AOP) was confirmed and additional key events were added. Evidences support that toxicity of Ag NM increases in longer-term exposure.

### Sample Protocol
Enchytraeus crypticus (Enchytraeidae, Oligochaeta) were used. The cultures were kept in agar, consisting of Bacti-Agar medium (Oxoid, Agar No. 1) and a sterilized mixture of four different salt solutions at the final concentrations of 2 mM CaCl2·2H2O, 1 mM MgSO4, 0.08 mM KCl, and 0.75 mM NaHCO3, under controlled conditions of temperature (20 ± 1 °C) and photoperiod (16:8 hours’ light dark).  Test procedures followed the standard Enchytraeid Reproduction Test (ERT) guideline63 with adaptations. Briefly, each replicate consisted of a glass vessel (Ø 4 cm, 45 ml volume) containing 20 g soil wet weight (WW) with food supply. Sixty-five organisms were added per replicate, covered with a lid with small holes and kept at 20 ± 1 ºC and 16 h:8 h photoperiod. Five replicates per treatment and exposure time were used. At each sampling time (0, 7, 14 d), organisms were carefully collected, washed in ultra-pure water drops, and left in ISO water64 during 4 h to purge their guts, and then frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80 ºC until further analysis. Organisms (pools of 60 per replicate) were washed 3 times with cold MilliQ water (1 mL per washing step), discarding the supernatant after centrifugation (1 min, 15,413 g, 4°C) (Eppendorf 5427R, Hamburg, Germany). Afterwards, the lysis was performed by the addition of 1000 µl cold methanol [plus internal standard tracer, ethylparaben 10 µM (Sigma-Aldrich)] to the microtube and sonicated (Sonifier 250, Branson sonicator, Geneva, Switzerland) on ice for full homogenization. Centrifugation (15 min, 21,578 g, 4ºC) was performed; the obtained pellet containing the proteins and the supernatant containing the intracellular metabolites were stored at -80°C until HPLC-MS analysis. Organisms (pools of 60 per replicate) were washed 3 times with cold MilliQ water (1 mL per washing step), discarding the supernatant after centrifugation (1 min, 15,413 g, 4°C) (Eppendorf 5427R, Hamburg, Germany). Afterwards, the lysis was performed by the addition of 1000 µL cold methanol to the microtube and sonicated (Sonifier 250, Branson sonicator, Geneva, Switzerland) on ice for full homogenization. Centrifugation (15 min, 21,578 g, 4°C) was performed; the obtained pellet containing the intracellular proteins was stored at -80°C until HPLC-MS analysis.  Protein expression profiling analysis was performed essentially according to Wilmes [9,10]. In short, after E. crypticus protein extraction and tryptic digestion, peptides were labelled with tandem mass tags (TMT 6-plex) and subsequently measured by HPLC-MS. A total of six TMT sets were analyzed comparing a lower and a higher Cu salt and CuO NM concentration (CuCl2 EC10 and EC50; CuO NM EC10 and EC50) to a respective control sample (untreated) for a sampling time (7 and 14 d) with three biological replicates for each condition. The HPLC system (Dionex Ultimate 3000, Germering, Germany), using a 0.2 x 200 mm column, self-packed with 3 μm Thermo Scientific Hypersil Gold aQ particles was directly coupled to a quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) with a nano-electrospray ionization source. Mobile phase A was 5.0 % (v/v) acetonitrile (with 0.10 % (v/v) formic acid (FA) and 0.050 % (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA)). Mobile phase B contained 80 % (v/v) acetonitrile (with 0.10 % (v/v) FA and 0.050 % (v/v) TFA). A gradient from 5.0% (v/v) B to 50 % (v/v) B was applied in 120 minutes, followed by a 10 minutes washing step with 100% (v/v) B and a 12 minutes column re-equilibration to 5.0% (v/v) B, all with a flowrate of 1.0 µL min-1. The injection volume was set to 1.6 µL, corresponding to a peptide load of 4.0 µg on column. A column temperature of 55°C was maintained. The mass spectrometer was operated in the positive ionization mode, acquiring a full scan spectrum from 450 to 2000 m/z, followed by consecutive fragmentation events of the 15 most abundant ions with a dynamic exclusion of 30 seconds. For the MS1 spectra, the resolution was set to 70,000 with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 1x106 and a maximum injection time of 100 ms. MS2 spectra were acquired at a resolution of 17,500 with an AGC target of 1x105 and an injection time of 50 ms. An isolation window of 2 m/z and a normalized collision energy of 29 was applied.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification was performed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8), followed by statistical analysis in Perseus (version 1.5.2.3). Log2 ratios of control versus each respective treatment were computed after TMT channel re-arrangement based on the experimental design template. Ratios were normalized on the most frequent value to account for unequal protein loading. Total protein number was assessed using default parameters with protein and peptide FDR of 0.01. FDR was estimated as a score function by the search combined with the protein sequence database and its randomized version (decoy database). ANOVA followed by post-Hoc identified the differentially expressed proteins (DEP) using a p < 0.05 significance level.

### Publication Abstract
Silver nanomaterials (AgNMs) are broadly used and among the most studied nanomaterials. The underlying molecular mechanisms (e.g. protein and metabolite response) that precede phenotypical effects have been assessed to a much lesser extent. In this paper, we assess differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) and metabolites (DEMs) by high-throughput (HTP) techniques (HPLC-MS/MS with tandem mass tags, reversed-phase (RP) and hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography (HILIC) with mass spectrometric detection). In a time series (0, 7, 14 days), the standard soil model Enchytraeus crypticus was exposed to AgNM300K and AgNO<sub>3</sub> at the reproduction EC20 and EC50. The impact on proteins/metabolites was clearly larger after 14 days. NM300K caused more upregulated DEPs/DEMs, more so at the EC20, whereas AgNO<sub>3</sub> caused a dose response increase of DEPs/DEMs. Similar pathways were activated, although often via opposite regulation (up vs down) of DEPs, hence, dissimilar mechanisms underlie the apical observed impact. Affected pathways included e.g. energy and lipid metabolism and oxidative stress. Uniquely affected by AgNO<sub>3</sub> was catalase, malate dehydrogenase and ATP-citrate synthase, and heat shock proteins (HSP70) and ferritin were affected by AgNM300K. The gene expression-based data in Adverse Outcome Pathway was confirmed and additional key events added, e.g. regulation of catalase and heat shock proteins were confirmed to be included. Finally, we observed (as we have seen before) that lower concentration of the NM caused higher biological impact. Data was deposited to ProteomeXchange, identifier PXD024444.

### Keywords
Ecotoxicology, E. crypticus, Ag, Lc-ms/ms, Nanomaterial

### Affiliations
University of Salzburg

### Submitter
David Licha

### Lab Head
Dr Christian G. Huber
University of Salzburg


