### Accession
PXD037493

### Title
Confirmation of the binding site of spermine to ATP13A2 protein

### Description
To better understand human ATP13A2-mediated polyamine transport, we used single-particle cryo-electron microscopy to solve high-resolution structures of human ATP13A2. Interestingly, we found polyamine binding at multiple sites distributed along the transmembrane regions in ATP13A2 protein, which has not been reported in previous studies. Therefore, we used cross-linking mass spectrometry (CX-MS) to confirm potential binding sites.

### Sample Protocol
The purified hATP13A2 (1 µg/µL) were cross-linked with BS3 (bis[sulfosuccinimidyl] suberate) in a 1:1 (w/w) ratio at room temperature for 30 min. The reaction was terminated by adding 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Run the cross-linker sample on SDS-PAGE to examine the cross-linking reaction. The Coomassie Brilliant Blue stained gel band was excised and digested with trypsin (Promega) for 16 h at 37℃. The solution was dried out and desalted using a Mono-Spin C18 column (GL Science, Tokyo, Japan). The peptide mixture was analyzed by a customized 30 cm-long pulled-tip analytical column (75 μm ID packed with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 μm resin, Dr. Maisch GmbH); the column was then placed in-line with an Easy-nLC 1200 nano HPLC (Thermo Scientific) for mass spectrometry analysis. The analytical column temperature was set at 55 ℃ during the experiments. The mobile phase and elution gradient used for peptide separation were as follows: 0.1% formic acid in water as buffer A and 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile as buffer B, 0-1 min, 3%-6% B; 1-96 min, 6-36% B; 96-107 min, 36%-60% B, 107-108 min, 60%-100% B, 108-120 min, 100% B.

### Data Protocol
Data-dependent MS/MS analysis was performed with a Q Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides eluted from the LC column were directly electro-sprayed into the mass spectrometer with the application of a distal 2.5-kV spray voltage. A cycle of one full-scan MS spectrum (m/z 355-2000) was acquired, followed by top 20 MS/MS events, sequentially generated on the first to the twentieth most intense ions selected from the full MS spectrum at a 28% normalized collision energy. Full scan resolution was set to 70,000 with automated gain control (AGC) target of 3e6. MS/MS scan resolution was set to 17,500 with an isolation window of 1.8 m/z and AGC target of 5e6. The number of microscans was one for both MS and MS/MS scans and the maximum ion injection time was 20 and 50 ms, respectively. The dynamic exclusion settings used were as follows: charge exclusion, 1 and >8; exclude isotopes, on; and exclusion duration, 40 seconds, respectively. MS scan functions and LC solvent gradients were controlled by the Xcalibur data system (Thermo Scientific). The search parameters used for pLink 2 were as follows: instrument, HCD; precursor mass tolerance, 20 ppm; fragment mass tolerance 20 ppm; cross-linker BS3+SPM(340.2838) (cross-linking site lysine, only considering mono-link, BS3+SPM mass shift 340.2838). Cysteine alkylation by iodoacetamide was specified as fixed modification and Methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation as a variable; peptide length, minimum 6 amino acids and maximum 60 amino acids per chain; peptide mass, minimum 600 and maximum 6000 Da per chain; enzyme, trypsin, with up to three missed cleavage sites per cross-link. Protein sequences of ATP13A2 proteins were used for database searching. Precursor and fragment tolerances were 10 and 20 ppm, respectively. The results were filtered by requiring a spectral false identification rate ≤ 0.01. MS2 spectra were annotated using pLabel, requiring mass deviation ≤ 20 ppm.

### Publication Abstract
Dysregulation of polyamine homeostasis strongly associates with human diseases. ATP13A2, which is mutated in juvenile-onset Parkinson's disease and autosomal recessive spastic paraplegia 78, is a transporter with a critical role in balancing the polyamine concentration between the lysosome and the cytosol. Here, to better understand human ATP13A2-mediated polyamine transport, we use single-particle cryo-electron microscopy to solve high-resolution structures of human ATP13A2 in six intermediate states, including the putative E2 structure for the P5 subfamily of the P-type ATPases. These structures comprise a nearly complete conformational cycle spanning the polyamine transport process and capture multiple substrate binding sites distributed along the transmembrane regions, suggesting a potential polyamine transport pathway. Integration of high-resolution structures, biochemical assays, and molecular dynamics simulations allows us to obtain a better understanding of the structural basis of how hATP13A2 transports polyamines, providing a mechanistic framework for ATP13A2-related diseases.

### Keywords
Spm, Atp13a2, Cx-ms

### Affiliations
Department of Biology, School of Life Sciences, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen 518055, Guangdong, China
Southern University of Science and Technology, 

### Submitter
jianqiang Mu

### Lab Head
Dr Zhongmin LIU
Department of Biology, School of Life Sciences, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen 518055, Guangdong, China


