### Accession
PXD017917

### Title
Functional analysis of BipA in E. coli reveals the plasticity of 50S ribosome assembly

### Description
BipA is a conserved translational GTPase that resembles elongation factor EF-G and 30S assembly factor LepA.  Recent evidence suggests that BipA functions in 50S subunit assembly, but the precise role of the factor remains unclear. Here, we use stable isotope labeling of amino acids in culture and mass spectrometry (SILAC / MS) to examine the function of BipA in ribosome biogenesis.  During growth at suboptimal temperature, loss of BipA leads to accumulation of immature large subunit particles (~40S) that lack several proteins. These include L2, L7/12, L10, L14, L16, L17, L19, L27, L28 and L32.  Parallel analysis of the control (wild-type) strain shows accumulation of virtually identical intermediate particles, although at much lower levels. Further analysis showed that the main path of 50S assembly differs depending on media in which the cells are grown, demonstrating the robust and flexible nature of the assembly process.

### Sample Protocol
For BipA SILAC analysis, cells were grown in M9 enriched minimal media plus glucose supplemented with medium (Arg 13C6 and Lys 2H4; MC0030), or heavy (Arg 13C6 15N4 and Lys 13C6 15N2; MRG06) amino acids.  Each strain was grown overnight at 37 °C in the appropriate M9 media then diluted 1:100 in 50 mL of the same media.  Cells were grown at 20 °C to OD600 ~0.5 then rapidly chilled, pelleted, and lysed as previously described 57.   Clarified lysate (0.3 mL) was loaded onto an 11 mL 10-35% sucrose gradient and subjected to ultracentrifugation at 35,000 rpm for 4 hours to separate ribosome complexes.  Gradients were pumped using a syringe-pump system (Brandel) with in-line UV absorbance detector (UA-6, ISCO) and equivalent volume (0.5 mL) fractions were collected.  In parallel, unlabeled 70S ribosomes were prepared and collected as previously described114 from WT cells grown in M9 minimal media supplemented with unlabeled Arg and Lys.  Corresponding fractions from WT and M strains were mixed and 1.5 µM of 70S ribosomes were added to each mixed fraction.  Proteins were precipitated using 13% (W/V) trichloroacetic acid (TCA).  For BipA complementation, YchF, and HflX SILAC experiments, cells were grown in M9 minimal media plus glucose supplemented with light (unlabeled Arg and Lys; MRG06), medium (Arg 13C6 and Lys 2H4; MRG36, MRG39), or heavy (Arg 13C6 15N4 and Lys 13C6 15N2; MRG71) amino acids.  Sucrose gradient fractions were collected as described above.  Corresponding fractions from WT, mutant, and complemented strains were mixed and proteins were precipitated. For temperature SILAC analysis, MRG03 was grown in M9 enriched minimal media plus glucose supplemented with medium (Arg 13C6 and Lys 2H4; 37 °C), or heavy (Arg 13C6 15N4 and Lys 13C6 15N2; 20 °C) amino acids. Sucrose gradient fractions were prepared as described above except gradients were centrifuged for 6 hours and 0.3 mL fractions were collected (33 total fractions). In parallel, polysomes were prepared and collected as described57 in M9 minimal media supplemented with light amino acids (unlabeled Arg and Lys).  Corresponding fractions from cells grown at 37 °C and 20 °C were mixed and an equal volume (0.3 mL) of polysomes were added and proteins were precipitated. Amino acid supplementation SILAC was performed similarly to the temperature SILAC experiment except that cells were grown in M9 enriched minimal media plus glucose supplemented with light amino acids (unlabeled Arg and Lys; MRG03 and MRG46), or without supplementation (MRG46) at 37 °C.  For ΔbipA and WT amino acid supplementation, cells were grown with light amino acids (unlabeled Arg and Lys; MRG103 and MRG46), or without supplementation (MRG103 and MRG46) at 20 °C.  In this case, the polysome spike-in was labeled by growing WT cells in M9 minimal media supplemented with heavy (Arg 13C6 15N4 and Lys 13C6 15N2) amino acids.  Protein precipitates were boiled in SDS sample buffer and run on a short 10% SDS-PAGE gel. Proteins were visualized by colloidal coomassie (PMID 15174055) and digested out of the gel as described (PMID 16920818). Peptide samples were purified by solid phase extraction on C-18 STop And Go Extraction (STAGE) Tips (PMID 12498253), and analyzed by a quadrupole – time of flight mass spectrometer (Impact II; Bruker Daltonics) coupled to an Easy nano LC 1000 HPLC (ThermoFisher Scientific) using an analytical column that was 40-50cm long, 75-μm-inner diameter fused silica with an integrated spray tip pulled with P-2000 laser puller (Sutter Instruments) and packed with 1.9 μm-diameter Reprosil-Pur C-18-AQ beads (Dr. Maisch, www.Dr-Maisch.com). Buffer A consisted of 0.1% aqueous formic acid, and buffer B consisted of 0.1% formic acid and 80% acetonitrile in water. A standard 90 min peptide separation was done and the column was washed with 100% Buffer B before re-equilibration with Buffer A. The Impact II was set to acquire in a data-dependent auto-MS/MS mode with inactive focus fragmenting the 20 most abundant ions (one at the time at 18 Hz rate) after each full-range scan from m/z 200 Th to m/z 2000 Th at 5 Hz rate. The isolation window for MS/MS was 2 to 3 Th depending on parent ion mass to charge ratio and the collision energy ranged from 23 to 65 eV depending on ion mass and charge. Parent ions were then excluded from MS/MS for the next 0.4 min and reconsidered if their intensity increased more than 5 times. Singly charged ions were excluded from fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Analysis of Mass Spectrometry Data was performed using MaxQuant 1.5.1.0. The search was performed against a database comprised of the protein sequences from Uniprot's E. coli K12 entries plus common contaminants with variable modifications of methionine oxidation, and N-acetylation of the proteins, in addition to the heavy amino acids used for quantitation. Only those peptides exceeding the individually calculated 99% confidence limit (as opposed to the average limit for the whole experiment) were considered as accurately identified.

### Publication Abstract
BipA is a conserved translational GTPase of bacteria recently implicated in ribosome biogenesis. Here we show that Escherichia coli &#x394;bipA cells grown at suboptimal temperature accumulate immature large subunit particles missing several proteins. These include L17 and L17-dependent binders, suggesting that structural block 3 of the subunit folds late in the assembly process. Parallel analysis of the control strain revealed accumulation of nearly identical intermediates, albeit at lower levels, suggesting qualitatively similar routes of assembly. This came as a surprise, because earlier analogous studies of wild-type E. coli showed early binding of L17. Further investigation showed that the main path of 50S assembly differs depending on conditions of growth. Either supplementation of the media with lysine and arginine or suboptimal temperature appears to delay block 3 folding, demonstrating the flexible nature of the assembly process. We also show that the variant BipA-H78A fails to rescue phenotypes of the &#x394;bipA strain, indicating a critical role for GTP hydrolysis in BipA function. In fact, BipA-H78A confers a dominant negative phenotype in wild-type cells. Controlled production of BipA-H78A causes accumulation of 70S monosomes at the expense of polysomes, suggesting that the growth defect stems from a shutdown of translation.

### Keywords
Ychf, Protein synthesis, Hflx, Typa, Gtpase

### Affiliations
University of British Columbia
Department of Microbiology and Center for RNA Biology, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210

### Submitter
Jenny Moon

### Lab Head
Dr Kurt L. Fredrick
Department of Microbiology and Center for RNA Biology, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210


