### Accession
PXD032786

### Title
Sequence Coverage Visualizer: A web application for protein sequence coverage 3D visualization

### Description
Protein structure is connected with its function and interaction and plays an extremely important role in protein characterization. As one of the most important analytical methods for protein characterization, Proteomics is widely used to determine protein composition, quantitation, interaction, and even structures. However, due to the gap between identified proteins by proteomics and available 3D structures, it was very challenging, if not impossible, to visualize proteomics results in 3D and further explore the structural aspects of proteomics experiments. Recently, two groups of researchers from DeepMind and Baker lab have independently published protein structure prediction tools that can help us obtain predicted protein structures for the whole human proteome. Although there is still debate on the validity of some of the predicted structures, it is no doubt that these represent the most accurate predictions to date. More importantly, this enabled us to visualize the majority of human proteins for the first time. To help other researchers best utilize these protein structure predictions, we present the Sequence Coverage Visualizer (SCV), http://scv.lab.gy, a web application for protein sequence coverage 3D visualization. Here we showed a few possible usages of the SCV, including the labeling of post-translational modifications and isotope labeling experiments. These results highlight the usefulness of such 3D visualization for proteomics experiments and how SCV can turn a regular result list into structural insights. Furthermore, when used together with limited proteolysis, we demonstrated that SCV can help validate and compare different protein structures, including predicted ones and existing PDB entries. By performing limited proteolysis on native proteins at various time points, SCV can visualize the progress of the digestion. This time-series data further allowed us to compare the predicted structure and existing PDB entries. Although not deterministic, these comparisons could be used to refine current predictions further and represent an important step towards a complete and correct protein structure database. Overall, SCV is a convenient and powerful tool for visualizing proteomics results.

### Sample Protocol
HEK 293T cells were cultured from frozenstock at 37°C in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (high glucose DMEM, Sigma-Aldrich) supplemented with 10% Fetal Bovine Serum (FBS) and antibiotics (100 ug/ml penicillin and streptomycin). Cell passaging was conducted routinely twice a week when ~80% confluency was reached. To prepare native protein lysate, ~15 million cells were harvested and washed with 1* phosphate-buffered saline (PBS, pH 7.4). Sonication of the HEK cells diluted in 1* PBS was performed on ice at 30%, 60 kHz for 30 seconds with a repetition of 3 times and 15 seconds interval was given to cool down the lysate between each sonication. Native protein was precipitated by CHCl3/MeOH method after spin down at 13,000g at max speed, precipitated protein was air-dried and dissolved in 100mM Trisbuffer (pH 7.4) and  subsequential  BCA  assay  (Invitrogen)  was  performed  to  measure  native  protein concentration prior to store at -80°C.  To perform the limited proteolysis, 3 mg native HEK protein dissolved in 100mM Tris buffer was mixed with 150 ug trypsin (Promega, TPCK treated, 1:20), and 1mM CaCl2. The mixture was injected into a Slide-A-Lyzer dialysis cassette (3.5K MWCO, Thermo Scientific) using instructions provided by vendor. The dialysis cassette was then put directlyinto a transparent ziploc bag (generic, 9 cm by 5 cm) filled with 5 mL 100mM Tris buffer (pH 7.4) to ensure that after leftover air inside ziploc bag was squeezed out, dialysis cassette could be submerged by Tris buffer. The zipped ziploc was then incubated at 37°C for 1 hour, supernatants containing digested peptides from 1 hour were transferred to a clean tube and digestion continued with the addition of another 5mL fresh 100mM Tris buffer into the same ziploc bag. The supernatants corresponding to digested peptides from 2 hour, 4 hour and 18 hour were collected the consistent way as 1 hour sample. All collected supernatants were acidified upon time-point completion and desalted on C18 desalting columns (Thermo Scientific) following the manufacturer’s instructions and eluted in 50% acetonitrile (ACN) with 0.1% Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Peptides were speed-vac (Eppendorf) at room temperature and reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid. Peptide concentrations were measured by a Nanodrop instrument (Thermo Scientific) at absorbance 205 nm.

### Data Protocol
A total amount of 2 μg equivalent of peptides from 4 time points were injected and separated by a capillary C18 reverse-phase column of the mass-spectrometer-linked Ultimate 3000 HPLC system (Thermo Fisher) using a 90-minutegradient (5-85% acetonitrile in water) at 300 nL/min flow. Mass spectrometry data were acquired on a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometry system (Thermo Fisher) with nanospray ESI source using data-dependent acquisition. Mass spectrometry raw files were converted into mzML files using MSconvert, and searched by MSFragger. The database used was a standard human reference proteome (20,371 reviewed entries only, UniProt ID: UP000005640, last modified on 3/7/2021) with 20,371 decoy sequences amending14. Trypsin was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavage, mass tolerance was set to 50 ppm for precursor ions and 20 ppm for fragment ions. The search included variable modifications of methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation without any fixed modification. Peptide length was set within a range between 7 to 50 amino acids and false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% at the peptide spectrum match (PSM), peptide, and protein levels.

### Publication Abstract
Protein structure defines protein function and plays an extremely important role in protein characterization. Recently, two groups of researchers from DeepMind and the Baker lab have independently published protein structure prediction tools that can help us obtain predicted protein structures for the whole human proteome. This enabled us to visualize the entire human proteome using predicted 3D structures for the first time. To help other researchers best utilize these protein structure predictions in proteomics experiments, we present the Sequence Coverage Visualizer (SCV), http://scv.lab.gy, a web application for protein sequence coverage 3D visualization. Here we showed a few possible usages of the SCV, including the labeling of post-translational modifications and isotope labeling experiments. These results highlight the usefulness of such 3D visualization for proteomics experiments and how SCV can turn a regular proteomics experiment (identified peptide list) into structural insights. Furthermore, when used together with limited proteolysis, we demonstrated that SCV can help to compare different protein structures from different sources, including predicted ones and existing PDB entries. We hope our tool can provide help in the process of improving protein structure prediction accuracy. Overall, SCV is a convenient and powerful tool for visualizing proteomics results in 3D.

### Keywords
3d structure, Visualization, Protein sequence coverage, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Illinois at Chicago
University of Illinois at Chicago

### Submitter
Xinhao Shao

### Lab Head
Dr Yu (Tom) Gao
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Illinois at Chicago


