### Accession
PXD001264

### Title
Bacterial phosphoproteome -  Systematic profiling of the bacterial phosphoproteome reveals bacterium-specific features of phosphorylation

### Description
Protein phosphorylation is a crucial post-translational modification in bacteria, but has not been extensively studied because of the technical difficulty of phosphopeptide enrichment. We present a new enrichment protocol, approximately 10 times more efficient than conventional approaches in E. coli. This protocol also performed well in B. subtilis and K. pneumoniae, in terms of high coverage and phosphopeptide identification numbers. Moreover, three high-confidence Ser/Thr phosphorylation motifs as well as 29 other motifs at various confidence levels were discovered for the first time, implying that both the position of phospho-acceptor residues and the surrounding sequences are critical for kinase-substrate specificity. As for N-terminal phosphorylation, a low rate of co-occurrence of N-terminal acetylation and acidic residues at the antepenultimate position appears to be prokaryote-specific. The comprehensive prokaryotic phosphoproteomes generated by our new protocol suggest the existence of distinct phosphorylation preferences between prokaryotes and eukaryotes.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial cells were collected at the mid-log phase and cell wall was disrupted by sonication.  Phosphopepteides were enriched by HAMMOC-based purification and analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
The peak list of each raw MS spectrum was generated and the peptide identification was performed by Mascot ver 2.4 (Matrix Science, London, UK) against a composite target−decoy protein sequence database containing 4,316 proteins for E. coli, 5,262 for K. pneumoniae, and 4,188 for B. subtilis. The search criteria used in this study were as follows: trypsin specificity allowing up to 2 missed cleavages; fixed modification of carbamidomethyl (C); and variable modifications of oxidation (M), acetylation (protein N-term), and phosphorylation (ST), (Y), (D), and (H). The precursor mass tolerance was set at 20 ppm, and the fragment ion tolerance was set at 0.1 Da.  The reliability of assignments of phosphorylation sites, pSer, pThr, and pTyr, was assessed by using PhosCalc version 1.2 (http://www.ayeaye.tsl.ac.uk/PhosCalc/) (MacLean et al., 2008). The probability of phosphorylation at all candidate sites within each phosphopeptide was extracted on the basis of the PTM (post-translational modification) score and grouped into class I (phosphosite probability p > 0.75), class II (0.5 < p ≤ 0.75), and class III (p ≤ 0.5) (Olsen et al., 2006). A phosphosite with a PTM localization probability of >0.75 (class I) was considered as a high-confidence site assignment and was accepted automatically as unambiguous (Olsen et al., 2006).  Phosphorylation motifs were generated by motif-x tool.

### Publication Abstract
Protein phosphorylation is a crucial posttranslational modification for regulating cellular processes in bacteria; however, it has not been extensively studied because of technical difficulties in the enrichment of phosphopeptides. We devised an enrichment protocol that enabled the identification of &gt;1000 phosphopeptides from a single bacterial sample. We discovered three high-confidence serine and threonine phosphorylation motifs, as well as 29 other motifs at various levels of confidence, from three distinct bacterial phosphoproteomes. We found that the proline-directed and basophilic phosphorylation motifs that are commonly enriched in eukaryotes were not observed in bacteria. Unlike eukaryotes, bacteria had a low occurrence of both phosphorylation and acetylation in N-terminal phosphopeptides. Because infection of host cells by bacterial pathogens is often accompanied by kinase-mediated phosphorylation events, the differences in phosphorylation preferences between bacteria and eukaryotes revealed by this study could be useful in identifying bacterial-specific targets for future therapies.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Protein phosphorylation

### Affiliations
De[artment of Molecular and Cellular Bioanalysis, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kyoto University
Department of Microbiology, College of Medicine, National Taiwan Unversity

### Submitter
Miao-Hsia Lin

### Lab Head
Dr Miao-Hsia Lin
De[artment of Molecular and Cellular Bioanalysis, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kyoto University


