### Accession
PXD016630

### Title
HIF-1α and HIF-2α differently regulate tumour development, metabolism and inflammation of clear cell renal cell carcinoma in mice

### Description
Mutational inactivation of VHL is the earliest genetic event in the majority of ccRCCs, leading to activation of the HIF-1α and HIF-2α transcription factors. While correlative studies of human ccRCCs and functional studies using human ccRCC cell lines have implicated HIF-1α as an inhibitor and HIF-2α as a promoter of aggressive tumour behaviours, their roles in tumour onset have not been functionally addressed. Using an autochthonous ccRCC model, we show genetically that Hif1a is necessary for tumour formation whereas Hif2a deletion has only minor effects on tumour initiation and growth. Both HIF-1α and HIF-2α are necessary for the clear cell phenotype. Transcriptomic and proteomic analyses revealed that HIF-1α regulates glycolysis while HIF-2α regulates genes associated with lipoprotein metabolism, ribosome biogenesis and E2F and MYC transcriptional activities. Deficiency of HIF-2α increased CD8+ T cell infiltration and activation. These studies reveal different functions of HIF-1α and HIF-2α in ccRCC.   SIGNIFICANCE  The roles of HIF-1α and HIF-2α in ccRCC pathogenesis remain unclear. Using a mouse genetic approach we show that HIF-1α but not HIF-2α is important for tumour formation, contrary to predictions from studies of human ccRCC. We show that HIF-1α and HIF-2α transcriptionally regulate different aspects of metabolism and identify HIF-2α as a suppressor of immune cell infiltration and activation.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue sections of wild-type kidney cortex controls from Cre negative mice in the Vhlfl/flTrp53fl/flRb1fl/fl background and from tumours of the different genetic backgrounds were homogenized by sonication (Diagenode, 4102 Seraing, Belgium) in 100 mM HEPES, pH 8.0, 4 % (w/v) SDS, 10 mM DTT, followed by heat incubation (95°C, 10 min), centrifugation (16,000 g, 10 min), cysteine alkylation, and buffer exchange to 100 mM HEPES, pH 8.0 with subsequent trypsination of 100 μg proteome based on the “filter aided sample preparation” protocol (CITE). 24 samples (six mice from four genotypes) were distributed across three batches and differentially labeled by amine-reactive tandem-mass tags (TMT, Thermo/Pierce, Rockford, lL 61105 USA) including a pooled normalization sample. Each batch was fractionated by high pH reversed phase chromatography (XBridge C18 column, 150 mm x 1 mm column containing 3.5µm particles (Waters)) For analysis by liquid chromatography – tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS), fractions were separated with an EASY-Spray™ C18 column (250 mm x 75 µm, 2µm particles heated at 50°C, Thermo) using a linear gradient of increasing buffer B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile, Fluka), ranging from 5 - 25% acetonitrile over the first 60 min and from 25 - 60% acetonitrile in the subsequent 30 min (90 min separating gradient length (300 nl/min). Peptides were analyzed using a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo) operating in a data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode, targeting the top 10 precursor ions for fragmentation scans using 35.000 resolution and a fixed first mass of 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed by MaxQuant v 1.6.013 with the following settings: tryptic specificity, up to two missed cleavages, TMT-modification of peptide N-termini and lysine side chains; cysteine carbamidomethylation, mouse reviewed sequences downloaded from Uniprot on Aug 26th, 2019, 1 % FDR for peptides and proteins, precursor intensity fraction = 0.5, one or more unique peptides for protein quantitation. MaxQuant output was further processed by MSStatsTMT (CITE) for normalization, batch removal, and protein assemblyData were analyzed by MaxQuant v 1.6.013 with the following settings: tryptic specificity, up to two missed cleavages, TMT-modification of peptide N-termini and lysine side chains; cysteine carbamidomethylation, mouse reviewed sequences downloaded from Uniprot on Aug 26th, 2019, 1 % FDR for peptides and proteins, precursor intensity fraction = 0.5, one or more unique peptides for protein quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Renal cancer, Mouse model, Hypoxia induced factor

### Affiliations
Prof. Dr. Oliver Schilling Heisenberg Professor of Translational Proteomics Institute of Surgical Pathology  Faculty of Medicine University of Freiburg  Breisacher Strasse 115a D-79106 Freiburg, Germany +49 761 27080610 oliver.schilling@mol-med.uni-freiburg.de
University of Freiburg

### Submitter
Oliver Schilling

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Oliver Schilling
Prof. Dr. Oliver Schilling Heisenberg Professor of Translational Proteomics Institute of Surgical Pathology  Faculty of Medicine University of Freiburg  Breisacher Strasse 115a D-79106 Freiburg, Germany +49 761 27080610 oliver.schilling@mol-med.uni-freiburg.de


