### Accession
PXD026953

### Title
Two novel zinc and cobalt-responsive proteins in marine eukaryotic phytoplankton and implications for Zn scarcity in the surface oceans

### Description
Observations of scarce surface ocean concentrations of dissolved zinc (Zn) have raised the possibility that Zn may co-limit the growth of oceanic phytoplankton, yet testing this hypothesis has been difficult because Zn is highly prone to contamination. Biomarkers of micro-nutrient stress can serve as an alternate means to assay, though biomarker proteins for Zn stress in marine algae are currently uncharacterized. In this study we identified two Zn-responsive proteins in four marine diatom species that became abundant under Zn and Co limitation, but were scarce or undetectable in replete conditions. We refer to these proteins as ZCRP-A and ZCRP-B (Zn/Co Responsive Protein A and B). Sequence similarity of ZCRP-A to the Escherichia coli model COG0523 protein YjiA suggests a Zn2+ binding capability using conserved metal binding sites. Cellular localization by fluorescent tagging and overexpression of these proteins showed that ZCRP-B is part of a membrane-bound transport complex and that ZCRP-A serves as a Zn/Co chaperone with a chloroplastic target. These results imply that ZCRP-A and ZCRP-B are important in intracellular Zn trafficking and high-affinity transport, respectively. Metaproteomic detection of ZCRP-A and ZCRP-B homologs in a variety of eukaryotic protists along a South Pacific Ocean transect demonstrated that both proteins were more abundant in the euphotic zone (0-200m) where dZn and dCo were scarce. These findings describe widely distributed marine algal proteins linked to Zn and Co metabolism that together contribute to our understanding of Zn homeostasis in important marine phytoplankton.

### Sample Protocol
Biomass from duplicate 25 mL cultures was collected during log phase growth by centrifugation at 11,000 RPM (14,610 x g) for 40 minutes at 4°C. Proteins were extracted, alkylated and reduced using a modification of previously published methods (Saito et al. 2011; Hughes et al. 2014). Biomass was resuspended in lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES, pH 8.5, 1% SDS) and heated for 10 min at 95°C, then incubated for 30 min at room temperature with gentle shaking at 350 RPM. Biomass was then centrifuged at 14,100 x g for 20 min to remove cellular debris. The supernatant was transferred to an ethanol-washed microcentrifuge tube and 2 L of benzonase nuclease was added before incubating for 30 mins at 37°C. Samples were then alkylated by adding 5μL of 200mM dithiothreitol (DTT) in 50 mM HEPES pH 8.5 per 100 μL of lysate and incubated at 45°C for 30 min. 10 μL of 400 mM iodoacetamide in 50 mM HEPES pH 8.5 was then added, followed by incubation in the dark for 30 mins at 24°C. 10 μL of 200 mM DTT in 50 mM HEPES pH 8.5 per 100 μL of lysate was then added to quench the reaction.  Proteins were isolated and washed using a magnetic bead method adapted from Hughes et al. (2014), using a 1:1 mixture of hydrophobic and hydrophilic Sera-Mag SpeedBeads (GE Healthcare Life Sciences). Magnetic beads were added to the protein mixture at a concentration of 20 μg / 100 μL of total reaction. The solution was acidified with 10% formic acid to pH 2. Acetonitrile (ACN) was then immediately added to a final concentration of 50% and samples were incubated for 15 min at 37°C, then for 30 mins at room temperature before being placed on magnetic racks for 2 min. The mixture was then washed with an equal volume of 70% ethanol (2×) and acetonitrile (1×). After removing the final ACN wash, the proteins were reconstituted in 50 mM HEPES (pH 8.0) and trypsin digested for 14 h at 37°C. The mixture was resuspended, washed with ACN, and placed on the magnetic rack. Proteins adhered to beads while ACN was removed by pipetting. The peptide sample was reconstituted in 2% DMSO and acidified with 1% formic acid to bring to a final concentration of 0.1 μg / μL. Protein concentration was quantified using a colorimetric assay at 562 nm (BCA total protein assay; ThermoFisher Scientific).  Whole cell protein digests were analyzed in technical triplicate by liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LC-MS) using a Paradigm MS4 HPLC system (Michrom) with reverse phase chromatography, a Michrom ADVANCE source, and a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive hybrid quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometer. Mass spectra were searched using Proteome Discoverer’s SEQUEST algorithm (Thermo, Inc.) with a fragment tolerance of 0.02 Da and parent tolerance of 10 ppm. Annotated proteomic databases used for T. pseudonana and P. tricornutum (Thaps3 and CCAP 1055/1 v2.0 Phatr2, all models) are available online from the Joint Genome Institute (JGI; jgi.doe.gov) (Armbrust et al.; Bowler et al. 2008). Chaetoceros RS19 mass spectra were searched against a Chaetoceros RS19 translated transcriptome database that was generated under iron limitation and otherwise replete conditions (assembly_ChaetocerosRS19.orf.fasta). This transcriptome has been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE (Perez-Riverol et al. 2019) partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD026895 and 10.6019/PXD026895. Database search results were processed and visualized using spectral counting abundance scoring within Scaffold 4.0 (Proteome Software, Inc.). Protein abundances are reported as total normalized spectra with the following parameters: 99.0% minimum peptide threshold, 99.0% minimum and 2 peptides minimum protein threshold, 0.0% peptide false discovery rate (FDR), and 0.0% protein FDR.

### Data Protocol
Biomass from duplicate 25 mL cultures was collected during log phase growth by centrifugation at 11,000 RPM (14,610 x g) for 40 minutes at 4°C. Proteins were extracted, alkylated and reduced using a modification of previously published methods (Saito et al. 2011; Hughes et al. 2014). Biomass was resuspended in lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES, pH 8.5, 1% SDS) and heated for 10 min at 95°C, then incubated for 30 min at room temperature with gentle shaking at 350 RPM. Biomass was then centrifuged at 14,100 x g for 20 min to remove cellular debris. The supernatant was transferred to an ethanol-washed microcentrifuge tube and 2 L of benzonase nuclease was added before incubating for 30 mins at 37°C. Samples were then alkylated by adding 5μL of 200mM dithiothreitol (DTT) in 50 mM HEPES pH 8.5 per 100 μL of lysate and incubated at 45°C for 30 min. 10 μL of 400 mM iodoacetamide in 50 mM HEPES pH 8.5 was then added, followed by incubation in the dark for 30 mins at 24°C. 10 μL of 200 mM DTT in 50 mM HEPES pH 8.5 per 100 μL of lysate was then added to quench the reaction.  Proteins were isolated and washed using a magnetic bead method adapted from Hughes et al. (2014), using a 1:1 mixture of hydrophobic and hydrophilic Sera-Mag SpeedBeads (GE Healthcare Life Sciences). Magnetic beads were added to the protein mixture at a concentration of 20 μg / 100 μL of total reaction. The solution was acidified with 10% formic acid to pH 2. Acetonitrile (ACN) was then immediately added to a final concentration of 50% and samples were incubated for 15 min at 37°C, then for 30 mins at room temperature before being placed on magnetic racks for 2 min. The mixture was then washed with an equal volume of 70% ethanol (2×) and acetonitrile (1×). After removing the final ACN wash, the proteins were reconstituted in 50 mM HEPES (pH 8.0) and trypsin digested for 14 h at 37°C. The mixture was resuspended, washed with ACN, and placed on the magnetic rack. Proteins adhered to beads while ACN was removed by pipetting. The peptide sample was reconstituted in 2% DMSO and acidified with 1% formic acid to bring to a final concentration of 0.1 μg / μL. Protein concentration was quantified using a colorimetric assay at 562 nm (BCA total protein assay; ThermoFisher Scientific).  Whole cell protein digests were analyzed in technical triplicate by liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LC-MS) using a Paradigm MS4 HPLC system (Michrom) with reverse phase chromatography, a Michrom ADVANCE source, and a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive hybrid quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometer. Mass spectra were searched using Proteome Discoverer’s SEQUEST algorithm (Thermo, Inc.) with a fragment tolerance of 0.02 Da and parent tolerance of 10 ppm. Annotated proteomic databases used for T. pseudonana and P. tricornutum (Thaps3 and CCAP 1055/1 v2.0 Phatr2, all models) are available online from the Joint Genome Institute (JGI; jgi.doe.gov) (Armbrust et al.; Bowler et al. 2008). Chaetoceros RS19 mass spectra were searched against a Chaetoceros RS19 translated transcriptome database that was generated under iron limitation and otherwise replete conditions (assembly_ChaetocerosRS19.orf.fasta). This transcriptome has been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE (Perez-Riverol et al. 2019) partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD026895 and 10.6019/PXD026895. Database search results were processed and visualized using spectral counting abundance scoring within Scaffold 4.0 (Proteome Software, Inc.). Protein abundances are reported as total normalized spectra with the following parameters: 99.0% minimum peptide threshold, 99.0% minimum and 2 peptides minimum protein threshold, 0.0% peptide false discovery rate (FDR), and 0.0% protein FDR.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pseudo nitzschia, Thalassiosira pseudonana, Chaetoceros, Proteomics, Diatoms, Cobalt, Zinc

### Affiliations
Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution/ Massachusetts Institute of Technology (WHOI-MIT)
Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, Marine Chemistry and Geochemistry Department

### Submitter
Riss Kellogg

### Lab Head
Dr Mak A. Saito
Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, Marine Chemistry and Geochemistry Department


