### Accession
PXD011797

### Title
Global Enrichment of Low-Abundance Peptide Hormones in Plasma for Discovery and Quantitation

### Description
We describe a method for global enrichment of active peptide hormones from blood plasma for both new hormone discovery and quantitative analysis. To extend the dynamic range of plasma proteomics, we employed high-resolution size exclusion chromatography to purify the peptide hormones and a powerful precipitation method to dissociate and remove bulk proteins prior to separation. Combining this method with high-sensitivity proteomic analysis, we characterized hormone abundance changes after intermittent fasting in humans.

### Sample Protocol
Human blood plasma was thawed on ice and vortexed prior to aliquoting 50 l into a 2 mL tube (Eppendorf) at room temperature that contained 450 L of extraction buffer (0.25 M HCl, 87.5% ethanol in H2O). Samples were vortexed every 15 min and incubated for a total of 30 min at room temperature. Precipitated proteins were pelleted by centrifugation at 8,400 x g for 10 minutes at room temperature. The supernatant was moved to new 2 mL tube and 125 L of chloroform added and the tube vortexed. To facilitate phase separation, 500 L of water was added and the tube vortexed prior to centrifugation for 10 minutes at 7,000 x g at room temperature. The clear top phase (~850 uL) was retained (peptide supernatant) while avoiding any pellet and the yellow chloroform phase. The peptide supernatant was filtered using 0.45 m Ultrafree-MC HV centrifugal filter units (Merck Millipore – Massachusetts, USA) prior to moving the filtrate into vials for uHPLC-based SEC separation. To isolate peptides <10 kDa from larger proteins in the peptide supernatant a Dionex Ultimate 3000 Bio-RS uHPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used combined with an Agilent (California, USA) AdvanceBio SEC column with 130Å pores, 2.7 m particles, dimensions of 7.8 x 300 mm. The column was equilibrated with 10 column volumes of denaturing SEC running buffer (30% acetonitrile and 0.1% TFA) prior to sample analysis. Standards consisting of either ubiquitin (Sigma – 79586-22-4), or a HPLC peptide standard mix (Sigma – H2016-1VL) diluted in SEC running buffer were used for mass calibration. The peptide supernatant was stored in the autosampler at 4oC prior to analysis and for each SEC separation 200 l was injected onto the column. Each SEC separation was performed for 25 min (1.5 column volumes) at a flow rate of 1 ml min-1 at a column temperature of 30oC. The eluting proteins/peptides were monitored by UV absorbance at 215 and 280 nm. Only one fraction was collected into a low protein binding 2 mL 96-deep-well plate (Eppendorf) between 6 min to 8 min retention time. This fraction corresponded to peptides of molecular weight between <10 kDa and >1 kDa, which had a total volume of 2 mL and the fractions were stored at 4oC prior to subsequent processing. The collected peptide fraction was dried using a GeneVac EZ-2 using the HPLC setting at 45oC and the dried peptides were resuspended in 100 uL of 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) pH 8.5 in H2O. Disulfide bonds were reduced by addition of DTT to a final concentration of 5 mM and incubated on a thermomixer at 95oC at 1000 rpm for 10 minutes. To alkylate the reduced sulfhydryl groups chloroacetamide was added to a final concentration of 20 mM and samples incubated on a thermomixer at 95oC at 1000 rpm for 10 minutes. For trypsin digestion samples were cooled to room temperature and trypsin was added at a ratio of 1:20 (trypsin to “peptide”), where each SEC fraction contained ~ 4 g peptide and therefore 200 ng was added. The samples were incubated for 16 h at 37oC at 500 rpm on a thermomixer to digest. To stop the digest 10% TFA in H2O was added to achieve a 1% final concentration. SDB-RPS StageTips were generated by punching double-stacked SDB-RPS discs (Sigma, Cat#66886-U) with an 18-gauge needle and mounted in 200µl tips (Eppendorf), as shown in Supplementary Method. For clean-up utilising the Spin96 (Harney et. al. J. Proteome Res. under review), StageTips were inserted into a holder and placed in the top, which was then stacked onto the wash-bottom containing a polypropylene 96-well microtitre plate to collect the sample flow-through and washes. Each tip was wetted with 100 L of 100% acetonitrile and centrifuged at 1,000 x g for 1 min. Following wetting, each StageTip was equilibrated with 30% methanol/1% TFA, followed by 100 L of 0.1% TFA in H2O, with centrifugation for each at 1,000 x g for 3 min. Each StageTip was then loaded with the equivalent of ~10ug peptide in 1% TFA (<100 l total volume per spin). The peptides were washed once with 100 l of 0.2% TFA in water, which was followed by one wash with 100 l of 99% isopropanol/1% TFA. For elution of peptides, the wash-bottom was exchanged with a bottom containing a holder supporting an unskirted PCR plate that has been trimmed to fit. To elute, 100 L of 5% ammonium hydroxide/80% acetonitrile was added to each tip and centrifuged as above for 5 min. Samples in the PCR plate were dried using a GeneVac EZ-2 using the ammonia setting at 35oC for 1 h 15 m. Dried peptides were resuspended in 7 L of 5% formic acid per 200 L SEC injection of peptide supernatant and stored at 4°C until analysed by LC-MS.

### Data Protocol
Using a Thermo Fisher Dionex RSLCnano UHPLC, peptides in 5% (vol/vol) formic acid (injection volume 3 μL) were directly injected onto a 45 cm x 75 um C18 (Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany, 1.9 μm) fused silica analytical column with a ~10 μm pulled tip, coupled online to a nanospray ESI source. Peptides were resolved over gradient from 5% acetonitrile to 40% acetonitrile over 60 min with a flow rate of 300 nL min−1. Peptides were ionized by electrospray ionization at 2.3 kV. Tandem mass spectrometry analysis was carried out on a Q-Exactive Plus/HF mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher) using HCD fragmentation. The data-dependent acquisition method used acquired MS/MS spectra of the top 10 most abundant ions at any one point during the gradient. RAW data were analysed using the quantitative proteomics software MaxQuant 13 (http://www.maxquant.org, version 1.5.7.0), and the MaxQuant output has also been uploaded to the ProteomeXchange Consortium under the same identifier. This version of MaxQuant includes an integrated search engine, Andromeda 14. Peptide and protein level identification were both set to a false discovery rate of 1% using a target-decoy based strategy. The database supplied to the search engine for peptide identifications contained both the human UniProt database downloaded on the 18th April 2018, containing XXX protein sequence entries and the MaxQuant contaminants database. Mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm for precursor ions and MS/MS mass tolerance was 20 ppm. Enzyme specificity was set to semi-specific N-ragged trypsin (cleavage C-terminal to Lys and Arg) with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages permitted for the main search and fully specific trypsin (cleavage C-terminal to Lys and Arg) for the first search. Deamidation of Asn and Gln, oxidation of Met, pyro-Glu (with peptide N-term Gln) and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was searched as a fixed modification. Maxquant ouput was processed and statistical tests performed using the R software package (version 3.4.3). Processed data was plotted using Tableau (version 10.0.2). RAW data were analysed using the quantitative proteomics software Spectronaut Pulsar X (version 12.0.20491.11.25225 (Jocelyn)), and the Spectronaut Pulsar X output has also been uploaded to the ProteomeXchange Consortium under the same identifier. The database supplied to the search engine for peptide identifications was a focused database generated in house from a high pH RP fractionated plasma sample searched with SwissProt human database. Database false discovery was generated using iRT profiling strategy. Enzyme specificity was set to semi-specific N-ragged trypsin (cleavage C-terminal to Lys and Arg) with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages permitted. Deamidation of Asn and Gln, oxidation of Met, pyro-Glu (with peptide N-term Gln) and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was searched as a fixed modification. All other settings were factory default. Processed data was plotted using Tableau (version 10.0.2). RAW data were analysed using the quantitative proteomics software Spectronaut Pulsar X (version 12.0.20491.11.25225 (Jocelyn)), and the Spectronaut Pulsar X output has also been uploaded to the ProteomeXchange Consortium under the same identifier. The data was searched against a library generated in Pulsar using the raw files to be searched, this library included the label modifications 15N1 (A, C, D, E, F, G, I, L, M, P, S, T, V, Y), 15N2 (K, N, Q, W), 15N3 (H) & 15N4 (R). Database false discovery was generated using iRT profiling strategy. All other settings were factory default. The database supplied to the search engine for peptide identifications was a focused database generated in house from a high pH RP fractionated plasma sample searched with SwissProt human database.

### Publication Abstract
Unbiased and sensitive quantification of low abundance small proteins in human plasma (<i>e.g.</i> hormones, immune factors, metabolic regulators) remains an unmet need. These small protein factors are typically analyzed individually and using antibodies that can lack specificity. Mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics has the potential to address these problems, however the analysis of plasma by MS is plagued by the extremely large dynamic range of this body fluid, with protein abundances spanning at least 13 orders of magnitude. Here we describe an enrichment assay (SPEA), that greatly simplifies the plasma dynamic range problem by enriching small-proteins of 2-10 kDa, enabling the rapid, specific and sensitive quantification of &gt;100 small-protein factors in a single untargeted LC-MS/MS acquisition. Applying this method to perform deep-proteome profiling of human plasma we identify C5ORF46 as a previously uncharacterized human plasma protein. We further demonstrate the reproducibility of our workflow for low abundance protein analysis using a stable-isotope labeled protein standard of insulin spiked into human plasma. SPEA provides the ability to study numerous important hormones in a single rapid assay, which we applied to study the intermittent fasting response and observed several unexpected changes including decreased plasma abundance of the iron homeostasis regulator hepcidin.

### Keywords
Human; plasma; intermittent fasting; peptide hormone; insulin; hepcidin; glp-1; igf-1.

### Affiliations
The University of Sydney
School of Life and Environmental Sciences, Charles Perkins Centre, Larance Lab, University of Sydney, Australia.

### Submitter
Mark Larance

### Lab Head
Dr Mark Colin Larance
School of Life and Environmental Sciences, Charles Perkins Centre, Larance Lab, University of Sydney, Australia.


