### Accession
PXD028001

### Title
A deep-sea bacterium senses and utilizes blue light via a BLUF-dependent pathway

### Description
Light was a ubiquitous environmental stimulus. Deep-sea microorganisms were exposed to a pervasive blue light optical environment. The utilization of blue light by deep-sea microorganisms, especially non-photosynthetic microorganisms, and the downstream pathway after light reception were obscure. Under the enrichment condition surrounded by blue light, a potential novel species named Spongiibacter nanhainus CSC3.9 from the deep-sea cold seep was isolated. Its growth and metabolism under blue light were significantly better than other wavelengths of light. Six blue light sensing proteins, including four BLUF (Blue Light Using Flavin) and two bacteriophytochrome, were annotated in the genome of strain CSC3.9. Then, with the assist of proteomic analysis, we demonstrated that 15960-BLUF was a crucial blue light receptor that interfered with motor behavior through chemotaxis pathway by means of in vivo and in vitro verification. In addition, 15960-BLUF mediated part of the blue light to promote the growth of strain CSC3.9. Further, we summarized the functional BLUF proteins from isolated marine microorganisms, and the high abundance distribution of BLUF similar to the downstream unresponsive domain type in strain CSC3.9 was demonstrated. The widespread distribution of BLUF protein in marine bacteria implied the extensiveness of this regulatory mechanism, and wavelength variation of light was a potential means to isolate uncultured microorganisms. This was the first reported in deep-sea microorganisms that BLUF-dependent physiological response to blue light. It provided a new clue for the blue light adaptation of microorganisms in disphotic zone.

### Sample Protocol
For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion. After trypsin digestion, peptide was desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. Peptide was reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for TMT kit. The tryptic peptides were fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Agilent 300Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated with a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0) over 60 min into 60 fractions. Then, the peptides were combined into 18 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging. The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 26 min, 23% to 35% in 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
he resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against NCBI database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met was specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for peptides was set > 40.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bluf, Deep-sea bacterium, Blue light, Chemotaxis, Light sensing

### Affiliations
The Institute of Oceanology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
The Institute of Oceanology, Chinese Academy of Sciences 

### Submitter
yeqi shan

### Lab Head
Dr yeqi shan
The Institute of Oceanology, Chinese Academy of Sciences


