### Accession
PXD017670

### Title
FilaminC pull-down experiment from myotube lysates

### Description
This project was designed to identify a difference in the binding affinity of FILIP1 to different FLNc variants. To this end FLNc domain 1-3 and FLNc d18-21 were used as bait for a pull-down analysis.

### Sample Protocol
For FLNc d18-21 and d1-3 pulldown experiments, FLNc-His variants immobilized on Ni2+-NTA beads were used to pull-down putative binding partners from extracts prepared from C2 myotubes. Differentiated myotubes (1xT74 flask) were lysed in 1 ml lysis buffer (25 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5 % (v/v) Sodiumdeoxycholate, 1 % (v/v) Nonidet P-40, 10 % (v/v) Glycerol, 2 mM EDTA and a protease inhibitor cocktail tablet, pH 8.0). Lysates were sonified for 10 s and insoluble material was removed by centrifugation (10 min, 21,000 x g). Cleared lysates were incubated while rotating at 10 °C for 1 h empty Ni2+-NTA-agarose beads or beads with bound FLNc d1-3 or FLNc d18-21. After five times washing with the lysis buffer bound proteins was eluted from the beads by addition of 100 µl 1x Laemmli sample buffer and heated for 10 min at 95°C. Eluted proteins (20 µl) were analyzed by SDS-PAGE. One band was cut form each lane of the gel corresponding the FLNc d1-3 and FLNc d18-21 bound proteins, respectively. For protein identification, a tryptic digests were prepared and analyzed by LC-MS using a Q Exactive Plus system and a 1 h LC gradient

### Data Protocol
Raw files from FLNc d18-21 and FLNc d1-3 pull down analyses were searched with MaxQuant 1.6.10.43 using the UniProt knowledge base isoform mouse database (release 07.2019, 95,824 protein entries) with additional sequences from hFLNc d18-21 and hFLNc d1-3. Precursor and fragment mass tolerances were set to 4.5 ppm and 0.1 Da, respectively. Search parameters were: proteolytic enzyme, trypsin (≤ 2 missed cleavages); variable modifications, methionine oxidation and acetylation (Protein N-term); fixed modification, carbamidomethylation.

### Publication Abstract
The PI3K/Akt pathway promotes skeletal muscle growth and myogenic differentiation. Although its importance in skeletal muscle biology is well documented, many of its substrates remain to be identified. We here studied PI3K/Akt signaling in contracting skeletal muscle cells by quantitative phosphoproteomics. We identified the extended basophilic phosphosite motif RxRxxp[S/T]xxp[S/T] in various proteins including filamin-C (FLNc). Importantly, this extended motif, located in a unique insert in Ig-like domain 20 of FLNc, is doubly phosphorylated. The protein kinases responsible for this dual-site phosphorylation are Akt and PKC&#x3b1;. Proximity proteomics and interaction analysis identified filamin A-interacting protein 1 (FILIP1) as direct FLNc binding partner. FILIP1 binding induces filamin degradation, thereby negatively regulating its function. Here, dual-site phosphorylation of FLNc not only reduces FILIP1 binding, providing a mechanism to shield FLNc from FILIP1-mediated degradation, but also enables fast dynamics of FLNc necessary for its function as signaling adaptor in cross-striated muscle cells.

### Keywords
Myotube lysate, Flnc, Pull-down

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Institute of Biology II, Faculty of Biology and Signalling Research Centres BIOSS and CIBSS, University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany
AG Warscheid
Biologie II
Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg
Schänzlestr. 1
79104 Freiburg
Germany


### Submitter
Friedel Drepper

### Lab Head
Dr Bettina Warscheid
Department of Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Institute of Biology II, Faculty of Biology and Signalling Research Centres BIOSS and CIBSS, University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany


