### Accession
PXD014559

### Title
Tetraspanin-6 antagonizes the release of exosomes by stimulating the lysosomal degradation of syntenin and syndecan-4

### Description
Exosomes, extracellular vesicles (EV) of endosomal origin, emerge as master regulators of cell-to-cell signaling in physiology and various systemic diseases. Exosomes are highly enriched in tetraspanins (TSPN) and syndecans (SDC), the latter occurring mainly in proteolytically-cleaved form, as membrane-spanning C-terminal fragments of the proteins. While both protein families are membrane scaffolds appreciated for their role in exosome formation, composition and activity, we currently ignore whether these work together to control exosome biology. Here we show that TSPN6, a poorly characterized tetraspanin, acts as a negative regulator of exosome release by supporting the lysosomal degradation of SDC4 and syntenin. In addition, we demonstrate that TSPN6 tightly associates with SDC4. Interestingly, TSPN6-dependent lysosomal degradation of syntenin strictly requires SDC4. TSPN6 also inhibits the shedding of the SDC4-ectodomain, mimicking the effects of matrix metalloproteinase inhibitors. Taken together our data identify TSPN6 as a regulator of the trafficking and processing of SDC4 and highlight an important physical and functional interconnection between these membrane scaffolds for the production of exosomes. These findings clarify our understanding of the molecular determinants governing EV formation and have potentially broad impact for EV-related biomedicine.

### Sample Protocol
GFP-Trap : MCF-7 cells overexpressing GFP-TSPN6 or GFP alone as control for 24h  were resuspended in lysis buffer (Tris 30 mM pH 7.4, NaCl 150 mM supplemented with 1% detergent (NP40 or Brij97) and protease inhibitor cocktail dilution 1/1000 reference P8340-5ML from Sigma-Aldrich) for 30 min at 4°C. Extracts were then centrifuged for 30 minutes at 10.000g at 4°C. Immunoprecipitation was performed for 1h at 4°C by incubating GFP-Trap®_A beads with the cellular extracts. After immunoprecipitation, the beads were washed three times in PBS and processed for mass spectrometry analysis. Mass spectrometry analysis: Four biological replicates (GFP-TSPN6 versus GFP) were used for label free LC MSMS relative quantitation. Each replicate was further injected thrice on the system. Briefly, pulldown protein extracts were loaded on NuPAGE 4-12% Bis-Tris acrylamide gels (Life Technologies) to stack proteins in a single band that was stained with Imperial Blue (Pierce, Rockford, IL) and cut from the gel. Gels pieces were submitted to an in-gel trypsin digestion. Briefly, gel pieces were washed and destained using 100 mM NH4HCO3/acetonitrile (50/50). Destained gel pieces were shrunk with acetonitrile and were rehydrated in the presence of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate in 50% acetonitrile and dried at room temperature. Protein bands were then rehydrated and cysteines were reduced using 10 mM DTT in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0 for 45 min at 56 C before alkylation in the presence of 55 mM iodoacetamide in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0 for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Proteins were then washed twice in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate and finally shrunk by incubation for 5 min with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate in 50% acetonitrile. The resulting alkylated gel pieces were dried at room temperature. The dried gel pieces were swollen by incubation in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0 supplemented with trypsin (12.5 ng/µL; Promega) for 1 h at 4 C and then incubated overnight at 37°C. Peptides were harvested by collecting the initial digestion solution and carrying out two extractions; first in 5% formic acid and then in 5% formic acid in 60% acetonitrile. Pooled extracts were dried down in a centrifugal vacuum system. Samples were reconstituted with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in 4% acetonitrile and analyzed by liquid chromatography (LC)-tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Electron, San Jose, CA) online with a nanoRSLC Ultimate 3000 chromatography system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA). Peptides were separated on a 50 cm Dionex Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 column. For peptide ionization in the EASY-Spray nanosource in front of the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer, spray voltage was set at 2.2 kV and the capillary temperature at 275 °C. The Orbitrap Lumos was used in data dependent mode to switch consistently between MS and MS/MS. Time between Masters Scans was set to 3 seconds. MS spectra were acquired with the Orbitrap in the range of m/z 400-1600 at a FWHM resolution of 120 000 measured at 400 m/z. AGC target was set at 4.0e5 with a 50 ms Maximum Injection Time. For internal mass calibration the 445.120025 ions was used as lock mass. The more abundant precursor ions were selected and collision-induced dissociation fragmentation was performed in the ion trap to have maximum sensitivity and yield a maximum amount of MS/MS data. Number of precursor ions was automatically defined along run in 3s windows using the “Inject Ions for All Available parallelizable time option” with a maximum injection time of 300 ms. The signal threshold for an MS/MS event was set to 5000 counts. Charge state screening was enabled to exclude precursors with 0 and 1 charge states. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a repeat count of 1 and duration of 60 s.

### Data Protocol
Quantitative analysis The iBAQ intensity were processed using the freely available MaxQuant computational proteomics platform, version 1.6.3.4. The acquired raw LC Orbitrap MS data were first processed using the integrated Andromeda search engine. Spectra were searched against the human database subset of the SwissProt database (date 180919, 20394 entries). This database was supplemented with a set of 245 frequently observed contaminants. The following parameters were used for searches: (i) trypsin allowing cleavage before proline; (ii) two missed cleavages were allowed; (ii) monoisotopic precursor tolerance of 20 ppm in the first search used for recalibration, followed by 4.5 ppm for the main search and 0.5 Da for fragment ions from MS/MS ; (iii) cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57.02146) as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation (+15.99491) and N-terminal acetylation (+42.0106) as variable modifications; (iv) a maximum of five modifications per peptide allowed; and (v) minimum peptide length was 7 amino acids and a maximum mass of 4,600 Da. The match between runs option was enabled to transfer identifications across different LC-MS/MS replicates based on their masses and retention time within a match time window of 0.7 min and using an alignment time window of 20 min. The quantification was performed using a minimum ratio count of 1 (unique+razor) and the second peptide option to allow identification of two co-fragmented co-eluting peptides with similar masses. The false discovery rate (FDR) at the peptide and protein levels were set to 1% and determined by searching a reverse database. For protein grouping, all proteins that cannot be distinguished based on their identified peptides were assembled into a single entry according to the MaxQuant rules. The statistical analysis was done with Perseus program (version 1.6.1.3) from the MaxQuant environment (www.maxquant.org). The iBAQ intensity were uploaded from the ProteinGroups.txt file. The iBAQ intensities are roughly proportional to the molar quantities of the proteins. Proteins marked as contaminant, reverse hits, and “only identified by site” were discarded. Quantifiable proteins were defined as those detected in 100% of samples in at least one condition (GFP-Tetraspanin6 or GFP Pool Down). Protein intensities were base 2 logarithmized to obtain a normal distribution. Missing values were replaced using data imputation by randomly selecting from a normal distribution centered on the lower edge of the intensity values that simulates signals of low abundant proteins using default parameters (a downshift of 1.8 standard deviation and a width of 0.3 of the original distribution). In this way, imputation of missing values in the controls allows statistical comparison of protein abundances that are present only in the positive Tetraspanin 6 samples. To determine whether a given detected protein was specifically differential a two-sample t-test were done using permutation based FDR-controlled at 0.01 and employing 250 permutations. The p value was adjusted using a scaling factor s0 with a value of 1. The differential proteomics analysis was carried out on identified proteins after removal of proteins only identified with modified peptides, peptides shared with other proteins, proteins from contaminant database and protein which are present above 100% in at least one condition.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Syntenin, Lc-msms, Gfp-trap, Exosomes, Tetraspanin

### Affiliations
Marseille Proteomique Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Marseille, CRCM Inserm UMR1068, CNRS UMR7258, Aix Marseille Université U105, Institut Paoli Calmettes 27 Boulevard Leï Roure CS30059 13273 Marseille Cedex 09 France
Marseille Proteomic, Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Marseille, Inserm UMR1068, CNRS UMR7258, Aix Marseille Université U105, Institut Paoli Calmettes, 27 Boulevard Leï Roure CS30059 13273 Marseille Cedex 09 France 

### Submitter
AUDEBERT Stephane

### Lab Head
Dr Jean-Paul BORG
Marseille Proteomique Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Marseille, CRCM Inserm UMR1068, CNRS UMR7258, Aix Marseille Université U105, Institut Paoli Calmettes 27 Boulevard Leï Roure CS30059 13273 Marseille Cedex 09 France


