### Accession
PXD012076

### Title
Proteomic response of the early divergent liverwort Marchantia polymorpha during infection with the oomycete pathogen Phytophthora palmivora

### Description
Here, we define the proteomic response of the early divergent liverwort Marchantia polymorpha during infection with the oomycete pathogen Phytophthora palmivora. We sampled whole liverwort thalli that were mock-inoculated (water) or infected with P. palmivora zoospores at 4 and 8 days post inoculation (dpi). This analysis revealed the protein profiles of liverworts during the biotrophic (4 dpi) and necrotrophic (8 dpi) stages of pathogen infection. In combination with additional omics datasets, our analyses reveal conserved aspects in the molecular response to pathogen infection in liverworts and angiosperms.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation and fractionation.  50 mg of powdered Marchantia polymorpha tissue were added to 250 µL of extraction buffer (8M Urea in 100mM Tris/HCl pH8.5, complemented with Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail 3(Sigma, P0044-5ML) (20ul/ml) and Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail 2 (Sigma, P5726-5ML) (20ul/ml)) and briefly mixed on a Vibrax shaker. Next, all samples were sonicated for 15 min and subsequently mixed on a Vibrax shaker for 15 min. After determination of the protein concentration using Pierce 660nm Protein Assay, aliquots of 100 µg total protein per sample were further processed by in-solution digest. Protein mixtures were reduced with dithiothreitol, alkylated with chloroacetamide, and digested first with Lys-C for 4h and subsequently with trypsin o/n. Next samples were submitted to SDB-RPS fractionation using a protocol adapted from Borner and Fielding (Cold Spring Harb. Protoc.; doi:10.1101/pdb.prot084137). In brief, stage tips were prepared with 2 layers of SDB-RPS membrane and activated with 100 µL acetonitrile, followed by equilibration with 100 µL equilibration buffer (30% (v/v) MeOH, 1% (v/v) TFA) and 100 µL 0.2% TFA. Next, peptides were immobilized on the membrane and washed with 100 µL 0.2% TFA. Peptides were then eluted into 3 consecutive fractions using SDB-RPS buffer 1 (100 mM NH4HCO2, 40% (v/v) ACN, 0.5% FA), SDB-RPS buffer 2 (150 mM NH4HCO2, 60% (v/v) ACN, 0.5% FA) and finally SDB-RPS buffer 3 (5% Ammonia (v/v), 80% (v/v) ACN). The collected fractions were evaporated to dryness to remove residual ammonia.  LC-MS/MS data acquisition. Dried peptides were re-dissolved in 2% ACN, 0.1% TFA for analysis and adjusted to a final concentration of 0.1 µg/µl. Samples were analysed using an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher) coupled to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). Peptides were separated on 16 cm frit-less silica emitters (New Objective, 0.75 µm inner diameter), packed in-house with reversed-phase ReproSil-Pur C18 AQ 1.9 µm resin (Dr. Maisch). Peptides (0.5 µg) were loaded on the column and eluted for 115 min using a segmented linear gradient of 5% to 95% solvent B (0 min : 5%B; 0-5 min -> 5%B; 5-65 min -> 20%B; 65-90 min ->35%B; 90-100 min -> 55%; 100-105 min ->95%, 105-115 min ->95%) (solvent A 0% ACN, 0.1% FA; solvent B 80% ACN, 0.1%FA) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Mass spectra were acquired in data-dependent acquisition mode with a TOP15 method. MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with a mass range of 300–1750 m/z at a resolution of 70,000 FWHM and a target value of 3×106 ions. Precursors were selected with an isolation window of 1.3 m/z. HCD fragmentation was performed at a normalized collision energy of 25. MS/MS spectra were acquired with a target value of 105 ions at a resolution of 17,500 FWHM, a maximum injection time of 55 ms and a fixed first mass of m/z 100. Peptides with a charge of +1, greater than 6, or with unassigned charge state were excluded from fragmentation for MS2, dynamic exclusion for 30s prevented repeated selection of precursors.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis. Raw data were processed using MaxQuant software (version 1.5.7.4, http://www.maxquant.org/) {Cox et al., Nat. Biotechnol. 2008, 26, 1367.} with label-free quantification (LFQ) and iBAQ enabled {Cox et al., Nat. Protoc. 2016, 11, 2301.}. MS/MS spectra were searched by the Andromeda search engine against a combined database containing the sequences from Marchantia polymorpha  (primary transcripts) (http://marchantia.info/download/download/ Mpolymorphav3.1.primaryTrs.pep_annot.fa.gz), Phytophthora palmivora (Sebastian/Phil: please specify origin)  and sequences of 248 common contaminant proteins and decoy sequences. Trypsin specificity was required and a maximum of two missed cleavages allowed. Minimal peptide length was set to seven amino acids. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed, oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. Peptide-spectrum-matches and proteins were retained if they were below a false discovery rate of 1%.  Statistical analysis of the MaxLFQ values was carried out using Perseus (version 1.5.8.5, http://www.maxquant.org/). Quantified proteins were filtered for reverse hits and hits “identified by site” and MaxLFQ values were log2 transformed. After grouping samples by condition (4 groups) only those proteins were retained for the subsequent analysis that had two valid values in one of the conditions. Missing values were imputed from a normal distribution, using the default settings in Perseus (1.8 downshift, separately for each column). Volcano plots were generated in Perseus using an FDR of 0.01 and an s0=1, data was exported and processed using Excel.

### Publication Abstract
The expansion of plants onto land necessitated the&#xa0;evolution of robust defense strategies to protect against a wide array of microbial invaders. Whereas host responses to microbial colonization are extensively explored in evolutionarily young land plant lineages such as angiosperms, we know relatively little about plant-pathogen interactions in early-diverging land plants thought to better represent the ancestral state. Here, we define the transcriptional and proteomic response of the early-divergent liverwort Marchantia polymorpha to infection with the oomycete pathogen Phytophthora palmivora. We uncover a robust molecular response to oomycete colonization in Marchantia that consists of conserved land plant gene families. Direct macroevolutionary comparisons of host infection responses in Marchantia and the model angiosperm Nicotiana benthamiana further reveal a shared set of orthologous microbe-responsive genes that include members of the phenylpropanoid metabolic pathway. In addition, we identify a role for the Marchantia R2R3-MYB transcription factor MpMyb14 in activating phenylpropanoid (flavonoid) biosynthesis during oomycete infection. Mpmyb14 mutants infected with P.&#xa0;palmivora fail to&#xa0;activate phenylpropanoid biosynthesis gene expression and display enhanced disease susceptibility compared to wild-type plants. Conversely, the ectopic induction of MpMyb14 led to the accumulation of anthocyanin-like pigments and dramatically enhanced liverwort resistance to P.&#xa0;palmivora infection. Collectively, our results demonstrate that the Marchantia response to oomycete infection displays evolutionarily conserved features indicative of an ancestral pathogen deterrence strategy centered on phenylpropanoid-mediated biochemical defenses.

### Keywords
Plant immunity, Lc-ms/ms, Pathogen-response, Marchantia polymorpha

### Affiliations
Basic Immune System of Plants / Protein Mass Spectrometry  Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research  Carl-von-Linne-Weg 10, 50829 Cologne, Germany
Plant Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry Group
Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research
Carl-von-Linné Weg 10
50829 Cologne

### Submitter
Sara Christina Stolze

### Lab Head
Dr Hirofumi Nakagami
Basic Immune System of Plants / Protein Mass Spectrometry  Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research  Carl-von-Linne-Weg 10, 50829 Cologne, Germany


