### Accession
PXD030440

### Title
Young Proteomics Investigators Club - Challenge 3

### Description
Data for the third YPIC Challenge. A synthetic peptide was analyzed using HR-MS. The peptide contains a codeword/phrase/sentence. Can you decrypt it? Get your best mates and try to crack the challenge!

### Sample Protocol
1. Preparations     i. 500 mM DTT: 0.0386 g DTT in 500 µl H2O    · 1 M IAA: 0.09248 g IAA in 500 µl H2O    · SP3 beads: Prepare a 1:1 combination (6+6 µl) of the two types of Sera-Mag beads. Place on a magnetic rack and remove the supernatant. Add 12 µl of water, then immobilize on magnetic rack and remove supernatant. Repeat twice (total: 3 times). Reconstitute beads with 10.44 µl water (x 0.87 of total volume) to get a 50 µg/µl stock. Stock can be stored at 4°C for 1 month.    · 80% Ethanol: 1120 µl Ethanol + 280 µl H20    · 50 mM ammoniumbicarbonate: 0.0988 g in 25 ml H2O    · Trypsin/LysC: 20 µg (1 vial) are dissolved in 20 µl Reconstitution Buffer    · Glu-C: 25 µg (1 vial) are dissolved in 25 µl 50mM acetic acid  2. Dissolve protein in 100 µl Dige. Aliquot in 20 µg. Use 2 aliquots and store the other at -20°C.   1. Reduce sample by 2µl adding 500 mM DTT (final concentration approx. 10 mM).   2. Vortex and incubate the solution for 1 h in the 56 °C incubator. Cool to room temperature.   3. Add 5.6 µl 1 M IAA to each sample (final concentration approx. 55 mM).   4. Vortex and incubate for 30 min at RT in the dark.   5. Add 4 µl of the prepared beads (~10:1 beads:protein) and mix by gentle tipping. Incubate at RT for 5 min.   6. Add 120 µl Acetonitrile to achieve a final concentration of 50% and shake briefly.   7. Incubate in a Thermomixer at 24°C for 15 min at 1000 rpm. Observe aggregation. Clumping of the beads indicates binding of the proteins.   8. Place the tube in a magnetic rack. Observe the binding pattern. A distributed spread of beads is a good indication of bound material.   9. Remove the supernatant (store to examine binding efficiency).   10. Remove the tube from the magnetic rack and add 100 µl of 80% Ethanol. Vortex and spin down.   11. Place the tube in a magnetic rack and remove the supernatant (store).   12. Repeat the washing steps with 80% Ethanol once (2 times in total).   13. Remove the tube from the magnetic rack and add 100 µl of Acetonitrile. Vortex and spin down.   14. Place the tube in a magnetic rack and remove the supernatant.   15. Try to remove as much Acetonitrile as possible after the last washing step.   16. Add 40 µl 50 mM ammoniumbicarbonate for digestion.   17. Digestion of 1 aliquot with Glu-C (CH1):   · Add 1 µg (1 µl) GluC (1:20). Vortex and shake tubes.   · Incubate overnight at 25°C in the thermomixer.   18. Digestion of 1 aliquot with Trypsin/LysC (CH2):   · Add 0.8 µg (0.8 µl) Trypsin/LysC (1:25). Vortex and shake tubes.   · Incubate overnight at 37°C in the incubator.   19. Vortex to resuspend the settled beads and homogenize the peptides.   20. Acidify samples with 30% TFA and vortex at 1000 rpm.   21. Centrifuge at 20 000 g at 24°C for 1 min.   22. Place the tube on a magnetic rack.   23. Collect the supernatant (contains peptides).   24. Store beads at 4°C in water (100 µl).      SPE Cleanup:  3. Use complete sample. Check pH – has to be below 3.   1. Use 1 Pierce Desalting Spin column per sample.  4. Centrifuge at 5000g for 1 min to remove solution and pack resin.  5. Wash with 2 x 300 µl Acetonitrile. Centrifuge at 5000g for 1 min.  6. Wash with 2 x 300 µl 0.1% TFA. Centrifuge at 5000g for 1 min.  7. Fill sample up to 300 µl and load. Centrifuge at 3000g for 1 min. Reload sample and store FT!  8. Wash with 3 x 300 µl 0.1% TFA. Centrifuge at 3000g for 1 min.   1. Use new tube. Elute with 2 x 120 µl SPE Elution (90% ACN, 0.4% FA). Centrifuge at 3000g for 1 min.   2. Transfer into glass vial with insert and evaporate at 45°C until 1 µl remain:  Sample Time Sample CH1   Sample CH2       9. Reconstitute in 160 µl of 0.1 % TFA (1µg in 8 µl).

### Data Protocol
No data processing has been conducted. No data processing has been conducted. No data processing has been conducted. No data processing has been conducted.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Synthetic peptides, Ypic, Fun

### Affiliations
Medical University of Vienna

### Submitter
Florian Wiesenhofer

### Lab Head
Dr Klaus Kratochwill
Medical University of Vienna


