### Accession
PXD011730

### Title
Loss-of-function mutations in QRICH2 cause male infertility with multiple morphological abnormalities of the sperm flagella

### Description
Aberrant sperm flagella impair sperm motility and cause male infertility, yet the genes which have been identified in multiple morphological abnormalities of the flagella (MMAF) can only explain the pathogenic mechanisms of MMAF in a small number of cases. Here, we identify and functionally characterize homozygous loss-of-function mutations of QRICH2 in two infertile males with MMAF from two consanguineous families. Remarkably, Qrich2 knock-out (KO) male mice constructed by CRISPR-Cas9 technology present MMAF phenotypes and sterility. To elucidate the mechanisms of Qrich2 functioning in sperm flagellar formation, we perform proteomic analysis on the testes of KO and wild-type mice. Furthermore, in vitro experiments indicate that QRICH2 is involved in sperm flagellar development through stabilizing and enhancing the expression of proteins related to flagellar development. Our findings strongly suggest that the genetic mutations of human QRICH2 can lead to male infertility with MMAF and that QRICH2 is essential for sperm flagellar formation.

### Sample Protocol
1. Protein Extraction  The mouse testes were grinded by liquid nitrogen into cell powder and then transferred to a 5-mL centrifuge tube. After that, four volumes of lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail) was added to the cell powder, followed by sonication three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. 2. Trypsin Digestion For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4h digestion. 3. TMT Labeling  After trypsin digestion, peptide was desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. Peptide was reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for TMT kit. Briefly, one unit of TMT reagent were thawed and reconstituted in acetonitrile. The peptide mixtures were then incubated for 2h at room temperature and pooled, desalted and dried by vacuum centrifugation. 4. HPLC Fractionation  The tryptic peptides were fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Agilent 300Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated with a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0) over 60 min into 60 fractions. Then, the peptides were combined into 18 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging. 5. LC-MS/MS Analysis The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 26 min, 23% to 35% in 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were processed by GO Annotation (www.  http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/), Domain Annotation (InterProScan) and KEGG Pathway Annotation (KEGG online service tools KAAS mapper).

### Publication Abstract
Aberrant sperm flagella impair sperm motility and cause male infertility, yet the genes which have been identified in multiple morphological abnormalities of the flagella (MMAF) can only explain the pathogenic mechanisms of MMAF in a small number of cases. Here, we identify and functionally characterize homozygous loss-of-function mutations of QRICH2 in two infertile males with MMAF from two consanguineous families. Remarkably, Qrich2 knock-out (KO) male mice constructed by CRISPR-Cas9 technology present MMAF phenotypes and sterility. To elucidate the mechanisms of Qrich2 functioning in sperm flagellar formation, we perform proteomic analysis on the testes of KO and wild-type mice. Furthermore, in vitro experiments indicate that QRICH2 is involved in sperm flagellar development through stabilizing and enhancing the expression of proteins related to flagellar development. Our findings strongly suggest that the genetic mutations of human QRICH2 can lead to male infertility with MMAF and that QRICH2 is essential for sperm flagellar formation.

### Keywords
Sperm flagella, Mutation, Proteomics analysis, Morphological abnormalities

### Affiliations
zhejiang scientific technology universitiy
Department of Obstetrics/Gynecology, Joint Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine (SCU-CUHK), Key Laboratory of Obstetric, Gynecologic and Pediatric Diseases and Birth Defects of Ministry of Education, West China Second University Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610041, China.

### Submitter
xiaonan fu

### Lab Head
Dr Wenming Xu
Department of Obstetrics/Gynecology, Joint Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine (SCU-CUHK), Key Laboratory of Obstetric, Gynecologic and Pediatric Diseases and Birth Defects of Ministry of Education, West China Second University Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610041, China.


