### Accession
PXD000699

### Title
Trichomonas vaginalis

### Description
Trichomonas vaginalis is a sexually transmitted infection that causes vaginitis and increases the risk of HIV transmission. We are interested in the secreted and membrane glycoproteins of Trichomonas because they are likely involved in pathogenesis and may include novel vaccine targets. Four mass spectrometric methods (identification of all parasite proteins, glycoprotein enrichment with the plant lectin Concanavalin A, peptide:N-glycanase treatment to identify occupied N-glycans sites, and analysis of N-terminal peptides) were used to identify >300 Trichomonas secreted and membrane proteins. The first group of these proteins, which were present in multiple genome copies and had homologs in diverse eukaryotes, included 1) those involved in the N-glycan-dependent quality control protein folding in the ER lumen, 2) metalloproteases, serine proteases, cysteine proteases, and other lysosomal enzymes, and 3) transporters and membrane-associated cyclases. The second group of secreted and membrane proteins were, for the most part, encoded by single copy genes, unique to Trichomonas, and missing N-terminal signal peptides. The latter observation is despite evidence that the signal peptide peptidase functions normally in Trichomonas. As the unique secreted and membrane proteins of Trichomonas were often large and lacked features that make it easy to choose vaccine candidates, alternative strategies for vaccination and/or therapy are discussed.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed, extracted proteins were then separated on SDS-PAGE, protein bands were in situ hydrolized with trypsin. Extracted peptides were analyzed by reversed phase C18 LC-MS/MS using an LTQ-Orbitrap-XL.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were converted in mgf files and proteins were identified by in house version of MASCOT software ( 2.4.0) using a Decoy database identification, using Trichomonas vaginalis database.

### Publication Abstract
The draft genome of Trichomonas vaginalis was recently published, but not much is known on why it has such a large genome. In part this size is due to many gene family expansions. For example we found over 100 members in the adenylyl cyclase family. About half are complete full length genes, and nearly half are initially confirmed to be pseudogenes, the remaining are either incomplete or the apparent result of assembly or sequencing problems. The family can be divided into two subgroups by sequence similarity. These can then be divided into functional and pseudo genes. Among all four of these sets the cyclase domain is very well conserved. We gave three possible hypotheses for that observation: a) Sequencing error or stop-codon read-through; b) Recency of duplication and mutation; c) The likelihood of functional pseudogene.

### Keywords
Trichomonas vaginalis, Con-a, Trichomoniasis, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Boston University Henry M. Goldman School of Dental Medicine, Department of Molecular & Cell Biology. Boston University School of Medicine, Department of Microbiology
Chemical Sciences

### Submitter
Andrea Carpentieri

### Lab Head
Dr John Crawford Samuelson
Boston University Henry M. Goldman School of Dental Medicine, Department of Molecular & Cell Biology. Boston University School of Medicine, Department of Microbiology


