### Accession
PXD023219

### Title
NUDT2 Knockout full proteome mouse

### Description
Proteome comparison between bone-marrow cells isolated from wildtype and NUDT2 knockout mice.

### Sample Protocol
For proteomic analysis, wild-type and Nudt2 knockout bone marrow cells (5e6/cell line/replicate; 4 replicates) were lysed in 300 µL of lysis buffer (4% SDS, 10 mM DTT in 50 mM Tris pH 7.6) supplemented with complete protease inhibitor (Roche) and boiled for 10 min at 95 °C. The protein concentration of cleared cell lysates was assessed using Pierce 660 nm Protein Assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Protein concentrations for all cell lines and replicates were equalized to 35 µg protein content and alkylated with 55 mM IAA for 20 min in the dark. Proteins were precipitated with acetone and resuspended in 150 µL of denaturation buffer (6 M Urea, 2 M Thiourea in 10 mM HEPES pH 8.0). Protein digestion was performed by adding 1:100 (protein:enzyme) trypsin and LysC overnight at room temperature. Peptides were purified on stage tips and analyzed by LC-MS/MS using the Easy nano LC 1200 system coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide mixtures were separated on a 50cm C18-reversed-phase column (Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µM, 200×0.075 mm; Dr. Maisch) using a 180-minute linear gradient of 5 to 30% buffer B (0.1% formic acid and 80% ACN) with a flow rate of 250 nL/min. The mass spectrometer was set up to run a Top10 method acquiring full scans (300-1,600 m/z, R = 60,000 at 200 m/z) at a target of 3e6 ions, followed by isolation of the ten most abundant ions, HCD fragmentation (target 1e5 ions, maximum injection time 120 ms, isolation window 1.4 m/z, NCE 27%, and underfill ratio of 20%) and detection in the Orbitrap analyzer.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification and quantification were performed using MaxQuant version 1.6.17.0. For all MaxQuant searches, typical default parameters were employed. Spectra were searched against forward and reverse sequences of the reviewed mouse proteome including isoforms (Uniprot, UP000000589). Settings included carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications. Trypsin/P was specified as the proteolytic enzyme. The minimal peptide length was defined as 7 amino acids, match between run was disabled for LFQ determination.

### Publication Abstract
While viral replication processes are largely understood, comparably little is known on cellular mechanisms degrading viral RNA. Some viral RNAs bear a 5'-triphosphate (PPP-) group that impairs degradation by the canonical 5'-3' degradation pathway. Here we show that the Nudix hydrolase 2 (NUDT2) trims viral PPP-RNA into monophosphorylated (P)-RNA, which serves as a substrate for the 5'-3' exonuclease XRN1. NUDT2 removes 5'-phosphates from PPP-RNA in an RNA sequence- and overhang-independent manner and its ablation in cells increases growth of PPP-RNA viruses, suggesting an involvement in antiviral immunity. NUDT2 is highly homologous to bacterial RNA pyrophosphatase H (RppH), a protein involved in the metabolism of bacterial mRNA, which is 5'-tri- or diphosphorylated. Our results show a conserved function between bacterial RppH and mammalian NUDT2, indicating that the function may have adapted from a protein responsible for RNA turnover in bacteria into a protein involved in the immune defense in mammals.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Mouse, Nudix hydolases, Bone-marrow, Full proteome

### Affiliations
Immunopathology of Virus Infections, Technical University of Munich, School of Medicine, Institute of Virology, 81675 Munich, Germany
TUM

### Submitter
Quirin Emslander

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Pichlmair
Immunopathology of Virus Infections, Technical University of Munich, School of Medicine, Institute of Virology, 81675 Munich, Germany


