### Accession
PXD010643

### Title
Characterization of degradative pathway of diclofenac in Raoultella sp. KDF8 resolved by comparative proteomics and metabolomics study

### Description
The widespread appearance of diclofenac as an emerging contaminant in the environment and its potential impact on living organisms is a matter  of concern. Our current work uses proteomics and metabolomics to gain a better understanding of diclofenac biodegradation by the bacterial strain Raoultella sp. KDF8.

### Sample Protocol
The strain Raoultella sp. KDF8 (deposited at the CCM Collection, Czech Republic under accession number 8678) is a bacterial strain isolated from polluted soils and modified by chemical mutagenesis [16]. Luria-Bertani broth (LB) medium consisting of (in g L-1) 10 tryptone, 5 yeast extract and 10 NaCl was used for pre-inoculum culture of Raoultella sp. KDF8. Basal salts broth medium (BSB) for DCF degradation contained (in g L-1) 0.1 NaCl, 1.03 K2HPO4, 0.75 KH2PO4 , 1 NH4Cl and was supplemented with trace elements (BSBTE; in mg L-1): MgSO4.7H2O 200, CaCl2.2H2O 10, ZnSO4.7H2O 6.6, MnSO4.4H2O 0.17, FeSO4.7H2O 1.5, CoCl2.6H2O 0.48, CuSO4.5H2O 0.47, and Na2MoO4.2H2O 0.45.   The cultures of Raoultella sp. KDF8 were grown in BSBTE medium supplemented with glycerol (1.0 g L-1) or DCF (1.0 g L-1) until the exponential phase of growth (24 h) and late exponential phase (48 h). The biomasses were harvested by centrifugation (5 min, 8000 g, 4 °C), washed and resuspended in phosphate-buffered saline buffer (PBS, 137 mM NaCl, 2.7 mM KCl, 10 mM Na2HPO4, 1.8 mM KH2PO4) to obtain a 10% ww/v suspension. The samples were sonicated with addition of sodium deoxycholate to a final concentration of 2%. The protein concentrations were determined by using Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific, USA). Aliquots of disintegrated samples (200 μg of proteins) were reduced with 5 mM tris-(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP, 60 °C, 60 min), and subsequently blocked by 10 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS, 10 min, 25 °C). Pretreated samples were digested by trypsin (1:100 ratio, overnight, 37 °C) and desalted on C18 column (Hichrom, UK).

### Data Protocol
For peptide analysis, the samples were applied on nLC-MS with a trap column (Acclaim PepMap300, C18, 5 µm, 300 Å, 300 µm x 5 mm) and nano reversed phase separation column (EASY-Spray column, C18, 2 µm, 100 Å, 75 µm x 50 cm). The liquid chromatography protocol with a flow rate of 15 μl min-1 and buffer system - buffer A: 2% AcN, 0.1% formic acid (FA) and buffer B: 80% AcN, 0.1% FA consisted of the steps: sample application - 4 min, linear gradient 2–40% buffer B for 60 min, 90% buffer B for 8 min.   Eluted peptides were directly ionized by electrospray and analyzed on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Q-OT-qIT, Thermo Scientific, USA). Peptide precursors with m/z 400 to 1600 (120K resolution, 200 m/z) were trapped, and those with charge states 2–6 were sampled for MS/MS and the dynamic exclusion duration 45 s with a 10 ppm tolerance. The spectra were acquired using an activation time of 30 ms and 30% normalized collision energy (NCE). The instrument was set to top speed mode with 2-s cycles.  All data were processed by using label-free algorithms in MaxQuant version 1.5.3.8 and the Andromeda software (for MS/MS data) [31]. Dithiomethylation, oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation were defined as a variable modification. Maximum false discovery rate (FDR) were set to 1% for peptides and proteins. The acquired data were used to search for Raoultella ornithinolytica protein sequences database (NCBI non-redundant protein sequences, 7631 sequences, July 2016).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Degradation, Proteomics, Raoultella;, Diclofenac

### Affiliations
Charles University
The Czech Academy of Sciences, Institute of Microbiology, Vídeňská 1083, 142 20 Prague 4, Czech Republic

### Submitter
Karel Harant

### Lab Head
Dr Jiří Zahradník
The Czech Academy of Sciences, Institute of Microbiology, Vídeňská 1083, 142 20 Prague 4, Czech Republic


