### Accession
PXD018450

### Title
Proteomic profiling of HepG2 cell line after 2DE fractionation

### Description
One of the major goals of the Chromosome-centric Human Proteome Project (C-HPP) is to catalog and annotate myriads of heterogeneous proteoforms, produced by ca. 20 thousand genes. To achieve deeper and personalized dive into proteome we suggest to use customized RNA-seq library of potential proteoforms, which includes aberrant variants, specific to the certain biological sample. Multidimensional fractionation by means of two-dimensional electrophoresis and high-performance liquid chromatography, allowed us to downgrade the difficulty of biological mixture for the following shotgun mass spectrometry. To benchmark proposed pipeline we examined heterogeneity of the HepG2 hepatoblastome cell line proteome.

### Sample Protocol
Approximately 10 mln cells, containing 2 mg of protein, of HepG2 cell line of the same biological sample, which was used for RNASeq analysis. 2DE was performed in accordance with the classical method of Klose and O’Farrell in denaturating conditions. Details of sample preparation and 2DE analysis are particularly described in (Naryzhny et al., 2016). The obtained 2DE gel was cut into 96 cells (~0.7 cm2 each) with previously determined coordinates of molecular mass and isoelectric point. 2DE was performed by the Naryzhny group. Each cell was cut, shredded, and treated by trypsin. After trypsinolysis mixtures of peptides were extracted from the gel cells and dried in a vacuum centrifuge. Then dry mixtures were prepared for LC-MS/MS analysis by dissolving in 5% (v/v) formic acid, and injection onto a trap column Zorbax 300SB-C18 (Agilent Technologies, USA) Agilent HPLC system 1100 Series (Agilent Technologies, USA). Peptides were fractionated on a 150 mm × 75 μm Zorbax 300SB-C18 reverse-phase analytical column (Agilent Technologies, USA) over a 30 min organic gradient of 5−60% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid and a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Peptides were ionized by nanoelectrospray at 2.0 kV. Tandem mass spectrometry was performed in two duplicates on Orbitrap Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, USA). Mass spectra were acquired in positive ion mode. LC-MS/MS was performed by the Zgoda group.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were extracted, converted into .mgf format and analyzed using combination of three search engines (X!Tandem, MS-GF+, and OMSSA), implemented into SearchGUI platform (v. 3.3.17), against RNA-specific and standard UniProt libraries.  We used the following search parameters: enzyme specificity – trypsin; maximum one missed cleavage; carbamidomethylation of cysteine regarded as fixed modification; oxidation of methionine, acetylation of lysine and N-terminus amino acid residues, phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine regarded as variable modifications; precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm; product mass tolerance of 0.01 Da. We ignored amino acid changes between I and L, which usually are hardly distinguishable by means of mass spectrometry. To control the confidence of identification, false discovery rates (FDR) were calculated in PeptideShaker by searching a decoy database generated by automatic reversing all the protein sequences from the library. FDR < 1% was used as a cut-off criterion for all identified peptides and proteins. According with the international criteria of protein identification, peptides with FDR > 1%, and peptides with less than 2 peptide-spectra matches, as well as short (< 9 a.a.) and long (> 25 a.a.) peptides were removed from the further processing.

### Publication Abstract
One of the major goals of the Chromosome-Centric Human Proteome Project (C-HPP) is to catalog and annotate a myriad of heterogeneous proteoforms, produced by ca. 20 thousand genes. To achieve a detailed and personalized understanding into proteomes, we suggest using a customized RNA-seq library of potential proteoforms, which includes aberrant variants specific to certain biological samples. Two-dimensional electrophoresis coupled with high-performance liquid chromatography allowed us to downgrade the difficulty of biological mixing following shotgun mass spectrometry. To benchmark the proposed pipeline, we examined heterogeneity of the HepG2 hepatoblastoma cell line proteome. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD018450.

### Keywords
Hepg2, Lc-ms/ms, Proteoforms

### Affiliations
Institute of Biomedical Chemistry
Lab of proteoforms' interactomics, Institute of Biomedical Chemistry, Moscow, Russia

### Submitter
Olga Kiseleva

### Lab Head
Dr Ekaterina Poverennaya
Lab of proteoforms' interactomics, Institute of Biomedical Chemistry, Moscow, Russia


