### Accession
PXD014222

### Title
Proteogenomics of colorectal cancer liver metastases

### Description
Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most common and second most deadly cancer worldwide. Treatments for metastatic CRC (mCRC) are still largely based on toxic chemotherapy regimens, but important insights into tumor biology enabled the development of targeted cancer therapies. Here, we describe a proteogenomic analysis of CRC liver metastases (metastatic CRC, mCRC), an ideal setting to analyze therapeutic resistance which occurs in a short time frame. We selected liver metastases from two CRC patients on both of which we performed deep proteome profiling and WES and RNAseq-directed database searches, identifying 10 predicted muttaions, one of which was KRAS G12V. finding we generated targeted parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) assays using stable isotope labelled standard (SIS) peptides to quantify the actual concentration (fmol per µg of total protein) of the mutated and canonical (wildtype) protein variants for 8 different mutations.  We demonstrate on a total of 8 tumor and 6 paired healthy tissue samples (7 and 6 out of these KRASG12V) that PRM allows quantifying the actual mutation rate on the protein level from as little 10 µg of total protein starting amount and within a single 1 hour nano-LC-MS/MS run.

### Sample Protocol
Snap-frozen tissue samples were grinded using a glass douncer using 600 µL of lysis buffer (4% SDS, 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris, pH 7.8; supplemented with cOmplete mini and PhosSTOP according the manufacturer’s recommendations). Homogenization was supported using an ultrasonic bath (3 x 30 s cycles on ice). Next, 10 µL of Benzonase and 2 mM MgCl2 were added and the sample incubated for 30 min at 37 °C. Lysate was clarified by centrifugation (18,000 rcf for 30 min at RT). The supernatant was collected and transferred to a protein LoBind tube. Protein concentration was estimated using the Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit using triplicate determination. Next, an aliquot corresponding to 400 µg of total protein was diluted 10-fold with ice-cold Ethanol and incubated at -40 °C for 1 h. After centrifugation (12,000 rcf for 30 min at 4 °C), the protein pellet was washed with 1 mL of ice-cold acetone, followed by centrifugation as above. The supernatant was carefully removed and the pellet dried in a laminar flow hood. Next, the protein pellet was re-solubilized in 50 µg of 6 M GuHCl, followed by dilution to a final concentrations of: 0.2 M GuHCl, 5% acetonitrile, 50 mM ammoniumbicarbonate, 2 mM CaCl2, pH 7.8. Trypsin (Sequencing Grade, Promega) was added in a ratio of 1:20 (w:w). The sample was incubated for 14 h at 37 °C under gentle shaking. Digestion was quenched using a final concentration of 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), and the sample was spun down at 18,000 rcf for 5 min at RT. 5 µL of the supernatant corresponding to 1 µg of protein was used for digest control using a monolithic HPLC system, as described previously . The remainder of the sample (399 µg) was desalted using C18 SPEC tips (4 mg, Varian). Tips were activated with 100 µL 100%  acetonitrile (ACN), equilibration with 3 x 100 µL 0.1 TFA, samples were loaded twice, washed with 3 x 100 µL 0.1% TFA, and eluted with 2 x 50 µL 70% ACN. After elution, an aliquot corresponding to 50 µg was transferred to a new tube for global proteome analysis. Both samples were dried under vacuum.  The dried 50 µg digest aliquot was resolubilized in 10 mM ammonium formate, pH 8.0. The sample was fractionated by reversed-phase chromatography at pH 8.0 on a Biobasic C18, 0.5 x 150 mm, 5 µm particle size column using an UltiMate 3000 LC system (both Thermo Scientific, Germany) with buffers A: 10 mM ammonium formate, pH 8.0, and B:  84% ACN in 10 mM ammonium formate, pH 8.0. Peptides were loaded onto the column with buffer A at a flow rate of 12.5 µL/min and separated using the following gradient: 3% B for 10 min, 3-45% B in 40 min, 45-60% B in 5 min, 60-95% B in 5 min, 95% B hold for 5 min, 95%-3% B in 5 min, re-equilibration of the column with 3% B for 20 min. A total of 20 fractions were collected at 1 min intervals from min 5 to 70 in a concatenation mode and all fractions were completely dried and stored at -80 °C until further use. Online LC separations were performed using Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano systems, equipped with trap columns (100 μm × 2 cm, C18 Acclaim Pepmap viper), and main columns (75 μm × 50 cm, C18 Acclaim Pepmap viper; all Thermo Fisher Scientific). All samples were pre-concentrated in 0.1% TFA for 5 min at a flow rate of 20 µL/min followed by separation on the main column at 250 nL/min using binary buffer (A: 0.1% formic acid; B: 84% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) ranging from 3-35% B in 120 min, at 60 °C. MS survey scans were acquired in the Q Exactive HF (Thermo Scientific) from 300 to 1500 m/z at a resolution of 60,000, using an AGC target value of 3e6, and a maximum injection time of 120 ms. The 15 most abundant precursors with charge states 2-4 were selected with an isolation width of 1.2 m/z an AGC target value of 5e4 and an maximum injection time of 200 ms, fragmented using higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy of 27 and analyzed at a resolution of 15,000. The dynamic exclusion was set to 20 s.

### Data Protocol
For global proteome profiling and phosphoproteome analysis, database searches were executed using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Scientific). Searches were conducted in a target/decoy manner against the sample-specific databases (20,779 and 20,794 target sequences, respectively) plus a common contaminant database (257 target sequences) using the search algorithms Mascot (Version 2.6.1, Matrix Science) and Sequest HT. Precursor mass tolerance was limited to 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance to 0.02 Da. Cleavage specificity was set to fully tryptic, allowing for a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was defined as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine as variable modification for all searches. Additionally, N-terminal protein acetylation and formation of pyro-glutamic acid from N-terminal glutamine residues were set as variable modifications for global proteome profiling, while phosphorylation of serine, threonine or tyrosine residues was allowed as variable modification for phosphoproteome analysis. Results were evaluated with percolator and filtered for 1% FDR (PSM, Peptide and Protein level), additionally excluding proteins without uniquely assigned peptides as well as ones not marked as ‘master’ protein. The ptmRS  node was used in phosphoRS-mode to evaluate phosphorylation site localization, setting a minimum confidence level of 90%.  For variant peptide identification, searches were conducted using MSGF+ (v10282) operated via the SerachGUI interface (Version 3.2.20 ). Databases and search settings were the same as described above, however, group-specific FDR calculation was employed. Validation was performed via an R script (Version 3.3.1): First, search results were parsed using the mzID package, and only variant-specific PSMs were used for FDR calculation, i.e. only PSMs where all protein candidates originated from the variant database where allowed. Target-decoy based FDR calculation was then performed using the MSnID package, employing a multi-variant filter optimization (“Nelder Mead” method) based on MSGF+ E-score and precursor mass deviation to achieve 1% group-specific FDR on peptide level.  In order to verify linearity of response and determine the limit of blank (LOB), limit of detection (LOD) and lower limit of quantification (LLOQ), response curves of SIS peptides were recorded. First, a background matrix was generated by pooling aliquots of all individual samples and SIS peptides were spiked in at 8 concentrations, covering a range of three orders of magnitude. Based on prior analysis to determine response of each SIS peptide, they were spiked in ranges between 10 and 100 fmol as highest concentration point and 5 to 50 amol as lowest concentration point. For analysis of individual patient samples, a total amount of SIS peptides ranging between 0.1 and 5 fmol was spiked into 3µg of total tissue protein digest, depending on the expected endogenous concentration.

### Publication Abstract
<b>:</b> Hotspot testing for activating <i>KRAS</i> mutations is used in precision oncology to select colorectal cancer (CRC) patients who are eligible for anti-EGFR treatment. However, even for <i>KRAS</i><sup>wildtype</sup> tumors anti-EGFR response rates are &lt;30%, while mutated-<i>KRAS</i> does not entirely rule out response, indicating the need for improved patient stratification. We performed proteogenomic phenotyping of <i>KRAS</i><sup>wildtype</sup> and <i>KRAS</i><sup>G12V</sup> CRC liver metastases (mCRC). Among &gt;9000 proteins we detected considerable expression changes including numerous proteins involved in progression and resistance in CRC. We identified peptides representing a number of predicted somatic mutations, including KRAS<sup>G12V</sup>. For eight of these, we developed a multiplexed parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) mass spectrometry assay to precisely quantify the mutated and canonical protein variants. This allowed phenotyping of eight mCRC tumors and six paired healthy tissues, by determining mutation rates on the protein level. Total KRAS expression varied between tumors (0.47-1.01 fmol/&#xb5;g total protein) and healthy tissues (0.13-0.64 fmol/&#xb5;g). In <i>KRAS</i><sup>G12V</sup>-mCRC, G12V-mutation levels were 42-100%, while one patient had only 10% KRAS<sup>G12V</sup> but 90% KRAS<sup>wildtype</sup>. This might represent a missed therapeutic opportunity: based on hotspot sequencing, the patient was excluded from anti-EGFR treatment and instead received chemotherapy, while PRM-based tumor-phenotyping indicates the patient might have benefitted from anti-EGFR therapy.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, Proteogenomics, Colorectal cancer, Prm

### Affiliations
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V., Otto-Hahn-Str. 6b, 44227 Dortmund, Germany
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V., Dortmund

### Submitter
Bernhard Blank-Landeshammer

### Lab Head
Dr Albert Sickmann
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V., Otto-Hahn-Str. 6b, 44227 Dortmund, Germany


