### Accession
PXD011815

### Title
Photosynthesis Degeneration is Elaborately Regulated during Blueberry Fruit Maturation

### Description
Blueberry is one of the most desirable and nutritious fruits. During fruit development, the blueberry’s organoleptic properties and phytonutrient composition are ever-changing [1]. Blueberry fruit development is typically described in five phases: pads, cups, green, pink, and blue (ripe) [2]. The former two phases are referred to as the initial “expansion”. During expansion, young fruit is generally hard, dark green and distinguishable by size [3]. The latter three phases are referred to as maturation. Green fruit are hard and fully rounded green berries; pink berries are partially pigmented; blue (ripe) berries are fully colored and soft. Fruit maturation has attracted considerable research attention, and typically, the characteristics fruit softening, coloring, and sweetening are assessed [4].

### Sample Protocol
2.1.1 Materials  During blueberry maturation, fruit was collected from three plants of the O‘Neal variety of southern highbush blueberry V. corymbosum. These fruit could be categorized into five phases according to the previously mentioned report [2]: pads, cups, green, pink, and blue (ripe). Samples were collected at green, pink and blue phases during the growing season (May, 2017) at Yangdu, Zhejiang (Fig. 1a).   2.1.2 Protein Extraction   The fruit were frozen in liquid nitrogen, ground into cell powder, and transferred to a 5 mL centrifuge tube. four volumes of lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Triton-100, 10 mM dithiothreitol, and 1% protease Inhibitor Cocktail) were added to the cell powder, followed by sonication three times, on ice, using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz, Ningbo, China). Debris was removed by centrifugation at 20,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the protein was precipitated with cold 20% Trichloroacetic acid (TCA) for 2 h at -20 °C. After centrifugation at 12,000 g 4 °C for 10 min, the supernatant was discarded. The remaining precipitate was washed with cold acetone three times. The protein was re-dissolved in 8 M urea and the protein concentration was determined using a BCA protein assay kit (Thermo) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  2.1.3 Trypsin Digestion  For the trypsin digestion, the protein solution was incubated with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature, in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM Triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) to urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion (overnight) and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratios for a second 4 h-digestion.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data was processed using the Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra data was searched against a blueberry database concatenated with a reverse decoy database [2]. Trypsin was specified as the cleavage enzyme, allowing for up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met was specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for peptides was set > 40.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Blueberry, Fruit maturation, Photosynthesis degeneration

### Affiliations
zhejiang scientific technology universitiy
Key Laboratory of the Ministry of Agriculture for Creative Agriculture, Zhejiang Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Hangzhou 310021, China

### Submitter
xiaonan fu

### Lab Head
Dr Xiaobai LI
Key Laboratory of the Ministry of Agriculture for Creative Agriculture, Zhejiang Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Hangzhou 310021, China


