### Accession
PXD031064

### Title
Human LC-MS/MS for MBTPS1/S1P protein

### Description
To explore the molecular mechanism underlying the inflammatory symptoms, we set out to screen S1P interactors using Co-IP  and liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) and identified 29 potential candidates

### Sample Protocol
To explore the molecular mechanism underlying the inflammatory symptoms, we set out to screen S1P interactors using Co-IP  and liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) and identified 29 potential candidates

### Data Protocol
identified 29 potential candidates. Among them, ETFA and ETFB were identified by six and fifteen unique peptides, respectively. To this end, we performed an in-depth bioinformatics analysis of potential S1P-binding proteins using HIPPIE software (Schaefer, Fontaine, Vinayagam, Porras, Wanker and Andrade-Navarro, 2012). The protein-protein interaction network suggested that ETF might play a central role in the S1P-associated mitochondrial signaling

### Publication Abstract
In this report, we discovered a new entity named cataract, alopecia, oral mucosal disorder, and psoriasis-like (CAOP) syndrome in two unrelated and ethnically diverse patients. Furthermore, patient 1 failed to respond to regular treatment. We found that&#xa0;CAOP syndrome was caused by an autosomal recessive defect in the mitochondrial membrane-bound transcription factor peptidase/site-1 protease (MBTPS1, S1P). Mitochondrial abnormalities were observed in patient 1 with CAOP syndrome. Furthermore, we found that S1P is a novel mitochondrial protein that forms a trimeric complex with ETFA/ETFB. S1P enhances ETFA/ETFB flavination and maintains its stability. Patient S1P variants destabilize ETFA/ETFB, impair mitochondrial respiration, decrease fatty acid &#x3b2;-oxidation activity, and shift mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) to glycolysis. Mitochondrial dysfunction and inflammatory lesions in patient 1 were significantly ameliorated by riboflavin supplementation, which restored the stability of ETFA/ETFB. Our study discovered that mutations in MBTPS1 resulted in a new entity of CAOP syndrome and elucidated the mechanism of the mutations in the new disease.

### Keywords
Human lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Department of Dermatology, Xinhua Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China
 Department of Dermatology, Xinhua Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China

### Submitter
Fuying  Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Zhirong Yao
Department of Dermatology, Xinhua Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China


