### Accession
PXD044432

### Title
Comparative proteomics analysis of bladder cancer tissues to reveal proteins associated with cancer progression

### Description
The project aimed to determine proteomics changes in Bladder cancer (BCa) tissue from early to more advanced stages of the disease and identify the proteins associated with the progression. The samples used in this study were fresh frozen BCa tissues from patients collected immediately after surgery, with histopathologicaly confirmed disease. Samples were grouped according to the histopathological report in 3 groups: 1) Group 1 (pTa, G1), 2) Group 2 (T1, G2-G3) and 3) Group 3 (pT2-T3, G3). Patients were aged 28–82 years with no significant differences among groups regarding age: Median age (Group 1 (pTa, G1)) =62; Median age (Group 2 (T1, G2-G3)) =58 and Median age (Group 3 (pT2-T3, G3)) =73.5. Each group had 6 samples or 18 samples in total were used for the comparative proteomics analysis by label-free data-independent LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction: The frozen tissues (10-15 mg per sample) were pulverized with liquid nitrogen, resuspended in 1:20 ratio (w/v) of Lysis buffer (4% SDS, 5mM MgCl2x6H2O, 10 mM CHAPS, 100 mM NH4HCO3, 50 mM DTT), mixed and allowed to dissolve by sonication. After air dry for 30 min, the tissues were resuspended in 1:20 ratio (w/v) of Lysis buffer (4% SDS, 5mM MgCl2x6H2O, 10 mM CHAPS, 100 mM NH4HCO3, 0.5 M DTT), vortexed, sonicated in ice bath for 30 min, and incubated at 95oC for 30 min and than at 80 °C for 2 h with mixing at 1000 rpm. After cooling on ice for 5 min and sonication for 15 min, the protein content was quantified by Bradford method. Sample preparation: Rapigest protocol was used with some modifications. Portion of each individual sample in Lysis buffer containing 100 µg of protein was adjusted to 100 µl with Lysis buffer and 150 μl of methanol and 38 μl of chloroform were added. After vortexing vigorously for about 1 min and centrifuging at 5,000 x g for 5 min, most of the upper layer of methanol/water was aspirated and 112 μl of methanol was added. Proteins were pelleted and dissolved in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate containing 0.1% RapiGestTM detergent in ratio 2.5:1 (w/v). DTT was added (0.12 µmol/50 µg protein) and the solution was sonicated and boiled for 5 minutes. Protein concentration was determined using the Bradford assay. The volume of each sample containing total of 30 µg protein was adjusted to 35 µl with 0.1% RapiGest in 50 mM NH4HCO3, heated at 80oC for 15 minutes, reduced in 5 mM DTT for 30 minutes at 60oC and alkylated in 15 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in the dark for 30 minutes at room temperature. Trypsin (TRYPSEQM-RO ROCHE) was added at a 1:100 trypsin:protein ratio and incubated overnight at 37°C. TFA was added to final concentration of 0.5% and samples were incubated at 37°C for 90 minutes. The final concentration of protein was 200 ng/μl and yeast alcohol dehydrogenase was added as an internal control with concentration of 25 fmol/μl. Nano LC-MS/MS: A label-free LC-MS/MS protein profiling was performed using an ultra-performance liquid chromatography system ACQUITY UPLC® M-Class (Waters Corporation) coupled with SYNAPT G2-Si High Definition Mass Spectrometer (Waters Corporation) equipped with a T-Wave-IMS device. Data were obtained using ion-mobility separation (IMS) enhanced MSE acquisition named ultradefinition MSE (UDMSE). Samples were run at 400 ng per run in UDMSE acquisition mode, in single technical replicate. Peptides were trapped on a ACQUITY UPLC M-Class Trap column Symmetry C18, 5µm particles, 180 µm×20mm, (Waters Corporation), for 3 min at 8 µL/min in 0.1% solvent B (0.1% (v/v) FA in ACN)/99.9% solvent A (0.1% (v/v) FA). Peptide separation was done on C18 column HSS T3, 1.8 µm, 75µm×250mm (Waters Corporation) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min using 90 min multistep concave gradient. The column temperature was set to 55 °C. Spectra were collected over the mass range 50–2000 m/z with scan time of 0.5 s. Collision energy was held at 0 V for low energy scan while for the high energy cycles, look-up table file was put into the MS file: (i) ion-mobility bins 0–20: CE of 2 eV, (ii) ion-mobility bins 21–120: CE ramp from 10.6 eV to 50.4 eV, (iii) ion-mobility bins 121–200: CE ramp from 51 eV to 60 eV. A reference sprayer was operated at 500 nl/min to produce a lockmass spectrum with Glu-1-Fibrinopeptide B (EGVNDNEEGFFSAR) (m/z 785.8426) every 45 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed with Progenesis QIP version 4.1 (Nonlinear dynamics, Waters Corporation). Data was imported into Progenesis QIP with LE and HE threshold set to auto and data lock mass corrected. Imported runs were automatically aligned to the most suitable reference run identified by the software, followed by normalization of the protein abundances in individual runs using the run that was least different from all other. UniProtKB/ Swiss-Prot database from June 2020 containing 20 370 proteins human protein sequences and yeast alcohol dehydrogenase (UniProt P00330) was used. Using the PLGS database management tool, the sequence of each protein entry from the UniProtKB/ Swiss-Prot database was reversed to generate decoy database, which was appended to the original fasta file. This combined target decoy database was used for database search with the following parameters: digest reagent - trypsin; maximum missed cleavages - one; maximum protein mass - 250 kDa; fixed modifications – carbamidomethyl C; variable modification – oxidation M. Search tolerance parameters were as follows: peptide tolerance - auto; fragment tolerance - auto; FDR < 1%. Ion matching requirements were: two fragment ion matches per peptide identification, five fragment ion matches per protein identification and one peptide matches per protein identification. Peptides with a sequence length less than six amino acids and a score below 4 were removed. Grouping of similar proteins and relative quantitation from non-conflicting peptides were used for protein building. Proteins were reviewed and exported in the form of .csv output file for subsequent data analysis.

### Publication Abstract
The high recurrence rate and invasive diagnostic and monitoring methods in bladder cancer (BCa) clinical management require the development of new non-invasive molecular tools for early detection, particularly for low-grade and low-stage BCa as well as for risk stratification. By using an in-solution digestion method and label-free data-independent LC-MS/MS coupled with ion mobility, we profiled the BCa tissues from initiation to advanced stages and confidently identified and quantified 1619 proteins (&#x2265;2 peptides). A statistically significant difference in abundance (Anova &#x2264; 0.05) showed 494 proteins. Significant correlation with stage with steady up or down with BCa stages showed 15 proteins. Testing of NNMT, GALK1, and HTRA1 in urine samples showed excellent diagnostic potential for NNMT and GALK1 with AUC of 1.000 (95% CI: 1.000-1.000; <i>p</i> &lt; 0.0001) and 0.801 (95% CI: 0.655-0.947; <i>p</i> &lt; 0.0001), respectively. NNMT and GALK1 also showed very good potential in discriminating non-invasive low-grade from invasive high-grade BCa with AUC of 0.763 (95% CI: 0.606-0.921; <i>p</i> = 0.001) and 0.801 (95% CI: 0.653-0.950; <i>p</i> &lt; 0.0001), respectively. The combination of NNMT and GALK1 increased prognostic accuracy (AUC = 0.813). Our results broaden the range of potential novel candidates for non-invasive BCa diagnosis and prognosis.

### Keywords
Human, Rapigest, Fresh frozen tissues, Lc-ms/ms, Progenesis qip, Bladder cancer

### Affiliations
Research Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology “Georgi D Efremov”, Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Skopje
Research Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology “Georgi D Efremov”, Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Skopje, Krste Misirkov 2, 1000 Skopje,  Republic of North Macedonia Tel.: +389-2-3235-410; Fax: +389-2-3115-434

### Submitter
Katarina Davalieva

### Lab Head
Dr Katarina Davalieva,
Research Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology “Georgi D Efremov”, Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Skopje, Krste Misirkov 2, 1000 Skopje,  Republic of North Macedonia Tel.: +389-2-3235-410; Fax: +389-2-3115-434


