### Accession
PXD034627

### Title
An Unexpected Encounter: Respiratory Syncytial Virus Non-Structural Protein 1 Interacts With Mediator Subunit MED25

### Description
Human respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is the leading cause of severe acute lower respiratory tract infections in infants worldwide. Non-structural protein NS1 of RSV modulates the host innate immune response by acting as an antagonist of type I and type III interferon (IFN) production and signaling in multiple ways. It is likely that NS1 performs this function by interacting with different host proteins. In order to obtain a comprehensive overview of NS1 interaction partners, we performed three complementary protein-protein interaction screens i.e. BioID, MAPPIT and KISS. The BioID proximity screen was performed during an RSV infection in A549 cells. MED25, a subunit of the Mediator complex, was identified in all 3 performed screening methods as a potential NS1 interacting protein. We confirmed the interaction between MED25 and RSV NS1 by co-immunoprecipitation, not only upon overexpression of NS1, but also with endogenous NS1 during RSV infection. We also demonstrate that the replication of RSV is enhanced in MED25 knockout A549 cells, suggesting a potential antiviral role of MED25 during RSV infection. Mediator subunits function as transcriptional coactivators and are involved in transcriptional regulation of their target genes. Therefore, the interaction between RSV NS1 and cellular MED25 might be beneficial during an RSV infection as this can affect host transcription and the host immune response to infection.

### Sample Protocol
5 million A549 cells were seeded in 14 cm petri dishes. The next day, 8 petri dishes were infected with RSV NS1-BirA*-Flag, 8 with RSV mKate2-BirA*-Flag, 4 petri dishes were mock-infected and 4 petri dishes were infected with wild type mKate2 expressing RSV at a multiplicity of infection of 1 for 4h at 37°C. After 4h, virus containing medium was replaced with DMEM supplemented with 2% FBS and 50 µM of biotin. After 16h (20h after infection) the biotin containing medium was removed and cells were gently washed with ice-cold PBS and collected in PBS by scraping the cells from the petri dish. Cells from 2 petri dishes were pooled to 1 biological sample. The cells were pelleted by centrifugation at 500xg for 5min and washed with PBS. After another centrifugation at 500xg for 5min, supernatant was removed and cell pellets were stored at -20°C. Cell pellets were thawed on ice and resuspended in 1ml lysis buffer (50mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150mM NaCl, 1% NP40, 1mM EDTA, 1mM EGTA, 0,5% sodium deoxycholate, 0,1% SDS and complete protease inhibitor cocktail (04693132001, Sigma-Aldrich)). 210 units benzonase® nuclease (E1014, Sigma-Aldrich) were added to the lysates which were then incubated at 4°C for 1h with agitation. Cell lysates were subsequently sonicated at 30% amplitude (3 intervals of 9 sec sonication/5 sec rest) and centrifuged at 4,332xg for 15min at 4°C to remove the insoluble fraction. Meanwhile, streptavidin-sepharose High performance beads (17-5113-01, GE healthcare life sciences) were washed 3 times with 20 bed volumes of lysis buffer without sodium deoxycholate and protease inhibitors. Washed beads were added to each sample and incubated for 3 hours at 4°C under constant rotation. After 3 hours, the beads were pelleted by centrifugation at 400xg for 1min. The supernatant was removed and beads were washed 3 times in 1ml lysis buffer without sodium deoxycholate and protease inhibitors. Beads were subsequently washed 3 times with trypsin digestion buffer (20mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0 and 2mM CaCl2) and finally resuspended in 150μl trypsin digestion buffer. Washed beads were incubated for 4 hours with 1µg of trypsin (Promega) at 37˚C. After removal of the beads, another 1µg of trypsin was added and proteins were further digested overnight at 37˚C. Peptides were acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to lower the pH below 3 and desalted on reversed phase C18 OMIX tips (Agilent). The tips were first washed 3 times with 100µl pre-wash buffer (0.1% TFA in water/acetonitrile (ACN, 20:80, v/v)) and pre-equilibrated 5 times with 100µl of wash buffer (0.1% TFA in water) before the sample was loaded on the tip. After peptide binding, the tip was washed 3 times with 100µl of wash buffer and peptides were eluted twice with 100µl elution buffer (0.1% TFA in water/ACN (40:60, v/v)). The combined elutions were dried in a vacuum concentrator and re-dissolved in 20 µl loading solvent A (0.1% TFA in water/ACN (98:2, v/v)) of which 0.5µl was injected for LC-MS/MS analysis on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system in line connected to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a pneu-Nimbus dual ion source (Phoenix S&T). Trapping was performed at 10μl/min for 4min in loading solvent A on a 20mm trapping column (made in-house, 100μm internal diameter (I.D.), 5μm beads, C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch) and the sample was loaded on a 50cm µPACTM column with C18-endcapped functionality (PharmaFluidics) mounted in the Ultimate 3000’s column oven and kept at a constant temperature of 50°C. For proper ionization, a fused silica PicoTip emitter (10µm ID, New Objective) was connected to the µPAC™ outlet union and a grounded connection was provided to this union. Peptides were eluted by a non-linear increase from 1 to 50% MS solvent B (0.1% FA in water/ACN (2:8, v/v)) over 91 minutes, first at a flow rate of 750nl/min, then at 300nl/min, followed by a 9-minutes wash reaching 95% MS solvent B and re-equilibration with MS solvent A (0.1% FA in water). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent, positive ionization mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 5 most abundant peaks in a given MS spectrum. 1 MS1 scan (m/z 400−2,000, AGC target 3E6 ions, maximum ion injection time 80 ms), acquired at a resolution of 70,000 (at 200 m/z) was followed by up to 5 MS/MS scans (resolution 17,500 at 200 m/z) of the most intense ions fulfilling predefined selection criteria (AGC target 5E4 ions, maximum ion injection time 8ms, isolation window 2Da, fixed first mass 140 m/z, spectrum data type: centroid, intensity threshold 1.3E4, exclusion of unassigned, 1, 5-8, >8 positively charged precursors, peptide match preferred, exclude isotopes on, dynamic exclusion time 12 s). The HCD collision energy was set to 25% NCE and the polydimethylcyclosiloxane background ion at 445.12002 Da was used for internal calibration. QCloud was used to control instrument longitudinal performance during the project.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed with MaxQuant (version 2.0.1.0) using the Andromeda search engine with default search settings including a false discovery rate set at 1% on PSM and protein level. The spectra of all 12 LC-MS/MS runs were interrogated against the human proteins in the Swiss-Prot Reference Proteome database (database release version of January 2021 containing 20,621 human protein sequences, (http://www.uniprot.org)), the HRSV-A proteins in the uniprot database (release version of July 2021 containing 7,972 protein sequences, (http://www.uniprot.org)) and the protein sequences of the NS1 and mKate constructs. The mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions was set to 4.5 and 20 ppm, respectively, during the main search. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine, also allowing cleavage at proline bonds with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionine residues and acetylation of protein N-termini. Matching between runs was enabled with a matching time window of 0.7 minutes and an alignment time window of 20 minutes. Only proteins with at least one unique or razor peptide were retained leading to the identification of 2,297 proteins. Proteins were quantified by the MaxLFQ algorithm integrated in the MaxQuant software. A minimum ratio count of two unique or razor peptides was required for quantification. Further data analysis was performed with the Perseus software (version 1.6.2.1) after loading the protein groups file from MaxQuant. Reverse database hits were removed, LFQ intensities were log2 transformed and replicate samples were grouped. Proteins with less than three valid values in at least one group were removed and missing values were imputed from a normal distribution around the detection limit leading to a list of 1,400 quantified proteins that were used for further data analysis.  On these quantified proteins, a t-test was performed for pairwise comparison of RSV NS1-BirA*-Flag-infected and RSV mKate2-BirA*-Flag-infected cells. The results of this t-test is shown in the volcano plot in Fig. 2B. For each protein, the log2 (NS1-BirA* RSV infected/mKate2-BirA* RSV infected) fold change value is indicated on the X-axis, while the statistical significance (-log p value) is indicated on the Y-axis. Proteins outside the curved lines, set by an FDR value of 0.05 and an S0 value of 1 in the Perseus software, represent candidate NS1 or mKate2 interacting proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Human respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is the leading cause of severe acute lower respiratory tract infections in infants worldwide. Nonstructural protein NS1 of RSV modulates the host innate immune response by acting as an antagonist of type I and type III interferon (IFN) production and signaling in multiple ways. Likely, NS1 performs this function by interacting with different host proteins. In order to obtain a comprehensive overview of the NS1 interaction partners, we performed three complementary protein-protein interaction screens, i.e., BioID, MAPPIT, and KISS. To closely mimic a natural infection, the BioID proximity screen was performed using a recombinant RSV in which the NS1 protein is fused to a biotin ligase. Remarkably, MED25, a subunit of the Mediator complex, was identified in all three performed screening methods as a potential NS1-interacting protein. We confirmed the interaction between MED25 and RSV NS1 by coimmunoprecipitation, not only upon overexpression of NS1 but also with endogenous NS1 during RSV infection. We also demonstrate that the replication of RSV can be enhanced in MED25 knockout A549 cells, suggesting a potential antiviral role of MED25 during RSV infection. Mediator subunits function as transcriptional coactivators and are involved in transcriptional regulation of their target genes. Therefore, the interaction between RSV NS1 and cellular MED25 might be beneficial for RSV during infection by affecting host transcription and the host immune response to infection. <b>IMPORTANCE</b> Innate immune responses, including the production of type I and III interferons, play a crucial role in the first line of defense against RSV infection. However, only a poor induction of type I IFNs is observed during RSV infection, suggesting that RSV has evolved mechanisms to prevent type I IFN expression by the infected host cell. A unique RSV protein, NS1, is largely responsible for this effect, probably through interaction with multiple host proteins. A better understanding of the interactions that occur between RSV NS1 and host proteins may help to identify targets for an effective antiviral therapy. We addressed this question by performing three complementary protein-protein interaction screens and identified MED25 as an RSV NS1-interacting protein. We propose a role in innate anti-RSV defense for this Mediator complex subunit.

### Keywords
Respiratory syncytial virus, Protein-protein interaction, Non-structural protein, Mass spectrometry, Proximity labeling

### Affiliations
VIB-UGent Center for Medical Biotechnology, VIB, Ghent, Belgium; Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium
VIB Proteomics Core

### Submitter
Delphi Van Haver

### Lab Head
Dr Xavier Saelens
VIB-UGent Center for Medical Biotechnology, VIB, Ghent, Belgium; Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium


