### Accession
PXD020819

### Title
Global analysis of lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation in wheat root

### Description
Lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation (Khib) is a novel naturally occurring PTM, which is firstly discovered in histone. The system Khib detection at proteomics level has been performed in various species and tissues for the function and role characterization of Khib in biological activities. However, the Khib study in plant species is relatively less and the plant root, one of the critical plant organ, haven’t been studied. In the present study, the first root tissues lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylome analysis was performed in wheat specie with antibody immunoprecipitation affinity and high resolution mass spectrometry-based proteomics. Bioinformatics analyses including function classification, subcellular location predication, gene ontology enrichment and pathway enrichment were conducted to demonstrate the roles of these Khib sites and proteins in wheat root.

### Sample Protocol
The protein extraction was conducted according to previous report with some modifications20. Briefly, clean wheat root tissues were grinded into powder in a mortar with liquid nitrogen. Then the powder were transfer to a tube and re-suspended in ice cold extraction buffer (250 mM sucrose, 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 1% Triton X-100, 2 mM EDTA, 3μM TSA, 50 mM NAM, 10 mM DTT and 1% protease Inhibitor Cocktail). After and 5 minutes sonication on ice, the extraction buffer was mixed with same volume ice-cold Tris buffer phenol (pH 8.0) and agitated for 15 minutes. After centrifugation at 15000 g for 20 min, transfer the phenolic phase to a new tube and add four volumes of 100 mM ammonium acetate in methanol to the tube and keep the tube at -20°C for 12 hours. Following centrifugation (15 min, 15000 g), the precipitated protein pellet was rinsed three times with ice-cold acetone, vacuum-dried and stored at −80°C. Trypsin digestion

### Data Protocol
The MaxQuant software with integrated Andromeda search engine (v.1.4.1.2) was used for database searching. Tandem mass spectra were searched against the database of wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) in Uniprot (130,673 sequence, October, 2019) concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as the cleavage enzyme and a maximum of 4 missing cleavages was allowed. The mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions.

### Publication Abstract
Lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation (Khib) is a novel naturally occurring post-translational modification. The system Khib identification at proteomics level has been performed in various species and tissues to characterize the role of Khib in biological activities. However, the study of Khib in plant species is relatively less. In the present study, the first plant root tissues lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylome analysis was performed in wheat with antibody immunoprecipitation affinity, high resolution mass spectrometry-based proteomics and bioinformatics analysis. In total, 6328 Khib sites in 2186 proteins were repeatedly identified in three replicates. These Khib proteins showed a wide subcellular location distribution. Function and pathways characterization of these Khib proteins indicated that many cellular functions and metabolism pathways were potentially affected by this modification. Protein and amino acid metabolism related process may be regulated by Khib, especially ribosome activities and proteins biosynthesis process. Carbohydrate metabolism and energy production related processes including glycolysis/gluconeogenesis, TCA cycle and oxidative phosphorylation pathways were also affected by Khib modification. Besides, root sulfur assimilation and transformation related enzymes exhibited Khib modification. Our work illustrated the potential regulation role of Khib in wheat root physiology and biology, which could be used as a useful reference for Khib study in plant root.

### Keywords
2-hydroxyisobutyrylation, Post-translational modification, Protein metabolism, Energy metabolism, Carbohydrate, Wheat root

### Affiliations
Micrometer Biotech
College of Agronomy, Shandong Agricultural University, Tai’an, Shandong,China

### Submitter
Xianliang Ma

### Lab Head
Dr Geng Li
College of Agronomy, Shandong Agricultural University, Tai’an, Shandong,China


