### Accession
PXD028670

### Title
Sister chromatid exchanges independent of canonical homologous recombination factors.

### Description
Sister chromatid exchanges (SCEs) are a product of joint DNA molecules resolution, and are considered to require homologous recombination (HR). Canonical HR factors BRCA1, BRCA2 and RAD51 were indeed essential for SCE induction in response to irradiation-induced DNA breaks. By contrast, replication-blocking agents, including PARP inhibitors, induced SCEs independently of BRCA1, BRCA2 or RAD51. HR-independent SCEs were associated with incomplete DNA replication, as evidenced by post-replicative single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) accumulation and enrichment of PARP inhibitor-induced SCEs at common fragile sites (CFSs). Importantly, PARP-induced DNA lesions were transmitted into mitosis, pointing towards SCEs originating from mitotic processing of underreplicated DNA. We found polymerase theta to be associated to mitotic DNA lesions, to be required for SCE formation and to prevent chromosome fragmentation upon PARP inhibition in HR-defective cells. Combined, our data show that replication-blocking agents lead to underreplicated DNA in mitosis, which is processed into SCEs independently of canonical HR factors.

### Sample Protocol
Mitotic and interphase extracts were prepared and frozen at -80ºC until use. Biotinylated-oligo was coupled to streptavidin-coupled magnetic beads and incubated with mitotic or interphase extract for 10 min. Pulldown samples were then subjected to on-bead digestion and analyzed using top-10 DDA method in a Q-Exactive-Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The raw data were analyzed with MaxQuant (version 1.3.0.5) containing the integrated Andromeda search engine, and searched against a curated Xenopus Laevis Fasta list, using FDR of 0.01 at the protein and peptide level, and LFQ was used to normalize peptide counts across samples.

### Publication Abstract
Sister chromatid exchanges (SCEs) are products of joint DNA molecule resolution, and are considered to form through homologous recombination (HR). Indeed, SCE induction upon irradiation requires the canonical HR factors BRCA1, BRCA2 and RAD51. In contrast, replication-blocking agents, including PARP inhibitors, induce SCEs independently of BRCA1, BRCA2 and RAD51. PARP inhibitor-induced SCEs are enriched at difficult-to-replicate genomic regions, including common fragile sites (CFSs). PARP inhibitor-induced replication lesions are transmitted into mitosis, suggesting that SCEs can originate from mitotic processing of under-replicated DNA. Proteomics analysis reveals mitotic recruitment of DNA polymerase theta (POLQ) to synthetic DNA ends. POLQ inactivation results in reduced SCE numbers and severe chromosome fragmentation upon PARP inhibition in HR-deficient cells. Accordingly, analysis of CFSs in cancer genomes reveals frequent allelic deletions, flanked by signatures of POLQ-mediated repair. Combined, we show PARP inhibition generates under-replicated DNA, which is processed into SCEs during mitosis, independently of canonical HR factors.

### Keywords
Parp inhibitors, Sce, Interphase, Mitosis, Genome stability, Xenopus laevis, Ms, Hr, Biotin, Synthetic lethality, Cross-over

### Affiliations
Department of Medical Oncology, University Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, the Netherlands, Hanzeplein 1, 9713GZ, Groningen, the Netherlands
University Medical Center Groningen

### Submitter
Anastasia Audrey

### Lab Head
Dr Marcel A.T.M. van Vugt
Department of Medical Oncology, University Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, the Netherlands, Hanzeplein 1, 9713GZ, Groningen, the Netherlands


