### Accession
PXD007975

### Title
Quantitative Proteomic Analysis of Plasma Samples from Chronic Hepatitis B and Chronic Liver Failure Patients for Biomarker Discovery

### Description
Hepatitis B virus (HBV)-associated acute on chronic liver failure (HBV-ACLF), characterized by an acute deterioration of liver function in the patients with chronic hepatitis B (CHB), is lack of predicting biomarkers for prognosis. To explore potential biomarkers of HBV-ACLF for clinical applications, immuno-depletion of high-abundance plasma proteins followed by iTRAQ-based quantitative proteomic approach was employed to analyze plasma samples from 20 healthy control people, 20 CHB patients and 20 HBV-ACLF patients, respectively. As a result, a total of 427 proteins were identified and quantified from these samples, and 42 proteins were differentially expressed in HBV-ACLF patients as compared to both CHB patients and healthy controls. According to bioinformatics analysis results, 6 proteins related to immune response (MMR), inflammatory response (OPN, HPX), blood coagulation (ATIII) and lipid metabolism (APO-CII, GP73) were selected as biomarker candidates. Further ELISA analysis confirmed the significant up-regulation of GP73, MMR, OPN and down-regulation of ATIII, HPX, APO-CII in HBV-ACLF plasma samples (p<0.01). Moreover, receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve analysis revealed high diagnostic value of these candidates in assessing HBV-ACLF. In conclusion, present quantitative proteomic study identified 6 novel HBV-ACLF biomarker candidates and might provide fundamental information for development of HBV-ACLF biomarker.

### Sample Protocol
12 pooled plasma samples (pooled from n=5) from 20 healthy controls, 20 CHB patients and 20 ACLF patients were subjected to removal of high abundant proteins. Then equal amounts of proteins from each sample were digested with trypsin. Resultant peptides were processed 8-plex iTRAQ labeling, HPRP fractionation and subsequent LC-MS/MS analysis. Bioinformatics analysis was performed using Uniprot and STRING database. The plasma levels of candidate proteins were further verified by ELISA assay and diagnostic value of these biomarkers were assessed by forward stepwise logistic regression analysis and ROC curve analysis.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed by search against the UniProt/SwissProt Human database (IPI.human.v3.87) using Maxquant (version 1.5.1.0), with default settings including the allowance of one missed cleavage and 8-plex iTRAQ fixed modifications. Minimum 7 amino acids for peptide, >2 peptides were required per protein. For peptide and protein identification, false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1%. iTRAQ reporter ion intensity were used for quantification. By setting the median of intensity for each channel to equal and matching the distributions of each treatment iTRAQ reporter group (114, 115, 116, 118, 119 and 121) to those of the control iTRAQ reporter group (113, which corresponded to the mixture sample), we able to make consistent comparisons across different samples obtained from different iTRAQ 8-plex experiments. The ratio can be restored to the intensity by multiplying the median of intensity value for channel 113.

### Publication Abstract
Hepatitis B virus (HBV)-associated acute-on-chronic liver failure (HBV-ACLF), characterized by an acute deterioration of liver function in the patients with chronic hepatitis B (CHB), is lack of predicting biomarkers for prognosis. Plasma is an ideal sample for biomarker discovery due to inexpensive and minimally invasive sampling and good reproducibility. In this study, immuno-depletion of high-abundance plasma proteins followed by iTRAQ-based quantitative proteomic approach was employed to analyze plasma samples from 20 healthy control people, 20 CHB patients and 20 HBV-ACLF patients, respectively. As a result, a total of 427 proteins were identified from these samples, and 42 proteins were differentially expressed in HBV-ACLF patients as compared to both CHB patients and healthy controls. According to bioinformatics analysis results, 6 proteins related to immune response (MMR), inflammatory response (OPN, HPX), blood coagulation (ATIII) and lipid metabolism (APO-CII, GP73) were selected as biomarker candidates. Further ELISA analysis confirmed the significant up-regulation of GP73, MMR, OPN and down-regulation of ATIII, HPX, APO-CII in HBV-ACLF plasma samples (<i>p</i> &lt; 0.01). Moreover, receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve analysis revealed high diagnostic value of these candidates in assessing HBV-ACLF. In conclusion, present quantitative proteomic study identified 6 novel HBV-ACLF biomarker candidates and might provide fundamental information for development of HBV-ACLF biomarker.

### Keywords
Biomarker., Proteomics, Hbv-aclf, Chb, Itraq

### Affiliations
Chinese Academy of Sciences Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica
Chinese Academy of Sciences Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica 

### Submitter
Shanhua Fang

### Lab Head
Dr Hu ZHOU
Chinese Academy of Sciences Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica


