### Accession
PXD038199

### Title
Proteomic study of walnut oleosome and first evidence on oleosin
sensitization in allergic patients

### Description
The research project aims to investigate the walnut oleosome sub-proteome of raw, boiled, and roasted kernels. To achieve this goal both off-gel and in-gel approaches were used. Moreover, the immunoblotting experiments were performed to characterize the walnut OB proteins as potential allergens by demonstrating that the sera collected from walnut allergic patients’ immune-recognized walnut oleosins.

### Sample Protocol
Extraction of proteins from walnut OB Ten g of raw, boiled and roasted chopped walnuts were sonicated in a 30 mL grinding medium (GM1: 0.6 M sucrose, 10 mM sodium phosphate, pH 9.5) and filtered using two-layer gauze. The filtrated sample was centrifuged at 21460×g for 20 min at 4 °C, and the resulting pad floating on the top was collected. The oil bodies contained in the floating pad were resuspended progressively in different buffers: firstly, 10 mL of GM2 (GM1 with the addition of 0.1% Tween 20), secondly, 5 mL GM 3 (GM2 with the addition of 2 M NaCl) and lastly, Urea 9 M (pH 11). The oil bodies were centrifuged, collected and re-suspended in GM1 at a final concentration of 100 mg/ml. In order to remove any oil residues, the samples were precipitated with methanol/chloroform/water. The samples were quantified by means of a Bradford assay. In solution tryptic digestion An aliquot of fifty μg of OB protein extracts from raw, boiled and roasted walnuts was suspended in 180 µl of 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate with 0.1 % SDS. The samples were reduced with DTT to a final concentration of 20 mM, kept for 1 hour at 37 °C, and alkylated with IAA at a final concentration of 55 mM, for 1 hour in the dark at room temperature (RT). The residual IAA was quenched in a second incubation with DTT at a final concentration of 30 mM for 15 minutes at RT. The protein mixtures were digested O/N at 37 °C under shaking with modified porcine proteomic grade trypsin (1 µg/µl) at a 1:20 trypsin-protein ratio. An aliquot of five µl of pure formic acid (FA) was added to stop the digestion. The tryptic peptide mixtures were desalted using Strata-X Polymeric SPE tubes. After desalting, the samples were dried in a 5301 Eppendorf Concentrator and suspended in 30µl of 0.1% (v/v) FA/5% ACN. Three biological replicates were prepared and analyzed for each condition (raw, boiled and roasted) by means of LC-MS/MS.  LC-MS/MS analysis The analyses were performed using an Orbitrap Q Exactive Plus, coupled to a UHPLC binary pump system. The stationary phase was a BioBasic™ C18 HPLC Column (1 × 150 mm, 5 μm). The mobile phases were 0.1% (v/v) FA in MilliQ water (A) and 0.1% (v/v) FA in ACN (B), and they were eluted at a flow-rate of 68.0 μL/min at increasing concentrations of solvent B, that is, from 5% to 45%, over 57 min, and from 45% to 50% in 2 min. The injection volume was 2.0 μL. The oven temperature was set at 55 °C. The autosampler was set at 6 °C. Mass spectra were acquired in Full MS-ddMS2 mode. The instrument was set up so that Full MS spectra were acquired in an m/z scan range of 150-1600, with an isolation window of 2 m/z, while the resolution was set at 70,000, the AGC target was 1x106, and the maximum IT was 256 ms. Up to 12 of the most intense ions in MS1 were selected for fragmentation in MS/MS mode. The fragmentation spectra resolution was set at 17,500 for the MS/MS spectra, with a dynamic exclusion of 40 s, the NCE was set at 28%, the AGC target at 2x104, and the maximum IT at 200ms. The allowed charge state was 2-6. The experiments were performed in triplicate for each condition.  Separation of the OB-associated proteins by means of LDS PAGE Lithium dodecyl sulfate-PAGE was performed using precast gels (NuPAGE 4–12% Bis–Tris) in an XCell SureLock Mini-Cell System, according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Each sample was diluted in the NuPage LDS Sample Buffer, under reducing condition, and loaded with an equal amount of proteins (5 µg). The gels were stained with Colloidal Coomassie Blue and scanned with a ChemiDoc MP System densitometer at a resolution of 600 dpi.  In-gel tryptic digestion The selected bands were cut and reduced in 10 mM DTT/50 mM NH4HCO3 for 45 min at 56 °C and alkylated in 55 mM IAA/50 mM NH4HCO3 for 30 min in the dark at RT. They were washed and destained three times with ACN 50%/50 mM NH4HCO3, pure ACN and, again with ACN 50%/50 mM NH4HCO3. The samples were dried in the 5301 Eppendorf Concentrator and digested O/N at 37 °C under shaking with 7μl of modified porcine proteomic grade trypsin at 75 ng/µl of 25 mM NH4HCO3/10% ACN. One µl of 5% FA was added to stop the digestion.  LC-MS/MS analysis The analyses were performed using the same previously described LC-MS system, albeit with some changes. The flow rate was set at 50.0 μL/min, with an increasing concentration of solvent B, from 5% to 70%, over 50 min and with 80% for 5 min. The injection volume was 4.0 μL. Mass spectra were acquired in Full MS-ddMS2 mode. The instrument was set up so that Full MS spectra were acquired in an m/z scan range of 150-1600, the resolution was set at 70,000, the AGC target was 5x105, and the allowed charge state was 2-6. Up to 12 of the most intense ions in MS1 were selected for fragmentation in the MS/MS mode. The fragmentation spectra resolution was set at 17,500 for the MS/MS spectra, with a dynamic exclusion of 40 s, the normalized collision energy was set at 32%, and the AGC target at 1x103

### Data Protocol
All the DDA files were searched for, using MaxQaunt (https://maxquant.org) v. 2.0.3.0, in the UniProt Juglans database (reviewed and unreviewed, 63749 entries). The amino acid sequences of 24 proteins (known as allergens) in their mature form i.e., with shorter chains than those present at the DNA level, were added to the database to match the information about protein MWs derived from the electrophoretic run with those derived from DNA. The search parameters were set as follow: S-carbamidomethyl derivate on cysteine as a fixed modification, oxidation on methionine, Acetyl (N-term), as variable modifications and two missed cleavage sites for trypsin digestion. The MS/MS fragment mass tolerance was 20 ppm. A minimum of 2 peptides, FDR of 0.01% for both protein and peptides, and a score of 20 for unmodified and modified peptides were set for the protein identification. A Label Free Quantification analysis was set up to compare the results of the shotgun proteomic analyses of the three biological replicates of the walnut samples (raw, boiled and roasted).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Food allergy, Oleosome, Walnut, Oil body, Oleosin, Processing, Sub-proteome

### Affiliations
CNR ISPA
Institute of the Science of Food Production (ISPA) – National Research Council, Largo Braccini 2, 10095 Grugliasco, TO, Italy

### Submitter
Simona Cirrincione

### Lab Head
Dr Simona Cirrincione
Institute of the Science of Food Production (ISPA) – National Research Council, Largo Braccini 2, 10095 Grugliasco, TO, Italy


