### Accession
PXD006196

### Title
moDCs HPLC-MS/MS -  Unbiased Quantitative Proteomics Reveals a Crucial Role of the Allergen Context for the Activation of Human Dendritic Cells

### Description
To investigate the allergenicity of the major birch pollen allergen Bet v 1 and the impact of known adjuvants coming from pollen, such as lipopolysaccharide (LPS), we performed quantitative proteome analysis of stimulated monocyte-derived dendritic cells (moDCs). Thus, we treated cells with birch pollen extract (BPE), a recombinant variant of Bet v 1 or LPS followed by proteomic profiling by means of high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) and tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) using isobaric labelling.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation: - moDC generation: PBMCs were extracted from human blood samples and differentiated into moDCs via IL-4 and GM-CSF - moDC treatment: cells were treated for 8 h by using 10 µg/ml birch pollen extract, 10 µg/ml Bet v 1, or 1 ng/ml LPS - cells were harvested and lysed by sonication - proteins were denatured (TFE 50 % (v/v), 60°C, 60min), reduced (4.5 mM TCEP, 60°C, 60 min)and alkylated (8.7 mM IAA, RT, 30 min) followed by acetone precipitation over night at -20°C - proteins were dissolved in 0.1 M TEAB followed by tryptic digest - peptides of 3 donors were pooled to reduce donor variability followed by SPE and iTRAQ labeling according to the manufacturer’s instructions HPLC-MS/MS analysis: - Labeled peptides were dissolved in 0.10 % (v/v) formic acid in a concentration of 2.0 µg/µl - HPLC system: UltiMate® 3000 RSLCnano (Thermo Scientific) - Column: self-packed 200 x 0.1 mm i.d. Hypersil GOLD™ aQ C18 capillary column packed with 3.0 µm particles - flow rate 350 nl/min, linear gradient of 5.0 – 40.0 % Acetonitril + 0.1 % FA in 300 min - column temperature 50 °C - HPLC system was hyphenated to a Q Exactive™ Plus Hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap™ mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) - Full scans: scan range of m/z 450 to 2,000 at a resolution of 70,000 - AGC-target: 1E6, maximum IT 100 ms - Data dependent MS2 (TOP10), HCD fragmentation at 29 % normalized collision energy, resolution 35,000 (at m/z = 200) followed by dynamic exclusion for 15.0 seconds. - MS2: fixed first mass m/z 100, AGC target 1xE5, maximum IT 60 ms - underfill ratio 1.0 %  intensity threshold of 1.7E4

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched against a human UniProt sequence database using Mascot in Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo). Further data evaluation was done using Pereus Software (version 1.5). Log2(x)-ratios were normalized on the most frequent value followed by averaging of used replicates (median). Ratios ≥/≤ 2 times the standard deviation were considered to be significant.

### Publication Abstract
Worldwide, more than 1 billion people suffer from allergic diseases. However, until now it is not fully understood how certain proteins can induce allergic immune responses, while others cannot. Studies suggest that allergenicity is a process not only determined by properties of the allergen itself but also by costimulatory factors, that are not classically associated with allergic reactions. To investigate the allergenicity of the major birch pollen allergen Bet v 1 and the impact of adjuvants associated with pollen, e.g. lipopolysaccharide (LPS), we performed quantitative proteome analysis to study the activation of monocyte-derived dendritic cells (moDCs). Thus, we treated cells with birch pollen extract (BPE), recombinant Bet v 1, and LPS followed by proteomic profiling via high-performance liquid chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry (HPLC-MS/MS) using isobaric labelling. Enrichment and pathway analysis revealed the influence of regulated proteins especially in cytokine signalling and dendritic cell activation. We found highly regulated, but differentially expressed proteins after treatment with BPE and LPS, whereas the cellular response to Bet v 1 was limited. Our findings lead to the conclusion that Bet v 1 needs a specific "allergen context" involving cofactors apart from LPS to induce an immune response in human moDCs.

### Keywords
Human, Modc, Hplc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
National Institute for Bioprocessing Research and Training NIBRT
University of Salzburg, Department of Molecular Biology, Division of Chemistry and Bioanalytics, Hellbrunnerstraße 34, 5020 Salzburg, Austria

### Submitter
Lisa Strasser

### Lab Head
Dr Christian G. Huber
University of Salzburg, Department of Molecular Biology, Division of Chemistry and Bioanalytics, Hellbrunnerstraße 34, 5020 Salzburg, Austria


