### Accession
PXD003010

### Title
Tomato xylem proteome composition following infection by Fusarium oxysporum

### Description
The influence of during colonization by Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. Lycopersici secreted effector proteins on the proteome of the xylem sap of tomato plants was investigated using a label-free quantitative proteomics approach. A comparison was made  between plants inoculated with either a mock control, a non-effector knockout control, Fusarium oxysporum Fol007 wildtype and four Fol007 single effector protein knockout strains. Specific effects on the relative abundance of certain proteins of the xylem sap occurred for the different knockout strains next to a core set of 24 differentially accumulated proteins which may provide insights into the mechanisms of promoting infection for each of the tested effector proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Xylem sap proteins were concentrated by TCA/aceton precipitation and futher cleaned by running a short SDS-polyacrylamide gel. After 1 slice in-gel digestion samples were reduced, caramidomethylated and trypsin digested. Peptides were measured by nLC-LTQ-Obitrap XL MSMS.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant software with Andromeda search engine was used for identification and (relative) quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
Plant pathogens secrete small proteins, of which some are effectors that promote infection. During colonization of the tomato xylem vessels the fungus Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. lycopersici (Fol) secretes small proteins that are referred to as SIX (Secreted In Xylem) proteins. Of these, Six1 (Avr3), Six3 (Avr2), Six5, and Six6 are required for full virulence, denoting them as effectors. To investigate their activities in the plant, the xylem sap proteome of plants inoculated with Fol wild-type or either AVR2, AVR3, SIX2, SIX5, or SIX6 knockout strains was analyzed with nano-Liquid Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry (nLC-MSMS). Compared to mock-inoculated sap 12 additional plant proteins appeared while 45 proteins were no longer detectable in the xylem sap of Fol-infected plants. Of the 285 proteins found in both uninfected and infected plants the abundance of 258 proteins changed significantly following infection. The xylem sap proteome of plants infected with four Fol effector knockout strains differed significantly from plants infected with wild-type Fol, while that of the SIX2-knockout inoculated plants remained unchanged. Besides an altered abundance of a core set of 24 differentially accumulated proteins (DAPs), each of the four effector knockout strains affected specifically the abundance of a subset of DAPs. Hence, Fol effectors have both unique and shared effects on the composition of the tomato xylem sap proteome.

### Keywords
Xylem sap proteome, Fungus, Fusarium oxysporum, Tomato, Ltq-orbitrap xl

### Affiliations
Biochemistry
Wageningen University

### Submitter
Sjef Boeren

### Lab Head
Dr Sjef Boeren
Wageningen University


