### Accession
PXD004165

### Title
Identification of quantitative proteomic differences between mycobacterial lineages with altered virulence

### Description
Mycobacterium tuberculosis is the causitive agent of TB, which is a global epidemic that has claimed millions of lives. Some clinical strains of M.tb have significantly more severe clinical outcomes, while some other mycobacteria ordinarily do not cause disease in humans. The biological processes underpinning this difference are poorly understood. Thus, this project aimed to identify proteomic differences between more virulent strains of the MTBC (Beijing, J37Rv, CAS and LAM) vs those strains that only cause disease in severely immune compromised humans (Bovis, Smegmatis and Avium). We hypothesise that these differences may offer insight into the molecular mechanisms by which M.tb has become more virulent by evading drug treatment or evading the host immune system more effectively.

### Sample Protocol
Seven mycobacterial strains (H37Rv, Beijing, Bovis BCG, Avium, Smegmatis, CAS and LAM) were grown in the laboratory to an OD of 0.9 and harvested. The bacterial proteomes were separated on PAGE gels, and gel fractions were prepared for mass spectrometry analysis by in gel tryptic digest (5 fractions per strain). The fractions were analysed on an Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer in discovery mode in order to identify proteins that are unique to virulent mycobacteria and clinical strains.

### Data Protocol
For the discovery portion of this experiment, a multi-search engine approach was used in order to maximise the number of identities obtained (Crux, Mascot and the output of MS2PIP). For each strain, the combined search engine results were then processed together in order to remove redundancy and maximise the number of identities obtained. These identities were then orthologue mapped to the H37Rv proteome in order to facilitate cross-strain proteomic comparison. After identifying proteins which were unique to the virulent clinical strains, we queried the TBDB with these proteins in order to identify which of these proteins had orthogonal evidence supporting their role in altered virulence.

### Publication Abstract
Evidence currently suggests that as a species Mycobacterium tuberculosis exhibits very little genomic sequence diversity. Despite limited genetic variability, members of the M. tuberculosis complex (MTBC) have been shown to exhibit vast discrepancies in phenotypic presentation in terms of virulence, elicited immune response and transmissibility. Here, we used qualitative and quantitative mass spectrometry tools to investigate the proteomes of seven clinically-relevant mycobacterial strains-four M. tuberculosis strains, M. bovis, M. bovis BCG, and M. avium-that show varying degrees of pathogenicity and virulence, in an effort to rationalize the observed phenotypic differences. Following protein preparation, liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LC MS/MS) and data capture were carried out using an LTQ Orbitrap Velos. Data analysis was carried out using a novel bioinformatics strategy, which yielded high protein coverage and was based on high confidence peptides. Through this approach, we directly identified a total of 3788 unique M. tuberculosis proteins out of a theoretical proteome of 4023 proteins and identified an average of 3290 unique proteins for each of the MTBC organisms (representing 82% of the theoretical proteomes), as well as 4250 unique M. avium proteins (80% of the theoretical proteome). Data analysis showed that all major classes of proteins are represented in every strain, but that there are significant quantitative differences between strains. Targeted selected reaction monitoring (SRM) assays were used to quantify the observed differential expression of a subset of 23 proteins identified by comparison to gene expression data as being of particular relevance to virulence. This analysis revealed differences in relative protein abundance between strains for proteins which may promote bacterial fitness in the more virulent W. Beijing strain. These differences may contribute to this strain's capacity for surviving within the host and resisting treatment, which has contributed to its rapid spread. Through this approach, we have begun to describe the proteomic portrait of a successful mycobacterial pathogen. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD004165.

### Keywords
Pathogenicity, Virulence, Mycobacteria, Discovery, Srm

### Affiliations
Head of division: Integrative Biomedical Sciences
University of Cape Town

### Submitter
Bridget Calder

### Lab Head
Dr Jonathan Blackburn
Head of division: Integrative Biomedical Sciences


