### Accession
PXD024251

### Title
Cell Surface Glycoengineering - HAP1 Cells

### Description
Cell Surface Glycoengineering of HAP1 Cells using CMP-Neu5Ac Derivatives

### Sample Protocol
After enzymatic cell-surface display of Compound 10h on HAP1-DAG1- cells in 10 cm dishes (6.5e6 cells/plate), cells were washed with cold DPBS. Cells were lysed by scraping in RIPA buffer supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail on ice. Lysates were clarified by centrifugation at 22,000 × g for 10 min and the total protein content of the clear supernatants was assessed using the BCA assay. Lysates were immunoprecipitated using protein G (Sigma-Aldrich) beads coated with unconjugated anti-biotin antibody (Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories). Coated protein G beads were prepared by incubating the anti-biotin antibody with protein G beads in immunoprecipitation buffer (RIPA buffer without protease inhibitors) at a 3:2 volume ratio of protein G beads: antibody for 2 h at 4 °C. Cell lysates were precleared by incubating with protein G beads for 2 h at 4 °C. The precleared lysate was collected and then incubated with the antibody-coated protein G beads overnight at 4 °C at 1.0 mg of lysate per 50 μL of coated protein G beads. After overnight incubation, the beads were washed 5 times with RIPA buffer and then eluted with 2× sample loading buffer containing 10 mM dithiotheitol by boiling for 10 min. Eluted proteins were resolved by SDS-PAGE and the resulting gel was silver stained for in-gel trypsin digestion followed by proteomic MS analysis.   Each gel lane was excised into four sections above 50 kDa, followed by in-gel tryptic digestion. Proteins in the destained gel sections were reduced by incubation with 10 mM dithiothreitol (Sigma-Aldrich) at 56 °C for 1 h, alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) for 45 min in the dark, and digested with Sequencing Grade Trypsin (Promega) at 37 °C overnight. Tryptic peptides were extracted from the gel sections by incubating with increasing concentrations of acetonitrile (25, 50, and 75%, respectively) in 5% formic acid, dried down by centrifugal evaporation, and resuspended in 4% acetonitrile in Solvent A (0.1% formic acid). The peptides were separated using a Thermo Scientific™ UltiMate™ 3000 Rapid Separation Liquid Chromatography (RSLC) system equipped with a 15 cm Acclaim™ PepMap™ RSLC C18 Column [2 μm particle size, 75 μm ID, heated to 35 °C] using a 180 min linear gradient consisting of 1−100% Solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) over 130 min at a flow rate of 200 nL/min. Separated peptides were directly eluted into a nanospray ion source of an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The stainless steel emitter spray voltage was set to 2200 V, and the temperature of the ion transfer tube was set to 280 °C. Full MS scans were acquired using Orbitrap detection from m/z 200 to 2000 at 60,000 resolution, and MS2 scans following fragmentation by collision-induced dissociation (38% collision energy) were acquired in the ion trap for the most intense ions in “Top Speed” mode within a 3 second cycle using Thermo Xcalibur Instrument Setup (v3.0, Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The raw spectra were searched against the Human (Homo sapiens) reference proteome database (UNIPROT) using SEQUEST HT (Proteome Discoverer v1.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a Full MS precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm and MS2 peptide fragment mass tolerance of 0.5 Da. Protein identifications were filtered using ProteoIQ (v2.7, Premier Biosoft) at the protein level to generate a 1% false-discovery rate (FDR) for protein assignments. Proteins present in the negative control experiment (Unlabeled cells), had fewer than 10 spectral counts in the CMP-Neu5Ac-(Biotin) labeling experiment, or known to be localized in intracellular compartments as assessed by UNIPROT annotations, were excluded. Proteins reported are all annotated in UNIPROT to contain sites of N-glycosylation or were manually validated to contain at least one N-X-(S/T) N-glycosylation sequon in the primary sequence.

### Publication Abstract
&#x3b1;-Dystroglycan (&#x3b1;-DG) is uniquely modified on O-mannose sites by a repeating disaccharide (-Xyl&#x3b1;1,3-GlcA&#x3b2;1,3-)<sub>n</sub> termed matriglycan, which is a receptor for laminin-G domain-containing proteins and employed by old-world arenaviruses for infection. Using chemoenzymatically synthesized matriglycans printed as a microarray, we demonstrate length-dependent binding to Laminin, Lassa virus GP1, and the clinically-important antibody IIH6. Utilizing an enzymatic engineering approach, an N-linked glycoprotein was converted into a IIH6-positive Laminin-binding glycoprotein. Engineering of the surface of cells deficient for either &#x3b1;-DG or O-mannosylation with matriglycans of sufficient length recovers infection with a Lassa-pseudovirus. Finally, free matriglycan in a dose and length dependent manner inhibits viral infection of wildtype cells. These results indicate that matriglycan alone is necessary and sufficient for IIH6 staining, Laminin and LASV GP1 binding, and Lassa-pseudovirus infection and support a model in which it is a tunable receptor for which increasing chain length enhances ligand-binding capacity.

### Keywords
Cell surface glycoengineering - hap1 cells

### Affiliations
Complex Carbohydrate Research Center, University of Georgia, Athens, GA, USA
University of Georgia

### Submitter
M. Osman Sheikh

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Lance Wells
Complex Carbohydrate Research Center, University of Georgia, Athens, GA, USA


