### Accession
PXD041943

### Title
Proteomic identification of the GPER1 interactome

### Description
The G-protein coupled estrogen receptor GPER1 is thought to mediate rapid estrogen signaling at the membrane. Despite considerable efforts over the last years, its physiological ligand(s), interactors, and regulators are still very poorly understood. This is particularly problematic at a time when the inducibility of GPER1 activity has been challenged. We therefore investigated both activity and interactome of GPER1. We could confirm that GPER1 can behave as a constitutivley active signaling protein. Using proximity labelling and immunoprecipitation coupled to mass spectrometry, we explored the GPER1 interactome. Intersecting the results of the two proteomic approaches and validating some candidate interactors, we generate a GPER1 a resource, which may be useful for further functional studies in the future.

### Sample Protocol
Proximity labelling samples For proximity labelling samples, beads were digested following a modified version of the iST method (Kulak, et al., 2014) (named miST method). 25 ul of miST lysis buffer (1% Sodium deoxycholate, 100mM Tris pH 8.6, 10 mM DTT) were added to the beads. After mixing and dilution 1:1 (v:v) with H2O, samples were heated 5 min at 95°C. After digestion with 0.5 ug of Trypsin/LysC mix (Promega #V5073) for 1h at 25°C, sample supernatants were transferred to new tubes. Supernatants were treated to reduce and alkylate thiols with chloroacetamide (32 mM final) for 45min at RT. Samples were digested overnight at 25°C with 1.0 ug Trypsin/LysC mix. To remove sodium deoxycholate, 2 vol.  of isopropanol containing 1% TFA were added to the digests, and samples were desalted on a strong cation exchange (SCX) plate (Oasis MCX; Waters Corp., Milford, MA) by centrifugation. After washing with isopropanol/1%TFA, peptides were eluted in 200ul of 80% MeCN, 19% water, 1% (v/v) ammonia, dried and resuspended in 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid, 2% (v/v) acetonitrile. Data-dependent LC-MS/MS analyses of proximity labelling samples were done on a Fusion Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) interfaced through a nano-electrospray ion source to an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system (Dionex), via a FAIMS interface (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on a reversed-phase custom packed 45 cm C18 column (75 μm ID, 100Å, Reprosil Pur 1.9 um particles, Dr. Maisch, Germany) with a 4-90% acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid (total time 140 min). Full MS survey scans were done at 120'000 resolution. A data-dependent acquisition method controlled by Xcalibur software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was set up that optimized the number of precursors selected (“top speed”) of charge 2+ to 5+ while maintaining a fixed scan cycle of 1.0 s per FAIMS compensation voltage (CV) (-40, -50, -60 V). Peptides were fragmented by HCD with a normalized energy of 32%. The precursor isolation window used was 1.6 Th, and the MS2 scans were done in the ion trap. The m/z of fragmented precursors was then dynamically excluded from selection during 60 s. Immunoprecipitation samples For immunoprecipitation samples, 40ul of 2x Laemmli buffer were added to the dried beads, and sample heated 5 min at 95°C. Protein samples were loaded (27ul) on a 12 % mini polyacrylamide gel, migrated about 3.0 cm and stained by Candiano colloidal Coomassie. Gel lanes between 15-250 kDa were excised into 5 pieces and digested with sequencing-grade trypsin as described (Shevchenko, et al., 2006). Extracted tryptic peptides were dried and resuspended in 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid, 2% (v/v) acetonitrile. LC-MS/MS analyses of immunoprecipitation samples were carried out on a TIMS-TOF Pro (Bruker, Bremen, Germany) mass spectrometer interfaced through a nanospray ion source (“captive spray”) to an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system (Dionex). Peptides were separated on a reversed-phase custom packed 45 cm C18 column (75 μm ID, 100Å, Reprosil Pur 1.9 um particles, Dr. Maisch, Germany) at a flow rate of 0.250 ul/min with a 2-27% acetonitrile gradient in 93 min followed by a ramp to 45% in 15 min and to 90% in 5 min  (total method time: 140 min, all solvents contained 0.1% formic acid). Data-dependent acquisition was carried out using a standard TIMS PASEF method (Meier, et al., 2018) with ion accumulation for 100 ms for each the survey MS1 scan and the TIMS-coupled MS2 scans. Duty cycle was kept at 100%. Up to 10 precursors were targeted per TIMS scan. Precursor isolation was done with a 2 or 3 m/z windows below or above m/z 800, respectively. The minimum threshold intensity for precursor selection was 2500.  If the inclusion list allowed it, precursors were targeted more than one time to reach a minimum target total intensity of 20’000. Collision energy was ramped linearly based uniquely on the 1/k0 values from 20 (at 1/k0=0.6) to 59 eV (at 1/k0=1.6). Total duration of a scan cycle including one survey and 10 MS2 TIMS scans was 1.16 s. Precursors could be targeted again in subsequent cycles if their signal increased by a factor 4.0 or more.  After selection in one cycle, precursors were excluded from further selection for 60s. Mass resolution in all MS measurements was approximately 35’000. Kulak, N. A., Pichler, G., Paron, I., Nagaraj, N., Mann, M. (2014). Minimal, encapsulated proteomic-sample processing applied to copy-number estimation in eukaryotic cells. Nature Methods 11(3): 319–24. Meier, F., Brunner, A., Koch, S., Koch, H., Lubeck, M., Krause, M., Mann, M. (2018). Online Parallel Accumulation-Serial Fragmentation (PASEF) with a Novel Trapped Ion Mobility Mass Spectrometer. Molecular & Cellular Proteomics 17(12), 2534–2545.  Shevchenko, A., Tomas, H., Havlis, J., Olsen, J. V, and Mann, M. (2006). In-gel digestion for mass spectrometric characterization of proteins and proteomes. Nat. Protoc. 1, 2856–2860.

### Data Protocol
Proximity labelling samples Data files were analysed with MaxQuant 1.6.14.0 (Cox et al., 2008) incorporating the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011). Cysteine carbamidomethylation was selected as fixed modification while methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were specified as variable modifications. The sequence databases used for searching were the human  reference proteome based on the UniProt database (www.uniprot.org, version of June 6th, 2021, containing 79’057 sequences), and a “contaminant” database containing the most usual environmental contaminants and enzymes used for digestion (keratins, trypsin, etc). Mass tolerance was 4.5 ppm on precursors (after recalibration) and 20 ppm on HCD fragments. Both peptide and protein identifications were filtered at 1% FDR relative to hits against a decoy database built by reversing protein sequences.  All subsequent analyses were done with the Perseus software package (version 1.6.15.0) (Tyanova et al 2016). Contaminant proteins were removed, and LFQ intensity values (Cox, et al., 2014)  were log2-transformed. After assignment to groups, only proteins quantified in at least 3 samples of one group were kept. After missing values imputation (based on normal distribution using Perseus default parameters), t-tests were carried out among all conditions, with permutation-based FDR correction for multiple testing (Q-value threshold <0.05). The difference of means obtained from the tests were used for 1D enrichment analysis on associated GO/KEGG annotations as described (Cox and Mann, 2012). The enrichment analysis was also FDR-filtered (Benjamini-Hochberg , Q-val<0.02).  Immunoprecipitation samples Data files were analysed with MaxQuant 1.6.14.0 (Cox et al., 2008) incorporating the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011). Cysteine carbamidomethylation was selected as fixed modification while methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were specified as variable modifications. The sequence databases used for searching were the human  reference proteome based on the UniProt database (www.uniprot.org, version of September 3rd, 2020, containing 75’796 sequences), and a “contaminant” database containing the most usual environmental contaminants and enzymes used for digestion (keratins, trypsin, etc). Mass tolerance was 10 ppm on precursors (after recalibration) and 25 ppm on MS/MS fragments. Both peptide and protein identifications were filtered at 1% FDR relative to hits against a decoy database built by reversing protein sequences.  All subsequent analyses were done with the Perseus software package (version 1.6.15.0) (Tyanova et al 2016). Contaminant proteins were removed, and IBAQ (Schwanhäusser, et al., 2011) intensity values were log2-transformed. Missing values were imputed based on normal distribution using Perseus default parameters. The difference of means were used for 1D enrichment analysis on associated GO/KEGG annotations as described (Cox and Mann, 2012). The enrichment analysis was also FDR-filtered (Benjamini-Hochberg , Q-val<0.02). Cox, J., Mann, M. (2008) MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat Biotechnol 26: 1367–1372. Cox, J., Neuhauser, N., Michalski, A., Scheltema, R.A., Olsen, J.V., et al. (2011) Andromeda: a peptide search engine integrated into the MaxQuant environment. J Proteome Res 10: 1794–1805.  Cox, J., & Mann, M. (2012). 1D and 2D annotation enrichment: a statistical method integrating quantitative proteomics with complementary high-throughput data. BMC Bioinformatics 13 Suppl 1(Suppl 16), S12.  Cox, J., Hein, M. Y., Luber, C. a, Paron, I., Nagaraj, N., & Mann, M. (2014). Accurate proteome-wide label-free quantification by delayed normalization and maximal peptide ratio extraction, termed MaxLFQ. Molecular & Cellular Proteomics 13(9), 2513–26. Tyanova, S., Temu, T., Sinitcyn, P., et al. (2016) The Perseus computational platform for comprehensive analysis of (prote)omics data. Nature Methods 13(9):731–740. Schwanhäusser, B., Busse, D., Li, N., Dittmar, G., Schuchhardt, J., Wolf, J., Chen, W., & Selbach, M. (2011). Global quantification of mammalian gene expression control. Nature, 473 (7347): 337-42.

### Publication Abstract
The G protein-coupled estrogen receptor 1 (GPER1) has been proposed to mediate rapid responses to the steroid hormone estrogen. However, despite a strong interest in its potential role in cancer, whether it is indeed activated by estrogen and how this works remain controversial. To provide new tools to address these questions, we set out to determine the interactome of exogenously expressed GPER1. The combination of two orthogonal methods, namely APEX2-mediated proximity labeling and immunoprecipitation followed by mass spectrometry, gave us high-confidence results for 73 novel potential GPER1 interactors. We found that this GPER1 interactome is not affected by estrogen, a result that mirrors the constitutive activity of GPER1 in a functional assay with a Rac1 sensor. We specifically validated several hits highlighted by a gene ontology analysis. We demonstrate that CLPTM1 interacts with GPER1 and that PRKCSH and GANAB, the regulatory and catalytic subunits of &#x3b1;-glucosidase II, respectively, associate with CLPTM1 and potentially indirectly with GPER1. An imbalance in CLPTM1 levels induces nuclear association of GPER1, as does the overexpression of PRKCSH. Moreover, we show that the Ca2+ sensor STIM1 interacts with GPER1 and that upon STIM1 overexpression and depletion of Ca2+ stores, GPER1 becomes more nuclear. Thus, these new GPER1 interactors establish interesting connections with membrane protein maturation, trafficking, and calcium signaling.

### Keywords
G-protein coupled estrogen receptor; membrane protein; estrogen signaling; protein-protein interactions; proximity labeling

### Affiliations
University of Lausanne
Département de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Université de Genève

### Submitter
Manfredo Quadroni

### Lab Head
Dr Didier Picard
Département de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Université de Genève


