### Accession
PXD004103

### Title
Comparative interactomes of VRK1 and VRK3: implication in cell cycle, chromatin assembly, RNA processing and DNA repair

### Description
Vaccinia related kinase (VRK) family is a ser/threonine kinase. VRK1 and VRK3 are localized in the same organelle, mainly in the nucleus. Comparative interactomes of VRK1 and VRK3 were not performed yet. We identified over 200 unreported VRK1/3-interacting proteins by proteomics-based analyses using the complementary mass spectrometry approach. Among those proteins, nuclear and cytoplasmic proteins were mostly enriched reflecting nuclear and cytoplasmic localization of VRK1/3. The interaction networks of interactome indicated biological processes associated with cell cycle, DNA repair, chromatin assembly and RNA processing. Interactions and co-localization of NCL, PARP1, HSP70, XRCC5, p53, NPM1, BAF1, cyclinB1 and ALYREF with VRK1/3 were confirmed by co-immunoprecipitation and immunofluorescent staining. Overall, this study represents a valuable resource for investigating VRK1 and VRK3 functions in health and disease, encompassing emerging themes of VRK1/3 regulation in cell cycle, mRNA processing, chromatin assembly and DNA repair.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were digested with trypsin, as described in a previous study, with some modifications [27]. Briefly, eluted proteins were lyophilized and resolved in a digestion solution of 6 M urea and 40 mM ammonium bicarbonate in high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC)-grade water. Protein reduction was performed with 5 mM Tris (2-arboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride for 1 h, followed by alkylation with 25 mM iodoacetamide in the dark for 30 min at room temperature. The sample was in-solution digested with 5 ng/mL sequencing-grade modified trypsin (Promega, USA) for 16 h at 37°C.  Nano-LC-ESI-MS/MS Peptides were analyzed using mass spectrometry, as described previously, with some modifications.[27] Tryptic peptides from in-gel digestion were separated using a homemade microcapillary column (75 μm x 12 cm) packed with C18 resin (Michrom Bioresources, USA). Samples were eluted using a linear gradient of a mixture of solvents A (0.1% formic acid in 2% ACN) and B (0.1% formic acid in 98% ACN), where the percentage of the latter mobile phase increased over 120 min at a flow rate of 0.26 μL/min: 2-50% over 94 min, 50-90% over 6 min, 90% over 6 min, 90-2% over 6 min, and 2% over 8 min. Eluted peptides were analyzed with an LTQ Velos Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Finnigan, USA) equipped with nano-ESI. MS precursor ion scans were acquired within a m/z range between 150 and 2000. The five most abundant ions detected in the precursor MS scan were dynamically selected for MS/MS analyses. Collision-induced dissociations of the selected precursor ions were performed in an ion trap (LTQ) with 35% normalized collision energy. We employed dynamic exclusion to increase the size of proteome to be detected as follows: repeat count for dynamic exclusion = 1, repeat duration = 30 s, dynamic exclusion duration = 180 s, and list size of dynamic exclusion = 50.

### Data Protocol
Peak lists of MS data were generated, and identification/quantification of peptides and proteins from three technical replicates of LC-MS/MS data performed using the MaxQuant quantification tool with Andromeda search engine (version 1.3.0.5).[28-30] The top 10 peaks per 100 Da were used for analysis. Enzyme specificity for trypsin was used. The minimal peptide length was six amino acids, and two mis-cleavages were allowed. Variable modification options were employed for oxidation of methionine (15.995 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine (57.021 Da). Tolerance was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.8 Da for fragment ions. Swiss-Prot database (Homo sapiens reference proteome set, release 2013_01, 20,226 entries) with added contaminants and reverse sequences was used. For peptide and protein identification, 1% false discovery rate (FDR) was determined by accumulating 1% of reverse database hits. Common peptides shared by two proteins were combined and reported as one protein group. The first majority protein ID was selected as the representative protein of each group, and used as protein ID for further analysis. For comparison of samples, we used label-free quantification with a minimum of two ratio counts to determine the normalized protein label-free quantification (LFQ) intensity.[31]

### Publication Abstract
Vaccinia-related kinase 1 (VRK1) and VRK3 are members of the VRK family of serine/threonine kinases and are principally localized in the nucleus. Despite the crucial roles of VRK1/VRK3 in physiology and disease, the molecular and functional interactions of VRK1/VRK3 are poorly understood. Here, we identified over 200 unreported VRK1/VRK3-interacting candidate proteins by affinity purification and LC-MS/MS. The networks of VRK1 and VRK3 interactomes were found to be associated with important biological processes such as the cell cycle, DNA repair, chromatin assembly, and RNA processing. Interactions of interacting proteins with VRK1/VRK3 were confirmed by biochemical assays. We also found that phosphorylations of XRCC5 were regulated by both VRK1/VRK3, and that of CCNB1 was regulated by VRK3. In liver cancer cells and tissues, VRK1/VRK3 were highly upregulated and its depletion affected cell cycle progression in the different phases. VRK3 seemed to affect S phase progression and G2 or M phase entry and exit, whereas VRK1 affects G1/S transition in the liver cancer, which could be explained by different interacting candidate proteins. Thus, this study not only provides a resource for investigating the unidentified functions of VRK1/VRK3, but also an insight into the regulatory roles of VRK1/VRK3 in biological processes.

### Keywords
Interactome, Vrk1, Vrk3

### Affiliations
Department of Life Science and Department of Integrative Biosciences & Biotechnology, Pohang University of Science and Technology, 77 Cheongam-Ro, Nam-Gu, Pohang, Kyungbuk, 790-784, Republic of Korea
Department of Life Science

### Submitter
Dae-Kyum Kim

### Lab Head
Dr Kwan Yong Choi
Department of Life Science and Department of Integrative Biosciences & Biotechnology, Pohang University of Science and Technology, 77 Cheongam-Ro, Nam-Gu, Pohang, Kyungbuk, 790-784, Republic of Korea


