### Accession
PXD006754

### Title
Nicotinamide Mononucleotide Requires SIRT3 to Improve Cardiac Function and Bioenergetics in a Friedreich’s Ataxia Cardiomyopathy Model

### Description
Martin et al. JCI Insigh (2017). Increasing NAD+ levels by supplementing with the precursor nicotinamide mononucleotide (NMN) improves cardiac function in multiple mouse models of disease. While NMN influences several aspects of mitochondrial metabolism, the molecular mechanisms by which increased NAD+ enhances cardiac function are poorly understood. A putative mechanism of NAD+ therapeutic action is via activation of the mitochondrial NAD+-dependent protein deacetylase sirtuin 3 (SIRT3). We assessed the therapeutic efficacy of NMN and the role of SIRT3 in the Friedreich’s Ataxia cardiomyopathy mouse model (FXNKO). At baseline, the FXNKO heart has mitochondrial protein hyperacetylation, reduced Sirt3 mRNA expression, and evidence of increased NAD+ salvage. Remarkably, NMN administered to FXNKO mice restores cardiac function to near-normal levels. To determine whether SIRT3 is required for NMN therapeutic efficacy, we generated SIRT3KO and SIRT3KO/FXNKO (dKO) knockout models. The improvement in cardiac function upon NMN treatment in the FXNKO is lost in the dKO model, demonstrating that the effects of NMN are dependent upon cardiac SIRT3. Coupled with cardio- protection, SIRT3 mediates NMN-induced improvements in both cardiac and extra-cardiac metabolic function and energy metabolism. Taken together, these results serve as important preclinical data for NMN supplementation or SIRT3 activator therapy in Friedreich’s Ataxia patients.

### Sample Protocol
Martin et al. JCI Insight (2017). Relative changes in protein acetylation and protein abundance were determined by quantitative mass spectrometry as described previously (19). Briefly, mitochondrial proteins were digested with trypsin and the resulting peptides labeled with 6plex Tandem Mass Tags (TMT, Thermo Fisher Sicentific). For each time-point, wild-type and FXNKO samples (n=3) were mixed, and subjected to immunoprecipitation (IP) using PTMScan Acetyl-Lysine Motif antibody (Cell Signaling Technology). Both the IP eluate and the input fraction were subjected to nanoLC-MS/MS on a Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer and data analysis with Proteome Discoverer 2.1 Service Pack 1 (SP1). See the online supplement for details.

### Data Protocol
Martin et al. JCI Insight (2017). Protein and peptide groups tabs in the PD2.1 results were exported as tab delimited .txt. files, opened in Microsoft EXCEL, and analyzed as described previously (2). First, peptide group reporter intensities for each peptide group in the input material were summed together for each TMT channel within a given time-point (5-, 8-, and 13-weeks), each channel’s sum was divided by the average of all channels’ sums, resulting in channel-specific loading control normalization factors to correct for any deviation from equal protein/peptide input into the six sample comparison. Reporter intensities for peptide groups from both the acetyl fractions and for proteins from the input fraction were divided by the loading control normalization factors for each respective TMT channel represented in a given time-point. Analyzing the acetylpeptide and protein datasets separately, all loading control-normalized TMT reporter intensities were converted to log2 space, and the average value from the six samples was subtracted from each sample-specific measurement to normalize the relative measurements to the mean. For the wild-type and FXNKO comparison at each time-point (n=3/genotype), condition average, standard deviation, p-value (p, two-tailed student’s t-test, assuming equal variance), and adjusted p-value (Padjusted, Benjamini Hochberg FDR correction) were calculated (Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995; Lesack and Naugler, 2011). For protein-level quantification, only Master Proteins—or the most statistically significant protein representing a group of parsimonious proteins containing common peptides identified at 1% FDR were used for quantitative comparison. PTM level measurements (acetyl) were calculated both alone (referred to as abundance) and with normalization to any change in the corresponding Master Protein (referred to as relative occupancy), calculated by subtracting Log2 Master Protein values from PTM-containing peptide quantitation values on a sample-specific basis.

### Publication Abstract
Increasing NAD+ levels by supplementing with the precursor nicotinamide mononucleotide (NMN) improves cardiac function in multiple mouse models of disease. While NMN influences several aspects of mitochondrial metabolism, the molecular mechanisms by which increased NAD+ enhances cardiac function are poorly understood. A putative mechanism of NAD+ therapeutic action exists via activation of the mitochondrial NAD+-dependent protein deacetylase sirtuin 3 (SIRT3). We assessed the therapeutic efficacy of NMN and the role of SIRT3 in the Friedreich's ataxia cardiomyopathy mouse model (FXN-KO). At baseline, the FXN-KO heart has mitochondrial protein hyperacetylation, reduced Sirt3 mRNA expression, and evidence of increased NAD+ salvage. Remarkably, NMN administered to FXN-KO mice restores cardiac function to near-normal levels. To determine whether SIRT3 is required for NMN therapeutic efficacy, we generated SIRT3-KO and SIRT3-KO/FXN-KO (double KO [dKO]) models. The improvement in cardiac function upon NMN treatment in the FXN-KO is lost in the dKO model, demonstrating that the effects of NMN are dependent upon cardiac SIRT3. Coupled with cardio-protection, SIRT3 mediates NMN-induced improvements in both cardiac and extracardiac metabolic function and energy metabolism. Taken together, these results serve as important preclinical data for NMN supplementation or SIRT3 activator therapy in Friedreich's ataxia patients.

### Keywords
Heart failure, Friedreich’s ataxia, Sirt3, Acetylation, Nmn

### Affiliations
Duke University
Assistant Professor Department of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism, and Nutrition Department of Pharmacology and Cancer Biology Duke University Medical Center

### Submitter
Angelical Martin

### Lab Head
Dr Matthew D. Hirschey
Assistant Professor Department of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism, and Nutrition Department of Pharmacology and Cancer Biology Duke University Medical Center


