### Accession
PXD009789

### Title
System-wide profiling of protein-RNA interactions in sindbis infected cells reveals host regulators of infection

### Description
RNA viruses rely on cellular RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) to infect the host cell. However, the repertoire of the cellular RBPs exploited by viruses is largely unknown. Using the ‘RNA interactome capture’ method, we profiled in a proteome-wide scale the RBP-RNA interactions occurring during sindbis virus (SINV) infection. We discover that SINV affects the activity of hundreds of RBPs, essentially rewiring the host RNA-bound proteome. Such alterations do not relate to changes in protein abundance but are rather due to subcellular redistribution of RBPs and pervasive transcriptome remodelling. Strikingly, RBPs stimulated by SINV accumulate in the cytoplasmic compartments where the virus replicates and interact with viral RNA. Perturbation of these RBPs can restrict or promote infection; for example, GEMIN5 binds to key regulatory regions of SINV RNAs and inhibits viral protein expression. Importantly, we show that drug based RBP intervention may have potential as therapeutic strategy against viruses.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation Whole cell lysate and RNA interactome samples were processed following the filter aided sample preparation (FASP) as in (Castello et al., 2017; Castello et al., 2013). Protein nteraction samples were processed with a slightly modified single-pot solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation (SP3) protocol (Hughes 2014, Sielaff 2017) for mass spec analysis. Prior to use, beads were washed, and reconstituted in water at a concentration of 10 μg solids/μl. Samples were denatured in 8M urea, 100mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) pH 8. Subsequently, they were reduced, alkylated and nuclease digested by addition of 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP), 50 mM chloroacetamide and 25 U Benzonase nuclease (Millipore), respectively. The prepared bead mix was added to the lysate and the mixtures were acidified to pH~2 by adding 1% (v/v) of 100% formic acid. Acetontrilie (ACN) was added to a final concentration of 80% (v/v) and samples were incubated at room temperature for 30 min. Subsequently, beads were immobilized by incubation on a magnetic rack and the supernatant was removed and discarded. The beads were washed several times with 70% (v/v) ethanol (EtOH) in water, followed by a rinse with 100% ACN. Trypsin in 50 mM TEAB with 1/25 (w/w) enzyme/protein was added to the beads and incubated at 800rpm, 37°C overnight.  Digested peptides were recovered from the beads. To ensure complete recovery, the beads were resuspended in 2% dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) and the supernatant was removed and combined with the first supernatant. Samples were acidified with 5% formic acid prior to LC-MS analysis.  LC-MS/MS Acidified peptides from whole cell lysate and protein interaction samples were analysed on an Ultimate 3000 ultra-HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and electrosprayed directly into a QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific). They were initially trapped on a C18 PepMap100 pre-column (300 µm inner diameter x 5 mm, 100Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific) in solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water). The peptides were then separated on an in-house packed analytical column (75 µm inner diameter x 50cm packed with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm, 120 Å, Dr. Maisch GmbH) using a linear 15%-35% (vol/vol) ACN gradient (2h for whole cell lysates and 1 h for protein interaction samples) and a flow rate of 200 nl/min. Full-scan mass spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap (scan range 350-1500 m/z, resolution 70000, AGC target 3 × 106, maximum injection time 50 ms) in a data-dependent mode. After the mass spectrum scans, the 20 (whole cell lysates) or 10 (protein interaction samples) most intense peaks were selected for higher-energy collisional dissociation fragmentation at 30% of normalised collision energy. Higher-energy collisional dissociation fragmentation spectra were also acquired in the Orbitrap (resolution 17500, AGC target 5 × 104, maximum injection time 120 ms) with first fixed mass at 180 m/z. For RNA interactome samples, liquid chromatography (LC) was performed using an EASY-nano-LC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in which peptides were initially trapped on a 75μm internal diameter guard column packed with Reprosil-Gold 120 C18, 3 μm, 120Å pores (Dr. Maisch GmbH, #r13.9g) in solvent A (0.1% [vol/vol] formic acid in water) using a constant pressure of 500bar. Peptides were then separated on a 45°C heated EASY-Spray column (50cm x 75μm ID, PepMap RSLC C18, 2μm, Thermo Fischer Scientific #164540) using a 3h linear 8-30% [vol/vol] acetonitrile gradient and constant 200nl/min flow rate. Peptides were introduced via an EASY-Spray nano-electrospray ion source into an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific). Spectra were acquired with resolution 30.000 , m/z range 350-1500, AGC target 1x106, maximum injection time 250ms. The 20 most abundant peaks were fragmented using CID (AGC target 5x103, maximum injection time 100ms, normalized collision energy 35%) in a data dependent decision tree method.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification and quantitation was then performed using MaxQuant (v1.5.0.35) (Cox and Mann, 2008). Data was searched against the Human Uniprot database (Jan 2016) alongside a custom Sindbis virus database (see “SINV_database.fasta”) and a list of common contaminants provided by the software. The protein interaction samples were additionally searched against the eGFP protein sequence (Uniprot ID C5MKY7). The search parameters for the Andromeda search engine were: full tryptic specificity, allowing two missed cleavage sites, fixed modification was set to carbamidomethyl (C) and the variable modification to acetylation (protein N-terminus), oxidation (M). Match between runs was applied. All other settings were set to default leading to a protein false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01. To compare the RNA-bound proteome under different conditions, peptide abundance ratios between two samples were computed and summarized for each protein exploiting the peptide mass shift provided by the differential isotopic labelling (SILAC). The log2-intensity ratio of each protein was tested to be different from zero in the three biological replicates using moderated t-test, which is implemented in the R/Bioconductor package limma (Smyth, 2004). P-values were corrected for multiple testing by controlling the false discovery rate with the method of Benjamini-Hochberg. F or proteins for which the protein intensity was ‘zero’ in one of the two conditions compared, we applied a semi-quantitative approach that assumes that proteins without quantitative information are below the detection limit (Sysoev et al., 2016). The approach compiles the number of replicates in each condition in which a given protein has an intensity value. When comparing 2 conditions and three biological replicates, this leads to a matrix with 16 different groups (detected 0, 1, 2 or 3 times in condition 1 versus detected 0, 1, 2 or 3 times in condition 2). A protein is classified as ‘dynamic RBP’ by the semi-quantitative method if an intensity value is assigned to it in 3 or 2 of the replicates in one of the two conditions, while only 1 or 0 intensity values are assigned to it in the other condition. F or protein-protein interaction analysis, protein quantification was performed by label free quantification methods using MaxQuant (Cox and Mann, 2008). Ratios were compiled and normalized to eGFP protein intensity in each sample. Significance of the fold changes was estimated by t-test using the software Perseus (Tyanova, S., 2016)

### Publication Abstract
The compendium of RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) has been greatly expanded by the development of&#xa0;RNA-interactome capture (RIC). However, it remained unknown if the complement of RBPs changes in response to environmental perturbations and whether these rearrangements are important. To answer these questions, we developed "comparative RIC" and applied it to cells challenged with an RNA virus called sindbis (SINV). Over 200 RBPs display differential interaction with RNA upon SINV infection. These alterations are mainly driven by the loss of cellular mRNAs and the emergence of viral RNA. RBPs stimulated by the infection redistribute to viral replication factories and regulate the capacity of the virus to infect. For example, ablation of XRN1 causes cells to be refractory to SINV, while GEMIN5 moonlights as a regulator of SINV gene expression. In summary, RNA availability controls RBP localization and function in SINV-infected cells.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, Sindbis virus

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry, University of Oxford, UK
Department of Biochemistry, University of Oxford

### Submitter
Caroline Lenz

### Lab Head
Dr Alfredo Castello Palomares
Department of Biochemistry, University of Oxford, UK


