### Accession
PXD029560

### Title
Analysis of HNRNPC Interactome in MDA-MB231 parental and LM2 cells

### Description
To define and compare the interactomes of the RNA binding protein HNRNPC in poorly vs. efficiently metastatic breast adenocarcinoma cells, we carried out immunoprecipitation of endogenous HNRNPC from parental MDA-MB231 cells vs. its highly metastatic isogenic derivate, the MDA-MB231-LM2 cells. We used a non-specific MOUSE IgG IP from each line as control. Each IP was performed in triplicate, and analysed by LC-MS/MS, on a Thermo Q-Exactive-plus instrument.

### Sample Protocol
MDA-Parental and MDA-LM2 cells (10x106 per replicate) were washed with ice-cold 1X PBS and lysed in nuclei lysis buffer (100 mM Tris HCl pH 7.5, 0.5% SDS, 1 mM EDTA) containing 1X protease inhibitors (Thermo Scientific) on ice for 10 min. The lysates were then diluted with 4 volumes of IP dilution buffer (62.5 mM Tris HCl pH 7.5, 187.5 mM NaCl, 0.625% Triton X-100, 1 mM EDTA) with protease inhibitors and passed through a 25G needle several times. The lysates were cleared 10 min at 21,000 g at +4°C and used for IP-MS. HNRNPC antibody was covalently bound to the magnetic beads. For this, HNRNPC antibody (Santa Cruz sc-32308) or mouse IgG (Jackson 015-000-003) was first purified using Protein A/G beads (Thermo). Briefly, 3 µg of antibody was bound to 15 µl Protein A/G beads per IP replicate in Modified Coupling buffer (20 mM sodium phosphate pH 7.2, 315 mM NaCl, 0.1 mM EDTA, 0.1% IGEPAL CA-630, 0.5% glycerol) and incubated 15 min at room temperature. The beads were washed twice in Modified Coupling buffer, once in Coupling buffer (20 mM sodium phosphate pH 7.2, 300 mM NaCl) and the antibody was eluted in 0.1 M sodium citrate buffer (pH 2.5) for 5 min at room temperature. After neutralization with 1/10 volume of 1 M sodium phosphate buffer (pH 8) the antibody was coupled to M270 Epoxy Dynabeads (Thermo Scientific) in ammonium sulfate buffer (0.1 M sodium phosphate pH 7.4, 1.2 M ammonium sulfate, final concentration) overnight at 37°C. Prior usage, the antibody conjugated beads were washed 4 times in 1X PBS, once in 1X PBS supplemented with 0.5% Tween-20 and resuspended in 1X PBS. Protein complexes were immunoprecipitated with antibody-conjugated beads for 2h at 4°C, washed three times in wash buffer (15 mM Tris HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% Triton X-100) and eluted in 1X NuPage LDS sample buffer with 0.1 M DTT for 10 min at 70°C. Eluates were then subjected to alkylation, detergent removal, and Trypsin digestion using Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) protocol (Wiśniewski et al., 2009), followed by desalting using StageTips (Rappsilber et al., 2003). Briefly, samples were diluted 1 in 7 in UA buffer (8M urea, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5), transferred to Vivacon-500 30kDa centrifugal filter units (Sartorius), and concentrated by centrifugation at 14,000 g for 15 min. Filters were then washed twice by addition of 0.2 mL of UA buffer and re-concentrating by centrifugation as before. Subsequently, the proteins were alkylated by addition of 100 µL of 50 mM iodoacetamide in UA buffer and incubation at room temperature in the dark for 30 min. The iodoacetamide solution was then removed by centrifugation at 14,000 g for 10 min, and samples were washed twice with 0.2 mL of UA buffer as before. This was followed by three washes with 0.2 mL of ABC buffer (0.04 M ammonium bicarbonate in water), prior to transferring the filters to new collection tubes, and addition of Digestion buffer (0.3 µg of MS grade Trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich) in 50 µL of ABC buffer per filter). The proteins were digested overnight in a thermo-mixer at 37C with gentle shaking (600 rpm). The next day, the resulting peptides were eluted from the filters by centrifugation at 14,000 g for 10 min, followed by two further elutions, each with 100 µL of the ABC solution. The combined eluates were then reconstituted in 2% Acetonitrile (ACN), 0.2% Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Samples were then subjected to desalting using home-made C18 StageTips. Desalted peptides were subsequently lyophilized by vacuum centrifugation, resuspended in 7 μL of A* buffer (2% ACN, 0.5% Acetic acid, 0.1% TFA in water), and analyzed on a Q-Exactive plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer coupled with a nanoflow ultimate 3000 RSL nano HPLC platform (Thermo Fisher).6 μL of each peptide sample was resolved at 250 nL/min flow-rate on an Easy-Spray 50 cm x 75 μm RSLC C18 column (Thermo Fisher), using a 123 minutes gradient of 3% to 35% of buffer B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) against buffer A (0.1% formic acid in water), followed by online infusion into the mass spectrometer by electrospray (1.95 kV, 255C). The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent positive mode. A TOP15 method in which each MS scan is followed by 15 MS/MS scans was applied. The scans were acquired at 375-1500 m/z range, with a resolution of 70,000 (MS) and 17,500 (MS/MS). A 30 seconds dynamic exclusion was applied.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (version 1.6.3.3) software was used for database search and label-free quantification of mass spectrometry raw files (Tyanova et al., 2016). The search was performed against a FASTA file of the Homo Sapiens proteome, extracted from Uniprot.org (2016). A precursor mass tolerance of 4.5 ppm, and a fragment mass tolerance of 20 ppm was applied. Methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were included as variable modifications whilst carbamidomethylation was applied as a fixed modification. Two trypsin miss-cleavages were allowed, and the minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids. Default MaxQuant parameters for Label-Free Quantification (LFQ) were used. All raw files were searched together (along with additional IP-MS runs which are not included in this study), with the match between runs option enabled. An FDR of 0.01 for both peptide and protein identifications were used. All other Maxquant settings were kept as default.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ip-ms; lc-ms/ms; label-free quantification

### Affiliations
Barts Cancer Institute, Queen Mary University of London, Charterhouse square, London EC1M 6BQ, UK.
Barts Cancer Institute

### Submitter
Faraz Mardakheh

### Lab Head
Dr Faraz Mardakheh
Barts Cancer Institute, Queen Mary University of London, Charterhouse square, London EC1M 6BQ, UK.


