### Accession
PXD005201

### Title
Analysis of the cilia membrane proteome by cmAPEX

### Description
APEX was targeted to the primary cilium of mouse IMCD cells using a 5HT6-APEX-GFP fusion construct. Proximity labling was performed using incubation with biotinphenol and H2O2. For details, please see the methods section of the accompanying paper.

### Sample Protocol
Cells expressing 5HT6-APEX-GFP were either treated with biotin phenol only (control) or with biotin phenol plus H2O2 (pulldown). Cells were lysed, and biotinylated proteins were immunopurified using streptavidin beads and subjected to MS/MS analysis. For technical details, please see the methods of the accompanying paper.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed by MaxQuant with LFQ option enabled. For details, please see the methods of the accompanying paper.

### Publication Abstract
Primary cilia are sensory, antennae-like organelles present on the surface of many cell types. They have been involved in a variety of diseases collectively termed ciliopathies. As cilia are essential regulators of cell signaling, the composition of the ciliary membrane needs to be strictly regulated. To understand regulatory processes at the ciliary membrane, we report the targeting of a genetically engineered enzyme specifically to the ciliary membrane to allow biotinylation and identification of the membrane-associated proteome. Bioinformatic analysis of the comprehensive dataset reveals high-stoichiometric presence of actin-binding proteins inside the cilium. Immunofluorescence stainings and complementary interaction proteomic analyses confirm these findings. Depolymerization of branched F-actin causes further enrichment of the actin-binding and actin-related proteins in cilia, including Myosin 5a (Myo5a). Interestingly, Myo5a knockout decreases ciliation while enhanced levels of Myo5a are observed in cilia upon induction of ciliary disassembly. In summary, we present a novel approach to investigate dynamics of the ciliary membrane proteome in mammalian cells and identify actin-binding proteins as mechanosensitive components of cilia that might have important functions in cilia membrane dynamics.

### Keywords
Mouse, Proteome, Cilia, Proximity labeling

### Affiliations
Kidney research center cologne
University of Cologne

### Submitter
Markus Rinschen

### Lab Head
Dr Bernhard Schermer
University of Cologne


