### Accession
PXD010200

### Title
Environment-driven changes of mRNA and protein levels in Pseudomonas aeruginosa

### Description
LFQ proteome datasets of Pseudomonas aeruginosa type strain PA14 cultured at different enviromental conditions: Exponential-, transition- and stationary(12 h and 24 h)growth phases. Biofilm (24 h and 48 h), low osmolarity conditions (control = exponential phase), iron starvation and respective control, Sub-MIC ciproflox treatment and respective control.

### Sample Protocol
P. aeruginosa PA14 was pre-cultured in in 4 mL lysogeny broth (LB) in glass tubes at 37 °C shaking at 180 rpm. For main experiments a 10 mL culture was prepared from one pre-culture in LB starting at optical density (OD)600 = 0.02. Experiments were performed with 3-5 biological replicates. In brief, exponential phase condition at OD600 = 1, transition phase at OD600 = 2 and stationary phase after 12/24 h and roughly OD600 = 4. For Biofilm conditions (24 h & 48 h) cells were cultured in 48 wells of a 96-well plate instead of 8 wells (for transcriptome analysis). For iron starvation and low osmolarity conditions cells were treated like described in Schulz et al (2015). For ciprofloxacin treatment main cultures were grown until OD600 = 0.5 and then treated for 3 h with sub-inhibitory (sub-MIC) concentrations of ciprofloxacin.  Schulz S, Eckweiler D, Bielecka A, Nicolai T, Franke R, Dötsch A, Hornischer K, Bruchmann S, Düvel J & Häussler S (2015) Elucidation of Sigma Factor-Associated Networks in Pseudomonas aeruginosa Reveals a Modular Architecture with Limited and Function-Specific Crosstalk. PLOS Pathog. 11: e1004744

### Data Protocol
All acquired files  were searched together against the P. aeruginosa UCBPP-PA14 database of the Pseudomonas Genome Database (Winsor et al, 2011) (download date 20.07.2015). Parameters for the search included fast label-free quantification (LFQ) options with min. ratio count = 1, variable modifications (propionamide at cystein, oxidation at methionine and deamidation at asparagines and glutamine), min. peptide length = 6 and using both second peptide and match between runs options. For all other settings default values were used.   Winsor GL, Lam DKW, Fleming L, Lo R, Whiteside MD, Yu NY, Hancock REW & Brinkman FSL (2011) Pseudomonas Genome Database: Improved comparative analysis and population genomics capability for Pseudomonas genomes. Nucleic Acids Res. 39: D596-600

### Publication Abstract
Systems biology approaches address the challenge of translating sequence information into function. In this study, we described the Pseudomonas aeruginosa PA14 proteomic landscape and quantified environment-driven changes in protein levels by the use of LC-MS techniques. Previously recorded mRNA data allowed a comparison of RNA to protein ratios for each individual gene and, thus, to explore the relationship between an mRNA being differentially expressed between environmental conditions and the mRNA-protein correlation for that gene. We developed a Random Forest-based predictor for protein levels and found that the mRNA to protein correlation was higher for genes/proteins that undergo dynamic changes. One example of a discrepancy between protein and predicted protein levels was observed for a phage-related gene cluster, which was translated into low protein levels under standard growth conditions. However, under SOS-inducing conditions more protein was produced and the prediction of protein levels based on mRNA abundancy became more accurate. In conclusion, our systems biology approach sheds light on complex mRNA to protein level relationships and uncovered condition-dependent post-transcriptional regulatory events.

### Keywords
Random forest prediction, Transcriptome, Proteome, Post-transcriptional regulation, Mass spectrometry, Label-free quantification of proteins

### Affiliations
Medical School Hannover - ZFA Proteomics & Twincore, Molecular Bacteriology
Research Core Unit Proteomics and Institute of Toxicology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany

### Submitter
Jelena Erdmann

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Pich
Research Core Unit Proteomics and Institute of Toxicology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany


