### Accession
PXD028400

### Title
Proteomic study of triple negative breast cancer cell lines at different tumorigenic stages reveals a divergent reprogramming metabolism

### Description
Breast cancer is the leading type of cancer. The triple negative is the most aggressive type of breast cancer, as it is resistant to several treatments as hormone based, for example. Cell metabolism is altered in cancer cells as they favor anaerobic pathways to produce energy in a faster pace and in accordance with the hypoxic environments found inside tumor mass, which is known as the Warburg effect. In this study, we sought to investigate the molecular mechanisms behind the different cell phenotypes during tumorigenesis. To pursue this goal, we employed proteomics in four types of cells; the non-tumorigenic epithelial cell MCF-10A, two triple negative breast cancer originated from primary tumor sites (MGSO-3 and MACL-1), and the metastatic tumor cell line MDA-231-MD. Our proteomic data shown that most proteins associated with the TCA cycle and oxidative phosphorylation (aerobic metabolic phase) were upregulated in primary cells while downregulated in metastatic cell, in line with a negative regulation of the Warburg effect for the primarily cells. We also shown that these cells have lower mitochondria density and upregulation of pro-apoptotic proteins when compared with metastatic cells. Molecular differences highlighted in this study may assist the scientific community in developing new protocols to treat the triple negative breast cancer.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysis and protein digestion Cell lysis, protein extraction, reduction and alkylation of thiol groups were achieved in a single step essentially as previously described [10]. Briefly, 50 μL of lysis buffer (urea 6M, thiourea 2M, tris hydrochloride (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP) 10mM, chloroacetamide 40 mM, and triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) 20 mM) was added to each sample. Tip sonication - on ice to avoid sample heating - was used to shear DNA filaments and enhance cell lysis. Then, the samples were incubated for 2h at room temperature. Protein quantification was performed by fluorescent method (Qubit, Thermo). Samples were diluted 10 times with TEAB 20 mM and incubated (1:50 enzyme/protein ratio) with Lys-C (Wako) for 2 hours in room temperature. Trypsin (Promega) was added (1:50 enzyme/protein ratio) and the samples were incubated for 16h at room temperature. Reaction was quenched with TFA (final concentration of 1%), and the samples were desalted using C18 ZipTip Pipette Tips (Millipore) using the manufacturer’s protocol. A sample reference pool was prepared by combining the same amount of peptides from each cell line used in this study. Samples were kept at 20oC until further use.  Peptide labeling and sample pre-fractionation The TMT 10plex (Thermo) was used to label 25 μg from each experimental condition (MCF-10A, MGSO-3, MACL-1, MDA-231-MD, and Samples Pool) as the manufacturer’s protocol. Samples were combined in equal amount and subjected to offline high-pH reverse-phase pre-fractionation. Samples were resuspended in ammonium formate 20 mM (pH 10) and loaded in the Sep-Pak SPE (Waters) equilibrated previously with ammonium formate 20 mM (pH 10). On-column samples were washed 3 times with ammonium formate 20 mM (pH 10). Samples were eluted with acetonitrile at 5%, 7,5%, 10%, 12.5%, 15%, 17.5%, 20%, 22.5%, 25%, 27%, 30%, 50% or 95% and collected in 8 concatenated fractions. Samples were dried down using a vacuum centrifuge and stored at -20oC until further use.  Mass spectrometry analysis Samples were resuspended in 0.1% acid formic (solvent A) and loaded in a pre-column (3 cm long x 100 μm inner diameter) packed with the resin Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ (5μm particle size) using the EasyLC HPLC system (Thermo) at 20 μl/min. Peptide separation was achieved in the analytical (20 cm long x 75 μm inner diameter) reverse-phase column packed with the resin Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ (3μm particle size) using the following gradient, expressed as the percentage (%) of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 95% acetonitrile): (i) 1–3% solvent B in 3 min, (ii) 3–28% solvent B in 45 min, (iii) 28–45% solvent B in 10 min, and (iv) 45–100% solvent B in 3 min. The flow was kept constant at 0.25 μL/min. Eluted peptides were analyzed online in the mass spectrometer Q Exactive HF (Thermo). The instrument was operated in the positive polarity and in the data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. The peptide ions were accumulated until 3x106 ions or 120ms, and scanned out in the orbitrap using 120,000 resolution at m/z 200 Th. The 20 most intense ions (Top20) were selected in the quadrupole (m/z 1.2 Th isolation width) for HCD fragmentation (32% normalized collision energy). Fragment ions were accumulated for up to 1x105 ions or 120 ms, and analyzed in the orbitrap using 60,000 resolution at m/z 200 Th. Selected ions were included in the dynamic exclusion list for 15 s.

### Data Protocol
Statistical and bioinformatic analyses Mass spectra were researched using the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.1.0). The search parameters were as follows. Search tolerance for first peptide set at 20 ppm and for main peptide set at 4.5 ppm. Lys-C and trypsin were selected allowing up to two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethyl (Cys) was defined as fixed modification. Oxidation (Met) and acetyl (N-terminal protein) were defined as variable modifications. Peptide FDR was defined as < 1%. We only analyzed proteins quantified in the four replicates. Protein intensity has been transformed into log2 and normalized using median values. We used one-way ANOVA and regulated proteins were considered when P < 0.05) and 1.3-fold change. The Volcano plots and the heat maps were done using the DanteR (https://omics.pnl.gov/software/danter). Venn diagrams were done using the Biovenn (http://www.biovenn.nl). Gene ontology was determined using DAVID (https://david.ncifcrf.gov) and the Cytoscape (https://cytoscape.org/). Protein interaction maps were done using the String (http://www.string-db.org).

### Publication Abstract
Breast cancer is the most prevalent cancer in women worldwide. Its molecular subtypes are based on the presence/absence of estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR), and human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2). MACL-1 and MGSO-3 are cell lines derived from primary tumor sites of patients diagnosed with luminal A subtype carcinoma (ER+/PR+/HER2-) and ductal carcinoma in situ (ER-/PR-/HER2+), respectively. However, these cell lines lost the expression of these markers over cell culturing, and both have triple-negative phenotypes (ER-/PR-/HER2-), which has the poorest prognosis. Here, we sought to study the proteome signature of MGSO-3 and MACL-1, comparing them with the epithelial cell line MCF-10A and the well-established metastatic-derived breast cancer cell line MDA-MB-231. Our results showed that proteins associated with the tricarboxylic acid cycle (TCA) and oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) were upregulated in MGSO-3 and MACL-1 cells. These cell lines also showed upregulation of pro-apoptotic proteins when compared with MDA-MB-231. The molecular differences highlighted in this study may clarify the molecular basis behind cancer cells functioning and may reveal novel signatures across the breast cancer cell models.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Tmt, Breast cancer

### Affiliations
Federal University of Minas Gerais
Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Institute of Biological Sciences, Federal University of Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte-MG, Brazil.

### Submitter
Thiago Verano-Braga

### Lab Head
Dr Thiago Verano Braga
Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Institute of Biological Sciences, Federal University of Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte-MG, Brazil.


