### Accession
PXD004884

### Title
Considerations for peptide and protein error rate control in large-scale targeted DIA analyses

### Description
Liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry has become the main method for high-throughput identification and quantification of peptides and the inferred proteins. Discovery proteomics commonly employs data-dependent acquisition in combination with spectrum-centric analysis. The accumulation of data generated from thousands of samples by this method has approached saturation coverage of different proteomes. Recently, as a result of technological advances, methods based on data acquisition strategies compatible with peptide-centric scoring have also reached similar proteome coverage in individual runs, and scalability. This is exemplified by SWATH-MS, which combines data-independent acquisition (DIA) with targeted data extraction of groups of transitions uniquely detecting a peptide. As the data matrices generated by these experiments continue to grow with respect to both the number of peptides identified per sample and the number of samples analyzed per study, challenges for error rate control have emerged.  Here, we discuss the adaptation of statistical concepts developed for discovery proteomics based on spectrum-centric scoring to large-scale DIA experiments analyzed with peptide-centric scoring strategies, and provide some guidance on their application. We propose that, in order to increase the quality and reproducibility of published proteomic results, well-established confidence criteria should be reported at each level as we progress from spectral evidence to identified or detected peptides and inferred proteins. These confidence criteria should equally be applied to proteomic analyses based on spectrum- and peptide-centric scoring strategies.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293 cells (ATCC) were cultured in DMEM (10% FCS, 50 μg/ml penicillin, 50 μg/ml streptomycin). Cell pellets were lysed on ice by using a lysis buffer containing 8 M urea (EuroBio), 40 mM Tris-base (Sigma-Aldrich), 10 mM DTT (AppliChem) and complete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche). The mixture was sonicated at 4 °C for 5 mins using a VialTweeter device (Hielscher-Ultrasound Technology) at the highest setting and centrifuged at 21130 g, 4 °C for 1 hr to remove the insoluble material. The supernatant protein mixtures were transferred and the protein amount was determined with a Bradford assay (Bio-Rad). Then 5 volumes of precooled precipitation solution containing 50% acetone, 50% ethanol, and 0.1% acetic acid were added to the protein mixture and kept at −20 °C overnight. The mixture was centrifuged at 20,400 g for 40 min. The pellets were further washed with 100% acetone and 70% ethanol with centrifugation at 20,400 g for 40 min. Aliquots of 2 mg protein mixtures were reduced by 5 tris(carboxyethyl)phosphine (Sigma-Aldrich) and alkylated by 30 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich). The samples were then digested with sequencing-grade porcine trypsin (Promega) at a protease/protein ratio of 1:50 overnight at 37 °C in 100 mM NH4HCO373. Digests were combined together and purified with Sep-Pak C18 Vac Cartridge (Waters). The peptide amount was determined by using Nanodrop ND-1000 (Thermo Scientific). An aliquot of retention time calibration peptides from an iRT-Kit (Biognosys) was spiked into the sample at a ratio of 1:20 or 1:25 (v/v) to correct relative retention times between acquisitions.

### Data Protocol
Spectral library and peptide query parameter generation. The combined human assay library (CAL) for the 64 variable windows setting (PXD000954) was filtered for proteotypic peptides and complemented by 30 additional SIS peptides. The HEK-293 subset library (HEK) was generated by filtering the CAL to only contain spectra from HEK-293 samples. The peptide query parameters were derived from the HEK-293 filtered spectral library as described previously (PXD000954). The sample-specific library (SSL) was generated from the spectra collected by six LC-MS/MS runs in DDA mode of the identical unfractionated HEK-293 tryptic digest, as described previously (PXD000954). The combined human and M. tuberculosis library was based on the SpectraST consensus library of the CAL (PXD000954) and the M. tuberculosis libraries (Schubert et al. PMID:23684311, Schubert et al. PMID:26094805). We generated a merged library by appending the M. tuberculosis to the CAL library using SpectraST (TPP 5.0). The protein identifiers were updated using the combined original FASTA files of the two libraries, to later exclude any shared peptides between the two organisms. Peptides and fragment ions were selected identically as described previously (PXD000954). msproteomicstools (master@c10a2b8) and OpenMS (version 2.1) was used with OpenSwathDecoyGenerator to generate combined target-decoy libraries (method: shuffle, similarity_threshold: 0.05, identity_threshold 0.7, exclude_similar: true, append: true). DIA data analysis. The analysis of the inter-laboratory SWATH-MS data set was conducted identically as described previously (PXD004886). The SWATH-MS data analysis was performed using OpenSWATH (OpenMS v2.0) essentially as described (Röst et al. PMID:24727770) except that the improved single executable OpenSwathWorkflow was used instead of the multi-step workflow to perform peak-picking and feature detection and the following parameters were changed: m/z extraction window = 75 ppm, RT extraction window = 900 seconds. The analysis was performed separately for the four different spectral libraries described above: combined human assay library, HEK-293 subset library, sample-specific library, and combined human + M. tuberculosis library. Semi-supervised learning and statistical validation were performed using an extended version of PyProphet (PyProphet-cli v0.19 - https://github.com/PyProphet). PyProphet was run for all three available contexts to conduct q-value estimation per run (run-specific context), across all runs (experiment-wide context) or in a global fashion (global context), with a fixed λ of 0.4. The set of peptide peak groups used for learning the score weights of OpenSWATH sub-scores to produce a single discriminant score were sampled with a ratio ≈ 1/(no. of samples), for aggregated analysis of all sites 0.005. A global “master list” of detected peak groups and proteins across the entire dataset was generated by filtering the results from the global context at 1% peptide query FDR and 1% protein FDR. The results from the experiment-wide context were filtered on three different stringency levels: 1% peptide query FDR, 1% peptide query FDR and 1% protein FDR, and 1% peptide query FDR and additional filtering based on the global “master list” of peptide queries and proteins. The sets of peak groups detected with the experiment-wide context were pre-filtered for 5% peak group FDR to reduce storage requirements.

### Publication Abstract
Liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) is the main method for high-throughput identification and quantification of peptides and inferred proteins. Within this field, data-independent acquisition (DIA) combined with peptide-centric scoring, as exemplified by the technique SWATH-MS, has emerged as a scalable method to achieve deep and consistent proteome coverage across large-scale data sets. We demonstrate that statistical concepts developed for discovery proteomics based on spectrum-centric scoring can be adapted to large-scale DIA experiments that have been analyzed with peptide-centric scoring strategies, and we provide guidance on their application. We show that optimal tradeoffs between sensitivity and specificity require careful considerations of the relationship between proteins in the samples and proteins represented in the spectral library. We propose the application of a global analyte constraint to prevent the accumulation of false positives across large-scale data sets. Furthermore, to increase the quality and reproducibility of published proteomic results, well-established confidence criteria should be reported for the detected peptide queries, peptides and inferred proteins.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Swath-ms, Dia, Error rate control

### Affiliations
Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich, CH-8093 Zurich, Switzerland. Faculty of Science, University of Zurich, CH-8057 Zurich, Switzerland
ETH Zurich

### Submitter
Isabell Bludau

### Lab Head
Dr Ruedi Aebersold
Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich, CH-8093 Zurich, Switzerland. Faculty of Science, University of Zurich, CH-8057 Zurich, Switzerland


