### Accession
PXD015311

### Title
Global Proteomic Analysis Implicates Hepatic Lipid Droplet-Associated Kinase STK25 in Regulation of Metabolic Stress Response in Steatotic Liver

### Description
Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD), defined as fatty infiltration in >5% of hepatocytes (steatosis) in the absence of excessive alcohol consumption, is emerging as a leading cause of liver disease worldwide (1). Subjects with NAFLD have an increased risk of progressing into non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) as well as developing type 2 diabetes, cardiovascular disease, and liver cancer (2-4). Thus, understanding the pathobiology of NAFLD is of high medical relevance for the efficient prevention and treatment of a range of complex metabolic diseases. In NAFLD, excess lipids accumulate within intrahepatocellular lipid droplets (LDs), which are composed of a neutral lipid core of mainly triacylglycerol (TAG) and cholesterol esters surrounded by a phospholipid monolayer that harbors specific proteins. Once thought to be only inert energy storage depots, hepatic LDs are increasingly recognized as organelles that orchestrate liver lipid partitioning but also play a critical role in protein quality control and storage, cell signaling, and viral replication (5). Notably, LDs are shown to dynamically interact with a variety of cellular organelles including the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), mitochondria, peroxisomes, and endosomes (6). Liver LD surface-associated proteins regulate the functional properties of LDs, and dietary fat content as well as liver metabolic status have been shown to dynamically influence the composition of hepatic LD proteins (7, 8). Consequently, exploring how LD-associated proteins affect hepatic metabolism is important for understanding the molecular pathophysiology of NAFLD.  In the search for novel targets that regulate ectopic lipid accumulation in the context of nutritional stress and obesity, we identified serine/threonine protein kinase (STK)25, a member of the Ste20 kinase superfamily (9), as a hepatic LD-associated protein, which critically controls the development and progression of NAFLD (10-15). We found that STK25 knockdown attenuates lipid deposition in human hepatocytes and mouse liver by repressing lipid synthesis and enhancing β-oxidation and very-low-density lipoprotein (VLDL)-TAG secretion, with the reciprocal phenotype seen when STK25 protein is overexpressed (10-15). Notably, administration of hepatocyte-targeting GalNAc-conjugated Stk25 antisense oligonucleotide (ASO) in obese mice effectively ameliorates diet-induced hepatic steatosis as well as NASH features (i.e., liver inflammation, hepatocellular ballooning, and fibrosis), providing in vivo nonclinical proof-of-principle for the metabolic benefit of pharmacological STK25 inhibitors (15). Furthermore, we observed that STK25 levels in human liver biopsies correlate with the severity of NASH, and several common non-linked single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the human STK25 gene are associated with altered liver fat content (12-14). Although these studies suggest a key role for STK25 in the control of liver LD dynamics, the mechanism-of-action of STK25 in regulation of hepatic lipid partitioning has remained elusive.  To provide novel insights into biological function of STK25 in the liver under steatotic conditions, we here characterized the hepatic LD-associated phosphoproteome in Stk25 knockout mice and their wild-type littermates following high-fat diet feeding using non-biased approach by isobaric tagging for relative quantification. Of the 4,515 proteins and 982 phosphoproteins identified with a 1% false discovery rate, we report a total of 131 proteins and 69 phosphoproteins that were differentially represented in STK25-deficient livers. Most notably, a number of proteins involved in peroxisomal function, antioxidant defense, and ubiquitination-mediated proteolysis were coordinately regulated in the livers from high-fat-fed Stk25-/- mice compared with wild-type controls.

### Sample Protocol
The livers were homomogenized. The LD-containing band was transferred into a fresh tube and centrifuged at 20,000 g for 20 min at 4°C. The isolated LDs were then stored at –80°C until further analysis.  For LC-MS analysis, the liver LD preparations were mixed with the Pierce Phosphatase Inhibitor X2 solution (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) and 16% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS)/200 mmol/l triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) to a final concentration of approximately 1.5% SDS at 4°C. The solution was centrifuged at 13,500 rcf/g for 20 min and the colorless protein extract layer was transferred to a separate vial. The remaining white top layer was then washed with 110 µl of the solution containing the phosphatase inhibitor at X0.5 concentration, 1.5% SDS, 20 mmol/l TEAB and centrifuged at 14 800 rpm for 20 min; the colorless aqueous layer was collected and combined with the protein extract from the previous step. Protein concentrations in the combined protein extracts were determined using the Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay (Pierce Biotechnology, Rockford, IL) and the Benchmark Plus microplate reader (BioRad, Hercules, CA). Aliquots containing 180 μg of protein were digested with trypsin using the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method (19). In brief, the samples were incubated with 100 mmol/l dithiothreitol at 60°C for 30 min, transferred onto the 30 kDa MWCO Nanosep centrifugal filters (Pall Life Sciences, Ann Arbor, MI), washed with 8M urea solution, and alkylated with 10 mmol/l methyl methanethiosulfonate in 50 mmol/l TEAB and 1% sodium deoxycholate. Digestion was performed in 50 mmol/l TEAB/1% sodium deoxycholate at 37°C in two stages: the samples were incubated with 1.8 µg of Pierce MS-grade trypsin (trypsin to protein ratio 1:100; Pierce Biotechnology) overnight, then 1.8 µg more of trypsin was added, and the digestion was performed for an additional 3 hours. The peptides were collected by centrifugation and labeled using TMT 10-plex isobaric mass tagging reagents (Pierce Biotechnology) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The labeled samples were mixed and sodium deoxycholate was removed by acidification with 10% TFA and subsequent centrifugation at 13,500 rcf/g. An aliquot containing approximately 90 µg of the pooled labeled peptide mixture (1/20 of the total amount by volume) was fractionated using the Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Pierce Biotechnology) according to the manufacturer’s recommendations. Eight fractions were collected using the elution solvents containing 0.1% of triethylamine and 10.0%, 12.0%, 14.0%, 16.0%, 18.0%, 20.0%, 22.5%, and 50.0% of acetonitrile. The fractions were dried on Speedvac and reconstituted in 3% acetonitrile/0.2% formic acid for analysis. For the phosphopeptide enrichment, the remaining part (19/20 of the total volume) of the pooled TMT-labeled peptide sample (approximately 1,700 µg) was divided into two equal aliquots and both aliquots were evaporated on Speedvac to dryness. One aliquot was resuspended in the buffer and processed using the Pierce TiO2 Phosphopeptide Enrichment and Clean Up Kit (Pierce Biotechnology) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Another aliquot was resuspended in the buffer and processed using the High-Select Fe-NTA Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. In both cases, the enriched samples were purified using the Pierce C18 Spin Columns (8 mg of the C18 material; Pierce Biotechnology), and the purified samples were then dried on Speedvac. TMT-labeled phosphopeptides from both TiO2 and Fe-NTA enrichment were reconstituted in 3% acetonitrile/0.2% formic acid and analyzed separately. All the samples were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) interfaced with an Easy-nLC 1200 nanoflow liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were trapped on the Acclaim Pepmap 100 C18 trap column (100 µm X 2 cm, particle size 5 µm; Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated on the in-house packed C18 analytical column (packing material 75 µm X 30 cm, particle size 3 µm; Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany) using 0.2% formic acid as eluent A and 80% acetonitrile/0.2% formic acid as eluent B. The precursor ion spectra were recorded at 120 000 resolution, the most intense precursor ions were selected (‘top speed’ setting with a duty cycle of 3 s), fragmented using CID at collision energy setting of 35, and the MS/MS spectra were recorded in ion trap with the maximum injection time of 50 ms and the isolation window of 0.7 Da. MS3 spectra for reporter ion quantitation were recorded at 50 000 resolution with HCD fragmentation at collision energy of 60 using the synchronous precursor selection of the 7 most abundant MS/MS fragments.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using Proteome Discoverer version 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The database search was performed against the Swissprot Mus musculus database (October 2017), Mascot 2.5.1 (Matrix Science, London, UK) was used as a search engine with precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 0.6 Da; one missed cleavage was accepted, mono-oxidation on methionine was set as a variable modification, methylthiolation on cysteine and TMT-6 reagent modification on lysine and peptide N-terminus were set as a fixed modification for all files; phosphorylation on serine, threonine, and tyrosine was set as a variable modification for the processing of the phosphopeptide-enriched samples. Percolator was used for the validation of identification results with the strict target false discovery rate of 1%. Reporter ion intensities were quantified in MS3 spectra at 0.003 Da mass tolerance and normalized on the total protein abundance within the Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Only the quantification values from the unique peptides were used for quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) and nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) are emerging as leading causes of liver disease worldwide and have been recognized as one of the major unmet medical needs of the 21st century. Our recent translational studies in mouse models, human cell lines, and well-characterized patient cohorts have identified serine/threonine kinase (STK)25 as a protein that coats intrahepatocellular lipid droplets (LDs) and critically regulates liver lipid homeostasis and progression of NAFLD/NASH. Here, we studied the mechanism-of-action of STK25 in steatotic liver by relative quantification of the hepatic LD-associated phosphoproteome from high-fat diet-fed <i>Stk25</i> knockout mice compared with their wild-type littermates. We observed a total of 131 proteins and 60 phosphoproteins that were differentially represented in STK25-deficient livers. Most notably, a number of proteins involved in peroxisomal function, ubiquitination-mediated proteolysis, and antioxidant defense were coordinately regulated in <i>Stk25</i><sup>-/-</sup> versus wild-type livers. We confirmed attenuated peroxisomal biogenesis and protection against oxidative and ER stress in STK25-deficient human liver cells, demonstrating the hepatocyte-autonomous manner of STK25's action. In summary, our results suggest that regulation of peroxisomal function and metabolic stress response may be important molecular mechanisms by which STK25 controls the development and progression of NAFLD/NASH.

### Keywords
Lipid droplet, Phosphoproteomics, Stk25, Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease

### Affiliations
Proteomics Core Facility / University of Gothenburg
Proteomics Core Facility at Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg

### Submitter
Carina Sihlbom

### Lab Head
Dr Carina Sihlbom
Proteomics Core Facility at Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg


