### Accession
PXD003444

### Title
The Extracellular Proteome and Citrullinome of the Oral Pathogen Porphyromonas gingivalis

### Description
Porphyrmonas gingivalis is an oral pathogen associated with the inflammatory disease periodontitis. The colonization of oral epithelial surfaces by P. gingivalis may also lead to the autoimmune disease rheumatoid arthritis. One of the hallmarks of rheumatoid arthritis is the loss of tolerance against citrullinated proteins. Citrullination is a post-translational modification of arginine residues, leading to a change in structure and function of the respective protein. This modification is catalysed by peptidylarginine deiminases (PAD). Interestingly, P. gingivalis secretes a citrullinating enzyme, known as P. gingivalis PAD (PPAD), which targets bacterial and human proteins. Since the extent of P. gingivalis protein citrullination by PPAD was not yet known, the present study was aimed at identifying the extracellular proteome and citrullinome of P. gingivalis. To this end, extracellular proteins of two reference strains, two PPAD-deficient mutants and three clinical isolates of P. gingivalis were analysed by mass spectrometry. The results uncovered substantial heterogeneity in the extracellular proteome and citrullinome of P. gingivalis, especially in relation to the extracellular detection of typical cytoplasmic proteins. In contrast, major virulence factors were identified in all investigated isolates although their citrullination was shown to vary. This may be related to post-translational processing of the PPAD enzyme.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for mass spectrometry. Dried exoproteome samples were first digested following an in-solution trypsin digestion procedure. The whole-protein pellets were resuspended in 100 µL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer (Fluka, Buchs, Switzerland). The samples were reduced by addition of 2 µL of 500 mM DTT and incubation for 45 min at 60°C. Subsequently, the samples were alkylated by addition of 2 µL iodoacetamide (IAA, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, USA), and incubated in the dark for 15 min at room temperature. Trypsin (80 ng; Promega, Madison, USA) was added and samples were incubated overnight at 37°C under continuous shaking at 250 rpm. The trypsin digestion was stopped by addition of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, USA) and incubation at 37°C for 45 min. To purify in-solution digested peptides, a ZipTip® (Millipore, Billerica, USA) filtration procedure was implemented as described by Dreisbach et al. (21). Briefly, after wetting and equilibrating a ZipTip® pipette tip, the peptides were bound to C-18 material. A subsequent washing step with 0.1% acetic acid was followed by a final elution with elution solution (containing 60% acetonitrile and 0.1% acetic acid). The samples were dried at room temperature in a Concentrator Plus Speed Vac (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany) using the V-AQ program, and the resulting peptide pellets were stored at 4°C until further use. Mass spectrometry analysis. Purified peptides were analyzed by reversed phase liquid chromatography (LC) electrospray ionization (ESI) MS/MS using an LTQ Orbitrap as described in Bonn et al.

### Data Protocol
Database searching was done with Sorcerer-SEQUEST 4 (Sage-N Research, Milpitas, USA). After extraction from the raw files, *.dta files were searched with Sequest against a target-decoy database with a set of common laboratory contaminants. A non-redundant database for the respective peptide/protein search was created from the published genome sequences of the W83, ATCC 33277 and TDC60 strains (Supplementary FASTA file). Protein sequences that differed in only 1 amino acid were included in this database. Validation of MS/MS based peptide and protein identification was performed with Scaffold v.4.4.1.1 (Proteome Software, Portland, USA). Peptide identifications were accepted if they exceeded the following specific database search engine thresholds. SEQUEST identifications required at least deltaCn scores of greater than 0.1 and XCorr scores of greater than 2.6, 3.5 and 3.5 for doubly, triply and quadruply charged peptides, respectively. Protein identifications were accepted if at least 2 identified peptides were detected with the above mentioned filter criteria in 2 out of 3 biological replicates. With these filter parameter no false positive hits were obtained. Protein data was exported from Scaffold and further curated in Microsoft Excel 2010 before further analysis. Citrullination of proteins was detected by a mass shift of 1 Dalton in arginine-containing peptides. To exclude false-positive identifications, peptides containing asparagine and/or glutamine were deleted from this analysis, because it is not possible to distinguish between citrullination of arginine, and deamidation of asparagine or glutamine.

### Publication Abstract
Porphyromonas gingivalis is an oral pathogen associated with the inflammatory disease periodontitis. Periodontitis and P. gingivalis have been associated with rheumatoid arthritis. One of the hallmarks of rheumatoid arthritis is the loss of tolerance against citrullinated proteins. Citrullination is a post-translational modification of arginine residues, leading to a change in structure and function of the respective protein. This modification, which is catalyzed by peptidylarginine deiminases (PADs), plays a role in several physiological processes in the human body. Interestingly, P. gingivalis secretes a citrullinating enzyme, known as P. gingivalis PAD (PPAD), which targets bacterial and human proteins. Because the extent of P. gingivalis protein citrullination by PPAD was not yet known, the present study was aimed at identifying the extracellular proteome and citrullinome of P. gingivalis. To this end, extracellular proteins of two reference strains, two PPAD-deficient mutants, and three clinical isolates of P. gingivalis were analyzed by mass spectrometry. The results uncovered substantial heterogeneity in the extracellular proteome and citrullinome of P. gingivalis, especially in relation to the extracellular detection of typical cytoplasmic proteins. In contrast, the major virulence factors of P. gingivalis were identified in all investigated isolates, although their citrullination was shown to vary. This may be related to post-translational processing of the PPAD enzyme. Altogether, our findings focus attention on the possible roles of 6 to 25 potentially citrullinated proteins, especially the gingipain RgpA, in periodontitis and rheumatoid arthritis.

### Keywords
Porphyromonas gingivalis, Citrullination, Periodontitis, Exoproteome, Rheumatoid arthritis, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Institute for Microbiology Department of Microbial Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry Ernst-Moritz-Arndt-University Greifswald F.-L.-Jahn-Str. 15 17489 Greifswald phone:  ++49 3834 864073             ++49 3834 864072
Institute for Microbiology

### Submitter
Andreas Otto

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Otto
Institute for Microbiology Department of Microbial Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry Ernst-Moritz-Arndt-University Greifswald F.-L.-Jahn-Str. 15 17489 Greifswald phone:  ++49 3834 864073             ++49 3834 864072


