### Accession
PXD010884

### Title
Cross-linking/mass spectrometry for the 13th Community Wide Experiment on the Critical Assessment of Techniques for Protein Structure Prediction (CASP13)

### Description
High-density cross-linking/mass spectrometry data was provided for four targets (T0957, T0968, T0975 and T0987) in the CASP13 experiment (https://www.predictioncenter.org/casp13/index.cgi).

### Sample Protocol
Cross-linking was carried out according to previously described procedures (Belsom et al., Mol Cell Proteomics. 2016, Belsom et al., Wellcome Open Res. 2016 and Ogorzalek et al., Proteins. 2018). Target proteins were cross-linked using sulfosuccinimidyl 4,4’-azipentanoate (sulfo-SDA) (Thermo Scientific Pierce, Rockford IL) in a two-stage reaction, with reaction of the NHS-ester firstly, followed subsequently by UV photoactivation at 365 nm. Cross-linked mixtures were separated by SDS-PAGE, followed by in-gel trypsin digestion of cross-linked protein bands. Resulting peptides were desalted using StageTips, and analysed directly using an HPLC coupled to a tribrid mass spectrometer (Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer, fitted with an EASY-Spray Source, Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA), considering precursors with a charge state of 3 and above.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed into mgf files using ProteoWizard msconvert (3.0.9576), with inclusion of a MS2 peak filter for the 20 most intense peaks in a 100 m/z window (Lenz et al. bioRxiv. 2018). Peak lists were then searched against sequences (fasta files provided here) of the target proteins using Xi (Giese et al. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2016, https://github.com/Rappsilber-Laboratory/XiSearch), version 1.6.731. Search parameters were as follows: MS accuracy, 3 ppm; MS/MS accuracy, 15 ppm; missing mono-isotopic peaks, 2; enzyme, trypsin; maximum missed cleavages, 4; cross-linker, SDA; fixed modifications, none; variable modifications, carbamidomethylation on cysteine, oxidation on methionine, SDA-loop (SDA cross-link within a peptide that is also cross-linked to a separate peptide). The linkage specificity for sulfo-SDA was assumed to be at lysine, serine, threonine, tyrosine and protein N-termini at one end, with the other end having specificity for any amino acid residue. False discovery rates (FDR) were estimated with xiFDR (Fischer et al. Anal Chem. 2017), version 1.1.26.58.

### Publication Abstract
With the advance of experimental procedures obtaining chemical crosslinking information is becoming a fast and routine practice. Information on crosslinks can greatly enhance the accuracy of protein structure modeling. Here, we review the current state of the art in modeling protein structures with the assistance of experimentally determined chemical crosslinks within the framework of the 13th meeting of Critical Assessment of Structure Prediction approaches. This largest-to-date blind assessment reveals benefits of using data assistance in difficult to model protein structure prediction cases. However, in a broader context, it also suggests that with the unprecedented advance in accuracy to predict contacts in recent years, experimental crosslinks will be useful only if their specificity and accuracy further improved and they are better integrated into computational workflows.

### Keywords
Cross-linking/mass spectrometry; casp; protein structure prediction

### Affiliations
Technische Universität Berlin
Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell Biology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH9 3BF, United Kingdom. Bioanalytics, Institute of Biotechnology, Technische Universität Berlin, 13355 Berlin, Germany.

### Submitter
Adam Belsom

### Lab Head
Dr Juri Rappsilber
Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell Biology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH9 3BF, United Kingdom. Bioanalytics, Institute of Biotechnology, Technische Universität Berlin, 13355 Berlin, Germany.


