### Accession
PXD044425

### Title
Proteomic analysis of anti-MRSA activity of caerin 1.1/1.9 in a murine skin infection model

### Description
Caerin 1 is a family of host-defense peptides with antimicrobial property originally isolated from Australia tree frog. Caerin 1.1+1.9 has been shown to inhibit multiple antibiotic resistant bacteria infection both in vitro and in vivo. In current study, we compare the MICs of caerin 1.1/1.9 with  commonly used antibiotics against S. aureus, Copper-Green Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Acinetobacter baumannii, and Streptococcus haemolyticus. We demonstrate that caerin 1.1/1.9 not only prevent the formation of biofilm by A. Baumann, but also have therapeutic effect on established biofilm. In addition, we find that caerin1.1/1.9 significantly inhibit the growth of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) strain in a murine skin infection model. The quantitative proteomic analysis suggested that caerin1.1/1.9 largely activate oxidative phosphorylation, as well as several pathways associated with tissue repair and growth, with respect to the untreated tissues infected with MRSA in mice. In summary, our results suggest that caerin 1.1/1.9 have the potential to be used as a drug candidate treating complicated antibiotic resistant bacterial infection in human.

### Sample Protocol
Tape-stripping infection model A tape-stripping infection model was used to investigate the antibacterial ability of F1/F3 gel (29, 34). Briefly, six- to eight-week-old female Balb/c mice or C57BL/6 mice were anesthetised. After the removal of the fur on the back, the skin was stripped with an elastic bandage (Smith & Nephew Medical, Hull, United Kingdom). Two areas of 1×2 cm on both the left and right sides of the torso was tape stripped. After stripping, 10 µl of S. aureus (GDM1.441) suspension (5×106 CFU/ml) was applied for each stripped surface. Four hours after the skin infection, 20 µl of F1/F3 gel containing 12.5 mg/ml each was applied to the left side of the striped area, while the same amount of poloxamer gel was to the right side. Mice in the infection control group were given 20 µl of normal saline. Each treatment was performed twice daily for consecutive three days with a total of five times. On the fourth day, the striped areas were removed and subsequently homogenized by glass homogenizer and diluted with normal saline, followed by inoculation on nutrition agar plates (LS0309, Guangzhou Dijing Microbiology Technology Co., Ltd.) for culture for 24 hr before the colonies were counted.   Protein extraction, TMT-10plex labelling and high pH reversed-phase fractionation  With the same infection model, tissue samples from the infection sites with MRSA (GDM1.1263), either treated by F1/F3 gel or untreated, as well as healthy tissue samples, were collected and directly frozen in liquid nitrogen prior to protein extraction. Biological triplicates were collected for each treatment and the control. The tissue samples were homogenised thoroughly in SDT buffer (4%(w/v) SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6, 0.1M DTT) at 4 oC, with the total protein contents quantified using the Pierce BCA protein assay on a NanoDrop 2000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The samples containing 200μg of total protein were subjected to trypsin digestion by the filter aided proteome preparation described elsewhere(35). Tryptic peptides were desalted on C18 Cartridges (Empore™ SPE Cartridges C18 (standard density), Sigma), lyophilised and quantified on the NanoDrop 2000.  The samples containing 100 μg peptides derived from uninfected, infected, and treated tissues were labelled by TMT10-plex following the manufacturer’s instruction (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The labelled samples were mixed and fractionated using a PierceTM high pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, IL, USA) according to manufacturer’s instruction. All fractions were lyophilised on a SpeedVac and resuspended 12 μL 0.1%FA for LC-MS/MS analysis.   Liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry analyses   A 10 μl of each sample solution was analysed by a two dimensional EASY-nLC1000 system coupled to a Q Exactive Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) using a similar method described in detail elsewhere(36, 37). Briefly, the samples were injected into the sample loading column (Thermo Scientific Acclaim PepMap100, 100 μm × 2 cm, nanoViper C18), then fractionated by the analytic column (Thermo scientific EASY column, 10cm, ID75μm, 3μm, C18-A2). The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode with MS data was acquired using a data-dependent method from the survey scan (300–1800 m/z) for HCD fragmentation. Automatic gain control (AGC) target was set to 3E6, and maximum inject time to 10 ms. Dynamic exclusion duration was 40.0 s. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200 and resolution for HCD spectra was set to 17,500 at m/z 200, and isolation width was 2 m/z. Normalised collision energy was 30 eV and the underfill ratio was defined as 0.1%. The instrument was run with peptide recognition mode enabled.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS data was searched against Swissprot Mouse (76,413 sequences, downloaded on Dec 12, 2014) database for protein identification using Mascot2.2 (Matrix Science, London, UK) and Proteome Discoverer1.4 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) with the following search settings: enzyme trypsin; two missed cleavage sites; precursor mass tolerance 20 ppm; fragment mass tolerance 0.1 Da; fixed modifications: Carbamidomethyl (C), TMT 10plex (N-term), TMT10 plex (K); variable modifications: oxidation (M), TMT 10plex (Y). The results of the search were further submitted to generate the final report using a cut-off of 1% FDR on peptide levels and only unique peptides were used for protein quantitation. All peptide ratios were normalised by the median protein ratio, and the median protein ratio was 1 after the normalisation. The protein showing a fold change ≥ 1.2 (upregulation ≥ 1.2 or downregulation ≤ 0.83) compared to the untreated group and the P-value < 0.05 were considered significantly regulated by the treatment and included in further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Caerin 1.1 and caerin 1.9, natural antimicrobial peptides derived from tree frogs, have demonstrated the ability to inhibit the growth of antibiotic-resistant bacteria, comparable to certain widely used antibiotics. Additionally, these peptides exhibit the capacity to prevent or treat biofilms formed by bacteria in conjunction with bodily components. The mechanisms underlying their antibacterial effects were investigated through a mouse model of bacterial skin infection, utilizing proteomic analysis as a technological approach.

### Keywords
Anti-mrsa, Proteomics, Caerin peptide

### Affiliations
University of the Sunshine Coast
Centre for Bioinnovation, University of the Sunshine Coast

### Submitter
Tianfang Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Tianfang Wang
Centre for Bioinnovation, University of the Sunshine Coast


