### Accession
PXD031574

### Title
Multi-omics evaluation of SARS-CoV-2 infected mouse lungs reveals dynamics of host responses

### Description
The outbreak of Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) throughout the world has caused millions of death, while the dynamics of host responses and the underlying regulation mechanisms during SARS-CoV-2 infection are not well depicted. Lung tissues from a mouse model sensitized to SARS-CoV-2 infection were serially collected at different time points for evaluation of transcriptome, proteome and phosphoproteome. We showed the ebb and flow of several host responses in the lung across viral infection. The signaling pathways and kinases regulating networks were alternated at different phases of infection. Our study not only revealed the dynamics of lung pathophysiology and their underlying molecular mechanisms during SARS-CoV-2 infection, but also highlighted some molecules and signaling pathways that might guide future investigations on COVID-19 therapies.

### Sample Protocol
After gently anesthetized with isoflurane, mice were administrated intranasally with 2.5  108 FFU of Ad5-hACE2 or Ad5-Empty in a total volume of 75 μl Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM, GIBCO, Grand Island, NY). Five days later, all mice were infected intranasally with SARS-CoV-2 (1 105 PFU) in 50 μl DMEM. Mice were sacrificed and their lung tissues were freshly collected at 2, 4 and 6 days post infection. Each group was performed in biologically triplicates (n = 3 for each time point of each group).  TMT labeling Peptide digested by trypsin was desalted with Strata X C18 (Phenomenex, California, USA) and vacuum freeze-dried. Peptide was dissolved in 0.5 M TEAB (Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA), and labeled according to the instruction of TMT kit (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Briefly, the labeled reagent was thawed and dissolved in acetonitrile (ACN, Fisher Chemical, Leicestershire, UK). Then the peptide mixtures were incubated for two hours and pooled, desalted and vacuum freeze-dried. High performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) fractionation The tryptic peptides were fractionated by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Agilent 300 Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated into 60 fractions with ACN (pH 9.0) of 8% to 32% over 60 min. Then, the peptides were combined into 14 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging. For phosphorylation, the peptides were combined into 4 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging. Phosphorylation enrichment Peptide mixtures were first incubated with IMAC microspheres suspension with vibration in loading buffer (50% acetonitrile/0.5% acetic acid). The IMAC microspheres with enriched phosphopeptides were collected by centrifugation, and the supernatant was removed. To remove nonspecifically adsorbed peptides, the IMAC microspheres were washed with 50% acetonitrile/0.5% acetic acid and 30% acetonitrile/0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, sequentially. To elute the enriched phosphopeptides from the IMAC microspheres, elution buffer containing 10% NH4OH was added and the enriched phosphopeptides were eluted with vibration. The supernatant containing phosphopeptides was collected and lyophilized for LC-MS/MS analysis. LC-MS/MS analysis Peptides dissolved in solvent A (0.1% formic acid in 2% ACN) were separated by EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The gradient was comprised of an increase from 5% to 23% solvent B (0.1% FA in 90% ACN) over 40 min, 23% to 35% in 12 min, 35% to 80% in 4 min then holding at 80% for the last 4 min. The constant flow rate was set at 550 nL/min. The peptide was then subjected to NSI source for ionization and analyzed by QE plus mass spectrometry. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.2 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1,800 for primary MS, and the resolution was set to 70,000. The fixed starting point of the scan range of secondary MS is 100 m/z, with the resolution of 35,000. Data dependent scanning (DDA) program was used as data acquisition. To enhance the efficiency of MS, automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 1E5. The signal threshold was set to 2E4 ions/s, the maximum injection time was set to 50 ms and the dynamic exclusion time of tandem MS was 15 s to avoid repeated scanning of parent ions.

### Data Protocol
Database search Maxquant (v1.5.2.8) was used to retrieve the secondary mass spectrometry data. Retrieval parameter setting: the database is Mus_musculus_10090 (17,045 sequences), reverse database is added to calculate the false discovery rate (FDR) caused by random matching, and common pollution database is added to the database to eliminate the influence of the contaminated protein in the identification results. The enzymatic cutting mode is set to trypsin/p and the number of missing bits is set to 2. The minimum length of peptide segment is set to 7 amino acid residues and the maximum modification number of peptide segment is set to 5. The mass error tolerance of first search and main search are 10 ppm and 5 ppm respectively, and the mass error tolerance of second fragment ion is 0.02 Da. The alkylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification, variable modification as Acetyl (Protein N-term), Oxidation (M), deamination (NQ) and Phospho (STY). The quantitative method was tmt-6plex, and the FDR of protein identification and PSM identification was set to 1%. Bioinformatic analysis Gene Ontology (GO), domain, the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) annotation and subcellular localization were performed. GO annotation proteome was obtained from the UniProt-GOA database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/) and completed with InterProScan. Identified proteins domain functional description were annotated by InterProScan (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/). KEGG database was used to annotate pathways by KAAS and KEGG mapper. Subcellular location was predicted by using WoLF PSORT. Further hierarchical clustering of protein functional classification base on differential expression (such as GO, domain, pathway, complex). The database number or protein sequence of differential expression protein screened from different comparison groups were compared with the STRING (v.11.0) protein network interaction database, and the interaction relationship of differential protein was extracted if the confidence score > 0.7 (high confidence). Then, R package "networkD3" tool was used to visualize the interaction network of different proteins.

### Publication Abstract
The outbreak of Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) throughout the world has caused millions of death, while the dynamics of host responses and the underlying regulation mechanisms during SARS-CoV-2 infection are not well depicted. Lung tissues from a mouse model sensitized to SARS-CoV-2 infection were serially collected at different time points for evaluation of transcriptome, proteome, and phosphoproteome. We showed the ebb and flow of several host responses in the lung across the viral infection. The signaling pathways and kinases regulating networks were alternated at different phases of infection. This multiplex evaluation also revealed that many kinases of the CDK and MAPK family were interactive and served as functional hubs in mediating the signal transduction during SARS-CoV-2 infection. Our study not only revealed the dynamics of lung pathophysiology and their underlying molecular mechanisms during SARS-CoV-2 infection, but also highlighted some molecules and signaling pathways that might guide future investigations on COVID-19 therapies.

### Keywords
Multi-omics analysis, Sars-cov-2; lung host response; dynamics; mouse model

### Affiliations
Guangzhou Medical University

### Submitter
Xiao Xiao  Tang

### Lab Head
Dr Xiao Xiao Tang
Guangzhou Medical University


