### Accession
PXD006575

### Title
Specific labeling of stem cell activity in human colorectal organoids
using an ASCL2-responsive minigene

### Description
Organoid technology provides the possibility to culture human colon
tissue and patient-derived colorectal cancers (CRC) while maintaining
all functional and phenotypic characteristics. Labeling of human colon
stem cells (CoSCs), especially in normal and benign tumor organoids, is
challenging and therefore limits usability of multi-patient organoid
libraries for CoSC research. Here, we developed STAR (STem cell Ascl2
Reporter), a minimal enhancer/promoter element that reports
transcriptional activity of ASCL2, a master regulator of LGR5+ CoSC
fate. Among others via lentiviral infection, STAR minigene labels stem
cells in normal as well as in multiple engineered and patient-derived
CRC organoids of different stage and genetic make-up. STAR revealed that
stem cell driven differentiation hierarchies and the capacity of cell
fate plasticity (de-differentiation) are present at all stages of human
CRC development. The flexible and user-friendly nature of STAR
applications in combination with organoid technology will facilitate
basic research on human adult stem cell biology.

### Sample Protocol
Dimethyl labeled DNA pulldown: DNA oligo’s of the 4x STAR and 4x mSTAR repeats were amplified using the primers ‘Ascl2_repeats_bio_FW’ and ‘Ascl2_repeats_RV’, followed by 5’-biotinylation of the oligo’s using ‘5’ Biotin TAG FW’ and ‘Ascl2_repeats_RV’. For the DNA-pulldown 20ul of Streptavidin-Sepharose beads slurry was used per pulldown. Pulldowns were performed in duplicate. Beads were washed once with PBS and 0.1% NP-40, spun 2 minutes at 2000g at 4C and washed once with DNA binding buffer (1M NaCl, 10mM Tris pH 8. 1mM EDTA, 0.05% NP-40). 1ug of oligo was combined with a total volume of 600ul DNA binding buffer and incubated with the beads for 30 minutes rotating at 4C. Beads were spun for 2 minutes at 2000g at 4C and washed once with DNA binding buffer and twice with protein incubation buffer (150mM NaCl, 50mM Tris pH 8, complete protease inhibitors, 0.25% NP-40, and 1mM DTT). 500ug of LS174T nuclear extract was combined with a total volume of 600ul protein incubation buffer and added to the beads. 10ug of competitor DNA (5ug poly-dldC, and 5ug poly-dAdT) was added and the beads with the extract were incubated for 90 minutes rotating at 4C. Beads were spun for 2 minutes at 2000g at 4C and washed three times with protein incubation buffer and twice with PBS, followed by removal of the supernatant using a 30G syringe. The proteins bound to the beads were reduced using elution buffer (2M urea, 100mM ammonium bicarbonate, and 10mM DTT) for 20 minutes shaking at room temperature. Alkylation of the samples was subsequently done by adding 50mM iodoacetamide (IAA) and incubated for 10 minutes shaking at the dark at room temperature. Afterwards on bead digestion was used to digest the proteins in tryptic peptides. The tryptic peptides from the DNA pulldown were applied to C18 Stagetips (without acidification). Afterwards the Stagetips were labelled using dimethyl labeling. Label swapping was performed for each replicate (forward and reverse). 300ul of labeling reagent light (16.2 ul CH2O 37%) or medium (30ul CD2O 20%) in 3mL dimethyl labeling buffer (10mM NaH2PO4, and 35mM Na2HPO4) and 6 mg NaBH3CN was added to each Stagetip and spun at 2200g for 10 minutes at room temperature. Afterwards, Stagetips were washed once with buffer A (0.1% formic acid). Label free FLAG pull-down: The label-free pulldown was performed in triplicate using 20ul of anti-FLAG M2 affinity gel (Sigma) per pulldown. Beads were washed three times with buffer C (300mM NaCl, 0.5% NP-40, complete protease inhibitors, and 0.5mM DTT) for 2 minutes at 2000g. Afterwards the beads were incubated for 90 minutes on a rotating wheel at 4C with 1mg LS174T nuclear extract per pulldown and 50mg/ml ethidium bromide in a volume of 400ul buffer C. After incubation, the beads were washed twice with buffer C (300mM NaCl, 1% NP-40), twice with PBS (1% NP-40), and twice with PBS. Afterwards on bead digestion was used to digest the affinity purified proteins in tryptic peptides. Finally, the tryptic peptides were acidified and desalted using C18 Stagetips prior to mass spec analysis.  For LC-MS/MS analysis of the DNA-pulldown and the label free FLAG-pulldown, the tryptic peptides were separated by an Easy-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher) connected online to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (version 1.5.1.0) was used to analyze the raw MS spectra by searching against the Uniprot curated human proteome (downloaded December 2015). For the analysis of the label-free FLAG pulldown and the DNA pulldown LFQ, iBAQ, and match between runs were enabled. Additional, for the analysis of the DNA pulldown, the multiplicity was set to 2, labels were specified (dimethylLys0, dimethyl Nter0, dimethylLys4, dimethylNter4), and re-quantify was enabled. Scatter plots were generated using in-house R scripts. Volcano plots were produced by using Perseus (1.4.0.20). Filtering on the protein list was applied for contaminant and reverse hits. Transformation in log2 was done for the LFQ values and missing values were imputed by normal distribution. The significant proteins were determined using a two samples t-test. Finally, volcano plots were generated using in-house R scripts.

### Publication Abstract
Organoid technology provides the possibility of culturing patient-derived colon tissue and colorectal cancers (CRCs) while maintaining all functional and&#xa0;phenotypic characteristics. Labeling stem cells, especially in normal and benign tumor organoids of human colon, is challenging and therefore limits maximal exploitation of organoid libraries for human stem cell research. Here, we developed STAR (stem cell Ascl2 reporter), a minimal enhancer/promoter element that reports transcriptional activity of ASCL2, a master regulator of LGR5<sup>+</sup> intestinal stem cells. Using lentiviral infection, STAR drives specific expression in stem cells of normal organoids and in multiple engineered and patient-derived CRC organoids of different genetic makeup. STAR reveals that differentiation hierarchies and the potential for cell fate plasticity are present at all stages of human CRC development. Organoid technology, in combination with the user-friendly nature of STAR, will facilitate basic research into human adult stem cell biology.

### Keywords
Organoids, Intestine, Stem cells, Colorectal cancer, Lgr5, Ascl2

### Affiliations
Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences
Molecular Cancer Research, Center for Molecular Medicine, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Rik Lindeboom

### Lab Head
Dr Hugo Snippert
Molecular Cancer Research, Center for Molecular Medicine, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands


