### Accession
PXD009012

### Title
ARIH2 is a novel Vif-dependent regulator of CUL5-mediated APOBEC3G degradation in HIV infection

### Description
Discovery of novel host-virus interactions leads to a better understanding of mechanisms underlying infection and points to potential therapeutic targets at the interface between virus and host proteins. Recently, global, virus-host interaction networks have been mapped using affinity purification-mass spectrometry (AP-MS) approaches, but these studies do not provide information about dynamic remodeling of host complexes during infection. Here, we describe a novel quantitative proteomics approach in the context of HIV infection to unravel dynamics of the Cullin RING E3 ligase 5 (CRL5) complex, which is hijacked by HIV Vif to degrade the viral restriction factor of the APOBEC3 family. Generating a dynamic and quantitative interaction network of CRL5 under various infection conditions, we identify the E3 ligase ARIH2 as novel regulator of APOBEC3G degradation, which is essential for HIV infectivity in primary CD4+ T-cells. ARIH2 acts in a “tag-team” mechanism that accelerates ubiquitin chain formation on APOBEC3G through CUL5Vif/CBFß by priming the substrate with mono-ubiquitination. Finally, our data suggest a general role for ARIH2 in CRL5 substrate ubiquitination in host cells.

### Sample Protocol
Jurkat T cells expressing tagged versions of CUL5, CBFB and ELOB as well as parental Jurkat T cells were subjected to infection with replication-deficient, Vesicular Stomatitis Virus Glycoprotein (VSVg) pseudotyped HIV-1 NL4-3 virus, a Vif-deficient version of the same virus strain (HIV ∆vif), or a mock serving as a non-infection condition (mock). Following 24h of infection, anti-FLAG immune complexes were purified, digested with trypsin and subjected to global, quantitative analysis by MS on an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectroemter.

### Data Protocol
Identification and quantification of proteins was performed using Maxquant.

### Publication Abstract
The Cullin-RING E3 ligase (CRL) family is commonly hijacked by pathogens to redirect the host ubiquitin proteasome machinery to specific targets. During HIV infection, CRL5 is hijacked by HIV Vif to target viral restriction factors of the APOBEC3 family for ubiquitination and degradation. Here, using a quantitative proteomics approach, we identify the E3 ligase ARIH2 as a regulator of CRL5-mediated APOBEC3 degradation. The CUL5<sup>Vif/CBF&#xdf;</sup> complex recruits ARIH2 where it acts to transfer ubiquitin directly to the APOBEC3 targets. ARIH2 is essential for CRL5-dependent HIV infectivity in primary CD4<sup>+</sup> T&#xa0;cells. Furthermore, we show that ARIH2 cooperates with CRL5 to prime other cellular substrates for polyubiquitination, suggesting this may represent a general mechanism beyond HIV infection and APOBEC3 degradation. Taken together, these data identify ARIH2 as a co-factor in the Vif-hijacked CRL5 complex that contributes to HIV infectivity and demonstrate the operation of the E1-E2-E3/E3-substrate ubiquitination mechanism in a viral infection context.

### Keywords
Ap-ms, Hiv, Arih2, Cul5, Host-virus interactions, Cullin ring e3 ligases

### Affiliations
UCSF
University of California San Francisco

### Submitter
Ruth Huttenhain

### Lab Head
Dr Nevan J. Krogan
University of California San Francisco


