### Accession
PXD017543

### Title
Exosomes derived from mouse myoblasts expressing PAX3-FOXO1 oncogene protect recipient cells from oxidative stress and promote plasticity

### Description
Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) is a highly malignant soft tissue sarcoma classified into two major histologic subtypes: embryonal (ERMS) and alveolar (ARMS). ARMS subtype is clinically more aggressive, and characterized by an oncogenic fusion protein PAX3-FOXO1 (P3F) that drives oncogenic cellular properties. To understand the role of the fusion oncoprotein in paracrine signaling, we focused on secreted exosomes, which have been demonstrated to contribute to metastasis in multiple tumor types. Mass spectrometry analysis of the protein cargo of exosomes isolated from C2C12 myoblasts transduced with P3F fusion gene revealed 52 deregulated proteins compared to control cells, with 26 enriched and 26 depleted proteins. Using both PANTHER gene classification and IPA software, we found that the main biological processes in which the 52 deregulated proteins are involved include “Catalytic activity”, “Binding”, “Metabolic process” and “Cellular process”. The pathways engaging the 26 enriched proteins include “14-3-3 mediated signaling”, “Cell cycle” and “ERK5, VEGF, IGF1and p70S6K signaling”. Main nodes in which deregulated exosome protein and miRNA intersected revealed pathways conferring protection from stress and promoting plasticity. Physiologically, exosomes derived from P3F-C2C12 cells activated ERK, 4-EBP1 and MMP-2, factors known to increase cell proliferation and invasion. In addition, they increased angiogenesis as evidenced by studies on HUVEC cells, and promoted stemness of MEFs and C2C12 cells. Treating stromal cells with exosomes from P3F-C2C12 cells protected them against effects of hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) in vitro, noting that P3F-C2C12 cells produce less ROS and are more resistant to induced exogenous oxidative stress as compared to control cells. Our findings highlight the role of P3F fusion protein in modulating exosome cargo to confer a protective effect on recipient cells against oxidative stress and promote plasticity and survival, potentially contributing to the known aggressive phenotype of the fusion gene-positive subtype of ARMS.

### Sample Protocol
Exosomes were isolated as previously described (6). Briefly, Ctrl-C2C12 cells and P3F-C2C12 cells were incubated in 20% FBS exosome-free medium prepared by ultracentrifugation at 100,000 xg, overnight at 4°C. Exosomes were then isolated from the conditioned media by differential ultracentrifugations (18): 300xg for 10-min 2,000xg for 20-min centrifugation at then 10,000 xg for 30 min. Finally, ExoQuick Exosome Precipitation Solution (System Biosciences, mountainite, CA) was added to the resulting supernatant, and stored overnight at 4˚C to allow exosome precipitation. The following day, the condensed medium was ultracentrifuged at 100,000xg for 70 minutes, the pellet resuspended in PBS 1X, and ultracentrifuged at 110,000 xg for 70 min to remove any contaminating element. The final pellet was resuspended in 300µL of PBS for functional assays and stored at -80˚C. All centrifugations were done at 4°C. Recipient cells were treated with exosomes at 1X and 10X concentration, where 1X corresponds to exosomes isolated from an equivalent number of cells to those treated and 10X is 10 times this value. Proteins were extracted from cells and exosomes using CHAPS lysis buffer (30mM Tris-Cl, pH 7.5; 150 mM NaCl; 1% CHAPS) mixed with 25X protease inhibitor (Roche, Basel, Switzerland). After adding the appropriate volume of lysis buffer, the mixture was sonicated for 20 minutes, centrifuged for 30 minutes at 13,000 ×g at 4°C, then the supernatant containing the proteins was collected (12) and quantified using Bradford protein assay. Extracted proteins from Ctrl-C2C12- and P3F-C2C12-derived exosomes were subjected to sample clean-up and tryptic digestion as described previously.(1) The LC-MS analysis of the tryptic digested proteins was performed using a 3000 Ultimate nano-LC system (Dionex) interfaced to an electrospray ionization (ESI) source equipped LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Aliquots of 1 μg of tryptic digests were injected and initially desalted on-line using an Acclaim PepMap100 C18 pre-column ((75 μm I.D. 20 mm length, 3 μm particle sizes,100 Å particle size, Thermo Scientific) at a flow rate of 3 μL/min. The purified peptides were separated using an Acclaim PepMap100 C18 capillary column (75 μm I.D., 150 mm length, 2 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific) at a flow rate of 0.35 μL/min. The gradient applied to achieve separation was as follow: solvent B (99.9% ACN with 0.1% formic acid) was maintained at 5% from 0 to 10 min, increased to 20% over 55 min, 20-30% over 25 min, 30-50% over 20 min, 50%-80% over 1 min, 80% over 4 min, decreased to 5% over 1 min, and finally was maintained at 5% for 4 min. Solvent A was 98% HPLC water, 1.9% ACN, and 0.1% FA. The LTQ Orbitrap Velos was operated in a data-dependent acquisition mode with 2 scan events. The first scan was a full MS scan of m/z 400−2000 with a mass resolution of 15 000. The second scan event was a CID MS/MS repeated on top 10 intense ions selected from the previous scan event with an isolation window of m/z 3.0.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discover version m1.2 (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) was used to convert raw files acquired from LC-MS analysis to mascot generic format (*.mgf) files. The *.mgf files were subjected to MASCOT version 2.4 (Matrix Science Inc., Boston, MA) to search against protein database. The carbamidomethylation of cysteine was a fixed modification and the oxidation of methionine was considered as a variable modi  peptide precursors and fragments was was 6 ppm and 0.8 Da, respectively. Enzyme was specified as trypsin. A maximum of 2 miscleavage was allowed. MASCOT searching results were then exported to Scaffold (version 3.6.3, Proteome Software, Portland, OR) for further processing and quantification. Identified proteins were filtered using the following criteria: Peptide threshold = 95%, protein thresholds = 99%, with a minimum of 2 peptides identified. The quantification was based on spectral counting. The quantitative proteomic results were further subjected to statistical analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) is a highly malignant soft tissue sarcoma classified into two major histologic subtypes: embryonal (ERMS) and alveolar (ARMS). ARMS subtype is clinically more aggressive, and characterized by an oncogenic fusion protein PAX3-FOXO1 (P3F) that drives oncogenic cellular properties. To understand the role of the fusion oncoprotein in paracrine signaling, we focused on secreted exosomes, which have been demonstrated to contribute to metastasis in multiple tumor types. Advanced Proteomics-bioinformatics analysis of the protein cargo of exosomes isolated from C2C12 myoblasts transduced with P3F fusion gene revealed 52 deregulated proteins compared to control cells, with 26 enriched and 26 depleted proteins. Using both PANTHER gene classification and Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) software, we found that the main biological processes in which the 52 deregulated proteins are involved, include "catalytic activity," "binding," "metabolic process," and "cellular process." The pathways engaging the 26 enriched proteins include the "14-3-3 mediated signaling," "cell cycle," and "ERK5, VEGF, IGF1,and p70S6K signaling." Furthermore, the main nodes in which deregulated exosome proteins and miRNAs intersected revealed pathways conferring protection from stress and promoting plasticity. Based on the bioinformatics analysis and the altered exosome proteome profile, we performed biochemical functional analysis to study the diverse properties of these exosomes where angiogenesis, stemness, and anti-oxidative stress properties were validated using different platforms. P3F-modulated exosomes activated ERK, 4-EBP1, and MMP-2 in recipient cells, and enhanced angiogenesis and stemness. In addition, P3F led to lower cellular reactive oxygen species levels and enhanced resistance against oxidative stress; and treatment of stromal cells with P3F-modulated exosomes also conferred protection against exogenous oxidative stress. Our findings highlight the role of P3F fusion protein in modulating exosome cargo to confer a protective effect on recipient cells against oxidative stress and to promote plasticity and survival, potentially contributing to the known aggressive phenotype of the fusion gene-positive subtype of RMS.

### Keywords
Oxidative stress, Plasticity, Rhabdomyosarcoma, Pax3-foxo1, Exosomes

### Affiliations
Texas Tech University
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Texas Tech University, Lubbock, TX

### Submitter
Wenjing Peng

### Lab Head
Dr Yehia Mechref
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Texas Tech University, Lubbock, TX


