### Accession
PXD023589

### Title
TOMATO SEEDLING LIGHT INDUCED PROTEOMICS ALTERATON

### Description
We use quantitative discovery proteomics along with metabolomics to unravel the role of Phytochrome A in regulating central metabolism.

### Sample Protocol
Total protein was extracted from tomato  seedlings grownunder FR light and dark using Urea extraction protocol (Zhang, H. et al. 2016) with slight modification. The powdered seedling samples (∼100 mg each) extracted with a urea-based lysis buffer . Tissue lysis was performed with sonication and bead milling. Clear supernatant was collected after centrifugation.Sample was digested into peptides with trypsin .Peptides were subsequently cleaned up with C18 desalting columns  and then iTRAQ labelling was performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions for the iTRAQ reagents 4-plex kit (AB Sciex Inc., Foster City, California, USA).After labelling, samples from the same set were combined together and lyophilized. The peptide mixtures were dissolved in 0.1% TFA. The samples were fractionated using a gradient of ACN and triethylamine by eluting the peptide with a linear gradient of 10–90% ACN in triethylamine. 7 fractions were collected and lyophilized for LC−MS/MS analysis. Each fraction was resuspended in 0.1% formic acid. MS/MS analysis was performed on a hybrid quadrupole Orbitrap (Q Exactive) mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) with high energy collision dissociation (HCD). The MS system was equipped with an automated Easy-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germerling, Germany). A linear gradient of solvent A (0.1% formic acid) to solvent B (0.1% formic acid, 99.9% acetonitrile) was run for 95 min, followed by a ramp to 98% B for 5 min.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer 1.4 with SEQUEST algorithm (Thermo Scientific Inc., Bremen, Germany) was used to search the original MS/MS protein data in the specified non-redundant databases. Protein identification was executed against the SGN tomato database ITAG3.0.Proteome Discoverer nodes for spectrum grouper and spectrum selector were set using default parameters. Tolerances were set to a 10 ppm precursor mass tolerance and a 0.05 Da fragment mass tolerance. 1 maximum missed cleavage sites of trypsin digestion were allowed. Percolator was used for protein identification with parameters set with a strict target fale discovery rate (FDR) at 0.01 and a relaxed target FDR at 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
In plants, during growth and development, photoreceptors monitor fluctuations in their environment and adjust their metabolism as a strategy of surveillance. Phytochromes (Phys) play an essential role in plant growth and development, from germination to fruit development. FR-light (FR) insensitive mutant (fri) carries a recessive mutation in Phytochrome A and is characterized by the failure to de-etiolate in continuous FR. Here we used iTRAQ-based quantitative proteomics along with metabolomics to unravel the role of Phytochrome A in regulating central metabolism in tomato seedlings grown under FR. Our results indicate that Phytochrome A has a predominant role in FR-mediated establishment of the mature seedling proteome. Further, we observed temporal regulation in the expression of several of the late response proteins associated with central metabolism. The proteomics investigations identified a decreased abundance of enzymes involved in photosynthesis and carbon fixation in the mutant. Profound accumulation of storage proteins in the mutant ascertained the possible conversion of sugars into storage material instead of being used or the retention of an earlier profile associated with the mature embryo. The enhanced accumulation of organic sugars in the seedlings indicates the absence of photomorphogenesis in the mutant.

### Keywords
Seedling, Light, Phytochrome a, Itraq, Tomato

### Affiliations
Proteomics Lab, 304, BSBE Department, Indian Institute Technology Bombay, Powai, Mumbai, India-400076
PhD student

### Submitter
Avinash singh

### Lab Head
Dr Sanjeeva Srivastava
Proteomics Lab, 304, BSBE Department, Indian Institute Technology Bombay, Powai, Mumbai, India-400076


