### Accession
PXD016851

### Title
Study of APOL1-containing complexes in podocytes

### Description
The C-terminal variants G1 and G2 of apolipoprotein L1 (APOL1) confer human resistance to the sleeping sickness parasite Trypanosoma rhodesiense, but also increase the risk of developing kidney disease. APOL1 and APOL3 are death-promoting proteins associated with endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi membranes. We report that in podocytes, either expression of APOL1 devoid of C-terminal helix (APOL1) or deletion of APOL3 (APOL3 KO) induce actomyosin reorganization linked to inhibition of phosphatidylinositol-4-phosphate (PI(4)P) synthesis by the Golgi PI(4)-kinase IIIB (PI4KB). Both APOL1 and APOL3 form K+ channels, but only APOL3 exhibited Ca2+-dependent binding to neuronal calcium sensor-1 (NCS-1), promoting NCS-1/PI4KB interaction that strongly activates PI(4)P  synthesis. APOL1 C-terminal deletion or mutations increased APOL1 binding to APOL3, affecting APOL3 interaction with NCS-1. Since podocytes of G1 and G2 patients exhibited an APOL1/APOL3KO-like phenotype, APOL1 C-terminal variants may induce kidney disease by preventing APOL3 from activating PI4KB, resulting in actomyosin reorganization of podocytes.

### Sample Protocol
Total protein extracts from human podocytes cell lines treated or not with poly(I:C) were immunoprecipited with anti-APOL1 antibodies in order to identify (direct and indirect) physical partners of APOL1 as follow : Protein lysates in RIPA buffer with 1% NP-40 or 1% CHAPS (1 mg) were incubated with anti-APOL1 antibody overnight at 4°C, followed by incubation with 20 μl of pre-blocked protein G-Sepharose beads for 1 h. Following four washes in RIPA buffer and one wash in PBS, the immune complexes were eluted in non-reducing Laemmli buffer and separated by SDS-PAGE

### Data Protocol
Each lane from the 1D gel was cut in 12 bands. Each band was digested and analysed by LC-MSMS separately. Mascot output files from the 12 analysis were combined into one analysis in Scaffold software. DATABASE SEARCHING-- Tandem mass spectra were extracted, charge state deconvoluted and deisotoped by Data analysis (Bruker, version 4.2). All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.5.1) and X! Tandem (The GPM, thegpm.org; version CYCLONE (2010.12.01.1)). Mascot was set up to search the UniRef100_2016_04 database (selected for Homo sapiens, 201454 entries) assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin. Mascot and X! Tandem were searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0,050 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 7,0 PPM. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified in Mascot and X! Tandem as a fixed modification. Gln->pyro-Glu of the n-terminus and oxidation of methionine were specified in Mascot as variable modifications.  CRITERIA FOR PROTEIN IDENTIFICATION-- Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.8.4, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 100,0 % probability by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 5,0 % probability to achieve an FDR less than 1,0 % and contained at least 2 identified peptide.  Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii, Al et al Anal. Chem. 2003;75(17):4646-58). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters.Proteins were annotated with GO terms from gene_association.goa_uniprot (downloaded 19-févr.-2014). (Ashburner, M et al Nat. Genet. 2000;25(1):25-9).

### Publication Abstract
The C-terminal variants G1 and G2 of apolipoprotein L1 (APOL1) confer human resistance to the sleeping sickness parasite Trypanosoma rhodesiense, but they also increase the risk of kidney disease. APOL1 and APOL3 are death-promoting proteins that are partially associated with the endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi membranes. We report that in podocytes, either APOL1 C-terminal helix truncation (APOL1&#x394;) or APOL3 deletion (APOL3KO) induces similar actomyosin reorganization linked to the inhibition of phosphatidylinositol-4-phosphate [PI(4)P] synthesis by the Golgi PI(4)-kinase IIIB (PI4KB). Both APOL1 and APOL3 can form K<sup>+</sup> channels, but only APOL3 exhibits Ca<sup>2+</sup>-dependent binding of high affinity to neuronal calcium sensor-1 (NCS-1), promoting NCS-1-PI4KB interaction and stimulating PI4KB activity. Alteration of the APOL1 C-terminal helix triggers APOL1 unfolding and increased binding to APOL3, affecting APOL3-NCS-1 interaction. Since the podocytes of G1 and G2 patients exhibit an APOL1&#x394; or APOL3KO-like phenotype, APOL1 C-terminal variants may induce kidney disease by preventing APOL3 from activating PI4KB, with consecutive actomyosin reorganization of podocytes.

### Keywords
Kidney disease, Podocytes, Apol1

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Molecular Parasitology, IBMM, Université Libre de Bruxelles, B-6041 Gosselies, Belgium
University of Namur - MaSUN

### Submitter
Marc Dieu

### Lab Head
Dr Etienne PAYS
Laboratory of Molecular Parasitology, IBMM, Université Libre de Bruxelles, B-6041 Gosselies, Belgium


