### Accession
PXD035142

### Title
Human UFSP1 is an active protease that regulates UFM1 maturation and UFMylation

### Description
An essential first step in the posttranslational modification of proteins with UFM1, UFMylation, is the proteolytic cleavage of pro-UFM1 to expose a C-terminal glycine. Of the two UFM1-specific proteases (UFSPs) identified in humans, only UFSP2 is reported to be active since the annotated sequence of UFSP1 lacks critical catalytic residues. Nonetheless, efficient UFM1 maturation occurs in cells lacking UFSP2 suggesting the presence of another active protease. We hereby identify UFSP1 translated from a non-canonical start site to be this protease. Cells lacking both UFSPs show complete loss of UFMylation resulting from an absence of mature UFM1. While UFSP2, but not UFSP1, removes UFM1 from the ribosomal subunit RPL26, UFSP1 acts earlier in the pathway to mature UFM1 and cleave a potential auto-inhibitory modification on UFC1, thereby controlling activation of UFMylation. In summary, our studies reveal distinctions in substrate specificity and localization-dependent functions for the two proteases in regulating UFMylation. The present dataset includes Data Independent Acquisition (DIA) quantitative proteomics analysis of knockout cell lines reported in our study. Our analysis of the processed data is presented in Figure-6.

### Sample Protocol
For each sample, a confluent 15cm plate of HEK293 cells was re-suspended in ice cold PBS (1mM EDTA/1mM EGTA), pelleted by centrifugation, and immediately lysed by addition of SDS-lysis buffer (5% SDS, 50mM TEAB pH8.5). Lysates were boiled for 5 minutes at 95℃ followed by sonication using a Diagenode Biorupter at high energy for 10 cycles (30sec ON, 30sec OFF). Lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 20,000xg for 20 minutes and quantified by BCA assay (Pierce; 23225). 200ug protein was prepared as follows; TCEP stock solution (100mM TCEP, 300mM TEABC) was added to final concentration of 10mM TCEP (1:10) and samples incubated at 60℃ for 30 minutes. Samples were rested at room temperature and freshly prepared iodoacetamide (IAA) added to 40mM final concentration. After 30 minutes at room temperature shielded from light and with gentle agitation, samples were acidified by addition of mass-spectrometry grade 12% phosphoric acid to a final concentration of 1.2% (1:10). Sample ‘clean-up’ was completed using S-trap micro-columns with an overnight on-column digestion using 13mg trypsin per 200mg of protein input. Eluted peptides were lyophilized by speed-vacuum and submitted to the MRC-PPU core mass-spectrometry facility.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched using DIA-NN 1.8.0 operating in library free mode against Uniprot SwissProt Human containing isoform (released on 5th October 2021) using default parameters.

### Publication Abstract
An essential first step in the post-translational modification of proteins with UFM1, UFMylation, is the proteolytic cleavage of pro-UFM1 to expose a C-terminal glycine. Of the two UFM1-specific proteases (UFSPs) identified in humans, only UFSP2 is reported to be active, since the annotated sequence of UFSP1 lacks critical catalytic residues. Nonetheless, efficient UFM1 maturation occurs in cells lacking UFSP2, suggesting the presence of another active protease. We herein identify UFSP1 translated from a non-canonical start site to be this protease. Cells lacking both UFSPs show complete loss of UFMylation resulting from an absence of mature UFM1. While UFSP2, but not UFSP1, removes UFM1 from the ribosomal subunit RPL26, UFSP1 acts earlier in the pathway to mature UFM1 and cleave a potential autoinhibitory modification on UFC1, thereby controlling activation of UFMylation. In summary, our studies reveal important distinctions in substrate specificity and localization-dependent functions for the two proteases in regulating UFMylation.

### Keywords
Endoplasmic reticulum (er), Ribosome, Cysteine protease, Ubiquitin like modifier, Ufm1

### Affiliations
Medical Research Council Protein Phosphorylation and Ubiquitylation Unit School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee, Scotland
University of Dundee

### Submitter
Frederic Lamoliatte

### Lab Head
Dr Yogesh Kulathu
Medical Research Council Protein Phosphorylation and Ubiquitylation Unit School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee, Scotland


