### Accession
PXD039259

### Title
Identification of FAME (Factor Associated with Metabolism and Energy) interactome

### Description
Using comparative genomics, we discovered that a previously uncharacterized gene (1700011H14RIK/C14ORF105/CCDC198) hereby named FAME (Factor Associated with Metabolism and Energy) shows an unusually high rate of evolutionary divergence in birds and mammals. By comparing SNVs, we identified gene-flow of FAME from Neandertals into modern humans. FAME knockout animals demonstrated increased body weight and decreased energy expenditure, corresponding to GWAS linking FAME with higher BMI, diabetes-related pathologies, and macular degeneration in humans. The analysis of gene expression and subcellular localization revealed that FAME is a membrane-bound protein enriched in kidneys. Although a gene knockout resulted in structurally normal kidneys, we detected higher Albumin in urine and lowered ferritin in the blood. The experiment confirmed interactions between FAME and ferritin and showed co-localization in vesicular and plasma membranes. Overall, our results show that FAME plays a role in tuning metabolite excretion and energy expenditure, partly explaining why it evolves at a high rate in birds and mammals. Here, we provide data related to identification of FAME interactome using the co-immunoprecipitation method.

### Sample Protocol
LC-MS/MS analyses of peptide mixture were done using Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system connected to Orbitrap Elite hybrid spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Before LC separation, tryptic digests were online concentrated and desalted using a trapping column (100 μm × 30 mm) filled with 3.5-μm X-Bridge BEH 130 C18 sorbent (Waters). After washing of trapping column with 0.1% FA, the peptides were eluted (flow rate 300 nL/min) from the trapping column onto an analytical column (Acclaim Pepmap100 C18, 3 µm particles, 75 μm × 500 mm; Thermo Fisher Scientific) by 100 min nonlinear gradient program (1-56% of mobile phase B; mobile phase A: 0.1% FA in water; mobile phase B: 0.1% FA in 80% ACN). Equilibration of the trapping column and the column was done before sample injection to the sample loop. The analytical column outlet was directly connected to the Digital PicoView 550 (New Objective) ion source with PicoTip emitter SilicaTip (New Objective; FS360-20-15-N-20-C12). ABIRD (Active Background Ion Reduction Device) was installed. MS data were acquired in a data-dependent strategy selecting up to the top 10 precursors based on precursor abundance in the survey scan (m/z 350-2000). The resolution of the survey scan was 60 000 (m/z 400) with a target value of 1×106 ions, one Microscan, and a maximum injection time of 200 ms. HCD MS/MS spectra were acquired with a target value of 50 000 and a resolution of 15 000 (m/z 400). The maximum injection time for MS/MS was 500 ms. Dynamic exclusion was enabled for 45 s after one MS/MS spectra acquisition, and early expiration was disabled. The isolation window for MS/MS fragmentation was set to 2 m/z.

### Data Protocol
For data evaluation, MaxQuant software (2.0.1.0) with inbuild Andromeda search engine was used using default settings unless otherwise noted. Search was done against UniProtKB proteome database for Homo sapiens (downloaded from https://ftp.uniprot.org/pub/databases/uniprot/current_release/knowledgebase/reference_proteomes/Eukaryota/UP000005640/UP000005640_9606.fasta.gz, version from 2021-06-16, 20,600 protein sequences), a separate fasta file containing mouse C14orf105 Q9CPZ1 (CN105_MOUSE) sequence and cRAP contaminants database (112 sequences, version from 2018-11-22, downloaded from http://www.thegpm.org/crap). Modifications were set as follows for database search: oxidation (M), deamidation (N, Q), and acetylation (Protein N-term) as variable modifications, with carbamidomethylation (C) as a fixed modification. Enzyme specificity was tryptic/P with two permissible miscleavages. Second peptides and match between runs (MBR) features were enabled (see the parameter file as a part of the deposited data for more details). Only peptides and proteins with false discovery rate threshold under 0.01 were considered. proteinGroups.txt file, the resulting output from MaxQuant, was further processed in R, v. 4.1.1. using the Differential Enrichment of Proteomics Data (DEP) R package [1]. In the workflow, firstly contaminant hits were filtered out and protein intensities were log2 transformed. Only proteins with intensity > 0 in more than 4/6 samples of at least one condition were retained. Intensities were normalized using LoessF normalization, and missing values were imputed using minimal value. Finally, limma test with Benjamini-Hochberg adjustment for multiple comparison was used to test for the differentially expressed proteins.  [1] Zhang X, Smits A, van Tilburg G, Ovaa H, Huber W, Vermeulen M (2018). “Proteome-wide identification of ubiquitin interactions using UbIA-MS.” Nature Protocols, 13, 530–550.

### Publication Abstract
In this study we use comparative genomics to uncover a gene with uncharacterized function (1700011H14Rik/C14orf105/CCDC198), which we hereby name FAME (Factor Associated with Metabolism and Energy). We observe that FAME shows an unusually high evolutionary divergence in birds and mammals. Through the comparison of single nucleotide polymorphisms, we identify gene flow of FAME from Neandertals into modern humans. We conduct knockout experiments on animals and observe altered body weight and decreased energy expenditure in Fame knockout animals, corresponding to genome-wide association studies linking FAME with higher body mass index in humans. Gene expression and subcellular localization analyses&#xa0;reveal that FAME is a membrane-bound protein enriched in the kidneys. Although the gene knockout results in structurally normal kidneys, we detect higher albumin in urine and lowered ferritin in the blood. Through experimental validation, we confirm interactions between FAME and ferritin and show co-localization in vesicular and plasma membranes.

### Keywords
Fame, Hek293, Co-ip

### Affiliations
Proteomics Core Facility and Research Group Proteomics
CEITEC-MU
Masaryk University
Brno, Czech Republic
Proteomics Core Facility and Research Group Proteomics, CEITEC-MU, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech

### Submitter
David Potesil

### Lab Head
Dr Zbynek Zdrahal
Proteomics Core Facility and Research Group Proteomics, CEITEC-MU, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech


