### Accession
PXD016880

### Title
Hepatitis Delta Virus histone mimicry drives the recruitment of chromatin remodelers for viral RNA replication

### Description
Hepatitis Delta virus (HDV) is a satellite of Hepatitis B virus with a single stranded circular RNA genome. HDV RNA genome synthesis is carried out in infected cells by cellular RNA polymerases with the assistance of the small hepatitis delta antigen (S-HDAg). Here we show that S-HDAg binds the Bromodomain (BRD) Adjacent To Zinc Finger Domain 2B (BAZ2B) protein, a regulatory subunit of BRF (BAZ2B-Associated Remodeling Factor) ISWI chromatin remodeling complexes. ShRNAs-mediated silencing of BAZ2B or its inactivation with the BAZ2B-BRD inhibitor GSK-2801 impairs HDV replication in HDV-infected human hepatocytes. S-HDAg contains a short linear interacting motif (SLiM) KacXXR, similar to the one recognized by BAZ2B-BRD in histone H3. We found that the integrity of the S-HDAg SLiM sequence is required for S-HDAg interaction with BAZ2B-BRD and for HDV RNA replication. Our results suggest that S-HDAg uses a histone mimicry strategy to co-activate the RNA Polymerase II-dependent synthesis of HDV RNA and sustain HDV replication.

### Sample Protocol
The S-HDAg-protein complexes were purified using the Strep•Tag® II/Strep•Tactin® system (ibaSolutions For Life Sciences www.iba-lifesciences.com). HepaRG cells and HepaRG ST-S-HDAg cells were grown in T175 flasks until differentiation and cultured for 72 hours without and with Dox. Cells were harvested and nuclear extracts were prepared. using a hypotonic buffer (Hepes 10 mM pH 7.9, MgCl2 1.5 mM, EGTA 0.1 mM, DTT 0.5 mM, Glycerol 5% and cOmplete™ Mini Protease Inhibitor Cocktail [Roche]) for 30 minutes and centrifuged at 2,500 × g for 15 minutes. Nuclear pellets were washed in the same buffer, cleared by centrifugation at 2,500 × g for 15 minutes at 4°C and lysed using the M–PER (Thermo scientific) reagent supplemented with Benzonase® nuclease (Sigma Aldrich, final concentration 1U/ml) and MgCl2 (1 mM). Strep-Tactin® charged magnetic agarose beads (Qiagen) were added to the nuclear protein extract and incubated at 4°C for two hours. Beads were washed three times with Tris-HCl 0.8 M pH 8.0, NaCl 1.2 M and EDTA 8 mM, Tween-20, resuspended inLaemmli (2X) and incubated at 95°C for 5 minutes. Eluted samples were separated on a 12% SDS polyacrylamide gel and incubated in a staining solution containing 0.1% Coomasie Brilliant Blue R–250 dye (Thermo Fisher Scientific), 40% ethanol, 10% acetic acid at 60°C for 1 hour. Gels were destained in Ethanol (10%) and Acetic acid (7.5%) under gentle agitation and stored in deionized water at 4°C until mass spectrometry analysis. Mass spectrometry analysis was performed at the “Protéomique Structurale et Fonctionnelle” platform (Institut Jacques Monod University Paris 7, France). Briefly, each lane from the SDS polyacrylamide gel (see above) was cut in 5 spots. Proteins in spots were reduced with DTT 10 mM, alkyled with iodoacetamide 55 mM, digested overnight at 37°C by trypsin (12.5 µg/ml; Promega) in 20 µl of NH4HCO3 25 mM and extracted from the gel. Following an Easy nano Liquid Chromatography (LC 1000 system), digests were analyzed by a LTQ VelosOrbitrap (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The raw data acquired were processed with the Proteome Discoverer 1.2 software (Thermo Fisher scientific) coupled to an in-house Mascot search server (Matrix Science, version 2.3.02). MS–MS data were searched against SwissProt databases with the Homo sapiens taxonomy.

### Publication Abstract
Hepatitis Delta virus (HDV) is a satellite of Hepatitis B virus with a single-stranded circular RNA genome. HDV RNA genome synthesis is carried out in infected cells by cellular RNA polymerases with the assistance of the small hepatitis delta antigen (S-HDAg). Here we show that S-HDAg binds the bromodomain (BRD) adjacent to zinc finger domain 2B (BAZ2B) protein, a regulatory subunit of BAZ2B-associated remodeling factor (BRF)&#xa0;ISWI chromatin remodeling complexes. shRNA-mediated silencing of BAZ2B or its inactivation with the BAZ2B BRD inhibitor GSK2801 impairs HDV replication in HDV-infected human hepatocytes. S-HDAg contains a short linear interacting motif (SLiM) KacXXR, similar to the one recognized by BAZ2B BRD in histone H3. We found that the integrity of the S-HDAg SLiM sequence is required for S-HDAg interaction with BAZ2B BRD and for HDV RNA replication. Our results suggest that S-HDAg uses a histone mimicry strategy to co-activate the RNA polymerase II-dependent synthesis of HDV RNA and sustain HDV replication.

### Keywords
Hepatitis delta virus (hdv), Rna polymerase ii (rna pol ii), Short linear interaction motif (slim), Hepatitis b virus (hbv), Bromodomain associated to zinc finger protein 2b (baz2b), Snf2l / smarca¬1, Baz2b associated remodeling factor (brf), Snf2h / smarca-5, Histone mimicry

### Affiliations
Université Paris 13, Unité de Formation et Recherches Santé Médecine et Biologie Humaine, BOBIGNY
Centre de Recherches en Cancérologie de Lyon, INSERM U1052, UMR CNRS 5268LYON
CRCL UMR Inserm U1052, CNRS 5286, UCBL, CLB

### Submitter
Paul Dény

### Lab Head
Dr Pr. Massimo Levrero
CRCL UMR Inserm U1052, CNRS 5286, UCBL, CLB


