### Accession
PXD045753

### Title
Peptidomic analysis of follicular fluid in patients with polycystic ovarian syndrome

### Description
The aim of this study was to analyze and compare the differential expression of peptides within the follicular fluid of polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) patients versus normal women by using peptidomics techniques. The underlying mechanisms involved in PCOS pathogenesis will be explored, together with screening and identification of potential functional peptides via bioinformatics analysis.

### Sample Protocol
A total of 12 patients who underwent in vitro fertilization and embryo transfer (IVF-ET) at the Reproductive Medicine Center of Shuguang Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai University of Traditional Chinese Medicine from September 1, 2022 to November 1, 2022 were included in this study. The follicular fluid of PCOS patients (n=6) and normal women (n=6) were collected. The presence and concentration differences of various peptides were detected by the LC-MS/MS method. GO and KEGG analysis were performed on the precursor proteins of the differentially-expressed peptides, and protein network interaction analysis was carried out to identify functionally-relevant peptides among the various peptides.

### Data Protocol
The instrument used is Thermo Fisher Scientific Q-Exactive Plus.The presence and concentration differences of various peptides were detected by the LC-MS/MS method. GO and KEGG analysis were performed on the precursor proteins of the differentially-expressed peptides, and protein network interaction analysis was carried out to identify functionally-relevant peptides among the various peptides.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Peptidomics analysis; assisted reproduction; polycystic ovarian syndrome; follicular fluid; in vitro fertilization

### Affiliations
Shuguang Hospital affiliated to Shanghai University of Traditional Chinese Medicine

### Submitter
lu lu

### Lab Head
Dr ping yin
Shuguang Hospital affiliated to Shanghai University of Traditional Chinese Medicine


