### Accession
PXD030113

### Title
Protein interaction network analysis reveals growth conditions-specific crosstalk between chromosomal DNA replication and other cellular processes in E. coli

### Description
E. coli and many other bacterial species can alternate their cell cycle according to nutrient availability. As a result, they grow and divide very fast under optimal conditions or slow down the cell cycle when conditions deteriorate. This adaptability is underlined by mechanisms coordinating cell growth with duplication of genetic material and cell division. Several mechanisms regulating DNA replication process in E. coli have been described so far with biochemical details, nevertheless we still don’t fully understand the source of remarkable precision that bacterial cells coordinate their growth and chromosome replication with. To shed light on regulation of E. coli DNA replication at systemic level, we used affinity purification coupled with mass spectrometry (AP-MS) to characterize protein-protein interactions (PPIs) formed by key E. coli replication proteins, under disparate bacterial growth conditions and phases. We present the resulting dynamic replication protein interaction network (PIN) and highlight links between DNA replication and several cellular processes, like outer membrane synthesis, RNA degradation and modification or starvation response.

### Sample Protocol
Isolation of SPA-tagged bacterial protein complexes was performed according to the detailed protocol published by Babu and coworkers[23], with several modifications. Briefly, cell pellets, harvested by centrifugation, were resuspended in 20-40 ml of sonication buffer (20 mM Tris pH 7.9, 100 mM NaCl, 0.2 mM EDTA, 10% glycerol, 0.1 mM DTT) supplemented with 1 tablet of Pierce™ Protease Inhibitors (Thermo Scientific, A32965) per 50 ml of buffer and lysed by sonication. Cell debris was removed by centrifugation at 18000 rpm for 45 min. Cleared lysate was incubated with 50-75 U of Viscolase nuclease (A&A Biotechnology) for 30 min on ice. After degradation of nucleic acids, Triton X-100 was added to the lysate to the final concentration of 0.1% and the lysate was incubated with 250 l of Sepharose® 4B-200 (Sigma-Aldrich), pretreated by washing with AFC buffer (10 mM Tris pH 7.9, 100 mM NaCl, 0.1% Triton X-100), for 1h at 4°C with gentle rotation. This step was performed to decrease the amount of proteins sticking unspecifically to the resin. The beads were separated from the lysate, which was subsequently incubated with anti-FLAG Sepharose (Biotool, B23102), pretreated by washing with AFC buffer, for 3h at 4°C with gentle rotation. The beads were subsequently collected by centrifugation at 4000 rpm for 15 min and transferred into mini-spin column. Beads were washed three times with 250 µl of AFC buffer and twice with 250 µl of TEV cleavage buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.9, 100 mM NaCl, 0.1% Triton X-100). 8 l of in-house purified TEV protease (conc. ~5 mg/ml) in 250 l of TEV cleavage buffer was added to the closed column and incubated overnight at 4°C. The next day supernatant containing cleaved proteins was collected, mixed with CaCl2 to the final concentration of 1.5 mM and incubated for 3h at 4°C with gentle rotation with Calmodulin Sepharose (GE Healthcare, 17-0529-01), pretreated by washing with CBB buffer (10 mM Tris pH 7.9, 100 mM NaCl, 2 mM CaCl2, 0.1% Triton X-100). The protein-bound beads were transferred into new mini-spin column, washed twice with 250 µl of CBB buffer and three times with 250 µl of CWB buffer (10 mM Tris pH 7.9, 100 mM NaCl, 0.1 mM CaCl2). Dried beads were stored at -20°C and subjected directly to trypsin digestion prior to Liquid Chromatography coupled to tandem Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS/MS).   Identification of proteins by LC-MS/MS Dried beads were suspended in 50 μl of 100 mM NH4HCO3 and reduced with TCEP on a shaker at RT, alkylated with iodoacetamide in darkness for 45 min at RT on the shaker and digested overnight with 10 ng/μl trypsin. Digestion was stopped with 5%TFA to a final concentration of 0.1%, acetonitrile was added to a final concentration of 2%. The resulting peptide mixtures were separated and measured at an online LC-MSMS setup. LC (Waters Accuity) RP-18 pre-columns (Waters), nano-HPLC RP-18 column (internal diameter: 75 μM, Waters) using an acetonitrile gradient (2%–35% ACN in 180 min) in the presence of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. The column outlet was directly coupled to the ion source of an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Three-blank-washing runs were done between each sample to ensure the absence of cross-contamination from preceding samples. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode.

### Data Protocol
Analysis was performed at the Laboratory of Mass Spectrometry (IBB PAS, Warsaw). Data were analyzed using MaxQuant 1.6.3.4, referenced to E.coli proteome from UniProt database downloaded on 25.05.2020, 4391 entries. In total, 1600 proteins were identified (FDR 1%). The error ranges for the first and main searches were 20 ppm and 6 ppm, respectively, with 2 missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification, and oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were selected as variable modifications for database searching. The minimum peptide length was set at 7 aa. Both peptide and protein identifications were filtered at a 1% false discovery rate and were thus not dependent on the peptide score. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, allowing cleavage of N-terminal proline. A ‘common contaminants’ database (incorporated in MaxQuant software) containing commonly occurring contaminations (keratins, trypsin etc.) was employed during MS runs.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ap-ms, Chromosmal dna, E.coli

### Affiliations
Department of Bacterial Molecular Genetics  University of Gdansk
Medical University of Bialystok

### Submitter
Dominik Cysewski

### Lab Head
Dr Monika Glinkowska
Department of Bacterial Molecular Genetics  University of Gdansk


