### Accession
PXD012256

### Title
P. aeruginosa PAO1 and ΔodsR (ΔPA2076) strains

### Description
We carried out globlal proteomics analysis on P. aeruginosa PAO1 and ΔodsR (ΔPA2076) strains to determine differences following treatment with OA, 10-HOME, or 7,10-DiHOME oxylipin vs non-treated controls.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial cells were collected by centrifugation (10,000 rpm, 5 min) from 1 ml aliquots of each culture and frozen at -80⁰C until use. Bacterial pellets were then thawed and lysed with 20 µL of NuPAGE LDS sample buffer, reduced, denatured and separated by 1D PAGE as previously referenced1. This step was carried out on an SDS Bis-Tris gel (10%, Invitrogen) as per manufacturer’s instructions. The gels were stained, the entire lane for each sample were partitioned into 3 MW fractions, and each gel plug was equilibrated in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AmBc). Each gel plug was then digested with Trypsin Gold (Promega) following manufacturer’s instruction, and peptide extracts were reconstituted in 0.1% Formic Acid/ ddH2O at ~0.1 µg/µL. Mass spectrometry runs were carried out, and the data processed, searched, filtered, grouped and quantified as previously reported in detail (Ludwig et al.; under section 2.5 nLC-ESI-MS2 and Protein IDs for GeLC)31. 1. Galloway, J. R. et al. SSBP3 Interacts With Islet-1 and Ldb1 to Impact Pancreatic β-Cell Target Genes. Mol. Endocrinol. Baltim. Md 29, 1774–1786 (2015). 2. Ludwig, M. R. et al. Surveying the serologic proteome in a tissue-specific kras(G12D) knockin mouse model of pancreatic cancer. Proteomics 16, 516–531 (2016).

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was carried out as described for the GeLC approach under Ludwig, M. R. et al. Surveying the serologic proteome in a tissue-specific kras(G12D) knockin mouse model of pancreatic cancer. Proteomics 16, 516–531 (2016).

### Publication Abstract
Oxygenated unsaturated fatty acids, known as oxylipins, are signaling molecules commonly used for cell-to-cell communication in eukaryotes. However, a role for oxylipins in mediating communication in prokaryotes has not previously been described. Bacteria mainly communicate via quorum sensing, which involves the production and detection of diverse small molecules termed autoinducers. Here we show that oleic acid-derived oxylipins produced by <i>Pseudomonas aeruginosa</i> function as autoinducers of a novel quorum sensing system. We found that this system controls the cell density-dependent expression of a gene subset independently of the quorum sensing systems thus far described in this bacterium. We identified a LysR-type transcriptional regulator as the primary receptor of the oxylipin signal. The discovery of this oxylipin-dependent quorum sensing system reveals that prokaryote-derived oxylipins also mediate cell-to-cell communication in bacteria.

### Keywords
Proteome, P. aeruginosa

### Affiliations
Southern Research Institute
University of Alabama at Birmingham

### Submitter
james mobley

### Lab Head
Dr Javier Campos Gomez
Southern Research Institute


