### Accession
PXD043389

### Title
A multi-omics dataset of human transcriptome and proteome stable reference

### Description
In recent years, the development of high-throughput omics technology has greatly promoted the development of biomedicine. However, the poor reproducibility of omics techniques limits its application. It is necessary to use standard reference materials of complex RNAs or proteins to test and calibrate the accuracy and reproducibility of omics workflows. Our study justified a omics standard reference material and reference datasets for transcriptomic and proteomics research. This helps to further standardize the workflow and data quality of omics techniques and thus promotes the application of omics technology in precision medicine.

### Sample Protocol
Each generation of cells was cultured to 80~90% confluency, then treated with 0.25% trypsin-EDTA (Gibco, 25200056, USA), centrifuged at 300 × g for 5 min at room temperature, washed twice with PBS (LEAGENE, Beijing, China), and the supernatant was removed by centrifuge. Cells were dissolved in 1% SDS lysis buffer (Beyotime, P0013G, China) and the protein concentration was measured by a BCA quantification kit (ThermoFisher, 23227, USA). The protein digestion was performed by filter-aided sample preparation (FASP)41 method. In brief, protein samples were treated with 8 M urea (8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.5), resulting in a final concentration of urea ≥ 4 M. Next, an appropriate amount of dithiothreitol solution (DTT) (Solarbio, D8220, China) was added to a concentration of 50 mM and incubated at 37 °C for 1 h. Iodoacetamide solution (IAA) (Merck, I6125, USA) was added to a concentration of 120~150 mM, and incubated at room temperature for 30 min in the dark. Each solution was transferred into a 10 KDa ultrafiltration tube (Merck, UFC501096, USA) and centrifuged at 12000 × g for 15 min.  The filter tube was washed twice with 8 M urea (200 µL each time) and then washed three times (200 µL each time) with 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) (ThermoFisher, 90114, USA). Finally, trypsin (Promega, V5280, USA) was added at the ratio of 1:40 (trypsin: protein), and incubated at 37 °C overnight. After 16 hours, all peptides were collected by centrifugation at 12000 × g for 20 min. Then washed the filter tubes twice with 50 mM TEAB (200 µL each time), and all eluted peptides were collected and mixed. Their concentrations were determined using the Pierce Quantitative Fluorometric Peptide Assay kit (Thermo Scientific, 23290, USA). Finally, all peptides were lyophilized and stored at - 80 °C. The peptides were then redissolved using 200 µL 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) (Macklin, T818782, China) solution and desalted using Waters C18 columns (Waters, WAT054955, USA). The procedure for desalting was as follows: the C18 columns were activated with 1 mL acetonitrile (ACN) (Thermo Scientific, A955-4, USA) and then equilibrated twice with 1 mL condition buffer (20% ACN with 0.1% TFA). All peptides were then loaded into the C18 columns and repeated 3 times. Then the C18 columns were washed 5 times with 1mL of washing buffer (0.1% TFA). Finally, all peptides were eluted with elution buffer (70% ACN with 0.1% TFA), lyophilized, and stored at -80 °C.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (version 1.5.7.4) was used for data-dependent acquisition data search. The common search parameters: Type: standard, multiplicity 1; Digestion: digestion mode(specific), enzyme, trypsin/P; Variable modification: oxidation(M), acetyl (protein N-term); Max number of modifications per peptide: 5; Missed cleavage sites were allowed: 2; Label-free quantification: LFQ; LFQ minimum ratio count: 2; Fast LFQ was selected; LFQ minimum number of neighbors: 3; LFQ average number of neighbors: 6; Instrument: orbitrap; Fixed modification: carbamidomethyl (C); Two missed cleavage sites were allowed. We adopted the criteria for confident identification with a false discovery rate (FDR) < 0.01, at peptide and protein levels. Data from label-free mass spectrometry analyses were searched with all three search engines.  Data of data-independent acquisition searched by the direct DIA module of Spectronaut powered by Pulsar 14.2.200619.47784 (Biognosys, Switzerland). The common search parameters: Enzymes / Cleavage Rules: trypsin/P; XIC Extraction: default parameter; Modifications: Fixed modification: Carbamidomethyl (C); Variable modifications: Oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein N-term); Calibration: default parameter; Identification FDR (false discovery rate) threshold: peptide levels: 0.01,  protein levels: 0.01, and PSM levels: 0.01; Identification: Machine Learning: Per Run, Precursor, and protein Qvalue Cutoff: 0.01, Probability Cutoff: 0.75, and the others were default parameter; Quantification: Quantity MS-Level: MS2 and the others were default parameter; The Workflow, Post Analysis and Pipeline Mode parameter setting was default parameter. The Database of Uniprot-Human-Filtered-Reviewed-Yes -UP000005640_9606.fasta was used for all database searches.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Reproducible, Reference, Proteome

### Affiliations
Key Laboratory of Functional Protein Research of Guangdong Higher Education Institutes and MOE Key Laboratory of Tumor Molecular Biology, Institute of Life and Health Engineering, Jinan University, Guangzhou, China.
Jinan university

### Submitter
Shaohua Lu

### Lab Head
Dr Gong Zhang
Key Laboratory of Functional Protein Research of Guangdong Higher Education Institutes and MOE Key Laboratory of Tumor Molecular Biology, Institute of Life and Health Engineering, Jinan University, Guangzhou, China.


