### Accession
PXD025274

### Title
Time-course proteomic analysis of spontaneously differentiating human embryonic stem cells (hESCs)

### Description
Mass spectrometry analysis was carried out to investigate the protein expression landscape of RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) during a time-course of spontaneously differentiating human embryonic stem cells (hESCs). Mass spectrometry was performed on whole-cell extracts of differentiating TE03 (I3) hESCs at four time-points (days 0, 23, 39, and 54), each with two biological replicates.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were lysed and digested with trypsin using the S-Trap method (by Protifi), followed by a desalting step. The resulting peptides were fractionated offline using high-pH reversed-phase chromatography, followed by online nanoflow liquid chromatography (nanoAcquity) coupled to a high-resolution mass spectrometer (Q Exactive HF).

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were processed using the MaxQuant software, version 1.5.5.1. MS/MS spectra were searched with the build-in Andromeda search engine against the UniProt human reference proteome (accessed 14 May 2016; www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000005640). Reversed sequences of all human proteins and a list of 245 laboratory contaminants were added to the sequence database. Trypsin/P was used as the digestive enzyme, allowing no more than two missed cleavages and a peptide length of at least six amino acids. Fixed modifications were set to carbamidomethylation of cysteines and variable modifications to oxidation (M), N-terminal acetylation (Protein N-term), and deamidation (Q or N). The peptide mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm for the first search and 4.5 ppm for the main search. The fragment mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm. The false discovery rate (FDR) was estimated by using a target-decoy strategy, with a maximum FDR of 1% at both the peptide-spectrum match (PSM) and protein level.

### Publication Abstract
Embryonic stem cell (ESC) self-renewal and cell fate decisions are driven by a broad array of molecular signals. While transcriptional regulators have been extensively studied in human ESCs (hESCs), the extent to which RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) contribute to human pluripotency remains unclear. Here, we carry out a proteome-wide screen and identify 810 proteins that bind RNA in hESCs. We reveal that RBPs are preferentially expressed in hESCs and dynamically regulated during early stem cell differentiation. Notably, many RBPs are affected by knockdown of OCT4, a master regulator of pluripotency, several dozen of which are directly targeted by this factor. Using cross-linking and immunoprecipitation (CLIP-seq), we find that the pluripotency-associated STAT3 and OCT4 transcription factors interact with RNA in hESCs and confirm the binding of STAT3 to the conserved NORAD long-noncoding RNA. Our findings indicate that RBPs have a more widespread role in human pluripotency than previously appreciated.

### Keywords
Spontaneously differentiating, Hescs, Human embryonic stem cells, Rna-binding proteins, Rbps, Early differentiation, Shotgun proteomics, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Faculty of Biology, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa 320003, Israel
1. Faculty of Biology, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa 320003, Israel 2. Computer Science Department, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa 320003, Israel

### Submitter
Shlomi Dvir

### Lab Head
Dr Yael Mandel-Gutfreund
1. Faculty of Biology, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa 320003, Israel 2. Computer Science Department, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa 320003, Israel


### SDRF
- organism: homo sapiens
- organism part: Whole-cell
- cell type: human embryonic stem cells (hESCs)
- disease: not applicable
- label: label free sample
- instrument:  Q Exactive HF

