### Accession
PXD007134

### Title
Identification and validation of a salivary protein panel to detect heart failure early

### Description
Background: Over 26 million people suffer from heart failure (HF) globally. Current diagnosis of HF relies on clinical evaluation, blood assays and imaging techniques at the time of diagnosis. Our aim is to develop a diagnostic assay to detect HF early in at risk individuals within the community using human saliva as a medium, paving the way towards precision medicine.  Methods: Saliva samples were collected from healthy controls (n=36) and HF patients (n=75). Salivary proteome profiles were analysed by Sequential Window Acquisition of All Theoretical fragment ion spectra – Mass Spectrometry (SWATH-MS). A total of 738 proteins were quantified and 177 proteins demonstrated significant differences in saliva from HF patients and healthy controls.  Candidate biomarkers were chosen based on their abundance and difference between the two cohorts. A multi-protein panel was developed using logistic regression analysis. The diagnostic performance of the multi-protein panel was assessed using the receiver operative characteristic curves. The candidate proteins were further validated technically, using western blot analysis as well as biologically, using an independent cohor.t. Results: A group of six proteins were chosen as potential protein candidates based on their differences in the abundance between the two cohorts. During the validation phase, two of the proteins were eliminated as these did not meet our criteria. The panel consists of four proteins with sensitivity of 83.3%, specificity of 62.5% with an area under ROC curve of 0.78 in discriminating healthy controls from NYHA class I/II HF patients.  Conclusion: Analysis of salivary proteome using SWATH-MS analysis revealed novel HF-specific protein candidates when combined into a panel yielding high diagnostic performance. A multi-centre longitudinal clinical trial will be the next step before clinical implementation of this panel. 

### Sample Protocol
Saliva samples containing 12.5 µg of total protein were used for the MS analysis as previously described [22]. Proteins in the samples were denatured and reduced by addition of 100 L of 1% sodium dodecyl sulphate, 100 mM Tris-HCl buffer pH 8.0 and 10 mM Dithiothreitol (DTT), and incubation at 95°C for 10 minutes. Cysteines in the samples were then alkylated by addition of 30 mM acrylamide and incubation at room temperature for 30 minutes. Excess acrylamide was quenched with the addition of DTT to a final concentration of 10 mM. Proteins were then precipitated by addition of 800 µL of 1:1 methanol/acetone, incubation at -20 °C overnight and centrifugation at 18,000 g for 10 minutes. The protein pellet was resuspended in 50 µL of 50 mM ammonium acetate and digested with 0.5 µg of proteomics grade trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MI, USA) at 37 °C for 16 hours. To desalt, clean and concentrate peptides, C18 ZipTips (Merck Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA) were used following manufacturer’s instructions.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification was performed by the Protein Pilot 4.1 software (SCIEX) using the LudwigNR database (downloaded from http://apcf.edu.au as at 27 January 2012; 16 818 973 sequences; 5 891 363 821 residues) with the following setting: Sample Type, identification; cysteine alkylation, acrylamide; instrument, TripleTof 5600; Species, human; ID focus, Biological modification; enzyme, trypsin; Search effort, thorough ID. ProteinPilot was used to perform false discovery rate (FDR) analysis for all searches. Further analysis was performed on peptides identified with greater than 99% confidence and with a local FDR of less than 1%. The abundance of peptides was measured using PeakView Software with standard settings essentially as described [24], summing the integrated areas of up to six fragment ions per peptide. Protein abundance was measured using the sum of the abundances of up to six peptides per protein. The accuracy of peak selection by PeakView was manually confirmed for proteins of interest in each sample.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Heart failure; saliva; diagnosis; mass spectrometry; multi-biomarker strategies

### Affiliations
The School of Biomedical Sciences, Queesnland University of Technology, Australia
Institute of Health and Biomedical Innovation, Queensland University of Technology

### Submitter
Xi Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Chamindie Punyadeera
The School of Biomedical Sciences, Queesnland University of Technology, Australia


