### Accession
PXD003690

### Title
Impact of moderate temperature changes on Neisseria meningitidis adhesive phenotypes and proteome

### Description
Neisseria meningitidis, the meningococcus, bears the potential of life-threatening invasive diseases, but it usually colonizes the nasopharynx without causing any symptoms. Within the nasopharynx, Neisseria meningitidis must face temperature changes depending on the ambient air temperature. Indeed, the nasopharyngeal temperature can be substantially lower than 37°C, the temperature commonly used in experimental settings. Here, we compared meningococcal biofilm formation, autoaggregation and cellular adherence between 32°C and 37°C and found a clear increase in all these phenotypes at 32°C, suggestive for a stronger in vivo colonization capability at this temperature. A comparative proteome analysis approach revealed differential protein expression levels between 32°C and 37°C, predominantly affecting the outer membrane. Among 375 analyzed proteins, 75 were localized in the outer membrane, 37 in the periplasm, 48 in the inner membrane and 215 in the cytosol. The outer membrane proteins NHBA, NMB1030 and ACP showed strongest upregulation at 32°C and were partially responsible for the observed temperature-dependent phenotypes. Screening of different global regulators of Neisseria meningitidis revealed that the extracytoplasmic sigma factor, E, might be involved in the temperature-dependent biofilm formation. In conclusion, subtle temperature changes trigger adaptation events promoting mucosal colonization by meningococci

### Sample Protocol
Proteome analysis was conducted similar to as described recently (Lappann et al., 2013). Strain MC58 was grown in 1 l liquid culture at either 32°C or 37°C for approximately 5-6 hours in MDM. Then, cultures were immediately cooled down on ice, and cells were harvested by centrifugation. In order to obtain an internal 15N-standard (MacCoss et al., 2003), equal portions of each condition were mixed with an equal amount of 15N labeled MC58 cells grown on Minimal Medium for Meningococci (MMM) with 15NH4Cl as sole source of nitrogen (Lappann et al., 2013). Subsequently, outer membrane preparations using the “shake-and-bake” method (Heckels, 1977) was conducted without further purification. We selected this approach in order to enrich outer membrane proteins in relation to dominating (regarding to relative abundance) cytoplasmic proteins. Samples were analyzed by one-dimensional SDS-PAGE and underwent in-gel tryptic digest (Dreisbach et al., 2008) for subsequent mass spectrometric analysis.

### Data Protocol
MS measurement  The mass spectrometric analysis was carried out as described in (Bonn et al., 2014). In brief, peptide samples were subjected to reversed-phase C18 column chromatography on an EASY nLC Proxeon coupled to mass spectrometry with an LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). Data analysis and 14N/15N quantification  Acquired MS/MS data were processed as described in detail in (Lappann et al., 2013, Otto et al., 2010). Database searching was carried out by using Sorcerer-SEQUEST (SageN; version v.28) against the N. meningitidis strain MC58 (Tettelin et al., 2000) target decoy protein sequence databases (complete proteome set of N. meningitidis strain MC58 with a set of common laboratory contaminants) compiled with BioEdit. The searches were performed in two iterations, i.e., with search parameters light (enzyme type, trypsin [KR]; peptide tolerance, 10 ppm; tolerance for fragment ions, 1 amu; b- and y-ion series; variable modification, methionine [15.99 Da]; a maximum of three modifications per peptide allowed) and with search parameters heavy (parameters identical to those used for 14N/light with the mass shift of all amino acids completely labeled with 15N taken into account). Resulting *.dta and *.out files were assembled and filtered with DTASelect (revision 2.0.25) (parameters −y 2 −c 2 −C 4 −here −decoy Rev_ −p 2 −t 2 −u −MC 2 −i 0.3 −fp 0.005). The resulting protein identification data were cured with an in-house written java script to ensure a minimum of two different peptides for each protein identified. The cured search results were then used for parsing by the Census software (Park et al., 2008) to obtain the relative quantitative data of 14N peaks (sample) versus 15N peaks (pooled reference). Quantification results were exported (R2 values of >0.7; only unique peptides; proteins failing to be relatively quantified were checked manually in the graphical user interface for on/off proteins). Proteins relatively quantified with at least two peptides were taken into account in the subsequent analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Neisseria meningitidis, the meningococcus, bears the potential to cause life-threatening invasive diseases, but it usually colonizes the nasopharynx without causing any symptoms. Within the nasopharynx, Neisseria meningitidis must face temperature changes depending on the ambient air temperature. Indeed, the nasopharyngeal temperature can be substantially lower than 37&#xb0;C, the temperature commonly used in experimental settings. Here, we compared the levels of meningococcal biofilm formation, autoaggregation, and cellular adherence at 32&#xb0;C and 37&#xb0;C and found a clear increase in all these phenotypes at 32&#xb0;C suggestive of a stronger in vivo colonization capability at this temperature. A comparative proteome analysis approach revealed differential protein expression levels between 32&#xb0;C and 37&#xb0;C, predominantly affecting the bacterial envelope. A total of 375 proteins were detected. Use of database annotation or the PSORTb algorithm predicted 49 of those proteins to be localized in the outer membrane, 21 in either the inner or outer membrane, 35 in the periplasm, 56 in the inner membrane, and 208 in the cytosol; for 6 proteins, no annotation or prediction was available. Temperature-dependent regulation of protein expression was seen particularly in the periplasm as well as in the outer and inner membranes. Neisserial heparin binding antigen (NHBA), NMB1030, and adhesin complex protein (ACP) showed the strongest upregulation at 32&#xb0;C and were partially responsible for the observed temperature-dependent phenotypes. Screening of different global regulators of Neisseria meningitidis suggested that the extracytoplasmic sigma factor &#x3c3;<sup>E</sup> might be involved in temperature-dependent biofilm formation. In conclusion, subtle temperature changes trigger adaptation events promoting mucosal colonization by meningococci.

### Keywords
Temperature, Biofilm, Proteome, Sigma e, Adhesion, Meningococcus

### Affiliations
Institute for Microbiology Department of Microbial Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry Ernst-Moritz-Arndt-University Greifswald F.-L.-Jahn-Str. 15 17489 Greifswald
Institute for Microbiology

### Submitter
Andreas Otto

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Otto
Institute for Microbiology Department of Microbial Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry Ernst-Moritz-Arndt-University Greifswald F.-L.-Jahn-Str. 15 17489 Greifswald


