### Accession
PXD010850

### Title
Translocase of the Outer Membrane (TOM complex) of hydrogenosomes in Trichomonas vaginalis

### Description
Mitochondria originated from α-proteobacterial endosymbionts, and the endosymbiont-to-organelle transition is tightly linked to the establishment of protein import pathways. The initial import of most proteins is mediated by the translocase of the outer membrane (TOM). Although TOM is common to all forms of mitochondria, recent studies have shown diversity of TOM subunits between main eukaryotic lineages. However, experimental knowledge is currently limited to a few model organisms. Here, we analysed the TvTOM complex in hydrogenosomes, an anaerobic form of mitochondria found in the excavate Trichomonas vaginalis. Using the pore-forming TvTom40-2 as bait, we immunoprecipitated the high molecular weight TvTOM complex both under crosslinking and native conditions and performed label-free quantitative mass spectrometry (LFQ-MS) to identify the components of the TvTOM complex. Further, we used two proteins that were enriched, Homp36 and Sam50 as baits for reciprocal experiments.

### Sample Protocol
Liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry  To remove SDS from the crosslinking coIPs and to remove HA peptides from the native coIPs, samples were resuspended in 8 M urea and processed using a FASP (Filter Aided Sample Preparation) protocol, according to Wisniewski et al. (Wisniewski et al ). Briefly, samples were loaded on centrifugal filters with a 3 kDa cut off (Microcon Ultracel-30, Merck Millipore) and centrifuged at 16000 x g at room temperature for 20 min. All the following centrifugation steps were performed under the same conditions. Loaded proteins were then washed twice with 200 µl of 100 mM TEAB (Triethylammonium bicarbonate) buffer. After the final wash, the lysate was diluted with 50 µl of TEAB, and TCEP (Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine) was added to a final concentration of 5 mM to reduce disulfide bonds. Reduction was performed at 60°C for 30 min in a ThermoMixer (Eppendorf). Reduction filters were left to cool down and were spun shortly before alkylation. Alkylation was performed using S-Methyl methanethiosulfonate (Sigma Aldrich) at a 10 mM final concentration for 10 min at room temperature and then centrifuged for 10 min. Then, the samples were digested with 1 µg of trypsin at 37°C overnight. The obtained peptides were eluted with 80 µl of 100 mM TEAB. The supernatant was collected following centrifugation, acidified with 1% TFA (Trifluoroacetic acid) and desalted on a Michrom C18 column. Nano Reversed phase columns (EASY-Spray column, 50 cm x 75 µm ID, PepMap C18, 2 µm particles, 100 Å pore size) were used for LC/MS analysis. Mobile phase buffer A was composed of 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Mobile phase buffer B was composed of 80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Samples were loaded onto the trap column (Acclaim PepMap300, C18, 5 µm, 300 Å wide pore, 300 µm x 5 mm, 5 Cartridges) for 4 min at 15 μl/min. Loading buffer was composed of 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% TFA. Peptides were eluted with a Mobile phase B gradient, from 2% to 40%, over 60 min. Eluting peptide cations were converted to gas-phase ions by electrospray ionization and analyzed on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion (Q-OT- qIT, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Survey scans of peptide precursors from 400 to 1600 m/z were performed at 120K resolution (at 200 m/z), with a 5 × 105 ion count target. Tandem MS was performed by isolation at 1.5 Th with the quadrupole, HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 30, and rapid scan MS analysis in the ion trap. The MS 2 ion count target was set to 104, and the max injection time was 35 msec. Only those precursors with a charge state between 2 and 6 were sampled for MS 2. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 45 sec, with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on. The instrument was run in top speed mode, with 2 sec cycles (Herbert et al 2014).

### Data Protocol
Data analysis All data were analyzed and quantified with the MaxQuant software (Version 1.5.3.8) (Cox et al 2014). The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% for both proteins and peptides, and we specified a minimum length of seven amino acids. The Andromeda search engine was used for the MS/MS spectra search against the T. vaginalis database (Downloaded from TrichDB, Trichomonas Genome Resource, www.trichdb.org, containing 59,862 entries). Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to Arg and Lys, allowing cleavage at proline bonds, and a maximum of two missed cleavages. Dithiomethylation of cysteine was selected as a fixed modification, and N-terminal protein acetylation and methionine oxidation were selected as variable modifications. The “match between runs” feature of MaxQuant was used to transfer identifications to other LC-MS/MS runs, based on their masses and retention times (Maximum deviation 0.7 min), and this was also used in quantification experiments. Quantifications were performed with the label-free algorithms, and the data analysis was performed using Perseus 1.5.2.4 software.

### Publication Abstract
Mitochondria originated from proteobacterial endosymbionts, and their transition to organelles was tightly linked to establishment of the protein import pathways. The initial import of most proteins is mediated by the translocase of the outer membrane (TOM). Although TOM is common to all forms of mitochondria, an unexpected diversity of subunits between eukaryotic lineages has been predicted. However, experimental knowledge is limited to a few organisms, and so far, it remains unsettled whether the triplet-pore or the twin-pore structure is the generic form of TOM complex. Here, we analysed the TOM complex in hydrogenosomes, a metabolically specialised anaerobic form of mitochondria found in the excavate Trichomonas vaginalis. We demonstrate that the highly divergent &#x3b2;-barrel T. vaginalis TOM (TvTom)40-2 forms a translocation channel to conduct hydrogenosomal protein import. TvTom40-2 is present in high molecular weight complexes, and their analysis revealed the presence of four tail-anchored (TA) proteins. Two of them, Tom36 and Tom46, with heat shock protein (Hsp)20 and tetratricopeptide repeat (TPR) domains, can bind hydrogenosomal preproteins and most likely function as receptors. A third subunit, Tom22-like protein, has a short cis domain and a conserved Tom22 transmembrane segment but lacks a trans domain. The fourth protein, hydrogenosomal outer membrane protein 19 (Homp19) has no known homology. Furthermore, our data indicate that TvTOM is associated with sorting and assembly machinery (Sam)50 that is involved in &#x3b2;-barrel assembly. Visualisation of TvTOM by electron microscopy revealed that it forms three pores and has an unconventional skull-like shape. Although TvTOM seems to lack Tom7, our phylogenetic profiling predicted Tom7 in free-living excavates. Collectively, our results suggest that the triplet-pore TOM complex, composed of three conserved subunits, was present in the last common eukaryotic ancestor (LECA), while receptors responsible for substrate binding evolved independently in different eukaryotic lineages.

### Keywords
Tom complex, Trichomonas vaginalis, Protein import/translocation, Mitochondria, Hydrogenosomes

### Affiliations
BIOCEV, Charles University
Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Science, Charles University, BIOCEV, Průmyslová 595, 25242 Vestec, Czech Republic

### Submitter
Abhijith Makki

### Lab Head
Dr Jan Tachezy
Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Science, Charles University, BIOCEV, Průmyslová 595, 25242 Vestec, Czech Republic


