### Accession
PXD037955

### Title
Immunological and Metabolic Characteristics of the Omicron Variants Infection

### Description
The Omicron variants of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), first identified in November 2021 in South Africa, has initiated the 5th wave of global pandemics. Here, we systemically examined immunological and metabolic characteristics of Omicron variants infection. We found Omicron resisted to neutralizing antibody targeting receptor binding domain (RBD) of wild-type SARS-CoV-2. Omicron could not be neutralized by sera of Corona Virus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) convalescent individuals who were infected with the Delta variant. Through mass spectrometry on MHC-bound peptidomes, we found that the spike protein of the Omicron variants could generate additional CD8+ T cell epitopes, compared with Delta. These epitopes could induce robust CD8+ T cell responses. Moreover, we found booster vaccination increased the cross-memory CD8+ T cell responses against Omicron. Metabolic regulome analysis of Omicron-specific T cell showed a metabolic profile that promoted memory T cell responses. Consistently, a higher fraction of memory CD8+ T cells were found in Omicron stimulated peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs). In addition, CD147 was also a receptor for the Omicron variants, and CD147 antibody inhibited infection of Omicron. CD147-mediated Omicron infection in a human CD147 transgenic mouse model induced exudative alveolar pneumonia. Taken together, our data suggested that vaccination booster and receptor blocking antibody are two effective strategies against Omicron.

### Sample Protocol
Production and purification of HLA class Ι peptides 2×10^7  cells were harvested by centrifugation and washed three times with cold phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). Cells were lysed for 40min at 4°C in lysis buffer. The lysis buffer consisted of Pierce IP lysis/wash buffer (Thermo Fischer Scientific, 0.025M Tris, 0.15M NaCl, 0.001M EDTA, 1% NP-40, 5% glycerol; pH7.4) Subsequently, the lysate was cleared by centrifugation for 20min at 13000g at 4°C. Protein concentration was determined with the BCA protein concentration assay kit (Beyotime). HLA class Ι complexes and peptide ligands were co-immunoprecipitated using W6/32 antibody coupled to AminoLink Plus Coupling Resin (Thermo Fischer Scientific) from whole-cell lysate. Incubation took place at 4 °C for approximately 16 hours. After co-immunoprecipitation, the resin was washed with cold IP lysis/wash buffer (Thermo Fischer Scientific). HLA class Ι complexes and peptide ligands were subsequently eluted with elution buffer (Thermo Fischer Scientific, pH 2.8, contains primary amine). HLA class Ι Hepatitis B virus peptides were purified by reverse chromatographic fractionation after rotational drying of the eluates. For HLA class Ι Delta/Omicron BA.1 peptides, the eluates were mixed in 1X SDS loading buffer and run into SDS-PAGE gel. Following gel cutting, peptides were extracted by in-gel trypsin digestion.

### Data Protocol
Ligandome LC-MS/MS analysis For HLA class Ι Hepatitis B virus peptides The enriched HLA class Ι Hepatitis B virus peptides samples after fractional processing was resolved in buffer A, injecting of each into a nano Elute（UHPLC）for analysis, respectively. Buffer A is 0.1% FA in ultrapure water and Buffer B is 0.1% FA in acetonitrile. All peptides were separated at a flow rate of 300 nL/min with a gradient of 2%-22% buffer B for 45min, 22%-80% buffer B for 15 min, while the nanoElute was coupled online with a timsTOF Pro2 mass spectrometer (Bruker DaltonicsTM). Data acquisition method use data-dependent mode with a full scan MS from m/z 300 to 1500 with the resolution 60,000, and an ion mobility range (1/K0) of 0.75−1.3 Vs/cm2 were reached. The precursors were fragmented in CID with collision energy from 20ev–59ev, then MS/MS scanned. For HLA class Ι Delta/Omicron BA.1 peptides The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 16 min, 23% to 35% in 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nl/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 20.0s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4.  Ligandome data analysis For HLA class Ι Hepatitis B virus peptides TimsToF Data files were searched using PEAKS Database Search in PEAKS Studio 10.6 against the Hepatitis B virus protein sequence database (Uniprot ID No.Q2F515). The enzyme and digest mode was set to none and unspecific with a precursor mass tolerance 20 ppm and fragment mass tolerance 0.05 Da. Methionine oxidation (+15.995 Da ) was set as variable modifications. Peptide score filter was set to PSM 1% FDR. For HLA class Ι Delta/Omicron BA.1 peptides Raw data files were searched using Sequest HT in Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) against the Delta (B.1.617.2)/Omicron (B.1.1.529) protein sequence database. The search enzyme name was set to Trypsin (Full) with a precursor mass tolerance 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance 0.02 Da. Methionine Oxidation (+ 15.995 Da), N-terminal Methionine Met-loss (-131.040 Da), Met-loss + Acetyl (-89.030 Da) and N-terminal acetylation (+ 42.011 Da) were set as dynamic modifications. Cysteine Carbamidomethyl (+57.021 Da) was set as static modification. The identified peptides were filtered against using the Fixed Value PSM Validator, General Validation Mode is Automatic (Without control of peptide level error rate), Target FDR (Strict) for PSMs and Peptides with 0.01, Target FDR (Relaxed) for PSMs and Peptides with 0.05. Peptide Confidence At Least set as Medium and Confidence Thresholds Target FDR (Strict) set to 0.01, Target FDR (Relaxed) set to 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
The Omicron variants of SARS-CoV-2, primarily authenticated in November 2021 in South Africa, has initiated the 5th wave of global pandemics. Here, we systemically examined immunological and metabolic characteristics of Omicron variants infection. We found Omicron resisted to neutralizing antibody targeting receptor binding domain (RBD) of wildtype SARS-CoV-2. Omicron could hardly be neutralized by sera of Corona Virus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) convalescents infected with the Delta variant. Through mass spectrometry on MHC-bound peptidomes, we found that the spike protein of the Omicron variants could generate additional CD8&#x2009;+&#x2009;T cell epitopes, compared with Delta. These epitopes could induce robust CD8&#x2009;+&#x2009;T cell responses. Moreover, we found booster vaccination increased the cross-memory CD8&#x2009;+&#x2009;T cell responses against Omicron. Metabolic regulome analysis of Omicron-specific T cell showed a metabolic profile that promoted the response of memory T cells. Consistently, a greater fraction of memory CD8&#x2009;+&#x2009;T cells existed in Omicron stimulated peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs). In addition, CD147 was also a receptor for the Omicron variants, and CD147 antibody inhibited infection of Omicron. CD147-mediated Omicron infection in a human CD147 transgenic mouse model induced exudative alveolar pneumonia. Taken together, our data suggested that vaccination booster and receptor blocking antibody are two effective strategies against Omicron.

### Keywords
Cos7 cell;hla class ι;hepatitis b virus and sars-cov-2 peptides

### Affiliations
School of Medicine, Shanghai University, Shanghai 200444, China.
Department of Cell Biology, National Translational Science Center for Molecular Medicine, Fourth Military Medical University

### Submitter
Kun Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Liang Chen
School of Medicine, Shanghai University, Shanghai 200444, China.


