### Accession
PXD008920

### Title
Imperfect Redundancy in the Family of Thylakoid Lumen Deg Proteases in Arabidopsis Helps Identifying Their Potential Substrates

### Description
Deg proteases are involved in protein quality control and response to stress in prokaryotic organisms. Out of the 16 Deg-encoding genes of Arabidopsis, the products of three, Deg1, Deg5 and Deg8, are located in the thylakoid lumen. Deg1 forms homo-hexamers, degrading photosynthetic proteins, especially during photoinhibition. Deg5 and Deg8 form hetero-complexes, performing apparently similar functions, raising the question whether the two complexes are redundant. To answer this, single, double and triple knockout mutants were generated and their phenotypes were compared. Under optimal growth conditions deg5 and deg8 mutants looked like WT, whereas all combinations of deg1 mutants were smaller and more sensitive to photoinhibition. Under harsher conditions, deg5 and deg8 mutants were also affected, although less than deg1 mutants. Overexpression of Deg5-Deg8 could partially compensate for the loss of Deg1, but only in optimal conditions. Comparative proteomic analysis of deg1 mutants vs. WT revealed moderate up-regulation of thylakoid proteins involved in photoprotection, assembly, repair and house-keeping functions, and down-regulation of all photosynthetic complexes, consistent with the reduced growth of the deg1 mutants. Testing the steady-state level of Deg proteases in WT plants demonstrated that Deg1 was approximately two-fold more abundant than the Deg5-Deg8 complex. Moreover, recombinant Deg1 had higher in vitro proteolytic activity compared with Deg5 and Deg8. Affinity enrichment assays on transgenic plants expressing epitope-tagged Deg proteases revealed that Deg1 was pulled-down almost exclusively, whereas Deg5 and Deg8 were associated with a plethora of thylakoid membrane and lumen proteins, suggesting that they are capable of binding potential substrates, but are unable to degrade them efficiently. Two of the co-precipitated proteins, TL29 and Psb27-H1, were found slightly up-regulated in the triple mutant, suggesting that they are substrates of lumenal Deg proteases. Other pulled-down proteins were the D1 protein, LHCB proteins and subunits of the OEC of PSII, and components of the Cyt b6-f and NADH dehydrogenase complexes, suggesting that these might also be substrates of lumenal Deg proteases. Altogether, the results of this study suggest that differences in abundance and proteolytic activity are the source of the differential importance of the two Deg protease complexes observed in vivo.

### Sample Protocol
For comparative proteomics analysis of WT and deg mutant plants, frozen-dry leaf tissue samples were prepared using the Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) method (Shalit et al., 2015). Briefly, samples were dissolved in 500 µl SDT buffer (4% (w/v) SDS, 100 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.6, 0.1 M DTT) and lysed for 3 min at 95°C. The lysate was then centrifuged at 16000 g for 10 min. 100 µg of extracted proteins were mixed with 200 µl UA buffer (8 M urea in 100 mM Tris/HCl pH 8.0 and 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate) and loaded onto 30 kDa molecular weight cutoff filters and spun down. 200 µl of UA buffer were added to the filter unit and centrifuged at 14000 g for 40 min. Alkylation of cysteines was performed using iodoacetamide with two subsequent washes with ammonium bicarbonate, and followed by incubation with trypsin (Promega; Madison, USA) at 1:50 trypsin:protein ratio for 16 hours at 37°C.  For analysis of proteins co-precipitated with Deg-His, the samples obtained by affinity-enrichment were subjected to an on-bead tryptic digestion. The beads were washed three times with 1 ml of PBS buffer. 8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris, pH 7.9 was added onto PBS washed beads and incubated for 15 min in room temperature. Proteins were reduced by incubation with dithiothreitol (5 mM; Sigma) for 60 min at room temperature, and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) in the dark for 30 min at room temperature. Urea was diluted to 2 M with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. 250 ng trypsin (Promega; Madison, WI, USA) was added and incubated overnight at 37°C followed by addition of 100 ng trypsin for 4 hr at 37°C. Digestions were stopped by addition of trifluoroacetic acid (1% final concentration). Following digestion, peptides were desalted using Oasis HLB μElution format (Waters, Milford, MA, USA), vacuum dried and stored in -80˚C until further analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was imported into the Expressionist® software (Genedata) and processed as previously described (Shalit et al., 2015). The software was used for retention time alignment and peak detection of precursor peptides. A master peak list was generated from all MS/MS events and sent for database searching using Mascot v2.5.1 (Matrix Sciences). Data was searched against a customized TAIR10 database (ftp://ftp.ensemblgenomes.org/pub/plants/release-34/fasta/arabidopsis thaliana/pep/) appended with 125 common laboratory contaminant proteins. The TAIR10 database was formatted in the following manner: All isoforms of the same gene were concatenated under one entry according to their gene identifier after removal of the first methionine of each sequence in the order they appeared in the database, except the first sequence that retained its methionine. Fixed modification was set to carbamidomethylation of cysteines and variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionine and deamidation of asparagine or glutamine. Search results were then filtered using the PeptideProphet algorithm (Keller et al., 2002) to achieve maximum false discovery rate of 1% at the protein level. Peptide identifications were imported back to Expressionist to annotate identified peaks. Quantification of proteins from the peptide data was performed using an in-house script (Shalit et al., 2015). Data was normalized based on the total ion current. Protein abundance was obtained by summing the three most intense, unique peptides per protein. A pairwise Student’s t-test, after logarithmic transformation, was used to identify significant differences between a given mutant and the WT across the biological replica. Fold changes were calculated based on the ratio of arithmetic means of the case versus control samples. We intentionally did not calculate FDR, to avoid filtering false negatives. For absolute quantification of Deg proteins in WT leaf samples, custom-made stable isotope-labeled peptides of Deg1 (VGDEVTVEVLR and LVLGDIITSVNGTK), Deg5 (IVGLDPDNDLAVLK) and Deg8 (IVPQLIQFSK, ILDEYSVGDK and VDAPETLLKPIK), were synthesized (JPT, Germany). The peptides were spiked into the protein samples that were prepared and processed as above, and data were acquired in parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) using Xcalibur (Thermo Scientific, Germany), where MS resolution was set to 35,000, AGC target 2e5 and the maximum injection time set to 300 msec. Data were then imported into Skyline software (MacLean et al., 2010; Stergachis et al., 2011) for final processing and evaluation. Quantification was based on the area under the curve of extracted ion chromatogram from the most intense transition per peptide. At least seven overlapping PRM transitions were acquired per peptide.

### Publication Abstract
Deg proteases are involved in protein quality control in prokaryotes. Of the three Arabidopsis (<i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i>) homologs, Deg1, Deg5, and Deg8, located in the thylakoid lumen, Deg1 forms a homohexamer, whereas Deg5 and Deg8 form a heterocomplex. Both Deg1 and Deg5-Deg8 were shown separately to degrade photosynthetic proteins during photoinhibition. To investigate whether Deg1 and Deg5-Deg8 are redundant, a full set of Arabidopsis <i>Deg</i> knockout mutants were generated and their phenotypes were compared. Under all conditions tested, <i>deg1</i> mutants were affected more than the wild type and <i>deg5</i> and <i>deg8</i> mutants. Moreover, overexpression of Deg5-Deg8 could only partially compensate for the loss of Deg1. Comparative proteomics of <i>deg1</i> mutants revealed moderate up-regulation of thylakoid proteins involved in photoprotection, assembly, repair, and housekeeping and down-regulation of those that form photosynthetic complexes. Quantification of protein levels in the wild type revealed that Deg1 was 2-fold more abundant than Deg5-Deg8. Moreover, recombinant Deg1 displayed higher in vitro proteolytic activity. Affinity enrichment assays revealed that Deg1 was precipitated with very few interacting proteins, whereas Deg5-Deg8 was associated with a number of thylakoid proteins, including D1, OECs, LHCBs, Cyt <i>b</i> <sub>6</sub> <i>f</i>, and NDH subunits, thus implying that Deg5-Deg8 is capable of binding substrates but is unable to degrade them efficiently. This work suggests that differences in protein abundance and proteolytic activity underlie the differential importance of Deg1 and Deg5-Deg8 protease complexes observed in vivo.

### Keywords
Deg proteins, Arabidopsis, Thylakoids

### Affiliations
Weizmann Institute of Science
The Robert H. Smith Institute of Plant Sciences and Genetics in Agriculture, The Hebrew University, Rehovot 76100, Israel

### Submitter
Meital Kupervaser

### Lab Head
Dr Zach Adam
The Robert H. Smith Institute of Plant Sciences and Genetics in Agriculture, The Hebrew University, Rehovot 76100, Israel


