### Accession
PXD041327

### Title
Proteomic shift in mouse embryonic fibroblasts Pfa1 during ML210-induced ferroptosis

### Description
This report provides data on ferroptosis induced proteomic response in immortalized mouse embryonic fibroblasts which are 4-OH-TAM-inducible Gpx4−/− (referred to as Pfa1 cells). Pfa1 cells are a valuable, widespread and well characterized model for ferroptosis research. We used ML210 (SML0521, Sigma-Aldrich) to induce ferroptosis and collected samples at 0h, 24h and 48 h after treatment. Untreated cells were used as a control. Pfa1 cells (kind gift from Marcus Conrad, Munich)  were cultured in RPMI-1640 media (2 g/L glucose, 10% FBS, 2 mM Gibco GlutaMAX Supplement, 1% pen/strep) at 37C with 5% CO2 in a humidified incubator. Cells (300k) were seeded on Corning 100 mm tissue-culture treated culture dishes and incubated overnight. On the next day Pfa1 cells were treated with or without 0.3 µM ML210.

### Sample Protocol
The original trifluoroethanol (TFE) based protocol was modified for sample preparation. Cells (about 1 mln) were washed (x3) with PBS, then treated with 80% cold methanol, scraped out, incubated (1h, -80C), and centrifuged. The pellet was washed with cold acetone, centrifuged and dried on air. The proteins were redissolved by ultrasonication in 120 ul of 50 mM ammonium-bicarbonate (ABC) buffer pH 8.0 mixture with TFE (1:1), then: +5 mM TCEP (1h, 50C) and +15 mM iodoacetamide (1h, RT). The samples were diluted 4 times with ABC buffer, 2 ug of trypsin/LysC mix were added, incubated (overnight, 37C), and the reaction stopped by adding formic acid (1%). Peptides were dried in vacuum centrifuge (45C, 3h), redissolved and measured with BCA assay.
LC-MS/MS was performed on a Q Exactive HF-X mass-spectrometer coupled with UltiMate 3000 nano-flow liquid chromatography system. 1 µg of peptide mixture was loaded onto an Acclaim µ-Precolumn enrichment column (0.5 mm × 3 mm, 5 µm) at 5 μl/min flow for 5 min in isocratic mode using buffer C as the mobile phase (2% Acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in DI water). Then the peptides were separated on an Acclaim Pepmap C18 column (75 μm × 500 mm, 3 μm) in a gradient of solvents A and B, where A: 0.1% formic acid, B: 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in DI water, at a flow rate 0.3 µl/min. The gradient consisted of the following steps: 4% B (5 min), 4 to 33% B (100 min), 33 to 45% B (30 min), 45 to 95% B (1 min), 95% B (20 min), 95 to 4% B (1 min), 4% B (30 min).
MS/MS-analysis was performed in positive ionization mode using a NanoFlex source. The parameters for the MS/MS-analysis were as follows: emitter voltage: 2.2 kV, capillary temperature: 260°C. Panoramic scan: the mass range 350 - 1500 m/z, resolution 60,000. Tandem scan: mass range 100 m/z - precursor m/z, resolution 15,000. Isolation window: ± 0.6 Da. DDA mode was set to “top20”, the intensity cutoff limit for precursor selection: 44000, NCE: 28 units. Only ions with charge states from +1 to +6 were sent to tandem scanning. The maximum accumulation time was 60 ms for precursor ions and 45 ms for fragment ions. The AGC values for precursor ions: 3E6, for fragment ions: 2E5. All the measured precursor ions were dynamically excluded from the tandem MS/MS analysis for 30 s.
Four biological replicates were prepared, and two or three technical replicates were acquired for each sample: all these LC-MS2 spectra are uploaded.

### Data Protocol
RAW files were converted by ThermoRawFileParser into mzML files. Closed database search was performed using MSFragger 3.5 with the followings parameters: true precursor tolerance of 12 ppm; fragment mass tolerance  50 mDa; allowed missed cleavages: 3; three variable modifications: methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation, and cysteine carbamidomethylation. As reference we used proteome UP000000589 augmented with standard contaminants of the Philosopher package and with FBS contaminants measured previously in our lab on FBS samples with the same instrument (see FASTA file). Statistical refinement was performed with peptideProphet (MZID files) and proteinProphet (PROT.XML file). LFQ was performeddone with IonQuant 1.8 with match-between-run option turned on (TSV files).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
['Pfa1', 'Cell death', 'Proteomics', 'Ferroptosis', 'Erastin', 'Ml210', 'Mouse embryonic fibroblasts', 'Glutathione peroxidase 4']

### Affiliations
['Federal Center of Brain Research and Neurotechnologies, Federal Medico-Biological Agency, 117513 Moscow, Russia', 'Federal Center of Brain Research and Neurotechnologies']

### Submitter
['Olga Kudryashova']

### Lab Head
[{'title': 'Dr', 'affiliation': 'Federal Center of Brain Research and Neurotechnologies, Federal Medico-Biological Agency, 117513 Moscow, Russia', 'email': 'vsevolod.belousov@gmail.com', 'country': '', 'orcid': '', 'name': 'Dr Vsevolod V. Belousov', 'id': '2561138'}]

### SDRF
characteristics[organism]: ['Mus musculus']
characteristics[organism part]: ['embryonic fibroblast cell line']
characteristics[cell type]: ['not available']
characteristics[disease]: ['not applicable']
comment[label]: ['NT=label free sample']
comment[instrument]: ['NT=Q Exactive HF-X']
comment[modification parameters]: ['NT=carbamidomethyl']

