### Accession
PXD009557

### Title
Proteome of ZIKV-infected and NS4B-transduced hNPC (H/PF/2013)

### Description
To investigate the effects of ZIKV infection or ZIKV-NS4B-transduction on the global proteome scale at early stages of hNPC differentiation into neurons, hNPC cells were infected with ZIKV (Asian strain: H/PF/2013; MOI=0.01) or transduced with ZIKV-NS4B or HCV-NS4B and one day later cells were either left under proliferative conditions or neuronal differentiation was induced with ROCK inhibitors treatment and growth factors withdrawals. Five days later samples were harvested and processed for quantitative label-free proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
Human induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSC) generated from healthy patient fibroblasts were maintained in mTeSRTM 1 media (STEMCELL Technologies) on Geltrex (ThermoFischer Scientific) plates in the absence of feeders. The iPSC were regularly confirmed to be mycoplasma-negative. The protocol used for derivation of human neural progenitor cells (hNPC) has been previously described44 with modifications. Briefly, iPSC colonies were harvested with a cell scraper to ensure relatively big colonies remain and cultured in suspension to form embroid bodies (EBs) in DMEM/F-12, 0.5% N2 supplement (Gibco), 5μM Dorsomorphin (Sigma-Aldrich), 10μM SB431542 (Sigma-Aldrich) and 10 μM Rho-associated kinase inhibitor (ROCK) (Y-27632, StemCell Technologies). EB were grown for 5 days with media changed every other day before gentle trituration and attachment on poly-ornithine/laminin coated dishes in NPC media consisting of DMEM/F-12, 0.5% N2, 1% B27 supplement with 10 ng/ml bFGF (Peprotech 100-18B-50) and 10 μM ROCK. Three to four days after EB plating, neural rosettes were manually isolated, dissociated mechanically to single cells and plated on fresh poly-ornithine/laminin coated dishes in NPC media with 10 μM ROCK inhibitor. On the next day, the media was changed to NPC media without ROCK and NPCs were propagated for up to 12 passages by splitting with accutase when 70-80% confluency was reached. For short-term differentiation experiments (Fig. 3c, d, e and Extended Data Fig. 4), 2x105 cells were seeded on 6-well plates, transduced with empty lentiviruses (NT), lentiviruses expressing HCV- or ZIKV-NS4B or infected with 0.01 MOI of ZIKV H/PF/2013. Forty-height hours later differentiation was induced for 5 days by growth factor withdrawal and addition of 10 µM ROCK inhibitor, while undifferentiated cells were kept in NPC media in the presence of bFGF. In both cases media was replaced every other day. Cell pellets were harvested, snap-frozen and processed for LC-MS/MS analysis as described below.

### Data Protocol
Peptide mixtures were separated on a 50 cm reversed-phase column (diameter of 75 μm packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 μm resin [Dr. Maisch GmbH]) as previously described47. Raw MS files were processed within the MaxQuant environment (version 1.5.6) using the integrated Andromeda search engine with FDR ≤ 0.01 at the protein, peptide, and modification level. Proteome and phosphoproteome files were assigned to separate search parameter groups. The search included fixed modifications for carbamidomethyl (C) and variable modifications for oxidized methionine (M), acetylation (protein N-term). Peptides with at least six amino acids were considered for identification, and “match between runs” was enabled with a matching time window of 0.7 min to transfer MS1 identifications between runs. Peptides and proteins were identified using a UniProt FASTA database from human (UniprotKB release 2015_08 including isoforms and unreviewed sequences) and ZIKV virus polyprotein corresponding to the H/PF/2013 strain (NCBI GenBank KJ776791.2; individual viral cleavage products were manually annotated). MaxQuant output files (proteinGroups.txt) were processed by a combination of in-house R (version 3.3), Julia (version 0.5) and Stan (version 2.14) scripts as detailed in the Materials and methods of the related manuscript.

### Publication Abstract
Zika virus (ZIKV) has recently emerged as a global health concern owing to its widespread diffusion and its association with severe neurological symptoms and microcephaly in newborns<sup>1</sup>. However, the molecular mechanisms that are responsible for the pathogenicity of ZIKV remain largely unknown. Here we use human neural progenitor cells and the neuronal cell line SK-N-BE2 in an integrated proteomics approach to characterize the cellular responses to viral infection at the proteome and phosphoproteome level, and use affinity proteomics to identify cellular targets of ZIKV proteins. Using this approach, we identify 386 ZIKV-interacting proteins, ZIKV-specific and pan-flaviviral activities as well as host factors with known functions in neuronal development, retinal defects and infertility. Moreover, our analysis identified 1,216 phosphorylation sites that are specifically up- or downregulated after ZIKV infection, indicating profound modulation of fundamental signalling pathways such as AKT, MAPK-ERK and ATM-ATR and thereby providing mechanistic insights into the proliferation arrest elicited by ZIKV infection. Functionally, our integrative study identifies ZIKV host-dependency factors and provides a comprehensive framework for a system-level understanding of ZIKV-induced perturbations at the levels of proteins and cellular pathways.

### Keywords
Zikv, Proteome, Hnpc, Differentiation

### Affiliations
Immunopathology of Virus Infections Institute of Virology Technical University of Munich Munich, Germany
Systems Arbovirology, Leibniz Institute of Virology

### Submitter
Pietro Scaturro

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Pichlmair
Immunopathology of Virus Infections Institute of Virology Technical University of Munich Munich, Germany


