### Accession
PXD013649

### Title
non-canonical HLA peptides in cancer

### Description
Efforts to precisely identify tumor human leukocyte antigen presented peptides (HLAp) capable of mediating T cell based tumor rejection still face important challenges. Recent reports suggest that non-canonical cancer HLAp could be immunogenic but their identification requires highly sensitive and accurate mass-spectrometry (MS)-based proteogenomics approaches. Here, we present a novel MS-based analytical pipeline that can precisely characterize the non-canonical HLAp repertoire, incorporating whole exome sequencing, bulk and single cell transcriptomics, ribosome profiling, and a combination of two MS/MS search tools. This approach results in the accurate identification of hundreds of shared and tumor-specific non-canonical HLAp. Albeit often at low levels and in distinct subpopulations of cells, numerous non-canonical HLAp are shared across tumors. This analytical platform holds great promise for the discovery of novel cancer antigens for cancer immunotherapy.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoaffinity purification of HLA peptides We performed HLA immunoaffinity purification following our previously established protocols40,66.  Briefly, W6/32 and HB145 monoclonal antibodies were purified from the supernatant of HB95 (ATCC® HB-95™) and HB145 cells (ATCC® HB-145™) using protein-A sepharose 4B (Pro-A) beads (Invitrogen), and antibodies were then cross-linked to Pro-A beads. Cell lysis was performed with PBS containing 0.25% sodium deoxycholate (Sigma-Aldrich), 0.2 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich), 1 mM EDTA, 1:200 Protease Inhibitors Cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich), 1 mM Phenylmethylsulfonylfluoride (Roche), 1% octyl-beta-D glucopyranoside (Sigma-Alrich) at 4°C for 1 hour.  Lysates were cleared by centrifugation at maximum speed for 50 min. Snap-frozen tissue samples were homogenized on ice in 3-5 short intervals of 5 seconds each using an Ultra Turrax homogenizer (IKA) at maximum speed. Lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 25,000 rpm in a high speed centrifuge (Beckman Coulter, JSS15314) at 4°C for 50 minutes. We employed the Waters Positive Pressure-96 Processor (Waters) and 96-well single-use micro-plates with 3µm glass fiber and 10µm polypropylene membranes (Seahorse Bioscience, ref no: 360063). Anti-pan HLA-I and HLA-II antibodies cross-linked to beads were loaded on their respective plates. For tissue samples, a depletion step of endogenous antibodies was required containing Pro-A beads. The lysates were passed sequentially through HLA-I and -II plates at 4°C. Plates were then washed separately with varying concentrations of salts using the processor. Finally, beads were washed twice with 2 mL of 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8. Sep-Pak tC18 100 mg Sorbent 96-well plates (Waters, ref no: 186002321) were used for the purification and concentration of HLA-I and HLA-II peptides. Plates were conditioned and direct elution of the HLA complexes and the bound peptides from the affinity plate with 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA; Sigma-Aldrich) was performed. After washing the C18 wells with 2 mL of 0.1 % TFA, HLA-I peptides were eluted with 28% Acetonitrile (ACN; Sigma-Aldrich) in 0.1% TFA. HLA-II peptides were eluted from the class II C18 plate with 500 µL of 32% ACN in 0.1% TFA. Recovered HLA-I and -II peptides were dried using vacuum centrifugation (Concentrator plus, Eppendorf) and stored at -20°C.  LC-MS/MS analyses The LC-MS/MS system consists of an Easy-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) hyphenated with a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on a 450 mm analytical column of 75 µm inner diameter. The analytical separation was run for 120 min using a gradient of H2O/ CH2O2 (FA; Sigma-Aldrich) 99.9 %/0.1 % and CH3CN/ CH2O2 80 %/0.1 % (solvent B). The gradient was run as follows: 0 min 2% B, then to 5% B at 5 min, 35% B at 85 min, 60% B at 100 min, and 95% B at 105 min at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. The mass spectrometer was operated as follows for discovery data-dependent acquisition (DDA). Full MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap from m/z = 300-1650 with a resolution of 60’000 (m/z = 200) and ion accumulation time of 80 ms. The autogain control (AGC) was set to 3e6 ions. MS/MS spectra were acquired in a data-dependent manner on 10 most abundant precursor ions (if present) with a resolution of 15’000(m/z = 200), ion accumulation time of 120 ms and an isolation window of 1.2 m/z. The AGC was set to 2e5 ions, dynamic exclusion to 20 s and a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 27 was used for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Mass Spectrometry Database Search  We used two widely used search tools: Comet35 and the Andromeda search engine within MaxQuant v1.5.9.4i76. Both Andromeda and Comet provided good results in preliminary tests, their scoring methods performed well for HLAp peptides, and they allowed searching for peptides with and without variants. Andromeda matched the MS/MS spectra of each sample against their personalized reference libraries (mentioned above). Similarly, the variants were annotated in the PEFF format (http://www.psidev.info/peff) for Comet. Both search tools were run with the same principal search parameters: precursor mass tolerance 20ppm, MS/MS fragment tolerance 0.02 Da, peptide length 8-15 for HLA-I only and 8-25 for HLA-I and HLA-II peptides, Oxidation (M) and Acetyl (Protein N-term) as variable modifications and no fixed modifications. A PSM FDR of 3% was used for Andromeda as a first filter, and nonc reference sequences were loaded into the “proteogenomics fasta files” module for separate FDR calculations for prot and nonc sequences. To assure that nonc peptide sequences do not match other protein coding genes, all peptides found by Andromeda or Comet were aligned against the UniProt (www.uniprot.org) sequence database (human reviewed sequences with isoforms, downloaded 18/12/2018), where leucine and iso-leucines were treated as equal since they are not distinguishable by mass spectrometry. If peptides were found matching standard UniProt sequences, they were assigned as prot with the UniProt IDs. However, we assigned and kept TE peptide sequences that matched  annotated TEs that were integrated into the human reference in UniProt.  As schematically described in Supplementary Figure 1, the Comet FDR calculation was done separately for prot and nonc PSMs with an in-house software written in Java, which utilizes the MzJava class library77. All PSMs resulting from the Comet search, including the decoy PSMs (decoy hits originating from reversed sequences), were split into three sublists with PSMs of charge (Z) 1, 2, and charge 3 or higher. The three Comet scores XCorr, deltaCn and spScore were considered. It has been shown that when feature vectors are partitioned into different groups, group-wise local FDR (lFDR) calculation provides the most sensitive decision boundaries, for controlling the global FDR78. Therefore, the 3D space (XCorr, deltaCn and spScore) was partitioned into small cells (40 intervals in each dimension) and the lFDR was estimated for each cell. We used the following equation to calculate the lFDR:  (1) lFDR(x,Z)=(π_0 p(x│Z,H=0))/(π_0 p(x│Z,H=0)+π_1 p(x│Z,H=1) )=(1+π_1/π_0 ∙(p(x│Z,H=1))/(p(x│Z,H=0) ))^(-1) =(1+π_1/π_0  γ(x,Z))^(-1)         where π_0 and π_1 are the class probabilities for true (H=1) and wrong (H=0) PSMs, and  p(x│Z,H=0,1) are the probability distributions for feature vector  x=(XCorr,deltaCn,spScore) of PSMs with charge Z. The probability ratio γ(x,Z) is estimated for every cell and charge using all the target and decoy PSMs. The π_1⁄π_0  ratios are calculated for the nonc and prot groups separately and then the π_1⁄π_0  ratios are plugged into Equation (1). This way the lFDR values are calculated for every cell for both groups. For each cell, the number of wrong hits (n0) is set to the number of decoy hits in that cell, while the number of true hits (n1) is set to the number of target hits minus n0. These counts are then smoothed by replacing the values to average counts of the neighboring cells. Then γ(x,Z)=n_1⁄n_0  or γ(x,Z)=1 if n0 = 0. The target and decoy PSMs are further split into nonc and prot PSMs. Since there usually are not enough PSMs to estimate γ(x,Z) for the nonc group, γ(x,Z) is taken from all PSMs but π_1⁄π_0  is adapted for each group. Therefore, it is assumed that the score distributions are the same for each group, but that the ratio of true to wrong PSMs may change. The π_1⁄π_0  ratios are calculated for the nonc and prot groups separately and then the π_1⁄π_0  ratios are plugged into Equation (1). This way the lFDR values are calculated for every cell for both groups separately. The π_1⁄π_0  ratio in the nonc group is relatively smaller than the prot π_1⁄π_0  ratio, because the nonc database is larger and mostly consists of peptides that are not present in the sample.  This will lead to a larger nonc lFDR value, and to a more conservative filtering of nonc PSMs. Finally, the lFDR threshold is adjusted to allow a global FDR of 1% for the nonc and prot groups. PSMs from both search tools were combined and only the intersection, meaning PSMs with identical Comet and Andromeda matches (same peptide sequence with the same modification) were retained.

### Publication Abstract
Efforts to precisely identify tumor human leukocyte antigen (HLA) bound peptides capable of mediating T cell-based tumor rejection still face important challenges. Recent studies suggest that non-canonical tumor-specific HLA peptides derived from annotated non-coding regions could elicit anti-tumor immune responses. However, sensitive and accurate mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteogenomics approaches are required to robustly identify these non-canonical peptides. We present an MS-based analytical approach that characterizes the non-canonical tumor HLA peptide repertoire, by incorporating whole exome sequencing, bulk and single-cell transcriptomics, ribosome profiling, and two MS/MS search tools in combination. This approach results in the accurate identification of hundreds of shared and tumor-specific non-canonical HLA peptides, including an immunogenic peptide derived from an open reading frame downstream of the melanoma stem cell marker gene ABCB5. These findings hold great promise for the discovery of previously unknown tumor antigens for cancer immunotherapy.

### Keywords
Immunopeptidomics, Non-canonical translation products, Antigen discovery, Cancer immunotherapy, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
UNIL/CHUV
Department of Oncology, University Hospital of Lausanne, Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Lausanne, Switzerland.

### Submitter
Michal Bassani-Sternberg

### Lab Head
Dr Michal Bassani-Sternberg
Department of Oncology, University Hospital of Lausanne, Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Lausanne, Switzerland.


