### Accession
PXD021344

### Title
The proteomic landscape of small urinary extracellular vesicles during kidney transplantation

### Description
This study represents the first quantitative analysis of the temporal changes in the small urinary extracellular vesicle proteome throughout living donor kidney transplantation identifying PCK2 abundance as a biomarker for renal function 12 months after transplantation

### Sample Protocol
Unbiased proteomic analysis Samples were measured by the CECAD/CMMC Proteomics Core Facility. Peptides were analyzed using a Q Exactive Plus tandem mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific,(22)). A 50 cm column was packed with 1.9 μm C18 beads (Dr Maisch GmbH). The column was used in a column oven at 50° C. Peptides were separated by nano-liquid chromatography prior to MS measurement. For this purpose, a binary buffer system was used consisting of 0.1% formic acid (buffer A) and 80% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid (buffer B). Linear gradients of 150 minutes duration were used according to the following scheme: initial 4 % B, up to 6 % B over 5 min, up to 23 % B over 120 min, up to 54 % B over 7 min. Washing occurred by increasing B to 85 % over 6 min, keeping at 85 % B for 5 min. Equilibration was performed by decreasing B to 5 % over 5 min followed by 2 min equilibration at initial conditions. Peptides were acquired in Top10 DDA with the following parameters for MS1 scans: injection time 20 ms, resolution 70,000, mass range 300-1750 m/z, 3E6 as to AGC target. Peptides selected for higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation were analyzed with the following parameters: 35,000 resolution, mass range 200-2000 m/z, AGC target of 5E5, max injection time 60 ms. Raw data (.raw) was analyzed using MaxQuant V 1.5.0.1 (23) The search (target decoy strategy) was performed against a 2017 reference human Uniprot database. The default settings were used and the “MQLFQ” and “Match between runs” options were both used(24). The FDR cutoffs were FDR 0.01 for all peptide, PSM, and protein identifications.   Targeted proteomic analysis Afterwards, a focused PRM method was set up to allow for fast screening of PCK2. In addition to the peptides HGVFVGSAMR and EGALDLSGLR, the peptide TMYVLPFSMGPVGSPLSR (charge state 2, m/z = 969.99440) was considered to increase assay stability. Furthermore, the peptides from PODXL, PROM1, LG3BP, and FN3K listed in Supplementary Table S4 were monitored to allow for stable normalizations between samples. Samples were analyzed on an Orbitrap Exploris 480 coupled to an EasyLC 1200 (both Thermo Scientific). Separation was performed on a 30 cm pico tip column (New Objective) heated to 50 °C and packed with 2.7 μm PoroShell 120 (Agilent). The Orbitrap was run in PRM mode with a resolution of 60,000, an AGC target of 100 %, a maximum injection time of 110 ms, a quadropol isolation window of 0.7 m/z, and HCD fragmentation set to 30 %. All samples were measured by the CECAD/CMMC Proteomics Core Facility. Samples were analyzed in a predefined Skyline document for rapid assessment of PCK2 presence and signal normalization.

### Data Protocol
Perseus (v. 1.4.0.1 and v. 1.5.2.4) (25) was used for further analysis. To correct for multiple testing, a SAM approach was chosen (cutoff s0 = 1, FDR <0.001) (26). Significantly enriched GeneOntology terms were determined by Fisher’s Exact Test (FDR = 0.05).

### Publication Abstract
Kidney transplantation is the preferred renal replacement therapy available. Yet, long-term transplant survival is unsatisfactory, partially due to insufficient possibilities of longitudinal monitoring and understanding of the biological processes after transplantation. Small urinary extracellular vesicles (suEVs) - as a non-invasive source of information - were collected from 22 living donors and recipients. Unbiased proteomic analysis revealed temporal patterns of suEV protein signature and cellular processes involved in both early response and longer-term graft adaptation. Complement activation was among the most dynamically regulated components. This unique atlas of the suEV proteome is provided through an online repository allowing dynamic interrogation by the user. Additionally, a correlative analysis identified putative prognostic markers of future allograft function. One of these markers - phosphoenol pyruvate carboxykinase (PCK2) - could be confirmed using targeted MS in an independent validation cohort of 22 additional patients. This study sheds light on the impact of kidney transplantation on urinary extracellular vesicle content and allows the first deduction of early molecular processes in transplant biology. Beyond that our data highlight the potential of suEVs as a source of biomarkers in this setting.

### Keywords
Temporal changes small urinary extracellular vesicle proteome

### Affiliations
University Hospital Cologne - Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne
Department II of Internal Medicine, University of Cologne, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Cologne, Germany

### Submitter
Philipp Antczak

### Lab Head
Dr Roman-Ulrich Mueller
Department II of Internal Medicine, University of Cologne, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Cologne, Germany


