### Accession
PXD028681

### Title
Redox Proteomics Analysis of Auranofin Exposed  Ovarian Cancer Cells

### Description
The effects of Auranofin (AF) on protein expression and protein oxidation in A2780 cancer cells were explored through a robust investigative strategy based on joint expression proteomics and redox proteomics determinations. Bioinformatics analysis of the proteomics data supports the view that the most critical cellular changes elicited by AF treatment consist of thioredoxin reductase inhibition, alteration of the cell redox state, impairment of the mitochondrial functions, associated metabolic changes with conversion to a glycolytic phenotype, induction of ER stress. The occurrence of the above cellular changes was extensively validated by performing direct biochemical assays. Our data are consistent with the concept that AF produces its effects through a multitarget mechanism that mainly affects the redox metabolism and mitochondrial functions and results in severe ER stress. Results are discussed in the frame of the current mechanistic knowledge existing on AF.

### Sample Protocol
After centrifugation (30 mins, 4°C, 13 000 RPM) and three acetone washes, the protein pellets were resuspended in a denaturing solution: 6M Urea, 150 mM Tris pH 8.5, β-octyl-glucopyranoside 1%, protease inhibitors, 200mM of iodoacetamide (IAM) and allowed to react for 1h at 37 °C under stirring. Proteins were precipitated with TCA and washed with acetone to remove IAM, then incubated in the denaturing buffer supplemented with 20 mM of dithiothreitol (DTT) for 2h at 37 °C. Proteins were precipitated with TCA, washed with acetone to remove DTT, then incubated in denaturing buffer supplemented with 0.4 mM of EZ-Link HPDP-biotin for 1h at 37 °C. Proteins were precipitated with TCA, washed with acetone to remove HPDP-biotin, then enzymatically proteolyzed overnight at 37 °C with 1 µg of trypsin/Lys-C (Promega) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution. Biotinylated peptides were enriched on a streptavidin resin (High capacity, Thermo Scientific) by incubation for 30 mins at rt. Unretained species were recovered by centrifugation (1 min, 2 000 rpm). Biotinylated enriched fractions were eluted with a solution of 10 mM AMBIC, 10 mM of DTT and incubated at rt for 30 mins. Both unbound and eluted fractions were acidified with trifluoroacetic acid TFA and stored at 4°C in glass vials for LC-MS/MS. For each fraction 6 µL of sample was concentrated on a C18 cartridge (Dionex Acclaim PepMap100, 5 µm, 300 µm i.d. x 5 mm) and eluted on a capillary reverse-phase column (C18 Dionex Acclaim PepMap100, 3 µm, 75 µm i.d. x 50 cm) at 220 nL/min, with a gradient of 2% to 50% of buffer B in 120 min for the bound fractions and 180 min for the unbound fractions; (A: 0.1% aq. Formic Acid/Acetonitrile 98:2 (v/v); B: 0.1% aq. Formic Acid/Acetonitrile 10:90 (v/v)), coupled to a quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive HF, ThermoFisher Scientific) using a Top 20 data-dependent acquisition MS experiment: 1 survey MS scan (400-2 000 m/z; resolution 70 000) followed by 20 MS/MS scans on the 20 most intense precursors (dynamic exclusion of 30 s, resolution 17 500). For each biological replicate, all LC-MS/MS acquisition data from the bound (oxidized Cys-containing peptides) and unbound (reduced Cys-containing and Cys-free peptides) fractions were pooled further processing.

### Data Protocol
Data Processing LC-MS/MS data were processed with the software Protein Discoverer 2.4.0 (Thermo Scientific).Protein identification was performed with Mascot (Matrix Science)  and SEQUEST (Thermo Scientific) search engines against the SwissProt sequence database (01/2020 version) with a mass tolerance at 10 ppm for MS and 0.02 Da for MS/MS data. Trypsin digestion was set with up to 3 miss cleavages. Met oxidation, Asn and Gln deamidations, and Cys carbamidomethylation were set as variable modifications. Peptide Spectrum Matches (PSMs) were filtered using a False Discovery Rate (FDR) of 0.01, calculated with a concatenated target-decoy database. Cys-containing peptides for redox proteomics were considered if the associated Post Error Probability (PEP) value was lower than 0.01. Protein quantification was performed in label-free mode using the three most intense peptides, excluding the post-translational modified peptides. Peptide intensities were normalized and scaled using the total ion current of the most intense LC-MS/MS run as reference.

### Publication Abstract
The effects of Auranofin (AF) on protein expression and protein oxidation in A2780 cancer cells were investigated through a strategy based on simultaneous expression proteomics and redox proteomics determinations. Bioinformatics analysis of the proteomics data supports the view that the most critical cellular changes elicited by AF treatment consist of thioredoxin reductase inhibition, alteration of the cell redox state, impairment of the mitochondrial functions, metabolic changes associated with conversion to a glycolytic phenotype, induction of ER stress. The occurrence of the above cellular changes was extensively validated by performing direct biochemical assays. Our data are consistent with the concept that AF produces its effects through a multitarget mechanism that mainly affects the redox metabolism and the mitochondrial functions and results into severe ER stress. Results are discussed in the context of the current mechanistic knowledge existing on AF.

### Keywords
Gold, Cysteine, Redox proteomics, Auranofin, Ovarian cancer

### Affiliations
Biological Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Group, SMBP, PDC UMR 8249 CNRS, ESPCI Paris, Université PSL, 10 rue Vauquelin 75005, Paris, France
ESPCI-CNRS

### Submitter
Giovanni Chiappetta

### Lab Head
Dr Joelle Vinh
Biological Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Group, SMBP, PDC UMR 8249 CNRS, ESPCI Paris, Université PSL, 10 rue Vauquelin 75005, Paris, France


