### Accession
PXD002213

### Title
Gastric cancer ascites proteome

### Description
Gastric cancer is one of the most lethal malignancies with high mortality and gastric cancer-specific biomarker is need due to the lack of specific method for early screening, diagnosis, and prognosis of the patients with gastric cancer. Ascites is known for an important source for conducing biomarker discovery because it contains the secreted proteins from malignant cells, growth factors, and cytokines. In this study, we have conducted a comprehensive proteome study using ascites of patients with inflammatory diseases and gastric cancer. In the discovery stage, we have identified 2761 ascites-specific proteins, where 234 proteins were quantitated using the label free quantitation method, the normalized spectral abundance factor (NSAF); 152 and 82 proteins showed up and down-regulated pattern, respectively. Our ascites proteome can be used as baseline data for the discovery of novel biomarkers of the gastric cancer.

### Sample Protocol
To generate a comprehensive proteome in human ascites, we performed three proteomic strategies using different analytical fractionation methods based on high-resolution mass spectrometry. First, we pooled samples from three individuals per benign disease and gastric cancer. Second, combined strategies with immunoaffinity depletion and peptide fractionation methods including non-fractionation, SDS-PAGE, and SCX fractionation were used to map the global ascites proteome. Lastly, peptide fractionation methods without immunoaffinity depletion were applied as complementary strategies.

### Data Protocol
To generate a high-quality data set, MS1 and MS/MS spectrum were acquired by high-high strategy. Spectra from high-resolution mass spectrometry (Q-Exacitve) were matched against the Uniprot Human database (Released 2016, august) using multiple database search strategy including SEQUEST and MS-Amanda. The search results were post-processed using the Percolator to estimate the false discovery rate (FDR) at the peptide level.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Biomarker, Proteomics, Proteome profiling, Ascites, Gastric cancer

### Affiliations
Proteomics core facility, Seoul National University Hospital
Proteomics Core Facility, Biomedical Research Institute, Seoul National University Hospital

### Submitter
Dohyun Han

### Lab Head
Dr Dohyun Han
Proteomics core facility, Seoul National University Hospital


