### Accession
PXD005381

### Title
Physical and functional screening of Polycomb Repressor Complex 2 highlights novel regulators of histone H3 lysine 27 methylation status

### Description
Polycomb Repressor Complex 2 (PRC2) is a multi-protein epigenetic regulator complex that plays critical roles in early development and tissue differentiation.  The complex catalyzes the methylation of histone H3 lysine 27 (H3K27).  The tri-methyl state (H3K27me3) is well studied as an agent of gene repression, but more recently distinct roles for the mono- and di-methyl states have been discovered.  In order to more fully understand how PRC2-associated factors might influence H3K27 status, we screened for physical associations of PRC2 subunits.  Knockdown of these factors was used to produce functional interaction maps focused on H3K27 methylation, including proteins that have positive and negative effects on the levels each histone mark.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were treated with trypsin and digested in 2M urea, 20mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8. Peptide samples were introduced into a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) which was connected to an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano chromatography system (Dionex) coupled to a packed C18 fused silica emitter (75 μm I.D.) Parent ion spectra (MS1) were measured at resolution 70,000, AGC target 3e6. Tandem mass spectra (MS2; up to 8 scans per duty cycle) were obtained at resolution 17,500, AGC target 5e4, collision energy of 25.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed using MaxQuant version 1.3.0.547 using the human UniProt database (release 2013_12; 67,911 entries). The following search parameters were used: Fixed Mod: cysteine carbamidomethylation; Variable Mods: methionine oxidation; Trypsin/P digest enzyme; Missed Cleavage: 1; Precursor mass tolerances 6 ppm; Fragment ion mass tolerances 20 ppm; Peptide FDR 1%; Protein FDR 1%. ‘Label-Free Quantitation; LFQ’, ‘iBAQ’, and ‘Match Between Run’ settings were selected. Reverse hits and contaminants were filtered out .

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Interactome, Pcr2

### Affiliations
UCD
Group Leader School of Biomolecular and Biomedical Science Conway Institute, University College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin 4, IRELAND

### Submitter
Eugene Dillon

### Lab Head
Dr Gerard Cagney
Group Leader School of Biomolecular and Biomedical Science Conway Institute, University College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin 4, IRELAND


