### Accession
PXD031012

### Title
ALS-Associated KIF5A Mutations Abolish Autoinhibition Resulting in a Toxic Gain of Function

### Description
Understanding the pathogenic mechanisms of disease mutations is critical to advancing treatments. ALS-associated mutations in the gene encoding the microtubule motor KIF5A result in skipping of exon 27 (KIF5AΔExon27) and the encoding of a protein with a novel 39-amino acid residue C-terminal sequence. Here, we report that expression of ALS-linked mutant KIF5A results in dysregulated motor activity, cellular mislocalization, altered axonal transport, and decreased neuronal survival. Single-molecule analysis revealed that the altered C-terminus of mutant KIF5A results in a constitutively active state. Further, mutant KIF5A possesses novel protein and RNA interactions and its expression results in altered gene expression/splicing. Taken together, our data support the hypothesis that causative ALS mutations result in a toxic gain of function in the intracellular motor KIF5A that disrupts intracellular trafficking and neuronal homeostasis.

### Sample Protocol
SKNAS cells were transfected with either V5-tagged KIF5A WT or KIF5A ALS mutant (d27) constructs using lipofectime 2000 with a 3ug DNA/8ul lipo ratio following the manufacturer's instructions.  The constructs were allowed to express for 24hr before harvesting in DHL buffer (Singh, Ricci and Moore, 2014). The protein concentration of the lysates was determined by the Pierce BCA Protein Assay kit (Thermo Fisher) per the manufacturer’s instructions. V5-antibody conjugated magnetic beads (MBL), were washed 3x with 1X PBS+0.1% Tween 20 (PBS-T) before combining it with lysate in a 1µl:2µg ratio (ex. 100ul of beads for 200µg of lysate). The IP was incubated overnight at 4◦C before collecting the flow-through (FT) and washing the beads 3x with PBS-T. The proteins were eluted by incubating the beads twice in 30ul of “soft elution buffer” (Antrobus and Borner, 2011) for 10min at 28°C in a thermomixer set to 1000rpm. Elution samples were sent to the UMASS Medical School Mass Spectrometry facility for preparation and mudpit analysis.  Briefly, The sample were dried to reduce the volume to ~25ul then were run on a Biorad mini-Protean TGX 4-15% precast SDS-PAGE with a shortened run time (~2cm on the gel). The gel was stained with Coomassie Blue to highlight the protein band in the gel and the entire region of the short gel (~2cm) was excised and transferred to a microcentrifuge tube. The gel slices were cut into 1x1 mm pieces and 1mL of water was added to remove residual buffers. 20µl of a 45mM DTT in 200µl of 250mM ammonium bicarbonate was added to reduce disulfide bonds and incubated at 50°C for 30min. The samples were cooled to RT followed by a 30min incubation in 20µl of 100mM iodoacetamide, and the gel pieces were then washed with water (3x, 1mL each). The gel slices were mixed with 1mL of 50:50 solution of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate: acetonitrile then quenched in 200µL of acetonitrile and dried in a Speed Vac lyophilizer. After complete drying, the rehydration was performed in a mixture of 4 ng/µl trypsin enzyme, and 0.01% proteaseMAX surfactant in 50µL of 50mM ammonium bicarbonate. The trypsin digestion was carried on for 18hrs at 37°C. The supernatants were collected, and further peptide extraction was performed by adding 200µl of 80:20 solution of acetonitrile: 1% formic acid in water. The supernatant was then combined with the previous supernatant and the peptides were lyophilized in a Speed Vac and resuspended in 25µL of 5% acetonitrile with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid.  The samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS. LC-MS/MS data were acquired using a NanoAcquity UPLC (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA) coupled to a Q Exactive hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Waltham, MA) mass spectrometer in positive electrospray ionization mode using 1.4 kv as ionization voltage. 3.8µL of the peptide mixture was injected into the UPLC, using an in-house packed pre-column (C18, 200A, 5µm, 2cm), an in-house packed analytical column (C18, 100A, 3µm, 25cm), water with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid as the aqueous mobile phase (A), and acetonitrile with 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid as the organic mobile phase (B). The peptides were trapped for 4 minutes with a flow rate of 4 µL/min and 5% B. This was followed by carrying over to the analytical column with a flow rate of 300nL/min and overall run time of 115 minutes, including a 90 minute gradient (5% to 35%B) followed by a 10 minutes high organic wash of 90% B, and 15 minutes of re-equilibration with 5% B. The MS1 data were acquired using an orbitrap mass analyzer at m/z scan range of 300-1750 Da with the resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200 and maximum injection time of 30ms using the AGC target of 1e6. The MS2 (MS/MS) data was acquired using a data-dependent acquisition method for the top 10 most abundant precursor ions with the resolution of 17500 (m/z 200), 1.6 Da isolation width, maximum injection time of 110 ms, and AGC target of 1e5 using 27 volts for higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed using Thermo Proteome Discoverer 2.1.1.21 (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) pipeline. The database search was performed by Mascot Server 2.6.2 (Matrix Science Ltd) search engine using the following search parameters: Homo Sapiens Swiss-Prot database FASTA file (download 04/2019); trypsin digestion with 2 maximum missed cleavages; the precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm for the monoisotopic mass, and the fragment mass tolerance of 0.05 Da; carbamidomethylation of cysteine specified as the fixed modification and peptide N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation, N-terminal glutamine to pyroglutamate conversion specified as a variable modifications. Peptide and protein validation and annotation was done in Scaffold 4.10.0 (Proteome Software Inc.) employing Peptide Prophet (Keller et al., 2002) and Protein Prophet (Nesvizhskii et al., 2003) algorithms. Peptides were filtered at a 1% FDR, while the protein identification threshold was set to greater than 99% probability and with a minimum of 2 identified peptides per protein. Normalized iBAQ (Schwanhäusser et al., 2011) values were assigned to identified proteins for the quantitative comparison.

### Publication Abstract
Understanding the pathogenic mechanisms of disease mutations is critical to advancing treatments. ALS-associated mutations in the gene encoding the microtubule motor KIF5A result in skipping of exon 27 (KIF5A<sup>&#x394;Exon27</sup>) and the encoding of a protein with a novel 39 amino acid residue C-terminal sequence. Here, we report that expression of ALS-linked mutant KIF5A results in dysregulated motor activity, cellular mislocalization, altered axonal transport, and decreased neuronal survival. Single-molecule analysis revealed that the altered C terminus of mutant KIF5A results in a constitutively active state. Furthermore, mutant KIF5A possesses altered protein and RNA interactions and its expression results in altered gene expression/splicing. Taken together, our data support the hypothesis that causative ALS mutations result in a toxic gain of function in the intracellular motor KIF5A that disrupts intracellular trafficking and neuronal homeostasis.

### Keywords
Human, Kif5a, Als, Interactors

### Affiliations
UMASS Medical School
Department of Neurology, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA, 01605, USA.

### Submitter
Desiree Baron

### Lab Head
Dr John Edward Landers
Department of Neurology, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA, 01605, USA.


