### Accession
PXD007660

### Title
Analysis of the TCR signalosome in primary T cells

### Description
T-cell receptor (TCR) signaling is essential for the function of T cells. Here we combine mouse genetics and affinity purification coupled to quantitative mass spectrometry to monitor the composition and dynamics of the signaling complexes that assemble around 15 nodes of the TCR signaling cascade of primary CD4+ T cells. This dataset contains the experiments performed with 14 different bait proteins • Cbl • Cblb • Fyb • Inpp5d • Itk • Lck • Lcp2 • Nck1 • Nfatc2 • Plcg1 • Ptpn22 • Ptpn6 • Themis • Vav1  Each of them contains mass spectrometry results from the analysis of AP-MS experiments, based on the endogenous expression of One-Strep-tagged (OST) bait proteins in engineered mice models, and affinity purification of these proteins from  primary CD4+ T cells, using Streptactin beads. Purification of OST proteins was performed at 5 different time points of stimulation of CD4+ T cells with anti-CD3 and anti-CD4 antibodies (0s; 30s; 120s; 300s; 600s). Each AP-MS purification of an OST- protein is associated with a corresponding control (purification from WT CD4+ T cells) at the same time point of stimulation. Several biological replicate experiments (time course OST series + associated WT controls) were performed for each bait. Several MS replicates were acquired for each sample. In addition, we analyzed the total proteome of CD4+ T cells isolated from each engineered mice model (14 different mice expressing an OST bait) and from WT mice, in order to calculate copy numbers of the baits and their associated proteins.

### Sample Protocol
CD4+ T cells were purified from pooled lymph nodes and spleens, expanded for 48 hours in culture, harvested and grown in the presence of IL-2 for 48 h prior to stimulation. A total of 100 x 106 short-term expanded CD4+ T cells from OST mice and wild-type mice were left unstimulated or stimulated at 37°C with antibodies. In the latter case, CD4+ T cells were incubated with anti-CD3 and anti-CD4, followed by one round of washing and then cross-linkage with a purified Rabbit anti-Rat for 30s, 120s, 300s or 600s at 37°C. Stimulation was stopped by the addition of twice concentrated lysis buffer and postnuclear lysates were then used for affinity purification on Strep-Tactin Sepharose beads. Proteins were eluted from the beads with 2.5 mM D-biotin, followed by trypsin digestion and single-run nanoLC-MS/MS analysis on a LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (Voisinne et al, 2016). For total proteome analysis, CD4+ T cells were lysed in 1% SDS buffer and sonicated. Proteins were in-gel digested with trypsin, followed by trypsin digestion and single-run nanoLC-MS/MS analysis on an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were processed with MaxQuant software (version 1.5.2.8) for database search with the Andromeda search engine and quantitative analysis of the the each interactome. Data were searched against Mus musculus entries in the UniProt protein database (release UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot+TrEMBL 2017_01, 89297 entries including isoforms), plus the Biognosys iRT peptides, the One-Strep-tag peptide sequence, and the set of common contaminants provided by MaxQuant. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification, whereas oxidation of methionine, protein N-terminal acetylation, and phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine were set as variable modifications. Specificity of trypsin digestion was set for cleavage after K or R, and two missed trypsin cleavage sites were allowed. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the first search and 4.5 ppm for the main Andromeda database search. The mass tolerance in tandem MS mode was set to 0.5 Da. Minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids, and minimum number of unique or razor peptides was set to one. The I=L option of MaxQuant was enabled to avoid erroneous assignation of undistinguishable peptides belonging to very homologous proteins. Andromeda results were validated by the target decoy approach using a reverse database at both a peptide and protein false-discovery rate of 1% at both PSM and protein level. For label-free relative quantification of the proteins across biological replicates and stimulation time points, the match between runs option of MaxQuant was enabled with a match time window of 1 min, to allow cross-assignment of MS features detected in the different runs, after alignment of the runs with a time window of 20min. Protein quantification was based on unique and razor peptides. The minimum ratio count was set to 1 for LFQ calculation, and computation of the iBAQ metric was also enabled.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tcr, Signalosome, Ap-ms, Interactome, Primary t cell

### Affiliations
Institut de Pharmacologie et Biologie Structurale-CNRS
IPBS/CNRS

### Submitter
Karima Chaoui

### Lab Head
Dr Odile Schiltz
Institut de Pharmacologie et Biologie Structurale-CNRS


