### Accession
PXD017978

### Title
Gain-of-function mutations amplify cytotoxic FAM111 protease activity in poikiloderma, gracile bone dysplasia and Kenny-Caffey syndromes

### Description
Dominant missense mutations in the human serine protease FAM111A underlie perinatally lethal gracile bone dysplasia and Kenny-Caffey syndrome 1-3, yet how FAM111A mutations lead to disease is not known. We show that FAM111A proteolytic activity suppresses DNA replication and transcription by displacing key effectors of these processes from chromatin, triggering rapid programmed cell death by Caspase-dependent apoptosis to potently undermine cell viability. Patient-associated point mutations in FAM111A exacerbate these phenotypes by hyperactivating its intrinsic protease activity. Moreover, FAM111A forms a complex with the uncharacterized homologous serine protease FAM111B, point mutations in which cause a hereditary fibrosing poikiloderma syndrome 4, and we demonstrate that disease-associated FAM111B mutants display amplified proteolytic activity and phenocopy the cellular impact of deregulated FAM111A catalytic activity. Thus, patient-associated FAM111A and FAM111B mutations may drive multisystem disorders via a common gain-of-function mechanism that relieves inhibitory constraints on their protease activities to powerfully undermine cellular fitness.

### Sample Protocol
Partial on-bead digestion was used for peptide elution from GFP-Trap Agarose (Chromotek). Briefly, 100 ul of elution buffer (2 M urea; 2 mM DTT; 20 ug/ml trypsin; 50 mM Tris, pH7.5) was added and incubated at 37°C for 30 min. Samples were alkylated with 25 mM CAA and digested overnight at room temperature before addition of 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to stop digestion. Peptides were desalted and purified with styrenedivinyl-benzene-reversed phase sulfonate (SDB-RPS) StageTips. Briefly, two layers of SDB-RPS were prepared with 100ul wash buffer (0.2% TFA in H2O). Peptides were loaded on top and centrifuged for 5 min at 500 g, and washed with 150 ul wash buffer. Finally, peptides were eluted with 50 ul elution buffer (80% ACN and 1% ammonia) and vacuum-dried. Dried peptides were dissolved in 2% acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.1% TFA in water and stored at -20°C. Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) analysis Nanoflow LC-MS analysis of tryptic peptides was performed using a quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive HF-X, Thermo Fisher Scientific 17) connected to an EASYnLC 1200 ultra-high-pressure system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Approximatly 0.5 g of peptides were loaded on a 50 cm HPLC column (75 m inner diameter, New Objective; in-house packed using ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 lm silica beads; Dr Maisch GmbH, Germany). Peptides were separated using a linear gradient from 2 to 20% B in 55 min and stepped up to 40% in 40 min followed by a 5 min wash at 98% B at 350 nl/min, where solvent A was 0.1% formic acid in water and solvent B was 80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in water for a total duration of 100 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in “top-15” data-dependent mode, collecting MS spectra in the Orbitrap mass analyzer (60,000 resolution, 300-1,650 m/z range) with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3x106 and a maximum ion injection time of 25 ms. The most intense ions from the full scan were isolated with an isolation width of 1.4 m/z. Following higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 27, MS/MS spectra were collected in the Orbitrap (15,000 resolution) with an AGC target of 1x105 and a maximum ion injection time of 28 ms. Precursor dynamic exclusion was enabled with a duration of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Bioinformatic analyses Raw MS files were processed using the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.5.0) (Cox & Mann, 2008). The integrated Andromeda search engine 18 was used for peptide and protein identification at an FDR of <1% and s0 value of 1 19. Missing values were imputed based on a normal distribution (width=0.15; downshift=1.8). The human UniProtKB database (January 2019) was used as forward database and the automatically generated reverse database for the decoy search. A minimum number of 7 amino acids was used for the peptide identification. Proteins that could not be discriminated by unique peptides were pooled in the same protein group 20. Label-free protein quantification was done using the MaxLFQ algorithm 21. Protein ratios were calculated based on median peptide ratios, and only common peptides were used for pairwise ratio calculations. The “match-between-runs” feature of MaxQuant was enabled to transfer peptide identifications across runs based on high mass accuracy and normalized retention times. All statistical and bioinformatic analyses were performed using Perseus 22 or the R framework (https://www.r-project.org/).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Genetic disorder, Fam111, Poikiloderma, Proteases, Transcrition, Replication stress, Kenny-caffey syndromes

### Affiliations
Max Delbrueck Center for Molecular Medicine
University of Copenhagen Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research Blegdamsvej 3B 2200 Copenhagen N Denmark

### Submitter
Fabian Coscia

### Lab Head
Dr Niels Mailand
University of Copenhagen Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research Blegdamsvej 3B 2200 Copenhagen N Denmark


