### Accession
PXD003863

### Title
Differential proteome analysis of Escherichia coli grown on acetate vs. glucose

### Description
Relative protein abundances of Escherichia coli growing exponentially on minimal medium with acetate or glucose as the sole carbon source were investigated in a quantitative shotgun proteome analysis with TMT6-plex isobaric tags. Peptides were separated by high resolution high/low pH 2D-LC, using an optimized fraction pooling scheme followed by mass spectrometric analysis. Quantitative data were acquired for 1,994 proteins covering 46 % of the predicted E. coli proteins and 361 differentially abundant proteins were discovered. Differences in protein abundance were observed for proteins in central carbon metabolism, in particular for proteins involved in TCA cycle and glyoxylate shunt, fatty acid metabolism, glycolysis/gluconeogenesis and anaplerotic pathways. Significant changes were observed in proteins relevant for amino acid and protein synthesis, proteins necessary to process environmental information and scavenge for a variety of alternate carbon sources.

### Sample Protocol
E. coli K12 strain MG1655 was grown on acetate vs. glucose. Both conditions were cultured in triplicate in M9 minimal medium containing either glucose (15 mM) or acetate (45 mM). After proteome isolation, protein reduction/alkylation and tryptic digestion) the six samples, each labeled with one TMT-reagent, were pooled and separated by 2D-LC, employing reverse phase (RP) LC at pH 10 in the first, and ion pair reverse phase (IP-RP) LC at pH 2 in the second dimension. In first dimension, 50 fractions were collected. A fraction pooling scheme was used, leading to 10 pooled fractions. Second dimension separation was coupled on-line to an LTQ Orbitrap Velos MS (Thermo). Each of the 10 pooled fractions was analyzed in four replicates; with two additional runs used to optimize acquisition parameters. The first two technical replicates were processed and after database search used to compile an exclusion list of m/z values with high confidence (FDR ≤ 0.01) peptides. Corresponding m/z values were excluded from data dependent MS/MS acquisition for the third and fourth replicate to reduce redundant scan events and increase protein coverage. The final dataset containes 42 LC-MS/MS raw files.

### Data Protocol
Recalibrated raw-files were subjected to database search and protein-quantification using Proteome Discoverer Software (v1.4). Mascot (v2.1), SequestHT and MSAmanda search algorithms were used for database search in E. coli K12 reference proteome dataset from UniProt (May 2013; 4,305 entries) including common contaminants (cRAP laboratory and contact dust contaminants). Percolator (v1.2) was used for error calculation combining the results of the database searches with a false discovery rate restricted to 0.01 by q-value. A multi pass search was performed to identify allowing phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine (variable modification).

### Publication Abstract
Relative protein abundances of Escherichia coli MG1655 growing exponentially on minimal medium with acetate or glucose as the sole carbon source were investigated in a quantitative shotgun proteome analysis with TMT6-plex isobaric tags. Peptides were separated by high resolution high/low pH 2D-LC, using an optimized fraction pooling scheme followed by mass spectrometric analysis. Quantitative data were acquired for 2099 proteins covering 49% of the predicted E. coli proteins, showing system-wide effects of growth conditions. In total, 507 proteins showed a fold change of at least 1.5 and 205 proteins changed by more than twofold. Significant differences in abundance were observed for most of the proteins in the central carbon metabolism and in proteins relevant for amino acid and protein synthesis, processing of environmental information and scavenging of a variety of alternate carbon sources. Periplasmic-binding proteins were also more abundant on acetate, especially proteins involved in scavenging extracellular resources such as sugars. All MS data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository (dataset identifier PXD003863).

### Keywords
Isobaric, Tmt, High/low ph 2d-lc

### Affiliations
Systematic Proteome Research & Bioanalytics, University of Kiel

### Submitter
Andreas Tholey

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Tholey
Systematic Proteome Research & Bioanalytics, University of Kiel


