### Accession
PXD024780

### Title
NHS-Ester Tandem Labeling in One Pot for 48-Plex Proteomics

### Description
Stable-isotope labeling strategies are extensively used for multiplex quantitative proteomics. Hybrid isotope labeling strate-gies that combine the use of isotopic mass difference labeling and isobaric tags can greatly increase sample multiplexity. In this work, we present a novel hybrid isotope labeling approach that we termed NHS-ester tandem labeling in one pot (NETLOP). We first optimized 16-plex isobaric TMTpro labeling of lysine residues followed by 2-plex or 3-plex isotopic mTRAQ labeling of peptide N-termini, both of which with commercially available NHS-ester reactive reagents. We then demonstrated the utility of the NETLOP approach by labeling HeLa cell samples and performing proof-of-principle quanti-tative 32-plex and 48-plex proteomic analyses, each in a single LC-MS/MS experiment. Compared to current hybrid isotope labeling methods, our NETLOP approach requires no sample cleanup between different labeling steps to minimize sample losses, induces no retention time shifts that compromise quantification accuracy, can be adapted to other NHS-ester isotop-ic labeling reagents to further increase multiplexity, and is compatible with samples from any origin in a wide array of bio-logical and clinical proteomics applications.

### Sample Protocol
. In our optimized NETLOP protocol, 10 microgram (µg) desalted HeLa tryptic digested peptides in 16 microliter (µL) 25mM Triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) (Sigma-Aldrich, USA)-250mM sodium carbonate (pH=9.2, Sigma-Aldrich, USA) was labeled with 20µg TMTpro rea-gent for 4hr at room temperature. After switching the pH to 8.5 with 1.5µl 2M (HEPES) (Sigma-Aldrich), the sample was labeled with 400mU mTRAQ reagent for 1hr at room temperature, before being quenched with 5% hydroxyla-mine. Labeled samples are then pooled and desalted, be-fore being injected onto the 2D LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS raw files were searched using Proteome Dis-coverer V2.2 (Thermo Fisher) against the SwissProt human database (released in June 2017), with the following pa-rameters: full tryptic specificity with up to two missed cleavage sites, carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues, protein N-terminal acetylation plus methionine oxidation as variable modifications, TMT labeling of lysine residues as fixed modification, plus mTRAQ(?0), mTRAQ(?4), mTRAQ(?8) labeling of peptide N-termini as fixed modifi-cation in three parallel searches for each raw file. TMTpro reporter ion intensities and mTRAQ-labeled peptide precur-sor peak areas were reported by Proteome Discoverer. The false discovery rate was set to 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
Stable-isotope labeling strategies are extensively used for multiplex quantitative proteomics. Hybrid-isotope labeling strategies that combine the use of isotopic mass difference labeling and isobaric tags can greatly increase sample multiplexity. In this work, we present a novel hybrid-isotope labeling approach that we termed NHS-ester tandem labeling in one pot (NETLOP). We first optimized 16-plex isobaric TMTpro labeling of lysine residues followed by 2-plex or 3-plex isotopic mTRAQ labeling of peptide N-termini, both of which with commercially available NHS-ester reactive reagents. We then demonstrated the utility of the NETLOP approach by labeling HeLa cell samples and performing proof-of-principle quantitative 32-plex and 48-plex proteomic analyses, each in a single LC-MS/MS experiment. Compared to current hybrid-isotope labeling methods, our NETLOP approach requires no sample cleanup between different labeling steps to minimize sample loss, induces no retention time shifts that compromise quantification accuracy, can be adapted to other NHS-ester isotopic labeling reagents to further increase multiplexity, and is compatible with samples from any origin in a wide array of biological and clinical proteomics applications.

### Keywords
48-plex proteomics, Mtraq, Tmtpro

### Affiliations
McMaster University
Department of Biochemistry and Biomedical Sciences McMaster University

### Submitter
Yu Lu

### Lab Head
Dr Yu Lu
Department of Biochemistry and Biomedical Sciences McMaster University


