### Accession
PXD009014

### Title
Activity profiling of αlpha-glycosidases in plants

### Description
With nearly 140 α-glycosidases in 14 different families, plants are well equipped with enzymes that can break the α-glucosidic bonds in a large diversity of molecules. Here, we introduce activity profiling of α-glycosidases in plants using α-configured cyclophellitol aziridine probes carrying various fluorophores or biotin. In Arabidopsis, these probes label members of the GH31 family of Glycosyl Hydrolases, including ER-resident α-glucosidase-II RSW3/PSL5 and Golgi-resident α-mannosidase-II HGL1, which both trim N-glycans on glycoproteins. We also detect the active state of extracellular α-glycosidases such as α-xylosidase XYL1, which acts on xyloglucan in the cell wall to promote cell expansion, and α-glucosidase AGLU1, which acts in starch hydrolysis and can suppress fungal invasion. α-glycosidase labelling causes specific signals at 100-130 kDa that are pH-dependent and can be supressed by α-glycosidase inhibitors miglitol and acarbose. The α-glycosidase probes display similar miglitol-sensitive signals in leaf extracts of in a broad range of plant species. To show its use on a non-model plant, we applied glycosidase activity profiling on Crocus sativa, a cash crop for the production of saffron spice. Using a combination of biotinylated glycosidase probes, we identified and quantified 70 active glycosidases in stigma stages 1 and 4 of saffron (Crocus sativa L.), ten of which are differentially active. We also uncover massive changes in hydrolase activities in corms upon infection with Fusarium oxysporum using multiplex fluorescent labelling in combination with probes for serine hydrolases and cysteine proteases. These experiments demonstrate the ease by which active α-glycosidases and other hydrolases can be displayed in non-model plants.

### Sample Protocol
Pull-down and on-bead, in-gel trypsin digestion - Pull down experiment and on bead, in-gel trypsin digestion were performed as described with minor modifications (Chandrasekar et al., 2014). The trypsin-digested peptides were purified using Sep-Pak C18 columns (Waters, WAT020515). Columns were equilibrated with 2% (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (FA) before peptides loading. Peptides were washed with 10 ml of 2% (v/v) ACN, 0.1% (v/v) FA and eluted with 2 × 1 mL of 65% (v/v) ACN, 0.1% (v/v) FA. Purified peptides were dried in a vacuum centrifuge and subjected to Mass Spectrometry analysis. After elution from the SEP-Pak, samples were dried using a vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf) and the peptides were taken up in 0.1 % formic acid solution (15 µL).   LC-MS/MS - Experiments were performed on an Orbitrap Elite instrument (Thermo, Michalski et al., 2012) that was coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 liquid chromatography (LC) system (Thermo). The LC was operated in the one-column mode. The analytical column was a fused silica capillary (75 µm × 20 cm or 75 µm × 40 cm) with an integrated PicoFrit emitter (New Objective) packed in-house with Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 1.9 µm resin (Dr. Maisch). The analytical column was encased by a column oven (Sonation) and attached to a nanospray flex ion source (Thermo). The column oven temperature was adjusted to 45 °C during data acquisition and in all other modi at 30 °C. The LC was equipped with two mobile phases: solvent A (0.1% formic acid, FA, in water) and solvent B (0.1% FA in acetonitrile, ACN). All solvents were of UPLC grade (Sigma). Peptides were directly loaded onto the analytical column with a maximum flow rate that would not exceed the set pressure limit of 980 bar (usually around 0.6 – 1.0 µL/min). Peptides were subsequently separated on the analytical column by running a 70 min or 140 min gradient of solvent A and solvent B (70 min gradient: start with 7% B; gradient 7% to 35% B for 60 min; gradient 35% to 100% B for 5 min and 100% B for 5 min; 140 min gradient: start with 7% B; gradient 7% to 35% B for 120 min; gradient 35% to 100% B for 10 min and 100% B for 10 min) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated using Xcalibur software (version 2.2 SP1.48). The mass spectrometer was set in the positive ion mode. Precursor ion scanning was performed in the Orbitrap analyzer (FTMS; Fourier Transform Mass Spectrometry) in the scan range of m/z 300-1800 and at a resolution of 60000 with the internal lock mass option turned on (lock mass was 445.120025 m/z, polysiloxane (Olsen et al., 2005)). Product ion spectra were recorded in a data dependent fashion in the ion trap (ITMS) in a variable scan range and at a rapid scan rate. The ionization potential (spray voltage) was set to 1.8 kV. Peptides were analyzed using a repeating cycle consisting of a full precursor ion scan (1.0 × 106 ions or 50 ms) followed by 12 or 15 product ion scans (1.0 × 104 ions or 80 – 100 ms) where peptides are isolated based on their intensity in the full survey scan (threshold of 500 counts) for tandem mass spectrum (MS2) generation that permits peptide sequencing and identification. Collision induced dissociation (CID) energy was set to 35% for the generation of MS2 spectra. During MS2 data acquisition dynamic ion exclusion was set to 60 – 120 seconds with a maximum list of excluded ions consisting of 500 members and a repeat count of one. Ion injection time prediction, preview mode for the FTMS, monoisotopic precursor selection and charge state screening were enabled. Only charge states higher than 1 were considered for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Peptide and Protein Identification using MaxQuant - RAW spectra were submitted to an Andromeda (Cox et al., 2011) search in MaxQuant (version 1.5.0.25 or 1.5.3.30) using the default settings (Cox et al., 2008). Label-free quantification and match-between-runs was activated (Cox et al., 2014). For Arabidopsis samples the MS/MS spectra data were searched against an Arabidopsis thaliana (mouse-ear cress, taxonomy-id: 3702) database downloaded from the TAIR repository (TAIR10_pep_20110103.fasta; 27416 entries). For Saffron (Crocus sativus L, taxonomy-id: 82528) samples we generated a dedicated protein database by translating the publicly available RNA-Seq data from (Jain et al. 2016) and filtering for the open reading frames larger than 50 amino acids (Saffron.PROTEIN_50.fasta; 83422 entries). All searches included a contaminants database search (as implemented in MaxQuant, 245 sequences). The contaminants database contains known MS contaminants and was included to estimate the level of contamination. Andromeda searches allowed oxidation of methionine residues (16 Da) and acetylation of the protein N-terminus (42 Da) as dynamic modifications and the static modification of cysteine (57 Da, alkylation with iodoacetamide). Enzyme specificity was set to “Trypsin/P” with two missed cleavages allowed. The instrument type in Andromeda searches was set to Orbitrap and the precursor mass tolerance was set to ±20 ppm (first search) and ±4.5 ppm (main search). The MS/MS match tolerance was set to ±0.5 Da. The peptide spectrum match FDR and the protein FDR were set to 0.01 (based on target-decoy approach). Minimum peptide length was 7 amino acids. For protein quantification unique and razor peptides were allowed. Modified peptides were allowed for quantification. The minimum score for modified peptides was 40. Label-free protein quantification was switched on, and unique and razor peptides were considered for quantification with a minimum ratio count of 2. Retention times were recalibrated based on the built-in nonlinear time-rescaling algorithm. MS/MS identifications were transferred between LC-MS/MS runs with the “Match between runs” option in which the maximal match time window was set to 0.7 min and the alignment time window set to 20 min. The quantification is based on the “value at maximum” of the extracted ion current. At least two quantitation events were required for a quantifiable protein. Further analysis and filtering of the results was done in Perseus v1.5.5.3 (Tyanova et al., 2016). Briefly, only protein groups with at least two identified unique peptides over all runs were considered for further analysis. For quantification we combined related biological replicates to categorical groups and investigated only those proteins that were found in at least one categorical group at least in 2 out of 3 biological replicas. Comparison of protein group quantities (relative quantification) between different MS runs is based solely on the LFQ’s as calculated by MaxQuant (MaxLFQ algorithm, Cox et al., 2014).

### Publication Abstract
With nearly 140 &#x3b1;-glycosidases in 14 different families, plants are well equipped with enzymes that can break the &#x3b1;-glucosidic bonds in a large diversity of molecules. Here, we introduce activity-based protein profiling (ABPP) of &#x3b1;-glycosidases in plants using &#x3b1;-configured cyclophellitol aziridine probes carrying various fluorophores or biotin. In Arabidopsis (<i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i>), these probes label members of the GH31 family of glycosyl hydrolases, including endoplasmic reticulum-resident &#x3b1;-glucosidase-II Radial Swelling3/Priority for Sweet Life5 (RSW3/PSL5) and Golgi-resident &#x3b1;-mannosidase-II Hybrid Glycosylation1 (HGL1), both of which trim <i>N</i>-glycans on glycoproteins. We detected the active state of extracellular &#x3b1;-glycosidases such as &#x3b1;-xylosidase XYL1, which acts on xyloglucans in the cell wall to promote cell expansion, and &#x3b1;-glucosidase AGLU1, which acts in starch hydrolysis and can suppress fungal invasion. Labeling of &#x3b1;-glycosidases generates pH-dependent signals that can be suppressed by &#x3b1;-glycosidase inhibitors in a broad range of plant species. To demonstrate its use on a nonmodel plant species, we applied ABPP on saffron crocus (<i>Crocus sativus</i>), a cash crop for the production of saffron spice. Using a combination of biotinylated glycosidase probes, we identified and quantified 67 active glycosidases in saffron crocus stigma, of which 10 are differentially active. We also uncovered massive changes in hydrolase activities in the corms upon infection with <i>Fusarium oxysporum</i> using multiplex fluorescence labeling in combination with probes for serine hydrolases and cysteine proteases. These experiments demonstrate the ease with which active &#x3b1;-glycosidases and other hydrolases can be analyzed through ABPP in model and nonmodel plants.

### Keywords
Xylosidase, Activity-profiling, Glucosidase, Glycoside hydrolase, Glycan, Mannosidase

### Affiliations
University Duisburg-Essen
Analytics Core Facility Essen (ACE), Chemische Biologie, Universität Duisburg-Essen, ZMB, Germany

### Submitter
Farnusch Kaschani

### Lab Head
Dr Farnusch Kaschani
Analytics Core Facility Essen (ACE), Chemische Biologie, Universität Duisburg-Essen, ZMB, Germany


