### Accession
PXD018805

### Title
Pull down of full length and mutant BCL9 (deltaHD1) in mouse colorectal tumors and colonic epithelium

### Description
Bcl9 and Bcl9l (Bcl9l) are commonly thought as beta-catenin-dependent Wnt signaling transcriptional activators. Here we searched for BCL9 interacts that could explain the PYGO-independent phenotype induced be the loss of the HD1 (PYGO-binding) domain of BCL9

### Sample Protocol
Dissected tumours (from AOM/DSS induction) from control or BCL)-detlaHD1 mutant mice, and healthy colonic epithelial cells were minced in cold PBS, and treated with a hypotonic lysis buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl; 75 mM NaCl; 1.5 mM MgCl2; 1 mM EGTA; 0.5% NP-40; 5% Glycerol). Protein extracts obtained were incubated with 1μg of anti-BCL9 antibody (abcam ab54833 or ab37305) and ProteinA-conjugated Sepharose beads (GE Healthcare); they were then diluted in lysis buffer to a final volume of 1 mL. After 4 hours of incubation at 4°C on a rotating wheel, the beads were spun down, and washed three times in lysis buffer. All steps were performed on ice, and all buffers were supplemented with fresh protease inhibitors (Complete, Roche) and 1 mM PMSF. For detecting the proteins in Western Blot, the pull down reactions were treated with “Laemmli buffer“, boiled at 95°C for 15’, and subjected to SDS–PAGE separation and blotting on PVDF membrane. For LC-MS/MS analysis, samples were treated as in Biner et al., 2015. Briefly, protein samples were dissolved in 100 mM NH4HCO3 buffer, pH 8, and reduced with 5 mM DTT for 45 min at 50 °C. Reduced Cys was modified with 20 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 60 min in the dark. Modification was stopped by adding 10 mM DTT and incubation for 15 min. Enzymatic cleavages were performed with trypsin, trypsin/Lys-C (both Promega), and Glu-C (Roche Diagnostics). All digests were incubated overnight at 37 °C and 700 rpm and stopped by adding TFA to a final concentration of 0.5%. The samples were desalted on ZipTip C18 tips (Merck Millipore). Desalted samples were dried completely in a vacuum centrifuge and reconstituted with 20 µl of 3% ACN, 0.1% formic acid. 5-10 µL of each peptide solution was analyzed on a Q-Exactive or Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an EASY-nLC1000 (Thermo Scientific). Instrument parameters are based on the “sensitive” method published by Kelstrup and colleagues, with slight modifications. Full scan MS spectra were acquired in profile mode from 300-1700 m/z with an automatic gain control target of 3e6, an Orbitrap resolution of 70’000 (at 200 m/z), and a maximum injection time of 120 ms. The 12 most intense multiply charged (z = +2 to +8) precursor ions from each full scan were selected for higher-energy collisional dissociation fragmentation with a normalized collision energy of 30 (arbitrary unit). Generated fragment ions were scanned with an Orbitrap resolution of 35’000 (at 200 m/z) an automatic gain control value of 5e4 and a maximum injection time of 120 ms. The isolation window for precursor ions was set to 2.0 m/z and the underfill ratio was at 1% (refereeing to an intensity of 4.2e3). Each fragmented precursor ion was set onto the dynamic exclusion list for 90 s. Peptide separation was achieved by RP-HPLC on an in-house packed C18 column (150 mm x 75 µm, 1.9 µm, C-18 AQ, 120 Ǻ, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany). Samples were loaded with maximum speed at a pressure restriction of 400 bar and separated with a linear gradient from 3-25% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in ACN, Biosolve BV, Netherlands) in solvent A (0.1% formic acid in H2O, Biosolve BV, Netherlands) at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. The column was washed after the separation by flushing with 95% solvent B for 10 min and automatically equilibrated prior to the next injection.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data were analyzed with Proteome Discoverer (version: 1.4.0.288; DBVersion: 79) in combination with MASCOT (version: 2.4). The search parameters were: max. missed cleavage = 3, precursor ion tolerance = 10 ppm, fragment ion tolerance = 50 mmu, fixed modification = Carboxyamidomethyl (C), variable modification = Oxidation (M)/amidation (protein C-terminus). Searches were performed using the MASCOT decoy option and results were filtered with percolator. Only peptides having a percolator score of q > 0.01 were considered as trustworthy. Data analysis was performed using Scaffold – proteome software (http://www.proteomesoftware.com/products/scaffold/).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Wnt signalling, Transcription, Colorectal tumor

### Affiliations
Wallenberg Center For molecular Medicine
Department of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences
Linköping University
Wallenberg Centre for Molecular Medicine, Linköping University Department of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences, Faculty of Health Science, SE-581 83 Linköping, Sweden

### Submitter
Claudio Cantù

### Lab Head
Dr Claudio Cantù
Wallenberg Centre for Molecular Medicine, Linköping University Department of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences, Faculty of Health Science, SE-581 83 Linköping, Sweden


