### Accession
PXD008539

### Title
Lamin A acetylation shapes nuclear architecture and safeguards genomic integrity

### Description
The nuclear lamina constitutes more than a structural scaffold for the nucleus and plays a crucial role in protection of genomic integrity. Here we report that the loss of the lysine acetyl-transferase (KAT) MOF leads to nuclear architecture defects during interphase including micronuclei formation. We identify Lamin A/C, a major component of the nuclear lamina, to be an acetylation target of MOF. A point mutation in Lamin A phenocopies nuclear morphology defects observed upon Mof-deletion. Through single cell DNA sequencing, we reveal that either loss of Mof or Lamin A mutation result in extensive genomic instability, including chromothripsis. Our work establishes MOF-dependent Lamin acetylation as a key regulator of nuclear architecture maintenance in mammals.

### Sample Protocol
After peptide elution from anti acetyl(K) beads, samples were desalted on C18 Stop And Go Extraction tips3. StageTip purification was conducted using two layers of 1.0 x 1.0mm C18 Empore Disks (3M). Prior to peptide sample loading, StageTips were conditioned with 80 μl of neat methanol, washed with 50 μl of buffer B* (80% acetonitrile, 0.1 % TFA) and equilibrated with 100 μl of buffer A* (0.1 % TFA). Peptide samples were diluted 1:1 with buffer A* and loaded onto StageTips. Flow-through after this step was loaded onto the same StageTips once again. Next, StageTip columns were washed twice with 200 μl of buffer A*. Peptides were eluted with 50 μl of buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) directly to a 96-well plate and vaporized in a vacuum concentrator to a final volume of 2 μl. Finally, 6 μl of 0.1% formic acid was added to reach a final volume of 8 μl prior loading of the samples onto the liquid chromatography nano-column. Digested and desalted peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using nanoflow UHPLC (Easy nLC1200, Thermo Scientific) coupled with a QExactive hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) through a nanoelectrospray ion source (Proxeon). Peptides were loaded on a 20 cm long, 75 μm I.D. analytical column filled in-house with 1.9 μm C18 beads (Reprosil Pur-120 C18 AQ, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany) at a flow rate of 600 nl/min. Elution profile was individually adjusted to each IP fraction. For all samples the elution was preceded with a 5 minute column equilibration (5 % buffer A) followed by a 150 minutes long peptide separation segment at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Each segment started with a buffer containing 5 % less acetonitrile than it was used to initially prepare (C18 SepPak) the particular IP fraction (ACN-15 %, ACN-22 %, ACN-29 %, ACN-36 %, ACN-50 %) and continued to linearly increase until to a buffer mixture contained 5 % more acetonitrile than it was used to prepare particular IP fraction (fig. S4A). Elution was completed with 25 minutes of column wash (80 % buffer B) for all fractions. QExactive was operated in positive mode, employing data-dependent acquisition of fragmentation spectra of multiple-charged peptides for their identification. Each instrument cycle consisted of a full MS scan at a resolution of 70,000 at 400 m/z (AGC target 3E6, maximum injection time 50 ms) followed by up to 10 data-dependent MS2 spectra at a resolution of 35,000 (AGC target 2E5, maximum injection time 120 ms, isolation window 1.6 a.m.u.). To prevent resequencing dynamic exclusion of already analyzed ions was set to an interval of 45 seconds.MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3.30) was used for raw file peak extraction and protein identification. Integrated Andromeda database search engine used Mouse UniprotKB protein sequence database (January 2017 - 83,962 entries) modified by addition of common protein contaminant sequences4,5. Multiplicity “2” was chosen with no labels for light channel, and Lys8/Arg10 for heavy channel quantification. Search parameters for peptides included trypsin as cleaving enzyme with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages, minimum 6 amino acids per peptide, 20 ppm MS peptide mass tolerance and 25 ppm MS/MS tolerance. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification, while acetylation at the protein N-terminus and at lysine residues, deamidation of asparagine or glutamine and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modification. Peptide and protein False Discovery Rate (FDR) was set to a maximum of 0.01 using the target-decoy database search strategy. Additionally, “match between runs” was used with a matching time window of 1 min and alignment time window of 20 minutes. Protein ratios were calculated only for those proteins that possessed at least two quantifiable SILAC pairs.

### Data Protocol
List of ratios of acetylated lysine sites derived from MaxQuant (Acetyl (K)sites.txt) was imported to Perseus6. Data matrix was modified by applying “Expand site table” step, removing empty rows, as well as contaminants and entries coming from decoy database. The last preparation step included inverting ratios derived from“reverse” labeling experiments. The same procedure was applied to the MaxQuant output generated from input samples (ProteinGroups.txt) with omission of the “Expand site table” step (that does not apply to this data table). Both modified tables were imported to R and matching proteins were merged into one table. All ratios were subsequently log2 transformed and quantile normalized (R command: normalize.quantiles). Missing ratios present in some replicates (in input samples) were imputed by an average ratio derived from other replicates where the values were present. For acetyl (K) sites that did not have a corresponding protein found in input samples, an average of the whole sample was imputed. By this two imputations, each acetyl(K)site had a corresponding input ratio which was used for “normalization on input” (NOI) where a protein ratio was subtracted from the acetyl(K)site ratio, thus eliminating the influence of protein fluctuation in the samples on the abundance of acetylated lysine sites. One sample t-test was utilized to test for significant differences between particular acetyl(K)sites and the “whole sites”population. Differences exhibiting a p value < 0.01 were considered as significant.  Volcano plots were created in R with the use of “ggplot” package. Heatmaps were created with “pheatmap” package. Upset diagrams were created with “upset” package.

### Publication Abstract
While nuclear lamina abnormalities are hallmarks of human diseases, their interplay with epigenetic regulators and precise epigenetic landscape remain poorly understood. Here, we show that loss of the lysine acetyltransferase MOF or its associated NSL-complex members KANSL2 or KANSL3 leads to a stochastic accumulation of nuclear abnormalities with genomic instability patterns including chromothripsis. SILAC-based MOF and KANSL2 acetylomes identified lamin A/C as an acetylation target of MOF. HDAC inhibition or acetylation-mimicking lamin A derivatives rescue nuclear abnormalities observed in MOF-deficient cells. Mechanistically, loss of lamin A/C acetylation resulted in its increased solubility, defective phosphorylation dynamics and impaired nuclear mechanostability. We found that nuclear abnormalities include EZH2-dependent histone H3 Lys&#x2009;27 trimethylation and loss of nascent transcription. We term this altered epigenetic landscape "heterochromatin enrichment in nuclear abnormalities" (HENA). Collectively, the NSL-complex-dependent lamin A/C acetylation provides a mechanism that maintains nuclear architecture and genome integrity.

### Keywords
Qexactive, Mouse, Lc-msms, Acetylation

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Terrestrial Microbiology
Max Planck Institute of Immunobiology and Epigenetics,  Stübeweg 51, 79108 Freiburg im Breisgau

### Submitter
Witold Szymanski

### Lab Head
Dr Gerhard Mittler
Max Planck Institute of Immunobiology and Epigenetics,  Stübeweg 51, 79108 Freiburg im Breisgau


