### Accession
PXD030907

### Title
Targeted Quantitative Profiling of Epitranscriptomic Reader, Writer and Eraser Proteins in Colorectal Cancer Metastasis

### Description
Epitranscriptomic reader, writer and eraser (RWE) proteins are involved in the recognition, installation, and removal, respectively, of chemical modifications in RNA, and aberrant expressions of some of these proteins were found to be associated with cancer initiation and progression. Here, we our recently established parallel-reaction monitoring (PRM)-based targeted proteomic method, in conjunction with stable isotope labelling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC), to investigate the differential expression of epitranscriptomic RWE proteins in a matched pair of primary/metastatic colorectal cancer (CRC) cells (i.e., SW480/SW620) derived from the same patient. We were able to detect 113 non-redundant epitranscriptomic RWE proteins in these two lines of cells. We found that 48 and 5 proteins were respectively up- and down-regulated by at least 1.5-fold in SW620 over SW480 cells. Particularly, NAT10, HNRNPC, and DKC1 were markedly up-regulated, and their potential roles in driving CRC metastasis were supported by recent studies. Interrogation of the Clinical Proteomic Tumor Analysis Consortium (CPTAC) data revealed that the elevated expressions of these and other RWE proteins are also accompanied with CRC initiation, suggesting the roles of these proteins in both the initiation and metastatic transformation of CRC. It can be envisaged that the established PRM method can be further utilized to examine the roles of epitranscriptomic RWE proteins in the metastatic transformations of other types of cancer.

### Sample Protocol
Light- or heavy-isotope labelled SW480 and SW620 cells were collected after washing with PBS for three times. Cells were lysed with CelLytic M cell lysis reagent (Sigma) supplemented with 1% protease inhibitor cocktail on ice for 30 min. After centrifugation at 9000 g for 30 min at 4 °C, the supernatant was collected for protein quantitation using the Bradford assay. In two forward SILAC experiments, the total protein lysate of SW480 cells cultured in the heavy medium and that of SW620 cells cultured in the light medium were combined at 1:1 ratio (by mass). In two reverse SILAC experiments, the total protein lysates of SW480 cells and SW620 cells, cultured in the light and heavy media, respectively, were combined at 1:1 ratio. Following the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol, proteins in the cell lysates were denatured using 8 M urea, reduced with dithiothreitol, alkylated with iodoacetamide, and digested with MS-grade trypsin (Pierce) in 50 mM NH4HCO3 at 37 °C overnight. The tryptic peptides were collected after centrifugation, dried using a Speed-vac, and desalted using OMIX C18 pipet tips (Agilent Technologies) prior to LC-PRM analysis. The LC-PRM experiments were carried out on a Q Exactive Plus quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer coupled with a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano UPLC system. Prior to analyzing the aforementioned SILAC samples, tryptic digestion mixture of BSA was analyzed under the same conditions to obtain the linear relationship between iRT and RT, since the iRT of each BSA peptide was pre-defined. With the iRT of each peptide of RWE proteins in the library, predicted RT was derived from the above-described iRT and RT relationship. By using our recently published Skyline PRM library, we were able to generate the inclusion list, including the m/z value and RT window for each precursor ion of interest for the PRM method.  The analytical column was packed in-house using 3 μm Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH HPLC) stationary phase material in a 25-cm fused silica column (75 μm i.d.). The trapping column was also prepared in-house with 5 μm Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH HPLC) in a 4-cm long fused silica column (150 μm i.d.). SILAC samples (500 ng) were separated using the analytical column at a flow rate of 300 nL/min with a 125-min linear gradient of 6-43% mobile phase B (80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid) in mobile phase A (0.1% formic acid in filtered MilliQ water). The spray voltage was 1.8 kV. The precursor ions were isolated in the quadrupole at an isolation window of 1.0 m/z and fragmented in the HCD collision cell at a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 28. MS/MS were acquired at a resolution of 17,500, an automated gain control (AGC) target 1×105, and a maximum accumulation time of 50 ms.

### Data Protocol
After data acquisition, raw files were imported into Skyline for plotting the extracted-ion chromatogram for peak integration.  For a positive detection of precursor ion of interest, 4-6 most abundance y ions from the same precursor ion in light and heavy forms should co-elute, and the relative abundances of fragment ions from the acquired MS/MS should be highly similar to the MS/MS in the library, which is measured by dot product (dotp) value. A dotp value of > 0.7, ideally above 0.9, is considered as highly similar. We manually excluded the potential interfering fragment ion if it does not overlay with other fragment ions. The sum of peak areas from the 4-6 fragment ions with overlaid elution profiles were used for quantification. The ratio of peak areas for the light and heavy forms of the peptide, provided by Skyline, reflects the relative abundance of that peptide and the expression ratio of the corresponding protein in SW620 over SW480 cells.

### Publication Abstract
RNA contains more than 170 types of chemical modifications, and these modified nucleosides are recognized, installed and removed by their reader, writer, and eraser (RWE) proteins, respectively. Here, we employed a parallel-reaction monitoring (PRM)-based targeted proteomic method, in conjunction with stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC), to examine comprehensively the differential expression of epitranscriptomic RWE proteins in a matched pair of primary/metastatic colorectal cancer (CRC) cells, namely SW480/SW620. We were able to quantify 113 nonredundant epitranscriptomic RWE proteins; among them, 48 and 5 were up- and down-regulated by&#xa0;&gt;1.5-fold in SW620 over SW480 cells, respectively. Some of those proteins with marked up-regulation in metastatic CRC cells, including NAT10, hnRNPC, and DKC1, were documented to assume important roles in the metastasis of CRC and other types of cancer. Interrogation of the Clinical Proteomic Tumor Analysis Consortium data revealed the involvement of DUS1L in the initiation and metastatic transformation of CRC. It can be envisaged that the PRM method can be utilized, in the future, to identify epitranscriptomic RWE proteins involved in the metastatic transformations of other types of cancer.

### Keywords
Colorectal cancer metastasis, Epitranscriptomic reader, Prm, Writer and eraser proteins

### Affiliations
UC RIVERSIDE
Environmental Toxicology Graduate Program, and Department of Chemistry, University of California Riverside, Riverside, CA 92521-0403

### Submitter
Tianyu Qi

### Lab Head
Dr Yinsheng Wang
Environmental Toxicology Graduate Program, and Department of Chemistry, University of California Riverside, Riverside, CA 92521-0403


