### Accession
PXD039171

### Title
Virotrap-based interactome analysis of 20 pairs of N-terminal proteoforms and their canonical protein

### Description
N-terminal proteoforms stem from the same gene but differ at their N-terminus, and most of these are found to be truncated, though some are N-terminally extended caused by ribosomes starting translation from codons in the annotated 5’UTR, and/or carry modified N-termini different from those of the canonical protein. Biological functions of N-terminal proteoforms are emerging, however, it remains unknown to what extend N-terminal proteoforms further expand the functional complexity. To address this in a more global manner, we mapped the interactomes of several pairs of N-terminal proteoforms and their canonical counterparts. For this, we first generated an in-depth catalogue of N-terminal proteoforms in the cytosol of HEK293T cells. From which 20 pairs of canonical protein and N-terminal proteoform(s) were selected. Protein-protein interaction profiling was done with Virotrap. Virotrap was selected as this methods avoids lysis before the isolation of the complexes and allows the detection of weak and cytosolic proteins as well. Our analysis of these pairs revealed that the overlap of the interactomes for both proteoforms is in general high, showing their functional relation. However, for all pairs tested we do report differences as well. We show that N-terminal proteoforms can be engaged in new/different interactions and as well can lose several interactions compared to the canonical protein.

### Sample Protocol
For MS, all baits were divided into sets of maximally four baits and one control bait based on similar expression levels as judged from WB data. In total, we have seven sets with baits. We here outline the composition of all sets, of the baits always a FL and PR are taken along unless specified otherwise. The first set includes eDHFR, CSDE1, MAVS and TSC22D3. The second set exists of eDHFR, PAIP1, UBXN6 and ZFAND1. Set number three: eDHFR, SPAST (FL, PR1 and PR2) and UCHL1 (FL, PR1 and PR2). Set number four: eDHFR, CFL2 and FNTA, Set number five: eDHFR, AIMP1, PRPSAP1 and UBE2M. Set six contains PRUNE1, PXN, UBAC1 and a protein from a non-translated region. The last set contained eDHFR, CACYBP, CAPRIN1 and EIF4A1. HEK293T cells were kept at low passage (<10) and cultured at 37 °C and 8% CO2 in DMEM , supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum , 25 units/ml penicillin and 25 μg/ml streptomycin. Each construct was done in triplicate and for every replicate, the day prior to transfection, a 75 cm2 falcon was seeded with 9× 106 cells. Cells were transfected using polyethylenemine (PEI), with a DNA mixture containing 6.43 μg of bait plasmid (pMET7-GAG-bait), 0.71 μg of pcDNA3-FLAG-VSV-G plasmid and 0.36 μg of pMD2.G plasmid. For the eDHFR control, cells were transfected with a DNA mixture containing 3.75 μg of eDHFR plasmid (pMET7-GAG-eDHFR), 2.68 µg of pSVsport plasmid, 0.71 μg of pcDNA3-FLAG-VSV-G plasmid and 0.36 μg of pMD2.G plasmid. The medium was refreshed after 6 h with 8 ml of supplemented DMEM.  The cellular supernatant was harvested after 46 h and centrifuged for 3 min at 1,250 g, to remove debris. The cleared supernatant was then filtered using 0.45 μm filters. For every sample, 20 μl MyOne Streptavidin T1 beads in suspension were first washed with 300 μl wash buffer containing 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5 and 150 mM NaCl and subsequently pre-loaded with 2 μl biotinylated anti-FLAG antibody. This was done in 500 μl wash buffer and the reaction was incubated for 10 min at room temperature. Beads were added to the samples and the protein tagged particles were allowed to bind for 2 h at room temperature by end-over-end rotation. Bead-particle complexes were washed once with 200 µl washing buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5 and 150 mM NaCl) and subsequently eluted with FLAG peptide (30 min at 37 °C; 200 μg/ml in washing buffer) and lysed by addition of Amphipol A8–35 to a final concertation of 1 mg/ml. After 10 min, about the lysates where acidified (pH <3) by the addition of 2.5% formic acid (FA). Samples were centrifuged for 10 min at >20.000 g to pellet the protein/Amphipol A8–35 complexes. The supernatant was removed and the pellet was resuspended in 20 µl 50 mM fresh triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB). Proteins were heated at 95 °C for 5 min, cooled on ice to room temperature for 5 min and digested overnight at 37 °C with 0.5 μg trypsin. Peptide mixtures were acidified to pH 3 with 1.5 µl 5% FA. Samples were centrifuged for 10 min at 20,000 g. 7.5 µl of the supernatant was injected for LC-MS/MS on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system in-line connected to a Q Exactive HF Biopharma mass spectrometer. Trapping was performed at 10 μl/min for 4 min in loading solvent A on a 20 mm trapping column (made in-house, 100 μm internal diameter (I.D.), 5 μm beads, C18 Reprosil-HD).  The peptides were separated on a 250 mm Waters nanoEase M/Z HSS T3 Column, 100Å, 1.8 µm, 75 µm inner diameter, kept at a constant temperature of 50°C. Peptides were eluted by a non-linear gradient starting at 1% MS solvent B reaching 55% MS solvent B in 80 min, 97% MS solvent B in 90  minutes followed by a 5-minute wash at 97% MS solvent B and re-equilibration with MS solvent A. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 12 most abundant ion peaks per MS spectrum. Full-scan MS spectra (375-1500 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 in the Orbitrap analyzer after accumulation to a target value of 3,000,000. The 12 most intense ions above a threshold value of 13,000 were isolated with a width of 1.5 m/z for fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 30% after filling the trap at a target value of 100,000 for maximum 80 ms. MS/MS spectra (200-2000 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 15,000 in the Orbitrap analyzer.

### Data Protocol
The generated MS/MS spectra were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.6.17.0) using the Andromeda search engine with default search settings, including a false discovery rate set at 1% on both the peptide and protein level. For the classical Virotrap experiment, the sequences of the human proteins in the Swiss-Prot database (release Jan 2021) were complemented with the sequences of GAG, VSV-G, FLAG-VSVG, eDHFR and the sequence of baits was replaced by the sequence of the shortest proteoform (only the baits used in that set were adjusted) and used as search space. The replacement of the bait sequences to the shortest variant was done to allow fair quantification of these proteins over the full length and proteoform samples. The enzyme specificity was set at trypsin/P, allowing for two missed cleavages. Variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionine residues and N-terminal protein acetylation. Other settings were kept as standard unless specified here. Match between runs over all samples in the set was implemented (with standard settings) and proteins were quantified by the MaxLFQ algorithm integrated in the MaxQuant software. Peptides with a minimum of two ratio counts of both unique and razor peptides were considered for protein quantification. Further data analysis was performed with the Perseus software (version 1.6.15.0) after uploading the protein groups file from MaxQuant. Proteins only identified by site and reverse database hits were removed as well as potential contaminants. Replicate samples were grouped and proteins with less than three valid values in at least one group were removed. Missing values were imputed using imputeLCMD (R package implemented in Perseus) with a truncated distribution with parameters estimated using quantile regression (QRILC). This imputed data was exported from Perseus and statistical analysis was performed on GenStat (version V21, https://genstat21.kb.vsni.co.uk/). For each set, proteins were analyzed separately by fitting a linear model of the following form: response = µ + bait + error, where the response represents the log2-transformed LFQ intensity measured. The significance of bait effect was assessed by a F-test. The significance of individual comparisons between the baits factor was assessed by a t-test. Correction for multiple testing was done by estimating the false discovery rate (FDR) by modeling significance values as a 2-component mixture of Uniform and Beta or Gamma densities as implemented in Genstat v21.  Potential interaction partners of all baits (both full-length proteins and Nt-proteoform) were selected in pairwise contrasts between the bait and eDHFR control samples at an FDR of 0.01. The generated list of potential interaction partners was compared with known interaction partners listed in BioGRID, STRING  and IntAct. Pairwise contrasts of interest between proteoforms were selected at an FDR of 0.05 and a difference of at least one log2 change.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Virotrap, Protein-protein interaction, N-terminal proteoform, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
VIB - Center for medical Biotechnology
Ghent University - Department of Biomolecular Medicine
VIB Center for Medical Biotechnology, VIB, Ghent,Belgium Department of Biomolecular Medicine, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium

### Submitter
Annelies Bogaert

### Lab Head
Dr Kris Gevaert
VIB Center for Medical Biotechnology, VIB, Ghent,Belgium Department of Biomolecular Medicine, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium


