### Accession
PXD035963

### Title
Chemoproteomic identification of a dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (DPP4) homolog in Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron important for envelope integrity and fitness

### Description
Serine hydrolases play important roles in signaling and human metabolism, yet little is known about the functions of these enzymes in gut commensal bacteria. Using bioinformatics and chemoproteomics, we identify serine hydrolases in the gut commensal Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron that are specific to the Bacteroidetes phylum. Two are predicted homologs of the human protease dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (hDPP4), a key enzyme that regulates insulin signaling. Functional studies reveal that BT4193 is a true homolog of hDPP4 while the other is misannotated and is a proline-specific triaminopeptidase. We demonstrate that BT4193 is important for envelope integrity and is inhibited by FDA-approved type 2 diabetes medications that target hDPP4. Loss of BT4193 reduces B. thetaiotaomicron fitness during in vitro growth within a diverse community. Taken together, our findings suggest that serine hydrolases contribute to gut microbiota dynamics and may be off-targets for existing drugs that could cause unintended impact on the microbiota.

### Sample Protocol
B. thetaiotaomicron VPI-5482 cultures were grown in 30 mL of mBHI in triplicate for 72 h prior to being aliquoted into three separate tubes and pelleted. For each biological replicate, each pellet was resuspended in 200 µL of either 25 µMfluorophosphonate-TAMRA (FP-TMR) in PBS or 0.05% DMSO in PBS and incubated anaerobically for 30 min at 37 ºC. Then, 2 µL of either 500 µM FP-biotin (final concentration, 5 µM) or DMSO was added to each sample and incubated anaerobically for 30 min at 37 ºC. Bacterial pellets were stored at -20 ºC prior to sample preparation. Treated B. thetaiotaomicron cell pellets were thawed, diluted in PBS (200 μL) and lysed by probe sonication. The proteomes were denatured and precipitated using 4:1 MeOH/CHCl3, resuspended in 0.5 mL of 6 M urea in PBS, reduced using tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP, 10 mM) for 30 min at 37 °C, and then alkylated using iodoacetamide (40 mM) for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. The biotinylated proteins were enriched with PBS-washed Pierce™ Streptavidin Agarose beads (100 µL per sample) by rotating at room temperature for 1.5 h in PBS with 0.2% SDS (6 mL). The beads were then washed sequentially with 5 mL 0.2% SDS in PBS (3x), 5 mL PBS (3x) and 5 mL H2O (3x). On-bead digestion was performed using sequencing-grade trypsin (2 μg; Promega) in 2 M urea in 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer with 2 mM CaCl2 for 12–14 h at 37 °C (200 μL). Tryptic digests were desalted using C18 solid phase extraction (SPE). C18 SPE plates (Thermo Scientific) were conditioned by the addition of acetonitrile (ACN) to each well and plates were centrifuged at 750 x g for 2 min. This process was repeated with Buffer A (200 μL, 0.1% formic acid in water). Samples were diluted with 560 L Buffer A and triturated with a pipette to mix. A portion (560 L) of each sample was added to separate wells of the SPE plate, the sample was allowed to slowly load over 5 min, then the plate was centrifuged for 5 min at 200 x g. The remaining sample volume was loaded into the same well of the SPE plate and the loading step was repeated. Samples were washed twice with Buffer A (200 μL, then 100 μL) followed by centrifugation of the SPE plate at 200 x g for 5 min after each wash. Samples were eluted into a clean 96-well plate by the addition of Buffer B (60 μL of 70% ACN and 0.1% formic acid in water) and centrifugation at 200 x g for 5 min. Samples were dried by centrifugal vacuum concentrator (50 °C, overnight) and resolubilized in TEAB (100 μL,100 mM, pH 8.5) containing 30% ACN.  Peptides were labelled with the addition of TMT tags (3 μL/channel, 19.5 μg/μL) to each sample and incubated at room temperature for 30 min. Hydroxylamine (8 μL, 5% in water) was subsequently added to quench the labelling reaction (15 min) and the TMT-labelled samples were mixed and desalted on C18 using the same protocol as above. Nanoflow LC-MS/MS measurements were performed on an Ultimate 3000 (Thermo Scientific) interfaced with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) via an EASY-Spray source (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated on an EASY-Spray PepMap RSLC C18 column (2 µm particle size, 75 µm × 50 cm; Thermo Scientific, ES801) heated to 55 °C using a flow rate of 400 nL/min. The compositions of LC solvents were A: water and 0.1 % formic acid, and B: 95% acetonitrile, 5% water and 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were eluted over 4 hours using the linear gradient, 2.5-215 min 3-35% B, 215-230 min 25-40% B, 230-231 min 45-70% B, 231-233 min 70-90% B, 233-234 min 5-70% B, 234-236 min 70-90% B, 236-240 min 3% B. MS data were acquired using an MS3 data-dependent acquisition method. MS1 profile scans were acquired in the Orbitrap (resolution: 120,000, scan range: 375–1500 m/z, AGC target: 4.0e5, maximum injection time: 50 ms). Monoisotopic peak determination was set to “peptide”. Only charge states 2-5 were included. Dynamic exclusion was enabled (repeat count, n: 1, exclusion duration: 60 s, mass tolerance: ppm, low: 10 and high: 10, excluding isotopes). An intensity threshold of 5e3 was set. Data-dependent MS2 spectra were acquired in centroid mode across a mass range of 400-1200 m/z. Precursor ions were isolated using the quadrupole (isolation window: 0.7 m/z), fragmented using CID (collision energy: 35%, activation time: 10 ms, activation Q: 0.25), and detected in the ion trap (scan range mode: auto m/z normal, scan rate: rapid, AGC target: 1.0e4, maximum injection time: 50 ms). Data-dependent MS3 spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap (resolution: 50000, scan range: 100-500 m/z, AGC target: 1.0e5, maximum injection time: 105 ms) following HCD activation (collision energy: 65%) using Synchronous Precursor Selection from up to 10 precursors.

### Data Protocol
Peptide and protein identifications were performed using MaxQuant v1.6.5.0 using the search engine Andromeda. Group-specific parameters were set to “Reporter ion MS3” with 10plex TMT isobaric labels for N-terminal and lysine residue modification selected. Reporter mass tolerance was set to 0.003 Da. Following parameters were used: Carbamidomethylation of cysteines as fixed modifications, oxidation of methionine and acetylation of N-terminus as dynamic modifications, trypsin/P as the proteolytic enzyme. Default settings were used for all other parameters. Searches were performed against the UniProt database for B. thetaiotaomicron VPI-5482 (Proteome ID: UP000001414, downloaded April 2019) with the following parameters: Min. peptide length: 6, Max. peptide mass [Da]: 6000, Min. peptide length for unspecific search: 6, Max. peptide length for unspecific search: 40. Identification was performed with at least 2 unique peptides and quantification only with unique peptides. Statistical analysis was performed with Perseus v1.6.0.783. Putative contaminants, reverse hits, and proteins identified by side only were removed. LFQ intensities were log2-transformed. Missing values were imputed using a normal distribution (width = 0.3, down-shift = 1.8). P-values were calculated using a two-sided, two-sample t-test. Proteins considered to be enriched serine hydrolases had a minimum fold-change of 3 (log2 fold-change of 1.58) and minimum p-value of 0.05 (-log10 of 1.30).

### Publication Abstract
Serine hydrolases have important roles in signaling and human metabolism, yet little is known about their functions in gut commensal bacteria. Using bioinformatics and chemoproteomics, we identify serine hydrolases in the gut commensal Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron that are specific to the Bacteroidetes phylum. Two are predicted homologs of the human dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (hDPP4), a key enzyme that regulates insulin signaling. Our functional studies reveal that BT4193 is a true homolog of hDPP4 that can be inhibited by FDA-approved type 2 diabetes medications targeting hDPP4, while the other is a misannotated proline-specific triaminopeptidase. We demonstrate that BT4193 is important for envelope integrity and that loss of BT4193 reduces B. thetaiotaomicron fitness during in vitro growth within a diverse community. However, neither function is dependent on BT4193 proteolytic activity, suggesting a scaffolding or signaling function for this bacterial protease.

### Keywords
Protease, Activity-based protein profiling, Microbiome

### Affiliations
Institute for Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry
Friedrich-Schiller-University Jena
Department of Pathology and Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305

### Submitter
Markus Lakemeyer

### Lab Head
Dr Matthew Bogyo
Department of Pathology and Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305


