### Accession
PXD021591

### Title
Structural basis of heterotetrameric assembly and disease mutations in the human cis-prenyltransferase complex.

### Description
Strcutural analysis of human cis-prenyltrasnferase showing its architecture in solution as heterotetramer composed of two catalytic dehydrodolichyl diphosphate synthase (DHDDS)units and two inactive Nogo-B receptor (NgBR) units.

### Sample Protocol
shcis-PT (20 μM) was transferred into 200 mM ammonium acetate pH 7.5 by Zeba Spin columns (0.5 mL, 7-kDa cut off) and adjusted to 5 or 10 μM concentration. Sample was loaded into a home-made quartz-glass ESI tip which was mounted onto a custom built nESI source interfaced to Waters Synapt G2Si. Analyses at different activation settings were performed. Low activation (trap collision energy 10 V) was used to obtain native-like conditions while high trap collisional energies (up to 110 V) were employed to strip the adducts and obtain more accurate mass. Key instrument parameters were: sampling cone voltage 40 V, source offset 20 V, trap gas 4 ml/min and source temperature 20 °C, ESI tip voltage 1.8 kV. Sepctra were recorded over mass range 1000-10000Da. The instrument was calibrated externally with CsI. Two spectra are provided - one with low activation and another where activation was stepped by 10V every 20 scans, starting at 10V and ending at 110V.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were processed in MassLynx 4.1 which in general included scan averaging with subseqeunt smoothing (Mean 50 smooth window, 2 smooths).

### Publication Abstract
The human cis-prenyltransferase (hcis-PT) is an enzymatic complex essential for protein N-glycosylation. Synthesizing the precursor of the glycosyl carrier dolichol-phosphate, mutations in hcis-PT cause severe human diseases. Here, we reveal that hcis-PT exhibits a heterotetrameric assembly in solution, consisting of two catalytic dehydrodolichyl diphosphate synthase (DHDDS) and inactive Nogo-B receptor (NgBR) heterodimers. Importantly, the 2.3&#x2009;&#xc5; crystal structure reveals that the tetramer assembles via the DHDDS C-termini as a dimer-of-heterodimers. Moreover, the distal C-terminus of NgBR transverses across the interface with DHDDS, directly participating in active-site formation and the functional coupling between the subunits. Finally, we explored the functional consequences of disease mutations clustered around the active-site, and in combination with molecular dynamics simulations, we propose a mechanism for hcis-PT dysfunction in retinitis pigmentosa. Together, our structure of the hcis-PT complex unveils the dolichol synthesis mechanism and its perturbation in disease.

### Keywords
Heterotetramer, Human cis-pt, Native ms, N-glycosylation

### Affiliations
Institute of Microbiology of the CAS
Institute of Microbiology of the Czech Academy of Sciences, Division BioCeV, Prumyslova 595,252 50 Vestec, Czech Republic

### Submitter
Petr Man

### Lab Head
Dr Petr Man
Institute of Microbiology of the Czech Academy of Sciences, Division BioCeV, Prumyslova 595,252 50 Vestec, Czech Republic


