### Accession
PXD014271

### Title
Protein paucimannosylation is a novel N-glycosylation signature of human cancers

### Description
While aberrant protein glycosylation is a recognised characteristic of human cancers, advances in glycoanalytics continue to discover new associations between glycoproteins and tumourigenesis. This glycomics-centric study investigates a possible link between protein paucimannosylation, an under-studied class of human N-glycosylation [Man1-3GlcNAc2Fuc0-1] and human cancers. The distribution of paucimannosidic glycans (PMGs) within the N-glycome of 34 cancer cell lines and 133 tissue samples spanning 11 prevalent cancer types and matching non-cancerous specimens were accurately determined from 467 PGC-LC-MS/MS datasets collected over a decade within our laboratories. PMGs, particularly the α1,6-fucosylated bi- and tri-mannosylated N-glycans, were prominent features of 29 cancer cell lines, but the PMG level varied dramatically across and within the investigated cancer types (1.0%-50.2%). Analyses of paired (tumour/non-tumour) and stage-stratified tissue cohorts demonstrated that PMGs are significantly enriched in tumours from four cancer types including liver and colorectal cancer and increase with prostate cancer and chronic lymphocytic leukaemia progression. Cancer cell surface expression of paucimannosidic proteins was demonstrated using immunofluorescence while biosynthetic involvement of β-hexosaminidase was indicated by quantitative proteomics. The intriguing association between protein paucimannosylation and human cancers reported here warrants further exploration to detail the biosynthesis, cellular location(s), protein carriers and functions of paucimannosylation in tumourigenesis and metastasis.

### Sample Protocol
): All biopsy cores were examined for signs of PCa by a trained pathologist. Fresh tissues were collected after radical prostatectomy from a cohort of 55 patients, which included ten patients from each disease stage (PCa grade 1-5) and five individuals presenting with benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH). The PCa grade was defined using the Modified Gleason Grading System proposed by the International Society of Urological Pathology (ISUP) in 2005, a system that was revised in 2014 [10, 11]. Fresh prostate tissues (~60 mg), stored in RNALater (stabilisation and storage solution), were washed in 80% (v/v) cold ACN and re-suspended in an extraction buffer containing 6 M urea, 10 mM DTT, 1 mM sodium fluoride, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate and a protease inhibitor cocktail (1:10). Prostate tissues were rapidly lysed (2 min, 30 Hz with a 5 mm stainless steel bead) using a TissueLyser (Qiagen, Chadstone, VIC, Australia). Protein concentrations were determined by the Qubit fluorimetric detection method and directly used for either N-glycomics or quantitative proteomics.  For the quantitative proteomics, which will be described in the following paragraphs, peptides originating from 25 µg protein from each urine sample were dissolved in 100 mM tetraethyl ammonium bromide buffer and labelled individually with 0.23 mg tandem mass tag (TMT)-10plex according to the manufacturer’s instructions. TMT-tagged peptides for LC-MS/MS profiling were loaded on a trap column (2 cm x 100 µm inner diameter) custom packed with ReproSil-Pur C18 AQ 5 µm resin (Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). Approximately 1 µg total peptide was injected per LC-MS/MS run. The peptides were separated at 250 nl/min on an analytical column (Reprosil-Pur C18-Aq, 25 cm x 75 µm, 3 µm ID, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) operated in reversed phase chromatography mode using UltiMate™ 3000 RSLCnano System. The mobile phases were 99.9% ACN in 0.1% (both v/v) aqueous FA (solvent B) and aqueous 0.1% (v/v) FA (solvent A). The linear gradient of solvent A increased from 2% to 30% over 100 min, 30-50% over 18 min, 50-95% over 1 min and 9 min at 95% B. The nanoLC was connected to a Q Exactive HF-X Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) operating in positive ion mode and using data-dependent acquisition. The Orbitrap acquired the full MS scan with an automatic gain control target value of 3 x 106 ions and a maximum fill time of 50 ms. Each MS scan was acquired at high-resolution 60,000 full width half maximum  at m/z 200 in the Orbitrap with a m/z range of 350-1,800. The 20 most abundant precursor ions were selected from each MS full scan utilising higher-energy collision-induced dissociation  fragmentation with a normalized collision energy of 35% with the condition that precursors should be at least doubly charged. Fragmentation was performed at high resolution (45,000 full width half maximum) for a target of 1 x 105 product ions and a maximum injection time of 90 ms using a precursor isolation window of m/z 1.0 and a dynamic exclusion of 30 s after a single isolation and fragmentation of a given precursor.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification, the LC-MS/MS raw files were imported into MaxQuant version 1.5.2.8 [53]. The database search engine Andromeda [86] was used to search the higher-energy collision-induced dissociation MS/MS spectra against a database composed of the reviewed UniProtKB human protein database (release April 15, 2015; 45,185 entries) with a precursor and product ion mass accuracy tolerance of 4.5 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively. For the reporter fragment ions, the 10-plex TMT was included in the search parameters. The enzyme specificity was defined as tryptic with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) was set as a fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine residues (+15.994 Da) and protein N-terminal acetylation (+42.010 Da) were selected as variable modifications. Five variable modifications per peptide were allowed. All identifications were filtered in order to achieve a 1% peptide spectrum match and a 1% protein false discovery rate. The quantitation of the identified proteins was performed by using reporter ion intensities using at least one razor/unique peptide.

### Publication Abstract
While aberrant protein glycosylation is a recognized characteristic of human cancers, advances in glycoanalytics continue to discover new associations between glycoproteins and tumorigenesis. This glycomics-centric study investigates a possible link between protein paucimannosylation, an under-studied class of human N-glycosylation [Man<sub>1-3</sub> GlcNAc<sub>2</sub> Fuc<sub>0-1</sub> ], and cancer. The paucimannosidic glycans (PMGs) of 34 cancer cell lines and 133 tissue samples spanning 11 cancer types and matching non-cancerous specimens are profiled from 467 published and unpublished PGC-LC-MS/MS N-glycome datasets collected over a decade. PMGs, particularly Man<sub>2-3</sub> GlcNAc<sub>2</sub> Fuc<sub>1</sub> , are prominent features of 29 cancer cell lines, but the PMG level varies dramatically across and within the cancer types (1.0-50.2%). Analyses of paired (tumor/non-tumor) and stage-stratified tissues demonstrate that PMGs are significantly enriched in tumor tissues from several cancer types including liver cancer (p = 0.0033) and colorectal cancer (p = 0.0017) and is elevated as a result of prostate cancer and chronic lymphocytic leukaemia progression (p &lt; 0.05). Surface expression of paucimannosidic epitopes is demonstrated on human glioblastoma cells using immunofluorescence while biosynthetic involvement of N-acetyl-&#x3b2;-hexosaminidase is indicated by quantitative proteomics. This intriguing association between protein paucimannosylation and human cancers warrants further exploration to detail the biosynthesis, cellular location(s), protein carriers, and functions of paucimannosylation in tumorigenesis and metastasis.

### Keywords
Cancer / glycomics / glycan / protein paucimannosylation / paucimannosidic glycan

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Sciences, Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW, Australia
Department of Molecular Sciences, Macquarie University, Sydney, Australia

### Submitter
Rebeca Kawahara

### Lab Head
Dr Morten Thaysen-Andersen
Department of Molecular Sciences, Macquarie University, Sydney, Australia


