### Accession
PXD026783

### Title
Differential retinal protein expression in primary and secondary retinal ganglion cell degeneration identified by integrated SWATH and target-based proteomics

### Description
To investigate the retinal proteins associated with primary and secondary retinal ganglion cell (RGC) degeneration and explore their molecular pathways, SWATH label-free and target-based mass spectrometry was employed to identify the proteomes in various retinal locations in response to localized optic nerve injury. Unilateral partial optic nerve transection (pONT) was performed on adult Wistar rats and their retinas were harvested at 2 weeks later. To confirm the separation of primary and secondary RGC degeneration, immunohistochemistry of RNA binding protein with multiple splicing (RBPMS) and glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) was performed on retinal whole-mounts. Retinal proteomes in the temporal and nasal quadrants were evaluated with high resolution hybrid quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometry (QTOF-MS), and SWATH-based acquisition, and their expression was compared to the corresponding retinal quadrant in contralateral control eyes and further validated by multiple reaction monitoring mass spectrometry (MRM-MS). A total of 3641 proteins (p<0.05, FDR<1%) were quantified by SWATH-MS. Bioinformatics data analysis showed that there were 35 up-regulated and 24 down-regulated proteins in the temporal quadrant while 19 and 5 proteins were up-regulated and down-regulated, respectively, in the nasal quadrant respectively (n=4, p<0.05; fold change ≥1.4 fold or ≤0.7). Six proteins were regulated in both the temporal and the nasal quadrants including CLU, GFAP, GNG5, IRF2BPL, L1CAM and CPLX1. Linear regression analysis indicated a strong association between the data obtained by SWATH-MS and MRM-MS (temporal, R2=0.97; nasal, R2=0.96). Gene ontology analysis reveals statistically significant changes in the biological processes and cellular components of primary RGC degeneration. The majority of the significant changes in structural, signaling, and cell death proteins were associated with loss of RGCs in the area of primary RGC degeneration. The combined use of SWATH-MS and MRM-MS methods detects and quantifies regional changes of retinal protein expressions after localized injury. Future investigation with this integrated approach will significantly increase understanding of diverse processes of progressive RGC degeneration from a proteomic prospective.

### Sample Protocol
Retinal sample homogenization and protein extraction Four rat retina tissues (rat number 203,204, 205 and 206) were used for this study. The dissected retina tissues were separated into four regions (Superior, Inferior, Nasal, Temporal). Only the temporal and nasal retinal quadrants were homogenized with Precellys 24 homogenizer (Bertin Technologies, Aix-en-Provence, France) with 100 µl lysis buffer containing 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 30 mM Tris, 0.2% (w/v) Biolytes, 1% (w/v) dithiothreitol, 2% (w/v) CHAPS and 1% (w/v) ASB14 in protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche Applied Science, Basel, Switzerland) at 5,800 rpm twice for 30s with a 20-second interval. The homogenized protein samples were centrifuged at 218,000 g for 25 minutes at 4C. The supernatant was collected for protein concentration measurement by Bradford assay (Bio-Rad, Hercules, USA).  Protein reduction, alkylation and digestion Based on the protein concentration, 70 µg protein from each sample was used for further analysis. The samples were reduced in 10mM dithiothreitol (DTT) in 25mM NH4HCO3 for 45 mins at 56ºC, followed by alkylation in 20mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in 25 mM NH4HCO3 for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. The protein was then precipitated by adding four volumes of ice-cold acetone and stored at -20ºC overnight. The samples were centrifuged at 21380 g for 25 minutes at 4C. After supernatant removal, the protein pellet was washed with 80% ice-cold acetone and supernatant removed again. The pellet was re-dissolved in 8 M urea and gradually diluted to 1 M urea with 25 mM NH4HCO3. Trypsin with a final ratio of 1:25 (trysin: protein amount, w/w), was added and the mixture incubated at 37C overnight for in-solution digestion. Peptides were purified before injection to Mass Spectrometer using Oasis HLB cartridge (Waters Associates, Inc., Massachusetts). In brief, the cartridge was conditioned with 1 mL acetonitrile (ACN) followed by 1 mL 0.1% trifluoracetic acid (TFA) for equilibration. Each peptide sample was added with 900 µl 0.1% TFA) and bound to the cartridge by passing slowly (1 drop/second) into the cartridge (sample load) for two times. The cartridge was washed by 1 mL 0.1% TFA and consequently 0.1% TFA in 5.0% methanol. The bound peptides were eluted by slowly passing 0.5 mL 0.1%TFA with 60% ACN through the cartridge medium, which was dried by vacuum centrifuge. Finally, the purified peptides were re-constituted in 20 µL 0.1% formic acid (FA). Peptide concentration after this purification in each sample was measured again using Pierce Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay (catalog #23275, Thermo Scientific, USA). Peptide concentration was adjusted to 0.5 µg/µL. A pool of sample (3µg) from individual biological samples was used for protein identification as a reference library. A second sample (2 µg) was quantified using SWATH acquisition in dupplicate.  Sciex TripleTOF 6600 Mass Spectrometry and SWATH-MS acquisition Unterageted protein identification and SWATH-MS data were acquired on a TripleTOF 6600 system (Sciex, Darmstadt, Germany) with Analyst TF (version 1.7) fitted with Nanospray III source and equipped with a hybrid quadrupole time-of-flight mass analyzer. A peptide sample was loaded onto a trap column (350 µm x 0.5 mm, C18) by loading buffer (0.1% FA, 5% acetonitrile) at a speed of 2 µL/min for 15 min. It was then separated on a nano-LC analytical column (100 µm x 30 cm, C18, 5 µm) using an Ekisgent 415 nano-LC system. MS data was searched on the UniProt database by ProteinPilotTM (version 5.0, Sciex) software using the Paragon algorithm. For ProteinPilot, queries were matched to rat (Rattus norvegicus), tryptic digested peptides, and alkylation (iodoacetamide) and only proteins with 1% global false discovery rate (FDR) were considered as a true positive identification. For protein quantification, all SWATH-MS acquisitions were conducted in duplicate for each biological sample. A variable isolation window (n=100) in a mass range of m/z 100-1800. An information dependent acquisition (IDA) was imported as the reference ion library. Both IDA and SWATH data were processed with PeakView (version 2.2, Sciex). Proteins quantified with up to 30 peptides per protein, 6 transitions per peptide and 90% peptide confidence threshold at 1% FDR within 10 min XIC peak elution window were selected for further MarkView (version 1.3, Sciex) data processing. Samples were normalized by most likely ratio (MLR) normalization with paired t-test statistical analysis to detect significantly differentiated proteins in biological samples among experimental groups. Statistically significant differential proteins detected by SWATH-MS of two groups were further filtered and validated using MRM-MS.

### Data Protocol
Target proteins were filtered with the following criteria: amino acid length between 8-25 units, unique peptide sequence, excluding peptides with structural modifications and missed tryptic cleavage. Proteins with less than three signature peptide sequences were not being considered. The high-quality peptide transitions were further refined with retention linear regression, r > 0.95 and similarity score, dotp > 0.9. The MRM data were analyzed with Skyline and MultiQuantTM (version 3.03,Sciex). The raw data were searched against the corresponding protein FASTA sequence and matched with a previously acquired TOF-MS spectral library. The MRM transition quality was determined by dotp score of the peak area and retention time. The MRM raw data were further processed using the MultiQuantTM software and the MQ4 algorithm for automatic peak integration, resulting retention time, peak area, peak height and signal to noise ratio for each monitored ion transition. The weighted average analysis performed as previously published. In brief, peaks were normalized by calculating the peak area for each transition relative to the peak area of GAPDH transition. Transition response was calculated from the average of the three technical replicates of individual biological samples and type (treatment, control). The transition weighted average was calculated respective to the weight = 0 for S/N ratio < 5 and weight = 1 for S/N ratio ≥ 20. A Sigmoid distribution was applied to the intermediate S/N value. The peptide weighted fold-change was calculated as the weighted average of its transitions. The protein weighted fold-change was further calculated as a weighted average of the corresponding individual peptides. The reported standard deviation was calculated from the protein weighted average fold-change of individual biological samples. A t-test of P<0.05 was considered as statistically significant in all cases.

### Publication Abstract
To investigate the retinal proteins associated with primary and secondary retinal ganglion cell (RGC) degeneration and explore their molecular pathways, SWATH label-free and target-based mass spectrometry was employed to identify the proteomes in various retinal locations in response to localized optic nerve injury. Unilateral partial optic nerve transection (pONT) was performed on adult Wistar rats and their retinas were harvested 2 weeks later. To confirm the separation of primary and secondary RGC degeneration, immunohistochemistry of RNA binding protein with multiple splicing (RBPMS) and glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) was performed on retinal whole-mounts. Retinal proteomes in the temporal and nasal quadrants were evaluated with high resolution hybrid quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometry (QTOF-MS), and SWATH-based acquisition, and their expression was compared to the corresponding retinal quadrant in contralateral control eyes and further validated by multiple reaction monitoring mass spectrometry (MRM-MS). A total of 3641 proteins (FDR &lt; 1%) were identified using QTOF-MS. The raw data are available via ProteomeXchange with the identifier PXD026783. Bioinformatics data analysis showed that there were 37 upregulated and 25 downregulated proteins in the temporal quadrant, whereas 20 and five proteins were upregulated and downregulated, respectively, in the nasal quadrant, respectively (<i>n</i> = 4, <i>p</i> &lt; 0.05; fold change &#x2265; 1.4-fold or &#x2264;0.7). Six proteins were regulated in both the temporal and the nasal quadrants, including CLU, GFAP, GNG5, IRF2BPL, L1CAM, and CPLX1. Linear regression analysis indicated a strong association between the data obtained by means of SWATH-MS and MRM-MS (temporal, R<sup>2</sup> = 0.97; nasal, R<sup>2</sup> = 0.96). Gene ontology analysis revealed statistically significant changes in the biological processes and cellular components of primary RGC degeneration. The majority of the significant changes in structural, signaling, and cell death proteins were associated with the loss of RGCs in the area of primary RGC degeneration. The combined use of SWATH-MS and MRM-MS methods detects and quantifies regional changes of retinal protein expressions after localized injury. Future investigation with this integrated approach will significantly increase the understanding of diverse processes of progressive RGC degeneration from a proteomic prospective.

### Keywords
Optic nerve, Neurodegeneration, Mass spectrometry, Protein, Ganglion cell

### Affiliations
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University/School of optometry
Associate Professor, Centre for Myopia Research, School of Optometry, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong SAR

### Submitter
Chuen Lam

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Chuen Lam
Associate Professor, Centre for Myopia Research, School of Optometry, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong SAR


