### Accession
PXD010495

### Title
Effect of purification of galactooligosaccharides derived from lactulose with Saccharomyces cerevisiae on their capacity to bind immune cell receptor Dectin-2

### Description
Lactulose-derived oligosaccharides (OsLu) are prebiotic galactooligosaccharides (GOS) known to be beneficial for human health. Many of these carbohydrates are reported to have immunomodulatory properties; however the molecular mechanism is unclear. OsLu produced by enzymatic synthesis can be purified with Saccharomyces cerevisiae (OsLu-Sc). We show that this purification method introduces yeast-derived proteins reactive to Dectin-2, an innate immune receptor for fungal polysaccharides. Using a cell-based bioassay, we tested the binding of OsLu and GOS samples to Dectin-2. While OsLu purified with active charcoal and commercial GOS failed to bind to Dectin-2, we found OsLu-Sc bound to this receptor. The carbohydrate-binding incompetent mutant of Dectin-2 failed to bind to OsLu-Sc. These data suggest that OsLu-Sc introduced carbohydrate ligands for Dectin-2. In accordance with this, proteomic analysis revealed OsLu-Sc contained S. cerevisiae-derived mannoproteins. Therefore, our data highlights the importance of the purification method for OsLu, which may positively affect the bioactivity of OsLu.

### Sample Protocol
Total protein concentration was determined using Pierce 660nm protein assay (Thermo).   Prior to digestion, total proteins of each sample were precipitated by methanol/chloroform method. For digestion, protein pellets were resuspended and denatured in 20 µl 7 M Urea/2M Thiourea/100mM TEAB, pH 7.5, reduced with 2 µL of 50mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP, AB SCIEX), pH 8.0, at 37°C for 60 min and followed by 2 µL of 200mM cysteine-blocking reagent (methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS, Pierce) for 10 min at room temperature. Samples were diluted up to 120 µL to reduce urea concentration with 25mM TEAB. Digestions were initiated by adding 1 µL (1 µg/µL) sequence grade-modified trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich) to each sample, which were then incubated at 37°C overnight on a shaker. Sample digestions were evaporated to dryness and then desalted onto SEP-PAK C18 cartridge (Waters) until the mass spectrometric analysis. Digested peptides of each sample was subjected to 1D-nano LC ESI-MSMS analysis using a nano liquid chromatography system (Eksigent Technologies nanoLC Ultra 1D plus, SCIEX, Foster City, CA) coupled to high speed Triple TOF 5600 mass spectrometer (SCIEX , Foster City, CA) with a Nanospray III Source. The analytical column used was a silica-based reversed phase column C18 ChromXP 75 µm × 15 cm, 3 µm particle size and 120 Å pore size (Eksigent Technologies, SCIEX, Foster City, CA). The trap column was a C18 ChromXP (Eksigent Technologies, SCIEX, Foster City, CA), 3 µm particle diameter, 120 Å pore size, switched on-line with the analytical column. The loading pump delivered a solution of 0.1% formic acid in water at 2 µl/min. The nano-pump provided a flow-rate of 300 nl/min and was operated under gradient elution conditions. Peptides were separated using a 100 minutes gradient ranging from 2% to 90% mobile phase B (mobile phase A: 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid; mobile phase B: 100% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). Injection volume was 5 µl. Data acquisition was performed with a TripleTOF 5600 System (SCIEX, Foster City, CA). Data was acquired using an ionspray voltage floating (ISVF) 2800 V, curtain gas (CUR) 20, interface heater temperature (IHT) 150, ion source gas 1 (GS1) 20, declustering potential (DP) 85 V. All data was acquired using information-dependent acquisition (IDA) mode with Analyst TF 1.7 software (SCIEX, Foster City, CA). For IDA parameters, 0.25 s MS survey scan in the mass range of 350–1250 Da were followed by 35 MS/MS scans of 100ms in the mass range of 100–1800 (total cycle time: 3.8 s). Switching criteria were set to ions greater than mass to charge ratio (m/z) 350 and smaller than m/z 1250 with charge state of 2–5 and an abundance threshold of more than 90 counts (cps). Former target ions were excluded for 20 s. IDA rolling collision energy (CE) parameters script was used for automatically controlling the CE.

### Data Protocol
MS and MS/MS data obtained for individual samples were processed using Analyst® TF 1.7 Software (SCIEX, Foster City, CA). Raw data file conversion tools generated mgf files which were also searched against the Saccharomyces cerevisiae protein database, containing 70.639 protein coding genes and other common protein contaminants using the Mascot Server v. 2.6 (Matrix Science, London, UK). Search parameters were set as follows: Methylthio (C) as fixed modification and acetyl (Protein N-term), pyrolidone from E, pyrolidone from Q and Oxidation (M) as variable modifications.  Peptide mass tolerance was set to 25 ppm and 0.05 Da for fragment masses, also 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Only the peptides with an individual MOWSE score ≥ 20 were considered correctly identified.

### Publication Abstract
Lactulose-derived oligosaccharides (OsLu) are prebiotic galactooligosaccharides (GOS) beneficial for human health including immunomodulatory properties; however, the molecular mechanism is unclear. OsLu produced by enzymatic synthesis can be purified with Saccharomyces cerevisiae (OsLu-Sc). We show that this purification introduces yeast-derived proteins reactive to Dectin-2, an innate immune receptor for fungal polysaccharides. Using a cell-based bioassay, we tested the binding of OsLu and GOS samples to Dectin-2. While OsLu purified with active charcoal and commercial GOS failed to bind to Dectin-2, we found OsLu-Sc bound to this receptor. The carbohydrate-binding incompetent mutant of Dectin-2 failed to bind to OsLu-Sc. These data suggest that OsLu-Sc introduced carbohydrate ligands for Dectin-2. In accordance with this, proteomic analysis revealed OsLu-Sc contained S. cerevisiae-derived mannoproteins. Therefore, our data highlight the importance of the purification method for OsLu, which may positively affect the bioactivity of OsLu. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD010495.

### Keywords
Mannoproteins, Lactulose, Dectin-2, Proteomics, Saccharomyces, Oligosaccharides, Prebiotics

### Affiliations
Spanish National Center for Biotechnology
Instituto de Investigación en Ciencias de la Alimentación, CIAL (CSIC-UAM)

### Submitter
Sergio Ciordia

### Lab Head
Dr Mar Villamiel Guerra
Instituto de Investigación en Ciencias de la Alimentación, CIAL (CSIC-UAM)


