### Accession
PXD010193

### Title
BCL2 amplicon loss and super-enhancer remodeling drives ABT-199 resistance

### Description
Drug-tolerant “persister” tumor cells underlie the emergence of drug-resistant clones contribute to relapse and disease progression; thus, identifying actionable targets that disable persisters and mitigate relapse are a high priority need. Although the BCL2-targeting agent venetoclax (ABT-199) has shown promising responses in mantle cell and double hit B cell lymphomas, resistance often arises, yet mechanistically how this occurs is unclear. Here we report that ABT-199 resistance can evolve from persister clones that have selective deletions  at 18q21 that involve the drug target BCL2 and the apoptotic regulators Noxa (PMAIP1) and TCF4. Notably, reprogramming of super enhancers (SE) in persisters contributes to resistance, where there is a selection for SE-directed overexpression of the apoptotic regulator BCL2A1 and oncogenic transcription factors IKZF1 and FOXC1. At the same time, the SE reprogramming confers an opportunity for overcoming ABT-199 resistance.  An unbiased drug screen on a platform that recapitulates the lymphoma microenvironment revealed that persisters are vulnerable to inhibitors of transcription initiation and elongation, and especially so to inhibitors of cyclin-dependent kinase 7 (CDK7) that is essential for transcription initiation. Specifically, CDK7 loss or inhibition eliminated the persister phenotype by disabling SE-driven expression of BCL2A1, IKZF1 and FOXC1.  Thus, the co-treatment of ABT-199 with CDK7 inhibitors blocked the evolution of drug resistance, and provoked tumor regression in models of mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) and double hit lymphomas (DHL) that overexpress both MYC and BCL2. Together, these findings establish loss of apoptotic regulators and an adaptive transcriptional response as drug resistance mechanisms in lymphoma, more importantly, establish a rationale for transcription inhibition-based combination strategies to prevent and overcome drug resistance in B cell malignancies toward BCL2 inhibitor.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were sonicated in IP/lysis buffer, desalted with Zeba spin columns to remove endogenous ATP, and incubated with 10 μM desthiobiotin-ATP probes at room temperature for 10 minutes. The labelled proteins were reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin at 37 °C for 2 h. The labelled peptides were purified with high capacity streptavidin agarose resin, washed, eluted and subjected to LC-MS/MS for quantification.  A nano flow liquid chromatograph (RSLC, Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA) interfaced with an electrospray ion trap mass spectrometer (LTQ-Orbitrap or Q-Exactive Plus, Thermo, San Jose, CA) was used for tandem mass spectrometry peptide sequencing experiments and relative quantification of ATP probe uptake. The sample was first loaded onto a trapping column (2 cm x 100 μm ID packed with C18 PepMap reversed-phase resin, 5μm, 100Å) and washed for 8 minutes with aqueous 2% acetonitrile containing 0.04% trifluoroacetic acid. The trapped peptides were then eluted onto the analytical column, (C18, 75 μm ID x 50 cm packed with C18 PepMap reversed-phase resin, 2 μm, 100Å, Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA). The gradient was programmed as: 95% solvent A (2% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid) for 8 minutes, solvent B (90% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid) from 5% to 50% in 90 minutes, increasing from 50% to 90% B in 7 minutes, then held at 90% for 5 minutes. Re-equilibration was achieved by decreasing solvent B from 90% to 5% in 1 minute and holding at 5% B for 10 minutes. The flow rate for the analytical column was 300 nl/min. Sixteen tandem mass spectra were collected in a data-dependent manner following each survey scan. Previously sampled peptide peaks are excluded from MS/MS for 60 seconds.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant was used to identify and quantify peptides for the publication; for deposition into PRIDE, Mascot database searches were used. Both strategies utilized the UniProt database.  The precursor mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm . Dynamic modifications included carbamidomethylation (Cys), oxidation (Met), and Desthiobiotinylation. The identification of peptides with significant changes was manually verified. Data normalization was performed using iterative rank order normalization (IRON), software implementation of IRON is available at [http://gene.moffitt.org/libaffy/]

### Publication Abstract
Drug-tolerant "persister" tumor cells underlie emergence of drug-resistant clones and contribute to relapse and disease progression. Here we report that resistance to the BCL-2 targeting drug ABT-199 in models of mantle cell lymphoma and double-hit lymphoma evolves from outgrowth of persister clones displaying loss of 18q21 amplicons that harbor BCL2. Further, persister status is generated via adaptive super-enhancer remodeling that reprograms transcription and offers opportunities for overcoming ABT-199 resistance. Notably, pharmacoproteomic and pharmacogenomic screens revealed that persisters are vulnerable to inhibition of the transcriptional machinery and especially to inhibition of cyclin-dependent kinase 7 (CDK7), which is essential for the transcriptional reprogramming that drives and sustains ABT-199 resistance. Thus, transcription-targeting agents offer new approaches to disable drug resistance in B-cell lymphomas.

### Keywords
Persister, Lymphoma, Abpp, Apoptosis

### Affiliations
Moffitt Cancer Center

### Submitter
John Koomen

### Lab Head
Dr Jianguo Tao MD/PhD
Moffitt Cancer Center


