### Accession
PXD022356

### Title
Mycoplasma pneumoniae processes functionally diverse proteins (N-Terminiome & Surfaceome)

### Description
Mycoplasma pneumoniae is a significant cause of pneumonia, particularly in children, the elderly and the immunocompromised, and post infection sequelae affecting organ sites distant to the respiratory tract are common. It is also a model pathogen where extensive ‘omics’ studies have been conducted to gain insight into how minimal genome self-replicating organisms function. Here we conducted an N-terminome study to determine which proteins are targets of processing events in M. pneumoniae.  We identified 6,973 unique N-terminal peptides that mapped to 391 (56%) predicted M. pneumoniae proteins. True N-terminal sequences beginning with the initiating methionine (iMet) residue from the predicted Open Reading Frame (ORF) were identified for 163 proteins. Nearly half (317; 46%) of the ORFS derived from M. pneumoniae strain M129 are post-translationally modified, presumably by proteolytic processing, because dimethyl labelled neo-N-termini were characterised that mapped beyond the predicted N-terminus. An analysis of the N-terminome describes endoproteolytic processing events which predominately target negatively charged residues in P1′ (D and E) with lysine or serine/alanine in P2′ and P3′ positions. Surfaceome studies identified 160 proteins (23% of the proteome) to be exposed on the extracellular surface of M. pneumoniae. The two orthogonal methodologies used to characterise the surfaceome each identified the same 116 proteins, a 72% (116/160) overlap. Apart from lipoproteins, transporters, and adhesins, 93/160 (58%) of the surface proteins lack signal peptides and have well characterised, canonical functions in the cell.  Mycoplasma pneumoniae culture conditions The M. pneumoniae (strain M129) cells were cultured in modified Hayflick’s medium at 37 °C in tissue culture flasks using established culture conditions63. Modified Hayflick’s medium contained 21 g PPLO broth base without crystal violet, 5 g of D-glucose, 4 mL of 0.5% phenol red, 100 mL of liquid yeast extract (150 g/L), 200 mL heat-inactivated horse serum (56 °C, 30 min) supplemented with 1 g ampicillin (Sigma, A5354, St. Louis, MO, USA) per litre. M. pneumoniae cells were harvested at mid-log phase by washing adherant cells 3 times with PBS and collected using cell scaping.

### Sample Protocol
Dimethyl labeling of M. pneumoniae proteins M. pneumoniae cells were resuspended in 6M guanidine hydrochloride with Complete protease inhibitors [Roche] and lysed with an ultrasonic probe 3 times for 30 sec, with 100% duty cycle at 50% power. M. pneumoniae protein lysates were reduced using 5 mM tributylphosphine [Sigma-Aldritch] and alkylated with 20 mM acrylamide monomers [Sigma-Aldritch] for 90 min at room temperature. Proteins were precipitated 8 volumes of acetone and 1 volume of methanol at -80 °C for 3 hr, pelleted by centrifugation at 20,000×g for 20 min and resuspended in 100 mM HEPES solution adjusted to pH 7. Protein labelling was performed on 1 mg of M. pneumoniae (strain M129) protein by the addition of 20 mM formaldehyde (ultrapure grade) [Polysciences, USA] and 20 mM sodium cyanoborohydride [Sigma-Aldritch], every 30 min to a final concentration of 60 mM buffered in a final volume of 1 mL and incubated at 37 °C for a minimum 4 hr. The reaction was quenched by the addition of 100 mM Tris for 30 min at 37 °C and then precipitated with 8 volumes of acetone and 1 volume of methanol at -80 °C for 3 hr. The precipitated protein was then pelleted by centrifugation at 20,000×g for 20 minutes and washed with 5 volumes of methanol. The protein pellet was resuspended in 50 mM sodium hydroxide, pH 8.0 and digested with Trypsin Gold [Promega, USA] overnight at 37 °C. The acetonitrile was evaporated using a speedvac, desalted by SiliaPrepX™ HLB Polymeric SPE cartridges [Silicycle, Canada], and analysed by LC-MS/MS.  M. pneumoniae enzymatic cell surface shaving Freshly harvested M. pneumoniae cells were washed extensively (>3 times) in PBS and pelleted by centrifugation (4,000×g 10 mins 4°C). Cells were resuspended in PBS (pH 7.8) and enzymatic cell shaving using trypsin was performed at 37°C for 5 min. Intact cells were pelleted by centrifugation and the supernatant containing liberated surface proteins collected on ice to cease trypsin activity. Surface proteins were analysed by 1D gel electrophoresis or further digested to peptides with trypsin prior to analysis by SCX and LC-MS/MS as described previously26. Trypsin shaving of M. pneumoniae cells was carried out as described previously26. In brief, adherent M. pneumoniae cells were extensively washed with PBS and then incubated with trypsin from porcine pancreas (Sigma, 50 μg·mL−1) for 5 minutes at 37 °C to release surface exposed peptides. Peptides were collected, digested a second time with trypsin Gold MS grade [Promega, USA] and analysed by LC-MS/MS. Liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) Using an Eksigent 415 autosampler connected to a 415 nanoLC system (Eksigent, USA), 5 µL of the sample was loaded at 300nl/min with MS buffer A (2% Acetonitrile, 0.2% Formic Acid) by direct injection onto a PicoFrit column (75 µmID x 150 mm; New Objective, Woburn, MA) packed with C18AQ resin, 1.9µm 200 Å [Dr Maisch, Germany]. Peptides were eluted from the column and into the source of a 5600 TripleTOF hybrid quadrupole-time-of-flight mass spectrometer [Sciex, USA] using the following program: 2-35% MS buffer B (80% Acetonitrile, 0.2% Formic Acid) over 90 minutes, 35-95% MS buffer B over 9 minutes, 95% MS buffer B for 9 minutes, 80-2% for 2 min. The eluting peptides were ionised at 2300V. An Intelligent Data Acquisition (IDA) experiment was performed, with a mass range of 350-1500 Da continuously scanned for peptides of charge state 2+-5+ with an intensity of more than 400 counts/s. Up to 50 candidate peptide ions per cycle were selected and fragmented and the product ion fragment masses measured over a mass range of 100-2000 Da. The mass of the precursor peptide was then excluded for 15 seconds. Peptides were analysed using a Sciex Q-Star Elite, Sciex 5600 and Thermo Scientific Q Exactive™ mass spectrometers. The methods, protocols, and parameters used have been described previously ( Widjaja, M, Berry, I, Pont, E, Padula, M & Djordjevic, S 2015, 'P40 and P90 from Mpn142 are Targets of Multiple Processing Events on the Surface of Mycoplasma pneumoniae', Proteomes, vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 512-537)

### Data Protocol
Mass Spectrometry Data Analysis The MS/MS data files produced by the 5600 TripleTOF were searched using Mascot Daemon (version 2.4;64) against the MSPnr100 database (based on the major reference sequence repositories of NCBI, Refseq, UniProtKB, EupathDB and Ensembl. Duplicate entries at the species-level are removed, “multispecies” entries (NCBI) and “fragments” (TrEMBL) are ignored. vQ115). The search parameters were: Precursor tolerance 10 ppm and product ion tolerances ± 0.2 Da; charge states: 2+, 3+ and 4+; Propionamide (C), Dimethyl (K) specified as fixed modifications; oxidation (M), deamidation (NQ), Dimethyl (N-term) specified as variable modifications; enzyme specificity was semi-ArgC; 1 missed cleavage was allowed. The results of the search were then filtered by including only peptides with a dimethyl labelled N-terminus and excluding peptides with a p-value greater than 0.05.  Bioinformatic Analysis The putative functions of M. pneumoniae were assigned by the Uniprot database and predicted cell localisations were determined by PSORTb65 and SecretomeP46. Transmembrane domains were predicted by TMPred47 and the presence of signal peptides was predicted by SignalP45. Protein interaction networks were predicted using STRING66. Sequence logos were generated by Seq2Logo67.

### Publication Abstract
Mycoplasma pneumoniae is a significant cause of pneumonia and post infection sequelae affecting organ sites distant to the respiratory tract are common. It is also a model organism where extensive 'omics' studies have been conducted to gain insight into how minimal genome self-replicating organisms function. An N-terminome study undertaken here identified 4898 unique N-terminal peptides that mapped to 391 (56%) predicted M. pneumoniae proteins. True N-terminal sequences beginning with the initiating methionine (iMet) residue from the predicted Open Reading Frame (ORF) were identified for 163 proteins. Notably, almost half (317; 46%) of the ORFS derived from M. pneumoniae strain M129 are post-translationally modified, presumably by proteolytic processing, because dimethyl labelled neo-N-termini were characterised that mapped beyond the predicted N-terminus. An analysis of the N-terminome describes endoproteolytic processing events predominately targeting tryptic-like sites, though cleavages at negatively charged residues in P1' (D and E) with lysine or serine/alanine in P2' and P3' positions also occurred frequently. Surfaceome studies identified 160 proteins (23% of the proteome) to be exposed on the extracellular surface of M. pneumoniae. The two orthogonal methodologies used to characterise the surfaceome each identified the same 116 proteins, a 72% (116/160) overlap. Apart from lipoproteins, transporters, and adhesins, 93/160 (58%) of the surface proteins lack signal peptides and have well characterised, canonical functions in the cell. Of the 160 surface proteins identified, 134 were also targets of endo-proteolytic processing. These processing events are likely to have profound implications for how the host immune system recognises and responds to M. pneumoniae.

### Keywords
Pneumonia, Affinity, N-terminiome, Surfaceome, Mycoplasma

### Affiliations
University of Technology Sydney 
ithree institute, University of Technology Sydney, PO Box 123, Broadway, NSW, 2007, Australia

### Submitter
Joel Steele

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Steven Djordjevic
ithree institute, University of Technology Sydney, PO Box 123, Broadway, NSW, 2007, Australia


