### Accession
PXD002322

### Title
Panorama of ancient metazoan macromolecular complexes: Homo sapiens

### Description
By combining extensive biochemical fractionation with quantitative mass spectrometry, we directly examined the composition of soluble multiprotein complexes among diverse animal models. The project has been jointly supervised by Andrew Emili and Edward M. Marcotte. Project website: http://metazoa.med.utoronto.ca

### Sample Protocol
Cells of the human neural stem cell line CB660 and human brain tumor stem cell line G166 were obtained from Patrick Paddison (Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle). Cell pellet resuspended in lysis buffer [10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 10 mM KCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 0.5 mM DTT, and 1x Protease Inhibitor Cocktail Set I (Calbiochem)], incubate o were centrifuged at 1000xg for 5 min (4 oC). The supernatant was saved as the cytosolic fraction. The pellet was resuspended in 250 mM sucrose/10 mM MgCl2/1x Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, layered over a sucrose cushion of 880 mM sucrose/0.5 mM MgCl2/1x Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, and centrifuged at 3000xg for 10 min (4 oC). The supernatant was discarded and the pellet resuspended in lysis buffer with 5% NP-40 by sonicating water bath (15 min). Following sonication, samples were centrifuged at 3,500xg for 10 min to pellet insoluble material, with the supernatant saved as the nuclear fraction. The lysates then were subjected to ion exchange fractionation using an Agilent 1100 HPLC system.Proteins from the HPLC fractions were precipitated, resuspended and digested in solution with trypsin, dried and re-solubilised before being analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a nanoflow HPLC System (EASY-nLC; Proxeon) coupled to LTQ Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Fisher).The peptide samples were directly loaded by auto-sampler into a 2.5 cm trap column and subsequently a 10 cm analytic column (both 75 mm inner diameter), packed with 3 mm Zorbax 80XDB-C18 reverse phase beads (Agilent). Peptides were eluted using a 60 min gradient of 5%–35% ACN in water (containing 1% formic acid) and analyzed by electro-spray ionization (2.5 kV), operating the instrument in data dependent mode (switching automatically between one full scan MS1 followed by top 10 precursor ion MS2 acquisitions) using Tune 2.6.0 and Xcalibur 2.1.0 for control. Full scan (400 – 2,000 m/z) MS1 spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer after accumulating a target value of 106 ions in the linear ion trap (resolution of 60,000 at 400 m/z). Fragmentation was performed in CID mode using 35% normalized collision energy.

### Data Protocol
FASTA file was downloaded as described in the manuscript and processed to retain only the longest sequence for each gene, to simplify orthology mapping between species, as the project was focused on conserved complexes. Samples were searched using 3 search engines: Tide, INSPECT, and MSGFDB and combined to create quantification using MSblender (Kwon, Choi et. al. J. Proteome Research 2011). Tide search output is provided in a form processed for best hits with MSblender; MSGFDB and INSPECT search output is provided directly, when available.

### Publication Abstract
Our analysis examines the conservation of multiprotein complexes among metazoa through use of high resolution biochemical fractionation and precision mass spectrometry applied to soluble cell extracts from 5 representative model organisms Caenorhabditis elegans, Drosophila melanogaster, Mus musculus, Strongylocentrotus purpuratus, and Homo sapiens. The interaction network obtained from the data was validated globally in 4 distant species (Xenopus laevis, Nematostella vectensis, Dictyostelium discoideum, Saccharomyces cerevisiae) and locally by targeted affinity-purification experiments. Here we provide details of our massive set of supporting biochemical fractionation data available via ProteomeXchange (PXD002319-PXD002328), PPIs via BioGRID (185267); and interaction network projections via (http://metazoa.med.utoronto.ca) made fully accessible to allow further exploration. The datasets here are related to the research article on metazoan macromolecular complexes in Nature [1].

### Keywords
Across species, Lc-msms, Metazoan, Conservation, Biofractionation

### Affiliations
University of Texas at Austin 
Donnelly Centre for Cellular and Biomolecular Research, Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada

### Submitter
Blake borgeson

### Lab Head
Dr Andrew Emili
Donnelly Centre for Cellular and Biomolecular Research, Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada


