### Accession
PXD046733

### Title
Identification of the RNF12/RLIM proximal proteome

### Description
RNF12/RLIM is an E3 ubiquitin ligase that plays key developmental roles and is genetically disrupted in the neurodevelopmental disorder Tonne-Kalscheuer syndrome. RNF12/RLIM regulates X-chromosome inactivation and controls the expression of neural and gametogenesis related genes. To better understand how RNF12/RLIM performs these transcription-related functions, we performed a TurboID proximity ligation experiment to identify RNF12/RLIM proximal proteins in mouse embryonic stem cells treated with DMSO or MG132. This knowledge will increase our understanding of how this protein controls developmental gene expression and how disruption of these pathways drives disease.

### Sample Protocol
TurboID, TurboID-RNF12 wild type and TurboID-RNF12 H569A-C572A stable mESC lines were generated using lentiviral transduction. Lentivirus supernatant obtained from HEK293T were filtered, concentrated via ultra-centrifugation (20,000xg and 4°C), resuspended in growth media and added to mESCs along with Polybrene (4 μg/ml; Santa Cruz Biotechnology). At 96 h after transduction, puromycin (6 μg/ml; Thermo Fisher Scientific) was added to the select transduced cells. Established cell lines were grown in 20 μg/ml puromycin.  Four 10cm dishes per sample at 80% confluency were incubated with doxycycline (1mg/ml) for 18 hours prior to induction of biotinylation with 50 μM biotin in the presence of DMSO or MG132 for 4 hours. Cells were rinsed twice with PBS and lysed in 8M urea 50mM Tris pH 7.4 containing protease inhibitor (87785, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and DTT, incubated with universal nuclease (88700, Thermo Fisher Scientific), and sonicated to further shear DNA. Lysates were precleared with Gelatin Sepharose 4B beads (17095601; GE Healthcare) for 2 hours and then incubated with Streptavidin Sepharose High Performance beads (17511301, GE Healthcare) for 4 hours. Streptavidin beads were washed four times with 8M urea 50mM Tris pH 7.4 wash buffer and resuspended in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate with 1mM biotin. These samples were analyzed via western blotting prior submission for mass spectrometry analysis. Protein samples were reduced, alkylated, and digested on-bead using filter-aided sample preparation with sequencing grade modified porcine trypsin (Promega). Tryptic peptides were separated by reverse phase XSelect CSH C18 2.5 um resin (Waters) on an in-line 150 x 0.075 mm column using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo). Peptides were eluted using a 60 min gradient from 98:2 to 65:35 buffer A:B ratio (Buffer A = 0.1% formic acid, 0.5% acetonitrile, Buffer B = 0.1% formic acid, 99.9% acetonitrile). Eluted peptides were ionized by electrospray (2.4 kV) followed by mass spectrometric analysis on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo).

### Data Protocol
MS data were acquired using the FTMS analyzer in profile mode at a resolution of 240,000 over a range of 375 to 1500 m/z. Following HCD activation, MS/MS data were acquired using the ion trap analyzer in centroid mode and normal mass range with normalized collision energy of 28-31% depending on charge state and precursor selection range. Proteins were identified by database search using MaxQuant (Max Planck Institute) label-free quantification with a parent ion tolerance of 2.5 ppm and a fragment ion tolerance of 0.5 Da. Scaffold Q+S (Proteome Software) was used to verify MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established with less than 1.0% false discovery and contained at least 2 identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
E3 ubiquitin ligase; rnf12/rlim; embryonic stem cells; protein ubiquitylation; turboid chromatin; transcription

### Affiliations
MRC Protein Phosphorylation & Ubiquitylation Unit, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee, DD1 5EH, UK
MRC-PPU, University of Dundee

### Submitter
Renata Soares

### Lab Head
Dr Greg Findlay
MRC Protein Phosphorylation & Ubiquitylation Unit, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee, DD1 5EH, UK


