### Accession
PXD006487

### Title
Nuclear Proteins in Chlamydomonas reinhardtii

### Description
A proteomic approach to identify and quantify differences in the nuclear proteome under high- and low-CO2 conditions with special emphasis on transcription factors and transcription regulators in Chlamydomonas reinhardtii.

### Sample Protocol
Chlamydomonas reinhardtii was cultured in 10L Erlenmeyer flasks under photoautotrophic and temperature-controlled conditions. Cells were cultured in High-salt medium with a 14h light/10h dark cycle and continuous shaking under constant aeration with 5% CO2 in air (HCO2). Once the cell culture reached an optical density of 1 at 750 nm, 5 litres were reduced to 0.03% in air (LCO2) and the remaining 5 liters were kept at 5% CO2. After 3h growth with these conditions the cultures was sampled for nuclei isolation. Four biological replicas were obtained. Nuclei isolation of C. Reinhardtii: The concentrated cell culture described above (350 ml) was filtered through ten layers of gauze and harvested by centrifugation at 3000g. The pellet was re-suspended in 60 ml of NIBA1 buffer purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. 1% Triton-X100 was added and the homogenized sample was kept on ice for 10 min. After incubation, 120 ml of NIB2 buffer  was added to induce lysis of the cytoplasmic membranes. The sample was then centrifuged at 4000g for 1 hour at 4 °C and the resulting pellet was washed with 30 ml NIBA1 buffer and incubated with 1% Triton-X100 for 10 min on ice. 15 ml of the lysed sample was transferred to a new tube and washed with 30 ml NIB2 buffer then centrifuged at 1000g for 30 min at 4 °C using a swing-out rotor. The obtained pellet was washed with 5 ml of NIBA1 buffer and centrifuged at 600g for 10 min at 4 °C. This washing step was repeated once, after which the pellet was washed with 2 ml of NIBA1 buffer and centrifuged at 600g for 10min at 4 °C. The obtained nuclei pellet was stored at -80 °C until needed for nuclear extraction. Extraction of Nuclear Proteins: The nuclei pellet was re-suspended in 1ml NIBA1 buffer and 1ml of A1.2 solution pH 7.6. Nuclear membranes were disrupted by sonication. Samples were kept on ice throughout this procedure. After sonication, the samples were centrifuged at 13000g for 15 min at 4 °C. Nuclear proteins were collected from the resulting supernatants by ultracentrifugation at 134000g for 20min. Proteome analysis and protein identification and quantification: 1% Sodium deoxycholate (SDC) in 10mM DL-Dithiothreitol (DTT)/50mM Ammonium bicarbonate (AmBic) solution was added to 800μg extracted Chlamydomonas proteins, mixed, heated to 95 °C for 15 min, and then processed as previously described [1]. [1] Obudulu O, Bygdell J, Sundberg B, Moritz T, Hvidsten TR, Trygg J, Wingsle G. 2016. Quantitative proteomics reveals protein profiles underlying major transitions in aspen wood development. BMC genomics 17, 1.

### Data Protocol
Fore details see [1] & [2]. [1] Obudulu O, Bygdell J, Sundberg B, Moritz T, Hvidsten TR, Trygg J, Wingsle G. 2016. Quantitative proteomics reveals protein profiles underlying major transitions in aspen wood development. BMC genomics 17, 1. [2] Pirmoradian M, Budamgunta H, Chingin K, Zhang B, Astorga-Wells J, Zubarev RA. 2013. Rapid and deep human proteome analysis by single-dimension shotgun proteomics. Molecular & Cellular Proteomics 12, 3330-3338.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nucleus proteome, Hdmse, Lc-ms/ms, Co2-concentrating mechanism, Chlamydomonas

### Affiliations
Umeå Plant Science Centre, Department of Forest Genetics and Plant Physiology, Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences
Computational Life Science Cluster (CLiC),
Deptartment of Chemistry, Umeå University

### Submitter
Joakim Bygdell

### Lab Head
Dr Gunnar Winglse
Umeå Plant Science Centre, Department of Forest Genetics and Plant Physiology, Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences


