### Accession
PXD038197

### Title
Mapping Ndc80 phosphorylation sites

### Description
Aurora A-TPX2 activity limits NDC80 phosphorylation

### Sample Protocol
STLC arrested mitotic cells were collected, washed with PBS and resuspended in low serum medium (OptiMEM). Cell were treated either with Aurora A or Aurora B inhibitor or vehicle control (DMSO). After 15min long incubation, cells were further treated with a PP1/PP2A inhibitor, calyculin for the next 10min. Finally cell pellets were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80C.  Cell lysates were subject to immunoprecipitation using a cocktail of anti-Ndc80 antibodies. 3% of immunoprecipitated Ndc80 (IP) was subject to WB analysis, while the remain part was cleaned up SP3 beads and digested overnight using trypsin. Peptides were cleaned up on home-made C18 ziptips. 10% of peptide samples were used for total IP analysis, while the remaining 90% was further subject to phosphor-enrichment using TiO2 beads. Phospho-enriched samples were cleaned up on commercial graphite columns and analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analysed using MaxQuant, version 2.1.4.0 using the default parameters plus phospho(STY) modification set as a variable modification and match between runs turned on.

### Publication Abstract
Amplification of the mitotic kinase Aurora A or loss of its regulator protein phosphatase 6 (PP6) have emerged as drivers of genome instability. Cells lacking PPP6C, the catalytic subunit of PP6, have amplified Aurora A activity, and as we show here, enlarged mitotic spindles which fail to hold chromosomes tightly together in anaphase, causing defective nuclear structure. Using functional genomics to shed light on the processes underpinning these changes, we discover synthetic lethality between PPP6C and the kinetochore protein NDC80. We find that NDC80 is phosphorylated on multiple N-terminal sites during spindle formation by Aurora A-TPX2, exclusively at checkpoint-silenced, microtubule-attached kinetochores. NDC80 phosphorylation persists until spindle disassembly in telophase, is increased in PPP6C knockout cells, and is Aurora B-independent. An Aurora-phosphorylation-deficient NDC80-9A mutant reduces spindle size and suppresses defective nuclear structure in PPP6C knockout cells. In regulating NDC80 phosphorylation by Aurora A-TPX2, PP6 plays an important role in mitotic spindle formation and size control and thus the fidelity of cell division.

### Keywords
Human, Hela, Ndc80 complex, Phosphorylation, Kinetochore, Metaphase, Aurora b, Aurora a, Ndc80

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry University of Oxford
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Katarzyna Kowalczyk

### Lab Head
Dr Francis A Barr
Department of Biochemistry University of Oxford


