### Accession
PXD021415

### Title
The Novel PII-Interacting Regulator PirC (Sll0944) Identifies 3-Phosphoglycerate Mutase (PGAM) as Central Control Point of Carbon Storage Metabolism in Cyanobacteria

### Description
Nitrogen limitation imposes a major transition in the life-style of non-diazotrophic cyanobacteria, which is regulated via a complex interplay of regulatory factors, involving, the nitrogen-specific transcription factor NtcA and the pervasive signal processor PII. Immediately upon nitrogen-limitation, newly fixed carbon is re-directed towards glycogen synthesis. How operation of the metabolic switch for distributing fixed carbon to either glycogen or cellular building blocks was poorly understood. Here we identify from Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 a novel PII interactor, PirC, (Sll0944) that controls 3-phosphoglycerate mutase (PGAM), the enzyme that deviates newly fixed CO2 towards lower glycolysis. PirC acts as competitive inhibitor of PGAM and this interaction is tuned by PII/2-oxoglutarate. High oxoglutarate release PirC from PII-complex to inhibit PGAM. Accordingly, PirC deficient mutant, as compared to the wild-type, shows strongly reduced glycogen levels upon nitrogen deprivation whereas polyhydroxybutyrate granules are over-accumulated. Metabolome analysis revealed an imbalance in 3-phosphoglycerate to pyruvate levels in the PirC mutant, conforming that PirC controls the carbon flux in cyanobacteria via mutually exclusive interaction with either PII or PGAM.

### Sample Protocol
Co-Immunoprecipitation and Liquid chromatography-Mass spectrometry (LC-MS)  To identify putative interaction partners of PirC, co-immunoprecipitation experiments were performed. For this, Synechocystis ΔPirC::PirC-mCitrine cultures were pre-cultivated in100 ml BG11 medium to an OD750 of ~0,8 and subsequently shifted to N-depleted medium. Cells were harvested after 24 h N-depletion by centrifugation for 10 min at 4200 x g at 4 °C, followed by resuspension of the cell pellet in 2 ml binding buffer containing 100 mM TRIS (pH 7.5), 100 mM KCl, 1 mM MgCl2, 1 mM DTT, 0.5 mM EDTA, 2 mM ATP and 2-OG. The cells were lysed with 150 µl glass beads in 1.5 ml screw cap tubes by harsh shaking in a high-speed homogenizer for 5 times 30 sec shaking at speed of 7 m · s-1 with each 5 min break. The lysate was than centrifuged at 25,000 x g for 5 min at 4 °C and a supernatant volume corresponding to a protein yield of approx. 3 mg was used for the immunoprecipitation. Therefore, GFP-Trap Magnetic Agarose beads or control beads without antibodies were used according to the manufactured protocol (both Chromotek, Planegg-Martinsried, Germany). The loaded magnetic beads were heated for 10 min at 95 °C in SDS loading buffer for the dissociation of purified proteins. Protein solutions were subjected to short SDS-PAGE runs, in which proteins were allowed to migrate for 1.5 cm into a 12% Bis-Tris Gels (Invitrogen) and then stained with Coomassie blue. Protein containing gel regions were isolated and subjected to InGel digestion with trypsin as described elsewhere (A. Shevchenko, H. Tomas, J. Havlis, J. V. Olsen, M. Mann, In-gel digestion for mass spectrometric characterization of proteins and proteomes. Nat Protoc 1, 2856–2860 (2006)). Tree independent experiments, each including a PirC-mCitrine and a control CoIP were performed in total. Peptides were subjected to a clean-up step using StageTips (J. Rappsilber, M. Mann, Y. Ishihama, Protocol for micro-purification, enrichment, pre-fractionation and storage of peptides for proteomics using StageTips. Nat Protoc 2, 1896–1906 (2007)) and subsequently analyzed by mass spectrometry. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher, Germany), using linear, segmented 60 min nanoLC RP gradients as described elsewhere (P. Spät, A. Klotz, S. Rexroth, B. Maček, K. Forchhammer, Chlorosis as a Developmental Program in Cyanobacteria: The Proteomic Fundament for Survival and Awakening. Molecular & cellular proteomics : MCP 17, 1650–1669 (2018)). All raw data was processed using MaxQuant software suite (version 1.6.5.0) at default settings. MS2 peak lists were searched against a target-decoy database of the Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 proteome, including the sequence of PirC(Sll0944)-mCitrine.

### Data Protocol
Label free quantification was used to calculate LFQ intensities for each CoIP sample. Data from all experiments was analyzed via the Perseus software (version 1.6.5.0). For the identification of significantly enriched proteins in PirC-mCitrine CoIPs, a t-test was performed with the following requirements: each protein had to be detected in at least two replicates and an FDR of 0.01 at S0 = 0.1 was set.

### Publication Abstract
Nitrogen limitation imposes a major transition in the lifestyle of nondiazotrophic cyanobacteria that is controlled by a complex interplay of regulatory factors involving the pervasive signal processor P<sub>II</sub> Immediately upon nitrogen limitation, newly fixed carbon is redirected toward glycogen synthesis. How the metabolic switch for diverting fixed carbon toward the synthesis of glycogen or of cellular building blocks is operated was so far poorly understood. Here, using the nondiazotrophic cyanobacterium <i>Synechocystis</i> sp. PCC 6803 as model system, we identified a novel P<sub>II</sub> interactor, the product of the <i>sll0944</i> gene, which we named PirC. We show that PirC binds to and inhibits the activity of 2,3-phosphoglycerate-independent phosphoglycerate mutase (PGAM), the enzyme that deviates newly fixed CO<sub>2</sub> toward lower glycolysis. The binding of PirC to either P<sub>II</sub> or PGAM is tuned by the metabolite 2-oxoglutarate (2-OG), which accumulates upon nitrogen starvation. In these conditions, the high levels of 2-OG dissociate the PirC-P<sub>II</sub> complex to promote PirC binding to and inhibition of PGAM. Accordingly, a PirC-deficient mutant showed strongly reduced glycogen levels upon nitrogen deprivation, whereas polyhydroxybutyrate granules were overaccumulated compared to wild-type. Metabolome analysis revealed an imbalance in 3-phosphoglycerate to pyruvate levels in the <i>pirC</i> mutant, confirming that PirC controls the carbon flux in cyanobacteria via mutually exclusive interaction with either P<sub>II</sub> or PGAM.

### Keywords
3-phosphoglycerate mutase, Pii, Pirc (sll0944), Synechocystis sp. pcc 6803, Cyanobacteria

### Affiliations
University Tuebingen Department of Quantitative Proteomics
Interfaculty Institute of Microbiology and Infection Medicine, University of Tübingen, Auf der Morgenstelle 28, 72076 Tübingen, Germany

### Submitter
Philipp Spaet

### Lab Head
Dr Karl Forchhammer
Interfaculty Institute of Microbiology and Infection Medicine, University of Tübingen, Auf der Morgenstelle 28, 72076 Tübingen, Germany


