### Accession
PXD039582

### Title
Advanced mass spectrometry workflows for accurate quantification of trace-level host cell proteins in drug products: benefits of FAIMS separation and gas-phase fractionation DIA

### Description
In this study, we investigated the benefits of adding high-field asymmetric ion mobility spectrometry (FAIMS) separation prior to data dependent acquisition (DDA) and gas phase fractionation (GPF) prior to data independent acquisition (DIA) LC-MS/MS analysis. Native digestion followed by LC-MS/MS with FAIMS allowed the identification of 221 HCPs among which 158 were reliably quantified for a global amount of 880 ng/mg of NIST mAb Reference Material. Our methods have also been applied to commercial DPs and demonstrate their ability to dig deeper into the HCP landscape with the identification of 60 and 67 HCPs, and accurate quantification of 29 and 31 of these impurities in nivolumab and trastuzumab respectively, with sensitivity down to the sub-ng/mg of mAb level.

### Sample Protocol
Data-independent acquisition (DIA) analyses were performed on an Ultimate 3000 UPLC device (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled to an Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany).

### Data Protocol
DIA data was analyzed using DirectDIA implemented in Spectronaut (v.15.7; Biognosys, Schlieren, Switzerland) using the following settings and a FASTA of Mus musculus (17,050 entries, 2021/05/26) from SwissProt for NIST mAb and Cricetulus Griseus (78,366 entries, 2022/03/15) FASTA files extracted from UniProt/TrEMBL for commercial mAbs, as well as the retention time standards, the standards for quantification, the mAb heavy and light chains and the common contaminants. Trypsin/P was used as digestion enzyme and one missed cleavage was allowed. Oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-term were set as variable modifications. Data was extracted using dynamic mass tolerances. Identification was performed using 1% precursor q-value cutoff. Quantification was performed using interference correction and at least three fragment ions used per peptide. Quantity is based on MS2 XIC peak areas. Non-identified precursors in rows with at least one q-value below 0.01 were selected for iRT profiling, by enabling carrying over the average template peak position. DIA data was also analyzed using a chromatogram library generated using Pulsar, implemented in Spectronaut (v.15.7; Biognosys, Schlieren, Switzerland) with similar parameters than the one used for DIA analysis: trypsin/P as digestion enzyme, methionine oxidation and protein N-term acetylation were as variable modifications, one missed cleavage authorized. Additional filters were applied for library generation, including a 1% FDR threshold at PSM, peptide and protein level filters and a number of fragments between 3 and 8 per precursor.

### Publication Abstract
Therapeutic monoclonal antibodies (mAb) production relies on multiple purification steps before release as a drug product (DP). A few host cell proteins (HCPs) may co-purify with the mAb. Their monitoring is crucial due to the considerable risk they represent for mAb stability, integrity, and efficacy and their potential immunogenicity. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA) commonly used for global HCP monitoring present limitations in terms of identification and quantification of individual HCPs. Therefore, liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) has emerged as a promising alternative. Challenging DP samples show an extreme dynamic range requiring high performing methods to detect and reliably quantify trace-level HCPs. Here, we investigated the benefits of adding high-field asymmetric ion mobility spectrometry (FAIMS) separation and gas phase fractionation (GPF) prior to data independent acquisition (DIA). FAIMS LC-MS/MS analysis allowed the identification of 221 HCPs among which 158 were reliably quantified for a global amount of 880&#xa0;ng/mg of NIST mAb Reference Material. Our methods have also been successfully applied to two FDA/EMA approved DPs and allowed digging deeper into the HCP landscape with the identification and quantification of a few tens of HCPs with sensitivity down to the sub-ng/mg of mAb level.

### Keywords
Data-independent analysis (dia), Host cell proteins (hcp), Final drug products (dp)

### Affiliations
Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse BioOrganique, IPHC, Université de Strasbourg, CNRS
Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse BioOrganique (LSMBO), Université de Strasbourg, CNRS, IPHC, UMR 7178, 25 Rue Becquerel, F-67087 Strasbourg, France

### Submitter
Corentin Beaumal

### Lab Head
Dr Christine Carapito
Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse BioOrganique (LSMBO), Université de Strasbourg, CNRS, IPHC, UMR 7178, 25 Rue Becquerel, F-67087 Strasbourg, France


### SDRF
- organism: mus musculus, cricetulus griseus
- organism part: not available
- disease: not available
- cell type: not available
- fractionation method: not available, gas-phase fractionation
- label: label free sample
- instrument: Orbitrap Eclipse

