### Accession
PXD013001

### Title
HDX-MS of CSN-CRL2 complexes -  Structural basis of Cullin 2 RING E3 ligase regulation by the COP9 signalosome

### Description
Cullin-Ring E3 Ligases (CRLs) regulate a multitude of cellular pathways through specific substrate receptors. The COP9 signalosome (CSN) deactivates CRLs by removing NEDD8 (N8) from activated Cullins. The structure of stable CSN-CRL can be used to understand this mechanism of regulation. Here we present the first structures of the neddylated and deneddylated CSN-CRL2 complexes by combining single particle cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) with chemical cross-linking mass spectrometry (MS). These structures reveal a conserved mechanism of CSN activation, consisting of conformational clamping of the CRL2 substrate by CSN2/CSN4, release of the catalytic CSN5/CSN6 heterodimer and finally activation of the CSN5 deneddylation machinery. Using hydrogen deuterium exchange-MS we show that CRL2 binding and conformational activation of CSN5/CSN6 occur in a neddylation-independent manner. The presence of NEDD8 is required to activate the CSN5 active site. Overall, by synergising cryo-EM with MS, we identified novel sensory regions of the CSN that mediate its stepwise activation mechanism and provide a framework for better understanding the regulatory mechanism of other Cullin family members.

### Sample Protocol
Hydrogen deuterium exchange mass spectrometry (HDX-MS) experiments were performed on a Synapt G2-Si HDMS coupled to an Acquity UPLC M-Class system with HDX and automation (Waters Corporation, Manchester UK). Protein samples were prepared at a concentration of 7.5 μM. Isotope labelling was initiated by diluting 5 μl of each protein sample into 95 μl of buffer L (10 mM potassium phosphate in D2O pD 6.6). The protein was incubated at various time-points (0.25, 5 and 30 minutes) and then quenched in ice cold buffer Q (100 mM potassium phosphate, brought to pH 2.3 with formic acid) before being digested online with a Waters Enzymate BEH pepsin column at 20 °C. The same procedure was used for un-deuterated control, with the labelling buffer being replaced by buffer E (10 mM potassium phosphate in H2O pH 7.0). The peptides were trapped on a Waters BEH C18 VanGuard pre-column for 3 minutes at a flow rate of 200 μl/min in buffer A (0.1% formic acid ~ pH 2.5) before being applied to a Waters BEH C-18 analytical column. Peptides were eluted with a linear gradient of buffer B (8-40% gradient of 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 40 μl/min. All trapping and chromatography was performed at 0.5 °C to minimise back exchange. MSE data were acquired with a 20-30 V trap collision energy ramp for high-energy acquisition of product ions. Leucine Enkephalin (LeuEnk - Sigma) was used as a lock mass for mass accuracy correction and the mass spectrometry was calibrated with sodium iodide. The on-line Enzymate pepsin column was washed with pepsin wash (1.5 M Gu-HCl, 4% MeOH, 0.8% formic acid) recommended by the manufacturer and a blank run using the pepsin wash was performed between each sample to prevent significant peptide carry-over from the pepsin column. Optimized peptide identification and peptide coverage for all samples was performed from undeuterated controls (three-four replicates). All deuterium timepoints were performed in triplicate.

### Data Protocol
Sequence identification was made from MSE data from the undeuterated samples using the Waters ProteinLynx Global Server 2.5.1 (PLGS). The output peptides were filtered using DynamX (v. 3.0) using the following filtering parameters: minimum intensity of 2500, minimum and maximum peptide sequence length of 5 and 30 respectively, minimum MS/MS products of 3, minimum products per amino acid of 0.1, and a minimum peptide score of 5. Additionally, all the spectra were visually examined and only those with high signal to noise ratios were used for HDX-MS analysis. The amount of relative deuterium uptake for each peptide was determined using DynamX (v. 3.0) and are not corrected for back exchange.

### Publication Abstract
Cullin-Ring E3 Ligases (CRLs) regulate a multitude of cellular pathways through specific substrate receptors. The COP9 signalosome (CSN) deactivates CRLs by removing NEDD8 from activated Cullins. Here we present structures of the neddylated and deneddylated CSN-CRL2 complexes by combining single-particle cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) with chemical cross-linking mass spectrometry (XL-MS). These structures suggest a conserved mechanism of CSN activation, consisting of conformational clamping of the CRL2 substrate by CSN2/CSN4, release of the catalytic CSN5/CSN6 heterodimer and finally activation of the CSN5 deneddylation machinery. Using hydrogen-deuterium exchange&#xa0;(HDX)-MS we show that CRL2 activates CSN5/CSN6 in a neddylation-independent manner. The presence of NEDD8 is required to activate the CSN5 active site. Overall, by synergising cryo-EM with MS, we identify sensory regions of the CSN that mediate its stepwise activation and provide a framework for understanding the regulatory mechanism of other Cullin family members.

### Keywords
E3 ligase, Conformational dynamics, Cop9 signalosome, Biological, Structural biology, Protein-protein interactions

### Affiliations
King's College London
King's College London, Chemistry Department, 7 Trinity Street, London, SE1 1DB, UK

### Submitter
Andy Lau

### Lab Head
Dr Argyris Politis
King's College London, Chemistry Department, 7 Trinity Street, London, SE1 1DB, UK


