### Accession
PXD039127

### Title
Mapping the cytosolic proteins of HEK293T cells

### Description
N-terminal proteoforms stem from the same gene but differ at their N-terminus, and most of these are found to be truncated, though some are N-terminally extended caused by ribosomes starting translation from codons in the annotated 5’UTR, and/or carry modified N-termini different from those of the canonical protein. Biological functions of N-terminal proteoforms are emerging, however, it remains unknown to what extend N-terminal proteoforms further expand the functional complexity. To address this in a more global manner, we mapped the interactomes of several pairs of N-terminal proteoforms and their canonical counterparts. For this, we first generated an in-depth catalogue of N-terminal proteoforms in the cytosol of HEK293T cells. In order to aid the selection of pairs of N-terminal proteoforms we generated a cytosolic map to verify their cytosolic interactions. This localization is crucial as Virotrap will be used for interactome analysis and this method works best for cytosolic proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Cytosolic extracts were prepared from 2.5 x107 HEK293T cells in triplicates. Cell pellets were washed with ice-cold DPBS and resuspended in 1.25 ml of cell-free systems (CFS) buffer (220 mM mannitol, 170 mM sucrose, 5 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 10 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 2.5 mM KH2PO4, 0.02 % digitonin and Complete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) and kept on ice for 2 min. Lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 14,000 x g for 15 min at 4 °C. The supernatants, containing the cytosolic extracts, were collected. The protein concentration was measured using a Bradford assay (Bio-Rad) and 500 µg of protein material was used to prepare samples for mass spectrometry analysis. Proteins were digested with endoproteinase-LysC (Promega, 1:100, w:w) for 4 h at 37 °C and then with trypsin (Promega, 1:100, w:w) overnight at 37 °C. Sample were acidified to a pH<3 by adding TFA to a final concentration of 1%. Following a 15-minutes incubation on ice, the samples were centrifuged for 15 min at 1750 xg at room temperature. The peptides containing supernatant was further purified using SampliQ C18 100 mg columns (Agilent) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Purified peptides were dried completely by vacuum drying, re-dissolved in 200 µl loading solvent A (0.1% TFA in water/acetonitrile (98:2, v/v). The peptide concentration was measured on a Lunatic microfluidic device (Unchained Labs) and from each replicate, 50 µg of peptide material was injected for fractionation by RP-HPLC (Agilent series 1200) connected to a Probot fractionator (LC Packings). Peptides were first loaded in solvent A on a 4 cm pre-column (made in-house, 250 µm internal diameter (ID), 5 µm C18 beads, Dr. Maisch) for 10 min at 25 µl/min and then separated on a 15 cm analytical column (made in-house, 250 µm ID, 3 µm C18 beads, Dr. Maisch). Elution was done using a linear gradient from 100% RP-HPLC solvent A (10 mM ammonium acetate (pH 5.5) in water/ACN (98:2, v/v)) to 100% RP-HPLC solvent B (70% ACN, 10 mM ammonium acetate (pH 5.5)) in 100 min at a constant flow rate of 3 µL/min. Fractions were collected every minute between 20 and 85 min and pooled every 10 minutes to generate a total of 10 samples for LC-MS/MS analysis. All 10 fractions were dried under vacuum in HPLC inserts and stored at -20 °C until further use. Peptides were re-dissolved in 20 µl of 0.1% TFA and 2% ACN and 15 µl was injected for LC-MS/MS analysis on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano LC in-line connected to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides were first loaded on a trapping column (made in-house, 100 μm internal diameter (I.D.) × 20 mm, 5 μm beads C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch) with loading solvent (0.1% TFA in water/ acetonitrile, 2/98 (v/v)). After 4 min, a valve switch put the loading column in-line with the analytical pump to load the peptides on a 50 cm µPAC™ column with C18-endcapped functionality (PharmaFluidics) kept at a constant temperature of 35 °C. Peptides were separated with a non-linear gradient from 98% solvent A’ (0.1% formic acid in water) to 30% solvent B′ (0.1% formic acid in water/acetonitrile, 20/80 (v/v)) in 70 min, further increasing to 50% solvent B’ in 15 min before ultimately reaching 99% solvent B’ in another 1 min. The column was then washed at 99% solvent B’ for 5 min and equilibrated for 15 min with 98% solvent A’. The flow rate was kept constant at 300 nl/min for the entire run except for the first 9 min at which the flow rate was set to 750 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent, positive ionization mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the five most abundant peaks in a given MS spectrum. The source voltage was 2.6 kV, and the capillary temperature was 275 °C. One MS1 scan (m/z 400−2,000, AGC target 3 × 106 ions, maximum ion injection time 80 ms), acquired at a resolution of 70,000 (at 200 m/z), was followed by up to 5 tandem MS scans (resolution 17,500 at 200 m/z, AGC target 5 × 104 ions, maximum ion injection time 80 ms, isolation window 2 m/z, fixed first mass 140 m/z, spectrum data type: centroid) of the most intense ions fulfilling predefined selection criteria (intensity threshold 1.3xE4, exclusion of unassigned, 1, 5-8, >8 positively charged precursors, peptide match preferred, exclude isotopes on, dynamic exclusion time 12 s). The HCD collision energy was set to 25% Normalized Collision Energy and the polydimethylcyclosiloxane background ion at 445.120025 Da was used for internal calibration (lock mass).

### Data Protocol
The generated MS/MS spectra were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.6.1.3) using the Andromeda search engine with default search settings, including a false discovery rate set at 1% on both the peptide and protein level. Spectra were searched against the sequences of the human proteins in the Swiss-Prot database (release Jan 2019). Matching between runs  was enabled and performed on the level of pre-fractionated peptides (1-10) such that it was enabled with each preceding and each following fraction. The enzyme specificity was set at trypsin/P, allowing for two missed cleavages. Variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionine residues and N-terminal protein acetylation. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was put as a fixed modification. All other settings were kept as standard. Proteins were quantified by the MaxLFQ algorithm integrated in the MaxQuant software. A minimum of two ratio counts and both unique and razor peptides were considered for protein quantification leading to the identification of 3,933 proteins across all samples.  Further data analysis was performed with the Perseus software (version 1.6.3.4) after uploading the protein groups file from MaxQuant. Proteins only identified by site and reverse database hits were removed as well as potential contaminants. To be able to perform GO (Gene Ontology), KEGG, Pfam, Corum and Keyword term enrichment, available annotations were uploaded from the Homo sapiens database (release date 2018-04-06). The replicate samples were grouped and the LFQ intensities were log(2) transformed. Proteins with less than two valid values in at least one group were removed and missing values were imputed from a normal distribution around the detection limit (with 0.3 spread and 1.8 down-shift). This led to the identification of 3,045 proteins. The efficiency of our cytosolic enrichment was checked by loading all identified UniProt identifications in the retrieveID/mapping tool on their website and checking the amount of proteins listed with the GOCC term cytosol.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Fractionation, Lc-ms/ms, Cytosol, Hek293t cells

### Affiliations
VIB - Center for medical Biotechnology
Ghent University - Department of Biomolecular Medicine
VIB Center for Medical Biotechnology, VIB, Ghent, B9052, Belgium Department of Biomolecular Medicine, Ghent University, Ghent, B9052, Belgium

### Submitter
Annelies Bogaert

### Lab Head
Dr Kris Gevaert
VIB Center for Medical Biotechnology, VIB, Ghent, B9052, Belgium Department of Biomolecular Medicine, Ghent University, Ghent, B9052, Belgium


