### Accession
PXD020247

### Title
TPL-2 kinase induces phagosome acidification to promote macrophage killing of bacteria

### Description
Tumor Progression Locus 2 (TPL-2) kinase mediates Toll-like Receptor (TLR) activation of ERK1/2 and p38 MAP kinases in myeloid cells to modulate expression of key cytokines in innate immunity. This study identified a novel MAP kinase-independent regulatory function for TPL-2 in phagosome maturation, an essential process for killing of phagocytosed microbes. TPL-2 catalytic activity was demonstrated to induce phagosome acidification and proteolysis in primary mouse and human macrophages following uptake of latex beads. Quantitative proteomics revealed that blocking TPL-2 catalytic activity significantly altered the protein composition of phagosomes, particularly reducing the abundance of V-ATPase proton pump subunits. Furthermore, TPL-2 stimulated the phosphorylation of DMXL1, a critical regulator of V-ATPases, to induce phagosome acidification. Consistent with these results, TPL-2 catalytic activity was required for phagosome maturation and the efficient killing of Staphylococcus aureus following phagocytic uptake by macrophages. These results indicate that TPL-2 controls the innate immune response of macrophages to bacteria via V-ATPase induction of phagosome maturation.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) phosphoproteome analysis of BMDMs BMDMs from WT or Tpl2D270A mice were incubated with carboxylated polystyrene beads as for phagosome isolations. Protein content was estimated by protein assay and a 200-μg aliquot of each sample was taken for further processing. Samples were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol for 25 min at 56°C and then alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature. The alkylation reaction was quenched with an additional 10 mM dithiothreitol, and then each sample was diluted with 50 mM HEPES to reduce the urea concentration to <2 M prior to digestion. Proteolytic digestion was carried out by the addition of 4 μg LysC (FUJIFILM Wako Pure Chemical Corporation) and incubated at 37°C for 2.5 h followed by the addition of 10 μg trypsin (Pierce) and overnight incubation at 37°C. After acidification, C18 MacroSpin columns (Nest Group) were used to clean up the digested peptide solutions and the eluted peptides dried by vacuum centrifugation. Samples were resuspended in 50 mM HEPES and labelled using the 0.8 mg Tandem Mass Tag 10plex isobaric reagent kit (Thermo Scientific) resuspended in acetonitrile. Labelling reactions were quenched with hydroxylamine, and a pool was made containing all of the samples. Acetonitrile content was removed from the pooled TMT solution by vacuum centrifugation and then acidified before using a Sep-Pak C18 (Waters) to clean up the labelled peptide pool prior to phosphopeptide enrichment. The eluted TMT-labelled peptides were dried by vacuum centrifugation and phosphopeptide enrichment was subsequently carried out using the sequential metal oxide affinity chromatography (SMOAC) strategy with High Select TiO2 and Fe-NTA enrichment kits (Thermo Scientific). Eluates were immediately dried by vacuum centrifugation after enrichment and then combined prior to fractionation with the Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation kit (Thermo Scientific). All fractions were dried by vacuum centrifugation and stored at -80C until the day of MS analysis.  MS data acquisition and processing for TMT phosphoproteome Dried TMT-labelled phosphopeptide fractions were resuspended in 0.1% TFA and then analysed by online nanoflow LC-MS/MS using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano (Thermo Scientific). 15 µL of sample was loaded via autosampler into a 20 µL sample loop and pre-concentrated onto an Acclaim PepMap 100 75µm x 2 cm nanoviper trap column with loading buffer, 2% v/v acetonitrile, 0.05% v/v trifluoroacetic acid, 97.95% water (Optima grade, Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 7µL/min for 6 minutes in the column oven held at 40C.  Peptides were gradient eluted onto a C18 75 µm x 50 cm, 2µm particle size, 100Å pore size, reversed phase EASY-Spray analytical column (Thermo Scientific) at a flow rate of 275 nL/min and with the column temperature held at 40C, and a spray voltage of 2100v using the EASY-Spray Source (Thermo Scientific). Gradient elution buffers were A 0.1% v/v formic acid, 5% v/v DMSO, 94.9% v/v water and B 0.1% v/v formic acid, 5% v/v DMSO, 20% v/v water, 74.9% v/v acetonitrile (all Optima grade, Fisher Scientific aside from DMSO, Honeywell Research Chemicals).  The gradient elution profile used was 2% B to 25% B over 120 minutes, increasing to 40% B over the following 25 minutes, then the column was washed 90% B and re-equilibrated to 2% B to complete the 180 minute run.  Two replicate injections were made for each fraction with different fragmentation methods based on the MS2 HCD and MSA SPS MS3 strategies.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw mass spectrometric data were processed in MaxQuant [64] (version 1.6.2.10) for peptide and protein identification; the database search was performed using the Andromeda search engine against the Mus Musculus reference proteome canonical sequences from UniProtKB (UP000000589 download August 2017). Fixed modifications were set as Carbamidomethyl (C) and variable modifications set as Oxidation (M) and Phospho (STY). The estimated false discovery rate was set to 1% at the peptide, protein, and site levels. A maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Reporter ion MS2 or Reporter ion MS3 was appropriately selected for each raw file. Other parameters were used as preset in the software.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tpl-2, Dmxl1, V-atpase, Bacteria, Phagosome, Staphylococcus aureus, Macrophage

### Affiliations
The Francis Crick Institute
Mass Spectrometry Proteomics STP The Francis Crick Institute 1 Midland Road London NW1 1AT UK

### Submitter
Helen Flynn

### Lab Head
Dr Bram Snijders
Mass Spectrometry Proteomics STP The Francis Crick Institute 1 Midland Road London NW1 1AT UK


