### Accession
PXD010715

### Title
Molecular profiling of innate immune response mechanisms in ventilator associated pneumonia (VAP)

### Description
Ventilator associated pneumonia (VAP) is the 2nd most common hospital acquired infection associated with high morbidity, mortality and increased hospitalization. Current practice of diagnosis is based on clinical symptoms and bronchoalvolar lavage (BAL) culture. The procedures of BAL collections are invasive whereas, endotracheal aspirate (ETA), a matrix of upper airway collection is minimally invasive and underexplored in VAP diagnosis. The study describes first in detail characterization of proteome of longitudinal ETA collections from 16 intubated patients including 11 VAP patients and explores potential utility of ETA in VAP diagnosis.

### Sample Protocol
ETA and BAL were collected in sterile tube and immediately frozen at -80C. Before processing samples were subjected to filter sterilization with 0.45 micron centrifugal filters. For proteomics experiments, the samples were immuno depleted followed by reduction and alkylation and trypsin digestion. For mass spectrometry experiments, 1microgram protein digest were subjected to online LC-MS/MS using Waters nano-acquity and BEH C18, 1.7 µM, 0.1 x 100 mm column at 0.5 ml/min flow rate and data-dependent HCD-MS/MS using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, San Jose, CA).

### Data Protocol
The raw data were searched against human proteins, and VAP bacterial and fungal pathogens, on Proteome Discoverer 2.1.1.21. For VAP pathogens, a list of common VAP pathogens comprised of bacteria and yeast were selected and used for metaproteomic analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Ventilator-associated pneumonia (VAP) is a common hospital-acquired infection, leading to high morbidity and mortality. Currently, bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) is used in hospitals for VAP diagnosis and guiding treatment options. Although BAL collection procedures are invasive, alternatives such as endotracheal aspirates (ETA) may be of diagnostic value, however, their use has not been thoroughly explored. Longitudinal ETA and BAL were collected from 16 intubated patients up to 15 days, of which 11 developed VAP. We conducted a comprehensive LC-MS/MS based proteome and metabolome characterization of longitudinal ETA and BAL to detect host and pathogen responses to VAP infection. We discovered a diverse ETA proteome of the upper airways reflective of a rich and dynamic host-microbe interface. Prior to VAP diagnosis by microbial cultures from BAL, patient ETA presented characteristic signatures of reactive oxygen species and neutrophil degranulation, indicative of neutrophil mediated pathogen processing as a key host response to the VAP infection. Along with an increase in amino acids, this is suggestive of extracellular membrane degradation resulting from proteolytic activity of neutrophil proteases. The metaproteome approach successfully allowed simultaneous detection of pathogen peptides in patients' ETA, which may have potential use in diagnosis. Our findings suggest that ETA may facilitate early mechanistic insights into host-pathogen interactions associated with VAP infection and therefore provide its diagnosis and treatment.

### Keywords
Endotracheal aspirates, Bronchoalveolar lavage, Lc-ms/ms, Ventilator associated pneumonia

### Affiliations
TGen
Translational Genomics Research Institute, Phoenix, AZ, USA

### Submitter
Krystine Mansfield

### Lab Head
Dr Patrick Pirrotte
Translational Genomics Research Institute, Phoenix, AZ, USA


