### Accession
PXD030710

### Title
Arg-GlcNAc analysis of the proteins GlmR and NagC

### Description
This project explores the Arg-GlcNAcylation on Salmonella proteins GlmR and NagC. Using MS analysis and Site directed mutagenesis we show Arg-GlcNAcylation occurs on these salmonella enzymes.

### Sample Protocol
Seperated affinity isolated proteins were subjected to in-gel digests or in solution digestion with either Tyrpsin or GluC to enabled the identification of Arg-GlcNAcylation events. Peptides were concentrated and desalted using C18 stage tips and then analyzed on a Q-Exactive plus Mass or a Spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Identification of Arg-glycosylation events was accomplished using MaxQuant (v1.6.17). The Salmonella typhimurium SL1344 proteome (Uniprot accession: UP000008962) wassearched allowing carbamidomethylation of cysteine set as a fixed modification and the variable modifications of oxidation of methionine, Arg-GlcNAcylation (H13C8NO5; 203.0793Da to Arginine). Searches were performed with either Trypsin or GluC cleavage specificity each protein sample allowing 2 miscleavage events with a maximum false discovery rate (FDR) of 1.0% set for protein and peptide identifications. The resulting modified peptides output was processed within the Perseus (v1.4.0.6) (51) analysis environment to remove reverse matches and common protein contaminates prior.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Arg-glcnac

### Affiliations
College of Veterinary Medicine, Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS, 66506, USA. (lab head)
University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Nichollas Scott

### Lab Head
Dr Philip Hardwidge
College of Veterinary Medicine, Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS, 66506, USA. (lab head)


