### Accession
PXD026991

### Title
SUPT3H-less SAGA coactivator can assemble and function without significantly perturbing RNA polymerase II transcription in mammalian cells

### Description
Co-activator complexes regulate chromatin accessibility and transcription. SAGA (Spt-Ada-Gcn5 Acetyltransferase) is an evolutionary conserved multisubunit co-activator complex with modular organization. The core module of SAGA constitutes the structural heart, composed of a histone octamer like structure and two additional proteins. The central histone octamer like core structure consists of six histone fold domain (HFD)-containing proteins, forming three HF pairs (TADA1/TAF12, TAF6L/TAF9/9b, and TAF10/SUPT7L) in the mammalian SAGA complexes, to which adds SUPT3H, which contains an intramolecular HF pair. The yeast homologue of SUPT3H, called Spt3, was shown to interact genetically and biochemically with the TATA binding protein (TBP). Here we investigated the role of SUPT3H in human U2OS and mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells. Using immuno-purification coupled mass spectrometry experiments we show that both human and mouse SAGA can assemble without the double HFD-containing SUPT3H. Nascent RNA-seq experiments indicted that in either U2OS or mouse ESCs lacking SUPT3H only a small subset of genes is deregulated. Consequently, in mouse ESCs SUPT3H is not essential for mouse ESC survival, but is required for ESC growth and self-renewal. In addition, TBP recruitment experiments show no major change in TBP accumulation at gene promoters in the absence of SUPT3H in mouse and human cells. Taken together our data suggest in mammalian cells SUPT3H is not required for the assembly of SAGA, general TBP recruitment to genes and cell survival, but it is important for regulating a limited set of genes.

### Sample Protocol
Prior to immunoprecipitations, Protein-A or Protein-G Sepharose beads were washed three times with filtered 1x PBS and two times with IP100 buffer (25 mM Tris-HCl 7.5, 5 mM MgCl2, 10% glycerol, 0,1% NP40, 100 mM KCl, 2 mM DTT and 1x protein inhibitor cocktail). Nuclear extracts were pre-cleared with 1/5 of 50% bead slurry for 2 hours at 4°C with agitation. For antibody binding, the 50% bead slurry was incubated with 5-8 µg of the respective antibodies for 2 hours at 4°C with agitation. After incubation, beads were washed three times with IP500 buffer and twice with IP100 buffer before addition of 1/5 volume of the 50% antibody-bead slurry to the pre-cleared nuclear extracts. Nuclear extracts were incubated with beads overnight at 4°C with agitation. After incubation, resins were washed three times with IP500 buffer and twice with IP100 buffer. Complexes were eluted from the beads using two subsequent 0.1 M glycine pH 2.8 elutions at room temperature and with agitation. Importantly, prior to anti-TAF10 IPs in mESC, nuclear extracts were depleted for TFIID by overnight incubation with beads coated with antibodies targeting the TFIID-specific subunit TAF7. This allowed to increase the purification efficiency for SAGA in anti-TAF10 IPs given that TAF10 is shared between the SAGA and TFIID complexes. All other IPs have been performed without pre-depletion. Eluates were then characterized by western blot or mass spectrometry analyses.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified by database searching using SequestHT (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with Proteome Discoverer 2.4 software (PD2.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific) on Homo sapiens database (UniProt, reviewed, release 2020_11_27, 20309 entries) and Mus musculus database (UniProt, non-reviewed, release 2020_07_13, 55428 entries). Precursor and fragment mass tolerances were set at 10 ppm and 0.6 Da respectively, and up to 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Oxidation (M) was set as variable modification, and Carbamidomethylation (C) as fixed modification. Peptides were filtered with a false discovery rate (FDR) at 1%, rank 1 and proteins were identified with 1 unique peptide. Normalized spectral abundance factors (NSAF) were calculated for each protein as described earlier. First to obtain spectral abundance factors (SAF), spectral counts identifying a protein were divided by the protein length represented by the number of amino acids. Then to calculate NSAF values, the SAF values of each protein were divided by the sum of SAF values of all detected proteins. Protein mixtures were Trichloroacetic acid (Sigma Aldrich, Cat# T0699) -precipitated overnight at 4°C. Samples were then centrifuged at 14000 rpm for 30 minutes at 4°C. Pellet were washed twice with 1 ml cold acetone and centrifuged at 14000 rpm  for 10 minutes at 4°C. Washed pellet were then urea-denatured with 8 M urea (Sigma Aldrich, Cat# U0631) in Tris-HCl 0.1 mM, reduced with 5 mM TCEP (tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine) for 30 minutes, and then alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma Aldrich, Cat# I1149) for 30 minutes in the dark. Both reduction and alkylation were performed at room temperature and under agitation (850 rpm). Double digestion was performed with endoproteinase Lys-C (Wako, Cat# 125-05061) at a ratio 1/100 (enzyme/proteins) in 8 M urea for 4h, followed by an overnight modified trypsin digestion (Promega, Cat# V5111) at a ratio 1/100 (enzyme/proteins) in 2 M urea. Both Lys-C and Trypsin digestions were performed at 37°C. Peptide mixtures were then desalted on C18 spin-column and dried on Speed-Vacuum before LC-MS/MS analysis. Samples were analyzed using an Ultimate 3000 nano-RSLC (Thermo Scientific, San Jose California) coupled in line with a LTQ-Orbitrap ELITE mass spectrometer via a nano-electrospray ionization source (Thermo Scientific, San Jose California). Peptide mixtures were loaded on a C18 Acclaim PepMap100 trap-column (75 µm ID x 2 cm, 3 µm, 100Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 3.5 minutes at 5 µL/min with 2% Acetonitrile MS grade (Sigma Aldrich, Cat# 1207802), 0.1% formic acid (FA, Sigma Aldrich, Cat# 94318)in H2O and then separated on a C18 Accucore nano-column (75 µm ID x 50 cm, 2.6 µm, 150Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a 90 minutes linear gradient from 5% to 35% buffer B (A: 0.1% FA in H2O / B: 99% Acetonitrile MS grade, 0.1% FA in H2O), then a 20 minutes linear gradient from 35% to 80% buffer B, followed with 5 min at 99% B and 5 minutes of regeneration at 5% B. The total duration was set to 120 minutes at a flow rate of 220 nl/min. The oven temperature was kept constant at 38°C. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ionization mode, in data-dependent mode with survey scans from m/z 350-1500 acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 400. The 20 most intense peaks (TOP20) from survey scans were selected for further fragmentation in the Linear Ion Trap with an isolation window of 2.0 Da and were fragmented by CID with normalized collision energy of 35%. Unassigned and single charged states were rejected. The Ion Target Value for the survey scans (in the Orbitrap) and the MS2 mode (in the Linear Ion Trap) were set to 1E6 and 5E3 respectively and the maximum injection time was set to 100 ms for both scan modes. Dynamic exclusion was used. Exclusion duration was set to 20 s, repeat count was set to 1 and exclusion mass width was ± 10 ppm.

### Publication Abstract
Coactivator complexes regulate chromatin accessibility and transcription. SAGA (Spt-Ada-Gcn5 Acetyltransferase) is an evolutionary conserved coactivator complex. The core module scaffolds the entire SAGA complex and adopts a histone octamer-like structure, which consists of six histone-fold domain (HFD)-containing proteins forming three histone-fold (HF) pairs, to which the double HFD-containing SUPT3H adds one HF pair. Spt3, the yeast ortholog of SUPT3H, interacts genetically and biochemically with the TATA binding protein (TBP) and contributes to global RNA polymerase II (Pol II) transcription. Here&#xa0;we demonstrate that (i) SAGA purified from human U2OS or mouse embryonic stem cells (mESC) can assemble without SUPT3H, (ii) SUPT3H is not essential for mESC survival, but required for their growth and self-renewal,&#xa0;and (iii) the loss of SUPT3H from mammalian cells affects the transcription of only a specific subset of genes. Accordingly, in the absence of SUPT3H no major change in TBP accumulation at gene promoters was observed. Thus, SUPT3H is not required for the assembly of SAGA, TBP recruitment, or overall Pol II transcription, but plays a role in mESC growth and self-renewal. Our data further suggest that yeast and mammalian SAGA complexes contribute to transcription regulation by distinct mechanisms.

### Keywords
And lászló tora, Stéphane d. vincent, Elisabeth scheer, Elisabeth lata bastian morlet, Veronique fischer, Damien plassard, Didier devys

### Affiliations
CNRS
Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, 67404 Illkirch, France

### Submitter
Luc Negroni

### Lab Head
Dr László Tora
Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, 67404 Illkirch, France


