### Accession
PXD032067

### Title
Novel Events, Gene Model Correction of Mycobacterium Avium by Proteogenomic Analysis

### Description
Mycobacterium avium is one of the prominent disease causing bacteria in humans. It causes lymphadenitis, chronic pulmonary and extrapulmonary and disseminated infections in adults, children and immunocompromised humans. M. avium has ~4,500 predicted gene models, out of which not all are identified at proteomic level.  Proteomic database search followed by proteogenomic analysis helps in the correction of gene models, identification of novel exons/genes, variant proteins. As part of this study, we performed proteomic analysis of M. avium cultures by data-dependent acquisition (DDA) and data-independent acquisition (DIA) method followed by proteogenomic analysis of M. avium proteomic data. M. avium culture was subjected to proteomic sample preparation. The resulting peptides were acquired in 120min DDA (12 bRPLC) and DIA method using EASY nLC 1200 liquid chromatogram system coupled to Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer. The resulting DDA raw files were searched sequentially against the M. avium proteome database, Mycobacterium tuberculosis H37Rv and Ra proteome database (Mtb), M. avium genome six-frame translated proteome and variant proteins database, respectively. The database search result was converted into a spectral library and used for DIA data search for the validation of GSSPs and variant peptides. The database search of M. avium DDA has resulted in the identification of 2,954 M. avium proteins, 128 Mtb proteins, 174 GSSPs (M. avium genome six-frame translated proteome) and 795 SNPs corresponding to 612 proteins (variant proteins database), respectively. The M. avium proteome database search has covered 62.09% of the proteome with the identification of 2,954 proteins out of 4,757 proteins in the database. From the manual categorization of 174 GSSPs, we observed 23 N-terminal extensions, 142 pseudogene coding peptides and one each novel exon and short peptide, respectively.

### Sample Protocol
M. avium (Mav) strain 104 (Taxon ID: 243243) carrying a cyan-fluorescent-protein expressing plasmid was cultured in 7H9 medium (BD Difco; Becton Dickinson) supplemented with albumin dextrose-catalase, 0.2% glycerol, 0.05% Tween80 and 20µg/ml Kanamycin to mid-log phase (OD600 (0.4-0.5)). Cultures (n=3) were centrifuged at 10,000 rpm for 10min at 4°C RT, the supernatant was discarded. The pellet was resuspended in 500µl cell lysis buffer (4% Sodium Dodecyl Sulphate, 1mM of Sodium orthovandate, 2.5mM of Sodium pyrophosphate and 1mM of ß-glycerophosphate in 50mM of Triethylammonium bicarbonate) and vortexed for 5 min. Cells were disrupted by sonication and this was followed by a 10 min incubation step at 90°C. After centrifugation (20,000xg for 10min at 4°C), the protein amount determined using a BCA assay. An equal amount of protein samples of M. avium were reduced with 10 mM of DTT at 60°C for 45 min and alkylated with 20 mM of IAA with 30 min of incubation under dark condition at RT. Finally, protein samples were subjected to overnight digestion with trypsin protease enzyme at 1:20 ratio. Post trypsin digestion, M. avium samples were desalted using C18 StageTips, where peptides bound to the C18 were eluted by passing 0.1% formic acid (FA) in 40% acetonitrile (ACN). The desalted M. avium peptide samples were loaded on to a C18 StageTip and fractioned into 12 fractions by passing elution buffers containing varying concentrations of ACN in 10mM TEABC. All the 12 fractions were vacuum evaporated and subjected for DDA using EASY-nLC 1200 liquid chromatography system connected to Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer. Each fraction was resuspended with 0.1% FA (Mobile Phase A) and loaded onto a 96 well plate. Peptide mixture sample in the well was loaded onto a trap column (Acclaim PepMap™ 100, 75 μm X 2 cm, nanoViper, C18, 3 μm, 100Å) and then made to elute out by passing 0.1% FA in 80% ACN (Mobile Phase B). Whereas, the separation of peptides based on their hydrophobicity was performed in the analytical column (PepMap™ RSLC C18, 2 μm, 100Å, 50 μm × 15 cm) by increasing the Mobile Phase B in gradient mode for 120 min at 300 nL/min flow rate. The columns equilibration prior to each run and sample loading was performed by passing mobile phase A (0.1% FA). Finally, the % B was kept at 100% for 9 min. Column temperature was set for 45°C. Peptides eluted from the column were ionized in positive ion mode at EASY-Spray™ source with spray voltage and ion transfer tube temperature of 1.9 kV and 275°C, respectively. Ionized peptides were acquired in DDA mode with 3 sec cycle time. Under FullMS scan, peptide precursors ranging between 400-1600 m/z were acquired in Orbitrap with the mass resolution of 120 K. The automatic gain control (AGC) and maximum ion injection time (Max. IT) for the precursor scan were 2e5 and 50 ms, respectively. Precursors with charge state (z) between 2-7 and intensity ≥ 5e3 were separated using Quadrupole with isolation window of 1 m/z and isolation offset of 0.5 m/z. Quadrupole isolated precursors were fragmented under HCD with collision energy of 35±3%. Finally, the fragment ions were acquired in Orbitrap at 60 K resolution. MS/MS scan range mode was set to “Auto” with AGC and Max. IT were 1e5 and 200 ms, respectively. All the three biological replicates of digested M. avium were acquired in technical triplicates using a 120 min fixed window data-independent acquisition (DIA) method (30 X 25 Da isolation windows for the mass range 400-1121 m/z) using EASY-nLC 1200 liquid chromatogram system coupled to Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer. Columns, LC parameters and conditions used in the DDA experiment were used here as well. Meanwhile, a pool of digested M. avium replicates was acquired 7 times as part of gas phase fractionation (GPF) in between the fixed window DIA runs as mentioned by Searl et. al. (2020) and Pino et. al. (2020). Here, the LC-MS parameter were set same as that of fixed window DIA methods except the precursor isolation window. A total of 7 precursor isolation schemes were generated in Skyline for the MS range 400-1100 m/z with staggered/ overlapping isolation window of 4 Da. In total, 7 DIA methods were generated and each GPF acquisition was used with separate method.

### Data Protocol
All the raw files were searched against the M. avium proteome database (M. avium hominissuis OCU464, RefSeq, NCBI: 4,757 sequences) using Sequest HT and MSAmanda search engines in Proteome Discoverer v2.2 (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). A common contaminant proteins database (116 sequences) was also included for the search. The unassigned spectra files from each search were extracted and searched sequentially against a non-redundant proteome database of Mtb H37Rv and H37Ra strains (5,745 sequences), M. avium genome (GCF_001865635.4_ASM186563v4), six-frame translated genome database (121,811 sequences), and variant proteins database (50,774 sequences) generated using missense variants identified from variant calling approach. Trypsin was set as protease enzyme with maximum missed cleave and minimum peptide length was set two and seven, respectively. Proteins were subjected for in-silico tryptic digestion and the resulting peptides were used for spectrum centric search. The peptide spectrum matches (PSM) with precursor tolerance ≤ 10 ppm and fragment tolerance ≤ 0.02 Da were subjected for false discovery rate (FDR) calculation using percolator module. Commonly found modifications such as carbamidomethylation of cysteine (C) was set as fixed modification. Whereas, oxidation of methionine (M) and acetylation of protein N-terminus were set as variable modifications. Finally, peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) with 1% FDR (q-value < 0.01) were considered as true identifications and used for further analysis. All the 7 GPF raw files were converted to mzML format using ProteoWizard. Filters such as, demultiplex (Overlap only) with 10 ppm mass error and peak picking at MS1 and 2 level were used. The mzML files were searched against the Prosit generated peptide spectral library of M. avium using EncyclopeDIA search algorithm and also against the M. avium proteome database using Walnut search algorithm in EncylopedDIA. The parameters used were; Target/Decoy Approach: Normal Target/Decoy; Precursor Window Width: -1; Enzyme: Trypsin; Fixed: C+57 (Carbamidomethyl); Fragmentation: HCD (Y-only); Precursor Mass Tolerance: 10 ppm; Fragment Mass Tolerance: 10 ppm; Maximum Missed Cleavage: 1; Percolator version: v3-01; Number of Quantitative Ions: 5; Charge range: 2-3. Finally, the results from individual GPF files were merged and saved as a chromatogram library. The database search results were converted into Skyline compatible spectral library and used for the Fixed window DIA raw data search using Skyline. Peptides identified in the chromatogram library were used to calibrate an iRT model in Skyline. Finally, peptide precursors were reintegrated using a decoy trained mProphet peak scoring model. Peptide precursors with q-values < 0.01 were considered as true identifications.

### Publication Abstract
Mycobacterium avium is one of the prominent disease-causing bacteria in humans. It causes lymphadenitis, chronic and extrapulmonary, and disseminated infections in adults, children, and immunocompromised patients. M.&#xa0;avium has &#x223c;4500 predicted protein-coding regions on average, which can help discover several variants at the proteome level. Many of them are potentially associated with virulence; thus, identifying such proteins can be a helpful feature in developing panel-based theranostics. In line with such a long-term goal, we carried out an in-depth proteomic analysis of M.&#xa0;avium with both data-dependent and data-independent acquisition methods. Further, a set of proteogenomic investigations were carried out using (i) a protein database for Mycobacterium tuberculosis, (ii) an M.&#xa0;avium genome six-frame-translated database, and (iii) a variant protein database of M.&#xa0;avium. A search of mass spectrometry data against M.&#xa0;avium protein database resulted in identifying 2954 proteins. Further, proteogenomic analyses aided in identifying 1301 novel peptide sequences and correcting translation start sites for 15 proteins. Ultimately, we created a spectral library of M.&#xa0;avium proteins, including novel genome search-specific peptides and variant peptides detected in this study. We validated the spectral library by a data-independent acquisition of the M.&#xa0;avium proteome. Thus, we present an M.&#xa0;avium spectral library of 29,033 peptide precursors supported by 0.4 million fragment ions for further use by the biomedical community.

### Keywords
Dda, Proteogenomics, Mycobacterium avium, Lc-ms/ms, Dia, Variant calling

### Affiliations
Professor and Deputy Director, Center for Systems Biology and Molecular Medicine Yenepoya Research Centre Yenepoya (Deemed to be University) University Road, Deralakatte Mangalore 575018, India
Institute of Bioinformatics, Bangalore, Karnataka, India.

### Submitter
Keshava Prasad T. S.

### Lab Head
Dr T. S. Keshava Prasad
Professor and Deputy Director, Center for Systems Biology and Molecular Medicine Yenepoya Research Centre Yenepoya (Deemed to be University) University Road, Deralakatte Mangalore 575018, India


