### Accession
PXD026434

### Title
Pyruvate kinase M2 controls lipid homeostasis via regulation of SREBPs activation and intestinal cholesterol absorption

### Description
The pyruvate kinase M2 isoform (PKM2) is preferentially expressed in cancer to regulate anabolic metabolism. However, the metabolic requirements of PKM2 in tumorigenesis have yielded contradictory results. Herein we discovered that this glycolytic enzyme regulates lipid homeostasis in cancer cell autonomous manner and at systemic levels. Transmembrane protein 33 (TMEM33) was identified as a downstream effector of PKM2, whose expression level positively correlates with plasma total cholesterol level in vivo. Loss of PKM2 leads to up-regulation of TMEM33, which recruits ring finger protein 5 (RNF5) to promote SCAP ubiquitination and degradation, thereby inhibiting Golgi translocation and activation of sterol regulatory element binding protein 1 (SREBP1). Moreover, global PKM2 knockout promoted allografted tumor growth, at least partially attributes to the elevated plasma cholesterol level caused by increased intestinal Niemann-Pick C1-Like 1 (NPC1L1) to facilitate cholesterol absorption. Collectively, PKM2-TMEM33 axis modulates cell autonomous lipid metabolism by regulating SREBP activation. PKM2 in small intestine plays critical functions in controlling systemic cholesterol level. Overall, our results underscore unappreciated functions of PKM2 in lipid homeostasis and imply that combining an allosteric activator of PKM2 with NPC1L1 inhibitor represents a therapeutic invention for cancer treatment.

### Sample Protocol
Cells with three biological and three technical replicates were lysed in 8M Urea buffer containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Thermo Fisher), followed by 1 min of sonication (3-s on and 3-s off, amplitude 25%). The lysate was reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 56℃ for 30 min and alkylated with 20mM iodoacetamide at room temperature in the dark for additional 15 min. About 100 µg of protein samples were then digested with trypsin at trypsin/protein ratio of 1:100 overnight at 37 °C. Peptides were extracted, dried (SpeedVac, Eppendorf) and concentrations of peptide mixture were measured by peptide assay (Thermo). Samples were lyophilized and stored in -80 °C until use.Treatment Cells and Parental cells with three biological and three technical replicates were lysed in 8M Urea buffer containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Thermo Fisher), followed by 1 min of sonication (3-s on and 3-s off, amplitude 25%). The lysate was reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 56℃ for 30 min and alkylated with 20mM iodoacetamide at room temperature in the dark for additional 15 min. About 100 µg of protein samples were then digested using trypsin at an enzyme to protein mass ratio of 1:100 overnight at 37 °C. Peptides were extracted, dried (SpeedVac, Eppendorf) and concentrations of peptide mixture were measured by peptide assay (Thermo). Samples were lyophilized and stored in -80 °C until use.

### Data Protocol
The liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) detection system consisted of a nanoflow high-performance liquid chromatograph (HPLC) instrument (Dionex UltiMate 3000 UPLC system, Thermo Fisher) coupled to an Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) with a nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher). In brief, 0.5 μg of peptide mixture resolved in buffer A (0.1% formic acid (FA)) were loaded onto a 75 µm x 15 cm fabricated column which was filled with 1.7 µm Ethylene Bridged Hybrid packing materials (130 Å, Waters), over a 126-min linear gradient of 3–45% Mobile Phase B (buffer A, 0.1% FA in water; buffer B, 0.1% FA in ACN) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The MS analysis was performed in a data-dependent manner using an Orbitrap mass analyser. For a full mass spectrometry survey scan, the target value was 1 × 105 and the scan ranged from 300 to 1,500 m/z at a resolution of 60,000 and a maximum injection time of 100 ms. For the MS2 scan, up to 15 of the most intense precursor ions from a survey scan were selected for MS/MS and detected by the Orbitrap at a mass resolution of 15,000 at m/z 400. Only spectra with a charge state of 2–6 were selected for fragmentation by higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy of 30%. The automatic gain control for MS/MS was set to 8e3, with maximum ion injection times of 100ms. Dynamic exclusion time was 45 s, and the window for isolating the precursors was 1.4m/z.Protein identification and quantification by MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.8) based database searching, using the integrated Andromeda search engine with FDR < 1% at peptide and protein level. The tandem mass spectra were searched against the human UniProt database (version 20200219, 20,193 sequences). A reverse database for the decoy search was generated automatically in MaxQuant. Enzyme specificity was set to ‘Trypsin’, and a minimum number of seven amino acids were required for peptide identification. For label-free protein quantification (LFQ), the MaxQuant LFQ algorithm was used to quantitate the MS signals, and the proteins’ intensities were represented in LFQ intesnity3. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as the fixed modification. The oxidation of M and acetylation of the protein N-terminal were set as the variable modifications. The first search mass tolerance was 20 ppm, and the main search peptide tolerance was 4.5ppm. The false discovery rates of the peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) and proteins were set to less than 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Pkm2, Lc-ms/ms, Lipid

### Affiliations
UW madison
School of Pharmacy, UW madiosn

### Submitter
Min Ma

### Lab Head
Dr lingjun Li
School of Pharmacy, UW madiosn


