### Accession
PXD013311

### Title
Profiling of epigenetic features in clinical samples reveals novel widespread changes in cancer

### Description
Aberrations in histone post-translational modifications (PTMs), as well as in the histone modifying enzymes (HMEs) that catalyze their deposition and removal, have been reported in many tumors, and many epigenetic inhibitors are currently under investigation for cancer treatment. Therefore, profiling epigenetic features in cancer could have important implications for the discovery of both biomarkers for patient stratification and novel epigenetic targets. In this study, we employed mass spectrometry based approaches to comprehensively profile histone H3 PTMs in a panel of normal and tumoral tissues for different cancer models

### Sample Protocol
Histones were extracted from tumor and normal tissues. About 5-10 μg of histones per run per sample were mixed with an approximately equal amount of super-SILAC mix and either separated on a 17% SDS-PAGE gel, or subjected to C18 StageTip column enrichment. For in-gel digestions, bands corresponding to histone H3 were excised, chemically alkylated with D6-acetic anhydride, in-gel digested with trypsin (the combination of chemical alkylation and trypsin digestion generates an “Arg-C-like” digestion).Peptide mixtures were separated by reversed-phase chromatography on an in-house-made 25-cm column (inner diameter 75 μm, outer diameter 350 μm outer diameter, 1.9  μm ReproSil, Pur C18AQ medium), using a ultra nanoflow high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) system (EASY-nLC™ 1000, Thermo Fisher Scientic), or an EASY-Spray column (Thermo Fisher Scientic), 50-cm long (inner diameter  75 µm, PepMap C18, 2 µm particles), which were connected online  to a Q Exactive HF instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific) through a Nanospray Flex™ or an EASY-Spray™ Ion Sources (Thermo Fisher Scientific), respectively. Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid (FA) in ddH2O and solvent B was 80% ACN plus 0.1% FA. Peptides were injected in an aqueous 1% TFA solution at a flow rate of 500 nl/min and were separated with a 50/100-min linear gradient of 0–40% solvent B for in-gel digested samples

### Data Protocol
Acquired RAW data were analyzed using the integrated MaxQuant software v.1.5.2.8, which performed peak list generation and protein identification using the Andromeda search engine. The Uniprot HUMAN_histones 1502 database was used for histone peptide identification. Enzyme specificity was set to Arg-C. The estimated false discovery rate (FDR) of all peptide identifications was set at a maximum of 1%.  The mass tolerance was set to 6 ppm for precursor and fragment ions. One missed cleavage was allowed, and the minimum peptide length was set to 6 amino acids. Variable modifications for in-gel digestions included lysine D6-acetylation (+45.0294 Da), lysine monomethylation (+ 59.0454, corresponding to the sum of D6-acetylation (+45.0294) and monomethylation (+14.016 Da)), dimethylation (+28.031 Da), trimethylation (+42.046 Da), and lysine acetylation (+42.010 Da). To reduce the search time and the rate of false positives, which increase with increasing the number of variable modifications included in the database search, the raw data were analyzed through multiple parallel MaxQuant jobs, setting different combinations of variable modifications

### Publication Abstract
Aberrations in histone post-translational modifications (PTMs), as well as in the histone modifying enzymes (HMEs) that catalyze their deposition and removal, have been reported in many tumors and many epigenetic inhibitors are currently under investigation for cancer treatment. Therefore, profiling epigenetic features in cancer could have important implications for the discovery of both biomarkers for patient stratification and novel epigenetic targets. In this study, we employed mass spectrometry-based approaches to comprehensively profile histone H3 PTMs in a panel of normal and tumoral tissues for different cancer types, identifying various changes, some of which appear to be a consequence of the increased proliferation rate of tumors, while others are cell-cycle independent. Histone PTM changes found in tumors partially correlate with alterations of the gene expression profiles of HMEs obtained from publicly available data and are generally lost in culture conditions. Through this analysis, we identified tumor- and subtype-specific histone PTM changes, but also widespread changes in the levels of histone H3 K9me3 and K14ac marks. In particular, H3K14ac showed a cell-cycle independent decrease in all the seven tumor/tumor subtype models tested and could represent a novel epigenetic hallmark of cancer.&amp;nbsp.

### Keywords
Histone post-translational modifications, Proteomics, Epigenetics, Mass spectrometry, Cancer

### Affiliations
Istituto Europeo di Oncologia
Department of Experimental Oncology, IEO, Milan

### Submitter
Roberta Noberini

### Lab Head
Dr Tiziana Bonaldi
Department of Experimental Oncology, IEO, Milan


