### Accession
PXD037835

### Title
Cellular responses in yeast proteostasis mutants affected in diverse branches of the protein quality control system

### Description
Protein quality controls (PQC) systems rely on three main activities to prevent the accumulation of misfolded proteins upon stress conditions and aging: refolding, degradation and sequestration. In Saccharomyces cerevisiae the Hsp70 chaperone system plays a central role in protein refolding, while degradation is predominantly executed by the ubiquitin proteasome system (UPS). The sequestrases Hsp42 and Btn2 deposit misfolded proteins in cytosolic and nuclear inclusions. This activity prevents exhaustion of limited Hsp70 resources by restricting the accessibility of misfolded proteins upon sequestration. Sequestrase mutants therefore show negative genetic interactions with yeast Hsp70 co-chaperone mutants (fes1D hsp104D, DD) that suffer from low Hsp70 capacity. Growth of DDbtn2D mutants is highly temperature-sensitive and results in proteostasis breakdown at non-permissive temperatures. Here, we probed for the role of the UPS system in maintaining protein homeostasis in DDbtn2D cells, affected in two major PQC branches. We show that DDD cells induce expression of diverse stress-related pathways including the UPS to counteract the proteostasis defects. UPS dependent degradation of the stringent Hsp70 substrate Luciferase in the mutant cells mirrors such compensatory activities of the PQC system. However, the enhanced UPS activity does not improve but aggravates the phenotypes of DDbtn2D cells. Reducing UPS activity in the mutant by lowering the levels of functional 26S proteasomes improved growth, increased refolding yield of the Luciferase reporter and attenuated global stress responses. This indicates that an imbalance between Hsp70-dependent refolding and UPS-mediated degradation activities strongly affects protein homeostasis of yeast Hsp70 capacity mutants and contributes to their severe growth phenotypes.

### Sample Protocol
Yeast arg4∆ lys1∆ cells were grown in SC medium in presence of heavy isotopes of L-arginine and L-lysine (Arg4 and Lys8), while respective derivatives of proteostasis mutants (fes1∆ hsp104∆ (∆∆), ∆∆btn2∆, ∆∆btn2∆rpn4∆) were grown in presence of regular (light) amino acids. Total protein extracts were prepared and equal amounts of WT and mutant total extracts (each 0.1 OD600) were mixed and separated on SDS-PAGE. The SDS gel was stained for 4 h in Quick-Coomassie (Abcam), followed by destaining in sterile water overnight. Samples were mixed with an internal standard, heavy SILAC (K8, R10) veast wt and separated by SDS PAGE for about 2 cm. Each lane was cut into four pieces and processed as described previously (1). In brief, proteins in gel pieces were reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin. Peptides were extracted from the gel pieces, concentrated in a vacuum centrifuge and dissolved in 15 µl 0.1% TFA. Nanoflow LC-MS2 analysis was performed with an Ultimate 3000 liquid chromatography system coupled to an QExactive HF (Thermo Fisher). An in-house packed analytical column (75 µm x 200 mm, 1.9 µm ReprosilPur-AQ 120 C18 material (Dr. Maisch, Germany) was used. Peptides were separated in a 120 min linear gradient (3-40% B) (Solvent A: 0.1% formic acid / 1% acetonitrile, solvent B: 0.1% formic acid, 89.9% acetonitrile). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode, automatically switching between MS and MS2. MS spectra (m/z 400–1600) were acquired in the Orbitrap at 60,000 (m/z 400) resolution and MS2 spectra were generated for up to 15 precursors with normalized collision energy of 27%.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS spectra were searched against the Uniprot KB yeast database and a contaminants database (MaxQuant 1.6.2.6) using Proteome Discoverer 2.5 with Sequest (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Trypsin was specified as enzyme. Carbamidomethyl was set as fixed modification of cysteine and oxidation (methionine), deamidation (asparagines, glutamine) and acetylation (protein N-terminus) as variable modifications. Mass tolerance was  set to 10ppm and 0.5 Da for MS and MS/MS, respectively. A false discovery rate was set to 0.01 using Percolator.

### Publication Abstract
To counteract proteotoxic stress and cellular aging, protein quality control (PQC) systems rely on the refolding, degradation and sequestration of misfolded proteins. In <i>Saccharomyces cerevisiae</i> the Hsp70 chaperone system plays a central role in protein refolding, while degradation is predominantly executed by the ubiquitin proteasome system (UPS). The sequestrases Hsp42 and Btn2 deposit misfolded proteins in cytosolic and nuclear inclusions, thereby restricting the accessibility of misfolded proteins to Hsp70 and preventing the exhaustion of limited Hsp70 resources. Therefore, in yeast, sequestrase mutants show negative genetic interactions with double mutants lacking the Hsp70 co-chaperone Fes1 and the Hsp104 disaggregase (<i>fes1&#x394; hsp104&#x394;</i>, <i>&#x394;&#x394;</i>) and suffering from low Hsp70 capacity. Growth of <i>&#x394;&#x394;btn2&#x394;</i> mutants is highly temperature-sensitive and results in proteostasis breakdown at non-permissive temperatures. Here, we probed for the role of the ubiquitin proteasome system in maintaining protein homeostasis in <i>&#x394;&#x394;btn2&#x394;</i> cells, which are affected in two major protein quality control branches. We show that <i>&#x394;&#x394;btn2&#x394;</i> cells induce expression of diverse stress-related pathways including the ubiquitin proteasome system to counteract the proteostasis defects. Ubiquitin proteasome system dependent degradation of the stringent Hsp70 substrate firefly Luciferase in the mutant cells mirrors such compensatory activities of the protein quality control system. Surprisingly however, the enhanced ubiquitin proteasome system activity does not improve but aggravates the growth defects of <i>&#x394;&#x394;btn2&#x394;</i> cells. Reducing ubiquitin proteasome system activity in the mutant by lowering the levels of functional 26S proteasomes improved growth, increased refolding yield of the Luciferase reporter and attenuated global stress responses. Our findings indicate that an imbalance between Hsp70-dependent refolding, sequestration and ubiquitin proteasome system-mediated degradation activities strongly affects protein homeostasis of Hsp70 capacity mutants and contributes to their severe growth phenotypes.

### Keywords
Hsp70, Proteostasis, Chaperone, Sequestrases, Proteasome

### Affiliations
Core facility for mass spectrometry and proteomics ZMBH, University Heidelberg Im Neuenheimer Feld 282 69120 Heidelberg Germany
ZMBH, Im Neuenheimer Feld 282, 69122 Heidelberg

### Submitter
Thomas Ruppert

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Ruppert
Core facility for mass spectrometry and proteomics ZMBH, University Heidelberg Im Neuenheimer Feld 282 69120 Heidelberg Germany


