### Accession
PXD021038

### Title
Phosphoproteomics identify arachidonic-acid-regulated signal transduction pathways modulating macrophage functions in ovarian cancer

### Description
Arachidonic acid (AA) is a polyunsaturated fatty acid present at high concentrations in the ovarian cancer (OC) microenvironment and is associated with poor clinical outcome. In the present study, we elucidate a potential link between AA and pro-tumorigenic macrophage polarization.  Methods: AA-triggered signal transduction was studied in primary monocyte-derived macrophages (MDMs) by phosphoproteomics, transcriptional profiling, measurement of intracellular Ca2+ accumulation and reactive oxygen species production in conjunction with bioinformatic analyses. Functional effects were investigated by actin filament staining, quantification of macropinocytosis and analysis of extracellular vesicle release. Results: We identified the ASK1 - p38 (MAPK13/14) axis as a central constituent of signal transduction pathways triggered by non-metabolized AA. This pathway was induced by the Ca2+-triggered activation of calmodulin kinase II, and to a minor extent by ROS generation in a subset of donors. Activated p38 in turn was linked to a transcriptional stress response associated with a poor relapse-free survival. Consistent with the phosphorylation of the p38 substrate HSP27 and the (de)phosphorylation of multiple regulators of Rho family GTPases, AA impaired actin filament organization and inhibited actin-driven macropinocytosis. AA also affected the phosphorylation of proteins regulating vesicle biogenesis, and consistently, AA enhanced the release of tetraspanin-containing exosomes. Finally, we identified phospholipase A2 Group 2A (PLA2G2A) as the clinically most relevant enzyme producing extracellular AA, providing further potentially theranostic options. Conclusion: Our results suggest that AA contributes to an unfavorable clinical outcome of OC by promoting the pro-tumorigenic phenotype of tumor-associated macrophages. Besides critical AA-regulated signal transduction proteins identified in the present study, PLA2G2A might represent a potential prognostic tool and therapeutic target to interfere with OC progression.

### Sample Protocol
Differentiation of the cells was performed as described above. The cells were serum starved for 40 h and then treated with 50 µM AA or solvent for 15 min.  Proteomic and phosphoproteomic analyses were performed in triplicate as described with modifications. 4% SDS, 100 mM Tris, pH 7.6 complemented with PhosStop (Roche) and Complete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) was used as a lyzis buffer and centrifugational extract clearing performed at 12000 rpm for 15 min at room temperature. Post-trypsinization, samples were acidified bringing them to 0.75% TFA. Starting from 400 ug protein extract per condition and replicate, 150 ug of peptides each were TMT labeled (6plex; channels 126-129) and combined by replicate to 600 μg samples, of which 50 μg were subjected to high pH reverse phase separation and 550 μg to TiSH. Following the batch enrichment steps of TiSH, ¾ of the product were HILIC fractionated and ¼ Measured un-fractionated. Documentation of liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry (LC/MS2) instrumentation and parametrization was extracted  as well as summarized from raw data using MARMoSET and is provided in the supplemental material.

### Data Protocol
The MaxQuant suite of algorithms (v. 1.6.8.0) together with the human canonical and isoforms UniProt database and parametrized as included in the supplemental information (downloaded on 2019/08/19; 173799 entries) were used for peptide/spectrum matching and quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
Arachidonic acid (AA) is a polyunsaturated fatty acid present at high concentrations in the ovarian cancer (OC) microenvironment and associated with a poor clinical outcome. In the present study, we have unraveled a potential link between AA and macrophage functions. <b>Methods:</b> AA-triggered signal transduction was studied in primary monocyte-derived macrophages (MDMs) by phosphoproteomics, transcriptional profiling, measurement of intracellular Ca<sup>2+</sup> accumulation and reactive oxygen species production in conjunction with bioinformatic analyses. Functional effects were investigated by actin filament staining, quantification of macropinocytosis and analysis of extracellular vesicle release. <b>Results:</b> We identified the ASK1 - p38&#x3b4;/&#x3b1; (MAPK13/14) axis as a central constituent of signal transduction pathways triggered by non-metabolized AA. This pathway was induced by the Ca<sup>2+</sup>-triggered activation of calmodulin kinase II, and to a minor extent by ROS generation in a subset of donors. Activated p38 in turn was linked to a transcriptional stress response associated with a poor relapse-free survival. Consistent with the phosphorylation of the p38 substrate HSP27 and the (de)phosphorylation of multiple regulators of Rho family GTPases, AA impaired actin filament organization and inhibited actin-driven macropinocytosis. AA also affected the phosphorylation of proteins regulating vesicle biogenesis, and consistently, AA enhanced the release of tetraspanin-containing exosome-like vesicles. Finally, we identified phospholipase A<sub>2</sub> group 2A (PLA2G2A) as the clinically most relevant enzyme producing extracellular AA, providing further potentially theranostic options. <b>Conclusion:</b> Our results suggest that AA contributes to an unfavorable clinical outcome of OC by impacting the phenotype of tumor-associated macrophages. Besides critical AA-regulated signal transduction proteins identified in the present study, PLA2G2A might represent a potential prognostic tool and therapeutic target to interfere with OC progression.

### Keywords
Ovarian cancer; arachidonic acid; macrophages

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Heart and Lung Research
Tranlational Oncology Group, Center for Tumor Biology and Immunology, Philipps University, Marburg, Germany

### Submitter
Johannes Graumann

### Lab Head
Dr Rolf Müller
Tranlational Oncology Group, Center for Tumor Biology and Immunology, Philipps University, Marburg, Germany


