### Accession
PXD045840

### Title
A framework for performing single-cell spatial metabolomics with cell-type specific protein profiling for tissue systems biology

### Description
Metabolic reprogramming in cancer and immune cells occurs to support their increasing energy needs in biological tissues. Here we propose Single Cell SPAtially resolved METabolic (scSpaMet) framework for joint protein-metabolite profiling of single immune and cancer cells in male human tissues by incorporating untargeted spatial metabolomics and targeted multiplexed protein imaging in a single pipeline. We utilized the scSpaMet pipeline to profile cell types and spatial metabolomic maps of 19507, 31156, and 8215 single cells in human lung cancer, tonsil and endometrium tissues, respectively. ScSpaMet analysis revealed cell type-dependent metabolite profiles and local metabolite competition of neighboring single cells in human tissues. Deep learning-based joint embedding revealed unique metabolite states within cell types. Trajectory inference showed metabolic patterns along cell differentiation paths.  Here we show scSpaMet’s ability to quantify and visualize the cell-type specific and spatially resolved metabolic-protein mapping as an emerging tool for systems-level understanding of tissue biology.

### Sample Protocol
Patients’ samples for lung tumor were obtained from a tumor microarray (TMA) purchased from a third-party vendor (Biomax, US) with the tissue ID: BS04081a. This TMA included a total of 63 tissue cores of formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) non-small cell lung adenocarcinoma and adjacent normal lung tissue samples obtained from 7 patients. We imaged 21 regions of interest from 7 cores. Each tissue core had a diameter of 1 mm and a thickness of 5-µm which is within the tissue thickness recommended for IMC (≤7-µm). The tissue labeling protocol was followed as previously reported in the protocol35 including antigen retrieval, protein blocking, metal-tagged antibody labeling, and nucleus counterstains. After the staining process is complete, the stained tissues were stored at 4oC until imaging time. The human tonsil tissue sections were from TissueArray.com under the IDs HuFPT161. Tonsil sample 1 had tissue ID SU1 and tonsil sample 2 had tissue ID SM2. Tonsil sample 1 had 5 imaging regions of interest and tonsil sample 2 had 6 imaging regions of interest.

### Data Protocol
Each ROI image was extracted using MCD Viewer (v 1.0.560.2) with minimum threshold intensity of 0 and maximum threshold intensity of 50. Each image intensity range was then scaled to 0.1 and 99.9th intensity percentile for processing. Noise removal using a KNN filter77 is applied to reduce noise in the dataset.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human lung, Endometrium imc imaging, Tumor

### Affiliations
Georgia Institute of Technology

### Submitter
THOMAS HU

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Hu
Georgia Institute of Technology


