### Accession
PXD026710

### Title
Severe pantothenic acid deficiency induces alterations in the intestinal mucosal proteome of starter Pekin ducks

### Description
We characterized the intestinal mucosal proteome of six Pekin ducks from pantothenic acid-deficient (PAD) group and the pantothenic acid-adequate (control, CON) group.

### Sample Protocol
Intestinal mucosal tissues of ducks from each group (PAD or CON) were obtained immediately, snap frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at -80 °C. Three individual mucosal samples were randomly chosen from each group to conduct the iTRAQ assays. Proteins were extracted and digested. The digested samples were labelled according to the manufacturer’s protocol for 8-plex iTRAQ reagents (AB SCIEX, Foster City, USA) as follows: the PAD samples were labelled with iTRAQ tags 113, 114, and 115, and the CON samples were labelled with tags 116, 117, and 118. Labelled samples were mixed and fractionated into 20 fractions by HPLC (DINOEX Ultimate 3000 BioRS, Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA, USA) using a Durashell C18 column (5 µm, 100 Å, 4.6 × 250 mm). LC-electrospray ionization-MS/MS analysis was carried out with a Triple TOF 5600 plus system (AB SCIEX, Framingham, USA).

### Data Protocol
The original MS/MS file data for identification and quantitation were analysed against the database UniProt_Mallard_8839 using ProteinPilot Software version 4.5 (AB SCIEX). To minimize false-positive results, we counted only peptides at the 95% CI and a false discovery rate < 0.01, containing at least one unique peptide. For protein quantitation, a differentially expressed protein containing at least two unique spectra was used with a Fold Change (FC) value > 1.5 or < -1.5 with P < 0.05 between the PAD and the CON groups.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pekin ducks, Mucosal, Proteomics, Pantothenic acid deficiency

### Affiliations
Institute of Animal Sciences, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences

### Submitter
Jing Tang

### Lab Head
Dr Shuisheng Hou
Institute of Animal Sciences, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences


