### Accession
PXD002584

### Title
Proteomic profiling reveals central role of STAT signaling during retinal degeneration in the rd10 mouse model

### Description
The rd10 mouse is a model of retinitis pigmentosa characterized by the dysfunction of a rod-photoreceptor-specific phosphodiesterase. Compared to the rd1 mouse, retinal degeneration in the rd10 mouse begins later in age with a milder phenotype, making it ideal for investigating cell death and neuroprotective mechanisms. Alterations in the rd10 retina proteome at pre-, peak-, and post-degenerative time points were examined using a modified high-recovery filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method and label-free mass spectrometry, generating a unique proteomic dataset on almost 3000 proteins. Our data confirmed a period of protein expression similar to age-matched wild-type mice pre-degeneration, with decreases in proteins associated with phototransduction and increases in signaling proteins at peak- and post-degenerative stages. 123 proteins were differentially expressed the rd10 retinae during peak-degeneration compared to wild-type mice. Network analysis separated these proteins into a cluster of downregulated photoreceptor proteins, and one of upregulated signaling proteins centered around GFAP, STAT3, and STAT1. This is the first study to identify alterations in STAT1 in the rd10 mouse, which were confirmed with gene expression and immunoblotting experiments. This finding proves the efficacy of our approach, and that this dataset could serve as an information source for protein alterations in retinal degeneration.

### Sample Protocol
Wildtype and rd10 mice were sacrificed at PN14, PN21, and PN28 via cervical dislocation. The eyes were immediately enucleated, and the retina was dissected and lysed in 9 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 65 mM DTT. Each 4 samples of each group were digested with LysC and trypsn using a modified FASP protocol. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on an LTQ OrbitrapXL.

### Data Protocol
The acquired spectra of the different samples were loaded and analyzed using Progenesis LC-MS software (Version 2.5, Nonlinear Dynamics) for label-free quantification. Features with one or more than seven charges were excluded from further analyses. Samples were then allocated to their respective experimental and age groups. All MS/MS spectra were exported as Mascot generic files (mgf) and used for peptide identification with Mascot (version 2.4) using the Ensembl Mouse protein database (mus musculus; release 72, 51765 sequences, 23352282 residues). Search parameters used were 10ppm peptide mass tolerance, 0.6 Da fragment mass tolerance, one missed cleavage allowed, carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification, and methionine oxidation and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine were allowed as variable modifications. Mascot integrated decoy database search was set to a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% when searching was performed on the concatenated mgf files with a percolator ion score cut-off of 15 and an appropriate significance threshold p. Identifications were re-imported into Progenesis LC-MS. For quantification, only unique peptides of an identified protein were included and the total cumulative normalized abundance was calculated by summing the abundances of all peptides allocated to the respective protein. No minimal thresholds were set for the method of peak picking or selection of data to use for quantifications. This study utilized proteins identified and quantified by at least two peptides with a mascot percolator score of ≥ 15 or by one unique peptide with a percolator score of ≥ 30 for further analysis. A Student’s t-test comparing the normalized abundances of the individual proteins was used to determine differential abundances of proteins in the treatment groups (wild-type versus rd10), and a ratio average (rd10/wild-type) was calculated for each time point.

### Publication Abstract
The rd10 mouse is a model of retinitis pigmentosa characterized by the dysfunction of a rod-photoreceptor-specific phosphodiesterase. Compared to the rd1 mouse, retinal degeneration in the rd10 mouse begins later in age with a milder phenotype, making it ideal for investigating cell death and neuroprotective mechanisms. Alterations in the rd10 retina proteome at pre-, peak-, and postdegenerative time points were examined using a modified high-recovery filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method in combination with label-free quantitative mass spectrometry, generating a proteomic data set on almost 3000 proteins. Our data confirmed a period of protein expression similar to age-matched wild-type mice predegeneration, with decreases in proteins associated with phototransduction and increases in signaling proteins at peak- and postdegenerative stages. A total of 57 proteins were differentially expressed in the rd10 retinae during peak-degeneration, compared to those in wild-type mice after stringent FDR correction (q &lt; 0.05). Network analysis separated these proteins into one cluster of down-regulated photoreceptor proteins and one of up-regulated signaling proteins centered around GFAP, STAT3, and STAT1. This is the first study to identify alterations in STAT1 in the rd10 mouse, which were confirmed with gene expression and immunoblotting experiments, underpinning the efficacy of our approach. This unique proteomic data set on protein dynamics during retinal degeneration could serve as an information source for vision research in the future.

### Keywords
Label-free mass spectrometry; phospho-stat; retinal müller glial cells

### Affiliations
Research Unit Protein Science, Helmholtz Zentrum München, German Research Center for Environmental Health (GmbH), Neuherberg, Germany
Research Unit Protein Science, Helmholtz Center Munich

### Submitter
Juliane Merl-Pham

### Lab Head
Dr Stefanie M. Hauck
Research Unit Protein Science, Helmholtz Zentrum München, German Research Center for Environmental Health (GmbH), Neuherberg, Germany


