### Accession
PXD010689

### Title
Epigallocatechin-3-gallate restores hippocampal proteomic alterations driven by Dyrk1A overexpression in mice

### Description
The inhibition of DYRK1A (Dual Specificity Tyrosine-Phosphorylation-Regulated Kinase 1A) activity, triplicated in trisomy 21 subjects, has been proved as a promising therapy for Down syndrome. Epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG), a polyphenol of green tea, is an allosteric inhibitor of DYRK1A that showed beneficial pro-cognitive effects in clinical trials with DS individuals. However, EGCG induces several pharmacological effects, and there is no proof that the observed improvements result from DYRK1A inhibition. Besides, the direct consequences of Dyrk1A overexpression are not well defined.  We therefore used quantitative proteomics to decipher the proteome and phosphoproteome alterations resulting from Dyrk1A overexpression and its inhibition to get insight into the mechanism of action of EGCG. Towards this aim, we used mice overexpressing Dyrk1A, and compared the hippocampal proteome and phosphoproteome with their wild type counterparts, in basal conditions, and after treatment with EGCG. Moreover, given that the human clinical trials found that the effects of EGCG potentiated the effects of cognitive stimulation, we also included  in our study treatment with environmental enrichment and its combination with EGCG. We found that DYRK1A overexpression leads to alterations in protein and phosphoprotein levels of hundreds of proteins, and that the levels of proteins involved in key postsynaptic pathways are restored by the cognitive enhancer treatments, which could help conceiving new therapeutic strategies.

### Sample Protocol
Hippocampi of selected mice were processed at the same time, homogenized with a RIPA-modified buffer (50 mM tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% NP-40, 0.1% sodium deoxycholate with the addition of 5 mM b-glycerophosphate, 10 mM sodium fluoride, 10 mM sodium orthovanadate, and protease inhibitors from the  Complete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail Roche).  Samples were sonicated using  Bioruptor® (Diagenode) for 5 min with 30 on/off cycles, maintaining the samples on ice. Samples were centrifuged for 10 min 10,000 rpm at 4 ºC, and the supernatants collected. Proteins from the supernatant were precipitated overnight at -20 °C by adding a volume of ice-cold acetone in six-fold excess. The acetone-precipitated proteins were solubilized in denaturation buffer (6 M urea + 200 mM ammonium bicarbonate in water). Final protein content was quantified using the BCA assay (Pierce). Proteins were reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT, 10 mM, 37 °C, 60 min), and alkylated with iodoacetamide (IAM, 20 mM, 25 °C, 30 min). Then samples were diluted with 200 mM ammonium bicarbonate up to 2 M urea, digested overnight with Lys-C at 37 °C, and then diluted two-fold again and digested overnight with trypsin at 37 °C. Peptides were desalted using a C18 MicroSpin 300A silica column (The Nest Group Inc), evaporated to dryness using a speedvac, and dissolved in 30 μL of 0.1% formic acid in water.  Phosphopeptides were enriched using titansphere chromatography as described previously [REF] . Briefly, tryptic peptides were desalted and completely evaporated to dryness, and then they were dissolved with 100 μl of Loading Buffer [80% ACN (vol/vol) and 6% TFA (vol/vol)] at ~1 μg/μl concentration of peptides. Samples were passed through a constricted TiO2 loaded spin tip, previously equilibrated with Loading Buffer, applying 2x50 μl and using a centrifuge at ~50 g in order to achieve a complete binding. TiO2 spin tip was washed once with 50 μl of Loading Buffer and once with 50 μl of Washing Buffer [50% ACN (vol/vol) and 0.1% TFA (vol/vol)]. Finally, phosphopeptides were eluted from the TiO2 spin tip with 30 μl of Elution Buffer (85% NH3-H2O, pH 11.0) into a tube that contains 30 μl of 20% formic acid. Second elution was made in the same tube with 3 μl Elution Buffer 2 [(80% ACN (vol/vol) and 2% formic acid (vol/vol)]. The eluted phosphopeptides were evaporated to dryness and dissolved with 0.1% formic acid in water for being analyzed by MS.  For each sample, 1 μg of tryptic peptides from digested hippocampal tissue and phosphoenriched peptides from 100 μg of the same tissue were injected in a LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a nano-LC (EASY-nLC, Proxeon). Nano-LC was equipped with a reversed-phase chromatography column of 25 cm with an inner diameter of 75 μm, packed with 3 μm C18 particles (Nikkyo Technos, NTCC-360/75-3-25L), and a Nano Trap Column Acclaim PepMap100 100 μm x 2 cm C18, 5 μm, 100A (Thermo, 164199). Chromatographic gradients started at 93% of buffer A and 7% of buffer B with a flow rate of 250 nL/min during 5min and linearly changed to 65% buffer A and 35% buffer B after 240 min. After each analysis, the column was washed for 16 min with 90% buffer A and 10% buffer B (Buffer A: 0.1% formic acid in water. Buffer B: 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile).

### Data Protocol
Acquired mass spectra were processed using the MaxQuant computational platform version 1.5.2.8 [24]. The MS2 spectra were searched by using the Andromeda search engine [25] against the Uniprot sequence database for Mus musculus (17,263 forward entries; version from July 2015). The search included cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification, and N-terminal protein acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. In the case of phosphoproteome analysis, phosphorylation on Ser, Thr and Tyr was also added as variable modification. FDR was set to 1% at the peptide and protein level, and protein identification required at least one unique or razor peptide per protein group.

### Publication Abstract
Down syndrome (DS), caused by trisomy of chromosome 21, is the most common genetic cause of intellectual disability. We recently discovered that green tea extracts containing epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG) improve cognition in mice transgenic for <i>Dyrk1a</i> (TgDyrk1A) and in a trisomic DS mouse model (Ts65Dn). Interestingly, paired with cognitive stimulation, green tea has beneficial pro-cognitive effects in DS individuals. Dual Specificity Tyrosine-Phosphorylation-Regulated Kinase 1A (<i>DYRK1A</i>) is a major candidate to explain the cognitive phenotypes of DS, and inhibiting its activity is a promising pro-cognitive therapy. DYRK1A kinase activity can be normalized in the hippocampus of transgenic DYRK1A mice administering green tea extracts, but also submitting the animals to environmental enrichment (EE). However, many other mechanisms could also explain the pro-cognitive effects of green tea extracts and EE. To underpin the overall alterations arising upon DYRK1A overexpression and the molecular processes underneath the pro-cognitive effects, we used quantitative proteomics. We investigated the hippocampal (phospho)proteome in basal conditions and after treatment with a green tea extract containing EGCG and/or EE in TgDyrk1A and control mice. We found that <i>Dyrk1A</i> overexpression alters protein and phosphoprotein levels of key postsynaptic and plasticity-related pathways and that these alterations were rescued upon the cognitive enhancer treatments.

### Keywords
Mouse, Dyrk1a, Proteomics, Down syndrome, Hippocampus

### Affiliations
Centre de Regulació Genòmica
Proteomics Unit, Center for Genomic Regulation, Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, 08003 Barcelona. Proteomics Unit, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, 08003 Barcelona

### Submitter
Eduard Sabidó

### Lab Head
Dr Eduard Sabidó
Proteomics Unit, Center for Genomic Regulation, Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, 08003 Barcelona. Proteomics Unit, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, 08003 Barcelona


