### Accession
PXD013948

### Title
Proteomic analysis of the secretome from 4T1 breast cancer cells upon Stat3 silencing.

### Description
Stat3 has been acknowledged as an oncogene that has dual protumorigenic activity in a cell-intrinsic way, by promoting cancer cell proliferation and survival and in a paracrine mode, acting as suppressor of immune cell attack. We demonstrated that Stat3 silencing with a small interfering RNA (siRNA) induced a senescence program in Stat3-addicted cancer cells and leads to the production of a senescence associated secretory phenotype (SASP) that has several antitumor properties. The composition of the SASP induced by Stat3 silencing is poorly characterized. The goal of the project was to analyze the protein content in the secretome released by the mouse breast cancer cell line 4T1 after Stat3 silencing with a small interfering RNA.

### Sample Protocol
4T1 cells were cultured for 8 passages in SILAC media Arg- and Lys-free DMEM supplemented with “light” (12C614N2-Lys and 12C614N4-Arg) or “heavy”(12C615N2 Lys and 12C615N4-Arg) isotopes. The stable isotope labeling was confirmed by LC-MS/MS after protein in-gel separation and digestion of blue bands.  4T1 cells labeled with “light” media were transfected with Control siRNA and cells labeled with “heavy” media were transfected with Stat3 siRNA. After 48h of transfection, cells were washed 5 times with PBS and cultured for another 24h with serum-free medium.  For secretome collection, three secretomes of independent experiments were collected (total volume: 5 mL/condition), samples mixed in a 1:1 ratio and filtered through 0.2 µm syringe filter. Samples were concentrated to 500 µl using centrifugal filtration units with 3 kDa molecular weight cut-off.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot Mus musculus database using SequestHT through Thermo Scientific Proteome Discoverer (v 2.1). The resulting files were further processed by using myProMS (v 3.5) (Poullet et al. 2007). The Sequest HT target and decoy search result were validated at 1% false discovery rate (FDR) with Percolator. For SILAC-based protein quantification, peptides XICs (Extracted Ion Chromatograms) were retrieved from Thermo Scientific Proteome Discoverer. Global MAD normalization was applied on the total signal to correct the XICs for each biological replicate (n=3). Protein ratios were computed as the geometrical mean of related peptides. To estimate ratio significance, a t-test was performed with the R package limma (Ritchie ME et al. 2015) and the false discovery rate has been controlled thanks to the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure (Benjamini, Y et al 1995) with a threshold set to 0.05. (All quantified proteins have at least 2 peptides quantified).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
4t1, Stat3, Secretome

### Affiliations
Curie Institute
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform

### Submitter
Valentin SABATET

### Lab Head
Dr Damarys Loew
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform


