### Accession
PXD017614

### Title
Heart mitochondria from CLPP knockout Mouse Complexome Profiling experiment

### Description
A  high-resolution complexome profiling analysis was performed to analyse the assembly defect of mitochondrial complex I and assess is assembly intermediates. Two biological replicates of wildtype (A_CLPP_WT_01,B_CLPP_WT_02)and knockout (C_CLPP_KO_01, D_CLPP_KO_02) were analyzed.

### Sample Protocol
Mitochondria were solubilized with 6 g digitonin/ g protein and native complexes were separated by BN-PAGE. Lanes were cut into 60 even slices that were smashed and subjected to in-gel digestion with trypsin. Peptides were separated by liquid chromatography and analyzed by online tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) in a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer equipped with an Easy nLC1000 nano-flow ultra-high pressure liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at the front end. The mass spectrometer operated in positive ion mode switching automatically between MS and data-dependent MS/MS of the top 20 most abundant precursor ions. Full scan MS mode (400 to 1400 m/z) was set at a resolution of 70,000 m/􀀀m with an automatic gain control target of 1 × 106 ions and a maximum injection time of 20 ms. Selected ions for MS/MS were analyzed using the following parameters: resolution 17,500 m/􀀀m, automatic gain control target 1 × 105; maximum injection time 50 ms; precursor isolation window 4.0 Th. Only precursor ions of charge z=2 and z=3 were selected for collision-induced dissociation. Normalized collision energy was set to 30% at a dynamic exclusion window of 60 s. A lock mass ion (m/z=445.12) was used for internal calibration.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data were analyzed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.0.25  and with version 1.6.10.43 to generat mzTab file). Spectra were matched against the human NCBI Reference Sequence Database with known contaminants added. The limit for the false discovery rate determined by target-decoy database search was set to 0.01. Database searches were done with 20 ppm mass tolerance for precursor ions and fragmented ions, respectively. Two missed cleavages were allowed for trypic digestion. N-terminal acetylation and oxidation of methionine were set as dynamic modifications and cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification.

### Publication Abstract
Regulation of the turnover of complex I (CI), the largest mitochondrial respiratory chain complex, remains enigmatic despite huge advancement in understanding its structure and the assembly. Here, we report that the NADH-oxidizing N-module of CI is turned over at a higher rate and largely independently of the rest of the complex by mitochondrial matrix protease ClpXP, which selectively removes and degrades damaged subunits. The observed mechanism seems to be a safeguard against the accumulation of dysfunctional CI arising from the inactivation of the N-module subunits due to attrition caused by its constant activity under physiological conditions. This CI salvage pathway maintains highly functional CI through a favorable mechanism that demands much lower energetic cost than de novo synthesis and reassembly of the entire CI. Our results also identify ClpXP activity as an unforeseen target for therapeutic interventions in the large group of mitochondrial diseases characterized by the CI instability.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Mouse heart, Clpp

### Affiliations
Radboud University Medical Center
 Radboud University Medical Centre

### Submitter
Ulrich  Brandt

### Lab Head
Dr Ulrich Brandt
Radboud University Medical Center


