### Accession
PXD029653

### Title
A Co-culture System Reveals a Cross-talk between Alveolar Epithelium and Pulmonary Microvascular Endothelium during SARS-CoV-2 Infection

### Description
SARS-CoV-2 seriously injures human alveoli and causes severe respiratory illness. Histopathologic evidences suggested alveolar-capillary barrier integrity is compromised in COVID-19 deaths, however, little is known about how it is disrupted. In this study, we investigated the effects of SARS-CoV-2 infection on alveolar epithelium and pulmonary microvascular endothelium, and tried to elucidate the cross-talk between them during viral infection. Under monoculture system, SARS-CoV-2 infection caused massive virus replication and dramatic organelles re-modeling in alveolar epithelial cells. While, as for pulmonary microvascular endothelial cells, direct viral exposure had little effect on them, but treatment with culture supernatant from infected epithelial cells significantly damaged them, which suggested SARS-CoV-2 affected endothelium indirectly, possibly by substances released from infected alveolar epithelium. Then, we tested SARS-CoV-2 infection in an alveolar epithelium/endothelium co-culture system, and found viral infection caused global proteomic modulations and ultrastructural changes in both cell types. Especially for alveolar epithelial cells, viral infection elicited significant protein changes and structural reorganizations across many sub-cellular compartments. Among the affected organelles, mitochondrion seems to be a primary target organelle. In addition, based on proteomic analysis and EM clues, we tested several autophagy inhibitors, and discovered one of them, Daurisoline, could inhibit virus replication effectively in cells. Collectively, our study revealed the distinctive responses of alveolar epithelium and microvascular endothelium to SARS-CoV-2 infection, which will expand our understanding of COVID-19 and helpful for targeted drug development.

### Sample Protocol
Cell samples were collected from transwells, lysed in lysis buffer and then inactivated by autoclave sterilization in BSL-3 lab. Immediately, protein samples were mailed in dry ice to Jingjie PTM BioLab (Hangzhou) Co. Ltd for mass spectrometry analysis. There, the samples were re-inactivated and then sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer. The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4°C for 10 min. Finally, the supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For tryptic digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea (less than 2M). Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion.

### Data Protocol
Analysis by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry The tryptic peptides were dissolved in solvent A (0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile/ in water), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (25-cm length, 75/100 μm i.d.). Peptides were separated with a gradient from 6% to 24% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) over 70 min, 24% to 35% in 14 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 450 nL/min on a nanoElute UHPLC system (Bruker Daltonics). The peptides were subjected to Capillary source followed by the timsTOF Pro (Bruker Daltonics) mass spectrometry. The electrospray voltage applied was 1.75 kV. Precursors and fragments were analyzed at the TOF detector, with a MS/MS scan range from 100 to 1700 m/z. The timsTOF Pro was operated in parallel accumulation serial fragmentation (PASEF) mode. Precursors with charge states 0 to 5 were selected for fragmentation, and 10 PASEF-MS/MS scans were acquired per cycle. The dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s. Database Search The resulting MS/MS data were processed using MaxQuant search engine (v.1.6.6.0). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the KA158LQ database (20395 entries) concatenated with reverse decoy database and common contamination database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 20 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 20 ppm. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification, and acetylation on protein N-terminal and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2;covid-19

### Affiliations
Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Peng Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Peng Wang
Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences


