### Accession
PXD017154

### Title
T-cell alloreactivity to HLA-DP is regulated by peptide repertoire divergence and HLA-DM mediated editing

### Description
Analysis of the peptide repertoires eluted from different HLA-DP molecules expressed in HeLa cells co-expressing Invariant chain either with or without HLA-DM as components of the HLA class II processing machinery. Divergence of the immunopeptidomes and the impact of HLA-DM were investigated in relation to the capacity of HLA-DP molecules to elicit alloreactive T-cell responses.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa cells expressing the relevant HLA-DP molecules with/without HLA-DM (1.2x109 cells per biological replicate) were lysed in in lysis buffer containing 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, and 0.5% Zwittergent 3-12 (Millipore) freshly supplemented with cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche). HLA-DP/peptide complexes were purified by immunoaffinity chromatography with Prot A Sepharose CL-4B beads (GE Healthcare) coupled to the HLA-DP specific monoclonal antibody B7/21 at a concentration of 2.5 mg/ml (cross-linking performed using dimethyl pimelimidate dihydrochloride, Sigma-Aldrich). After washing, the HLA-DP/peptide complexes were eluted and dissociated 4 column volumes of 10% acetic acid, and peptides were separated by low pH solid phase extraction unsing Oasis HLB 1cc extraction cartridges (Waters). Peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano liquid chromatography system online coupled to an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (both Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA). The peptides were pre-concentrated for 7 min on a trap column (Acclaim® PepMap 100, 75 μm × 2 cm, C18, 5 μm, 100 Å) using 30 μl/min 0.1 % TFA as loading solvent. Subsequent separation on an analytical column (Acclaim® PepMap RSLC, 75 μm × 50 cm, nano Viper, C18, 5 μm, 100 Å) was carried out using a gradient from 5 to 40 % solvent B in solvent A over 98 min (solvent A: 0.1% formic acid; solvent B: 0.1% formic acid, 84% acetonitrile). A flow rate of 400 nl/min was used. The mass spectrometric analysis was conducted in a data-dependent acquisition mode. Full scans were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer (mass range: 350 – 2,000 m/z, resolution: 60,000). FTMS full scan AGC target was set to 1x106 with a maximum injection time of 200 ms. Number of micro scans was set to 1. The 20 most abundant ions of a spectrum acquired at MS1 level were fragmented using CID (collision-induced dissociation) with a normalized collision energy of 35% and an isolation width of 2 m/z. Fragment mass spectra were acquired in the linear ion trap with a maximum injection time of 100 ms.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer software (ver. 1.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used for peptide identification using Mascot (ver. 2.5.1, Matrix Science Ltd) against the human UniProt/Swiss-Prot database (release 2016_10, number of sequences: 20,121). Settings included: mass tolerances were set to 5 ppm and 0.4 Da for precursor and fragment ion masses, respectively; proteolytic cleavage was set to unspecific with no missed cleavages; oxidation of methionine was considered as variable modification; only high confident peptide identifications with false discovery rates <1% were considered in the further analysis. Lists of peptide spectrum matches and corresponding peptide and protein identifications were exported as Excel sheets (Microsoft) and subsequent analysis were limited to unique peptides with a length of >9 amino acids. Further analyses included: peptide quantification performed with Progenesis QI for Proteomics (ver. 2.0.5, Nonlinear Dynamics Ltd) following the quantification procedure described in Megger et al. Mol Cell Proteomics 2013 12, 2006-2020, and Padden et al.  Mol Cell Proteomics 2014 13, 2661-2672; analysis of core epitopes performed using the online available webtool PLAtEAU (https://plateau.bcp.fu-berlin.de/ Alvaro-Benito et al. Front Immunol 2018 9, 872); identification of peptide binding motifs using GibbsCluster 2.0 Server (http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/GibbsCluster/ Andreatta et al. Nucleic Acids Res 2017 45, W458-W463); and gene ontology analysis using the software Cytoscape with ClueGO plug-in (Bindea et al. Bioinformatics 2009 25, 1091-1093).

### Publication Abstract
In hematopoietic cell transplantation (HCT), permissive HLA-DPB1 mismatches between patients and their unrelated donors are associated with improved outcomes compared with nonpermissive mismatches, but the underlying mechanism is incompletely understood. Here, we used mass spectrometry, T-cell receptor-&#x3b2; (TCR&#x3b2;) deep sequencing, and cellular in vitro models of alloreactivity to interrogate the HLA-DP immunopeptidome and its role in alloreactive T-cell responses. We find that permissive HLA-DPB1 mismatches display significantly higher peptide repertoire overlaps compared with their nonpermissive counterparts, resulting in lower frequency and diversity of alloreactive TCR&#x3b2; clonotypes in healthy individuals and transplanted patients. Permissiveness can be reversed by the absence of the peptide editor HLA-DM or the presence of its antagonist, HLA-DO, through significant broadening of the peptide repertoire. Our data establish the degree of immunopeptidome divergence between donor and recipient as the mechanistic basis for the clinically relevant permissive HLA-DPB1 mismatches in HCT and show that permissiveness is dependent on HLA-DM-mediated peptide editing. Its key role for harnessing T-cell alloreactivity to HLA-DP highlights HLA-DM as a potential novel target for cellular and immunotherapy of leukemia.

### Keywords
Hla-dm, Hla class ii, T-cell alloreactivity, Immunopeptidome, Hla-dp

### Affiliations
Institute for Experimental Cellular Therapy, University Hospital Essen, Essen, Germany
Institute for Experimental Cellular Therapy

### Submitter
Pietro Crivello

### Lab Head
Dr Katharina Fleischhauer
Institute for Experimental Cellular Therapy, University Hospital Essen, Essen, Germany


