### Accession
PXD035328

### Title
Proteome response to microbiota in dairy cows with high and low somatic cell count

### Description
Host response to invasive microbes in the bovine udder has an important role on the animal health and is essential to the dairy industry to ensure production of high-quality milk and reduce the mastitis incidence. To better understand the biology behind these host-microbiome interactions, we investigated the somatic cell proteomes at quarter level for four cows (collected before and after milking) using a shotgun proteomics approach. Simultaneously, we identified the quarter microbiota by amplicon sequencing to detect presence of mastitis pathogens or other commensal taxa. In total, 32 quarter milk samples were analyzed divided in two groups depending on the somatic cell count (SCC). The high SCC group (> 100,000 cell/mL) included 10 samples and significant different proteome profiles were detected. Differential abundance analysis uncovers a specific expression pattern in high SCC samples revealing pathways involved in immune responses such as inflammation, activation of the complement system, migration of immune cells, and tight junctions.

### Sample Protocol
To prepare peptides for identification through LC-MS/MS, 40 mL milk was centrifuged and washed with 2 % citrate water in order to rid the samples of as much of the milk caseins as possible. The final pellet was resuspended in 200 µl lysis buffer (50 mM TrisHCl, pH 7.5, 4 % SDS, 10 mM DTT) and the cells were lysed by bead beating. The resulting protein solution was denatured at 95 °C for 10 minutes and alkylated with 100 mM iodoacetamide for 20 minutes in the dark. Phosphoric acid (1/10th of the total volume) was used to acidify the sample before loading it onto the suspension trapping column for washing and digestion as previously described  [30]. Briefly, the columns, made up of a plug of C18 (Empore) with an overlaying stack of quartz (Munktell MK360 quartz filter), were made in a 200 µl pipette tip (Eppendorf™ epT.I.P.S.™, 2-200 µl). The protein solution was loaded onto the column in a suspension trapping buffer containing 90 % methanol and 100 mM Tris-Cl pH 7.1, resulting in a protein suspension on top of the quartz stack. Centrifugation trapped the protein suspension in the quarts stack where it is washed twice (suspension trapping solution and 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, respectively) and digested with Trypsin (V5111, Promega) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate for an hour at 47 °C.  Additional washes with 0.5 % and 0.1 % trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) moved the peptides to the C18 plug, where an elution buffer (80 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % TFA) eluted the peptides from the column. Analysis of the peptides were performed with a nano UPLC (nanoElute, Bruker) coupled to a trapped ion mobility spectrometry/quadrupole time of flight mass spectrometer (timsTOF Pro, Bruker)

### Data Protocol
The raw ms/ms data were analyzed using the MaxQuant software  with the MaxLFQ algorithm for label free quantification. The search database was taken from UniProt Proteomes (Bos taurus, UP000009136). The match between runs option was used to increase the number of hits. For further analysis we used the proteinGroups output file from MaxQuant. The filtering steps were performed with the Perseus software, removing hits considered as contaminants (Reverse, Only identified by site, and Potential contaminants). The caseins detected in the samples were removed with the contaminants. Finally, for differential expression and WGCNA analysis, a protein was considered to be present in a sample only if it was detected in both replicates.

### Publication Abstract
Host response to invasive microbes in the bovine udder has an important role on the animal health and is essential to the dairy industry to ensure production of high-quality milk and reduce the mastitis incidence. To better understand the biology behind these host-microbiome interactions, we investigated the somatic cell proteomes at quarter level for four cows (collected before and after milking) using a shotgun proteomics approach. Simultaneously, we identified the quarter microbiota by amplicon sequencing to detect presence of mastitis pathogens or other commensal taxa. In total, 32 quarter milk samples were analyzed divided in two groups depending on the somatic cell count (SCC). The high SCC group (&gt;100,000 cell/mL) included 10 samples and significant different proteome profiles were detected. Differential abundance analysis uncovers a specific expression pattern in high SCC samples revealing pathways involved in immune responses such as inflammation, activation of the complement system, migration of immune cells, and tight junctions. Interestingly, different proteome profiles were also identified in quarter samples containing one of the two mastitis pathogens, Staphylococcus aureus and Streptococcus uberis, indicating a different response of the host depending on the pathogen. Weighted correlation network analysis identified three modules of co-expressed proteins which were correlated with the SCC in the quarters. These modules contained proteins assigned to different aspects of the immune response, but also amino sugar and nucleotide sugar metabolism, and biosynthesis of amino acids. The results of this study provide deeper insights on how the proteome expression changes at quarter level in naturally infected cows and pinpoint potential interactions and important biological functions during host-microbe interaction.

### Keywords
Bovine, Proteomics, Somatic cell, Shotgun proteomics

### Affiliations
Norwegian University of Life Sciences

### Submitter
Davide Porcellato

### Lab Head
Dr Davide Porcellato
Norwegian University of Life Sciences


