### Accession
PXD009257

### Title
Asian citrus psyllid hemolymph LC-MS/MS

### Description
Citrus greening disease, also known as Huanglongbing (HLB), is the most serious disease of citrus plants. It is associated with the Gram-negative bacterium ‘Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus’ (CLas), which is transmitted between host plants by the hemipteran insect vector Diaphorina citri in a circulative, propagative manner involving specific interactions with various insect tissues, including the hemolymph, fluid that occupies the body cavity akin to insect blood. High resolution quantitative mass spectrometry was performed to investigate the effect of CLas exposure on D. citri hemolymph at the proteome level. In contrast to the broad proteome effects on hundreds of proteins and a diverse array of metabolic pathways previously reported in gut and whole insect proteome analyses, the effect of CLas on the hemolymph was observed to be highly specific, restricted to key immunity and metabolism pathways, and lower in magnitude than that previously observed in the whole insect body and gut. Vitellogenins were abundantly expressed and CLas-responsive. Gene-specific RNA expression analysis suggests that these proteins are expressed in both male and female insects, and may have roles outside of reproductive vitellogenesis. Proteins for fatty acid synthesis were found to be up-regulated, along with metabolic proteins associated with energy production, supported at the organismal level by the previously published observation that D. citri individuals experience a higher level of hunger when reared on CLas-infected plants. Prediction of post-translational modifications identified hemolymph proteins with phosphorylation and acetylation upon CLas exposure. Proteins derived from the three most prominent bacterial endosymbionts of the psyllid were also detected in the hemolymph, and several of these have predicted secretion signals. A DNAK protein, the bacterial HSP70, detected in the hemolymph expressed from Wolbachia pipientis was predicted to encode a eukaryotic nuclear localization signal. Taken together, these data show specific changes to immunity and metabolism in D. citri hemolymph involving host and endosymbiont proteins. These data provide a novel context for proteomic changes seen in other D. citri tissues in response to CLas and align with organismal data on the effects of CLas on D. citri metabolism and reproduction.

### Sample Protocol
A total of 80 µL of 0.2% RapiGest surfactant (Waters Corporation, Milford MA) in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate was added to each biological replicate containing extracted hemolymph from 50 insects. Cell membranes were disrupted using a probe sonicator on ice for two cycles of 15 seconds each at 15% amplitude. Protein concentration was quantified using a bicinchoninic acid assay (Thermofisher Scientific, Waltham MA). For each sample, 30 µg of protein was diluted in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate to a final volume of 117 μL.  Proteins were reduced by adding 100mM ditihiotreitol (DTT, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) to a final concentration of 10mM and incubating at 56°C for 1 hour. Cysteines were alkylated with methyl methanethiosulfonate (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham MA) at a final concentration of 30 mM with incubation at 25°C for one hour. Proteins were digested using 1 µg of sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) per sample and incubated at 37°C overnight. Oasis mixed-mode cation exchange (MCX) solid phase extraction cartridges (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA) was used to remove lipids and other contaminants from the digested peptides. Peptide samples were dried using a centrifugal evaporator. The dried tryptic digests were solubilized in 90 ul of 0.1% trifluoracetic acid and 2% acetonitrile by vortexing for 10 minutes at 37 °C and bath sonication for 5 minutes to give a final concentration of 0.333 µg/µl, based on prior BCA protein assays. The solubilized digests were centrifuged at 14,000 g for 5 minutes to pellet any particulates that might cause HPLC clogging, and a portion of each supernatant was carefully removed and placed into autosampler vials. All mass spectrometry was performed on an LTQ-Orbitrap-Lumos (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). Three microliters (~1 µg) was loaded from the autosampler onto a 150-µm Kasil fritted trap packed with Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ (3-µm bead diameter, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) to a bed length of 2 cm at a flow rate of 2 µl/min for five minutes. After loading and desalting, the trap was brought in-line with a pulled fused-silica capillary tip (75-µm i.d.) packed with 30 cm of the same material as the trap, which was mounted in an in-house constructed nanospray source. Peptides were eluted off the trap and column using a Waters Nanoacquity binary UPLC pump using a gradient of 2–25% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid over 100 minutes, followed by an additional 25–60% gradient over 40 minutes. The trap and column were subsequently washed for five minutes each with 60% and 95% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid, all at a flow rate of 250 nL/min.

### Data Protocol
Spectral data were converted from Thermo Raw files to Mascot Generic Format (MGF) using ProteoWizard MSConvertGUI [44]. These files were searched against a combined database containing predicted proteins from D. citri, its endosymbionts ‘Ca. Carsonella ruddii’, ‘Ca. Profftella armatura, Wolbachia pipientis as well as CLas using Mascot Daemon 2.3.2 (Matrix Science, Boston, MA). The database had a total of 47,160 combined insect and microbial sequences as well as 112 common contaminant sequences (trypsin, keratin, etc.). The database is available to download at (ftp://ftp.citrusgreening.org/annotation/MCOT/). The search parameters allowed for fixed methylthio modification and variable modifications (methionine oxidation; asparagine, glutamine deamidation) with a peptide mass tolerance of ±20ppm and fragment mass tolerance of ±0.6Da. A maximum of one missed cleavage was allowed. Raw files were converted to Mascot Generic Format files using MSConvert in Proteowizard and used as input files for Mascot Daemon. Peptides were identified at a 90% threshold with a 0.04% decoy false discovery rate (FDR). Proteins were identified with a 95% threshold and 0.4% decoy FDR with a minimum of 2 matching peptides. Statistical analysis of peptide spectral counts between CLas(-) and CLas(+) hemolymph protein extracts was performed using the Fisher’s Exact Test (N=3, Benjamini-Hochberg corrected pvalue < 0.05). A P-value cutoff of 0.05 was applied.

### Publication Abstract
Huanglongbing (HLB), also known as citrus greening disease, is the most serious disease of citrus plants. It is associated with the Gram-negative bacterium ' Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus' ( CLas), which is transmitted between host plants by the hemipteran insect vector Diaphorina citri in a circulative, propagative manner involving specific interactions with various insect tissues including the hemolymph, fluid that occupies the body cavity akin to insect blood. High resolution quantitative mass spectrometry was performed to investigate the effect of CLas exposure on D. citri hemolymph at the proteome level. In contrast to the broad proteome effects on hundreds of proteins and a diverse array of metabolic pathways previously reported in gut and whole insect proteome analyses, the effect of CLas on the hemolymph was observed to be highly specific, restricted to key immunity and metabolism pathways, and lower in magnitude than that previously observed in the whole insect body and gut. Vitellogenins were abundantly expressed and CLas-responsive. Gene-specific RNA expression analysis suggests that these proteins are expressed in both male and female insects and may have roles outside of reproductive vitellogenesis. Proteins for fatty acid synthesis were found to be up-regulated, along with metabolic proteins associated with energy production, supported at the organismal level by the previously published observation that D. citri individuals experience a higher level of hunger when reared on CLas-infected plants. Prediction of post-translational modifications identified hemolymph proteins with phosphorylation and acetylation upon CLas exposure. Proteins derived from the three most prominent bacterial endosymbionts of the psyllid were also detected in the hemolymph, and several of these have predicted secretion signals. A DNAK protein, the bacterial HSP70, detected in the hemolymph expressed from Wolbachia pipientis was predicted to encode a eukaryotic nuclear localization signal. Taken together, these data show specific changes to immunity and metabolism in D. citri hemolymph involving host and endosymbiont proteins. These data provide a novel context for proteomic changes seen in other D. citri tissues in response to CLas and align with organismal data on the effects of CLas on D. citri metabolism and reproduction.

### Keywords
Citrus, Hemolymph, Lc-ms/ms, Psyllid, Candidatus liberibacter asiaticus, Diaphorina citri, Vitellogenin

### Affiliations
USDA-ARS, Boyce Thompson Institute, Cornell University
Vanderbilt University

### Submitter
Angela Kruse

### Lab Head
Dr Michelle Heck
USDA-ARS, Boyce Thompson Institute, Cornell University


