### Accession
PXD037140

### Title
H11-induced immune protection is predominantly linked to N-glycan moieties

### Description
Parasitic nematodes of humans, animals and plants cause significant economic losses worldwide. Control of these pathogens is currently challenging due to the widespread problem of nematode anthelmintic resistance. Unfortunately, most efforts to develop anti-nematode vaccines for use in animals and humans have not succeeded. However, one effective (dead) anti-nematode vaccine (Barbervax) has been developed to protect livestock animals against the socioeconomically important parasitic nematode Haemonchus contortus (barber’s pole worm). This vaccine contains a major native antigen, termed H11. In its native form, H11 alone consistently induces high immunoprotection (75-95%) in animals, but recombinant forms thereof do not. Here, to test the hypothesis that post-translation modification of H11 is responsible for achieving the immunoprotection. We explored the N-glycoproteome and N-glycome of H11 using high-resolution mass spectrometry and assessed the roles of N-glycosylation in protective immunity against H. contortus. We demonstrated that N-glycans are a predominant protective component that induces protection and an associated IgG antibody response in immunised animals. We also showed that anti-H11 IgG antibodies confer specific, passive immunity in naïve animals. This study is the first detailed investigation of the relevance of protein glycosylation in protective immunity against a parasitic nematode, and should have important implications for developing vaccines against metazoan parasites.

### Sample Protocol
Parasites Adult H. contortus were obtained from abomasa of goats at an abattoir in Hubei province, China. All worms were kept in liquid nitrogen until required.   Preparation of H11 proteins Native H11 proteins were extracted using lectin Con A, as described previously (Smith et al., 1993). Briefly, 15 g of the wet worms were homogenized in ice-cold PBS for 25 min in a glass homogenizer. The homogenate was centrifuged (12000g for 25 min). The remaining pellets were extracted four times with 1% Thesit in PBS, and samples were subsequently filtered (0.45 µM) and purified using Con A sepharose columns. The column-bound samples were washed 3 times (20 mM Tris-HCl), followed by elution of proteins in a buffer containing 200 mM a methyl-D-mannopyranoside and 200 mM a methyl-D-glucopyranoside. The resultant solution was sterilized through a 0.22 µM filter enriched for the protein H11. Proteins were quantified using the BCA method and resolved on 4-12% gradient SDS-PAGE gel followed by Coomassie blue staining.  Trypsin digestion and glycopeptide enrichment 400 μg of protein sample was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol and then alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide. The reduced H11 proteins were digested with trypsin at enzyme-to-protein ratio of 1:50 (overnight). After tryptic peptides were dried, the HILIC enrichment of N-glycopeptides was carried out using an established method (Zhu et al., 2014). In brief, the dried peptides were re-dissolved in 40 μL loading buffer (80% ACN containing 1% TFA) and transferred into a HILIC tip. After centrifugation (4000g, 15 min), peptides were washed four times with 30 μL of loading buffer, and then glycopeptides were eluted with 20 μL of 10% ACN and evaporated to dryness.  N-glycoproteome analysis of H11 sample Glycopeptides were subjected to de-glycosylation by PNGase F and PNGase A, as reported previously (Wang et al., 2021). Briefly, 2 μL of PNGase F in 50 μL of 50 mM NH4HCO3 buffer was incubated at 37 °C overnight. The non-deglycosylated peptides were subjected to HILIC enrichment and reconstituted in 2 μL of PNGase A in 50 μL of 50 mM sodium acetate solution at 37 °C overnight. Then PNGase F- and A-deglycosylated peptides were acidified with formic acid, purified using an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system and subjected to LC MS/MS analysis in Orbitrap FusionTM TribridTM (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany).   N-glycome analysis of H11 sample The N-glycan analysis workflow was based on our earlier work (Wang et al., 2021). Briefly, N-glycans were cleaved in a 50 μL reaction containing sodium phosphate buffer and 2 μL of PNGase F (37°C, overnight). PNGase F-cleaved glycans were then desalted and purified by PGC cartridges, as described elsewhere (Liu et al., 2010). Remaining glycans after PNGase F treatment were re-cleaved by using 2 μL of PNGase A in 50 μL of sodium acetate solution at 37 °C overnight. Isolated glycans were permethylated by the addition of 100 μL of DMSO-NaOH slurry. Subsequently, 1 μL of permethylated glycan was mixed with 1 μL of freshly-prepared DHB before spotting on a MALDI-target plate and allowed to crystalize at room temperature. N-glycome spectra were obtained using AB 5800 MALDI-TOF-TOF instruments (SCIEX, Concord, Canada) in the positive ionization mode.

### Data Protocol
N-glycoproteome MS data were analyzed using MaxQuant to identify peptides. Glycosylation sites identified herein are based on the consensus of ≥2 biological replicates. Amino acid sequence motifs comprising at least 20 residues (+/-10) of the N-glycosylation sites were analyzed by the MoMo program (http://meme-suite.org/tools/momo/). The functional domains were annotated based on the InterPro database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/).  N-glycome MS/MS analyses were performed with air as CID gas using 2 kV collision energy and data were processed using Data Explorer 4.0 (SCIEX) and GlycoWorkbench (v2.1).

### Publication Abstract
Nematodes are one of the largest groups of animals on the planet. Many of them are major pathogens of humans, animals and plants, and cause destructive diseases and socioeconomic losses worldwide. Despite their adverse impacts on human health and agriculture, nematodes can be challenging to control, because anthelmintic treatments do not prevent re-infection, and excessive treatment has led to widespread drug resistance in nematode populations. Indeed, many nematode species of livestock animals have become resistant to almost all classes of anthelmintics used. Most efforts to develop commercial anti-nematode vaccines (native or recombinant) for use in animals and humans have not succeeded, although one effective (dead) vaccine (Barbervax) has been developed to protect animals against one of the most pathogenic parasites of livestock animals - <i>Haemonchus contortus</i> (the barber's pole worm). This vaccine contains native molecules, called H11 and H-Gal-GP, derived from the intestine of this blood-feeding worm. In its native form, H11 alone consistently induces high levels (75-95%) of immunoprotection in animals against disease (haemonchosis), but recombinant forms thereof do not. Here, to test the hypothesis that post-translational modification (glycosylation) of H11 plays a crucial role in achieving such high immunoprotection, we explored the N-glycoproteome and N-glycome of H11 using the high-resolution mass spectrometry and assessed the roles of N-glycosylation in protective immunity against <i>H. contortus</i>. Our results showed conclusively that N-glycan moieties on H11 are the dominant immunogens, which induce high IgG serum antibody levels in immunised animals, and that anti-H11 IgG antibodies can confer specific, passive immunity in na&#xef;ve animals. This work provides the first detailed account of the relevance and role of protein glycosylation in protective immunity against a parasitic nematode, with important implications for the design of vaccines against metazoan parasites.

### Keywords
Immunoprotection, H11 antigen, Igg antibodies, N-glycan, Vaccine, N-glycosylation, Parasitic nematode

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Huazhong Agricultural University
State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Huazhong Agricultural University (lab head)

### Submitter
Chunqun Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Min Hu
State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Huazhong Agricultural University (lab head)


