### Accession
PXD018591

### Title
Peroxisomal targeting of the protein phosphatase Ptc5 via mitochondrial transit

### Description
Correct intracellular distribution of proteins is critical for the function of eukaryotic cells. Certain proteins are targeted to more than one cellular compartment, e.g. to mitochondria and peroxisomes. The protein phosphatase Ptc5 from Saccharomyces cerevisiae contains an N-terminal mitochondrial presequence followed by a trans-membrane domain and has been detected in the mitochondrial intermembrane space. Here we show mitochondrial transit of Ptc5 to peroxisomes. Translocation of Ptc5 to peroxisomes depended both on the C-terminal peroxisomal targeting signal (PTS1) and N-terminal cleavage by the mitochondrial inner membrane peptidase complex. Indirect targeting of Ptc5 to peroxisomes prevented deleterious effects of its phosphatase activity in the cytosol. Sorting of Ptc5 involves simultaneous interaction with import machineries of both organelles. We identify additional mitochondrial proteins with PTS1, which localize in both organelles and can increase their physical association.  Thus, a tug-of-war like mechanism can influence the interaction and communication of two cellular compartments.

### Sample Protocol
Cells (10.000 OD600 per strain) were pelleted at 6000 g for 10 min at room temperature, resuspended in 10 ml lysis buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 137 mM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100, 2 mM EDTA, 1 mM 4-Aminobenzamidinedihydrochloride, 1 µg/ml Aprotinin, 1 µg/ml Leupeptin, 1 mM Phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, 10 µg/ml N-Tosyl-L-Phenylalanine chloromethyl ketone and 1 µg/ml Pepstatin) and ground to a fine powder using a pestle and mortar filled with liquid nitrogen. After thawing, extracts were centrifuged at 1300 g for 10 min at 4°C and subsequently incubated with 25 µl Pierce Anti-HA magnetic beads (Thermo Fisher) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. After washing, beads were resuspended in 20 µl protein loading buffer and incubated at 95°C for 10 min to elute bound protein. Beads were removed by centrifugation prior to sample loading. After electrophoresis, gels were fixed with 40% ethanol, 10% acetic acid, 50% H2O for 1 h and then washed once with water for 30 min. Gels were sensitized using 0.02% sodium thiosulfate for 1 min, washed three times with water for 1 min and incubated for 20 min at 4°C with prechilled 0.1% silver nitrate solution containing 0.02% formaldehyde. Gels were washed three times with water for 1 min, placed in a new staining tray, washed again with water for 1 min and then developed using 3% sodium carbonate solution containing 0.05% formaldehyde. Staining was terminated using 5% acetic acid and gels were stored in 1% acetic acid at 4°C. Excised gel pieces were chopped into small pieces, destained with 30% isopropyl alcohol containing 60 mM ammonium carbonate and 30 mM thioglycolic acid, dehydrated with isopropyl alcohol and dried. Gel pieces were rehydrated in 10% acetonitrile containing 5 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 8 mM DTT and 2.5 µg/ml sequencing-grade modified trypsin (Promega) and incubated overnight at 30°C. Samples were desalted using C18 microspin columns (Nest Group) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Dried and reconstituted peptides were analyzed by liquid-chromatography-mass spectrometry using a Q-Exactive Plus instrument connected to an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano and a nanospray flex ion source (Thermo Scientific). Peptide separation was performed on a reverse phase HPLC column (75 μm x 40 cm) packed with C18 resin (2.4 μm) using a formic acid/acetonitrile gradient. The data acquisition mode was set to obtain one high resolution MS scan at a resolution of 70,000 full width at half maximum (at m/z 200) followed by MS/MS scans of the most intense ions. MS/MS data were searched against a database containing the Ptc51-201-RFP-H

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified using Mascot(v2.5, Matrix Science)executed via the Proteome Sicvoerer 1.4 environment. A Saccharomyces cerevisiae protein database containing Ptc51-201-RFP-HA was used for protein search and search results were loaded into Scaffold 3 (Proteome Software.

### Publication Abstract
Correct intracellular distribution of proteins is critical for the function of eukaryotic cells. Certain proteins are targeted to more than one cellular compartment, e.g. to mitochondria and peroxisomes. The protein phosphatase Ptc5 from Saccharomyces cerevisiae contains an N-terminal mitochondrial presequence followed by a transmembrane domain, and has been detected in the mitochondrial intermembrane space. Here we show mitochondrial transit of Ptc5 to peroxisomes. Translocation of Ptc5 to peroxisomes depended both on the C-terminal peroxisomal targeting signal (PTS1) and N-terminal cleavage by the mitochondrial inner membrane peptidase complex. Indirect targeting of Ptc5 to peroxisomes prevented deleterious effects of its phosphatase activity in the cytosol. Sorting of Ptc5 involves simultaneous interaction with import machineries of both organelles. We identify additional mitochondrial proteins with PTS1, which localize in both organelles and can increase their physical association. Thus, a tug-of-war-like mechanism can influence the interaction and communication of two cellular compartments.

### Keywords
Ptc5, Yeast, Peroxisome, Protein phosphatase

### Affiliations
Department of Biology, Philipps University Marburg, Marburg, Germany
MPI Marburg

### Submitter
Timo Glatter

### Lab Head
Dr Johannes Freitag
Department of Biology, Philipps University Marburg, Marburg, Germany


