### Accession
PXD001729

### Title
Quantitative Phosphoproteomic Identification of Novel Vasopressin-mediated Signaling Networks in Kidney Distal Convoluted Tubule Cells

### Description
The kidney distal convoluted tubule (DCT) plays an important role in body sodium regulation and thus control of blood pressure. The main sodium reabsorption pathways in the DCT are the epithelial sodium channel (ENaC) and the thiazide-sensitive NaCl cotransporter (NCC), the functions of which can be modulated by the hormone vasopressin (VP) acting via uncharacterized signaling cascades. We performed large scale stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) based quantitative phosphoproteomics of cultured mouse DCT cells (mpkDCT) to map global changes in protein phosphorylation events upon acute treatment with the VP type II receptor agonist 1-desamino-8-D-arginine vasopressin (dDAVP). The aim of this study is to identify unique VP signaling cascades in DCT cells that may be important for regulating ENaC or NCC activity. These pathways may be novel targets for modulation of blood pressure.

### Sample Protocol
Differentially treated mpkDCT cells grown in SILAC media were lysed in cell lysis buffer (8 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 50 mM Tris, pH 7.5) containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors. Differentially labelled control and hormone-treated samples were pooled in pairs. Pooled samples were reduced, alkylated, and digested using trypsin and desalted using C18 columns (Waters) prior to further SCX fractionation. SCX fractionated samples were desalted again using self-packed C18 column, and subjected to TiO2 enrichment for phosphopeptides. Peptide samples were then analyzed by nano Liquid-Chromatography (nLC) (Ultimate 3000, Dionex) coupled to a mass spectrometer (Q Exactive, Thermo Fisher Scientific) through an EASY-Spray nano-electrospray ion source (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were searched against a mouse protein database (RefSeq database downloaded Oct. 2014 containing 58513 sequences) using the SEQUEST algorithm. Peptide identification and quantification were carried out using Proteome Discoverer (PD) software (version 1.4.0.288, Thermo Scientific). Precursor mass tolerance was 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was 0.02 Da. Maximum miss cleavage sites were 2. Carbamidomethyl on cysteine was set as a static modification. N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation, 10+ for heavy arginine, 6+ for heavy lysine, as well as phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine were included as variable modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) was calculated using Percolator and phosphorylation site probability score was evaluated using the phosphoRS 3.0 algorithm. Only rank 1 and high confidence (with a target false discovery rate (FDR) q-value below 0.01) peptides were included in the final results. The quantification of each unique peptide was obtained from the sum of raw values from different peptide charge states and from different SCX fractions. The heavy-to-light ratio was calculated from the summed raw quantification values of the same peptides from both channels. Quantification ratios were then normalized based on median log2 ratio of each biological replicate prior to further analysis. Normalization was carried out on all peptides, including peptides identified from the non-phosphorylated fractions.

### Publication Abstract
The kidney distal convoluted tubule (DCT) plays an essential role in maintaining body sodium balance and blood pressure. The major sodium reabsorption pathway in the DCT is the thiazide-sensitive NaCl cotransporter (NCC), whose functions can be modulated by the hormone vasopressin (VP) acting via uncharacterized signaling cascades. Here we use a systems biology approach centered on stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) based quantitative phosphoproteomics of cultured mouse DCT cells to map global changes in protein phosphorylation upon acute treatment with a VP type II receptor agonist 1-desamino-8-D-arginine vasopressin (dDAVP). 6330 unique proteins, containing 12333 different phosphorylation sites were identified. 185 sites were altered in abundance following dDAVP. Basophilic motifs were preferential targets for upregulated sites upon dDAVP stimulation, whereas proline-directed motifs were prominent for downregulated sites. Kinase prediction indicated that dDAVP increased AGC and CAMK kinase families' activities and decreased activity of CDK and MAPK families. Network analysis implicated phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate 3-kinase or CAMKK dependent pathways in VP-mediated signaling; pharmacological inhibition of which significantly reduced dDAVP induced increases in phosphorylated NCC at an activating site. In conclusion, this study identifies unique VP signaling cascades in DCT cells that may be important for regulating blood pressure.

### Keywords
Kidney distal convoluted tubule cells, Phosphoproteomics, Quantitation, Signaling networks, Vasopressin

### Affiliations
Key Laboratory of Separation Science for Analytical Chemistry, CAS
Center for Interactions of Proteins in Epithelial Transport, Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University

### Submitter
Qi Wu

### Lab Head
Dr Robert A. Fenton
Center for Interactions of Proteins in Epithelial Transport, Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University


