### Accession
PXD024685

### Title
Proteomic analyses of non-preconditioned murine kidneys pre- and post-IRI in comparison to kidneys after preconditioning by hypoxia or caloric restriction

### Description
12 – 14-week-old male C57Bl6N mice were divided into 3 treatment groups (n=5). First, non-preconditioned animals received ad libitum access to food under a daily 12 hour light and 12 hour dark rhythm with similar specific pathogen free (SPF) conditions in group-cages with up to 5 mice at the same time. Calorically restricted mice obtained 66% of the usual daily intake (3 g per day per mouse) 28 days before surgery as previously described (PMID: 30522767). For the hypoxic preconditioning mice were kept in a hypoxia chamber with a reduction of oxygen to 8.3% for 2 h, 4 h and 8 h on three following days prior to surgery based on the description of Bernaudin et al. (PMID: 11919510). On the day of Ischemia-Reperfusion Injury (IRI) all mice were anesthetized by ketamin (Zoetis (Berlin, Germany))/xylazine (Bayer (Leverkusen, Germany)) and afterwards all mice received a midline abdominal incision as previously described (PMID: 27557097). After ligation of the right kidney vessels right nephrectomy was performed and the kidneys were cut into halves. One half was frozen in liquid nitrogen for proteomic analyses. Then, the left renal vessels were clamped for 40 minutes followed by a subsequent removal of the clamp for reperfusion. The abdominal incision was closed. Subsequently, the mice were placed into single cages. 4 h after reperfusion and following another anesthesia the left kidneys were taken out. Again, the kidneys were cut into two halves and one of it was preserved in liquid nitrogen for proteomic analyses.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were prepared as previously described (PMID: 26740551) In brief, kidney samples were homogenized and sonicated in urea buffer (8M), ammonium bicarbonate (100 mM) and protease inhibitor (Roche Diagnostics GmbH, Penzberg and Mannheim, Deutschland). Each sample was reduced with dithiothreitol and alkylated using iodoacetamide afterwards. Over night proteins were digested using trypsin (1:100 w/w ratio). Then,  cleaning of peptides was performed by use of StageTips (PMID: 12585499).  Afterwards, nano-liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry was performed on a Q Exactive Plus hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Waltham, MA) coupled to a nano-liquid chromatography device (Proxeon Odense, Syddanmark, Denmark) as previously described (PMID: 26792178). For the separation of peptides a 4-hour gradient was used.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were searched against the uniprot mouse reference database dated 03/2021 (uploaded with this submission). Data was analyzed using MaxQuant version 1.6.17.0 with the parameters in this submission. Data was further analyzed using Perseus 1.6.15.0.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ischemia-reperfusion injury, Hypoxia, Preconditioning, Caloric restriction

### Affiliations
1) Department II of Internal Medicine and Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne, University of Cologne, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Cologne, Cologne, Germany
2) CECAD, University of Cologne, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Cologne, Cologne, Germany

1) Department II of Internal Medicine and Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne, University of Cologne, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Cologne, Cologne, Germany  2) CECAD, University of Cologne, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Cologne, Cologne, Germany

### Submitter
Martin Hoehne

### Lab Head
Dr Roman-Ulrich Müller
1) Department II of Internal Medicine and Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne, University of Cologne, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Cologne, Cologne, Germany  2) CECAD, University of Cologne, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Cologne, Cologne, Germany


