### Accession
PXD002058

### Title
Tau interactome -  The human tau interactome: binding to the ribonucleoproteome, and impaired binding of the P301L mutant to chaperones and the proteasome

### Description
The tau protein is central to the etiology of several neurodegenerative diseases, including Alzheimer’s disease, a subset of frontotemporal dementias, progressive supranuclear palsy and dementia following traumatic brain injury, yet the proteins it interacts with have not been studied using a systematic discovery approach. The study employed mild in vivo crosslinking, isobaric labeling and tandem mass spectrometry to characterize molecular interactions of human tau in a neuroblastoma cell model.

### Sample Protocol
Six 150 mm x 15 mm SH-SY5Y cell culture plates were grown to near-confluency per sample (or control) and processed as described under ‘Affinity Capture’. Identical procedures were applied to generate three biological replicates for each condition tested.  Workflows for protein reduction, alkylation and trypsinization followed steps that have recently been described in detail. Following trypsinization, peptide mixtures were side-by-side conjugated to six-plex tandem mass tag (TMT) reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) or four-plex isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ) (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA) using manufacturer instructions. Subsequently, equal volumes of the TMT (or iTRAQ) labeling mixtures were pooled into a master mix and subjected to C18 or SCX ZipTip clean-up using Bond Elut Omix 100 μL tips (Agilent Technologies Inc., Santa Clara, CA, USA) followed by tandem mass spectrometry analysis on a Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a previously described data-dependent MS3 workflow. Briefly, TMT-labeled (or iTRAQ-labeled) peptide mixtures were injected onto 25 cm Acclaim nanocapillary C18 columns using a split-free nLC 1100 nano-HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and were separated by applying 4 hour linear gradients of 3-50% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The eluent was directed toward the ion transfer tube of the Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid instrument by dynamic nanospray ionization. The acquisition method incorporated three separate scans. Following an orbitrap-based survey scan of the 400-2000 m/z range at 120,000 resolution, the 10 most intense ions carrying charges of two or more were isolated and fragmented by collision-induced dissociation (CID). Peptide fragments were scanned out from the linear ion trap to provide peptide sequence information. Finally, the 10 most abundant CID fragments were further fragmented by high energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) to release TMT or iTRAQ signature ions, which were detected by the orbitrap at a resolution of 60,000. A dynamic exclusion window of 20 min prevented reanalysis of previously selected parent ions.

### Data Protocol
The post-acquisition data analyses of tau interactome and global proteome datasets was conducted against the human international protein index (IPI) database (Version 3.87) which was queried with Mascot (Version 2.4; Matrix Science Ltd, London, UK) and Sequest HT search engines within Proteome Discoverer (Version 1.4; Thermo Fisher Scientific). Spectra were filtered by the percolator algorithm using a maximum ΔCn of 0.05 for input data and a strict target false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 for the decoy database search. Protein identifications were cross-validated by the respective algorithm for determining the FDR within PEAKS Studio software (Version 6.0; Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, Ontario, Canada). A separate module within the latter software further served in assessing the reproducibility of the nano-HPLC runs. Searches were configured to accommodate a maximum of two missed tryptic cleavages and considered only peptides with a minimum length of six amino acids. Naturally occurring variable posttranstlational modifications (PTMs) considered were phosphorylations of serine, threonine or tyrosine residues. Other variable PTMs considered were oxidation of methionines as well as deamidation of glutamines and asparagines. Static modifications considered were pyridylethyl-derivatised cysteines and TMT6plex-modified primary amines present on peptide N-termini or lysine side chains. Precursor mass tolerance and fragment mass tolerance thresholds were set to 10 ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively. All protein identifications and relative quantitations were based on a minimum of three CID spectra and TMT signature ion distributions linked to them (note that the median count of quantified PSMs underlying individual protein quantitations was 14). Filtering of entries on the basis variances was avoided as we observed variances to be skewed by isolation interference (despite setting an isolation interference threshold of 30%) (41). Instead, cut-offs were based on the number of PSMs that contributed to protein group identifications and quantitations. A subset of quantitation data were exported from Proteome Discoverer to provide representative examples of TMT-based ratio assignments (Fig. S1 and S3). The Gene Ontology analyses as well as the identification of KEGG pathways and InterPro domains, which were enriched amongst proteins that co-isolated with the tau protein, were undertaken with an integrated suite of statistical algorithms embedded in ProteinCenter software (Version 3.12; Thermo Fisher Scientific). The analysis was based on 390 protein groups, for which a minimum of three reporter ion distributions were available, that exhibited average enrichment ratios >1,2. As the reference data set served in these calculations the human IPI database with 91,464 entries. When p-values were corrected for multiple statistical testing using a previously published methodology they are shown as False Discovery Rate (FDR) p-values.

### Publication Abstract
The tau protein is central to the etiology of several neurodegenerative diseases, including Alzheimer's disease, a subset of frontotemporal dementias, progressive supranuclear palsy and dementia following traumatic brain injury, yet the proteins it interacts with have not been studied using a systematic discovery approach. Here we employed mild in vivo crosslinking, isobaric labeling, and tandem mass spectrometry to characterize molecular interactions of human tau in a neuroblastoma cell model. The study revealed a robust association of tau with the ribonucleoproteome, including major protein complexes involved in RNA processing and translation, and documented binding of tau to several heat shock proteins, the proteasome and microtubule-associated proteins. Follow-up experiments determined the relative contribution of cellular RNA to the tau interactome and mapped interactions to N- or C-terminal tau domains. We further document that expression of P301L mutant tau disrupts interactions of the C-terminal half of tau with heat shock proteins and the proteasome. The data are consistent with a model whereby a higher propensity of P301L mutant tau to aggregate may reflect a perturbation of its chaperone-assisted stabilization and proteasome-dependent degradation. Finally, using a global proteomics approach, we show that heterologous expression of a tau construct that lacks the C-terminal domain, including the microtubule binding domain, does not cause a discernible shift of the proteome except for a significant direct correlation of steady-state levels of tau and cystatin B.

### Keywords
Human, Interactome, Tau, Frontotemporal dementia, Alzheimer, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Tanz Centre for Research in Neurodegenerative Diseases, University of Toronto, Ontario M5T2S8, Canada.  Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5S1A8, Canada
University of Toronto

### Submitter
Gerold Schmitt-Ulms

### Lab Head
Dr Gerold Schmitt-Ulms
Tanz Centre for Research in Neurodegenerative Diseases, University of Toronto, Ontario M5T2S8, Canada.  Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5S1A8, Canada


