### Accession
PXD039033

### Title
Signaling network response to alpha-particle targeted therapy with actinium-225 labeled minigastrin analogue 225Ac-PP-F11N

### Description
Alpha-particle emitters have recently been explored as valuable therapeutic radionuclides. Yet, toxicity to healthy organs and cancer radioresistance limit the efficacy of targeted alpha-particle therapy (TAT). Identification of the radiation-activated mechanisms, which drive cancer cell survival, provides opportunities to develop new points for therapeutic interference to improve the efficacy and safety of TAT. Quantitative phosphoproteomics and matching proteomics followed were employed to identify alterations in the signaling networks in response to TAT with actinium-225 labeled minigastrin analogue 225Ac-PP-F11N in A431 cells, which overexpress cholecystokinin B receptor (CCKBR).

### Sample Protocol
Human epidermoid carcinoma A431/CCKBR cells were grown on 150 mm TC plates and 100% confluent cells were treated with 10 kBq/mL 225Ac-PP-F11N for 2 h. Control plates were incubated with medium without radiolabeled compound. After incubation time, control and treated cells were washed with PBS, and incubated with normal growth medium for another 2 h. The total protein lysates were prepared in 8 M urea lysis buffer in 0.1 M Ambic supplemented with cOmplete mini protease and PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitors. For each sample, 500 µg of proteins were taken and used for on-filter digestion using an adaptation of the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol. Briefly, proteins were diluted in 200 µL of UT buffer (8 M Urea in 100 mM Tris/HCL, pH 8.2), loaded on Ultracel 30000 MWCO centrifugal unit and centrifuged at 14000 g. SDS buffer was exchanged by one centrifugation round of 200 µL UT buffer. Alkylation of reduced proteins was carried by 5 min incubation with 100 µL iodoacetamide 0.05 M in UT buffer, followed by three 100 µL washing steps with UT and two 100 µL washing steps with Triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEAB, pH 8). Finally, proteins were on-filter digested using 120 µL of 0.05 TEAB (pH 8) containing trypsin in ratio 1:50 (w/w). Digestion was performed overnight in a wet chamber at room temperature, and peptides were eluted by centrifugation at 14000 g for 20 minutes. After elution, 5 µL of peptide mixture were taken and stored for later MS analysis of the proteomes. The remaining volume was dried almost to completeness for enrichment of the phosphopeptides by using a KingFisher Flex System and MagReSyn Ti-IMAC beads. Beads were conditioned following the manufacturer’s instructions, consisting of 2 washes with 200 µL of 70% ethanol, 1 wash with 100 µL of 1 M NH4OH and 3 washes with loading buffer (0.1 M glycolic acid in 80% ACN, 5% trilfuoroacetic acid (TFA)). Samples were diluted with 200 µL of loading buffer. The beads, wash solutions and the samples were loaded into 96 deep well plates and transferred to the KingFisher. The protocol of the robot carried out the following steps: washing of the magnetic beads in loading buffer (5 min), binding of the phosphopeptides to the beads (20 min), washing the beads in wash 1 (0.1 M glycolic acid in 80% ACN, 5% TFA, 2 min), wash 2 (80% ACN, 1% TFA, 2 min), wash 3 (10% ACN, 0.2% TFA, 2 min) and eluting the phosphopeptides from the magnetic beads (1 M NH4OH, 10 min). The phosphopeptides were dried to completeness and re-solubilized with 10 µL of 3% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid for MS analysis. 1 µL of iRT peptides (Biognosys) at 1:100 dilution were added to each samples. The analysis of phosphoproteomics sample was performed on a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a Digital PicoView source (New Objective) and coupled to a M-Class UPLC (Waters). Solvent composition at the two channels was 0.1% formic acid for channel A and 0.1% formic acid, 99.9% acetonitrile for channel B. Column temperature was 50 °C. For each sample 4 μL of peptides were loaded on a commercial ACQUITY UPLC M-Class Symmetry C18 Trap Column (100Å, 5 µm, 180 µm x 20 mm, Waters) followed by ACQUITY UPLC M-Class HSS T3 Column (100Å, 1.8 µm, 75 µm X 250 mm, Waters). The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 300 nL/min by a gradient from 5 to 40% B in 90 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode (DDA), acquiring a full-scan MS spectra (350−1’500 m/z) at a resolution of 120’000 at 200 m/z after accumulation to a target value of 3’000’000, and a maximum injection time of 50 ms followed by HCD fragmentation on the ten most intense signals per cycle. HCD spectra were acquired at a resolution of 60’000 using a normalized collision energy of 25 and a maximum injection time of 120 ms. The automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 1’000’000 ions. Only precursors with intensity above 100’000 were selected for MS/MS. Precursor masses previously selected for MS/MS measurement were excluded from further selection for 30 s, and the exclusion window was set at 10 ppm. The samples were acquired using internal lock mass calibration on m/z 371.1012 and 445.1200. MS analysis of the proteome samples was performed right after the acquisition of the phosphoproteomics data, on the same Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer, using the same UPLC conditions as of the phosphoproteomics experiment. Samples were dried and re-solubilized with 15 µL of 3% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid for MS analysis. 1 µL of iRT peptides (Biognosys) at 1:100 dilution were added to each sample. Two microliters were injected. The MS method changed only for the following parameters: HCD fragmentation was performed on the twelve most intense signals per cycle. HCD spectra were acquired at a resolution of 30’000 using a normalized collision energy of 28 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. The automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 100’000 ions.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw MS data were processed by MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.3), followed by protein identification using the integrated Andromeda search engine. Spectra were searched against a canonical Uniprot reference proteome of Homo sapiens (UP000005640, version 2016-12-09), concatenated to common protein contaminants. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification, while methionine oxidation and N-terminal protein acetylation were set as variable. Additionally, in the search for the phosphoproteome, serine, threonine and tyrosine phosphorylation were set as variable modifications. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin/P allowing a minimal peptide length of 7 amino acids and a maximum of two missed-cleavages. MaxQuant Orbitrap default search settings were used. The maximum false discovery rate was set to 0.01 for peptides and 0.05 for proteins. Label free quantification was enabled and a 2 minutes window for match between runs was applied. In the MaxQuant experimental design template, each file is kept separate in the experimental design to obtain individual quantitative values. Statistics of the phosphopeptide analysis and the total proteome analysis were merged together and the calculated p-values were adjusted for multiple testing (q-values). Values of q < 0.05 were considered statistically significant.

### Publication Abstract
&#x3b1;-particle emitters have recently been explored as valuable therapeutic radionuclides. Yet, toxicity to healthy organs and cancer radioresistance limit the efficacy of targeted &#x3b1;-particle therapy (TAT). Identification of the radiation-activated mechanisms that drive cancer cell survival provides opportunities to develop new points for therapeutic interference to improve the efficacy and safety of TAT. <b>Methods:</b> Quantitative phosphoproteomics and matching proteomics followed by the bioinformatics analysis were used to identify alterations in the signaling networks in response to TAT with the <sup>225</sup>Ac-labeled minigastrin analog <sup>225</sup>Ac-PP-F11N (DOTA-(dGlu)<sub>6</sub>-Ala-Tyr-Gly-Trp-Nle-Asp-Phe) in A431 cells, which overexpress cholecystokinin B receptor (CCKBR). Western blot analysis and microscopy verified the activation of the selected signaling pathways. Small-molecule inhibitors were used to validate the potential of the radiosensitizing combinatory treatments both in&#xa0;vitro and in A431/CCKBR tumor-bearing nude mice. <b>Results:</b> TAT-induced alterations were involved in DNA damage response, cell cycle regulation, and signal transduction, as well as RNA transcription and processing, cell morphology, and transport. Western blot analysis and microscopy confirmed increased phosphorylations of the key proteins involved in DNA damage response and carcinogenesis, including p53, p53 binding protein 1 (p53BP1), histone deacetylases (HDACs), and H2AX. Inhibition of HDAC class II, ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM), and p38 kinases by TMP269, AZD1390, and SB202190, respectively, sensitized A431/CCKBR cells to <sup>225</sup>Ac-PP-F11N. As compared with the control and monotherapies, the combination of <sup>225</sup>Ac-PP-F11N with the HDAC inhibitor vorinostat (suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid, SAHA) significantly reduced the viability and increased the DNA damage of A431/CCKBR cells, led to the most pronounced tumor growth inhibition, and extended the mean survival of A431/CCKBR xenografted nude mice. <b>Conclusion:</b> Our study revealed the cellular responses to TAT and demonstrated the radiosensitizing potential of HDAC inhibitors to <sup>225</sup>Ac-PP-F11N in CCKBR-positive tumors. This proof-of-concept study recommends development of novel radiosensitizing strategies by targeting TAT-activated and survival-promoting signaling pathways.

### Keywords
Human, Phosphoproteomics, Proteomics, Radioresistance, Minigastrin, Cancer

### Affiliations
Paul Scherrer Institute 
Center for Radiopharmaceutical Sciences 
Paul Scherrer Institute Center for Radiopharmaceutical Sciences Forschungsstrasse 111 5232 Villigen PSI Switzerland

### Submitter
Michal Grzmil

### Lab Head
Dr Michal Grzmil
Paul Scherrer Institute Center for Radiopharmaceutical Sciences Forschungsstrasse 111 5232 Villigen PSI Switzerland


