### Accession
PXD001827

### Title
Extinct Bison Latifrons Proteomics

### Description
Bone samples from several vertebrates were collected from the Ziegler Reservoir fossil site, in Snowmass Village, Colorado and processed for proteomics analysis. The specimens come from Pleistocene megafauna, Bison latifrons, dating back to 110 or 120 ka. Proteomics analysis using a simplified sample preparation procedure and tandem mass spectrometry (MS) was applied to obtain protein identifications. Several bioinformatics resources were used to obtain peptide identifications based on sequence homology to extant species with annotated genomes. With the exception of soil sample controls, all samples resulted in confident peptide identifications that mapped to collagen I. In addition, we analyzed a specimen from the extinct Bison latifrons that yielded peptide identifications mapping to over 33 bovine proteins. Our analysis resulted in extensive fibrillar collagen sequence coverage, including the identification of post-translational modifications. Hydroxylysine glucosylgalactosylation, a modification thought to be involved in collagen fiber formation and bone mineralization, was identified. Meta-analyses of data from other studies indicates that this modification may be enriched in well-preserved prehistoric samples. Additional peptide sequences from extracellular matrix (ECM) and non-ECM proteins have also been identified. These data provide a framework for analyzing ancient protein signatures in well-preserved fossil specimens, while also contributing novel insights into the molecular basis of organic matter preservation.

### Sample Protocol
Bone samples were collected from the Ziegler reservoir in Snowmass Village, CO and processed directly. The skull tissue sample (Bison latifrons 13.009a) was removed from the underlying bone with a razor blade using mild force. The sample was brought up in 0.1% ProteaseMax in ABC (25 mM, 100 µL/1 mg bone) and vortexed at room temperature for 1 hour. Reduction of disulfide bonds was achieved by addition of 10 mM TCEP and incubating for 30 min at 70 °C. After cooling to room temperature, IAM was added (15 mM) and the samples were incubated in the dark at room temperature for 45 min. Supernatant from centrifuged samples were subjected to standard overnight digestion. Digestion was carried out by adding 5 μg trypsin and incubating at 37 °C overnight. An aliquot of the Bison latifrons sample (5 %) was removed and acidified using formic acid, after 1 hour it was spun (~5 kG) to remove insoluble material. This sample was run by LC-MS/MS twice to generate the preliminary unfractionated dataset (BL_UF). The remainder of the sample was spun in a similar fashion before high pH reversed phase chromatographic separation on an AKTA micro HPLC system (GE Healthcare Life Sciences). The sample was run on a Gemini-NX C18 column (250 mm x 4.60 mm) (Phenomenex; Torrance, CA) over a gradient of 5% to 40% acetonitrile with 20 mM ammonium acetate (pH 10.0). Fractions were pooled (fraction 1+11, 2+12, etc.), concentrated on a speed-vac and acidified using FA to generate 10 samples for LC-MS/MS analysis (BL_F1-10). Samples were analyzed on an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Eksigent nanoLC-2D system through a nanoelectrospray LC−MS interface. 8 µL of sample was injected and desalted using a trapping column (ZORBAX 300SB-C18, dimensions 5x0.3 mm 5 µm). Here the sample was washed with 5% ACN, 0.1% FA at a flow rate of 10 µL/min for 3 minutes. Afterwards the trapping column was put online with the nano-pump at a flow rate of 350 nL/min. Separations were performed using 15 cm long Kasil fritted, fused silica capillary columns (100 μm i.d., 360 m o.d.) (Polymicro Technologies, Phoenix, AZ) slurry packed in-house with 4 µm, Synergi C18 resin (Phenomenex; Torrance, CA). The mobile phase consisted of water with 0.1% FA (solvent A) and 99.9 % acetonitrile with 0.1% FA (solvent B). A 90 minute gradient from 6% ACN to 35% ACN was used to separate the peptides. Data acquisition was performed using the instrument supplied Xcalibur (version 2.0.6) software. The LC runs were monitored in positive ion mode by sequentially recording survey MS scans (m/z 400−2000), in the ICR cell of the Orbitrap mass analyzer followed by 8 MS/MS scans in the ICR cell via HCD for the most intense ions detected in the full MS scan. After two acquisitions of a given ion within 30 s, the ion was excluded for 90 s.

### Data Protocol
Exploratory searches were performed to determine the most appropriate search conditions. Database searches were performed using Protein Prospector, Mascot, and Byonic. As expected most peptide matches where to bovine proteins (Bos taurus or Bos indicus extant species) with the exception of the reagent porcine trypsin and human keratins, both common processing contaminants. Bos taurus sequences were isolated from UniprotKB, and concatenated with decoy-randomized sequences, human keratins, latex contaminants, and porcine trypsin. This database was used for all searches (release date 2013.6.17 for Protein Prospector, and 2014.9.18 for Mascot and Byonic).  Protein annotations were determined when necessary using the Uniref90 or Uniref50 databases.  Initial searches revealed that deamidation of Asn and Gln, carbamidomethylation of peptide N-termini (due to unquenched alkylating reagent during sample prep), and oxidation of Met and Pro (Hyp) were all common modifications. These modifications were used in Protein Prospector’s Batch-Tag utility (v5.12.1) as variable modifications, with a maximum of three per peptide, to generate initial protein identifications. Additional parameters included semi-trypsin specificity, precursor ion tolerance of 8 ppm, and fragment ion tolerance of 0.05 Da.  Protein IDs were filtered at a max E-value of 1.0E-5, and the resulting accession numbers were searched with an “open mass” modification search with limits of -100 to +400 Da mass addition on any residue to identify additional modifications.  178 Da and 340 Da mass additions, indicative of lysine galactosylation and glucosylgalactosylation, were identified.  A final Batch-Tag search, “BT_Final,” added oxidation, galactosylation, and glucosylgalactosylation of lysine to the “base” search variable modifications, and allowed for a max of four modifications per peptide and up to one missed cleavage.  The BT_Final parameters were used to search the fractionated data with Mascot and Byonic.

### Publication Abstract
Bone samples from several vertebrates were collected from the Ziegler Reservoir fossil site, in Snowmass Village, Colorado, and processed for proteomics analysis. The specimens come from Pleistocene megafauna Bison latifrons, dating back &#x223c; 120,000 years. Proteomics analysis using a simplified sample preparation procedure and tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) was applied to obtain protein identifications. Several bioinformatics resources were used to obtain peptide identifications based on sequence homology to extant species with annotated genomes. With the exception of soil sample controls, all samples resulted in confident peptide identifications that mapped to type I collagen. In addition, we analyzed a specimen from the extinct B. latifrons that yielded peptide identifications mapping to over 33 bovine proteins. Our analysis resulted in extensive fibrillar collagen sequence coverage, including the identification of posttranslational modifications. Hydroxylysine glucosylgalactosylation, a modification thought to be involved in collagen fiber formation and bone mineralization, was identified for the first time in an ancient protein dataset. Meta-analysis of data from other studies indicates that this modification may be common in well-preserved prehistoric samples. Additional peptide sequences from extracellular matrix (ECM) and non-ECM proteins have also been identified for the first time in ancient tissue samples. These data provide a framework for analyzing ancient protein signatures in well-preserved fossil specimens, while also contributing novel insights into the molecular basis of organic matter preservation. As such, this analysis has unearthed common posttranslational modifications of collagen that may assist in its preservation over time. The data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD001827.

### Keywords
Paleoproteomics, Hydroxylysine glycosylation, Ziegler reservoir, Lc-ms/ms, Bison latifrons, Snowmass

### Affiliations
Dept. of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Colorado-Denver: Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO
University of Colorado Denver

### Submitter
Matthew Wither

### Lab Head
Dr Kirk Charles Hansen
Dept. of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Colorado-Denver: Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO


