### Accession
PXD037175

### Title
Glycoengineering of hCK and MDCK for influenza A virus propagation

### Description
Recent human H3N2 influenza A viruses have evolved to bind elongated glycans terminated with α2,6-linked sialic acids. These extended glycans are of low abundance on cells that are used for the propagation of these viruses, which may explain why it is very difficult to isolate and propagate human H3N2 viruses. This greatly hampers the further study of these viruses. Therefore, we elongated the glycans on cells (MDCK and hCK) by overexpression of the glycosyltransferases that are responsible for building N-acetyllactosamine (LacNAc) repeats, namely B3GNT2 and B4GALT1. Overexpression was clearly shown by qPCR and MS experiments.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysates were obtained by first washing cell monolayers once using D-PBS (D5837, Sigma). Cells were harvested after incubation at 37°C for 20 min with TrypLE Express Enzyme. The cell suspension was centrifuged for 5 min at 250 rcf. The cells pellets were lysed by the addition of RIPA lysis buffer (20-188, Merck Millipore) supplemented with protease inhibitor (A32965, Thermo Fisher Scientific), which was vortexed for 20 sec. The suspension was incubated on ice for 30 min, after which it was centrifuged at 16500 rcf in a fixed-angle centrifuge at 4°C. From the cell lysates 10 ug of protein was denatured, reduced and alkylated by adding 100 ul of 150 mMTris, 5mM TCEP, 30 mM CAA, 1% SDC; pH 8,5. Next 100 ng lysC and 100 ng trypsin was added and the sample was incubated overnight at 37°C.The samples where then acidified by adding FA to a concentration of 0.5% prior to SPE sample clean-up, causing SDC to precipitate. SPE clean up was performed on an Oasis HBL u-elution plate. After SPE clean up the samples where dried with a vacuum centrifuge. Subsequently the sample was reconstituted in 2% FA prior to analysis on the orbitrap mass spectrometer. Samples  were analyzed on an exploris mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) connected to a UHPLC 3000 system (Thermo). Approximately 200 ng of reconstituted peptides were trapped on a precolumn and then separated on a 50cm x 75μm Poroshell EC-C18 analytical column (2.7μm) temperature controlled at  40°C. Solvent A consisted of 0.1% formic acid, solvent B of 0.1 % formic acid in 80% acetonitrile. Trapping was performed for 2 min in 9% solvent B. Peptides were separated by a 65 min gradient of 9–44 % buffer B  followed by 44–99% B in 3 min, 99% B for 4 min. MS data were obtained in data-dependent acquisition mode.  The full scans were acquired in the m/z range of 350-1600 at the resolution of 60,000 (m/z 400) with AGC target 3E6. The most intense precursor ions automatically were selected for HCD fragmentation performed at normalized collision energy (NCE) 28, after accumulation to target value of 1E5. MS/MS acquisition was performed at a resolution of 15,000.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was done with Byonic (Protein Metrics). Search was performed against the dog proteome (UP000002254_9615) with addition of the human B3/B4/ST6 sequences. Search was performed with specific digestion C-terminal of R/K, allowing 3 missed cleavages, using precursor and fragment mass tolerances of 12 and 24 ppm, respectively. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification, oxidation of methionine or tryptophan as variable modification. Peptides unique for human B3/B4/ST6 were manually selected and MS1 peak areas integrated with Skyline, and normalized against the combined MS1 signals for identified peptides of tubulin beta (E2RFJ7). The peptide library for Skyline was built by repeating the search with a focused database containing only the human B3/B4/ST6 and tubulin beta sequences.

### Publication Abstract
Recent human H3N2 influenza A viruses have evolved to employ elongated glycans terminating in &#x3b1;2,6-linked sialic acid as their receptors. These glycans are displayed in low abundancies by (humanized) Madin-Darby Canine Kidney cells, which are commonly employed to propagate influenza A virus, resulting in low or no viral propagation. Here, we examined whether the overexpression of the glycosyltransferases &#x3b2;-1,3-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase and &#x3b2;-1,4-galactosyltransferase 1, which are responsible for the elongation of poly-N-acetyllactosamines (LacNAcs), would result in improved A/H3N2 propagation. Stable overexpression of &#x3b2;-1,3-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase and &#x3b2;-1,4-galactosyltransferase 1 in Madin-Darby Canine Kidney and "humanized" Madin-Darby Canine Kidney cells was achieved by lentiviral integration and subsequent antibiotic selection and confirmed by qPCR and protein mass spectrometry experiments. Flow cytometry and glycan mass spectrometry experiments using the &#x3b2;-1,3-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase and/or &#x3b2;-1,4-galactosyltransferase 1 knock-in cells demonstrated increased binding of viral hemagglutinins and the presence of a larger number of LacNAc repeating units, especially on "humanized" Madin-Darby Canine Kidney-&#x3b2;-1,3-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase cells. An increase in the number of glycan receptors did, however, not result in a greater infection efficiency of recent human H3N2 viruses. Based on these results, we propose that H3N2 influenza A viruses require a low number of suitable glycan receptors to infect cells and that an increase in the glycan receptor display above this threshold does not result in improved infection efficiency.

### Keywords
Influenza; glycosylation

### Affiliations
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Joost Snijder

### Lab Head
Dr Joost Snijder
Utrecht University


