### Accession
PXD010155

### Title
Probing the contribution of individual polypeptide GalNAc-transferase isoforms to the O-glycoproteome by inducible expression in isogenic cell lines

### Description
The GalNAc-type O-glycoproteome is orchestrated by a large family of polypeptide GalNAc-transferase isoenzymes (GalNAc-Ts) with partially overlapping contributions to the O-glycoproteome as well as distinct non-redundant functions. Increasing evidence indicate that individual GalNAc-Ts co-regulate and fine-tune specific protein functions in health and disease, and deficiencies in individual GALNT genes underlie congenital diseases with distinct phenotypes. Studies of GalNAc-T specificities have mainly been performed with in vitro enzyme assays using short peptide substrate, but recently quantitative differential O-glycoproteomics of isogenic cells with and without GALNT genes has enabled a more unbiased exploration of the non-redundant contributions of individual GalNAc-Ts. Both approaches suggest that fairly small subsets of O-glycosites are non-redundantly regulated by specific GalNAc-Ts, but how these isoenzymes orchestrate regulation amongst competing redundant substrates is unclear. To explore this, we developed isogenic cell model systems with Tet-On inducible expression of two GalNAc-T genes, GALNT2 and GALNT11, in a knockout background. Using quantitative O-glycoproteomics with TMT labelling we found that isoform-specific glycosites were glycosylated in a dose dependent manner, and induction of GalNAc-T2 or T11 produced discrete glycosylation effects without affecting the major part of the glycoproteome. The results support the findings that individual GalNAc-T isoenzymes can serve in fine-tuned regulation of distinct protein functions

### Sample Protocol
Differential O-glycoproteomics. 2.5 × 106 HEKindT2 or HEKindT11 cells were seeded in T75 flasks and cultured for a total of 72 h and induced for 48 h before harvest. Cells were induced with dox at 24 h and 48 h by media replacement. HEKindT2 was induced at 0, 4, 8, 12 and 16 ng/mL and HEKindT11 at 0, 2.5, 5, 7.5 and 10 ng/mL of dox. 2.5 × 106 HEK WT cells were cultured in parallel with 0 ng/mL of dox. Total cell lysates were prepared as previously described (22). In brief, packed cell pellets were lysed in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Ambic) 0.2% RapiGest SF Surfactant (Waters Corp) and the lysate homogenized by sonication. Cleared lysates were diluted in 50 mM Ambic to bring the final concentration of RapiGest below 0.2% before being subjected to reduction with dithiothreitol, alkylation with iodoacetamide and digestion with trypsin (Roche). Each tryptic digest was purified using a 1 ml Sep-Pak C18 column (Waters Corp) and peptide concentration measured on a NanoDrop. Equal amounts of each digest were analyzed by LC-MS to ensure sample uniformity before labeling; 200 µg of each digest was labeled by TMTsixplex™ Isobaric labeling (Thermo Scientific) following manufacturer’s instructions, providing one channel for HEK WT and five channels for induced HEKindT2 or HEKindT11. 1% of each labeling reaction was combined and labeling efficiency verified in a LC-MS ratio check. Labeled peptides were pooled, treated with neuraminidase (N3001, Sigma) and O-glycopeptides enriched by peanut agglutinin lectin weak affinity chromatography (PNA LWAC). Selected elution fractions were StageTip purified, pooled and fractionated using Pierce™ High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Scientific) following manufacturer’s instructions. PNA LWAC flow-through was purified on a 1 ml Sep-Pak C18 column and 100 µg of FT peptides were fractionated using Pierce™ High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit. Mass spectrometry   EASY-nLC 1000 UHPLC (Thermo Scientific) interfaced via PicoView nanoSpray ion source (New Objectives) to an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) was used for glycoproteomic and proteomic studies. nLC was operated in a single analytical column set up using PicoFrit Emmiters (New Objectives, 75µm inner diameter) packed in-house with Reprosil-Pure-AQ C18 phase (Dr. Maisch, 1.9-μm particle size, ~19 cm column length), with the flow rate 200 nl min-1. All samples dissolved in 0.1% formic acid were injected onto the column and eluted in a gradient from 2 to 25% acetonitrile in either 95 (for glycoproteomic samples) or 155 min (for proteomic samples), from 25% to 80% acetonitrile in 10 min, followed by isocratic elution at 80% acetonitrile for 15 min (total elution time 120 or 180 min, respectively). The nanoSpray ion source was operated at 2.1 kV spray voltage and 300°C heated capillary temperature. A precursor MS1 scan (m/z 350–1,700) of intact peptides was acquired in the Orbitrap at a nominal resolution setting of 120,000. For glycoproteomic samples the five most abundant multiply charged precursor ions in the MS1 spectrum at a minimum MS1 signal threshold of 50,000 was triggered for sequential Orbitrap HCD-MS2 and ETD-MS2 (m/z of 100–2,000). MS2 spectra were acquired at a resolution of 50,000 for HCD MS2 and 50,000 for ETD MS2. Activation times were 30 and 200 ms for HCD and ETD fragmentation, respectively; isolation width was 4 mass units, and 1 microscan was collected for each spectrum. Automatic gain control targets were 1,000,000 ions for Orbitrap MS1 and 100,000 for MS2 scans, and the automatic gain control for fluoranthene ion used for ETD was 300,000. Supplemental activation (20 %) of the charge-reduced species was used in the ETD analysis to improve fragmentation. Dynamic exclusion for 60 s was used to prevent repeated analysis of the same components. For proteomic samples the ten most abundant multiply charged precursor ions in the MS1 spectrum at a minimum MS1 signal threshold of 100,000 was triggered for sequential Orbitrap HCD-MS2 at a resolution of 60,000. In addition for some proteomic samples a synchronous-precursor selection (SPS) MS3 method was used for quantitative analysis (67,68). Polysiloxane ions at m/z 445.12003 were used as a lock mass in all runs.

### Data Protocol
Data processing was performed using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software (Thermo Scientific) using Sequest HT Node as previously described (1) with minor changes. Briefly, all spectra were initially searched with full cleavage specificity, filtered according to the confidence level (medium, low and unassigned) and further searched with the semi-specific enzymatic cleavage. In all cases the precursor mass tolerance was set to 6 ppm and fragment ion mass tolerance to 20 mmu. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine residues was used as a fixed modification. Methionine oxidation and HexNAc attachment to serine, threonine and tyrosine were used as variable modifications for ETD MS2. All HCD MS2 were pre-processed as described (1) and searched under the same conditions mentioned above using only methionine oxidation as variable modification.    For the quantitative analysis only HCD MS2 spectra were used. In the case of ETD MS2 spectra the group of TMT reporter fragment ions (m/z range of 126-132) was extracted from the adjacent HCD MS2 spectrum (the same precursor ions), concatenated with the corresponding ETD MS2 spectrum and later used for quantification. Data processing of the TMT MS3 data was performed using Proteome Discoverer 2.1 software (Thermo Scientific) . All spectra were searched against a concatenated forward/reverse human-specific database (UniProt, January 2013, containing 20,232 canonical entries and another 251 common contaminants) using a target false discovery rate (FDR) of 1 %. FDR was calculated using target decoy PSM validator node. The resulting list was filtered to include only peptides with glycosylation as a modification.

### Publication Abstract
The GalNAc-type <i>O</i>-glycoproteome is orchestrated by a large family of polypeptide GalNAc-transferase isoenzymes (GalNAc-Ts) with partially overlapping contributions to the <i>O</i>-glycoproteome besides distinct nonredundant functions. Increasing evidence indicates that individual GalNAc-Ts co-regulate and fine-tune specific protein functions in health and disease, and deficiencies in individual <i>GALNT</i> genes underlie congenital diseases with distinct phenotypes. Studies of GalNAc-T specificities have mainly been performed with <i>in vitro</i> enzyme assays using short peptide substrates, but recently quantitative differential <i>O</i>-glycoproteomics of isogenic cells with and without <i>GALNT</i> genes has enabled a more unbiased exploration of the nonredundant contributions of individual GalNAc-Ts. Both approaches suggest that fairly small subsets of <i>O</i>-glycosites are nonredundantly regulated by specific GalNAc-Ts, but how these isoenzymes orchestrate regulation among competing redundant substrates is unclear. To explore this, here we developed isogenic cell model systems with Tet-On inducible expression of two GalNAc-T genes, <i>GALNT2</i> and <i>GALNT11</i>, in a knockout background in HEK293 cells. Using quantitative <i>O</i>-glycoproteomics with tandem-mass-tag (TMT) labeling, we found that isoform-specific glycosites are glycosylated in a dose-dependent manner and that induction of GalNAc-T2 or -T11 produces discrete glycosylation effects without affecting the major part of the <i>O</i>-glycoproteome. These results support previous findings indicating that individual GalNAc-T isoenzymes can serve in fine-tuned regulation of distinct protein functions.

### Keywords
Inducible expression, Glycoproteomics, O-glycosylation, Mass spectrometry, Galnac-transferase

### Affiliations
Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine
Associate Professor Glyco MS Group Copenhagen Center for Glycomics (CCG) Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine University of Copenahgen Blegdamsvej 3 2200 Copenhagen N Denmark

### Submitter
Sergey Vakhrushev

### Lab Head
Dr Sergey Vakhrushev
Associate Professor Glyco MS Group Copenhagen Center for Glycomics (CCG) Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine University of Copenahgen Blegdamsvej 3 2200 Copenhagen N Denmark


