### Accession
PXD027482

### Title
Mpe1 senses the polyadenylation signal in pre-mRNA to promote efficient cleavage and control polyadenylation

### Description
Crosslinking mass spectrometry dataset of the Mpe1 and Cft2 bound to the yeast CPF polymerase module. Sulfo-SDA is the crosslinker used.

### Sample Protocol
To crosslink the polymerase module-Cft2(S)-Mpe1-RNA complex, we dissolved the sulfo-SDA crosslinker in crosslinking buffer to 4 mM and incubated it with the complex at a final concentration of 2 mM for 2 hours on ice. We then irradiated the sample with UV light at 365 nm for 15 minutes and visualized the crosslinked complex in Tris-Acetate gels. Next, we cut out gel slices containing the crosslinked complex, dehydrated them with LCMS-grade acetonitrile, and denatured the samples in 8 M urea and 100 mM NH4HCO3. We derivatized the proteins with iodoacetamide and digested them with LysC endoproteinase for 4 hours at 25 °C. We then added trypsin and digested the samples for 16 hours at 25 °C, extracted and desalted the resulting tryptic peptides using C18 StageTips, and fractionated them using a Superdex 30 Increase 3.2/300 column. We collected 50 μl fractions and dried them, selecting the five highest molecular weight samples for LC-MS/MS analysis. We performed the analysis on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer coupled on-line with an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system. The mass spec data were acquired in data-dependent mode using the top-speed setting with a three second cycle time and the full scan mass spectrum was recorded using the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000 in the range of 400 to 1,600 m/z. We isolated and fragmented ions with a precursor charge state between 3+ and 7+ by higher-energy Collisional Dissociation (HCD) at 26%, 28% and 30%, and recorded the fragmentation spectra in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 60,000.

### Data Protocol
We conducted a recalibration of the precursor m/z based on high-confidence linear peptide identifications and searched the re-calibrated peak lists against the sequences and the reversed sequences of crosslinked peptides using the Xi software suite (v.1.6.745) for identification. Finally, we compiled the crosslink lists using the identified candidates filtered to 1% False Discovery Rate on link level with xiFDR v.2.1.5.2.

### Publication Abstract
Most eukaryotic messenger RNAs (mRNAs) are processed at their 3' end by the cleavage and polyadenylation specificity factor (CPF/CPSF). CPF mediates the endonucleolytic cleavage of the pre-mRNA and addition of a polyadenosine (poly(A)) tail, which together define the 3' end of the mature transcript. The activation of CPF is highly regulated to maintain the fidelity of RNA processing. Here, using cryo-EM of yeast CPF, we show that the Mpe1 subunit directly contacts the polyadenylation signal sequence in nascent pre-mRNA. The region of Mpe1 that contacts RNA also promotes the activation of CPF endonuclease activity and controls polyadenylation. The Cft2 subunit of CPF antagonizes the RNA-stabilized configuration of Mpe1. In&#xa0;vivo, the depletion or mutation of Mpe1 leads to widespread defects in transcription termination by RNA polymerase II, resulting in transcription interference on neighboring genes. Together, our data suggest that Mpe1 plays a major role in accurate 3' end processing, activating CPF, and ensuring timely transcription termination.

### Keywords
Protein complex, Crosslinking, Sulfo-sda

### Affiliations
NCI-NIH

### Submitter
Francis O'Reilly 

### Lab Head
 Juri Rappsilber 
NCI-NIH


