### Accession
PXD038275

### Title
Small heat shock proteins operate as molecular chaperones in the mitochondrial intermembrane space

### Description
Mitochondria are complex organelles with different compartments, each harboring their own protein quality control factors. While the chaperones of the mitochondrial matrix have been well characterized, it is poorly understood which chaperones protect the mitochondrial intermembrane space. We show that cytosolic small heat shock proteins are imported under basal conditions into the mitochondrial intermembrane space, where they operate as molecular chaperones. To identify chaperone substrates with MS/MS, we used a molecular trap variant of HSPB1/Hsp27 (S135F mutant). Through affinity-enrichment co-immunoprecipitation we identified significantly enriched substrates versus GFP-negative control.

### Sample Protocol
For the affinity-enriched mass spectrometry, after HSPB1 affinity isolation, washed beads were resuspended in 150 µl trypsin digestion buffer (T6567, Sigma-Aldrich, Saint Louis, MI, USA) and incubated with 1 µg trypsin (V511A, Promega, Madison, WI, USA) for 4 h at 37°C. Beads were removed by centrifugation and another 1 µg of trypsin was added to the supernatants to complete digestion overnight at 37°C. Peptides were purified on Omix C18 tips (A57003100, Agilent, Santa Clara, CA, USA), dried and redissolved in 20 µl loading buffer (0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in water:acetonitrile [98:2, v:v]) of which 2 µl was injected for LC-MS/MS analysis on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano LC (ThermoFisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) in-line connected to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). The peptides were first loaded on a trapping column (in-house, 100 μm internal diameter [I.D.] × 20 mm, 5 μm beads C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). After flushing the trapping column, peptides were loaded in solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) on a reverse-phase column (in-house, 75 µm I.D. x 250 mm, 3 µm beads C18 Reprosil-Pur, Dr. Maisch), packed in the needle and eluted by an increase in solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) in a linear gradient from 2% solvent B to 55% solvent B in 120 min, followed by a washing step with 99% solvent B, all at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent, positive ionization mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 10 most abundant peaks in a given MS spectrum. The source voltage was set at 3.4 kV, and the capillary temperature at 275°C. One MS1 scan (m/z 400−2,000, AGC target 3 × 106 ions, maximum ion injection time 80 ms), acquired at a resolution of 70,000 (at 200 m/z), was followed by up to 10 tandem MS scans (resolution 17,500 at 200 m/z) of the most intense ions fulfilling predefined selection criteria (AGC target 5 × 104 ions, maximum ion injection time 60 ms, isolation window 2 Da, fixed first mass 140 m/z, spectrum data type: centroid, underfill ratio 2%, intensity threshold 1.7xE4, exclusion of unassigned, 1, 5–8, >8 positively charged precursors, peptide match preferred, exclude isotopes on, dynamic exclusion time 20 s). The HCD collision energy was set to 25% normalized collision energy and the poly-dimethyl-cyclosiloxane background ion at 445.120025 Da was used for internal calibration (lock mass).

### Data Protocol
Data analysis of the affinity-enriched immunoprecipitation samples was performed with MaxQuant (version 2.0.1.0) using the Andromeda search engine with default search settings including a false discovery rate set at 1% at both the peptide and protein level. Spectra were searched against the human proteins in the Uniprot/Swiss-Prot database (database release version of April 2015 containing 20,193 human protein sequences (www.uniprot.org) expanded with the eGFP sequence). Mass tolerances for precursor and fragment ions were set to 4.5 and 20 ppm, respectively, during the main search. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine, also allowing cleavage at proline bonds with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionine residues and acetylation of protein N-termini, phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine residues and biotinylation of lysine residues. Proteins were quantified by the MaxLFQ algorithm integrated in the MaxQuant software. A minimum ratio count of 2 unique or razor peptides was required for quantification. Further data analysis was performed with the Perseus software (version 1.5.2.6) after loading the protein groups file from MaxQuant. Proteins only identified by site, contaminants and reverse database hits were removed and replicate samples were grouped. Proteins with less than 3 valid values in at least 1 group were removed and missing values were imputed from a normal distribution around the detection limit. For each quantified protein, a t-test was performed for pairwise comparison of both conditions. The results of this t-test are shown in the volcano plot in Figure 5a. For each protein, the fold change value is indicated on the X-axis, while the statistical significance (-log p value) is indicated on the Y-axis. Proteins outside the curved lines, set by an FDR value of 0.05 and an S0 value of 1 in the Perseus software are considered to be significantly regulated. To identify mitochondrial proteins, we identified all significantly enriched proteins that are listed in MitoCarta3.0 database and compared the number of mitochondrial proteins to non-mitochondrial proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Intermembrane space, Protein quality control, Small heat shock proteins, Chaperones, Charcot-marie-tooth (cmt) disease

### Affiliations
VIB-UGent
1. Peripheral Neuropathy Research Group, Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium 2. Laboratory of Neuromuscular Pathology, Institute Born Bunge, Antwerp, Belgium

### Submitter
Sara Dufour

### Lab Head
Dr Vincent Timmerman
1. Peripheral Neuropathy Research Group, Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium 2. Laboratory of Neuromuscular Pathology, Institute Born Bunge, Antwerp, Belgium


