### Accession
PXD023620

### Title
Proteome adaptations of AC16 cells different oxygen exposure

### Description
To simulate in vitro different oxidative stress exposures, AC16 cells were cultured either under physioxia (5% oxygen) or normoxia (21% oxygen), and were consequently harvested either under physioxia or normoxia.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were harvested in 150 µl of 100 mM Tris pH = 8.5, containing 1 % sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS) and 10 mM of NEM and sonicated 2 x 10 s at 80 % amplitude (Bandelin, Germany). Lysates were then centrifuged and 100 µg of protein was acetone-precipitated over-night. Protein pellets were re-dissolved in 87.5 µl of 50% trifluoroethanol (TFE) in 50 mM ammonium-bicarbonate (ABC) and reduced with TCEP (5 mM final concentration) for 20 min at 60 °C. Reduced samples were subjected to a second alkylation step using d5-NEM (10 mM final concentration, 20 min at RT) and diluted 1:4 with 25 mM ABC prior to digestion with trypsin over-night at 37°C. Prior analysis samples were desalted offline using SDB-RPS tips and 500 ng per each sample was used for injection. Chromatography was carried out on an Ultimate 3000 RCS Nano Dionex system equipped with an Ionopticks Aurora Series UHPLC C18 column (250 mm x 75 µm, 1.6 µm) (Ionopticks, Australia). Total LC-MS/MS run per sample was 133 min with the following gradient (solvent A is 0.1% formic acid in water; solvent B is acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid): 0-0.1 min: 2% B; 0.1-18 min: 2% B; 18-100 min: 2-25% B; 100-107 min: 25-35% B, 107-108 min: 35-95% B, 108-118 min: 95% B; 118-118.1 min: 95-2%B; 118.1-133 min: 2% B at a flow rate of 300 nl/min and 50 °C. The maXis II ETD mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics, Germany) was operated with the captive source in positive mode employing following settings: mass range: 200 – 2000 m/z, 2 Hz, capillary 1600 V, dry gas flow 3 L/min at 150 °C, nanoBooster 0.2 bar, precursor acquisition control set to fragment top 20 most abundant peaks.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis including database search, light to heavy (L/H) ratio calculation as well as label free protein quantification (LFQ) was performed using MaxQuant (v1.6.17.0). False discovery rate (FDR) for database matching was set to 1 % and minimum peptide length to six amino acids. Match between run feature was enabled with the match and alignment windows of 1 and 20 min, respectively. For redox proteomics further steps were: for peptide L/H (light to heavy, NEM to d5-NEM) ratio estimation, NEM and d5-NEM were configured as a „light“ (NEM) and „heavy“ (d5-NEM) label pair in MaxQuant configuration window. Methionine oxidation was selected as dynamic modification and no static modifications were defined. Statistical analysis was performed in Perseus (v1.6.5.0). For each sample, MaxQuant table containing peptide specific L and H values was imported into Perseus, L/H ratios were then calculated per sample and the matrix was filtered to keep only cysteine containing peptides and exclude all contaminants, reverse and peptides identified by site. Matrix was then filtered to contain only those peptides with reported L/H ratio in all 3 replicates in each group of all samples and two-tailed Student t-testing was performed between the sample groups. Label free proteomics: Methionine oxidation, NEM and d5-NEM cysteine modifications were selected as dynamic modifications and no static modifications were defined. At least two peptides were required for quantification. In Perseus, table with protein LFQ intensities was as well filtered for contaminants, after which matrix was further filtered to contain at least 3 valid values in at least one of the groups. Missing values were then imputed from normal distribution (width 0.2, downshift 2) and two-sample t-tests were performed between the groups (FDR 5 %, S0 0.1).

### Publication Abstract
Oxidative stress contributes to detrimental functional decline of the myocardium, leading to the impairment of the antioxidative defense, dysregulation of redox signaling, and protein damage. In order to precisely dissect the changes of the myocardial redox state correlated with oxidative stress and heart failure, we subjected left-ventricular tissue specimens collected from control or failing human hearts to comprehensive mass spectrometry-based redox and quantitative proteomics, as well as glutathione status analyses. As a result, we report that failing hearts have lower glutathione to glutathione disulfide ratios and increased oxidation of a number of different proteins, including constituents of the contractile machinery as well as glycolytic enzymes. Furthermore, quantitative proteomics of failing hearts revealed a higher abundance of proteins responsible for extracellular matrix remodeling and reduced abundance of several ion transporters, corroborating contractile impairment. Similar effects were recapitulated by an in vitro cell culture model under a controlled oxygen atmosphere. Together, this study provides to our knowledge the most comprehensive report integrating analyses of protein abundance and global and peptide-level redox state in end-stage failing human hearts as well as oxygen-dependent redox and global proteome profiles of cultured human cardiomyocytes.

### Keywords
Heart, Oxidative stress, Ac16

### Affiliations
Senior Scientist at Institute of Chemical Technologies and Analytics
Faculty of Technical Chemistry, TU Wien
Getreidemarkt 9/164, 1060 Vienna

Full Professor for Analytical Chemistry   Institute of Chemical Technologies and Analytics   TU Wien Getreidemarkt 9/E164  A-1060 Vienna Austria

### Submitter
Tamara Tomin

### Lab Head
Dr Ruth Birner-Gruenberger
Full Professor for Analytical Chemistry   Institute of Chemical Technologies and Analytics   TU Wien Getreidemarkt 9/E164  A-1060 Vienna Austria


