### Accession
PXD019248

### Title
NAP1-RELATED PROTEIN1 and 2 negatively regulate H2A.Z abundance in chromatin in Arabidopsis

### Description
In eukaryotes, DNA wraps around histones to form nucleosomes, which are compacted into chromatin. DNA-templated processes, including transcription, require chromatin disassembly and reassembly mediated by histone chaperones. Additionally, distinct histone variants can replace core histones to regulate chromatin structure and function. Although replacement of H2A with the evolutionarily conserved H2A.Z via the SWR1 histone chaperone complex has been extensively studied, in plants little is known about how a reduction of H2A.Z levels can be achieved. Here, we show that NRP proteins cause a decrease of H2A.Z-containing nucleosomes in Arabidopsis under standard growing conditions. nrp1-1 nrp2-2 double mutants show an over-accumulation of H2A.Z genome-wide, especially at heterochromatic regions normally H2A.Z-depleted in wild-type plants. Our work suggests that NRP proteins regulate gene expression by counteracting SWR1, thereby preventing excessive accumulation of H2A.Z.

### Sample Protocol
We collected between 5-8.5 g tissue from young inflorescences from the complementing lines T3  NRP2-3xFlag or T3 NRP2-9xMyc and from Columbia plants as negative controls. Tissue was ground to a fine powder using a RETCH tissue-lyser and suspended in 20-35 mL of IP buffer, then centrifuged for 5 min at 4,000 g and 4 °C. The lysate was filtered through two layers of Miracloth. For NRP2-3xFlag, the supernatant was incubated with 250 μL FLAG M2 magnetic beads (Sigma, USA), at 4°C for 2 h. The beads were then washed initially with 10 mL of IP buffer, then five additional times (5 min rotating at 4°C with 1 mL IP buffer). The FLAG-IP was eluted twice with 400 µl of 250 µgmL-1 3X FLAG peptides (Sigma, USA) in 1xPBS pH=7.4 (2.7 mM KCl, 150 mM NaCl, 10 mM Na2HPO4, 1.8 mM K2HPO4), rotating for 15 min. at 4 °C. The eluted protein complexes were precipitated by the addition of 25% TCA, washed twice in ice-cold acetone and subjected to mass spectrometric analyses. For NRP2-9xMyc supernatant was incubated with 500μL streptavidin-coupled magnetic beads for 1 hour at 4°C (Invitrogen, USA). Proteins were released from the streptavidin beads by 3C cleavage overnight at 4°C. Then 3C-GST (SIGMA, USA) was removed by incubation with 300 μL of GST-coupled magnetic beads (Pierce, USA) twice rotating for 30 min. at 4 °C. The following steps were identical to NRP2-3xFlag. TCA precipitates were digested by the sequential addition of lys-C and trypsin proteases. The digested peptides were fractionated online using reversed-phase chromatography and eluted directly into a Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermofisher, USA) where MS/MS spectra were collected.

### Data Protocol
Database searching was performed with the ProLuCID algorithm against a fasta protein database downloaded from The Arabidopsis Information Resource. Peptide identification and protein mapping were performed using the DTASelect2 algorithm.  Peptide spectrum matches were filtered using a false-positive rate of less than 5% as estimated by a decoy database strategy and confident protein identifications required at least two unique peptides per protein.

### Publication Abstract
In eukaryotes, DNA wraps around histones to form nucleosomes, which are compacted into chromatin. DNA-templated processes, including transcription, require chromatin disassembly and reassembly mediated by histone chaperones. Additionally, distinct histone variants can replace core histones to regulate chromatin structure and function. Although replacement of H2A with the evolutionarily conserved H2A.Z via the SWR1 histone chaperone complex has been extensively studied, in plants little is known about how a reduction of H2A.Z levels can be achieved. Here, we show that NRP proteins cause a decrease of H2A.Z-containing nucleosomes in Arabidopsis under standard growing conditions. nrp1-1 nrp2-2 double mutants show an over-accumulation of H2A.Z genome-wide, especially at heterochromatic regions normally H2A.Z-depleted in wild-type plants. Our work suggests that NRP proteins regulate gene expression by counteracting SWR1, thereby preventing excessive accumulation of H2A.Z.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
UCLA
State Key Laboratory of Crop Stress Biology for Arid Areas and College of Life Sciences, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi 712100, China

### Submitter
Zhong Zhenhui

### Lab Head
Dr Israel Ausin
State Key Laboratory of Crop Stress Biology for Arid Areas and College of Life Sciences, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi 712100, China


