### Accession
PXD003256

### Title
BRAF interactome -  Phospho-proteomic analyses of B-Raf protein complexes reveal new regulatory principles

### Description
SILAC-based analysis of BRAF interaction partners in DT40 chicken cells and mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEF)

### Sample Protocol
SILAC triple labeling of (1) DT40 cells and (2) MEFs (two biological replicates each). In DT40 cells BRAF interactions are analyzed comparing BRAF ko cells with cells overexpressing human BRAF. In MEFs (a) ko cells are compared to cells overexpressing BRAF WT and cells overexpressing BRAF WT treated with sorafenib; (b) ko cells comapred to cell overexpressing BRAF WT and cells overexpressing BRAF D594A.

### Data Protocol
Data was processed with MaxQuant: mass accuracy thresholds of 0.5 (MS/MS) and 6 ppm (precursor), maximum two missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation (C) as fixed modification and deamidation (NQ), oxidation (M), phosphorylation(STY) and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. MaxQuant was used to filter the identifications for a FDR below 1% for peptides, sites and proteins using forward-decoy searching.

### Publication Abstract
B-Raf represents a critical physiological regulator of the Ras/RAF/MEK/ERK-pathway and a pharmacological target of growing clinical relevance, in particular in oncology. To understand how B-Raf itself is regulated, we combined mass spectrometry with genetic approaches to map its interactome in MCF-10A cells as well as in B-Raf deficient murine embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) and B-Raf/Raf-1 double deficient DT40 lymphoma cells complemented with wildtype or mutant B-Raf expression vectors. Using a multi-protease digestion approach, we identified a novel ubiquitination site and provide a detailed B-Raf phospho-map. Importantly, we identify two evolutionary conserved phosphorylation clusters around T401 and S419 in the B-Raf hinge region. SILAC labelling and genetic/biochemical follow-up revealed that these clusters are phosphorylated in the contexts of oncogenic Ras, sorafenib induced Raf dimerization and in the background of the V600E mutation. We further show that the vemurafenib sensitive phosphorylation of the T401 cluster occurs in trans within a Raf dimer. Substitution of the Ser/Thr-residues of this cluster by alanine residues enhances the transforming potential of B-Raf, indicating that these phosphorylation sites suppress its signaling output. Moreover, several B-Raf phosphorylation sites, including T401 and S419, are somatically mutated in tumors, further illustrating the importance of phosphorylation for the regulation of this kinase.

### Keywords
Mouse, Sorafenib, Lc-ms/ms, Silac, Chicken, Affinity purification ms

### Affiliations
University of Fribourg
Dep. of Dermatology, Medical Center and Center for Biological Systems Analysis, University of Freiburg, Germany

### Submitter
Joern Dengjel

### Lab Head
Dr Joern Dengjel
Dep. of Dermatology, Medical Center and Center for Biological Systems Analysis, University of Freiburg, Germany


