### Accession
PXD011285

### Title
P. yoelii exos

### Description
Exosomes are a subclass of nanometer-sized vesicles formed by the endocytic pathway which contain genetic and protein material and reflect the contents of their cells of origin. In Plasmodium infections, vesicles derived from the parasite or parasite-infected cells have been shown to induce the expression of pro-inflammatory elements, which have been correlated with manifestations of clinic disease. Thus, these vesicles are of great interest as therapeutic targets, or as vehicles for immunomodulatory control. Herein, the identification and characterization of proteins within naturally occurring exosomes from a rodent Plasmodium yoelii infection is described. Our results establish that exosomes derived from an infection with P. yoelii contain proteins of interest as vaccine candidates (e.g. p235 rhoptry protein, multiple members of the yir multi-gene protein family, and the ribosomal protein S12), uncharacterized proteins which may be good targets of T cell immunoreactivity, and proteins involved in metabolic processes, homeostasis and immunity. These findings add to the growing interest on parasite exosomes and provide a different way to understand the interactions between host and parasite and identify novel proteins potentially targeted by protective immune responses. Together with evidence that exosomes can interact with the host immune system and generate an immune response, these data provide a solid foundation for future studies aimed at novel vaccination strategies in the context of parasitic diseases, where the classical approaches that have thus far failed.

### Sample Protocol
Pooled plasma, obtained by centrifugation of whole blood at 2,000x g for 15 min, was diluted 1:1 with PBS and centrifuged for 30 min at 2,000x g (AllegraX-14R, Beckman Coulter, Australia); the supernatant was transferred to new tubes and centrifuged for 45 min at 15,000x g. Resulting supernatant was collected and centrifuged at 100,000x g for a further 2 hrs. The pellet was resuspended in PBS, filtered through a 0.2μm syringe filter (Acrodisc® Syringe Filters, Pall Corporation, Australia), and centrifuged for a further 2 hrs at 100,000x g. All centrifugation steps were performed at 4°C in order to maintain exosome stability. The final pellet was resuspended in Dulbecco's PBS (dPBS). Isopycnic separation was used to further purify exosomes using sequential ultracentrifugations in an OptiPrep™ (Sigma-Aldrich) iodixanol gradient, as previously described [89]. After centrifugation, 12 x 1 mL fractions were collected from each gradient column. Samples were stored at - 80°C prior to assay. Density gradient fractions indicated by electron microscopy to contain exosomes were subjected to three rounds of high-speed centrifugation for 1 hr at 100,000x g at 4°C.  The resultant pellet was resuspended in 1% SDS in PBS, and 50 mM TEAB added. Samples were vortexed and incubated for 15 min at RT with constant slow agitation. Proteins were purified using a modified FASP protocol [90]. Briefly, total proteins from lysed exosome preparations were reduced with 20mM DTT (5 min, 95°C) and then alkylated with 40mM IAA (45 min, room temperature in the dark). Samples were next diluted by eight volumes of 8M Urea, 10% isopropanol in 100mM TEAB, transferred into a 30kDa cutoff Acroprep advance 96 filter plate (PALL) and centrifuged at 3,000x g for 30 min. This was followed by four consecutive wash and centrifugation steps (3,000x g, 40 min) where the first two washes were performed with 8M Urea:10% isopropanol in 100mM TEAB and the final two with 100mM TEAB. Trypsin was then added to a final ratio of 1:50 trypsin:protein and samples were incubated overnight at 37°C. The samples were then centrifuged at 3,000x g for 20 min, and 50mM TEAB added to recover left-over peptides. The flow-through was collected and dried in a speed-vacuum (Savant SVC-100H Speedvac Concentrator, ThermoFisher Scientific, Australia) before re-solubilization in 0.1% TFA aqueous solution. Prior to mass spectral analysis, tryptic peptides were desalted on a ZipTip C18 pipette tip (Millipore). Briefly, C18 tips were washed 5 times with 10µl of 70% ACN/0.1% TFA, then equilibrated with a 0.1% TFA solution. Peptides were loaded onto the tips by pipetting and bound peptides were washed 5 times with a solution of 0.1% TFA, and eluted in 70µl of 70% ACN/0.1% TFA. Desalted peptides were lyophilized (Savant SVC-100H Speedvac Concentrator, ThermoFisher Scientific, Australia) at 37°C, resuspended in 0.1% formic acid [aq]/2% ACN, centrifuged at  12,000x g for 1 min and fractionated using reverse-phase chromatography. Peptides were desalted for 10 min using 0.1% formic acid [aq]/5% acetonitrile in an Eksigent cHiPLC which was then placed in-line with an analytical cHiPLC column. Full scan TOF-MS data was acquired in an Information Dependant Acquisition (IDA) mode on a triple-TOF 5600 (AB Sciex) over the mass range 300-2000 (m/z) with 250ms accumulation time and, for product ions, 100-2000 (m/z) with 100ms accumulation time for a total of 4152 cycles. Ions observed in the TOF-MS scan, exceeding a threshold of 50 counts and possessing a charge state of +2 to +4, were set to trigger the acquisition of product ion spectra for a maximum of 10 of the most intense ions.  Dynamic exclusion was incorporated for 10 secs after two occurrences of a precursor ion. A scan of the reference compound (Glufibrinopeptide B) was acquired every ten scans of the analyte through the entire run. Data was acquired and processed using Analyst TF1.5.1 software (AB Sciex, Canada).

### Data Protocol
Spectral searches of LC-MS/MS data were conducted on Protein Pilot (AB Sciex Pte. Ltd) with the following parameters: one miss cleavage permitted, carboxymethylation specified as a fixed modification and oxidation of methione as a variable modification, background correction used, and biological modifications specified as an ID focus. Rsults were validated using MASCOT Daemon v2.5 (Matrix Science). Searches were conducted against general protein databases, parasite-specific and exosome-specific databases, as follows: for general annotation, including mouse-specific annotation, the following databases were prospected: National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/), European Bioinformatics Institute (EMBL-EBI) (http://www.ebi.ac.uk), UniProt (http://www.uniprot.org), Gene Ontology (GO) (http://geneontology.org), Panther Classification System (http://pantherdb.org) and Ensembl (http://www.ensembl.org/index.html). For parasite-specific annotation, the PlasmoDB v39 (http://plasmodb.org/plasmo) database was used. For exosome-specific annotation, ExoCarta v5 (http://exocarta.org/index.html) was prospected.

### Publication Abstract
Small extracellular vesicles, including exosomes, are formed by the endocytic pathway and contain genetic and protein material which reflect the contents of their cells of origin. These contents have a role in vesicle-mediated information transfer, as well as physiological and pathological functions. Thus, these vesicles are of great interest as therapeutic targets, or as vehicles for immunomodulatory control. In Plasmodium spp. infections, vesicles derived from the parasite or parasite-infected cells have been shown to induce the expression of pro-inflammatory elements, which have been correlated with manifestations of clinical disease. Herein, we characterised the protein cargo of naturally occurring sEVs in the plasma of P. yoelii-infected mice. After in vivo infections, extracellular vesicles in the size range of exosomes were collected by sequential centrifugation/ultracentrifugation followed by isopycnic gradient separation. Analysis of the vesicles was performed by transmission electron microscopy, dynamic light scattering, SDS-PAGE and flow cytometry. LC-MS analysis followed by bioinformatics analysis predicted parasite protein cargo associated with exosomes. Within these small extracellular vesicles, we identified proteins of interest as vaccine candidates, uncharacterized proteins which may be targets of T cell immunoreactivity, and proteins involved in metabolic processes, regulation, homeostasis and immunity. Importantly, the small extracellular vesicles studied in our work were obtained from in vivo infection rather than from the supernatant of in vitro cultures. These findings add to the growing interest in parasite small extracellular vesicles, further our understanding of the interactions between host and parasite, and identify novel proteins which may represent potential targets for vaccination against malaria.

### Keywords
Malaria, Yoelii, Exosomes

### Affiliations
QIMR Berghofer MRI
James Cook University, Cairns Campus, QLD Australia

### Submitter
Karina de Sousa

### Lab Head
Dr Denise L. Doolan
James Cook University, Cairns Campus, QLD Australia


