### Accession
PXD040480

### Title
Structure and dynamics of the Arabidopsis O-fucosyltransferase SPINDLY

### Description
SPINDLY (SPY) in Arabidopsis thaliana is a novel nucleocytoplasmic protein O-fucosyltransferase (POFUT), which regulates diverse developmental processes. Sequence analysis indicates that AtSPY is distinct from ER-localized POFUTs and contains N-terminal tetratricopeptide-repeats (TPRs) and a C-terminal catalytic domain resembling the O-linked-N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc) transferases (OGTs). However, the structural feature that determines the distinct enzymatic selectivity of SPY remains unknown. Here we report the cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) structure of AtSPY and its complex with GDP-fucose, revealing distinct active-site features enabling GDP-fucose instead of UDP-GlcNAc binding. AtSPY forms an antiparallel dimer instead of the X-shaped dimer in human OGT, and its catalytic domain dynamically interconverts among inward, middle, and outward states. The entire eleven TPRs are visible in the middle state, with TPR1 of one subunit touching down on the catalytic domain of the other subunit of the AtSPY dimer, whereas the densities of TPRs 1-5 are absent or severely attenuated in the inward and outward states. Analysis of mass spectrometry, co-IP, in planta fucosylation activity, and cryo-EM data further demonstrates that the N-terminal disordered peptide in SPY contains trans auto-fucosylation sites and inhibits its catalytic activity, whereas TPRs 1-5 regulate SPY activity by interfering with protein substrate binding.

### Sample Protocol
Trypsin-digested proteins from N. benthamiana (expressing AtSPY) were separated by HPLC and analyzed on a Thermo™ Orbitrap Fusion™ Tribrid™ mass spectrometer equipped with ETD52. HPLC was performed as described previously3. MS1 spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 120,000, followed by a data-dependent, 3-second TopN method with a neutral loss trigger. Precursors were isolated by resolving quadrupole with a 3 m/z window. CAD MS2 spectra were collected in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 15,000. A neutral loss trigger selected precursors exhibiting the characteristic loss of one to three fucose units in the Orbitrap CAD MS2 spectra for additional fragmentation events. An HCD MS2 (25% NCE) was collected in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 15,000. CAD MS2, CAD MS3, and ETD MS2 spectra were acquired in the ion trap at a normal scan rate. Calibrated reaction times were used for ETD events. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a repeat count of 2 and an exclusion duration of 6 sec.

### Data Protocol
Data files were searched against a database containing the sequence of AtSPY (N-terminally Myc-tagged AtSPY, Uniprot Accession Q96301) and the UniprotKB/Swiss-Prot protein sequence database for N. benthamiana. Search parameters included specific cleavage C-terminal to R and K residues with up to 5 allowed missed cleavages, 10 ppm tolerance for precursor mass, 15 ppm mass tolerance for high resolution MS2s, and 0.35 Da mass tolerance for low resolution MS2s. Variable modifications selected included oxidation of Met residues, phosphorylation of Ser, Thr, and Tyr residues, alkylation of Cys residues, and O-GlcNAcylation, O-Fucosylation, and O-Hexosylation of Ser and Thr residues. No protein false discovery rate cutoff or score cutoff was applied prior to output of search results. Peptide sequences were validated by manual interpretation of MS2 data. Modification sites were determined manually based on ETD MS2 spectra.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Spindly, Protein o-fucosylation, Spy

### Affiliations
University of Virginia

### Submitter
Jeffrey Shabanowitz

### Lab Head
Dr Jeffrey Shabanowitz
University of Virginia


