### Accession
PXD013009

### Title
Quantitative proteomic analysis of differentially expressed proteins in tubers of potato plants differing in resistance to Dickeya solani

### Description
To identify differently expressed proteins in tuber tissue of potato cultivars and diploid interspecific hybrids of Solanum, differing in resistance to Dickeya solani, comparative analysis was performed. Two highly resistant (Bea and Humalda) and three susceptible (Irys, Katahdin, Ulster Supreme) potato cultivars, as well as the highly resistant (DG 00-270) and the susceptible (DG 08-305) diploid clones, were studied. DG 00-270 exhibited higher resistance to D. solani than the cultivars Bea and Humalda. Proteins were extracted from wounded potato tubers inoculated with bacteria at an early symptomatic phase and from controls, i.e., intact tubers and wounded mock-inoculated tubers. Protein profiles were analyzed using nano-liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS-MS/MS).

### Sample Protocol
Tubers were stored in the dark at 8°C for 6 months before the experiments were conducted. For proteomic analyses, tubers wounded with a steel rod (10 mm, Ø 2 mm) were inoculated with 10 μL of bacterial suspension (adjusted to an optical density (OD600) of 1.0, equivalent to 109 CFU ml-1. The holes were sealed with Vaseline and a piece of a parafilm. The tubers were externally sprayed with water, enclosed in boxes and kept for 8 hours before collecting samples for protein extraction. Control tubers were kept intact or wounded and treated with sterilized water instead of the bacterial suspension. Two samples from each of two different tubers on each of two different experimental dates were collected. In total, 8 samples for each of five potato cultivars for every three combinations (of bacteria-inoculated, mock-inoculated and intact tubers) were examined. Accordingly, 8 samples for each of two diploid clones for every two combinations, bacteria-inoculated and mock-inoculated tubers and 4 samples for intact-tubers, were examined.   The total proteomes of the tuber tissues were extracted as described by Murawska et al.  Tuber tissue fragments of up to 250 mg were cut out from the edges of inoculated or symptom-exhibiting tubers using a corkborer (Ø 4). The samples were immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen and then kept in a freezer at -80°C before freeze-drying for two days. Lyophilized samples were homogenized using micropestles, and proteins were solubilized in 135 µl of 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 15 µl of 4% SDS. After 15 min of sonication, 100 µl of 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate was added, and the samples were vortexed and then centrifuged for 10 min at 12 000 × g. The supernatant was collected, and the total protein content in the sample was measured using the bicinchoninic acid assay. The protein concentration was estimated twice: once after protein extraction from homogenized tissue, to minimize variations resulting from material isolation and tissue homogenization, and once after acetone precipitation, to minimize the effect of the resolubilization of different proteins among samples. For digestion of peptide bonds carboxyterminal to lysine under high urea concentrations, the total protein content (and hence the amount of enzyme) in the samples was adjusted to 50 µg with 20 µl of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate containing 0.1 µg of endoproteinase Lys-C (Pierce™ Lys-C Protease, MS-grade, 90307). After 90 min of incubation at room temperature, to disrupt disulfide bonds, 1 µl of 0.5 M Tris (2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride was added, and the samples were incubated for 20 min at 60°C. To prevent the regeneration of disulfide bridges, 3 µl of 0.2 MS-methyl methanethiosulfonate was added. Overnight tryptic hydrolysis of 50 µg of total protein in the samples was performed at 37°C using 20 µl of sequencing-grade modified trypsin (Promega, V5117). Two microliters of 1% TFA (trifluoroacetic acid) was added to the samples, which were then stored in refrigerator until nano-LC-MS-MS/MS analysis.  Peptide mixtures were analyzed by nano-LC-MS-MS/MS using a nanoACQUITY (Waters) LC system and a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron Corp., San Jose, CA). The peptide mixture was applied to an RP-18 precolumn (nanoACQUITY Symmetry® C18, Waters 186003514) using water containing 0.1% TFA as a mobile phase and then transferred to a nano-HPLC RP-18 column (nanoACQUITY BEH C18, Waters 186003545) using an acetonitrile gradient (5-35% AcN in 180 min) in the presence of 0.05% formic acid with a flow rate of 250 nl/min. The column outlet was directly coupled to the electrospray ion source of the spectrometer functioning under a data-dependent MS-to-MS/MS switch. A blank run ensuring lack of cross contamination from previous samples preceded each analysis.

### Data Protocol
The raw data acquired were processed by Mascot Distiller followed by a Mascot Search (Matrix Science, London, UK, on-site license) against the UniProt Solanum tuberosum database (June 2015 release) restricted to human sequences. The search parameters were as follows: precursor and product ion mass tolerance of 30 ppm and 0.1 Da, respectively; enzyme specificity, trypsin; missed cleavages allowed, 1; fixed modification of cysteine by a methylthio group; and variable modification by methionine oxidation. Peptides with Mascot scores exceeding the threshold value corresponding to < 5% of the expected value, as calculated by Mascot, were considered to be positively identified. For the quantitative analysis, the mass calibration and data filtering described above were carried out with MScan software, which was developed in-house. Only proteins represented by at least two peptides were considered, and proteins identified by a subset of peptides from another protein were excluded. Peptides lists from the LC-MS/MS runs that matched the acceptance criteria were merged and overlaid onto 2-D heat maps generated from the LC-MS/MS datasets using m/z and retention time coordinates and validated by predicted and observed isotopic pattern correlation (acceptance criteria: RMS>90%) using MSparky. Peptide intensities were determined as the surfaces of the tagged isotopic envelopes. Finally, lists of identified peptides with corresponding quantitative values were exported for statistical analysis, which was carried out with the Diffprot software program (version 1.5.19; 3.01.2013).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Resistance, Potato tubers, Dickeya solani, Protein expression

### Affiliations
Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics PAS
Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics PAS

### Submitter
Michał Kistowski

### Lab Head
Dr Michał Dadlez
Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics PAS


