### Accession
PXD037612

### Title
Argiope (Orb weaver) aggregate glue protein composition

### Description
Using proteomics, we documented the glue composition in two congeners that live in different environments, Argiope argentata (dry southwest US) and A. trifasciata (humid southeast US). The viscoelastic protein cores of A. argentata droplets comprised a smaller portion of droplet volume than did those of A. trifasciata and, as humidity increased, incorporated a smaller percentage of absorbed water. Argiope argentata core protein was many times stiffer and tougher than A. trifasciata protein. Each species’ glue included ~30 aggregate-expressed proteins, most of which (24 and 23, respectively) were homologous between the two species. However, the relative contribution and number of gene family members of each homologous group differed. For instance, the aggregate spidroins (AgSp1 and AgSp2) accounted for nearly half of the detected glue composition in A. argentata, but only 38% in A. trifasciata. Additionally, AgSp1, which has highly negatively charged regions, was ~2X as abundant as the positively charged AgSp2 in A. argentata but ~3X as abundant in A. trifasciata. As another example, A. argentata glue included 11 members of a newly discovered cysteine-rich gene family, versus 5 in A. trifasciata. The ability to selectively express different glue protein genes and/or to extrude their products at different rates provides a faster mechanism to evolve material properties than sequence evolution alone.

### Sample Protocol
Intact capture spirals were collected from the Argiope trifasciata or Argiope agentata individual’s spider webs onto stainless steel forceps over 2 consecutive days for A. argentata and 1, 2, or 3 consecutive days for A. trifasciata to obtain sufficient silk for protein processing. During collection, radial lines and stabilimenta (rarely made in the lab) were avoided to the greatest extent possible. These silk samples were stored at -80 C until processing. Silks were solubilized using hexafluoroisopropanol, resuspended in guanidine hydrochloride, denatured, alkylated, and subjected to tryptic digest and the digested silk proteins were sent to the University of Arizona Proteomics Core for LC-MS/MS on a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer. Peptides were eluted from an Acclaim PepMap 100 trap column onto an Acclaim PepMap RSLC analytical column (both from Thermo Fisher). Chromatography was performed using a 5-20% gradient of solvent B (acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) over 90 min, then 20-50% solvent B for 10 min, 50-95% solvent B for 10 min, 95% solvent B for 10 min, and return to 5% solvent B for 10 min. Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid in water. Flow rates were 300 nL/min using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Scientific), and peptides were ionized with an EasySpray nanoESI source. Data dependent scanning was performed by the Xcalibur software (Andon et al. 2002) using a survey scan at 70,000 resolution scanning mass/charge (353 – 1550) followed by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) tandem mass spectrometry at 27nce (normalized collision energy) of the 10 most intense ions. Dynamic exclusion was set to place any selected mass/charge on an exclusion list for 30 seconds after a single MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
The initial protein databases provided for searches with Thermo Proteome Discoverer were derived from de novo assembled transcriptomes from TRINITY from 8 silk gland-type specific RNAseq libraries (2-3 replicates each gland type) for A. argentata and 2 pooled silk gland (3 replicates of aggregate and 3 replicates of non-aggregate) RNAseq libraries for A. trifasciata. The transcriptomes were annotated using a published pipelines using TrTAP which retains a single transcript per Trinity-identified genes based on BLASTx alignments to custom arachnid databases or length of open reading frames in the absence of a BLAST alignment. The transcriptomes were further reduced by removing lowly expressed transcripts and subjecting predicted proteins to BLASTCLUST with 95% amino acid identity and 95% overlap. From these clusters, the protein with the best BLASTx alignment to a database protein, or the longest protein were retained for initial mass spec searches. Also spidroin sequences were reduced to reflect regions of unique peptides, being sure to include at least one iteration of repeat units to maximize identification of peptides and PTMs.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Glue, Spider, Argiope

### Affiliations
Department of Biology, Washington and Lee University
Washington and Lee

### Submitter
Thomas Clarke

### Lab Head
Dr Nadia Ayoub
Department of Biology, Washington and Lee University


