### Accession
PXD010112

### Title
(Phospho-)proteomic analysis of gemcitabine resistant pancreatic cancer cells reveals that microtubule-associated protein 2 upregulation associates with taxane treatment response

### Description
Chemoresistance hampers the treatment of patients suffering from pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC). The present study aimed to evaluate the proteome and phosphoproteome of gemcitabine-sensitive and -resistant PDAC cells to identify novel targets and predictive biomarkers.The oncogenic capabilities of sensitive and resistant PDAC cells were evaluated in vitro and in vivo. Cultured cells were subsequently analysed by label-free mass spectrometry. Differential proteins and phosphopeptides were evaluated for Gene Ontology and predictive and / or prognostic biomarker potential by immunohistochemistry of tissue microarrays (TMAs). Differential analyses showed that resistant proteins are associated with membrane organization and microtubule regulation. Importantly, resistant cells displayed an increased sensitivity for paclitaxel treatment in vitro (p < 0.001) and nab-paclitaxel had a strong anti-tumour efficacy in vivo. Microtubule-associated protein 2 (MAP2) was found to be highly upregulated and phosphorylated in resistant cells. The identified resistance marker MAP2 emerged as a novel prognostic marker in PDAC patients treated with gemcitabine.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture In this study, PANC1 and a gemcitabine resistant derivative cell line, PANC1R, were kindly supplied by the Institute for Surgical Research, Philipps-University of Marburg, Marburg, Germany. Cells were cultured in RPMI medium supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated fetal calf serum and 1% penicillin and streptomycin. Biological duplicates of different passages were prepared.   Cell lysis and digestion Cell line lysates for phosphoproteomics were prepared in 9 M urea buffer containing 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0 and phosphatase inhibitors. Cells were scraped and sonicated. Subsequent centrifugation of the lysate was performed for 15 min at maximum speed and and protein concentrations were measured using the BCA method The cleared lysate was aliquotted and stored at -80 °C until further use. Lysates were reduced in 4 mM dithiotreitol (DTT) for 20 min at 60°C, cooled to room temperature and subsequently alkylated in 10 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min in the dark. After dilution to 2M urea using 20 mM HEPES buffer pH 8.0, the lysate was digested with 20 µg Sequencing Grade Modified trypsin/mg protein by overnight incubation at 22°C. Digestion was then halted by adding trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 1%. For protein expression analysis 50 μg of protein was mixed with NUpage LDS sample buffer containing dithiotreitol (DTT, Sigma) and loaded on a NUpage 4-12 % gradient gel. After electrophoresis, gels were fixed and stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue solution. After reduction and alkylation, proteins were digested overnight with trypsin (Promega) and extracted from the gel for further analysis.  Phosphopeptide enrichment For phosphoprotein analysis, 500 μg of lysates was digested in-solution after reduction and alkylation. Digestion was stopped by acidification and peptides were desalted with C18 cartridges (Waters). Global phosphopeptide enrichement was performed using titaniumdioxide beads from (GL sciences ,10 micron) using 300 mM Lactic acid and 80% acetonitrile. Phosphopeptides were eluted by 0.5% and 5% piperidine. After enrichment, phosphopeptides were  desalted in 20 ul StageTips using 0.1% TFA  and eluted with 80% ACN/0.1% TFA into glass-lined autosampler vials. Eluates were dried in a speedvac and redissolved in 20µl loading solvent (4% acetonitrile in 0.5% TFA)  and stored at 4˚ C until LC-MS/MS measurement on the same day.   LC-MS/MS Peptides were separated by an Ultimate 3000 nanoLC-MS/MS system (Dionex LC-Packings, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) equipped with a 20 cm × 75 μm ID fused silica column custom packed with 3 μm 120 Å ReproSil Pur C18 aqua (Dr Maisch GMBH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). After injection, peptides were trapped at 6 μl/min on a 10 mm × 100 μm ID trap column packed with 5 μm 120 Å ReproSil Pur C18 aqua at 2% buffer B (buffer A: 0.5% acetic acid (Fischer Scientific), buffer B: 80% ACN, 0.5% acetic acid) and separated at 300 nl/min in a 10–40% buffer B gradient in 90 min (120 min inject-to-inject). Eluting peptides were ionized at a potential of +2 kVa into a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany). Intact masses were measured at resolution 70.000 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 3 × 106 charges. The top 10 peptide signals (charge-states 2+ and higher) were submitted to MS/MS in the HCD (higher-energy collision) cell (1.6 amu isolation width, 25% normalized collision energy). MS/MS spectra were acquired at resolution 17.500 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 2 × 105 charges and an underfill ratio of 0.1%. Dynamic exclusion was applied with a repeat count of 1 and an exclusion time of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification MS/MS spectra were searched against the uniprot human reference proteome 2014_01_NO_fragments FASTA file (61552 entries) using MaxQuant 1.5.2.8 (protein expression) and the  2015_08_NO_fragments FASTA file (62447 entries) . Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Cysteine carboxamidomethylation (Cys, +57.021464 Da) was treated as fixed modification and serine, threonine and tyrosine phosphorylation (+79.966330 Da), methionine oxidation (Met,+15.994915 Da) and N-terminal acetylation (N-terminal, +42.010565 Da) as variable modifications. Peptide precursor ions were searched with a maximum mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and fragment ions with a maximum mass deviation of 20 ppm. Peptide, protein and site identifications were filtered at an FDR of 1% using the decoy database strategy. The minimal peptide length was 7 amino-acids and the minimum Andromeda score for modified peptides was 40 and the corresponding minimum delta score was 6. Proteins that could not be differentiated based on MS/MS spectra alone were grouped to protein groups (default MaxQuant settings). Phosphopeptide identifications were propagated across samples using the match between runs option checked. Protein expression searches were performed with the label-free quantification option selected.  Label-free phosphopeptide quantification Phosphopeptides were quantified by their extracted ion intensities (‘Intensity’ in MaxQuant). For each sample the phosphopeptide intensities were normalized on the median intensity of all identified peptides of the corresponding lysate sample (‘normalised intensity’).  Label-free protein quantification Proteins were quantified by spectral counting, i.e. the number of identified MS/MS spectra for a given protein. Protein expression was measured from samples fractionated in five fractions by Gel electrophoresis. Raw counts were normalized on the sum of spectral counts for all identified proteins in a particular sample, relative to the average sample sum determined with all samples. To find statistically significant differences in normalized counts between sample groups, we applied the beta-binomial test, which takes into account within-sample and between-sample variation using an alpha level of 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Phosphoproteomics, Gemcitabine, Pancreatic cancer, Paclitaxel, Label-free, Single-shot

### Affiliations
OncoProteomics Laboratory, Dept of Medical Oncology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
OncoProteomics Laboratory, dept of Medical Oncology, VUmc Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Sander Piersma

### Lab Head
Dr Connie Ramona Jimenez
OncoProteomics Laboratory, Dept of Medical Oncology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands


