### Accession
PXD026999

### Title
Ultrasmall epiparasitic Saccharibacteria suppresses gingival inflammation and bone loss through host bacterial modulation

### Description
Saccharibacteria (TM7) are obligate epibionts living on the surface of their host bacteria, and strongly correlated with dysbiotic microbiomes during periodontitis and other inflammatory diseases, suggesting they are putative pathogens. However, due to the recalcitrance of TM7 cultivation, no causal research has been conducted to investigate their role in inflammatory diseases. Here, we isolated multiple TM7 species on their host bacteria from periodontitis patients. These TM7 species reduced inflammation and consequential bone loss by modulating their host bacterial pathogenicity in mouse ligature-induced periodontitis model. Two host bacterial functions involved in collagen binding and utilization of eukaryotic sialic acid were identified as required for inducing bone loss and altered by TM7 association. This down-regulation of host bacterial pathogenicity by TM7 was shown for multiple TM7/host bacteria pairs, suggesting that, in contrast to their suspected pathogenic role, TM7 could protect mammalian hosts from inflammatory damage induced by their host bacteria.

### Sample Protocol
Isolation and washing of bacterial cell walls.  Total cell wall proteins of Actinomyces were isolated using a modified protocol by (Yu et al., 2012) that was adapted for nanoLC-MS/MS instead of 2D-gel analysis. XH001p and XH001np cultures (5 biological replicates each) were grown for 24 hrs in 100 mL of BHI, harvested at OD600 0.5-0.8 by centrifugation (7,000 x g for 5 min at 4 °C). Each pellet was washed twice with 1.0 mL 4 °C cold PBS, centrifuged and re-suspended in 750 µL ice-cold PBS. Cell suspensions were mixed with equal volumes of 4% (w/v) SDS in PBS and boiled for 15 min in a water bath. Boiling of the cells in SDS dissolved membranes and released cytoplasmic and membrane proteins into solution including well-described surface protein markers such as S-layer proteins (Yu et al., 2012). To release remaining cytosolic proteins repeated freeze-thaw cycles (3 x for 10 min at -80 °C) were used to crack cells open. Soluble protein fractions were recovered by centrifugation at 18,000 x g for 20 min in RT followed by three wash steps with 1 mL of 2 % (w/v) SDS. To eliminate SDS from samples, cell wall pellets were transferred into clean tubes and washed twice with 1.0 mL TE buffer (25 mM Tris–HCl, pH 7.5) containing 10% isopropanol and centrifuging samples for 5 min at 18,000 x g. An additional wash step with 1.0 mL TE containing 1 M NaCl was employed to released proteins attached to the cell wall fraction through ionic interactions. Two additional wash steps with 1.0 mL TE followed to eliminate NaCl from specimens (18,000 x g for 5 min at RT). The last two wash fractions were subjected to SDS-PAGE analysis to test for residual soluble proteins.   Digestion of cell wall with mutanolysin.  10,000 U of mutanolysin (Sigma-Aldrich, Burlington, MA, USA) were dissolved in 1 mL of 50% Glycerol/50% 25mM Tris-HCl, 50 mM NaCl, pH 7.5 and 50 µl aliquots prepared and kept at -20°C until further use. To release cell wall associated proteins, each purified Actinomyces cell wall was resuspended to a final concentration of 20 µg/mL in 750 µL TE containing 100 U of mutanolysin and incubated for 3-4 h at 37 °C. Dissolved cell wall proteins were separated from insoluble materials by centrifugation at 18,000 x g for 15 min at 4 °C.   Protein sample preparation.  Cell wall protein extracts were prepared for mass spectrometric analysis by using a modified version of the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol described by (Wiśniewski et al., 2009). Specifically, 500 µL of cell wall extracts were ultrafiltrated in Vivaspin filter units (molecular weight cut-off: 10,000 Da; Sartorius, Göttingen, Germany) for 60 min at 14,000  g at 4 °C. Retentates were washed with 400 µL UA buffer (8 M urea, 50 mM Tris pH 8.0, 10 mM DTT), 200 µL UA buffer, 100 µL 50 mM iodoacetamide in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) buffer after 15 min incubation, 400 µL 50 mM and 200 µl ABC 50 mM buffer. Subsequentially, retentates were reconstituted in 100 µL 50 mM ABC buffer and transferred into new microcentrifuge tubes. Total protein content was quantified by using the Micro BCA Assay (Pierce, Dallas, TX, USA). Equivalents of 80 µg of protein were diluted in ABC buffer to a final volume of 80 µL. Protein samples were digested overnight at 37°C with 10 µL trypsin (0.1 µg/µL; Promega, Madison, WI, USA) in ABC buffer with an additional bolus of 10 µL trypsin added in the morning. Samples were incubated for an additional 2 hrs at 37 °C to cleave remaining undigested proteins. Protein digests were transferred into new Vivaspin filter units and centrifuged for 30 min at 12,000  g. To release peptides trapped in the filter units 100 µL ABC buffer were added and centrifuged again for 30 min at 12,000  g. Filtrates from respective samples were combined and acidified to a final concentration of 0.5 % (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Acidified digests were subjected to C18 solid-phase extraction using 100 µL C18 Tips (Pierce, Dallas, TX, USA) according to specifications provided by the manufacturer. Purified peptides were released from the C18 resin with 50% (v/v) acetonitrile containing 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid, evaporated to dryness in a Vacufuge plus (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany) and resuspended in 25 µL 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid. Insoluble compounds were removed by centrifugation prior to analysis by nanoflow-liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (nanoLC-MS/MS).

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS Analysis.  LC-MS/MS analyses of tryptically digested cell wall protein samples were performed on an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) interfaced with an Easy-nLC 1000 system coupled online with an EASY-Spray source. The LC-MS/MS system was operated using Xcalibur software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For the analyses, 5 µL of tryptic digest extracts were injected and trapped on an Acclaim PepMap 100 (100 μm x 2 cm; Thermo Fisher Scientific) trap column and separated on a PepMap RSLC C18 (ES901, 50 µm x 15 mm, 100 Ȧ particle size; Thermo Fisher Scientific) analytical column. The flow rate was set to 300 nL/min, the column temperature to 45°C, and the ion source temperature to 275°C with an electrical potential of 1800 V in positive ionization mode. Peptides were chromatographically separated with a 2-32% 150 min linear acetonitrile/water gradient in 0.1% formic acid. Mass spectra were acquired in data-dependent acquisition mode with high resolution MS1 acquisition (Resolution (R) = 60,000; automatic gain control (AGC) target setting 3.0 x 105 ions, maximal injection time of 250 ms) and MS2 (R = 15,000, AGC target 5 x 104 ions, maximal injection time of 150 ms). The 20 most intense precursor ions with a minimum intensity of 5 .0 x 104 ions were selected (1.6 Da isolation window) for fragmentation in the HCD cell (collision energy set to 30). The dynamic exclusion window was set to 40s. Protein identification, quantitation, and statistical analysis.  The raw data was processed and searched with the PEAKS Studio 8.5 software package (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, Ontario, Canada) using the Schaalia odontolytica UniProt database (UniProt release July 2020, 1925 entries). Raw data were processed using the following specifications: merge scans (retention time window: 10 ppm, precursor m/z tolerance: 10 ppm, precursor mass and charge states z = 1-10). Other data pre-processing (centroiding, deisotoping, and deconvolution) was executed automatically. The following search parameters were used: precursor mass error tolerance 10 ppm; fragment ion mass error tolerance 0.05 Da; trypsin enzyme specificity with cleavage prior to proline permitted; fixed modifications: carbamidomethylation (C); variable modifications: phosphorylation (STY), oxidation (M), pyro-glu (Q), deamidation (NQ); one non-specific cleavage specificity on one terminus, maximal two missed cleavages, maximal two variable posttranslational modifications per peptide. The false discovery rate for peptide identifications was controlled using the decoy-fusion method. A 1% peptide FDR was applied at the peptide spectrum match level and only protein hits above the significance threshold of 20 (-10lgP) were retained for further analysis. For the relative quantitation of proteins, the peak areas of the top 3 most abundant unique peptides were employed. Raw protein peak areas were exported as a CSV table and analyzed by using Microsoft Excel. All protein abundance differences with log2 mean ratio ≤ or ≥ 1 and FDR ≤ 20 were considered

### Publication Abstract
Saccharibacteria (TM7) are obligate epibionts living on the surface of their host bacteria and are strongly correlated with dysbiotic microbiomes during periodontitis and other inflammatory diseases, suggesting they are putative pathogens. However, due to the recalcitrance of TM7 cultivation, causal research to investigate their role in inflammatory diseases is lacking. Here, we isolated multiple TM7 species on their host bacteria from periodontitis patients. These TM7 species reduce inflammation and consequential bone loss by modulating host bacterial pathogenicity in a mouse ligature-induced periodontitis model. Two host bacterial functions involved in collagen binding and utilization of eukaryotic sialic acid are required for inducing bone loss and are altered by TM7 association. This TM7-mediated downregulation of host bacterial pathogenicity is shown for multiple TM7/host bacteria pairs, suggesting that, in contrast to their suspected pathogenic role, TM7 could protect mammalian hosts from inflammatory damage induced by their host bacteria.

### Keywords
Symbiosis, Lc-ms, Uncultivable, Oral microbiome, Proteome

### Affiliations
Brandeis University
Assistant Member of Staff, The Forsyth Institute

### Submitter
Fabian Schulte

### Lab Head
Dr Batileg Bor
Assistant Member of Staff, The Forsyth Institute


