### Accession
PXD008164

### Title
Use of a Photo-crosslinkable Diaminoquinazoline Inhibitor for Target Identification in Plasmodium Falciparum

### Description
Diaminoquinazolines represent a privileged scaffold for antimalarial discovery, including use as putative Plasmodium histone lysine methyltransferase inhibitors (BIX-01294). Despite this, robust evidence for their molecular targets, proteome-wide, is lacking. Here we report the design and development of a small-molecule photo-crosslinkable probe to investigate the targets of our diaminoquinazoline series. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our designed probe for photoaffinity labelling of Plasmodium lysates and initial pull-down proteomics experiments identified proteins from different classes enriched by the probe, highlighting the suitability of the developed probe as a valuable tool for protein identification in Plasmodium falciparum.

### Sample Protocol
Saponin-treated pellets derived from Plasmodium falciparum cultures, 30-40 hours post invasion, were used to produce a lysate in PBS. The lysate was incubated with the photo-crosslinkable diaminoquinazoline probe before irradiation and copper-catalysed click chemistry with AzTB (Azide-TAMRA-Biotin). After protein precipitation, proteins were enriched with Neutravidin agrose beads, reduced, alkylated and subjected to trypsin digestion. For LC-MS/MS analysis the supernatants containing the peptides were combined and stage-tipped.LC-MS/MS runs were performed on an Easy nLC-1000 system coupled to a QExactive mass spectrometer via an easy-spray source. 3 µL injections of peptide sample were separated on a reverse phase Acclaim PepMap RSLC column (50 cm x 75 μm inner diameter, Thermo Fisher Scientific) across a 2 h acetonitrile gradient containing 0.1% formic acid, using a flow rate of 250 nL·min-1. The QExactive was operated in data-dependent mode with survey scans acquired at a resolution of 75,000 at m/z 200 (transient time 256 ms). Up to 10 of the most abundant isotope patterns with a charge of +2 or higher from the survey scan were selected with an isolation window of 3.0 m/z and fragmented by higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) with normalized collision energies of 25. The maximum ion injection times for the survey scan and the MS/MS scans (acquired with a resolution of 17 500 at m/z 200) were 20 and 120 ms, respectively. The ion target value for MS was set to 106 and for MS/MS to 105, and the intensity threshold was set to 8.3 × 102. (DOI: 10.1016/j.dib.2015.06.010, 10.1021/acschembio.6b00371, 10.1038/ncomms5919, 10.1002/anie.201500342, 10.1038/nchem.1830)

### Data Protocol
The data were processed with MaxQuant version 1.5.7.4 and the peptides were identified from the MS/MS spectra searched against the Plasmodium falciparum Swissprot+TrEMBL database (September 2017) using the Andromeda search engine. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was selected as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation as a variable modification. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Peptides and proteins were identified utilising a 0.01 false discovery rate (FDR), with “Unique and razor peptides” mode selected (razor peptides are uniquely assigned to protein groups and not to individual proteins). Other parameters were used as pre-set in the software. Data was analysed using Perseus version 1.5.6.0 and Microsoft Office Excel 2016. Peptides categorised by MaxQuant as ‘potential contaminants’, ‘only identified by site’ or ‘reverse’ were filtered, and the processed LFQ intensities transformed in Log2(LFQ). Two valid values were required for identification. Missing values were replaced from a normal distribution with width 0.3 and downshift 1.8.

### Publication Abstract
Diaminoquinazolines represent a privileged scaffold for antimalarial discovery, including use as putative Plasmodium histone lysine methyltransferase inhibitors. Despite this, robust evidence for their molecular targets is lacking. Here we report the design and development of a small-molecule photo-cross-linkable probe to investigate the targets of our diaminoquinazoline series. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our designed probe for photoaffinity labeling of Plasmodium lysates and identify similarities between the target profiles of the probe and the representative diaminoquinazoline BIX-01294. Initial pull-down proteomics experiments identified 104 proteins from different classes, many of which are essential, highlighting the suitability of the developed probe as a valuable tool for target identification in Plasmodium falciparum.

### Keywords
Plasmodium falciparum, Diaminoquinazoline, Photo-crosslinkable

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry, Imperial College London, London, SW7 2AZ
Imperial College London

### Submitter
Alexandra Lubin

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Matthew Fuchter
Department of Chemistry, Imperial College London, London, SW7 2AZ


