### Accession
PXD001963

### Title
Proteome alterations associated with transformation of multiple myeloma to secondary plasma cell leukemia

### Description
Plasma cell leukemia is a rare and aggressive plasma cell neoplasm that may either originate de novo (primary PCL) or by leukemic transformation of multiple myeloma (MM) to secondary PCL (sPCL). The prognosis of sPCL is very poor, and currently no standard treatment is available due to lack of prospective clinical studies. In an attempt to elucidate factors contributing to transformation, we have performed quantitative proteome profiling of malignant plasma cells collected from the same patient at both the MM and sPCL stages of the disease.

### Sample Protocol
After sample collection from the patient the malignant plasma cells were purified by CD138+ magnetic-activated cell sorting (MACS) microbeads (Miltenyi, CA), and the cells were stored at 80oC, either as a cell pellet (500.000 cells per pellet), or in DMSO. When samples were provided for the MS experiments, the cells were in a cell pellet, containing 500.000 cells.  The cells were homogenized in 25µL 2D-buffer (7M urea, 2M thiourea, 2.5% CHAPS, 25mM DTT), using a mechanical mixer. After mixing and thorough vortexing the cells were incubated for 15 minutes at RT, to solubilize the proteins. Centrifugation was used to separate the proteins from cell debris. For the purpose of quantification of the MS spectra, the proteins from the patient samples were mixed with an internal standard, which was labeled with heavy amino acids Lys-8 (13C615N2-lysine) and Arg-10 (13C615N4-arginine). The internal standard consisted of a mix of 6 myeloma (OH-2, IH-1, KJON, INA-6, LR5, VOLIN) and 2 lymphoma (RAMOS, KARPAS-466) cell lines, to cover as much proteins as possible. Figure 6 shows an overview of the workflow of the super-SILAC experimental setup.  From both patient samples and internal standard, 25 ug of protein was mixed preceding methanol/chloroform precipitation. The proteins were digested using Trypsin, overnight at 37oC.   Mass Spectrometry analysis The peptides were dried down in a SpeedVac centrifuge and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid. The peptides were analyzed on a LC-MS/MS platform consisting of an Easy-nLC 1000 UHPLC system (Thermo Scientific/Proxeon) interfaced with an LTQ-Orbitrap Elite hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) via a nanospray ESI ion source (Proxeon, Odense). Peptides were injected onto a C-18 trap column (Acclaim PepMap100, 75 μm i. d. x 2 cm, C18, 5 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific) and further separated on a C-18 analytical column (Acclaim PepMap100, 75 μm i. d. x 50 cm, C18, 3 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific) using a 240 min gradient from 10-40% CH3CN, 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. Peptides eluted were analyzed on the LTQ-Orbitrap Elite hybrid mass spectrometer operating in positive ion- and data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode using the following parameters: Electrospray voltage 1.9 kV, CID fragmentation with normalized collision energy 35, automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 1E6 for Orbitrap MS and 1E3 for MS/MS scans. Each MS scan (m/z 400–1600) was acquired at a resolution of 120,000 FWHM, followed by 20 MS/MS scans triggered for intensities above 500, at a maximum ion injection time of 200 ms for MS and 50 ms for MS/MS scans.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were analyzed with MaxQuant v 1.5 {{456 Cox,J. 2008}} using its default settings with multiplicity 2 (Arg10,Lys8), FTMS and ITMS MS/MS tolerance of 0.5 Da and 20 ppm, respectively. Search was performed against the October 2013 version of Human proteome set with isoforms from Uniprot {{457 UniProt Consortium 2013}}. The unique and razor peptides were used for calculating the SILAC ratios for the identified protein groups. The normalized SILAC ratios were parsed together with a PERL v 5.14.2 {{459 Perl}} script in a matrix format. Hierarchical clustering was performed with Matlab v R2012a programming environment, using the correlation coefficient values between the identified proteins across different subjects {{458 Bar-Joseph,Z. 2001; 460 Matlab}}. The missing values were imputed with its k-nearest-neighbor method using Euclidean distance.

### Publication Abstract
Plasma cell leukemia is a rare and aggressive plasma cell neoplasm that may either originate de novo (primary PCL) or by leukemic transformation of multiple myeloma (MM) to secondary PCL (sPCL). The prognosis of sPCL is very poor, and currently no standard treatment is available due to lack of prospective clinical studies. In an attempt to elucidate factors contributing to transformation, we have performed super-SILAC quantitative proteome profiling of malignant plasma cells collected from the same patient at both the MM and sPCL stages of the disease. 795 proteins were found to be differentially expressed in the MM and sPCL samples. Gene ontology analysis indicated a metabolic shift towards aerobic glycolysis in sPCL as well as marked down-regulation of enzymes involved in glycan synthesis, potentially mediating altered glycosylation of surface receptors. There was no significant change in overall genomic 5-methylcytosine or 5-hydroxymethylcytosine at the two stages, indicating that epigenetic dysregulation was not a major driver of transformation to sPCL. The present study constitutes the first attempt to provide a comprehensive map of the altered protein expression profile accompanying transformation of MM to sPCL in a single patient, identifying several candidate proteins that can be targeted by currently available small molecule drugs. Our dataset furthermore constitutes a reference dataset for further proteomic analysis of sPCL transformation.

### Keywords
Mm, Plasma, Secondary, Leukemia, Pcl, Myeloma, Cell

### Affiliations
PROMEC Core Facility for Proteomics and Metabolomics, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, NTNU, N-7489 Trondheim, Norway
Engineer at NTNU, Norway

### Submitter
Animesh Sharma

### Lab Head
Dr Geir Slupphaug
PROMEC Core Facility for Proteomics and Metabolomics, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, NTNU, N-7489 Trondheim, Norway


