### Accession
PXD038687

### Title
The scaffold protein CNK2 promotes cancer cell motility by mediating ARF6 activation downstream of AXL signalling

### Description
Cell motility is a critical feature of invasive tumour cells that is governed by complex signal transduction events. Particularly, the underlying mechanisms that bridge extracellular stimuli to the molecular machinery driving motility remain partially understood. Here, we show that the scaffold protein CNK2 promotes cancer cell migration by coupling the pro-metastatic receptor tyrosine kinase AXL to downstream activation of ARF6 GTPase. Mechanistically, AXL signalling induces PI3K-dependent recruitment of CNK2 to the plasma membrane. In turn, CNK2 stimulates ARF6 by associating with cytohesin ARF GEFs and with a novel adaptor protein called SAMD12. ARF6-GTP then controls motile forces by coordinating the respective activation and inhibition of RAC1 and RHOA GTPases. Significantly, genetic ablation of CNK2 or SAMD12 potently reduces metastasis in a mouse xenograft model. Together, this work identifies CNK2 and its partner SAMD12 as key components of a novel pro-motility pathway in cancer cells, which could be targeted in metastasis.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were reconstituted in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate with 10 mM TCEP [Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride; Thermo Fisher Scientific], and vortexed for 1 h at 37°C. Chloroacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) was added for alkylation to a final concentration of 55 mM. Samples were vortexed for another hour at 37°C. One microgram of trypsin was added, and digestion was performed for 8 h at 37°C. Samples were dried down and solubilized in 4% formic acid (FA). Peptides were loaded and separated on an home-made reversed-phase column (150-μm i.d. by 200 mm) with a 56-min gradient from 10 to 30% ACN-0.2% FA and a 600-nl/min flow rate on a Easy nLC-1000 connected to an Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). Each full MS spectrum acquired at a resolution of 120,000 was followed by tandem-MS (MS-MS) spectra acquisition on the most abundant multiply charged precursor ions for a maximum of 3s. Tandem-MS experiments were performed using collision-induced dissociation (CID) at a collision energy of 30%.

### Data Protocol
The data were processed using PEAKS X Pro (Bioinformatics Solutions, Waterloo, ON) and a Uniprot human database (20366 entries). Mass tolerances on precursor and fragment ions were 10 ppm and 0.3 Da, respectively. Fixed modification was carbamidomethyl (C). Variable selected posttranslational modifications were oxidation (M), deamidation (NQ), phosphorylation (STY) along acetylation (N-ter).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Axl signaling, Cnk2, Cancer cell motility

### Affiliations
IRIC-Université de Montréal
Proteomic Platform

### Submitter
Eric Bonneil

### Lab Head
Dr Marc Therrien
IRIC-Université de Montréal


