### Accession
PXD019110

### Title
Structural basis of human full-length kindlin-3 homotrimer in an auto-inhibited state

### Description
Kindlin-1, -2, and -3, directly bind integrin β cytoplasmic tails to regulate integrin activation and signaling. Despite their functional significance and link to several diseases, structural information on full-length kindlin proteins remains unknown.  Here, we report the crystal structure of human full-length kindlin-3, which reveals a novel homotrimer state. Unlike kindlin-3 monomer, which is the major population in insect and mammalian cell expression systems, kindlin-3 trimer does not bind integrin β cytoplasmic tail as the integrin-binding pocket in the F3 sub-domain of one protomer is occluded by the PH domain of another protomer, suggesting that kindlin-3 is auto-inhibited upon trimer formation. This is also supported by functional assays in which kindlin-3 knockout K562 erythroleukemia cells re-constituted with the mutant kindlin-3 containing trimer-disrupting mutations exhibited an increase in integrin-mediated adhesion and spreading on fibronectin compared to those re-constituted with wild type kindlin-3. Taken together, our findings reveal a novel mechanism of kindlin auto-inhibition that involves its homotrimer formation.

### Sample Protocol
Disuccinimidyl sulfoxide (DSSO) was purchased from Thermo Fisher Scientific and used for crosslinker. 1 mg DSSO was first dissolved into 100 μL DMSO to prepare a 25 mM stock solution before use. Both monomeric and trimeric kindlin-3 purified from insect cells were applied for DSSO treatment. Protein was dissolved in 40 μL of 20 mM HEPES buffer (pH7.5) at 0.2 μM. 0.1 μL of DSSO stock solution was added to protein sample and the final reaction buffer was adjusted to 45 μL with a 300-fold molar excess of crosslinker over the protein concentration. A control sample containing the protein without crosslinker was also prepared. Both samples were incubated at room temperature for 1 hour and the reaction was quenched by adding 1M Tris buffer (pH 8.5) to a final concentration of 20 mM. The crosslinked protein was analyzed by SDS-PAGE and mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
The two bands corresponding to kindlin3 trimers from two crosslinking experiment were excised from the SDS-PAGE gel for in-gel digestion. After reduction using DTT, alkylation with IAA, and dehydration by ACN, the protein in the gel matrix was first digested by lys-C for 4 hours followed with overnight trypsin digestion. The peptides were re-suspended in 0.1% formic acid and analyzed on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system coupled to a Q-Exactive tandem mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). The LC-MS/MS was operated at an electrospray potential of 1.5 kV. A full MS scan (350–1600 m/z range) was acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200 and a maximum ion accumulation time of 100 ms. Peptide ions with charge state equal or less than 3+ were excluded from MS/MS. The LC-MS/MS raw data files were searched for cross-linked peptides using pLINK2 (44). We have done two replicates, with those consistently observed cross-linked peptides in all experiments/replicates

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Kindlin; ferm; fermitin; kindlin-3; integrin; extracellular matrix; dsso

### Affiliations
Nanyang Technological University

### Submitter
SoFong Cam Ngan

### Lab Head
Dr Siu Kwan Sze
Nanyang Technological University


