### Accession
PXD029431

### Title
Enrichment and Proteomic Identification of Cryptosporidium parvum Oocyst Wall

### Description
The Cryptosporidium parvum (C. parvum) oocyst wall provides strong protection against hostile environmental factors; however, research is limited concerning about the oocyst wall at the proteomic level. In this study, a comprehensive analysis of the proteome expressed by the oocyst wall of C. parvum was performed using label-free qualitative high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) fractionation and mass spectrometry-based qualitative proteomics technologies. A total of 798 proteins were identified, accounting for about 20% of the CryptoDB proteome. By using bioinformatic analysis, functional annotation and subcellular localization of the identified proteins were examined for better understanding of the characteristics of the oocyst wall. Among the identified proteins, one protein encoded by the C. parvum cgd7_5140 (Cpcgd7_5140) gene was predicted to be located on the surface of the oocyst wall. To verify its localization, an indirect immunofluorescent antibody assay (IFA) demonstrated that the Cpcgd7_5140 was localized on the surface of the oocyst wall, illustrating the potential usage as a marker for C. parvum detection in vitro. The results provide new information about the proteomic composition of the Cryptosporidium oocyst wall, thereby providing a theoretical basis for further study of Cryptosporidium oocyst wall formation as well as the selection of targets for Cryptosporidium detection.

### Sample Protocol
Cryptosporidium parvum oocysts of the IId strain (genotype A19G1) were maintained in the lab.Excystation was then performed at 37°C by suspending in 0.75% taurocholic acid (sodium taurocholate, NaT) and 0.25% trypsin in PBS for 2 h. To obtain clean oocyst walls, 1 ml of the excysting solution was added to a high-speed centrifuge tube (Beckman Coulter, USA) containing 9 ml of 70% Percoll and centrifuged at 25000 g for 45 min. The  oocyst walls were aspirated with a pipette, washed three times with PBS, and then centrifuged at 10000 g for 10 min.The protease inhibitor PMSF was added to the collected oocyst walls, after which the oocyst walls were frozen in liquid nitrogen for 3 min, thawed in a 37°C water bath, and the steps repeated six times. PMSF and lysis buffer (3% SDS, 8 M of urea) were added to break the oocyst walls, and the solution was lysed on ice for 30 min. The sample was sonicated at 100 W for 30 min, and the temperature and the occurrence of air bubbles were observed. The thermal cracking was followed by ultracentrifugation at 10000 rpm for 30 min.

### Data Protocol
In order to thoroughly understand the functions of the identified proteins, we analyzed the characteristics of the proteins from the following aspects. Gene Ontology (GO) annotations at the proteomics level were derived from the UniProt-GOA database (Http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/). These proteins were then classified according to cellular composition, molecular function, or physiological process. The protein domains were annotated using InterProScan and the corresponding InterPro domain database. The KEGG online service tool KAAS (http://www.genome.jp/kaas-bin/kaas_main) was used to annotate the submitted proteins, and then, KEGG mapper (http://www.kegg.jp/kegg/mapper.html) was employed to match the annotated proteins to the corresponding pathways in the database. We performed GO classification and KEGG pathway enrichment analysis on the identified proteins. The purpose was to find out whether the focal protein had a significant enrichment trend in certain functional types. Wolfpsort (http://www.genscript.com/psort/wolf_psort.html) and CELLO (http://cello.life.nctu.edu.tw/) were used to predict subcellular localization and for predictive analysis of submitted proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cryptosporidium parvum; oocyst wall; proteomics; detection

### Affiliations
College of Veterinary Medicine, Henan Agricultural University, Zhengzhou 450002, China

### Submitter
Wang Luyang

### Lab Head
Dr Longxian Zhang
College of Veterinary Medicine, Henan Agricultural University, Zhengzhou 450002, China


