### Accession
PXD010352

### Title
Complementary proteomics strategies identify the ataxin-1 interactome in Neuro-2a cells

### Description
To identify protein partners of ataxin-1 in neuronal cells under control or stress conditions, we use complementary proteomics strategies of proximity-dependent biotin identification (BioID) and affinity purification (via GFP-trap pulldown) in Neuro-2a cells expressing epitope-tagged forms of ataxin-1[85Q]. These approaches allowed our enrichment of proximal proteins and interacting partners, respectively, with the subsequent protein identification performed by liquid chromatography-MS/MS. Background proteins, defined by identification not dependent on the polyQ-ataxin-1 protein, were additionally identified by their endogenous biotinylation (for the BioID protocol) or by their non-specific interaction with GFP only (in the GFP-trap protocol). All datasets were generated from biological replicates.

### Sample Protocol
Neuro-2a cells were transiently transfected using Lipofectamine 2000 (ThermoFisher) to express mycBioID-ataxin-1[85Q] or remained untransfected as a control; biotin (50 uM) was included during the transfection protocol. For the affinity purification protocol, subsequently called the GFP-trap protocol, Neuro-2a cells were transiently transfected using Lipofectamine 2000 (ThermoFisher) to express GFP-ataxin-1[85Q] or GFP as a control. After 24 h, all cells were washed with ice-cold phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and lysed with ice-cold radioimmunoprecipitation assay (RIPA) buffer supplemented with cOmpleteTM protease inhibitor mix (Roche Diagnostic).  Lysates were centrifuged (1,000 rpm, 20 min, 4oC) and supernatants were collected. Protein concentration was determined by the BioRad protein assay, using bovine serum albumin (BSA) standards. For BioID pulldown, lysates (1.5 mg total protein) were then incubated with streptavidin-agarose (Invitrogen) overnight at 4C (end-over-end rotation); for GFP-trap pulldown, lysates (1.5 mg total protein) were incubated with GFP-trap agarose (Chromo Tek) for 2 h at room temperature (end-over-end rotation). The pellets for both protocols were captured (12,000 rpm, 1 min) and washed thoroughly. Proteins in all washed pellets were further prepared for mass spectrometry analysis. For streptavidin-agarose pellets, an on-bead digestion was performed by adding 20 l trypsin-containing denaturing solution (50 mM urea, 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP) and 0.25 g trypsin (Sigma) in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB)). After incubation (overnight, 37C, end-over-end rotation), supernatants were collected. For the GFP-trap-agarose pellets, an in-solution digestion for the eluted proteins was performed by adding the elution solution (50% aqueous 2,2,2-Trifluoroethanol (TFE)/0.05% formic acid, pH 2.0, 1mM TCEP). After incubation (5 min, room temperature), supernatants were collected and then 5 L trypsin solution (0.25 g trypsin, 200 mM TEAB) added before incubation (overnight, 37C). For each trypsin-digested sample, supernatant (10 l) was collected and tryptic peptides were analysed by liquid chromatography-MS/MS (LC-MS/MS) using an Q-Exactive plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) fitted with nanoflow reversed-phase-HPLC (Ultimate 3000 RSLC, Dionex). The nano-LC system was equipped with an Acclaim Pepmap nano-trap column (Dionex – C18, 100 Å, 75 μm × 2 cm) and an Acclaim Pepmap RSLC analytical column (Dionex – C18, 100 Å, 75 m × 50 cm). Typically for each LC-MS/MS experiment, 1 L supernatant was loaded onto the enrichment (trap) column (isocratic flow 5 L/min, 3% CH3CN containing 0.1% formic acid, 6 min) before the enrichment column was switched in-line with the analytical column. For LC, the eluents used were 0.1% formic acid (solvent A) and 100% CH3CN/0.1% formic acid (solvent B) with the following sequence of gradients: 3 to 20% B (in 95 min), 20 to 40% B (in 10 min), 40 to 80% B (in 5 min), 80% B (maintained for the final 5 min) before equilibration in 3% B prior to the next analysis (10 min). All spectra were acquired in positive mode with full scan MS1 scanning from m/z 375-1400 (70000 resolution, AGC target 3e6, maximum accumulation time 50 ms, lockmass 445.120024). The 15 most intense peptide ions with charge states ≥2-5 were isolated (isolation window 1.2 m/z) and fragmented with normalized collision energy of 30 (35000 resolution, AGC target 1e5, maximum accumulation time 50 ms). An underfill threshold was set to 2% for triggering of precursor for MS2. Dynamic exclusion was activated for 30s.

### Data Protocol
Resultant MS/MS data was analyzed using the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science version 2.4) against the SWISSPROT database released July 2015 (with the settings as follows: taxonomy - Mus., enzyme - Trypsin, Protein Mass -  20 ppm, Fragment Mass Tolerance -  0.2 Pa, Max Missed Cleavages: 2). Identifications in all samples (test or background/non-specific binding) were accepted for proteins with > two significant peptides (p<0.05). Background/non-specific binding proteins were identified as follows: for the GFP-trap protocol assessments, proteins identified in samples prepared from GFP only-transfected cells processed in parallel in each of the 3 replicates were defined as background/non-specific binding; for BioID assessments, proteins identified in samples prepared from untransfected cells across all 3 replicates were pooled and defined as background as endogenously biotinylated proteins. Proteins after background reduction were retained for further biological triplicates comparison and bioinformatics analyses.

### Publication Abstract
Ataxin-1 mutation, arising from a polyglutamine (polyQ) tract expansion, is the underlying genetic cause of the late-onset neurodegenerative disease Spinocerebellar ataxia type 1 (SCA1). To identify protein partners of polyQ-ataxin-1 in neuronal cells under control or stress conditions, here we report our complementary proteomics strategies of proximity-dependent biotin identification (BioID) and affinity purification (via GFP-Trap pulldown) in Neuro-2a cells expressing epitope-tagged forms of ataxin-1[85Q]. These approaches allowed our enrichment of proximal proteins and interacting partners, respectively, with the subsequent protein identification performed by liquid chromatography-MS/MS. Background proteins, not dependent on the presence of the polyQ-ataxin-1 protein, were additionally defined by their endogenous biotinylation (for the BioID protocol) or by their non-specific interaction with GFP only (in the GFP-Trap protocol). All datasets were generated from biological replicates. Following the removal of the identified background proteins from the acquired protein lists, our experimental design has captured a comprehensive polyQ-ataxin-1 proximal and direct protein partners under normal and stress conditions. Data are available via ProteomeXchange, with identifier PXD010352.

### Keywords
Bioid, Neuro-2a, Lc – msms, Ataxin-1, Interactome, Gfp-trap

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia
University of Melbourne 

### Submitter
Sunyuan Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Marie A. Bogoyevitch
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia


