### Accession
PXD002190

### Title
C. elegans SGK-1 IP-MS -  Serum- and Glucocorticoid-Inducible Kinase-1 (SGK-1) Plays a Role in Membrane Trafficking in Caenorhabditis elegans

### Description
We performed an IP against SGK-1::GFP and the candidate interacting proteins have been identified by MS.

### Sample Protocol
The IP product has been digested by trypsin and the peptides were loaded onto a C18 column and analyzed by MS.

### Data Protocol
We used prolucid as a search engine and  filtered the search results with DTASelect 2.0 at 0.01 false discovery rate (FDR) at the spectral level, 5 ppm precursor mass accuracy, and a minimal Z score of 4.0. The overall false discovery rate for protein identification is less than 0.5%.

### Publication Abstract
The mammalian serum- and glucocorticoid-inducible kinase SGK1 regulates the endocytosis of ion channels. Here we report that in C. elegans sgk-1 null mutants, GFP-tagged MIG-14/Wntless, the sorting receptor of Wnt, failed to localize to the basolateral membrane of intestinal cells; instead, it was mis-sorted to lysosomes. This effect can be explained in part by altered sphingolipid levels, because reducing glucosylceramide biosynthesis restored the localization of MIG-14::GFP. Membrane traffic was not perturbed in general, as no obvious morphological defects were detected for early endosomes, the Golgi apparatus, and the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) in sgk-1 null animals. The recycling of MIG-14/Wntless through the Golgi might be partially responsible for the observed phenotype because the subcellular distribution of two plasma membrane cargoes that do not recycle through the trans-Golgi network (TGN) was affected to a lesser degree. Consistently, knockdown of the ArfGEF gbf-1 altered the distribution of SGK-1 at the basolateral membrane of intestinal cells. In addition, we found that sgk-1(RNAi) induced unfolded protein response in the ER, suggesting at least an indirect role of SGK-1 early in the secretory pathway. We propose that SGK-1 function is required for lipid homeostasis and that it acts at different intracellular trafficking steps.

### Keywords
C. elegans sgk-1 ip-ms

### Affiliations
NIBS
National institute of biological sciences, beijing

### Submitter
Ming Zhu

### Lab Head
Dr Meng-Qiu Dong
National institute of biological sciences, beijing


