### Accession
PXD025623

### Title
Huh-7 Over-expression FNDC4 LC-MS

### Description
To clarify the molecular mechanism by which FNDC4 promotes HCC invasion, mass spectrometry (MS) analysis was performed on the lysates of Huh-7-overexpressing FNDC4 and normal Huh-7 cells.

### Sample Protocol
Overexpression FNDC4 lentivirus (LV-FNDC4-GFP) were performed by adding 50 μl of lentivirus (1×108 TU/ml) to each well when the Huh-7 cell fusion rate reached 50-70%. After 48-72 h, the FNDC4 expression levels were tested experimentally.

### Data Protocol
MS was performed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) that was coupled to Easy nLC (Thermo Scientific). The MS raw data for each sample were combined and searched using MaxQuant 1.5.3.17 software for identification and a quantitation analysis. The protein sequences of the selected differentially expressed proteins were locally searched using NCBI BLAST client software and InterProScan to find homologous sequences. Then, gene ontology (GO) terms were mapped, and sequences were annotated using the software program Blast2GO.

### Publication Abstract
FNDC4 is highly homologous to the exercise-associated myokine FNDC5/irisin, which is highly expressed and promotes the invasion and metastasis of HCC cells. However, the function of FNDC4&#xa0;remains unknown. Here, we report that FNDC4, an extracellular factor, plays important roles in the invasion and metastasis of HCC. We found that high FNDC4 expression is associated with poor survival in HCC patients and FNDC4 promotes the migration and invasion of HCC cells. Mechanistically, we found that FNDC4 is related to the PI3K/Akt signalling pathway to a certain extent. Specifically, the extracellular domain of FNDC4 acts as an extracellular factor to promote Akt phosphorylation levels in this pathway. These findings reveal that FNDC4 promotes the invasion and metastasis of HCC partly via the PI3K/Akt signalling pathway.

### Keywords
Fndc4, Lc-ms, Liver cancer

### Affiliations
Institute of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Southwest Hospital, Third Military Medical University (Army Medical University)

### Submitter
shuguo zheng

### Lab Head
Dr Shuguo Zheng
Institute of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Southwest Hospital, Third Military Medical University (Army Medical University)


