### Accession
PXD006877

### Title
Haloferax volcanii SILAC study of Oxidative stress

### Description
SILAC was used to monitor proteome changes to Haloferax volcanii after treatment with oxidizing agent NaOCl. SILAC amino acids used were Lysine(+8) and Arginine(+6).  For treatment and control groups 4 replicates were used. In replicates 1 and 3, the control group had supplementation of both light lysine and argninie to the medium and the treatment group was supplemented with both heavy lysine(+8) and arginine(+6). In replicates 2 and 4, the labeling was switched, with the control containing heavy lysine(+8) and arginine(+6) and the treatement was supplemented with light lysine and arginine.  After treatment, cells were mixed at a 1:1 ratio (control:treatment) and proteins were extracted and digested with trypsin.   For the incorporation test, cells were grown in meduim containing heavy lysine(+8) and argnine(+6) and allowed to grow for 24 hours, then subcultured twice, sequentially after 24 h of growth. To test for incorporation of the heavy amino acids, cells were harvested, proteins extracted, and digested with trypsin.

### Sample Protocol
For the oxidative stress study, proteins were treated with MMTS, digested with trypsin, and separated by SCX into 14 fractions. Each fration (and post-run fractions) was analysed by LC-MS/MS (Thermo Easy-nLC coupled to a Thermo Q Exactive Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer).   For the incorporation study, proteins were treated with iodoacetamide, digested with trypsin, and analysed by 60 min gradient on Thermo Easy-nLC coupled to a Thermo Q Exactive Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
For the oxidative stress study, using Proteome Discoverer 2.1, 2 missed cleavages by trypsin were allowed, static modification of Methylthio on cysteine, dynamic modifications of lysine(+8), arginine(+6), proline (+5), methionine oxidation, N-term acetylation, lysine (digly), FDR cutoff for protein and peptide identification of 1% and q-value of 0.01.    For the incorporation test, using Proteome Discoverer 2.1, 2 missed cleavages by trypsin were allowed, static modification of Carbamidomethyl on cysteine, dynamic modifications of lysine(+8), arginine(+6), proline (+5), methionine oxidation, N-term acetylation, lysine (digly), FDR cutoff for protein and peptide identification of 1% and q-value of 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
While many aspects of archaeal cell biology remain relatively unexplored, systems biology approaches like mass spectrometry (MS) based proteomics offer an opportunity for rapid advances. Unfortunately, the enormous amount of MS data generated often remains incompletely analyzed due to a lack of sophisticated bioinformatic tools and field-specific biological expertise for data interpretation. Here we present the initiation of the Archaeal Proteome Project (ArcPP), a community-based effort to comprehensively analyze archaeal proteomes. Starting with the model archaeon Haloferax volcanii, we reanalyze MS datasets from various strains and culture conditions. Optimized peptide spectrum matching, with strict control of false discovery rates, facilitates identifying&#x2009;&gt;&#x2009;72% of the reference proteome, with a median protein sequence coverage of 51%. These analyses, together with expert knowledge in diverse aspects of cell biology, provide meaningful insights into processes such as N-terminal protein maturation, N-glycosylation, and metabolism. Altogether, ArcPP serves as an invaluable blueprint for comprehensive prokaryotic proteomics.

### Keywords
['Oxidative stress', 'Quantitative proteomics', 'Haloferax volcanii', 'Archaea', 'Sodium hypochlorite', 'Silac']

### Affiliations
['University of Florida', 'Department of Microbiology and Cell Science, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, Genetics Institute, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, 32611']

### Submitter
['Lana McMillan']

### Lab Head
[{'title': 'Dr', 'affiliation': 'Department of Microbiology and Cell Science, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, Genetics Institute, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, 32611', 'email': 'jmaupin@ufl.edu', 'country': '', 'orcid': '', 'name': 'Julie A. Maupin-Furlow', 'id': '75320100'}]

### SDRF
characteristics[organism]: ['Haloferax volcanii DS2']
characteristics[organism part]: ['Whole organism']
characteristics[cell type]: ['prokaryotic cell']
characteristics[disease]: ['not applicable']
comment[label]: ['SILAC light K:12C(6)14N(2)' 'SILAC heavy K:13C(6)15N(2)']
comment[label].1: ['SILAC light R:12C(6)14N(4)' 'SILAC medium R:13C(6)14N(4)']
comment[instrument]: ['AC=MS:1002634;NT=Q Exactive Plus']
comment[modification parameters]: ['NT=Methylthio;AC=UNIMOD:39;TA=C;MT=Fixed']
comment[modification parameters].1: ['NT=Label:13C(6)15N(2);AC=UNIMOD:259;TA=K;MT=Variable']
comment[modification parameters].2: ['NT=Label:13C(6);AC=UNIMOD:259;TA=R;MT=Variable']

