### Accession
PXD034091

### Title
Fibroblast-tracks are topographical cues that direct cancer cell migration

### Description
Fibroblasts rely on adhesive structures to migrate. It is generally thought that adhesive structures disassemble once at the rear of the cell to release the cell and allow further movement. However, a significant portion of adhesions is not disassembled and is instead left on the substrate. We observed that virtually all the non-resorbed adhesions remain connected to the substrate by the means of integrin β5. Forward cell migration results in plasma membrane pulling giving rise to tubular structures that are then left on the ground, forming a network of lipid tracks that persist for several days, thus altering substrate’s topography. Cancer cells of different origin exploit fibroblast-tracks as migration railways. The adhesion of cancer cells along tracks is not mediated by focal adhesions, but rather by frustrated clathrin-coated structures (CCSs). Analysis of the composition of track generated by cancer associated fibroblasts allowed to identify integrin αv as the receptor on cancer cells responsible for track recognition. Some cancer cell lines are not able to perform durotaxis (rigidity driven migration), while fibroblasts are very good at it. We thus tested whether, in the presence of fibroblast-tracks, non-durotactic cancer cells would become durotactic by following tracks and this was indeed the case. Hence, fibroblast-tracks are a novel structure capable of physically directing cell migration of different cell types.

### Sample Protocol
CAFs were plated at a density of 40 cells/mm² in several T75 cell culture flasks. After 48 hours of migration, DMEM + ITS + FCS was replaced with DMEM + ITS. 24 h later, Calyculin A was added (final concentration 20 nM) for 20 minutes, when cells rounded up and detached. Flasks were then washed 5 times with PBS. 3ml of DMEM were added to each flask. Cilengitide, a selective inhibitor of the integrins αvβ3 and αvβ5, was added to half of the flasks (final concentration 20 µM), while DMSO was added to the other half of the flasks. After 80 min incubation at 37°C, the medium was recovered and centrifuged at 20.000g for 30 min. Pellets were then recovered in 20 µl of PBS, dried and solubilized in 10 µL of 8M urea, 200 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Proteins were then reduced in 5 mM dithiothreitol, pH 8 by vortexing at 57°C for 30min. After cooling to room temperature, cysteines were alkylated by adding 10 mM of iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark. After diluting to 1 M urea with 200 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0, samples were digested with 0.4µg trypsine/LysC (Promega) overnight, by vortexing at 37°. Samples were then loaded onto homemade C18 StageTips for desalting. Peptides were eluted using 40/60 MeCN/H2O + 0.1% formic acid, vacuum concentrated to dryness and reconstituted in 10µl or 20µl injection buffer (0.3% TFA) before nano-LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
For identification, the data were searched against the Homo Sapiens  UP000005640 database using Sequest HT through Proteome Discoverer (v.2.4). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and a maximum of two miss cleavages sites were allowed. Oxidized methionine, Met-loss, Met-loss-Acetyl and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation of cysteins were set as fixed modification. Maximum allowed mass deviation was set to 10 ppm for monoisotopic precursor ions and 0.6 Da for MS/MS peaks. False-discovery rate (FDR) was calculated using Percolator [PMID: 27572102] and was set to 1% at the peptide level for the whole study. The resulting files were further processed using myProMS [PMID: 17610305] v.3.9.3 (https://github.com/bioinfo-pf-curie/myproms). Label-free quantification was performed using peptide extracted ion chromatograms (XICs), computed with MassChroQ [PMID: 21751374] v.2.2.1. For protein quantification, XICs from proteotypic peptides (TopN matching) were used including peptides with missed cleavages. Median and scale normalization at the peptide level was applied on the total signal of shared peptides to correct the XICs for each biological replicate (N=2). To estimate the significance of the change in protein abundance, a linear model (adjusted on peptides and biological replicates) was performed, and p-values were adjusted using the Benjamini–Hochberg FDR procedure. Protein molar and mass percentage were estimated by using the Top 3 [PMID:16219938] (including proteins with less than 3 peptides) as the Protein Quantification index and the direct proportionality model [PMID: 23794183].

### Publication Abstract
Fibroblasts play a fundamental role in tumor development. Among other functions, they regulate cancer cells' migration through rearranging the extracellular matrix, secreting soluble factors, and establishing direct physical contacts with cancer cells. Here, we report that migrating fibroblasts deposit on the substrate a network of tubular structures that serves as a guidance cue for cancer cell migration. Such membranous tubular network, hereafter called tracks, is stably anchored to the substrate in a &#x3b2;5-integrin-dependent manner. We found that cancer cells specifically adhere to tracks by using clathrin-coated structures that pinch and engulf tracks. Tracks thus represent a spatial memory of fibroblast migration paths that is read and erased by cancer cells directionally migrating along them. We propose that fibroblast tracks represent a topography-based intercellular communication system capable of steering cancer cell migration.

### Keywords
Cafs, Extracellular matrix, Cancer

### Affiliations
Institut Curie - Centre de Recherche
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform

### Submitter
Vanessa Masson

### Lab Head
Dr Damarys Loew
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform


