### Accession
PXD003210

### Title
REST-interactome -  Interactomic analysis of REST/NRSF and implications of its functional links with the transcription suppressor TRIM28 during neuronal differentiation

### Description
Namgyu Lee has participated in the experimental part of this project and she is a co-first author of the under-going manuscript. RE-1 silencing transcription factor (REST) is a transcriptional repressor with a role in regulating gene expression through binding to repressor element 1. We identified REST/NRSF-interacting proteins by proteomics-based analyses using the complementary mass spectrometry approach. Our interactome revealed 204 REST-interacting proteins. Among those proteins, nuclear proteins were mostly enriched reflecting nuclear localization of REST. The interaction networks of interactome indicated biological processes associated with mRNA processing, chromatin organization and transcription. Interactions of ALYREF, HnRNP M, HnRNP Q, NPM1, NCL, PARP1, HDAC5, TRIM28 and HMGA1 with REST were confirmed by co-immunoprecipitation. Using public microarray dataset, a highly significant overlaps were observed in differentially expressed transcripts following knockdown of REST and interacting proteins such as HDAC5, HMGA1 and TRIM28, suggesting that the REST might cross-talk with those transcription regulators to regulate transcription of shared target genes. Our interactomic study of REST implies novel cross-talks with transcription regulators by its associations with interacting proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Co-immunoprecipitation of potential REST-interacting proteins and Western Blotting  Cells were harvested 24 h after transfection in cold PBS and centrifuged at 800 g. Cells were lysed with a lysis buffer containing 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, 0.2% TritonX-100, 15U/ml DNAse I and the inhibitor cocktail of proteases and phosphateases (Complete ULTRA Tablet and PhosSTOP, Roche). REST and its interacting proteins were pulled down with anti-V5 antibody immobilized on agarose beads (Sigma), and then subjected to mass spectrometric analysis or Western blotting.  All samples boiled at 100oC for 5 min were subjected to SDS-PAGE and then transferred onto PVDF membranes (Millipore, USA). After treatment with 5% skimmed milk in TBS-T buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% Tween20) for 1 h, membranes were incubated with the primary antibodies at 4oC with shaking overnight. After incubated with the secondary antibody for 2 h, immunocomplexes were detected by use of the femto, Pico or ECL reagent (Thermo).  Antibodies for immunoprecipitation and Western blotting are from the companies as follows: rabbit anti-REST antibody (Millipore), mouse anti-V5 antibody (Sigma), mouse ant-ALY antibody (Santa Cruz), mouse anti-HnRNP Q (Santa Cruz), mouse anti-HnRNP M (Santa Cruz), anti-HDAC5 (Santa Cruz), rabbit anti-B23 antibody (Santa Cruz), rabbit anti-C23 antibody (Santa Cruz), rabbit anti-PARP1 antibody (Cell signaling), rabbit anti-TRIM28 (Santa Cruz), rabbit anti-HMG-l/HMG-Y (Santa Cruz)  In-solution Digestion Proteins were digested with trypsin, as described in a previous study, with some modifications.[5] Briefly, eluted proteins were lyophilized and resolved in a digestion solution of 6 M urea and 40 mM ammonium bicarbonate in high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC)-grade water. Protein reduction was performed with 5 mM Tris (2-arboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride for 1 h, followed by alkylation with 25 mM iodoacetamide in the dark for 30 min at room temperature. The sample was in-solution digested with 5 ng/mL sequencing-grade modified trypsin (Promega, USA) for 16 h at 37°C.  Nano-LC-ESI-MS/MS Peptides were analyzed using mass spectrometry, as described previously, with some modifications.[5] Tryptic peptides from in-gel digestion were separated using a homemade microcapillary column (75 μm x 12 cm) packed with C18 resin (Michrom Bioresources, USA). Samples were eluted using a linear gradient of a mixture of solvents A (0.1% formic acid in 2% ACN) and B (0.1% formic acid in 98% ACN), where the percentage of the latter mobile phase increased over 120 min at a flow rate of 0.26 μL/min: 2-50% over 94 min, 50-90% over 6 min, 90% over 6 min, 90-2% over 6 min, and 2% over 8 min. Eluted peptides were analyzed with an LTQ Velos Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Finnigan, USA) equipped with nano-ESI. MS precursor ion scans were acquired within a m/z range between 150 and 2000. The five most abundant ions detected in the precursor MS scan were dynamically selected for MS/MS analyses. Collision-induced dissociations of the selected precursor ions were performed in an ion trap (LTQ) with 35% normalized collision energy. We employed dynamic exclusion to increase the size of proteome to be detected as follows: repeat count for dynamic exclusion = 1, repeat duration = 30 s, dynamic exclusion duration = 180 s, and list size of dynamic exclusion = 50.

### Data Protocol
Identification and Quantification of Proteins Peak lists of MS data were generated, and identification/quantification of peptides and proteins from three technical replicates of LC-MS/MS data performed using the MaxQuant quantification tool with Andromeda search engine (version 1.3.0.5).[6-8] The top 10 peaks per 100 Da were used for analysis. Enzyme specificity for trypsin was used. The minimal peptide length was six amino acids, and two mis-cleavages were allowed. Variable modification options were employed for oxidation of methionine (15.995 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine (57.021 Da).  Tolerance was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.8 Da for fragment ions. Swiss-Prot database (Homo sapiens reference proteome set, release 2013_01, 20,226 entries) with added contaminants and reverse sequences was used. For peptide and protein identification, 1% false discovery rate (FDR) was determined by accumulating 1% of reverse database hits. Common peptides shared by two proteins were combined and reported as one protein group. The first majority protein ID was selected as the representative protein of each group, and used as protein ID for further analysis. For comparison of samples, we used label-free quantification with a minimum of two ratio counts to determine the normalized protein label-free quantification (LFQ) intensity.[9]

### Publication Abstract
RE-1 silencing transcription factor (REST) is a transcriptional repressor that regulates gene expression by binding to repressor element 1. However, despite its critical function in physiology, little is known about its interaction proteins. Here we identified 204 REST-interacting proteins using affinity purification and mass spectrometry. The interactome included proteins associated with mRNA processing/splicing, chromatin organization, and transcription. The interactions of these REST-interacting proteins, which included TRIM28, were confirmed by co-immunoprecipitation and immunocytochemistry, respectively. Gene Ontology (GO) analysis revealed that neuronal differentiation-related GO terms were enriched among target genes that were co-regulated by REST and TRIM28, while the level of CTNND2 was increased by the knockdown of REST and TRIM28. Consistently, the level of CTNND2 increased while those of REST and TRIM28 decreased during neuronal differentiation in the primary neurons, suggesting that CTNND2 expression may be co-regulated by both. Furthermore, neurite outgrowth was increased by depletion of REST or TRIM28, implying that reduction of both REST and TRIM28 could promote neuronal differentiation via induction of CTNND2 expression. In conclusion, our study of REST reveals novel interacting proteins which could be a valuable resource for investigating unidentified functions of REST and also suggested functional links between REST and TRIM28 during neuronal development.

### Keywords
Interaction profiling, Proteomics, Cell biology, Lc-ms/ms, Transcription factor

### Affiliations
Department of Life Science, Pohang University of Science and Technology, Pohang, Gyeongbuk, Korea Department of Integrative Biosciences & Biotechnology, Pohang, Gyeongbuk, Republic of Korea
Department of Life Science

### Submitter
Dae-Kyum Kim

### Lab Head
Dr Kwan Yong Choi
Department of Life Science, Pohang University of Science and Technology, Pohang, Gyeongbuk, Korea Department of Integrative Biosciences & Biotechnology, Pohang, Gyeongbuk, Republic of Korea


