### Accession
PXD019306

### Title
Proteomic analysis of the trypanosomatid Novymonas esmeraldas

### Description
An endosymbiotic event where an archaeon acquired and intracellular protobacteria underpinned the evolution of mitochondria, a key event for the evolution of eukaryotes. Despite is biological importance, the molecular mechanisms driving the early stages of the host-endosymbiont interactions that lead to the evolution of endosymbiont-derived organelles remains poorly understood. Novymonas esmeraldas is a trypanosomatid that recently acquired a -proteobacterial endosymbiont which is compartmentalized into vacuole-like structures called symbiosomes. The life cycle of the host is not synchronized with that of its endosymbiont resulting in heterogeneous numbers of endosymbionts per cell among the population. In order to elucidate the molecular mechanisms mediating this early stage of the host-endosymbiont interactions we isolated the endosymbionts from Novymonas esmeraldas and analyzed the proteome of isolated endosymbionts, holosymbionts (cells containing endosymbionts) and aposymbionts (cells where endosymbionts where removed by treatment with antibiotics). We show that at least one host-encoded protein localizes to the symbiosome and knockout of the corresponding gene leads to an increase of over 2-fold of endosymbionts per cell. This result suggests that controlling the endosymbiont proliferation by the host is an early step for the establishment and posterior evolution of an endosymbiotic event.

### Sample Protocol
Samplels were processed for mass spectrometric analysis essentially as described in Grube et al., 2018 PMID 29322779. Briefly, 5 µg of protein lysates were shortly separated in a gel, protein containing bands reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed with MaxQuant version 1.6.0.1. Searches weres carried out using sequence datasets from Novymonas (9299 sequences) and Pandoraea (971 sequences. Standard parameters were applied for the searches except of enabled label-free quantification and 'match between runs' functionality.

### Publication Abstract
The stability of endosymbiotic associations between eukaryotes and bacteria depends on a reliable mechanism ensuring vertical inheritance of the latter. Here, we demonstrate that a host-encoded protein, located at the interface between the endoplasmic reticulum of the trypanosomatid Novymonas esmeraldas and its endosymbiotic bacterium Ca. Pandoraea novymonadis, regulates such a process. This protein, named TMP18e, is a product of duplication and neo-functionalization of the ubiquitous transmembrane protein 18 (TMEM18). Its expression level is increased at the proliferative stage of the host life cycle correlating with the confinement of bacteria to the nuclear vicinity. This is important for the proper segregation of bacteria into the daughter host cells as evidenced from the TMP18e ablation, which disrupts the nucleus-endosymbiont association and leads to greater variability of bacterial cell numbers, including an elevated proportion of aposymbiotic cells. Thus, we conclude that TMP18e is necessary for the reliable vertical inheritance of endosymbionts.

### Keywords
Protobacteria, Eukaryotes, Mitochondria, Evolution, Endosymbiont, Novymonas esmeraldas

### Affiliations
Molecular Proteomics Laboratory
Proteome Research (AG Stühler) Institute of Molecular Medicine I Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf Germany

### Submitter
Gereon Poschmann

### Lab Head
Dr Gereon Poschmann
Proteome Research (AG Stühler) Institute of Molecular Medicine I Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf Germany


