### Accession
PXD009528

### Title
Identification of Acinetobacter baumannii AB307-0294 type VI secretion system secreted proteins

### Description
In order to identify secreted proteins associated with the type VI secretion system (T6SS), the secretome of a wild-type A. baumannii AB307 0294 T6SS active strain was compared to the secretome of a T6SS inactive mutant strain, A. baumannii AB307-0294ΔtssM.

### Sample Protocol
For each sample, 1 ml of an A. baumannii overnight culture (grown in LB at 37°C with shaking) was pelleted by centrifugation (10,000 x g, 1 min), washed in an equal volume of M9 minimal media supplemented with 20 mM sodium butyrate and 1% casamino acids (for optimal A. baumannii growth) and then diluted 1/500 into 100 ml fresh M9 and grown with shaking (200 rpm) at 37°C to an OD600 of 0.8. The culture supernatant was collected by centrifugation at 4,000 x g, 4°C, 10 minutes then filtered through a 0.22 μM vacuum filter (Corning, USA) to remove any remaining cellular material. The filtered was then concentrated to an approximate volume of 500μl (approximately 200-fold) in Rebuffer solution (50 mM Tris pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl), using a 3 kDa Amicon Ultra-15 centrifugal filter unit (Merck Millipore, USA) in a swinging basket rotor according to the manufacturer’s instructions and stored at -80°C until required. The protein concentration in each concentrated supernatant was determined at an absorbance of 280nm using the Nanodrop 1000 spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, CA, USA) then a volume equivalent to a total protein concentration of 50 μg was diluted in Rebuffer solution to give a final volume of 220 μL. Following this, the proteins were denatured via the addition of using 1,4-dithiothreitol (DTT) to a final concentration of 10mM and incubation at 65°C for 30 min, then alkylated via the addition of 40mM chloroacetamide (CAA) (Sigma) and incubation at room temperature for 20 min in the absence of light. Trypsin Gold (2μg/ml Promega, USA) was then added at a ratio of 1:100 (v/v) and the sample incubated overnight at 37°C. To stop the reaction, the sample was acidified (to approximately pH 3.0) by the addition of reagent grade formic acid to a final concentration of 1%. Samples were concentrated to a final volume of 50 μL by vacuum-drying, desalted using P-10 ZipTip columns (Agilent, OMIX-Mini Bed 96 C18), vacuumed dried, then reconstituted in 20μl of 0.1% formic acid prior to mass spectrometry. Peptide identification using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system equipped with a Dionex 732 UltiMate 3000 RS autosampler was performed as described previously (Gulliver, et al., 2018) with the exception that that peptides were analysed using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Acquired .raw files were identified and quantified with MaxQuant (60) software. Statistical analyses were performed using Limma within R studio where FDR is derived from the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure. Proteins with a ≥ 4 fold (2 log2 ) change and an FDR ≤ 0.05 were considered differentially expressed.

### Publication Abstract
The type VI secretion system (T6SS) is a macromolecular machine that delivers protein effectors into host cells and/or competing bacteria. The effectors may be delivered as noncovalently bound cargo of T6SS needle proteins (VgrG/Hcp/PAAR) or as C-terminal extensions of these proteins. Many <i>Acinetobacter baumannii</i> strains produce a T6SS, but little is known about the specific effectors or how they are delivered. In this study, we show that <i>A. baumannii</i> AB307-0294 encodes three <i>vgrG</i> loci, each containing a <i>vgrG</i> gene, a T6SS toxic effector gene, and an antitoxin/immunity gene. Each of the T6SS toxic effectors could kill <i>Escherichia coli</i> when produced in <i>trans</i> unless the cognate immunity protein was coproduced. To determine the role of each VgrG in effector delivery, we performed interbacterial competitive killing assays using <i>A. baumannii</i> AB307-0294 <i>vgrG</i> mutants, together with <i>Acinetobacter baylyi</i> prey cells expressing pairs of immunity genes that protected against two toxic effectors but not a third. Using this approach, we showed that AB307-0294 produces only three T6SS toxic effectors capable of killing <i>A. baylyi</i> and that each VgrG protein is specific for the carriage of one effector. Finally, we analyzed a number of <i>A. baumannii</i> genomes and identified significant diversity in the range of encoded T6SS VgrG and effector proteins, with correlations between effector types and <i>A. baumannii</i> global clone lineages.

### Keywords
Acinetobacter baumannii, Bacteria, Secretome, Tssm, Type vi secretion system

### Affiliations
Monash University
Monash Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Department of Microbiology, Monash University, Australia

### Submitter
Ralf Schittenhelm

### Lab Head
Dr John Boyce
Monash Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Department of Microbiology, Monash University, Australia


