### Accession
PXD038772

### Title
Biomarkers of favorable immune capacity in growth hormone receptor knockout pig model

### Description
Laron Syndrome (LS) is a rare hereditary disease in humans caused by a mutation in the growth hormone receptor gene which leads to high levels of circulating GH [1]. The disease is characterized by short statue, obesity, transient hypoglycemia during youth and low incidences of cancer and diabetes [2]. Thus making it interesting to study the underlying mechanisms. Recently a porcine model to mimic human LS was developed [3]. Growth hormone receptors are expressed on various cells of the immune system yet the extent to which dysregulation of GH might affect immune function in LS is poorly understood [4]. Therefore we decided to characterize the influence of growth hormone receptor knockout on the immune function of these animals by analyzing the proteome of their CD4+ and CD4- peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC).  1. Werner, H.; Sarfstein, R.; et al. Laron Syndrome Research Paves the Way for New Insights in Oncological Investigation. Cells 2020, 9, doi:10.3390/cells9112446. 2. Werner, H.; Lapkina-Gendler, L.; et al. Genome-Wide Profiling of Laron Syndrome Patients Identifies Novel Cancer Protection Pathways. Cells 2019, 8, doi:10.3390/cells8060596. 3. Hinrichs, A.; Kessler, B.; et al. Growth hormone receptor-deficient pigs resemble the pathophysiology of human Laron syndrome and reveal altered activation of signaling cascades in the liver. Mol Metab 2018, 11, 113-128, doi:10.1016/j.molmet.2018.03.006. 4. Hattori, N. Expression, regulation and biological actions of growth hormone (GH) and ghrelin in the immune system. Growth Horm IGF Res 2009, 19, 187-197, doi:10.1016/j.ghir.2008.12.001.

### Sample Protocol
PBMC of five wild type (wt) and four growth hormone receptor knockout (GHR-KO) pigs at the age of 12 weeks were used. GHR-KO pigs were generated as previously described [3]. For sampling, pigs were fasted overnight and heparinized venous whole blood was collected. All animals were housed under controlled conditions, had free access to water and were fed a commercial diet. PBMC were isolated from whole blood by density gradient centrifugation (RT, 500 x g, 25 min, brake off) with Pancoll separating solution (PAN-Biotech, Aidenbach, Germany), and restored in PBS (pH 7.4) or RPMI medium (PAN-Biotech) supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated fetal calf serum (FCS) and 1% penicillin/ streptomycin (both Biochrom, Berlin, Germany). A total of 6 x 10^7 PBMC of each animal was separately incubated in staining buffer with mouse anti-pig CD4α ab (clone MIL17; Bio-Rad AbD Serotec; 1:50) at 4°C for 20 min. Staining buffer contained phosphate-buffered saline (pH 7.2). Staining buffer was supplemented with 2 mM EDTA and 0.5% bovine serum albumin. In a following step, cells were resuspended in staining buffer before adding anti-mouse IgG2a/b MicroBeads (Miltenyi Biotec; 20 μL per 10^7 total cells) for an incubation time of 15 min. Next, magnetic separation was performed using LS columns (Miltenyi Biotec). Magnetically labelled CD4+ PBMC were retained in the magnetic field of the columns, while unlabeled flowthrough (CD4- PBMC) passed through the columns in three washing steps. The positive CD4+ PBMC fraction was eluted by removing the column from the magnetic field and flushing with staining buffer. Until filter-aided sample preparation (FASP), 6 x 10^5 positively selected cells of eluate and flowthrough were each pelleted and stored at −20°C.  Then, each sample was digested using a modified FASP procedure [5,6]. After reduction and alkylation using DTT and IAA, the proteins were centrifuged on a 30 kDa cutoff filter device (Sartorius, Göttingen, Germany), washed twice with UA buffer (8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris/HCl pH 8.5) and twice with 50 mM ammoniumbicarbonate. The proteins were digested for 2 hours at room temperature using 0.5 µg Lys-C (Wako Chemicals, Neuss, Germany) and for 16 hours at 37°C using 1 µg trypsin (Promega, Mannheim, Germany). After centrifugation (10 min at 14,000 g) the eluted peptides were acidified with 0.5% TFA and stored at -20°C.  5.Grosche, A.; Hauser, A.; et al. The Proteome of Native Adult Müller Glial Cells From Murine Retina. Mol Cell Proteomics 2016, 15, 462-480, doi:10.1074/mcp.M115.052183. 6. Wiśniewski, J.R.; Zougman, A.; et al. Universal sample preparation method for proteome analysis. Nat Methods 2009, 6, 359-362, doi:10.1038/nmeth.1322.

### Data Protocol
Alterations in protein abundances in CD4+ PBMC and CD4- PBMC of five wt and four GHR-KO pigs were analyzed. Acidified eluted peptides were analyzed in the data independent acquisition mode on a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) online coupled to an ultra-high-performance liquid chromatography (UHPLC) system (Ultimate 3000, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Tryptic peptides were automatically loaded on a C18 trap column (300 µm inner diameter (ID) × 5 mm, Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 5 µm, 100 Å, LC Packings) at 30µl/min flow rate prior to C18 reversed phase chromatography on the analytical column (nanoEase MZ HSS T3 Column, 100Å, 1.8 µm, 75 µm x 250 mm, Waters, Eschborn, Germany) at 250nl/min flow rate in a 95 minutes non-linear acetonitrile gradient from 3 to 40% in 0.1% formic acid. The DIA method consisted of a survey scan from 300 to 1,650 mass-to-charge ratio at 120,000 resolution and an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3e6 or 120 ms maximum injection time. Fragmentation was performed via higher energy collisional dissociation with a target value of 3e6 ions determined with predictive AGC. Precursor peptides were isolated with 37 variable windows spanning from 300 to 1,650 mass-to-charge ratio at 30,000 resolution with an AGC target of 3e6 and automatic injection time. The normalized collision energy was 28 and the spectra were recorded in profile mode. For label-free quantification of DIA data, the DIA LC-MS/MS data set was analyzed by comparing the MS2 fragment spectra from the recorded windows against a spectral library collected from data-dependent acquisition data (54 raw files, derived from high pH fractionated porcine granulocytes and lymphocytes) from the same instrument. The spectral library was generated directly in Spectronaut Pulsar XII (Biognosys, Schlieren, Switzerland) as described [7]. Spectronaut was equipped with the Ensembl Pig database (Release 75 (Sscrofa10.2), 25,859 sequences, https://www.ensembl.org). The default settings for database match included: full trypsin cleavage, peptide length of between 7 and 52 amino acids and maximally two missed cleavage sites. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification and variable modifications allowed were deamidation and oxidation of methionine. All FDRs were set as 0.01 for the peptide-spectrum match (PSM), peptide and protein. The best 3-6 fragments per peptide were included in the library. The final spectral library generated in Spectronaut contained 5537 protein groups and 84044 peptide precursors. Quantification was based on cumulative MS2 area levels. Briefly, raw files were imported into Spectronaut and XIC extraction settings were set to dynamic with a correction factor of one. Normalization was performed by default settings in Spectronaut, based on the Local Regression Normalization [8]. Automatic calibration mode was chosen and interference correction on MS1 and MS2 level was enabled. Peptide and protein identification was filtered to satisfy an FDR of 1% by the mProphet approach [9]. Only proteotypic peptides were considered for protein quantification applying summed precursor quantities based on MS2 area quantity. A match between runs was enabled with the q-value percentile mode 0.2 threshold. Thus, only peptide precursors, which passed the q-value cut-off in at least 20% of samples were reported. For the following evaluation of data, statistical analysis was performed on log2 transformed normalized abundance values using Student’s t-test.   7. Singh, J.; Kaade, E.; et al. Systematic Comparison of Strategies for the Enrichment of Lysosomes by Data Independent Acquisition. J Proteome Res 2020, 19, 371-381, doi:10.1021/acs.jproteome.9b00580. 8. Callister, S.J.; Barry, R.C.; et al. Normalization Approaches for Removing Systematic Biases Associated with Mass Spectrometry and Label-Free Proteomics. Journal of Proteome Research 2006, 5, 277-286, doi:10.1021/pr050300l. 9. Reiter, L.; Rinner, O.; et al. mProphet: automated data processing and statistical validation for large-scale SRM experiments. Nat Methods 2011, 8, 430-435, doi:10.1038/nmeth.1584.

### Publication Abstract
Laron syndrome (LS) is a rare genetic disorder characterized by low levels of insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF1) and high levels of growth hormone (GH) due to mutations in the growth hormone receptor gene (<i>GHR</i>). A <i>GHR</i>-knockout (<i>GHR</i>-KO) pig was developed as a model for LS, which displays many of the same features as humans with LS-like transient juvenile hypoglycemia. This study aimed to investigate the effects of impaired GHR signaling on immune functions and immunometabolism in <i>GHR</i>-KO pigs. GHR are located on various cell types of the immune system. Therefore, we investigated lymphocyte subsets, proliferative and respiratory capacity of peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs), proteome profiles of CD4<sup>-</sup> and CD4<sup>+</sup> lymphocytes and IFN-&#x3b1; serum levels between wild-type (WT) controls and <i>GHR</i>-KO pigs, which revealed significant differences in the relative proportion of the CD4<sup>+</sup>CD8&#x3b1;<sup>-</sup> subpopulation and in IFN-&#x3b1; levels. We detected no significant difference in the respiratory capacity and the capacity for polyclonal stimulation in PBMCs between the two groups. But proteome analysis of CD4<sup>+</sup> and CD4<sup>-</sup> lymphocyte populations revealed multiple significant protein abundance differences between <i>GHR</i>-KO and WT pigs, involving pathways related to amino acid metabolism, beta-oxidation of fatty acids, insulin secretion signaling, and oxidative phosphorylation. This study highlights the potential use of <i>GHR</i>-KO pigs as a model for studying the effects of impaired GHR signaling on immune functions.

### Keywords
Quantitative label-free lc-ms/ms; laron syndrome; ghr-ko; porcine model; immune function

### Affiliations
Research Unit Protein Science, Helmholtz Center Munich, German Research Center for Environmental Health GmbH, Germany
LMU Munich, Veterinary Sciences, Chair of Physiology, Lena-Christ-Straße 48, 82152 Planegg/Martinsried,  Germany

### Submitter
Roxane Degroote

### Lab Head
Dr Stefanie M Hauck
Research Unit Protein Science, Helmholtz Center Munich, German Research Center for Environmental Health GmbH, Germany


