### Accession
PXD037594

### Title
Inhibitors molecules isolated from midgut and midgut diverticula of the spider Nephilingis cruentata

### Description
Spiders are insect predators and their venoms are important to prey capture. Spider venomshave several potential applications as pharmaceutical compounds and insecticides. However,transcriptomic and proteomic analyses of the digestive system (DS) of spiders show that DS is also a rich source of new inhibitor molecules. Biochemical, transcriptomic and proteomic data of crude DS extracts show the presence of molecules with inhibitor potential in the spider Nephilingis cruentata.  Therefore, the aims of this work were to isolate and characterize molecules with serine peptidase inhibitory activity. The DS of fasting adult females was homogenized under acidic conditions and subjected to heat treatment. After that, samples were submitted to ion exchange batch and high-performance reverse-phase chromatography. The fractions with inhibitory activity were confirmed by mass spectrometry, identifying 6 molecules with inhibitor potential. The inhibitor Nc6834 was kinetically characterized, showing a KD value of 30.25 nM ± 8.13. Analysis of the tertiary structure by molecular modeling using Alpha-Fold2 indicates that the inhibitor Nc6834 structurally belongs to theMIT1-like atracotoxin family. This is the first time that a serine peptidase inhibitory function is attributed to this structural family and the reactive site inhibitor residue is identified. Sequence analysis indicates that these molecules may be present in the DS of other spiders.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic analysis was performed with a gel slice of approximately 1 mm2, and the pieces were destained with 200 µL of decolorized solution (50 mM of NH4HCO3 in 25% ACN). In the next step, 200 ul ACN were added until the gel pieces got white, and in sequence ACN was removed by vacuum centrifugation (Speed Vac) for 10 min. After that, 100 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) was added (v/v) for 30 min at room temperature. After incubation DTT solution was discarded. The addition of ACN and vacuum centrifugation was repeated. The sample was then alkylated with 200 mM (v/v) iodoacetamide (IAA) at 25°C for 30 min in the dark. After this procedure, the IAA solution was discarded, and the addition of ACN was repeated once more. The pieces of the gel after precedent were incubated for 18 hours with 100 ng of bovine pancreatic trypsin (Sigma 6502), and the reaction was stopped with 10 µl of 10% acetic acid. The samples were concentrated by vacuum centrifugation and resuspended in 0.1% acetic acid solution. Aliquots of the grouped samples (n = 4) were analyzed in a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano (Thermo Fisher Scientific) system connected to an Impact II mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics). The mobile phases used were as follows: Solution A: Water: Ac. Formic (999: 1) and solution B: ACN: Ac. Formic (999:1). The samples were injected and uploaded online into a Nano-trap Acclaim PepMap column (Dionex-C18, 100 Å, 75 μm × 2 cm) using 98% solution A for 2 min at a flow rate of 5 μL.min⁻¹ and then the peptides were eluded with a gradient of 5 to 40% solution B over 120 min at a flow rate of 350 nL.min⁻¹. Mass spectra were acquired in positive ion mode with MS precursors and MS/MS products purchased at 2 Hz in the mass range of 50-2000 m/z. Ramp-induced dissociation energy (ICD) parameters ranged from 7 to 70 eV.

### Data Protocol
The raw data (mzML) was uploaded to Peaks Studio 8.5 (Bioinformatics Solution Inc., Waterloo,Canada) and processed with new peptide sequencing and Peaks DB. The MS/MS spectra were searched in a custom database  GEWZ00000000.1  compiled from the Uniprot database.

### Publication Abstract
Spiders are important predators of insects and their venoms play an essential role in prey capture. Spider venoms have several potential applications as pharmaceutical compounds and insecticides. However, transcriptomic and proteomic analyses of the digestive system (DS) of spiders show that DS is also a rich source of new peptidase inhibitor molecules. Biochemical, transcriptomic and proteomic data of crude DS extracts show the presence of molecules with peptidase inhibitor potential in the spider Nephilingis cruentata. Therefore, the aims of this work were to isolate and characterize molecules with trypsin inhibitory activity. The DS of fasting adult females was homogenized under acidic conditions and subjected to heat treatment. After that, samples were submitted to ion exchange batch and high-performance reverse-phase chromatography. The fractions with trypsin inhibitory activity were confirmed by mass spectrometry, identifying six molecules with inhibitory potential. The inhibitor NcTI (Nephilingis cruentata trypsin inhibitor) was kinetically characterized, showing a K<sub>D</sub> value of 30.25&#xa0;nM&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;8.13. Analysis of the tertiary structure by molecular modeling using Alpha-Fold2 indicates that the inhibitor NcTI structurally belongs to the MIT1-like atracotoxin family. This is the first time that a serine peptidase inhibitory function is attributed to this structural family and the inhibitor reactive site residue is identified. Sequence analysis indicates that these molecules may be present in the DS of other spiders and could be associated to the inactivation of prey trypsin (serine peptidase) ingested by the spiders.

### Keywords
Inhibitors. spider. midgut. midgut diverticula

### Affiliations
Instituto Butantan, Laboratory of Biochemistry, São Paulo,05503900, Brazil
Universidade de São Paulo, ICB.

### Submitter
Oscar Bento

### Lab Head
Dr Adriana Rios Lopes
Instituto Butantan, Laboratory of Biochemistry, São Paulo,05503900, Brazil


