### Accession
PXD044264

### Title
Interpreting biologically informed neural networks for enhanced proteomic biomarker discovery and pathway analysis

### Description
The incorporation of machine learning methods into proteomics workflows improves the identification of disease-relevant biomarkers and biological pathways. However, machine learning models, such as deep neural networks, typically suffer from lack of interpretability. Here, we present a deep learning approach to combine biological pathway analysis and biomarker identification to increase the interpretability of proteomics experiments. Our approach integrates a priori knowledge of the relationships between proteins and biological pathways and biological processes into sparse neural networks to create biologically informed neural networks. We employ these networks to differentiate between clinical subphenotypes of septic acute kidney injury and COVID-19, as well as acute respiratory distress syndrome of different aetiologies. To gain biological insight into the complex syndromes, we utilize feature attribution-methods to introspect the networks for the identification of proteins and pathways important for distinguishing between subtypes. The algorithms are implemented in a freely available open source Python-package (https://github.com/InfectionMedicineProteomics/BINN).

### Sample Protocol
56 samples were chosen from acute kidney injury patients. All sample preparation steps, including desalting and protein digestion, used the Agilent AssayMAP Bravo Platform (Agilent Technologies, Inc.) per manufacturers protocol. Each plasma sample was diluted 1:10 (100-mM ammonium bicarbonate (AmBic); Sigma-Aldrich Co, St Louis, MO, USA), and 10 l of each diluted plasma sample were transferred to a 96-well plate (Greiner G650201) where 40 microL of 4 M urea (Sigma-Aldrich) in 100 mM AmBic was manually added with a pipette for a final volume of 50 microliter. The proteins were reduced with 10 microliter of 60 mM dithiothreitol (DTT, final concentration of 10 mM, Sigma-Aldrich) for one hour at 37 °C followed by alkylation with 20 microL of 80 mM iodoacetamide (IAA, final concentration of 20 mM, Sigma-Aldrich) for 30 min in a dark at room temperature. The plasma samples were digested with 2 microgram Lys-C (FUJIFILM Wako Chemicals U.S.A. Corporation) for five hours at room temperature and further digested with 2 microgram trypsin (Sequencing Grade Modified, Promega, Madison, WI, USA) overnight at room temperature (Betancourt et. all 2018). The digestion was stopped by pipetting 20 microliter of 10% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, Sigma-Aldrich) and the digested peptides were desalted on Bravo platform. To prime and equilibrate the AssayMAP C18 cartridges (Agilent, PN: 5190-6532), 90% acetonitrile (ACN, Sigma-Aldrich) with 0.1% TFA and 0.1% TFA were used, respectively. The samples were loaded into the cartridges at the flow rate of 5 microliter/min. The cartridges were washed with 0.1% TFA before the peptides were eluted with 80% ACN/0.1% TFA. The eluted peptides were dried in a SpeedVac (Concentrator plus Eppendorf) and resuspended in 25 microliter of 2% ACN/0.1% TFA. The peptide concentration was measured using the Pierce Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA). The samples, 10 microliter, were diluted with 10 microliter 2% ACN/0.1% TFA and spiked with synthetic iRT peptides (JPT Peptide Technologies, GmbH, Berlin, Germany) before liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis.

### Data Protocol
To augment the Pan Human Library with additional identifications and correct the retention time to the experiment at hand, we first searched the 141 AKI plasma samples using MSFragger-DIA (v3.5). Using the resulting set of identifications, shared precursors between the PHL and direct search were selected for retention time alignment. LOWESS was first used to smooth the correlation between the direct search results and the PHL and then an interpolated univariate spline function was fit on top of this to adjust the retention time in the direct search to the scale of the PHL. The shared proteins between the 2 libraries were replaced in the PHL with proteins, and associated precursors, from the direct search, and the proteins not contained in the PHL were appended to the library. 10 spiked-in retention time peptides (iRT) were used for alignment and retention time correction for each sample. We adapted the previously published DIAnRT workflow (De Marchi et all 2021) to optimize signal extraction at the sample level before combining the analysis to control for the global FDR. To do this, a first iteration is performed where sub-optimal retention time peptides are provided to align the experimental chromatograms to the spectral library. The first pass of signal extraction is scored and validated, and then the highest scoring peakgroups from a specified number of bins are selected and written out to a sample specific retention time library. This sample specific retention time library is used to align and correct the retention time to the spectral library with more stringent parameters in a second pass. Again, the second pass analysis is scored and validated and the highest scoring peakgroups for a specified number of bins are extracted and used as sample specific retention time libraries for a final pass. The final pass uses these sample specific retention time libraries to additionally correct mz and rentention time in an even more stringent manner. These final validated peakgroups are then used to infer peptide and proteins in a global manner to control for FDR and are finally combined in an output matrix that can be used for downstream analysis.

### Publication Abstract
The incorporation of machine learning methods into proteomics workflows improves the identification of disease-relevant biomarkers and biological pathways. However, machine learning models, such as deep neural networks, typically suffer from lack of interpretability. Here, we present a deep learning approach to combine biological pathway analysis and biomarker identification to increase the interpretability of proteomics experiments. Our approach integrates a priori knowledge of the relationships between proteins and biological pathways and biological processes into sparse neural networks to create biologically informed neural networks. We employ these networks to differentiate between clinical subphenotypes of septic acute kidney injury and COVID-19, as well as acute respiratory distress syndrome of different aetiologies. To gain biological insight into the complex syndromes, we utilize feature attribution-methods to introspect the networks for the identification of proteins and pathways important for distinguishing between subtypes. The algorithms are implemented in a freely available open source Python-package ( https://github.com/InfectionMedicineProteomics/BINN ).

### Keywords
Neural networks, Machine learning, Sepsis, Proteome, Dia, Aki

### Affiliations
Lund University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Clinical Sciences Lund, Division of Infection Medicine, Lund, Sweden
Lund University

### Submitter
Erik Hartman

### Lab Head
Dr Johan Malmström
Lund University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Clinical Sciences Lund, Division of Infection Medicine, Lund, Sweden


