### Accession
PXD009864

### Title
Mitten crab hepatopancreas LC-MSMS

### Description
As representatives of n-6 and n-3 fatty acids, many studies have analyzed the use of soybean oil and linseed oil rich in linoleic acid (18:2n-6, LA) and α-linolenic acid (18:3n-3, LNA) as better substitutes for fish oil. In aquatic animals, different dietary ratios of LA and LNA could have significant effects on growth, lipid metabolism, immune response, and reproduction. To assess the nutritive value of these two fatty acids for the Chinese mitten crab (Eriocheir sinensis), we performed transcriptome analysis and proteomic analysis using label-free quantification of the hepatopancreas of mitten crabs fed with LA or LNA diet. Our results provide new insights for further investigation into the replacement of fish oil from mitten crabs with vegetable oils and enable us to better understand the different roles and nutrition value of LA and LNA in mitten crabs.

### Sample Protocol
The protein from each group was digested with trypsin (Promega, USA) with a ratio of protein:trypsin = 100:1 at 37°C for 12 h. Following digestion in trypsin, the peptides in each group were divided into triplicate for the proteomic analysis to minimize equipmnet error. Six peptide samples were separately loaded into Nano high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) Ultimate 3000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) by a C18 trap column (3 μm, 0.10 × 20 mm) for separation. Subsequently, a spectrometry analysis was performed using Q Exactive HF (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) coupled to the Nano HPLC.

### Data Protocol
Transcriptome analysis was performed before the proteome analysis, and the mass spectra was searched against the database by using Proteome Discoverer, version 2.0 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) and in-house Mascot, version 2.2 (Matrix Science, UK). The search results were then filtered using a cutoff of 1% for the peptide false identification rate. Label-free quantification was used for quantification of the proteins. For quantitative changes, a cutoff of ≥1.5 or ≤0.666 fold change was set for differentially expressed proteins. Functional annotations of the proteins were conducted according to the annotation of the transcriptome.

### Publication Abstract
As representatives of n-6 and n-3 fatty acids, many studies have analyzed the use of soybean oil and linseed oil rich in linoleic acid (18:2n-6, LA) and &#x3b1;-linolenic acid (18:3n-3, LNA) as better substitutes for fish oil. In aquatic animals, different dietary ratios of LA and LNA could have significant effects on growth, lipid metabolism, immune response, and reproduction. To assess the nutritive value of these two fatty acids in Chinese mitten crab (<i>Eriocheir sinensis</i>), we performed transcriptome analysis and label-free quantification proteomic analysis of the hepatopancreas from mitten crabs fed with LA or LNA diet. Parallel reaction monitoring was used to confirm the reliability of the proteomic analysis. A total of 186 proteins were differentially expressed with fold change &#x2265;1.5 or &#x2264;0.666. Among the 186 proteins, 116 were upregulated and 70 were downregulated in the LA than LNA. Most of these proteins participate in cellular process and metabolism process and have molecular functions such as binding and catalytic activity; the cellular component of these proteins are cell, cell part, membrane, and membrane part. A total of 18 proteins were identified to be related to lipid, carbohydrate, and protein metabolism, and they mainly participate in digestive enzyme activities, fatty acid transport, and glycolysis. Our results provide new insights for further investigation into the replacement of fish oil from mitten crabs with vegetable oils and enable us to better understand the different roles and nutrition value of LA and LNA in mitten crabs.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Eriocheir sinensis, Hepatopancreas, Α-linolenic acid, Linoleic acid

### Affiliations
Shanghai Ocean University
Shanghai Ocean University, Shanghai, China

### Submitter
Zhigang Yang

### Lab Head
Dr Zhigang Yang
Shanghai Ocean University, Shanghai, China


