### Accession
PXD003403

### Title
Denaturing and native top-down venomics:  Mapping proteoforms and protein complexes from king cobra venom

### Description
Characterizing whole proteins by top-down proteomics avoids a step of inference encountered in the dominant bottom-up methodology when peptides are assembled computationally into proteins for identification. The direct interrogation of whole proteins and protein complexes from the venom of Ophiophagus hannah (king cobra) provides a sharply clarified view of toxin sequence variation, transit peptide cleavage sites and post-translational modifications (PTMs) likely critical for venom lethality. A tube-gel format for electrophoresis (called GELFrEE) and solution isoelectric focusing were used for protein fractionation prior to LC-MS/MS analysis resulting in 131 protein identifications (18 more than bottom-up) and a total of 184 proteoforms characterized from 14 protein toxin families. Operating both GELFrEE and mass spectrometry to preserve non-covalent interactions generated detailed information about two of the largest venom glycoprotein complexes: the homodimeric L-amino acid oxidase (LAAO, ~130 kDa) and the multi-chain toxin cobra venom factor (~147 kDa). The LAAO complex exhibited two clusters of multi-proteoform complexes corresponding to the presence of 5 or 6 N-glycans moieties, each consistent with a distribution of N-acetyl hexosamines. Employing top-down proteomics in both native and denaturing modes provides unprecedented characterization of venom proteoforms and their complexes. A precise molecular inventory of venom proteins will propel the study of snake toxin variation and the targeted development of new anti-venoms or other biotherapeutics.

### Sample Protocol
Venom samples. Ophiophagus hannah (king cobra) venom milked from two individuals from Malaysia was purchased from the Kentucky Reptile Zoo, and was pooled by zoo staff. Venom protein concentration was determined using the BCA protein assay kit and BSA as standard following the manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Pierce). Denaturing top-down proteomics. GELFrEE separation was performed on a GELFREE 8100 fractionation system (Expedeon) using 300 µg of venom sample on a 10% cartridge following the manufacturer’s instructions. Twelve 150 μL fractions were collected manually and precipitated with MeOH/CH3Cl/H2O to remove SDS and salts as described previously (16). Pelleted fractions were resuspended in 30 μL of buffer A (95% H2O, 5% ACN, 0.2% formic acid). In-solution isoelectric focusing (sIEF) was performed on a 1 mg sample of venom dissolved in 3 mL of 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 30 mM DTT, and 2% Biolyte 3/10 ampholytes (Biorad). The separation was performed on a MicroRotofor (BioRad) at 1 W constant power for 3 hours at 10°C. Ten fractions were collected and cleaned using homemade C-18 stage tips (34). Fractions were dried and resuspended in 50 μL of buffer A. Nano RPLC-MS/MS was performed using an Ultimate 3000 nanoRPLC (Thermo Scientific Dionex) system on an in-house packed polymeric reverse phase resin (PLRP-S, 5 μm, 1000 Å, Phenomenex) for the trap-column (2 cm x 150 μm i.d.) and analytical column (20 cm x 75 μm i.d.). Fractionated samples were separated with a 90 min. gradient while the whole venom was analyzed using a 120 min. gradient. RPLC was used in tandem with an Orbitrap Elite and a modified Q-Exactive HF (Thermo Scientific) for online MS/MS analysis. Briefly, the standard Q-Exactive quadrupole rf drive was modified in order to decrease the resonant rf frequency to 284 kHz and enable higher m/z selection up to m/z 20 000, as described (22).  MS1 (intact protein) spectra were acquired at 120,000 resolving power (at 400 m/z for the Orbitrap Elite and at 200 m/z for the Q-Exactive HF) using four µscans. Data-dependent top two MS2 (protein fragmentation) spectra were acquired using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) at 60,000 resolving power with an isolation window of 15 m/z (Orbitrap Elite) and 4 m/z (Q-Exactive HF). Bottom-up proteomics. Protein digestion. In triplicate, 100 μg of venom was resuspended in 8 M urea, 2 M thiourea, and reduced using 10 mM of DTT for 1 hour at room temperature. Cysteine residues were carboxamidomethylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min. in the dark. Samples were diluted to 1 M urea with Tris-HCL 100 mM, pH 8.2, and MS grade trypsin (Promega) was added (1:50 protease/substrate (w/w)) for overnight digestion at 37 ºC. Proteolysis was stopped by adding trifluoroacetic acid to a 1% final concentration (43). Peptides were cleaned using homemade C-18 stage tips (34) and resuspended in buffer A. LC-MS/MS. Peptides were fractionated using a Ultimate 3000 nanoRPLC (Thermo Scientific Dionex) system on an in-house packed 2 cm x 150 μm i.d. pre-column (Jupiter C18, 3 μm, 300 Å, Phenomenex), and 25 cm x 75 μm i.d. column (Jupiter C18, 3 μm, 300 Å, Phenomenex) coupled to a Q-Exactive HF (22) (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Chromatography was performed at 300 nl/min. flow rate with 95% water, 5% ACN and 0.2% formic acid (FA) as mobile phase A and 85% ACN, 15% water, and 0.2% FA as phase B. Runs were performed in optimized gradient of 120 min. (5% B per 10 min., 5-45% B over 85 min., followed by 45-90% B over 5 min., 90% B for 5 min., and 90-5% B for 5 min.). Mass spectra were acquired by Tune and Xcalibur software operating in data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode, switching between full scan MS1 (60,000 resolution at 200 m/z, 200 ms maximum injection time, AGC 1x106 ions, range 300-2,000 m/z) and MS2 (15,000 resolution at 200 m/z, 250 ms maximum injection time, AGC 1x105 ions, range 200-2,000 m/z). MS2 spectra were obtained by HCD fragmentation of the 10 most intense ions using 22 to 26 stepped normalized collision energy.

### Data Protocol
Denaturing Top-down data analysis. Intact protein mass and fragment ions were searched against protein sequences and candidate proteoforms from the suborder Serpente, including sequences, features and modifications for the king cobra (35). This was accomplished by downloading a UniprotKB flatfile on June 10, 2014 and the database for searching was created using the Database Manager application within ProSightPC v3.0 (Thermo Scientific). The resulting database was established as a ProSight Warehouse File (.pwf) and contained 331,349 candidate proteoforms. Searches were performed using an iterative, three-tiered, absolute mass search tree (2.5 Da, 200 Da, and 2000 Da intact mass tolerance), and then re-searched using a biomarker search with a 15 ppm tolerance for intact protein mass and a 10 ppm mass tolerance for fragment ions. In order to estimate the false discovery rate (FDR) for each dataset, spectra were searched against a scrambled database and their p-scores derived from a Poisson statistical model (36) were fit to a gamma distribution as described previously (16, 37). The E-values corresponding to a 5% FDR cutoff for absolute mass searches are as follows: GELFrEE, 1.1x10-6; whole venom, 1.7x10-6; sIEF 2.7x10-6. Due to the differences in the search space covered by biomarker (“no enzyme”) searches, the E-values corresponding to a 5% instantaneous FDR (a.k.a. q-values) for those were generated separately and were: 1.2x10-10 for denaturing GELFrEE, 2.6x10-11 for LC-MS of whole venom and 1.7x10-8 for sIEF. Relative protein abundance was quantified by summing ion abundance measurements using in-house protein software built and reported for label-free quantitation (38). All raw data files associated with this study are available at ftp://MSV000079351@massive.ucsd.edu, and all 184 identified proteoforms will be assigned unique PRF identifiers, deposited in the Consortium for Top Down Proteomics Proteoform Repository (http://repository.topdownproteomics.org/) and made available upon publication. They can also be viewed in Table S4, the Excel file entitled, “Supplemental_TableS4.xlsx”. Bottom-up data analysis. Peptide searches were performed using ProLuCID v1.3 search engine (44) against just the canonical protein sequences in the Serpente database, including the O. hannah genome data, downloaded from UniprotKB on June 10, 2014, totaling 49,360 entries. Carboxamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine was set as a variable modification. Only full tryptic peptides were considered with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Mass tolerances for MS1 and MS2 were set at 70 and 550 ppm, respectively. XCorr was determinate as a primary score, and DeltaCN was used as a secondary one. Resultant peptides were processed and evaluated by Search Engine Processor (SEPro) v3.2.0.2 using the following filter parameters: 10 ppm deviation from theoretical peptide precursor, peptides longer than six amino acid residues, and a 1% estimated protein-level FDR (45). Label free protein quantitation was performed according to the normalized spectral abundance factor (NSAF) (46).

### Publication Abstract
Characterizing whole proteins by top-down proteomics avoids a step of inference encountered in the dominant bottom-up methodology when peptides are assembled computationally into proteins for identification. The direct interrogation of whole proteins and protein complexes from the venom of Ophiophagus hannah (king cobra) provides a sharply clarified view of toxin sequence variation, transit peptide cleavage sites and post-translational modifications (PTMs) likely critical for venom lethality. A tube-gel format for electrophoresis (called GELFrEE) and solution isoelectric focusing were used for protein fractionation prior to LC-MS/MS analysis resulting in 131 protein identifications (18 more than bottom-up) and a total of 184 proteoforms characterized from 14 protein toxin families. Operating both GELFrEE and mass spectrometry to preserve non-covalent interactions generated detailed information about two of the largest venom glycoprotein complexes: the homodimeric l-amino acid oxidase (&#x223c;130 kDa) and the multichain toxin cobra venom factor (&#x223c;147 kDa). The l-amino acid oxidase complex exhibited two clusters of multiproteoform complexes corresponding to the presence of 5 or 6 N-glycans moieties, each consistent with a distribution of N-acetyl hexosamines. Employing top-down proteomics in both native and denaturing modes provides unprecedented characterization of venom proteoforms and their complexes. A precise molecular inventory of venom proteins will propel the study of snake toxin variation and the targeted development of new antivenoms or other biotherapeutics.

### Keywords
King cobra venom, Native mass spectrometry, Top-down proteomics, Proteoforms, Protein complexes

### Affiliations
Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro
Institute of Chemistry, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro Av Athos da Silveira Ramos, 149, CT- A-542, Cidade Universitária 21941-909 Rio de Janeiro, RJ Brazil

### Submitter
RAFAEL MELANI

### Lab Head
Dr Gilberto B Domont
Institute of Chemistry, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro Av Athos da Silveira Ramos, 149, CT- A-542, Cidade Universitária 21941-909 Rio de Janeiro, RJ Brazil


