### Accession
PXD022202

### Title
Mannose and mannobiose specific responses of insect associated cellulolytic Streptomyces.

### Description
The cellulolytic insect symbiont bacterium, Streptomyces sp. SirexAA-E (SirexAA-E), is known to secrete a suite of Carbohydrate Active enZymes (CAZymes) for plant cell wall degradation in response to the available carbon sources. In this study, we sought to examine a poorly understood response of this bacterium to mannan, one of the major components of the plant cell wall, particularly in pine trees, the preferred host for SirexAA-E. SirexAA-E grew well on glucose, mannose, carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC), and locust bean gum (LBG) as sole carbon sources in the culture medium. The secreted proteins from each culture supernatant were tested for the polysaccharide-degrading ability, and the composition of secreted CAZymes in each culture supernatant were determined by LC-MS/MS. The results indicated that mannose, LBG, and CMC induced the secretion of mannan and cellulose-degrading enzymes. We found two α-1,2-mannosidases that were secreted during growth on mannose and LBG. By genomic analysis, we found a unique 12 bp palindromic sequence motif (5’-GACAACGTTGTC-3’) at 4 locations in the SirexAA-E genome, two of which were found upstream of genes encoding the above-mentioned α-1,2-mannosidases, along with a newly identified novel mannose and mannobiose responsive transcriptional regulator, SsManR. Furthermore, a transcriptional repressor that we previously showed was responsive to cellobiose, SsCebR, was determined to also use mannobiose as an effector ligand by in vitro binding assays. To test whether mannobiose induces the sets of genes under control of the two regulators, SsManR and SsCebR, SirexAA-E was grown on mannobiose, and the secretome composition was analyzed. As hypothesized, the composition of the mannobiose secretome combined sets of CAZymes found in both LBG and CMC secretomes, and so are likely under the regulation of both SsManR and SsCebR. To summarize, our findings support a transcriptional network that regulates mannose and LBG utilizing genes in SirexAA-E. Overall, this study defines a novel mannose regulatory transcriptional network that enables SirexAA-E to aggressively hydrolyze mannan-containing wood materials.

### Sample Protocol
30 μg equivalent of protein from the culture supernatant from each culture was precipitated by adding 25% (v/v) trichloroacetic acid (TCA), then washed two times with ice-cold acetone, and suspended in 8 M urea. Solubilized samples were diluted to 1 M urea by adding 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate followed by a reduction with 50 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 50˚C, and alkylation with 500 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark at 25˚C. Tryptic digestion was carried out for 10 h at 37˚C by using a 1:100 trypsin/secretome ratio (proteomic grade; Roche, Mannheim, Germany), and peptides were purified by using C18 ziptip pipette tips (Millipore, Ireland). Mass spectra were obtained using an Easy nLC1000 liquid chromatography system with Q-exactive plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, IL, USA), and Xcalibur software (ver. 3.1, Thermo Fisher Scientific, IL). The peptides were separated on a C18 capillary tip column (NTCC-360/75-3-125, Nikkyo Techno, Japan) by linear gradient from 5 to 30 % in 120 min in 0.1 % formic acid in acetonitrile. Full scan mass spectra were obtained in the Orbitrap with a scan range of 300.0 to 2,000.0 m/z with a resolution of 70,000.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified from the acquired MS/MS spectra using Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, IL) with all CDSs of S. sp. SirexAA-E. The peptide mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm, and fragment mass tolerance was set at 0.8 Dalton. The peptide charge was set at +2, +3 and +4. The accuracy and sensitivity of peptide identification was optimized using the automatic decoy and percolator functions built into the Proteome Discoverer software.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cellulose utilization, Glycoside hydrolases, Proteomics analysis, Transcriptional regulation, Streptomyces sp. sirexaa-e

### Affiliations
Research Faculty of Agriculture, Hokkaido University, Sapporo, 060-8589, Japan
Research Faculty of Agriculture, Hokkaido University

### Submitter
Taichi E. Takasuka

### Lab Head
Dr Taichi E Takasuka
Research Faculty of Agriculture, Hokkaido University, Sapporo, 060-8589, Japan


