### Accession
PXD015149

### Title
Mass spectrometry detection of photodamage in human extracellular matrix assemblies

### Description
Photoageing in skin is commonly recognised by architectural remodelling of dermal extracellular matrix components. Mass spectrometry was previously used to identify tissue-specific patterns of fibrillin-1 and collagen VI peptide spectrum matches (PXD008450). This study aimed to determine if the same mass spectrometry-based approach could detect peptide spectrum match patterns and significantly differences in relative abundance of peptide sequences characteristic of damage following exposure to UVR of co-purified suspensions of fibrillin and collagen VI microfibrils. Human dermal fibroblast-derived suspensions of microfibrils were irradiated with either broadband UVB or solar simulated radiation (SSR). UVR-induced molecular damage was characterised by proteolytic peptide generation with elastase followed by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). This allowed the molecular scale identification of UV-induced structural changes within two skin matrix assemblies. The proteomic approaches used have the potential to facilitate the rapid, protein-specific identification of differential molecular fingerprints of damage in key extracellular matrix proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Fibrillin and collagen VI microfibrils were extracted and purified from cultured primary human dermal fibroblasts (N=3; M79 [male aged 79 years], M75 and F75). Matched samples were split into three; one group was irradiated with a 30 J/cm2 dose of SSR (95% UVA, 5% UVB), another with a 0.1 J/cm2 of broadband UVB, and the third was kept as control (un-irradiated). Samples were then desalted, frozen at -80°C and subsequently freeze-dried. Freeze dried microfibril purifications were re-suspended and denatured, reduced and alkylated prior to digestion with porcine elastase. Vacuum dried peptide samples were analysed via LC-MS/MS using an UltiMate® 3000 Rapid Separation LC (Dionex Corp; Sunnyvale, CA, USA) and an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), run for 60 minutes. Peptides were automatically picked for fragmentation via data-dependent analysis.

### Data Protocol
Mascot v2.5.1 (Matrix Science; London, UK) was used to correlate the spectra against the Swissprot_2016_04 database with the following search parameters: species - Homo sapiens; enzyme – non-specific (elastase); max missed cleavages – 1; fixed modifications - carbamidomethyl, mass – 57.02 Da, AA – C; variable modification – oxidation, mass – 15.99 Da, AA – M; peptide tolerance - 10 ppm (monoisotopic); fragment tolerance - 0.6 Da (monoisotopic). The PSMs reported were generated using Scaffold (Proteome Software; Portland, OR, USA). Only exclusive, unique peptide counts are reported for every dataset. FDR was calculated by Scaffold using protein and peptide probabilities assigned using the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline and the Peptide Prophet™ algorithm (Sourceforge; Seattle. WA, USA). Peptide Prophet FDR was thresholded to ≤ 5% for every dataset. Data-dependent peptide quantification was performed using Progenesis QI (Nonlinear Dynamics, Waters; Newcastle, UK). Raw mass spectra files were imported and aligned using default settings. Data was then searched using Mascot v2.5.1 with same search parameters and on the same database as described earlier. This was then re-imported back into Progenesis QI where identified peptides and proteins were automatically matched. Normalised peptide abundances were compared between matched samples (control vs. broadband UVB and control vs SSR) and a fold change for each peptide calculated automatically. Normalised peptide abundances compared between matched samples were statistically analysed within Progenesis QI using a paired ANOVA.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Microfibrils, Lc-ms/ms, Collagen vi, Fibrillin, Ultraviolet, Ecm

### Affiliations
University of Manchester
Division of Cell Matrix Biology & Regenerative Medicine, School of Biological Sciences, Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, The University of Manchester, Manchester, UK

### Submitter
Alexander Eckersley

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Sherratt
Division of Cell Matrix Biology & Regenerative Medicine, School of Biological Sciences, Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, The University of Manchester, Manchester, UK


