### Accession
PXD018315

### Title
Identification of proteins that interact with the lncRNA Sarrah

### Description
Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) contribute to (patho)physiological processes in the heart. Aging is the major risk factor for cardiovascular disease. Apoptosis of individual cardiomyocytes is one of the underlying causes for age-related cardiac dysfunction. Here, we identified the lncRNA Sarrah that is regulated during aging in cardiomyocytes and show that it has a protective effect on the myocardium. We used an RNA pulldown approach to identify proteins interacting with endogenous Sarrah to determine the mechanism by which Sarrah induces a cardioprotective gene expression pattern.

### Sample Protocol
Boiled samples were supplemented with 1mM DTT and 0.25 volume of SDS-Samplebuffer (12% SDS (wt/vol), 30% glycerol (wt/vol), 0.05% Coomassie blue G-250 (Serva), 150 mM Tris/HCl (pH 7.0)). Proteins were speparated by Bis-Tris SDS-PAGE (4-12% gradient gel, Novex, Life technologies) in a short run <2cm. SDS gels were fixed in 50% (v/v) methanol, 10% (v/v) acetic acid, 10 mM ammonium acetate for 30 min and stained with Coomassie (0.025% Serva Blue G, 10% (v/v) acetic acid).  Each lane was cut into four equal fractions and collected in 96 filter well plates (30-40 µm PP/PE, Pall Corporation). The gel pieces were destained in 60% Methanol, 50 mM ammoniumbicarbonate (ABC). Solutions were removed by centrifugation for 2 min at 600×g. Proteins were reduced in 10 mM DTT, 50 mM ABC for one hour at 56 °C and alkylated for 45 min in 30 mM iodoacetamid. Samples were digested for 16 hours with trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega) at 37°C in 50 mM ABC, 0.01% Protease Max (Promega) and 1 mM CaCl2. Peptides were eluted in 30% acetonitrile and 3% formic acid, centrifuged into a fresh 96 well plate, dried in speed vac and resolved in 1% acetonitrile and 0.5% formic acid. Liquid chromatography / mass spectrometry (LC/MS) was performed on Thermo Scientific™ Q Exactive Plus equipped with an ultra-high performance liquid chromatography unit (Thermo Scientific Dionex Ultimate 3000) and a Nanospray Flex Ion-Source (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded on a C18 reversed-phase precolumn (Thermo Scientific) followed by separation on a with 2.4 µm Reprosil C18 resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH) in-house packed picotip emitter tip (diameter 100 µm, 15 cm from New Objectives) using a gradient from 4% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid to 50 %  eluent B (99% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) for 30 min with a flow rate 400 nl/min and washout with 99% B for 5 min.  MS data were recorded by data dependent acquisition. The full MS scan range was 300 to 2000 m/z with resolution of 70000, and an automatic gain control (AGC) value of 3*10E6 total ion counts with a maximal ion injection time of 160 ms. Only higher charged ions (2+) were selected for MS/MS scans with a resolution of 17500, an isolation window of 2 m/z and an automatic gain control value set to 10E5 ions with a maximal ion injection time of 150 ms. MS1 Data were acquired in profile mode.seconds.

### Data Protocol
For data analysis MaxQuant 1.6.1.0 (Cox and Mann, 2008), Perseus 1.6.1.3 (Tyranova et al 2016) and Excel (Microsoft Office 2013) were used. N-terminal acetylation (+42.01) and oxidation of methionine (+15.99) were selected as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation (+57.02) on cysteines as a fixed modification. The mouse reference proteome set (Uniprot, February 2018, 52538 entries) was used to identify peptides and proteins with a false discovery rate (FDR) less than 1%. Minimal ratio count for label-free quantification (LFQ) was 1. Reverse identifications and common contaminants were removed. Proteins were filtered to be at least identified 4 times in one experimental group.  Missing values were replaced by half of the lowest value. Significant interacting proteins were determined by student´s t-Test.  Cox, J. & Mann, M. MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat. Biotechnol. 26, 1367–1372 (2008). Tyanova, S. et al. The Perseus computational platform for comprehensive analysis of (prote)omics data. Nat Methods. 13, (2016).

### Publication Abstract
Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) contribute to cardiac (patho)physiology. Aging is the major risk factor for cardiovascular disease with cardiomyocyte apoptosis as one underlying cause. Here, we report the identification of the aging-regulated lncRNA Sarrah (ENSMUST00000140003) that is anti-apoptotic in cardiomyocytes. Importantly, loss of SARRAH (OXCT1-AS1) in human engineered heart tissue results in impaired contractile force development. SARRAH directly binds to the promoters of genes downregulated after SARRAH silencing via RNA-DNA triple helix formation and cardiomyocytes lacking the triple helix&#xa0;forming domain of Sarrah show an increase in apoptosis. One of the direct SARRAH targets is NRF2, and restoration of NRF2 levels after SARRAH silencing partially rescues the reduction in cell viability. Overexpression of Sarrah in mice shows better recovery of cardiac contractile function after AMI compared to control mice. In summary, we identified the anti-apoptotic evolutionary conserved lncRNA Sarrah, which is downregulated by aging, as a regulator of cardiomyocyte survival.

### Keywords
Rna/protein interaction

### Affiliations
Functional Proteomics, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main , Germany
Institute for Cardiovascular Regeneration, Centre for Molecular Medicine, Goethe University Frankfurt am Main, Germany

### Submitter
Ilka Wittig

### Lab Head
Dr Reinier Boon
Institute for Cardiovascular Regeneration, Centre for Molecular Medicine, Goethe University Frankfurt am Main, Germany


