### Accession
PXD008648

### Title
Activation of neuronal genes via LINE-1 elements upon global DNA demethylation in human neural progenitors

### Description
DNA methylation is an important epigenetic modification that is thought to contribute to the maintenance of genomic integrity in somatic cells, in part through the silencing of transposable elements (TEs). In this study we used CRISPR/Cas9 mediated gene editing to disrupt DNMT1, the key maintenance methyltransferase in somatic human cells. Surprisingly, and in contrast to findings in mouse, inactivation of DNMT1 in human neural progenitor cells (hNPCs) resulted in viable proliferating cells that maintained the expression of appropriate marker genes. Removal of DNA methylation in hNPCs resulted in a specific activation of hominid-specific LINE-1 elements (L1s), while other classes of TEs remained silent. We also found that the transcriptionally activated L1s acted as alternative promoters for many protein-coding genes involved in neuronal functions, uncovering an L1-based transcriptional network influencing neuronal protein-coding genes. Our results prove novel mechanistic insight into the role of DNA methylation in somatic human cells.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were sorted on day 10 and frozen at -80°C. lysis of cells, proteins were reduced/alkylated and digested with trypsin (Promega). Protein digests were differentially dimethyl labeled on column as previously described (Boersema et al., 2009). Briefly, samples were labeled by flushing the columns with labeling reagent (light or heavy using CH2O (Sigma-Aldrich) + NaBH3CN (Sigma-Aldrich) or CD2O (Sigma-Aldrich) + NaBH3CN (Sigma-Aldrich), respectively). Labeling scheme was as follows: LacZ 1: Light; LacZ 2: Heavy; LacZ 3: Light; DNMT1-KO 1: Heavy; DNMT1-KO 2: Light; DNMT1-KO 3: Heavy. Sample complexity was reduced by fractionation using OFFGEL isoelectric focusing (Agilent). The 12 fractions resolved were acidified and desalted with C18 Ultra-Micro SpinColumns (Harvard). Peptide samples were dried by vacuum centrifugation and stored at - 20C until further use. Samples were reconstituted in 4% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid prior to MS analysis.  MS analyses were carried out on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid MS system (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a Proxeon Easy-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher). Injected peptides were trapped on an Acclaim PepMap C18 column (3 μm particle size, 75 μm inner diameter x 20 mm length, nanoViper fitting). After trapping, gradient elution of peptides was performed on an Acclaim PepMap C18 100 Å column (3 μm particle size, 75 μm inner diameter x 150 mm length, nanoViper fitting). The mobile phases for LC separation were 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in LC-MS grade water (solvent A) and 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in acetonitrile (solvent B). Peptides were first loaded with a constant flow of solvent A at 9 μl/min onto the trapping column. Subsequently, peptides were eluted via the analytical column at a constant flow of 600 nl/min. During the elution step, the percentage of solvent B increased in a linear fashion from 5% to 10% in 2 minutes, then increased to 25% in 85 minutes and finally to 60% in a further 20 minutes. The peptides were introduced into the mass spectrometer via a Stainless Steel Nano-bore emitter 150 μm OD x 30 μm ID; 40 mm length (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a spray voltage of 2.0 kV was applied. The capillary temperature was set at 275 °C. One full scan spectrum from m/z 375 to 1500 at resolution 60,000 FWHM was followed by MS/MS scans (resolution 15,000 FWHM) of the most intense ions (up to 15) from the full scan MS. The precursor ions were isolated with 1.6 m/z isolation width and fragmented using higher- energy collisional-induced dissociation at a normalized collision energy of 30%. The dynamic exclusion time was set to 30 s. The automatic gain control was set to 4e5 and 5e4 for MS and MS/MS, respectively, and ion accumulation times of 50 ms (MS) and 60 ms (MS/MS). The intensity threshold for precursor ion selection was 5e4.

### Data Protocol
MS raw data files were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.0.0) (Cox and Mann, 2008). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin/P and a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Cysteine carbamidomethylation and methionine oxidation were selected as fixed and variable modifications, respectively. The derived peak list was searched using the in-built Andromeda search engine in MaxQuant against the Uniprot human database together with the Cas9 and GFP genes used in this study, as well as 265 frequently observed contaminants (Andromeda configured database) and reversed sequences of all entries. Initial maximal allowed mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for peptide masses, followed by 6 ppm in the main search, and 20 ppm for fragment ion masses. The minimum peptide length was set to seven amino acid residues. A 1% false discovery rate (FDR) was required at both the protein level and the peptide level. In addition to the FDR threshold, proteins were considered identified if they had at least one unique peptide. The protein identification was reported as an indistinguishable “protein group” if no unique peptide sequence to a single database entry was identified. The ‘match between runs’ was enabled for consecutive peptide fractions with a 1.5 minutes time window. Ratio count 1 was used. Contaminants, reverse hits and “hits-only-identified-by-site” were excluded. The iBAQ algorithm was used for estimation of the abundance of different proteins within a single sample (proteome) (Schwanhausser et al., 2011).

### Publication Abstract
DNA methylation contributes to the maintenance of genomic integrity in somatic cells, in part through the silencing of transposable elements. In this study, we use CRISPR-Cas9 technology to delete DNMT1, the DNA methyltransferase key for DNA methylation maintenance, in human neural progenitor cells (hNPCs). We observe that inactivation of DNMT1 in hNPCs results in viable, proliferating cells despite a global loss of DNA CpG-methylation. DNA demethylation leads to specific transcriptional activation and chromatin remodeling of evolutionarily young, hominoid-specific LINE-1 elements (L1s), while older L1s and other classes of transposable elements remain silent. The activated L1s act as alternative promoters for many protein-coding genes involved in neuronal functions, revealing a hominoid-specific L1-based transcriptional network controlled by DNA methylation that influences neuronal protein-coding genes. Our results provide mechanistic insight into the role of DNA methylation in silencing transposable elements in somatic human cells, as well as further implicating L1s in human brain development and disease.

### Keywords
Human, Dnmt1, Lc-msms

### Affiliations
Lund Stem Cell Center, Division of Molecular Hematology, Lund University, Lund, Sweden
Lund University

### Submitter
Jenny Hansson

### Lab Head
Dr Jenny Hansson
Lund Stem Cell Center, Division of Molecular Hematology, Lund University, Lund, Sweden


