### Accession
PXD011004

### Title
Map of the Kir2.1 interactome using BioID

### Description
Kir2.1, an inward rectifier potassium channel, plays an important role in controlling membrane potential specially in cardiomyocytes. Here we explore its interactome via proximity biotin labeling and affinity purification approach (BioID). First, BioID membrane controls were generated with randomly selected transmembrane domains from yeast proteins, demonstrating the identification of membrane-associated proteins more than GFP or NLS controls. Using this control and a mutation from Andersen-Tawil syndrome which causes Kir2.1 Golgi accumulation, we have identified the most comprehensive Kir2.1 interactome and also found clues to its spatial information in subcellular levels. The interactome is showing that Kir2.1 in plasma membrane is surrounded by desmosome, integrin, cadherin and dystrophin-glycoprotein complex complexes, and supported by MAGUK family scaffold proteins. On the other hand, Kir2.1 mutant BioID revealed the COPII-mediated delivery of Kir2.1 from ER to Golgi and lysosome-mediated degradation of Golgi-accumulated and/or retrograde Kir2.1. Validating the interactome with co-immunoprecipitation, confocal microscope, and patch clamp analysis, we concluded that Kir2.1 is located in the defined membrane environment and is actively regulated by endosomal sorting for lysosome degradation.

### Sample Protocol
BioID protein purification followed the previous method (Couzens et al. 2013) with some minor modification. Cells were incubated for 24h in complete media supplemented with 10 µg/mL tetracycline and 50 µM biotin. After washing with cold PBS, cells (3 X 107) were lysed for 30 min at 4oC with lysis buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.2, 150 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol, 1% NP40, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 0.2% SDS, protease inhibitor (Roche, 05 056 489 001), phosphatase inhibitor (Sigma, P0044), and Benzonase (Sigma, E1014)). The cleared cell lysates were incubated with 30 μL of streptavidin bead slurry (Thermo, 20361) for 3 h at 4oC. The beads were washed with washing buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.2, 150 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol, 1% NP40, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 0.2% SDS) four times and then rinse buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.2, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5% NP40) three times. The beads were washed with fresh 50 mM NH4HCO3 three times and stored at - 80oC. The beads were resuspended in 0.1 M NH4HCO3 and proteins were digested overnight with 1 µg of Trypsin. Peptides were reduced with 10 mM DTT in 0.1 M NH4HCO3 at 45°C for 30 min and alkylated with 50 mM 2-chloroacetamide in 0.1 M NH4HCO3 at 27°C for 30 min in the dark. Peptides were acidified with TFA and desalted using C18 Sep-Pak Light column. First the columns were washed with 50% ACN and 0.1% TFA. After peptide loading, the columns were washed with 0.1% TFA. Peptides were eluted with 0.1% TFA in 50% ACN and stored at - 80oC in dried condition. Peptides were resolved on a nano-capillary reverse phase column (PicoFrit column, New Objective®) using a 5-50% acetonitrile gradient at 300 nL/min and directly introduced into a mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometry). Data-dependent MS/MS spectra on the five most intense ions from each full MS scan were collected (relative collision energy ∼35%).

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified by searching the data against Swiss-Prot human database (January 9th 2013) appended with decoy (reverse) sequences using the Proteome Discoverer (Thermo Scientific). All peptides and proteins with a probability score of >0.8 (false discovery rate <2% estimated using a target-decoy strategy) were considered positive identifications.

### Publication Abstract
Kir2.1, a strong inward rectifier potassium channel encoded by the <i>KCNJ2</i> gene, is a key regulator of the resting membrane potential of the cardiomyocyte and plays an important role in controlling ventricular excitation and action potential duration in the human heart. Mutations in <i>KCNJ2</i> result in inheritable cardiac diseases in humans, <i>e.g.</i> the type-1 Andersen-Tawil syndrome (ATS1). Understanding the molecular mechanisms that govern the regulation of inward rectifier potassium currents by Kir2.1 in both normal and disease contexts should help uncover novel targets for therapeutic intervention in ATS1 and other Kir2.1-associated channelopathies. The information available to date on protein-protein interactions involving Kir2.1 channels remains limited. Additional efforts are necessary to provide a comprehensive map of the Kir2.1 interactome. Here we describe the generation of a comprehensive map of the Kir2.1 interactome using the proximity-labeling approach BioID. Most of the 218 high-confidence Kir2.1 channel interactions we identified are novel and encompass various molecular mechanisms of Kir2.1 function, ranging from intracellular trafficking to cross-talk with the insulin-like growth factor receptor signaling pathway, as well as lysosomal degradation. Our map also explores the variations in the interactome profiles of Kir2.1<sup>WT</sup><i>versus</i> Kir2.1<sup>&#x394;314-315</sup>, a trafficking deficient ATS1 mutant, thus uncovering molecular mechanisms whose malfunctions may underlie ATS1 disease. Finally, using patch-clamp analysis, we validate the functional relevance of PKP4, one of our top BioID interactors, to the modulation of Kir2.1-controlled inward rectifier potassium currents. Our results validate the power of our BioID approach in identifying functionally relevant Kir2.1 interactors and underline the value of our Kir2.1 interactome as a repository for numerous novel biological hypotheses on Kir2.1 and Kir2.1-associated diseases.

### Keywords
Bioid, Ats, Kir2.1

### Affiliations
Department of Pathology, University of Michigan Medical School
University of Michigan Medical School, Department of Pathology

### Submitter
Jean-Francois Rual

### Lab Head
Dr Jean-Francois Rual
Department of Pathology, University of Michigan Medical School


