### Accession
PXD013252

### Title
High productivity in hybrid-poplar trees without isoprene emission to the atmosphere

### Description
The use of hybrid-poplar tree plantations as a source for biofuels and biomass production in temperate regions of the Northern Hemisphere has also, unintentionally, increased forest isoprene emissions to the atmosphere. The consequences of increased isoprene emissions include higher rates of tropospheric ozone production and increases in atmospheric aerosol production. Using RNA interference (RNAi) to suppress isoprene emission in several gene insertion events of hybrid-poplars, we show that this trait, which has been assumed as a requisite for the tolerance of abiotic stress, is not required for high rates of woody biomass production, even in extremely hot and dry climates. Biomass production over four years in experimental poplar plantations in Arizona and Oregon was similar among genetic lines that emitted or did not emit significant amounts of isoprene. Lines that had substantially reduced isoprene emission rates also showed decreases in flavonol pigments, which reduce oxidative damage during extremes of abiotic stress; a pattern that would be expected to amplify metabolic dysfunction during abiotic stress. Compensatory increases in the expression of other proteomic components, however, such as those that disable superoxide and other free radicals, and the fact that most biomass is produced during the spring, prior to the hottest and driest part of the growing season, explains the apparent paradox of high biomass production with low isoprene emission. The results of this study provide optimism for designing agroforest plantations of the future that provide high rates of lignocellulose production while eliminating detrimental effects of isoprene emission on atmospheric quality.

### Sample Protocol
One fully developed leaf was from each tree (# 12) per genotype (# 4) on July 3rd 2013 at the Arizona plantation, and immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen prior to dawn (0415-0530) and at noon (1200-1400 h). From each genotype frozen leaves were homogenized and 50 mg leaf powder of 3 plants was pooled for analysis, resulting in 4 replicates per genotype and harvesting time point. Twenty milligrams of each sample was washed twice in1 mL MeOH/Chloroform (1:1) (to remove chlorophyll). The pellet was re-suspended in 0.5 ml buffer (10 ml 0.5 M Sodium phosphate, pH 7.5; 5 ml 10% sodium dodecyl sulfate -SDS; 5 ml glycerol, 2.5 ml Mercapto, and 27.5 ml H2O) and 5 minutes at 35°C incubated (on a shaker) before(14,000 g for 10 min). The supernatant was used for proteomic analysis. Protein content was determined using a 2D Quant Kit (GE Healthcare, D). Each 10µg per sample were subjected to filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) (Wisniewski JR et al Nature Methods 2009). LC-MSMS analysis of each individual sample was performed on a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) online coupled to an Ultimate 3000 nano-RSLC (Dionex). Tryptic peptides were separated over 85 minutes in a non-linear acetonitrile gradient on a C18 analytical column (nanoEase MZ HSS T3 Column, 100Å, 1.8 µm, 75 µm x 250 mm, Waters). Precursor and TOP10 fragment spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap mass detector at 60000 or 15000 resolution respectively with maximum injection times of 50ms.

### Data Protocol
Generated raw-files containing all acquired spectra were loaded to the Progenesis QI for proteomics software (v3.0, Nonlinear Dynamics Ltd, part of Waters, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK) for, label-free quantification and analyzed as previously described49,50. Features of only one charge or features with more than seven charges were excluded. The raw abundances of the remaining features were normalized to allow for the correction of factors resulting from experimental variation. All MS/MS spectra were exported as MASCOT generic file and used for identification by Mascot search engine (v 2.5.1, Matrix Science, London, UK) in a Populus trichocarpa protein database (v3, 30197159 residues; 73016 sequences). The search parameters were 10 ppm peptide mass and 0.02 Da MS/MS tolerance, one missed cleavage allowed. For the identification and quantification of the leaf proteins, carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation and deamination of asparagine/glutamine as variable modification. A MASCOT-integrated decoy database search calculated a FDR of 0.45%, applying the MASCOT Percolator algorithm to distinguish between correct and incorrect spectrum identifications51. The peptide assignments were re-imported into the Progenesis QI software. After summing up the abundances of all unique peptides that were allocated to each protein, the identification and quantification results were exported.

### Publication Abstract
Hybrid-poplar tree plantations provide a source for biofuel and biomass, but they also increase forest isoprene emissions. The consequences of increased isoprene emissions include higher rates of tropospheric ozone production, increases in the lifetime of methane, and increases in atmospheric aerosol production, all of which affect the global energy budget and/or lead to the degradation of air quality. Using RNA interference (RNAi) to suppress isoprene emission, we show that this trait, which is thought to be required for the tolerance of abiotic stress, is not required for high rates of photosynthesis and woody biomass production in the agroforest plantation environment, even in areas with high levels of climatic stress. Biomass production over 4 y in plantations in Arizona and Oregon was similar among genetic lines that emitted or did not emit significant amounts of isoprene. Lines that had substantially reduced isoprene emission rates also showed decreases in flavonol pigments, which reduce oxidative damage during extremes of abiotic stress, a pattern that would be expected to amplify metabolic dysfunction in the absence of isoprene production in stress-prone climate regimes. However, compensatory increases in the expression of other proteomic components, especially those associated with the production of protective compounds, such as carotenoids and terpenoids, and the fact that most biomass is produced prior to the hottest and driest part of the growing season explain the observed pattern of high biomass production with low isoprene emission. Our results show that it is possible to reduce the deleterious influences of isoprene on the atmosphere, while sustaining woody biomass production in temperate agroforest plantations.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Poplar, Isoprene

### Affiliations
Research Unit Environmental Simulation, Institute of Biochemical Plant Pathology, Helmholtz Zentrum München, 85764 Neuherberg, Germany
Research Unit Protein Science, Helmholtz Center Munich

### Submitter
Juliane Merl-Pham

### Lab Head
Dr Jörg-Peter Schnitzler
Research Unit Environmental Simulation, Institute of Biochemical Plant Pathology, Helmholtz Zentrum München, 85764 Neuherberg, Germany


