### Accession
PXD017309

### Title
Quantitative Proteomics to identify nuclear RNA-binding proteins of Malat1

### Description
The long non-coding RNA Malat1 has been implicated in several human cancers, while the mechanism of action is not completely understood. As RNAs in cells function in the context of RBPs identification of their RNA-binding proteins can shed light on their functionality. We here performed quantitative interactomics of 14 non-overlapping fragments covering the full length of Malat1 to identify possible nuclear interacting proteins. Overall, we identified 35 candidates including 14 already known binders, which are able to interact with Malat1 in the nucleus. Furthermore, the use of fragments along the full-length RNA allowed us to reveal two hotspots for protein binding, one in the 5’-region and one in the 3’-region of Malat1. Our results provide confirmation on previous RNA-protein interaction studies and suggest new candidates for functional investigations.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were separated on a 4–12% NuPAGE Novex Bis‐Tris precast gel (Thermo Scientific) for 8 min at 180 V in 1x MES buffer (Thermo Scientific). After protein fixation and coomassie blue staining for protein detection, gels (one slice per sample) were mince and destained in 50% EtOH/25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) followed by dehydration in 100% acetonitrile (ACN). Afterwards a reduction reaction was performed by incubating samples for 1h in 10 mM DTT, 50 mM ABC at 56°C followed by an alkylation reaction in alkylation buffer (50 mM iodoacetamide [Sigma Aldrich] in 50 mM ABC) for 45 min at room temperature in the dark. Gel slices were washed with 50 mM TEAB buffer pH 8.0 and dehydrated again with ACN. Dried gel pieces were subsequently incubated over night with trypsin solution (1 μg trypsin [Sigma Aldrich] in 50mM TEAB per sample) at 37°C. Tryptic peptides were extracted twice with 30% ACN and three times with pure ACN. The mixture with the extracted peptides was concentrated in a speed-vac (Eppendorf) to a final volume of ca. 100 µl. Dimethyl labeling was performed as described (Hsu et al., 2003; Boersema et al., 2009). Peptides were either incubated with formaldehyde (Sigma Aldrich) and NaBH3CN (Sigma Aldrich) leading to a 28 Da mass-tag (light labeled fraction) or with formaldehyde-d2 (Sigma Aldrich) and NaBH3CN resulting in a 32 Da mass-tag (heavy labeled fraction). Heavy labeled peptides from pulldowns with Malat1 fragments were mixed with light-labeled peptides from the control RNA pulldown (forward experiment) and vice versa (reverse experiment). Peptides were desalted on StageTips [37] and separated on a capillary (New Objective) packed with Reprosil C18 (Dr. Maisch GmbH). The column was attached to an Easy nLC 1000 system (Thermo) operated with a gradient from 5% to 60% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid at a flow of 225 nl/min. The spray capillary was mounted on the nanospray ion source of a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo). Measurements were using HCD fragmentation with a data-dependent Top10 MS/MS spectra acquisition scheme per MS full scan in the Orbitrap analyzer.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8) and searched against the mouse UniProt database (54,220 entries). MaxQuant standard settings were used, except dimethyl labels (Lys0, Nter0, Lys4 and Nter4) were defined.   Contaminants, reverse database hits, protein groups only identified by site and protein groups with less than 2 peptides (at least one of them classified as unique) were removed by filtering from the proteinGroups file. Missing values were imputed by shifting a compressed normal distribution obtained from the LFQ intensity values to the limit of quantitation. The two-dimensional interactions plots were generated from the filtered MaxQuant proteinGroups output file using in-house R scripts

### Publication Abstract
The long non-coding RNA Malat1 has been implicated in several human cancers, while the mechanism of action is not completely understood. As RNAs in cells function together with RNA-binding proteins (RBPs), the composition of their RBP complex can shed light on their functionality. We here performed quantitative interactomics of 14 non-overlapping fragments covering the full length of Malat1 to identify possible nuclear interacting proteins. Overall, we identified 35 candidates including 14 already known binders, which are able to interact with Malat1 in the nucleus. Furthermore, the use of fragments along the full-length RNA allowed us to reveal two hotspots for protein binding, one in the 5'-region and one in the 3'-region of Malat1. Our results provide confirmation on previous RNA-protein interaction studies and suggest new candidates for functional investigations.

### Keywords
Malat1; lncrna; rbps; interactome

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB) Ackermannweg 4 55128 Mainz
Quantitative Proteomics
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB)

### Submitter
F Butter

### Lab Head
Dr Falk Butter
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB) Ackermannweg 4 55128 Mainz


