### Accession
PXD036394

### Title
LncRNA-Smad7 mediates cross-talk between Nodal/TGF-β and BMP signaling to regulate cell fate determination of pluripotent and multipotent cells

### Description
LC-MS/MS combined with the ChIRP for the mESCs of WT and lncRNA-Smad7 KO

### Sample Protocol
Mass spectrometry was performed followed ChIRP experiment. Equal amount of E14 cells were used for the ChIRP and control group. Proteins was eluted in 300μL RIPA lysis buffer (Solarbio) with 10 μL RNaseA (20 mg/mL) and 10μL RNaseH1 (10 U/μL) and incubated 2 hours at 37°C. Discard the beads by centrifuge, and take the supernatant for the following experiment. Add 5x SDS loading buffer to the supernatant and prepare the sample for 10 mins at 100°C. Protein samples were separated in SDS-PAGE gel, and stained with Coomassie brilliant blue R-250. Each lane was cut into 4-6 pieces for the following mass spectrometry.  The gel bands of interest were excised from the gel, reduced with 5 mM of DTT and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide which was followed by in-gel digestion with sequencing grade modified trypsin in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate at 37°C overnight. The peptides were extracted twice with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in 50% acetonitrile aqueous solution for 1h and then dried in a speedVac. Peptides were redissolved in 25μL 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, and 6μL of the extracted peptides were analyzed by Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
For LC-MS/MS analysis, the peptides were separated by a 120 min gradient elution at a flow rate 0.30 μL/min with a Thermo-Dionex Ultimate 3000 HPLC system, which was directly interfaced with an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The analytical column was a home-made fused silica capillary column (75 µm ID, 150 mm length; Upchurch, Oak Harbor, WA) packed with C-18 resin (300 Å, 5 µm, Varian, Lexington, MA). Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid, and mobile phase B consisted of 100% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. The Q Exactive mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent acquisition mode using Xcalibur 2.1.2 software and there was a single full-scan mass spectrum in the orbitrap (300-1800 m/z, 70,000 resolution) followed by 20 data-dependent MS/MS scans at 27% normalized collision energy (HCD). The MS/MS spectra from each LC-MS/MS run were searched using an in-house Proteome Discoverer (Version PD1.4, Thermo-Fisher Scientific, USA). Static peptide modification included carbamidomethylation (C), dynamic oxidation (M). Two trypsin missed cleavage was allowed. Precursor tolerance and ion fragment tolerance were set at 20 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. Confidence levels were set to 1% FDR (high confidence) and 5% FDR (middle confidence).

### Publication Abstract
Transforming growth factor &#x3b2; (TGF-&#x3b2;) superfamily proteins are potent regulators of cellular development and differentiation. Nodal/Activin/TGF-&#x3b2; and BMP ligands are both present in the intra- and extracellular milieu during early development, and cross-talk between these two branches of developmental signaling is currently the subject of intense research focus. Here, we show that the&#xa0;Nodal&#xa0;induced&#xa0;lncRNA-Smad7&#xa0;regulates cell fate determination via repression of BMP signaling in mouse embryonic stem cells (mESCs). Depletion of lncRNA-Smad7 dramatically impairs cardiomyocyte differentiation in mESCs. Moreover, lncRNA-Smad7 represses Bmp2 expression through binding with the Bmp2 promoter region via (CA)12-repeats that forms an R-loop. Importantly, Bmp2 knockdown rescues defects in cardiomyocyte differentiation induced by lncRNA-Smad7 knockdown. Hence, lncRNA-Smad7 antagonizes BMP signaling in mESCs, and similarly regulates cell fate determination between osteocyte and myocyte formation in C2C12 mouse myoblasts. Moreover, lncRNA-Smad7 associates with hnRNPK in mESCs and hnRNPK binds at the Bmp2 promoter, potentially contributing to Bmp2 expression repression. The antagonistic effects between Nodal/TGF-&#x3b2; and BMP signaling via lncRNA-Smad7 described in this work provides a framework for understanding cell fate determination in early development.

### Keywords
Mouse lc-ms/ms mescs chirp

### Affiliations
Tsinghua University
MOE Key Laboratory of Protein Sciences, School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China

### Submitter
Xiaohui Kong

### Lab Head
Dr Qiaoran Xi
MOE Key Laboratory of Protein Sciences, School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China


