### Accession
PXD032069

### Title
Complementary gene regulation by NRF1 and NRF2 safeguard hepatic cholesterol detoxification

### Description
Metabolic-associated steatohepatitis is a progressive fatty liver disease caused, in part, by hepatocyte stress linked to cholesterol overload. Counteracting this stress may be beneficial but there is insufficient understanding of underlying stress defenses to develop a therapeutic strategy. Here, we aimed to elucidate how stress-adaptive transcription factors, nuclear factor erythroid 2 related factor-1 (NRF1) and -2 (NRF2), counteract hepatic cholesterol overload and determine whether they function cooperatively. C57bl/6 mice were fed high fat, fructose, and cholesterol diet (HFFC). Expression profiling and phenotypic analyses were done on liver of mice with adult-onset and hepatocyte-specific deficiency of NRF1, NRF2, or both, and results compared to control. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) sequencing was done and combined with expression profiles to identify genes that NRF1 and NRF2 interact with and regulate in vivo. Three weeks HFFC diet feeding to mice with NRF1 and NRF2 deficiency caused severe steatohepatitis and increased hepatic cholesterol storage. These outcomes did not occur in single gene-deficient mice or control. Expression profiling at a time preceding hepatic cholesterol overload and ChIP sequencing profiling revealed complementary gene regulation by NRF1 and NRF2 to promote cholesterol excretion and mitigate hazardous metabolic biproducts generated from converting cholesterol to bile acid. Consequently, combined gene deficiency, and not single-gene deficiency, increased liver oxidized protein level, decreased cholesterol in bile, and increased unconjugated bile acid in liver and bile. We discover, for the first time, that NRF1 and NRF2 work together to protect liver against damaging effects of excess cholesterol. Targeting these combined actions may prove an effective therapeutic strategy

### Sample Protocol
Whole liver tissue samples (about 300mg each) were dissected from anesthetized mice and then frozen on dry ice. For the preparation of crude extracts, 300 mg of liver tissue was finely chopped and homogenised in 10 volumes of lysis buffer (PBS with 6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, supplemented with a protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma P1724) and 0.05% ProteaseMax Surfactant (Promega)), using a glass Pestle homogenizer.  Homogenates were kept on ice for 1.5 h and were subsequently centrifuged at 14,000×g for 20 min at 4 °C. The protein-containing supernatant was removed and used for comparative proteomic analysis. In order to carry out Trypsin digestion, 100 μl supernatant was diluted with 200 μl Trypsin digestion buffer (50mM NH4HCO3 pH 7.8, 1 mM DTT, 0.05% ProteaseMax Surfactant and 2 μg of Trypsin (Pierce Trypsin Protease, MS-Grade)) was added and incubated 30 min at 37oC. Then, 0.5mM 2-chloroacetamide (final concentration) was added to each sample.  After incubation at 37oC with shaking for 8 hour, 3 μl of TFA was added to the samples to stop Trypsin digestion.  Digested samples were then desalted with Top-Tip C-18 cartridge (Glygen).  Top-Tip was wetted with wetting solution (60% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in water) and then equilibrated by equilibration solution (2% acetnitrile and 0.1% formic acid in water).  Peptide samples were loaded on the column and centrifuged at 500 g for 5 min. After washing by water with 0.1 % formic acid solution, peptide samples were eluted by 100 μl of elution solution (60% acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid in water).  Fractionated samples were also prepared in the same way as above. The sample containing 0.5% Triton X was cleaned through Pierce Detergent Removal Spin Column, 0.5 mL (Thermo Scientific). Eluted peptides were air-dried and dissolved in 20 μl of water with 0.1% formic acid. All samples were analyzed by nanoLC coupled to the Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Chromatographic separation of peptides was performed on a Proxeon EASY nLC 1000 System (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a Thermo Scientific™ Acclaim™ PepMap™ C18 column, 15 cm x 50 μm ID, 3 μm, 100 Å employing a water/acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid gradient. 5 μl of the samples were loaded onto the column for 100 min at a flow rate of 0.30 μl/min. Peptides were separated using 1% acetonitrile and increasing to 3% acetonitrile in the first 2 min and then using a linear gradient from 3 to 24 % of acetonitrile for 170 min, followed by gradient from 24 to 100 % of acetonitrile for 29 min and wash 10 min at 100 % of acetonitrile. Eluted peptides were directly sprayed into mass spectrometer using positive electrospray ionization (ESI) at an ion source temperature of 250°C and an ionspray voltage of 2.1 kV. Full-scan MS spectra (m/z 350–2000) were acquired in the Orbitrap elite at 60 000 (m/z 400) resolution. The automatic gain control settings were 1e6 for full FTMS scans and 5e4 for MS/MS scans. Fragmentation was performed with collision-induced dissociation (CID) in the linear ion trap when ions intensity was >1500 counts. The 15 most intense ions were isolated for ion trap CID with charge states ≥2 and sequentially isolated for fragmentation using the normalized collision energy set at 35%, activation Q at 0.250 and an activation time of 10 ms. Ions selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 30 s. Calibration was performed externally with Pierce LTQ Velos ESI Positive Ion Calibration Solution (Thermo Fisher Scientific, catalog number 88322). The Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer was operated with Thermo XCalibur software. All RAW files were converted to mzXML using ReAdW-4.3.1.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched in MaxQuant Version 1.6.7.0 (Cox and Mann, 2008) against the Mus musculus canonical Swiss-Prot proteome downloaded from UniProt on July 24 2020. Two missed cleavage events were allowed and carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification while variable modifications were oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-termini. Peptide search tolerance was set to 4.5ppm for MS1, and MS2 fragment tolerance was set to 20ppm. Both false discovery rates at peptide-spectrum match and protein levels were set to 0.01 and peptides with minimum 7 amino acids were considered for identification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Obesity, Mouse, Nrf2, Nuclear factor erythroid 2 related factor, Nrf1

### Affiliations
Department of Anatomy, Physiology, and Pharmacology, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, Canada
University of Toronto;
University of Regina

### Submitter
Sadhna Phanse

### Lab Head
Dr Scott B. Widenmaier
Department of Anatomy, Physiology, and Pharmacology, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, Canada


