### Accession
PXD011694

### Title
Revealing mechanisms of mating plug function under sexual selection C4PR_LIV

### Description
A novel proteomic approach reveals dual functions for rodent mating plugs in sperm competition.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were solubilised in a mass spectrometry compatible detergent (Rapigest, Waters) reduced and alkylated, prior to digestion with trypsin.

### Data Protocol
Skyline was used to retrieve XIC of labeled heavy and light peptides in order to calculate RIA.

### Publication Abstract
Mating plugs are produced by many sexually reproducing animals and are hypothesized to promote male fertilization success under promiscuous mating. However, tests of this hypothesis have been constrained by an inability to discriminate ejaculates of different males in direct competition. Here, we use stable isotope labeling in vivo and proteomics to achieve this in a promiscuous rodent, <i>Myodes glareolus</i> We show that, although the first male's plug is usually dislodged, it can be retained throughout the second male's copulation. Retained plugs did not completely block rival sperm but did significantly limit their numbers. Differences in the number of each male's sperm progressing through the female reproductive tract were also explained by natural variation in the size of mating plugs and reproductive accessory glands from which major plug proteins originate. Relative sperm numbers in turn predicted the relative fertilization success of rival males. Our application of stable isotopes to label ejaculates resolves a longstanding debate by revealing how rodent mating plugs promote fertilization success under competitive conditions. This approach opens new opportunities to reveal cryptic mechanisms of postcopulatory sexual selection among diverse animal taxa.

### Keywords
Stable isotope labelled amino acid in vivo, Myodes glareolus, Sexual competition, Rodent, Mating plugs

### Affiliations
Centre for Proteome Research, University of Liverpool
Centre for Proteome Research G44, Biosciences Building| Institute of Integrative Biology University of Liverpool Crown Street | Liverpool  | L69 7ZB +44 151 794 4312

### Submitter
Catarina Franco

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Rob Beynon
Centre for Proteome Research G44, Biosciences Building| Institute of Integrative Biology University of Liverpool Crown Street | Liverpool  | L69 7ZB +44 151 794 4312


