### Accession
PXD021423

### Title
Global Lysine Crotonylation Alterations of Host Cell Proteins Caused by Brucella GNAT Containing Effector BspF

### Description
In Brucella spp., the type IV secretion system (T4SS) is essential for bacterial intracellular survival and inhibition of the host innate immune response. The Brucella T4SS secretes 15 different effectors to escape host immunity and promote intracellular replication. Among them, BspF has a GNAT-family acetyltransferase domain, implying its acetyltransferase activity. To test this, in this study, we first tested and confirmed that BspF has de-histone crotonyltransferase activity in vitro. Unexpectedly, we also found that BspF enhances histone crotonylation of host cell proteins. We then conducted enrichment of crotonylated proteins and used LC-MS to study the crotonylation of proteins in HEK-293T cells caused BspF overexpression. A total of 5,559 crotonylation sites were identified on 1,525 different proteins, of which 331 sites on 265 proteins were significantly changed 30 h after transfection. Among these differentially modified proteins, a significant proportions were involved in immune response and defense mechanism. We propose that BspF may influence the function of these host proteins by changing the level of crotonylation, thereby promoting the intracellular propagation of Brucella.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction and digestion Samples were sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% protease inhibitor cocktail, 3 μM TSA, and 50 mM NAM). Cell debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4°C for 10 min, and the supernatant was collected and protein concentration determined using a BCA kit. The protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56°C, then alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. Finally, the sample was diluted until the urea concentration was less than 2 M. Trypsin was added at a mass ratio of 1:50 (trypsin:protein) and digestion was performed overnight at 37°C, followed by a second 4 h digestion with a trypsin:protein mass ratio of 1:100. Affinity enrichment of crotonyl peptides Peptides were dissolved in NETN buffer solution (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0), and the supernatant was gently shaken and incubated with pre-washed antibody beads (Lot number PTM503, PTM Bio) at 4°C overnight. After incubation, the beads were washed 4 times with NETN buffer and twice with ddH2O. The bead-bound peptides were eluted with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid three times, and the eluate was collected and vacuum-dried. After draining, the resulting peptides were desalted using C18 ZipTips (Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s instructions for LC-MS/MS analysis. LC-MS/MS analysis Peptides were dissolved in solvent A (0.1% formic acid) and directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15 cm length, 75 μm id) for separation. The gradient comprised an increase in solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) from 6% to 23% over 26 min, 23% to 35% over 8 min, 35% to 80% over 3 min, and a hold at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The separated peptides were injected into an NSI ion source for ionization, followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The voltage was 2.0 kV. The primary mass spectrometer scan range was 350-1,600 m/z, the scan resolution was 120,000, and the secondary scan resolution was 15,000. The data acquisition mode used a data-dependent scanning program that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0 s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control was set at 5E4.

### Data Protocol
Database search Secondary mass spectral data were processed using Maxquant (v1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the SwissProt Human database (20,317 sequences), and the impact of contaminating proteins in the identification results was minimized as much as possible. Trypsin was specified as the cleavage enzyme, allowing up to 4 missing cleavages. The precursor ions mass error tolerance was 20 ppm for the first search and 5 ppm for the main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set at 0.02 Da. Cysteine alkylation was specified as a fixed modification, and variable modifications were methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation, and lysine crotonylation. The FDR for protein identification and PTM identification was set to 1%. Protein-protein Interaction Network Search for all differentially expressed proteins in the STRING database of version 10.5, set interactions between proteins that only belong to the search data, thereby excluding external candidates, and set a confidence score> 0.7 (high confidence) for protein interaction analysis. The interactive network of STRING is visualized in Cytoscape. In the figure, the ore clustering algorithm of Molecular Clustering Detection (MCODE) is used to analyze densely connected areas. MCODE is part of the plug-in toolkit of the network analysis and visualization software Cytoscape.

### Publication Abstract
In <i>Brucella</i> spp., the type IV secretion system (T4SS) is essential for bacterial intracellular survival and inhibition of the host innate immune response. The <i>Brucella</i> T4SS secretes 15 different effectors to escape host immunity and promote intracellular replication. Among them, BspF has a GNAT-family acetyltransferase domain, implying its acetyltransferase activity. We confirmed that BspF has acetyltransferase activity (data not shown) and de-crotonyltransferase activity. However, BspF overexpressed in HEK-293T cells can also enhance octamer crotonylation <i>in vitro</i>. Then we enriched crotonylated proteins and conducted LC-MS to study the crotonylation changes of proteins in HEK-293T cells caused by BspF overexpression. A total of 5,559 crotonylation sites were identified on 1,525 different proteins, of which 331 sites on 265 proteins were significantly changed. We found that Rab9A and RAP1B in proteomics data have a great impact on <i>Brucella</i> survival, so we speculate that BspF may influence the function of host proteins by altering crotonylation, thereby promoting the intracellular propagation of <i>Brucella</i>.

### Keywords
Brucella; t4ss; effector; bspf; lysine crotonylation; crotonyltransferase

### Affiliations
Key Laboratory of Zoonotic of Liaoning Province, College of Animal Science and Veterinary Medicine, Shenyang Agricultural University, Liaoning Province, Shenyang 110866, P. R. China
Shenyang Agricultural University

### Submitter
Jinying Zhu

### Lab Head
Dr Zeliang Chen
Key Laboratory of Zoonotic of Liaoning Province, College of Animal Science and Veterinary Medicine, Shenyang Agricultural University, Liaoning Province, Shenyang 110866, P. R. China


