### Accession
PXD031871

### Title
Physiological and proteomic analyses indicate delayed sowing improves photosynthetic capacity in wheat flag leaves under heat stress

### Description
Background and aims Climate warming has become an indisputable fact, and wheat is among the most heat-sensitive cereal crops. Heat stress during grain filling threatens global wheat production and food security. Here, we analyzed the physiological and proteomic changes by delayed sowing on the photosynthetic capacity of winter wheat leaves under heat stress. Our aim is to provide a new cultivation way for the heat stress resistance in wheat. Methods Through 2 years field experiment and an open warming simulation system, we compared the changes in wheat grain weight, yield, photosynthetic rate, and chlorophyll fluorescence parameters under heat stress at late grain–filling stage during normal sowing and delayed sowing. At the same time, based on the iTRAQ proteomics, we compared the changes of differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) during the two sowing periods under high temperature stress.

### Sample Protocol
Ten flag leaves were stored on the fourth day after heat treatment (25 DAA) in the same area. They were ground in liquid nitrogen and transferred to centrifuge tubes, and then sonicated on ice in lysis buffer (1 M sucrose, 0.5 M Tris 8.0, 0.1 M KCl, 50 mM ascorbic acid, 1% NP40, 1% sodium deoxycholate, 10 mM EDTA, 10 mM dithiothreitol, 1% protease inhibitor cocktail, and 1% phosphatase inhibitor cocktail). After centrifugation (16,000 × g, 4℃, 10 min), debris was removed and the protein was precipitated with cold 0.1 M ammonium acetate/methanol for 12 h at −20℃. After centrifugation (16,000 × g, 4°C, 10 min), the remaining precipitate was washed three times with cold acetone. The protein was redissolved in buffer (8 M urea, 50 mM Tris 8.0, 1% NP40, 1% sodium deoxycholate, 10 mM EDTA, 5 mM dithiothreitol, 1% protease inhibitor cocktail, and 1% phosphatase inhibitor cocktail) and the protein concentration was determined with a 2D Quant Kit (GE Healthcare, USA) following the manufacturer’s protocol.

### Data Protocol
Gene Ontology (GO) annotation proteome was derived from the UniProt-GOA database (www. http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/). Firstly, Converting identified protein ID to UniProt ID and then mapping to GO IDs by protein ID. If some identified proteins were not annotated by UniProt-GOA database, the InterProScan soft would be used to annotated protein’s GO functional based on protein sequence alignment method. Then proteins were classified by Gene Ontology annotationbased on three categories: biological process, cellular component and molecular function. ENRICHMENT OF GENE ONTOLOGY ANALYSIS Proteins were classified by GO annotation into three categories: biological process, cellular compartment and molecular function. For each category, a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test was employed to test the enrichment of the differentially expressed protein against all identified proteins. Correction for multiple hypothesis testing was carried out using standard false discovery rate control methods. The GO with a corrected p-value < 0.05 is considered significant. ENRICHMENT OF PATHWAY ANALYSIS Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database was used to identify enriched pathways by a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test to test the enrichment of the differentially expressed protein against all identified proteins. Correction for multiple hypothesis testing was carried out using standard false discovery rate control methods. The pathway with a corrected p-value < 0.05 was considered significant. These pathways were classified into hierarchical categories according to the KEGG website.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Heat stress; photosynthetic capacity; proteomics; wheat

### Affiliations
Shandong Agricultural University
Micrometer Biotech

### Submitter
Xianliang Ma

### Lab Head
Dr He MingRong
Shandong Agricultural University


