### Accession
PXD018634

### Title
Analysis of NRF2 knockdown effect in A549 and H1437 cells

### Description
This project tessts whether translation of all selenoproteins are affected by NRF2 downregualation in A549 and H1437 cells.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were plated in complete media and allowed to adhere to plates for 24 hours. shRNAs were induced by replacing media with fresh complete media containing doxycycline (1 ug/mL). Three replicates of shControl and shNRF2 in A549, two replicates of shControl and three replicates of H1437 were conducted. Seventy-two hours after induction of shRNAs, cells were trypsinized, washed with PBS, and snap frozen. Cells were syringe-lysed in 8 M urea and 200 mM EPPS pH 8.5 with protease inhibitor. BCA assay was performed to determine protein concentration of each sample. Samples were reduced in 5 mM TCEP, alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide, and quenched with 15 mM DTT. One hundred µg protein was chloroform-methanol precipitated and re-suspended in 100 µL 200 mM EPPS pH 8.5. Protein was digested by Lys-C at a 1:100 protease-to-peptide ratio overnight at room temperature with gentle shaking. Trypsin was used for further digestion for 6 hours at 37°C at the same ratio with Lys-C. After digestion, 30 µL acetonitrile (ACN) was added into each sample to 30% final volume. Two hundred µg TMT reagent (126C, 126N, 126C, 127N, 127C, 128N, 128C, 129N, 129C, 130N, 130C, 130N or 131C) in 10 µL ACN was added to each sample. After 1 hour of labeling, 2 µL of each sample was combined, desalted, and analyzed using mass spectrometry. Total intensities were determined in each channel to calculate normalization factors. After quenching using 0.3% hydroxylamine, eleven samples were combined in 1:1 ratio of peptides based on normalization factors. The mixture was desalted by solid-phase extraction and fractionated with basic pH reversed phase (BPRP) high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC), collected onto a 96 six well plate and combined for 24 fractions in total. Twelve fractions were desalted and analyzed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS).  Mass spectrometric data were collected on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer coupled to a Proxeon NanoLC-1200 UHPLC. The 100 µm capillary column was packed with 35 cm of Accucore 50 resin (2.6 μm, 150Å; ThermoFisher Scientific). The scan sequence began with an MS1 spectrum (Orbitrap analysis, resolution 120,000, 350−1400 Th, automatic gain control (AGC) target 4E5, maximum injection time 50 ms). SPS-MS3 analysis was used to reduce ion interference [2, 3]. The top ten precursors were then selected for MS2/MS3 analysis. MS2 analysis consisted of collision-induced dissociation (CID), quadrupole ion trap analysis, automatic gain control (AGC) 1E4, NCE (normalized collision energy) 35, q-value 0.25, maximum injection time 60 ms), and isolation window at 0.7. Following acquisition of each MS2 spectrum, we collected an MS3 spectrum in which multiple MS2 fragment ions are captured in the MS3 precursor population using isolation waveforms with multiple frequency notches. MS3 precursors were fragmented by HCD and analyzed using the Orbitrap (NCE 65, AGC 3E5, maximum injection time 150 ms, resolution was 50,000 at 400 Th).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed using a Sequest-based pipeline. Spectra were converted to mzXML using a modified version of ReAdW.exe. Database searching included all entries from the Human UniProt database (downloaded: 2014-02-04) This database was concatenated with one composed of all protein sequences in the reversed order. Searches were performed using a 50 ppm precursor ion tolerance for total protein level analysis. The product ion tolerance was set to 0.9 Da. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+229.163 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) was set as a variable modification.  Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR). PSM filtering was performed using a linear discriminant analysis (LDA), as described previously, while considering the following parameters: XCorr, ΔCn, missed cleavages, peptide length, charge state, and precursor mass accuracy. For TMT-based reporter ion quantitation, we extracted the summed signal-to-noise (S:N) ratio for each TMT channel and found the closest matching centroid to the expected mass of the TMT reporter ion. For protein-level comparisons, PSMs were identified, quantified, and collapsed to a 1% peptide false discovery rate (FDR) and then collapsed further to a final protein-level FDR of 1%, which resulted in a final peptide level FDR of <0.1%. Moreover, protein assembly was guided by principles of parsimony to produce the smallest set of proteins necessary to account for all observed peptides. Proteins were quantified by summing reporter ion counts across all matching PSMs, as described previously. PSMs with poor quality, MS3 spectra with more than eight TMT reporter ion channels missing, MS3 spectra with TMT reporter summed signal-to-noise of less than 100, or having no MS3 spectra were excluded from quantification. Each reporter ion channel was summed across all quantified proteins and normalized assuming equal protein loading of all 11 samples.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Knockdown, H1437, Nrf2, A549, Tmt, Selenoproteins

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Tian Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Steven Gygi
Harvard Medical School


