### Accession
PXD013635

### Title
Tendon tissue degradome in response to the patho-physiological niche

### Description
Aberrant matrix turnover with elevated matrix proteolysis is a hallmark of tendon pathology. While tendon disease mechanisms remain obscure, mechanical cues are central regulators. Unloading of tendon explants in standard culture conditions provokes rapid cell-mediated tissue breakdown. Here we show that biological response to tissue unloading depends on the mimicked physiological context. Our experiments reveal that explanted tendon tissues remain functionally stable in a simulated avascular niche of low temperature and oxygen, regardless of the presence of serum. This hyperthermic and hyperoxic niche-dependent catabolic switch was shown by whole transcriptome analysis (RNA-seq) to be a strong pathological driver of an immune-modulatory phenotype, with a stress response to reactive oxygen species (ROS) and associated activation of catabolic extracellular matrix proteolysis that involved lysosomal activation and transcription of a range of proteolytic enzymes. Secretomic and degradomic analysis through terminal amine isotopic labeling of substrates (TAILS) confirmed that proteolytic activity in unloaded tissues was strongly niche dependent. Through targeted pharmacological inhibition we isolated ROS mediated oxidative stress as a major checkpoint for matrix proteolysis. We conclude from these data that the tendon stromal compartment responds to traumatic mechanical unloading in a manner that is highly dependent on the extrinsic niche, with oxidative stress response gating the proteolytic breakdown of the functional collagen backbone.

### Sample Protocol
Tendon fascicles were extracted from tails of freshly euthanized 12-13 weeks old wild-type C57BL6/J male mice and cultivated in absence of mechanical load. Fascicles were cultured in serum-free medium (high glucose Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s Medium (DMEM), 1% N2-supplement (v/v), 1% penicillin-streptomycin (v/v), 200µM L-ascorbic acid phosphate magnesium salt n-hydrate) or serum-supplemented medium (high glucose DMEM, 10% fetal bovine serum (v/v), 1% penicillin-streptomycin (v/v), 1% non-essential amino acids (v/v), 200µM L-ascorbic acid phosphate magnesium salt n-hydrate). Fascicles were maintained in a humidified atmosphere containing 5% CO2 at either low oxygen partial pressure (pO2 = 3%) and low temperature (29 °C) or high oxygen partial pressure (pO2 = 20%) and temperature (37°C).  Terminal amine isotope labeling of substrates (TAILS) analysis was performed according to Madzharova et al., 2019 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30840238) except for using 10plex Tandem mass TagTM labelling (TMT, #90110, Thermo Fisher) and adding the trypsin at a ratio of 1:20 (trypsin/protein ratio). Prior to protein denaturation and labelling, proteins of samples were extracted by pressure cycling technology (60 cycles of 45’000psi for 20s, atmospheric pressure for 10s, 33°C) from ca. 4mg tissue in a buffer containing 4M Guanidine hydrochloride (Sigma-Aldrich), 250mM HEPES (Sigma-Aldrich (pH 7.8) and protease inhibitor cocktail (cOomplete EDTA-free, Roche) using a Barocycler 2320ETX (Pressure Biosciences Inc.).  Secretomes of 18-22 equally sized and 12-days-cultured fascicles were collected for each of the two conditions in 2ml serum-free and phenol red-free DMEM (#31053028, Gibco supplemented with 1% penicillin-streptomycin (v/v), 200µM L-ascorbic acid phosphate magnesium salt n-hydrate and 1% GlutaMAX (v/v), A1286001, Gibco) during an exposure time of 48 hours. Fascicles were thoroughly washed with PBS before secretome collection. Secretomes were supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail (cOomplete EDTA-free, Roche) and concentrated ca. 40 times by centrifugal filtration (3K Amicon Ultra, Merck Millipore, 14’000g, 4°C) and buffer was exchanged to 4M Guanidine hydrochloride in 50mM HEPES (pH 7.8). Subsequently, secretomes were reduced in tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (200mM , Sigma-Aldrich) and alkylated in chloroacetamide (400mM, Sigma-Aldrich) for 30 minutes at room temperature and then digested by LysC (Lysyl endopeptidase, #125-05061, Wako, ratio LysC/protein 1:100) and trypsin (Trypsin Gold, V5280, Promega, ratio trypsin/protein 1:20) overnight. Desalting was performed according to the TAILS protocol. PreTAILS, TAILS and secretome peptide mixtures were loaded onto an PepMap100 C18 precolumn (75 µm x 2 cm , 3µm, 100Å, nanoViper, Thermo Scientific) and separated on a PepMap RSLC C18 analytical column (75 µm x 50 cm , 2µm, 100Å, nanoViper, Thermo Scientific) using an EASY-nLC™ 1000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific) coupled in line with a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Separation of 1 µg of peptide mixture was achieved by running a constant flow rate of 250 nL/min in 0.1% formic acid/99.9% water and a 140 min gradient from 10% to 95% (23% for 85min, 38% for 30min, 60% for 10min, 95% for 15min) elution buffer (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid, 19.9% water). A data-dependent acquisition (DDA) method operated under Xcalibur 3.1.66.10 was applied to record the spectra. The full scan MS spectra (300-1750 m/z) were acquired with a resolution of 70,000 after accumulation to a target value of 3e6. Higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) MS/MS spectra with fixed first mass of 120 m/z were recorded from the 10 most intense signals with a resolution of 35,000 applying an automatic gain control of 1e6 and a maximum injection time of 120ms. Precursors were isolated using a window of 1.6 m/z and fragmented with a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 28%. Precursor ions with unassigned or single charge state were rejected and precursor masses already selected for MS/MS were excluded for further selection for 60s. Settings for the scan of the secretome peptide mixture were the same except for using a resolution of 17,500 for recording the MS/MS spectra, a maximum injection time of 60ms, and a NCE of 25%.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were analysed using Proteome DiscovererTM 2.3 software (PD) searching the peak lists against a database collated in the UniProt reference proteome for the species Mus musculus (ID: 10090, entries: 17’005). Search parameters for the TAILS experiment were set according to Madzharova et al., 2019, treating preTAILS and TAILS samples as fractions. Raw data files of the secretome experiments were processed by PD using the label-free quantification algorithm Minora Feature Detector node.

### Publication Abstract
Although the molecular mechanisms behind tendon disease remain obscure, aberrant stromal matrix turnover and tissue hypervascularity are known hallmarks of advanced tendinopathy. We harness a tendon explant model to unwind complex cross-talk between the stromal and vascular tissue compartments. We identify the hypervascular tendon niche as a state-switch that gates degenerative matrix remodeling within the tissue stroma. Here pathological conditions resembling hypervascular tendon disease provoke rapid cell-mediated tissue breakdown upon mechanical unloading, in contrast to unloaded tendons that remain functionally stable in physiological low-oxygen/-temperature niches. Analyses of the stromal tissue transcriptome and secretome reveal that a stromal niche with elevated tissue oxygenation and temperature drives a ROS mediated cellular stress response that leads to adoption of an immune-modulatory phenotype within the degrading stromal tissue. Degradomic analysis further reveals a surprisingly rich set of active matrix proteases behind the progressive loss of tissue mechanics. We conclude that the tendon stromal compartment responds to aberrant mechanical unloading in a manner that is highly dependent on the vascular niche, with ROS gating a complex proteolytic breakdown of the functional collagen backbone.

### Keywords
Thermo q exactive, Mouse, Tails, Tendon

### Affiliations
Technical University of Denmark

### Submitter
Ulrich auf dem Keller

### Lab Head
Dr Ulrich auf dem Keller
Technical University of Denmark


