### Accession
PXD003768

### Title
Lotus seed development

### Description
Sacred lotus (Nelumbo nucifera) belongs to Nelumbonaceae family. Its seeds are widely consumed in Asia countries as snacks or even medicine. Besides the market values, lotus seed also plays crucial roles in lotus life cycle. Consequently, it is essential to gain a comprehensive understanding on the development of lotus seed. During its development, lotus seed undergoes cell division, expansion, reserve accumulation, desiccation and maturation phases. We observed the morphological and biochemical changes of lotus seed from 10 to 25 days after pollination (DAP) which was corresponding to the reserve synthesis and accumulation phase. The volume of the seed expanded until 20 DAP with the color of the seed coat changing from yellow-green to dark green and gradually faded again. Starch and protein rapidly accumulated from 15 to 20 DAP. To further reveal the metabolism adaptation, primary metabolites and proteins profiles were obtained from the mass spectrometry based platforms. Metabolites and enzymes involved in sugar metabolism, glycolysis, TCA cycle and amino acids metabolism schematized on their biosynthetic pathways. Both metabolic and proteomic profiles indicated more active metabolism from 10 to 15 DAP than after 20 DAP. The results provide a frame of reference for the evaluation of primary metabolism during lotus seed development.

### Sample Protocol
The harvested lotus seed were ground to powder in liguid nitrogen.  Proteins were extracted using the phenol method according to previously description (Liu et al. 2013). The grounded powder was extracted with pre-cooled homogenization buffer (20 mM Tris/HCl (pH 7.5), 250 mM sucrose,10 mM ethylene glycol-bis(b-aminoethylether)-N,N,N’,N’-tetraacetic acid (EGTA), 1 mM PMSF, 1 mM DTT, and 1% Triton X-100), followed by centrifugation at 12 000 g for 20 min at 4°C. Supernatants were collected, and mixed with equal volume of Tris-phenol (pH>8.0) by vortexing, and centrifuged again. The top phenol phase was carefully transferred to a new tube, and mixed with 5 volumes of 0.1 M methanolic ammonium acetate in 100% methanol, then incubated overnight at -20 °C. The precipitated proteins were washed one time with 0.1 M methanolic ammonium acetate and two times with acetone. Then the protein pellets were vacuum-dried. For in-gel digestion, 25 µg of total proteins were loaded onto 12.5% sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel (SDS-PAGE) and run at 50 V until bromophenol blue line enter into the resolving gel for about 1 cm. After running, the gels were stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue (CBB R-250) solution, and then destained until protein bands were clearly visualized. The gel was cut into small slices, and subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion (Liu et al. 2016). For in-solution digestion, 100 µg of protein was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 37°C for 45 min then alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) at 23°C in dark for 60 min. Finally the reaction was finished with addition of 5 mM of DTT (23°C, dark, 15 min). Endoproteinase LysC and trypsin were applied for digestion based on the protocol reported before (Hoehenwarter et al. 2008). Peptide measurement: Peptides from each sample were thoroughly dissolved in 4% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid, and desalted. Afterwards, 10 µg peptides sample was taken out and subjected to analysis using nanoHPLC coupled to LTQ-Orbitrap-MS according to previously report (Liu et al. 2016). MS analysis was performed on an Orbitrap LTQ XL mass spectrometer (Thermo, Germany) with a controlled flow rate of 500 nL/min. Specific tune was set to 1.8 kV for spray voltage and 180 °C for temperature of the heated transfer capillary. MS raw data were searched by SEQUEST algorithm of Proteome Discoverer version 1.3 (Thermo, Germany). The filter criteria were set as follows. (I) 1% false discovery rate (FDR); (II) a variable modification of acetylation of N-terminus and oxidation of methionine; (III) mass tolerance of 10 ppm for parent ion and 0.8 Da for fragment ion.

### Data Protocol
The MS data were searched against the newly annotated genome database of lotus (http://lotus-db.wbgcas.cn) to identify proteins. The assembled genome of lotus was 804 Mb, representing 86.5% of the estimated lotus genome. Following repeat-masking and annotation, 26,685 unigenes were inferred, 82% of them have similarity to proteins in SwissProt (Ming et al. 2013). The searching parameters are as follows: (ⅰ) medium or high peptide confidence; (ⅱ) minimum Xcorr of 1 for +1, 2 for +2 and 3 for +3 charged peptides, etc. Subsequently, a label-free approach based on spectral counts (SpCs) was used to quantify the identified proteins followed by a normalized spectral abundance factor (NSAF) normalization strategy (Zybailov et al. 2006).

### Publication Abstract
Sacred lotus (Nelumbo nucifera) belongs to the Nelumbonaceae family. Its seeds are widely consumed in Asian countries as snacks or even medicine. Besides the market value, lotus seed also plays a crucial role in the lotus life cycle. Consequently, it is essential to gain a comprehensive understanding of the development of lotus seed. During its development, lotus seed undergoes cell division, expansion, reserve accumulation, desiccation, and maturation phases. We observed morphological and biochemical changes from 10 to 25 days after pollination (DAP) which corresponded to the reserve synthesis and accumulation phase. The volume of the seed expanded until 20 DAP with the color of the seed coat changing from yellow-green to dark green and gradually fading again. Starch and protein rapidly accumulated from 15 to 20 DAP. To further reveal metabolic adaptation, primary metabolites and proteins profiles were obtained using mass spectrometry based platforms. Metabolites and enzymes involved in sugar metabolism, glycolysis, TCA cycle and amino acid metabolism showed sequential dynamics enabling the clear separation of the different metabolic states during lotus seed development. The integration of the data revealed a highly significant metabolic switch at 15 DAP going through a transition of metabolically highly active tissue to the preparation of storage tissue. The results provide a reference data set for the evaluation of primary metabolism during lotus seed development.

### Keywords
Seed, Lc-esi-orbitrap-ms, Nelumbo nucifera

### Affiliations
MOSYS, University of Vienna
Key Laboratory of Plant Germplasm Enhancement and Speciality Agriculture, Wuhan Botanical Garden, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan 430074, Hubei, China

### Submitter
Lei Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Pingfang Yang
Key Laboratory of Plant Germplasm Enhancement and Speciality Agriculture, Wuhan Botanical Garden, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan 430074, Hubei, China


