### Accession
PXD013689

### Title
Brain adiponectin signaling controls peripheral insulin response in Drosophila

### Description
The brain plays a key role in energy homeostasis, detecting circulating hormones from peripheral organs, nutrients, and metabolites, and integrating this information to control food intake and energy expenditure. However, the signals mediating communication between peripheral organs and brain are largely unknown. Here, we show that a group of neurons in the Drosophila larval brain expressing the adiponectin receptor (AdipoR) control systemic growth and metabolism. We identify glucose-regulated protein 78 (Grp78) as a circulating ligand for AdipoR. Grp78 is produced by fat cells in response to dietary sugar and modulates the activity of AdipoR-positive neurons. The terpenoid juvenile hormone (JH) serves as an effector for brain AdipoR signaling, reducing the levels of insulin signaling in peripheral organs. In conclusion, we identify a neuroendocrine axis whereby AdipoR neurons control systemic insulin responses by modulating peripheral JH function.

### Sample Protocol
Ubiquitously expressed Myc-AdipoR protein was immunoprecipitated from larvae using magnetic microparticles (MACS purification system, Miltenyi Biotech) according to the manufacturer's instructions and as previously described (36). µMACS magnetic microbeads are coated with a monoclonal anti-Myc antibody (Miltenyi Biotec). Negative controls, wild type larvae and the negative control protein myc-SMO (kindly provided by Dr L. Ruel) were purified by affinity with the same conditions to remove unspecific proteins. A positive control was carried out with a co-expression of Myc-AdipoR with hAdipoQ. Co-immunoprecipitation experiments were carried out in triplicates. Proteins were eluted out of the magnetic stand with the SDS-loading buffer from the kit.

### Data Protocol
Eluted proteins were digested with sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega) and analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS on a QExactive+ mass spectrometer coupled to an EASY-nanoLC-1000 (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, USA) as described previously (37). Data were searched against the Flybase database (release r6.16) with a decoy strategy. Peptides were identified with Mascot algorithm (version 2.5, Matrix Science, London, UK) and data were further imported into Proline 1.4 software (http://proline.profiproteomics.fr/). Proteins were validated on Mascot pretty rank equal to 1, and 1% FDR on both peptide spectrum matches (PSM score) and protein sets (Protein Set score). The total number of MS/MS fragmentation spectra was used to quantify each protein from at least three independent biological replicates. This spectral count was submitted to a negative-binomial test using an edgeR GLM regression through R (R v3.2.5). For each identified protein, an adjusted P-value corrected by Benjamini–Hochberg was calculated, as well as a protein fold-change (FC).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Insulin response, Growth, Drosophila, Energy homeostasis, Adiponectin receptor, Juvenile hormone

### Affiliations
CNRS, IBMC, FRC1589
Aix-Marseille University, INSERM, TAGC, UMR_S1090, Marseille, France

### Submitter
Lauriane Kuhn

### Lab Head
Dr Nathalie ARQUIER
Aix-Marseille University, INSERM, TAGC, UMR_S1090, Marseille, France


