### Accession
PXD011595

### Title
aPKC controls endothelial growth by modulating c-Myc via FoxO1 DNA binding ability

### Description
Strict regulation of proliferation is vital for development, whereas unregulated cell proliferation is a fundamental characteristic of cancer. The polarity protein atypical protein kinase C lambda/iota (aPKC lambda) is associated with cell proliferation through unknown mechanisms.  In endothelial cells, suppression of aPKC lambda impairs proliferation despite hyperactivated mitogenic signaling. Here we show that aPKC lambda phosphorylates the DNA binding domain of forkhead box O1 (FoxO1) transcription factor, a gatekeeper of endothelial growth. Although mitogenic signaling excludes FoxO1 from the nucleus, consequently increasing c-Myc abundance and proliferation, aPKC lambda controls c-Myc expression via FoxO1/miR-34c signaling without affecting its localization. We find this pathway is strongly activated in the malignant vascular sarcoma, angiosarcoma, and aPKC inhibition reduces c-Myc expression and proliferation of angiosarcoma cells. Moreover, FoxO1 phosphorylation at Ser218 and aPKC expression correlates with poor patient prognosis. Our findings may provide a new therapeutic strategy for treatment of malignant cancers, like angiosarcoma.

### Sample Protocol
Extracted peptides from in-gel digestion were desalted, concentrated and re-suspended in acidified water (0.1 % formic acid).). Peptides were separated on nanoLC 1000 (Proxeon, now Thermo Fisher) using a binary buffer system of A (0.1 % (v/v) formic acid in H2O) and B (0.1 % (v/v) formic acid in 80% Acetonitrile) as described previously69. We applied a linear gradient from 7 to 35% B for 35 min followed by 95% B for 15 min and re-equilibration to 5% B within 5 min (held for further 5 min at 5 %) on a 50 cm column (75 µm ID) in-house packed with C18 1.8 µm diameter resin (Dr. Maisch, Germany). To control the column temperature we used an in-house made column oven at 40°C. The UHPLC was coupled via a nano-electrospray ionization source (Thermo Scientific) to the quadrupole based mass spectrometer QExactive (Thermo Scientific)69. MS spectra were acquired using 3e6 as an AGC target at a resolution of 70,000 (200 m/z) in a mass range of 350-1650 m/z. A maximum injection time of 60ms was used for ion accumulation. In a data dependent mode MS/MS events were acquired for the ten most abundant peaks (Top10 method) in the high mass accuracy Orbitrap after HCD (Higher energy C-Trap Dissociation) fragmentation at 25 collision energy in a 100-1650 m/z mass range. The resolution was set to 17,500 at 200 m/z combined with a maximum injection time of 60ms.

### Data Protocol
For data analysis all 27 raw files were processed using MaxQuant (1.3.7.4) and the implemented Andromeda search engine70. For protein assignment ESI-MS/MS fragmentation spectra were correlated with the Uniprot human reference proteome database including a list of common contaminants. Searches were performed with Trypsin specificity allowing two missed cleavages and a mass tolerance of 4.5 ppm and 7 ppm for MS/MS first and main searches, respectively. Carbamidomethyl at cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification and phosphorylation (STY), oxidation at methionine and acetylation at the N-terminus were defined as variable modifications. The minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and the false discovery rate for proteins and peptides to 1 %. The FDR was applied separately for modifications using the implemented decoy approach in revert mode. Fold changes were calculated based on raw intensities.

### Publication Abstract
Strict regulation of proliferation is vital for development, whereas unregulated cell proliferation is a fundamental characteristic of cancer. The polarity protein atypical protein kinase C lambda/iota (aPKC&#x3bb;) is associated with cell proliferation through unknown mechanisms. In endothelial cells, suppression of aPKC&#x3bb; impairs proliferation despite hyperactivated mitogenic signaling. Here we show that aPKC&#x3bb; phosphorylates the DNA binding domain of forkhead box O1 (FoxO1) transcription factor, a gatekeeper of endothelial growth. Although mitogenic signaling excludes FoxO1 from the nucleus, consequently increasing c-Myc abundance and proliferation, aPKC&#x3bb; controls c-Myc expression via FoxO1/miR-34c signaling without affecting its localization. We find this pathway is strongly activated in the malignant vascular sarcoma, angiosarcoma, and aPKC inhibition reduces c-Myc expression and proliferation of angiosarcoma cells. Moreover, FoxO1 phosphorylation at Ser218 and aPKC expression correlates with poor patient prognosis. Our findings may provide a potential therapeutic strategy for treatment of malignant cancers, like angiosarcoma.

### Keywords
Human, C-myc, Immuno precipitation, Apk, Foxo1

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Heart and Lung Research
Laboratory for Cell Polarity and Organogenesis Max Planck Institute for Heart and Lung Research D-61231, Bad Nauheim, Germany

### Submitter
Scientific Service Group Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry

### Lab Head
Dr Masanori Nakayama
Laboratory for Cell Polarity and Organogenesis Max Planck Institute for Heart and Lung Research D-61231, Bad Nauheim, Germany


