### Accession
PXD034073

### Title
Proteomics of Human Hepatoma Huh-7 Cells Treated by Three  Multi-RTK Inhibitors

### Description
Sorafenib, lenvatinib and regorafenib, the multi-RTK inhibitors with potent anti-angiogenesis effects, are currently therapeutic drugs generally recommended for the patients with advanced hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). To date, however, there have been no published studies on the mechanism underling differential effects of the three drugs on HCC cell proliferation, and the proteomic analysis in HCC cell lines treated by regorafenib or lenvatinib.The present project for the first time performed a direct comparison of their pharmacological interventions for influencing whole cell proteomics using tandem mass tag-based peptide-labeling technique.

### Sample Protocol
After 72 h incubation of Huh-7 cells with normal saline, DMSO, sorafenib, lenvatinib and regorafenib, the intact cell samples were harvested, and then lysed with buffer (8 M urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 1×protease inhibitor cocktail). For each sample, 50 μg of extracted protein was reducedwith 20 mM DTT for 1 h and alkylated with 50 mM IAM for 45 min in darkness at 37°C. Then proteins were precipitated by ice-cold acetone overnight. The protein pellets were digested with Lys-C enzyme (enzyme: substrate = 1:150) at 37°C for 3 h and continued to be digested by adding trypsin (enzyme: substrate = 1:100) at 37°C overnight. Finally, the digestion was terminated by adding 10 μl of 10% FA.  Peptides were solid-phase extracted using Sep-Pak tC18 cartridges (Waters, Millford, MA) dried down, and stored at -80 °C.    Then the peptides were labled by TMT 6-plex kits (Thermo Scientific, USA) according to manufacturer’s instructions. After labeling, the mixed TMT-labeled peptides were fractioned, and analyzed by Thermo Easy-nLC 1000 HPLC system coupled with an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer. Chromatographic conditions and MS methods were performed as described previously (Kong et al., 2018, PROTOMCS, 18, e1700354).  Briefly, the peptides were separated in a home-made C18 column packed in 75 µm ⅹ 20 cm fused silica of Phenomenex chromatographic material (Aqua C18 120 Å, 3 µm) with buffer A (0.1% FA) and buffer B (ACN, 0.1% FA) at gradient elution in 95 min delivered at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The gradient was as follows: 2-4% B from 0 to 2 min, 4-23% B from 2 to 67 min, 23-60% B from 67 to 80 min, 60-95% B from 80 to 81 min, and 95% B from 81 to 95 min.   The Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode for the MS2 data acquisition. For the MS1, a full scan was acquired in the range of 350-1,550 m/z with a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 200. Ion filtering for MS2 was isolated by the quadrupole with an isolation window of 1.6 m/z. HCD (High energy collisional dissociation) fragmentation was performed with 38% normalized collision energy, followed by analysis of fragment ions in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 15,000 at m/z 200. The duty cycle was fixed at 3 s. The automatic gain control (AGC) settings were 2 × e5 and 5 × e4 ions, and maximal ion injection times of 50 and 100 ms were setting for MS1 and MS2 scans, respectively.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analyzed with SEQUEST HT in Proteome Discoverer 2.1 software (Thermo Scientific, USA) against Homo species proteome database. Default settings were configured with an exception of allowing 2 missed cleavages; a parent ion tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da were set; and a false discovery rate (FDR) cutoff value of 1% was applied at peptide and protein levels. Carbamidomethyl (+57.021 Da) was selected as a fixed modification. TMT reagents (+229.163 Da) on lysines and N termini, oxidation of methionine residues (+15.9949 Da) and N-terminal acetylation (+42.011 Da) were selected as variable modifications.   We employ two normalization procedures to handle the 20-plex experiment (5 TMT experiments with 4 channels each) according to the reference (Plubell et al., 2017, Mol Cell Proteomics 16, 873-890). The first normalization was applied within each TMT experiment. The grand total reporter ion intensity for each channel was multiplied by global scaling factors to adjust its total intensity to the average total intensity across the 4 channels. The second normalization for each protein was performed according to the average values in the common pool channels within each TMT experiment. Differential protein abundance between groups was then determined by comparing the normalized total reporter ion intensities.

### Publication Abstract
Sorafenib, lenvatinib and regorafenib, the multi-RTK inhibitors with potent anti-angiogenesis effects, are currently therapeutic drugs generally recommended for the patients with advanced hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). To date, however, there have been no published studies on the mechanism underling differential effects of the three drugs on HCC cell proliferation, and the proteomic analysis in HCC cell lines treated by regorafenib or lenvatinib. The present study for the first time performed a direct comparison of the cell cycle arrest and apoptosis induction in the Huh-7 cells caused by sorafenib, regorafenib and lenvatinib at respective IC<sub>50</sub> using flow cytometry technique, as well as their pharmacological interventions for influencing whole cell proteomics using tandem mass tag-based peptide-labeling coupled with the nLC-HRMS technique. Sorafenib, regorafenib and lenvatinib at respective IC<sub>50</sub> drove the remaining surviving Huh-7 cells into a G<sub>0</sub>/G<sub>1</sub> arrest, but lenvatinib and regorafenib were much more effective than sorafenib. Lenvatinib produced a much stronger induction of Huh-7 cells into early apoptosis than sorafenib and regorafenib, while necrotic cell proportion induced by regorafenib was 2.4 times as large as that by lenvatinib. The proteomic study revealed 419 proteins downregulated commonly by the three drugs at respective IC<sub>50</sub>. KEGG pathway analysis of the downregulated proteins indicated the ranking of top six signaling pathways including the spliceosome, DNA replication, cell cycle, mRNA surveillance, P53 and nucleotide excision repair involved in 33 proteins, all of which were directly related to their pharmacological effects on cell cycle and cell apoptosis. Notably, lenvatinib and regorafenib downregulated the proteins of PCNA, Cyclin B1, BCL-xL, TSP1, BUD31, SF3A1 and Mad2 much more strongly than sorafenib. Moreover, most of the proteins in the P53 signaling pathway were downregulated with lenvatinib and regorafenib by more than 36% at least. In conclusion, lenvatinib and regorafenib have much stronger potency against Huh-7 cell proliferation than sorafenib because of their more potent effects on cell cycle arrest and apoptosis induction. The underling mechanism may be at least due to the 33 downregulated proteins centralizing the signal pathways of cell cycle, p53 and DNA synthesis based on the present proteomics study.

### Keywords
Multi-rtk inhibitors, Proteomics, Huh-7 cells

### Affiliations
School of Chinese Integrative Medicine, Hebei Medical University, Shijiazhuang, China
Hebei medical university

### Submitter
Dezhi Kong

### Lab Head
Dr Dezhi Kong
School of Chinese Integrative Medicine, Hebei Medical University, Shijiazhuang, China


