### Accession
PXD037267

### Title
Attenuated inflammatory profile following single and repeated handgrip exercise and remote ischemic preconditioning in patients with cerebral small vessel disease

### Description
Similar to remote ischemic preconditioning bouts of exercise may possess immediate protective effects against ischemia-reperfusion injury. However, underlying mechanisms are largely unknown. This study compared the impact of single and repeated handgrip exercise versus remote ischemic preconditioning on inflammatory biomarkers in patients with cerebral small vessel disease (cSVD). In this crossover study, 14 patients with cSVD were included. All participants performed 4-days of handgrip exercise (4x5-minutes at 30% of maximal handgrip strength) and remote ischemic preconditioning (rIPC; 4x5-minutes cuff occlusion around the upper arm) twice daily. Patients were randomized to start with either handgrip exercise or rIPC and the two interventions were separated by >9 days. Venous blood was drawn before and after one intervention, and after 4-days of repeated exposure. We performed a targeted proteomics on inflammation markers in all blood samples.

### Sample Protocol
For the proteomics analysis all 84 samples were analyzed simultaneously for 92 unique protein biomarkers using a pre-designed Proseek MultiplexÒ immunoassay panel; Inflammation (OLINK Proteomics, Uppsala, Sweden). The entire list of proteins can be found in supplementary table 1. Plasma was analyzed using Proximity Extension Assay (PEA), which has a high specificity and sensitivity (Assarsson et al., 2014). Validation data and limits of detection (LOD) are available at the manufacturer’s webpage (http://www.olink.com).  The Olink assay was performed with a fixed proportion of the plate designated for control samples. Samples were randomly allocated to wells. The outcome data was normalized using standard Olink workflows to produce relative protein abundance on a log2 scale (‘NPX’). Quality assessment was performed by examination of Olink internal controls. Following this step, one sample with poor-quality was removed. 37 proteins had more than 75% of the samples below the limit of detection and were excluded from the final analysis. For the remaining 55 proteins, the change in NPX for each protein between baseline and after single application was determined and compared between rIPC and handgrip.  Additionally, the difference in NPX levels for each inflammatory biomarker after repeated preconditioning was analyzed for both rIPC and handgrip.

### Data Protocol
Analyses were performed using RStudio (R Core Team (2019))(Team, 2019). All outcomes were checked for normality. The differences in NPX for each protein were investigated with two linear mixed models (baseline versus single and baseline versus repeated). Linear mixed models were performed using the lmer function in the lme4 package (Bates D, 2015) with a random intercept. The fixed variables were time (baseline, single and repeated) and treatment (rIPC and handgrip), including an interaction term for time*treatment. We used the Benjamini–Hochberg method to correct for multiple testing of the 55 inflammatory biomarkers. Adjusted P-values <0.05 were considered statistically significant, but because of the exploratory nature of this study, we also reported all proteins that had unadjusted P-values <0.05.

### Publication Abstract
<b>Background:</b> Similar to remote ischemic preconditioning bouts of exercise may possess immediate protective effects against ischemia-reperfusion injury. However, underlying mechanisms are largely unknown. This study compared the impact of single and repeated handgrip exercise versus remote ischemic preconditioning on inflammatory biomarkers in patients with cerebral small vessel disease (cSVD). <b>Methods:</b> In this crossover study, 14 patients with cSVD were included. All participants performed 4-day of handgrip exercise (4x5-minutes at 30% of maximal handgrip strength) and remote ischemic preconditioning (rIPC; 4x5-minutes cuff occlusion around the upper arm) twice daily. Patients were randomized to start with either handgrip exercise or rIPC and the two interventions were separated by &gt; 9&#xa0;days. Venous blood was drawn before and after one intervention, and after 4-day of repeated exposure. We performed a targeted proteomics on inflammation markers in all blood samples. <b>Results:</b> Targeted proteomics revealed significant changes in 9 out of 92 inflammatory proteins, with four proteins demonstrating comparable time-dependent effects between handgrip and rIPC. After adjustment for multiple testing we found significant decreases in FMS-related tyrosine kinase-3 ligand (Flt3L; 16.2% reduction; adjusted <i>p</i>-value: 0.029) and fibroblast growth factor-21 (FGF-21; 32.8% reduction adjusted <i>p</i>-value: 0.029) after single exposure. This effect did not differ between handgrip and rIPC. The decline in Flt3L after repeated handgrip and rIPC remained significant (adjusted <i>p</i>-value = 0.029), with no difference between rIPC and handgrip (adjusted <i>p</i>-value = 0.98). <b>Conclusion:</b> Single handgrip exercise and rIPC immediately attenuated plasma Flt3L and FGF-21, with the reduction of Flt3L remaining present after 4-day of repeated intervention, in people with cSVD. This suggests that single and repeated handgrip exercise and rIPC decrease comparable inflammatory biomarkers, which suggests activation of shared (anti-)inflammatory pathways following both stimuli. Additional studies will be needed to exclude the possibility that this activation is merely a time effect.

### Keywords
Proteomics., Exercise, Remote ischemic preconditioning, Inflammation, Cerebral small vessel disease

### Affiliations
Radboud University Medical Centre, Radboud institute for Health sciences, Department of Physiology. Geert Grooteplein Zuid 10, Nijmegen, Gelderland, Netherlands, 6525GA.
Radboudumc

### Submitter
Thijs Landman

### Lab Head
Dr DHJ Thijssen
Radboud University Medical Centre, Radboud institute for Health sciences, Department of Physiology. Geert Grooteplein Zuid 10, Nijmegen, Gelderland, Netherlands, 6525GA.


