### Accession
PXD013743

### Title
Colorectal cancer anti-ORF1p LFQ IP-MS

### Description
Here, three colorectal tumors were subjected to anti-ORF1p LFQ, IP-MS: (A) Krukenberg Carcinoma, Ovary; (B) Metastatic Rectal Adenocarcinoma, Liver; (C) Adenocarcinoma, Colon. These were accompanied by matched normal IP controls and/or mouse IgG IP controls. The objective is to map LINE-1 RNP interactions in cancer.

### Sample Protocol
Cell line and tumor cryomilling and protein extraction Handling of cryomilled HEK-293TLD cells ectopically expressing L1 from pLD401 and pMT302 previously described in {PMIDs: 24267889, 26895062}. Patient samples were milled and extracted similarly, as previously described {PMID: 28060343}. Protein extraction solution: 20 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 500 mM NaCl, 1% (v/v) Triton X-100, 1x Roche Complete EDTA-free protease inhibitors. Tumor A was extracted in a separate instance in the same solution with the addition of Promega recombinant RNasin at 1:50 (v:v).  Affinity Capture Carried out as previously described in {PMIDs: 24267889, 26895062, 28060343}. For patient samples subjected to LFQ-MS we used the following parameters: 200 mg-scale, 10 µl of anti-ORF1p (Millipore Sigma #MABC1152) and mouse IgG (Millipore Sigma #I5381) affinity medium were used per 200 mg-scale affinity capture. In addition to the mouse IgG mock affinity capture control, for Tumors B and C, we carried out an additional mock affinity capture using the anti-ORF1p antibody and extracts from matched normal tissue, resected at the time the CRC was removed from the patient. Affinity media and clarified extracts were incubated for 1 hr at 4 °C, washed three times with extraction solution, and eluted with NuPage sample buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific #NP0007) at 70 °C. After SDS-PAGE  (Thermo Fisher Scientific: 1 mm, 4-12% Bis-Tris NuPAGE system). Samples destined for MS were reduced (DTT) and alkylated (iodoacetamide) prior to electrophoresis. In a second instance, Tumor A affinity isolations were conducted at a 100 mg-scale using 15 µl of anti-ORF1p and mouse IgG medium, were extracted and washed (3 x 250 µl washes as opposed to 1 ml)  in the presence of 1:50 RNasin (not previously included), and 1x protease inhibitors (normally only present during extraction); approximately ⅔ the standard sonication energy was applied (the standard is 15-20 J per 100 mg-scale in a 25% (w:v) extract).  Mass Spectrometry Peptides were resuspended in 10 µL 5% (v/v) methanol, 0.2% (v/v) formic acid and half was loaded onto an EASY-Spray column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, ES800, 15cm x 75µm ID, PepMap C18, 3 µm) via an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Column temperature was set to 35 °C. Using a flow rate of 300 nl/min, peptides were eluted in a gradient of increasing acetonitrile, where Solvent A was 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water and Solvent B was 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in 95% (v/v) acetonitrile. Peptides were ionized by electrospray at 1.8 – 2.1 kV as they eluted. The elution gradient length was 10 minutes for gel bands and 140 min for all gel plugs except, the second set derived from Tumor A, where the gradient length was 190 min. Full scans were acquired in profile mode at 70,000 resolution (at 200 m/z). The top 5 (for gel bands) or 25 (for gel plugs) most intense ions in each full scan were fragmented by HCD. Peptides with charge state 1 or unassigned were excluded. Previously sequenced precursors were also excluded, for 4 s (for gel bands) or 30 s (for gel plugs), within a mass tolerance of 10 ppm. Fragmentation spectra were acquired in centroid mode at 17,500 resolution. The AGC target was 2x105, with a maximum injection time of 200 msec. The normalized collision energy was 24%, and the isolation window was 2 m/z units.

### Data Protocol
Analysis of excised protein bands MS data obtaing from proteins bands labeled in the image were handled via the following process: The RAW files were converted to MGF format by ProteoWizard {PMID: 23051804} and searched against the human protein database with X! Tandem {PMID: 14976030}, using the following settings: fragment mass error - 10 ppm; parent mass error - 10 ppm; cleavage site - R or K, except when followed by P; maximum missed cleavage sites - 1; maximum valid peptide expectation value - 0.1; fixed modification - carbamidomethylation at C; potential modification - oxidation at M; include reversed sequences - yes. Parameters for the refinement search were: maximum valid expectation value - 0.01; potential modifications - deamidation at N or Q, oxidation or dioxidation at M or W; unanticipated cleavage - yes. For each protein ID list, the proteins were ranked by log E-value; keratins, proteins ranked below trypsin, and non-human proteins were removed; if multiple proteins remained, the nth protein (n>1) was removed if (a) it is homologous to a higher-ranked protein or (b) does not have within 50% the number of PSMs of the top-ranked remaining protein; remaining proteins were listed as IDs for each band. For identification of candidate phosphorylation sites using X! Tandem, the RAW files from Tumor IPs were converted to MGF, these were searched against orthogonalized ORF protein sequences and included the following additional potential modifications during the refinement search: Phospho@S, Phospho@T, Phospho@Y. Label-free quantitative analysis Processing RAW data in MaxQuant We used MaxQuant v1.6.5.0 {PMIDs: 19029910, 27809316} with default settings and the following adjustments (in brief). Trypsin/P cleavage. Modifications included in protein quantification: Oxidation (M); Acetyl (Protein N-term); Carbamidomethyl (C). Phospho (STY) were searched, but excluded from quantification along with their unmodified counterpart peptides. Label min. ratio count: 2. Match between runs: True. Second peptides: True. Stabilize large LFQ ratios: True. Separate LFQ in parameter groups: False. Require MS/MS for LFQ comparisons: True. The RAW and MaxQuant processed files are available for download in this submission.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Retrotransposon, Line-1, Lc-msms, L1, Crc, Patient tumor

### Affiliations
The Rockefeller University

### Submitter
John LaCava

### Lab Head
Dr John LaCava
The Rockefeller University


