### Accession
PXD028704

### Title
Master mitotic kinases regulate viral genome delivery during papillomavirus cell entry

### Description
Cell cycle progression into mitosis induce cellular rearrangements such as mitotic spindle formation, Golgi fragmentation, and nuclear envelope breakdown. Like certain retroviruses, nuclear delivery of HPV16 genomes is facilitated by these processes during entry into host cells by tethering of the viral DNA to mitotic chromosomes through the minor capsid protein L2. However, the mechanism of delivery onto and tethering to the condensed chromosomes is barely understood on a mechanistic level. To date it is unclear, which cellular proteins facilitate this process in interaction with L2 or how this process is regulated. Here, we discovered that HPV16 minor capsid protein L2 is phosphorylated during entry upon mitosis onset on conserved residues within the chromosome-binding region (CBR) that is responsible for nuclear import. The crucial L2 phosphorylations occurred sequentially by the master mitotic kinases CDK1 and PLK1. L2 phosphorylation, thus, not only regulated timely delivery of HPV16 vDNA to mitotic chromatin at mitosis onset, but also likely resulted in a conformational switch in L2 that allowed engagement of cellular proteins for this purpose. In summary, our work demonstrates for the first time a crucial role of mitotic kinases for nuclear entry of a DNA virus and provides important insights into the molecular mechanism of pathogen import into the nucleus during mitosis.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitated L2 protein as well as bacterially produced L2 protein that was used as substrate in the in vitro kinase assay (see above) were first subjected to acetone precipitation to get rid of SDS and other contaminating substances. IP samples were dissolved in 8M urea, reduced by the addition of DTT (20mM; 1h, 37°C) and alkylated using iodoacetamide (55mM; 30min at RT in darkness), while the L2 from the in vitro kinase assay was resuspended in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer and directly alkylated using chloroacetamide (55mM; 30min at RT in the dark). Subsequent to dilution (IP) and the addition of CaCl2 (10mM final concentration) digestion was initiated by the addition of chymotrypsin (0.5 – 1µg; dissolved in 1mM HCl) and incubated for 16 h at 25°C. The digests were quenched by the addition of TFA to a final concentration of 1% and subsequently desalted using C18 Stage tips.  For mass spectrometry analysis, samples were eluted from the Stage tips twice using 20 µl of Buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.5% formic acid) dried in a Eppendorf evaporator and dissolved in 10µl Buffer A (0.5% formic acid in water) each. LC-MSMS was performed using a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) online coupled to an EASY nLC 1200 nano-HPLC via a self-packed fused silica emitter column ( 360µm  OD x 75µm ID x 25 cm L; Nanoseparations, NL) that had been pressure filled with 1.9µm C18 beads ( Reprosil pur, C18-AQ, Dr. Maisch; Ammerbuch, Germany). The column was placed in a PRSO column oven mounted on top of the NanoSpray Flex source (both Thermo Fisher Scientific) with the column oven temperature set to 45°C.  Immunoprecipitation samples were online separated using a multilinear gradient running from 2 – 20% Buffer B in 150min, from 20-50% B in 90 min and from 50-90% B in 10 min with a flow rate of 250 nl/min. The column was flushed with 90% B for additional 5 min before re-equilibration at starting conditions (Buffer A). In contrast, samples from the in vitro kinase assay were separated using a linear gradient running from 3 – 35% Buffer B in 75 min at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The column was also flushed with Buffer B for 5min before returning to starting conditions.  The Orbitrap HF mass spectrometer was operated in positive mode, alternating in data dependent mode between survey scans in the orbitrap (mass range m/z = 300-1750; resolution R=60000; target value = 3E6; max IT 100 ms) and MS/MS acquisition (HCD) of the 17 most intense ion peaks detected (resolution R = 15.000; target value = 1E5; max IT = 50msec; NCE = 27). Spectra were recorded all in profile mode. Dynamic exclusion of already identified spectra was allowed and set to 20 s. Mass spectrometry settings for the analysis of the L2 protein from in vitro kinase samples were similar, except for adaptations to the scan range (m/z = 300 – 1650), the max IT ( 50 ms) and the NCE (NCE = 28).

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data were processed using MaxQuant (v. 1.6.6.0 (IP) or v. 1.6.17.0 (in vitro kinase assay)) with the built-in Andromeda search engine. Tandem mass spectra obtained from the measurement of the immunoprecipitated samples were searched against the human papilloma virus as well as the human uniprotKB database (UP000009251_333760.fasta; UP000005640_9606.fasta; versions from 04/2019), while spectra obtained from the measurement of the in vitro phosphorylated, bacterially expressed L2 protein were searched against the sequence of the L2 protein proper (L2_capsid.fasta) as well as against the uniprotKB database for E.choli (UP000000625_83333.fasta, version from 04/2019). In both instances, databases were concatenated with reversed sequence versions of all entries, supplemented also with common lab contaminants. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine residues was set as fixed modification for the search, while oxidation at methionine, deamidation of asparagine residues, acetylation of protein N-termini and phosphorylation on serine, threonine and tyrosine were set as variable modifications. Chymotrypsin was defined as the digesting enzyme, allowing a maximum of two missed cleavages and requiring a minimum length of 6 or 7 amino acids. The maximum allowed mass deviation was 20 ppm for MS and 0.5 Da for MS/MS scans. The match between run function was enabled as well as the calculation of iBAQ intensity values. Protein groups were regarded as being unequivocally identified with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% for both the peptide and protein identifications. Phosphorylation sites were accepted when they were identified with a localization probability of >0.75 (class I sites)

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human papillomavirus, Lc-msms, Plk1, Mitosis, Nuclear import, Proteomics, Cdk1, Virus entry, Hpv

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Moleclar Biomedicine Bioanalyticyl Mass Spectrometry Unit Röntgenstr. 20 48149 Münster Germany
Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry

### Submitter
Hannes Drexler

### Lab Head
Dr Hannes C. A. Drexler
Max Planck Institute for Moleclar Biomedicine Bioanalyticyl Mass Spectrometry Unit Röntgenstr. 20 48149 Münster Germany


