### Accession
PXD038314

### Title
IQGAP1 mediates the communication between the nucleus and the mitochondria via NDUFS4 alternative splicing

### Description
A constant communication between mitochondria and nucleus ensures cellular homeostasis and adaptation to mitochondrial stress. Anterograde regulatory pathways involving a large number of nuclear-encoded proteins control mitochondrial biogenesis and functions. Such functions are deregulated in cancer, resulting in proliferative advantages for cancer cells, aggressive disease and therapeutic resistance. Transcriptional networks controlling the nuclear-encoded mitochondrial genes are known, however alternative splicing (AS) regulation has not been implicated in this communication. Here, we show that IQGAP1, a scaffold protein that regulates AS of distinct gene subsets in gastric cancer cells, participates in AS regulation that strongly affects mitochondrial respiration. Combined proteomic and RNA-seq analyses of IQGAP1 KO and parental cells show that IQGAP1 KO alters a specific AS event of the mitochondrial respiratory chain complex I (CI) subunit NDUFS4 and downregulates a subset of CI subunits. In IQGAP1 KO cells, CI intermediates accumulate resembling assembly deficiencies observed in patients with Leigh syndrome bearing NDUFS4 mutations. Mitochondrial CI activity is significantly lower in KO compared to parental cells, while exogenous expression of IQGAP1 reverses mitochondrial defects of IQGAP1 KO cells. Our work sheds light to a novel facet of IQGAP1 in mitochondrial quality control that involves fine-tuning of CI activity through AS regulation in gastric cancer.

### Sample Protocol
The tryptic digested samples (through Sp3 protocol) were subjected to nLC-nESI MS/MS analysis in an Ultimate3000 RSLC chromatographic system coupled to the HF-X Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Analysis was carried out in a data-dependent positive ion mode (DDA). The spray voltage was set to 2.2 kV with a capillary temperature of 270°C. Full scan MS were obtained on the Orbitrap analyzer at a 60,000 resolution with an Automatic Gain Control (AGC) set to 3e6 and maximum injection time 45 ms. Data were obtained in technical duplicates using the Xcalibur software. The mass spectrometer was operated using the lockmass function on.

### Data Protocol
he raw files were searched and the identified proteins were quantified using Label Free Quantitation (LFQ) in MaxQuant (version 1.6.14.0), using tryptic/P search against the human uniprot protein database (downloaded 19/09/2019). Search parameters included a molecular weight ranging from 350 to 5,000 Da, a precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm, an MS/MS fragment tolerance of 0.5 Da, and methionine oxidation, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. The protein and peptide false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1%. The match-between-run and second peptides functions were enabled. Statistical analyses and visualization (heatmap) were performed in the environment of Perseus software platform.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lfq proteomics, Alternative splicing; mitochondrial respiratory complex i; gastric cancer

### Affiliations
Institute for Fundamental Biomedical Research,  BSRC “Al. Fleming”, Vari 16672, Greece
Protein Analysis Laboratory
B.S.R.C. "Alexander Fleming",
Alexander Fleming Street 34
16672, Vari,
Greece

### Submitter
Martina Samiotaki

### Lab Head
Dr Panagiota Kafasla
Institute for Fundamental Biomedical Research,  BSRC “Al. Fleming”, Vari 16672, Greece


