### Accession
PXD033109

### Title
TgCrk2 interactome in Toxoplasma gondii RH and ME49 parasites

### Description
Although apicomplexans lack conventional R-point regulators, presence of the quiescent G1 forms of 43 parasites, including mature T. gondii bradyzoites suggests that a functional RESTRICTION checkpoint 44 exists in apicomplexan parasites. We showed that Cdk-related G1 kinase TgCrk2 forms alternative 45 complexes with atypical cyclins (TgCycP1, TgCycP2 and TgCyc5) in the rapidly dividing developmentally 46 incompetent RH and slower dividing developmentally competent ME49 tachyzoites and bradyzoites. 47 Examination of individual cyclins verified the correlation of cyclin expression with growth dependence and 48 development capacity of type I RH and type II ME49 strains. We demonstrated that rapidly dividing RH 49 tachyzoites are dependent on TgCycP1 and expression of TgCycP1 interferes with bradyzoite 50 differentiation. By using an auxin-induced degradation (AID) model, we established that TgCycP2 51 regulates G1 duration in the developmentally competent ME49 tachyzoites but not in the developmentally 52 incompetent RH tachyzoites. We also tested the functions of TgCycP2 and TgCyc5 in alkaline induced in 53 vitro model and in ex vivo model of spontaneous bradyzoite differentiation (rat embryonic brain cells). 54 Based on functional and global gene expression analyses, we determined that TgCycP2 also regulates 55 bradyzoite replication, while stress- or host-induced TgCyc5 was critical for efficient bradyzoite conversion 56 and tissue cyst maturation.

### Sample Protocol
T. gondii RHKu80hxgprt double KO AtTIR1 TgCrk2HA (RH tachyzoites) and ME49Ku80hxgprt double KO AtTIR1 TgCrk2myc (ME49 tachyzoites) parasites were grown at pH7.4, 5% CO2, 37oC for 36-48h; ME49Ku80hxgprt double KOAtTIR1 TgCrk2myc parasites were also grown at pH8.2, ambient air, 37oC for 72h (ME49 bradyzoites). Parental RHKu80hxgprt AtTIR1 and ME49Ku80hxgprt double KO AtTIR1 parasites were grown under the same conditions. Each sample was prepared from 2x109 parasites collected by filtration. Total proteins were extracted by incubation in the phosphate buffered saline solution with 263mM NaCl, 0.25% NP-40 and proteinase-phosphatase inhibitors cocktail. TgCrk2HA or TgCrk2myc complexes were isolated on -HA or -Myc magnetic beads.  Protein samples were processed for mass spectrometry-based proteomic analysis using filter-aided sample preparation (FASP). Briefly, proteins are reduced using diothiothreitol (DTT), alkylated with iodoacetamide (IAA), buffer exchanged with urea followed by ammonium bicarbonate, and finally digested with Trypsin/Lys-C overnight at 37°C. Peptides were eluted and desalted using C18 SPE columns (Waters) with a vacuum manifold, and dried in a vacuum concentrator. Peptides were separated using a 75µm x 50cm C18 reversed-phase-UHPLC column (Thermo Scientific) on an Ultimate 3000 UHPLC (Thermo Scientific) with a 120-minute gradient (2-32% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid). Full MS survey scans were acquired at 70,000 resolution. Data-dependent acquisition (DDA) selected the top 10 most abundant ions for MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were processed in MaxQuant (www.maxquant.org) and searched against the current Uniprot Toxoplasma gondii ME49 protein sequence database. Search parameters include constant modification of cysteine by carbamidomethylation and the variable modification, methionine oxidation. Proteins were identified using the filtering criteria of 1% protein and peptide false discovery rate.

### Publication Abstract
Human toxoplasmosis is a life-threatening disease caused by the apicomplexan parasite Toxoplasma gondii. Rapid replication of the tachyzoite is associated with symptomatic disease, while suppressed division of the bradyzoite is responsible for chronic disease. Here, we identified the T. gondii cell cycle mechanism, the G<sub>1</sub> restriction checkpoint (R-point), that operates the switch between parasite growth and differentiation. Apicomplexans lack conventional R-point regulators, suggesting adaptation of alternative factors. We showed that Cdk-related G<sub>1</sub> kinase TgCrk2 forms alternative complexes with atypical cyclins (TgCycP1, TgCycP2, and TgCyc5) in the rapidly dividing developmentally incompetent RH and slower dividing developmentally competent ME49 tachyzoites and bradyzoites. Examination of cyclins verified the correlation of cyclin expression with growth dependence and development capacity of RH and ME49 strains. We demonstrated that rapidly dividing RH tachyzoites were dependent on TgCycP1 expression, which interfered with bradyzoite differentiation. Using the conditional knockdown model, we established that TgCycP2 regulated G<sub>1</sub> duration in the developmentally competent ME49 tachyzoites but not in the developmentally incompetent RH tachyzoites. We tested the functions of TgCycP2 and TgCyc5 in alkaline induced and spontaneous bradyzoite differentiation (rat embryonic brain cells) models. Based on functional and global gene expression analyses, we determined that TgCycP2 also regulated bradyzoite replication, while signal-induced TgCyc5 was critical for efficient tissue cyst maturation. In conclusion, we identified the central machinery of the T. gondii restriction checkpoint comprised of TgCrk2 kinase and three atypical T. gondii cyclins and demonstrated the independent roles of TgCycP1, TgCycP2, and TgCyc5 in parasite growth and development. <b>IMPORTANCE</b> Toxoplasma gondii is a virulent and abundant human pathogen that puts millions of silently infected people at risk of reactivation of the chronic disease. Encysted bradyzoites formed during the chronic stage are resistant to current therapies. Therefore, insights into the mechanism of tissue cyst formation and reactivation are major areas of investigation. The fact that rapidly dividing parasites differentiate poorly strongly suggests that there is a threshold of replication rate that must be crossed to be considered for differentiation. We discovered a cell cycle mechanism that controls the T. gondii growth-rest switch involved in the conversion of dividing tachyzoites into largely quiescent bradyzoites. This switch operates the T. gondii restriction checkpoint using a set of atypical and parasite-specific regulators. Importantly, the novel T. gondii R-point network was not present in the parasite's human and animal hosts, offering a wealth of new and parasite-specific drug targets to explore in the future.

### Keywords
Bradyzoite, Toxoplasma gondii, Restriction checkpoint, Tachyzoite, Cell cycle, Cyclin, Differentiation, Crk

### Affiliations
Department of Internal Medicine Division of Infectious Diseases and International Medicine Morsani College of Medicine University of South Florida Tampa, FL
University of South Florida

### Submitter
Dale Chaput

### Lab Head
Dr Elena Suvorova
Department of Internal Medicine Division of Infectious Diseases and International Medicine Morsani College of Medicine University of South Florida Tampa, FL


