### Accession
PXD033193

### Title
The metabolite-controlled ubiquitin conjugase Ubc8 promotes mitochondrial protein import by enhancing assembly of the TOM complex - Data Set 2

### Description
Mitochondria are essential organelles that play a key role in energy metabolism. Transitions between glycolytic and respiring conditions induce considerable adaptations of the cellular proteome. These metabolism-dependent changes are particularly pronounced for the protein composition of mitochondria. Here we show that the ubiquitin conjugase Ubc8 of the yeast cytosol plays a crucial role in the remodeling process when cells are shifted from respiratory to fermentative conditions. Ubc8 is a conserved and well-studied component of the catabolite control system that is known to regulate the stability of gluconeogenesis enzymes. Unexpectedly, we found that Ubc8 also promotes the assembly of the translocase of the outer membrane of mitochondria (TOM) and stabilizes its cytosol-exposed receptor subunit Tom22. Ubc8 deficiency results in a compromised protein import into mitochondria and a subsequent accumulation of mitochondrial precursor proteins in the cytosol. Our observations show that Ubc8 which is controlled by the prevalent metabolic conditions, promotes on the one hand the switch from glucose synthesis to glucose usage in the cytosol and, on the other hand, the biogenesis of the mitochondrial TOM machinery in order to protect the mitochondrial import machinery during phases of metabolic transition.

### Sample Protocol
To analyze the metabolic shift by label-free mass spectrometry (Fig. 4B, S4B) the respective yeast strains were cultured in YPG. Glucose (final concentration 2%) was added to the cultures for 4 h. 10 OD600 of cells were harvested (5,000 g, 5 min, RT) and washed with sterile water. Pellets were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C for further analysis. In total four biological replicates (n=4) were prepared. Samples were prepared for mass spectrometry like described before including the following changes: Cell lysates of 10 OD were prepared in 200 µl lysis buffer and 25 µg of protein was used for trypsin and Lys.C digestion. Peptides were separated on reversed-phase columns (50 cm, 75 m inner diameter packed in-house with C18 resin ReproSilPur 120, 1.9 m diameter (Dr. Maisch) using an Easy-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Scientific) directly coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). A 3 hours gradient from 5% - 95% Solvent B (Solvent A: aqueous 0.1% formic acid; Solvent B: 80 % acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) at a constant flow rate of 250 nl/min was used to elute the bound peptides. Further details of the gradient and instrument parameters are provided with the raw files uploaded to the ProteomeXchange repository.

### Data Protocol
MS data was processed using the MaxQuant software Version 2.0.1.0{Cox, 2008 #6855;Cox, 2011 #6895;Tyanova, 2016 #7545} and a Saccharomyces cerevisiae proteome database obtained from Uniprot. Data wasquantified using the LFQ algorithm in MaxQuant

### Publication Abstract
Mitochondria play a key role in cellular energy metabolism. Transitions between glycolytic and respiratory conditions induce considerable adaptations of the cellular proteome. These metabolism-dependent changes are particularly pronounced for the protein composition of mitochondria. Here, we show that the yeast cytosolic ubiquitin conjugase Ubc8 plays a crucial role in the remodeling process when cells transition from respiratory to fermentative conditions. Ubc8 is a conserved and well-studied component of the catabolite control system that is known to regulate the stability of gluconeogenic enzymes. Unexpectedly, we found that Ubc8 also promotes the assembly of the translocase of the outer membrane of mitochondria (TOM) and increases the levels of its cytosol-exposed receptor subunit Tom22. Ubc8 deficiency results in compromised protein import into mitochondria and reduced steady-state levels of mitochondrial proteins. Our observations show that Ubc8, which is controlled by the prevailing metabolic conditions, promotes the switch from glucose synthesis to glucose usage in the cytosol and induces the biogenesis of the mitochondrial TOM machinery to improve mitochondrial protein import during phases of metabolic transition.

### Keywords
Metabolic switch, Mitochondrial import

### Affiliations
Molecular Genetics, Tech. University Kaiserslautern
Technical University Kaiserslautern

### Submitter
Markus Räschle

### Lab Head
Dr Markus Räschle
Molecular Genetics, Tech. University Kaiserslautern


