### Accession
PXD000564

### Title
LC-MS/MS analysis of visceral and subcutaneous adipose tissue proteomes in young goats with focus on innate immunity and inflammation related proteins

### Description
The aim of this study was to undertake an in-depth and comparative study of the protein expression patterns of subcutaneous and visceral adipose tissues in goats, combined to an mRNA expression study of proteins involved in immune and inflammatory response. Samples were obtained from four healthy goat-kids, Alpine breed, naturally reared by their mothers. Animals were slaughtered at the age of 30 days, during routinely slaughtering procedures, and four different adipose tissues were collected from each animal. Subcutaneous fat was taken from sternum and base of the tail; visceral fat was taken from perirenal and omental depots. The four adipose tissues deposits were selected due to their frequent use in experimental studies on fat tissue. Liver samples were also collected, and used as reference samples. Tissue samples were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at –80 degrees C until analysis. The 20 runs included in this dataset are from the 4 animals x 5 tissues (sternum, base of the tail, perirenal area, omentum and liver). A 2-D label free LC-MS/MS approach followed by cluster analysis was used for comparing the subcutaneous and visceral fat tissue proteomes. Each sample was analysed in ~12 SCX fractions which correspond to the WIFF files included in each RAW_GOAT0xx.zip files.

### Sample Protocol
200 mg of each tissue were homogenized in 5µl/mg TES buffer and centrifuged at 10000x g for 30 min at 4°C. Protein concentration in the supernatant was determined by the Pierce BCA Protein Kit, using BSA as a standard. Proteins (120 µg) were obtained after precipitation with 6 volumes of ice-cold acetone, using the same protocol for liver and fat tissues and then denatured. After reduction and blocking of the cysteine residues, proteins were digested with trypsin (1:10 w/w) at 37°C overnight. Peptide mixtures generated from the digestion of 50 µg of protein were injected into an Agilent 1100 Series capillary HPLC equipped with a Zorbax Bio-SCX Series II, and peptides were eluted with a gradient of increasing NaCl solution. Fractions were collected every minute for 65 minutes and then combined according to their peptide loads into 9-10 pooled samples. The pooled SCX fractions were further separated by a reverse phase liquid chromatography using an Agilent 1100 Series nano-flow HPLC system. The eluted peptides were sprayed through a nano-spray needle directly into a q-TOF mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
The raw spectrum files from 20 individual shotgun LC-MS/MS runs (comprising four biological replicates from each of the five tissues) were searched separately with Protein Pilot 1.0 software using the ProGroup and Paragon algorithms for protein grouping and confidence scoring. The confidence for protein identification was selected to a protein score of 1.3, equivalent to 95% confidence and a minimum of two peptides per protein. The target database used for searching was NCBI Capridae (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/protein?LinkName=genome_protein&from_uid=10731) which comprised 24585 non-redundant sequences (version as of 24 March 2014). The list of common contaminants UniProt cRAP (ftp://ftp.thegpm.org/fasta/cRAP/) was appended. The reversed copy of each of the target protein sequences for estimating the False Discovery Rate (FDR) was generated on the fly by ProteinPilot during searches. To compare the proteome profiles of the tissue types, a hierarchical clustering analysis was performed, using the Ward’s linkage method. Data handling and analysis was performed using the statistical software package R. The open source online tool Blast2GO (http://www.blast2go.com) was used for the functional annotation of the identified proteins. The functional analysis was further narrowed by PANTHER classification into protein families and functional pathways in order to increase the confidence.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Subcutaneous adipose tissue; visceral adipose tissue; lc-ms/ms; adipokines; goat

### Affiliations
Laura Restelli, Dipartimento di Scienze Veterinarie per la Salute, la Produzione Animale e la Sicurezza Alimentare – Università degli Studi di Milano, Via Celoria 10, 20133 Milan, Italy. Phone: +39 02 50318100
Dipartimento di Scienze Veterinarie per la Salute, la Produzione Animale e la Sicurezza Alimentare

### Submitter
Laura Restelli

### Lab Head
Dr Laura Restelli
Laura Restelli, Dipartimento di Scienze Veterinarie per la Salute, la Produzione Animale e la Sicurezza Alimentare – Università degli Studi di Milano, Via Celoria 10, 20133 Milan, Italy. Phone: +39 02 50318100


