### Accession
PXD033872

### Title
The selenoprotein TXNRD3 supports male fertility via the redox regulation of spermatogenesis

### Description
Thioredoxin/glutathione reductase (TGR, TXNRD3) is a selenoprotein composed of thioredoxin reductase and glutaredoxin domains; the function of this enzyme remains unknown. This NADPH-dependent thiol oxidoreductase evolved by gene duplication within the Txnrd family, is expressed in the testes and can reduce both thioredoxin and glutathione in vitro. To characterize the function of TXNRD3 in vivo, we generated a strain of mice with the deletion of Txnrd3 gene. We show that Txnrd3 knockout mice are viable and without discernable gross phenotypes, but TXNRD3 deficiency leads to fertility impairment in male mice. Txnrd3 knockout animals exhibit a lower fertilization rate in vitro, a sperm movement phenotype and an altered redox status of thiols. Proteomic analyses revealed a broad range of substrates reduced by TXNRD3 during sperm maturation, presumably as a part of quality control. The results show that TXNRD3 plays a critical role in male reproduction via the thiol redox control of spermatogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
Aiming to identify TXNRD3 target proteins, we collected luminal content of caput, corpus, and cauda regions of the epididymis of Txnrd3 KO and WT mice, pooling material from 8 mice to yield the amounts sufficient for further analyses. We subjected samples to a procedure designed to enrich endogenous target proteins. Our strategy assumed that target proteins are in an oxidized form in the Txnrd3 KO testis. The thiol-trapping column was made by loading organic mercury resin onto the column. The organic mercury resin is a recently synthesized resin, which binds reduced thiols (and certain other related chemical groups), so we used it to capture and elute target proteins. We prepared a thiol-trapping column by loading 5 ml binding buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 100 mM NaCl, 0.1 mM EDTA) to an empty column, adding 5 ml homogenous suspension of the resin onto the column equilibrated with the flow buffer, washed the resin with 5-10 volumes of H2O, and then with 5-10 column volumes of a binding buffer. The thiol-trapping column was prepared right before use. The luminal content including sperm from each epididymal region was lysed with RIPA buffer (#9806, CST), supplemented with 50 mM N-ethylmaleimide (NEM) for 5 min, and applied onto a PD MidiTrap G-25 column to clean up the excess of NEM prior to loading the samples. Under these conditions, NEM permanently modified reduced cysteines in proteins. In Txnrd3 KO mice, TXNRD3 targets would still be partially oxidized, and these oxidized residues would not react with NEM. In order to specifically reduce TXNRD3 target proteins, we generated a column with an immobilized reduced Grx-domain of TXNRD3. The N-terminal His-tagged Grx domain of mouse TXNRD3 was cloned and purified as described previously (16). HisTrap was used to capture the His-tagged Grx domain in order to immobilize it to the column. First, we prepared HisTrap and linked 1 ml of it to the pump system, added 5 ml H2O to wash the material, and equilibrated with 5 ml binding buffer. Second, we loaded the purified Grx domain onto the HisTrap column, washed with 5 ml binding buffer, added 5 ml binding buffer containing 10 mM DTT to reduce the Grx domain, and washed with 5 ml binding buffer. Third, we applied the epididymal luminal lysate to the reduced Grx column and collected the eluate (elution 1), then applied 5 ml binding buffer and collected the second eluate (elution 2). Finally, we applied the eluates, both elution 1 and elution 2, to the pre-prepared thiol-trapping column to trap specifically reduced cysteines, loaded 5 volumes of the binding buffer to the thiol-trapping column to remove unspecifically bound proteins, and then the bound proteins were eluted with 5 column volumes of the elution buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 300 mM imidazole, 50 mM NaCl, 0.1 mM EDTA) containing 5 mM DTT. The eluate from this step was alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide (IAM) and subjected to LC-MS/MS for protein identification.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were colelcted on an QExactive mass spectrometer and processed using a Comet-based pipeline. Spectra were converted to mzXML using a modified version of ReAdW.exe. Database searching included all canonical mouse entries from Uniprot. This database was concatenated with one composed of all protein sequences in the reversed order. Searches were performed using a 50-ppm precursor ion tolerance for total protein-level profiling. The product ion tolerance was set to 0.03 Da. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) was set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) was set as a variable modification. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR). PSM filtering was performed using a linear discriminant analysis, as described previously, while considering the following parameters: XCorr, ΔCn, missed cleavages, peptide length, charge state, and precursor mass accuracy. PSMs were collapsed to a 1% peptide FDR and then collapsed further to a final protein-level FDR of 1%. Moreover, protein assembly was guided by principles of parsimony to produce the smallest set of proteins necessary to account for all observed peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Thioredoxin/glutathione reductase (TXNRD3) is a selenoprotein composed of thioredoxin reductase and glutaredoxin domains. This NADPH-dependent thiol oxidoreductase evolved through gene duplication within the Txnrd family, is expressed in the testes, and can reduce both thioredoxin and glutathione in&#xa0;vitro; however, the function of this enzyme remains unknown. To characterize the function of TXNRD3 in&#xa0;vivo, we generated a strain of mice bearing deletion of Txnrd3 gene. We show that these Txnrd3 knockout mice are viable and without discernable gross phenotypes, and also that TXNRD3 deficiency leads to fertility impairment in male mice. We found that Txnrd3 knockout animals exhibited a lower fertilization rate in&#xa0;vitro, a sperm movement phenotype, and an altered thiol redox status in sperm cells. Proteomic analyses further revealed a broad range of substrates reduced by TXNRD3 during sperm maturation, presumably as a part of sperm quality control. Taken together, these results show that TXNRD3 plays a critical role in male reproduction via the thiol redox control of spermatogenesis.

### Keywords
Male fertility, Thioredoxin glutathione reductase, Redox control, Sperm motility

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School
Harvard Institutes of Medicine, BWH/Genetics  77 Avenue Louis Pasteur, Boston MA 02115, United States

### Submitter
Joao Paulo

### Lab Head
Dr Vadim Gladyshev
Harvard Institutes of Medicine, BWH/Genetics  77 Avenue Louis Pasteur, Boston MA 02115, United States


