### Accession
PXD004893

### Title
Increased cysteine protease activity in the aphid midgut decreases the transmission efficiency of a circulative plant virus

### Description
Aphids, sap-sucking insects in the order Hemiptera, are among the most prolific insect vectors of plant viruses Plant viruses from the family Luteoviridae are transmitted exclusively by aphids in a circulative manner and cause significant crop yield losses. Circulative plant viruses must cross the aphid gut and other tissues prior to transmission to a new host plant. The discovery of proteins that control acquisition and transmission in the insect vector is the biggest challenge for the vector biology field and will have practical applications for growers by providing new molecular targets for the development of precision vector management tools. The green peach aphid, Myzus persicae, is a vector of the Potato leafroll virus (PLRV), a polerovirus in the Luteoviridae. PLRV transmission efficiency was significantly reduced when a clonal lineage of M. persicae was reared on turnip (T-Myzus) as compared to the weed physalis (P-Myzus). The effect on PLRV transmission efficiency was transient and caused by a host-switch response. Using 2-D DIGE, we revealed that the major difference in the proteome profile of P- and T-Myzus was the lysosomal cysteine protease cathepsin B, with multiple size and charge isoforms of this enzyme up-regulated in T-Myzus. Quantitative, shotgun proteomics revealed a specific upregulation in the expression of other lysosomal proteins in T-Myzus as compared to P-Myzus, including cathepsin B, cathepsin B-16, beta-glucuronidase, peroxidasin, legumain-like, and aminopeptidase-N. The titer of PLRV was over 1.5 fold higher in P-Myzus than in T-Myzus at 24h and 72h after the beginning of virus acquisition, suggesting that virus acquisition in P-Myzus was more efficient. Cathepsin B and PLRV localization were starkly different in P- and T-Myzus midguts, the site of PLRV acquisition into the insect. In P-Myzus midguts, an abundance of PLRV was observed inside midgut cells, and cathepsin B was sequestered in a subcellular compartment. In contrast, there is near complete co-localization of cathepsin B and PLRV at the cell membranes in viruliferous T-Myzus. Inhibition of cathepsin and other cysteine proteases with E64 restored the ability of T-Myzus to transmit PLRV in a dose-dependent manner, suggesting that the activities of lysosomal cysteine proteases at the cell membrane in T-Myzus is responsible for the change in virus transmission phenotype in these aphids. T-Myzus individuals weighed more and had more progeny than P-Myzus individuals. These data are all consistent with the hypothesis that there is an induction of lysosomal exocytos in the midgut of T-Myzus linked to the ability of the aphid to acquire PLRV. These data also show that the ability of the generalist aphid M. persicae to transmit PLRV is influenced by the host plant the aphids are reared on, information that is useful to growers for polerovirus management in field crops.

### Sample Protocol
Parthenogenic reproducing colonies of the same clonal lineage of M. persicae Sultz were maintained on caged physalis for four months prior to the experiments and proteomics analyses.  Aphids from turnip and physalis were transferred to PLRV-infected Hairy nightshade leaves for an acquisition access period of 24 hours. After collecting the data for this initial experiment, another experiment was performed with an AAP of 48 hours to test whether a longer AAP would increase the virus transmission rate by T-Myzus.  After that, 10 aphids were transferred to each healthy potato cv. Red Maria seedling (n=10 plants) for an inoculation access period of 48 hours, as described. After three weeks, systemic infection of PLRV was detected in the recipient plants by double-antibody sandwich enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (DAS-ELISA) using α-PLRV antibodies.  To test for transient PLRV transmission, aphids reared on turnip were transferred to physalis plants for 3 days, then transferred to PLRV-infected HNS for a 48 hr AAP. Similarly, aphids reared on physalis were transferred to turnip plants for three days and then fed to PLRV-infected HNS detached leaves for 48 hr AAP. 5 aphids were transferred to healthy potato seedlings for the transmission assay for a 48 hr IAP, in 10 replicates per treatment. 3 weeks later, systemic PLRV infection in potato plants was detected by DAS-ELISA using α-PLRV antibodies. The proportion of plants infected with PLRV was compared to non-infected plants using the Chi square test. The effect of each host plant on aphid reproduction and overall weight was evaluated- 4th instar nymphs of M. persicae reared on physalis were transferred to either a turnip or a physalis plant and after 24 hours, nymphs that had molted to adults were transferred to a fresh turnip or physalis plant in 4 biological replicates to measure the host effect on aphid reproduction. 15 days later, progeny were counted and individual weight of adults was obtained by averaging weight of 15-30 adults/replicate.  P- and T-Myzus were fed on PLRV-infected HNS plants for a 24h AAP. Aphids were then transferred to an artificial diet for gut clearing. Aphid cohorts were collected at 24h or 72h after the start of the AAP for PLRV quantification by digital droplet PCR (ddPCR).  We used 2D-DIGE to measure the relative quantification of protein expression between P-Myzus and T-Myzus.  Gel plugs were picked from preparative gels and proteinsprepared for mass spectrometry. Peptides were analyzed using a Q Exactive mass spectrometer with an EasyNanoLC 1000 system via 30 min reversed-phase separation.   The same P- and T-Myzus samples analyzed using 2-D DIGE were also subjected to a 1-D separation and analysis using LC-MS/MS with an EasyNanoLC 1000 system coupled with a Q-Exactive.  Profile MS1 spectra were obtained and the 20 most intense ions from each MS1 scan with charge states of 2-7 were selected for fragmentation.   The levels of Cathepsin B transcripts were compared between P-Myzus and T-Myzus by qRT-PCR. Gene specific primers were used to amplify Cathepsin and B-actin M. persicae genes. Ct values of Cathepsin were normalized to the Ct values of the reference gene B-actin. Three biological replicates and three analytical replicates were performed for each gene.

### Data Protocol
Progeny counts and adult weights were analyzed by one-way ANOVA, and the means were compared using the Student’s t-test.  The ddPCR droplet data were analyzed using the QuantaSoft analysis software.  2D-DIGE gels were scanned on the Typhoon Variable Mode Imager.  DIGE gel images were analyzed using Progenesis Samespots v. 3.1. Spots were selected as being differentially expressed if they showed greater than a 2.0 fold change in spot density and an ANOVA P-value of <0.05.    For mass spectrometry analysis, a custom database was built using M. persicae proteins sequences available from Aphidbase, available Buchnera sequences, and predicted protein sequences from the pea aphid genome available on NCBI. MGF files were searched using Mascot v. 2.5.   For Skyline analysis, three biological and three analytical replicates were analyzed and a Student’s t-test was used to compare total peak areas. Spectral counting was performed using Scaffold 4 (Proteome Software) and differentially expressed proteins were selected using a p-value <0.05 and the Fisher’s Exact test.

### Publication Abstract
The green peach aphid, <i>Myzus persicae</i>, is a vector of the <i>Potato leafroll virus</i> (PLRV, Luteoviridae), transmitted exclusively by aphids in a circulative manner. PLRV transmission efficiency was significantly reduced when a clonal lineage of <i>M. persicae</i> was reared on turnip as compared with the weed physalis, and this was a transient effect caused by a host-switch response. A trend of higher PLRV titer in physalis-reared aphids as compared with turnip-reared aphids was observed at 24 h and 72 h after virus acquisition. The major difference in the proteomes of these aphids was the up-regulation of predicted lysosomal enzymes, in particular the cysteine protease cathepsin B (cathB), in aphids reared on turnip. The aphid midgut is the site of PLRV acquisition, and cathB and PLRV localization were starkly different in midguts of the aphids reared on the two host plants. In viruliferous aphids that were reared on turnip, there was near complete colocalization of cathB and PLRV at the cell membranes, which was not observed in physalis-reared aphids. Chemical inhibition of cathB restored the ability of aphids reared on turnip to transmit PLRV in a dose-dependent manner, showing that the increased activity of cathB and other cysteine proteases at the cell membrane indirectly decreased virus transmission by aphids. Understanding how the host plant influences virus transmission by aphids is critical for growers to manage the spread of virus among field crops.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Potato leafroll virus, Luteoviridae, 2d-dige, Host-pathogen interactions

### Affiliations
US Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service (USDA-ARS), Boyce Thompson Institute, Cornell University
USDA-ARS

### Submitter
Kevin Howe

### Lab Head
Dr Michelle Cilia
US Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service (USDA-ARS), Boyce Thompson Institute, Cornell University


