### Accession
PXD005614

### Title
Ave1 Homologs in Venturia pirina and Venturia inequalis

### Description
This dataset relates to a proteomic analysis of Ave1 homologs in the fungal pathogens Venturia pirina and Venturia inequalis.  These species are the cause of scab disease on European pear (Pyrus communis) and apple (Malus pumila). Sample preparation for both V. pirina and V. inequalis was designed to focus on effectors and eliminate host proteins. To do this the fungi were grown in vitro, on cellophane sheets mimicing the growth habit in infected leaves and proteins were extracted using a gentle washing procedure designed to avoid cell wall breakage. LC-MS/MS data was queried against a protein database generated from gene predictions obtained from whole genome sequences of V. pirina and V. inequalis.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation including fungal culture, protein extraction and LS-MS/MS have previously been described for V. pirina in (Cooke et. al. 2014, PubMed 24965097).  We used an identical procedure for V. inequalis in this study. For V. pirina in this study we reanalysed data already published as ProteomeXChange (PXD000710)

### Data Protocol
Search databases consisting of all predicted proteins based on genome annotations from V. pirina and V. inequalis were created prior to initiating database searches in this study. Prior to database searching, raw data from each instrument was converted from native instrument format to mzML.  All conversions were performed using msconvert with vendor peak picking enabled, and the MS2Denoise function with default settings to remove noise. Database searches were performed on each output file from each instrument run, using 3 search engines, Mascot (version 2.4.0 Matrix Science), X!Tandem (Cyclone 2013.02.01.1) and MS-GF+ (v9517).  Settings for all search engines were; variable modifications (oxidised methionine, N-terminal acetylation), fixed modification (carbamidomethylation of cysteine), precursor ion mass tolerance (10 ppm Orbitrap, 80 ppm MALDI , 1.2 Da HCT), fragment ion mass tolerance (0.5 Da Orbitrap, 0.8 Da HCT  and 0.3 Da MALDI), up to 1 missed tryptic cleavage was allowed.  For X!Tandem and MS-GF+ only, semi-tryptic searches were enabled thereby permitting peptides with a single trypsin cut site. Raw search results for each run were then converted to pepXML and processed with PeptideProphet using decoy sequences to help fit the negative distribution.  Since we were not interested in assigning peptides to specific extracted fractions, all files were combined by processing with iProphet (default settings) to produce a single pepXML file.  This was subsequently analysed with ProteinProphet to produce a single protXML file containing information about all peptides identified.  For submission to ProteomeExchange we converted each peptide prophet output to mzIdentML using the idconvert tool from the proteowizard suite.

### Publication Abstract
A proteogenomic analysis is presented for Venturia pirina, a fungus that causes scab disease on European pear (Pyrus communis). V. pirina is host-specific, and the infection is thought to be mediated by secreted effector proteins. Currently, only 36 V. pirina proteins are catalogued in GenBank, and the genome sequence is not publicly available. To identify putative effectors, V. pirina was grown in vitro on and in cellophane sheets mimicking its growth in infected leaves. Secreted extracts were analyzed by tandem mass spectrometry, and the data (ProteomeXchange identifier PXD000710) was queried against a protein database generated by combining in silico predicted transcripts with six frame translations of a whole genome sequence of V. pirina (GenBank Accession JEMP00000000 ). We identified 1088 distinct V. pirina protein groups (FDR 1%) including 1085 detected for the first time. Thirty novel (not in silico predicted) proteins were found, of which 14 were identified as potential effectors based on characteristic features of fungal effector protein sequences. We also used evidence from semitryptic peptides at the protein N-terminus to corroborate in silico signal peptide predictions for 22 proteins, including several potential effectors. The analysis highlights the utility of proteogenomics in the study of secreted effectors.

### Keywords
Venturia inequalis, Lc-msms, Effectors, Venturia pirina, Ave1

### Affiliations
James Cook University

### Submitter
Ira Cooke

### Lab Head
Dr Ira R Cooke
James Cook University


