### Accession
PXD013750

### Title
Conformational dynamics of the human serotonin transporter during substrate and drug binding

### Description
The serotonin transporter (SERT), a member of the neurotransmitter:sodium symporter family, is responsible for termination of serotonergic signaling by re-uptake of serotonin (5-HT) into the presynaptic neuron. Its key role in synaptic transmission makes it a major drug target, e.g. for the treatment of depression, anxiety and post-traumatic stress. Here, we apply hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry to probe the conformational dynamics of human SERT in the absence and presence of known substrates and targeted drugs. Our results reveal significant changes in dynamics in regions TM1, EL3, EL4, and TM12 upon binding co-transported ions (Na+/K+) and ligand-mediated changes in TM1, EL3 and EL4 upon binding 5-HT, the drugs S-citalopram, cocaine and ibogaine. Our results provide a comprehensive direct view of the conformational response of SERT upon binding both biologically relevant substrate/ions and ligands of pharmaceutical interest, thus advancing our understanding of the structure-function relationship in SERT.

### Sample Protocol
Prior to HDX labeling, purified hSERT was dialyzed or diluted 1:4 (in the case of the HDX-MS experiments with inhibitors) into sample buffer (26 mM Tris (pH 8.0), 500 µM TCEP, 0.5 mM CHS, 24 µM of lipid mixture (POPC:POPE:POPG; 1:1:1 ratio), 1 mM DDM, 5% glycerol) containing either 300 mM NaCl or 300 mM KCl resulting in a final concentration of 2.16 µM. For HDX of hSERT in the presence of ligands, individual ligands were added as a part of the NaCl-containing sample buffer. 5-HT or inhibitors were added in a concentration that yielded a 90% binding occupancy of hSERT (0.31 µM) during the deuterium labeling reactions, based on published affinities (ligand concentrations: 10, 0.34, 2.4, and 25.5 µM, for 5-HT (Kd: ~1 µM), S-citalopram (Kd: ~5 nM), cocaine (Kd: ~220 nM), and ibogaine (Kd: ~2.6 µM), respectively). The HDX reactions were initiated by diluting the hSERT equilibration solutions 1:6.5 with deuterated buffer (26 mM Tris (pH 8.0), 500 µM TCEP, 0.5 mM CHS, 24 µM of lipid mixture (POPC:POPE:POPG; 1:1:1 ratio), 1 mM DDM with either 300 mM of NaCl or 300 mM of KCl), resulting in 85% deuterium content during HDX. HDX reactions were incubated for specific time periods (0.25, 1, 10 minutes, 60, and 480 min) at 25 °C before a sample was extracted from the reaction tube and quenched by 1:1 dilution into ice cold quench buffer (219 mM potassium phosphate (pH 2.5), 6 M urea, 1 mM DDM). Quenched samples were immediately frozen at −80 °C and stored until their intended measurements by liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LC–MS). Frozen quenched samples were quickly thawed in a table top centrifuge and injected into a refrigerated (0 °C) UPLC platform (NanoAcquity, Waters). The protein was passed through a self-pack column containing rhizopuspepsin immobilized on POROS 20AL resin at 20 °C. The generated peptides were trapped on a Vanguard column (C8, 130 Å, 1.7 µm, 2.1 mm × 5 mm; Waters) and desalted for 4 min at a flow rate of 150 µl/min solvent A (0.23% formic acid in MQ water, pH 2.5). Subsequently, the peptides were separated over an Acquity UPLC column (C8, 130 Å, 1.7 µm, 1 mm × 100 mm; Waters) with a linear gradient rising from 8 to 30% solvent B (0.23% formic acid in acetonitrile). Following the chromatographic separation, the peptides were analyzed using a hybrid ESI-Q-TOF mass spectrometer (Synapt G2-Si, Waters). The MS was set in positive ionization mode and the peptides were further separated by ion mobility for enhanced peak capacity. For peptide identification, nondeuterated samples were injected and subjected to identical chromatographic separation. The peptides were fragmented by collision-induced dissociation using argon as collision gas, either in data dependent (DDA) or data independent acquisition (DIA) mode.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data was processed with ProteinLynx Global Server (PLGS) version 3.0 (Waters), for peptide identification. Peptides identified by DDA had to have PLGS Ladder Score above 1.0, below 15 ppm mass error for the precursor ion, along with passing manual inspection of the fragment spectrum in PLGS. DynamX version 3.0 (Waters) was used to filter peptides identified by DIA with the peptides having to be fragmented at least 3 times, 0.1 fragmentations per amino acid, and below 10 ppm mass error for the precursor ion. Further, the peptides had to be identified in 2:3 of the acquired MS/MS files. Lastly, the presence of a signal for the precursor ion was verified in DynamX along with analysis of deuterium uptake of all positively identified peptides.

### Publication Abstract
The serotonin transporter (SERT), a member of the neurotransmitter:sodium symporter family, is responsible for termination of serotonergic signaling by re-uptake of serotonin (5-HT) into the presynaptic neuron. Its key role in synaptic transmission makes it a major drug target, e.g. for the treatment of depression, anxiety and post-traumatic stress. Here, we apply hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry to probe the conformational dynamics of human SERT in the absence and presence of known substrates and targeted drugs. Our results reveal significant changes in dynamics in regions TM1, EL3, EL4, and TM12 upon binding co-transported ions (Na<sup>+</sup>/K<sup>+</sup>) and ligand-mediated changes in TM1, EL3 and EL4 upon binding 5-HT, the drugs S-citalopram, cocaine and ibogaine. Our results provide a comprehensive direct view of the conformational response of SERT upon&#xa0;binding both biologically relevant substrate/ions and ligands of pharmaceutical interest, thus advancing our understanding of the structure-function relationship in SERT.

### Keywords
Hdx-ms; protein-ligand interactions; membrane proteins; mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Department of Pharmacy, University of Copenhagen
Protein Analysis Group, Department of Pharmacy, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark

### Submitter
Kasper  Rand

### Lab Head
Dr Kasper D. Rand
Protein Analysis Group, Department of Pharmacy, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark


