### Accession
PXD045578

### Title
Effect of intrauterine growth restriction on fetal sex: biomarker discovery using  cord blood plasma proteomics

### Description
Intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR) is associated with increased risk of cardiometabolic disease later in life and have been shown to affects female and male offspring differently, but the mechanisms remain unclear. The purpose of this study was to identify proteomic differences and metabolic risk markers in IUGR from male and female neonates when compare with appropriate for gestational age (AGA) that will provide a better understanding of IUGR pathogenesis and its associated risks. Our result revealed alterations in IUGR cord plasma proteomes with most of the enriched proteins implicated in peroxisome pathways. This effect was evident in females but not in males. Furthermore, we observed that catalase activity, peroxisome enzyme, was significantly increased in females (P<0.05) but unchanged in males. Finally, we identified risk proteins associated with obesity, type-2 diabetes, and glucose intolerance such as EGF containing fibulin extracellular matrix protein 1, proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 (PCSK9) and transforming growth factor beta receptor 3 (TGFBR3) proteins unique to females while coagulation factor IX (C9) and retinol binding protein 4 (RBP4) are for males. Our data reveal that IUGR may display sexual dimorphism which may be associated with differences in lifelong risk for cardiometabolic disease between males and females.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma samples were resuspended in 5% SDS 50mM ammonium bicarbonate and 5 mM DTT and incubated for 30 minutes at 60 ºC. Samples were then alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide in the dark for 30 minutes. Afterward, phosphoric acid was added to the sample at a final concentration of 1.2%. Samples were diluted in six volumes of binding buffer (90% methanol and 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.0). After gentle mixing, the protein solution was loaded to an S-trap filter (Protifi) and spun at 500 g for 30 sec. The sample was washed twice with binding buffer. Finally, 1 µg of sequencing grade trypsin (Promega), diluted in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, was added into the S-trap filter and samples were digested at 37oC for 18 h. Peptides were eluted in three steps:  (i) 40 µl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, (ii) 40 µl of 0.1% TFA and (iii) 40 µl of 60% acetonitrile and 0.1% TFA. The peptide solution was pooled, spun at 1,000 g for 30 sec and dried in a vacuum centrifuge.  Prior to mass spectrometry analysis, samples were desalted using a 96-well plate filter (Orochem) packed with 1 mg of Oasis HLB C-18 resin (Waters). Briefly, the samples were resuspended in 100 µl of 0.1% TFA and loaded onto the HLB resin, which was previously equilibrated using 100 µl of the same buffer. After washing with 100 µl of 0.1% TFA, the samples were eluted with a buffer containing 70 µl of 60% acetonitrile and 0.1% TFA and then dried in a vacuum centrifuge. Samples were resuspended in 10 µl of 0.1% TFA and loaded onto a Dionex RSLC Ultimate 300 (Thermo Scientific), coupled online with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Scientific). Chromatographic separation was performed with a two-column system, consisting of a C-18 trap cartridge (300 µm ID, 5 mm length) and a picofrit analytical column (75 µm ID, 25 cm length) packed in-house with reversed-phase Repro-Sil Pur C18-AQ 3 µm resin. To analyze the proteome, peptides were separated using a 120 min gradient from 4-30% buffer B (buffer A: 0.1% formic acid, buffer B: 80% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was set to acquire spectra in a data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. Briefly, the full MS scan was set to 300-1200 m/z in the orbitrap with a resolution of 120,000 (at 200 m/z) and an AGC target of 5x10e5. MS/MS was performed in the ion trap using the top speed mode (2 secs), an AGC target of 1x10e4 and an HCD collision energy of 35.

### Data Protocol
Proteome raw files were searched using Proteome Discoverer software (v2.4, Thermo Scientific) using SEQUEST search engine and the SwissProt human database (updated June 2021). The search for total proteome included variable modification of N-terminal acetylation, and fixed modification of carbamidomethyl cysteine. Trypsin was specified as the digestive enzyme with up to 2 missed cleavages allowed. Mass tolerance was set to 10 pm for precursor ions and 0.2 Da for product ions. Peptide and protein false discovery rate was set to 1%. Following the search, data was processed as described by Aguilan et al. Briefly, proteins were log2 transformed, normalized by the average value of each sample and missing values were imputed using a normal distribution 2 standard deviations lower than the mean. Statistical regulation was assessed using heteroscedastic t-test (p < 0.05).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cardiometabolic disease, Compensatory responses peroxisome pathways, Catalase activity, Sexual dimorphism

### Affiliations
Albert Einstein College of Medicine
Department of Biochemistry, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, United States

### Submitter
Simone Sidoli

### Lab Head
Dr Simone Sidoli
Department of Biochemistry, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, United States


