### Accession
PXD005977

### Title
Mouse Hepatic Lipid Droplet Proteome under Fasting and Re-Feeding

### Description
One of the key functions of the mammalian liver is lipid metabolism. During fasting, lipid storage in the liver increases in order to reserve and provide energy for cellular functions. Upon re-feeding, this reserve of lipids is rapidly depleted; this change is visible, as the organelles responsible for lipid storage – lipid droplets (LDs) – drastically decrease in size following re-feeding. Little is known regarding LD proteome, or how it changes during the fasting/re-feeding transition. Our study investigated the hepatic LD proteome and how it changes between fasting and re-feeding conditions. For this purpose, LDs were isolated from 4 month-old C57BL/6 mice after a 24 hour fasting period, or a 24 hour fasting period followed by 6 hours of re-feeding. Proteins isolated from these LDs were subject to SDS-PAGE followed by in-gel trypsinization and LC-MS/MS. We identified a combined total of 941 proteins on hepatic LDs, of which 817 had quantifiable extracted ion chromatograms in at least 2 samples (n=6 total) and were not deemed contaminants. 777 of the 817 proteins were observed in both energetic states, with 33 being uniquely observed in fasted LDs, and 7 being uniquely observed in re-fed LDs.

### Sample Protocol
Animals and feeding conditions: 4 month-old male C57BL/6 mice were fed ad libitum a chow diet (LabDiet, PICO Laboratory Rodent Diet 20, 23.9% protein, 5% fat, 48.7% carbohydrates) and randomly split into 2 groups: fasted (24-hour fasting) and re-fed (24-hour fasting followed by 6-hour re-feeding). Animals were housed 3-5/cage and exposed to a 12-hour light/dark cycle with light starting at 8:00 AM. LD Fractionation: Following each feeding period, mice were sacrificed via cardiac puncture and livers were harvested and rinsed in ice-cold PBS. Livers were subjected to mechanical homogenization in a hypotonic lysis medium (HLM, 20 mM Tris·Cl, pH 7.4, 1 mM EDTA) with protease and phosphatase inhibitors (EDTA-free Complete protease inhibitor/PhosSTOP; Roche Diagnostics). Homogenates were spun at 500xg for 10 minutes, and supernatants were subsequently spun at 15000xg for 10 minutes to remove mitochondria and allow fat cake separation. Fat cakes were isolated and washed twice at 15000xg for 10 minutes. Fat cakes were then diluted 1/3 in 60% sucrose, layered at the bottom of ultracentrifuge tubes, covered by double the volume of HLM-5% sucrose, then overlayed with an equivalent volume of HLM. Ultracentrifugation was performed at 28000xg for 30 minutes. Sample preparation for LC-MS/MS: Recovered fat cakes were solubilized by first mixing with 10% SDS (1:1 v/v) followed by a 1-hour incubation at 37ºC in a sonicating water bath with constant agitation. Samples were spun for 10 minutes at 14000xg and the infranatants were collected and mixed with SDS loading buffer. Samples were boiled at 100ºC for 10 minutes prior to loading on a 10% sterile-filtered SDS-PAGE gel. Gels were run at 110V for ~100 minutes and visualized using R-250 coomassie blue protein stain (SigmaAldrich). Protein lanes were subsequently excised with a scalpel and cut into 1mm bands. Bands were cut into 1x1mm cubes and placed into a 96-well conical bottom plate. Gel cubes were destained using 50% acetonitrile in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate prior to dehydration with acetonitrile. Samples were reduced by incubating in 10mM 2-ME in 100mM ammonium bicarbonate for 45 minutes at 37ºC. Following reduction, samples were alkylated by incubating in 55mM iodoacetamide in 100mM ammonium bicarbonate for 45 minutes at 37ºC. Samples were then trypsinized for 18 hours at room temperature. Tryptic peptides were extracted by first using 97% water/2% acetonitrile/1% formic acid followed by a second extraction using 50% of the first extraction buffer and 50% acetonitrile (final concentration of 25% v/v acetonitrile and 1% (v/v) formic acid. LC-MS/MS: Peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a Thermo Easy-nLC II coupled to a LTQ XL-Orbitrap hybrid mass spectrometer. 5uL of sample from each well was subject to a 60-minute gradient (0-45% buffer B; buffer B= 0.2% formic acid in acetonitrile) on a PicoFrit fused silica capillary LC column (C18 ProteoPepII; New Objective).

### Data Protocol
Raw data files comprising an entire gel lane were grouped and searched using Proteome Discoverer 1.4.1.14's SEQUEST search algorithm using the reviewed, non-redundant Mus musculus complete proteome retrieved from Uniprot KB on October 16, 2015. Search parameters included a precursor mass tolerance of 10ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.8Da. Peptides were searched with a static modification of carbamidomethylated cysteine (+57.021Da), and dynamic modifications of oxidized methionine (+15.995Da) and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine (+0.984Da). The ‘Precursor Ion Area Detector’ node was implemented in the data processing workflow to determine relative extracted ion chromatograms for each protein identified. Search results were filtered using a minimum of 2 medium confidence peptides per protein. Magellan storage files from all n=6 LD samples (fasted n=3, re-fed n=3) were opened together using the Proteome Discoverer 1.4.1.14 software package. Protein lists were exported to Microsoft Excel, and relative protein abundance was determined by looking at each protein’s ‘Area’ (relative extracted ion chromatogram). Data correction was achieved by normalizing each protein’s ‘Area’ to the area of Perilipin-2 observed in each sample. Fasted and re-fed proteins were compared; a Student’s two-tailed, heteroscedastic T-test was applied to determine the significance of differential protein abundance between the two experimental conditions. Fold-changes of protein abundance were determined by generating log2 ratios of the average protein abundance between fasted and re-fed conditions. Significance thresholds were determined in one of 3 ways; proteins with a log2 ratio equating at least a 6-fold change in abundance between experimental conditions, a p-value<0.05, or unique expression in an experimental condition. Proteins deemed significantly more abundant in an experimental condition were grouped, and uploaded to the STRING 10.0 web-utility for bioinformatics analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lipid droplet proteome, Mouse, Lipid droplets, Lc-ms/ms, Liver lds, Lipid metabolism

### Affiliations
University of Alberta Department of Biochemistry
Department of Pediatrics, Group on Molecular and Cell Biology of Lipids 328 Heritage Medical Research Centre, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada Phone: (780) 492-2963 Fax: (780) 492-3383 (fax)

### Submitter
David Kramer

### Lab Head
Dr Richard Lehner
Department of Pediatrics, Group on Molecular and Cell Biology of Lipids 328 Heritage Medical Research Centre, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada Phone: (780) 492-2963 Fax: (780) 492-3383 (fax)


