### Accession
PXD031795

### Title
Chemerin effect on the endometrial proteome of the domestic pig during implantation obtained by LC-MS/MS analysis

### Description
Chemerin (CHEM) is a hormone mainly expressed in adipocytes involved in the regulation of energy homeostasis and inflammatory response. CHEM expression has been demonstrated in the structures of the porcine hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis, as well as in the uterus, trophoblasts and conceptuses of pigs. In this study, we performed high-throughput proteomic analyses (Liquid Chromatography with Tandem Mass Spectrometry, LC-MS/MS) to examine the influence of CHEM (400 ng/ml) on differentially regulated proteins (DRPs) in the porcine endometrial tissue explants during implantation (15 to 16 days of gestation). Among all 352 DRPs, 164 were up-regulated and 188 were down-regulated in CHEM-treated group. DRPs were assigned to 47 gene ontology (GO) terms (p-adjusted < 0.05). Validation of four DRPs (IFIT5, TGFβ1, ACO1 and PGRMC1) by Western blot analysis confirmed the veracity and accuracy of LC-MS/MS method used in the present study. We suggest that CHEM, by modulating various protein expressions takes part in the endometrial cell proliferation, migration and invasion at the time of implantation. It also regulates the endometrial immune response, sensitivity to P4 and formation of new blood vessels. Additionally, CHEM appears to be an important factor involved in endothelial cell dysfunction during the pathogenesis of preeclampsia. The identification of a large number of DRPs under the influence of CHEM provides a valuable resource for understanding the molecular mechanisms of this hormone during implantation, which is a prerequisite for better control of pig reproduction.

### Sample Protocol
The present study was conducted on five female crossbreed pigs (Large White × Polish Landrace, 7–8 months of age and 120 to 130 kg of weight), gained from a private breeding farm. The animals were on days 15 to 16 of pregnancy (the beginning of implantation). Uterine tissue cultures were performed as described by Smolinska et al. (2016). The explants were preincubated for 2 h at a rocking platform in a water bath at 37℃ (95% O2 and 5% CO2) and then treated for 24 h with human recombinant CHEM (cat. no. 268e10032; RayBiotech Life, USA) at the concentration of 400 ng/ml. After incubation, the endometrial slices were frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80℃ until the total protein extraction. The viability of tissue explants was monitored by quantifying lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) activity as we described in Dobrzyn et al. (2021). The average activity of LDH in the cultured tissue explants after the treatment period was 128,7 ± 35,6 U/L (0.67% of maximal release of LDH after the total endometrial cells destruction). Protein extraction was performed by homogenizing 15-20 mg of endometrial tissue in 150-200 μL of lysis buffer (30 mM TrisHCl pH 8, 8M urea and 2% CHAPS) on ice three times for 15 s using TissueRuptor (Qiagen, Germany). Proteins extracts were incubated on ice for 30 min and then centrifuged (10,000 g for 5 min at 4°C). The supernatants were quantified using Bradford dye-binding procedure with 0.5 mg/mL BSA as a standard. All analyses were performed in duplicate. Probes were stored at -80°C for further analysis. Proteomics analysis was performed by Mass Spectrometry Laboratory at the Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics of the Polish Academy of Sciences. 100 µg of each endometrial sample and pulled internal standard was diluted with 200 µl 8 M urea solution in 200 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEAB, pH 8.5). Cysteine bridges were reduced by incubation with 20 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) (1 h at 37oC). Proteins were transferred into Vivacon 30 kDa molecular weight cut-off filter (Sartorius Stedim, Poland) and digested according to a Filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol with minor modifications. Samples were spun at 14,500 x g for 30 min and washed with 100 µL urea solution before cysteine blocking by 15 min incubation with 50 mM s-methylmethanethiosulfonate (MMTS) at RT. Proteins were washed three times with 8 M urea buffer and 200 mM TEAB. After each addition, the samples were centrifuged until the cut-off filter was dry. Digestion was carried out using trypsin/LysC mix (Promega, USA) in 1:25 enzyme-to-protein ratio overnight at 37oC. Peptides were eluted from spin filters by two washes with 200 mM TEAB and one wash with 500 mM NaCl. Dried peptides were resuspended in 85 µl of 200 mM TEAB buffer and labelled with TMT10plex (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) tags in 41 µL acetonitrile for 1 h on vortex. Internal standards were labelled with TMT10-126 Label Reagent. The reaction was quenched by the addition of 8 µL 5% hydroxylamine. The labelling efficiency was checked and combined samples for each TMT set were desalted using two 30 mg Oasis HLB columns (Waters, USA). Briefly, cartridges were preconditioned with 1 mL methanol and 1 mL MS-grade water. After the sample was loaded and rinsed with 1 mL water, peptides were eluted from columns with 400 µL of 80% acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.1% formic acid (FA). Aliquots were dried and resuspended in 500 µL 10 mM ammonium hydroxide. TMT labelled peptides were fractionated using high-pH reverse-phase chromatography on XBridge Peptide BEH C18 column (4.6 x 250 mm, 130 Å, 5 µm; Waters, USA). Separation was performed at 1 ml/min flow rate for 27 min on Waters Acquity UPLC H-class system. Mobile phases consisted of water (A), ACN (B) and 100 mM ammonium hydroxide solution (C). The percentage of phase C was kept at a constant 10% through the entire gradient. Fractions were collected every 1 minute starting from the third minute of the run. The following gradient was applied: 3 to 5% solvent B for 0.5 min, 5 to 22% for 17 min, 22 to 28% for 2 minutes, 28 to 45% for 1.5 min, 45 to 90% for 0.5 min, 2.5 min isocratic hold at 90% and final column equilibration at 3% phase B for 3 min. The peptide elution profile was monitored at 214 nm by UV detector. 25 fractions from each TMT set were dried in Speedvac and reconstituted in 100 ul 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and 2% acetonitrile before LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Fractions were analyzed using LC-MS/MS system composed of ACQUITY UPLC M-Class System (Waters, USA) directly coupled to a QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, USA). Peptides were trapped on C18 pre-column (180 µm x 20 mm; Waters, USA) using 0.1% FA in water as a mobile phase and transferred to a nanoAcquity BEH C18 column (75 µm x 250 mm, 1.7 µm; Waters, USA) using ACN gradient (0 – 35% ACN in 160 min) in the presence of 0.1% FA at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. Data acquisition was carried out using a data-dependent method with the top 12 precursors selected for MS2 analysis after collisional induced fragmentation (CID) with normalized collision energy (NCE) of 27. Full MS scans covering the mass range of 300–1600 m/z (mass-to-charge ratio) were acquired at a resolution of 70.000 with a maximum injection time of 60 ms and an AGC target value of 1e6. MS2 scans were acquired with a maximum injection time of 120 ms and an AGC target value of 5e5 with a resolution of 35.000. The isolation window was set to 1.2 m/z and a dynamic exclusion to 30 s. Offline recalibration, as well as peptides and proteins identification, was performed in the MaxQuant/Andromeda software suite (version 1.6.17.0) using Sus scrofa full Uniprot database (versions 2020_10). The search included tryptic and LysC-generated peptides, Metylthio (C) was set as a fixed modification and Oxidation (M) as a variable one. Reporter MS2 quantification was specified in order to obtain values for quantitative analysis. TMT 10plex correction factors were specified for each labelling set according to manufacturer’s datasheets. Reverse database was used for target/decoy statistical results validation. Protein groups along with quantitative data were further analyzed in Perseus (version 1.6.13). Hits from the reversed database, proteins only identified by site and contaminants were removed. TMT reporter values were normalized with Internal Reference Scaling (IRS). Reporter intensities were log2 transformed and proteins with less than 3 values in at least one biological group were filtered out. Missing values were replaced with data from normal distribution (width 0.3, down shift 1.8) separately for each column. The significance threshold for p-value resulting from Student’s t-test was 0.05 and fold-change cutoff was ±1.2.

### Publication Abstract
Chemerin (CHEM) is a hormone mainly expressed in adipocytes involved in the regulation of energy homeostasis and inflammatory response. CHEM expression has been demonstrated in the structures of the porcine hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis, as well as in the uterus, trophoblasts and conceptuses of pigs. In this study, we performed high-throughput proteomic analyses (liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry, LC-MS/MS) to examine the influence of CHEM (400 ng/mL) on differentially regulated proteins (DRPs) in the porcine endometrial tissue explants during implantation (15 to 16 days of gestation). Among all 352 DRPs, 164 were up-regulated and 188 were down-regulated in CHEM-treated group. DRPs were assigned to 47 gene ontology (GO) terms (p-adjusted &lt; 0.05). Validation of four DRPs (IFIT5, TGF&#x3b2;1, ACO1 and PGRMC1) by Western blot analysis confirmed the veracity and accuracy of the LC-MS/MS method used in the present study. We suggest that CHEM, by modulating various protein expressions, takes part in the endometrial cell proliferation, migration and invasion at the time of implantation. It also regulates the endometrial immune response, sensitivity to P4 and the formation of new blood vessels. Additionally, CHEM appears to be an important factor involved in endothelial cell dysfunction during the pathogenesis of preeclampsia. The identification of a large number of DRPs under the influence of CHEM provides a valuable resource for understanding the molecular mechanisms of this hormone action during implantation, which is a prerequisite for better control of pig reproduction.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Chemerin, Tmt, Endometrium, Pig

### Affiliations
IBB PAS
Department of Animal Anatomy and Physiology, Faculty of Biology and Biotechnology, University of Warmia and Mazury

### Submitter
Agata Malinowska

### Lab Head
Dr Nina Smolińska
Department of Animal Anatomy and Physiology, Faculty of Biology and Biotechnology, University of Warmia and Mazury


