### Accession
PXD019859

### Title
Translational activity of the splicing factor SRSF1 is required for development and cilia function

### Description
The SR protein family of splicing factors regulate constitutive and alternative pre-mRNA splicing. A subset of them, including SRSF1, shuttles continuously between the nucleus and cytoplasm affecting post-splicing processes. We have previously identified a role for SRSF1 in promoting the translation of specific mRNA transcripts, particularly those encoding centrosomal proteins. Here, we used CRISPR/Cas9 editing to knock-in a nuclear retention signal (NRS) in Srsf1 resulting in a non-shuttling SRSF1 mouse model (Srsf1NRS). Srsf1NRS/NRS mice displayed small body size, hydrocephaly and male infertility, all associated with ciliary defects. We observed reduced translation of thousands of mRNAs, in particular of ciliary components, in cells derived from this model. Consistently, we found that the lack of cytoplasmic SRSF1 led to decreased abundance of proteins involved in multiciliogenesis and affected ciliary structure and motility in multiciliated cells. Altogether, these results highlight the physiological relevance of the activity of a splicing factor in the cytoplasm.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were lysed in 1% SDS 50 mM TrisHCl pH 8.5 by probe sonication and heating to 95ºC for 5 min. Protein concentration was measured by a BCA assay and processed according to the multi-enzyme Filter-Aided-Sample digestion protocol as described [PMID: 25063446]. Briefly, the samples were reduced, alklylated in a spin membrane concentrator (Vivaspin, 30kDa, Sartorius) digested with LysC (Wako) with an enzyme to substrate ratio of 1/200 over night at 37 ºC and the peptide were isolated. Subsequently the samples were digested with Trypsin (Promega) with an enzyme to substrate ratio of 1/200 for 4 h at 37 ºC and the peptides were isolated. Samples were acidified to 1% TFA, cleared by centrifugation (16,000 g at RT) and approximately desalted using Stage-tips. Eluted peptides were lyophilised, resuspended in 0.1% TFA/water and the peptide concentration was measured by A280 on a nanodrop instrument (Thermo). The sample was dilute to 1 µg/ 5 µl for subsequent analysis. The tryptic peptides were analyzed on a Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer connected to an Ultimate Ultra3000 chromatography system (both Thermo Scientific, Germany) incorporating an autosampler. 5 μL of the tryptic peptides, for each sample, was loaded on a homemade column (250 mm length, 75 μm inside diameter [i.d.]) packed with 1.8 μm uChrom (nanoLCMS Solutions) and separated by an increasing acetonitrile gradient, using a 150-min reverse-phase gradient (from 3%–40% Acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 400 nL/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode with a capillary temperature of 220 °C, with a potential of 2000 V applied to the column. Data were acquired with the mass spectrometer operating in automatic data-dependent switching mode, with MS resolution of 240k, with a cycle-time of 1 s and MS/MS HCD

### Data Protocol
Data was analyzed using the MaxQuant software package. Raw data files were searched against a mouse database, using a mass accuracy of 4.5 ppm and 0.01 false discovery rate (FDR) at both peptide and protein level. Every single file was considered as separate in the experimental design; the replicates of each condition were grouped for the subsequent statistical analysis. Carbamidomethylation was specified as fixed modification while methionine oxidation and acetylation of protein N-termini were specified as variable. Subsequently missing values were replaced by a normal distribution (1.8 π shifted with a distribution of 0.3 π) in order to allow the following statistical analysis. Results were cleaned for reverse and contaminants and a list of significant interactions determined based on average ratio and t-test.

### Publication Abstract
Shuttling RNA-binding proteins coordinate nuclear and cytoplasmic steps of gene expression. The SR family proteins regulate RNA splicing in the nucleus and a subset of them, including SRSF1, shuttles between the nucleus and cytoplasm affecting post-splicing processes. However, the physiological significance of this remains unclear. Here, we used genome editing to knock-in a nuclear retention signal (NRS) in <i>Srsf1</i> to create a mouse model harboring an SRSF1 protein that is retained exclusively in the nucleus. <i>Srsf1<sup>NRS/NRS</sup></i> mutants displayed small body size, hydrocephalus, and immotile sperm, all traits associated with ciliary defects. We observed reduced translation of a subset of mRNAs and decreased abundance of proteins involved in multiciliogenesis, with disruption of ciliary ultrastructure and motility in cells and tissues derived from this mouse model. These results demonstrate that SRSF1 shuttling is used to reprogram gene expression networks in the context of high cellular demands, as observed here, during motile ciliogenesis.

### Keywords
Sr proteins/ srsf1/ mrna translation/ alternative splicing/ cilia

### Affiliations
University of Edinburgh

### Submitter
Alex von kriegsheim

### Lab Head
Dr Alex von Kriegsheim
University of Edinburgh


