### Accession
PXD043566

### Title
Proteomics analysis reveals a role for E. coli polyphosphate kinase in regulation of membrane structure and polymyxin resistance via the BasS-BasR two component system

### Description
Polyphosphates (polyP) are chains of inorganic phosphates that can reach 1000s of residues in length. In Escherichia coli, polyP is produced by the polyP kinase (PPK) and is thought to play a protective role during the response to cellular stress. However, the pathways impacted by PPK activity and polyP accumulation remain poorly characterized. In this work we used label-free mass spectrometry to study the response of bacteria that cannot produce polyP (∆ppk mutants) during nutrient starvation and to identify novel pathways regulated by PPK.   In response to nutrient starvation, we found 92 proteins significantly differentially expressed between wild-type and ∆ppkmutant cells. Wild-type cells were enriched for proteins related to amino acid biosynthesis and transport while Δppkmutants were enriched for proteins related to translation and ribosome biogenesis, suggesting that without PPK cells remain inappropriately primed for growth.   From our data set, we were particularly interested in Arn and EptA proteins, which were downregulated in ∆ppk mutants compared to wild-type controls, because they play a role in lipid A modifications linked to polymyxin resistance. Using western blotting, we confirm differential expression of these and related proteins, and provide evidence that this mis-regulation in ∆ppk cells stems from a failure to induce the BasS/BasR two component system during starvation. We also show that ∆ppk mutants unable to upregulate Arn and EptA expression lack the respective L-Ara4N and pEtN modifications on lipid A. In line with this observation, loss of ppk restores polymyxin sensitivity in resistant strains carrying a constitutively active basR allele.   Overall, we show a new role for PPK in lipid A modification and provide a rationale for targeting PPK to sensitize bacteria towards polymyxin treatment. We further anticipate that our proteomics work will provide an important resource for researchers interested in diverse pathways impacted by PPK.

### Sample Protocol
Lyophilised proteins were solubilised in 50 µL Solubilisation Buffer, consisting of 5% SDS, 50 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate, pH 7.5. A Bichinoic Acid Assay was taken of all samples, and 100ug total protein from each sample was then used to perform protein digestion via suspension-trap devices (S-Trap) (ProtiFi). S-Trap is a powerful Filter-Aided sample preparation (FASP) method that consists in trapping acid aggregated proteins in a quartz filter prior enzymatic proteolysis and allows for reduction / alkylation / tryptic proteolysis all in one vessel. Disulfide bonds were reduced with dithiothreitol and alkylated with iodoacetamide in 50mM TEAB buffer. The enzymatic digestion was a first addition of trypsin 1:100 enzyme: protein (wt/wt) for 4 hours at 37 °C, followed by a boost addition of trypsin using same wt/wt ratios for overnight digestion at 37 °C. Peptides were eluted from S-Trap by sequential elution buffers of 100mM TEAB, 0.5% formic acid, and 50% acetonitrile 0.1% formic acid. The eluted tryptic peptides were dried in a vacuum centrifuge and re-constituted in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. These were subjected to Liquid Chromatography couple to tandem Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis. Peptides were resolved on a Thermo Scientific Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLC system using a PepMap 75umx25cm C18 column with 2 μm particle size (100 Å pores), heated to 40 °C. A volume of 5 μL was injected corresponding to 1 μg of total peptide and separation was performed in a total run time of 90 min with a flow rate of 200 μL/min with mobile phases A: water/0.1% formic acid and B: 80%ACN/0.1% formic acid. Gradient elution was performed from 10% to 8% B over 3 min, from 8% to 46% B over 66 min, and from 46 to 99% B over 3 min, and after holding at 99% B for 2 min, down to 2% B in 0.5 min followed by equilibration for 15min. Peptides were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer. Spray voltage was set to 1.8 kV, RF lens level was set at 46%, ion transfer tube temperature was set to 275 °C. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent acquisition mode. A survey full scan MS (from m/z 375 to 1600) was acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 60,000 (at 200 m/z). The automatic gain control (AGC) target for MS1 was set as 4e5, and ion filling time was set as 50 msec. The n=15 most abundant precursor ions with charge state +2, +3 were isolated in a 3-sec cycle, isolation window width of 1.2 m/z, fragmented by using collision-induced dissociation (CID) fragmentation with 30% normalized collision energy, and detected via IonTrap, with a scan rate set to Rapid. The AGC target for MS/MS was set as 5e3 and ion filling time was set at 35 msec. Dynamic exclusion was set to 50 sec with a 10-ppm (parts per million) mass window.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry RAW data were processed using the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (TPP v5.2.0) files from the mass spectrometry runs were converted to mzML files using the msconvert tool from ProteoWizard (v3.0.22088). Comet (v2018.01.4) was used to search the files against the UniProt E. coli protein sequence database (UP000000625 downloaded 2021-08-04), along with a target-decoy strategy where all protein sequences were reversed. The database search was performed with trypsin as a digestive enzyme, allowing for up to 3 missed cleavages and considering semi-tryptic digestion. The peptide mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification, and the variable modifications considered were deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, as well as oxidation of methionine. The probability of protein identifications was evaluated with ProteinProphet, and proteins identified at a false discovery rate (FDR) <1% were deemed confidently identified.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cell culture, Lc-msms, Bacteria, Label-free quantification, E. coli

### Affiliations
University of Ottawa
Ottawa Institute of Systems Biology, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada Department of Cellular & Molecular Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada

### Submitter
Iryna Abramchuk

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Downey
Ottawa Institute of Systems Biology, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada Department of Cellular & Molecular Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada


