### Accession
PXD042571

### Title
In situ ribosome clustering and ultrastructure reorganization of polar tube proteins in germinated microsporidia polar tube

### Description
During host cell invasion, microsporidia translocate their entire cytoplasmic contents through a thin, hollow superstructure known as the polar tube. To achieve this, the polar tube transitions from a compact spring-like state inside the environmental spore to a long needle-like tube capable of longrange sporoplasm delivery. The unique mechanical properties of the building blocks of the polar tube allow for an explosive transition from compact to extended state and support the rapid cargo translocation process. The molecular and structural factors enabling this ultrafast process and the ultrastructural changes during cargo delivery remain a mystery. Here, we employ light microscopy and in situ cryo-electron tomography to visualize multiple ultrastructural states of the polar tube, allowing us to evaluate the kinetics of its germination and characterize the underlying morphological transitions. We describe a cargo-filled state with a unique ordered arrangement of microsporidian ribosomes, which cluster along the thin tube wall, and an empty post-translocation state with a reduced diameter but a thicker wall. Together with endogenous compositional information from an affinity-purified polar tube, our work provides comprehensive novel data on the infection apparatus of microsporidia and demonstrates that ribosomes are efficiently transported through polar tubes in a spiral-like parallel arrangement.

### Sample Protocol
The sample was reduced with DL-dithiothreitol (DTT, 100 mM) at 60°C for 30 min and digested with trypsin using modified filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method (Wisniewski JR et. al. Nat Methods. 2009 May). In short, the reduced sample was transferred to a Microcon-30kDa centrifugal filter (Merck) washed repeatedly with 8 M Urea, 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) and once with digestion buffer (0.5 % sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 50 mM TEAB). The reduced cysteine side chains were alkylated with 10 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS) in digestion buffer for 30 min at room temperature. The sample was repeatedly washed with digestion buffer and digested with trypsin (0.2 µg, Pierce MS grade Trypsin, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 37°C overnight. An additional portion of trypsin (0.2 µg) was added and incubated for another 3 hours the next day. The peptides were collected by centrifugation and SDC was removed by acidification with 10% trifluoroacetic acid. The sample was purified using High Protein and Peptide Recovery Detergent Removal Spin Column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and Pierce peptide desalting spin columns (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer instructions. The purified peptide sample was dried on a vacuum centrifuge and reconstituted in 3% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid for the LC-MS/MS analysis. Analysis was performed on an Orbitrap Exploris™ 480 mass spectrometer interfaced with an Easy-nLC1200 nanoflow liquid chromatography system (both Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were trapped on an Acclaim Pepmap 100 C18 trap column (100 μm x 2 cm, particle size 5 μm, Thermo Fischer Scientific) and separated on an in-house packed analytical column (75 μm x 35 cm, particle size 3 μm, Reprosil-Pur C18, Dr. Maisch) from 5% to 45% B over 78 min, followed by an increase to 100% B at a flow of 300 nL/min. Solvent A was 0.2% formic acid and solvent B was 80% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid. MS scans were performed at 120 000 resolution, m/z range 380-1500. MS/MS analysis was performed in a data-dependent, with a cycle time of 2 s for the most intense doubly or multiply charged precursor ions. Precursor ions were isolated in the quadrupole with a 0.7 m/z isolation window, with dynamic exclusion set to 10 ppm and duration of 30 seconds. Isolated precursor ions were fragmented with higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) set to 30%, AGC target was set to 200% and maximum injection time to 54 ms.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using Proteome Discoverer version 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The raw data was matched against V.necatrix using Mascot 2.5.1 (Matrix Science) as a database search engine with peptide tolerance of 5 ppm and fragment ion tolerance of 30 mmu. Tryptic peptides were accepted with one missed cleavage, oxidation on methionine was set as a variable modification and methylthiolation on cysteine was set as a fixed modification. Fixed Value PSM Validator was used for PSM validation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ribosome, Polar tube, Cryo-electron tomography, Polar tube proteins, Microsporidia

### Affiliations
Gothenburg University
Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of Umea, Sweden

### Submitter
Johannes Fuchs

### Lab Head
Dr Himanshu Sharma
Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of Umea, Sweden


