### Accession
PXD028112

### Title
Proteome of mature flatworm Triaenophorus crassus (Bothriocephalidea:Triaenophoridae) from pike Esox lucius

### Description
Adult pike Esox lucius was caught in the end of summer (August, 2020) in Teletskoye Lake (Altai region, west Siberia, Russia, 51°79’10’’ N, 87°30’43’’E). Parasite (Triaenophorus crassus) was retrieved from the intestine of pike and immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen. After that, the sample was lyophilized and sent in ice (-20 °C) to the Group of mass spectrometry of Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry RAS (Moscow, Russia) where further analysis was performed.

### Sample Protocol
Reduction, alkylation and digestion of the proteins in solution were performed as described previously [Kulak NA et al., 2014, doi:10.1038/nmeth.2834] with minor modifications. Briefly, sodium deoxycholate (SDC) lysis, reduction and alkylation buffer pH 8.5 contained 100 mM TRIS, 1% (w/v) SDC, 10 mM TCEP and 20 mM 2-chloroacetamide were added to a cell sample. The sample was heated for 10 min at 95oC, protein concentration in the sample was determined by Bredford assay and the equal volume of trypsin solution in 100 mM TRIS pH 8.5 was added in a 1:100 (w/w) ratio. After overnight digestion at 37oC, peptides were acidified by 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) for SDB-RPS binding, and 0.02 g was loaded on three 14-gauge StageTip plugs, equal volume of ethyl acetate was added, and the StageTips were centrifuged at 300 g. After washing the StageTips with a 0.1 ml of 1% TFA/ethyl acetate mixture and 0.1 ml of 0.2% TFA, peptides were eluted by 0.05 ml of elution solution contained 50% acetonitrile, 45% water and 5% ammonia. The collected material was vacuum-dried and stored at -80oC. Before analyses peptides were dissolved in 2% acetonitrile/0.1% TFA solution and sonicated for 2 min in ultrasonic water bath.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were analyzed by Peaks studio 10.0 (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc.). Identification of proteins was made by searching against the transcriptome dataset published by Kochneva et al. (2020) {https://doi.org/10.1016/j.margen.2019.100702} with a carbamidomethyl Cys as a fixed modification and deamidation Asn/Gln and Met oxidation as variable modifications. False discovery rate for peptide-spectrum matches was set to 0.01 was determined by searching a reverse database. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine, and a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed in the database search. Peptide identification was performed with an allowed initial precursor mass deviation up to 10 p.p.m. and an allowed fragment mass deviation 0.02 Da.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Gut, Cestode, Teletskoye lake

### Affiliations
Institute of Systematics and Ecology of Animals SB RAS

### Submitter
Mikhail Solovyev

### Lab Head
Dr Mikhail Solovyev
Institute of Systematics and Ecology of Animals SB RAS


