### Accession
PXD015412

### Title
Re-evaluation of the mechanism of action of α,β-unsaturated carbonyl DUB inhibitors b-AP15 and VLX1570: CIAPIN1 is a major target of VLX1570 for non-selective covalent modification and aggregation in a multiple myeloma model.

### Description
Deubiquitinating enzymes are a growing target class across multiple disease states, with several inhibitors now reported. b-AP15 and VLX1570 are two structurally related USP14/UCH-37 inhibitors. Initially taken forward into a phase I/II clinical trial for refractory Multiple Myeloma, VLX1570 has since been put on full clinical hold due to dose limiting toxicity. Though a proteomic approach, here we demonstrate that these compounds target a diverse range of proteins, resulting in the formation of higher molecular weight complexes. Activity-based proteome profiling identified CIAPIN1 as a sub-micromolar covalent target of VLX1570, and further analysis demonstrated that high molecular weight complex formation leads to aggregation of CIAPIN1 in intact cells.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation was conducted as previously described.4 Briefly, 400 µg of each competition condition was mixed with 200 µg of spike, the protein concentration adjusted to 2 mg/mL, and CuAAC ligation performed. Protein pellets were resupended in 0.2 % w/v SDS, 1 mM dithiothreitol in PBS to give a final protein concentration of 1 mg/mL. Samples were enriched on NeutrAvidin agarose resin (30 µL, pre-washed three times in 0.2% w/v SDS in PBS) by incubation with gentle shaking for 2 h at room temperature. The supernatant was then removed, and the beads washed consecutively with: 3 × 1% w/v SDS in PBS, 2 × 4M Urea in PBS, 5 × 50 mM Ammonium bicarbonate (AMBIC). The washed beads were resuspended in 50 µL of 50 mM AMBIC and reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol at 55 °C for 30 min. The samples were washed twice and resuspended in 50 µL of 50 mM AMBIC, and cysteines were alkylated by 10 mM iodoacetamide in the dark for 30 min. The samples were washed twice and resuspended in 50 µL of 50 mM AMBIC, treated with trypsin (5uL, 0.2 mg / ml, Promega) and digested overnight at 37 °C. The supernatant was retained and the beads washed with 80 µL AMBIC followed by 80 µL 0.1% v/v TFA in H2O (80 µL). The combined supernatants were desalted and dried in vacuo. Dried peptides were stored at -80 °C, and resuspended in 0.5% v/v TFA, 2% v/v MEOH in H2O (20 µL) for LC-MS/MS analysis. LC-MS/MS runs were performed at Imperial College London on an Easy nLC-1000 system coupled to a QExactive mass spectrometer via an easy-spray source (all Thermo Fisher Scientific). 3 µL injections of peptide sample were separated on a reverse phase Acclaim PepMap RSLC column (50 cm x 75 μm inner diameter, Thermo Fisher Scientific) across a 2 h acetonitrile gradient containing 0.1 % v/v formic acid, using a flow rate of 250 nL/min. The instrument was operated in a data-dependent cycling mode with survey scans acquired at a resolution of 75,000 at m/z 200 (transient time 256 ms). The top 10 most abundant isotope patterns with charge +2 from this survey scan were then selected with an isolation window of 3.0 m/z and subjected to MS/MS fragmentation by HCD with normalized collision energies of 25. The maximum ion injection times for the survey scan and the MS/MS scans were 250 and 80 ms, respectively. The ion target value for MS was set to 106 and for MS/MS to 105, and the intensity threshold was set to 8.3 × 102.

### Data Protocol
The raw data was processed using MaxQuant version 1.5.0.253 and the reference complete human proteome FASTA file. ‘Arg10’ and ‘Lys8’ were selected as heavy labels, cysteine carbamidomethylation was selected as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation as a variable modification. Default settings for identification and quantification were used. Specifically, a minimum peptide length of 7, a maximum of 2 missed cleavage sites, and a maximum of 3 labelled amino acids per peptide were employed. Peptides and proteins were identified utilising a 0.01 false discovery rate, with “Unique and razor peptides” mode selected for both identification and quantification of proteins (razor peptides are uniquely assigned to protein groups and not to individual proteins). At least 2 razor + unique peptides were required for valid quantification. Processed data was further analysed using Perseus version 1.5.0.9 and Microsoft Excel 2010. Peptides categorised by MaxQuant as ‘potential contaminants’, ‘only identified by site’ or ‘reverse’ were filtered, and the processed H/L ratios transformed in Log2(L/H) ratios. The ratios for each experimental condition were normalised relative to their median, and biological triplicates grouped. The detection of at least 2 unique peptides was used as a threshold for protein identification and 2 valid ratio values were required in at least one experimental group for quantification. Statistically significant competition was determined through the application of a P2 test, using a permutation-based FDR of 0.01 and an S0 of 0.1. To determine the relative response to inhibition, the average fold change was calculated for each protein under each inhibitor condition, by normalising all mean ratios relative to the condition lacking inhibitor (0 µM compound 1).

### Publication Abstract
Deubiquitinating enzymes (DUBs) are a growing target class across multiple disease states, with several inhibitors now reported. b-AP15 and VLX1570 are two structurally related USP14/UCH-37 inhibitors. Through a proteomic approach, we demonstrate that these compounds target a diverse range of proteins, resulting in the formation of higher molecular weight (MW) complexes. Activity-based proteome profiling identified CIAPIN1 as a submicromolar covalent target of VLX1570, and further analysis demonstrated that high MW complex formation leads to aggregation of CIAPIN1 in intact cells. Our results suggest that in addition to DUB inhibition, these compounds induce nonspecific protein aggregation, providing molecular explanation for general cellular toxicity.

### Keywords
Chemoproteomics, Proteomics, Multiple myeloma, Vlx1570, Bap-15

### Affiliations
University of Oxford
Department of Chemistry, Molecular Sciences Research Hub, Imperial College London, London, UK

### Submitter
Jenny Ward

### Lab Head
Dr Edward Tate
Department of Chemistry, Molecular Sciences Research Hub, Imperial College London, London, UK


