### Accession
PXD018946

### Title
BMAL1 associates with NOP58 in the nucleolus and contributes to pre-rRNA processing

### Description
The transcription factor BMAL1 is a core element of the circadian clock that contributes to cyclic control of genes transcribed by RNA polymerase II. By using biochemical cellular fractionation and immunofluorescence analyses we reveal a previously uncharacterized nucleolar localization for BMAL1. We used an unbiased approach to determine the BMAL1 interactome by mass spectrometry and identified NOP58 as a prominent nucleolar interactor. NOP58, a core component of the box C/D small nucleolar ribonucleoprotein complex, associates with Snord118 to control specific pre-ribosomal RNA (rRNA) processing steps. These results suggest a non-canonical role of BMAL1 in rRNA regulation. Indeed, we show that BMAL1 controls NOP58-associated Snord118 nucleolar levels and cleavage of unique pre-rRNA intermediates. Our findings identify an unsuspected function of BMAL1 in the nucleolus that appears distinct from its canonical role in the circadian clock system

### Sample Protocol
Co-immunoprecipitation 2mg of nucleoplasmic and nucleolar fractions from WT mouse livers harvested at ZT8 and ZT20 were prepared in 1x RIPA (50mM Tris pH7.5, 150mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche), 0.5mM PMSF, 20mM NaF, 1µM TSA, 10mM NAM)  Lysates were pre-cleared with 20µl of Protein G Sepharose beads (Sigma) while rocking at 4ºC for 1hr. After removal of pre-clearing beads, 10% of lysate was retained as input, the remainder of lysates were then incubated with 4µg of BMAL1 antibody (Abcam, ab93806). An additional, pooled sample was prepared with equal amount of protein for incubation with equal amount of Rabbit IgG (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, sc-2027 or Invitrogen, 10500C), and rocked overnight at 4ºC. The next day, 40µl of fresh Protein G Sepharose beads were added to the lysates and rocked at 4ºC for 2hrs. Beads were washed three times with 1x RIPA.   On beads digestion  After the last washing step with lysis buffer, beads were washed 3 times by adding 100 μL of 50mM NH4HCO3. For trypsin digest, beads were transferred to a clean tube and incubated with 100 µl of 10 ng/µl trypsin-solution in 1M urea and 50 mM NH4HCO3 for 30 min at 25°C. Samples were centrifuged at 800 rpm and supernatant was transferred into a fresh tube. Beads were washed twice with 50 µl of 50 mM NH4HCO3. The supernatants were pooled into the corresponding tube and incubated overnight at 25°C after addition of 1mM DTT. 27mM Iodoacetamide (IAA) was added and incubated for 30 min in the dark at 25°C. To quench the IAA, 1 µl of 1M DTT was added and samples were incubated for 10 min at 25°C, followed by addition of 2.5 µl of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and desalting using 2x C18 Stagetips. Stagetips were washed 3 times with 20 µl of 100% ACN (1000 rpm, 1 min) and 3 times by adding 20 µl of 0.1% TFA (1800 rpm, 1 min). Subsequently, samples were added (800 rpm, 30 min) and washed 3 times with 20 µl of 0.1% TFA, followed by elution into a clean tube by washing 3 times with 20 µl of 80% ACN / 25% TFA solution. Finally, samples were evaporated to dryness, resuspended in 20 µl formic acid solution and stored at -20°C until LC-MS analysis.  Protein quantification by liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS)  Purified peptides (5µl) were automatically injected into in an Ultimate 3000 RSLC HPLC system (Dionex Thermo), separated on an analytical column C18 micro column (75 µm i.d. × 15 cm, packed in-house with Reprosil Pur C18 AQ 2.4 µm, Doctor Maisch) using a 50-min gradient from 5 to 60% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. The effluent from the HPLC was subsequently electrosprayed into a LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo). The MS instrument was operated in a data dependent mode to automatically switch between full scan MS and MS/MS acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (from m/z 300 – 1800) were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of R = 60,000 at m/z 400 (after accumulation to a ‘target value’ of 500,000 in the linear ion trap). The six most intense peptide ions with charge state between 2 and 4 were sequentially isolated to a target value of 10,000 and fragmented in the linear ion trap by collision induced dissociation (CID). For all measurements with the Orbitrap mass analyzer, 3 lock-mass ions from ambient air (m/z = 371.10123, 445.12002, 519.13882) were used for internal. Usual MS conditions were: spray voltage, 1.5 kV; no sheath and auxiliary gas flow; heated capillary temperature, 200°C; normalized collision energy 35% for CID in LTQ. The threshold for ion selection was 10,000 counts for MS2. The used activation was 0.25 and activation time 30 ms.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant 1.5.2.8 was used to identify proteins and quantify by iBAQ with the following parameters: Database, Uniprot_Hsapiens_3AUP000005640_170526; MS tol, 10ppm; MS/MS tol, 0.5Da; Peptide FDR, 0.1; Protein FDR, 0.01 Min. peptide Length, 5; Variable modifications, Oxidation (M); Fixed modifications, Carbamidomethyl (C); Peptides for protein quantitation, razor and unique; Min. peptides, 1; Min. ratio count, 2. Identified proteins were considered as interaction partners if their MaxQuant iBAQ values displayed a greater value than log2 5-fold enrichment (FC) and p-value 0.05 (t-test adjusted for multiple comparisons) when compared to the control.

### Publication Abstract
The transcription factor BMAL1 is a core element of the circadian clock that contributes to cyclic control of genes transcribed by RNA polymerase II. By using biochemical cellular fractionation and immunofluorescence analyses we reveal a previously uncharacterized nucleolar localization for BMAL1. We used an unbiased approach to determine the BMAL1 interactome by mass spectrometry and identified NOP58 as a prominent nucleolar interactor. NOP58, a core component of the box C/D small nucleolar ribonucleoprotein complex, associates with Snord118 to control specific pre-ribosomal RNA (pre-rRNA) processing steps. These results suggest a non-canonical role of BMAL1 in ribosomal RNA regulation. Indeed, we show that BMAL1 controls NOP58-associated Snord118 nucleolar levels and cleavage of unique pre-rRNA intermediates. Our findings identify an unsuspected function of BMAL1 in the nucleolus that appears distinct from its canonical role in the circadian clock system.

### Keywords
Circadian clock, Bmal1 interactome, Ribosome biogenesis, Nucleolus

### Affiliations
Biomedical Center-LMU
Center for Epigenetics and Metabolism,  U1233 INSERM, Department of Biological Chemistry, University of California, Irvine, 92697 California.

### Submitter
Ignasi Forne

### Lab Head
Dr Paolo Sassone-Corsi
Center for Epigenetics and Metabolism,  U1233 INSERM, Department of Biological Chemistry, University of California, Irvine, 92697 California.


