### Accession
PXD033067

### Title
Mapping subcellular localizations of unannotated microproteins with MicroID

### Description
Proteogenomic and ribosome profiling identification of translated small open reading frames have revealed thousands of microproteins, or polypeptides of less than 100 amino acids, that were previously invisible to geneticists. However, the vast majority of microproteins remain uncharacterized in molecular detail, in part because their lack of conservation and short lengths preclude analysis of homology to protein domains of known function. Proximity-dependent biotinylation technique provided an alternative approach to define the composition of subcellular compartments in living cells and animals. Here, we developed the first high-throughput technology for global mapping of cryptic microproteins to specific subcellular localizations and organelles by proximity-dependent biotinylation technology, thereby coupling their discovery to a dimension of biological functional information. In this work, we showed that hundreds of microproteins are subnuclear organelles associated with critical cellular and biological functions. Moreover, one of these novel microproteins, alt-LAMA3, localized in the nucleolus, is functionally associated with pre-rRNA transcription and required for global protein synthesis during ribosome biogenesis. Lastly, we applied this technique to mouse models, demonstrating the foundation for its use in discovery and characterization of microproteins in animals.

### Sample Protocol
Briefly, gel slices were digested with trypsin at 37℃ for 14-16 h. The resulting peptide mixtures were extracted from the gel and remove residual detergent by ethyl acetate extraction, de-salted with peptide cleanup C18 spin column (Agilent Technologies, 5188-2750), then re-suspended in 30 µl 0.1% formic acid (FA), followed by centrifugation at 15000 rpm, 4℃, 30 min. A 5 μL aliquot of each sample was injected onto a pre-packed column attached to a nanoAcquity UPLC (Waters) in-line with a Thermo Scientific™ Q Exactive™ Plus Hybrid Quadrupole Orbitrap™ mass spectrometer  (Thermo Scientific) and a 130 min gradient was used to further separate the peptide mixtures as follows (solvent A: water with 0.1% FA; solvent B: acetonitrile with 0.1% FA): Isocratic flow was maintained at 0.1 μL/min at 1% solvent B for 40 min, followed by linear gradients from 1% B to 6% B over 2 min, 6% B to 24% B over 48 min, 24% B to 48% B over 5 min, 48% B to 80% B over 5 min. Isocratic flow at 80% B was maintained for 5 min, followed by a gradient from 80% B to 1% B over 5 min, and isocratic flow at 1% B was maintained for 10 min. The full MS was collected over the mass range of 300-1,700 m/z with a resolution of 70,000 and the automatic gain control (AGC) target was set as 3x 106. MS/MS data was collected using a top 10 high-collisional energy dissociation method in data-dependent mode with a normalized collision energy of 27.0 eV and a 1.6 m/z isolation window. MS/MS resolution was 17,500 and dynamic exclusion was 90 seconds.

### Data Protocol
For identification of annotated and unannotated microproteins, ProteoWizard MS Convert was used for peak picking and files were analyzed using Mascot. Oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications, and a previously reported three-frame translation of assembled transcripts from HEK 293T mRNA-seq was used as the database4. For the label free quantification (LFQ) analysis, raw data were analyzed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.8.0), oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications, and human UniProt (https://www.uniprot.org/, version 2021) plus unannotated microproteins, was used as the database for searching. For all analysis, a mass deviation of 20 p.p.m. was set for MS1 peaks, and 0.6 Da was set as maximum allowed MS/MS peaks with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Maximum false discovery rates (FDR) were set to 1% both on peptide and protein levels. Protein interaction networks are constructed from Maxquant LFQ data that were imported into Cytoscape 3.8.2

### Publication Abstract
Proteogenomic identification of translated small open reading frames has revealed thousands of previously unannotated, largely uncharacterized microproteins, or polypeptides of less than 100 amino acids, and alternative proteins (alt-proteins) that are co-encoded with canonical proteins and are often larger. The subcellular localizations of microproteins and alt-proteins are generally unknown but can have significant implications for their functions. Proximity biotinylation is an attractive approach to define the protein composition of subcellular compartments in cells and in animals. Here, we developed a high-throughput technology to map unannotated microproteins and alt-proteins to subcellular localizations by proximity biotinylation with TurboID (MicroID). More than 150 microproteins and alt-proteins are associated with subnuclear organelles. One alt-protein, alt-LAMA3, localizes to the nucleolus and functions in pre-rRNA transcription. We applied MicroID in a mouse model, validating expression of a conserved nuclear microprotein, and establishing MicroID for discovery of microproteins and alt-proteins in&#xa0;vivo.

### Keywords
Microprotein; proximity-dependent biotinylation

### Affiliations
Yale University

### Submitter
ZHENKUN NA

### Lab Head
Dr Sarah Slavoff
Yale University


