### Accession
PXD035396

### Title
Optineurin links Hace1-dependent Rac ubiquitylation 1 to integrin-mediated mechanotransduction to control bacterial invasion and cell divisionOptineurin links Hace1-dependent Rac ubiquitylation 1 to integrin-mediated mechanotransduction to control bacterial invasion and cell division

### Description
Extracellular matrix (ECM) elasticity is perceived by cells via focal adhesion structures, which transduce mechanical cues into chemical signaling to conform cell behavior. Although the contribution of ECM compliance to the control of cell migration or division has been extensively studied, little has been reported regarding whole proteome adaptation to changes of mechanical forces. Uropathogenic E. coli (UPEC) are responsible of 70-95% of the Urinary Tract Infections (UTIs), comprising cystitis, prostatitis and pyelonephritis. These are recurrent or chronic infections causing significant costs in public health. UPEC produce the Cytotoxic Necrotizing Factor1 (CNF1) toxin, targeting one of the major host mechano-sensor and -adaptor, namely the actin cytoskeleton. We have discovered that the CNF1 and integrin-dependent invasion of cells by UPEC is highly dependent on ECM stiffness. Here we aim to analyze primary human cells treated or not with CNF1 and cultured on a fibronectin ECM of variable stiffness by label free shotgun proteomics, to bring new concepts on the manipulation of host tissue mechanics by pathogens.

### Sample Protocol
For label-free quantitative proteomic analysis of stiffness related proteins, HUVEC cells( passage1,  cell density 0.5x106) were seeded  on 35 mm Matrigen hydrogels of different stiffnesses after fibronectin coating for 2.5 hours at 37 °C. Four independent biological replicates were prepared and analysed for each condition. After overnight seeding, complete medium was changed, and CNF1 at 1 nM was added for 2 hours where indicated. Cells were washed with PBS and lysed in urea lysis buffer (8 M urea, 20 mM HEPES, pH 8, filtered) supplemented with a cocktail of protease (A32961 Pierce) and phosphatase inhibitors(PhosStop Roche).

### Data Protocol
Purified peptides for shotgun analysis were re-dissolved in 20 μl solvent A (0.1% TFA in water/ACN (98:2, v/v) and peptide concentration was determined on a Lunatic spectrophotometer (Unchained Labs). 2 μg of each sample was injected for LC-MS/MS analysis on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system in-line connected to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo) equipped with a pneu-Nimbus dual ion source (Phoenix S&T). Trapping was performed at 10 μl/min for 4 min in solvent 738 A on a 20 mm trapping column (made in-house, 100 μm internal diameter (I.D.), 5 μm beads, C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch, Germany) and the sample was loaded on a 200 cm long micro pillar array column (PharmaFluidics) with C18-endcapped functionality mounted in the Ultimate 3000’s column oven at 50°C. For proper ionization, a fused silica PicoTip emitter (10 μm inner diameter) (New Objective) was connected to the μPAC™ outlet union and a grounded connection was provided to this union. Peptides were eluted by a non-linear increase from 1 to 55% MS solvent B (0.1% FA in water/ACN (2:8, v/v)) over 175 minutes, first at a flow rate of 750 ml/min, then at 300 ml/min, followed by a 10-minutes wash reaching 99% MS solvent B and re-equilibration with MS solvent A (0.1% FA in water). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition. Full-scan MS spectra (300-1500 m/z) were acquired in 3 s acquisition cycles at a resolution of 120,000 in the Orbitrap analyzer after accumulation to a target AGC value of 200,000 with a maximum injection time of 250 ms. The precursor ions were filtered for charge states (2-7 required), dynamic range (60 s; +/- 10 ppm window) and intensity (minimal intensity of 3E4). The precursor ions were selected in the multipole with an isolation window of 1.2 Da and accumulated to an AGC target of 1.2E4 or a maximum injection time of 40 ms and activated using HCD fragmentation (34% NCE). The fragments were analyzed in the Ion Trap Analyzer at normal scan rate. MaxQuant search: LC–MS/MS runs of all 24 samples were searched together using MaxQuant 103 (version 1.6.11.0) with mainly default search settings, including a false discovery rate set at 1% on peptide-to-spectrum matches (PSM), peptide and protein level. Spectra were searched against the human protein sequences in the Swiss-Prot database (database release version of 2019_06), containing 20,960 sequences (www.uniprot.org). The mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions was set to 4.5 and 20 ppm, respectively, during the main search. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine, also allowing cleavage at proline bonds with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionine residues and acetylation of protein N-termini, while carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed modification. Matching between runs was enabled with a matching time window of 0.7 minutes and an alignment time window of 20 minutes. Only proteins with at least one unique or razor peptide were retained leading to the identification of 3,515 proteins. Proteins were quantified by the MaxLFQ algorithm integrated in the MaxQuant software. A minimum ratio count of two unique or razor peptides was required for quantification. Further data analysis 770 of the shotgun results was performed with an in-house R script using the proteinGroups output table from MaxQuant. Reverse database hits were removed, LFQ intensities were log2 transformed, and replicate samples were grouped. Proteins with less than three valid values in at least one group were removed, and missing values were imputed from a normal distribution centred around the detection limit (package DEP 104), leading to a list of 1,804 quantified proteins in the experiment that were used for further data analysis. For comparison of protein abundance between pairs of sample groups (4 kPa vs. 1 kPa, 50 kPa vs. 1 kPa and 50 kPa vs. 4 kPa within the NT and CNF1 sample groups), statistical testing for differences between two group means was performed using the limma package. Statistical significance for differential regulation was set to a false discovery rate (FDR) of <0.05 and fold change of >2- or <0.5-fold (|log2FC|= 1). The results are presented in Supplementary Tables S1 and S2. Z-scored LFQ intensities from significantly regulated proteins were plotted in a heatmap after nonsupervised hierarchical clustering.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cnf1 toxin, Rac1 gtpase, Mechanotransduction, E3 ubiquitin ligase, Tumor suppressor, Host-pathogen interaction, Integrin signaling

### Affiliations
Unité des Toxines Bactériennes, Département de Microbiologie, UMR 6047 CNRS, INSERM U 1306, Institut Pasteur, 75724 Paris CEDEX 15, France. Université de Paris, 75006 Paris.
VIB Proteomics Core

### Submitter
Delphi Van Haver

### Lab Head
Dr Amel Mettouchi
Unité des Toxines Bactériennes, Département de Microbiologie, UMR 6047 CNRS, INSERM U 1306, Institut Pasteur, 75724 Paris CEDEX 15, France. Université de Paris, 75006 Paris.


