### Accession
PXD020584

### Title
Formation of a protein corona on the surface of extracellular vesicles in blood plasma

### Description
In this study we tested whether a protein corona is formed around extracellular vesicles (EVs) in biofluids. We isolated nascent EVs of THP1 cells and platelets, and incubated them in EV-depleted platelet-free plasma from healthy subjects and patients with rheumatoid arthritis. EVs were subjected to differential centrifugation, size exclusion chromatography, or density gradient ultracentrifugation followed by mass spectrometry. Plasma protein-coated EVs had a higher density compared to nascent ones and carried numerous newly associated proteins. Interactions between plasma proteins and EVs were confirmed by immune electron microscopy and flow cytometry. Based on the results of this study and data published by others, we identified 9 shared corona proteins (ApoA1, ApoB, ApoC3, ApoE, CO3, CO4B, FIBA, IgHG2 and IgHG4) equally present in association with EVs, viruses and artificial nanoparticles in blood plasma. Since ALBU was also present in association with our nascent EVs, we could not include it in the list. We found induction of protein aggregation by centrifugation of our EV-depleted plasma samples at 12,500 g and the aggregate proteins showed high overlap with the EV corona. However, in contrast to aggregates which had no effect, coated EVs induced an increased expression of TNFa, IL-6 and CD83 of human monocyte-derived dendritic cells. In conclusion, our data shed new light on the commonly reported plasma protein “contamination” of EV preparations.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture THP1 monocytic cell line (ATTC) was cultured at 2.5-5x105/mL concentration in RPMI 1640 medium containing 10 % FBS, 1 % Antibiotic Antimycotic Solution for Cell Culture and 1 % glutamine. Five mL of calcium and magnesium free Hanks’ Balanced Salt Solution and 5 μL of 1 μg/μL prostaglandin E1 (PGE1) solutions were added to 40 mL platelet concentrate. Samples were centrifuged at 900 g at RT for 15 min. The pellet was re-suspended in 15 mL HBSS, to which 100 ng/mL PGE1 solution was added. Next, 10-17 % discontinuous iodixanol gradient was prepared in 50 mL Falcon tubes with the following layers: 13 mL 17 %, 12 mL 13 %, 12 mL 10 %. Subsequently, 10-12.5 mL platelet suspension was layered onto the gradient. Tubes were centrifuged at 300 g at RT for 30 min. The middle layer, rich in platelets, was washed again at 300 g at RT for 5 min. The supernatant was centrifuged at 2,200 g at RT for 15 min, after which the pellet was re-suspended in 100 mL calcium-and magnesium-free HBSS. Nascent EV isolation from cell culture Prior to isolation of EVs, cells were transferred into serum-free medium for 18-20 hours at 5-10x105/mL concentration. Cells were 90-95 % negative for apoptosis. Cells were centrifuged twice at 300 g at RT for 10 min. The pellet was discarded and the supernatant was transferred into new tubes each time. The supernatant was then filtered through a 5 μm filter, was centrifuged at 2,000 g at 18°C for 20 min and was filtered again through a 0.8 μm filter. The flow-through was then centrifuged at 12,500 g at 16°C for 40 min. The supernatant was discarded and the pellet was washed once in 0.2 μm filtered 10 mM HEPES containing 0.9% NaCl (”EV buffer”). EV isolation from platelet culture Isolated platelets were incubated for 180 min at 37°C 5 % CO2 with continuous rocking. Subsequently, samples were centrifuged in two steps: first at 4,750 g at RT for 5 min, then at 11,000 g at RT for 1 min. The supernatant was centrifuged again at 2,500 g at RT for 15 min. After filtration of the supernatant through 0.8 μm filters, it was centrifuged at 20,000 g at 14°C for 40 min. Production of EV-depleted blood plasma Peripheral blood samples of 18 mL were collected from the cubital vein of healthy subjects and from patients with rheumatoid arthritis patients (RA) in acid-citrate-dextrose (ACD-A) tubes. The blood was centrifuged twice at 2,500 g at RT for 15 min according to the recommendation of International Society on Thrombosis and Haemostasis to yield platelet-free plasma (PFP). After the second centrifugation, the plasma was diluted two folds with 0.2 μm filtered PBS. Gravitation driven filtration was applied first with 5 μm and then with 0.8 μm filters. Next, the plasma was centrifuged at 20,000 g at 16°C for 40 min, and then the supernatant was ultracentrifuged at 100,000 g at 4°C for 12-16 hours. Density gradient ultracentrifugation (DGUC) Re-isolation of EVs was also carried out by DGUC. A discontinuous iodixanol gradient was used as described earlier by Van Deun et al. modified for the total volume of 4 mL of gradient (1 mL of 40 %, 1 mL of 20 %, 1 mL of 10 % and 1 mL of 5 % solutions layered onto each other in an 5 mL). EVs incubated in healthy EV-depleted PFPs (n=3) in 560 μL were loaded onto the top of the gradient in an open top 5 mL maximum volume polyallomer tube. The samples were spun at 100,000 g on 4°C for 18 hours. Fractions of 500μL were collected starting from the top of the gradient, and the densities of each fraction were determined by measuring the weight of identical volume of each sample. Each fraction was diluted to 2 mL with EV buffer, from which 30 μL was separated for flow cytometry, while the rest was centrifuged at 12,500 g at 16°C for 80 min. Meanwhile, flow cytometry analysis of each sample was done and those two or three fractions where EVs were detected, were pooled and were then analysed by MS. Size exclusion chromatography (SEC) Besides using DGUC, aliquots of the same samples were also separated by SEC. Size exclusion columns (qEVoriginal (IZON), separation size: 70 nm nominal, bed volume 10 mL) were used according to the instructions of the manufacturer. The pooled fractions were then spun at 12,500 g at 16°C for 40 min, the pellets were re-suspended in 30 μL of HPLC distilled water and were subjected to MS analysis. Mass spectrometry (MS) Proteins were extracted by repeated freeze-thaw cycles and digested by a miniaturized tryptic digestion protocol as described earlier. Samples were analysed on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nanoRSLC coupled to a Bruker Maxis II mass spectrometer via CaptiveSpray nanobooster ionsource. Peptides were separated on an ACQUITY UPLC M-Class Peptide BEH C18 column (130 Å, 1.7 μm, 75 μm x 250 mm) following trapping on an AcclaimTM PepMap100TM C18 NanoTrap column (100 Å, 5 μm, 100 μm × 20 mm).

### Data Protocol
Data dependent analysis was performed using a fix cycle time of 2.5 sec. Raw data files were processed using the Compass DataAnalysis software (Bruker). Protein identification was performed utilising search engines Mascot (Matrix Science, version Mascot 2.5) and X!Tandem (The GPM, thegpm.org; version 2007.01.01.1) against the Swissprot Homo sapiens database (2015_08). The following search criteria were used: 10 ppm peptide mass tolerance, 0.15 Da fragment mass tolerance and 2 missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation on cysteines was set as fixed modification and the following variable modifications were applied: deamidation (N, Q), and oxidation (M).

### Publication Abstract
In this study we tested whether a protein corona is formed around extracellular vesicles (EVs) in blood plasma. We isolated medium-sized nascent EVs of THP1 cells as well as of Optiprep-purified platelets, and incubated them in EV-depleted blood plasma from healthy subjects and from patients with rheumatoid arthritis. EVs were subjected to differential centrifugation, size exclusion chromatography, or density gradient ultracentrifugation followed by mass spectrometry. Plasma protein-coated EVs had a higher density compared to the nascent ones and carried numerous newly associated proteins. Interactions between plasma proteins and EVs were confirmed by confocal microscopy, capillary Western immunoassay, immune electron microscopy and flow cytometry. We identified nine shared EV corona proteins (ApoA1, ApoB, ApoC3, ApoE, complement factors 3 and 4B, fibrinogen &#x3b1;-chain, immunoglobulin heavy constant &#x3b3;2 and &#x3b3;4 chains), which appear to be common corona proteins among EVs, viruses and artificial nanoparticles in blood plasma. An unexpected finding of this study was the high overlap of the composition of the protein corona with blood plasma protein aggregates. This is explained by our finding that besides a diffuse, patchy protein corona, large protein aggregates also associate with the surface of EVs. However, while EVs with an external plasma protein cargo induced an increased expression of TNF-&#x3b1;, IL-6, CD83, CD86 and HLA-DR of human monocyte-derived dendritic cells, EV-free protein aggregates had no effect. In conclusion, our data may shed new light on the origin of the commonly reported plasma protein 'contamination' of EV preparations and may add a new perspective to EV research.

### Keywords
Protein corona; extracellular vesicles; blood plasma; rheumatoid arthritis; mass spectrometry; aggregation

### Affiliations
Department of Genetics, Cell- and Immunobiology, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary MTA-SE Immune-Proteogenomics Extracellular Vesicle Research Group, Budapest, Hungary HCEMM-SE Extracellular Vesicles Research Group, Budapest, Hungary
RCNS HAS, MS Proteomics Research Group

### Submitter
Lilla Turiák

### Lab Head
Dr Edit Buzás
Department of Genetics, Cell- and Immunobiology, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary MTA-SE Immune-Proteogenomics Extracellular Vesicle Research Group, Budapest, Hungary HCEMM-SE Extracellular Vesicles Research Group, Budapest, Hungary


