### Accession
PXD022384

### Title
MDP phosphorylation by NAGK is essential for NOD2 activation

### Description
Bacterial cell wall components provide various unique molecular structures that are detected by pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) of the innate immune system as non-self. Most bacterial species form a cell wall that consists of peptidoglycan, a polymeric structure comprising of alternating amino sugars. Muramyl dipeptide (MDP) is the minimal, biologically active molecular structure derived from peptidoglycan, and its immunogenicity is well documented in numerous studies. MDP is sensed by the cytosolic nucleotide-binding and nucleotide oligomerization domain-like receptor 2 (NOD2), which triggers a pro-inflammatory response upon engagement 1,2. Conducting a forward genetic screen to identify factors required for MDP detection, we discovered that N-acetylglucosamine kinase (NAGK) is essential for the immunostimulatory activity of MDP. NAGK, which has previously been identified to contribute to the hexosamine salvage pathway in humans, is broadly expressed and inducible in innate immune cells. Mechanistically, NAGK functions upstream of NOD2 in that it directly phosphorylates the N-acetylmuramic moiety of MDP at the hydroxyl group of its C6 position, yielding 6-O-phospho-MDP. NAGK-phosphorylated MDP constitutes an essential component of NOD2 dependent signal transduction. Altogether, these results unveil a previously unknown interconnection of amino sugar metabolism and innate immunity to bacterial cell walls.

### Sample Protocol
We applied the Easy Phos protocol (Humphrey et al., 2015, Humphrey et al., 2018) to enrich for phosphopeptides. In short, 8 Mio. THP-1 cells were stimulated with L18-MDP (200 ng/mL) washed with ice cold TBS and lysed in 2% sodium deoxycholate (SDC) and 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5 and boiled immediately. After sonication protein amounts were adjusted to 1 mg before reduction (10 mM tris(2-carboxy(ethyl)phosphine (TCEP)), alkylation (40 mM 2-chloroacetamide (CAA)) and digestion with Trypsin and LysC (1:100, enzyme/protein, w/w) overnight. Isopropanol (final conc. 50%), trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, final conc. 6 %) and monopotassium phosphate (KH2PO4, final conc. 1mM) were added to the rest of the digested lysate. Lysates were shaken then spun for 3 min at 2000 x g and supernatants were incubated with TiO2 beads for 5 minutes at 40 °C (1:10, protein/beads, w/w). Beads were washed 5 times with isopropanol and 5% TFA and phosphopeptides were eluted off the beads with 40% acetonitrile (ACN) and 15% of ammoniumhydroxide (25% NH4OH) on C8 stage tips. After 20 minutes of SpeedVac at 45 °C phosphopeptides were desalted on SDB-RPS stage tips and resolubilized in 5 uL of 2% ACN and 0.3% TFA and injected in the mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were processed by the Spectronaut software version 14 (Biognosys, (Bruderer et al., 2015)) using the directDIA option. Serine/Threonine/Tyrosine phosphorylation was added as variable modification to the default settings which include cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification and N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidations as variable modifications. The human (Reviewed 21,039, Unreviewed 70,579 entries, 2015) uniport FASTA databases was used as forward database. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to less than 1% at the peptide and protein levels and a minimum length of 7 amino acids for peptides was specified. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to Arginine and Lysine as expected using Trypsin and LysC as proteases and a maximum of two missed cleavages. The localization cutoff for phosphorylations was set to 0 but afterwards filtered for the localization probability of 0.75 using the Perseus plugin (Bekker-Jensen et al, 2020).

### Publication Abstract
The cytosolic pattern recognition receptor NOD2 is activated by the peptidoglycan fragment muramyl dipeptide to generate a proinflammatory immune response. Downstream effects include the secretion of cytokines such as interleukin 8, the upregulation of pro-interleukin 1&#x3b2;, the induction of autophagy, the production of antimicrobial peptides and defensins, and contributions to the maintenance of the composition of the intestinal microbiota. Polymorphisms in NOD2 are the cause of the inflammatory disorder Blau syndrome and act as susceptibility factors for the inflammatory bowel condition Crohn's disease. The complexity of NOD2 signalling is highlighted by the observation that over 30 cellular proteins interact with NOD2 directly and influence or regulate its functional activity. Previously, the majority of reviews on NOD2 function have focused upon the role of NOD2 in inflammatory disease or in its interaction with and response to microbes. However, the functionality of NOD2 is underpinned by its biochemical interactions. Consequently, in this review, we have taken the opportunity to address the more 'basic' elements of NOD2 signalling. In particular, we have focused upon the core interactions of NOD2 with protein factors that influence and modulate the signal transduction pathways involved in NOD2 signalling. Further, where information exists, such as in relation to the role of RIP2, we have drawn comparison with the closely related, but functionally discrete, pattern recognition receptor NOD1. Overall, we provide a comprehensive resource targeted at understanding the complexities of NOD2 signalling.

### Keywords
Nagk, Muramyl dipeptide, Bacterial sensing, Sugar kinase, Inflammation, Nod2

### Affiliations
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry  Germany
Proteomics

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry  Germany


