### Accession
PXD025397

### Title
Combination of a microfluidic device with brain extracellular matrix promotes structural and functional maturation of human brain organoids

### Description
Brain organoids derived from human pluripotent stem cells provide a highly valuable in vitro model to recapitulate human brain development and neurological diseases. However, the current systems for brain organoid culture require further improvement for the reliable production of high-quality organoids. Here, we demonstrate two engineering elements to improve human brain organoid culture, (1) a human brain extracellular matrix (BEM) to provide brain-specific cues and (2) a microfluidic device with periodic flow to improve the survival and reduce the variability of organoids. A three-dimensional culture modified with BEM significantly enhanced neurogenesis in developing brain organoids from human induced pluripotent stem cells. Cortical layer development, volumetric augmentation, and electrophysiological function of human brain organoids were further improved in a reproducible manner by dynamic culture in microfluidic chamber devices. Our engineering concept of reconstituting brain-mimetic microenvironments facilitates the development of a reliable culture platform for brain organoids, enabling effective modeling and drug development for human brain diseases.

### Sample Protocol
Detailed protocols about brain ECM, sample preparation for bottom-up proteomics and LC-MS/MS analysis are provided in the associated manuscript.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed using MaxQuant. Detailed settings are provided in the associated manuscript (supplemantary information part). The intensity based absolute quantification (iBAQ) was used for quantification of protein groups

### Publication Abstract
Brain organoids derived from human pluripotent stem cells provide a highly valuable in vitro model to recapitulate human brain development and neurological diseases. However, the current systems for brain organoid culture require further improvement for the reliable production of high-quality organoids. Here, we demonstrate two engineering elements to improve human brain organoid culture, (1) a human brain extracellular matrix to provide brain-specific cues and (2) a microfluidic device with periodic flow to improve the survival and reduce the variability of organoids. A three-dimensional culture modified with brain extracellular matrix significantly enhanced neurogenesis in developing brain organoids from human induced pluripotent stem cells. Cortical layer development, volumetric augmentation, and electrophysiological function of human brain organoids were further improved in a reproducible manner by dynamic culture in microfluidic chamber devices. Our engineering concept of reconstituting brain-mimetic microenvironments facilitates the development of a reliable culture platform for brain organoids, enabling effective modeling and drug development for human brain diseases.

### Keywords
Brain extracellular matrix, Organoid, Microfluidic device

### Affiliations
Department of Biotechnology, Stem cell and biomaterial engineering Lab, Yonsei University, Republic of Korea.
Soongsil university

### Submitter
Sung-Hyun Jo

### Lab Head
Dr Seung-Woo Cho
Department of Biotechnology, Stem cell and biomaterial engineering Lab, Yonsei University, Republic of Korea.


