### Accession
PXD004865

### Title
Pabpn1-driven cytoskeletal rearrangement induces muscle wasting

### Description
Poly(A) binding protein nuclear 1 (PABPN1) is a multifunctional regulator of mRNA processing. PABPN1 inhibits alternative polyadenylation (APA), and in conditions with reduced PABPN1 levels APA utilization causes genome-wide mRNA dysregulation. PABPN1 levels decline from midlife onwards in Oculopharyngeal Muscular Dystrophy (OPMD) and in aged muscles. Reduced PABPN1 levels cause muscle atrophy by altering mRNA levels of the ubiquitin proteasome system. The effect of PABPN1-mediated APA utilization on the proteome has not been investigated yet. We report the PABPN1-mediated proteome in Tibialis anterior (TA) mouse muscles, signifying functional impact for the mitochondria, cytoskeleton and translation cellular machineries. Central nucleation and split myofibers marked PABPN1-derived muscle histology. We show that up-regulation of the cytoskeletal proteins: Murc, Pfn1 and Csrp3, is highly associated with PABPN1-mediated muscle pathology and with reduced PABPN1 levels. Elevation of PABPN1 levels by sirtinol treatment reversed muscle pathology and restored levels of those cytoskeletal proteins. We suggest that restoration of PABPN1 levels in aged muscles could be a novel therapeutic strategy to mitigate muscle waste.

### Sample Protocol
20 mg muscle tissue was homogenised with plastic beads using bead beater (Precellys Stretton Scientific). Proteins were extracted using RIPA buffer (50mM Tris, pH 7.4, 150mM NaCl, 1% SDS, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 1% Igepal CA-630 and protease inhibitors cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich), and protein concentration was determined with a BCA protein assay kit (Pierce, Thermofisher Scientific). Peptides were obtained by a tryptic digestion according to the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method. In brief, 50 µg protein was pretreated with DTT (20mM), IAA (1M) and washed with urea (8M) in between. Protein digestion was carried out with 1.7 µg trypsin at 37C overnight. Trypsin was deactivated with 5% formic acid (FA) and the peptides were then washed with NaCl (0.5M) and H2O.  Desalting was performed using a Sep-Pak column with C18 Sep-Pack cartridges (Waters), the purified peptides were then dried using speed-vac concentrator. Peptides were resuspended in 20 µl solution A (98% MilliQ-H2O, 2% CH3CN and 0.1% FA), vortexed and sonicated before injection in the HF Q Exactive Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass spectrometer (Thermofisher Scientific). 1 µl of the samples was injected and allowed to run on a one-hour gradient in two technical replicates.

### Data Protocol
The chromatograms were aligned using Progenesis QI. The peptides were identified using Mascot, searching against the UniProt reference proteome for Mus musculus (retrieved 17/07/2015) with the following parameters: precursor tolerance 10ppm (up to 1 13C), fragment tolerance 0.05 Da, .Carbamidomethylation (C) as a fixed modification, and Deamidation (N) and Oxidation (M) as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Reduced poly(A)-binding protein nuclear 1 (PABPN1) levels cause aging-associated muscle wasting. PABPN1 is a multifunctional regulator of mRNA processing. To elucidate the molecular mechanisms causing PABPN1-mediated muscle wasting, we compared the transcriptome with the proteome in mouse muscles expressing short hairpin RNA to PABPN1 (shPab). We found greater variations in the proteome than in mRNA expression profiles. Protein accumulation in the shPab proteome was concomitant with reduced proteasomal activity. Notably, protein acetylation appeared to be decreased in shPab versus control proteomes (63%). Acetylome profiling in shPab muscles revealed prominent peptide deacetylation associated with elevated sirtuin-1 (SIRT1) deacetylase. We show that SIRT1 mRNA levels are controlled by PABPN1 via alternative polyadenylation site utilization. Most importantly, SIRT1 deacetylase inhibition by sirtinol increased PABPN1 levels and reversed muscle wasting. We suggest that perturbation of a multifactorial regulatory loop involving PABPN1 and SIRT1 plays an imperative role in aging-associated muscle wasting. VIDEO ABSTRACT.

### Keywords
Csrp3, Progenesis, Mouse, Lfq, Pabpn1, Pfn1, Murc

### Affiliations
Department of Human Genetics Leiden University Medical Center Leiden The Netherlands
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Philip Charles

### Lab Head
Dr Vered Raz
Department of Human Genetics Leiden University Medical Center Leiden The Netherlands


