### Accession
PXD017416

### Title
Optimised Workflow for the Proteomic Detection of Small Proteins

### Description
Small open reading frame encoded proteins (SEPs) gained increasing interest during the last years due to their broad range of important functions in both, prokaryotes and in eukaryotes. In bacteria, signalling, virulence or regulation of enzyme activities have been associated with this protein class. Nonetheless, the number of SEPs detected in large scale proteome studies is often low as classical methods are biased towards the identification of larger proteins. In the accompanying manuscript, we present a workflow that allows enhanced identification rates of small proteins compared to traditional protocols. For this aim, the steps of small protein enrichment, proteolytic digest and database search were reviewed and adjusted to the special requirement of SEPs. Enrichment by the use of small pore sized solid phase material increased the absolute numbers of identified SEPs by a factor of two and the application of alternative proteases to trypsin reduced spectral counts for larger proteins. The application of an integrated proteogenomics search database (iPtgxDB) in combination with the optimized protocol allowed the detection of several proteins not yet annotated in the reference genome of Bacillus subtilis. Finally, the identification of some of these missed proteins was validated by comparing their identifying spectra to those of synthetic peptides.

### Sample Protocol
All experiments were conducted with cellular protein extracts of B. subtilis, strain 168 trp+ For the initial experiments, cells were grown in lysogeny broth (LB) at 37 °C with 180 rpm orbital shaking to early stationary phase and harvested at an optical density (600 nm) of 4.0. Bacteria were collected by centrifugation, the remaining growth medium was removed by washing with Tris-HCl buffer and cells were disrupted by ultrasonication. A mild centrifugation step at 8,000 x g for 5 minutes ensured the minimal loss of membrane associated small proteins. Within the main experiment, samples obtained from 14 different growth conditions were analysed to characterise the small proteome of B. subtilis. The selected conditions included chemically defined and rich media, induction of diverse stresses, different carbon sources and conditions that initiate sporulation. Protein samples were either digested directly after the cell disruption or enriched for small proteins by solid phase enrichment on columns containing a 8.5 nm pore size, modified styrene-divinylbenzene resign. For this aim, the columns were equilibrated by passing twice 1 ml acetonitrile and twice 1 ml water through it. Subsequently, 500 µg protein (as determined by Bradford assay using bovine serum albumin as external calibrant) was loaded; and unbound proteins were removed by washing twice with 1 ml water. The enriched small protein fraction was eluted with 0.5 ml 70% (v/v) acetonitrile and evaporated to dryness in a vacuum centrifuge. For protein digestion 20 µg aliquots of the enriched or non-enriched protein samples were diluted to a final volume of 100 µl with either 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEAB, for trypsin and Arg-C), TEAB containing 8 M urea (for Lys-C), or 500 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8) containing 10 mM calcium chloride (for chymotrypsin). All samples were subsequently reduced for 45 minutes with 0.5 µmol Tris(2-carboxyethyl)-phosphine (TCEP) at 65 °C. The reaction was quenched by adding 1 µmol iodoacetamide; the mixture was allowed to alkylate for 15 minutes in the dark at room temperature and the corresponding protease was added in a 1: 75 enzyme to protein ratio. The samples were digested in a temperature controlled shaker for 12 h either at 37 °C (for trypsin, Lys-C and Arg-C) or at 25 °C (for chymotrypsin) and the digestion was interrupted by acidifying the mixture with trifluoroacetic acid. Prior to analysis with mass spectrometry, peptides were purified by Pierce C18 Tips (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer's protocol and retention time calibration peptides (iRT, Biognosys) were spiked to each sample. For the main experiment only Lys-C and Arg-C were applied and the digestion protocol was slightly modified to include the acid labile surfactant RapiGest (Waters): Thus, the samples were diluted with 50 mM TEAB, RapiGest was added prior reduction at a final concentration of 0.2% (w/v), the protein to enzyme ratio was decreased to 1: 100 and RapiGest was removed before peptide purification by hydrolysis with trifluoric acid for 30 minutes.  The samples were analysed in CID mode on an LTQ Orbitrap Velos Elite or in HCD mode on a Q Exactive instrument (both Thermo Fisher Scientific). The Orbitrap Velos Elite was coupled to an EASY nLC 1200 (Thermo-Fisher Scientific), which was equipped with an in house built 20 cm reversed phase column packed with 3 µm diameter C18 particles (Dr. Maisch) and had in integrated emitter tip. About 1 µg peptides were loaded onto the column with solvent A (0.1% v/v acetic acid in water), eluted by a non linear gradient of solvent B (0.1% v/v acetic acid, 95% v/v acetonitrile in water) and on-line infused in the MS, which was programmed with a data dependent top20 method. The survey scans were acquired in the Orbitrap (300 – 1700 Th; 60,000 resolution at m/z 400; 1 x 1e6 predictive automatic gain control target; max. 200 ms injection time; activated lock mass correction). After collision induced dissociation with a normalised collision energy of 35, fragment spectra were recorded in the LTQ (mass range dependent on precursor m/z; 5 x 1e3 predictive automatic gain control; max. 50 ms injection time). The Q-Exactive was coupled to an EASY nLC 1000 (Thermo-Fisher Scientific) and identical columns as above were used. Since solvent B composition differed (0.1% v/v acetic acid in acetonitrile), gradients were adjusted to match those from the Orbitrap Velos Elite measurements. The Q-Exactive was operated with the following parameters. Survey scan: 300 – 1650 Th mass range; 70,000 resolution at m/z 200; 3 x 1e6 predictive automatic gain control target; max. 120 ms injection time; activated lock mass correction. Fragment scans: higher energy collisional dissociation at normalised energy of 27.5 for the top 10 ions; fixed first mass: 100 Th; mass range dependent on precursor m/z; 17,500 resolution at m/z 200; 1 x 1e5 predictive automatic gain control target; max. 60 ms injection time.

### Data Protocol
Two different sequence databases were applied: For analysis of the optimisation experiments and in silico analysis, the NCBI RefSeq database for B. subtilis strain 168 (NC_000964.3, from March, 3rd 2019, 4,325 protein sequences) was downloaded and supplemented with 44 sequences of commonly observed laboratory contaminants, the retention time calibration peptides and with a reversed version of each protein. This database finally contained 8,738 entries. To permit the identification of non-annotated small proteins, an iPtgxDB, which also contained a six-frame translation considering alternative start codons, was created. Obtained raw files were converted to mzXML using the msconvert script of ProteoWizard (v3.0.9974) and its vendor supplied algorithms for centroiding mass peaks. Afterwards, spectra were searched against the database using either Comet (v2018.01.rev4), MSFragger (v2019 07 01) or MSGF Plus (v2019.07.03). Semi specific enzymatic cleavage, and up to two missed cleavage sites were considered and methionine oxidation (+15.994915 Da), deamidation of asparagine or glutamine ( 0.984016 Da), conversion of N-terminal glutamic acid or glutamine to pyroglutamic acid (-17.026549 or -18.010565 Da, respectively), and carbamylation at peptide N-termini, lysine, arginine, cysteine or methionine residues (+43.005814 Da) as variable modifications as well as static carbamidomethylation (+57.021464 Da) were considered. A precursor mass deviation up to 10 ppm was allowed whereas fragment mass tolerance depended on the instrument (0.5 Th for Velos Elite and 20 ppm for Q Exactive). MSFragger was set up to automatically recalibrate the masses for each file separately and the option to detect optimal parameters was enabled. MSGF-Plus outputs mzident files, which were subsequently converted to pep.xml format using the idconvert script of ProteoWizard (v3.0.9974). The two other search engines generate pep.xml files directly. Identification probabilities were unified experiment wise by PeptideProphet using a minimal peptide length of 6 aa, semi- parametric modelling of a ppm error based high mass accuracy model, reporting of decoy hits and calculated molecular weight of proteins. When results from different search engines were combined, a merging step of interact.pep.xml files by InterProphetParser was included. The resulting interact.pep.xml or ipro.pep.xml files were subsequently processed with ProteinProphet and the output from both scripts was analysed with the filter and report options of Philosopher (v1.4.6). Multi-level false-discovery-rates (FDR) were calculated for spectrum, peptide and protein level using the picked-FDR algorithm and a cutoff of 0.1% or 1.0%, as indicated, was applied for reporting. Proteins from the target database were considered identified only if the number of independent peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) was at least two for RefSeq annotated proteins, three for ab initio predicted proteins or four for proteins from in silico predictions, while proteins from the decoy database were considered identified by two PSMs. In order to validate the identification of peptides assigned to proteins not annotated in the NCBI RefSeq database, 68 reference peptides for 37 proteins were synthesised by JPT Peptide Technologies (Berlin) and analysed on the LTQ Velos Elite and Q-Exactive instruments in CID and HCD mode, respectively. Using the same pipeline as above, the peptide samples were searched with MSFragger against the iPtgx database. Spectra identified with a PeptideProphet assigned probability of at least 0.99, which identified one of the synthesised peptides or a truncated version of these, were included into a CID or HCD spectral library build with SpectraST55 (version 5.0). Truncated versions of synthetic peptides could appear due to the process of peptide synthesis. The library was supplemented with spectra obtained at a 1% peptide FDR from an MSFragger database search of the B. subtilis samples obtained during the main experiment against the RefSeq database, and decoy spectra were created within SpectraST on the level of the merged consensus HCD or CID libraries. The same CID and HCD samples were finally searched against the corresponding library, further processed with PeptideProphet and ProteinProphet and finally filtered with Philosopher (v.2.0.0) for 1% protein level FDR and new proteins with at least 2 assigned spectral counts were considered validated.

### Publication Abstract
Small open reading frame encoded proteins (SEPs) gained increasing interest during the last few years because of their broad range of important functions in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes. In bacteria, signaling, virulence, and regulation of enzyme activities have been associated with SEPs. Nonetheless, the number of SEPs detected in large-scale proteome studies is often low as classical methods are biased toward the identification of larger proteins. Here, we present a workflow that allows enhanced identification of small proteins compared to traditional protocols. For this aim, the steps of small protein enrichment, proteolytic digest, and database search were reviewed and adjusted to the special requirement of SEPs. Enrichment by the use of small-pore-sized solid-phase material increased the number of identified SEPs by a factor of 2, and utilization of alternative proteases to trypsin reduced the spectral counts for larger proteins. The application of the optimized protocol allowed the detection of 210 already annotated proteins up to 100 amino acids (aa) length, including 16 proteins below 51 aa in the Gram-positive model organism <i>Bacillus subtilis</i>. Moreover, 12% of all identified proteins were up to 100 aa, which is a significantly larger fraction than that reported in studies involving traditional proteomics workflows. Finally, the application of an integrated proteogenomics search database and extensive subsequent validation resulted in the confident identification of three novel, not yet annotated, SEPs, which are 21, 26, and 42 aa long.

### Keywords
Seps, Proteogenomics, Bacillus subtilis, Sproteins, Proteolytic digest, Database search, Small protein enrichment

### Affiliations
University of Greifswald,  Institute for Microbiology,  Department for Microbial Proteomics
University of Greifswald, Department for Microbial Proteomics

### Submitter
Juergen Bartel

### Lab Head
Dr Dörte Becher
University of Greifswald,  Institute for Microbiology,  Department for Microbial Proteomics


