### Accession
PXD015568

### Title
Insights on the S-layer Deinoxanthin Binding Complex of Deinococcus radiodurans, a massive protein complex with a porin-like structure and function

### Description
In Deinococcus radiodurans the outermost Surface layer is tightly matched with the rest of the cell wall into a compact and integrated structure able to contrast environmental adversities. The fundamental unit of this S-layer is the S-layer Deinoxanthin Binding Complex, which has been reported to bind the carotenoid deinoxanthin, to provide thermostability, and ultraviolet radiation resistance. Here we report the low-resolution structural features of this S-layer complex, which has been isolated retaining minor subunits not reported previously. In the present study the S-layer Deinoxanthin Binding Complex is shown to possess peculiar transport functions, as assessed by electrophysiological assays, and a porin-like structural organization, as observed by single particles analysis. In assays on lipid bilayer membranes, the increase in ion current related to the complex insertion, ranged between 10 and 100 pA, suggesting a very broad distribution of the pore sizes. The analysis of the ion current after a few insertions suggested minimal substates of ~0.3-3 nS and likely reflected the unitary conductance. Further assays, based on the reversal potential under different conditions revealed a rather non-selective channel. Eventually, the functional properties of this system and its porin-like organization provide essential elements for understanding the rationale of permeability in bacterial strains carrying S-layers.

### Sample Protocol
Protein identification by mass spectrometry from bands in SDS-PAGE was essentially performed as described in Haniewicz et al. (2018). Briefly, bands of interest were subjected to in-gel digestion using sequencing-grade modified trypsin. Extracted peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos, (Thermo) mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed with the software MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.28, Cox and Mann, 2008) and raw files from the MS were searched using the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al, 2011) against a species-specific (D. radiodurans) Uniprot database with a list of common contaminants appended. The mass error tolerance for the full scan MS spectra was set at 20 ppm and for the MS/MS spectra at 0.5 Da. A maximum of 2 missed cleavages was allowed.. A filter of an Andromeda score of 40 for a protein to be identified was applied. Peptides and protein hits were filtered at a false discovery rate of 1% using a target-decoy strategy (Elias and Gygi, 2007).   The iBAQ values were used to determine the most abundant protein per gel band from the analysis.

### Publication Abstract
In the extremophile bacterium <i>Deinococcus radiodurans</i>, the outermost surface layer is tightly connected with the rest of the cell wall. This integrated organization provides a compact structure that shields the bacterium against environmental stresses. The fundamental unit of this surface layer (S-layer) is the S-layer deinoxanthin-binding complex (SDBC), which binds the carotenoid deinoxanthin and provides both, thermostability and UV radiation resistance. However, the structural organization of the SDBC awaits elucidation. Here, we report the isolation of the SDBC with a gentle procedure consisting of lysozyme treatment and solubilization with the nonionic detergent <i>n</i>-dodecyl-&#x3b2;-d-maltoside, which preserved both hydrophilic and hydrophobic components of the SDBC and allows the retention of several minor subunits. As observed by low-resolution single-particle analysis, we show that the complex possesses a porin-like structural organization, but is larger than other known porins. We also noted that the main SDBC component, the protein DR_2577, shares regions of similarity with known porins. Moreover, results from electrophysiological assays with membrane-reconstituted SDBC disclosed that it is a nonselective channel that has some peculiar gating properties, but also exhibits behavior typically observed in pore-forming proteins, such as porins and ionic transporters. The functional properties of this system and its porin-like organization provide information critical for understanding ion permeability through the outer cell surface of S-layer-carrying bacterial species.

### Keywords
Protein complex, Porin, S-layer, Deinococcus radiodurans

### Affiliations
The Francis Crick Institute
Department of Plant Physiology, Warsaw University of Life Sciences - SGGW, Nowoursynowska Str. 159, 02776, Warsaw, Poland

### Submitter
Joanna Kirkpatrick

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Dario Piano
Department of Plant Physiology, Warsaw University of Life Sciences - SGGW, Nowoursynowska Str. 159, 02776, Warsaw, Poland


