### Accession
PXD010031

### Title
Proteome Analysis from a Multispanning Transmembrane Gene COR413-PM1 in Arabidopsis

### Description
Proteomic Analysis of the Arabidopsis wild-type and cor413-pm1 seedlings under control and freezing treatment.

### Sample Protocol
The Filter-aided Sample Preparation method (FASP) was used to prepare the samples. The samples were disrupted effectively by using Cell Disruption System, then incubated with extraction buffer and freeze-thawe 3-5 times. The clear supernatant was loaded onto the filtration device.The filtration device was incubated for 60min at 30℃ on a shaker after 200μl DDT buffer was added for reduction of the disulfide bonds in the protein extracts. 200μl UT buffer was applied 3 times to replace the DTT in each protein sample. Subsequently, freshly prepared IAA buffer was added and then samples were incubated for 30min at 30℃ in the dark. After three buffer exchanges with 8M Urea, 200μl 50mM NH4HCO3 solution was applicated to dilute the urea agent. Finally, the protein extract was digested with 0.5µg Trypsin (0.5µg Trypsin, 50mM NH4HCO3) for 10h at 37℃. Ultrafiltration of the peptide mixture was conducted, and the obtained 25μl peptide mixture was analyzed via mass spectrometry (MS).

### Data Protocol
The qualitative analysis of identified proteins was conducted by using the Proteome Discoverer 2.1 software (PD, Thermo Fisher). The plant genome was searched from the Arabidopsis Database (https://phytozome.jgi.doe.gov), using version Athaliana_167_TAIR10. protein. Maxquant version 1.3.0.5 software was used to conduct the quantitative analysis of identified proteins. Pearson correlation analysis between the quantitation data of the four samples was performed using SPSS 22.0 data processing software.

### Publication Abstract
The plasma membrane is the first subcellular organ that senses low temperature, and it includes some spanning transmembrane proteins that play important roles in cold regulation. COR413-PM1 is a novel multispanning transmembrane cold-regulated protein; however, the related functions are not clear in <i>Arabidopsis</i>. We found the tolerance to freezing stress of <i>cor413-pm1</i> was lower than wild-type (WT). A proteomics method was used to analyze the differentially abundant proteins (DAPs) between <i>cor413-pm1</i> and WT. A total of 4143 protein groups were identified and 3139 were accurately quantitated. The DAPs associated with <i>COR413-PM1</i> and freezing treatment were mainly involved in the metabolism of fatty acids, sugars, and purine. Quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) confirmed the proteomic analysis results of four proteins: fatty acid biosynthesis 1 (FAB1) is involved in fatty acid metabolism and might affect the plasma membrane structure; fructokinase 3 (FRK3) and sucrose phosphate synthase A1 (SPSA1) play roles in sugar metabolism and may influence the ability of osmotic adjustment under freezing stress; and GLN phosphoribosyl pyrophosphate amidotransferase 2 (ASE2) affects freezing tolerance through purine metabolism pathways. In short, our results demonstrate that the multispanning transmembrane protein COR413-PM1 regulates plant tolerance to freezing stress by affecting the metabolism of fatty acids, sugars, and purine in <i>Arabidopsis</i>.

### Keywords
Cold stress, Arabidopsis, Q-excative plus

### Affiliations
Northwest A&F University/CAAS
Institute of Crop Sciences, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences (CAAS)/National Key Facility for Crop Gene Resources and Genetic Improvement, Beijing, China

### Submitter
Su Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Ming Chen
Institute of Crop Sciences, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences (CAAS)/National Key Facility for Crop Gene Resources and Genetic Improvement, Beijing, China


