### Accession
PXD017130

### Title
Immuno-Transcriptomic Profiling Identifies Actionable Alterations in Pediatric Solid Malignancies

### Description
Immuno-Transcriptomic Profiling Identifies Actionable Alterations in Pediatric Solid Malignancies

### Sample Protocol
Purified HLA-associated peptides were sequenced by tandem mass spectrometry (MS) using an Orbitrap Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA). Briefly, peptides were separated on a reverse phase C18 Nano column (75µm ´ 250mm, 2 µm particle) using a 90-minute effective gradient with 4-35% phase B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) on an Ultimate 3000 Nano liquid chromatography (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA). Data dependent acquisition mode was used to profile the HLA peptidome. MS full scan range was 375-1650 m/z at resolution 120,000, and the top 15 most abundant peaks with assigned charge state 1-4 were selected for MS/MS fragmentation using high collision dissociation(HCD) at resolution 30,000 and maximum injection time was 200 milliseconds, isolation window was 1.4 m/z, and dynamic exclusion was set to 20 seconds.

### Data Protocol
The peptide sequence alignment was mapped by PEKAS studio (Version 8.5, Bioinformatics Solutions Inc.) using UniProtKB human proteome sequence database (released on Feb 7th 2017). In the PEAKS searching engine, no enzyme digestion (for natural peptides), the Orbi-Orbi HCD fragmentation, no variable modification, and de novo sequencing (library free search) were selected. The precursor mass tolerance was 15ppm and fragment ion tolerance was 0.5Da. The false discovery rate (FDR) was estimated by decoy-fusion database and was set to 5%. Selected peptides tandem mass spectrum was visualized and manually inspected to assure the data quality.

### Publication Abstract
We perform an immunogenomics analysis utilizing whole-transcriptome sequencing of 657 pediatric extracranial solid cancer samples representing 14 diagnoses, and additionally utilize transcriptomes of 131 pediatric cancer cell lines and 147 normal tissue samples for comparison. We describe patterns of infiltrating immune cells, T&#xa0;cell receptor (TCR) clonal expansion, and translationally relevant immune checkpoints. We find that tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes and TCR counts vary widely across cancer types and within each diagnosis, and notably are significantly predictive of survival in osteosarcoma patients. We identify potential cancer-specific immunotherapeutic targets for adoptive cell therapies including cell-surface proteins, tumor germline antigens, and lineage-specific transcription factors. Using an orthogonal immunopeptidomics approach, we find several potential immunotherapeutic targets in osteosarcoma and Ewing sarcoma and validated PRAME as a bona fide multi-pediatric cancer target. Importantly, this work provides a critical framework for immune targeting of extracranial solid tumors using parallel immuno-transcriptomic and -peptidomic approaches.

### Keywords
Immunology; transcriptome; pediatric;  malignancies

### Affiliations
National Cancer Institute/NIH
Genetics Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA

### Submitter
Yue Andy Qi

### Lab Head
Dr Javed Khan, M.D.
Genetics Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA


