### Accession
PXD034438

### Title
Hepatic responses of mice and rats to equivalent acetaminophen (APAP) insult – SWATH proteomics

### Description
The well-known difference in sensitivity of mice and rats to acetaminophen (APAP) liver injury has been related to differences in the fraction that is bioactivated to the reactive metabolite N-acetyl-p-benzoquinoneimine (NAPQI). Physiologically-based pharmacokinetic modelling was used to identify doses of APAP (300 and 1000 mg/kg in mice and rats, respectively) yielding similar hepatic burdens of NAPQI, to enable the comparison of temporal liver tissue responses under conditions of equivalent chemical insult.

### Sample Protocol
Male C57Bl/6J mice (8 weeks old; 15-22 g body weight) or Sprague-Dawley rats (5 weeks old; 119-144 g body weigh) were fasted for 16 h prior to dosing. Acetaminophen (APAP) was solubilised in 1% (w/v) hydroxyethylcellulose (both, Sigma-Aldrich). Mice (n=5 per time point) and rats (n=5 per time point) were administered 300 mg/kg and 1000 mg/kg APAP, respectively, or vehicle (1% hydroxyethylcellulose) by oral gavage. The animals were sacrificed by exsanguination under isoflurane anaesthesia at baseline (0 h) and at 3, 6, 9 and 24 h after administration of APAP or vehicle. Liver tissue (100-200mg) was lysed in 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 40 mM tris (pH 7.5), 4% CHAPS buffer. Protein was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 37°C and alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) followed by overnight digestion with trypsin/Lys-C. For spectral library generation, a pool of the samples was fractionated by strong cation exchange and desalted fractions were delivered into a Triple TOF 6600 (SCIEX) via an Eksigent NanoLC 415 System (SCIEX). DDA was performed using 25 MS/MS per cycle. For SWATH acquisitions, individual samples were analysed using 100 windows of variable effective isolation width (400-1600 m/z), with a total cycle time of 3.1s. Batch effects were compensated for by the inclusion of a consistent pooled sample in every batch, plus a single sample replicate in each batch.

### Data Protocol
To generate a spectral library for each species, data were searched using ProteinPilot 5.0 (SCIEX) and the Paragon algorithm (Sciex) against the UniProtKB database (Mus musculus UP000000589, gene count 22,001, 55,366 proteins, last modified March 2021; Rattus norvegicus UP000002494, gene count 21,588, 29,934 proteins, last modified March 2021), with carbamidomethyl as a fixed modification of cysteine residues and no biological modifications allowed. Mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions was 10ppm. The data were also searched against a reversed decoy database and proteins lying within a 1% global false discovery rate (FDR) were included in the libraries. In order to align SWATH data with the libraries, only proteotypic peptides with no modifications were required. To this end, a ‘rapid’ search of the data was performed using ProteinPilot. SWATH data were aligned with the spectral libraries using DIA-NN (v1.8) with default settings in ‘robust LC (high accuracy)’ mode and annotated using the reference proteomes (UP000000589 and UP000002494) downloaded as FASTA files. Mass tolerances were determined automatically in DIA-NN for each run separately (Unrelated runs option). Match-between-runs was enabled to re-process the same dataset using a spectral library generated from the data-independent acquisition (DIA) data. Only proteins identified with proteotypic peptides and protein q-value below 0.01 were considered. Normalisation and differential expression analyses were carried out using the DEqMS package (v1.8.0) in R. Protein quantities were log2 transformed and normalised using the equalMedianNormalization function, and Limma batch effect correction was applied.

### Publication Abstract
To minimize the occurrence of unexpected toxicities in early phase preclinical studies of new drugs, it is vital to understand fundamental similarities and differences between preclinical species and humans. Species differences in sensitivity to acetaminophen (APAP) liver injury have been related to differences in the fraction of the drug that is bioactivated to the reactive metabolite N-acetyl-p-benzoquinoneimine (NAPQI). We have used physiologically based pharmacokinetic modeling to identify oral doses of APAP (300 and 1000&#x2009;mg/kg in mice and rats, respectively) yielding similar hepatic burdens of NAPQI to enable the comparison of temporal liver tissue responses under conditions of equivalent chemical insult. Despite pharmacokinetic and biochemical verification of the equivalent NAPQI insult, serum biomarker and tissue histopathology analyses revealed that mice still exhibited a greater degree of liver injury than rats. Transcriptomic and proteomic analyses highlighted the stronger activation of stress response pathways (including the Nrf2 oxidative stress response and autophagy) in the livers of rats, indicative of a more robust transcriptional adaptation to the equivalent insult. Components of these pathways were also found to be expressed at a higher basal level in the livers of rats compared with both mice and humans. Our findings exemplify a systems approach to understanding differential species sensitivity to hepatotoxicity. Multiomics analysis indicated that rats possess a greater basal and adaptive capacity for hepatic stress responses than mice and humans, with important implications for species selection and human translation in the safety testing of new drug candidates associated with reactive metabolite formation.

### Keywords
Oxidative stress, Acetaminophen, Swath, Species differences, Liver injury

### Affiliations
University of Liverpool
MRC Centre for Drug Safety Science, Department of Pharmacology & Therapeutics, Institute of Systems, Molecular & Integrative Biology, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK.

### Submitter
Giusy Russomanno

### Lab Head
Dr Ian Copple
MRC Centre for Drug Safety Science, Department of Pharmacology & Therapeutics, Institute of Systems, Molecular & Integrative Biology, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK.


