### Accession
PXD040824

### Title
Subcellular proteomics for determining iron limited remodeling of plastids in the model diatom Thalassiosira pseudonana

### Description
Diatoms are important primary producers in the world’s oceans, yet their growth is constrained in large regions by low bioavailable iron (Fe). Low Fe-induced limitation of primary production is due to requirements for Fe in components of essential metabolic pathways including photosynthesis and other chloroplast plastid functions. Studies have shown that under Fe-limited stress, diatoms alter plastid-specific processes, including components of electron transport. These physiological changes suggest changes of protein content and their abundance within the diatom plastid. While in-silico predictions provide putative information on plastid-localized proteins, knowledge of diatom plastid proteins remains limited in comparison to model photosynthetic organisms. To characterize proteins enriched in diatom plastids we have used shotgun proteomics to assess the proteome of subcellular plastid-enriched fractions from Thalassiosira pseudonana. To improve our understanding of how the plastid proteome is remodeled in response to Fe limitation, proteome sequencing has been performed on T. pseudonana grown under Fe replete and limited conditions. These analyses have shown that Fe limitation regulates major metabolic pathways in the plastid, including the Calvin cycle, as well as changes in light harvesting protein expression. In-silico localization predictions of proteins identified in this plastid-enriched proteome allowed for an in-depth comparison of theoretical vs observed plastid-localization, providing evidence for the potential of additional protein import pathways into the diatom plastid.

### Sample Protocol
T. pseudonana Culturing  T. pseudonana cultures (CCMP 1335) were grown under Fe-replete and Fe-limited f/2 media (Guillard and Ryther 1962) utilizing trace metal clean procedures. Cultures were maintained in f/2 media made using filter sterilized Sargasso seawater amended with trace metal clean nutrient stocks. Fe-limited media received no Fe amendments, remaining at an ambient concentration of 4 nM Fe, while Fe-replete media received an amendment of 400 nM Fe. All cultures were maintained at 13°C, at a continuous light intensity of 150 μmol quanta • m-2 • s-1. Growth of cultures was assessed using duplicate cell counts. Cultures were grown under each respective Fe condition until growth rates were normalized across successive subcultures. Prior to plastid isolation, culturing of T. pseudonana was performed for four days under both Fe-replete and Fe-limited conditions. Growth rates of both cultures were assessed with Fe-replete cultures exhibiting a nearly double growth relative to the Fe-limited condition. On day of plastid isolation and protein purification, Fe-replete reached a cell density of ~1.54E+06 cells • mL-1, compared to ~1.1054E+06 cells • mL-1 under Fe-limited conditions.    Plastid Organelle Enrichment Following culture acclimation to each respective Fe condition, through determination of changes in growth rate, equal volumes of cultures were divided during the exponential phase of growth and triplicate plastid isolate was performed for each condition. To prepare a plastid-enriched fraction from cultures, cells were collected by centrifugation and resuspended in a minimal amount of f/2 media. To collect intact organelles, the silica frustule of diatom cells was dissolved using ammonia fluoride (10 M). Cells were then sonicated briefly (10 seconds, 10 Watts) to disrupt the plasma membrane while maintaining organelle integrity. Intact plastid-enriched fractions were then collected using a 40/80 percoll density gradient (Chappell and Jenkins 2017; Nunn et al., 2017). Enrichment of the plastid fraction was assessed through SDS-PAGE. Plastids and whole cells were extracted by ice cold homogenization (Barkan 1993). 5 μg of each sample was mixed with Invitrogen™ LDS buffer and β-mercaptoethanol, denatured at 70°C and run on a 4-12% Bis-Tris mini gel with MOPS buffer, with Bio-Rad’s Kaleidoscope Prestained Protein Standard. Gels were stained with Invitrogen™ SimplyBlue™ SafeStain and imaged on a Syngene Geniusgel documentation system.   Protein sample prep and mass spectrometry Plastid-enriched samples were sonicated in 6M urea in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate to solubilize proteins prior to reduction, alkylation, and trypsin digestion (details found in Nunn et al. 2013). Resulting peptides were analyzed on linear ion trap Orbitrap (LTQ-OT) inline with a nanoAquity UPLC chromatography system with an electrospray ionization interface. Peptides were separated using inline reverse-phase chromatography (20 cm, 75 µm i.d. fused silica column and 2 cm, 100 µm i.d. precolumn packed with 3µm C18 beads Dr. Maisch). For each sample, 1 µg of peptide digest was eluted using an acidified water acetonitrile gradient (5-35% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) and analyzed on the LTQ-OT in data dependent mode, top 20 ions.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry results were searched and interpreted with Comet v.2 2016.01(Friso et al. 2004, Eng et al. 2013) using protein database used for correlating spectra with peptides consisted of the latest release version 3.0 of the T. pseudonana predicted protein database (www. jgi.doe.gov), the unmapped sequences (Thaps3_bd; www.jgi.gov), and 50 common contaminants. Using concatenated target-decoy database searches, false discovery rates (FDR) were <1%.  Protein abundances were assessed using spectral count data with normalization between mass spec analyses, performed using Abacus (Fermin et al. 2011), with differences in protein abundance statistically performed using QSPEC (Choi et al. 2008). Proteins were considered present within an Fe condition if there were ≥ 2 spectral counts across all replicates for that condition. The threshold for statistically significant changes in abundance of proteins between conditions was defined as a reported BayesFactor > 10, the corresponding FDR < 1%, and an absolute value of log2fold change > 0.5.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Organelle, Iron limitation, Diatom, Ocean, Plastid

### Affiliations
University of Washington Department of Genome Sciences
University of Washington

### Submitter
Brook Nunn

### Lab Head
Dr Brook Nunn
University of Washington Department of Genome Sciences


