### Accession
PXD001071

### Title
Proteogenomics of Candida tropicalis – an opportunistic pathogen

### Description
Candida tropicalis is an opportunistic pathogen which causes candidiasis in immune-compromised individuals. It is one of the members of the non-albicans group of Candida that are known to be azole resistant and is frequently seen in individuals being treated for  cancers, HIV-infection and bone-marrow transplant. Although the genome of C. tropicalis was sequenced in the year 2009, the genome annotation has not been supported by experimental validation. In the present study, we have carried out in-depth proteomic profiling of C. tropicalis using high-resolution Fourier transform mass spectrometry and mapped ~44% of the computationally predicted protein-coding genes with peptide level evidence. In addition to identifying 2,740 proteins in the cell lysate of this yeast, we also analysed the proteome of the conditioned media of C. tropicalis culture and identified several unique secreted proteins among a total of 780 proteins. By subjecting the mass spectrometry data derived from cell lysate and conditioned media to proteogenomic analysis, we identified 86 novel genes, 12 novel exons and corrected 49 computationally predicted gene models. To our knowledge, this is the first high-throughput proteomic study to refine the genome annotation of C. tropicalis.

### Sample Protocol
Candida tropicalis cell pellet was suspended in cracker buffer (5% SDS, 8 M urea lysis buffer, 40 mM Tris-HCl – pH 6.8, 0.1 mM EDTA) and were subjected to disruption with glass beads for 60 minutes using a cell disruptor. The samples were centrifuged at 14,000 rpm for 15 minutes and the clear supernatant was collected. The conditioned media was obtained by processing the supernatant after pelleting out C. tropicalis cells from the culture. The supernatant was filtered using a 0.22 µ filter and then concentrated using a 3,000 Da molecular mass cut-off spin filter. Protein estimation was performed using BCA assay. For both total proteome and secreted fraction, 300 µg of protein was separated on SDS-PAGE and in-gel digestion was carried out using trypsin. The peptides were extracted, vacuum dried and stored at -80 ºC until further analysis. 2 mg of proteins from cell pellet and 900 µg protein from the conditioned media were separately subjected to in-solution trypsin digestion following reduction and alkylation with DTT and IAA respectively. The peptide digest was then desalted using Sep-Pak C18 columns, lyophilized and fractionated using high pH reverse phase chromatography using XBridge C18, 5 µm 250 x 4.6 mm column (Waters, Milford, MA). 96 fractions were collected which were then concatenated to 12 and 24 fractions in conditioned media and cell lysate respectively. The pooled fractions were lyophilized and stored at -80 ºC until further LC-MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data obtained from all LC-MS/MS analyses were searched against 2 databases – i) C. tropicalis protein database (6,258 entries) and ii) six-frame translated genome database (992,921 entries) using Sequest and Mascot search algorithms through Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The search parameters included trypsin as the proteolytic enzyme with 2 missed cleavages and semi-tryptic identifications allowed. Oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine, glutamine and arginine, and carbamylation of the peptide N terminus and lysine were set as dynamic modifications while carbamidomethylation at cysteine was set as a static modification. Precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set to 20 ppm and 0.1 Da, respectively. Only those peptides that qualified a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) were considered as authentic identifications. The FDR was calculated using target-decoy database searches.

### Publication Abstract
The frequency of Candida infections is currently rising, and thus adversely impacting global health. The situation is exacerbated by azole resistance developed by fungal pathogens. Candida tropicalis is an opportunistic pathogen that causes candidiasis, for example, in immune-compromised individuals, cancer patients, and those who undergo organ transplantation. It is a member of the non-albicans group of Candida that are known to be azole-resistant, and is frequently seen in individuals being treated for cancers, HIV-infection, and those who underwent bone marrow transplantation. Although the genome of C. tropicalis was sequenced in 2009, the genome annotation has not been supported by experimental validation. In the present study, we have carried out proteomics profiling of C. tropicalis using high-resolution Fourier transform mass spectrometry. We identified 2743 proteins, thus mapping nearly 44% of the computationally predicted protein-coding genes with peptide level evidence. In addition to identifying 2591 proteins in the cell lysate of this yeast, we also analyzed the proteome of the conditioned media of C. tropicalis culture and identified several unique secreted proteins among a total of 780 proteins. By subjecting the mass spectrometry data derived from cell lysate and conditioned media to proteogenomic analysis, we identified 86 novel genes, 12 novel exons, and corrected 49 computationally-predicted gene models. To our knowledge, this is the first high-throughput proteomics study of C. tropicalis validating predicted protein coding genes and refining the current genome annotation. The findings may prove useful in future global health efforts to fight against Candida infections.

### Keywords
Genome annotation, Shotgun proteomics

### Affiliations
Institute of Bioinformatics, Bangalore, Karnataka, India.
Institute of Bioinformatics,  Discoverer Building, 7th Floor,  International Tech Park, Whitefield,  Bangalore - 560 066, Karnataka, India.

### Submitter
Keshava Prasad T. S.

### Lab Head
Dr T. S. Keshava Prasad
Institute of Bioinformatics,  Discoverer Building, 7th Floor,  International Tech Park, Whitefield,  Bangalore - 560 066, Karnataka, India.


