### Accession
PXD021621

### Title
Hydroxyl radical footprinting analysis of a human haptoglobin-hemoglobin complex

### Description
Methods of structural mass spectrometry have become more popular to study protein structure and dynamics. Among them, fast photochemical oxidation of proteins (FPOP) has several advantages such as irreversibility of modifications and more facile determination of the site of modification with single residue resolution. In the present study, FPOP analysis was applied to study the hemoglobin (Hb) – haptoglobin (Hp) complex allowing identification of respective regions altered upon the complex formation. The footprinting using a timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer allowed to obtain structural information for 84 and 76 residues in Hp and Hb, respectively, including statistically significant differences in the modification extent below 0.3 %. The most affected residues upon the complex formation were Met76 and Tyr140 in Hbα, and Tyr280 and Trp284 in Hpβ. The data allowed determination of amino acids directly involved in Hb – Hp interactions and those located outside of the interaction interface yet affected by the complex formation. Also, previously modeled interaction between Hb βTrp37 and Hp βPhe292 was not confirmed by our data.

### Sample Protocol
Samples collected after the FPOP experiment were subjected to a reduction of cysteines with 20 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine, for 20 min, at 56 °C, followed by alkylation with 20 mM iodoacetamide for 20 min at 25 °C in the dark. Samples were then two times diluted with 100 mM 4-ethylmorpholine buffer (pH 8.5): acetonitrile (ACN) (90:10 v/v), followed by overnight deglycosylation with PNGase F (protein:enzyme ratio 1:20). Afterwards, trypsin/Lys-C was added (protein:enzyme ratio 1:20), and samples were digested for 8 hours at 37 °C. Digestion was stopped by addition of TFA to a final concentration of 0.1%, and tryptic peptides were subsequently dried by SpeedVac (Eppendorf). Samples were analyzed on an ultra-high pressure nanoflow chromatography system (nanoElute, Bruker Daltonics) coupled to a quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometer with a trapped ion mobility (TIMS) front end (timsTOF Pro, Bruker Daltonics) via a nano-electrospray ion source (Captive Spray Source, Bruker Daltonics). By microliter pickup, peptides (in amount corresponding to the 40 ng of digested proteins) were directly loaded and separated on an analytical column 25 cm x 75 µm, C18, 1.6 µm (Aurora Column, Ion Opticks, Australia). Peptides were eluted using 2 % ACN, 0.1% formic acid as mobile phase A at a flow rate of 400 nl/min, applying a 21 min gradient of 2-37% acetonitrile by mobile phase B: ACN, 0.1% formic acid at 50 °C column oven temperature. The eluting peptides were interrogated by an MS acquisition method recording spectra from 100-1,700 m/z and ion mobility was scanned from 0.6 to 1.6 Vs/cm2. The method consisted of a TIMS survey scan of 150 ms followed by 6 PASEF MS/MS scans, each 150 ms for ion accumulation and ramp time (ion accumulation was carried out in parallel, ions were accumulated for the next scan in the accumulation region of the TIMS device, while ions were being scanned out of the analyzer region). Total cycle time was 1.08 seconds. Target intensity was 40,000, intensity threshold 1000, singly charged peptides with m/z < 800 were excluded by an inclusion/exclusion polygon filter applied within the ion mobility – m/z heatmap. Precursors for data-dependent acquisition were fragmented with an ion mobility-dependent collision energy, which was linearly increased from 20 to 59 eV.

### Data Protocol
Acquired data were searched against a database containing the sequences of Hb (Uniprot IDs: P69905 and P68871) and Hp (Uniprot ID: P00738), including deglycosylated form of β subunit, supplemented with sequences of common contaminants using PEAKS X+ software (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, ON, Canada). Precursor ion tolerance was set at 12 ppm, and the mass tolerance for MS/MS fragment ions was set at 0.05 Da. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine and commonly observed FPOP modifications were considered as variable modifications. Peptide FDR was set to 1 %. Intensities of peptides were determined using Compass DataAnalysis v.5.2 (Bruker Daltonics). Data were corrected by substracting background oxidation (a respective sample not exposed to the laser irradiation).Since all samples were run in triplicates only differences passing the Student P-test were taken into the account. The statistical significance was set to P-value 0.05 and lower.

### Publication Abstract
Methods of structural mass spectrometry have become more popular to study protein structure and dynamics. Among them, fast photochemical oxidation of proteins (FPOP) has several advantages such as irreversibility of modifications and more facile determination of the site of modification with single residue resolution. In the present study, FPOP analysis was applied to study the hemoglobin (Hb) - haptoglobin (Hp) complex allowing identification of respective regions altered upon the complex formation. FPOP footprinting using a timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer revealed structural information for 84 and 76 residues in Hp and Hb, respectively, including statistically significant differences in the modification extent below 0.3%. The most affected residues upon complex formation were Met76 and Tyr140 in Hb&#x3b1;, and Tyr280 and Trp284 in Hp&#x3b2;. The data allowed determination of amino acids directly involved in Hb - Hp interactions and those located outside of the interaction interface yet affected by the complex formation. Also, previously modeled interaction between Hb &#x3b2;Trp37 and Hp &#x3b2;Phe292 was not confirmed by our data. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD021621.

### Keywords
Footprinting, Timstof pro, Haptoglobin, Hemoglobin, Fpop

### Affiliations
Institute of Microbiology of the CAS
BioCeV - Institute of Microbiology of the CAS

### Submitter
Dmitry Loginov

### Lab Head
Dr Petr Novak
Institute of Microbiology of the CAS


