### Accession
PXD023943

### Title
Glycoproteomic and phenotypic elucidation of B4GALNT2 expression variants in the SID histo-blood group system

### Description
The Sda histo-blood group antigen [GalNAcβ1-4(NeuAcα2-3)Galβ-R] is present in colon, kidney and body fluids among 96-98% of Europeans whilst 90% have Sda-positive erythrocytes. Sda is implicated in various infections and constitutes a potential biomarker for colon cancer. The 2-4% truly Sd(a‒) individuals may produce anti-Sda, which can lead to incompatible blood transfusions, especially if donors with the high-expressing Sda phenotype, Sd(a++) or Cad, are involved. It was hypothesized that defects in the B4GALNT2-encoded β4GalNAc-T2 glycosyltransferase underlies the null phenotype. We recently reported the association of B4GALNT2 mutations with the Sd(a‒) phenotype, which formally established the SID blood-group system. In the present study, we provide causal proof and glycoprotein profiling underpinning this correlation. Phenotypically Sd(a‒) HEK293 cells were transfected with different B4GALNT2 constructs and evaluated by immunostaining and LC-MS/MS-based glycoproteomics. The pre¬dominant SIDnull allele with SNP rs7224888:T>C (p.Cys406Arg) abolished Sda synthesis, while this antigen was detectable as N- or O-glycans on multiple glycoproteins following transfection of wildtype B4GALNT2. Surprisingly, two rare missense SNPs, rs148441237:A>G and rs61743617:C>T, found in a Sd(a‒) compound heterozygote gave results similar to wildtype. To elucidate if Sd(a++)/Cad is also due to B4GALNT2 alterations, its coding region and 2 kbp upstream were sequenced in five Cad individuals. No genetic changes were associated with this phenotype but a detailed erythroid Cad glycoprotein profile was obtained, especially for GLPA (O-glycosylation) and, for the first time, B3AT (N-glycosylation). In conclusion, the p.Cys406Arg β4GalNAc-T2 variant causes Sda-deficiency in humans, while the enigmatic Cad phenotype remains unresolved, albeit further characterized.

### Sample Protocol
B4GALNT2 overexpression in HEK293 cells Constructs with the B4GALNT2 wt gene (Genbank accession no. AJ517771) or B4GALNT2 mutated constructs based on the same sequence but with SNPs, B4GALNT2_rs7224888:T>C, B4GALNT2_rs148441237:A>G or B4GALNT2_rs61743617:C>T were synthesized (Genecopeia) and  transformed into E. coli and then the plasmid constructs were extracted using the plasmid midi kit from Qiagen. The constructs were transfected into HEK293 cells. The cells were cultured in DMEM/F-12 (1:1) with Glutamax, FBS (10%) and Penstrep. The cells were cultured in DMEM high glucose medium (Thermo Fisher) with 10% FBS. Stably transfected cells were plated at 5 million cells per 10-cm-diameter-dish and cultured until cells reached ca 80% confluency. The adhering cells were rinsed three times in PBS, lysed with 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer with 2% SDS, transferred to tubes and stored at -80°C.  Blood samples  Anonymized whole blood samples were obtained from the Australian Red Cross Lifeblood (Brisbane, and Perth, Australia) and from the blood group reference laboratory in Lund, Sweden. Four Australian Cad samples (from individuals of Asian origin) were initially identified in the routine automated PK Olympus blood grouping reaction (Diagast) and further investigated at the Red Cell Reference Laboratory, Kelvin Grove, Australia and in the blood group reference laboratory at the Department of Clinical Immunology and Transfusion Medicine in Lund, Sweden. Preparation of erythrocyte (white ghost) membranes – The erythrocytes were lysed and repeatedly washed in cold hypotonic buffer (310 buffer, 100 mM NaH2PO4, 155 mM Na2HPO4, diluted 1:20.5 in H2O), until the supernatant was neutral in color and a white fluffy pellet of membranes remained. The membranes were stored at –80°C. Enrichment of glycopeptides  The lysates were subjected to filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) with trypsin digestion. Briefly, samples were reduced with 100 mM dithiothreitol at 60°C for 30 min, and then applied to 30 kDa MWCO filters (Pall Nanosep, Sigma-Aldrich). After centrifugation the retentate was washed with 8 M urea and then with 0.5% sodium deoxycholate (SDC) in TEAB buffer. Cys residues were methylthio derivatized with 10 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate in 0.5% SDC in TEAB buffer at room temperature for 20 min. The trypsin digestion was performed on the MWCO filter with 4 µg trypsin (Thermo Fisher) in 0.5% SDC in TEAB buffer at 37°C overnight, and with a new trypsin addition during 2h the following day. Alternatively, cleavages were performed with chymotrypsin and proteinase K (sequencing grade, Promega). After centrifugation of the MWCO spin column the filtrate was saved and SDC was precipitated by acidification using 10% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), and the supernatant was saved after centrifugation. Glycopeptides were desalted with C18 spin columns, dissolved in 80% acetonitrile / 1% TFA in water and enriched with hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography (HILIC). Briefly, the samples were applied to in-house packed cartridges containing 20 mg Zic-HILIC particles (10 μm, 200 Å; Sequant/Merck). The flow-through was collected and re-applied three times. The column was then washed with 1.2 mL of 80 % acetonitrile and 1% TFA in water. Enriched glycopeptides were eluted with 1) 50 µL 0.1% TFA, 2) 50 μL of 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate in water, and 3) 50 μL of 50% (v/v) acetonitrile in water.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis The samples were dissolved in 20 µL 0.2% formic acid, 3% acetonitrile in water and analyzed on an Orbitrap Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer interfaced with Easy-nLC1200 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher). An Acclaim Pepmap 100 C18 trap column (100 μm x 2 cm, particle size 5 μm, Thermo Fischer Scientific) was used and peptides were separated at 300 nL/min on an in-house packed analytical column (75 μm x 30 cm, particle size 3 μm, Reprosil-Pur C18, Dr. Maisch) using a linear gradient of 7-35% of solvent B in solvent A during 75 min and then an increase to 100% of solvent B during 5 min, and finally 100% of solvent B for 5 min. Solvent A was 0.2 % formic acid in water and solvent B was 80% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid in water. The precursor ion scans were performed at a resolution of 120,000 and the m/z range was 600-2000. The most abundant precursor ions with a positive charge (z) of 2-7 were selected for MS/MS (MS2) during 3 s with a 5 m/z unit isolation window and subjected sequentially to higher-energy collision induced dissociation (HCD) at normalized collision energies (NCEs) of 20%, 30% and 40%. The MS2 spectra were detected in the Orbitrap in centroid mode at 30,000 resolution.  The LC-MS/MS raw files were analyzed with the Byonic software (Protein Metrics) using a modified list of the modifications “182 human N-glycans” and “6 most common O-glycans”. For instance, N-glycan modifications with NeuAc2Hex5HexNAc6 and NeuAc2Hex5HexNAc6dHex compositions were added and O-glycan modifications of NeuAcHexHexNAc2 and NeuAc2HexHexNAc2 were added. Additional search criteria included use of the Uniprot Homo sapiens database (20 369 sequences) and C-terminal cleavage after Lys and Arg with two missed cleavages allowed. For chymotrypsin, C-terminal cleavages after Leu, Phe, Trp and Tyr were specified with two missed cleavages allowed. No enzyme was specified for pronase and the database was here only the B3AT and CMGA sequences. For all Byonic searches, the accuracy for the MS1 precursor ion was set to 10 ppm and for MS2 ions it was 20 ppm; static modification was a methylthio group on Cys (+45.9877 u) and variable modification was oxidation of Met. A cut off score >300 was initially used for glycopeptide hits and were verified to contain the correct peptide+HexNAc ion in relation to the proposed structure, and for NeuAc hits the diagnostic NeuAc oxonium ions at m/z 274.09 and m/z 292.10 had to be present. Extracted ion chromatograms (XICs) were produced with the Xcalibur software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for the diagnostic ion [NeuAc HexHexNAc2]+ at m/z 860.31 to identify additional glycopeptides. The glycosidic fragmentation patterns were characterized and compared to those of corresponding non-Sda hits. Such hits were included although the Byonic scores were <300 or were not identified by Byonic.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Erythrocyte, Flow cytometry, Glycobiology, Sid blood group system, Glycopeptide, Glycosyltransferase, Carbohydrate biosynthesis, Glycoprotein, Glycosylation, Gene expression

### Affiliations
Hematology and Transfusion Medicine, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Lund University, Lund, Sweden
University of Gothenburg

### Submitter
Jonas Nilsson

### Lab Head
Dr Martin L Olsson
Hematology and Transfusion Medicine, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Lund University, Lund, Sweden


