### Accession
PXD033077

### Title
Marchantia phototropin interactome LC-MSMS

### Description
To identify interactors of Mpphot, we performed an immunoprecipitation assay using wild-type (WT) Marchantia plants and transgenic Marchantia plants expressing Mpphot-Citrine or free Citrine. The experiment was repeated twice.

### Sample Protocol
The immunoprecipitation assay was performed with a µMACS GFP isolation kit (Miltenyi). We prepared 1 g of 7-day-old non-transgenic and transgenic Marchantia gemmalings expressing free Citrine or Mpphot-Citrine. All subsequent procedures were performed at 4°C. The gemmalings were ground in 3 mL extraction buffer [50 mM HEPES-KOH (pH 7.5), 0.3 M sucrose, 5 mM EDTA, 5 mM MgCl2, 1 mM DTT, cOmplete, mini protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche)] with a mortar and pestle. The homogenate was centrifuged twice at 15,000 g for 10 min to remove the debris. After adding 50 μL Anti-Tag MicroBeads to the lysate, the wash and separation steps were performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  The IP products were separated using a ready-made 12.5% (w/v) SDS–polyacrylamide gel (DRC) and stained using Flamingo (BioRad). The separated proteins were sliced into five bands of equal length. Each gel band was washed twice with HPLC-grade water containing 60% (v/v) acetonitrile (Kanto Chemical)/ 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Next, the gel was incubated in 10mM DTT/50mM ammonium bicarbonate for 45min at 56°C, followed by 55 mM iodoacetamide/50mM ammonium bicarbonate for 30 min at room temperature. The incubated gel was washed twice with HPLC-grade water containing 60% (v/v) acetonitrile/50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and dried in a vacuum concentrator. The dried gel pieces were treated with 2 ml of 10 ng/ml trypsin (MS grade gold; Promega)/50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and incubated at 37°C for 16 h. The digested peptides were recovered to a new tube. The gel was treated twice with 20 ml of 0.2% (v/v) formic acid (Wako)/50% (v/v) acetonitrile, and then all extracted peptides were collected into a tube. The extracts were dried in a vacuum concentrator and dissolved in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid/5% (v/v) acetonitrile. The dissolved solution was filtered by the Ultrafree-MC Centrifugal Filters (PVDF 0.45mm; Millipore) to avoid contamination of gel pieces. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed by using a HTC-PAL/Paradigm MS4 system coupled to a LTQ-Orbitrap XL (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer. Trypsin-digested peptides were loaded on the L-column (100 mm internal diam- eter, 15 cm; CERI) using a Paradigm MS4 HPLC pump (Michrome BioResources) and an HTC-PAL autosampler (CTC analytics). Buffers were 0.1% (v/v) acetic acid and 2% (v/v) acetonitrile in water (solvent A) and 0.1% (v/v) acetic acid and 90% (v/v) acetonitrile in water (solvent B). A linear gradient from 5% to 45% B for 26 min was applied, and peptides eluted from the L-column were introduced directly into a LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer with a flow rate of 500 nl min–1 and a spray voltage of 2.0 kV.

### Data Protocol
All events for the MS scan were controlled and acquired by Xcalibur software version 2.0.7 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The range of the MS scan was m/z 400–1,500, and the top three peaks were subjected to MS/MS analysis. The spectra were compared with a protein database (Marchantia_v6.1) using the MASCOT server (version 2.7). The Mascot search parameters were as follows: threshold of the ion-score cut-off, 0.05; peptide tolerance, 10 ppm; MS/MS tolerance, ±0.8 Da; and peptide charge, 2+ or 3+. The search parameters allowed one missed cleavage by trypsin, a carbamidomethylation modification of cysteine residues, and a variable oxidation modification of methionine residues.

### Publication Abstract
Plant cells alter the intracellular positions of chloroplasts to ensure efficient photosynthesis, a process controlled by the blue light receptor phototropin. Chloroplasts migrate toward weak light (accumulation response) and move away from excess light (avoidance response). Chloroplasts are encircled by the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), which forms a complex network throughout the cytoplasm. To ensure rapid chloroplast relocation, the ER must alter its structure in conjunction with chloroplast relocation movement, but little is known about the underlying mechanism. Here, we searched for interactors of phototropin in the liverwort Marchantia polymorpha and identified a RETICULON (RTN) family protein; RTN proteins play central roles in ER tubule formation and ER network maintenance by stabilizing the curvature of ER membranes in eukaryotic cells. Marchantia polymorpha RTN1 (MpRTN1) is localized to ER tubules and the rims of ER sheets, which is consistent with the localization of RTNs in other plants and heterotrophs. The Mprtn1 mutant showed an increased ER tubule diameter, pointing to a role for MpRTN1 in ER membrane constriction. Furthermore, Mprtn1 showed a delayed chloroplast avoidance response but a normal chloroplast accumulation response. The live cell imaging of ER dynamics revealed that ER restructuring was impaired in Mprtn1 during the chloroplast avoidance response. These results suggest that during the chloroplast avoidance response, MpRTN1 restructures the ER network and facilitates chloroplast movement via an interaction with phototropin. Our findings provide evidence that plant cells respond to fluctuating environmental conditions by controlling the movements of multiple organelles in a synchronized manner.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Phototropin, Interactome, Marchantia polymorpha

### Affiliations
Center for Bioscience Research and Education, Utsunomiya University
Center for Bioscience Research and Education, Utsunomiya University, Tochigi, Japan

### Submitter
Kazuya Ishikawa

### Lab Head
Dr Yutaka Kodama
Center for Bioscience Research and Education, Utsunomiya University, Tochigi, Japan


