### Accession
PXD008147

### Title
First evidence that a protein coded by a short ORF, not by the annotated CDS is the main gene product

### Description
Proteogenomics and ribosome profiling concurrently show that genes may code for both a large and one or more small proteins translated from annotated coding sequences (CDSs) and unannotated alternative open reading frames (named alternative ORFs or altORFs), respectively, but the stoichiometry between large and small proteins translated from the same gene is unknown. \textit{MIEF1}, a gene recently identified as a dual-coding gene, harbours a CDS and a newly annotated and actively translated altORF located in the 5’UTR . Here, we use absolute quantification with stable isotope-labeled peptides and parallel reaction monitoring to determine levels of both proteins in two human cells lines and in human colon. We report that the main \textit{MIEF1} translational product is not the canonical 463 amino acid MiD51 protein but the small 70 amino acid alternative MiD51 protein (altMiD51). These results demonstrate the inadequacy of the single CDS concept and provide a strong argument for modernizing functional annotations of genes.

### Sample Protocol
AP-MS Cells were rinsed twice with cold PBS 1X and lysed in 1 mL of AP-buffer (NP-40 0.5 %, Tris-HCl 50 mM pH 7.5, NaCl 150 mM, EDTA-free Roche protease inhibitor 1X). Lysate was cleared by centrifugation (2000 g, 5 min) and supernatant was collected. GFP-Trap agarose beads (ChromoTek) were conditioned by three consecutive PBS 1X washes followed by three AP-buffer washes. Lysate supernatant was mixed with beads and incubated at 4 ◦C for 18 h on a rotating device. Beads were then washed with 3 times with AP-buffer and 5 times with 50 mM NH4HCO3 (ABC). Digestion was performed on beads by adding 1 µg of trypsin (Promega) in 100 µL ABC at 37 ◦C overnight. Digestion was quenched with formic acid to a final concentration of 1 % and supernatant, containing peptides, was collected. Beads were then washed once with acetonitrile/water/formic acid (1/1/0.01 v/v) and pooled with supernatant. Peptides were dried using a speedvac, desalted using a C18 Zip-Tip (Merck) and resuspended into 25 µL of 1 % formic acid in water prior to MS analysis.  PRM samples A total of 100 µg of protein and 1 µg of recombinant Glutathione S-transferase (GST, Schistosoma japonicum) were reduced by adding dithiothreitol to a final concentration of 50 mM incubated 15 min at 55 ◦C. Lysate were prepared according to the filter aided sample preparation protocol (FASP) with minor modifications. Lysates were diluted in 500 µL of 8 M urea solution and transferred into a 3 kDa centrifugation device (Amicon Ultra, Merck) and centrifuged for 30 min at 14,000 g. After one 8 M urea wash and centrifugation, samples were diluted in 200 µL of 50 mM iodoacetamide in 8 M urea and let at room temperature in the dark for 30 min. Samples were centrifuged followed by three consecutive washes of 8 M urea. Buffer was then exchanged for 50 mM ABC by three consecutive 200 µL washes. Final retentate was digested by adding 1 µg of trypsin (Gold, Promega) in 40 µL ABC and AQUA peptides (pepoTec Ultimate, Thermo) were added to mixture prior to overnight incubation at 37 ◦C. Tryptic peptides were collected by filter centrifugation followed by three ABC washes and centrifugation. Peptide-containing filtrate was concentrated using a speedvac and then acidified by formic acid to a final concentration of 1 %. Peptides were desalted using a C18 Zip-Tip and dried using a speedvac.  Dephosphorylation of peptides Peptides were dephosphorylated using calf intestinal phosphatase (CIP). Briefly, 5 µg of desalted peptides were resuspended with 10 units of CIP (New England Biolabs) in 50 µL of CIP buffer (100 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 10 mM MgCl2 and 1 mM DTT; pH 7.9) and incubated at 37 ◦C for 2 h. Mixture was acidified by adding trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 0.5 %. Peptides were desalted using a C18 Zip-Tip (Merck), dried and resuspended into 25 µL of 1% formic acid in water.

### Data Protocol
DDA identification Mass spectrometry RAW files were searched with Andromeda, search engine implemented in MaxQuant 1.5.5.1. Trypsin/P was set as digestion mode with a maximum of two missed cleavages per peptides. Oxidation of methionine and acetylation of N-terminal were set as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification. Files were searched using a target-decoy approach against Uniprot 03/2017 release (UniProt, 2017) and GST (P08515) at a 1 % false discovery rate at peptide-spectrum-match, peptide and protein levels. Peptides sequences were recovered from MaxQuant output files.  PRM experiments Mass-spectrometry RAW files were analyzed using Xcalibur 2.2 (Thermo) by measuring area of each peptide monoisotopic transitions within a 3 ppm mass precision window. Absolute quantification experiments, protein concentration was determined by comparing the ratio of endogenous peptide to spiked-in AQUA standard and its concentration with the same precursor to fragment transitions within a 3 ppm mass precision window. Spectral similarity was controlled by importing RAW files into Skyline.

### Publication Abstract
Proteogenomics and ribosome profiling concurrently show that genes may code for both a large and one or more small proteins translated from annotated coding sequences (CDSs) and unannotated alternative open reading frames (named alternative ORFs or altORFs), respectively, but the stoichiometry between large and small proteins translated from a same gene is unknown. <i>MIEF1</i>, a gene recently identified as a dual-coding gene, harbors a CDS and a newly annotated and actively translated altORF located in the 5'UTR. Here, we use absolute quantification with stable isotope-labeled peptides and parallel reaction monitoring to determine levels of both proteins in two human cells lines and in human colon. We report that the main <i>MIEF1</i> translational product is not the canonical 463 amino acid MiD51 protein but the small 70 amino acid alternative MiD51 protein (altMiD51). These results demonstrate the inadequacy of the single CDS concept and provide a strong argument for incorporating altORFs and small proteins in functional annotations.

### Keywords
Translation, Crispr-cas9, Targeted proteomics, Short orf

### Affiliations
Université de Sherbrooke - Université de Lille
Département de Biochimie, Université de Sherbrooke, Québec, Canada

### Submitter
Vivian Delcourt

### Lab Head
Dr Xavier Roucou
Département de Biochimie, Université de Sherbrooke, Québec, Canada


