### Accession
PXD038249

### Title
Identification of pH-specific protein expression responses by Campylobacter jejuni strain NCTC 11168

### Description
Campylobacter jejuni is one of the major causes of food-borne infections world-wide. The species is strictly host associated and tolerates mild levels of acidity and alkalinity. The ability to survive pH challenges is one of the key aspects of the ability of C. jejuni to survive in food, stomach transit and enables host gastrointestinal tract colonisation. In this study C. jejuni reference strain NCTC 11168 grown within its pH physiological normal growth range (pH 5.8, 7.0 and 8.0,  = ~0.5 h-1) and exposed to pH 4.0 shock for 2 hours. Proteins extracted from biomass were quantified using a combined data dependent and independent acquisition label-free based approach with the aim to identify pH-dependent proteins that respond in a growth phase independent manner. It was discovered that gluconate 2-dehydrogenase GdhAB, NssR-regulated globins Cgb and Ctb, cupin domain protein Cj0761, cytochrome c protein CccC (Cj0037c), and phosphate-binding transporter protein PstB all show acidic pH dependent abundance increases but are not activated by sub-lethal acid shock. Glutamate synthase (GLtBD) and the MfrABC and NapAGL respiratory complexes were induced in cells grown at pH 8.0. The response to pH stress by C. jejuni is to bolster microaerobic respiration and at pH 8.0 this is assisted by accumulation of glutamate the conversion of which could bolster fumarate respiration. Global protein abundance reduction of proteins linked to growth and survival overalls aids cellular energy conservation thus preserving a similar growth rate.

### Sample Protocol
Sonication (Bioruptor Plus, Diagenode) was used to disrupt cells utilising 3 cycles of 5 s with cells held 5 s between cycles in ice. The supernatant containing protein extracts was collected after centrifugation of the homogenate at 14000 × g for 30 min at 4 °C. The protein extracts were precipitated with 9 volumes of ethanol, and protein pellets were washed twice in 70% (v/v) ethanol and resuspended in 200 μL of solubilization buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 30 mM Tris, pH 8.0). To avoid proteolytic degradation cOmplete EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich) was added as instructed by the manufacturer. The protein concentrations were estimated by using an EZQ protein quantitation kit (Invitrogen). Aliquots of 50 mg protein were sequentially reduced and alkylated using standard methods. Protein samples were then digested using the SP3 method (Hughes et al, 2019) and peptide samples were desalted using ZipTips (Merck Millipore) according to manufacturer's instructions.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were imported into MaxQuant version 1.6.5.0 (http://maxquant.org/) (Cox & Mann, 2008) and MS2 spectra were searched using the Andromeda search engine against protein database for Campylobacter jejuni comprising 1625 entries including putative pseudogenes (downloaded from UniProt on 5/11/2018). Default settings for protein identification by Orbitrap MS/MS were used, with the match-between-runs function enabled. Mass error tolerances were set to 20 ppm then 4.5 ppm for initial and main peptide searches, respectively, and 0.5 Da tolerance was used for fragment ions. Carbamidomethyl modification of cysteine, variable methionine oxidation and a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. A false discovery rate of 0.01 was used for both peptide-spectrum matches and protein identification.

### Publication Abstract
In this study a data dependent acquisition label-free based proteomics approach was used to identify pH-dependent proteins that respond in a growth phase independent manner in Campylobacter jejuni reference strain NCTC 11168. NCTC 11168 was grown within its pH physiological normal growth range (pH 5.8, 7.0 and 8.0, &#x3bc;&#xa0;=&#xa0;&#x223c;0.5 h<sup>-1</sup>) and exposed to pH 4.0 shock for 2&#xa0;h. It was discovered that gluconate 2-dehydrogenase GdhAB, NssR-regulated globins Cgb and Ctb, cupin domain protein Cj0761, cytochrome c protein CccC (Cj0037c), and phosphate-binding transporter protein PstB all show acidic pH dependent abundance increases but are not activated by sub-lethal acid shock. Glutamate synthase (GLtBD) and the MfrABC and NapAGL respiratory complexes were induced in cells grown at pH 8.0. The response to pH stress by C.&#xa0;jejuni is to bolster microaerobic respiration and at pH 8.0 this is assisted by accumulation of glutamate the conversion of which could bolster fumarate respiration. The pH dependent proteins linked to growth in C.&#xa0;jejuni NCTC 11168 aids cellular energy conservation maximising growth rate and thus competitiveness and fitness.

### Keywords
Campylobacter jejuni; food safety; ph stress; proteomics

### Affiliations
University of Tasmania
Proteomics facility, Central Science Laboratory, University of Tasmania

### Submitter
Richard Wilson

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Richard Wilson
Proteomics facility, Central Science Laboratory, University of Tasmania


