### Accession
PXD036008

### Title
Anti-hsp70 pull down CIK cells lysis infected GCRV and MS for identify the proteins

### Description
HSP70 of grass carp and outer capsid protein VP7 of GCRV determines the early stage of viral entry. Multi-transcriptomic analysis identified HSP70 as a key player in the pathogenesis of GCRV infection. Temperature-dependent, and primarily plasma membrane anchored HSP70 interacts with VP7 to facilitate viral entry during the early phase of GCRV infection. We indentified the interaction of vp7 and hsp70 by MS.

### Sample Protocol
CIK Cells were collected and lysed with Cell lysis buffer for Western and IP (beyotime), supplemented with PMSF (1mM), following the manufacturer’s protocol. Then, whole-cell lysates were centrifuged at 12000 rpm for 20 min at 4 °C. Discard the precipitate, add protein A/G agarose beads (***uL) into the supernatant at 4 °C for 1 h in order to precleaning. After then, the whole cell lysates were centrifuged at 2000 rpm for 2 min at 4 °C to discard the agarose beads, the supernatant was incubated with the corresponding antibody at 4 °C overnight with gentle agitation to form the immunocomplex, follow by protein A/G agarose beads were added into whole-cell lysates incubated for 1 h at room temperature keeping gentle agitation. Then, to collect and wash agarose beads with cell lysis buffer (without protease inhibitor) for MS.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry was performed by Sangon Biotech Co., Ltd. Briefly, the reaction mixture contained TCEP, SDC, CAA was added to VP7-His-beads for alkylation, one-step reduction, elution and collected the eluent, these steps repeat 2 times. Then, the eluent was treated to enzymatic hydrolysis by trypsin, the peptide solution is desalted through the desalting column and being drained by centrifuge concentrator. After then, the samples were analysed by Q EXactive Plus liquid mass spectrometry system (Thermo). Mass spectrometry data generated by Q Exactive Plus were retrieved by ProteinPilot (V4.5) using Paragon database retrieval algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Gcrv, Hsp70, Ctenopharyngodon idella, Receptor

### Affiliations
Department of Fisheries, College of Animal Science and Technology, Hunan agriculture university
huazhong Agricultural University

### Submitter
guoli hou

### Lab Head
Dr Guoli Hou
Department of Fisheries, College of Animal Science and Technology, Hunan agriculture university


