### Accession
PXD020688

### Title
Profiling of Y1 cells treated with FGF-2 reveals parallels with oncogene-induced senescence

### Description
Paradoxically, oncogenes that drive cell cycle progression may also trigger pathways leading to senescence, thereby inhibiting the growth of tumorigenic cells.  Along these lines, Y1 cells, which carry an amplification of Ras, become senescent after treatment with the mitogen FGF-2.  To understand how FGF-2 promotes senescence, we profiled the epigenome, transcriptome, proteome, and phospho-proteome of Y1 cells stimulated with FGF-2.  FGF-2 caused delayed acetylation of histone H4 and higher levels of H3K27me3.  Sequencing analysis revealed decreased expression of cell cycle-related genes with concomitant loss of H3K27ac.  In contrast, FGF-2 promoted the expression of p21, various cytokines, and MAPK-related genes.  Nuclear envelope proteins, particularly lamin B1, displayed increased phosphorylation in response to FGF-2.  Proteome analysis suggested alterations in cellular metabolism, as evident by modulated expression of enzymes involved in purine biosynthesis, tRNA aminoacylation, and the TCA cycle.  Altogether, the response of Y1 cells to FGF-2 is consistent with oncogene-induced senescence.  We propose that Y1 cells enter senescence due to deficient cyclin expression and high levels of p21, which may stem from DNA damage or TGFb signaling.

### Sample Protocol
Y1 cells were grown in DMEM supplemented with 10% serum, 100 mg/L streptomycin, 25 mg/L ampicillin, 1.2 g/L sodium bicarbonate and kept at 37°C in a 5% CO2 incubator. After plating, cells were allowed to reach 30% confluence before serum-starvation for 48 hours.  Starved cells were then stimulated with fetal bovine serum (10%, FBS condition) or serum plus FGF-2 (10 ng/mL, FGF condition) and harvested at various timepoints (5 min, 10 min, 30 min, 60 min, 5 hr, 16 hr, 24 hr).  The experiments were performed with 3 biological replicates.  Y1 cells were lysed in a buffer containing 6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, and 60 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.2, supplemented with phosphatase and protease inhibitors. Proteins were reduced using 10 mM DTT for 1 h at room temperature, alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in the dark for 30 min at room temperature, and then digested with trypsin (enzyme:sample ratio, 1:100) overnight at room temperature. Phospho-peptide enrichment was performed using titanium dioxide (TiO2) chromatographic resin, as previously described (Thingholm & Larsen, 2016). Samples were desalted and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid for analysis (2 µL injections) by nLC-MS/MS, composed of a Dionex nano-LC (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a QE-HF Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) operating in data-dependent acquisition mode.  Chromatography was performed at a flow rate of 300 nL/min over nano-columns (75 µm ID x 25 cm) packed with Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ (3 µm, Dr. Maisch GmbH).  Water and 80% acetonitrile, both containing 0.1% formic acid, served as solvents A and B, respectively. The gradient for proteome analysis consisted of 5-36% solvent B for 71 min, 36-65% B for 5 min, 65-95% B for 0.1 min, and 10 min of isocratic flow at 95% B. The gradient for phospho-proteome analysis consisted of 2-28% B for 61 min, 28-38% B for 19 min, 38-85% B for 1 min, and 15 min of isocratic flow at 85% B. For the phospho-proteome, a full MS scan was acquired over 300-1200 m/z in the Orbitrap in centroid mode with a resolution of 60K, AGC target of 1e6, and maximum injection time of 100 ms.  The top 20 most intense ions (charge state 2+ and higher) were selected for MS/MS by high-energy collision dissociation (HCD) at 27 NCE, and fragmentation spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap in centroid mode with a resolution of 15K, AGC target of 5e4, and maximum injection time of 150 ms. The proteome analysis used similar settings except the full MS scan was acquired in profile mode and the maximum injection time for MS and MS/MS scans was 50 ms.

### Data Protocol
Data was processed in Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Scientific) using the Sequest-HT node to search MS/MS spectra against the UniProtKB/SwissProt (organism: Mus musculus / November 2017) database along with a contaminant database.  Trypsin was selected as the protease with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. For the proteome data, the search parameters were as follows: 20 ppm precursor ion mass tolerance; 0.05 Da fragment ion mass tolerance; carbamidomethylation (+57.021 Da to Cys) as a static modification; and oxidation (+15.995 Da to Met) and acetylation (+42.011 Da to protein N-terminus) as variable modifications. For the phospho-proteome data, the search parameters were as follows: 10 ppm precursor ion mass tolerance; 0.02 Da fragment ion mass tolerance; carbamidomethylation (+57.021 Da to Cys) as a static modification; and phosphorylation (+79.966 Da to Ser/Thr/Tyr) as a variable modification. The Percolator node was used with default parameters and data were filtered for < 1% FDR at the peptide level.  Statistical analysis was performed in R with the MSstats package (MacLean et al, 2014) as detailed below.  Pathway analysis was performed using the ReactomePA (Yu & He, 2016) and ClusterProfiler (Yu et al, 2012) packages.  For analysis of the phospho-proteome, which was limited to early timepoints (0, 5, 10, 30, and 60 mins), the peptide table from PD2.2, containing raw abundance measurements, was imported into R and filtered for the presence of the phosphorylation modification.  Phospho-peptides lacking a position assignment were excluded.  Additionally, phospho-peptides were filtered for detection in at least 2 of 3 biological replicates in at least 1 timepoint (excluding the 0 min pre-treatment samples) in at least 1 condition (FBS or FGF).  These peptides were processed by MSstats to obtain run-normalized abundance measurements.  To obtain protein abundance values for normalization of phospho-peptides to the levels of the respective proteins, the peptide and protein tables from the full proteome analysis in PD2.2 were imported into R.  Peptides were filtered for detection in at least 2 of 3 biological replicates in at least 2 timepoints (excluding 0 mins) for at least 1 condition.  Additionally, peptides from PD2.2 were required to have Confidence = High, PSM Ambiguity = Unambiguous, Number of Proteins = 1, Number of Protein Groups = 1, Contaminant = False, Number of Razor Quan Results = 0, and no quan info flags.  Likewise, proteins from the PD2.2 output were required to have Protein FDR Confidence Combined = High, Number of Unique Peptides > 1, Number of Protein Unique Peptides > 1, and Master = IsMasterProtein.  Additionally, proteins were required to have at least 3 peptides for quantitation.  These filtered peptides were processed by MSstats to obtain run-normalized abundance measurements of proteins.  At this point, two separate phospho-data sets were constructed for further analysis in parallel, one in which all phospho-peptides were kept without protein normalization and one in which phospho-peptides without protein normalization were excluded.  Statistics, including p-values from unpaired t-tests, and log2 fold-changes were calculated for each phospho-peptide within each timepoint using R.  Data was filtered for phospho-peptides with detections in 3 of 3 biological replicates for both conditions and Z-scores of log2 fold-changes were calculated within each timepoint.  Finally, for each phospho-peptide, the number of detections per timepoint or per condition was summed to obtain contingency tables for chi square tests to circumvent undefined fold-changes and p-values and facilitate the analysis of phosphorylation events appearing uniquely in one condition or timepoint.  For the analysis of the full proteome in R and MSStats, which was restricted to the later timepoints (1, 5, 16, 24 hrs), the peptide group and protein tables were imported from PD2.2.  Proteins were filtered for the following criteria from PD2.2: FDR Confidence Combined = High; Number of Protein Unique Peptides > 1; Number of Unique Peptides > 1; Master = IsMasterProtein.  Likewise, Peptides were filtered for the following criteria: Confidence = High, PSM Ambiguity = Unambiguous, Number of Protein Groups =1, Contaminant = False, Number of Proteins = 1, Number of Razor Quan Results = 0, and valid Quan Info.  Additionally, peptides were required to be detected in at least 2 of 3 biological replicates in at least 2 timepoints (1, 5, 16, or 24 hrs) from at least one condition (FGF or FBS) and proteins were required to have at least 3 peptides for quantitation.  Raw, unnormalized peptide measurements were processed by MSStats to obtain normalized protein abundance measurements.  Statistics were generated by MSStats by comparing FGF versus FBS for each timepoint.  Z-scores of the log2 fold-changes (log2[FGF/FBS]) were also calculated for each timepoint.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Fgf-2, Phosphorylation, Senescence, Cell cycle

### Affiliations
University of Pennsylvania
Epigenetics Institute, Dept. of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA

### Submitter
Peder Lund

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin A. Garcia
Epigenetics Institute, Dept. of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA


