### Accession
PXD009541

### Title
CTDP1 BRCT domain PPI -  CTDP1 regulates breast cancer survival and DNA repair through BRCT-specific interactions with FANCI

### Description
The BRCT domain is commonly found in DNA damage response proteins, but its role in the phosphatase CTDP1 is unknown. This project examined the protein-protein interactions (PPI) associated with the CTDP1 BRCT domain region only and identified 106 significant interacting partners. Many of these partners play prominent roles in distinct DNA damage repair pathways and reveal novel functions of CTDP1 in these pathways.

### Sample Protocol
The BRCT domain of CTDP1 was cloned into a pNTAP construct using InterPlay N-Terminal Mammalian TAP Vectors (Agilent Technologies). The InterPlay TAP Purification Kit (Agilent Technologies) and NETN buffer was used to purify TAP-tagged CTDP1 and its interactors. Protein fractions (n = 4) created by SDS-PAGE were excised, destained, reduced with tris-carboxyethylphosphine, alkylated with iodoacetamide, and digested overnight with sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega). Tryptic peptides were eluted from the gel and concentrated to 20 ml by vacuum centrifugation. A nanoflow liquid chromatograph (U3000, Dionex) coupled to an electrospray ion trap mass spectrometer (LTQ-Orbitrap, Thermo) was used for tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) peptide sequencing experiments. Samples were first loaded onto a pre-column [5 mm × 300 mm inside diameter (ID), C18 PepMap100, Dionex] and washed for 8 min with aqueous 2% acetonitrile and 0.04% trifluoroacetic acid.With a flow rate of 300 nl/min, the trapped peptides were eluted onto the analytical column (75 mm ID × 15 cm, C18 PepMap 100, Dionex). The 60-min gradient program began at 95% solvent A (aqueous 2% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid) for 8 min; solvent B (aqueous 90% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid) was ramped from 5% to 50% over 35 min. Then, solvent B was ramped from 50% to 90% B over 5 min, followed by washing and re-equilibration of the column. The mass spectrometer cycled through a survey scan, and five tandem mass spectra were collected in a data-dependent manner in the linear ion trap using 60-s exclusion for previously sampled peptide peaks.

### Data Protocol
Database searches were conducted against human entries in the SwissProt database (v.20130501) using Mascot (Matrix Science, version 2.2.04), assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin was used and allowing as many as two missed cleavages. Tandem mass spectra were matched to peptide sequences with a peptide ion mass tolerance of 1.2 daltons and a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.80 dalton. Oxidation of methionine and carbamidomethylation of cysteine were specified as variable modifications. Assignments were manually verified by inspection of the tandem mass spectra and coalesced into Scaffold reports for statistical analysis and data presentation.

### Publication Abstract
BRCA1 C-terminal domains are found in a specialized group of 23 proteins that function in the DNA damage response to protect genomic integrity. C-terminal domain phosphatase 1 (CTDP1) is the only phosphatase with a BRCA1 C-terminal domain in the human proteome, yet direct participation in the DNA damage response has not been reported. Examination of the CTDP1 BRCA1 C-terminal domain-specific protein interaction network revealed 103 high confidence interactions enriched in DNA damage response proteins, including FANCA and FANCI that are central to the Fanconi anemia DNA repair pathway necessary for the resolution of DNA interstrand crosslink damage. CTDP1 expression promotes DNA damage-induced FANCA and FANCD2 foci formation and enhances homologous recombination repair efficiency. CTDP1 was found to regulate multiple aspects of FANCI activity, including chromatin localization, interaction with &#x3b3;-H2AX, and SQ motif phosphorylations. Knockdown of CTDP1 increases MCF-10A sensitivity to DNA interstrand crosslinks and double-strand breaks, but not ultraviolet radiation. In addition, CTDP1 knockdown impairs in vitro and in vivo growth of breast cancer cell lines. These results elucidate the molecular functions of CTDP1 in Fanconi anemia interstrand crosslink repair and identify this protein as a potential target for breast cancer therapy.

### Keywords
Brct dna damage lc-msms

### Affiliations
University of Nebraska Medical Center - Eppley Institute for Research in Cancer
Molecular & Biochemical Etiology Program Eppley Institute for Research in Cancer Fred & Pamela Buffett Cancer Center University of Nebraska Medical Center USA

### Submitter
Nicholas Woods

### Lab Head
Dr Nicholas T. Woods, Ph.D.
Molecular & Biochemical Etiology Program Eppley Institute for Research in Cancer Fred & Pamela Buffett Cancer Center University of Nebraska Medical Center USA


