### Accession
PXD022821

### Title
The proteomic response of the coral symbiont Symbiodinium microadriaticum to thermal and nutrient stress

### Description
Abstract  The coral–dinoflagellate symbiosis is increasingly disrupted by global and local anthropogenic stressors. Coral bleaching is primarily a result of high sea surface temperatures, while eutrophication is associated with reef ecosystem degradation. Excess inorganic nitrogen relative to phosphate has been proposed to directly sensitise corals to thermal bleaching and accelerate reef decline. We assessed the proteomic response of the dinoflagellate coral symbiont Symbiodinium microadriaticum to elevated temperatures under multiple nutrient conditions by mass spectrometry. Elevated temperatures resulted in reductions of many chloroplast proteins, particularly light-harvesting complexes, with simultaneous increases in chaperone proteins. N:P imbalance had a larger effect on the proteome than temperature, but the biological processes and proteins responding to each stressor largely overlapped. The proteomes were highly similar at low N:P ratios but were strongly affected by phosphate starvation. High N:P ratios inhibited cell division, reflected by changes in proteins involved in protein translation. Imbalanced N:P did not increase sensitivity to high temperatures as measured by physiological means; however, imbalanced N:P strongly upregulated cell redox homeostasis proteins at high temperatures. As redox balance is critical during thermal bleaching, these data provide insight into the mechanisms of cellular responses to thermal and multiple stresses in the coral–dinoflagellate symbiosis.

### Sample Protocol
Algal cells were lysed with deoxycholate, denatured and processed via a modified FASP protocol. Proteins were digested with trypsin and desalted with C18 tips. Samples were analysed with a nonlinear 300 min gradient on an Ultimate 3000 liquid chromatograph. Peptides were analysed with an LTQ Orbitrap XL (Thermo Scientific) by injection at a 2.2 kV spray voltage and a resolution of 30,000. The top six MS peaks were analysed by the ion trap, rejecting +1 charge states with dynamic exclusion enabled (180 s). Each sample was analysed twice as technical replicates.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was conducted using the Andromeda search engine in MaxQuant (1.6.3.4) against the Symbiodinium microadriaticum trEMBL database (Uniprot taxon 2951), plus common contaminants (Cox & Mann, 2008; Cox et al., 2014). False discovery rate (FDR) thresholds were set at 0.01 for peptide and protein search matches, and a minimum of two peptides per protein were required for identification. Searches assumed trypsin digestion with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Oxidation of methionine and acetylation of the protein N-terminus were specified as variable modifications, and carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification. Sequence matches were grouped into protein groups by parsimony and quantified by label-free quantification intensity with the “match between runs” feature enabled (Cox et al., 2014).

### Publication Abstract
Coral bleaching is primarily caused by high sea surface temperatures, and nutrient enrichment of reefs is associated with lower resilience to thermal stress and ecological degradation. Excess inorganic nitrogen relative to phosphate has been proposed to sensitize corals to thermal bleaching. We assessed the physiological and proteomic responses of cultures of the dinoflagellate coral symbiont Symbiodinium microadriaticum to elevated temperature under low-nutrient, high-nutrient and phosphate-limited conditions. Elevated temperature induced reductions of many chloroplast proteins, particularly the light-harvesting complexes, and simultaneously increased the abundance of many chaperone proteins. Proteomes were similar when the N:P ratio was near the Redfield ratio, regardless of absolute N and P concentrations, but were strongly affected by phosphate limitation. Very high N:P inhibited Symbiodinium cell division while increasing the abundance of chloroplast proteins. The proteome response to phosphate limitation was greater than that to elevated temperature, as measured by the number of differentially abundant proteins. Increased physiological sensitivity to high temperatures under high nutrients or imbalanced N:P ratios was not apparent; however, oxidative stress response proteins were enriched among proteins responding to thermal stress under imbalanced N:P ratios. These data provide a detailed catalog of the effects of high temperatures and nutrients on a coral symbiont proteome.

### Keywords
Thermal stress, Coral reefs, Coral bleaching, Nutrient stress, Symbiodinium

### Affiliations
Victoria University of Wellington
School of Biological Sciences, Victoria University of Wellington, New Zealand

### Submitter
Clinton Oakley

### Lab Head
Dr Simon Keith Davy
School of Biological Sciences, Victoria University of Wellington, New Zealand


