### Accession
PXD030466

### Title
Writing and erasing O-GlcNAc on casein kinase 2 alpha alters the phosphoproteome

### Description
O-GlcNAc is an essential carbohydrate modification that intersects with phosphorylation signaling pathways via crosstalk on protein substrates or by direct modification of the kinases that write the phosphate modification. Casein kinase 2 alpha (CK2), the catalytic subunit of the ubiquitously expressed and constitutively active kinase CK2, is modified by O-GlcNAc, but the effect of this modification on the phosphoproteome in cells is unknown. Here, we apply complementary targeted O-GlcNAc editors, nanobody-OGT and -splitOGA, to selectively write and erase O-GlcNAc from a tagged CK2 to measure the effects on the phosphoproteome in cells.  These tools effectively and selectively edit the S347 glycosite on CK2. Using quantitative phosphoproteomics, we report 51 proteins whose enrichment changes as a function of editing O-GlcNAc on CK2, including HDAC1, HDAC2, ENSA, SMARCAD1, and PABPN1. Specific phosphosites on HDAC1 S393 and HDAC2 S394, both reported CK2 substrates, are significantly enhanced by O-GlcNAcylation of CK2.  These data will propel future studies on the crosstalk between O-GlcNAc and phosphorylation.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed by adding 1 mL of lysis buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 7.9, 1% SDS, 1 × protease inhibitors). Protein concentrations were determined by BCA assay. Reduction and alkylation were performed as previously described.  S-trap digestion was done according to the manufacturer's instructions resulting in 0.8 mg tryptic peptides. Samples were desalted on C18 spin columns and evaporated to near dryness in a vacuum concentrator. The enrichment of phosphopeptides was performed by TiO2 Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit (cat.no. A32993, ThermoFisher Scientific). Briefly, approximately 0.8 mg of tryptic peptides were resuspended in 150 µL of Binding/Equilibration buffer. The suspended peptide sample was added to a pre-equilibrated TiO2 spin tip and centrifuged at 1000 × g for 5 minutes. The spin tip was then washed with 20 µL of Binding/Equilibration/Wash Buffer for three times, and eluted by 50 µL of Elution buffer for two times. The eluates were evaporated to near dryness and subjected to the TMT-labeling.  For each sample, 10 µL the corresponding amine-based TMT 10-plex reagents (10 µg/µL) was added and reacted for 1 h at room temperature. The reactions were quenched with 2 µL 5% hydroxylamine solution and combined. The combined mixture was concentrated to dryness. High-pH fractionation (ThermoFisher Scientific) was done according to the manufacturer's instructions resulting in 6 fractions.  A Thermo Scientific EASY-nLC 1000 system was coupled to a Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid with a nano-electrospray ion source. Mobile phases A and B were water with 0.1% formic acid (v/v) and acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid (v/v), respectively. For each fraction, peptides were separated with a linear gradient from 4 to 32% B within 45 min, followed by an increase to 50% B within 10 min and further to 98% B within 10 min, and re-equilibration. peptides were separated using a linear gradient from 4% to 32% B within 50 min, followed by an increase to 50% B within 10 min and further to 98% B within 10 min and re-equilibration. The following instrument parameters were used as previously described.

### Data Protocol
The raw data was processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Data was searched against the UniProt/SwissProt human (Homo sapiens) protein database (19 August 2016; 20,156 total entries) and contaminant proteins using the Sequest HT algorithm. The database was adjusted by adding the sequences of GFP-FLAG-CK2-EPEA and either HA-nLaG6-OGT(4) or myc-OGA(1-400) + Ha-nLaG6-OGA(544-706). Searches were performed with the following guidelines: spectra with a signal-to-noise ratio greater than 1.5; trypsin as enzyme, 2 missed cleavages; variable oxidation on methionine residues (15.995 Da), deamidation on asparagine and glutamine (0.984 Da) and phosphorylation on serine, threonine and tyrosine (79.966 Da); static carboxyamidomethylation of cysteine residues (57.021 Da), static TMT labeling (229.163 Da) at lysine residues and peptide N-termini; total variable modification max to 3 per peptide; 10 ppm mass error tolerance on precursor ions, and 0.02 Da mass error on fragment ions. Data were filtered with a peptide-to-spectrum match (PSM) of 1% FDR using Percolator. The TMT reporter ions were quantified using the Reporter Ions Quantifier with total peptide normalization. For the obtained PSMs, the data was further filtered with the following guidelines: confidence is high; PSM ambiguity is unambiguous; modifications contain phosphorylation; exclude all contaminant proteins. Data was processed using in-house script. After methods are applied for calculating and adjusting missing data in TMT Proteomics data, the file is further filtered with protein FDR confidence is high, unique peptides greater than 2, master proteins only, and no contaminants. Some of the graphs and tables produced include PCA plots, Volcano plots, and tables including all the statistics presented in the graphs. Applied here is a VSN normalization computed on the imputed matrix using a robust variant of the maximum-likelihood estimator for an additive-multiplicative error model and affine calibration. The model incorporates dependence of the variance on the mean intensity and a variance stabilizing data transformation. A linear model is fitted to the expression data for control and treatment, then t-statistics are computed by empirical Bayes moderation of standard errors towards a common value.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, O-glcnac, Ck2, Casein kinase 2

### Affiliations
Associate Professor of Chemistry and Chemical Biology Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology Harvard University, USA
Harvard University

### Submitter
Christina Woo

### Lab Head
Dr Christina May Woo
Associate Professor of Chemistry and Chemical Biology Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology Harvard University, USA


