### Accession
PXD045774

### Title
Chemical proteomics reveals that the anticancer drug everolimus affects ubiquitin-proteasome system

### Description
Rapamycin is a natural antifungal, immunosuppressive, and antiproliferative compound allosterically inhibiting mTOR complex 1. The ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS) responsible for protein turnover is usually not listed among the pathways affected by mTOR signaling; however, a number of reports indicated the interplay between UPS and mTOR. It is also reported that rapamycin and analogs can allosterically inhibit the proteasome itself. We studied the molecular effect of rapamycin and its analogs (rapalogs), everolimus, and temsirolimus by expression chemical proteomics on A549 cell line. The analysis revealed that the cellular response to everolimus differs dramatically from that of rapamycin and temsirolimus. In cluster analysis the effect of everolimus was similar to that of bortezomib, a well-established proteasome inhibitor. UPS-related pathways were enriched in the cluster of proteins specifically up-regulated upon everolimus and bortezomib treatments, suggesting that both compounds have similar proteasome inhibition effects. In particular, the total amount of ubiquitin was significantly elevated in the samples treated with everolimus and bortezomib, and the analysis of the polyubiquitination patterns revealed elevated intensities of the ubiquitin peptide with a GG modification at K48 residue, consistent with a bottleneck in the proteasomal protein degradation. Moreover, everolimus treatment resulted in both ubiquitin phosphorylation and a significant amount of semi-tryptic peptides illustrating the induction of protease activity. These observations suggest that everolimus affects the ubiquitin-proteasome system in a unique way and its mechanism of action is strikingly different from that of its close chemical analogs, rapamycin and temsirolimus.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation Human A549 cells (ATCC, USA) were grown in DMEM medium (Fisher Scientific) supplemented with 10% FBS (Fisher Scientific), 2 mM L-glutamine (Fisher Scientific) and 100 units per mL of penicillin/streptomycin (Thermo Fisher) and incubated at 37 °C in 5% CO2. Rapamycin (S1039), everolimus (S1120), temsirolimus (S1044) and bortezomib (S1013) were purchased from Selleckchem as 10 mM solutions in DMSO.  In LC50 determination, cells were seeded at a density of 4,000 per well in 96-well plates and after a day of growth, were treated with the serial concentrations of molecules for 48 h. Thereafter cell viability was measured using CellTiter-Blue Cell Viability Assay (Promega; Cat#G8081) according to the manufacturer protocol. Cells were seeded at a density of 250,000 per well and allowed to grow for 24 h in biological triplicates. Next, cells were either treated with vehicle (DMSO) or compounds at IC50 concentrations (25 μM for rapamycin and temsirolimus, 50 μM for everolimus, and 0.15 μM for bortezomib) for 48h. After treatment, cells were collected, washed twice with PBS (Fisher Scientific) and then lysed using 8 M urea, 1% SDS, and 50 mM Tris at pH 8.5 with protease inhibitors (Sigma; Cat#05892791001). The cell lysates were subjected to 1 min sonication on ice using Branson probe sonicator and 3 s on/off pulses with a 30% amplitude. Protein concentration was then measured for each sample using a BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo) and 25 µg of each sample was reduced with DTT (final concentration 10 mM) (Sigma; Cat#D0632) for 1 h at room temperature. Afterwards, iodoacetamide (IAA) (Sigma; Cat#I6125) was added to a final concentration of 50 mM. The samples were incubated at room temperature for 1 h in the dark, with the reaction being stopped by addition of 10 mM DTT. After precipitation of proteins using methanol/chloroform, the semi-dry protein pellet was dissolved in 25 µL of 8 M urea in 20 mM EPPS (pH 8.5) (Sigma; Cat#E9502) and was then diluted with EPPS buffer to reduce urea concentration to 4 M. Lysyl endopeptidase (LysC) (Wako; Cat#125-05061) was added at a 1: 75 w/w ratio to protein and incubated at room temperature overnight. After diluting urea to 1 M, trypsin (Promega; Cat#V5111) was added at the ratio of 1: 75 w/w and the samples were incubated for 6 h at room temperature.  Acetonitrile (Fisher Scientific; Cat#1079-9704) was added to a final concentration of 20% v/v. TMTpro16 reagents (Thermo; Cat#90110) were added 4x by weight to each sample, followed by incubation for 2 h at room temperature. The reaction was quenched by addition of 0.5% hydroxylamine (Thermo Fisher; Cat#90115). Samples were combined, acidified by trifluoroacetic acid (TFA; Sigma; Cat#302031-M), cleaned using Sep-Pak (Waters; Cat#WAT054960) and dried using a DNA 120 SpeedVac™ concentrator (Thermo). The pooled dried sample was resuspended in 20 mM ammonium hydroxide and separated into 96 fractions on an XBrigde BEH C18 2.1 × 150 mm column (Waters; Cat#186003023), using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 2DLC system (Thermo Scientific) over a 48 min gradient of 1–63%B (B = 20 mM ammonium hydroxide in acetonitrile) in three steps (1–23.5%B in 42 min, 23.5–54%B in 4 min and then 54–63%B in 2 min) at 200 µL min−1 flow. Fractions were then concatenated into 24 fractions (e.g. A1, C1, E1, G1). After drying and resuspension in 0.1% formic acid (FA) (Fisher Scientific), each fraction was analyzed over a 100 min gradient (total method time = 120 min) in random order. Chemical proteomics analysis Samples were loaded with buffer A (0.1% FA in water) onto a 50 cm EASY-Spray column (75 µm internal diameter, packed with PepMap C18, 2 µm beads, 100 Å pore size) connected to a nanoflow Dionex UltiMate 3000 UPLC system (Thermo) and eluted in an increasing organic solvent gradient from 4 to 28% over 90 min and up to 34% till 100 min (B: 98% ACN, 0.1% FA, 2% H2O) at a flow rate of 300 nL min−1. Mass spectra were acquired with an Orbitrap Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo) in data-dependent mode with MS1 scan at 120,000 resolution, and MS2 at 50,000 (@200 m/z), in the mass range from 400-1600 m/z. Isolation window was set at 1.6. Peptide fragmentation was performed via higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) with energy set at 35 NCE.

### Data Protocol
The raw data from TMT-based LC-MS/MS were converted to mzML by MSconvert and analyzed by IdentiPy, version 0.3.759 with a post-search validation performed using Scavager, version 0.2.1260. MS/MS data were searched against the SwissProt protein sequence database (human, version 04_2021, 20395 entries). Cysteine carbamidomethylation was used as a fixed modification, while methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were selected as variable modifications. Trypsin was selected as enzyme specificity. No more than two missed cleavages were allowed. A 1% false discovery rate was used as a filter at both protein and peptide levels. The molecular mass tolerance was 10 ppm, and the minimum peptide length was 5 residues. For the analysis of proteolysis products, a semi-tryptic search with similar parameters was performed. For the polyubiquitination search, a limited database containing only ubiquitin sequences with different sites of ubiquitination (addition of GG residues to K residue, Supplementary Table 1) was used with the same search settings with an addition of serine phosphorylation potential modification. Post-search validation, as well as extraction and quantification of the TMT reporter ions in the mass spectra were performed using Scavager. Quantitation results were normalized by the sum of all intensities within a TMT channel. Gene ontology (GO) enrichment for biological processes was performed using Enrichr61 (https://maayanlab.cloud/Enrichr/), the set of genes corresponding to all identified proteins was used as the background. Gene ontology (GO) terms with adjusted p-values < 0.05 were considered. Motif enrichment was performed using an in-house script comparing the amino acid frequencies at each position to that of random background samples with a p-value threshold of 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ubiquitination, Cell line, Diglycine modification, Expression proteomics, Drug treatment, Semi-tryptic peptides, Rapamycin, Ubiquitin-proteasome system, Everolimus

### Affiliations
INEPCP FRC CP RAS
INEPCP RAS

### Submitter
Lev Levitsky

### Lab Head
Dr Mikhail Gorshkov
INEPCP FRC CP RAS


