### Accession
PXD038450

### Title
Redifferentiated cardiomyocytes retain residual dedifferentiation signatures and are protected against ischaemic injury

### Description
Near-complete reversal of ERBB2-driven cardiomyocyte dedifferentiation is driven by the Hippo pathway, restoring contractility whilst long-lasting conferring cardioprotection.

### Sample Protocol
samples were derived from whole hearts, from either WT or ERBB2 over-expressing, and either sham-injured or MI injured at 3 timepoints: Dediff (during ERBB2 expression), Intermediate (2 weeks following ERBB2 shut-off) or Rediff (4-weeks following ERBB2 shut-off). Samples were subjected to in-solution tryptic digestion using the suspension trapping (S-trap) as previously described. Briefly, tissue was homogenized in the presence of lysis buffer containing  5% SDS in 50mM Tris-HCl. Lysates were incubated at 96°C for 5 min, followed by six cycles of 30 s of sonication (Bioruptor Pico, Diagenode, USA). Protein concentration was measured using the BCA assay (Thermo Scientific, USA). 50 ug of total protein was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide in the dark. Each sample was loaded onto S-Trap microcolumns (Protifi, Farmingdale, NY, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. After loading, samples were washed with 90:10% methanol/50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Samples were then digested with trypsin (1:50 trypsin/protein) for 1.5 h at 47°C. The digested peptides were eluted using 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Trypsin was added to this fraction and incubated overnight at 37°C. Two more elutions were made using 0.2% formic acid and 0.2% formic acid in 50% acetonitrile. The three elutions were pooled together and vacuum-centrifuged to dryness. Samples were kept at−80°C until further analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed with MaxQuant v1.6.0.16 . The data was searched with the Andromeda search engine against the mouse (Mus musculus) protein database as downloaded from Uniprot (www.uniprot.com), and appended with common lab protein contaminants and Rat Erbb2 protein sequence (Uniprot accession P06494). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Fixed modification was set to carbamidomethylation of cysteines and variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionines, and deamidation of glutamines and asparagines, and protein N-terminal acetylation. Peptide precursor ions were searched with a maximum mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and fragment ions with a maximum mass deviation of 20 ppm. Peptide and protein identifications were filtered at an FDR of 1% using the decoy database strategy (MaxQuant’s “Revert” module). The minimal peptide length was 7 amino-acids and the minimum Andromeda score for modified peptides was 40. Peptide identifications were propagated across samples using the match-between-runs option checked. Searches were performed with the label-free quantification option selected. The quantitative comparisons were calculated using Perseus v1.6.0.7. Decoy hits were filtered out. A Student’s t-Test, after logarithmic transformation, was used to identify significant differences between the experimental groups, across the biological replica. Fold changes were calculated based on the ratio of geometric means of the different experimental groups.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Heart regeneration, Cardioprotection, Erbb2, Dedifferentiation, Lc-ms/ms, Redifferentiation

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Cell Biology Faculty of Biology Weizmann Institute of Science Rehovot,Israel
The Weizmann Institute of Science

### Submitter
Alon Savidor

### Lab Head
Dr Eldad Tzahor
Department of Molecular Cell Biology Faculty of Biology Weizmann Institute of Science Rehovot,Israel


