### Accession
PXD005658

### Title
HIV-1 activates T cell signaling independently of antigen to drive viral spread

### Description
HIV-1 spreads between CD4 T cells most efficiently through virus-induced cell-cell contacts. To test whether this process potentiates viral spread by activating signaling pathways we developed an approach to analyze the phosphoproteome in infected and uninfected mixed population T cells using differential metabolic labeling and mass spectrometry. We discovered HIV-1 induced activation of signaling networks during viral spread encompassing over 200 cellular proteins. Strikingly, pathways downstream of T cell receptor were the most significantly activated, despite the absence of canonical antigen dependent stimulation. The importance of this pathway was demonstrated by depletion of proteins and we show that HIV-1 Env mediated cell-cell contact, T cell receptor and the Src kinase Lck were essential for signaling dependent enhancement of viral dissemination. This study demonstrates that manipulation of signaling at immune cell contacts by HIV-1 is essential for promoting virus replication and defines a new paradigm for antigen independent T cell signaling.

### Sample Protocol
Triple SILAC was performed on Jurkat CE6-1 cells and incorporation confirmed by MS. Jurkats labeled with ‘heavy’ (R10K8) amino acids were infected with HIV-1 and mixed with uninfected target Jurkat cells labeled with ‘light’ (R0K0) amino acids. Infected and uninfected T cells were mixed, and incubated for 0, 5, 20 or 40 minutes prior to lysis. “Medium’ labeled (R6K4) cells were used as an internal reference to enable inter-time point comparison and temporal analysis. All time point samples were buffer exchanged, reduced and alkylated and subsequently digested using FASP.  Digested peptides were fractionated via HILIC and enriched for phosphopeptides using Ti-IMAC and analyzed by high-resolution nano LC ESI MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
All samples were processed and analyzed by MS using a LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro, Thermo Scientific with quantification of abundance changes based on MS signal intensities of the triple SILAC labelled peptides. Raw MS data was processed using MaxQuant for protein assignment, quantification of peptides, phosphorylation and phosphosite localization.

### Publication Abstract
HIV-1 spreads between CD4 T&#xa0;cells most efficiently&#xa0;through virus-induced cell-cell contacts. To test whether this process potentiates viral spread by activating signaling pathways, we developed an approach to analyze the phosphoproteome in infected and uninfected mixed-population T&#xa0;cells using&#xa0;differential metabolic labeling and mass spectrometry. We discovered HIV-1-induced activation of signaling networks during viral spread encompassing over 200 cellular proteins. Strikingly, pathways downstream of the T&#xa0;cell receptor were the most significantly activated, despite the absence of canonical antigen-dependent stimulation. The importance of this pathway was demonstrated by the depletion of proteins, and we show that HIV-1 Env-mediated cell-cell contact, the T&#xa0;cell receptor,&#xa0;and the Src kinase Lck were essential for signaling-dependent enhancement of viral dissemination. This study demonstrates that manipulation of signaling at immune cell contacts by HIV-1 is essential for promoting virus replication and defines a paradigm for antigen-independent T&#xa0;cell signaling.

### Keywords
Virological synapse, Phosphorylation, Hiv, T cell

### Affiliations
Division of Infection and Immunity University College London London United Kingdom
University College London

### Submitter
Clare Jolly

### Lab Head
Dr Clare Jolly
Division of Infection and Immunity University College London London United Kingdom


