### Accession
PXD012213

### Title
Effects of Caloric Restriction with Protein Supplementation on Plasma Protein Profiles in Middle-Aged Women with Metabolic Syndrome – A Preliminary Open Study

### Description
Clinical studies have demonstrated that higher protein intake based on caloric restriction (CR) alleviates metabolic abnormalities. However, no study has examined the effects of plasma protein profiles on caloric restriction with protein supplementation (CRPS) in metabolic syndrome (MetS). Therefore, using a proteomic perspective, this pilot study investigated whether CRPS ameliorated metabolic abnormalities associated with MetS in middle-aged women. Methods: Plasma samples of middle-aged women with MetS in CR and CRPS groups for 12-week intervention were obtained and their protein profiles were analysed. Briefly, blood samples from qualified participants were drawn before and after the dietary treatment. Anthropometric, clinical, and biochemical variables were measured and correlated with plasma proteomics. Results: In results, we found that body mass index, total body fat, and fasting blood glucose decreased significantly after the interventions but were not different between the CR and CRPS groups. After liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry analysis, the relative plasma levels of A2M, C4BPA, C1RL, C6, C8G, and PROS were significantly different between the CRPS and CR groups. These proteins are involved in inflammation, the immune system, and coagulation responses. Moreover, blood low-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels were significantly and positively correlated with C6 plasma levels in both groups. Conclusions: These findings suggest that CRPS improves inflammatory responses in middle-aged women with MetS. Specific plasma protein expression (i.e. A2M, C4BPA, C1RL, C6, C8G, and PROS) associated with the complement system was highly correlated with FBG, BLs, and body fat.

### Sample Protocol
Liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry After sample preparation, digested peptides were loaded into a LTQ-Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer with a nanoelectrospray ionisation source (Thermo Electron, MA, USA) connected to a nanoACQUITY UPLC system (Waters, Milford, MA, USA. Peptide samples were first loaded with a single injection model into the nanoACQUITY UPLC system, and then peptides were captured and desalted on a C18 trap column (2 cm × 180 μm, Symmetry C18, Waters, MA, USA). The peptide samples were separated using a BEH130 C18 column (25 cm × 75 μm, Waters, Milford, MA, USA) with a 0%–95% segmented gradient of 3%–40% B for 168 min, 40%–95% B for 2 min, and 95% B for 10 min at a flow rate of 0.5 μL/min. Mobile phases were prepared as solution A (0.1% formic acid in water) and solution B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile). The eluted peptides were ionised with a spray voltage of 2.33 kV and introduced into the LTQ-Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer. The mass spectrometer was conducted in the positive ion mode and on the basis of a data-dependent acquisition method (isolation width: 1.5 Da). Mass spectrum data of the peptides were obtained using a full mass spectrometer survey scan (m/z range of 350–1600) of 30,000. According to the data-dependent acquisition method, the first 15 most intensively charged peptide ions were scanned. High-energy collisional dissociation of the selected precursor peptide ions was stimulated with helium.

### Data Protocol
The acquired LC-MS/MS raw data files were then applied to search against a UniProt human protein database (containing 162,989 protein sequences; released on April 2017; http://www.uniprot.org/) by using PEAKS Studio 7.5 (Bioinformatics Solutions, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada). The settings in PEAKS Studio 7.5 combined with UniProt for searching the protein database were as follows: enzyme set as trypsin with a maximum of two missed cleavage sites; precursor and fragment mass tolerance of 20 ppm and 0.8 Da, respectively; and false discovery rate <1%, obtained through search against a decoy database. A protein was identified when at least one unique peptide was matched. Protein quantification was based on label-free quantitative analysis. Furthermore, spectrum counts were normalised with the total identified spectra per biological sample and the proteins. The proteins (containing at least two matched peptides or one unique peptide) with statistically higher or lower peptide counts in the participants (nonparametric Quade’s test was conducted in SAS version 9.4, Cary, NC, USA) were considered as different expressions. All mass data of this study have been documented as raw ﬁles and peak lists in ProteomeXchange.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Metabolic syndrome; caloric restriction; protein supplementation; plasma proteomics

### Affiliations
Proteomics Research Center,National Yang-Ming University
National Yang-Ming University, Proteomics Research Center, Taiwan (ROC)

### Submitter
Chen-Chung Liao

### Lab Head
Dr Chen-Chung Liao
National Yang-Ming University, Proteomics Research Center, Taiwan (ROC)


