### Accession
PXD027105

### Title
Evidence of immune modulators in the secretome of the equine tapeworm Anoplocephala perfoliata

### Description
Anoplocephala perfoliata is a neglected gastro-intestinal tapeworm, commonly infecting horses worldwide. Molecular investigation of A. perfoliata is hampered by a lack of tools to better un-derstand the host-parasite interface. This interface is likely influenced by parasite derived immune modulators released in the secretome as free proteins or components of extracellular vesicles (EVs). Therefore, adult RNA was sequenced and de novo assembled to generate the first A. perfoliata transcriptome. In addition, excretory secretory products (ESP) from adult A. perfoliata were col-lected and EVs isolated using size exclusion chromatography, prior to proteomic analysis of the EVs, the EV surface and EV depleted ESP. Transcriptome analysis revealed 454 sequences ho-mologous to known helminth immune modulators including 2 novel Sigma class GSTs, 5 α-HSP90s and 3 α-enolases with isoforms of all three observed within the proteomic analysis of the secretome. Furthermore, secretome proteomics identified common helminth proteins across each sample with known EV markers, such as annexins and tetraspanins, observed in EV fractions. Importantly, 49 of the 454 putative immune modulators were identified across the secretome proteomics contained within and on the surface of EVs in addition to those identified in free ESP. This work provides the molecular tools for A. perfoliata to reveal key players in the host-parasite interaction within the horse host.

### Sample Protocol
Adult A. perfoliata were maintained in vitro from individual horse infections following Morphew et al. (2014). A. perfoliata were maintained at 39oC for 5 hours in DMEM (supplemented with 2.2 mM Calcium acetate, 2.7 mM Magnesium sulphate, 61 mM glucose, 15 mM HEPES pH7.0-7.6, gentamycin (5 μg/mL) and 1 μM serotonin). The culture supernatant was collected and immediately stored at -80°C for EV purification and proteomics analysis. EVs were purified from culture media following Davis et al. (2019). Media was centrifuged at 4oC at 300 x g for 10 min and then 700 x g for 30 min. Residual cells and debris were removed by filtering supernatant through a 0.45 µm PES syringe membrane filter. Supernatant was concentrated using 10 KDaMWCO Amicon® Ultra-15 Centrifugal Filter Units. Filtration flow-through was stored at -80 °C for further analysis. EVs were then purified using a qEVoriginal size exclusion chromatography (SEC) column (iZON Science, Oxford, UK). Both EVs and EV depleted SEC ESP were stored at -80˚°C until further proteomics analysis. Surface proteins of SEC purified EVs were removed through hydrolysis with trypsin as previously described (Allen et al. 2021). The resulting supernatant was stored at -20°C prior to gel free mass spectrometry analysis. EV depleted SEC ESP were concentrated by precipitation with ice-cold 20% (w/v) trichloroacetic acid (Thermo Scientific, Loughborough, UK) in 100% acetone as previously described in Morphew et al. (2014). Precipitated pellets were re-suspended in Isoelectric Focusing (IEF) Buffer Z (8 M urea, 2% w/v CHAPS (C32H58N2O7S), 33 mM Dithiothreitol, 0.5% carrier ampholytes v/v BioLyte®3/10) prior to protein quantification. EVs depleted ESP samples were quantified using Bradford assay (Bradford, 1976)  according to the manufacturer’s protocol, through an UV-visible spectrophotometer (Cary 50, Agilent Technologies, Cheshire, UK) at an absorbance measurement of A595 nm. The Qubit® Protein Assay Kits along with the Qubit® 2.0 Fluorometer (Invitrogen, Thermo Scientific, Loughborough, UK) was employed to quantify the concentration of EV samples according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Samples were evaporated under a vacuum centrifugation for approximately 1 hour to concentrate the samples, which was repeated until an acceptable concentration was reached and quantified. All EVs and EV depleted ESP samples were stored at -20°C until further 1D SDS-PAGE electrophoresis.Both EVs and EV depleted ESP samples were run on a mini 1D SDS-PAGE gel, 7cm 12.5 % resolving acrylamide gels. SDS PAGE lanes containing either EVs or EV depleted ESP were divided into 9 and 12 sections respectively. Each of these sections were excised for in-gel digestion with trypsin, as described in Morphew et al. (2011). Briefly, excised gel bands were de-stained with 50% (v/v) acetonitrile (and 50% (v/v) 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Thermo Scientific) at 37°C for 15 minutes. The supernatant was discarded and the process repeated until gel pieces were de-stained. Gel bands were then dehydrated in 100% acetonitrile at 37°C for 15 minutes, and the gel dried at 50°C. Following drying, 10 mM dithiothreitol in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate was added to gel pieces and incubated at 80°C for 30 minutes before then incubating with 55 mM iodoacetamide in in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma-Aldrich) at room temperature for 20 minutes. Gel pieces were washed with 50% (v/v) acetonitrile and 50% (v/v) 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate at room temperature for 15 minutes, dehydrated with 100% acetonitrile at room temperature for 15 minutes and then dried at 50°C. Gel pieces were rehydrated and digested with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate containing trypsin at 10 ng/μL at 37˚C for approximately 16 hours. Gel pieces were then centrifuged at 10,000 x g for 10 minutes and then MilliQ water added before placing on a shaker at room temperature for 10 minutes, and the supernatant retained. 50% (v/v) acetonitrile and 5% (v/v) formic acid were again added to the gel pieces at room temperature for 60 minutes. Gel pieces were centrifuged as previously and the supernatant retained and added to the previously retained extraction. All retained supernatants containing peptides were dried until pelleted ready for mass spectrometry analysis. LC-MSMS was performed at the AMSF, University of Birmingham. Briefly, dried peptide pellets were re-suspended in 0.1% v/v formic acid and then loaded with an autosampler to be analysed by Liquid Chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (Q Exactive™ HF Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap™ Mass Spectrometer, Thermo Scientific) equipped with a TriVersa Nanomate (Advion, Harlow, UK) and nanoflow liquid chromatography system (Dionex, Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification of A. perfoliata proteomics profiles were performed through MASCOT [150] hosted by IBERS, Aberystwyth University, according to the method described [104]. Briefly, the acquired MS/MS spectra (Mascot Generic Files) were submitted to a MASCOT MS/MS ions search (Matrix Science, v2.6; www.matrixscience.com) against the A. perfoliata transcriptome and Equus caballus genome version 3.0. Search parameters used the following: trypsin enzymatic cleavage with up to 1 missed cleavage allowed, fixed modifications to Carboxymethyl cysteine with variable modifications set for Oxidation of methionine, fixing fragment monoisotopic mass error with peptide tolerances of ±1.2 Da and MS/MS of ±0.6 Da, peptide charge 1+, 2+ and 3+, monoisotopic, data format with mascot generic, Electrospray ionization (ESI) TRAP. The resulting identified proteins that indicated the identity or extensive homology (p<0.05) were selected according to the individual MASCOT ions score with scores set at greater than 48 for EVs and EVs depleted ESP samples and 47 for EVs surface samples.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Anoplocephala perfoliata; secretome; extracellular vesicles; ev surface; ev depleted esp; lcmsms

### Affiliations
Aberystwyth University
Institute of Biological, Environmental & Rural Sciences (IBERS,)Aberystwyth University, Wales, UK.

### Submitter
Russ Morphew

### Lab Head
Dr Russell M Morphew
Institute of Biological, Environmental & Rural Sciences (IBERS,)Aberystwyth University, Wales, UK.


