### Accession
PXD017243

### Title
Impact of Staphylococcus aureus infection on the late lactation goat milk proteome: new perspectives for monitoring and understanding mastitis in dairy goats

### Description
This investigation reports a differential proteomic analysis of the goat milk to evaluate and understand the protein changes induced by Staphylococcus spp. during a subclinical intramammary infection (IMI). A number of 9 milk samples from multiparous goats were selected for the study, 3 of which in mid-lactation (30-60 Days in milk - DIM) with very low somatic cell count (SCC) from half-udders producing a sterile milk bacterial culture (MLU), 3 of which in late lactation samples (> 250 DIM) with SCC > 2,000,000 cells/mL from half-udders producing a sterile milk bacterial culture for the whole lactation (LHU) and in conclusion 3 in late lactation (> 250 DIM) with SCC > 2,000,000 cells/mL from goat half-udders with a milk bacterial culture repeatedly positive for Staphylococcus aureus (LHS). Samples were analyzed using a shotgun proteomics approach, based on filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) followed by LC-MS/MS and on differential analysis conducted by spectral count approach (1). (1) Pisanu S, Cacciotto C, Pagnozzi D, Puggioni GMG, Uzzau S, Ciaramella P, Guccione J, Penati M, Pollera C, Moroni P, Bronzo V,  Addis MF. Proteomic changes in the milk of water buffaloes (Bubalus bubalis) with subclinical mastitis due to intramammary infection by Staphylococcus aureus and by non-aureus staphylococci. Sci Rep, 2019, 9 (1), 15850. Here, we reported both a characterization of goat milk proteins and a panel of differential proteins specific of S. Aureus-infected milk that mostly affected proteins involved in defense response processes and cytoskeleton organization.  In conclusion, our results provide a depth characterization of milk proteins in goat samples uninfected and infected with S. Aureus, describe the changes induced by LHU and LHS subclinical intramammary infection and suggest indications to reveal subclinical staphylococcal mastitis in goat by a proteomic investigation of milk.

### Sample Protocol
Goat milk samples were collected from an Alpine goats farm. These animals were clinically healthy and they were classified according to bacteriological analysis for identification of Staphilococcus aureus by catalase and coagulase production and  somatic cell count (SCC) obtained to somatic cell counter  (Bentley Somacount 150, Bentley Instrument, USA). After classification of animals, goat milk were immediately stored at -80°C until their use. Samples were treated as described by Pisanu at al. (1).   Briefly, milk was centrifugated to remove fat and diluted 1:1 with lysis buffer and incubated at 95°C for 10 min and then sonicated in a refrigerated water bath for 10 min. In finally, the extract of each sample obtained by centrifugation at 10,000 x g for 10 min at 4°C, it was subjected to filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) for shotgun proteomic analysis, as described previously (1,2). (2) Pisanu S, Cubeddu T, Pagnozzi D, Rocca S, Cacciotto C, Alberti A, et al. Neutrophil extracellular traps in sheep mastitis. Vet Res. BioMed Central Ltd; 2015;46: 59. All peptide samples were analyzed on a Q-Exactive interfaced with an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnanoLC system (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA), as described by Pisanu et al. (3). (3) Pisanu S, Biosa G, Carcangiu L, Uzzau S, Pagnozzi D. Comparative evaluation of seven commercial products for human serum enrichment/depletion by shotgun proteomics. Talanta. 2018;185: 213–220.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed by Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4; Thermo Scientific) software to obtain protein identification using Sequest-HT as search engine and percolator as algorithm to evaluate correct and incorrect spectrum identifications (1). The database was customized by merging Bos taurus database downloaded from Swiss-Prot and Capra Hircus and Staphylococcus databases downloaded from TrEMBL. Differential analysis was conducted by the spectral counting (SpC) approach, as describe by Pisanu et al. (1).

### Publication Abstract
The milk somatic cell count (SCC) is a standard parameter for monitoring intramammary infections (IMI) in dairy ruminants. In goats, however, the physiological increase in SCC occurring in late lactation heavily compromises its reliability. To identify and understand milk protein changes specifically related to IMI, we carried out a shotgun proteomics study comparing high SCC late lactation milk from goats with subclinical Staphylococcus aureus IMI and from healthy goats to low SCC mid-lactation milk from healthy goats. As a result, we detected 52 and 19 differential proteins (DPs) in S. aureus-infected and uninfected late lactation milk, respectively. Unexpectedly, one of the proteins higher in uninfected milk was serum amyloid A. On the other hand, 38 DPs were increased only in S. aureus-infected milk and included haptoglobin and numerous cytoskeletal proteins. Based on STRING analysis, the DPs unique to S. aureus infected milk were mainly involved in defense response, cytoskeleton organization, cell-to-cell, and cell-to-matrix interactions. Being tightly and specifically related to infectious/inflammatory processes, these proteins may hold promise as more reliable markers of IMI than SCC in late lactation goats. SIGNIFICANCE: The biological relevance of our results lies in the increased understanding of the changes specifically related to bacterial infection of the goat udder in late lactation. The DPs present only in S. aureus infected milk may find application as markers for improving the specificity of subclinical mastitis monitoring and detection in dairy goats in late lactation, when other widespread tools such as the SCC lose diagnostic value.

### Keywords
Capra hircus, Mastitis, Lc-ms/ms, Label-free proteomics, Milk, Biological dataset

### Affiliations
Porto Conte Ricerche, Alghero, Sardinia, Italy
Porto Conte Ricerche,
Alghero, Sardinia, Italy.

### Submitter
Salvatore Pisanu

### Lab Head
Dr Daniela Pagnozzi
Porto Conte Ricerche, Alghero, Sardinia, Italy


