### Accession
PXD015751

### Title
Cellular interactome dynamics during paclitaxel treatment

### Description
Cell cycle inhibitors, including paclitaxel, are among the most widely used and effective cancer therapies. However, several challenges limit the success of paclitaxel including drug resistance and toxic side effects. Paclitaxel is thought to act primarily by stabilizing microtubules and locking cells in a mitotic state. However, the resulting cytotoxicity and tumor shrinkage rates observed cannot be fully explained by this mechanism alone.  Here we apply quantitative chemical cross-linking with mass spectrometry analysis to paclitaxel treated cells. Our results provide large scale measurements of relative protein levels and, perhaps more importantly, changes to protein conformations and interactions that occur upon paclitaxel treatment. Drug concentration dependent changes are revealed in known drug targets including tubulins, as well as many other proteins and protein complexes involved in apoptotic signaling and cellular homeostasis. As such this study provides insight into systems-level changes to protein structures and interactions which occur with paclitaxel treatment.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa cells were cultured in SILAC media and treated with varying concentrations of mitotic inhibitors (5, 10, 20, 50, 100, 500 nM) paclitaxel (PTX), 3 μm nocodazole (NOC), 5 μm S-trityl-L-cysteine (STLC), 5 nM combretastatin A-4 (CA4),  or 0.1% v/v dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) for 18 h before harvesting from the plates with 5 mL of phosphate buffered saline (PBS) containing 5 mM EDTA.  Cells were washed with PBS and pelleted by centrifugation at 300 g for 3 min.  Cell pellets were then suspended in 170 mM Na2HPO4 pH 8.0 in preparation for chemical cross-linking. Isotopically light and heavy cells were mixed at equal numbers (2E7 cells) in two biological replicates, either light PTX treated/ heavy control (treated with 0.1 % by volume of DMSO) or light control/ heavy PTX treated, before adding the PIR cross-linker (Biotin Aspartate Proline – N-hydroxyphthalamide, BDP-NHP) and reacting for 1h at room temperature. Protein was extracted from all samples using 8 M urea and ultrasonication to homogenize the samples. A pooled sample containing 1mg of protein was subjected to avidin affinity enrichement to identify putative cross-linked proteins and form a stage 1 database used for later identification of cross-linked peptide pairs. Protein was reduced with TCEP, alkylated with iodoacetamide and digested with trypsin. Cross-linked peptide pairs were enriched by strong cation exchange chromatography using a binary mobile phase solvent system consisting of solvent A (7 mM KH2PO4, 30% acetonitrile pH 2.8) and solvent B (7 mM KH2PO4, 350 mM KCl, 30% acetonitrile pH 2.8) at a flow rate of 1.5 mL/min using the following gradient program: 0-7.5 min 100% A, 7.5-47.5 min 95% A/5% B to 40% A/ 60% B, 47.5-67.5 min 40% A/ 60% B to 100% B, 67.5-77.5 min 100% B, 77.5-97.5 min 100% A.  A total of 15 fractions (5 min time slices, 7.5 mL each) were collected starting after an initial 17.5 min delay.  Resulting SCX fractions were concentrated by vacuum centrifugation before their pH was adjusted to 8.0 by the addition of 0.1 M NH4HCO3.  Fractions 6 and 7 were combined as well as fractions 11-14.  To each of five fractions (6-7, 8, 9, 10, 11-14) 200 μL of monomeric avidin slurry (Thermo) was added and the samples were mixed for 30 minutes at room temperature. Standard data dependant LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Q-Excative Plus instrument with an Easy-nLC for the stage 1 database sample and a pooled sample of SCX fractions 1-5, used for global protein level quantification. Samples containing enriched cross-linked peptides were analyzed using a Velos-FTICR mass spectrometer coupled with a Waters nano-Acquity. The instrument was operated using ReACT, a realtime adaptive method to selectively target PIR cross-linked peptide pairs. Ions with a charge state of 4 or greater are subjected to high resolution MS2. An on the fly check for the PIR mass relationship (mass precursor = mass peptide 1 + mass peptide 2 + mass reporter ion) is performed. If statisfied within 20 ppm mass error the released peptides are sequentially analyzed by MS3 to obtain their primary sequence information.

### Data Protocol
RAW data files were converted to mzXML using ReAdW from the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline.  Comet was used for database searching. XLinkProphet was used for probability assignment of cross-linked peptide pairs.  MassChroQ was used for quantification of the MS1 signal for SILAC isotope pairs.

### Publication Abstract
Cell-cycle inhibitors, including paclitaxel, are among the most widely used and effective cancer therapies. However, several challenges limit the success of paclitaxel, including drug resistance and toxic side effects. Paclitaxel is thought to act primarily by stabilizing microtubules, locking cells in a mitotic state. However, the resulting cytotoxicity and tumor shrinkage rates observed cannot be fully explained by this mechanism alone. Here we apply quantitative chemical cross-linking with mass spectrometry analysis to paclitaxel-treated cells. Our results provide large-scale measurements of relative protein levels and, perhaps more importantly, changes to protein conformations and interactions that occur upon paclitaxel treatment. Drug concentration-dependent changes are revealed in known drug targets including tubulins, as well as many other proteins and protein complexes involved in apoptotic signaling and cellular homeostasis. As such, this study provides insight into systems-level changes to protein structures and interactions that occur with paclitaxel treatment.

### Keywords
Chemical cross-linking, Mitotic inhibitor

### Affiliations
University of Washington
Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle WA, USA

### Submitter
Juan Chavez

### Lab Head
Dr James E. Bruce
Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle WA, USA


