### Accession
PXD014125

### Title
Label-free quantitative proteomics in Candida yeast species: technical and biological replicates to asses data reproducibility

### Description
Objective Label-free quantitative proteomics has emerged as a powerful strategy to obtain high quality quantitative measures of the proteome with only a very small quantity of total protein extract. Because our research projects were requiring the application of bottom-up shotgun Mass Spectrometry proteomics in the pathogenic yeasts Candida glabrata and Candida albicans, we performed preliminary experiments to i) obtained a precise list of all the proteins for which measures of abundance could be obtain and ii) assess the reproducibility of the results arising respectively from biological and technical replicates.   Data description C. glabrata and C. albicans cells were grown in minimal liquid medium. Three independent time-courses were performed simultaneously, in each species, and an alkaline pH stress was induced for two of them. Cells were collected 10 and 60 minutes after stress induction and proteins were extracted. They were analysed and quantified two time by mass spectrometry. Our final dataset thus comprises label-free quantitative proteomics results for 24 samples (two species, three time-courses, two time points and two runs of mass spectrometry). Statistical procedures were applied to identify proteins with differential abundances between stressed and unstressed situations. Considering that C. glabrata and C. albicans are human pathogens which face important pH fluctuations during a human host infection, this dataset has a potential value to other researchers in the field.

### Sample Protocol
LC-MS/MS acquisition: Protein extracts (30 µg) from Candida albicans and Candida glabrata were precipitated with acetone at -20°C during 3 hours and incubated with 20 μL of 25 mM NH4HCO3 containing sequencing-grade trypsin (12.5 μg/mL; Promega) overnight at 37°C. Peptides were desalted using ZipTip µ-C18 Pipette Tips (Millipore) and analyzed in a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer coupled to a Nano-LC Proxeon 1000 equipped with an easy spray ion source (all from Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated by chromatography with the following parameters: Acclaim PepMap100 C18 pre-column (2 cm, 75 μm i.d., 3 μm, 100 Å), Pepmap-RSLC Proxeon C18 column (50 cm, 75 μm i.d., 2 μm, 100 Å), 300 nl/min flow rate, gradient from 95 % solvent A (water, 0.1% formic acid) to 35% solvent B (100 % acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) over a period of 97 minutes, followed by column regeneration for 23 min, giving a total run time of 2 hours. Peptides were analyzed in the Orbitrap cell, in full ion scan mode, at a resolution of 120,000 (at m/z 200), with a mass range of m/z 350-1550 and an AGC target of 4 x105. Fragments were obtained by high collision-induced dissociation (HCD) activation with a collisional energy of 30 %, and a quadrupole isolation window of 1.6 Da. MS/MS data were acquired in the Orbitrap cell. Precursor priority was highest charge state, followed by most intense. Peptides with charge states from 2 to 8 were selected for MS/MS acquisition. The maximum ion accumulation times were set to 100 ms for MS acquisition and 60 ms for MS/MS acquisition.

### Data Protocol
Peptides and proteins identifications and quantifications by LC-MS/MS: For the peptide and protein identification step, all MS and MS/MS data were processed with the Proteome Discoverer software (Thermo Scientific, version 2.1) and with the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, version 2.5.1). The mass tolerance was set to 6 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragments. The following variable modifications (2 maximum per peptide) were allowed: oxidation (Met), phosphorylation (Ser, Thr, Tyr), acetylation (N-term of protein) and carbamidomethylation (Cys). The maximum number of missed cleavages was limited to two for the trypsin protease. Candida albicans and Candida glabrata protein databases (02/201) were obtained on Candida Genome Database website and used for the MS/MS identification step. Peptide Identifications were validated using a 1 % FDR (False Discovery Rate) threshold calculated with the Percolator algorithm. Progenesis QI for Proteomics software (version 4.1, Waters) was used for the relative quantification of the protein abundances by using co-detection to eliminate missing values. The relative quantifications of proteins were performed using a between subject analysis and a Hi-3 method (for which the three most abundant peptides were used for protein quantification). Abundance variations of proteins with an ANOVA p-value under 0.05 and with at least two identified peptides were further considered.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mass spectrometry; label-free quantitative proteomics; candida glabrata; candida albicans; alkaline ph

### Affiliations
EHESP/LERES
Université Paris-Sud Institut de Biologie Intégrative de la Cellule, campus Orsay

### Submitter
Thibaut LEGER

### Lab Head
Dr Pr. Gaëlle Lelandais
Université Paris-Sud Institut de Biologie Intégrative de la Cellule, campus Orsay


