### Accession
PXD009579

### Title
Proteome profiles of oil palm fruit mesocarp

### Description
Proteome profiles of oil palm mesocarp from different stages of fruit development were analysed using two-dimensional gel electrophoresis (2DE) and the significantly changed protein were identified using  by matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization-time of flight (MALDI-TOF/TOF) and functionally classified using ontology analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Mesocarp proteins were extracted using TCA/acetone method and separated using 2DE. The selected protein spots were excised and digested using in-gel tryptic digestion. Then, the peptide digests were subjected to MALDI-TOF/TOF analysis for protein identification.

### Data Protocol
The proteome profiles for the oil palm mesocarps were analysed using Progenesis analysis software. The principal component analysis (PCA) was achieved by COVAIN. The mass spectrometry results were blasted against oil palm transcriptome and NCBI database for the protein identification through Mascot search engine.

### Publication Abstract
Palm oil is an edible vegetable oil derived from lipid-rich fleshy mesocarp tissue of oil palm (Elaeis guineensis Jacq.) fruit and is of global economic and nutritional relevance. While the understanding of oil biosynthesis in plants is improving, the fundamentals of oil biosynthesis in oil palm still require further investigations. To gain insight into the systemic mechanisms that govern oil synthesis during oil palm fruit ripening, the proteomics approach combining gel-based electrophoresis and mass spectrometry was used to profile protein changes and classify the patterns of protein accumulation during these complex physiological processes. Protein profiles from different stages of fruit ripening at 10, 12, 14, 15, 16, 18 and 20 weeks after anthesis (WAA) were analysed by two-dimensional gel electrophoresis (2DE). The proteome data were then visualised using a multivariate statistical analysis of principal component analysis (PCA) to get an overview of the proteome changes during the development of oil palm mesocarp. A total of 68 differentially expressed protein spots were successfully identified by matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionisation-time of flight (MALDI-TOF/TOF) and functionally classified using ontology analysis. Proteins related to lipid production, energy, secondary metabolites and amino acid metabolism are the most significantly changed proteins during fruit development representing potential candidates for oil yield improvement endeavors. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD009579. This study provides important proteome information for protein regulation during oil palm fruit ripening and oil synthesis.

### Keywords
Fruit, Proteomics, Mass spectrometry, Elaeis guineensis

### Affiliations
Malaysian Palm Oil Board (MPOB), Malaysia
Head of Metabolics Unit Advanced Biotechnology & Breeding Centre Malaysian Palm Oil Board (MPOB) Malaysia

### Submitter
Hasliza Hassan

### Lab Head
Dr Umi Salamah Ramli
Head of Metabolics Unit Advanced Biotechnology & Breeding Centre Malaysian Palm Oil Board (MPOB) Malaysia


