### Accession
PXD006515

### Title
A plasmid goes viral, part 2 -  A plasmid from an Antarctic haloarchaeon uses specialized membrane vesicles to disseminate and infect plasmid-free cells

### Description
Analysis of protein compostition of plasmid vesicles (PVs) purified through CsCl gradients.

### Sample Protocol
PVs and MVs were isolated as described in Methods by PEG precipitation and filtered through 0.45 µm followed by filtration through 0.22 µm syringe filters. Purification through a CsCl gradient was obtained by loading PV and MV preparations on top of 0.64 g ml-1 CsCl in 1 mM Tris-HCl, 1.2 M NaCl, pH 7.5 and centrifugation for 22 hours at 256,136 x g, 4 °C.Resulting red bands in gradients were collected with a syringe and diluted with modified DBCM2 medium prior to precipitation of PVs and MVs with 10 % PEG. Pellets were washed with 1 mM Tris-HCl, 4.5 M NaCl, pH 7.5 and dissolved in 200 µl TE Buffer pH 7.5.  100 µl of each sample were used for DNA extraction as described in Methods, digested with EcoRV (NEB, 20 units) and separated on 1 % Agarose gels. The remaining 100 µl were used to purify proteins for SDS-PAGE using Pierce™ SDS-PAGE Sample Prep Kit (Life Technologies Australia Pty Ltd, Tullamarine, Australia) following manufacturer’s instructions. Proteins were eluted with 30 µl Elution Buffer, supplied with 10 µl of 4x NuPAGE® LDS Sample Buffer (Life Technologies Australia Pty Ltd, Tullamarine, Australia) and incubated at 95 °C for 10 min prior to separation on a NuPAGE™ 10% Bis-Tris Protein Gel (Life Technologies Australia Pty Ltd, Tullamarine, Australia) and staining with CoomassieTM. Gels that contained protein bands of interest for mass spectrometric analysis were firstly washed with deionized water for 5 min. Protein bands or lanes of interest were excised using a fresh scalpel blade with excision being made as close as possible to the boundary of the band. Gel pieces were then placed into a 1.5 ml screwcap tube with a small amount of liquid left to keep the gel slice hydrated. Coomassie stain was removed by incubating gel bands in 200 µl NH4HCO3 (25 mM) in ACN until clear. After removal of the solvent, the bands were incubated with 40 µl iodoacetamide (25 mM) in NH4HCO3 (50 mM) for 30 min at 37°C. The bands were then washed with 50 µl ACN twice, 10 min each and 40 µl trypsin (~100 ng) in NH4HCO3 (20 mM) was added then the solution incubated at 37°C for 14 h. The bands were then washed with 50 µl deionized water with 1% v/v formic acid and 100 µl of ACN for 15 min. The extracted peptides were then dried and dissolved in 10 µl deionized water with 0.05% v/v heptafluorobutyric acid and 0.1% v/v formic acid. Digested peptides were separated by nanoLC using an Ultimate nanoRSLC UPLC and autosampler system (Dionex, Amsterdam, Netherlands). Samples (2.5 µl) were concentrated and desalted onto a micro C18 precolumn (300 µm x 5 mm, Dionex) with H2O:CH3CN (98:2, 0.1 % TFA) at 15 µl/min. After a 4 min wash the pre-column was switched (Valco 10 port UPLC valve, Valco, Houston, TX) into line with a fritless nano column (75µ x ~15cm) containing C18AQ media (1.9µ, 120 Å Dr Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen Germany). Peptides were eluted using a linear gradient of H2O:CH3CN (98:2, 0.1 % formic acid) to H2O:CH3CN (64:36, 0.1 % formic acid) at 200 nl/min over 30 min. High voltage 2000 V was applied to low volume Titanium union (Valco) with the column oven heated to 45°C (Sonation, Biberach, Germany) and the tip positioned ~ 0.5 cm from the heated capillary (T=300°C) of a QExactive Plus (Thermo Electron, Bremen, Germany) mass spectrometer. Positive ions were generated by electrospray and the QExactive operated in data dependent acquisition mode (DDA). A survey scan m/z 350-1750 was acquired (resolution = 70,000 at m/z 200, with an accumulation target value of 1,000,000 ions) and lockmass enabled (m/z 445.12003) Up to the 10 most abundant ions (>80,000 counts, underfill ratio 10%) with charge states > +2 and <+7 were sequentially isolated (width m/z 2.5) and fragmented by HCD (NCE = 30) with a AGC target of 100,000 ions (resolution = 17,500 at m/z 200). M/z ratios selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Peak lists were generated using Mascot Daemon/Mascot Distiller (Matrix Science, London, England) and submitted to the database search program Mascot (version 2.5.1, Matrix Science). Search parameters were: Precursor tolerance 4 ppm and product ion tolerances ± 0.05 Da; Met(O) carboxyamidomethyl-Cys specified as variable modification, enzyme specificity was trypsin, 1 missed cleavage was possible and customized databases (Hrr. lacusprofundi R1S1, Hrr. lacusprofundi ACAM34 and pR1SE) were searched.

### Publication Abstract
The major difference between viruses and plasmids is the mechanism of transferring their genomic information between host cells. Here, we describe the archaeal plasmid pR1SE from an Antarctic species of haloarchaea that transfers via a mechanism similar to a virus. pR1SE encodes proteins that are found in regularly shaped membrane vesicles, and the vesicles enclose the plasmid DNA. The released vesicles are capable of infecting a plasmid-free strain, which then gains the ability to produce plasmid-containing vesicles. pR1SE can integrate and replicate as part of the host genome, resolve out with fragments of host DNA incorporated or portions of the plasmid left behind, form vesicles and transfer to new hosts. The pR1SE mechanism of transfer of DNA could represent the predecessor of a strategy used by viruses to pass on their genomic DNA and fulfil roles in gene exchange, supporting a strong evolutionary connection between plasmids and viruses.

### Keywords
Virus, Plasmid, Membrane vesicles, Haloarchaea

### Affiliations
School of Biotechnology and Biomolecular Sciences University of NSW
UNSW

### Submitter
Susanne Erdmann

### Lab Head
Dr Ricardo Cavicchioli
School of Biotechnology and Biomolecular Sciences University of NSW


