### Accession
PXD024659

### Title
EROS/CYBC1 CONTROLS THE PHAGOCYTE RESPIRATORY BURST VIA DIRECT INTERACTION WITH GP91PHOX AND HAS A NOVEL ROLE IN NLRP3 INFLAMMASOME ACTIVATION

### Description
EROS (Essential for Reactive Oxygen Species) protein (CYBC1) is indispensable for expression of the gp91phox-p22phox heterodimer of the phagocyte NADPH oxidase. EROS deficiency in humans is a novel cause of chronic granulomatous disease (CGD) but its mechanism of action remains unclear. Our work describes how EROS regulates protein abundance and describes novel roles for EROS in innate and adaptive immunity. EROS acts very early in gp91phox maturation, binding the translated 58kDa precursor directly in the endoplasmic reticulum  prior to glycosylation and heme incorporation, thus preventing its degradation. Its actions are distinct from that of p22phox, which is required much later in gp91phox biosynthesis. Further, EROS’s ability to regulate p22phox abundance is entirely secondary to its effect on gp91phox. EROS also regulates the expression of other proteins, including the purine receptors P2X7 and P2X1 through direct interactions.

### Sample Protocol
AP-MS Eros-FLAG affinity purifications were carried out as described previously (Thomas et al., JEM 2017). Bound proteins were eluted by 3xFLAG peptide competitive elution, reduced with 5 mM TCEP and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide prior to sample fractionation by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis with Novex NuPAGE Bis-Tris 4–12% gels (Life Technologies). Whole gel lanes were excised into 12 bands and processed for mass spectrometry analysis as previously described (Pardo et al., Cell Stem Cell 2010).  Full Proteome  The cell pellets were lysed in 1% Sodium deoxylate / 10% isopropanol / 50 mM NaCl /100 mM TEAB (tetraethylammonium bromide, Sigma) with Halt™ Protease and Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail (1x, Thermo).  The mixture was probe sonicated at 40% power for 15x of 1s on / 1s off, heated at 90⁰C for 5 min, and then probe sonicated again as above.  The protein concentration was measured by Pierce Bradford Protein Assay (Thermo).  100 µg of proteins per sample was taken. Proteins were reduced by TCEP (Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine, Sigma), alkylated by iodoacetamide (Sigma), and then 3 µg of trypsin  (Pierce MS grade, Thermo) was added and the digestion went on overnight at the room temperature, then labelled by 0.8 mg TMT10plex according to the manufaturer’s instruction.  10 samples were pooled and acidified by 20 µl of formic acid, and then centrifuged at 14,000 rpm for 5min to remove the precipitated deoxylate acid.  The supernatant was dried in SpeedVac (Thermo), and then resuspened in 0.1% NH4OH/100% H2O, and fractionated on an XBridge BEH C18 column (2.1 mm i.d. x 150 mm, Waters) with an initial 5 min loading then linear gradient from 5% ACN/0.1% NH4OH (pH 10) – 35% CH3CN /0.1% NH4OH in 30 min, then to 80% CH3CN /0.1% NH4OH in 5 min and stayed for another 5 min. The flow rate was at 200 µl/min.  Fractions were collected ay every 42 sec from 7.8 min to 50 min and then concatenated to 28 fractions and dried in SpeedVac.  The peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% FA/H2O and 25% was injected for on-line LC-MS/MS analysis on the Orbitraip Fusion Lumos hybrid mass spectrometer coupled with an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano UPLC system (both from Thermo Fisher). Samples were first loaded and desalted on a PepMap C18 nano trap (100 µm i.d. x 20 mm, 100 Å, 5µ) then peptides were separated on a PepMap C18 column (75 µm i.d. x 500 mm, 2 µm) over a linear gradient of 5.6 – 30.4% CH3CN/0.1% FA in 90 min / cycle time at 120 min at a flow rate at 300 nl/min. The MS acquisition used MS3 level quantification with Synchronous Precursor Selection (SPS5) with the Top Speed 3s cycle time.  Briefly, the Orbitrap full MS survey scan was m/z 375 – 1500 with the resolution 120,000 at m/z 200, with AGC set at 4e5 and 50 ms maximum injection time.  Multiply charged ions (z = 2 – 5) with intensity threshold at 5000 were fragmented in ion trap at 35% collision energy, with AGC at 1e4 and 50 ms maximum injection time, and isolation width at 0.7 Da in quadrupole.  The top 5 MS2 fragment ions were SPS selected with the isolation width at 0.7 Da, and fragmented in HCD at 65% NCE, and detected in the Orbitrap to get the report ions’ intensities at a better accuracy. The resolution was set at 50,000, and the AGC at 1e5 with maximum injection time at 86 ms.  The dynamic exclusion was set 40 s with ± 10 ppm exclusion window.     LC-MS/MS analysis for IP samples  The peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% FA/H2O and was injected for on-line LC-MS/MS analysis on the LTQ FT Ultra hybrid mass spectrometer coupled with an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano UPLC system at a very similar method as above.  After peptides was trapped and desalted, the peptides were separated on a PepMap C18 column (75 µm i.d. x 250 mm, 2 µm) over a linear gradient of 4 – 33.6% CH3CN/0.1% FA in 60 min / cycle time at 90 min at a flow rate at 300 nl/min. The MS acquisition used standard data-dependant acquisition mode to fragment the top 5 multiply charged ions with the intensity above 1000.  Briefly, the FT full MS survey scan was m/z 380 – 1800 with the resolution 100,000 at m/z 400, with AGC set at 1e6 and 500 ms maximum injection time.  The MS/MS fragmented in ion trap was set at 35% collision energy, with AGC at 1e4 and 250 ms maximum injection time, and isolation width at 2.0 Da.  The dynamic exclusion was set 45 s with ± 20 ppm exclusion window.

### Data Protocol
AP-MS Raw files were processed with Proteome Discover 2.3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Database searches were performed with Sequest HT against the mouse Uniprot database (v. August 2019). The search parameters were: trypsin, maximum of 2 missed cleavages, 10 ppm mass tolerance for MS, 0.5 Da tolerance for MS/MS, with variable modifications of carbamidomethyl (C), N-acetylation (protein N-term), deamidation (NQ), oxidation (M), formylation (N-term) and Gln- > pyro-Glu (N-term Q). Database search results were refined through processing with Percolator (FDR <1%).  Full Proteomes The raw files were processed with Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Fisher) using the Sequest HT search engine. Spectra were searched against fasta files of reviewed Uniprot Mus musculus entries (April 2020) and an in-house contaminate database. Search parameters were: trypsin with 2 maximum miss-cleavage sites, mass tolerances at 20 ppm for Precursor, and 0.5 Da for fragment ions, dynamic modifications of Deamidated (N, Q), Oxidation (M) and and Acetyl (Protein N-terminius), static modifications of Carbamidomethyl (C) and TMT6plex (Peptide N-terminus and K). Peptides were validated by Percolator with q-value set at 0.01 (strict) and 0.05 (relaxed). The TMT10plex reporter ion quantifier included 20 ppm integration tolerance on the most confident centroid peak at the MS3 level. Only unique peptides were used for quantification. The co-Isolation threshold was set at 100%.  Peptides with average reported S/N>3 were used for protein quantification, and the SPS mass matches threshold was set at 55%.  The abundance normalization mode used the total peptide amount, and scaling mode used on all average.  Only master proteins were reported.

### Publication Abstract
EROS (essential for reactive oxygen species) protein is indispensable for expression of gp91<i>phox</i>, the catalytic core of the phagocyte NADPH oxidase. EROS deficiency in humans is a novel cause of the severe immunodeficiency, chronic granulomatous disease, but its mechanism of action was unknown until now. We elucidate the role of EROS, showing it acts at the earliest stages of gp91<i>phox</i> maturation. It binds the immature 58 kDa gp91<i>phox</i> directly, preventing gp91<i>phox</i> degradation and allowing glycosylation via the oligosaccharyltransferase machinery and the incorporation of the heme prosthetic groups essential for catalysis. EROS also regulates the purine receptors P2X7 and P2X1 through direct interactions, and P2X7 is almost absent in EROS-deficient mouse and human primary cells. Accordingly, lack of murine EROS results in markedly abnormal P2X7 signalling, inflammasome activation, and T cell responses. The loss of both ROS and P2X7 signalling leads to resistance to influenza infection in mice. Our work identifies EROS as a highly selective chaperone for key proteins in innate and adaptive immunity and a rheostat for immunity to infection. It has profound implications for our understanding of immune physiology, ROS dysregulation, and possibly gene therapy.

### Keywords
Eros, Chronic granulomatous disease, Cybc1, P2x7, Gp91phox, Nadph oxidase

### Affiliations
The Institute of Cancer Research
The Institute of Cancer Research, London

### Submitter
James Wright

### Lab Head
Dr Jyoti Choudhary
The Institute of Cancer Research, London


