### Accession
PXD025519

### Title
Comparative proteomics of paired human vocal fold and oral mucosa tissue

### Description
This dataset brief is about the descriptive proteomic comparison of human oral mucosa and vocal fold tissues by high-resolution mass spectrometry (CID-MS/MS).  The vast majority of voice disorders is associated with changes of the unique but delicate tissue of the human vocal folds, wheras the ability to develop new effective treatment methods is significantly limited by the physical inaccessibility and the extremely rare occasion to gather healthy tissue biopsies. Therefore, oral mucosa reached specific interest for laryngological research, as the tissue harvesting process is less invasive and accompanied with faster healing and less scarring. Proteomic analysis of both tissues will provide a fundamental laryngological resource for the research community.  Our study identifies a total of 1575 proteins detected within both tissues that are highly consistent in several crucial biological processes, cellular components, and molecular functions.

### Sample Protocol
Paired native tissue samples from VF and OM from 3 true biological replicates were collected during autopsy, within 6 hours post mortem of patients who had previously not been intubated. Procedures were approved by the local ethics committee. Tissue samples were collected in decontamination medium (DM), consisting of DMEM supplemented with 1 % Antibiotic-Antimycotic solution and 100 µg/ml Normocin. Snap-frozen tissue samples were homogenized with steel beads (Sigma, Austria) using MagNAlyser (Roche, Switzerland) for 3 min in 600 µL of 100 mM Tris-HCL (containing 1 % SDS, 10 mM TCEP and 40 mM CAA). After removal of the beads, homogenates were reduced and alkylated for 10 min at 95°C. Afterwards, homogenates were centrifuged at 15,000 x g for 7 min at 4°C and the supernatants were collected for proteomics analysis. Protein concentration was determined using the BCA-RAC assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) according to the manufacturer´s instructions.  For LC-MS/MS analysis, 100 µg protein were precipitated with four volumes of acetone overnight and obtained protein pellets were re-solubilized in TFE buffer (25 % TFE, 100 mM Tris HCl pH 8.5), then diluted with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (to reach 10 % TFE). Next, diluted samples were predigested with rLysC (Promega, USA; enzyme/protein 1:100) for 4 hours at 37°C and, lastly, digested overnight with trypsin (Promega, enzyme/protein 1:50). Peptides were desalted using SBD-RPS tips. 500 ng per sample (re-dissolved in 2 % acetonitrile/0.1 % formic acid in water) was subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis. Protein digests were separated by nano-HPLC (Dionex Ultimate 3000, Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with an Aurora (Ionoptics, Australia) nanocolumn (C18, 1. µm, 250 x 0.075 mm) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min at 50°C using the following gradient, where solvent A (0.1 % formic acid in water) and solvent B (acetonitrile containing 0.1 % formic acid): 0-18 min: 2 % B, 18-100 min: 2-25 % B; 100-107 min: 25-35 % B; 107-108 min: 35-95 % B; 108-118 min: 95 % B; 118-118 min: 95-2 % B; 118-133 min: 2 % B. The maXis II ETD mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics, Germany) was operated with the captive source in positive mode with the following settings: mass range: 200-2000 m/z, 2 Hz, capillary 16.000 V, dry gas flow 3 l/min with 150°C, nanoBooster 0.2 bar, precursor acquisition control top 20 (collision induced dissociation (CID).

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS data were analyzed by MaxQuant by searching the public SwissProt human database (11393515 residues, 20467 sequences) and common contaminants. Carbamidomethylation on cystein and oxidation on methionine were set as a fixed and as a variable modification, respectively. Detailed search criteria were used as follows: trypsin, max. missed cleavage sites: 2; search mode: MS/MS ion search with decoy database search includes; precursor mass tolerance ± 0.0006 Da; product mass tolerance ± 80 ppm; acceptance parameters for identification: 1 % PSM FDR; 1 % protein FDR. Additionally, a label free quantification (LFQ) was performed using MaxQuant (19) requiring a minimum of 2 ratio counts of quantified razor and unique peptides.

### Publication Abstract
The vast majority of voice disorders is associated with changes of the unique, but delicate, human vocal fold mucosa. The ability to develop new effective treatment methods is significantly limited by the physical inaccessibility and the extremely rare occasions under which healthy tissue biopsies can be obtained. Therefore, the interest in laryngological research has shifted to human oral (buccal) mucosa, a similar and more easily available tissue. The harvesting process is less invasive and accompanied with faster healing and less scarring, compared to vocal fold mucosa. Here we report a descriptive proteomic comparison of paired human buccal and vocal fold mucosa by high-resolution mass spectrometry (CID-MS/MS). Our study identified a total of 1575 proteins detected within both tissues that are highly consistent in several crucial biological processes, cellular components, and molecular functions. Hence, our proteomic analysis will provide a fundamental resource for the laryngological research community.

### Keywords
Vocal folds, Comparative proteomics, Oral mucosa, Human tissue

### Affiliations
Omics Center Graz
Ruth Birner-Gruenberger, Ph.D.  Full Professor for Analytical Chemistry Vienna University of Technology Institute of Chemical Technologies and Analytics Getreidemarkt 9/E164 A-1060 Vienna Austria  Associate Professor for Biochemistry Medical University of Graz Diagnostic and Research Institute of Pathology Stiftingtalstrasse 24 A-8010 Graz Austria

### Submitter
Barbara Darnhofer

### Lab Head
Dr ruth birner-gruenberger
Ruth Birner-Gruenberger, Ph.D.  Full Professor for Analytical Chemistry Vienna University of Technology Institute of Chemical Technologies and Analytics Getreidemarkt 9/E164 A-1060 Vienna Austria  Associate Professor for Biochemistry Medical University of Graz Diagnostic and Research Institute of Pathology Stiftingtalstrasse 24 A-8010 Graz Austria


