### Accession
PXD008068

### Title
Quantifying missing (phospho)proteome regions with the broad-specificity protease subtilisin

### Description
Despite huge efforts to map the human proteome using mass spectrometry the overall sequence coverage achieved to date is still below 50%. Reasons for missing areas of the proteome comprise protease-resistant domains including the lack/excess of enzymatic cleavage sites, non-unique peptide sequences, impaired peptide ionization/separation and low expression levels. To access novel areas of the proteome the beneficial use of enzymes complementary to trypsin, such as GluC, AspN, LysN, ArgC, LysArginase has been reported. Here, we present how the broad-specificity protease subtilisin enables mapping of previously hidden areas of the proteome. We systematically evaluated its digestion efficiency and reproducibility and compared it to the gold standard in the field, trypsin. Notably, subtilisin allows reproducible near-complete digestion of cells lysates in 1 minute. As expected from its broad specificity the generation of overlapping peptide sequences reduces the number of identified proteins compared to trypsin (8,363 vs. 6,807; 1% protein FDR). However, subtilisin considerably improved the coverage of missing and particularly proline-rich areas of the proteome. Along 14,628 high confidence phosphorylation sites identified in total, only 33% were shared between both enzymes, while 37% were exclusive to subtilisin. Notably, 926 of these were not even accessible by additional in silico digestion with either AspN, ArgC, GluC, LysC, or LysN. Thus, subtilisin might be particularly beneficial for system-wide profiling of post-translational modification sites. Finally, we demonstrate that subtilisin can be used for reporter-ion based in-depth quantification, providing a precision comparable to trypsin – despite broad specificity and fast digestion that may increase technical variance.

### Sample Protocol
The study comprises bottom-up proteomics and phosphoproteomics datasets. Experiments aimed at a systematic comparison of subtilisin and trypsin for digestion of purified protein fractions: Sample preparation: HeLa S3 cells were lysed in 1 % SDS and incubated with benzonase to digest chromatin. After purification of a soluble protein fraction, cysteines were reduced and alkylated. Proteins were precipitated (ethanol) and re-suspended in 6 M GuHCl. For digestion, solutions were diluted to 0.2 M GuHCl using 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC). Digestion with subtilisin was performed at 56°C for 20 min. Digestion with trypsin was performed at 37°C for 14 h. The protein-to-protease-ratio was 20:1 in both cases. Afterwards, digests were acidified by adding TFA to a final concentration of 1 %. Reproducibility of digestion (Files Rep_Sx and Rep_Tx): Digests were analysed by nano-LC-MS. Coverage of the proteome (Files PC_Sx and PC_Tx): A431-digests were subjected to high-pH-RP pre-fractionation to generate 20 fractions for subsequent nano-LC-MS analysis. Subtilisin for quantitative proteomics experiments (Files iTRAQ_GP_S and iTRAQ_GP_T, iTRAQ_MIXx – iTRAQ): A431-digests were desalted using RP-SPE, split in aliquots and differentially labelled with 8-plex iTRAQ (channels 113-121) according to the manufactures' instructions. Channels were mixed in a 1:2:3:4:5:6:7:8 ratio in case of subtilisin and 8:7:6:5:4:3:2:1 in case of trypsin. Afterwards, samples were desalted by RP-SPE. Subtilisin and trypsin digests were analysed by nano-LC-MS (iTRAQ_GP_S and iTRAQ_GP_T). A 1:1 mixture of both was subjected to high-pH-RP pre-fractionation to generate 20 fractions for subsequent nano-LC-MS analysis (iTRAQ_MIXx – iTRAQ, 3 files: search with enzyme “Trypsin” and enzyme “Semitrypsin”, remaining spectra with enzyme: “None”). Subtilin for quantitative phosphoproteomics (Files iTRAQ_Phos_Sx and iTRAQ_Phos_Tx): Phosphopeptides from iTRAQ-labelled A431-digests were enriched using TiO2-affinity-purification and fractionated by HILIC.

### Data Protocol
Database-searches were performed using Mascot v2.4 implemented in Proteome Discoverer v2.2 against the Uniprot database, taxonomy human (16-09-2014, 20194 target sequences). For subtilisin, enzyme settings were "none" with a maximum of 0 missed cleavage sites; for trypsin, settings were "trypsin" with a maximum of 2 missed cleavage sites. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed and oxidation of methionine as variable modification. For iTRAQ-experiments, iTRAQ 8-plex labelling of Lys and peptide N-termini was set as a fixed modifications. In case of phosphoproteomics experiments, phosphorylation of Ser, Thr and Tyr was set as variable modifications. The precursor error tolerance was set to 10 ppm (all instruments) and the fragment ion tolerance to 0.02 Da (Q Exactive HF and Fusion Lumos) or 0.5 Da (LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro). The FDR was set to 1 % on PSM-level using percolator v3.0.48. Phosphorylation sites were validated using ptmRS and only sites with at least 99 % probability were considered.

### Publication Abstract
Despite huge efforts to map the human proteome using mass spectrometry the overall sequence coverage achieved to date is still below 50%. Reasons for missing areas of the proteome comprise protease-resistant domains including the lack/excess of enzymatic cleavage sites, nonunique peptide sequences, impaired peptide ionization/separation and low expression levels. To access novel areas of the proteome the beneficial use of enzymes complementary to trypsin, such as Glu-C, Asp-N, Lys-N, Arg-C, LysargiNase has been reported. Here, we present how the broad-specificity protease subtilisin enables mapping of previously hidden areas of the proteome. We systematically evaluated its digestion efficiency and reproducibility and compared it to the gold standard in the field, trypsin. Notably, subtilisin allows reproducible near-complete digestion of cells lysates in 1-5 min. As expected from its broad specificity the generation of overlapping peptide sequences reduces the number of identified proteins compared to trypsin (8363 vs 6807; 1% protein FDR). However, subtilisin considerably improved the coverage of missing and particularly proline-rich areas of the proteome. Along 14&#x202f;628 high confidence phosphorylation sites identified in total, only 33% were shared between both enzymes, while 37% were exclusive to subtilisin. Notably, 926 of these were not even accessible by additional in silico digestion with either Asp-N, Arg-C, Glu-C, Lys-C, or Lys-N. Thus, subtilisin might be particularly beneficial for system-wide profiling of post-translational modification sites. Finally, we demonstrate that subtilisin can be used for reporter-ion based in-depth quantification, providing a precision comparable to trypsin-despite broad specificity and fast digestion that may increase technical variance.

### Keywords
Alternative enzymes, Novel phosphorylation sites, Trypsin, Sample preparation, Pro-rich regions, Missing proteins, Proteome coverage

### Affiliations
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V.
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V., Dortmund, Germany Gerald Bronfman Department of Oncology, Jewish General Hospital, McGill University, Montreal, Canada.  Segal Cancer Proteomics Centre, Lady Davis Institute, Jewish General Hospital, McGill University, Montreal, Canada.

### Submitter
Humberto Jorge

### Lab Head
Dr René Peiman Zahedi
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V., Dortmund, Germany Gerald Bronfman Department of Oncology, Jewish General Hospital, McGill University, Montreal, Canada.  Segal Cancer Proteomics Centre, Lady Davis Institute, Jewish General Hospital, McGill University, Montreal, Canada.


