### Accession
PXD003081

### Title
Proteomic Dataset of the organohalide-respiring bacterium Dehalococcoides mccartyi strain CBDB1 grown on hexachlorobenzene as electron acceptor

### Description
The proteome of the anaerobic bacterium Dehalococcoides mccartyi strain CBDB1 from the phylum Chloroflexi was investigated. D. mccartyi strain CBDB1 is a model organism for organohalide respiration where halogenated organic compounds serve as terminal electron acceptors. A wide range of halogenated organic compounds have been shown to be dehalogenated by the strain CBDB1. Therefore, D. mccartyi strain CBDB1 is a promising candidate for bioremediation application. Proteomic analysis of cultures grown with hexachlorobenzene as only electron acceptor resulted in identification of 8,491 distinct peptides which represents 1,023 proteins. A coverage of 70% of the 1,458 annotated proteins for strain CBDB1 was achieved. In addition, a spectral library was created from the annotated spectra. By using proteogenomics, 18 previously not annotated peptides were identified which contribute to four proteins previously not annotated and corrections in length of eight protein coding sequences.

### Sample Protocol
Dehalococcoides mccartyi strain CBDB1 was grown with hexachlorobenzene as sole electron acceptor in synthetic, Ti(III) citrate-reduced anaerobe medium. After harvest, samples were processed either by in-solution or in-gel digestion. Resulting peptides were analyzed by LC-MS using a nanoRSLC (Ultimate 3000, Dionex) system coupled to a Q Exactive (Thermo Scientific) operated in data-dependent mode.

### Data Protocol
Data was analyzed using the proteome discoverer platform. Spectra were searched with the algorithms Sequest HT and MS Amanda against the D. mccartyi strain CBDB1 database obtained from UniProt with the following settings: trypsin as cleavage enzyme, up to two missed cleavages allowed, precursor mass tolerance 5 ppm and fragment mass tolerance 0.05 Da. Peptide spectral matches were validated using the Percolator algorithm and filtered according to <1% false discovery rate (FDR). The spectral library was created with the ISB/SPC Trans Proteomic Pipeline, using the accurate mass binning and filtering of the results according to PeptideProphet probability (>0.9). For proteogenomic analysis, an in silico six-frame translation of the D. mccartyi strain CBDB1 genome was performed using the standard genetic code. All codons were translated to their corresponding amino acid with exception of stop codons which were used to define the beginning and the end of theoretical proteins. After removing sequences shorter than 20 amino acids, the database was used to search LC-MS data with the settings described above. Peptides which were not annotated before could be identified from the result list by a suffix array search algorithm, manual inspection and further functional annotation using BLASTp.

### Publication Abstract
The proteome of the anaerobic organohalide-respiring bacterium Dehalococcoides mccartyi strain CBDB1 was analyzed by nano liquid chromatography coupled to mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Two different preparation methods, (i) in-solution and (ii) in-gel proteolytic digestion were assessed to elucidate the core and the functional proteome of bacterial cultures grown in synthetic anaerobic medium with hexachlorobenzene as sole electron acceptor. A detailed analysis of the data presented is available (Schiffmann et al., 2014) [1].

### Keywords
Dehalococcoides mccartyi strain cbdb1, Organohalide respiration

### Affiliations
Department of Proteomics, Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research – UFZ, Permoserstr. 15, 04318 Leipzig, Germany

### Submitter
Christian Schiffmann

### Lab Head
Dr Martin von Bergen
Department of Proteomics, Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research – UFZ, Permoserstr. 15, 04318 Leipzig, Germany


