### Accession
PXD011919

### Title
Proteomic analysis of human skeletal micro muscles

### Description
Three dimensional engineered culture systems are powerful tools to rapidly expand our knowledge of human biology and identify novel therapeutic targets for disease. Bioengineered skeletal muscle has been recently shown to recapitulate many features of native muscle biology. However, current skeletal muscle bioengineering approaches require large numbers of cells, reagents and labour, limiting their potential for high-throughput studies. Herein, we use a miniaturized 96-well micro-muscle platform to facilitate semi-automated tissue formation, culture and analysis of human skeletal micro muscles (hμMs). Utilising an iterative screening approach we define a serum-free differentiation protocol that drives rapid, directed differentiation of human myoblast to skeletal myofibres. The resulting hμMs comprised organised bundles of striated and functional myofibres, which respond appropriately to electrical stimulation. Additionally, we developed an optogenetic approach to chronically stimulate hμM to recapitulate known features of exercise training including myofibre hypertrophy and increased expression of metabolic proteins. Taken together, our miniaturized approach provides a new platform to enable high-throughput studies of human skeletal muscle biology and exercise physiology.

### Sample Protocol
Single hμMs were washed 2X in PBS and snap frozen and stored at −80 °C. Tissues were lysed by tip-probe sonication in 1% SDS containing 100 mM Tris pH 8.0, 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine, 40 mM 2-chloroacetamide and heated to 95 °C for 5 min. Proteins were purified using a modified Single-Pot Solid-Phase-enhanced Sample Preparation (SP3) strategy [20]. Briefly, Proteins were bound to Sera-Mag carboxylate coated paramagnetic beads in 50% acetonitrile containing 0.8% formic acid (v/v) (ThermoFisher Scientific). The beads were washed twice with 70% ethanol (v/v) and once with 100% acetonitrile. Proteins were digested on the beads in 100 mM Tris pH 7.5 containing 10% 2,2,2-Trifluoroethanol overnight at 37 °C with 200 ng of sequencing grade LysC (Wako Chemicals) and trypsin (Sigma). Beads were removed and peptides acidified to 1% trifluoroacetic acid prior to purification by styrene divinyl benzene – reversed phase sulfonated solid phase extraction microcolumns. Peptides were spiked with iRT peptides (Biognosys) and analysed on an Easy-nLC1200 coupled to a Q-Exactive HF in positive polarity mode. Peptides were separated using an in-house packed 75 μm × 50 cm pulled column (1.9 μm particle size, C18AQ; Dr Maisch) with a gradient of 2–35% acetonitrile containing 0.1% FA over 120 min at 300 nl/min at 60 °C. The instrument was operated in data-independent acquisition (DIA) mode essentially as described previously [21]. Briefly, an MS1 scan was acquired from 350 to 1650 m/z (120,000 resolution, 3e6 AGC, 50 ms injection time) followed by 20 MS/MS variable sized isolation windows with HCD (30,000 resolution, 3e6 AGC, 27 NCE). A spectral library was created by fractionating a pooled mix of peptides from 4 separate hμMs on an inhouse packed 320 μm × 25 cm column (3 μm particle size, BEH; Waters) with a gradient of 2–40% acetonitrile containing 10 mM ammonium formate over 60 min at 6 μl/min using an Agilent 1260 HPLC. A total of 12 concatenated fractions were analysed using the identical LC-MS/MS conditions above except the instrument was operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. Briefly, an MS1 scan was acquired from 350 to 1650 m/z (60,000 resolution, 3e6 AGC, 50 ms injection time) followed by 20 MS/MS with HCD (1.4 m/z isolation, 15,000 resolution, 1e5 AGC, 27 NCE).

### Data Protocol
DDA data were processed with Andromeda in MaxQuant v1.5.8.3 [22] against the human UniProt database (January 2016) using all default settings with peptide spectral matches and protein false discovery rate (FDR) set to 1%. DIA data were processed with Spectronaut v11 [23] using all default settings with precursor and protein FDR set to 1% and quantification performed at MS2. All proteomic data were Log2 transformed and median normalised. Differential abundance was determined with two sample t-tests with FDR-based multiple hypothesis testing correction. GO analysis was performed with DAVID v6.8 and gene ontology terms from BP_ALL [24] and heat-maps and hierarchical clustering was performed using GENE-E (Broad Institute).

### Publication Abstract
Three dimensional engineered culture systems are powerful tools to rapidly expand our knowledge of human biology and identify novel therapeutic targets for disease. Bioengineered skeletal muscle has been recently shown to recapitulate many features of native muscle biology. However, current skeletal muscle bioengineering approaches require large numbers of cells, reagents and labour, limiting their potential for high-throughput studies. Herein, we use a miniaturized 96-well micro-muscle platform to facilitate semi-automated tissue formation, culture and analysis of human skeletal micro muscles (h&#x3bc;Ms). Utilising an iterative screening approach we define a serum-free differentiation protocol that drives rapid, directed differentiation of human myoblast to skeletal myofibres. The resulting h&#x3bc;Ms comprised organised bundles of striated and functional myofibres, which respond appropriately to electrical stimulation. Additionally, we developed an optogenetic approach to chronically stimulate h&#x3bc;M to recapitulate known features of exercise training including myofibre hypertrophy and increased expression of metabolic proteins. Taken together, our miniaturized approach provides a new platform to enable high-throughput studies of human skeletal muscle biology and exercise physiology.

### Keywords
Skeletal muscle proteomics

### Affiliations
The University of Sydney
The University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Benjamin Parker

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin Parker
The University of Sydney


