### Accession
PXD008120

### Title
Dengue Virus NS1 Replicon - Dengue virus (DENV) is a major human pathogen that belongs to the flavivirus genus

### Description
Dengue virus (DENV) is a major human pathogen that belongs to the flavivirus genus. Among non-structural viral proteins, NS1 is an enigmatic factor that is exclusively encoded by members of the flavivirus genus within the Flaviviridae family and accomplishes different functions during DENV infection. To gain insight into the molecular and cellular function of NS1 in viral replication, we generated a tagged NS1 DENV replicon and identified the associated host proteins during active viral replication. Replicons are self-replicating flavivirus RNAs containing large in-frame deletions in the structural genes and are useful tools to study translation and RNA amplification of several flaviviruses. To establish a global map of NS1-host protein interactions occurring during DENV replication, we stably expressed a DENV2 replicon encoding NS1 tagged with N-terminal FLAG and HA epitopes (FH-NS1) or the untagged version (WT) in three different human cell lines (Raji, HeLa and HAP1). Interactors of NS1 were identified by AP-MS/MS from these three different cell lines.

### Sample Protocol
5.10+8 HeLa, Raji, or Hap1 cells, expressing either the WT or the FLAG-HA-tagged DENV2 replicon, were lysed for 30 min in cold IP Lysis Buffer (Invitrogen cat # 87788) supplemented with complete protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Roche Diagnostics, Basel, Switzerland), and then cleared by centrifugation for 30 min at 6,000 g. Supernatants were incubated overnight at 4°C, with anti-FLAG magnetic beads (Sigma # M8823). Beads were washed three times with B015 buffer (20 mMTris-HCl pH 7.4, 150mM NaCl, 5mM MgCl2, 10% Glycerol, 0.5 mM EDTA, 0.05% Triton, 0.1% Tween-20), and immune complexes were eluted twice with 3xFLAG-peptide (200 μg/ml; SIGMA F4799-4MG) for 30 min at room temperature (RT). FLAG-IP complexes were further incubated with HA magnetic beads (Pierce # 88837) for 6 h at 4°C, washed 3 times with B015, and immune complexes were eluted twice with HA peptide (400 μg/ml; Roche# 11666975001). Eluates were concentrated on a Pierce Concentrator, PES, 10K (Pierce # 88513) and stored at -20°C until use. A total of five co-affinity purifications and MS analysis experiments were performed with the NS1 tagged DENV2 replicon or the untagged replicon as a control in Raji (IP-1 and 2), HeLa (IP-3 and 4) and HAP1 (IP-5) cells. Samples were analyzed at Taplin Biological Mass Spectrometry Facility (Harvard Medical School). Briefly, concentrated eluates issued from Immunopurification of WT and FLAG-HA-tagged replicon are separated on 10% Tris–glycine SDS–PAGE gels (Invitogen), and stained with Imperial™ Protein Stain (Thermo Fisher). Individual regions of the gel were cut into approximately 1 mm3 pieces and subjected to a modified in-gel trypsin digestion procedure (Shevchenko et al., 1996). Peptides were desalted and subjected to a nano-scale reverse-phase HPLC (Peng and Gygi, 2001). Eluted peptides are then subjected to electrospray ionization and then MS/MS analysis into an LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro ion-trap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). Peptides were detected, isolated, and fragmented to produce a tandem mass spectrum of specific fragment ions for each peptide.

### Data Protocol
Peptide sequences were determined by matching protein databases with the acquired fragmentation pattern by the Sequest software program (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). All databases include a reversed version of all the sequences and the data was filtered to ≤ 2 % peptide false discovery rate. Then, AP-MS data were analyzed using the online server (https://modbase.compbio.ucsf.edu/mist/) to run the MiST algorithm (Mass spectrometry interaction STatistics). Total peptide counts from each of the five experiments performed in Raji, HeLa, and HAP1 cells, including both untagged controls and tagged replicons, were used as quantitative values to run the analysis. The molecular weight of each protein was used as a scaling factor to normalize the quantitative value for each protein to its size. The MiST score is a weight of three parameters (protein abundance, reproducibility, and specificity). We selected interactions with a cut-off >0.75. Finally and to further increase the robustness of our dataset, we only considered interactions identified in all the three cell lines to eliminate cell-specific interactions. Overall, 270 proteins that selectively co-purified with the tagged replicon were considered.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dengue virus, Ns1, Human cells, Replicon

### Affiliations
Université Paris Descartes
Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale U944, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique Unité Mixte de Recherche 7212, Institut Universitaire d’Hématologie, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Université Paris Diderot, Hôpital Saint Louis, 1 Avenue Claude Vellefaux, 75010 Paris, France

### Submitter
Pierre-Olivier Vidalain

### Lab Head
Dr Ali Amara
Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale U944, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique Unité Mixte de Recherche 7212, Institut Universitaire d’Hématologie, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Université Paris Diderot, Hôpital Saint Louis, 1 Avenue Claude Vellefaux, 75010 Paris, France


