### Accession
PXD010440

### Title
Quantitative phosphoproteomic analysis reveals common regulatory mechanisms of immune components during effector- and PAMP-triggered immunity

### Description
The dataset for this project was to identify significantly regulated phosphorylation sites of membrane-associated proteins during RPS2-mediated effector-triggered immunity in Arabidopsis.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen plant tissue was ground and solubilized in homogenization buffer (50 mM MOPS, 5 mM EDTA, 0.33 M sucrose, 0.2% (w/v) insoluble polyvinylpolypyrrolidone, 2 mM DTT, 1.5 mM ascorbate, 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, 0.2 mM 4-(2-aminoethyl)benzenesulfonyl fluoride hydrochloride, 0.7 µM bestatin, 0.7 µM pepstatin A, 10 µM leupeptin, 1.4 µM E-64, 1.4 µM phenanthroline, 50 mM sodium pyrophosphate decahydrate, 25 mM sodium fluoride, 1 mM sodium molybdate, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 25 mM β-glycerophosphate, pH= 5.6) at 4°C. Solubilized samples were filtered through two layers of cheesecloth and centrifuged for 15 min at 10.000 x g at 4°C to pellet cell debris. The supernatant was collected and centrifuged for 1 h at 100.000 x g at 4°C, and membrane pellets were frozen until further analysis.  In-solution trypsin digest and peptide concentration were performed as previously described (Minkoff et al., 2014) with small modifications. In brief, membrane pellets were solubilized in 500 µL 8M Urea containing 1x PhosSTOP cocktail (Roche). The protein concentration in each sample was determined using the Pierce 660 nm Protein Assay (ThermoFisher Scientific). A total of 400 µg protein was diluted to 1 M Urea using 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. DTT was added to the solution to a final concentration of 5 mM, and samples were incubated at 50°C for 45 min. Next, iodoacetamide was added to final concentration of 15 mM and samples were incubated at room temperature in the dark for 45 min. Hereafter, trypsin was added in a ratio of 1:50 and proteins were digested by overnight incubation at 37°C while shaking. The digests were arrested by the addition of 0.3 % formic acid until samples reached a pH= 3. Peptides were concentrated using a Sep-Pak Vac 3cc 500 mg C18 column (Waters). After equilibration with 4 mL acetonitrile, the column was washed with 4 mL 80% acetonitrile / 0.5% formic acid and thereafter with 6 mL 0.1% formic acid. Samples were passed through the column, flow-through was collected and once more passed through the column. The column was then washed with 6 mL 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were eluted slowly with 1.5 mL 80% acetonitrile / 0.5% formic acid and thereafter with 500 µL acetonitrile. Peptides were dried down by centrifugation in a speed vacuum and stored at -80°C . Phosphopeptides were enriched using the Pierce Magnetic TiO2 phosphopeptide enrichment kit (ThermoFisher Scientific). The manual approach protocol was followed with some alterations. In short, frozen peptides were solubilized in 300 µL 80% acetonitrile / 2% formic acid, 290 µL (~387 µg peptides) was then and added to 30 µL of prepared TiO2 beads. The other 10 µL (~13 µg peptides) was freeze-dried and stored for total unenriched protein analysis. Samples were incubated with the beads for 20 min while shaking at room temperature. After washing three times with binding buffer and twice with washing buffer, captured phosphopeptides were eluted by incubating the beads in a shaker with 70 µL elution buffer at room temperature. Samples were centrifuged, the supernatant containing the phosphopeptides was transferred to a new tube and dried down by centrifugation in a speed vacuum. Samples were stored at -80°C until LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
A Proxeon Easy-nLC II HPLC (ThermoFisher Scientific) with a Proxeon Nanospray Source was used in combination with a QExactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). Peptides were reconstituted in 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid and were trapped and washed on a 75 µm x 30 mm Michrom C18 trap. Subsequently, peptides were eluted and separated on a Michrom Magic C18AQ (200 µm x 150 mm) capillary reverse-phase column at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. A 120 min gradient was applied with a 2% to 35% B for 100 min, a 35% B to 80% B for 7 min and 80% B for 2 min. Subsequently a decrease of 80% to 5% B in 1 min followed by 98% A for 10 min. Solution A = 0.1% formic acid, solution B = 100% acetonitrile. The QExactive was operated in Data-Dependent Acquisition (DDA) mode using a top 15 method. Spray voltage was set to 2.2 kV, and the scan range was set to 350-1600 m/z. The maximum injection time was 30 ms. Automatic gain control was set to 1x106. The MS1 resolution was set to 70,000. For MS/MS, the maximum injection time was 50 ms, the isolation window was 1.6 m/z, the scan range 200-2000 m/z, automatic gain control was set to 5x104, and normalized collision energy was 27. The dynamic exclusion window was set to 15 sec, fragment MS2 resolution was 17,500. An intensity threshold of 1x104 was applied, and the under-fill ratio was 1%. For unenriched total proteins, a 180 min gradient was applied, and the flow rates and volumes were adjusted accordingly. Obtained phosphosite intensities in Maxquant were log2 transformed, and the sites matching contaminants or reverse database hits were removed. Next, phosphosites were filtered, and sites with a peptide Andromeda search engine score of >60, a phosphosite probability of >0.5 and a delta score of >5 were maintained. The phosphosite table was expanded using the “expand site table” function of Perseus. We kept and analyzed phosphosite identifications based on singly, doubly or triply phosphorylated phosphopeptides separately, indicated in the ‘multiplicity’ columns in Table S1. Hence some phosphosites occur more than once in our analysis (Fig.1, 2 and Table1, S1-S3).  Subsequently, we filtered for phosphosites for which at least two valid intensities were reported in the biological replicates for at least one time point and treatment. Intensities were normalized by using the ‘subtraction of the most frequent value (position of global maximum) function’ per individual column. Missing intensity values were then imputed from a normal distribution per column using a width of 0.3 and 1.8 downshift to enable statistical analysis. ANOVA analysis was performed to determine statistically differentially regulated phosphosites. Phosphosites having an ANOVA p-value of ≤0.05 were kept and used for subsequent analysis. For generating an expression heat map, we performed Euclidean clustering per row on z-scored data using the complete linkage method in the heatmap.2 function in the package of the statistical software R (https://www.r-project.org/). To obtain the ratios in Table S1 and highest intensities in Table S8, we followed the procedure described above except that intensities were not normalized by subtracting the most frequent value. Log2 intensities were transformed to raw intensity values, and ratios were calculated. Raw files of the unenriched total protein samples were searched against a fasta database containing the Arabidopsis thaliana proteome. Detailed search parameters for Maxquant can be found in Table S7. The Maxquant Label-free quantitation (LFQ) algorithm and matching between runs were enabled (Cox et al., 2014). Reverse hits, contaminants, and proteins only identified by modified peptides were removed. Protein LFQ intensities were log2 transformed, and we filtered for proteins with at least two valid intensities reported in the biological replicates for at least one time point and treatment. Missing intensity values were then imputed from a normal distribution per column using a width of 0.3 and 1.8 downshift to enable statistical analysis. ANOVA analysis (p ≤0.05) was performed to determine differentially regulated proteins (Table S1). To determine protein ratios shown in Table S1, log2 intensities were transformed to raw intensity values.

### Publication Abstract
Plant immunity consists of two arms: pathogen-associated molecular pattern (PAMP)-triggered immunity (PTI), induced by surface-localized receptors, and effector-triggered immunity (ETI), induced by intracellular receptors. Despite the little structural similarity, both receptor types activate similar responses with different dynamics. To better understand phosphorylation events during ETI, we employed a phosphoproteomic screen using an inducible expression system of the bacterial effector avrRpt2 in Arabidopsis thaliana, and identified 109 differentially phosphorylated residues of membrane-associated proteins on activation of the intracellular RPS2 receptor. Interestingly, several RPS2-regulated phosphosites overlap with sites that are regulated during PTI, suggesting that these phosphosites may be convergent points of both signaling arms. Moreover, some of these sites are residues of important defense components, including the NADPH oxidase RBOHD, ABC-transporter PEN3, calcium-ATPase ACA8, noncanonical G&#x3b1; protein XLG2 and H<sup>+</sup> -ATPases. In particular, we found that S343 and S347 of RBOHD are common phosphorylation targets during PTI and ETI. Our mutational analyses showed that these sites are required for the production of reactive oxygen species during both PTI and ETI, and immunity against avirulent bacteria and a virulent necrotrophic fungus. We provide, for the first time, large-scale phosphoproteomic data of ETI, thereby suggesting crucial roles of common phosphosites in plant immunity.

### Keywords
Fungi, Reactive oxygen species, Arabidopsis, Plant immunity, Effectors, Bacteria, Rbohd, Pamps, Protein phosphorylation

### Affiliations
Department of Plant Pathology, University of California, Davis
UC Davis

### Submitter
Thomas Liebrand

### Lab Head
Dr Gitta Coaker
Department of Plant Pathology, University of California, Davis


