### Accession
PXD016256

### Title
Cooperation of the NEIL3 and Fanconi Anemia/BRCA Pathways in Interstrand Crosslink Repair

### Description
The NEIL3 DNA glycosylase is a base excision repair enzyme that excises bulky base lesions from DNA. Although NEIL3 has been shown to unhook interstrand crosslinks (ICL) in Xenopus extracts, how NEIL3 participants in ICL repair in human cells and its corporation with the canonical Fanconi anemia (FA)/BRCA pathway remain unclear. Here we show that the NEIL3 and the FA/BRCA pathways are non-epistatic in psoralen-ICL repair. The NEIL3 pathway is the major pathway for repairing psoralen-ICL, and the FA/BRCA pathway is only activated when NEIL3 is not present. Mechanistically, NEIL3 is recruited to psoralen-ICL in a rapid, PARP-dependent manner. Importantly, the NEIL3 pathway repairs psoralen-ICLs without generating double-strand breaks (DSBs), unlike the FA/BRCA pathway. In addition, we found that the RUVBL1/2 complex physically interact with NEIL3 and function within the NEIL3 pathway in psoralen-ICL repair. Moreover, TRAIP is important for the recruitment of NEIL3 but not FANCD2, and knockdown of TRAIP promotes FA/BRCA pathway activation. Interestingly, TRAIP is non-epistatic with both NEIL3 and FA pathways in psoralen-ICL repair, suggesting that TRAIP may function upstream of the two pathways. Taken together, the NEIL3 pathway is the major pathway to repair psoralen-ICL through a unique DSB-free mechanism in human cells.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T cells were seeded in 15 cm dishes and transfected with NEIL3-eGFP or empty vector. 24 hours after transfection, cells were treated with 10 μM psoralen plus UVA irradiation (0.8 J/cm2) and released to culture for indicated time. Cells were then washed with pre-chilled PBS three times and lysed into the lysis buffer (20 mM HEPES-K+, pH7.6, 0.1 mM KCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 0.2 mM EDTA, 10% glycerol, 0.01% NP-40, 1 mM DTT, 0.2 mM PMSF, 0.5 mM benzamidine, 1 ug/ml each of leupeptin, aprotinin, and pepstatin A) for 30 min at 4 °C. Cell lysates were incubated with GFP-Trap resin (ChromoTek) at 4 °C overnight and the resin was washed with cold lysis buffer four times. The immunoprecipitated NEIL3-eGFP and its binding partners were eluted with SDS elution buffer (2% SDS, 50 mM Tris-Cl-pH 6.8). Samples were prepared by trichloroacetic acid (TCA) precipitation, trypsinized and sent to for mass spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
Inclosed are raw data that directely exported from instrument and have not been processed. The peak files (.mgf files) were extracted from the RAW files.

### Publication Abstract
The NEIL3 DNA glycosylase is a base excision repair enzyme that excises bulky base lesions from DNA. Although NEIL3 has been shown to unhook interstrand crosslinks (ICL) in Xenopus extracts, how NEIL3 participants in ICL repair in human cells and its corporation with the canonical Fanconi anemia (FA)/BRCA pathway remain unclear. Here we show that the NEIL3 and the FA/BRCA pathways are non-epistatic in psoralen-ICL repair. The NEIL3 pathway is the major pathway for repairing psoralen-ICL, and the FA/BRCA pathway is only activated when NEIL3 is not present. Mechanistically, NEIL3 is recruited to psoralen-ICL in a rapid, PARP-dependent manner. Importantly, the NEIL3 pathway repairs psoralen-ICLs without generating double-strand breaks (DSBs), unlike the FA/BRCA pathway. In addition, we found that the RUVBL1/2 complex physically interact with NEIL3 and function within the NEIL3 pathway in psoralen-ICL repair. Moreover, TRAIP is important for the recruitment of NEIL3 but not FANCD2, and knockdown of TRAIP promotes FA/BRCA pathway activation. Interestingly, TRAIP is non-epistatic with both NEIL3 and FA pathways in psoralen-ICL repair, suggesting that TRAIP may function upstream of the two pathways. Taken together, the NEIL3 pathway is the major pathway to repair psoralen-ICL through a unique DSB-free mechanism in human cells.

### Keywords
Neil3, Fanconi anemia, Psoralen interstrand crosslink

### Affiliations
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute Harvard Medical School
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Jia Zhou

### Lab Head
Dr Alan D'Andrea
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute Harvard Medical School


