### Accession
PXD019847

### Title
Blue Native Page based separation of the TNFRSC

### Description
Separation and relative quantification by targeted mass spectrometry of the TNFRSC members pior and after treatment with a generic deubiquitinating enzyme

### Sample Protocol
For the BNPAGE experiments, 50x15cm and 66x15cm dishes, respectively, were used for the -DUB and +DUB condition; cells were stimulated (continuous stimulation) with ~800 ng/ml purified flag-tagged TNFalphafor 10 minutes; cells were washed 2x with ice-cold PBS and ~1 ml lysis buffer (HN Buffer supplemented with 10% Glycerol, 2mM EDTA, 0.5% NP-40/IGEPAL, 400uM Sodium Orthovanadate, protease inhibitors, 10uM PR619 (Abcam)) was added to each dish before cell collection with a cell scraper. Lysis was carried out for 20’ at 4°C on an orbital rotor, and debris was removed by centrifugation at 14000g on a tabletop centrifuge at 4°C. Supernatants were incubated o/n with AntiFlag M2 affinity gel (Sigma-Aldrich). Beads were subsequently washed 2x with lysis buffer and 3x with HN Buffer (50 mM Hepes 150 mM NaCl, pH 7.4) and the TNF-RSC was eluted from beads with 5 mg/ml 3xFlag peptide and the elution was coupled in the one condition with USP21 treatment (0.5 uM; Boston Biochem). 40uL of eluted complex was supplemented with 12 uL of Native Sample Loading Buffer (Invitrogen) and loaded on a NativePage 3-12% Bis-Tris precast protein gel (Invitrogen) for native separation, according to the manufacturer’s instructions, with the following exceptions: Cathode chamber was filled with light blue cathode buffer and native page was running for 3hrs at 4C with a three-step gradient (150-180-200V). Once the run was finished, proteins were stained with SimpleBlue SafeStain (Invitrogen) and proteolyzed with proteaseMAX (Promega) in-gel digestion protocol. To excise 64/76 bands with the same size from a native gel preparation, a custom device constituted by ~100 parallel blades spaced 1 mm from one another was used. Briefly, protein bands were destained, dehydrated, reduced, and alkylated (55 mM IAA) before proteolysis. Digestion was performed in 50uL digestion solution (0.5 ug of trypsin, Promega sequencing grade; 0.1ug Lys-C, Wako; 0.01 proteaseMAX surfactant, Promega in 50mM Ammonium Bicarbonate). After o/n digestion peptides were collected while gel bands were covered with 50% ACN solution for 30 minutes. Peptide solutions generated from the proteolysis and from the treatment of gel slices with 50% ACN were dried and resuspended in 10uL 0.1% FA and 2% ACN.

### Data Protocol
Data Acquisition. Targeted data acquisition (PRM) for the BNPAGE experiments were carried out on an Orbitrap Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) coupled to EasynLC1200 (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated on a Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 (25 cm length; 75 uM diameter) using a 40 minutes gradient from ACN 5% to 37% at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Signal generated from known amounts of the corresponding heavy peptides was measured every 5 runs. Isolation was performed with a quadrupole and the isolation window was set at 1.4Da. A single peptide per protein was fragmented with a collision energy at 30% (HCD) and detected in an Orbitrap using a fill time of 256 ms and a resolution of 120000, with the exception of the iRT peptides, whose spectra were recorded with a resolution of 15000.   BNPAGE. Representative peptides for the TNF-RSC proteins were selected based on the following criteria: proteotypic; few or no known posttranslational modifications; tryptic; good response factor and linearity, as measured by targeted/untargeted MS, and/or reported in peptide atlas (http://www.peptideatlas.org/). All targeted data were quantified using Skyline (version: daily(beta); MacLean et al. 2010). Downstream data analysis was performed in R, and included: (i) standardization; (ii) imputation of missing values (lowest value from the entire data matrix); (iii) detection and correction of outlier measurements, where outliers were defined as data points whose intensities were at least 5-fold lower than the adjacent data points, with the average of which they were replaced; (iv) curve smoothening, using rollmean function in the R package zoo. Both peak-picking and data analyses were independently carried out by RC and FU and results compared for agreement.

### Publication Abstract
Protein-protein interactions (PPIs) represent the main mode of the proteome organization in the cell. In the last decade, several large-scale representations of PPI networks have captured generic aspects of the functional organization of network components but mostly lack the context of cellular states. However, the generation of context-dependent PPI networks is essential for structural and systems-level modeling of biological processes-a goal that remains an unsolved challenge. Here we describe an experimental/computational strategy to achieve a modeling of PPIs that considers contextual information. This strategy defines the composition, stoichiometry, temporal organization, and cellular requirements for the formation of target assemblies. We used this approach to generate an integrated model of the formation principles and architecture of a large signalosome, the TNF-receptor signaling complex (TNF-RSC). Overall, we show that the integration of systems- and structure-level information provides a generic, largely unexplored link between the modular proteome and cellular function.

### Keywords
Bn page tnfrsc prm

### Affiliations
ETH
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich, 8093 Zurich, Switzerland Faculty of Science, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland

### Submitter
Federico Uliana

### Lab Head
Dr Ruedi Aebersold
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich, 8093 Zurich, Switzerland Faculty of Science, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland


