### Accession
PXD002465

### Title
A novel protein coding potential of long intergenic non-coding RNAs (lincRNAs) in the kinetoplastid protozoan parasite Leishmania major

### Description
Leishmania major is a kinetoplastid protozoan parasite which causes the debilitating infectious disease cutaneous leishmaniasis (CL). This disease results in scars and disfiguration of the infected individuals. The L. major genome was the first leishmanial genome to be sequenced in 2005 and this study resulted in the identification of 8,300 protein coding genes. This landmark study paved the way for further sequencing of other leishmanial parasites (L. infantum, L. braziliensis and L. donovani). A recent study provided the glimpse of the global transcriptome of L. major promastigotes. This study identified 1,884 uniquely expressed non-coding RNAs (ncRNA) in L. major. Additionally, we had previously mapped the global proteome of L. major promastigote using a proteogenomic approach which resulted in identification of 3,613 proteins in L. major promastigotes which covered 43% of its proteome. In the present study, we have carried out extensive analysis of the 1,884 novel ncRNAs using a proteogenomic approach to identify their protein coding potential. Our analysis resulted in identification of 10 novel protein coding genes based on peptide data and additional hundreds of proteins coding genes based on homology searches of previously classified ncRNA genes. We have analyzed each of these novel protein coding genes and in the process have improved the genome annotation of L. major on the basis of mass spectrometry derived peptide data and also based on homology.

### Sample Protocol
The L. major promastigote sample was processed for proteomic analysis as described in the previous published research work (PMID: 24937402). Briefly, 1x109 promastigotes were lysed in 0.5% SDS solution post 6 sonication cycles. The lysate was centrifuged at 10,000 rpm for 10 min and the supernatant was used for further proteomic experimentation. Promastigote lysate (200 µg) was resolved using 10% SDS-PAGE and in-gel trypsin digestion (1:20 trypsin) of different protein bands was carried out. The peptide fractions were dried using the vacuum drying process. In addition, 200 µg of lysate was subject to in-solution trypsin digestion (1:15 trypsin). This was followed by strong cation exchange (SCX) chromatography based fractionation of tryptic peptides. These fractions were completely dried and reconstituted in 40 µl of 0.2% formic acid. All the peptide fractions were desalted using C18 tips before mass spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
A non-coding RNA (ncRNA) database (n=1,884) was first created by fetching sequences from Leishmania major strain Fredlin genome data downloaded from TriTrypDB (http://tritrypdb.org/common/downloads/release-9.0/Lmajor/) based on the genome co-ordinates provided in the L. major promastigote RNA-seq study. A three-frame translated ncRNA database (n=47,275) was generated using in-house python scripts and commonly occurring contaminants such as keratins, trypsin and BSA were added to three-frame translated ncRNA databases that were used for MS/MS ion search. The previously generated L. major mass spectrometry data was searched in a database dependent manner using Mascot (version 2.2) and Sequest search engines using Proteome Discoverer (Thermo Scientific, version 1.4) and the data was analyzed. The following search parameters were used for the database dependent searches: a) Proteolytic enzyme used was trypsin (with up to one missed cleavage); b) 20 ppm was set as the peptide mass error tolerance; c) 0.1 Da was set as the fragment mass error tolerance; d) Fixed modification was cysteine carbamindomethylation; e) oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation was included as variable modifications. Peptide data from Mascot and Sequest search algorithms was extracted with 1% false discovery rate (FDR) as threshold using Thermo Proteome Discoverer.

### Publication Abstract
Cutaneous leishmaniasis (CL) is caused by a kinetoplastid protozoan parasite Leishmania major, as a skin ulcer at the site of the sandfly bite. CL is curable and in most cases ulcers heal spontaneously within three to six months leaving a scar and disfiguration. Complete genome of L. major was reported in 2005 at the very initial phase of kinetoplastid parasite genome sequencing project. Presently, L. major genome is most studied and comprehensively annotated genome and therefore, it is being used as a reference genome for annotating recently sequenced Leishmanial genomes. A recent study reporting global transcriptome of L. major promastigotes, identified 1884 uniquely expressed non-coding RNAs (ncRNA) in L. major. In the current study, an in-depth analysis of the 1884 novel ncRNAs was carried out using a proteogenomic approach to identify their protein coding potential. Our analysis resulted in identification of eight novel protein coding genes based on mass spectrometry data. We have analyzed each of these eight novel CDS and in the process have improved the genome annotation of L. major on the basis of mass spectrometry derived peptide data. Although sequenced a decade ago, the improvement in the L. major genome annotation thus is an ongoing process.

### Keywords
Cutaneous leishmaniasis, Proteomics, Gene annotations, Non-coding rna, Protozoan parasite

### Affiliations
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905
McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205 USA

### Submitter
Akhilesh Pandey

### Lab Head
Dr Akhilesh Pandey
McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205 USA


