### Accession
PXD003531

### Title
Proteomics of Primary cells derived from Ovarian Cancer

### Description
We analyzed primary cells derived from patients with ovarian cancer. We compared OSE, FTE and EOC and we use quantitative propeomics followed by WB, IHC, TMA for validation of our findings. We also analyzed the phosphoproteome of OVCAR3.

### Sample Protocol
We started form 700 ug of proteins, enriched (or not) for phophorylated peptides by TiO2-based chromatography, and analyzed the peptide mixture on QExactive and QExavtive-HF from Thermofisher.

### Data Protocol
We used MaxQuant, Perseus, and the Bioconductor pachkage LIMNA in R for data analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Our understanding of the molecular determinants of cancer is still inadequate because of cancer heterogeneity. Here, using epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) as a model system, we analyzed a minute amount of patient-derived epithelial cells from either healthy or cancerous tissues by single-shot mass-spectrometry-based phosphoproteomics. Using a multi-disciplinary approach, we demonstrated that primary cells recapitulate tissue complexity and represent a valuable source of differentially expressed proteins and phosphorylation sites that discriminate cancer from healthy cells. Furthermore, we uncovered kinase signatures associated with EOC. In particular, CDK7 targets were characterized in both EOC primary cells and ovarian cancer cell lines. We showed that CDK7 controls cell proliferation and that pharmacological inhibition of CDK7 selectively represses EOC cell proliferation. Our approach defines the molecular landscape of EOC, paving the way for efficient therapeutic approaches for patients. Finally, we highlight the potential of phosphoproteomics to identify clinically relevant and druggable pathways in cancer.

### Keywords
Primary cells, Ose, Cdk7, Ihc, Fte, Proteomics, Eoc, Ovcar3, Quantitative phosphoproteomics, Ovarian cancer

### Affiliations
Proteomics Program Novo Nordisk Foundation CPR University of Copenhagen Copenhagen Denmark
NNF CPR, University Copenhagen

### Submitter
Chiara Francavilla

### Lab Head
Dr Jesper V. Olsen
Proteomics Program Novo Nordisk Foundation CPR University of Copenhagen Copenhagen Denmark


### SDRF
- organism: Homo sapiens
- organism part: ascites, distal fallopian tube epithelium, ovarian surface epithelium, not applicable
- cell type: epithelial cells
- disease: high grade serous ovarian cancer, normal, epithelial ovarian cancer
- Comment[instrument: Q Exactive, Q Exactive HF-X
- Comment[label: label free sample
- Comment[modification parameters: Carbamidomethyl
- Comment[modification parameters: oxidation
- Comment[modification parameters: not aplicable, Phospho
- Comment[modification parameters: deamidation
- Comment[modification parameters: Acetyl

