### Accession
PXD017441

### Title
Comparative Proteomics of Root Apex and Root Elongation Zones Provides Insights into Molecular Mechanisms for Drought Stress and Recovery Adjustment in Switchgrass

### Description
Switchgrass plants were grown in a Sandwich tube system to induce gradual drought stress by withholding watering. After 29 days, leaf photosynthetic rate decreased significantly, compared to the control plants which were watered regularly. The drought-treated plants recovered to the same leaf water content after three days of re-watering. Root tip (1cm basal fragment, designated as RT1 hereafter) and the elongation/maturation zone (the next upper 1 cm tissue, designated as RT2 hereafter) tissues were collected at the 29th day of drought stress treatment, (named SDT for severe drought treated), one (D1W) and three days (D3W) of re-watering. The tandem mass tags mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteomics analysis was performed to identify the proteomes, and drought-induced differentially expressed proteins (DEPs). From RT1 tissues, 6,156, 7,687 and 7,699 proteins were quantified, and 296, 535 and 384 DEPs were identified in the SDT, D1W and D3W samples, respectively. From RT2 tissues, 7,382, 7,255 and 6,883 proteins were quantified, and 393, 587 and 321 proteins DEPs were identified in the SDT, D1W and D3W samples. Between RT1 and RT2 tissues, very few DEPs overlapped at SDT, but the number of such proteins increased during the recovery phase. A large number of hydrophilic proteins and stress-responsive proteins were induced during SDT and remained at a higher level during the recovery stages. A large number of DEPs in RT1 tissues maintained the same expression pattern throughout drought treatment and the recovery phases. The DEPs in RT1 tissues were classified in cell proliferation, mitotic cell division, and chromatin modification, and those in RT2 were placed in cell wall remodeling and cell expansion processes. This study provided information pertaining to root zone-specific proteome changes during drought and recover phases, which will allow us to choose the proteins (genes) as better defined targets for developing drought tolerant plants.

### Sample Protocol
Switchgrass ‘Alamo’ seeds were surface disinfected in 50% bleach followed by 3x DI water rinse. Seeds germinated in boxes partially filled with water and placed in an incubator shaker 25 ºC for 3D. 1 cm radicals transferred into seed cubes. Seedlings grown to the three-leaf stage and transplanted into the “sandwich” drought treatment system and maintained in greenhouse. The moisture content of the growing medium was maintained.  2 wks post transplant, root length was evaluated each 3D. 3 plants per replicate group selected, randomly. Once roots reached the perlite layer, drought treatment initiated by withholding water to these test plants. The control groups received normal watering. Drought treatment plants were grown in triplicate. One set of the treatment plants were harvested as the SDT group. Remaining 2 sets were used to study plant responses. 3 bio reps were set up for every treatment group (control, SDT, D1W and D3W); and a single replicate was conducted in 10 tubes each growing two plants. Distal root tips and distal end of elongation zone were measured using a scale, and sampled. The next 1cm long root tissues representing the elongation/maturation zone (RT2) were harvested. Each root section was flash frozen in LN2 and stored at -80 ºC until protein extraction.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified using the MS data to query the switchgrass annotated database (http://www.phytozome.net/search.php?show=t ext&org=Org_Pvirgatum_v1. 1) via Mascot v2.3.02 (Matrix Sciences, Boston MA).For a protein to be included in the quantitative analysis, it was required that at least two unique peptides be identified in all six biological samples. The intensities of reporter ions of constituent peptides were log2-transformed and subjected to t-test (general linear model procedure). The adjusted p value for each protein was obtained after false discovery rate (FDR) test of the raw p values of all the proteins [28-30]. The log2 transformed abundance ratios were then fit to a normal distribution. Two standard deviations (i.e., a 95% confidence level) of the log2 fold transformed protein abundance ratios (treated/control) with an adjusted FDR p ≤ 0.05 were used as the cut off for Al-induced differentially expressed proteins (DEPs). The ratio of log2 fold value of proteins were transformed using the antilog function and reported as the drought-induced protein fold changes (fold (T/C)). Statistical analyses were performed using SAS (version 9.3; SAS Institute, Cary, NC, USA) [23,30,34]

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Root-tip zone-specific quantitative proteomics; drought; cell proliferation; cell wall remodeling; hydrophilic proteins; stress proteins; phytohormones.

### Affiliations
USDA-ARS

### Submitter
Kevin Howe

### Lab Head
Dr Ted Thannhauser
USDA-ARS


