### Accession
PXD006601

### Title
Results of the 3 times mass spectrometry experiments of YAP interacted proteins in liver cancer cells.

### Description
To determine the identities of the proteins co-purified with YAP and find new YAP-interacted transcription factors , we performed 3 times mass spectrometry experiments.

### Sample Protocol
The corresponding protein bands in the Coomassie Brilliant blue gel were excised and in-gel digested with trypsin. The tryptic peptide digests of the proteins were analyzed using a Capillary Electrophoresis/Nano-liquid chromatography (Nano-LC) system coupled with a Quadrupole-Time-of-Flight Mass Spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics, Leipzig, Germany).

### Data Protocol
An internal MASCOT 2.4.1 server (Matrix Science, Boston, MA, USA; http://www.matrixscience.com/) using the Swiss-Prot database was applied to identify peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Although YAP-dependent transcription is closely associated with liver tumorigenesis, the mechanism by which YAP maintains its function is poorly understood. Here, we show that TFCP2 is required for YAP-dependent transcription and liver malignancy. Mechanistically, YAP function is stimulated by TFCP2 via a WW-PSY interaction. TFCP2 also maintains YAP stability by inhibiting &#x3b2;TrCP. Notably, genomic co-occupancy of YAP and TFCP2 is revealed. TFCP2 acts as a transcription co-factor that stimulates YAP transcription by facilitating YAP binding with YAP binding motif (YBF)-containing transcription factors. Interestingly, TFCP2 also stimulated the YAP-TEAD interaction and TEAD target gene expression. Finally, several genes co-regulated by YAP and TFCP2 that contribute to YAP-dependent tumorigenesis are identified and verified. Thus, we establish a model showing that TFCP2 acts as a YAP co-factor to maintain YAP-dependent transcription in liver cancer cells, suggesting that simultaneous targeting of both YAP and TFCP2 may be an effective therapeutic approach.

### Keywords
Liver cancer, Yap, Tfcp2

### Affiliations
Tongji University 
Shanghai tenth people of Tongji University

### Submitter
Xiao Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Fenyong Sun
Shanghai tenth people of Tongji University


