### Accession
PXD016761

### Title
Distinct transcriptomic and proteomic profile specifies heart failure patients with potential of myocardial recovery upon circulatory support and mechanical unloading

### Description
Phosphoproteomic Analysis of LVAD assisted human heart samples.

### Sample Protocol
Cardiac Tissue Lysis for Phosphoproteomics: Frozen heart samples were placed in lysis buffer [100 mM Tris (pH7.6), 4% Sodium Dodecyl Sulfate, 100 mM Dithiothreitol, supplemented with protease inhibitors (Roche) and phosphatase inhibitor (1 mM NaF)] based on the mass of the tissue size (10 μL per 1 mg tissue). Samples were kept on a -20°C insulator at all times during lysis and homogenized using a tip sonicator with 10 sec pulses at 45% amplitude. Pulses were repeated until all tissue was completely homogenized (3-6 times). Between pulses, samples rested at -20°C. Lysed samples were then incubated at 100°C for 5 minutes to aid in the denaturing process and then allowed to cool and sonicated for 3X 10 sec cycles at 25% amplitude. Samples were clarified by centrifugation at 16,000×g for 15 min. Protein Digestion: Samples were diluted with 10 mL UA buffer (8M urea, 0.1M Tris/HCl, pH 8.5) and loaded onto a Vivaspin 30,000 MWCO Hydrosart Membrane (Sartorius, #VS15RH22) and centrifuged at 6,000×g at 25°C until concentrated to 1 mL. Samples were washed with an additional 5 mL of UA buffer and concentrated to 0.5 mL at 6000×g. Samples were then carbamidomethylated with 2 mL of UA buffer plus 50mM iodoacetamide for 1 hr in the dark, and then spun at 6000×g at 25°C until concentrated to 0.5 mL. Samples were then washed twice with 5 mL of UA buffer and concentrated to a final volume of less than 1.5 mL followed by two washes of 5 mL of ammonium bicarbonate solution (0.05M ammonium bicarbonate [Sigma, #101240595] in UA buffer) and concentrated to a volume of less than 1.5 mL. Protein concentration was measured using the BCA (bicinchoninic acid) protein assay (Pierce) and trypsin (Promega) was added at 1:100 enzyme to protein ratio in a final volume of 2.5 mL and incubated for 12 hrs at 37°C. Peptides were collected by centrifugation at 6000×g and filters washed twice with 1 mL of mass spec grade water (Fisher, Optima LC/MS #W6-4).  Desalting: C18 SPE cartridges (Waters, WAT054945) were prepared by washing with methanol, 0.1% TFA/70% acetonitrile, and then 0.1% TFA (2 mL each). Peptide solutions were acidified with TFA to a final concentration of 0.1% and placed on a prepared C18 SPE cartridge and allowed to drip by gravity. Cartridges were then washed with 2 mL 0.1% TFA. Peptides were then eluted in 2 mL (70% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA) and evaporated to 20 μL using a vacuum centrifuge. Samples were then brought to a final volume of 100 μL in 0.1% TFA and concentrations determined by 280 nm abs on a spectrophotometer. Phosphopeptide Enrichment: Titanium dioxide (TiO2) beads (GL Sciences, 5020-75000) were prepared for each sample at a 9:1 ratio of mg of TiO2 beads to peptides and resuspended in 2:1 ratio in 3% (m/v) Dihydroxybenzoic acid (DHB) in 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA] to μg of beads. Peptide solutions were brought to 500 μL using 30% acetonitrile, 0.3% TFA, 150 mg/ml DHB with 1/3 volume of bead mixture and allowed to incubate for 30 min at room temperatures. Beads were collected by centrifugation at 5000×g for 3 min. Supernatants were removed and subjected to 2 more rounds of bead incubation. All beads were collected and combined. Beads were washed with 3 rounds of 800 μl of 30% acetonitrile and 3% TFA (v/v) for 15 min by vortex then centrifuge at 5000×g for 3 min, follow by three rounds of 800 µl of 80% acetonitrile and 0.3% TFA (v/v) for 15 min by vortex then centrifuge at 5000×g for 3 min. Beads were then loaded into a 200 μL tip with a glass microfiber stage filter and spun at 2000×g for 3 minutes to remove all wash buffer. Tips were transferred to a new tube and peptides eluted with two rounds 100 μl of 40% acetonitrile/1M ammonium hydroxide at 500×g for 10 min. Samples were then concentrated on a vacuum centrifuge to 10 μL and reconstituted in 60 μL of 0.1% TFA.

### Data Protocol
Mass Spectrometry Data Analyses: The resulting spectra were analyzed using MaxQuant 1.5.5.1 against the UniprotKB human database. Database search engine parameters were as follows: trypsin digestion, two missed cleavages, precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 0.5 Da, and dynamic carbamidomethylation (C), oxidation (M), deamidation (N,Q)  and phosphorylation (S,T,Y). The false discovery rate (FDR) was 1% and modified peptides had a minimum Andromeda score of 40. The resulting 15,816 identified phosphopeptides were filtered to only include those identified in at least 50% of either non-responder, responder, and donor control samples, resulting in 2,023 phosphopeptides. Peptide intensity were log transformed and missing values were imputated with Perseus 1.5.6.0 and then normalized using the normalizeQuantiles function in the Limma library using R. Statistical analyses were performed on the resulting quantifications using Perseus software package. Enrichment of phosphopeptides from mass spectrometry samples was calculated as a ratio of phosphopeptides over all peptides identified.  Mass Spectrometry Bioinformatics Analyses: Normalized log2 intensities of phosphopeptides were used in statistical comparisons of groups: Student’s two sample t-test was used for comparisons between two samples and ANOVA was used in comparisons between three groups. Both statistical analyses were performed in Perseus 1.5.6.0. Proteins with differentially phosphorylated peptides were then chosen (p-value < 0.01 and fold change more than 1.5) and submitted to DAVID 6.7 functional annotation tool for enrichment analysis in Gene Ontology, KEGG, and Biocarta databases. Entries with p-value less than 0.01 were selected for subsequent analysis. Principal component analysis (PCA) was performed in Perseus software and values for the first three components were submitted to OriginLab software (OriginLab, Northampton, Massachusetts, USA) to generate 3D PCA plots. Venn diagrams for comparisons of this data to previously published data were generated in Venny 2.0 software by submitting gene lists into the program. Heat map for comparison between heart failure and donors was generated in Perseus Software with unsupervised clustering using Euclidean distances with average linkage. Heat map for comparison of all peptides between responders and non-responders was generated in MetaboAnalyst 3.0 online software; heat maps for individual pathways were generated in Perseus using average of fold change of each group compared to an average of donor in Cytoscape 3.7.1.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Heart, Human, Phosphoproteomics

### Affiliations
CVRTI, University of Utah
University of Utah

### Submitter
Aman Makaju

### Lab Head
Dr Sarah Franklin
CVRTI, University of Utah


