### Accession
PXD015442

### Title
Rat plasma proteomics using single-shot proteomics

### Description
label free quantitative proteomic analysis on the submitted samples using abundant protein removal, solution digestion with trypsin, 3hr LC-MS/MS, data analysis and reporting

### Sample Protocol
10µL of each plasma sample was depleted using Proteome Purify 2 Mouse Serum Protein Immunodepletion Resin (R&D Systems, Catalog no. MIDR002-020) according to manufacturer’s protocol. Depleted samples were buffer exchanged into water on a Corning Spin X 5kD molecular weight cut off spin column and quantified by Qubit fluorometry (Life Technologies). 50µg of each sample was reduced with dithiothreitol, alkylated with iodoacetamide and digested overnight with trypsin (Promega). The digestion was terminated with formic acid. Samples were deslated using a 3M Empore C18.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed with MaxQuant version 1.6.0.13 (Max Planck Institute for Biochemistry, Tyanova et al. “The MaxQuant computational platform for mass spectrometry–based shotgun proteomics” Nature Protocols 2016) which incorporates the Andromeda search engine. MaxQuant performs the following tasks:  1. Recalibration of MS data 2. Protein/peptide identification using the Andromeda database search engine 3. Filtering of database search results at the 1% protein and peptide false discovery (FDR) 4. Protein Quantitation.  The Andromeda settings were as follows: Enzyme: Trypsin/P Database: Uniprot Rat Fixed modification: Carbamidomethyl (C) Variable modifications: Acetyl (Protein N-term), Oxidation (M),  Missed cleavages: 2 Second peptide: TRUE Match Between Runs: TRUE LFQ: TRUE  The MaxQuant output was further processed using Perseus 1.6.2.3 (Max Planck Institute for Biochemistry, Tyanova et al. “The Perseus computational platform for comprehensive analysis of (prote)omics data” Nature Methods 2016)).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rat, Plasam, Single-shot

### Affiliations
Cytosorbents

### Submitter
Karl-Gustav Ruggberg

### Lab Head
Dr Karl-Gustav Ruggeberg
Cytosorbents


