### Accession
PXD033003

### Title
Infection signaling and antimicrobial wound care in a predatory ant

### Description
Infected wounds pose a major mortality risk in animals. Injuries are particularly common in the ant Megaponera analis which raids pugnacious prey. Here we show that M. analis can determine when wounds are infected and treat them specifically. By applying a variety of antimicrobial compounds and proteins secreted from the metapleural gland to infected wounds workers reduce the mortality of infected individuals by 90%. Chemical analyses showed that wound infection is associated with specific changes in the cuticular hydrocarbon profile thereby likely allowing nestmates to diagnose the infection state of injured individuals and apply the appropriate antimicrobial treatment. This study demonstrates that the targeted use of antimicrobials to treat infected wounds, previously thought to be a uniquely human behavior, has evolved in insect societies as well.

### Sample Protocol
The samples for the proteomic analysis were collected directly in the Comoé National Park (Ivory Coast) from wild colonies in April 2020. In total three types of samples were collected: Secretory: dissection of the secretory cells without the atrium, a total of 5 such dissections were pooled per sample (n=6); Hemolymph: using a glass microcapillary, hemolymph was collected from the thorax by creating a small wound to allow the hemolymph to flow, a total of 4-5 μl were collected from 5 individuals per sample (n=6); Atrium: due to the difficulty of collecting pure MG Content we chose to first widen the opening of the atrium and add 1 μl of PBS before extracting the content together with the PBS, we pooled the content of 5 individuals per sample (n=6). The samples were kept at -23°C in Low bind Eppendorf tubes with 5μl of PBS together with a 1x Protease inhibitor Cocktail (Sigmafast) during transportation. Once in Lausanne, Switzerland, the samples were kept at -80 °C and processed swiftly.  Proteins were digested according to a modified version of the iST protocol. Samples were resuspended in 20 μl of modified iST buffer (1% sodium deoxycholate, 10 mM DTT, 100mM Tris pH 8.6) and heated at 95°C for 5 minutes. They were then diluted with 24μl of 4mM MgCl2 and 1:100 of benzonase in H2O and incubated 15 min at ambient temperature. 14μl of 160 mM chloroacetamide (in 10 mM Tris pH 8.6) were then added and cysteines were alkylated for 45 minutes at 25°C in the dark. After addition of 0.5 M EDTA (3mM final concentration), samples were digested with 0.1 μg of trypsin/Lys-C mix (Promega) at 37°C for 1 hour, followed by a second enzyme addition (0.1 μg trypsin/LysC) and 1h incubation. Two volumes of isopropanol + 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) were added to one volume of sample and loaded onto an equilibrated OASIS MCX uElution plate (Waters) prefilled with SCX0 buffer (20% MeCN, 0.5% formic acid) and centrifuged. The columns were washed three times with 200 μl isopropanol + 1% TFA and once with 200μl HPLC solvent A (2% MeCN, 0.1% formic acid). The peptide mixture was then sequentially eluted with 150 μl SCX125 buffer (20% MeCN, 0.5% formic acid, 125 mM ammonium acetate), 150 μl SCX500 buffer (20%MeCN, 0.5% formic acid, 500 mM ammonium acetate), and lastly with 150 μl basic elution buffer (80% MeCN, 19% water, 1% NH3). Tryptic peptides fractions were dried and resuspended in 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid, 2% (v/v) acetonitrile, for mass spectrometry analyses. Tryptic peptide mixtures were injected on an Ultimate RSLC 3000 nanoHPLC system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) interfaced to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Peptides were loaded onto a trapping microcolumn Acclaim PepMap100 C18 (20 mm x 100 μm ID, 5 μm, 100Å, Thermo Scientific) before separation on a reversed-phase custom packed nanocolumn (75 μm ID × 40 cm, 1.8 μm particles, Reprosil Pur, Dr. Maisch). A flow rate of 0.25 μl/min was used with a gradient from 4 to 76% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid (total time: 65 min). Full survey scans were performed at a 120’000 resolution, and a top speed precursor selection strategy was applied to maximize acquisition of peptide tandem MS spectra with a maximum cycle time of 0.6s. HCD fragmentation mode was used at a normalized collision energy of 32%, with a precursor isolation window of 1.6 m/z, and MS/MS spectra were acquired in the ion trap. Peptides selected for MS/MS were excluded from further fragmentation during 60s.

### Data Protocol
Tandem MS data were processed by the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.14.0) incorporating the Andromeda search engine. A custom-made protein database containing 19’618 sequences of Megaponera analis (July 2019 version), supplemented with sequences of common contaminants was used. Trypsin (cleavage at K,R) was used as the enzyme definition, allowing 2 missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification. N-terminal acetylation of protein and oxidation of methionine were specified as variable modifications. All identifications were filtered at 1% FDR at both the peptide and protein levels with default MaxQuant parameters. For protein quantitation the iBAQ values were used. MaxQuant data were further processed with Perseus software (version 1.6.14.0) for filtering, log2-transformation and normalization of values and ortholog annotations. To determine which proteins are secreted by the MG, we proceeded through a series of filters. Proteins not found in the atrium samples were eliminated and those found only in the MG atrium were considered hits. The log2 fold change between the atrium and the hemolymph were determined for all remaining proteins. Only proteins that were on average 1.5-fold more abundant in atrium samples than hemolymph were retained as hits. Percent of total iBAQ per sample was assigned to each protein to indicate abundance.

### Publication Abstract
Infected wounds pose a major mortality risk in animals. Injuries are common in the ant Megaponera analis, which raids pugnacious prey. Here we show that M. analis can determine when wounds are infected and treat them accordingly. By applying a variety of antimicrobial compounds and proteins secreted from the metapleural gland to infected wounds, workers reduce the mortality of infected individuals by 90%. Chemical analyses showed that wound infection is associated with specific changes in the cuticular hydrocarbon profile, thereby likely allowing nestmates to diagnose the infection state of injured individuals and apply the appropriate antimicrobial treatment. This study demonstrates that M. analis ant societies use antimicrobial compounds produced in the metapleural glands to treat infected wounds and reduce nestmate mortality.

### Keywords
Antimicrobial, Metapleural gland, Ants, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
University of Lausanne
Department of Ecology and Evolution, Biophore, University of Lausanne, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland

### Submitter
Patrice Waridel

### Lab Head
Dr Erik Frank
Department of Ecology and Evolution, Biophore, University of Lausanne, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland


