### Accession
PXD007215

### Title
Analysis of Substrate Specificity of Trypanosoma brucei OSTs by Functional Expression in Yeast

### Description
N-linked protein glycosylation is an essential and highly conserved post-translational modification in eukaryotes. The transfer of a glycan from a lipid-linked oligosaccharide (LLO) donor to asparagine residues of nascent polypeptide chains is catalyzed by the oligosaccharyltransferase (OST) in the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). Trypanosoma brucei encodes three paralogue single protein OSTs called TbSTT3A, TbSTT3B and TbSTT3C that can functionally complement the Saccharomyces cerevisiae OST. We characterized the LLO and polypeptide specificity of all three OST isoforms in the heterologous expression host S. cerevisiae. We demonstrated that TbSTT3A accepted LLO substrates ranging from Man5GlcNAc2 to Man7GlcNAc2. In contrast, TbSTT3B required Man6GlcNAc2 to Glc3Man9GlcNAc2 structures while TbSTT3C did not display any LLO preference. We identified regions within different OST proteins that influence the specificity towards the LLO and polypeptide substrate.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were grown at 25°C in synthetic complete medium (0.67% (w/v) yeast nitrogen base, 2% (w/v) glucose with appropriate amino acid supplements) containing either 20 mg/l light [12C6/14N2] L-lysine and [12C6] L-arginine or heavy [13C6/15N2] L-lysine and [13C6] L-arginine (Cambridge Isotope laboratories). Cells were harvested in early log phase (OD600nm = 0.8-1.2) by centrifugation and mixed 1:1 (w/w) for membrane protein preparation. Membrane proteins were prepared as described (45). Shortly, cells were lysed and microsomal fractions were collected by high spin centrifugation at 16,000xg, 4°C for 20 min.  Proteins were processed using the filter-assisted sample preparation (FASP) protocol (46). After reduction and alkylation, proteins were digested with Lys-C (20 µg/ml; Wako Pure Chemical, Richmond, VA) and trypsin (20 µg/ml; Promega)  endopeptidases. Protein digestion was directly followed by EndoH (500 U; New England BioLabs) endoglycosidase treatment.  Peptides were desalted using C18 ZipTips (Millipore) and dried using speed vacuum. Desalted peptides were resuspended in ACN/H2O (3:97 (v/v)) with formic acid (FA; 0.1% (v/v)) and analyzed by LC-ESI-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Skyline software (v2.6.0) with standard settings was used for data processing (47). Briefly, raw MS data files were imported and the peaks were manually inspected and adjusted to ensure proper peak picking and peak integration. The resulting light to heavy intensity ratio (L/H) for glyco-peptides modified with HexNAc was used to calculate the relative site occupancy for the given peptide/ glycosylation site. The relative site occupancy was normalized for expression differences between heavy labelled reference wild type strain (H) and the TbSTT3 expressing light strains (L) by dividing the L/H intensity ratio for the occupied glyco-peptide by the median of L/H intensity ratios reported for all non-glyco (i.e. not containing a NxT/S sequon) peptides from the same protein as the glyco peptide. Cluster analysis was performed with Cluster 3.0 software (library version 1.50) (48, 49) using the Spearman rank correlation to calculate similarity between site occupancy data for different TbSTT3s. Hierarchical clustering with the single linkage method was used to generate a dendrogram visualized with Java TreeView 1.1.6 software. Statistical tests used to analyse significant differences indicated in the respective figure legends were performed using T-test in Microsoft Excel.

### Publication Abstract
<i>N</i>-Linked protein glycosylation is an essential and highly conserved post-translational modification in eukaryotes. The transfer of a glycan from a lipid-linked oligosaccharide (LLO) donor to the asparagine residue of a nascent polypeptide chain is catalyzed by an oligosaccharyltransferase (OST) in the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). <i>Trypanosoma brucei</i> encodes three paralogue single-protein OSTs called <i>Tb</i>STT3A, <i>Tb</i>STT3B, and <i>Tb</i>STT3C that can functionally complement the <i>Saccharomyces cerevisiae</i> OST, making it an ideal experimental system to study the fundamental properties of OST activity. We characterized the LLO and polypeptide specificity of all three <i>Tb</i>OST isoforms and their chimeric forms in the heterologous expression host <i>S. cerevisiae</i> where we were able to apply yeast genetic tools and newly developed glycoproteomics methods. We demonstrated that <i>Tb</i>STT3A accepted LLO substrates ranging from Man<sub>5</sub>GlcNAc<sub>2</sub> to Man<sub>7</sub>GlcNAc<sub>2</sub> In contrast, <i>Tb</i>STT3B required more complex precursors ranging from Man<sub>6</sub>GlcNAc<sub>2</sub> to Glc<sub>3</sub>Man<sub>9</sub>GlcNAc<sub>2</sub> structures, and <i>Tb</i>STT3C did not display any LLO preference. Sequence differences between the isoforms cluster in three distinct regions. We have swapped the individual regions between different OST proteins and identified region 2 to influence the specificity toward the LLO and region 1 to influence polypeptide substrate specificity. These results provide a basis to further investigate the molecular mechanisms and contribution of single amino acids in OST interaction with its substrates.

### Keywords
Glycosylation occupancy analysis, N-linked glycosylation, Trypanosoma brucei, Lipid linked oligosaccharide specificity, Oligosaccharyltransferase

### Affiliations
ETH Zurich
ETH Zurich, Institute of Microbiology, Zurich, Switzerland

### Submitter
Kristina Poljak

### Lab Head
Dr Markus Aebi
ETH Zurich, Institute of Microbiology, Zurich, Switzerland


