### Accession
PXD018766

### Title
Proteome of primary, CRISPR/CAS9 modified mouse CD4+ T cells

### Description
We analyzed the total proteome of CD4+ T cells isolated from WT mice, and cultured to perform a CRISPR/CAS9 edition of their genome, in order to introduce an OST sequence at the C-terminus of proteins of interest (LAT or UBASH3A, n=6 biological replicates in each case). Control CD4+ T cells , isolated and cultured in the same way, but not modified by CRISPR/CAS9, were also analyzed (CT, n=6 biological replicates), as well as CD4+ T cells which have undergone a smaller number of expansion cycles than long term CD4+ T cells (WT, n=2 biological replicates). Each sample was analyzed once by single run naoLC-MS, resulting in 20 raw files.

### Sample Protocol
For proteome analysis, cell pellets (5 x 106 cells) corresponding each type of CD4+ T cells (Lat-OST, Ubash3a-OST, CT, WT) were incubated with 150 μl of lysis buffer containing Tris 50 mM, pH 7.5, EDTA 0.5 mM, NaCl 135 mM, SDS 1% for 10 min on ice and subjected to sonication with a Bioruptor ultrasonicator. Protein concentration was determined using a detergent compatible assay (DC assay, Bio-Rad) and an aliquot of 100µg of each sample was migrated briefly on SDS–PAGE gel and processed for in-gel digestion. Tryptic peptides were resuspended in 125 µl of 2% acetonitrile and 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid and analyzed by nano-liquid chromatography (LC) coupled to tandem MS, using an UltiMate 3000 system (NCS-3500RS Nano/Cap System; Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Q Exactive HFX mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Five microliters of each sample were loaded on a C18 precolumn (300 µm inner diameter × 5 mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) in a solvent made of 2% acetonitrile and 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid, at a flow rate of 20 µl/min. After 5 min of desalting, the precolumn was switched online with the analytical C18 column (75 µm inner diameter × 50 cm, Acclaim PepMap C18, 2 µM, Thermo Fisher Scientific) equilibrated in 95% solvent A (5% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid) and 5% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid). Peptides were eluted using a 10%-45% gradient of solvent B over 120min at a flow rate of 350 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode with the Xcalibur software.  MS survey scans were acquired with a resolution of 60,000 and an AGC target of 3e6. The 12 most intense ions were selected for fragmentation by high-energy collision induced dissociation, and the resulting fragments were analyzed at a resolution of 15000, using an AGC target of 1e5 and a maximum fill time of 22ms. Dynamic exclusion was used within 30 s to prevent repetitive selection of the same peptide

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were processed with MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3.30) for database search with the Andromeda search engine against Mus musculus entries in the Swissprot protein database (release UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot 2015_05, 16711 entries), plus the set of common contaminants provided by MaxQuant. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification, whereas oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Specificity of trypsin digestion was set for cleavage after K or R. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the first search and 4.5 ppm for the main Andromeda database search. The mass tolerance in tandem MS mode was set to 20 ppm. Minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids, and minimum number of unique or razor peptides was set to one.  Andromeda results were validated by the target decoy approach using a reverse database at both a peptide and protein false-discovery rate of 1% at both PSM and protein level. For label-free relative quantification of the proteins across stimulation time points, the match between runs option of MaxQuant was enabled with a match time window of 1 min, to allow cross-assignment of MS features detected in the different runs, after alignment of the runs with a time window of 20min. Protein quantification was based on unique peptides. The minimum ratio count was set to 1 for LFQ calculation, and computation of the iBAQ metric was also enabled.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Whole cell lysate, Primary cd4+ t cell, Crispr/cas9, Proteome

### Affiliations
Institute of Pharmacology and Structural Biology, CNRS, Toulouse
CNRS/IPBS

### Submitter
Anne Gonzalez de Peredo

### Lab Head
Dr Odile Burlet-Schiltz
Institute of Pharmacology and Structural Biology, CNRS, Toulouse


