### Accession
PXD025552

### Title
A FOXN1 mutation competitively displaces wild-type FOXN1 from higher-order nuclear condensates to cause immunodeficiency

### Description
The transcription factor FOXN1 is a master regulator of thymic epithelial cell development and function. Here we demonstrate that FOXN1 expression is differentially regulated during organogenesis and participates in multi-molecular nuclear condensates essential for the factor's transcriptional activity. FOXN1's C-terminal sequence regulates the diffusion velocity within these aggregates and modulates the binding to proximal gene regulatory regions. These dynamics are significantly altered in a patient's FOXN1 mutant modified in its C-terminal sequence. This mutant is transcriptionally inactive and acts as a dominant negative factor displacing wild-type FOXN1 from condensates and causing athymia and severe lymphopenia in heterozygotes. Expression of the mutated mouse ortholog, Foxn1, selectively impairs mouse thymic epithelial cell (TEC) differentiation, revealing a gene dose dependency for individual TEC subtypes. We have therefore identified the cause for a primary immunodeficiency disease and determined the mechanism by which this FOXN1 gain-of-function mutant mediates its dominant negative effect.

### Sample Protocol
4D6 cells were transfected with constructs encoding either wild-type-FLAG or Δ550-FLAG sequences. Three experimental replicates were prepared for each experimental condition. Cells were lysed and anti-FLAG immunoprecipitation was performed as described above. To confirm the presence of proteins other than FOXN1, a fraction of the sample was analysed by silver staining (PierceTM silver staining kit, Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer's recommendations. For the mass spectrometric analysis, frozen samples were thawed and subjected to two rounds of chloroform/methanol precipitation.  An in-solution trypsin digestion was performed as previously described [57]. After digestion and desalting, samples were resuspended in 20μL 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid and subjected to nano-flow liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS, here referred to as MS). LC MS/MS analysis was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Ultimate 3000 nUPLC with an EASY-Spray column (50 cm). Peptides were separated using a solvent gradient of 2-35% Acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid/5% DMSO over 60 minutes. MS data was acquired using a method to also cater for DSSO crosslinked peptides. Briefly, precursor masses were acquired with a resolution of 60000 for up to 50 ms. MS2 were acquired in the Orbitrap after CID fragmentation. A mass difference of 31.9721 triggered subsequent MS3 scans with increased collision energy (25% to 35% and detection in the linear ion trap in rapid mode followed by an MS2 scan after ETD fragmentation and detection in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 15000.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS data were processed with  Progenesis QI for Proteomics v. 4.1.6675.48614 to generate label-free relative quantitation. MS/MS spectra were searched against a SwissProt Homo sapiens database (retrieved 05/2018) with precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 0.5Da using Proteome Discoverer 3.5 including the XLinkX node (ref https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30446747/). Variable modifications were set as Oxidation on methionine and the DSSO water and Tris quench monoadducts on Lysine.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Forkhead box n1 transcription factor, Immunodeficiency, Thymus

### Affiliations
Department of Paediatrics and the Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Philip Charles

### Lab Head
Dr Georg Hollander
Department of Paediatrics and the Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.


