### Accession
PXD001583

### Title
CoIP of Nrl1 from normal and irradiated fission yeast cells

### Description
Nrl1-associated proteins were isolated from wild-type cells untreated or exposed to 100Gy of ionising radiation, and then subjected to LC-MSMS analysis. Identifications were carried out using trypsin as protease.

### Sample Protocol
Glycin elution of CoIP, in-solution digest with trypsin, LC-MS/MS analysis on a nano RSLC-QExactive system, 1 hour gradient

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant 1.5.1.2, tryptic specificity allowing 2 MC, variable mod: oxMet and N-term protein acetylation, carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification, 4.5 ppm precursor tolernace, 20 ppm fragment ion tolerance, 1% FDR filtering on peptide and protein level

### Publication Abstract
The formation of RNA-DNA hybrids, referred to as R-loops, can promote genome instability and cancer development. Yet the mechanisms by which R-loops compromise genome instability are poorly understood. Here, we establish roles for the evolutionarily conserved Nrl1 protein in pre-mRNA splicing regulation, R-loop suppression and in maintaining genome stability. nrl1&#x394; mutants exhibit endogenous DNA damage, are sensitive to exogenous DNA damage, and have defects in homologous recombination (HR) repair. Concomitantly, nrl1&#x394; cells display significant changes in gene expression, similar to those induced by DNA damage in wild-type cells. Further, we find that nrl1&#x394; cells accumulate high levels of R-loops, which co-localize with HR repair factors and require Rad51 and Rad52 for their formation. Together, our findings support a model in which R-loop accumulation and subsequent DNA damage sequesters HR factors, thereby compromising HR repair at endogenously or exogenously induced DNA damage sites, leading to genome instability.

### Keywords
Splicesosome, Fission yeast, Dna repair

### Affiliations
Max F. Perutz Laboratories, Mass Spectrometry Facility, University of Vienna
Max Perutz Labs, Mass Spectrometry Facility, University of Vienna

### Submitter
Dorothea Anrather

### Lab Head
Dr Markus Hartl
Max F. Perutz Laboratories, Mass Spectrometry Facility, University of Vienna


