### Accession
PXD030463

### Title
Label-free quantitative proteome of AML CD34+ and mobilized PB CD34+ cells

### Description
The label-free quantitative proteome was generated for 42 primary AML patient samples enriched for CD34+ cells (or mononuclear cells in the case of NPMcyt sameples) and as controls 6 mobilized peripheral blood CD34+ cells were included. Furthermore, 6 AML cell lines were included, and also primary mesenchymal stem cells grown under normaoxia or hypoxia were included.

### Sample Protocol
Cryopreserved MNC fractions of AML patients or PB from allogeneic donors were thawed, resuspended in new born calf serum (NCS) supplemented with DNase I (20 Units/mL), 4 µM MgSO4 and heparin (5 Units/mL) and incubated on 37˚C for 15 minutes (min). Next, CD34+ cells were isolated on the autoMACS using a magnetically activated cell-sorting progenitor kit (Miltenyi Biotech). In case of NPM1 mutated AMLs with CD34 expression <1%, the MNC fraction was used. A panel of six cell lines was also inlcuded, as well as  primary mesenchymal stem cells grown under normaoxia or hypoxia. After isolation, 5x106 cells were washed twice with phosphate buffered saline (PBS), pelleted and snap frozen. At this stage, cells could be stored at -80oC, and could be transported on dry ice between laboratories.  Cell pellets were thawed on ice and lysed in 200 µl of ice-cold lysis buffer (8 M urea, 50 mM Tris, pH 8.2, 75 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, 1 mM PMSF, 10 mM sodium fluoride, 10 mM β-glycerophosphat, 2.5 mM sodium orthovanadate, 50 ng/mL calyculin A, 10 µg/mL aprotinin, 10 µg/mL leupeptin and 1:100 (v/v) phosphatase inhibitor cocktails 1 and 3 (Sigma-Aldrich)). After sonication, cell debris was sedimented by centrifugation and the protein concentration was determined by a Bradford assay. Protein extracts (up to 200 µg of total protein each) were reduced (10 mM DTT, 30 min at room temperature) and alkylated (55 mM iodoacetoamide for 30 min at room temperature) followed by in-solution digestion with endoproteinase Lys-C and trypsin (Promega) as detailed before (Wandinger et al., 2016). Tryptic peptides were desalted using reversed-phase 100 mg C18 SepPak cartridges (Waters) and fractionated by high pH reversed phase chromatography on an ÄKTA explorer system (GE Healthcare) as described previously (Tebbe et al., 2015). Collected peptide fractions were combined by concatenation to obtain twelve final fractions per sample followed by peptide desalting and LC-MS/MS analysis (Tebbe et al., 2015).

### Data Protocol
All LC-MS/MS analyses were performed with an Easy nano LC II system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap Velos instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide samples were loaded in solvent A (0.5% acetic acid) on a 20 cm fused silica column (New Objective) packed in-house with reversed phase material (Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ, 1.9 µm, Dr. Maisch GmbH) at a flow rate of 500 nL/min. Bound peptides were eluted by a 2 h gradient from 10% to 60% of solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 5% DMSO, 0.5% acetic acid) at a flow rate of 200 nL/min and sprayed directly into the mass spectrometer by applying a spray voltage of 2.2 kV using a nanoelectrospray ion source (Proxeon Biosystems). The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode to automatically switch between MS and MS/MS acquisition. For all MS measurements with the orbitrap detector a lock-mass ion from ambient air (m/z 445.120024) was used to improve mass accuracy (Olsen and Macek, 2009). Full scans were acquired in the orbitrap mass analyzer at a resolution R = 60,000 and a target value of 1,000,000 ions. The fifteen most intense ions detected in the MS scan were selected for collision induced dissociation in the LTQ at a target value of 5000 ion counts. The resulting fragmentation spectra were also recorded in the linear ion trap. Ions that were once selected for data-dependent acquisition were dynamically excluded for 90 seconds from further fragmentation.  General used mass spectrometric settings were: no sheath and auxiliary gas flow; heated capillary temperature, 240°C; normalized collision energy, 35% and an activation q = 0.25.   All MS raw data files were collectively processed with the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3.2)(Cox and Mann, 2008) using the Andromeda search engine for false discovery rate (FDR) controlled peptide and protein identification and label-fee quantification (LFQ) enabled by the MaxLFQ algorithm embedded in MaxQuant (Cox et al., 2014; Cox et al., 2011). Data were searched against the human Swiss-Prot database (version: 05.2015) comprising 42,119 database entries and 245 frequently detected contaminants (such as porcine trypsin, human keratins and Lys-C). Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were allowed as variable modifications. The minimum required peptide length was seven amino acids and up to two missed cleavages were allowed per peptide. The minimum required ratio count for protein quantification was set to two unique or razor peptides. An FDR of 0.01 was selected for both protein and peptide identifications and a posterior error probability (PEP) below or equal to 0.1 for each peptide-to-spectral match was required. The match between runs option was enabled for a time window of 0.5 min. Data was processed in 5 processing batches. The proteingroups.txt output table of Maxquant was used to evaluate protein abundance. It was preprocessed by removing reverse and contaminant database hits. Furthermore, LFQ intensities were log 10 transformed and normalized for variation between processing batches by application of partial least square (PLS) based normalization. The latter was based on the assumption that the differences of protein intensities between batches are caused by latent variables depending on the processing batches but are not observable. First PLS analysis were performed to obtain the latent variables that summarize the effects of the experimental factors on the protein intensities, X=TP^T+E Y=UQ^T+F where X is the matrix of the log LFQ intensities, Y is the indicator matrix of the processing batches, P and Q are orthogonal loading matrices, E and F are error terms. The decompositions of X and Y were performed such that the covariance between the score matrices T and U were maximized. The latent variable T was then used in the linear regression model for each protein i: X_i= T_(c_i )+ϵ If the regression vector c_i is significantly different from 0 (α=0.05, F-test), the log LFQ intensities were corrected: X_i^*= X_i-T_(c_i )

### Publication Abstract
Intra-tumor heterogeneity caused by clonal evolution is a major problem in cancer treatment. To address this problem, we performed label-free quantitative proteomics on primary acute myeloid leukemia (AML) samples. We identified 50 leukemia-enriched plasma membrane proteins enabling the prospective isolation of genetically distinct subclones from individual AML patients. Subclones differed in their regulatory phenotype, drug sensitivity, growth, and engraftment behavior, as determined by RNA sequencing, DNase I hypersensitive site mapping, transcription factor occupancy analysis, in&#xa0;vitro culture, and xenograft transplantation. Finally, we show that these markers can be used to identify and longitudinally track distinct leukemic clones in patients in routine diagnostics. Our study describes a strategy for a major improvement in stratifying cancer diagnosis and treatment.

### Keywords
Acute myeloid leukemia, Leukemic stem/progenitor cells

### Affiliations
Experimental Hematology, University Medical Center Groningen, The Netherlands
Experimental Hematology, University Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen 

### Submitter
Jan Jacob Schuringa

### Lab Head
Dr Jan Jacob Schuringa
Experimental Hematology, University Medical Center Groningen, The Netherlands


