### Accession
PXD006470

### Title
Label-free quantitative proteomic analysis of Mycobacterium avium hominissuis

### Description
The objective of this study is to investigate the protein expression level difference between Mycobacterium avium hominissuis wild type strain MAH-104 , its mutant  21m (gene lysX (MAV_3128) mutated - Lysyl tRNA synthetase)  and the complemented strain 21c (MAV_3128comp) using liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC/MS) based label free quantitative proteomics analysis.

### Sample Protocol
The mycobacterial strains were cultivated in Middlebrook 7H9 broth along with 0.05% Tween 80 and supplemented  with 10% ADC . The strains were cultured without shaking at 37°C until they reached the mid-logarithmic phase. Each of the strains - wild type strain MAH-104 (Mycobacterium avium hominissuis) , Mutant  21m (gene lysX (MAV_3128) mutated - Lysyl tRNA synthetase)  and the complemented strain 21c (MAV_3128comp) were cultured independently in six replicates under the same conditions. Then, the cells were harvested by brief centrifugation at their mid-logarithmic phase: The cells were inactivated with ethanol (300 µl of distilled water and 900 µl of ethanol) The proteins were extracted in 250 µl of 20 mM HEPES buffer (pH 7.4)  after sonicated on ice  (1 min, 100% amplitude and 1 duty cycle, Hielscher Ultrasonics, Teltow, Germany). The volume of extract containing 10 µg of proteins was acetone precipitation and subjected to in-solution digested with lys-C and trypsin. The resultant peptides were then desalted by solid phase extraction, using reversed phase chromatography. Tryptic peptides were analyzed by nanospray liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nanoLC system (Dionex, Germering, Germany) with a LTQ linear ion trap mass spectrometer Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany).

### Data Protocol
The raw MS files were processed using, MaxQuant (version. 1.3.0.5 / Max-Planck-Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany). MS and MS2 data was searched against forward and backward protein sequences of Mycobacterium avium subsp. hominissuis (strain TH135) (Proteome ID: UP000016440, Protein count 4774, updated 23.03.2016). The label free quantification algorithm of the MaxQuant software package was used for MS-Quantification of proteins. Statistical analysis was carried out  with software Perseus (version 1.4.1.3 /Max-Planck-Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany). Student’s t-test and FDR correction of the alpha error was done by the method of Benjamini-Hochberg for identification of significantly differentially expressed proteins between the bacterial strain groups.

### Publication Abstract
Lysyl-phosphatidylglycerol is one of the components of the mycobacterial membrane that contributes to the resistance to cationic antimicrobial peptides, a host-induced frontline defense against invading pathogens. Its production is catalyzed by LysX, a bifunctional protein with lysyl transferase and lysyl transfer RNA synthetase activity. Comparative proteome analysis of a lysX mutant of Mycobacterium avium strain 104 and the wild type indicated that the lysX mutant strain undergoes a transition in phenotype by switching the carbon metabolism to &#x3b2;-oxidation of fatty acids, along with accumulation of lipid inclusions. Surprisingly, proteins associated with intracellular survival were upregulated in the lysX mutant, even during extracellular growth, preparing bacteria for the conditions occurring inside host cells. In line with this, the lysX mutant exhibited enhanced intracellular growth in human-blood-derived monocytes. Thus, our study exposes the significance of lysX in the metabolism and virulence of the environmental pathogen M. avium hominissuis.

### Keywords
Maxquant software, Maxquant-andromeda, Mutant, Mycobacterium avium hominissuis, Proteomic analysis, Perseus software, Label free quantitative analysis, Ltq orbitrap velos mass spectrometer

### Affiliations
Freie Universitaet-Berlin,Institute of Animal Hygiene and Environmental Health
Institute of Animal Hygiene and Environmental Health,  Centre for Infectious Medicine,  Freie Universität Berlin,  Robert-von-Ostertag-Str. 7-13,  14163 Berlin, Germany.

### Submitter
Jayaseelan Murugaiyan

### Lab Head
Dr Jayaseelan Murugaiyan
Institute of Animal Hygiene and Environmental Health,  Centre for Infectious Medicine,  Freie Universität Berlin,  Robert-von-Ostertag-Str. 7-13,  14163 Berlin, Germany.


