### Accession
PXD002586

### Title
Quantitative analysis of changes in the phosphoproteome of maize induced by the plant hormone salicylic acid

### Description
Phytohormone salicylic acid (SA) plays an important role in regulating various physiological and biochemical processes. Our previous study identified several protein kinases responsive to SA, suggesting an important role for phosphorylation events in the plant response to SA.

### Sample Protocol
In this study, we characterized the phosphoproteome of maize in response to SA using isotope tags for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ) technology and TiO2 enrichment method.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched using Mascot 2.2 (Matrix Science) embedded in Proteome Discoverer 1.4 against the UniProt,_Poales, FASTA and decoy databases.  Phosphorylated peptides were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 1.3 (Thermo Electron, San Jose, CA, USA) with the score threshold for peptide identification set at a 1% FDR and with PhosphoRS site probability cutoffs of 0.75.  Molecular functions of identified phosphoproteins were classified according to their gene ontology (GO) annotations combined with their biological function.  Subcellular locations of unique phosphoproteins identified in this study were determined from the UniProt database (http://www.uniprot.org) or predicted using the publicly available program, WolfPsort (http://wolfpsort.org).

### Publication Abstract
Phytohormone salicylic acid (SA) plays an important role in regulating various physiological and biochemical processes. Our previous study identified several protein kinases responsive to SA, suggesting that phosphorylation events play an important role in the plant response to SA. In this study, we characterized the phosphoproteome of maize in response to SA using isotope tags for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ) technology and TiO2 enrichment method. Based on LC-MS/MS analysis, we found a total of 858 phosphoproteins among 1495 phosphopeptides. Among them, 291 phosphopeptides corresponding to 244 phosphoproteins were found to be significantly changed after SA treatment. The phosphoproteins identified are involved in a wide range of biological processes, which indicate that the response to SA encompasses a reformatting of major cellular processes. Furthermore, some of the phosphoproteins which were not previously known to be involved with SA were found to have significantly changed phosphorylation levels. Many of these changes are phosphorylation decreases, indicating that other currently unknown SA signaling pathways that result in decreased phosphorylation of downstream targets must be involved. Our study represents the first attempt at global phosphoproteome profiling in response to SA, and provides a better understanding of the molecular mechanisms regulated by SA.

### Keywords
Cellular processes, Salicylic acid (sa), Maize, Phosphoproteomic, Itraq

### Affiliations
Henan agricultural university
Henan Agricultural university

### Submitter
Liuji Wu

### Lab Head
Dr Yanhui Chen
Henan agricultural university


