### Accession
PXD039396

### Title
Alpha-Synuclein pathology and reduced neurogenesis in the olfactory system affect olfaction in a mouse model of Parkinson's disease

### Description
Parkinson’s disease (PD) is characterized by multiple symptoms including olfactory dysfunction, whose underlying mechanisms remain unclear. Here, we explored pathologic changes in the olfactory pathway of transgenic (Tg) mice of both sexes expressing the human A30P mutant α-synuclein (α-syn; α-syn-Tg mice) at 6–7 and 12–14 months of age, representing early and late-stages of motor progression, respectively. α-Syn-Tg mice at late stages exhibited olfactory behavioral deficits, which correlated with severe α-syn pathology in projection neurons (PNs) of the olfactory pathway. In parallel, olfactory bulb (OB) neurogenesis in α-syn-Tg mice was reduced in the OB granule cells at six to seven months and OB periglomerular cells at 12–14 months, respectively, both of which could contribute to olfactory dysfunction. Proteomic analyses showed a disruption in endocytic and exocytic pathways in the OB during the early stages which appeared exacerbated at the synaptic terminals when the mice developed olfactory deficits at 12–14 months. Our data suggest that (1) the α-syn-Tg mice recapitulate the olfactory functional deficits seen in PD; (2) olfactory structures exhibit spatiotemporal disparities for vulnerability to α-syn pathology; (3) α-syn pathology is restricted to projection neurons in the olfactory pathway; (4) neurogenesis in adult α-syn-Tg mice is reduced in the OB; and (5) synaptic endocytosis and exocytosis defects in the OB may further explain olfactory deficits.

### Sample Protocol
Tissues were obtained from OB and APC of WT and -syn-Tg mice at 6-7 (n= 3/genotype) and 12-14 (n=3/genotype) months, respectively. Briefly, mice were euthanized with an overdose of 5% isoflurane (Covetrus) and brains were rapidly extracted from skulls. Working on an ice-cooled petri dish, the left and right OBs and APCs were dissected from each animal using a scalpel and a 45º curved forceps (Dumont #5/45). Tissues were immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen and tissues from the left hemisphere were used for proteomic analysis.

### Data Protocol
Samples were analyzed as technical triplicates. The data were normalized to internal controls and total spectral counts by dividing each replicate's normalized abundance value by the square root of the sum of squared spectral counts for that replicate. Proteins with two or more unique peptide counts were listed using UniProt nomenclature and included for further analysis. A 1.25-fold change and a p-value of <0.05 between WT and a-syn-Tg mice were considered as significant.

### Publication Abstract
Parkinson's disease (PD) is characterized by multiple symptoms including olfactory dysfunction, whose underlying mechanisms remain unclear. Here, we explored pathologic changes in the olfactory pathway of transgenic (Tg) mice of both sexes expressing the human A30P mutant &#x3b1;-synuclein (&#x3b1;-syn; &#x3b1;-syn-Tg mice) at 6-7 and 12-14 months of age, representing early and late-stages of motor progression, respectively. &#x3b1;-Syn-Tg mice at late stages exhibited olfactory behavioral deficits, which correlated with severe &#x3b1;-syn pathology in projection neurons (PNs) of the olfactory pathway. In parallel, olfactory bulb (OB) neurogenesis in &#x3b1;-syn-Tg mice was reduced in the OB granule cells at six to seven months and OB periglomerular cells at 12-14 months, respectively, both of which could contribute to olfactory dysfunction. Proteomic analyses showed a disruption in endocytic and exocytic pathways in the OB during the early stages which appeared exacerbated at the synaptic terminals when the mice developed olfactory deficits at 12-14 months. Our data suggest that (1) the &#x3b1;-syn-Tg mice recapitulate the olfactory functional deficits seen in PD; (2) olfactory structures exhibit spatiotemporal disparities for vulnerability to &#x3b1;-syn pathology; (3) &#x3b1;-syn pathology is restricted to projection neurons in the olfactory pathway; (4) neurogenesis in adult &#x3b1;-syn-Tg mice is reduced in the OB; and (5) synaptic endocytosis and exocytosis defects in the OB may further explain olfactory deficits.<b>SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT</b> Olfactory dysfunction is a characteristic symptom of Parkinson's disease (PD). Using the human A30P mutant &#x3b1;-synuclein (&#x3b1;-syn)-expressing mouse model, we demonstrated the appearance of olfactory deficits at late stages of the disease, which was accompanied by the accumulation of &#x3b1;-syn pathology in projection neurons (PNs) of the olfactory system. This dysfunction included a reduction in olfactory bulb (OB) neurogenesis as well as changes in synaptic vesicular transport affecting synaptic function, both of which are likely contributing to olfactory behavioral deficits.

### Keywords
Parkinson's disease, Olfaction, Alpha-synuclein

### Affiliations
Keck MS & Proteomics Resource Yale University School of Medicine
Yale University

### Submitter
TuKiet Lam

### Lab Head
Dr TuKiet Lam
Keck MS & Proteomics Resource Yale University School of Medicine


