### Accession
PXD007656

### Title
SWATH-MS in quality control of biologicals: Towards confident label-free and non-targeted quantification with single injection? - An illustration with plasma residuals profiling in human immunoglobulin.

### Description
By performing data-independent acquisition (DIA), SWATH-MS is expected to provide comprehensive and repeatable spectral data that can be perpetually interrogated by reference spectral libraries. In the context of biological sample quality control, a benchmark spectral library could index all the possible low-abundant contaminants that should be screened in the sample. Here, the case study concerns the profiling of plasma residuals in human immunoglobulin (Ig) preparations. Yet with such an application, a strong repeatability issue in protein quantification calls for a MS2-level data quality criterion. A MS device intrinsic relationship between MS2 quantification CV and peak area allows using peak area range instead of CV threshold as such a criterion, and by this flagging confident data from single injections. A Python script is provided to perform this flagging. Using such flagging becomes increasingly important as the library becomes more distant from the actual sample. Using appropriated sample fractionation, Ig residuals profiles based on flagged MS2-level quantifications are remarkably consistent with MS1-level quantifications based on classical shotgun (DDA) approach. Sensitivity, which is around three to four orders of magnitude in the concentration dynamic range with a TripleTOF5600 device, remains the main pitfall to gain confident quantification of proteins which were not identified with DDA in the sample and to fully benefit from the SWATH potential for QC applications: provide MS2 specific, comprehensive, label-free and non-targeted quantitative profiles with single injections.

### Sample Protocol
Products A (respectively two different batches A1 and A2), B and C are regular intravenous Ig products from two different manufacuters, while product D is a TEE positive subcutaneous Ig product. Plasma pools from the production of A, B and C wwere obtained to build in-house spectral libraries. Native coagulation factors XIa (FA11)and XII (FA12) and prekallikrein (PK)from human plasma (Calbiochem) were used to spike an Ig sample at different ratios, ranging from 10 µg/mg ("log 2" ratio) to 0.2 ng/mg ("log 6.7 ratio") total protein. Unless specified ("not fractionated"), samples were enriched by using combinatorial peptide ligand library strategy (ProteoMiner kits, Bio-Rad). Samples were tryptic (Try-LysC) digested in solution or on-bead (see Journal of Proteomics 152 (2017) 312–320). Dried peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (FA) in water. Every sample to be injected was spiked with iRT peptides (iRT Kit, Biognosys) at 0.1 µL of 10x iRT Standard (see manufacturer user guide) per injection for retention time (RT) calibration while Hi3 EColi Standard (Waters) and Beta-galactosidase, digested (Sciex) were each spiked at 50 fmol per injection, as general purpose internal standards. Peptides were separated on an Eksigent nanoLC 425 (Eksigent, Sciex). Two, four or eight micrograms of sample was first trapped on a pre-column (YMC-Triart C18, pore size 12nm, particle size 3µm, 0.5 mm internal diameter by 5 mm; YMC), and separated on reversed-phase (C18) microflow (5µL/min) LC column (YMC-Triart C18 15 cm, particle size 3 µm, 0.3 mm internal diameter by 150 mm; YMC) using a linear gradient of 95:5 buffer A (95% H2O; 5% DMSO; 0.1% FA) /buffer B (95% ACN; 5% DMSO; 0.1% FA) to 20:80 buffer A/buffer B at 5 µL/min over 1 or 2 hour(s). LC peak width was around 30s. MS analysis was performed using a TripleTOF 5600 mass spectrometer (Sciex) operated in positive ionization mode with a Duospray Ion Source. All MS parameters were controlled by AnalystTF software 1.7 (Sciex). The source conditions were as follows: temperature: 80°C; curtain gas (CUR): 30 psi; ion source gas (GS) 1 and 2: 13 and 0 psi respectively; and ion-spray voltage floating (IVSF): 5.5 kV. MS1 and MS2 declustering potential was set at 100V. MS2 Ion release delay and ion release width were 67 and 25 respectively. Fractionated Ig sample library was run with the same DDA method as used in previous DDA work.1 Extended spectral library in-house generation by using fractionated plasma sample was performed in accordance to recent published guidelines.3,6,23 Briefly, each cycle consisted of one full MS1 scan (m/z 400-1250) of 250 ms followed by MS2 data-dependent trigger events (m/z 65-2000, high sensitivity mode). A maximum of 20 candidate ions (charge state +2 to +4) exceeding 150 cps were monitored per cycle, with an accumulation time of 150 ms and using a rolling collision energy (CE) with a spread of 15V. Cycle time was 3.3 s, in order to have 8 to 10 data points per LC peak. Dynamic accumulation and dynamic background subtraction were switched on. Surpassing ions were excluded from further analysis for 20s.  SWATH runs consisted in successive cycles of one full MS1 scan followed by consecutive Q1 isolation windows for MS2 fragmentation, covering a precursor mass range of m/z 400-1250. Optimized isolation windows widths across the m/z range were calculated using the Variable Window Calculator Excel tool from Sciex (download from http://www.absciex.com/software-downloads). Cycle time was fixed at 2.8s, in order to have 8 to 10 data points per LC peak. The MS1 full scan had an accumulation time of 250 ms, with CE of 10 eV. Each isolation window had an accumulation time of 25, 50 or 100 ms, depending on the number (respectively 100, 50 or 25) of windows (with 1 m/z overlap on the lower side of the window). Rolling CE (charge state: +2) with a CE spread of 15 eV was used, and MS2 was conducted either in high sensitivity (HS) or high resolution (HR) mode.

### Data Protocol
In first instance, a library was built using 8 DDA runs of fractionated Ig sample (sample A1) spiked with 1 ng/mg FXIa. Secondly, three libraries were built using 24 DDA runs (8 injections for each pH of fractionation) of fractionated plasma pool from products A, B and C manufacture respectively. Raw spectra data (wiff) files were converted into a peak list format and searched against human reviewed protein database (downloaded from UniProtKB /Swiss-Prot in June 2016 and complemented with internal standards, iRT and crap peptides 24) using Protein Pilot (V 4.5, Sciex) with the Paragon algorithm. The search parameters were set as follows: sample type: identification; Cys alkylation: MMTS; digestion: trypsin; special factors: none; ID focus: allow biological modifications; search effort: thorough ID; results quality: detected protein threshold > 0.05; false discovery rate option ticked. The .group files resulting from the database search were directly imported into Peakview (V2.2 with SWATH Acquisition MicroApp 2.0, Sciex) with exclusion of shared peptides. Protein FDR threshold was set at 1% by limiting the maximal number of proteins to import, according to the ProteinPilot FDR analysis. Libraries were saved as text files. An external fractionated plasma library was also provided by Sciex as txt file. Peakview V2.2 with SWATH Acquisition MicroApp 2.0 (Sciex) was used to perform peak extraction with parameters as following: maximum 6 transitions per peptide, XIC extraction window of 10 min and XIC width (mass tolerance) of 50 ppm. Peptide filter settings included a peptide confidence threshold being either the ProteinPilot reported confidence corresponding to 1% FDR during the database search of the library files for the in-house libraries searched with Protein Pilot or the default and most stringent value of 99% for the external library. Shared and modified peptides were both excluded. The SWATH 2.0 integrated FDR threshold was set at 1%. RT calibration was performed using reference peptides from the iRT-kit (Biognosys) spiked into each sample, so that every extracted peptide was aligned to this LC device-independent RT unit system. After the peak extraction, the resulting .swath sessions were saved and the ion, peptide and protein level peak areas could be exported in Excel format.

### Publication Abstract
Sequential windows acquisition of all theoretical fragment ions mass spectrometry (SWATH-MS) provides large-scale protein quantification with high accuracy and selectivity. Nevertheless, reliable quantification of low-abundant signals in complex samples remains challenging, as recently illustrated in a multicenter benchmark study of different label-free software tools. Here, the SWATH Replicates Analysis 2.0 template from Sciex is used to highlight that the relationship between the MS2 peak area and the variability can be described by a function. This functional relationship appears to be largely insensitive to variation in samples or acquisition conditions, suggesting a device-intrinsic property. By using a power regression, it is shown that the MS2 peak area can be used to predict the quantification repeatability without relying on replicate injections, thus contributing to high-throughput confident quantification of low-abundant signals with SWATH-MS.

### Keywords
Immunoglobulin, Swath ms, Single injection, Tripletof5600, Biologicals

### Affiliations
Faculity of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology
Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology. Department of Pharmaceutics, Ghent University, Belgium

### Submitter
Maarten Dhaenens

### Lab Head
Dr Dieter Deforce
Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology. Department of Pharmaceutics, Ghent University, Belgium


