### Accession
PXD025527

### Title
Comprehensive proteomics for Discovery vaccine candidates against Streptococcus equi Infections

### Description
Streptococcus equi subspecies equi (S. equi) is a major pathogen which cause strangles, a highly contagious respiratory infection, in horses and other equines. In this study, we purified the extracellular vesicles (EVs) of S. equi ATCC 39506 and evaluated them as vaccine candidates against S. equi infections in mice. Through immunization in an animal model and immunoprecipitation-mass spectrometry, we evaluated EV as vaccine candidates against S. equi infections and identified novel immunogenic proteins.

### Sample Protocol
To discover immunogenic antigens present in the EVs, immunoprecipitation was performed. Purified EVs (30 μg) were lysed with immunoprecipitation lysis buffer (ThermoFisher Scientific) at 4 °C for 1 h, and the supernatant was collected. Anti-IgG conjugated with magnet beads (Dynabeads, Invitrogen) was used to remove non-specific antigens at 4 °C for 1 h. Each 20 μl serum sample of the mock and IP groups was incubated with magnetic beads at room temperature for 30 min, and then the supernatant was incubated with antibody-bead complex at 4 °C overnight. Beads were washed five times with phosphate-buffered saline. The bound proteins were eluted with SDS sample buffer heated at 95 °C for 10 min. The eluents were used for in-gel digestion and MS/MS analysis

### Data Protocol
Each proteome was tryptic-digested and analyzed by LC-MS/MS using the Q Exactive Plus (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). All MS and MS/MS spectra were acquired in a data-dependent mode and were processed by MASCOT version 2.4 (Matrix Science). The genome of S. equi ATCC 39506 (CP021972.1) was used for protein identification. The following search parameters were used: missed cleavages, 2; peptide mass tolerance, ±0.8 Da; peptide fragment tolerance, ±0.8 Da; peptide charge, 2+, 3+, and 4+; static modifications, carbamidomethyl; and dynamic modification, oxidation (Met). Low-confidence peptides were filtered with a false discovery rate of at least 1%, using a target-decoy search strategy.To reduce false positives, the ion score was recalculated using Percolator, and proteins with more than one independent significant peptide matches were selected.

### Publication Abstract
Streptococcus equi subspecies equi is a pathogenic bacterium that causes strangles, a highly contagious respiratory infection in horses and other equines. The limitations of current vaccines against S. equi infection warrants the development of an affordable, safe, and effective vaccine. Because gram-positive extracellular vesicles (EVs) transport various immunogenic antigens, they are attractive vaccine candidates. Here, we purified the EVs of S. equi ATCC 39506 and evaluated them as a vaccine candidate against S. equi infection in mice. As an initial step, comparative proteomic analysis was performed to characterize the functional features of the EVs. Reverse vaccinology and knowledge-based annotations were then used to screen potential vaccine candidates (PVCs) for S. equi ATCC 39506. Finally, 32 PVCs were found to be enriched in the EV fraction, suggesting the usefulness of this fraction as a vaccine. Importantly, a significantly higher survival rate after S. equi infection was detected in mice immunized with S. equi-derived EVs via the intraperitoneal route than in mice immunized with heat-killed bacteria. Of note, immunoprecipitation-mass spectrometry results validated various immunogenic antigens within the EV proteome. In conclusion, our results suggest that S. equi-derived EVs can serve as a vaccine candidate against S. equi infection.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Immunoprecipitation-ms, Streptococcus equi, Label-free, Extracellular vesicle

### Affiliations
Research Center for Bioconvergence Analysis, 458 Korea Basic Science Institute, Ochang 28119, Korea Center for Convergent Research of Emerging Virus Infection, Korea Research Institute of Chemical Technology (KRICT), Daejeon 34114, Republic of Korea
Korea basic science institute

### Submitter
Hayoung Lee

### Lab Head
Dr Seung Il Kim
Research Center for Bioconvergence Analysis, 458 Korea Basic Science Institute, Ochang 28119, Korea Center for Convergent Research of Emerging Virus Infection, Korea Research Institute of Chemical Technology (KRICT), Daejeon 34114, Republic of Korea


