### Accession
PXD037924

### Title
Proteomics of extracellular vesicles from mouse liver

### Description
Fatty liver disease and insulin resistance are common comorbidities, highlighting the potential for the liver to secrete factors that influence glycemic control. We assessed the influence of progressive liver disease, including non-alcoholic steatosis and non-alcoholic steatohepatitis on liver secreted extracellular vesicle secretion and composition.

### Sample Protocol
Protein disulphide bonds for EV proteins (10 μg) were reduced at 65°C with 10 mmol/L TCEP (Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine) for 20 mins. Samples were mixed with 6.6 x volume of 8 M urea, added to a Microcon-30 kDa Centrifugal Filter (Sigma-Aldrich), and centrifuged at 14,000 × g at 14 °C for 15 min. Subsequently, 200 μl of 8 M Urea was added, samples were spun at 14,000 × g at 14 °C for 15 min, and the flow-through was discarded. Proteins were alkylated through addition of 10 µL of 100 mM chloroacetamide and 90 µL of 8 M urea for 20 mins at room temperature in the dark. Samples were centrifuged at 14,000 x g for 15 mins and the flow through was discarded, followed by 2 wash steps with 100 µL of 8 M urea and 3 wash steps with 100 µL of 50 mM ammonia bicarbonate (pH=8.5). Proteins were then digested with trypsin (1 µg trypsin / 100 µg of protein in 50 mM ammonia bicarbonate) overnight at 37 °C. The following day, peptides were washed by adding 40 µL of 50 mM of ammonia bicarbonate to the Centrifugal Filter and spinning the samples twice at 14,000 x g for 15 mins. To elute the peptides, 50 µL of 0.5 M NaCl was added and the samples were respun. Eluted peptides were acidified to pH=3.0 with formic acid, purified with Millipore® C18 Ziptips (Sigma Aldrich, USA), and dried using a Speedvac concentrator (Eppendorf Concentrator Plus, Germany). The purified peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid, centrifuged for 15 min at 16,000 x g, and transferred to liquid chromatography vials for analysis through liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (Nano-ESI-LC-MS/MS) using an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer, as previously described (Montgomery et al., 2022).

### Data Protocol
DDA Data were searched against the UniProt mouse database with MaxQuant v1.6.12.0 using default parameters with peptide spectral matches, peptide and protein false discovery rate (FDR) set to 1% (Cox and Mann, 2008). All data were searched with oxidation of methionine set as the variable modification and carbamidomethylation set as a fixed modification. First search MS1 mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm followed by recalibration and main search MS1 tolerance set to 4.5 ppm, while MS/MS mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm. MaxQuant output data were initially processed with Perseus (Tyanova et al., 2016) to remove decoy data, potential contaminants and proteins only identified with a single peptide containing oxidized methionine.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse, Liver, Proteomics, Extracellular vesicles

### Affiliations
The University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Benjamin Parker

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin Parker
The University of Melbourne


