### Accession
PXD019604

### Title
Serum protein abundance of MDR-TB patients based on PRM analysis

### Description
A mass spectrometry strategy of parallel reaction monitoring was used to detect and validate differential proteins in serum. Here are the data including 3 groups of MDR-TB, DS-TB and HC.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation Five samples of an equal amount were randomly chosen from each group of samples and mixed together to make a sample pool, and then enzymatic hydrolysis was conducted directly in the solution.  Protein extraction and pretreatment  From each sample about 200ug of protein was taken and then DTT was added to the final concentration of 100mM. The protein was incubated in boiling water for 15min, cooled to room temperature. The enzymatic hydrolysis process was carried out by referring to the above-mentioned protein extraction for DIA samples. The enzyme addition ratio of NH4HCO3 buffer (including Trypsin) was 1:50, next centrifuged at 600 rpm for 1 min, then left 37 ° C for 16 h, and the other steps were the same as ones described in the section of DIA analysis. The digested peptides were desalted and lyophilized, then reconstituted with 0.1% FA, and the peptide concentration was determined by OD280.The peptide information suitable for PRM analysis was imported into the software Xcalibur to set up the PRM method. 2ug of peptide was taken from each sample, and 20 fmol of standard peptide (PRTC: ELGQSGVDTYLQTK) was incorporated for detection.

### Data Protocol
Peptide scores of the identification greater than 40 were required to ensure reliable results. According to the qualitative analysis results of the protein, the identified target peptides were screened, the trusted peptides were retained, and the trusted peptides suitable for PRM analysis were introduced into the mass spectrometry software Xcalibur for PRM method setting. After 3 repeated PRM tests were performed , the data of the PRM original file was analyzed by the software Skyline 3.7.0, and the target proteins and the target peptides were quantified.

### Publication Abstract
Multidrug-resistant tuberculosis (MDR-TB), defined as tuberculosis (TB) resistant to at least isoniazid and rifampicin, is a major concern of TB control worldwide. However, the diagnosis of MDR-TB remains a huge challenge to its prevention and control. To identify new diagnostic methods for MDR-TB, a mass spectrometry strategy of data-independent acquisition and parallel reaction monitoring was used to detect and validate differential serum proteins. The bioinformatic analysis showed that the functions of differential serum proteins between the MDR-TB group and the drug-sensitive tuberculosis group were significantly correlated to the complement coagulation cascade, surface adhesion and extracellular matrix receptor interaction, suggesting a disorder of coagulation in TB. Here, we identified three potential candidate biomarkers such as sCD14, PGLYRP2 and FGA, and established a diagnostic model using these three candidate biomarkers with a sensitivity of 81.2%, a specificity of 90% and the area under the curve value of 0.934 in receiver operation characteristics curve to diagnose MDR-TB. Our study has paved the way for a novel method to diagnose MDR-TB and may contribute to elucidate the mechanisms underlying MDR-TB.

### Keywords
Serum, Prm, Tb

### Affiliations
Zhejiang University School of Medicine

### Submitter
Jing Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Ji-Cheng Li
Zhejiang University School of Medicine


