### Accession
PXD031527

### Title
Autophagy cargo receptors are secreted via extracellular vesicles and particles in response to endolysosomal inhibition or impaired autophagosome maturation

### Description
The endosome-lysosome (endolysosome) system plays central roles in both autophagic degradation and secretory pathways, including the exocytic release of extracellular vesicles and particles (EVPs). Although previous work has revealed important interconnections between autophagy and EVP-mediated secretion, our molecular understanding of these secretory events during endolysosome inhibition remains incomplete. Here, we delineate a secretory autophagy pathway upregulated in response to endolysosomal inhibition that mediates the EVP-associated extracellular release of autophagic cargo receptors, including p62/SQSTM1. This extracellular secretion is highly regulated and critically dependent on multiple ATGs required for the progressive steps of early autophagosome formation as well as Rab27a-dependent exocytosis. Furthermore, the disruption of autophagosome maturation, either due to genetic inhibition of the autophagosome-to-autolyosome fusion machinery or blockade via the SARS-CoV2 viral protein ORF3a, is sufficient to induce robust EVP-associated secretion of autophagy cargo receptors. Finally, we demonstrate that this ATG-dependent, EVP-mediated secretion pathway buffers against the intracellular accumulation of autophagy cargo receptors when classical autophagic degradation is impaired. Based on these results, we propose that secretory autophagy via EVPs functions as an alternate route to clear sequestered material and maintain proteostasis in response to endolysosomal dysfunction or impaired autophagosome maturation.

### Sample Protocol
WT and ATG7-/- HEK293T cells were treated with 20nM BafA1 or vehicle in serum-free media for 16 h. After 16 h, conditioned media was collected and EVs were isolated using the differential centrifugation protocol outlined previously. Pelleted EVs were lysed in 800 uL RIPA buffer (25 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, 1% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS) supplemented with 2% SDS, then sonicated with a probe sonicator at amplitude 8 for 10 pulses of 10 s each. Samples were then diluted in 4 mL ice-cold 100% acetone and incubated at -20oC overnight. Samples were spun in an ultracentrifuge at 200,000 g for 18 h at 4oC, the acetone was decanted, and the samples air dried for 1 h at 25oC before being stored at -80oC until further processing. Three biological replicates of precipitated EVs from WT and ATG7-/- bafA1-treated cells were resuspended in 30 uL 6 M guanidinium-chloride, 100 mM Tris pH 8.0, 10 mM TCEP, 40 mM 2-chloroacetamide. EV proteins were denatured for 1 h at 37oC, then quantified with 660nm Protein Assay Reagent (Thermo Scientific 22660). Samples were then diluted six-fold in 150 uL 100 mM Tris pH 8.0. 125-150 ug of protein for each sample was trypsinized with 15 ug trypsin (Thermo Scientific 90057) in an orbital shaker at 250 rpm, 37oC for 20 h. Trypsin digestion was then stopped by adding 10% trifluoracetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 0.5% TFA. Samples were desalted with SOLA solid phase extraction cartridges (Thermo Scientific 60109). Briefly, columns were washed with 500 uL 100% acetonitrile (ACN), then equilibrated with 500 uL 0.1% TFA twice before adding sample. Samples were washed with 500 uL 0.1% TFA three times, then 500 uL 0.1% formic acid (FA), 2% ACN, and eluted with 450 uL 0.1% FA, 50% ACN. Samples were dried by speed-vac, then resuspended in 10 uL 50 mM HEPES pH 8.5 and quantified by Pierce Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay (Thermo Scientific 23275). For Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) labeling, 800 ug of TMT10-126, 127N, 128C, 129N, 130C, and 131 (Thermo Scientific 90110) was reconstituted with 41 uL 100% anhydrous ACN. 15 ug of peptides from each replicate were individually combined with 7.69 uL (150 ug) of the TMT isobaric tags. Samples were incubated at 25oC for 1 h before quenching the reaction with 8 uL 5% hydroxylamine for 15 min. After labeling, the six individually labeled samples were pooled, dried by speed-vac, and then resuspended in 300 uL 0.1% TFA. The pooled samples were then fractionated into 8 fractions using Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Scientific 84868), then dried by speed-vac. The fractions were then resuspended in 0.1% FA, 2% ACN before LC-MS/MS analysis. For LC-MS/MS analysis, 1 ug TMT-labeled peptide per fraction was analyzed on a 15 cm C18 analytical column, in-line with a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer. The peptides were separated on a multi-slope, 100 min gradient (6.4% - 27.2% ACN with 0.1% FA for 80 min at 0.2 uL/min, then 27.2% - 40% ACN with 0.09% FA for 15 min at 0.3 uL/min, then 40% - 56% ACN with 0.09% FA for 5 min at 0.3 uL/min, and then washed for 3 min). Data dependent acquisition with MS1 resolution of 70,000, top15 method, and HCD normalized collision energy of 32 was used, with MS2 resolution of 35,000 and an isolation window of 0.7 m/z. Dynamic exclusion was activated for 30 s after initial parent ion selection.

### Data Protocol
Eight injections of the different fractions of TMT-labeled EV peptides were analyzed together via MaxQuant (v1.6.0.16). Search parameters for peptide search tolerance was 4.5 ppm, centroid match tolerance was 8 ppm, and 2 missed tryptic cleavages were permitted. Constant modification of carbamidomethylation of cysteines and variable modifications of N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation, and Ser/Thr/Tyr phosphorylation were allowed. Peptide spectrum match FDR and protein FDR were set at 1%. “Match between runs” was enabled to increase peptide identification. Type was set to “Reporter ion MS2,” and the six labels used in sample preparation were selected.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hek293t, Extracellular vesicles, Lc-ms/ms, Tmt

### Affiliations
University of California, San Francisco
Department of Pathology, University of California, San Francisco, USA

### Submitter
Yu-Hsiu Lin

### Lab Head
Dr Andrew Leidal
Department of Pathology, University of California, San Francisco, USA


