### Accession
PXD020823

### Title
Divide-and-conquer matrisome protein (DC-MaP) strategy: an optimal approach to proteomic matrisome characterization

### Description
Currently, the extracellular matrix (ECM) is considered a pivotal complex meshwork of macromolecules playing a plethora of biomolecular functions in health and disease beyond its commonly known mechanical role. Only by unravelling its composition, we can leverage related tissue engineering and pharmacological efforts. Nevertheless, its unbiased proteomic identification still encounters major limitations mainly due to partial ECM enrichment by precipitation, sequential fractionation using unfriendly mass spectrometry (MS) detergents and resuspension with harsh reagents that need to be entirely removed prior to analysis. These methods can be technically challenging and labor-intensive, which affects the reproducibility of ECM identification and induces protein loss. Here, we present a simple new method applicable to tissue fragments of 10 mg and more. The technique involves a standardized procedure for sample processing with an MS-compatible detergent and combined centrifugation. This two-step protocol eliminates the need for laborious sample clarification and divides our samples into 2 fractions, soluble and insoluble, successively enriched with matrisome-associated (ECM-interacting) and core matrisome (structural ECM) proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Ovarian tissue fragments (n=3) were mechanically lysed in the presence of MS-compatible detergents to obtain soluble and insoluble fractions by the 2-step and 3-step fractionations, as described above. Soluble fraction processing Thirty µg of total soluble proteins was reduced with a 10 mM final concentration of DTT and incubated for 30 min at 56°C, and subsequently alkylated with a 60 mM final concentration of chloroacetamide for 25 min at room temperature (RT) in the dark. The proteins were then precipitated using the methanol-chloroform method, before being resuspended in 100 mM TEAB (pH 8) and further digested with Lys-C/trypsin at an enzyme:substrate ratio of 1:25 [wt/wt] overnight at 37°C. The reaction was halted by adding fresh trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 0.2% [vol/vol] (pH<2). The samples were then centrifuged at 16000 g for 10 min at 4°C. Recovered peptides were dried in a speedvac, resuspended in 50 µl of 3.5% acetonitrile (ACN) [vol/vol] and 0.1% TFA [vol/vol] in water. Insoluble fraction processing Fifty µg of total insoluble proteins was resuspended in a 6 M final concentration of urea in 100 mM TEAB, with continuous vortexing and sonication. Proteins were reduced in a 5 mM final concentration of DTT and incubated for 1 h at 37°C.  After cooling to RT, cysteines were alkylated by addition of 25 mM chloroacetamide for 30 min at RT in the dark. No precipitation was conducted during insoluble fraction processing to avoid resolubilization problems and to get advantage of the trypsin-enhancing action of MS compatible detergents. Protein digestion was performed using Lys-C/trypsin at an enzyme:substrate ratio of 1:50 [wt/wt] and incubation for 2 h at 37°C under 1000 rpm agitation. After reducing urea concentration to 1M by addition of 100 mM TEAB, a second aliquot of trypsin was added to the sample at an enzyme:substrate ratio of 1:100 [wt/wt] and incubated overnight at 37°C with continuous agitation at 1000 rpm. The reaction was halted by addition of freshly prepared 50% TFA [vol/vol], pH<2. The acidified sample was centrifuged at 16000 g for 10 min at RT to eliminate MS-compatible detergents. Digests were first desalted and concentrated on HyperSep C18 cartridges (50 mg/mL, Thermo Scientific, San Jose, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions, and then dried using a speedvac. Peptides were resuspended in 50 µl of 3.5% ACN [vol/vol] and 0.1% TFA [vol/vol] in water. One µg of peptides dissolved in solvent A (0.1% TFA in 2% ACN) was directly loaded onto a reversed-phase pre-column (Acclaim PepMap 100, Thermo Scientific) and eluted in backflush mode. Peptide separation was achieved using a reversed-phase analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, 0.075 × 250 mm, Thermo Scientific) with a 140 min linear gradient of 4%-32% solvent B (0.1% TFA in 80% ACN) for 99 min, 32%–60% solvent B for 10 min, 60%-95% for 1 min and holding at 95% for the last 10 min at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min on an Ultimate 3000 RSLN nanoHPLC system (Thermo Scientific). The peptides were analyzed by an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with enabled advanced peak determination (APD). The peptides were subjected to a nanospray ionization source, followed by MS/MS in the Fusion Lumos coupled online to the UPLC. Intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120 000 and MS/MS spectra were acquired in the IT after HCD fragmentation at 30%. A data-dependent procedure of MS/MS scans was applied for the top precursor ions above a threshold ion count of 5.0E3 in the MS survey scan with 30 sec dynamic exclusion. The total cycle time was set to 4 sec. MS1 spectra were obtained with an AGC target of 4E5 ions and a maximum injection time of 50 msec. MS2 spectra were acquired with an AGC target of 1E4 ions and a maximum injection time of 35 msec. For MS scans, the m/z scan range was 350 to 1800. MS/MS spectra were exported using the following settings: peptide mass range: 350-5000 Da, minimal total ion intensity: 500. Protein identification and quantification Resulting MS/MS data were processed using Sequest HT search engine within Proteome Discoverer 2.3 against a human protein reference target-decoy database obtained from Uniprot (01/03/2020, 87489 forward entries). Trypsin was specified as the cleavage enzyme, allowing up to 2 missed cleavages, 4 modifications per peptide and up to 3 charges. Mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.1 Da for fragment ions, and considered dynamic modifications were +15.99 Da for oxidized methionine and +57.00 for carbamidomethyl cysteine. The false discovery rate (FDR) was investigated using Percolator, and thresholds for protein, peptide and modification sites were specified at 1%.

### Data Protocol
A threshold was maintained to pinpoint the most confidently detected proteins to consider in our interpretation of results. This threshold included proteins with an FDR <1% and unique peptides ≥2 for each sample. Extracted ion chromatograms (XICs) were performed by label-free quantification using Proteome Discoverer 2.3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and were regarded as an indicator of protein abundance. Sampling rate normalization was applied to all our data (mean XICs / number of detected proteins). After confirming data normality, two-way ANOVA was used to first compare the overall performance of detergents irrespective of their used concentrations, and then the outcomes of the same detergent at different concentrations. To evaluate the reproducibility of each procedure between replicates, Pearson’s correlation was used to calculate the correlation coefficient, r. Intra-class correlation coefficients (ICCs) were also acquired between replicates to further evaluate the consistency of each method using IBM SPSS Statistics 24 software  (IBM Corp, Armonk, NY, USA), as described by Richard Landers(14). Briefly, intra class correlation is measured on a scale of 0 to 1; 1 represents perfect consistency (reproducibility) with no measurement/technical error, while 0 indicates no reliability.Total abundance of a protein was considered as the sum of its XICs in all fractions, and the percentage per fraction was accordingly calculated. Log2 fold change of XICs between fraction 2 per fraction 1 was used to identify the most enriched protein matrisome categories in each fraction. To evaluate the total amount of identified matrisome proteins in all fractions, we used quantile normalization of the XIC sum in all fractions, as well as Log10 transformation. To compare the identification of matrisome proteins using DC-MaP with a fractionation-free technique, we applied a paired t-test (core matrisome) and Wilcoxon’s test (matrisome-associated) according to data distribution in each matrisome category. In this comparison, only proteins confidently identified with both techniques were considered. 8) Data mining and data visualization Matrisome protein recognition in raw MS data was achieved by comparison of confidently detected proteins with the Matrisome Project data set (15), an in silico-identified ECM protein set founded on the characteristic domain-based organization of ECM proteins. JMP® 14 was used to manage data, conduct correlations and generate qualitative analysis graphs.

### Publication Abstract
Currently, the extracellular matrix (ECM) is considered a pivotal complex meshwork of macromolecules playing a plethora of biomolecular functions in health and disease beyond its commonly known mechanical role. Only by unraveling its composition can we leverage related tissue engineering and pharmacological efforts. Nevertheless, its unbiased proteomic identification still encounters some limitations mainly due to partial ECM enrichment by precipitation, sequential fractionation using unfriendly-mass spectrometry (MS) detergents, and resuspension with harsh reagents that need to be entirely removed prior to analysis. These methods can be technically challenging and labor-intensive, which affects the reproducibility of ECM identification and induces protein loss. Here, we present a simple new method applicable to tissue fragments of 10 mg and more. The technique has been validated on human ovarian tissue and involves a standardized procedure for sample processing with an MS-compatible detergent and combined centrifugation. This two-step protocol eliminates the need for laborious sample clarification and divides our samples into 2 fractions, soluble and insoluble, successively enriched with matrisome-associated (ECM-interacting) and core matrisome (structural ECM) proteins.

### Keywords
Proteins, Human, Fractionation, Ovarian, Matrisome, Identifcation

### Affiliations
UCL - de Duve Institute, Brussels Belgium
Pôle de Recherche en Gynécologie, Institut de Recherche Expérimentale et Clinique, Université Catholique de Louvain, 1200 Brussels, Belgium

### Submitter
Didier Vertommen

### Lab Head
Dr Amorim Christiani
Pôle de Recherche en Gynécologie, Institut de Recherche Expérimentale et Clinique, Université Catholique de Louvain, 1200 Brussels, Belgium


