### Accession
PXD007189

### Title
The physiology of Agaricus bisporus in semi-commercial compost cultivation appears to be highly conserved among unrelated isolates

### Description
In this project we evaluated the physiology of different agaricus bisporus strains during growth in compost, in particular with respect to plant biomass d egradation and carbon catabolism.

### Sample Protocol
Compost samples were taking at two time points of the cultivation and used for the isolation of RNA and proteins, that were further processed towards transcriptomics and proteomics

### Data Protocol
Samples were normalized and analyzed for the abundance of the proteins, based on PSM counts and compared between the time points and strains

### Publication Abstract
The white button mushroom Agaricus bisporus is one of the most widely produced edible fungus with a great economical value. Its commercial cultivation process is often performed on wheat straw and animal manure based compost that mainly contains lignocellulosic material as a source of carbon and nutrients for the mushroom production. As a large portion of compost carbohydrates are left unused in the current mushroom cultivation process, the aim of this work was to study wild-type A. bisporus strains for their potential to convert the components that are poorly utilized by the commercial strain A15. We therefore focused our analysis on the stages where the fungus is producing fruiting bodies. Growth profiling was used to identify A. bisporus strains with different abilities to use plant biomass derived polysaccharides, as well as to transport and metabolize the corresponding monomeric sugars. Six wild-type isolates with diverse growth profiles were compared for mushroom production to A15 strain in semi-commercial cultivation conditions. Transcriptome and proteome analyses of the three most interesting wild-type strains and A15 indicated that the unrelated A. bisporus strains degrade and convert plant biomass polymers in a highly similar manner. This was also supported by the chemical content of the compost during the mushroom production process. Our study therefore reveals a highly conserved physiology for unrelated strains of this species during growth in compost.

### Keywords
Agaricus bisporus, Compost, Cazy genes, Physiology

### Affiliations
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Group
1Fungal Physiology, Westerdijk Fungal Biodiversity Institute & Fungal Molecular Physiology, Utrecht University, Uppsalalaan 8, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Harm Post

### Lab Head
Dr Ronald P. de Vries
1Fungal Physiology, Westerdijk Fungal Biodiversity Institute & Fungal Molecular Physiology, Utrecht University, Uppsalalaan 8, The Netherlands


