### Accession
PXD001130

### Title
Proteomics of GPI-anchored proteins

### Description
GPI-anchored proteins (GPI-APs) are an important class of glycoproteins that are tethered to the surface of mammalian cells via the lipid glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI).  GPI-APs have been implicated in many important cellular functions including cell adhesion, cell signaling, and immune regulation. Proteomic identification of mammalian GPI-APs en masse has been limited technically by poor sensitivity for these low abundance proteins and the use of methods that destroys cell integrity. Here we present methodology that permits identification of GPI-APs liberated directly from the surface of intact mammalian cells through exploitation of their appended glycans to enrich for these proteins ahead of LC-MS/MS analyses. We validate our approach in HeLa cells, identifying a greater number of GPI-APs from intact cells than has been previously identified from isolated HeLa membranes and a lipid raft preparation. We further apply our approach to define the cohort of endogenous GPI-APs that populate the distinct apical and basolateral membrane surfaces of polarized epithelial cell monolayers. Our approach provides a new method to achieve greater sensitivity in the identification of low abundance GPI-APs from the surface of live cells and the non-destructive nature of the method provides new opportunities for the temporal or spatial analysis of cellular GPI-AP expression and dynamics.

### Sample Protocol
Per-O-acetylated N-azidoacetylgalactosamine (GalNAz) labeled MDCK cells (~5 x 107) were treated with or without Bacillus cereus PI-PLC (3U/ml) for 30 min at 37▒C in fresh DMEM without FBS. Spent culture medium was harvested after PI-PLC and mock treatments and concentrated using a VivaSpin20 concentrator (10 kDa MWCO). Purification of GalNAz labeled proteins was performed using a ClickIT Protein Enrichment Kit (Invitrogen), followed by on-bead tryptic digestion. Peptides solutions were loaded onto a biphasic C18-SCX (Phenomonex) self-packed nano back column (3 cm C18, 3 cm SCX, 150 ?m i.d.). After loading, the column was moved in-line with a U3000 HPLC split to obtain ~300 nL/min flow rate over the nano-analytical columns. The back column was first washed with a gradient of high water to high organic and back to high water to remove salts and move the peptides to the SCX. The back column was then attached to a 15 cm x 100 ?m C18 front resolving column with an integrated nanospray tip (New Objective Picofrit packed with Phenomenex Aqua C18). An automated two-dimensional LC-MS/MS run was programmed into Xcalibur (Thermo Fisher) and each sample was analyzed with a 3 salt step followed by 2 h C18 separation for a total of 6 h analyses time per sample. The C18 resolving column with integrated nanospray tip was housed in a nanospray source (Proxeon, Thermo Fisher) attached to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). During the entire 2D-LC-MS/MS analyses, the Q Exactive operated in data-dependent mode with top 10 MS/MS spectra (1 microscan, 17,500 resolution) for every full scan (1 microscan, 70,000 resolution). Dynamic exclusion was turned on with a 15 s interval and normalized collision energy was set at 28.0%.

### Data Protocol
RAW files from each 6 h 2D-LC-MS/MS analysis were extracted into mzXML files, using the MSConvert utility from ProteoWizard suite of tools (http://proteowizard.sourceforge.net). The search database was constructed using a recent canine predicted protein database (NCBI DogRefSeq, CanFam3.1, September 2013 assembly, containing 34,594 proteins), the common contaminants (trypsin, keratin, etc.) and lab protein standards (BSA, hemoglobin, etc.). Searches were done with the MyriMatch search engine (Version 2.1.138). The parent ion tolerance of 20 ppm and the fragment ion tolerance of 30 ppm were specified. Carbamidomethylation of Cys (+57.0293 Da) was specified as a fixed modification. The maximum number of missed cleavages was set to 2. Resulting pepXML output files were analyzed with IDPicker for assembling the raw peptide identifications from MyriMatch into confident protein identifications. False Discovery Rate (FDR) for each sample run was calculated by IDPicker based on the reverse database target-decoy search strategy with a Maximum FDR parameter set to 2%. Calculated FDRs were <1.35% across all sample runs.

### Publication Abstract
Glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored proteins (GPI-APs) are an important class of glycoproteins that are tethered to the surface of mammalian cells via the lipid GPI. GPI-APs have been implicated in many important cellular functions including cell adhesion, cell signaling, and immune regulation. Proteomic identification of mammalian GPI-APs en masse has been limited technically by poor sensitivity for these low abundance proteins and the use of methods that destroy cell integrity. Here, we present methodology that permits identification of GPI-APs liberated directly from the surface of intact mammalian cells through exploitation of their appended glycans to enrich for these proteins ahead of LC-MS/MS analyses. We validate our approach in HeLa cells, identifying a greater number of GPI-APs from intact cells than has been previously identified from isolated HeLa membranes and a lipid raft preparation. We further apply our approach to define the cohort of endogenous GPI-APs that populate the distinct apical and basolateral membrane surfaces of polarized epithelial cell monolayers. Our approach provides a new method to achieve greater sensitivity in the identification of low abundance GPI-APs from the surface of live cells and the nondestructive nature of the method provides new opportunities for the temporal or spatial analysis of cellular GPI-AP expression and dynamics.

### Keywords
Proteomics gpi proteins mammalian glycan glycosylphosphatidylinositol

### Affiliations
New England BioLabs Inc

### Submitter
Manesh Shah

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Christopher Taron
New England BioLabs Inc


