### Accession
PXD001253

### Title
iTRAQ proteomics of non fibrotic carcinoma on Human Liver

### Description
We present a study of hepatocellular carcinoma developed on non-fibrotic liver (nfHCC) that combines complementary quantitative iTRAQ-based proteomics and phosphoproteomics approaches. Using both approaches, we analyzed a set of 24 samples (18 nfHCC vs 6 non-tumor liver tissue).

### Sample Protocol
Fifty to 100 mg of liver tissue were homogenized at 4°C in 0.5 ml of buffer containing 0.1 M TEAB pH 9.3, 0.15 M NaCl, 0.1% SDS, 5 mM NaF, 2 mM Na3VO4 and 10 mM DTT, then heated 10 min at 100°C. After cooling at 25°C, 40 mM IAA was added for 45 min at RT for cysteine alkylation. Proteolytic cleavage with trypsin 1% (w/w) was performed overnight at 37°C. The mixture was acidified with TFA 1% final and tryptic peptides were purified with online C18 SPE (washing buffer: 0.1% TFA, elution buffer 60% ACN). The purified fraction was dried with a vacuum centrifuge (Speed Vac,Thermo Scientific) and weighted. Ten mg of dried extract were currently obtained from 100 mg tissue. Phosphopeptides purification was performed with 2 mm x 4 cm column packed with TiO2 (Titansphere TiO 5 µm, GL Science, Japan), and UV detection (280 nm). Loading / washing buffer was 1M Glycolic acid in 5% TFA. Retained peptides were eluted with was 1M ammonium hydroxide immediately neutralized with formic acid, then desalted with C18 SPE. iTRAQ 8plex labeling was carry out according to the manufacturer recommendations. Acquisition with LTQ 0rbitrap XL was a FT-MS scan followed by ion trap MS/MS and FT MS/MS of the 3 most intense precursor ions.

### Data Protocol
Data processing was performed with Proteome Discoverer 1.3 (Thermo Scientific). Query parameters were set as follows: precursor and fragment tolerance respectively 3 ppm and 0.5 Da, full tryptic peptides, 1 miss-cleavage, static modification on C (+57.0215) n-terminal and lysine (304.2054) and dynamic modification on S, T, Y (+79.9663) and M (+15.9949). The human sequences were extracted from Swiss-Prot complete genome databases. Result filters were: peptide confidence = high (automatic adjustment of XCorr for False Discovery Rate (FDR) <1%).

### Publication Abstract
Proteomics-based clinical studies represent promising resources for the discovery of novel biomarkers or for unraveling molecular mechanisms underlying particular diseases. Here, we present a discovery study of hepatocellular carcinoma developed on nonfibrotic liver (nfHCC) that combines complementary quantitative iTRAQ-based proteomics and phosphoproteomics approaches. Using both approaches, we compared a set of 24 samples (18 nfHCC versus six nontumor liver tissue). We identified 43 proteins (67 peptides) differentially expressed and 32 peptides differentially phosphorylated between the experimental groups. The functional analysis of the two data sets pointed toward the deregulation of a protein homeostasis (proteostasis) network including the up-regulation of the Endoplasmic Reticulum (ER) resident HSPA5, HSP90B1, PDIA6, and P4HB and of the cytosolic HSPA1B, HSP90AA1, HSPA9, UBC, CNDP2, TXN, and VCP as well as the increased phosphorylation of the ER resident calnexin at Ser583. Antibody-based validation approaches (immunohistochemistry, immunoblot, Alphascreen(&#xae;), and AMMP(&#xae;)) on independent nfHCC tumor sets (up to 77 samples) confirmed these observations, thereby indicating a common mechanism occurring in nfHCC tumors. Based on these results we propose that adaptation to proteostasis imbalance in nfHCC tumors might confer selective advantages to those tumors. As such, this model could provide an additional therapeutic opportunity for those tumors arising on normal liver by targeting the tumor proteostasis network. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD001253.

### Keywords
Human, Itraq, Non fibrotic hepatocellular carcinoma

### Affiliations
CNRS
Inserm U1053, Université Bordeaux 2, France

### Submitter
Luc NEGRONI

### Lab Head
Dr Eric Chevet
Inserm U1053, Université Bordeaux 2, France


