### Accession
PXD027265

### Title
A universal peptide matrix interactomics approach to disclose motif dependent protein binding

### Description
Protein-protein interactions (PPIs) mediated by intrinsically disordered regions (IDRs) are often based on short linear motifs (SLiM). SLiMs are implicated in signal transduction and gene regulation, yet remain technically laborious and notoriously challenging to study. Here, we present an optimized method for a PRotein Interaction Screen on a peptide MAtrix (PRISMA) in combination with quantitative mass spectrometry. The protocol was benchmarked with previously described SLiM based PPIs using peptides derived from EGFR, SOS1, GLUT1 and CEBPB and extended to map binding partners of kinase activation loops. The detailed protocol provides practical considerations for setting up a PRISMA screen and subsequently implementing PRISMA on a liquid handling robotic platform as a cost effective high-throughput method. Optimized PRISMA can be universally applied to systematically study SLiM based interactions and associated post translational modifications (PTMs) or mutations to advance our understanding of the largely uncharacterized interactomes of intrinsically disordered protein regions.

### Sample Protocol
PRISMA protocol optimization  PRISMA experimental conditions were optimized stepwise to determine optimal parameters. As a starting point, a protocol adapted from the workflows described by Meyer et al. and Dittmar et al. were used: In brief, peptide membranes were conditioned with detergent-free modified RIPA buffer, followed by incubation with cell lysate (45 min, shaking, 4°C), and three washing steps 5 min each with PRISMA washing buffer (50mM HEPES pH 7.6, 150mM NaCl, 1mM EGTA, 1mM MgCl2, 10% Glycerol). After air drying of membranes, individual peptide spots were punched out with a 2 mm biopsy puncher (Stiefel) and placed into a 96 well plate containing 20 µl of denaturation buffer (6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 10 mM HEPES pH 8) per well. After in solution digestion and desalting via STAGE tips, samples were subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis. We optimized this default protocol by modification of one parameter at a time, using three different EGFR peptides (WT, p-Y1092p, N1094A) in technical quadruplicates or triplicates as a reference. Protein concentration was tested at 1, 2, 4 and 8 mg/ml while keeping the incubation time at 45 min. In a second experiment, protein concentration was kept at 4 mg/ml and incubation times were tested at 10, 20, 45 and 90 min. Influence of temperature during washing (at 4°C and at room temperature) was also evaluated as an indicator of the suitability of the protocol for automation. Different HPLC gradient lengths were tested by modifying the length of the linear part of the gradient (10, 20 or 45 min) as described.   Universal PRISMA method All incubation and washing steps were performed on an orbital shaker at 4°C in a plastic box. PRISMA membranes were pre-conditioned with PRISMA washing buffer for 15 min. After pre-conditioning, the membrane was incubated with HeLa cell lysate  (4 mg/ml) for 20 min on ice and washed three times for 5 min each with cold PRISMA washing buffer. After washing, the membrane was placed on a glass plate and air dried (~1 h). After drying, each spot was punched out with a 2 mm biopsy puncher and fully immersed in 20 µl denaturation buffer in a 96 well plate. At this point, samples can be frozen at -80°C before continuing with in solution digestion. In solution digestion of PRISMA samples For in solution digestion, samples were first reduced by with 2 μl of 10mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP) for 30 min, followed by alkylation with 2 μl of 55mM chloroacetamide (CAA) for 45 min. Samples were diluted with 100 μl of 50mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) and digested overnight by adding 0.5 µg of sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) and 0.5 mAU of sequencing grade LysC (Wako) per sample. Digested samples were acidified with 4 μl of 25% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and desalted with STAGE tips as described previously [24]. Desalted and dried samples were resuspended in 12 µl MS sample buffer (3% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid v/v) and 2 µl of the sample were separated online with an Easy-nLCTM 1200 system directly coupled to a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (both Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were separated on a 20 cm reverse-phase column (inner diameter 75 µm, packed in-house with 3 µm C18-reprosil beads) at a flow rate of 250 nl/min at 55°C. The gradient was ramping from 3% to 81% acetonitrile in 20 min, followed by a plateau at 81% acetonitrile for 2 min and 45% acetonitrile for 10 min (total gradient length 32 min). MS data was acquired in positive data dependent acquisition mode with a top20 method. Full scan MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 60 000 in the scan range from 350 to 1800 m/z, automated gain control (AGC) target value of 3e6 and maximum injection time (IT) of 10 ms. MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 15000, AGC target of 1e5 and maximum IT of 25 ms. Ions were isolated with a 1.3 m/z isolation window and normalized collision energy was set to 28. Unassigned charge states and charge states 1, 7 or higher were excluded from fragmentation. The minimum AGC target was set to 5e3 and dynamic exclusion was set to 20 s. The acquisition queue was randomized and blank injections were run every fourth sample.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed using MaxQuant version 1.5.2.8 searching against the human UniProt database (2017) containing reviewed entries, isoforms and un-reviewed entries (total 92931 entries) and common contaminants. Protease specificity was set to trypsin. A maximum of two missed cleavage sites per peptide were allowed. Fixed modifications were set to carbamidomethylation of C and variable modifications were set to M-oxidation, N-terminal acetylation (M) and deamidation (NQ). A maximum of 5 modification per peptide were allowed. N-terminal acetylation and M-oxidation were used in protein quantification (unmodified counterpart  discared). Minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and the main search peptide tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm. Modified peptide identifications with a score greater than 40 and a delta score greater than 6 were allowed. False-discovery rate was set to 0.01 on protein and peptide level. Minimal ratio count was set to 2. For all runs, the fast label-free quantification (Fast LFQ) was enabled. The match between run option was disabled unless otherwise stated.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ptm, Peptide interactomics, Prisma

### Affiliations
Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Association, Berlin, Germany
Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine, Berlin

### Submitter
Evelyn Ramberger

### Lab Head
Dr Philipp Mertins
Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Association, Berlin, Germany


