### Accession
PXD008745

### Title
N-glycoproteomic analyses from different insect species reveal conserved and  unique glycoproteins

### Description
N-glycosylation is  one  of  the  most  abundant and  conserved  protein  modifications  in eukaryotes.  This  modification  serves  various important  functions,  such  as  protein  folding  and cellular  attachment,  but  also  modulation  of  a protein’s  function.  Recently,  it  has  been  shown that N-glycosylation of proteins plays a vital role in insect development and survival, which makes it an interesting target for pest control. Despite the importance of protein N-glycosylation in insects, not  much  is  known  about  insect  N-glycoproteomes.  Here,  we  report  on  the  N-glycoproteomes  of  three  major  pest  insects spanning  different  insect  orders;  Drosophila melanogaster  (Diptera),  Tribolium  castaneum (Coleoptera)  and  Acyrthosiphon  pisum (Hemiptera).  The  number  of  identified  N-glycosylation  sites  ranged  from  889  in  T. castaneum, to 941 in D. melanogaster and 1,338 in  A.  pisum.  Comparison  between  the  different insect  species  revealed  both  conserved  and species-specific  glycoproteins.  The  functionality of  the  insect  glycoproteins  together  with  the conservation  of  the  N-glycosites  throughout evolution are discussed. This information can help in  the  elaboration  of  novel  pest  insect  control strategies  based  on  interference  in  insect  glycosylation.

### Sample Protocol
nsect  colonies  and  lectin:  All  insects  were collected  from  laboratory  colonies  kept  under standard conditions. The D. melanogaster colony was maintained on a corn meal-based diet under standard conditions  of  23-25°C,  65-70% relative humidity  and  a  16:8  light/dark  photoperiod.  T. castaneum  was  kept  on  whole  wheat  flour containing  5%  brewer’s  yeast  and  cultured  at 30°C  and  60%  humidity  in  darkness.  The  pea aphid A. pisum was reared on broad beans (Vicia faba)  at  23°C  and  60%  relative  humidity. Concanavalin  A  (ConA)  was  purified  from  Jack bean meal (Canavalia ensiformis).  Protein  extraction:  Protein  extracts  were made  from  approximately  100  mg  of  adult insects.  Complete  insects  were  crushed  in  liquid nitrogen using a chilled mortar and pestle. Insect powder  was  dissolved  in  extraction  buffer  (2% SDS, 50 mM DTT in 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 7.8) at a  ratio  of  10  ml/g  of  tissue.  The  samples  were vortexed and sonicated for 5 min to break down insect  particles.  Subsequently,  extracts  were incubated for 3 min in boiling water and further sonicated for 5 min. After centrifugation at 16 000 x g for 15 min, the supernatant from the protein. extract was collected.  Clean-up  of  extract  on  filter  device  and trypsin  digest:  Extracts  were  subsequently processed using the FASP method, as previously described47,  with  adjustments  (experimental procedures mentioned as supporting information, p.  S-2  –  S-4).  Briefly,  protein  extracts  were diluted  1:10 (v:v)  with  8 M  urea  in  0.1 M Tris-HCl,  pH  8.5  (urea  buffer)  and  applied  on  an Amicon Ultra-0.5 centrifugal filter device (30 K, Millipore,  Burlington,  MA).  After  centrifugation for 15 min at 14 000 x g the protein extracts were washed twice with urea buffer on the filter device. Subsequently,  50  mM  iodoacetamide  was  added and samples were incubated for 20 min at 37°C in darkness. After alkylation, samples were washed twice  with  urea  buffer,  followed  by  two  washes with  40  mM  ammonium  bicarbonate  (ABC). Filter  units  were  transferred  into  new  collection tubes  and  trypsin  (Pierce,  Thermo  Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) was added in a ratio of 1:100 (w:w). Samples were incubated overnight at 37°C.  Resulting  peptides  were  collected  in  40 mM ABC using two centrifugation steps. Trypsin was  deactivated  by  heating  (5  min  at  99°C)  and removed by leading the samples over a Nanosep® Centrifugal Device (10K, Pall, NY). Lectin enrichment and deglycosylation: The method  for  insect  glycopeptide  enrichment  was based on the N-glyco-FASP technique, previously described  by  Zielinska  et  al.4,  with  adjustments (experimental  procedures  mentioned  as supporting  information,  p.  S-2  –  S-4).  The digested  peptides  (150  µg)  were  mixed  with ConA (300 µg) in 2x binding buffer (1mM CaCl 2 , 1 mM  MnCl 2 ,  0.5 M  NaCl  in  20  mM  Tris-HCl, pH  7.4),  the  mixture  was  added  on  a  Microcon Centrifugal  device  (30  K,  Millipore)  and incubated  for  1  h  at  room  temperature.  Each  of the  following  centrifugation  steps  was  preceded by  2  min  incubation  at  37°C  in  a  warm  water bath.  Unbound  peptides  were  eluted  by centrifugation and 4 washes with binding buffer. Subsequently, the captured peptides were washed twice with 50 mM citrate-phosphate buffer, pH 5  and  the  filter  unit  was  transferred  into  a  new collection  tube.  PNGase  A  (0.2  mU)  from almonds (ProGlycAn, Vienna, Austria) in 100 µl of  50  mM  citrate-phophate  buffer,  pH  5  was added  to  the  filter  unit  and  incubated  for  3  h  at 37°C  for  deglycosylation.  The  deglycosylated peptides  were  eluted  twice  with  50  µl  40  mM ABC  and  collected  together.  Samples  were prepared  in  three  biological  replicates,  and  for each  biological  replicate  the  eluent  from  three filter units was pooled. The  obtained  peptide  mixtures  were  purified  on  Ziptips  C18  (10  µl, Millipore) and analyzed on a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Gemany). For each sample, 10 µl was introduced into an  LC−MS/MS  system  through  an  Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano LC (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Raw  data  from  each  LC  run  were  searched with  the  MaxQuant  software48  (version  1.5.8.3) against  the  SwissProt  database  (Organism:  D. melanogaster  (21,982  entries),  T.  castaneum (18,505 entries), A. pisum (35,819 entries)) with a precursor  mass  tolerance  set  to  20  ppm  for  the first  search  and  set  to  4.5  ppm  for  the  main search. Trypsin/P was selected as enzyme setting, allowing for two missed cleavages, and cleavage was  allowed  when  arginine  or  lysine  was followed  by  proline.  S-carbamidomethylation  of cysteines  was  searched  as  fixed  modification, whereas  methionine  oxidation, acetylation of the protein  N-terminus  and  asparagine  deamidation were  set  as  variable  modifications.  The  false discovery  rate  for  peptide,  protein,  and  site identification  was  set  to  1%,  and  the  minimum peptide length to 7. The minimum score threshold for  both  modified  and  unmodified  peptides  was set  to  40.  Collected  data  were  analyzed using a KNIME workflow (version 3.3.2)49. First, former  N-glycopeptides  were  identified  as peptides  containing  an  N-glycosylation  sequon, either N-X!-S, N-X!-T, N-X!-V or N-X!-C, where the  asparagine  residue  at  postion  1  in  the  N-glycosylation  sequon  is  deamidated.  Only  N-glycosylation sites that were detected in all three biological replicates were further studied. Mapped glycopeptides were  grouped by  protein  to  assess the number of unique identified N-glycoproteins. Gene Ontology (GO) was studied for the different unique N-glycoproteins using the online database DAVID50, for the visualization of overrepresented molecular  functions,  cellular  components  and biological  processes  in  relation  to  the  insect’s proteome. Sequence motif analysis was used to compare the N-glycopeptides released with PNGase A and PNGase  F  using  iceLogo51.  Protein  sequence analysis  of  the  identified  glycoproteins  was studied  using  InterProScan52.  Similarity  of glycoproteins  identified  in  each  insect  species were  assessed  using  BLAST+  revealing  which glycoproteins  were  present  in  two  or  all  three studied  insects.53.  Orthologues  of  selected glycoproteins  were  retrieved  using  the  BLAST tool from Uniprot (http://www.uniprot.org/blast/). Retrieved  protein  sequences  were  aligned  in MEGA754 using Muscle and Maximum-likelihood phylogenetic  trees  were  constructed  and compared to the evolutionary species tree.

### Publication Abstract
N-glycosylation is one of the most abundant and conserved protein modifications in eukaryotes. The attachment of N-glycans to proteins can modulate their properties and influences numerous important biological processes, such as protein folding and cellular attachment. Recently, it has been shown that protein N-glycosylation plays a vital role in insect development and survival, which makes the glycans an interesting target for pest control. Despite the importance of protein N-glycosylation in insects, knowledge about insect N-glycoproteomes is scarce. To fill this gap, the N-glycosites were identified in proteins from three major pest insects, spanning different insect orders and diverging in post-embryonic development, feeding mechanism and evolutionary ancestry: Drosophila melanogaster (Diptera), Tribolium castaneum (Coleoptera) and Acyrthosiphon pisum (Hemiptera). The N-glyco-FASP method for isolation of N-glycopeptides was optimized to study the insect N-glycosites and allowed the identification of 889&#x202f;N-glycosylation sites in T. castaneum, 941 in D. melanogaster and 1338 in A. pisum. Although a large set of the corresponding glycoproteins is shared among the three insects, species- and order-specific glycoproteins were also identified. The functionality of the insect glycoproteins together with the conservation of the N-glycosites throughout evolution is discussed. This information can help in the elaboration of novel pest insect control strategies based on interference in insect glycosylation.

### Keywords
Lectin, Drosophila  melanogaster, Mass  spectrometry  (ms), N-linked  glycosylation, Glycoprotein, Proteomics, Insect, Pest insect

### Affiliations
Medical Protein Chemistry
Department of Crop Protection, Faculty of Bioscience Engineering, Ghent University, Coupure links 653, B-9000 Ghent,Belgium

### Submitter
An Staes

### Lab Head
Dr Guy Smagghe
Department of Crop Protection, Faculty of Bioscience Engineering, Ghent University, Coupure links 653, B-9000 Ghent,Belgium


