### Accession
PXD013053

### Title
Discovery of DYRK1A dependent phosphorylation in mouse embryonic heart

### Description
The Dp1Tyb mouse model for Down syndrome contains a duplication of 23Mb of mouse chromosome 16 (Mmu16) that is orthologous to human chromosome 21 (Hsa21). This region contains 145 coding genes, and thus these genes are present in 3 copies. Dp1Tyb mice display congenital heart defects, similar to the ones seen in people with Down syndrome. These defects include ventricular and atrio-ventricular septal defects and are seen at embryonic day 14.5 (E14.5) of gestation. One of the 145 genes present in 3 copies in Dp1Tyb mice codes for a kinase called DYRK1A. We found that by crossing Dp1Tyb mice with mice carrying a heterozygous Dyrk1a loss of function allele, thereby reducing the dosage of the Dyrk1a gene from 3 to 2 copies, we rescue the congenital heart defects. Thus 3 copies of Dyrk1a are required to cause heart defects, and, presumably, increased DYRK1A protein is required for the heart defects. We compared the phosphoproteome in Dp1Tyb versus Dp1TybDyrk1a+/+/- embryonic hearts in order to discover alterations in phosphoproteins that could pinpoint molecular mechanisms that give rise to the congenital heart defects. The two strains (Dp1Tyb and Dp1TybDyrk1a+/+/-) differ only in the copy number of Dyrk1a (3 v 2) and thus differences in phosphoproteins would include both direct and indirect targets of DYRK1A activity.

### Sample Protocol
Lysates generated from individual mouse embryonic hearts were reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin. Peptide samples were cleaned up with C18 spin columns prior to labelling with TMT10plex reagents. The pooled TMT-labelled samples were enriched for phosphopeptides using Fe-NTA based IMAC and titanium dioxide based methods and then analysed by LC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed in MaxQuant v1.6.0.13, with the database search conducted against the canonical sequences of the UniProt Mus Musculus complete proteome, downloaded August 2017.

### Publication Abstract
Down syndrome (DS) is caused by trisomy of human chromosome 21 (Hsa21). DS is a gene dosage disorder that results in multiple phenotypes including congenital heart defects. This clinically important cardiac pathology is the result of a third copy of one or more of the approximately 230 genes on Hsa21, but the identity of the causative dosage-sensitive genes and hence mechanisms underlying this cardiac pathology remain unclear. Here, we show that hearts from human fetuses with DS and embryonic hearts from the Dp1Tyb mouse model of DS show reduced expression of mitochondrial respiration genes and cell proliferation genes. Using systematic genetic mapping, we determined that three copies of the dual-specificity tyrosine phosphorylation-regulated kinase 1A (<i>Dyrk1a</i>) gene, encoding a serine/threonine protein kinase, are associated with congenital heart disease pathology. In embryos from Dp1Tyb mice, reducing <i>Dyrk1a</i> gene copy number from three to two reversed defects in cellular proliferation and mitochondrial respiration in cardiomyocytes and rescued heart septation defects. Increased dosage of DYRK1A protein resulted in impairment of mitochondrial function and congenital heart disease pathology in mice with DS, suggesting that DYRK1A may be a useful therapeutic target for treating this common human condition.

### Keywords
Imac, Lc-ms/ms, Orbitrap fusion lumos, Tio2

### Affiliations
Head of the Crick Mass Spectrometry Proteomics Platform
The Francis Crick Institute

### Submitter
Helen Flynn

### Lab Head
Dr Ambrosius P.
Head of the Crick Mass Spectrometry Proteomics Platform


