### Accession
PXD039145

### Title
Can Blood Proteome Diversity Among Fish Species Help Explain Perfluoroalkyl Acid Trophodynamics in Aquatic Food Webs?

### Description
Per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) are a diverse family of industrially significant synthetic chemicals infamous for extreme environmental persistence and global environmental distribution. Many PFAS are bioaccumulative and biologically active mainly due to their tendency to bind with various proteins. These protein interactions may be the most important element in determining the accumulation potential and tissue distribution of individual PFAS. Trophodynamics studies including aquatic food webs present inconsistent evidence for PFAS biomagnification. This study strives to identify whether the observed variability in PFAS bioaccumulation potential among species could correspond with interspecies protein composition differences. Specifically, this work compares the perfluorooctane sulfonate (PFOS) serum protein binding potential and the tissue distribution of ten perfluoroalkyl acids (PFAAs) detected in alewife (Alosa pseudoharengus), deepwater sculpin (Myoxocephalus thompsonii), and lake trout (Salvelinus namaycush) of the Lake Ontario aquatic piscivorous food web. To identify interspecies differences in PFAS-binding serum proteins, fish sera were pre-equilibrated with PFOS, fractionated by serial molecular weight cut-off filter fractionation, followed by liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry analysis of the tryptic protein digests and the PFOS extracts of each fraction. This workflow identified similar serum proteins for all fish species. However, serum albumin was only identified in lake trout, suggesting apolipoproteins are likely the primary PFAA transporters in alewife and deepwater sculpin sera. PFAA tissue distribution analysis provided supporting evidence for interspecies variations in lipid transport and storage, which may also contribute to the varied PFAA accumulation in these species.

### Sample Protocol
Alewife and deepwater sculpin were collected near Oswego, NY using a bottom trawl on May 1, 2018 between approximately 43° 33.653'N, 76° 31.548'W (125 m deep) and 43° 33.645'N, 76° 44.958'W (220 m deep). Fish were placed in a plastic storage tote filled with fresh lake water until blood collection occurred. Lake trout were collected by hook and line angling on April 9, 2019 near Porter, NY near 43° 19.570'N, 78° 58.503'W (25 m deep) and kept in a livewell with recirculating lake water until blood collection.  Fish blood samples were collected by dorsal gill incision[1] using capillary tubes, swiftly transferred to 1.5 mL polypropylene microcentrifuge tubes, clotted (30 min, ~10 °C) and centrifuged (20 min; 3,000 RCF). Serum was transferred followed by addition of protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (3x concentration in final sample) and sodium azide (0.1% wt./v in final sample). 250 µL polypropylene vial inserts within microcentrifuge tubes were used for alewife and sculpin sera collection. Sera were stored on ice until returning to shore and then frozen at -80 °C.  Serum samples were thawed in a room temperature water bath, centrifuged (18,000 RCF; 10 min), and a 50 µL aliquot was combined with 50 µL of 100 µM PFOS stock solution (in 9 mM ammonium acetate), agitated by hand, centrifuged (3,000 RCF; 30 sec), and equilibrated (1 hr; room temp.). Filter fractionation proceeded similar to published protocols.[2]–[4] A single 100, 50, and 3 kDa Amicon Ultra filter per sample was pre-rinsed with 0.1 M Trizma buffer with 18% acetonitrile (ACN; added to help disaggregate serum proteins[2], [4]). Equilibrated serum/PFOS solutions were diluted with 400 µL of 0.1 M Trizma with 22.5% ACN, mixed, and 150 µL were loaded to a 100 kDa filter device and centrifuged (1,500 RCF) to ~40 µL (~10 min). Another 150 µL was loaded to each filter, mixed, and the upper reservoirs rotated 180 degrees and again centrifuged to ~40 µL. This process continued until ~40 µL of 100 kDa retentate remained, and then repeated with 50 kDa and 3 kDa devices (6,000 RCF used for 3 kDa). Retentate aliquots were transferred to microcentrifuge tubes for total protein analysis by Bradford assay (5 µL) and PFOS analysis by UPLC-MS/MS (10 µL). The remaining retentate was determined gravimetrically, dried by vacuum centrifugation (no heat), and stored at -20°C. Dried protein fractions were solubilized in 20 µL of buffer (7 M urea, 0.05 M tris-HCl, pH 7.8). A max of 200 µg of protein per sample were subjected to further processing. Disulfides were reduced (1 µL 0.2 M dithiothreitol (DTT) in 0.05 M tris-HCl, pH 7.8; 1 hr, room temp.)  and alkylated (4 µL 0.2 M Iodoacetamide (IAA) in 0.05 M tris-HCl, pH 7.8; 1 hr, room temp. in darkness). Lyophilized trypsin was resolubilized to 400 µg/mL with ice-chilled 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate and added to ice-chilled samples (protein:trypsin 10:1; final volume 70 µL, adjusted with water). Protein digestion at 37°C was terminated after ~16 hrs. with formic acid (FA; 1% v/v in each sample; ~pH 3). Digests were dried (45°C) and stored at -20°C before reconstituting with 100 µL of 0.2% aq. FA and cleanup using C18 TopTips. TopTips were conditioned with three 50 µL washes each of ACN, 1:1 water/ACN with 0.2% FA, and 0.2% aq. FA. Samples were pushed through TopTips twice followed by two discarded 50 µL washes with 0.2% aq. FA and four elutions with 100 µL total of 1:1 water/ACN with 0.2% FA (two 50 µL volumes each loaded twice). Eluates were evaporated to dryness (45°C) and reconstituted (max 3 µg/µL) with LC-MS water containing 2% ACN and 0.2% FA for nanoLC-MS/MS. [1] C. F. Watson, K. N. Baer, and W. H. Benson, “Dorsal gill incision: A simple method for obtaining blood samples in small fish,” Environ. Toxicol. Chem., vol. 8, no. 5, pp. 457–461, May 1989, doi: 10.1002/etc.5620080512. [2] R. G. Harper, S. R. Workman, S. Schuetzner, A. T. Timperman, and J. N. Sutton, “Low-molecular-weight human serum proteome using ultrafiltration, isoelectric focusing, and mass spectrometry,” Electrophoresis, vol. 25, no. 9, pp. 1299–1306, 2004, doi: 10.1002/elps.200405864. [3] C. Shupenko, P. Chaudhury, and D. Koticha, “A simple strategy for protein enrichment using ultrafiltration. Accessible as online protocol at: https://www.sigmaaldrich.com/US/en/technical-documents/protocol/protein-biology/protein-concentration-and-buffer-exchange/a-simple-strategy-for-protein-enrichment-using-ultrafiltration,” 2007. Accessed: Oct. 06, 2020. [Online]. Available: Accessible as online protocol at: https://www.sigmaaldrich.com/US/en/technical-documents/protocol/protein-biology/protein-concentration-and-buffer-exchange/a-simple-strategy-for-protein-enrichment-using-ultrafiltration [4] R. S. Tirumalai, K. C. Chan, D. A. Prieto, H. J. Issaq, T. P. Conrads, and T. D. Veenstra, “Characterization of the Low Molecular Weight Human Serum Proteome,” Mol. Cell. Proteomics, vol. 2, no. 10, pp. 1096–1103, Oct. 2003, doi: 10.1074/mcp.M300031-MCP200.

### Data Protocol
Data-directed MS data were acquired by a Xevo G2 quadrupole time-of-flight (QToF) MS (Waters Corp., Milford, Massachusetts (MA), USA) in FastDDA mode using 0.2 sec survey scans over the m/z range of 350–1,800. The 12 most intense ions with a charge of 2+, 3+, 4+, 5+, or 6+ were fragmented via collision-induced dissociation until the total MS/MS ion counts exceeded 6,000 intensity per sec or for up to 5.1 sec. MS/MS acquisition over m/z 50–2,000 was triggered when an MS ion signal intensity exceeded 350 counts per second. Each injection of sample was followed by a series of gradient washes to remove carryover proceeded by injection of [Glu1]-Fibrinopeptide B (Glu-Fib; 1 pmol/mL) solution to monitor system stability. Mass spectrometer-generated raw data files (.RAW) were converted to peak list files (.PKL) using ProteinLynx Global Server 2.4 (PLGS 2.4, Waters Corp.) with the following parameters: fifth order polynomial adaptive background subtraction, a threshold of 30%, Savitzky–Golay smoothing with two iterations and a window of three channels, and centroid calculation of the top 80% of peaks based on a minimum peak width of four channels at half height. These .PKL files were loaded into Mascot Daemon 2.5.1 (Matrix Science, Inc., Boston, MA) for protein database searching. Protein databases for Mascot Daemon searches were exported as .FASTA files originating from various queries against all protein databases available through the National Center for Biotechnology Information website (NCBI; https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/). Specifically, these databases were: SwissProt and protein information resource (PIR) components of UniProt; Protein Research Foundation (PRF); Protein Data Bank (PDB); and translations of coding regions on sequences in Entrez Nucleotide (NCBI reference sequences (RefSeq) and International Sequence Database Collaboration resources including the DNA Data Bank of Japan (DDBJ), European Molecular Biology Laboratory (EMBL), and the National Institutes of Health (NIH) genetic sequence database, GenBank). The protein database was created from combining entries from three ray-finned fish taxa: cohort Otomorpha (1,839,047 entries from 13,200 species including 114 alewife entries; superorder Protacanthopterygii (1,505,888 entries from 466 species including 58,488 lake trout entries; and order Perciformes (1,001,646 entries from 5,531 species including 26 deepwater sculpin entries).  Mascot Daemon database search criteria included trypsin as the digestive enzyme, a maximum of three missed cleavages, peptide charges 2+, 3+, or 4+, 0.5 Da and 0.8 Da were respective parent ion and fragment ion mass tolerances, carbamidomethylation was a fixed modification for cysteine and a variable modification for N-termini, and methionine oxidation was a variable modification. Mascot Daemon database search results, as .DAT files, and the searched protein database, in .FASTA format, were imported into Scaffold version 4.3.4 (Proteome Software, Inc., Portland, Oregon, USA), which uses an intuitive graphical interface to validate and compare MS/MS-based peptide and protein identifications among samples. When loading .DAT files in Scaffold, each sample injected on the LC was treated as a unique biosample. After Scaffold processed all loaded .DAT files into a Scaffold file (.SF3), Scaffold Viewer 5.1.0 (open source; Proteome Software, Inc.) was used to further validate protein identifications and qualify and compare protein abundance across filter fractions and fish species based on total spectrum counts. Depending on the comparison being made, Scaffold biosamples were categorized based on the respective fish species, filter molecular weight cut-off (kDa), or a combination of both species and filter molecular weight cut-off. Peptides and proteins were validated based on exceedance of 95% confidence in the identification (<5% chance of the same identification being made by chance). Protein clustering was used to group proteins sharing common peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) are a diverse family of industrially significant synthetic chemicals infamous for extreme environmental persistence and global environmental distribution. Many PFAS are bioaccumulative and biologically active mainly due to their tendency to bind with various proteins. These protein interactions are important in determining the accumulation potential and tissue distribution of individual PFAS. Trophodynamics studies including aquatic food webs present inconsistent evidence for PFAS biomagnification. This study strives to identify whether the observed variability in PFAS bioaccumulation potential among species could correspond with interspecies protein composition differences. Specifically, this work compares the perfluorooctane sulfonate (PFOS) serum protein binding potential and the tissue distribution of ten perfluoroalkyl acids (PFAAs) detected in alewife (Alosa pseudoharengus), deepwater sculpin (Myoxocephalus thompsonii), and lake trout (Salvelinus namaycush) of the Lake Ontario aquatic piscivorous food web. These three fish sera and fetal bovine reference serum all had unique total serum protein concentrations. Serum protein-PFOS binding experiments showed divergent patterns between fetal bovine serum and fish sera, suggesting potentially two different PFOS binding mechanisms. To identify interspecies differences in PFAS-binding serum proteins, fish sera were pre-equilibrated with PFOS, fractionated by serial molecular weight cut-off filter fractionation, followed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry analysis of the tryptic protein digests and the PFOS extracts of each fraction. This workflow identified similar serum proteins for all fish species. However, serum albumin was only identified in lake trout, suggesting apolipoproteins are likely the primary PFAA transporters in alewife and deepwater sculpin sera. PFAA tissue distribution analysis provided supporting evidence for interspecies variations in lipid transport and storage, which may also contribute to the varied PFAA accumulation in these species. Proteomics data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD039145.

### Keywords
Albumin, Shotgun proteomics, Apolipoproteins, Pfas, Biomagnification, Protein binding

### Affiliations
Biochemistry & Proteomics Group, Department of Chemistry and Biomolecular Science, Clarkson University, Potsdam, NY, USA
Clarkson University

### Submitter
Adam Point

### Lab Head
Dr Costel C. Darie
Biochemistry & Proteomics Group, Department of Chemistry and Biomolecular Science, Clarkson University, Potsdam, NY, USA


