### Accession
PXD006527

### Title
A thiol probe for measuring unfolded protein load and proteostasis in cells

### Description
When proteostasis becomes unbalanced, unfolded proteins accumulate and can aggregate. However, probes quantifying proteostasis imbalance are lacking. We report a dye, tetraphenylethene maleimide (TPE-MI) that can measure unfolded protein load.TPE-MI fluorescence is enhanced upon reaction with cellular proteomes under conditions promoting accumulation of unfolded proteins and, via proteomic analysis, can track which proteins expose more cysteine residues under stress.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics sample preparation. Neuro2a cells were cultured for 12 passages in SILAC-LYS6 (Catalog Number: 89983, Thermofischer scientific, MA, USA) labelled media or unlabelled media. The SILAC-LYS6 labelled cells were treated with tunicamycin (1µg/ml) in T25 flasks overnight, then  both SILAC-LYS6 labelled and unlabelled cells were treated with TPE-MI (200 µM, 30 min). Cells were then detached using a cell scraper, lysed using RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, 150 mM NaCl, Protease inhibitor, 1% v/v NP40, 2 mM EDTA and DNAase1), then centrifuged at 16,000 g for 10 min. The protein concentration in the supernatant was determined by a BCA assay (Catalog number: 23225, Thermofischer scientific, MA, USA) using appropriate standards. Then, 50 µg of the total protein in each supernatant (i.e., tunicamycin treated and control)  (n=5) was combined in a 1:1 ratio and extracted using methanol-chloroform precipitation {Wessel, 1984 #2751}. The protein pellet was solubilized in 100 µL of 8 M Urea, 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), reduced using 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine, pH 8.0, and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 45 min, then subjected to trypsin digestion (2.5 µg, 24 ºC, overnight). The resultant peptides were desalted by solid-phase extraction (SPE), by acidification in 1% v/v formic acid; pre-washing the cartridge (Oasis HLB 1 cc Vac Cartridge, product number 186000383, Waters Corp., USA) with 1 mL of 80% v/v acetonitrile (ACN) containing 0.1% v/v trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and washing with 1.2 mL of 0.1% v/v TFA 3 times by applying to a vacuum manifold; loading the sample on the cartridge and washing with 1.5 mL of 0.1% v/v TFA; eluting the sample with 0.8 mL of 80% v/v ACN containing 0.1% v/v TFA and collecting in 1.5 mL microcentrifuge tubes; then lyophilization by freeze drying (Virtis, SP Scientific). The peptides were resuspended in 100 µL distilled water. A microBCA assay (Catalog Number: 23235, Thermofischer scientific, MA, USA) with appropriate standards was performed in triplicate to quantify the peptides. Then, a 2 µg aliquot of peptides was resuspended in 15 µL of 2% v/v ACN containing 0.05% v/v trifluoroacetic acid prior to analysis. NanoESI-LC-MS/MS analysis. Samples were analysed by nanoESI-LC-MS/MS using a Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA. USA) fitted with a nanoflow reversed-phase-HPLC (Ultimate 3000 RSLC, Dionex). The nano-LC system was equipped with an Acclaim Pepmap nano-trap column (Dionex – C18, 100 Å, 75 μm × 2 cm) and an Acclaim Pepmap RSLC analytical column (Dionex – C18, 100 Å, 75 μm × 50 cm). For each LC-MS/MS experiment, 1 μL (0.135 µg protein) of the peptide mix was loaded onto the enrichment (trap) column at an isocratic flow of 5 μL/min of 3% CH3CN containing 0.1% v/v formic acid for 5 min before the enrichment column was switched in-line with the analytical column. The eluents used for the LC were 0.1% v/v formic acid (solvent A) and 100% CH3CN/0.1% formic acid v/v (solvent B). The gradient used (300 nL/min) was from 3-22% B in 90 min, 22-40% B in 10 min, and 40-80% B in 5 min then maintained for 5 min before re-equilibration for 8 min at 3% B prior to the next analysis. All spectra were acquired in positive mode with full scan MS from m/z 400–1500 in the FT mode at 120,000 mass resolving power after accumulating to a target value 5.00e5 with maximum accumulation time of 50 ms. Lockmass of 445.12002 was used. Data dependant HCD MS/MS of charge states >1 was performed using a 3 second scan method, at a target value of 1.00e4, a maximum accumulation time of 60 ms, a normalized collision energy of 35%, an activation Q of 0.25, and at a 15,000 mass resolving power. Dynamic exclusion was used for 45 sec.

### Data Protocol
Proteomic data analysis.  Data analysis was carried out using Proteome Discoverer (version 2.1.0.81; Thermo Scientific) with the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science version 2.4.1) against the Swissprot Mus Musculus database (Version: 2015_07; 548,872 entries). The search was conducted with 20 ppm MS tolerance, 0.6 Da MS/MS tolerance, with one missed cleavage allowed. The following modifications were allowed: Methionine oxidation, N-terminal protein acetylation, N-terminal Methionine cleavage and SILAC-LYS6 (Variable); Carbamidomethylcysteine (Fixed). The false discovery rate (FDR) maximum was set to 0.005 % at the peptide identification level (actual was 0.005 for each replicate) and 1% at the protein identification level. Proteins were filtered for those containing at least one unique peptide in all five replicates. The common contaminant, Keratin, was excluded from the dataset. Peptide quantitation was performed in Proteome Discoverer v. 2.1.0.81 using the precursor ion quantifier node with the mass tolerance for isotope pattern multiplets set to 2 ppm, and 2 single peak/missing channels allowed. The protein abundance in each replicate was calculated by summation of the unique peptide abundances that were used for quantitation (heavy SILAC-LYS6 and light unlabelled derivatives). Quantified proteins were then filtered to those containing at least two unique peptides, one of which contained cysteine. The average peptide abundance ratio (i.e., tunicamycin treated versus control) for the non-cysteine containing peptides were then calculated for each protein. These values were then compared with the peptide abundance ratio of the corresponding cysteine-containing peptide(s) for each protein, in order to quantify the change in cysteine peptide abundance following TPE-MI treatment. Wilcoxon matched pair sign rank test was performed to calculate the statistical significance (Graphpad Prism, v.7) of cysteine depletion on TPE-MI treatment.

### Publication Abstract
When proteostasis becomes unbalanced, unfolded proteins can accumulate and aggregate. Here we report that the dye, tetraphenylethene maleimide (TPE-MI) can be used to measure cellular unfolded protein load. TPE-MI fluorescence is activated upon labelling free cysteine thiols, normally buried in the core of globular proteins that are exposed upon unfolding. Crucially TPE-MI does not become fluorescent when conjugated to soluble glutathione. We find that TPE-MI fluorescence is enhanced upon reaction with cellular proteomes under conditions promoting accumulation of unfolded proteins. TPE-MI reactivity can be used to track which proteins expose more cysteine residues under stress through proteomic analysis. We show that TPE-MI can report imbalances in proteostasis in induced pluripotent stem cell models of Huntington disease, as well as cells transfected with mutant Huntington exon 1 before the formation of visible aggregates. TPE-MI also detects protein damage following dihydroartemisinin treatment of the malaria parasites Plasmodium falciparum. TPE-MI therefore holds promise as a tool to probe proteostasis mechanisms in disease.Proteostasis is maintained through a number of molecular mechanisms, some of which function to protect the folded state of proteins. Here the authors demonstrate the use of TPE-MI in a fluorigenic dye assay for the quantitation of unfolded proteins that can be used to assess proteostasis on a cellular or proteome scale.

### Keywords
Mouse, Lc/msms, Silac, Orbitrap fusion lumos, Neuro2a, Tpe-mi

### Affiliations
The University of Melbourne
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and Bio21 Molecular Science and Biotechnology Institute, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC 3010, Australia

### Submitter
Nagaraj Moily

### Lab Head
Dr Danny Hatters
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and Bio21 Molecular Science and Biotechnology Institute, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC 3010, Australia


