### Accession
PXD007610

### Title
Ubiquilin1 promotes antigen-receptor mediated proliferation by eliminating mislocalized mitochondrial proteins

### Description
Ubiquilins (Ubqlns) are a family of ubiquitin receptors that promote the delivery of hydrophobic and aggregated ubiquitinated proteins to the proteasome for degradation. We carried out a proteomic analysis of a B cell lymphoma-derived cell line, BJAB, that requires UBQLN1 for survival to identify UBQLN1 client proteins. When UBQLN1 expression was acutely inhibited, 120 mitochondrial proteins were enriched in the cytoplasm, suggesting that the accumulation of mitochondrial client proteins in the absence of UBQLN1 is cytostatic. Using a Ubqln1-/- mouse strain, we found that B cell receptor (BCR) ligation of Ubqln1-/- B cells led to a defect in cell cycle entry. As in BJAB cells, mitochondrial proteins accumulated in BCR-stimulated cells, leading to protein synthesis inhibition and cell cycle block. Thus, UBQLN1 plays an important role in clearing mislocalized mitochondrial proteins upon cell stimulation, and its absence leads to suppression of protein synthesis and cell cycle arrest.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for Mass Spectrometry analysis: Murine B cell samples for multiplexed quantitative mass spectrometry analysis were processed and analyzed through the Thermo Fisher Scientific Center for Multiplexed Proteomics at Harvard Medical School. First, cells were harvested following IgM stimulation, washed twice with PBS, and snap-frozen at -80° C. Lysis buffer (8 M Urea, 1% SDS, 50 mM Tris pH 8.5, Protease and Phosphatase inhibitors from Roche) was added to the cell pellets to achieve a cell lysate with a protein concentration between 2-8 mg/mL. A BCA assay was used to determine the final protein concentration in the cell lysate. Fractionated human BJAB cytosol samples were processed using the QProteome Mitochondrial isolation kit and analyzed in the Finley and Gygi laboratories. Cytosolic proteins were methanol/chloroform precipitated and resuspended in urea buffer (8 M urea, 50 mM EPPS pH 8.0, 75 mM NaCl, protease and phosphatase inhibitors). Then, all protein were reduced and alkylated as previously described, and finally precipitated following the methanol/chloroform protocol. Precipitated proteins were resuspended in 4 M Urea, 50 mM Tris pH 8.5. Proteins were first digested with LysC (1:50; enzyme:protein) for 12 hours at 25 C. The LysC digestion is diluted down to 1 M Urea, 50 mM Tris pH8.5 and then digested with trypsin (1:100; enzyme:protein) for another 8 hours at 37 C. Peptides were desalted using a C18 solid phase extraction cartridges as previously described. Dried peptides were resuspended in 200 mM EPPS, pH 8.0 and then quantified using the micro-BCA assay (Pierce). The same amount of peptide from each condition was labeled with tandem mass tag (TMT) reagent (1:4; peptide:TMT label) (Pierce). The TMT labeling reactions (either 10-plex of 6-plex) were performed for 2 hours at 25 C. Modification of tyrosine residue with TMT was reversed by the addition of 5% hydroxyl amine for 15 minutes at 25 C. The reaction was quenched with 0.5% TFA and samples were combined at a 1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1 ratio. Combined samples were desalted and offline fractionated into 24 fractions as previously described.  Liquid chromatography-MS3 (LC-MS3): Fractions from the basic reverse phase step (every other fraction) were analyzed with an LC-MS3 data collection strategy on an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) equipped with a Proxeon Easy nLC 1000 for online sample handling and peptide separations. Approximately 5 µg of peptide resuspended in 5% formic acid and 5% acetonitrile was loaded onto a 100 µm inner diameter fused-silica micro capillary with a needle tip pulled to an internal diameter less than 5 µm. The column was packed in-house to a length of 35 cm with a C18 reverse phase resin (GP118 resin 1.8 μm, 120 Å, Sepax Technologies, Newark DE). The peptides were separated using a 180 min or 150 min linear gradient from 3% to 25% buffer B (100% ACN + 0.125% formic acid) equilibrated with buffer A (3% ACN + 0.125% formic acid) at a flow rate of 400 nL/min across the column. The scan sequence for the Orbitrap Fusion began with an MS1 spectrum (Orbitrap analysis, resolution 120,000, 400−1,400 m/z scan range with quadrapole isolation, AGC target 2 × 105, maximum injection time 100 ms, dynamic exclusion of 90 seconds). ‘Top N” (the top 10 precursors) was selected for MS2 analysis, which consisted of CID ion trap analysis, AGC target 8 × 103, NCE 35, maximum injection time 150 ms), and quadrapole isolation of 0.5 Da for the MS1 scan. The top ten fragment ion precursors from each MS2 scan were selected for MS3 analysis (synchronous precursor selection, SPS), in which precursors were fragmented by HCD prior to Orbitrap analysis (NCE 55, max AGC 1 × 105, maximum injection time 150 ms, MS2 ion trap isolation was set to 2 Da, resolution 60,000 or 15,000 for the TMT-10plex and -6plex respectively.

### Data Protocol
TMT-SPS-MS3 data analysis: A suite of in-house software tools were used for .RAW file processing and controlling peptide and protein level false discovery rates, assembling proteins from peptides, and protein quantification from peptides as previously described. MS/MS spectra were searched against a Uniprot human database (February 2014) with both the forward and reverse sequences. Database search criteria are as follows: tryptic with two missed cleavages, a precursor mass tolerance of 50 ppm, fragment ion mass tolerance of 1.0 Da, static alkylation of cysteine (57.02146 Da), static TMT labeling of lysine residues and N-termini of peptides (229.162932 Da), and variable oxidation of methionine (15.99491 Da). TMT reporter ion intensities were measured using a 0.003 Da window around the theoretical m/z for each reporter ion in the MS3 scan. Peptide spectral matches with poor quality MS3 spectra were excluded from quantitation (<200 summed signal-to-noise across 10 channels and <0.5 precursor isolation specificity).

### Publication Abstract
Ubiquilins (Ubqlns) are a family of ubiquitin receptors that promote the delivery of hydrophobic and aggregated ubiquitinated proteins to the proteasome for degradation. We carried out a proteomic analysis of a B cell lymphoma-derived cell line, BJAB, that requires UBQLN1 for survival to identify UBQLN1 client proteins. When UBQLN1 expression was acutely inhibited, 120 mitochondrial proteins were enriched in the cytoplasm, suggesting that the accumulation of mitochondrial client proteins in the absence of UBQLN1 is cytostatic. Using a <i>Ubqln1<sup>-/-</sup></i> mouse strain, we found that B cell receptor (BCR) ligation of <i>Ubqln1</i><sup>-/-</sup> B cells led to a defect in cell cycle entry. As in BJAB cells, mitochondrial proteins accumulated in BCR-stimulated cells, leading to protein synthesis inhibition and cell cycle block. Thus, UBQLN1 plays an important role in clearing mislocalized mitochondrial proteins upon cell stimulation, and its absence leads to suppression of protein synthesis and cell cycle arrest.

### Keywords
Mitochondrial, Tmt, B cells, Cytosol

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School
Finley and Gygi lab Cell Biology Department Harvard Medical School US

### Submitter
Miguel Prado

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel J Finley
Finley and Gygi lab Cell Biology Department Harvard Medical School US


