### Accession
PXD009228

### Title
FLNc S2233 S2236 PRM analysis

### Description
Skeletal muscle is known to adapt dynamically to changes in workload by regulatory processes of the phosphatidylinositide 3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt pathway. We performed a global quantitative phosphoproteomics analysis of contracting mouse C2 myotubes treated with insulin growth factor 1 (IGF-1) or LY294002 to activate or inhibit PI3K/Akt signaling, respectively. Among the significantly regulated phosphopeptides we identified the novel extended basophilic motif RxRxxp[S/T]xxp[S] to be enriched in the set of down-regulated phosphopeptides following inhibition of PI3K/Akt signaling. Using literature-based text mining we identified the kinases Akt, serum and glucocorticoid-regulated kinase 1 (SGK1) and p70S6 kinase to be potentially involved in the phosphorylation of the first serine in the RxRxxp[S/T]xxp[S] motif, whereas no kinase targeting the serine in the +3 position was revealed. In the signaling adapter protein filamin c (FLNc) we found this novel motif in immunoglobulin (Ig)-like domain 20 which is involved in various protein interactions. Through in vitro and in cellulo kinase assays we identified Akt and protein kinase C alpha as the responsible kinases phosphorylating FLNc in this motif at the first and the second serine, respectively.

### Sample Protocol
Mouse C2 cells transiently expressing BirA* FLNc d18-21 were treated for with 10 µM MK-2206 (Selleck) or 10 µM Gö6976 (Merck) for 1 h or with 300 nM PMA (Sigma Aldrich) for 15 min. In experiments using both, inhibitor and activator, cells were first treated with the respective inhibitor (MK-2206, Gö6976) for 1 h and PMA was added for the last 15 min of the treatment. Cells were lysed on ice with 500 µl modified RIPA buffer. Enrichment of the Myc-tagged FLNc fragment was performed with 10 µl Myc-Ddynabeads (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. On-bead tryptic digestion was performed in 200 µl ammonium bicarbonate solution (50 mM) for 3.5 h at 42°C and 800 rpm on a thermoshaker using sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) in a 1:50 (w/w) ratio. Phosphopeptides were enriched as described above and mixed with 47.5-95 fmol phosphopeptides of a phosphopeptide standard comprising 181 phosphopeptides (Intavis). For targeted MS analysis on a QExactive Plus instrument, an inclusion list comprising 16 precursors with 96 transitions was generated with Skyline 2.6.0.6709 and is available in the PanoramaWeb interface. One scan cycle consisted of a full MS1 scan at a resolution of 70,000, an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3e6 ions, a max. ion time of 20 ms and a scan range from m/z 400 to 1600, followed by 10 PRM scans. Each PRM scan targeted one precursor of the inclusion list at a resolving power of 17,500, an AGC target of 2e5, a max. ion time of 49 ms and an isolation window of 2 m/z. Raw files were analyzed with Skyline and intensities of hFLNc phosphopeptides were normalized to the summed intensities of eight phosphopeptides (SEGpSPVLPHEPAK, TGMGSGpSAGKEGGPFK, pSTVASMMHR, VIEDNEpYTAR, LIEDNEpYTAR, pSFNGSLKNVAVDELSR, pSGGQRHSPLSQR, AYpTHQVVTR) from the standard under control conditions.

### Data Protocol
Raw files from PRM analyses were pre-processed into mascot generic files using the ProteomeDiscoverer and searched against Uniprot Proteomeset database (release 11.2016, 92,933 protein entries) including the sequence of the recombinantly expressed FLNc d18-21 and its mutants as background for FDR calculation. Precursor and fragment mass tolerances were set to 5 ppm and 0.1 Da, respectively. Search parameters were as follows: proteolytic enzyme: trypsin, max. number of missed cleavages: 1, variable modifications: methionine oxidation and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine. Mascot .dat files, all raw files and the FLNc d18-21 sequence were imported into Skyline 4.1.0. MS1 intensities were calculated as described by (Schilling et al, 2012) using the MS1 filtering tutorial provided by the software developers. Skyline peptide settings were as follows: tryptic peptides with 1 missed cleavage, a time window of 3 min, min. and max. peptide length 8 and 30 aa, respectively, exclusion of cysteine-containing peptides, phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine and oxidation of methionine as variable modifications, and max. number of variable modifications and neutral losses 3 and 1, respectively. Orbitrap default parameters were used for transition settings. Extracted ion chromatograms of the imported peptides were manually inspected for correct peak picking and peak integration was manually adjusted, if necessary. Total MS1 areas for all peptides with ≥6 MS/MS spectra, a mass error of ≤ 3 ppm were exported into a pivot table and processed using Excel 2010 and Origin 9.1. Mean and standard error of the mean (SEM) were first calculated for the three biological replicates and subsequently for the technical replicates. Intensities of all phosphopeptides were summed and were normalized by the respective calculated summed intensity.

### Publication Abstract
The PI3K/Akt pathway promotes skeletal muscle growth and myogenic differentiation. Although its importance in skeletal muscle biology is well documented, many of its substrates remain to be identified. We here studied PI3K/Akt signaling in contracting skeletal muscle cells by quantitative phosphoproteomics. We identified the extended basophilic phosphosite motif RxRxxp[S/T]xxp[S/T] in various proteins including filamin-C (FLNc). Importantly, this extended motif, located in a unique insert in Ig-like domain 20 of FLNc, is doubly phosphorylated. The protein kinases responsible for this dual-site phosphorylation are Akt and PKC&#x3b1;. Proximity proteomics and interaction analysis identified filamin A-interacting protein 1 (FILIP1) as direct FLNc binding partner. FILIP1 binding induces filamin degradation, thereby negatively regulating its function. Here, dual-site phosphorylation of FLNc not only reduces FILIP1 binding, providing a mechanism to shield FLNc from FILIP1-mediated degradation, but also enables fast dynamics of FLNc necessary for its function as signaling adaptor in cross-striated muscle cells.

### Keywords
Filamin c, Pkc, Akt, Myocytes

### Affiliations
AG Warscheid
Biologie II
Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg
Schänzlestr. 1
79104 Freiburg
Germany

Department of Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Institute of Biology II, Faculty of Biology and BIOSS Centre for Biological Signalling Studies, University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany

### Submitter
Friedel Drepper

### Lab Head
Dr Bettina Warscheid
Department of Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Institute of Biology II, Faculty of Biology and BIOSS Centre for Biological Signalling Studies, University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany


