### Accession
PXD030492

### Title
Dynamics of allosteric regulation of the phospholipase C-gamma isoform

### Description
we used hydrogen deuterium exchange masss spec (HDX-MS) to define the exchange kinetics of PLC-y1 as it interacts with the kinase domain of FGFR1, and liposomes containing PIP2, in order to understand how PLC-y isozymes operate at membranes. We show that the binding of FGFR1k to PLC-y1 increases deuterium incorporation within the interface between the regulatory domains and the catalytic core. Importantly, the addition of liposomes further increase deuterium exchange within the same region.

### Sample Protocol
Exchange reactions were carried out at 18°C in 20 μL volumes with a final concentration of 1.25 μM PLC-γ1 (H335A), PLC-γ1 (H335A+D1165H), PLC-γ1 (H335A)-FGFR1K complex, or PLC-γ1 (H335A+D1165H)-FGFR1K complex. A total of eight conditions were assessed: four in the presence of liposomes containing 90% phosphatidylethanolamine (PE) and 10% phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PIP2) and four in the absence of liposomes. The conditions were as follows:  PLC-γ1(H335A) alone PLC-γ1(H335A+D1165H) alone PLC-γ1(H335A)-FGFR1K PLC-γ1(H335A+D1165H)-FGFR1K PLC-γ1(H335A) + liposomes PLC-γ1(H335A+D1165H) + liposomes PLC-γ1(H335A)-FGFR1K + liposomes PLC-γ1(H335A+D1165H)-FGFR1K + liposomes For conditions containing liposomes, lipids were present at a final concentration of 320 µM. Prior to the addition of D2O, 2.0 μL of liposomes (or liposome buffer [20 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 100 mM KCl]) were added to 1.5 μL of protein, and the solution was left to incubate at 18°C for 2 min. Hydrogen-deuterium exchanges was initiated by the addition of 16.5 μL D2O buffer (88% D2O, 150 mM NaCl, 100 mM HEPES pH 7.0, 10 µM CaCl2, 0.5 mM TCEP pH 7.5) to 3.5 μL protein or protein-liposome solution for a final D2O concentration of 72%. Exchange was carried out over five time points (3, 30, 300, 3000, and 10000 sec) and terminated by the addition of 50 μL ice-cold acidic quench buffer (0.8 M guanidine-HCl, 1.2% formic acid). After quenching, samples were immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C. All reactions were carried out in triplicate.

### Data Protocol
Protein digestion and MS/MS data collection – Protein samples were rapidly thawed and injected onto an integrated fluidics system containing a HDx-3 PAL liquid handling robot and climate-controlled chromatography system (LEAP Technologies), a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system, as well as an Impact HD QTOF Mass spectrometer (Bruker). Proteins were run over two immobilized pepsin columns (Applied Biosystems; Poroszyme™ Immobilized Pepsin Cartridge, 2.1 mm x 30 mm; Thermo-Fisher 2‐3131‐00; at 10°C and 2°C respectively) at 200 μL/min for 3 minutes. The resulting peptides were collected and desalted on a C18 trap column (Acquity UPLC® BEHTM C18 1.7µm column (2.1 x 5 mm); Waters 186002350). The trap was subsequently eluted in line with a C18 reverse-phase separation column (Acquity 1.7 μm particle, 100 × 1 mm2 C18 UPLC column, Waters 186002352), using a gradient of 5‐36% B (Buffer A 0.1% formic acid; Buffer B 100% acetonitrile) over 16 minutes. Mass spectrometry experiments were performed on an Impact II QTOF (Bruker) acquiring over a mass range from 150 to 2200 m/z using an electrospray ionization source operated at a temperature of 200 °C and a spray voltage of 4.5 kV. Peptide identification – Peptides were identified using data-dependent acquisition following tandem MS/MS experiments (0.5 s precursor scan from 150‐2000 m/z; twelve 0.25 s fragment scans from 150-2000 m/z). MS/MS datasets were analyzed using PEAKS7 (PEAKS), and a false discovery rate was set at 1% using a database of purified proteins and known contaminants. Mass analysis of peptide centroids and measurement of deuterium incorporation – HD‐Examiner Software (Sierra Analytics) was used to automatically calculate the level of deuterium incorporation into each peptide. All peptides were manually inspected for correct charge state, correct retention time, and appropriate selection of isotopic distribution. Deuteration levels were calculated using the centroid of the experimental isotope clusters. Results for these proteins are presented as relative levels of deuterium incorporation and the only control for back exchange was the level of deuterium present in the buffer (72%). Changes in any peptide at any time point greater than specified cut-offs (5% and 0.4 Da) and with an unpaired, two-tailed t-test value of p<0.01 were considered significant.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Plc, Hdxms

### Affiliations
University of Victoria

### Submitter
John Burke

### Lab Head
Dr Dr John E Burke
University of Victoria


