### Accession
PXD015212

### Title
Co-immunoprecipitation of FAMA-interacting proteins in Arabidopsis thaliana seedlings

### Description
Identifying interaction partners and protein complex compositions for transcription factors (TFs) can produce valuable information on the mechanisms by which they regulate gene expression or are themselves regulated by signaling pathways in the cell. FAMA is a TF that is specifically expressed in the last stages of stomatal guard cell development in the epidermis of young leaves and other aerial tissues of higher plants. It is a master regulator of guard cell development and promotes terminal differentiation of the guard cell precursor by both activating and repressing hundreds of genes. How this is achieved mechanistically is still unclear. We therefore isolated putative FAMA interaction partners from young Arabidopsis seedlings expressing FAMA-CFP under the FAMA promoter using proteasome inhibitor treatment and formaldehyde crosslinking, followed by a classical co-immunoprecipitation mass spectrometry approach. Plants expressing nuclear GFP under a stomatal lineage specific promoter were used as controls. In two independent experiments with different crosslinking and immunoprecipitation conditions, we found ICE1, a known heterodimerization partner of FAMA, to be enriched in FAMA-CFP versus control samples. Other proteins with known transcriptional regulator or co-regulator function were not identified, presumably due to the low abundance of the bait protein. The interaction of FAMA with BRXL2, another regulator of guard cell development, which was detected in one experiment, is likely an artifact since BRXL2 does not localize to the nucleus under normal conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Samples from two independent experiments were analyzed in this project. Where sample preparation was different, this is indicated behind the respective conditions using [IP1] and [IP2] for the two experiments. Four day old Arabidopsis seedlings expressing FAMA-CFP under the FAMA promoter or GFP-NLS under the SPCH or MUTE promoter were treated with 10 μM MG-132 for 2.5 hours [IP1] or 2 hours [IP2] to stabilize the bait protein and crosslinked by treatment with 0.25 % [IP1] or 0.125 % [IP2] formaldehyde for 15 minutes on ice, followed by quenching with 120 mM glycine. Proteins were extracted by resuspending the ground plant material (15 g per sample) in extraction buffer (containing 75 mM NaCl, 0.5 % [IP1] or 1 % [IP2] Triton-X-100, 1mM PMSF and 1x complete proteasome inhibitor), sonicating, adding 15 μl Lysonase and incubating for 30 minutes at 4°C, followed by centrifuging at 12,000 g at 4°C for 10 minutes. For affinity purification, the supernatants were incubated with GFP-Trap_MA beads (ChromoTek) for five [IP1] or three [IP2] hours at 4°C. Bound proteins were eluted from the beads by boiling in 2x Leammli buffer and separated by SDS-PAGE on Tris-glycine gels. About 1 cm long sample areas were excised from the gel, and used for in-gel Tryptic digestion. Peptides were desalted using C18 ZipTips. LC-MS/MS was done on a Q-Exactive HF hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher), equipped with an Easy LC 1200 UPLC liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher). Peptides were separated using analytical column ES803 (Thermo Fisher). The flow rate was 300 nl/min and a 120-min gradient was used. Peptides were eluted by a gradient from 3 to 28 % solvent B (80 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid) over 100 minutes and from 28 to 44 % solvent B over 20 minutes, followed by short wash at 90 % solvent B. Precursor scan was from mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) 375 to 1,600 and top 20 most intense multiply charged precursors were selection for fragmentation. Peptides were fragmented with higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) with normalized collision energy (NCE) 27.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and label-free quantification (LFQ) were done in MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.6). Both experiments were searched together. Settings were default settings with minor modifications. Methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications and Carbamidomethylcysteine as fixed modification. Maximum number of modifications per peptide was five. Trypsin/P with a maximum of two missed cleavages was set as digest. Peptides were searched against the latest TAIR10 protein database containing a total of 35,386 entries (TAIR10_pep_20101214, updated 2011-08-23, www.arabidopsis.org) plus a list of likely contaminants containing Trypsin, human Keratin and YFP and against the contaminants list of MaxQuant. Minimum allowed peptide length was seven. FTMS and TOF MS/MS tolerance were 20 ppm and 40 ppm, respectively, and the peptide FDR and protein FDR were 0.01. Unique and razor peptides were used for protein quantification. LFQ minimum ratio count was set to one and fast LFQ was active with a minimum and average number of neighbors of three and six, respectively. Match between runs and second peptides were checked. Subsequent filtering and statistical analysis to identify enriched proteins was done in Perseus (version 1.6.2.3).

### Publication Abstract
Defining specific protein interactions and spatially or temporally restricted local proteomes improves our understanding of all cellular processes, but obtaining such data is challenging, especially for rare proteins, cell types, or events. Proximity labeling enables discovery of protein neighborhoods defining functional complexes and/or organellar protein compositions. Recent technological improvements, namely two highly active biotin ligase variants (TurboID and miniTurbo), allowed us to address two challenging questions in plants: (1) what are in vivo partners of a low abundant key developmental transcription factor and (2) what is the nuclear proteome of a rare cell type? Proteins identified with FAMA-TurboID include known interactors of this stomatal transcription factor and novel proteins that could facilitate its activator and repressor functions. Directing TurboID to stomatal nuclei enabled purification of cell type- and subcellular compartment-specific proteins. Broad tests of TurboID and miniTurbo in <i>Arabidopsis</i> and <i>Nicotiana benthamiana</i> and versatile vectors enable customization by plant researchers.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Interaction partners, Plant, Seedling, Co-immunoprecipitation, Lc-ms/ms, Bhlh transcription factor, Stomatal guard cell, Fama

### Affiliations
Carnegie Institution at Stanford
Carnegie Mass Spectometry facility Carnegie Science at Stanford

### Submitter
Shouling Xu

### Lab Head
Dr Shouling Xu
Carnegie Mass Spectometry facility Carnegie Science at Stanford


