### Accession
PXD041562

### Title
Transmembrane nuclease NUMEN/ENDOD1 regulates DNA repair pathway choice at the nuclear periphery

### Description
Proper repair of DNA damage lesions is essential to maintaining genome integrity and preventing the development of human diseases including cancer. Increasing evidence suggests the importance of the nuclear envelope in the spatial regulation of DNA repair, although the mechanisms of such regulatory processes remain poorly defined. Through a genome-wide synthetic viability screen for PARP inhibitor (PARPi) resistance using an inducible CRISPR/Cas9 platform and BRCA1-deficient breast cancer cells, we identified a transmembrane nuclease (renamed NUMEN) that could facilitate compartmentalized and NHEJ-dependent repair of DNA double-strand breaks at the nuclear periphery. Collectively, our data demonstrate that NUMEN generates short 5’ overhangs through its endonuclease and 3’-5’ exonuclease activities, promotes the repair of DNA lesions including heterochromatic LAD breaks as well as deprotected telomeres, and functions as a downstream effector of DNA-PKcs. These findings underline NUMEN’s role as a key player in DNA repair pathway choice and genome stability maintenance and have implications for ongoing research into the development and treatment of genome instability disorders.

### Sample Protocol
Flag-tagged BioID was inserted either N- or C-terminal of the NUC domain and cloned into a pHAGE-based lentiviral vector. BioID alone fused to a nuclear localization signal (NLS) served as the control. The constructs were then stably expressed in HEK293T cells. Localization of the fusion proteins was confirmed by immunofluorescence. For large-scale BioID pulldown, 4×107 cells were incubated with 50 μM biotin for 4 h. Nuclear fractions were then extracted in a low ionic strength solution (10 mM HEPES pH 7.9, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 10 mM KCl, 0.5% NP40) and lysed in RIPA buffer for 10 min on ice. After sonication, the lysates were clarified by centrifugation at 15,000 rpm for 15 min at 4°C. Next, 100 μL streptavidin magnetic beads (Pierce) that had been washed twice with RIPA lysis buffer were added to the lysates and incubated at 4°C overnight with constant rotation. The beads were then washed twice with 1 mL of RIPA lysis buffer, once with 1 mL 1M KCl, once with 1 mL 0.1M Na2CO3, once with 1 mL 2M urea in 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), twice with 1 mL RIPA lysis buffer, and twice with 1 mL digestion buffer (75 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0), before being resuspended in 80 μL digestion buffer for further analysis.

### Data Protocol
For mass spectrometry, on-bead trypsin digestion was performed and liquid chromatography-tandem MS (LC-MS/MS) was carried out on the Thermo Q Exactive Hybrid quadrupole orbitrap mass spectrometer as reported before. Raw data were processed by MaxQuant using the Uniprot human 192283 database. Full tryptic specificity was required. Common contaminants and putative peptide identifications of more than two missed cleavages were filtered out. Oxidation of methionine as well as acetylation (N-terminal) and biotinylation of lysine were defined as variable modifications, and carbamidomethyl of cysteine as a fixed modification. Label-free quantification module was performed. Protein intensity was analyzed by estimating the intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) values as described before.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dual-specificity nuclease, Parpi resistance, Nuclear membrane, Dna repair, Nhej, Double-strand break, Numen

### Affiliations
MOE Key Laboratory of Gene Function and Regulation and Guangzhou Key Laboratory of Healthy Aging Research, School of Life Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, 510275, China

### Submitter
Tianyu Ge

### Lab Head
Dr Zhou Songyang
MOE Key Laboratory of Gene Function and Regulation and Guangzhou Key Laboratory of Healthy Aging Research, School of Life Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, 510275, China


