### Accession
PXD041656

### Title
N-terminome analysis of pathogen-induced cell death in maize

### Description
Regulated cell death (RCD) is crucial for plant development, as well as in decision-making in plant-pathogen interactions. Previous studies revealed components of the molecular network controlling RCD, including different proteases. However, the identity, the proteolytic network as well as molecular components involved in the initiation and execution of distinct plant RCD processes, still remain largely elusive. We analyzed the N-terminome of Z. mays leaves treated with the Xanthomonas effector avrRxo1, the mycotoxin Fumonisin B1 (FB1), or the phytohormone salicylic acid (SA) to dissect plant cellular processes related to cell death and plant immunity. We found highly distinct and time-dependent biological processes being activated on N-terminome level in response to avrRxo1, FB1 and SA. This study characterizes distinct RCD responses in Z. mays and provides a framework for the mechanistic exploration of components involved in the initiation and execution of cell death.

### Sample Protocol
The second leaf of 8-9 day old plants was used for each experiment. Leaves were excised and vacuum infiltrated with a control solution (1% Dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) in H2O), 2mM salicylic acid, 50µM Fumonisin B1, or Xanthomonas oryzae pv oryzae PXO99A carrying pHMI, pHMI-avrRxo1 or pHMI-avrRxo1 D193T. Samples were taken at 24, 48, 60 and 72 hpi. Per sample, treatment and time point four whole leaves were pooled for each of four biological replicates. Approximately 1 mL of powder was transferred to a 2 mL reaction tube, dissolved in 1.5 mL of a denaturing buffer (6 M Gua-HCl, 100 mM HEPES, adjusted to pH 7.4 and supplemented with 1x HALT protease inhibitor cocktail. Afterwards the sample was filtered with Miracloth and the flowthrough collected in a 2 mL reaction tube. The protein concentration was measured by using the Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit. For proteome analysis, 20 µg proteome and treated with 0.5µL Benzonase (~26 U/μL). 10mM DTT was added to the samples and incubated shaking at 37°C for 30 min, cooled to RT, 50mM Chloroacetamide (CAA) were added and incubated in the dark for 30min. The reaction was quenched by adding additional 50 mM DTT and incubating for another 20min before protein purification using SP3-beads as described in Hughes et al., 2019. Protein samples were resupended in denaturing buffer (6 M Gua-HCl, 100 mM HEPES, pH 7.4) and stable isotope labelled using 30 mM 12CH2O and 30 mM sodium cyanoborohydride (light), 30 mM 12CD2O and 30 mM sodium cyanoborohydride (medium) or 30 mM 13CD2O and 30 mM  sodium cyanoborodeuteride and incubated for 2 h at 37°C. The reactions were quenched by adding 1 M Tris-HCl pH 6.8 and incubating for 30 min at 37°C. The samples were combined into two triplex experiments    (control+SA+FB1 and pHMI+D193T+avrRxo1), followed by protein purification with SP3-beads like before. The samples were now resuspended in trypsin digestion buffer (volume accordingly to a final protein concentration of 2µg/µL) containing 100 mM HEPES and 2.5 mM CaCl2 adjusted to pH 7.4 and digested with trypsin (1:100 trypsin: proteome) over night at 37°C. The next day the samples were desalted by using self-made STAGE tips packed with C18-material (Rappsilber et al., 2007). The samples were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid. The LC-MS/MS analysis was performed with an UltiMate 3000 RSCL nano-HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) coupled to an Impact II Q-TOF mass spectrometer (Bruker) using a CaptiveSpray ion source (Bruker Daltonik GmbH) operated with an ACN-saturated nitrogen gas stream was used. The peptides were loaded on an µPAC pillar array trap column (1 cm length, PharmaFluidics) and separated on a µPAC pillar array analytical column (50 cm flowpath, PharmaFluidics). Peptides were eluted using a 2 h elution protocol that included an 80 min separation gradient from 5% to 35% solvent B (solvent A: H2O+0.1% FA, solvent B: ACN+0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 600 nl min–1, with columns temperated at 40°C. Proteome data were acquired using a Data Dependent Acquisition (DDA) method: MS spectra were acquired at 5 Hz in m/z range from 200 to 1400, with the 14 most intense precursors selected for fragmentation at 5 to 20 Hz in an intensity-dependent manner. Due to technical factors, the first steps of the analysis were conducted independently for the two experiments avrRxo1/D193T/pHMI and FB1/SA/control.

### Data Protocol
For peptide to sequence matching of the mass spectrometry data, we generated a custom protein database file based by filtering the maizeGDB database (B73 reference genome version 5.0) with only proteins observed in the RNA-seq dataset. Peptides were identified by matching spectra against the database using the MaxQuant software version 2.0.3.0 (Tyanova et al., 2016). We used standard settings, if not mentioned otherwise. ‘Type’ was set to three labels: Light (+28.0313), medium (+32.0564) and heavy (+37.0756) dimethylation of Lys residues. Peptide N-terminal acetylation, Met oxidation and pyro-Glu were set as variable modifications, and enzyme specificity to semi-specific ‘ArgC’. Furthermore, the ‘requantify’ option was enabled and the minimum score for recalibration was set to 47.

### Publication Abstract
Regulated cell death (RCD) is crucial for plant development, as well as in decision-making in plant-microbe interactions. Previous studies revealed components of the molecular network controlling RCD, including different proteases. However, the identity, the proteolytic network as well as molecular components involved in the initiation and execution of distinct plant RCD processes, still remain largely elusive. In this study, we analyzed the transcriptome, proteome, and N-terminome of Zea mays leaves treated with the Xanthomonas effector avrRxo1, the mycotoxin Fumonisin B1 (FB1), or the phytohormone salicylic acid (SA) to dissect plant cellular processes related to cell death and plant immunity. We found highly distinct and time-dependent biological processes being activated on transcriptional and proteome levels in response to avrRxo1, FB1, and SA. Correlation analysis of the transcriptome and proteome identified general, as well as trigger-specific markers for cell death in Zea mays. We found that proteases, particularly papain-like cysteine proteases, are specifically regulated during RCD. Collectively, this study characterizes distinct RCD responses in Z. mays and provides a framework for the mechanistic exploration of components involved in the initiation and execution of cell death.

### Keywords
Hunter, Rcd, Zea mays, Fb1, Regulated cell death, Avrrxo1, Plants

### Affiliations
Forschungszentrum Jülich
CECAD

### Submitter
Melissa Mantz

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Pitter Florian Huesgen
Forschungszentrum Jülich


