### Accession
PXD008652

### Title
Proteomic Analysis on the Mechanism of Iron-Compensation Substitute for Manganese Deficiency of Streptococcus pneumoniae

### Description
Iron (Fe) and Manganese (Mn) are essential for bacterial survival and virulence as they are involved in catalysis, infection and biofilm formation. The basal metabolism of pathogenic bacteria would be disturbed by the deficiency of metal ions in the host environment. In this study, we found that Streptococcus pneumoniae (S. pneumoniae) can still grow slowly in the medium without manganese ions. Further ICP-MS determination showed that the iron concentration in the bacterium was increased when the manganese content was decreased. The supplement of iron in the manganese deficient culture medium (MDCM) can recovery the bacterial growth. The quantitative proteome using stable-isotope dimethyl labeling was performed to investigate the adaptive growth mechanism of S. pneumoniae in Mn-deficiency condition. Compared with the bacteria cultured in the normal medium, 25 proteins were down-regulated and 54 proteins were up-expressed with more than 1.2-fold alteration (P < 0.05) in S. pneumoniae cultured with MDCM. A large number of depressed proteins are participated in cell energy metabolism, amino acid synthesis process and oxidation products reduction process. The subsequent detection indicated that both intracellar and extracellular hydrogen peroxide levels of in cells were significantly elevated, and the intracellular ATP levels of were evidently decreased in cells cultured in the absence of manganese, meaning that Mn-deficiency can cause multiple metabolic disorders. More importantly, several iron ABC transporters, such as PiuA/PiaA/PitA/SPD_1609, etc, were over-expressed to uptake more iron from the medium. These results suggest that lacking of manganese only disturbed multiple metabolic processes of S. pneumoniae, but also caused the compensatory effect of iron for manganese Mn which is beneficial to the survival of bacteria in extreme environments.

### Sample Protocol
Stable-Isotope Dimethyl Labeling and Peptides Data Acquisition in MS. The peptides were labeled using reagent of stable-isotope CH2O (light-label, 4 μL 4%) and CD2O (intermediate-label, 4 μL 4%). To exclude the preference of amino acids, light-label and intermediate-label were alternately used on 200 g total peptides of MDPs and MRPs. The 1% ammonia (16 μL) was added to react with excess formaldehyde, then formic acid (8μL) was added to completely stop the labeling reaction. Different labeled samples were mixed into one 1.5 mL tube and desalinated using desalting column (Bio-Rad, Shanghai, China) and the Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 column of HPLC system (Thermo).

### Data Protocol
The samples after lyophilization were redissolved using 0.1% (v:v) formic acid. Mass spectra of peptides were acquired using Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo) mass spectrometer. Raw data were viewed in Xcalibur v2.1 (Thermo Scientific). The identified piptides were performed to search against the NCBInr database of S. pneumoniae D39 using the Sequest HT engine of the Proteome Discoverer v2.1 (Thermo). The specific parameters were shown as follows: (1) enzyme, trypsin; (2) protein level FDR ≤ 1% (Proteome Software, Portland, OR); (3) peptide length ≥ 8 aa; (4) unique peptides ≥ 2; (5) contaminants, trypsin and keratins; (6) protein modification, phosphorylation and methylation. We selected the intersection of proteins identified from three repetitions of experiments as the differential proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Iron-compensation, Proteomic, Manganese deficiency, Streptococcus pneumoniae

### Affiliations
Key Laboratory of Functional Protein Research of Guangdong Higher Education Institutes, Institute of Life and Health Engineering, College of Life Science and Technology, Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, China
Jinan university

### Submitter
Kun Cao

### Lab Head
Dr Xuesong Sun
Key Laboratory of Functional Protein Research of Guangdong Higher Education Institutes, Institute of Life and Health Engineering, College of Life Science and Technology, Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, China


