### Accession
PXD012610

### Title
miR-17-92/106b regulate beta cell mitotic checkpoint and insulin secretion

### Description
Adult beta cells in the pancreas are the sole source of insulin in our body. Beta cell loss or increased demand for insulin, impose metabolic challenges because adult beta cells are generally quiescent and infrequently re-enter the cell division cycle. miR-17-92/106b is a family of proto-oncogene microRNAs, that regulate proliferation in normal tissues and in cancer. Here, we employ mouse genetics to demonstrate a critical role for miR-17-92/106b in glucose homeostasis and in controlling insulin secretion. Mass spectrometry analysis was performed on miR-17-92LoxP/LoxP;106-25-/-  MEF lysate, without or with CRE-Adenovirus. miR-17-92LoxP/LoxP;106-25+/+ MEFs with GFP-Adenovirus served as controls. We demonstrate that miR-17-92/106b regulate the adult beta cell mitotic checkpoint and that miR-17-92/106b deficiency results in reduction in beta cell mass in-vivo. Furthermore, protein kinase A (PKA) is a new relevant molecular pathway downstream of miR-17-92/106b in control of adult beta cell division and glucose homeostasis. Therefore, contributes to the understanding of proto-oncogene miRNAs in the normal, untransformed endocrine pancreas, and illustrates new genetic means for regulation of beta cell mitosis and function by non-coding RNAs.

### Sample Protocol
Protein concentration was measured using a BCA assay (Thermo Scientific). 50 μg total protein was reduced with 5mM dithiothreitol and alkylated with 10mM iodoacetamide in the dark. Each sample was loaded onto S-trap micro columns (Protifi, USA) according to the manufacturer instructions. Briefly, after loading the samples they were washed with 90:10% methanol: 50mM ammonium bicarbonate. Samples were then incubated with trypsin (1:50 trypsin:protein) for 1.5 hr at 47°C. The digested peptides were eluted using 50mM ammonium bicarbonate, trypsin was added to this fraction and incubated overnight at 37°C. Two more elutions were made using 0.2% formic acid and 0.2% formic acid in 50% acetonitrile. The three elutions were pooled together and vacuum-centrifuged to dryness. Samples were kept in -80°C unitl analysis. The resulting peptides were resuspended and analyzed using nanoflow liquid chromatography (nanoAcquity) coupled to high resolution, high mass accuracy mass spectrometry (Q Exactive Plus). Each sample was analyzed on the instrument separately in a random order in discovery mode (Data Dependent Aquisition).

### Data Protocol
Database search was done using the Mascot algorithm against the mouse proteome database appended with common laboratory contaminants, and quantitative analysis was performed using the Expressionist software from GeneData.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse, Lc-msms, Mir-17-92/106b

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Genetics Faculty of Biochemistry Weizmann Institute of Science
The Weizmann Institute of Science

### Submitter
Alon Savidor

### Lab Head
Dr Eran Hornstein
Department of Molecular Genetics Faculty of Biochemistry Weizmann Institute of Science


