### Accession
PXD015476

### Title
Yeast homologs of MCUR1 regulate mitochondrial proline metabolism

### Description
MCUR1 is an evolutionarily conserved mitochondrial protein that has been shown to act as a scaffold factor for the assembly of the mammalian mitochondrial calcium uniporter (MCU). Surprisingly, many fungi that do not have MCU contain MCUR1 homologs, suggesting these proteins possess alternate functions. Herein we characterized two Saccharomyces cerevisiae homologs of MCUR1- Put6 and Put7 as regulators of mitochondrial proline metabolism. Put6 and Put7 are tethered to the inner mitochondrial membrane in a large hetero-oligomeric complex. The abundance and assembly of this complex are regulated by proline and the loss of this complex results in unregulated proline uptake in the mitochondria, leading to redox imbalance in the cell. Yeast cells lacking either Put6 or Put7 exhibit a pronounced defect in proline utilization, which can be corrected by the heterologous expression of human MCUR1. Our work uncovers an unexpected role of evolutionarily conserved MCUR1 homologs in mitochondrial proline metabolism.

### Sample Protocol
3 mg of crude mitochondria isolated from put6Δ/put7Δ yeast cells transformed with empty vector or Put6-V5/ Put7-V5 were solubilized in IP buffer and immunoprecipitated using anti-V5 antibody chemically crosslinked to Dynabeads® Protein G. Crosslinking was performed by BS3 reagent as per the manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Scientific, USA). Proteins were eluted from the beads with 100 µl 0.1 M glycine, pH 3.0, on a shaker at 25°C for 5 minutes. The elution was repeated three times, and the eluates of each sample were pooled. Proteins were precipitated with cold acetone, centrifuged at 16,000g, air-dried, and resuspended in 50 µl of LYSE buffer (PreOmics). Samples were digested overnight at 37°C in a shaker after adding 0.5 µg of Trypsin (Sigma Aldrich) and 0.5 µg Lys-C (Wako, Japan). The digestion was stopped after ~12 hours by acidifying the sample with 1% Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and a final peptide cleanup was performed using SDB-RPS StageTips as described (Kulak et al., 2014).

### Data Protocol
The MaxQuant software (version 1.6.1.13) was used for the analysis of raw files and peak lists were searched against the yeast Uniprot FASTA reference proteomes version of 2014 and a common contaminants database by the Andromeda search engine. False discovery rate was set to 1% for peptides (minimum length of 7 amino acids) and proteins and was determined by searching a reverse database. A maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed in the database search. Peptide identification was performed with an allowed initial precursor mass deviation up to 7 ppm and an allowed fragment mass deviation of 20 ppm.

### Publication Abstract
Mitochondria house evolutionarily conserved pathways of carbon and nitrogen metabolism that drive cellular energy production. Mitochondrial bioenergetics is regulated by calcium uptake through the mitochondrial calcium uniporter (MCU), a multi-protein complex whose assembly in the inner mitochondrial membrane is facilitated by the scaffold factor MCUR1. Intriguingly, many fungi that lack MCU contain MCUR1 homologs, suggesting alternate functions. Herein, we characterize Saccharomyces cerevisiae homologs&#xa0;Put6 and Put7 of MCUR1 as regulators of mitochondrial proline metabolism. Put6 and Put7 are tethered to the inner mitochondrial membrane in a large hetero-oligomeric complex, whose abundance is regulated by proline. Loss of this complex perturbs mitochondrial proline homeostasis and cellular redox balance. Yeast cells lacking either Put6 or Put7 exhibit a pronounced defect in proline utilization, which can be corrected by the heterologous expression of human MCUR1. Our work uncovers an unexpected role of MCUR1 homologs in mitochondrial proline metabolism.

### Keywords
Mitochondrion, Mcur1, Proline metabolism

### Affiliations
MPI Biochemistry
Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843, USA

### Submitter
Marta Murgia

### Lab Head
Dr Vishal M. Gohil
Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843, USA


