### Accession
PXD005205

### Title
Proteins modulated during persistent lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus infection

### Description
The experimental data indicate that during a persistent infection, lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV) may both directly or indirectly modulate the regulatory cellular processes and alter the cellular functions that are not critical for the survival, but are needed for the homeostasis in the organism. Two-dimensional differential in-gel electrophoresis (2D-DIGE) and MALDI-TOF MS/MS analyses were used to determine the cellular proteome response of HeLa cell line to persistent LCMV infection. Quantitative analysis revealed 24 differentially abundant proteins, half of which were up-regulated and the rest down-regulated. Functional categorization showed that LCMV-responsive proteins were mainly involved in metabolism, stress and defense responses. Among identified proteins, significant changes were found for peroxiredoxins, family of antioxidant enzymes. Decreased amount of these antioxidant proteins was accompanied with the elevation of ROS content in infected cells.

### Sample Protocol
Human cervical carcinoma cells (HeLa) were grown in Dulbecco‘s modified Eagle medium (DMEM) containing 10% fetal calf serum (FCS) supplemented with 40 μg/ml gentamicin in a humidified atmosphere with 5% CO2 at 37°C. Lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus strain MX was continuously propagated in persistently infected HeLa cells (designated HeLa-MX). The cells were washed with ice-cold PBS and 600 μl of lysis buffer (150 mM NaCl; 1 M Tris, pH 7.5; 1% Triton X-100; and 0.1% SDS) was added to the culture followed by 20 min incubation on ice. The lysed cells were scratched, transferred to tubes, passaged through an insulin syringe and finally, centrifuged at 15 000 rpm for 15 min at 4°C. Next, 9 volumes of precipitation solution (acetone:methanol 9:1) were added and the resulting solutions were incubated overnight at -20°C. Upon that, samples were centrifuged at 9000 x g for 30 min, at 4°C. Obtained pellets were air-dried and resuspended in 300 μl of UTC solution (7M Urea, 2M Thiourea, 4% CHAPS). Fluorescent dyes Cy2, Cy3 and Cy5 were used for minimal sample labelling. Fifty micrograms of each sample was labelled with 400 pmol of either Cy3 or Cy5, in biological triplicates, using dye-swap technique between individual replicate pairs. For the internal standard, 25 μg of each sample replicate was mixed with 400 pmol of Cy2 per sample. Hundred mikrograms of each sample were mixed together and added up with UTC solution until the final volume of 225 μl. Equal volume of loading/reswelling buffer (65 mM DTT; 2% (v/v) IPG buffer, pH 3-10 NL, 2.8% DeStreak reagent) was mixed with UTC solution until the final volume of 500 μl. Eighteen centimeters Immobilized pH Gradient (IPG) strip with non-linear 3-10 pH range was overnight passively reswelled in 450 μl of the sample mixture. Isoelectric focusing was performed using Multiphor II unit (GE Healthcare). The strip was equilibrated in SDS Equilibration solution (6M Urea; 2% SDS; 20% glycerol; 37.5 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.8) containing 0.5% (w/v) dithiothreitol (DTT) for 15 min; followed by 15 min incubation with SDS Equilibration solution in the presence of 4.5% Iodoacetamide (IAA). The equilibrated strip was placed on top of a 12% polyacrylamide gel cast between low-fluorescence glass plates. Obtained 2D gels were immediately scanned between two low-fluorescence glass plates, using the PharosFX Molecular Imager at 50 µm resolution. After reduction and alkylation, the gel plugs were digested overnight with sequencing grade-modified trypsin. Concentrated peptides were desalted by µ-C18 ZipTips.  Next 1 µl of cleaned digests were spotted onto 800 µm AnchorChip MALDI target.  After drying of the samples 1 µl of CHCA matrix 0.7 mg/ml. Mass spectra of peptides were measured on ultrafleXtreme TOF instrument. For every position 4000 shots were summed in positive reflector mode in 700-3500 m/z range.  Following that, up to the 25 most intense precursor peaks per sample were selected for the MS/MS analysis with minimal S/N 15.  Fragmentation spectra were acquired by accumulation of 3000 laser shots in positive reflector LIFT mode.  Fragmentation was achieved by LID (laser induced dissociation) mechanism by 50% increase in laser power.

### Data Protocol
Quantitative gel analysis was carried out using DeCyder 7.2 Software package. Analysis for significance using an one-way Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) were performed for those proteins found to be different in mock-infected and infected samples. Only proteins spots showing a significance (p<0.05) and at least 1.5-fold difference in abundance (ratio of mean normalized spot volume of mock versus infected samples) were considered as up- or down-regulated. Acquired spectra were processed by flexAnalysis 3.3 software.  Sophisticated numerical annotation procedure (SNAP) algorithm was used for peak peaking to calculate exact monoisotopic masses.  For the precursor spectra S/N threshold was set to 10 and resulting spectra were externally recalibrated against data from standards in adjacent spots. For the fragment spectra S/N threshold was set to 5, also baseline subtraction TopHat algorithm and smoothing Savitzky-Golay algorithm 3 cycles with 0.15 m/z width were done. MS/MS peak lists were imported into the ProteinScape 2.1 proteomic data management software.  Peptide identification was performed by in-house Mascot 2.3 server, querying against custom "human" protein sequence database, downloaded from Uniprot (uniprot.org) in April 2014, containing 69060 sequences.  Search parameters were the following: fixed cysteine carbamidomethylation, variable methionine oxidation, 1 missed trypsin cleavage site, 40 ppm precursor mass tolerance, 0.4 Da fragment mass tolerance.  Protein identifications were accepted if the ion scores of the at least 2 different matched peptides were higher then 30, meaning significant p < 0.05 probability of identity. Gene Onthology annotation for biological process and molecular function were obtained from the gene ontology project using PANTHER database. The protein-protein interaction network was analyzed using the STRING 10.0 database with default settings.

### Publication Abstract
Experimental data indicate that during persistent infection, lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV) may both directly or indirectly modulate regulatory cellular processes and alter cellular functions that are not critical for survival, but are essential for cell homeostasis. In order to shed more light on these processes, two-dimensional differential in-gel electrophoresis (2D-DIGE) and MALDI-TOF tandem mass spectrometry were used to determine the proteome response of the HeLa cell line to persistent LCMV infection. Quantitative analysis revealed 24 differentially abundant proteins. Functional analysis showed that LCMV-responsive proteins were primarily involved in metabolism, stress, and the defense response. Among identified proteins, we discovered significant changes for peroxiredoxins, a family of antioxidant enzymes. Decreased amount of these antioxidant proteins correlated with elevation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) in infected cells. Increased levels of ROS were accompanied by changes in the pattern of telomere restriction fragments (TRFs) in infected cells and mediated activation of hypoxia-inducible transcription factor-1 (HIF-1) and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt signaling pathways. Moreover, treatment with antioxidants resulted in reduced levels of viral nucleoprotein, indicating a connection between ROS-dependent signaling and viral replication.

### Keywords
Host response, Lcmv, 2d-dige, Arenavirus, Peroxiredoxins

### Affiliations
Plant Science and Biodiversity Center SAS
Department of Molecular Medicine, Institute of Virology, Biomedical Research Center, Slovak Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Maksym Danchenko

### Lab Head
Dr Jana Tomášková
Department of Molecular Medicine, Institute of Virology, Biomedical Research Center, Slovak Academy of Sciences


