### Accession
PXD031862

### Title
Extracellular vesicles derived from the choroid plexus trigger neural stem cells differentiation

### Description
An organized network of beating cilia transports cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) through the ventricles of the brain. CSF takes along diverse solutes including extracellular vesicles (EV), which arise from the choroid plexus, a secretory epithelium that reaches into the ventricles. Along their path through the ventricles, EVs have the opportunity to contact neural stem cell (NSC) niches. We purified EVZ310 produced by a choroid plexus-cell line, by differential centrifugation and flotation in iodixanol density gradients. We co-cultured suspensions of EVZ310 with NSC from the lateral and third ventricle. Alternatively, EVZ310 were dried-down on a polymer substrate and a suspension of NSCs was added. In both cases, EV Z310 induced, in a dose dependent manner, the NSC to rapidly form cellular networks accompanied by the expression of genes characteristic for neurons (Tuj1) and astrocytes (Gfap). NSCs from either origin responded to EVZ310 qualitatively and quantitatively in a very similar way. By contrast, EVMEF purified from mouse embryonic fibroblasts had little effect on both types of NSC. Mass spectrometry revealed significant differences in composition between EVMEF and EVZ310 proteomes. Notably, EVZ310 were enriched for the membrane or membrane associated proteins known to be involved in neurogenesis, cell differentiation, membrane trafficking and membrane organization.

### Sample Protocol
Isolated EVs were lysed by adding an equal volume of a lysis buffer (4% (wt/v) SDS 1 mM EDTA 100 mM Hepes, pH 8) supplemented with a protease inhibitor cocktail (cOmplete, Roche)) and sonicatted in BioRuptor (Diagenode) with 30s on-and-off cycles for 5min. Proteins were reduced, alkylated and purified as described elsewhere [47, 48]. The digestion was accomplished overnight in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer using trypsin (Promega)-to-protein ratio (wt/wt) of 1:20. Vacuum-dried samples were re-dissolved in 2% (v/v) acetonitrile 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) in water and subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis. Samples were analyzed in using Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid or Q-Exactive HF-X (both Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer interfaced via an LC set-up as described elsewhere [47]. Peptides were separated using 118min linear gradients ranging A) from 5.6 to 16, 25.6, and 40% (v/v) acetonitrile over 57, 30, and 26 min, respectively (Orbitrap Fusion) or B) from 4 to 33.6 over 101min (Orbitrap HF-X). The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent acquisition mode. Survey scan was performed at 120.000 resolution and 50ms maximum injection time (MaxIT). 30 top-abundant peptide precursors (or keeping a constant duty cycle of 3s) were selected for sequencing using a 1.6 m/z isolation window. Precursor ions were fragmented in an HCD cell and the normalized collision energy setting of 28% or 30%. MS/MS spectra were acquired in Orbitrap operated using 15000 resolution and 54ms MaxIT or 30000 resolution and 120ms MaxIT. Precursors were excluded from repeated sequencing for 30s.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data were processed by MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.10) [49] using default parameters. MS/MS spectra were searched against rattus norvegicus and mus musculus canonical protein sequences from Uniprot [50] (December 2020, 29940 and 17051 sequences, respectively). Protein groups with at least two razor or unique peptides were considered as identified.

### Publication Abstract
The choroid plexus secrets cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) composed of electrolytes, cytokines, growth factors, metabolites and extracellular vesicles (EVs) that flow through the interconnected brain ventricles. On their course, CSF components can act as signals that affect, for example, neural stem cells (NSCs) residing in niches of the ventricular wall. We studied EV-born CSF signals in an in vitro culture system. We purified EVs from the secretome of a choroid plexus cell line (Z310 cells), and from primary choroid plexus cultures and co-cultured those EVs with NSCs isolated from the niche of the lateral and the third ventricle. EVs<sup>Z310</sup> and EVs<sup>CHP</sup> were purified by differential centrifugation. This yielded fractions of EVs of 50-150-nm diameter that induced a complex multicellular network formation and NSC differentiation. Both types of EV converted the round NSCs to cells that extended long processes that contacted nearby, alike-shaped cells. Mass spectrometry showed that the differentiation-inducing EV<sup>Z310</sup> were enriched for membrane and membrane-associated proteins involved in cell differentiation, membrane trafficking, and membrane organization. We hypothesize that this type of EV <sup>Z310</sup> cargo causes changes of stem cell morphology that leads to multicellular networks in the niches. This cell-shape transition may represent an initial step in NSC differentiation.

### Keywords
Extracellular vesicles, Neural stem cells, Neural stem cell differentiation, Cerebrospinal fluid, Mass spectrometry, Exosome assay, Choroid plexus derived vesicle

### Affiliations
MPI Biophysical Chemistry
Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Group, Max-Planck-Institute for Multidisciplinary Sciences, Göttingen, Germany;  Institute for Clinical Chemistry, University Medical Center Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany

### Submitter
Ivan Silbern

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Henning Urlaub
Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Group, Max-Planck-Institute for Multidisciplinary Sciences, Göttingen, Germany;  Institute for Clinical Chemistry, University Medical Center Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany


