### Accession
PXD002934

### Title
Cell surface proteomic map of HIV infection reveals antagonism of amino acid metabolism by Vpu and Nef

### Description
Critical cell surface immunoreceptors downregulated by HIV have previously been identified using non-systematic, candidate approaches. To gain a comprehensive, unbiased overview of how HIV infection remodels the T-cell surface, we took a distinct, systems-level, quantitative proteomic approach. HIV downregulated >100 plasma membrane proteins, many without characterised roles in the immune system. An exclusive group of host factors were targeted by the viral accessory proteins Vpu or Nef, including the amino acid transporter SNAT1 and the serine carriers SERINC3/5. We focussed on SNAT1, a novel, ß- TrCP-dependent Vpu substrate. Antagonism of SNAT1 emerges in Vpu variants from the lineage of SIVcpz/HIV-1 viruses responsible for pandemic AIDS. We found marked SNAT1 induction in activated primary human CD4+ T-cells, and used Consumption and Release (CoRe) metabolomics to identify alanine as an endogenous SNAT1 substrate required for T- cell mitogenesis. Downregulation of SNAT1 therefore defines a novel paradigm of viral interference with immunometabolism.

### Sample Protocol
For proteomic timecourse analysis, CEM-T4 T-cells were spinoculated with VSVg- pseudotyped NL4-3-dE-EGFP HIV-1 virus at an MOI of 10, aliquots of infected cells harvested sequentially at the indicated timepoints, and dead cells removed by immunomagnetic depletion prior to PMP.  PMP was performed as previously described (Weekes et al., 2013; Weekes et al., 2014) using 2x10 7 viable cells per condition and a “one pot” oxidation and aminooxy-biotinylation reaction to selectively biotinylate plasma membrane glycoproteins before immunoprecipitation with streptavidin beads and on-bead tryptic digestion. For TMT quantitation, cells from each condition were processed separately, and peptide samples labelled with TMT reagent before pooling.

### Data Protocol
Peptide samples were fractionated by high pH reverse-phase high pressure liquid chromatography (HpRP-HPLC) and analysed by liquid chromatography coupled to triple- stage (TMT) or tandem (SILAC) mass spectrometry using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid (TMT) or Q Exactive (SILAC) mass spectrometer. Reporter ions from TMT-labelled peptides were quantitated from an MS3 scan using Proteome Discoverer.

### Publication Abstract
Critical cell surface immunoreceptors downregulated during HIV infection have previously been identified using non-systematic, candidate approaches. To gain a comprehensive, unbiased overview of how HIV infection remodels the T cell surface, we took a distinct, systems-level, quantitative proteomic approach. &gt;100 plasma membrane proteins, many without characterized immune functions, were downregulated during HIV infection. Host factors targeted by the viral accessory proteins Vpu or Nef included the amino acid transporter SNAT1 and the serine carriers SERINC3/5. We focused on SNAT1, a &#x3b2;-TrCP-dependent Vpu substrate. SNAT1 antagonism was acquired by Vpu variants from the lineage of SIVcpz/HIV-1 viruses responsible for pandemic AIDS. We found marked SNAT1 induction in activated primary human CD4+ T cells, and used Consumption and Release (CoRe) metabolomics to identify alanine as an endogenous SNAT1 substrate required for T cell mitogenesis. Downregulation of SNAT1 therefore defines a unique paradigm of HIV interference with immunometabolism.

### Keywords
Virus infection, Hiv, Cell surface proteome

### Affiliations
University of Cambridge

### Submitter
Yagnesh Umrania

### Lab Head
Dr Paul Lehner
University of Cambridge


