### Accession
PXD015044

### Title
Insight into the structure of the “unstructured” tau protein

### Description
Here, we apply a recently-developed approach for de novo protein structure determination based on the incorporation of short-distance crosslinking data as constraints in discrete molecular dynamics simulations (CL-DMD), for the determination of the conformational ensemble of tau protein in solution. The predicted structure may facilitate an understanding of the misfolding and oligomerization pathways of the tau protein.

### Sample Protocol
Expression and purification of the tau protein: Human 2N4R tau isoform (441-residue isoform) with an additional 21-residue N-terminal fusion tag containing 6x-His and a thrombin cleavage site (MGSSHHHHHHSSGLVPRGSHM) was recombinantly expressed and purified.  Crosslinking: Tau samples were crosslinked by the addition of CBDPS-H8/D8 (Creative Molecules Inc.), DSA-12C6/13C6 (Creative Molecules Inc.), DSG-H6/D6 (Creative Molecules Inc.), or SDA (ThermoFisher Scientific) to final concentrations ranging from 0.1-0.2 mM (CBDPS, DSA, and DSG) or 5 mM (SDA), at room temperature for 15 min.  Reactions were quenched by adding ammonium bicarbonate to a final concentration of 10 mM.  SDA crosslinking reaction mixtures were incubated for 10 minutes in the dark to allow the NHS-ester reaction to take place, followed by 10 minutes of UV irradiation under a 25W UV lamp (Model UVGL-58 Mineralight lamp, UVG) with a 366-nm wavelength filter.  SDA reaction mixtures were quenched with 10 mM ammonia bicarbonate.  A portion of each crosslinking reaction mixture was checked by SDS-PAGE gel to see the extent of potential intermolecular crosslinked products.  Aliquots were subsequently run on SDS-PAGE and monomeric tau bands were exised and in-gel digested with trypsin (Shevchenko et al., 2006).  The recovered protein digests were lyophilized to dryness and stored at -80oC until analysis by LC-MS, at which time they were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid (FA) containing 10 mM TCEP prior to autosampler loading.    LC-MS/MS analysis: Mass spectrometric analysis was then performed using a nano-HPLC system (Easy-nLC II, ThermoFisher Scientific), coupled to the ESI-source of an LTQ Orbitrap Velos or Fusion (ThermoFisher Scientific), using conditions described previously (Brodie et al., 2017).  Samples were injected onto a 100 μm ID, 360 μm OD trap column packed in-house with Magic C18AQ 100 Å, 5-μm pore size (Bruker-Michrom, Auburn, CA), and desalted by washing with Solvent A (2% acetonitrile:98% water, both containing 0.1% FA).  Peptides were separated with a 60-min gradient as follows:  (0–60 min: 4–40% solvent B (90% acetonitrile, 10% water, 0.1% FA, 60–62 min: 40–80% B, 62–70 min: 80% B), on a 75-μm ID, 360-μm OD analytical column packed with Magic C18AQ 100 Å, 5-μm pore size (prepared in-house), with IntegraFrit (New Objective Inc., Woburn, MA) and equilibrated with solvent A.  MS data were acquired using a data-dependent method.  The data-dependent acquisition also utilized dynamic exclusion, with an exclusion window of 10 ppm and exclusion duration of 60 seconds.  MS and MS/MS events used 60000- and 30000-resolution FTMS scans, respectively, with a scan range of m/z 400-2000 in the MS scan.  For MS/MS, the CID collision energy was set to 35%.

### Data Protocol
Crosslinking data were analyzed using Kojak (Hoopmann et al., 2015) and Percolator (Käll et al., 2007) using filtering criteria of Percolator q-value <= 0.01, score >= 1.675, population type = "intra", ppm error +/- 2.5.

### Publication Abstract
Intrinsically disordered regions of proteins, which lack unique tertiary structure under physiological conditions, are enriched in phosphorylation sites and in significant local bias toward the polyproline II conformation. The overrepresented coincidence of this posttranslational regulatory signal and local conformational bias within unstructured regions raises a question: can phosphorylation serve to manipulate the conformational preferences of a disordered protein? In this study, we use time-resolved fluorescence resonance energy transfer and a, to our knowledge, novel data analysis method to directly measure the end-to-end distance distribution of a phosphorylatable peptide derived from the human microtubule associated protein tau. Our results show that phosphorylation at threonine or serine extends the end-to-end distance and increases the effective persistence length of the tested model peptides. Unexpectedly, the extension is independent of salt concentration, suggestive of a nonelectrostatic origin. The phosphorylation extension and stiffening effect provides a peptide-scale physical interpretation for the posttranslational regulation of the highly abundant protein-protein interactions found in disordered proteins, as well as a potential insight into the regulatory mechanism of the tau protein's microtubule binding activity.

### Keywords
Idp, Cross-linking, Intrinsically disordered proteins, Discrete molecular dynamics, Tau, Cl-dmd

### Affiliations
University of Victoria
1. University of Victoria Genome BC Proteomics Centre, University of Victoria, Victoria, British Columbia, Canada 2. Segal Cancer Proteomics Centre, Lady Davis Institute, Jewish General Hospital, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada 3. Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of Victoria, Victoria, British Columbia, Canada 4. Gerald Bronfman Department of Oncology, Jewish General Hospital, Montreal, Quebec, Canada

### Submitter
Karl Makepeace

### Lab Head
Dr Christoph H. Borchers
1. University of Victoria Genome BC Proteomics Centre, University of Victoria, Victoria, British Columbia, Canada 2. Segal Cancer Proteomics Centre, Lady Davis Institute, Jewish General Hospital, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada 3. Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of Victoria, Victoria, British Columbia, Canada 4. Gerald Bronfman Department of Oncology, Jewish General Hospital, Montreal, Quebec, Canada


