### Accession
PXD004809

### Title
mitoSILAC - Comparison of control and promoter mutant mitochondrial proteomes.

### Description
Comparison of control and promoter mutant mitochondrial proteomes.

### Sample Protocol
Patient derived fibroblasts were incubated with normal (light) amino acids while control fibroblasts of the same low passage number were incubated with 13C6 Arginine and 13C8 Lysine (heavy) for at least 5 passages. Pairs of patient and control fibroblasts were mixed at 1x10^7 cells each and lysed by dounce homogenisation. Mitochondria were enriched as previously described by differential centrifugation followed by further enrichment on a Percoll gradient. 50 mg of enriched mitochondria were resolved approximately 6 cm into a pre-cast 4-12% Bis-Tris polyacrylamide gel (Novex, Thermo Fisher Scientific, East Grinstead, UK). The lane was excised and cut in 8 approximately equal chunks and the proteins reduced, alkylated and digested in-gel. The resulting tryptic peptides were analysed by LC-MSMS using a Q Exactive coupled to an RSLCnano3000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed using MaxQuant 1.5.2.8 using Andromeda to search a human Uniprot database (downloaded 03/12/14). Acetyl (protein N-terminus), oxidation (M) and deamidation (N/Q) were set as variable modifications and carbamidomethyl (C) as a fixed modification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mitochondrial, Silac, Promoter variant

### Affiliations
Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University of Cambridge
University of Cambridge

### Submitter
Yagnesh Umrania

### Lab Head
Dr Patrick Maxwell
Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University of Cambridge


