### Accession
PXD007265

### Title
Human melanoma cell lines secretome analysis

### Description
The imbalance of cellular homeostasis during oncogenesis together with the high heterogeneity of tumor-associated stromal cells have a marked effect on the repertoire of the proteins secreted by malignant cells (the secretome). Hence, the study of tumoral secretomes provides insights for understanding the cross-talk between cells within the tumor microenvironment as well as the key effectors for the establishment of the pre-metastatic niche in distant tumor sites. In this context, we performed a proteomic analysis of the secretomes derived from four cell lines: (i) a paired set of fibroblasts - Hs 895. T, a cell line obtained from a lung node metastatic site from a patient who had melanoma and Hs 895.Sk, a skin fibroblast cell line (derived from the same patient); (ii) two malignant metastatic melanoma cell lines - A375, a malignant melanoma cell line from primary source and SH-4, a cell line derived from pleural effusion of a patient with metastatic melanoma. Clustering of expression profiles together with functional enrichment revealed patterns that mirrored each cell type (skin fibroblasts, cancer-associated fibroblasts and metastatic cells). These patterns might be the result of cell-specific protein expression programs and may serve as basis for further proteomic analysis of melanoma cell lines secretomes.

### Sample Protocol
Secretome harvesting   Subconfluent cell cultures were washed three-times with warm buffered phosphate-saline (without Ca2+ and Mg2+) and, after culturing the cells in T175 cm2 flasks for 24h under phenol red-free, FBS-free DMEM medium, the conditioned media was harvested and centrifuged (2,200 x g, 10 min, 4ºC) for removing any remaining cell. Protease inhibitor cocktail (SIGMAFASTTM, Sigma, USA) was added to each sample and the secretomes were filtered (0.22 m; Millipore, USA) and concentrated (5,000 x g; 4°C) using ultrafiltration devices (Vivaspin 20, 3 kDa cutoff, GE Healthcare,USA). Protein contents were measured by the Bradford method. Secretomes were independently obtained from three biological replicates derived from each cell line.   In-solution trypsin digestion and reductive isotopic dimethylation   Briefly, a solution of 6 M guanidine hydrochloride (GuHCl) was added to a sample of 100 μg of protein from each secretome to a final concentration of 3 M GuHCl, followed by the addition of 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) (final concentration). The mixture was incubated at 65 °C for 60 min. Iodoacetamide (IAA) was then added to a final concentration of 15 mM and the samples were incubated for 60 min at room temperature, in the dark. To quench the excess of IAA, DTT was added to a final concentration of 15 mM. Clean-up of samples was performed by the addition of ice cold acetone (8 volumes) and methanol (1 volume), followed by the incubation of samples for 3 h at -80° C. After centrifugation at 14,000 x g for 10 min, protein pellets were washed twice with one volume of ice cold methanol and then resolubilized with NaOH solution (final concentration of 2.5 mM), followed by the addition of 50 mM HEPES buffer, pH 7.5, to a final volume of 100 L. Trypsin (Proteomics grade; Sigma, USA) was added at 1:100 ratio (enzyme/substrate) and protein samples were incubated at 37 °C for 18 h. Tryptic peptides were differentially labeled via stable-isotope dimethyl labeling. In brief, tryptic peptides were submitted to reductive dimethylation with either light or heavy formaldehyde/cyanoborohydride solutions, as follows: Hs 895 Sk (light) vs. Hs 895 T peptides (heavy); A375 peptides (light) vs. SH-4 peptides (heavy). Tryptic peptides (pH 7.5) from each sample were incubated overnight at 37 °C with either light or heavy sodium cyanoborohydride (NaBH3CN, light, or NaBD3CN, heavy) to a final concentration of 20 mM followed by the addition of formaldehyde 12CH2O (light) or 13CD2O (heavy) to a final concentration of 40 mM, resulting in mass differences of +28.031300 Da and +36.075670 Da for the light and heavy-labeled samples, respectively. The reaction was terminated by adding 1 M Tris (pH 6.8; to a final concentration of 200 mM) to each sample and the mixture was incubated for 2 h at 37 °C. Samples were then combined at 1:1 ratio into two pools: (i) Hs 895 Sk + Hs 895 T and (ii) A375 + SH-4. After desalting using C-18 cartridges (3M EmporeTM SPE Extraction disks, USA) peptide samples were dried in a SpeedVac and redissolved in 50 uL of 0.1% formic acid prior to nanoflow liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry (LC−MS/MS) analysis.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric (RAW) data were analyzed with MaxQuant software (version 1.5.5.1). A False Discovery Rate (FDR) of 1% was required for both protein and peptide-to-spectrum match identifications. LTQ-Orbitrap Velos raw data were searched against a target database restricted to the taxonomy ‘Homo sapiens’ (release 2017_07; 159,552 entries). This database was also combined with the sequences of 245 common contaminants and concatenated with the reversed versions of all sequences. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and at least two missed cleavages were allowed; cysteine carbamidomethylation was selected as fixed modification whereas methionine oxidation, glutamine/asparagine deamidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were selected as variable modifications. Multiplicity was set to 2 to account for the two labeling states that were used (light and heavy dimethyl labeling at peptide N-terminus and lysine side chains). Peptide identification was based on a search with an initial mass deviation of the precursor ion of 7 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm. For protein quantification, a minimum of two ratio counts was set and the ‘Re-quantify’ and ‘match between runs’ functions of MaxQuant software were enabled. As is observed from complex proteomes such as vertebrates, peptides can be shared between homologous proteins or splice variants, leading to “protein groups”. For each protein group in the MaxQuant’s ‘proteinGroups.txt’ file, the first protein entry was selected as representative.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics, Melanoma, Secretome, Cancer

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Functional Proteomics  -

Department of Science and Technology -
Federal University of São Paulo (UNIFESP), Sao Jose dos Campos-SP, Brazil
Functional Proteomics Laboratory Department of Science and Technology, Federal University of São Paulo (ICT-UNIFESP), São José dos Campos, SP, Brazil, Rua Talim, 330, 12231-280, Tel.: +55 11 3385-4135 ext. 9727.

### Submitter
Andre Zelanis

### Lab Head
Dr André Zelanis
Functional Proteomics Laboratory Department of Science and Technology, Federal University of São Paulo (ICT-UNIFESP), São José dos Campos, SP, Brazil, Rua Talim, 330, 12231-280, Tel.: +55 11 3385-4135 ext. 9727.


