### Accession
PXD034557

### Title
Comparative Proteomic Profiling of Variants SARS-CoV-2 Virus-Like-Particles (VLPs) Incubated Cells

### Description
The COVID-19 pandemic is arguably the most important global threat to humankind that the world has seen in the 21st century. Since the initial outbreak of SARS-CoV-2 in 2019, the virus genome is continuously mutating that may affect virus characteristics such as infectivity, transmission, and pathogenicity. We recently found that two consecutive amino acid mutations R203K and G204R in the nucleocapsid (N) protein, are linked with higher viral load and severity in COVID-19 patients. Here, we performed comparative total proteomic analysis of HEK293T (stably expressing ACE2/TMPRSS2) cell lines infected with wildtype (WT) VLP, KR-mutant (KR) VLP with two mutations R203K/G204R in the nucleocapsid protein, and two additional controls D614G-KR (containing both R203K/G204R and spike D614G mutations) and D614G (only spike D614G mutation). Our data reveal enhanced expression of immune response proteins in KR VLP infected cells.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T cell lines stably expressing ACE2/TMPRSS2 were infected with different VLPs (WT, KR, D614G-KR, and D614G). Briefly, after infection (24 hours) cells were collected with 10mM EDTA in 1xPBS and washed twice with cold PBS (1x) in the presence of protease inhibitor. The cell pellets were stored at −80 °C. Cells were lysed in lysis buffer 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4), 150 mM NaCl, 1mM EDTA, 1% NP-40, 1% Na-deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS, supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktails) for 30 minutes while rotating at 4 °C and then sonicated and centrifuge at high speed to collect the supernatant. Protein concentration was determined using BCA protein assay kit (Pierce™, Catalog: 23225). The protein extract was purified using methanol/chloroform precipitation and dried under vacuum. The dried pellets were resuspended into the extraction buffer (50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate and 5% SDS in Water). The protein content was determined using a nanodrop (Thermo Scientific), and then digested using STrap as described (PMID: 24678027). Approximately 200 ng of peptide mixture per sample was analyzed using a timsTOF Pro 2 QTOF mass spectrometer coupled with a nanoElute liquid chromatography system (Bruker Daltonik GmbH, Germany).

### Data Protocol
The sample was injected directly into a RP-C18 Aurora emitter column (75 µm i.d.× 250 mm, 1.6 μm, 120 Å pore size) (Ion Opticks, Australia) using a one-column separation method. An 80-min gradient was established using mobile phase A (0.1% formic acid in H2O) and mobile phase B (0.1% formic acid in Acetonitrile): 2–25% B for 60 min, 25–37% for 10 min, ramping 37% to 95% in 5 min, and maintaining 95% B for 5 min. The column temperature was set at 50oC and the flow rate at 250 nl/min. The sample eluting from the separation column was introduced into the mass spectrometer via a CaptiveSpray nano-electrospray ion source (Bruker Daltonik GmbH) with an electrospray voltage of 1.6 kV. The ion source temperature set to 180 °C and a dry gas of 3 l/min.   The samples were analyzed using diaPASEF scheme (PMID: 33257825) consisting of 24 cycles including a total of 48 mass width windows (13 Da (m/z) from m/z 400 to 1,000 and TIMS scan range from 0.63 to 1.35 Vs cm−2 (1/K0). The collisional energy increased linearly from 20.01 eV at 0.6 (1/K0) to 52.00 eV at 1.35 Vs cm−2 (1/K0). The scan range for MS and MS/MS spectra was set to 100-1700 m/z. TIMS ramping time and accumulation time were set to 100 milliseconds. The diaPASEF data were analyzed by directDIA approach using Spectronaut software (version 15.5.211111) as described (PMID: 34575131)

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Data independent acqusition (dia), Virus-like-particle, Nucleocapsid mutations, Hek293t cells

### Affiliations
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Bioscience Division

### Submitter
Muhammad Shuaib

### Lab Head
Dr Muhammad Shuaib
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Bioscience Division


