### Accession
PXD015361

### Title
Global proteomic profiling of primary macrophages during M. tuberculosis infection identifies TAX1BP1 as a mediator of autophagy targeting

### Description
We profiled changes in the macrophage proteome during a time-course of primary murine bone marrow-derived macrophages infected with Mycobacterium tuberculosis. We measured changes in global protein abundance, phosphorylation, and ubiquitylation.

### Sample Protocol
Protein lysates were digested with trypsin, desalted, and 10 mcg aliquots were subjected to LC-MS/MS for global protein abundance measurements. 1 mg aliquots were enriched for phosphopeptides using iron immobilized metal affinity chromatography. 9 mg aliquots were enriched for diGly modified peptides using immunoaffinity purification. Enriched peptides were desalted and subjected to LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant was used for label free quantitation. MS stats and artMS were used for statistical analysis. Further details of the analysis protocols can be found in this preprint submission: https://doi.org/10.1101/534917.

### Publication Abstract
Macrophages are highly plastic cells with critical roles in immunity, cancer, and tissue homeostasis, but how these distinct cellular fates are triggered by environmental cues is poorly understood. To uncover how primary murine macrophages respond to bacterial pathogens, we globally assessed changes in post-translational modifications of proteins during infection with <i>Mycobacterium tuberculosis</i>, a notorious intracellular pathogen. We identified hundreds of dynamically regulated phosphorylation and ubiquitylation sites, indicating that dramatic remodeling of multiple host pathways, both expected and unexpected, occurred during infection. Most of these cellular changes were not captured by mRNA profiling, and included activation of ubiquitin-mediated autophagy, an evolutionarily ancient cellular antimicrobial system. This analysis also revealed that a particular autophagy receptor, TAX1BP1, mediates clearance of ubiquitylated <i>Mtb</i> and targets bacteria to LC3-positive phagophores. These studies provide a new resource for understanding how macrophages shape their proteome to meet the challenge of infection.

### Keywords
Post-translational modification, Tuberculosis, Autophagy, Macrophage

### Affiliations
UCSF
University of Califoria, Berkeley Dept of Molecular & Cell Biology

### Submitter
Jonathan Budzik

### Lab Head
Dr Jeffery Scott Cox
University of Califoria, Berkeley Dept of Molecular & Cell Biology


