### Accession
PXD008917

### Title
Protein composition of catalytically active U7-dependent processing complexes assembled on histone pre-mRNA containing biotin and a photo-cleavable linker

### Description
To identify components of the U7 snRNP, we used cleavage-resistant histone pre-mRNA containing biotin and a photo-sensitive linker and purify processing complexes from Drosophila and mouse nuclear extracts.

### Sample Protocol
75 ng of mouse or Drosophila non-cleavable (containing methyl groups around the cleavage site) histone pre-mRNAs with photo-cleavable linker and biotin (pcB) in either cis (pcB-mH2a or pcB-dH3) or trans (dH3 annealed at the 3’ end with pcB/22mer – dH3 duplex) were incubated with 1 ml of highly active mouse or Drosophila nuclear extract, respectively, and immobilized on streptavidin beads (Sigma). In the negative control, nuclear extracts contained inhibitors that abolished assembly of histone pre-mRNAs processing complexes. Streptavidin beads containing immobilized U7-dependent processing complexes were rinsed twice with a processing buffer containing 15 mM HEPES-KOH pH 7.9, 75 mM KCl, 20 mM EDTA pH 8 and 15% glycerol, rotated with 1 ml of the same buffer for 1 hour at 4 oC and next transferred to a new tube for an additional 30 min rotation. Following the extensive washes, the beads were re-suspended in 100 µl of the processing buffer and the samples were placed on ice and irradiated 30 min from a distance of 10 mm with a high intensity UV lamp (UVP Blak-Ray B-100AP) containing 100W spot bulb emitting 365 nm UV light (Cole-Parmer). The samples were frequently inverted and vortexed to ensure even exposure to UV and to avoid excessive heating. Following UV irradiation, the samples were spun down and the supernatant carefully collected and re-spun to remove residual beads. A fraction (10-15%) of the UV-eluted supernatant was directly treated with trypsin and analyzed by mass spectrometry. In some cases, 50% of the UV eluted sample was precipitated with 80% acetone, dissolved in a small volume of SDS dye and loaded on 4-12% SDS/polyacrylamide gel for a brief electrophoresis allowing the samples to enter 10 mm into the gel. A small section of the gel containing the sample was excised and in gel-treated with trypsin. Tryptic peptides were applied to C-18 trap column (20mm × 100μm, particle size 5 μm, pore size 100Å, Waters) followed by C-18 analytical column (250 mm × 75 μm, particle size 1.7μm, pore size 130Å) and eluted with an acetonitrile gradient (5%-35% AcN in 160 min) in the presence of 0.05% formic acid with the flow rate of 250 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent mode working with a resolution of 30000 for MS scans and 15000 for MS/MS scans. A higher-collision energy device was utilized for peptide fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Acquired raw data were processed with Mascot Distiller (Matrix Science, London, UK) against Swiss-Prot and FlyBase databases restricted to Mus musculus and Drosophila melanogaster, respectively. The following search parameters were used: (i) mass tolerance for precursor, 30 ppm, (ii) product ions mass tolerance, 0.1 Da, (iii) trypsin enzyme specificity, one missed cleavage site allowed, (iv) fixed and variable modification of cysteine by carbamidomethylation and methionine by oxidation, respectively. Data were imported into MScan software (Tymon Rubel, proteom.ibb.waw.pl) for their ﬁltration and presentation. A false discovery rate (FDR) threshold of 0.05 was applied for peptide identification and threshold score of 50 was applied for protein identification (MudPIT score in Mascot, described in detail at http://www.matrixscience.com). Related proteins, identified based on the identical subset of peptides, were grouped into single hits. Proteins identified by a subset of peptides from another protein that were not grouped into related hits, and peptides shared between unrelated hits were excluded from further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
3' end cleavage of metazoan replication-dependent histone pre-mRNAs requires the multi-subunit holo-U7 snRNP and the stem-loop binding protein (SLBP). The exact composition of the U7 snRNP and details of SLBP function in processing remain unclear. To identify components of the U7 snRNP in an unbiased manner, we developed a novel approach for purifying processing complexes from Drosophila and mouse nuclear extracts. In this method, catalytically active processing complexes are assembled in vitro on a cleavage-resistant histone pre-mRNA containing biotin and a photo-sensitive linker, and eluted from streptavidin beads by UV irradiation for direct analysis by mass spectrometry. In the purified processing complexes, Drosophila and mouse U7 snRNP have a remarkably similar composition, always being associated with CPSF73, CPSF100, symplekin and CstF64. Many other proteins previously implicated in the U7-dependent processing are not present. Drosophila U7 snRNP bound to histone pre-mRNA in the absence of SLBP contains the same subset of polyadenylation factors but is catalytically inactive and addition of recombinant SLBP is sufficient to trigger cleavage. This result suggests that Drosophila SLBP promotes a structural rearrangement of the processing complex, resulting in juxtaposition of the CPSF73 endonuclease with the cleavage site in the pre-mRNA substrate.

### Keywords
Photo-cleavable linker, U7 snrnp; slbp, 3’ end processing, Histone pre-mrna, Flash; lsm11

### Affiliations
Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics PAS
UNC at Chapel Hill

### Submitter
Aleksandra Skrajna

### Lab Head
Dr Michał Dadlez
Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics PAS


