### Accession
PXD032741

### Title
FAM134B oligomer ubiquitination and ER-phagy

### Description
FAM134B is a reticulon-homology domain (RHD)-containing protein that participates in membrane-shaping of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)8 13. It also functions as a mammalian ER-phagy receptor, mediating the fragmentation and selective degradation of ER sheets in multiple cell types8. However, little is known about the molecular and biophysical mechanisms that control and/or switch between these two FAM134B functions.

### Sample Protocol
From 10 cm cell culture dishes of GFP-FAM134B doxycycline induced U2OS cells and HEK293T cells transiently transfected with the constructs V1-FAM134B and V2-FAM134B, V1-FAM134C and V2-FAM134C, V2-FAM134B LIRmut or V2-FAM134B 17KR. After 24 h, cells were lysed with 1% Triton X-100 Lysis Buffer (50 Mm Tris-HCL pH:7.5, 15 0mM NaCl, EDTA-free complete protease inhibitor cocktail, NEM-n-Ethylmaleimide) and incubated with HA-agarose beads (Sigma) or GFP-trap beads (Chromotek) overnight at 4°C on a rotating platform. Protein-bound beads were washed three times with lysis buffer and three times with Lysis Buffer without detergents. HA-IP samples were incubated with 40 µl SDC-buffer (2% sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 1mM TCEP, 4mM chloroacetamide, 50mM Tris pH 8.5) and heated at 60°C for 30 min. Samples were mixed 1:1 with 500 ng LysC, incubated for 3 hours at 37°C and digested with 0,25 µg of trypsin (50mM Tris, pH 8.5) overnight at 37°C. Reaction was stopped with 150 µl of isopropanol with 1% TFA. Peptides were cleaned up by loading them onto SDB-RPS stage tips (Sigma). After one wash with 1% TFA in isopropanol and one wash with 0.2% TFA in water, peptides were eluted using 80% acetonitrile and 1.25% ammonia. Eluted peptides were dried, processed for LC-MS measurements.  LC-MS analysis Dried peptides were reconstituted in 2% ACN, 0.1% TFA and analysed on a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer coupled to an easy nLC 1200 (ThermoFisher Scientific) using a 35 cm long, 75 µm ID fused-silica column packed in house with 1.9 µm C18 particles (Reprosil pur, Dr. Maisch), and kept at 50°C using an integrated column oven (Sonation). Peptides were eluted by a non-linear gradient from 4-28% acetonitrile over 45 minutes and directly sprayed into the mass-spectrometer equipped with a nanoFlex ion source (ThermoFisher Scientific). Full scan MS spectra (300-1650 m/z) were acquired in profile mode at a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 200, a maximum injection time of 20 ms and an AGC target value of 3 x 106 charges. Up to 15 most intense peptides per full scan were isolated using a 1.4 Th window and fragmented using higher energy collisional dissociation (normalised collision energy of 28). MS/MS spectra were acquired in centroid mode with a resolution of 30,000, a maximum injection time of 45 ms and an AGC target value of 1 x 105. Single charged ions, ions with a charge state above 4 and ions with unassigned charge states were not considered for fragmentation and dynamic exclusion was set to 20 s to minimise the acquisition of fragment spectra of already acquired precursors.

### Data Protocol
MS raw data was processed with MaxQuant (v1.6.10.43) applying default parameters. Acquired spectra were searched against the human “one sequence per gene” database (Taxonomy ID 9606) downloaded from UniProt (12-03-2020; 20531 sequences), and a collection of 244 common contaminants (“contaminants.fasta” provided with MaxQuant) using the Andromeda search engine integrated in MaxQuant {Cox, 2011 #56;Tyanova, 2016 #58}. Identifications were filtered to obtain false discovery rates (FDR) below 1% for both peptide spectrum matches (PSM; minimum length of 7 amino acids) and proteins using a target-decoy strategy {Elias, 2007 #61}. Protein quantification and data normalization relied on the MaxLFQ algorithm implemented in MaxQuant {Cox, 2014 #57}. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium {Deutsch, 2017 #62} via the PRIDE partner repository {Perez-Riverol, 2019 #60} with the dataset identifier. All acquired raw files were processed using MaxQuant (1.6.10.43) and the implemented Andromeda search engine. For protein assignment, spectra were correlated with the UniProt human database (v. 2019) including a list of common contaminants. Searches were performed with tryptic specifications and default settings for mass tolerances for MS and MS/MS spectra. Carbamidomethyl at cysteine residues oxidations at methionine, acetylation at the N-terminus were defined as a fixed modification. The minimal peptide length was set to seven amino acids, and the false discovery rate for proteins and peptide-spectrum matches to 1%. The match-between-run feature with a time window of 1 min was used. For further analysis, the Perseus software (1.6.6.0) was used and first filtered for contaminants and reverse entries as well as proteins that were only identified by a modified peptide.

### Publication Abstract
The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) undergoes continuous remodelling via a selective autophagy pathway, known as ER-phagy<sup>1</sup>. ER-phagy receptors have a central role in this process<sup>2</sup>, but the regulatory mechanism remains largely unknown. Here we report that ubiquitination of the ER-phagy receptor FAM134B within its reticulon homology domain (RHD) promotes receptor clustering and binding to lipidated LC3B, thereby stimulating ER-phagy. Molecular dynamics&#xa0;(MD) simulations showed how ubiquitination perturbs the RHD structure in model bilayers and enhances membrane curvature induction. Ubiquitin molecules on RHDs mediate interactions between neighbouring RHDs to form dense receptor clusters that facilitate the large-scale remodelling of lipid bilayers. Membrane remodelling was reconstituted in vitro with liposomes and ubiquitinated FAM134B. Using super-resolution microscopy, we discovered FAM134B nanoclusters and microclusters in cells. Quantitative image analysis revealed a ubiquitin-mediated increase in FAM134B oligomerization and cluster size. We found that the E3 ligase AMFR, within multimeric ER-phagy receptor clusters, catalyses FAM134B ubiquitination and regulates the dynamic flux of ER-phagy. Our results show that ubiquitination enhances RHD functions via receptor clustering, facilitates ER-phagy and controls ER remodelling in response to cellular demands.

### Keywords
Venus fam134b ubiquitinated sites

### Affiliations
Goethe University
Institute of Biochemistry II, Faculty of Medicine, Goethe University Frankfurt, Theodor-Stern-Kai 7, 60590 Frankfurt am Main, Germany Buchmann Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Goethe University Frankfurt, Max-von-Laue Straße 15, 60438 Frankfurt am Main, Germany

### Submitter
Adriana Covarrubias-Pinto

### Lab Head
Dr Ivan Dikic
Institute of Biochemistry II, Faculty of Medicine, Goethe University Frankfurt, Theodor-Stern-Kai 7, 60590 Frankfurt am Main, Germany Buchmann Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Goethe University Frankfurt, Max-von-Laue Straße 15, 60438 Frankfurt am Main, Germany


