### Accession
PXD012882

### Title
Direct Nucleosome Binding of Borealin Secures Chromosome Association of the Chromosomal Passenger Complex

### Description
CPC-NCP complexes were crosslinked using EDC and analysed by mass spectrometry. The results showed Borealin is critical for nucleosome binding made extensive contacts with NCPs, whereas Survivin interactions are mostly limited to the BIR domain and the H3 N-terminal tail as expected. Mapping the crosslinks onto the three dimensional structures of NCP and CPC suggests a model where the localisation module of the CPC together with a highly basic N-terminal tail of Borealin docks onto the acidic patch formed by H2A and H2B, a surface commonly involved in nucleosome recognition. This interaction may orient the Survivin BIR domain to facilitate binding of histone H3 tail phosphorylated at Thr3. Notably, Borealin loop residues trace along the DNA-histone interface implying its major contribution to nucleosome binding involves both protein-histone and possibly protein-DNA contacts.

### Sample Protocol
Crosslinking experiments of the CPC-NCP complexes were performed using 1-ethyl-3-(3-dimethylaminopropyl) carbodiimide (EDC, Thermo Fisher Scientific) in the presence of N-hydroxysulphosuccinimide (NHS, Thermo Fisher Scientific). EDC is a zero-length chemical crosslinker capable of covalently linking primary amines of Lysine and the protein N-terminus and to a lesser extend also hydroxyl groups of Serine, Threonine and Tyrosine with carboxyl groups of Aspartate/Glutamate. 8 μg of CPC or CPC-NCP complexes were incubated with 30 μg EDC and 66 μg of N-hydroxysulphosuccinimide for 2 hours at room temperature. The crosslinking was stopped by the addition of 100 mM Tris-Cl. Crosslinking products were resolved using 4-12% Bis-Tris NuPAGE (Invitrogen) for 5 min and briefly stained using Instant Blue (Expedeon). Bands were excised, and the proteins were reduced with 10 mM DTT for 30 min at room temperature, alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide for 20 min at room temperature and digested using 13 ng/μl trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37°C. The digested peptides were loaded onto C18-Stage-tips for LC-MS/MS analysis. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a “high/high” acquisition strategy. The peptide separation was carried out on an EASY-Spray column (50 cm × 75 μm i.d., PepMap C18, 2 μm particles, 100 Å pore size, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Mobile phase A consisted of water and 0.1% v/v formic acid. Mobile phase B consisted of 80% v/v acetonitrile and 0.1% v/v formic acid. Peptides were loaded at a flow rate of 0.3 μl/min and eluted at 0.2 μl/min using a linear gradient going from 2% mobile phase B to 40% mobile phase B over 109 or 139 min (each sample has been running three times with different gradients), followed by a linear increase from 40% to 95% mobile phase B in 11 min. The eluted peptides were directly introduced into the mass spectrometer. MS data were acquired in the data-dependent mode with 3 s acquisition cycle. Precursor spectra were recorded in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 120,000. The ions with a precursor charge state between 3+ and 8+ were isolated with a window size of 1.6 m/z and fragmented using high-energy collision dissociation (HCD) with collision energy 30. The fragmentation spectra were recorded in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 15,000. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with single repeat count and 60 s exclusion duration.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometric raw files were processed into peak lists using ProteoWizard (version 3.0.6618), and cross-linked peptides were matched to spectra using Xi software (version 1.6.743) with in-search assignment of monoisotopic peaks. Search parameters were MS accuracy, 3ppm; MS/MS accuracy, 10ppm; enzyme, trypsin; cross-linker, EDC; max missed cleavages, 4; missing mono-isotopic peaks, 2; fixed modification, carbamidomethylation on cysteine; variable modifications, oxidation on methionine and phosphorylation on threonine for phosphorylated sample; fragments, b and y ions with loss of H2O, NH3 and CH3SOH. FDR was computed using XiFDR and results reported at 5% residue level FDR.

### Publication Abstract
Chromosome association of the chromosomal passenger complex (CPC; consisting of Borealin, Survivin, INCENP, and the Aurora B kinase) is essential to achieve error-free chromosome segregation during cell division. Hence, understanding the mechanisms driving the chromosome association of the CPC is of paramount importance. Here using a multifaceted approach, we show that the CPC binds nucleosomes through a multivalent interaction predominantly involving Borealin. Strikingly, Survivin, previously suggested to target the CPC to centromeres, failed to bind nucleosomes on its own and requires Borealin and INCENP for its binding. Disrupting Borealin-nucleosome interactions excluded the CPC from chromosomes and caused chromosome congression defects. We also show that Borealin-mediated chromosome association of the CPC is critical for Haspin- and Bub1-mediated centromere enrichment of the CPC and works upstream of the latter. Our work thus establishes Borealin as a master regulator determining the chromosome association and function of the CPC.

### Keywords
Nucleosome core particles, Crosslinking, Chromosomal passenger complex

### Affiliations
The University of Edinburgh
1. Wellcome Centre for Cell Biology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH9 3BF, UK 2. Technical University, Berlin 13355, Germany

### Submitter
Juan Zou

### Lab Head
Dr Juri Rappsilber
1. Wellcome Centre for Cell Biology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH9 3BF, UK 2. Technical University, Berlin 13355, Germany


