### Accession
PXD030134

### Title
RNase L activating 2′-5′ oligoadenlyates bind ABCF1, -3 and Decr-1

### Description
Identification of 2′–5′ OA binding proteins in human (HeLa), mouse (BMDM) and fly (Schneider S2) cells using affinity purification mass spectrometry (AP-MS). Pulsed SILAC-based translational profiling in HeLa and HeLa S3 cells treated with 2′–5′ OA or OH-2′–5′ OA.

### Sample Protocol
Nucleic acid coated beads were incubated with 2 mg protein of cell lysates for 60 min and then washed three times with TAP buffer. Affinity purification coupled to mass spectrometry (AP-MS) was performed on lysates from HeLa, immortalized murine BMDM, and drosophila S2 cells. After affinity purification and three washings with TAP buffer, the beads were additionally washed twice with TAP buffer lacking Nonidet-P40 to remove residual detergent. At least three independent affinity purifications were performed for each bait (biotinylated 2′–5′ OA or biotinylated ATP, which was used as control). Enriched proteins were denatured in U/T buffer (6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 1 mM DTT (Sigma), 10 mM HEPES, pH 8) for 30 min and alkylated with 5.5 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) for 20 min. After digestion through addition of 1 µg LysC (WAKO Chemicals USA) at room temperature for 3 h, the suspension was diluted in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer (pH 8). Beads were removed by filtration through 96-well multiscreen filter plates (Millipore, MSBVN1210) and the protein solution was digested with 0.5 µg trypsin (Promega) overnight at room temperature. Peptides were purified on StageTips with three C18 Empore filter discs (3M) and analyzed by MS as described previously (Hubel et al., 2019). Briefly, peptides were eluted from StageTips and separated on a C18 reversed-phase column (Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 3 µM, 150×0.075 mm; Dr. Maisch) by applying a 5% to 30% acetonitrile gradient in 0.5% acetic acid at a flow rate of 250 nl min−1 with a total length of 120 or 130 min, using an EASY-nanoLC system (Proxeon Biosystems). The nanoLC system was directly coupled to the electrospray ion source of an LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) operated in a data dependent acquisition mode with a full scan (300 – 1,650 m/z) in the Orbitrap cell at a resolution of 60,000 and concomitant isolation and fragmentation of the ten most abundant precursor ions. To measure translation rates by pulsed SILAC, HeLa and HeLa S3 cells were cultured in DMEM medium, containing antibiotics, 10 mM L-glutamine, 10% dialyzed fetal calf serum (PAA Laboratories) and either heavy (84 mg/l 13C6 15N4 L-arginine and 146 mg/l 13C6 15N2 L-lysine) or medium (84 mg L−1 13C6 L-arginine and 146 mg L−1 2H4 L-lysine) SILAC amino acids (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories). Medium SILAC labeled HeLa or HeLa S3 cells were used as spike-in control. These cells were labeled for at least 8 doublings with medium SILAC medium. For pulsed SILAC, HeLa and HeLa S3 cells were stimulated through MetafectenePRO-based transfection of 200 pmol 2′–5′ OA or OH-2′–5′ OA and incubated with heavy L-lysine and L-arginine amino acids for 12 h post stimulation using heavy SILAC medium. Cells from the pulsed SILAC experiment as well as medium SILAC-labelled spike-in cells were lysed in SDS lysis buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 4% sodium dodecyl sulfate) at 95°C for 5 min, sonicated for 15 min with a Bioruptor (Diagenode) and centrifuged for 5 min at 16,000 × g at room temperature. Protein concentration was determined using a Lowry assay (DC Protein Assay, BioRAD) and each sample from the pulsed SILAC experiment was mixed in a 1:1 ratio with medium SILAC-labelled proteins from the spike-in control. Subsequently, 50 µg protein per sample were reduced with 10 mM DTT (Sigma) for 30 min, alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) for 20 min at room temperature, and precipitated with 80% acetone for 3 h at −20°C. After centrifugation for 15 min at 16,000 × g at 4°C, protein pellets were washed with 80% acetone, dried for 30 min at room temperature and dissolved in U/T buffer (6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 1 mM DTT, 10 mM HEPES, pH 8). Proteins were digested with LysC and trypsin overnight at room temperature and purified on StageTips with 3 layers of C18 Empore filter discs (3M) and analyzed by LC-MS/MS using an Easy nanoLC system coupled to a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide separation was achieved on a C18-reversed phase column (Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µM, 500×0.075 mm; Dr. Maisch) using a linear gradient of 2% to 30% acetonitrile in 0.1% acetic acid with a total length of 180 min. The mass spectrometer was set up to run a Top15 method, with a full scan scan range: 300-1,650 m/z, R: 120,000, AGC target: 3e6, max IT: 20 ms) followed by isolation, HCD fragmentation and detection of the 15 most abundant precursor ions (scan range: 200-2,000 m/z, R: 15,000, AGC target: 1e5, max IT: 25 ms, NCE: 27, isolation window: 1.4 m/z, dynamic exclusion: 20 s).

### Data Protocol
RAW mass spectrometry files were processed with MaxQuant (version 2.0.1.0) (Cox and Mann, 2008) using the built-in Andromeda search engine and protein sequence data from either human, mouse or fly proteomes (UniprotKB, release 2021-06). In addition to the standard settings, iBAQ and label free quantification (LFQ) was enabled with an LFQ minimum ratio count of 1, disabled LFQ normalization and without stabilization of large LFQ ratios. Match between runs was activated but only allowed across replicates of the same condition. In case of SILAC data, the multiplicity was set to 3 to include light (Lys0/Arg0), medium (Lys4/Arg6) and heavy (Lys8/Arg10) SILAC amino acids with a maximum number of 3 labeled amino acids per peptide.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Psilac, Ap-ms, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Institute of Virology, Technical University Munich
Technical University of Munich, School of Medicine, Institute of Virology, Munich, Germany

### Submitter
Christian Urban

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Pichlmair
Technical University of Munich, School of Medicine, Institute of Virology, Munich, Germany


