### Accession
PXD022978

### Title
Influence of LRP-1 on MDA-MB-231 secretome

### Description
LRP-1 (low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein-1) receptor is a multifunctional endocytosis receptor that is part of the LDL receptor family. Due to its capacity to control the pericellular level of various growth factors and proteases, LRP-1 plays a crucial role in controlling the dynamics of the membrane proteome. LRP-1 overexpression in breast cancer, prompted us to take an interest in its involvement in tumor progression. An RNA interference strategy in MDA-MB-231 line was used, based on shRNA stable expression. In addition to integrated experimental strategies (in vitro and in vivo) through combined approaches of biochemistry, molecular biology, cell biology, multimodal preclinical imaging, proteomics allowed us to compare shLRP-1 MDA-MB-231 tumor conditioned media to shCtrl MDA-MB-231 tumor conditioned media in order to identify secreted molecular targets modulate by LRP-1 repression and thus provide a better understanding of its regulatory action within the TNBC microenvironment.

### Sample Protocol
This analysis was performed by the proteomics core facility at University of Bordeaux (https://proteome.cgfb.u-bordeaux.fr/en). The steps of sample preparation and protein digestion were performed as previously described [Henriet E et al. Hepatology. 2017 Dec;66(6):2016-2028]. NanoLC-MS/MS analysis were performed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC Nano-UPHLC system (Thermo Scientific, USA) coupled to a nanospray Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, California, USA). Each peptide extracts were loaded on a 300 µm ID x 5 mm PepMap C18 precolumn (Thermo Scientific, USA) at a flow rate of 10 µL/min. After a 3 min desalting step, peptides were separated on a 50 cm EasySpray column (75 µm ID, 2 µm C18 beads, 100 Å pore size, ES803A rev.2, Thermo Fischer Scientific) with a 4-40% linear gradient of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN) in 115 min. The separation flow rate was set at 300 nL/min. The mass spectrometer operated in positive ion mode at a 2.0 kV needle voltage. Data was acquired using Xcalibur 4.1 software in a data-dependent mode. MS scans (m/z 375-1500) were recorded at a resolution of R = 120000 (@ m/z 200) and an AGC target of 4×105 ions collected within 50 ms, followed by a top speed duty cycle of up to 3 seconds for MS/MS acquisition. Precursor ions (2 to 7 charge states) were isolated in the quadrupole with a mass window of 1.6 Th and fragmented with HCD@30% normalized collision energy. MS/MS data was acquired in the ion trap with rapid scan mode, AGC target of 3x103 ions and a maximum injection time of 300 ms. Selected precursors were excluded for 60 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and Label-Free Quantification (LFQ) were done in Proteome Discoverer 2.4. MS Amanda 2.0, Sequest HT and Mascot 2.4 algorithms were used for protein identification in batch mode by searching against a Uniprot Homo sapiens database (75 093 entries, release May 20, 2020). Two missed enzyme cleavages were allowed. Mass tolerances in MS and MS/MS were set to 10 ppm and 0.6 Da. Oxidation (M), acetylation (K) and deamidation (N, Q) were searched as dynamic modifications and carbamidomethylation (C) as static modification. Peptide validation was performed using Percolator algorithm [Käll L et al. Nature Methods 4:923 – 925, November 2007] and only “high confidence” peptides were retained corresponding to a 1% false discovery rate at peptide level. Minora feature detector node (LFQ) was used along with the feature mapper and precursor ions quantifier. The normalization parameters were selected as follows : (1) Unique peptides (2) Precursor abundance based on intensity (3) Normalization mode : total peptide amount (4) Protein abundance calculation : summed abundances (5) Protein ratio calculation : pairwise ratio based and (6) Hypothesis test : t-test (background based). Quantitative data were considered for master proteins, quantified by a minimum of 2 unique peptides, a fold changes above 2 and a statistical p-value lower than 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Breast cancer, Lrp-1, Mda-mb-231

### Affiliations
UMR CNRS 7369 MEDyC, Matrice Extracellulaire et Dynamique Cellulaire, Université Reims Champagne-Ardenne, Campus Moulin de la Housse, BP 1039, 51687 REIMS Cedex 2, France.
Plateforme Proteome Bordeaux

### Submitter
Dupuy Jean-William

### Lab Head
Dr Jerome Devy
UMR CNRS 7369 MEDyC, Matrice Extracellulaire et Dynamique Cellulaire, Université Reims Champagne-Ardenne, Campus Moulin de la Housse, BP 1039, 51687 REIMS Cedex 2, France.


