### Accession
PXD030450

### Title
Comparative assessment of quantification methods for tumor tissue phosphoproteomics

### Description
The choice of quantification method is critical for study design and comparison of cancer phosphoproteomes. We comparatively assessed label-free quantification (LFQ), spike-in-SILAC (stable isotope labeling of amino acids in cell culture) and tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling techniques for quantitative phosphoproteome analysis in tumor tissues. Using ovarian cancer tissue as an example, our study establishes a resource for the design and analysis of quantitative phosphoproteomics studies in cancer research and diagnosis.  TMT provided the lowest accuracy and the highest precision and robustness across different phosphosite abundances and matrices (cell culture versus tumor tissue). Spike-in-SILAC offered the best compromise between these features, but was limited by low phosphosite coverage. LFQ provided the lowest precision, but the highest number of phosphosite identifications. Spike-in-SILAC and LFQ were susceptible to matrix effects arising from different sample types. Analysis based on match between run (MBR) improved phosphosite coverage across technical replicates in LFQ and spike-in-SILAC, but further reduced the precision and robustness of quantification.

### Sample Protocol
SKOV3 cells (ATCC, HTB-77, Homo sapiens ovary) were cultivated in lysine- and arginine-free Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) with 1 g/L glucose, (PAN Biotech, cat. no. P04-02506), supplemented with 10% (v/v) dialyzed fetal bovine serum (FBS) (Gibco, cat. no. 0270-106), D-(+)-Glucose solution (Sigma-Aldrich, cat. no. G8644-100 ML) to a final concentration of 4.5 g/L, 3 mM L-glutamine (Gibco, cat. no. 25030-024), and 84 mg/L lysine and 146 mg/L arginine. For SILAC labeling heavy lysine (13C6, 15N2, CNLM-291-H-PK) and arginine (13C6, 15N4, CNLM-539-H-PK) (heavy labeled medium) or light lysine (ULM-8766-PK) and arginine (ULM-8347-PK) (light labeled medium) was used. For TMT and LFQ analysis, cells were cultivated in light-labeled medium. All cells were maintained in SILAC medium at 37ºC and 7.5% CO2 for at least five passages prior to analysis. The ovarian cancer frozen tumor samples were crushed on dry ice and subsequently pulverized at 35 Hz for 2 min in liquid nitrogen precooled Teflon milling cups using a ball mill and a metal ball. Tumor tissue and cell line samples were dephosphorylated by alkaline phosphatases in phosphatase reaction buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 100 mM KCl, 0.02% Triton X-100, pH 8.0). After pooling the original and dephosphorylated samples, samples were digested for 16h at 37° with trypsin and phosphopeptides were enriched by IMAC spin column. Peptides were analysed by nano-LC-MS/MS using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid instrument (Thermofisher Scientific). For LFQ and spike-in-SILAC, precursor MS scans were performed with a resolution of 120,000 FWHM at m/z 200 and MS/MS spectra were recorded with a resolution of 7,500 FWHM at m/z 200. For TMT, multi-notch synchronous precursor selection (SPS)-MS3 technology was used to co-isolate and co-fragment multiple MS2 fragment ions in the linear ion trap, followed by reporter ions detection in the orbitrap (MS3, R= 60,000 FWHM at m/z 200).

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analysed with MaxQuant (version 1.6.5). Peptide and protein identification was performed using the Andromeda search engine and searched against the Swissprot database (Uniprot, downloaded 2019-09-20, 20430 entries) and a contamination database. For analysis of LFQ measurements, data were searched with and without “match between runs” (MBR). For analysis of the spike-in-SILAC measurements, the data were searched with and without MBR and re-quantify (req) option. TMT correction factors were added in MaxQuant using the isotope cross contamination values provided by the reagent manufacturer. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was specified as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine, and N-terminal protein acetylation and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine residues were defined as variable modifications. Only phosphosites with a localization probability larger than 0.75 were considered for further analysis. The pre-processed LC-MS/MS data were further processed and statistically analyzed using R 3.6.5. The phosphosite intensities of the LFQ and spike-in-SILAC datasets were normalized to the total protein intensity. The phosphosite intensities of the TMT datasets was normalized to the reference sample to remove the variance between batches, before further normalization to the total protein intensity for each analysis batch.  Dataset and R Scripts used for this analysis can be found at https://github.com/functional-proteo-metabolomics/quantitative_phosphoproteomics. Further details of sample analysis and data processing are described in the manuscript.

### Publication Abstract
With increasing sensitivity and accuracy in mass spectrometry, the tumor phosphoproteome is getting into reach. However, the selection of quantitation techniques best-suited to the biomedical question and diagnostic requirements remains a trial and error decision as no study has directly compared their performance for tumor tissue phosphoproteomics. We compared label-free quantification (LFQ), spike-in-SILAC (stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture), and tandem mass tag (TMT) isobaric tandem mass tags technology for quantitative phosphosite profiling in tumor tissue. Compared to the classic SILAC method, spike-in-SILAC is not limited to cell culture analysis, making it suitable for quantitative analysis of tumor tissue samples. TMT offered the lowest accuracy and the highest precision and robustness toward different phosphosite abundances and matrices. Spike-in-SILAC offered the best compromise between these features but suffered from a low phosphosite coverage. LFQ offered the lowest precision but the highest number of identifications. Both spike-in-SILAC and LFQ presented susceptibility to matrix effects. Match between run (MBR)-based analysis enhanced the phosphosite coverage across technical replicates in LFQ and spike-in-SILAC but further reduced the precision and robustness of quantification. The choice of quantitative methodology is critical for both study design such as sample size in sample groups and quantified phosphosites and comparison of published cancer phosphoproteomes. Using ovarian cancer tissue as an example, our study builds a resource for the design and analysis of quantitative phosphoproteomic studies in cancer research and diagnostics.

### Keywords
Tissue, Phosphoproteomics, Quantification, Ovarian cancer

### Affiliations
Department of Analytical Biochemistry, Groningen Research Institute of Pharmacy, University of Groningen, 9713 AV Groningen, The Netherlands.
Institute of Biochemistry and Center for Molecular Biosciences Innsbruck, University of Innsbruck, 6020 Innsbruck, Austria

### Submitter
yang zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Peter L. Horvatovich
Department of Analytical Biochemistry, Groningen Research Institute of Pharmacy, University of Groningen, 9713 AV Groningen, The Netherlands.


