### Accession
PXD000243

### Title
Telomeric protein composition deriving from q-TIP analysis comparing Hela supertelomerase cells, Hela TRF2 knockdown cells or Hela POT1 knockdown cells with Hela control cells,  proteomes by 2D-LC-MS/MS

### Description
All samples derived from the q-TIP experiments were analysed using reverse-phase chromatography coupled to orbitrap high-resolution mass spectrometer using trypsin digestion. MS/MS files were searched against the UniProt human protein database (release date 18-04-2012) by MaxQuant software (version 1.2.2.5 and 1.3.0.5). Mass spectra were searched with an initial mass tolerance of 7 ppm in MS mode and 0.5 Da in MS/MS mode. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, whereas oxidation (M) and acetylation (Protein N-term) were considered as variable modifications. Phospho (STY) was set as variable modifications for the approach B as well. Minimum required peptide length was set to six amino acids (seven for the approach B) and at least two (unique + razor) peptides were required for protein identification. A cut-off was fixed at 1% FDR at the peptide and protein level. Reverse and contaminants sequences were removed and proteins with a Posterior Error Probability (PEP) lower than 0.1 were accepted for further data treatment. Protein quantification was performed with razor and unique peptides, using only unmodified, oxidated (M) and acetylated (Protein N-term) peptides. A minimum of two ratio counts was required to quantify proteins. A FDR < 0.05 was applied on the Significances B to accept proteins significantly differentially quantified between conditions. In the article and the supplementary table 2, Rep3 corresponds to the forward experiment or the second replicate (Rep2)

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
Telomere composition changes during tumourigenesis, aging and in telomere syndromes in a poorly defined manner. Here we develop a quantitative telomeric chromatin isolation protocol (QTIP) for human cells, in which chromatin is cross-linked, immunopurified and analysed by mass spectrometry. QTIP involves stable isotope labelling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) to compare and identify quantitative differences in telomere protein composition of cells from various states. With QTIP, we specifically enrich telomeric DNA and all shelterin components. We validate the method characterizing changes at dysfunctional telomeres, and identify and validate known, as well as novel telomere-associated polypeptides including all THO subunits, SMCHD1 and LRIF1. We apply QTIP to long and short telomeres and detect increased density of SMCHD1 and LRIF1 and increased association of the shelterins TRF1, TIN2, TPP1 and POT1 with long telomeres. Our results validate QTIP to study telomeric states during normal development and in disease.

### Keywords
Human, Chromatin, Telomer length, Lc-ms/ms, Silac, Telomers

### Affiliations
PCF

### Submitter
Romain Hamelin

### Lab Head


