### Accession
PXD032821

### Title
Improved peptide backbone fragmentation is the primary advantage of MS-cleavable crosslinkers

### Description
Proteome-wide crosslinking mass spectrometry studies have coincided with the advent of MS-cleavable crosslinkers that can reveal the individual masses of the two crosslinked peptides. However, recently such studies have also been published with non-cleavable crosslinkers suggesting that MS-cleavability is not essential. We therefore examined in detail the advantages and disadvantages of using the commonly used MS-cleavable crosslinker, DSSO. Indeed, DSSO gave rise to signature peptide fragments with a distinct mass difference (doublet) for nearly all identified crosslinked peptides. Surprisingly, we could show that it was not these peptide masses that proved the main advantage of MS-cleavability of the crosslinker, but improved peptide backbone fragmentation which reduces ambiguity of peptide identifications. This also holds true for another commonly used MS-cleavable crosslinker, DSBU. We show, furthermore, that the more intricate MS3-based data acquisition approaches lack sensitivity and specificity, causing them to be outperformed by the simpler and faster stepped HCD method. This understanding will guide future developments and applications of proteome-wide crosslinking mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
We reanalysed published datasets PXD019120, PXD010317, PXD015160, PXD011861 and PXD012546. The individual sample processing protocols can be found on the respective project pages.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry raw data were processed using MSconvert (v3.0.11729) to convert to mgf-file format. A linear peptide search using xiSEARCH was employed to determine median precursor and fragment mass errors. Peak list files were then re-calibrated to account for mass shifts during measurement prior to analysis using xiSEARCH 1.7.6.1 with the following settings: MS1 error tolerances of 3 ppm; MS2 error tolerance of 5 ppm for the E. coli lysate dataset and 15 ppm for the others; up to two missing precursor isotope peaks; tryptic digestion specificity with up to two missed cleavages; modifications: carbamidomethylation (Cys, +57.021464 Da) as fixed and oxidation (Met, +15.994915 Da), deamidation (Asn and Gln, +0.984016 Da), methylation (Glu and Asp, +14.015650 Da), amidated crosslinker (Lys and protein N-terminus, DSSO-NH2: +175.03031 Da; BS3-NH2: 155.09463 Da; DSBU-NH2 +213.11134 Da) and hydrolysed crosslinker (Lys and protein N-terminus, DSSO-OH: +176.01433 Da; BS3-OH: +156.07864 Da; DSBU-OH +214.095357 Da) as variable modifications; Maximum number of variable modifications per peptide: 1; losses: –CH3SOH, –H2O, –NH3 and additionally masses for crosslinker-containing ions were defined accounting for its cleavability (DSSO A: 54.01056 Da, S: 103.99320 Da, T: 85.98264 Da; DSBU A: 85.05276 Da, B: 111.032028 Da). Crosslink sites for both reagents were allowed for side chains of Lys, Tyr, Ser, Thr and the protein N-terminus. Note that we included a “non-covalent” crosslinker with a mass of zero to flag spectra potentially arising from gas-phase associated peptides. These spectra were removed prior to false-discovery-rate (FDR) estimation. Results were filtered prior to FDR to matches having a minimum of three matched fragments per peptide, a delta score of > 15% of the match score and a peptide length of at least six amino acids. Additionally, identifications of peptide sequences that are found in two or more proteins were removed. FDR was estimated using xiFDR (v2.1.2) on a unique CSM level to 5% grouped by self- and heteromeric matches.

### Publication Abstract
Proteome-wide crosslinking mass spectrometry studies have coincided with the advent of mass spectrometry (MS)-cleavable crosslinkers that can reveal the individual masses of the two crosslinked peptides. However, recently, such studies have also been published with noncleavable crosslinkers, suggesting that MS-cleavability is not essential. We therefore examined in detail the advantages and disadvantages of using the commonly used MS-cleavable crosslinker, disuccinimidyl sulfoxide (DSSO). Indeed, DSSO gave rise to signature peptide fragments with a distinct mass difference (doublet) for nearly all identified crosslinked peptides. Surprisingly, we could show that it was not these peptide masses that proved the main advantage of MS cleavability of the crosslinker, but improved peptide backbone fragmentation which reduces the ambiguity of peptide identifications. This also holds true for another commonly used MS-cleavable crosslinker, DSBU. We show furthermore that the more intricate MS3-based data acquisition approaches lack sensitivity and specificity, causing them to be outperformed by the simpler and faster stepped higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) method. This understanding will guide future developments and applications of proteome-wide crosslinking mass spectrometry.

### Keywords
Dsbu, Lc-msms, Crosslinking, Ms-cleavable crosslinker, Dsso, Clms

### Affiliations
Technische Universität Berlin, Chair of Bioanalytics, 10623 Berlin, Germany
TU Berlin

### Submitter
Lars Kolbowski

### Lab Head
Dr Juri Rappsilber
Technische Universität Berlin, Chair of Bioanalytics, 10623 Berlin, Germany


