### Accession
PXD009298

### Title
Modern Paint Binder Controls for Palaeoproteomic Profiling of Conservation Layers on a 14th Century Italian Wall Painting

### Description
Ahead of display, a non-original layer was observed on the surface of a fragment of a wall painting by Ambrogio Lorenzetti (active 1319, died 1348/9). FTIR analysis suggested proteinaceous content. Mass spectrometry was used to better characterise this layer and revealed two protein components: sheep and cow glue and chicken and mallard egg white. Analysis of posttranslational modifications detected several photo-oxidation products, which suggest that the egg experienced prolonged exposure to UV-light and was likely applied long before the addition of the glue. Additionally, glycation products detected may indicate naturally occurring glycoprotein degradation or reaction with a carbohydrate material such as starch, identified by ATR-FTIR in a cross-section of a sample taken from the painting. Palaeoproteomics is shown to provide detailed characterisation of organic layers associated with mural paintings and therefore aids reconstruction of the conservation history of these objects.

### Sample Protocol
Mock-ups of egg white and glue mixed with pigments were prepared. The egg white was prepared according to traditional methods: carefully separated from the yolk, whipped until frothy, left overnight and then the froth removed before being painted on a glass slide and dried overnight. Two different pigmented glue samples (one mixed with lead white and one with smalt) were prepared in 1978 by the National Gallery (London) for experimental purposes. Relatively small amounts (<100 µg)of each of these were then processed using a guanidinium buffer to extract the proteins, followed by digestion with endoproteinases Lys-C and trypsin. The digested peptides were subsequently analysed by single-shot nanoflow liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (nLC-MS/MS) on a Q-Exactive HF-X Orbitrap instrument.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and additional data analysis was performed with the MaxQuant software. The resulting proteins and their modifications from the mock-ups were compared with data from PXD008486, prepared with the same basic workflow.

### Publication Abstract
Ahead of display, a non-original layer was observed on the surface of a fragment of a wall painting by Ambrogio Lorenzetti (active 1319, died 1348/9). FTIR analysis suggested proteinaceous content. Mass spectrometry was used to better characterise this layer and revealed two protein components: sheep and cow glue and chicken and duck egg white. Analysis of post-translational modifications detected several photo-oxidation products, which suggest that the egg experienced prolonged exposure to UV light and was likely applied long before the glue layer. Additionally, glycation products detected may indicate naturally occurring glycoprotein degradation or reaction with a carbohydrate material such as starch, identified by ATR-FTIR in a cross-section of a sample taken from the painting. Palaeoproteomics is shown to provide detailed characterisation of organic layers associated with mural paintings and therefore aids reconstruction of the conservation history of these objects.

### Keywords
Conservation science, Posttranslational modifications, Proteomics, Cultural heritage, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
University of Copenhagen
Natural History Museum of Denmark University of Copenhagen, Øster Voldgade 5–7, 1350 Copenhagen, Denmark

### Submitter
Meaghan Mackie

### Lab Head
Dr Enrico Cappellini
Natural History Museum of Denmark University of Copenhagen, Øster Voldgade 5–7, 1350 Copenhagen, Denmark


