### Accession
PXD003981

### Title
Data in support of Synthesis and deposition of basement membrane proteins by primary brain capillary endothelial cells in a murine model of the blood-brain barrier

### Description
The aim of the present study was to analyze four different in vitro models of the murine BBB for expression and possible secretion of major basement membrane proteins from murine BCECs (mBCECs). The mBCECs and pericytes were isolated from brains of adult C57BL/6 mice, and glial cells (mainly astrocytes and microglia) were prepared from cerebral cortices of newborn C57BL/6 mice. The mBCECs were grown as mono-culture, in co-culture with pericytes or mixed glial cells, or as a triple-culture with both pericytes and mixed glial cells.

### Sample Protocol
mBCECs and pericytes were isolated from 6-10 weeks old C57BL/6 mice based on a protocol on cellular isolation from the rat brain.To analyse the expression of basement membrane proteins in mBCECs with induced BBB properties, they were grown as either mono-culture (n=2) or co-glia culture (n=2). After two days, the mBCECs were washed twice with PBS and solubilised in lysis buffer containing 5% sodium deoxycholate (SDC) and 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB). Filter-aided sample preparation and trypsin digestion were performed as recently described (Bennike et al. 2015). In short, the samples were heated for 5 min at 95°C, and to reduce and alkylate the samples a final concentration of 50 mM chloroacetamide and 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) were added, and the samples incubated 30 min at 37°C. Next, the samples were transferred to Amicon-Ultra 0.5 ml centrifugal filters Ultracel® 10 K at where the buffer was exchanged to a digest buffer containing 0.5% SDC in 50 mM TEAB. To digest the samples, 1µg trypsin/50 µg sample protein was added, and the digestion performed inside the filters overnight at 37°C. Next day, the samples were transferred to a new collection tube, and the resulting digested peptides collected by centrifugation at 14000 x g for 15 min. at room temperature. Ethyl acetate 3:1 (v/v) was added to extract SDC and to aid positive ionisation of the samples formic acid was added to a final concentration of 1%. The peptides were then dried using vacuum centrifugation, and stored at -20 before being re-solubilised and analysed on a Thermo Electron Qexactive plus mass spectrometer. Each sample (n=4) was analysed in technical triplicates.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and label-free quantitation analysis of the mBCECs were performed using MaxQuant (v. 1.5.2.8) by searching the data-files against the Uniprot Mus musculus reference proteome (Cox et al. 2014) (UP000000589, April 2015). All standard settings were employed with carbamidomethyl as a static modification, and protein deamidation, hydroxyproline and oxidation were included as variable modifications. All proteins were reported with <1% false discovery rate (FDR) to ensure high-confidence protein identifications only. The protein group results file from the MaxQuant analysis were processed using Perseus v1.5.2.6. All FDR hits were removed from further analysis, and the data was log2-transformed. Two or more unique peptides were required for protein quantitation to ensure high-quality data. The replicates were combined by the mean to yield protein abundances (technical triplicate n=3). To identify replicate outliers, a principle component analysis (PCA) was performed using all measured protein abundances in all replicates (Cox et. Al.). For the purpose of conducting PCA missing values (i.e. proteins where a LFQ value was not obtained for a given replicate analysis), Null values were replaced with values from a normal distribution (width 0.3 and down shift 1.8) to simulate signals from low abundant proteins. The grouping of the replicates on the calculated scores plots was investigated. Scatter plots were constructed based on the method-wise combined datasets to investigate the variance in the protein abundances across the mono-culture and co-culture samples.

### Publication Abstract
The brain vascular basement membrane is important for both blood-brain barrier (BBB) development, stability, and barrier integrity and the contribution hereto from brain capillary endothelial cells (BCECs), pericytes, and astrocytes of the BBB is probably significant. The aim of this study was to analyse four different in&#xa0;vitro models of the murine BBB for expression and possible secretion of major basement membrane proteins from murine BCECs (mBCECs). mBCECs, pericytes and glial cells (mainly astrocytes and microglia) were prepared from brains of C57BL/6 mice. The mBCECs were grown as monoculture, in co-culture with pericytes or mixed glial cells, or as a triple-culture with both pericytes and mixed glial cells. The integrity of the BBB models was validated by measures of transendothelial electrical resistance (TEER) and passive permeability to mannitol. The expression of basement membrane proteins was analysed using RT-qPCR, mass spectrometry and immunocytochemistry. Co-culturing mBCECs with pericytes, mixed glial cells, or both significantly increased the TEER compared to the monoculture, and a low passive permeability was correlated with high TEER. The mBCECs expressed all major basement membrane proteins such as laminin-411, laminin-511, collagen [&#x3b1;1(IV)]<sub>2</sub> &#x3b1;2(IV), agrin, perlecan, and nidogen 1 and 2 in&#xa0;vitro. Increased expression of the laminin &#x3b1;5 subunit correlated with the addition of BBB-inducing factors (hydrocortisone, Ro 20-1724, and pCPT-cAMP), whereas increased expression of collagen IV &#x3b1;1 primarily correlated with increased levels of cAMP. In conclusion, BCECs cultured in&#xa0;vitro coherently form a BBB and express basement membrane proteins as a feature of maturation. Cover Image for this issue: doi: 10.1111/jnc.13789.

### Keywords
Blood-brain barrier; primary murine capillary endothelial cells; basement membrane; in vitro models

### Affiliations
Aalborg University Fredrik Bajersvej 3B 9220 Aalborg
Aalborg University

### Submitter
Allan Stensballe

### Lab Head
Dr Allan Stensballe
Aalborg University Fredrik Bajersvej 3B 9220 Aalborg


