### Accession
PXD037293

### Title
Proteomic analysis of lumpy skin disease virion (strain KSGP 0240).

### Description
Proteomic analysis of lumpy skin disease virion (strain KSGP 0240), a  poxvirus of the Capripoxvirus genus responsible of ruminant diseases in numerous countries.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were loaded on a SDS-PAGE for a short migration, excised from a single polyacrylamide band, treated with chemical reagents for fixing the cysteine modification or untreated, digested by trypsin, and the resulting peptides were analyzed by means of a Q-Exactive HF tandem mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were analyzed by MASCOT, the results were then parsed, spectral counts and NSAF were extracted and compared.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Lumpy skin disease virus</i> (LSDV) is the causative agent of an economically important cattle disease which is notifiable to the World Organisation for Animal Health. Over the past decades, the disease has spread at an alarming rate throughout the African continent, the Middle East, Eastern Europe, the Russian Federation, and many Asian countries. While multiple LDSV whole genomes have made further genetic comparative analyses possible, knowledge on the protein composition of the LSDV particle remains lacking. This study provides for the first time a comprehensive proteomic analysis of an infectious LSDV particle, prompting new efforts toward further proteomic LSDV strain characterization. Furthermore, this first incursion within the capripoxvirus proteome represents one of very few proteomic studies beyond the sole <i>Orthopoxvirus</i> genus, for which most of the proteomics studies have been performed. Providing new information about other chordopoxviruses may contribute to shedding new light on protein composition within the <i>Poxviridae</i> family.

### Keywords
Virus, Poxvirus, Viral particle, Proteomics, Host, Mature virion, Structure, Pathogen

### Affiliations
CEA-Marcoule, ProGénoMIX platform, DRF-Li2D, 30207 Bagnols-sur-Cèze, France
Li2D

### Submitter
Jean ARMENGAUD

### Lab Head
Dr Jean Armengaud
CEA-Marcoule, ProGénoMIX platform, DRF-Li2D, 30207 Bagnols-sur-Cèze, France


