### Accession
PXD035092

### Title
THOC5 complexes with other proteins (DDX5, DDX17 and CDK12) essential in primitive cell survival to regulate R loop structures and RNA elongation rate.

### Description
THOC5, a member of the THO complex, is essential for the 3´processing of some inducible genes, the export of a subset of genes and stem cell self-renewal. Utilising nanopore mRNA-sequencing we show that when THOC5 is depleted 50% of mRNAs undergo altered 3´end cleavage. Further, THOC5 depletion leads to increased RNA Polymerase II (Pol II) presence on the gene body and close to the 3’end. Moreover, THOC5 is recruited close to high density Pol II sites except those at the promotor regions suggesting that THOC5 is involved in transcriptional elongation. Indeed, THOC5 independent genes in cells expressing fast Pol II became THOC5 dependent in cells expressing slow Pol II. In cells expressing slow Pol II chromatin associated THOC5 interacts with CDK12 (a protein that modulates mRNA elongation rates), RNA helicases DDX5, DDX17, and THOC6. Importantly these interactions were not observed in cells expressing fast Pol II. The CDK12/THOC5 interaction promotes CDK12 recruitment to R-loops in a THOC6-dependent manner. These data demonstrate that THOC5/THOC6 play a part in transcription elongation. Given the role of THOC5 in primitive cell survival its phosphorylation by agonists, oxidative stress and oncogenes the pathway we identified has relevance in the physiology and pathology of stem cells

### Sample Protocol
Precipitated THOC5 protein complexes and control IgGs were subjected to electrophoresis on 10% (w/v) polyacrylamide gels and stained with simply Blue Coomassie safe stain (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Precipitated THOC5 protein complexes and control IgGs were subjected to  electrophoresis on 10% (w/v) polyacrylamide gels and stained with simply Blue Coomassie safe stain (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Protein bands were excised and destained with repeated incubation in 200 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 40% (v/v) acetonitrile. Gel pieces were dried with 3 washes in acetonitrile and then trypsinized (trypsin resuspended in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 5% (v/v) acetonitrile) overnight at 37°C. Peptides were extracted from the gel pieces by incubation in 50% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid, and peptides were desiccated and resuspended in 3% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 20 mM citric acid, pH 2.7.

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Sciences, IL, USA) software; the parameters were: Uniprot database, trypsin with up to 1 missed cleavage allowed, variable modifications oxidized methionine, phosphorylated serine, threonine, and tyrosine modifications permitted and peptide tolerance of 0.025 and 0.03 Da for MS/MS tolerance.

### Publication Abstract
THOC5, a member of the THO complex, is essential for the 3'processing of some inducible genes, the export of a subset of mRNAs and stem cell survival. Here we show that THOC5 depletion results in altered 3'cleavage of &gt;50% of mRNAs and changes in RNA polymerase II binding across genes. THOC5 is recruited close to high-density polymerase II sites, suggesting that THOC5 is involved in transcriptional elongation. Indeed, measurement of elongation rates <i>in&#xa0;vivo</i> demonstrated decreased rates in THOC5-depleted cells. Furthermore, THOC5 is preferentially recruited to its target genes in slow polymerase II cells compared with fast polymerase II cells. Importantly chromatin-associated THOC5 interacts with CDK12 (a modulator of transcription elongation) and RNA helicases DDX5, DDX17, and THOC6 only in slow polymerase II cells. The CDK12/THOC5 interaction promotes CDK12 recruitment to R-loops in a THOC6-dependent manner. These data demonstrate a novel function of THOC5 in transcription elongation.

### Keywords
Pol ii elongation rate, R-loop, Mrna export protein thoc5, Rna sequencing using nanopore technology

### Affiliations
University of Manchester
Stem Cell and Leukemia Protoemics Laboratory, Division of Cancer Sciences, University of Manchester, M20 3LJ, UK

### Submitter
Bethany Geary

### Lab Head
Dr Bethany Geary
Stem Cell and Leukemia Protoemics Laboratory, Division of Cancer Sciences, University of Manchester, M20 3LJ, UK


