### Accession
PXD043757

### Title
Activation of multiple stress responses in Staphylococcus aureus substantially lowers the MIC when combining two novel antibiotic drug candidates

### Description
The past few decades have been plagued by an increasing number of infections caused by antibiotic resistant bacteria. To mitigate the rise in untreatable infections, we need new antibiotics with novel targets and drug combinations that reduce resistance development. The novel β-clamp targeting antimicrobial peptide BTP-001 was recently shown to have a strong additive effect in combination with the halogenated pyrrolopyrimidine JK-274. In this study, the molecular basis for this effect was examined by a comprehensive proteomic and metabolomic study of the individual and combined effects on Staphylococcus aureus. We found that JK-274 reduced activation of several TCA cycle enzymes, likely via increasing the cellular nitric oxide stress, and BTP-001 induced oxidative stress in addition to inhibiting replication, translation, and DNA repair processes. Analysis indicated that several proteins linked to stress were only activated in the combination and not in the single treatments. These results suggest that the strong additive effect is due to the activation of multiple stress responses that can only be trigged by the combined effect of the individual mechanisms. Importantly, the combination dose required to eradicate S. aureus was well tolerated and did not affect cell viability of immortalized human keratinocyte cells. Our findings demonstrate the potential of JK-274 and BTP-001 as antibiotic drug candidates and warrant further studies.

### Sample Protocol
S. aureus ATCC 29213 cultivated in CAMHB was used for signalomic and metabolomic analysis. To prepare S. aureus pre-cultures, glycerol stock was plated onto blood agar plates and incubated overnight at 37 °C. A single colony was picked and incubated in CAMHB overnight. The pre-culture was diluted 1:100 and aliquoted into 6 individual flasks and incubated (37 °C and 250 rpm) until an OD600 = 0.3. Next, the cultures were treated with either 0.5 µM BTP-001, 1 µM BTP-001, 5 µM JK-274, 7.5 µM JK-274 or 0.5 µM BTP-001 and 5 µM JK-274. One culture was left untreated as a control. After treatment, the cultures were incubated (37 °C and 250 rpm) until sampling. Sampling for signalomics was conducted at 10, 25, 50 and 180 min after treatment. For the first 3 time points, 10 mL culture was sampled from 3 independent biological replicas (BRs). At 180 min, 5 mL were sampled for 4 BRs. Samples were centrifuged (4500 rcf, 4 °C, 10 min) and supernatant discarded. The pellet was frozen in N2 (l) and stored at -80 °C until further processing. To prepare the cell extract, pellets were thawed on ice and resuspended in 3× packed cell volume of lysis buffer (50% glycerol, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 0.1 M NaCl, 0.1 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, and 0.1% Triton X-100), followed by addition of OmniCleave™ Endonuclease (200 U per 100 µL; Lucigen, USA), RNAse A (1 mg/mL, Sigma Aldrich, USA), DNAse I (10 U per 100 µL; Roche, Switzerland), 1X phosphatase inhibitor cocktail 2 and 3 (Sigma-Aldrich), and 1X cOmplete™ protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche). Samples were incubated for 20 minutes (min) at room temperature (RT). Lysostaphin (1 µg/mL) was added to the mixture and incubated for 30 min at RT. Suspensions were centrifuged (9300 rcf, 15 min, 4 °C) and the supernatant was diluted to 1 mg/mL protein. EAH Sepharose 4B beads were coupled to in-house kinase inhibitors and Purvalanol B (Tocris). The coupled beads beads (~75 µL) were added to Pierce™ spin-columns (Thermo Scientific; one column per kinase inhibitor).  Bacterial extract (100 µg protein) was added to the column and incubated for 15 min at RT. The MIB assay was performed with on-column trypsinization as previously described (Petrovic et al., 2017). After trypsinization, peptides were eluted with ammonium bicarbonate (AmBic, 0.1 M) and acetonitrile (ACN), which were collected and dried (Vacuum Concentrator plus; Eppendorf, Germany). Dried peptides were resuspended in AmBic before dithiothreitol (DTT, 5 mM) was added. Samples were incubated at 55 °C for 30 min on a heat block before adding iodoacetamide (IAA, 20 mM) and incubated at RT for 30 min. DTT (5 mM)  was added to stop alkylation reaction and samples were dried. Samples were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid (FA) in H2O. Residual detergent was removed using Pierce™ detergent removal spin columns (Thermo Scientific) according to manufacturer’s protocol. The samples were then desalted with a stage tip using two filters of C18 material. The tip was first washed with methanol (MeOH) and equilibrated with 0.1% FA-H2O before samples were added. The tips were washed with 0.1% FA-H2O and samples were eluted with 0.1% FA-ACN. The samples were dried and reconstituted in 0.1% FA-H2O before mass spectrometry (MS) analysis. Liquid chromatography (LC)-MS/MS analysis was used for protein identification.

### Data Protocol
MS data were processed using MaxQuant v.2.1.3.0 for label free quantification (LFQ) of proteins. The following search parameters were used: the digestion enzyme was specified as trypsin with a maximum of 2 missing cleavages, variable modifications were set to oxidation (M), acetylation of protein N-terminal, and deamination (NQ), and fixed modifications were set to carbamidomethyl (C). LFQ min. ratio count was set to 1. Samples were queried against the S. aureus (strain NCTC 8325 / PS 47, proteome ID: UP000008816, downloaded on February 09, 2022) reference proteome from UniProt and Andromeda, MaxQuant’s internal contaminants database. The false discovery rate (FDR) for protein and peptide identification was set to 1%. Only unique peptides were used for definite protein group identification. The area under the peak curve was integrated to obtain peak abundances. The total abundance of all peptides identified for each protein during each run was used to normalize the abundance in every protein group using the LFQ algorithm with minimum peptides ≥1. LFQ values were analyzed in R using the DEP package from Bioconductor (v.1.22.0). Each timepoint was analyzed separately. Data were normalized using variance stabilizing transformation. Proteins with a missing value in ≥ 2 BRs for ≥ 1 sample were filtered out, and remaining missing values were imputed by the k-nearest neighbor (kNN) technique. Differentially enriched proteins were defined as having a p-value < 0.1 and based on a two-sided non-parametric Wilcoxon Sign Rank Test, which looks at the directionality of change instead of the observation value, namely a negative sign reflecting decreased and positive sign reflecting the increased expression of respective protein group. The STRING database (v.11.5) was used create a protein-protein physical interaction network of differentially pulled down proteins with the highest confidence (interaction score > 0.9) (Szklarczyk et al., 2023). The PANTHER 17.0 classification system was used to run a gene ontology enrichment analysis of biological processes (Mi et al., 2013). Heatmaps of DE were made using pheatmap in R (CRAN - Package pheatmap ).

### Publication Abstract
The past few decades have been plagued by an increasing number of infections caused by antibiotic resistant bacteria. To mitigate the rise in untreatable infections, we need new antibiotics with novel targets and drug combinations that reduce resistance development. The novel &#x3b2;-clamp targeting antimicrobial peptide BTP-001 was recently shown to have a strong additive effect in combination with the halogenated pyrrolopyrimidine JK-274. In this study, the molecular basis for this effect was examined by a comprehensive proteomic and metabolomic study of the individual and combined effects on <i>Staphylococcus aureus</i>. We found that JK-274 reduced activation of several TCA cycle enzymes, likely via increasing the cellular nitric oxide stress, and BTP-001 induced oxidative stress in addition to inhibiting replication, translation, and DNA repair processes. Analysis indicated that several proteins linked to stress were only activated in the combination and not in the single treatments. These results suggest that the strong additive effect is due to the activation of multiple stress responses that can only be triggered by the combined effect of the individual mechanisms. Importantly, the combination dose required to eradicate <i>S. aureus</i> was well tolerated and did not affect cell viability of immortalized human keratinocyte cells, suggesting a species-specific response. Our findings demonstrate the potential of JK-274 and BTP-001 as antibiotic drug candidates and warrant further studies.

### Keywords
Pyrrolopyrimidine, Antibiotics, Apim, Staphylococcus aureus

### Affiliations
Department of Clinical and Molecular Medicine Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences Norwegian University of Science and Technology Trondheim, Norway
NTNU

### Submitter
Amanda Singleton

### Lab Head
Dr Marit Otterlei
Department of Clinical and Molecular Medicine Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences Norwegian University of Science and Technology Trondheim, Norway


