### Accession
PXD001191

### Title
Integrative Genomics Positions MKRN1 as a Novel Ribonucleoprotein within the Embryonic Stem Cell Gene Regulatory Network

### Description
In this study we affinity purified FLAG-tagged MKRN1 from mouse embryonic stem cells constitutively expressing FLAG:MKRN1 that were pre-treated or untreated with the proteasome inhibitor MG132. FLAG:MKRN1 repeatedly co-immunoprecipitated with 48 proteins irrespective of MG132 treatment.  Many of the MKRN1-associated proteins are well-characterized RNA-binding proteins, and post-translational regulators of gene expression.

### Sample Protocol
FLAG:MKRN1 overexpression and FLAG vector control (FLAG:Ctrl) ESC clones were expanded in feeder-free culture conditions. For mass spectrometry experiments, 108 ESCs were treated with 20 µM MG132 or with vehicle (DMSO) 5 h prior to lysis. In all cases, cells were washed with ice cold PBS prior to lysis with TNTE lysis buffer (150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl ﬂuoride (PMSF), 0.5% TritonX-100; pH 7.4) containing 1x Complete protease inhibitors (Roche) followed by gentle rocking at 4oC for 20 min. Whole cell lysates were centrifuged at 14,000 g and total protein in the resultant supernatants was quantified using the Bradford assay. For each IP, 1.5 mg of total protein was used.  Prior to the IP, lysates were pre-cleared with 150 μL of a 20% slurry of protein G sepharose beads (GE Healthcare) while agitating at 4oC for 1 h. Subsequently, cleared lysates were immunoprecipitated with 60 μL of a 50% slurry anti-FLAG antibody conjugated to agarose beads (M2, Sigma-Aldrich) while agitating at 4oC for 1 h. Following the IP, beads were washed extensively in TNTE wash buffer (150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0.1% TritonX-100; pH 7.4) and either trypsinized in preparation for mass spectrometry analysis or boiled in 2x sample buffer supplemented with 100 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and resolved on 4-20% SDS-PAGE for immunoblot analysis.

### Data Protocol
The RAW files generated by XCalibur (Thermo Scientific) were converted into DTA files and searched using SEQUEST against 16,253 mouse proteins from the UniProt/SwissProt database.  An empirical false discovery rate of 3.0% was determined using a reverse decoy peptide sequence (Elias & Gygi, 2007)

### Publication Abstract
In embryonic stem cells (ESCs), gene regulatory networks (GRNs) coordinate gene expression to maintain ESC identity; however, the complete repertoire of factors regulating the ESC state is not fully understood. Our previous temporal microarray analysis of ESC commitment identified the E3 ubiquitin ligase protein Makorin-1 (MKRN1) as a potential novel component of the ESC GRN. Here, using multilayered systems-level analyses, we compiled a MKRN1-centered interactome in undifferentiated ESCs at the proteomic and ribonomic level. Proteomic analyses in undifferentiated ESCs revealed that MKRN1 associates with RNA-binding proteins, and ensuing RIP-chip analysis determined that MKRN1 associates with mRNAs encoding functionally related proteins including proteins that function during cellular stress. Subsequent biological validation identified MKRN1 as a novel stress granule-resident protein, although MKRN1 is not required for stress granule formation, or survival of unstressed ESCs. Thus, our unbiased systems-level analyses support a role for the E3 ligase MKRN1 as a ribonucleoprotein within the ESC GRN.

### Keywords
Embryonic stem cells / makorin-1 / rna metabolism / stress granules

### Affiliations
Ottawa Hospital Research Institute

### Submitter
Gareth Palidwor

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. William Stanford
Ottawa Hospital Research Institute


