### Accession
PXD014698

### Title
Arabidopsis thaliana leaf proteome label-free shotgun digested by Legumain at various pH

### Description
Proteomic optimisation of Arabidopsis thaliana leaf proteome generated using legumain (cleave C-terminal of asparagine/aspartic acid) as protease at different pH from pH 5.0 to pH 6.5.

### Sample Protocol
Arabidopsis thaliana columbia (Col-8) proteome extract were harvested from 10 week old plant leaves. The Arabidopsis proteome (100 µg) was digested by legumain at protease to proteome ratio of 1:50 in a reaction containing 0.1 M sodium acetate (pH 5.0 and 5.5)/ 0.1 M MES (pH 6.0 and 6.5), 0.1 M NaCl, 2 mM DTT at 37 ºC overnight. All samples were pre-cleaned using C18 stage tip. Peptides were separated on a two-column nano-HPLC setup (ThermoFisher, Dreieich, Germany) with a binary gradient from 5-35% B for 80 minutes coupled online to a high resolution Q-TOF mass spectrometer (ImpactII, Bruker) as described (Rinschen et al., 2017).

### Data Protocol
The MaxQuant software package (v1.6.0.16) was used for identification and quantification of peptides & proteins with default settings for LFQ quantification and match between runs applied (Tyanova et al., 2016). Protein identification required at least 2 unique peptides and LFQ quantification in at least 2 out of 4 biological replicates. Database used for the search was the Arabidopsis thaliana reference proteome including canonical + all isoform entries, downloaded on January 2018 from UniProt with 41350 entries (Bateman et al., 2017). Statistical analysis was done by the Perseus (Tyanova and Cox, 2018) software package (v1.6.1.1).

### Publication Abstract
Bottom-up mass spectrometry-based proteomics utilizes proteolytic enzymes with well characterized specificities to generate peptides amenable for identification by high-throughput tandem mass spectrometry. Trypsin, which cuts specifically after the basic residues lysine and arginine, is the predominant enzyme used for proteome digestion, although proteases with alternative specificities are required to detect sequences that are not accessible after tryptic digest. Here, we show that the human cysteine protease legumain exhibits a strict substrate specificity for cleavage after asparagine and aspartic acid residues during in-solution digestions of proteomes extracted from <i>Escherichia coli</i>, mouse embryonic fibroblast cell cultures, and <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i> leaves. Generating peptides highly complementary in sequence, yet similar in their biophysical properties, legumain (as compared to trypsin or GluC) enabled complementary proteome and protein sequence coverage. Importantly, legumain further enabled the identification and enrichment of protein N-termini not accessible in GluC- or trypsin-digested samples. Legumain cannot cleave after glycosylated Asn residues, which enabled the robust identification and orthogonal validation of N-glycosylation sites based on alternating sequential sample treatments with legumain and PNGaseF and vice versa. Taken together, we demonstrate that legumain is a practical, efficient protease for extending the proteome and sequence coverage achieved with trypsin, with unique possibilities for the characterization of post-translational modification sites.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis legumain digestion

### Affiliations
Forschungszentrum Juelich GmbH ZEA-3 Analytics Wilhelm-Johnen-Str D-52425 Juelich Germany
Forschungszentrum Juelich
ZEA-3 Analytics
Wilhelm-Johnen-Str
D-52425 Juelich

### Submitter
Fatih Demir

### Lab Head
Dr Pitter Florien Huesgen
Forschungszentrum Juelich GmbH ZEA-3 Analytics Wilhelm-Johnen-Str D-52425 Juelich Germany


