### Accession
PXD022297

### Title
Dynamic 3D proteomes reveal functional pathway alterations in situ

### Description
Many biological processes are regulated via molecular events, such as intermolecular interactions and chemical modifications, which do not affect protein levels and escape detection in classical proteomic screens. Reasoning that these events affect protein structure, we propose here that a global protein structural readout could detect many functional alterations simultaneously and in situ. We test this idea using limited proteolysis-mass spectrometry (LiP-MS), which monitors structural changes in thousands of proteins within a native-like environment. In bacteria undergoing nutrient adaptation and in yeast responding to acute stress, this global structural readout captures enzyme activity changes, allosteric regulation, phosphorylation, protein aggregation and protein complex formation, with sufficiently high resolution to identify alterations of single functional sites such as active site occupancy and binding interfaces. Comparison with prior knowledge, including flux, phosphoproteomics and metabolomics data, shows that LiP-MS captures most known enzyme functional alterations and suggests novel metabolite-protein binding events, enabling identification of a fructose-1,6-bisphosphate-based regulatory mechanism of glucose uptake in E. coli. The structural readout dramatically increases classical proteomics screen coverage and generates mechanistic hypotheses, thus better linking holistic and reductionist approaches and paving the way for a new in situ structural systems biology.

### Sample Protocol
E. coli experiments were performed with the BW25113 wild-type strain in shake-flask cultures. Cultures were performed in M9 minimal medium supplemented until OD 0.8 with various carbon sources (Acetate, Fructose, Galactose, Gluconate, Glucose, Glycerol, Pyruvate, Succinate). Cell pellets were washed and lysed in cold lysis buffer (LB) by beads beating. For the background proteome preparation, cells grown in M9 minimal medium supplemented with glucose were prepared as before, with an additional size-exclusion chromatography step to remove the endogenous metabolites and nucleic acids.  Yeast experiments were performed with the BY4742 wild-type strain in shake-flask cultures.  Cultures were performed in SC minimal medium or YPD medium until OD 0.8 when the cells were then pelleted. For the heat shock experiment, cell pellets were resuspended in the same volume of 42°C pre-warmed SC medium and incubated at 42°C for 3 min (respectively at 30°C for the controls). Cells were pelleted, resuspended in LB, liquid-nitrogen frozen and grounded in a Freezer Mill.  Ecoli pgk was expressed as an N-terminal His6 fusion protein in LB cultured cells. The supernatant obtained after high-speed centrifugation was applied to an Ni-IMAC column. The protein was eluted with imidazole, dialyzed and concentrated with 10 kDa MWCO concentrators. E. coli ptsI was expressed as 6 x His-tagged fusion protein. The supernatant obtained after high-speed centrifugation was applied to an His GraviTrap TALON column. The protein was eluted with imidazole, the buffer was exchanged using ultrafiltration columns with 10 kD cut-off.   Each proteome extract was split into a control sample, which was subjected to only tryptic digestion (to quantify protein abundance changes), and a LiP sample, which was subjected to double-protease digestion step with a nonspecific protease followed by complete digestion with trypsin (to quantify peptide changes due to protein structural changes). 100 μg of extracted proteome was incubated with 1:100 (w/w) of Proteinase K for 1 min (E.coli experiment) or 3 min (S. cerevisiae experiment) at 25°C. Digestion reactions were stopped by heating LiP samples for 5 min at 98°C in a thermocycler followed by denaturation with 5% sodium deoxycholate. The same procedure was applied to control samples with water added instead of Proteinase K. Both LiP and control samples were then subjected to reduction with 5mM TCEP, alkylation with 40mM Iodoacetamide and complete tryptic digestion with trypsin 1:100 (w/w) for 16 h at 37°C. The peptide mixtures were acidified with formic acid and desalted with Sep-Pak tC18 cartridges or 96 wells elution plates.  For the phospho-peptide enrichment, the desalted peptides were resuspended in a phthalic acid solution, incubated on titaniumdioxide (TiO2) beads and eluted with 0.3 M NH4OH. The elution solution was acidified trifluoroacetic acid and further desalted with Sep-Pak tC18 cartridges.  The final desalted peptides were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid and analyzed by mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
LC-MSMS data was acquired either on a Thermo Q Exactive Plus or on a Thermo Lumos Tribrid instrument in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode for library generation and in data-independent (DIA) mode for label-free peptide quantification. The DDA raw files were searched with ProteomeDiscoverer 2.2 (SEQUEST HT) against either a yeast or ecoli uniprot databases (releases from Nov. 2016 for S288c and Oct. 2017 for K12 strain respectively), depending on the organism analyzed. The search results were filtered by ProeomeDiscoverer at 1% FDR and then imported into Spectronaut 13 to generate the spectral library that was then used to extract the DIA raw files in Spectronaut 13 as well. The Spectronaut results were exported as report and further processed for statistical analysis with MSStats or statistically processed internally in Spectronaut using the "groupComparison" statistical functions.  The phospho-peptide DDA label free quantification was performed with Progenesis QI 2.0. and the statistical analysis thereof performed with the R packages SafeQuant v2.3.1 and limma.

### Publication Abstract
Biological processes are regulated by intermolecular interactions and chemical modifications that do not affect protein levels, thus escaping detection in classical proteomic screens. We demonstrate here that a global protein structural readout based on limited proteolysis-mass spectrometry (LiP-MS) detects many such functional alterations, simultaneously and in situ, in bacteria undergoing nutrient adaptation and in yeast responding to acute stress. The structural readout, visualized as structural barcodes, captured enzyme activity changes, phosphorylation, protein aggregation, and complex formation, with the resolution of individual regulated functional sites such as binding and active sites. Comparison with prior knowledge, including other 'omics data, showed that LiP-MS detects many known functional alterations within well-studied&#xa0;pathways. It suggested distinct metabolite-protein interactions and enabled identification of a fructose-1,6-bisphosphate-based regulatory mechanism of glucose uptake in E.&#xa0;coli. The structural readout dramatically increases classical proteomics coverage, generates mechanistic hypotheses, and paves the way for in situ structural systems biology.

### Keywords
Dda, Lc-msms, Structural barcodes, Limited proteolysis, Shotgun proteomics, Metabolism, Dia, Heat shock, Osmotic stress, Structure-function

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, Department of Biology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
ETH Zurich

### Submitter
Ludovic Gillet

### Lab Head
Dr Paola Picotti
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, Department of Biology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland


