### Accession
PXD037501

### Title
Signalling Inhibition by Ponatinib Disrupts Productive Alternative Lengthening of Telomeres (ALT)

### Description
Alternative lengthening of telomeres (ALT) supports telomere maintenance and replicative immortality in around 10-15% of cancers, thus representing a compelling target for therapy.To identify anti-cancer drugs that can be repurposed as ALT-centered therapies, we performed for a compound library screen on isogenic cell lines that rely either on telomerase or ALT mechanisms. We validated candidates on a panel of ALT- vs. telomerase-positive sarcoma cells and assessed levels of extrachromosomal telomeric C-circles after drug treatment, as a bona fide marker of ALT activity. We identified a receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor ponatinib that deregulated ALT mechanisms, increased telomeric replicative stress and induced telomeric  dysfunction in ALT cells. Using a model of ALT sarcoma xenografts, we found that ponatinib targeted ALT-positive cells and mitigated telomere elongation in these tumors. To identify the mode of action of ponatinib on ALT, we performed RNA-sequencing and quantitative proteomic and phosphoproteomic analyses, and shortlisted candidates to test the effect of their loss on telomeric C-circle levels. We identified an ABL1-JNK-JUN signalling circuit to be inhibited by ponatinib and to have a role in suppressing extrachromosomal telomeric C-circle formation. Furthermore, transcriptome and interactome analyses of JUN suggested a role of JUN in DNA damage repair pathways, independently of its capacity as a transcription factor. These results were corroborated by new synergistic drug interactions between ponatinib and either DNA synthesis or repair inhibitors such as triciribine and KU-60019, respectively. Overall, we identified a novel signalling pathway impacting ALT which can be targeted by a clinically approved kinase inhibitor.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC-based quantitative proteomics  SAOS-2 SILAC-labelled cells were treated with DMSO or ponatinib at 250 nM for 24 hours. Proteins were extracted using RIPA buffer (ThermoFisher Scientific) supplemented with cOmplete™ EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail Tablets (Sigma-Aldrich) and phosphatase inhibitor PhoSTOP tablets (Sigma-Aldrich). Protein concentration was estimated using BCA Protein Assay Kit and samples were processed for mass spectrometry analysis as described below. Equal amounts of corresponding heavy or light-labelled DMSO or drug-treated extracts were mixed, and 200 µg of protein were boiled at 95°C and used for MS sample preparation.   SILAC-based quantitative phosphoproteomics SILAC-labelled SAOS-2 cells treated with either DMSO or ponatinib at 250 nM for 24 hours were collected by scraping in cold PBS on ice. Cells were lysed in RIPA buffer supplemented with cOmplete™ EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail and PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor. 5 mg of proteins were used to perform a TiO2-based phosphopeptide enrichment. Heavy or light-labelled DMSO or ponatinib-treated extracts were mixed, reduced by adding 10 μL of 1M DTT per 1 mL of protein extract (final concentration: 10 mM) and incubating at 56°C for 1 hour. Next, samples were alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) by adding 100 μL of a 550 mM stock solution per 1 mL of protein extract, followed by incubation for 45 min in the dark. Prior to in-solution digestion, samples were diluted 3:1 with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer (pH 8.0). The digestion was then performed by adding trypsin (Promega) at 1:100 ratio (w/w) at 37°C overnight (i.e., 50 μg trypsin were added to each 5 mg of protein). Peptides were desalted by adding 10 μL of trifluoroacetic acid per 1 mL of protein extract (TFA, 1% final concentration) and cleaned on SEP-PAK C18 columns (Waters). The columns were primed with 10 mL of methanol followed by one wash with 10 mL of solution B (0.5% formic acid and 80% acetonitrile) and two washes with 10 mL of solution A (0.5% formic acid). Next, the digested protein extracts were applied to the column followed by a wash with 10ml of solution A. Finally, peptides were eluted in 5ml of solution B and concentrated by speed vacuum centrifugation (Eppendorf) to 50 μL. Samples were then mixed with solution C (solution B + 4M lactic acid) to obtain a final concentration of 2 M lactic acid. 100 mg of titanium dioxide (TiO2) beads (GL Sciences) were washed with 1mL of solution D (solution B + 2M lactic acid) and added to the peptides at a 1:1 ratio (w/w, 1 mg of TiO2 beads for each 1 mg of protein digest) and incubated for 1 hour on a rotating wheel at room temperature. For washing and elution, a single layer of C8 (3M) was packed into a 200 μL pipette tip and washed with 200 μL of solution A followed by 200 μL of solution B. Subsequently, the TiO2 mix was loaded to the C8 tips, followed by 3 washes with 200 μL of solution D and 3 washes with 200 μL of solution B. Samples were eluted twice with 100 μL of 400 mM NH4OH. 17.5 μL of formic acid were added to the samples for neutralization before C18 stage tipping as part of the general mass spectrometry analysis workflow described below.  JUN interactome identification by label-free quantification Immunoprecipitation experiments were performed using non-labelled nuclear extracts of either SAOS-2 jun sg1 cells or cells treated with DMSO or ponatinib at 250 nM for 3 hours. IP reactions were performed in quadruplicates. For each reaction, 300 μg of nuclear extracts were used and 2 μg of antibodies (sc-74543; Santa Cruz Biotechnology) were non-covalently coupled to 15 μL of Dynabeads™ protein G (Life Technologies). The beads-antibodies matrixes were then washed and incubated on a rotating wheel for 2 hours at 4¡C with 300 μg of extracts diluted in protein binding buffer (PBB) (150mM NaCl, 50mM Tris, 5mM MgCl2, 0.25% NP40, 1mM DTT) supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitors. Next, the beads were washed three times with cold PBB, and proteins were eluted from the beads by heating the samples in SDS loading buffer. Samples were processed for peptide identification by mass spectrometry as described below.  Mass spectrometry analysis Samples were separated on a 4-12% (for proteome) or 12 % (for JUN interactome) NuPAGE Bis-Tris precast gel (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 60 min (proteome) or 10 min (JUN IP) at 170 V. The gel was fixed using the Colloidal Blue Staining Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For proteome samples, each lane was divided into 8 equal fractions, while for JUN IP samples, a single fraction was processed. For in-gel digestion, samples were destained (25 mM ammonium bicarbonate; 50% ethanol), reduced in 10 mM DTT for 1h at 56°C followed by alkylation with 55mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) for 45 min in the dark. Tryptic digestion was performed with 2 μg trypsin (Promega) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer at 37°C overnight.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were desalted on stage tips by packing two layers of C18 (3M) into a 200 μL pipette tip. The stage tips were first primed with 50 μL methanol, followed by 1 wash with 50 μL solution B (0.5% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile) and 2 washes with 50 μL solution A (0.5% formic acid). Next, the samples (proteome, JUN IP or phosphoproteome) were applied followed by 1 wash with solution A. Samples were stored on stage tips upon MS analysis for which they were eluted with 30 μL of solution B, speed vacuum concentrated to 6 μL in order to remove the acetonitrile, and diluted to 12 μL with solution A. 6 μL of the sample (i.e. 50% of the original reaction) were stored at -20C as a back-up while the other 6 μL were placed into an EASY-nLC 1200 system at 7C and 5ul were injected for nanoflow liquid chromatography coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for the proteome and phosphoproteome samples and to a timsTOF fleX (Bruker) for the JUN IP samples. For the proteome and phosphoproteome, peptides were separated on a C18-reversed phase column (25 cm long, 75 μm inner diameter) packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 μm resin (Dr Maisch). The column was mounted on an Easy Flex Nano Source and temperature controlled by a column oven (Sonation) at 40°C. A 215-min gradient from 2 to 40% acetonitrile in 0.5% formic acid at a flow of 225 nl/min was used. Spray voltage was set to 2.4 kV. The Q Exactive HF was operated with a TOP20 MS/MS spectra acquisition method per MS full scan. MS scans were conducted with 60,000 at a maximum injection time of 20 ms and MS/MS scans with 15,000 resolution at a maximum injection time of 50 ms. For the JUN IP, peptides were separated on an Aurora series column (25 cm x 75 μm, 1.6 μm C18 resin) with an integrated captive spray insert (IonOpticks). The column was mounted on an Easy Flex Nano Source and temperature controlled by a column oven (Sonation) at 50°C. A 105-min gradient from 2 to 40% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid at a flow of 400 nl/min was used. Spray voltage was set to 1.65 kV. The timsTOF flex was operated with data-dependent acquisition (DDA) in PASEF mode with 10 PASEF ramps per topN acquisition cycle (cycle time 1.17s) and a target intensity of 10,000. Singly charged precursor ions were excluded based on their position in the m/z-ion mobility plane and precursor ions that reached the target intensity were dynamically excluded for 24 seconds. For proteome and phosphoproteome, the raw files were processed with MaxQuant [13] version 1.5.2.8 with preset standard settings for SILAC labeled samples and the re-quantify option was activated. For the JUN IP, the raw files were processed with MaxQuant version 2.0.1.0 with LFQ quantification (without fast LFQ) using at least 2 LFQ ratio counts and the match between run option activated. Carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification while methionine oxidation and protein N-acetylation were considered as variable modifications in addition to phospho (STY) for the phosphoproteome samples. Search results were filtered with a false discovery rate of 0.01. Known contaminants, proteins groups only identified by site, and reverse hits of the MaxQuant results were removed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Telomeres, Jun, Sarcoma, Alt, Ponatinib

### Affiliations
Cancer Science Institute of Singapore (CSI), National University of Singapore (NUS)
Cancer Science Institute of Singapore

### Submitter
Dennis Kappei

### Lab Head
Dr Dennis Kappei
Cancer Science Institute of Singapore (CSI), National University of Singapore (NUS)


