### Accession
PXD011176

### Title
Cytological, biochemical and molecular events related to the embryogenic state in Douglas-fir

### Description
Objectives: to characterize and to better understand differences at a protein level in embryonic and non-embryogenic tissues of embryonal masses in Douglas-fir.  In Europe, Douglas-fir is a major species for reforestation with increasing demand for its wood. Harvested stems provide timber of outstanding wood quality, mechanical properties and durability. Commercial Douglas-fir plantations in France are limited by the ability to produce seed from the latest breeding developments. Somatic embryogenesis is considered a promising biotechnology for large-scale clonal propagation of forest trees, due to the high multiplication rates it can provide. Moreover, embryogenic cultures are amenable to both cryogenic storage for long-term preservation of genetic resources and genetic engineering (including genome editing) for functional characterization of genes expressed during embryogenesis.  In conifers, embryogenic cultures take the form of embryonal mass made up of early differentiated cells forming immature somatic embryos that proliferate via cleavage polyembryony. In Douglas-fir embryogenic lines consisting in embryonal mass have been compared to non-embryogenic callus during their proliferation. Comparison of proteomes (free-gel proteomics) of embryonal mass vs non-embryogenic callus were performed.

### Sample Protocol
Soluble proteins extracts were prepared from four biological replicates for each samples (150 mg f.w. of frozen EMs) with 1 ml of urea extraction buffer (4 M urea, 0.1 % v/v SDS 10 %, 0.1 M DTT, 80 mM Tris HCl pH 6.8, 10 % v/v glycerol).

### Data Protocol
Protein sample were loaded onto SDS-PAGE gel, stained with colloidal blue. Gel bands were cut out from the SDS-PAGE gel, destained and digested by trypsin. The resulting peptide mixture was analyzed on an Ultimate 3000 nanoLC system (C18 PepMapTM trap column, Dionex, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) coupled to an Electrospray Q-Exactive quadrupole Orbitrap benchtop mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). The mass spectrometer operated in positive ion mode at a 1.8-kV needle voltage. Data were acquired using Xcalibur 2.2 software in a data-dependent mode. MS scans (m/z 350-1600) were recorded at a resolution of R = 70,000 (@ m/z 200) and an AGC target of 3E6 ions collected within 100 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s and top 15 ions were selected from fragmentation in HCD mode. MS/MS scans with a target value of 1E5 ions were collected with a maximum fill time of 100 ms and a resolution of R = 17500. Additionally, only +2 and +3 charged ions were selected for fragmentation. Data were searched by SEQUEST through Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) against a Pseudotsuga menziesii v1 transcriptome database from PineRefSeq (54,595 entries, August 2016, http://dendrome.ucdavis.edu/ftp/Genome_Data/genome/pinerefseq/Psme/v1.0/gene_models/). Spectra from peptides higher than 5000 Da or lower than 350 Da were rejected. The search parameters were as follows: mass accuracy of the monoisotopic peptide precursor and peptide fragments was set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da respectively. Only b- and y-ions were considered for mass calculation. Oxidation of methionine (+16 Da) was considered as variable modification and carbamidomethylation of cysteines (+57 Da) as fixed modification. Two missed trypsin cleavages were allowed. Peptide validation was performed using Percolator algorithm and only “high confidence” peptides were retained corresponding to a 1% False Discovery Rate (FDR) at peptide level. Raw LC-MS/MS data were imported in Progenesis QI for Proteomics 2.0 (Nonlinear Dynamics Ltd, Newcastle, U.K). Data processing includes the following steps: (i) Features detection, (ii) Features alignment across all samples, (iii) Volume integration for 2-6 charge-state ions, (iv) Raw data normalization based on ratio median calculated from LC-MS features, (v) Import of sequence information, (vi) Calculation of protein abundance (sum of the volume of corresponding peptides). Noticeably, only non-conflicting features and unique peptides were considered for calculation at protein level. Quantitative data were considered for proteins quantified by a minimum of 2 peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Somatic embryogenesis techniques have been developed for most coniferous species, but only using very juvenile material. To extend the techniques' scope, better integrated understanding of the key biological, physiological and molecular characteristics of embryogenic state is required. Therefore, embryonal masses (EMs) and non-embryogenic calli (NECs) have been compared during proliferation at multiple levels. EMs and NECs originating from a single somatic embryo (isogenic lines) of each of three unrelated genotypes were used in the analyses, which included comparison of the lines' anatomy by transmission light microscopy, transcriptomes by RNAseq Illumina sequencing, proteomes by free-gel analysis, contents of endogenous phytohormones (indole-3-acetic acid, cytokinins and ABA) by LC-MS analysis, and soluble sugar contents by HPLC. EMs were characterized by upregulation (relative to levels in NECs) of transcripts, proteins, transcription factors and active cytokinins associated with cell differentiation accompanied by histological, carbohydrate content and genetic markers of cell division. In contrast, NECs were characterized by upregulation (relative to levels in EMs) of transcripts, proteins and products associated with responses to stimuli (ABA, degradation forms of cytokinins, phenols), oxidative stress (reactive oxygen species) and carbohydrate storage (starch). Sub-Network Enrichment Analyses that highlighted functions and interactions of transcripts and proteins that significantly differed between EMs and NECs corroborated these findings. The study shows the utility of a novel approach involving integrated multi-scale transcriptomic, proteomic, biochemical, histological and anatomical analyses to obtain insights into molecular events associated with embryogenesis and more specifically to the embryogenic state of cell in Douglas-fir.

### Keywords
Soluble carbohydrate, Embryonal mass, Pseudostuga, Histo-cytology, Proteomic, Non-embryogenic callus, Phytohormone, Transcriptomic

### Affiliations
Plateforme Proteome, Centre Genomique Fonctionnelle Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France
Plateforme Proteome

### Submitter
Stephane Claverol

### Lab Head
Dr Stephane Claverol
Plateforme Proteome, Centre Genomique Fonctionnelle Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France


