### Accession
PXD039509

### Title
Human Plasma from non-Hispanic White and African American Sepsis Survivors and Non-Survivors with Primary Urinary Tract Infection LC-MS/MS

### Description
This study examined global proteomic changes in blood plasma from non-Hispanic White and African American sepsis patients with primary urinary tract infection using LC-MS/MS on a Q-Exactive HF. Proteins were quantified in the LC-MS/MS experiments using Tandem Mass Tags 16-plex (TMTpro).

### Sample Protocol
Crude plasma was immunodepleted using a Multiple Affinity Removal System (MARS) 14 column and concentrated with spin filters. After protein concentration for each sample was determined using BCA assay, a pool with equal protein amounts from all samples was prepared for QC and normalization purposes. The samples were randomly divided into 12 batches of 15, with each batch including one pooled sample. 60 ug of protein from each sample was digested using trypsin/Lys-C. 25 ug of the resulting peptides were tagged using TMTpro 16plex. After pooling the tagged samples, each batch was fractionated offline using high pH reversed phase fractionation into 24 concatenated fractions. Each fraction was injected in duplicate for LC-MS/MS analysis. Online reversed phase LC separation took place over 160 minutes for Batches 1-11 and 185 minutes for Batch 12. The different gradients produced similar protein identifications. Note that some TMT channels in Batch 12 were assigned samples from Batch 8 of a prior cohort of ProCESS samples (PXD030476) due to having extra channels available; hence, those files are named Batches 8 & 12.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer version 2.5 using SEQUEST HT and Percolator. Some key parameters included dynamic modifications of Methionine oxidation, TMTpro 16plex at the peptide N-terminus and Lysine residues, acetylation and methylation on protein N-termini, and methionine loss with acetylation. Carbamidomethylation on Cysteine residues was a fixed modification. Precursor mass tolerance was 10 ppm, and fragment mass tolerance was 0.02 Da. The cleavage enzyme was set to trypsin with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Peptide confidence was set to high with one peptide minimum needed for identification and peptides were only counted for the top scored protein. Quantification was performed based on reporter ion intensity and underwent a two-step normalization using the pooled samples. Quantifiable proteins had to be identified with high confidence peptides, at least 2 PSMs, and have intensity values in the pool channel of all batches in which they were identified.

### Publication Abstract
Urinary tract infections (UTIs) are a common cause of sepsis worldwide. Annually, more than 60,000 US deaths can be attributed to sepsis secondary to UTIs, and African American/Black adults have higher incidence and case-fatality rates than non-Hispanic White adults. Molecular-level factors that may help partially explain differences in sepsis survival outcomes between African American/Black and Non-Hispanic White adults are not clear. In this study, patient samples (N = 166) from the Protocolized Care for Early Septic Shock cohort were analyzed using discovery-based plasma proteomics. Patients had sepsis secondary to UTIs and were stratified according to self-identified racial background and sepsis survival outcomes. Proteomics results suggest patient heterogeneity across mechanisms driving survival from sepsis secondary to UTIs. Differentially expressed proteins (n = 122, false discovery rate-adjusted P &lt; 0.05) in Non-Hispanic White sepsis survivors were primarily in immune system pathways, while differentially expressed proteins (n = 47, false discovery rate-adjusted P &lt; 0.05) in African American/Black patients were mostly in metabolic pathways. However, in all patients, regardless of racial background, there were 16 differentially expressed proteins in sepsis survivors involved in translation initiation and shutdown pathways. These pathways are potential targets for prognostic intervention. Overall, this study provides information about molecular factors that may help explain disparities in sepsis survival outcomes among African American/Black and Non-Hispanic White patients with primary UTIs.

### Keywords
Human, Plasma, Lc-ms/ms, Sepsis, Tmt

### Affiliations
Vanderbilt University Department of Chemistry Nashville, TN, USA
Vanderbilt University

### Submitter
Kathryn Kapp

### Lab Head
Dr Renã A. S. Robinson
Vanderbilt University Department of Chemistry Nashville, TN, USA


