### Accession
PXD035814

### Title
LC-MSMS of media agar from co-cultivation of Auricularia cornea and Pseudonocardia mangrovi

### Description
The co-cultivation investigation showed that A. cornea TBRC 12900 co-cultivated with P. mangrovi TBRC-BCC 42794 showed a high level of A. cornea mycelial growth. Proteomics analysis was employed to reveal predicted biological activities involved in the mutualistic relationship between the two strains during mycelial growth.

### Sample Protocol
A. cornea TBRC 12900 and P. mangrovi TBRC-BCC 42794 were subjected to co-cultivation at 25 °C on PDA supplemtned with 10 g/l pepteone on the same 90 mm petri dish for 7 days. Then, pieces of media agar between A. cornea mycelia and P. mangrovi cells were collected. lysis buffer solution contaiing 0.5% Triton X-100, 10 mM DTT, and 10 mM NaCl in 50 mM HEPES-KOH (pH 8.0) was added to the obtained agar pieces and the agar pieces  were then shaken at 800 rpm (25°C) for 60 minutes, followed by centrifugation at 20,000 х g for 10 minutes at 4 °C. The protein extracts were precipitated by adding cold acetone and incubated at -20 °C overnight. After precipitation, the protein pellet was resuspended in 0.25% RapidGest SF (Waters, UK) containing 10 mM Ammonium bicarbonate (AMBIC). The concentration of extracted proteins were determined by the Bradford Reagent assay (Sigma, USA), using bovine serum albumin (BSA) as the standard. Then, 20 µg of the extracted proteins were digested with trypsin. DTT (10mM) in 10 mM AMBIC  was added to the protein extracts before incubation at 62 °C for 20 minutes to reduce the sulfhydryl bonds. Alkylation of sulfhydryl was performed at room temperature for 25 minutes in the dark. The solution was then subjected to a desalting process with a desalting column (Thermo Scientific, USA). The flow-through from the column was collected and digested with trypsin (Thermo Scientific, LT) at a ratio of 1:50 (trypsin: protein) at 37 °C overnight.  The trypsin-digested peptides were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid and transferred to a TruView LCMS vial (Waters, UK) before being subjected to LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Liquid chrmatography combined with tandem mass spectrometery (LC-MS/MS) was used to analyzed 1.0 μg of the trypsin-degested peptides. The data was obtained in a positive mode with a sciex triple TOF-6600+ mass spectrometer (ABSCIEX, De) combined with a nano-liquid chromatography (LC) system (Thermo Scientific, USA). A nano analytical column (75 µm i.d. x 15 cm) packed with Acclaim PepMap™ C18) (Thermo Scientific, De) was used. Mobile phase A (0.05% Trifluoroacetic acid; TFA) and phase B (80% acetonitrile/ 0.04% TFA) were used for liquid chromatography. The samples loaded onto the analytical column were separated using a linear gradient of B (3-35%) for 95 minutes at a constant flow rate of 300 ml/minutes prior to regeneration of the column with 90% solution B for 10 minutes and re-equilibration of the column with 5% solution B for 15 minutes. The eluted peptides were then subjected to tandem mass spectrometry. The MS acquisition time was set from zero to 120 minutes in a gradient. The MS1 spectra were obtained in the range of 400 to 1,500 m/z with 250 milliseconds. Each MS1 spectrum was further fragmented with a maximum of 30 precursors per cycle. The Switch criteria used were charge of 2+ to 5+, 500 cps intensity threshold, and dynamic exclusion for 15 seconds.   The raw MS-spectra files were then converted into mzML files and subjected to analysis by a trans proteomic pipeline (TPP). The Comet program was used to blast searched the MS spectra against the protein database containing proteins from Pseudonocardia and A. cornea. PeptideProphet and iProphet were used for validation of peptide-spectrum matches. ProteinProphet was emplloyed for protein assignments. StPeter was used for Label-free quantification of the proteins (0.95 minimum probability threshold).

### Publication Abstract
Complex dynamic bacterial-fungal interactions play key roles during mushroom growth, ranging from mutualism to antagonism. These interactions convey a large influence on mushroom's mycelial and fruiting body formation during mushroom cultivation. In this study, high-throughput amplicon sequencing was conducted to investigate the structure of bacterial communities in spent mushroom substrates obtained from cultivation of two different groups of <i>Auricularia cornea</i> with (A) high yield and (B) low yield of fruiting body production. It was found that species richness and diversity of microbiota in group (A) samples were significantly higher than in group (B) samples. Among the identified 765 bacterial OTUs, 5 bacterial species found to exhibit high differential abundance between group (A) and group (B) were <i>Pseudonocardia mangrovi</i>, <i>Luteimonas composti</i>, <i>Paracoccus pantotrophus</i>, <i>Sphingobium jiangsuense</i>, and <i>Microvirga massiliensis</i>. The co-cultivation with selected bacterial strains showed that <i>A. cornea</i> TBRC 12900 co-cultivated with <i>P. mangrovi</i> TBRC-BCC 42794 promoted a high level of mycelial growth. Proteomics analysis was performed to elucidate the biological activities involved in the mutualistic association between <i>A. cornea</i> TBRC 12900 and <i>P. mangrovi</i> TBRC-BCC 42794. After co-cultivation of <i>A. cornea</i> TBRC 12900 and <i>P. mangrovi</i> TBRC-BCC 42794, 1,616 proteins were detected including 578 proteins of <i>A. cornea</i> origin and 1,038 proteins of <i>P. mangrovi</i> origin. Functional analysis and PPI network construction revealed that the high level of mycelial growth in the co-culture condition most likely resulted from concerted actions of (a) carbohydrate-active enzymes including hydrolases, glycosyltransferases, and carbohydrate esterases important for carbohydrate metabolism and cell wall generation/remodeling, (b) peptidases including cysteine-, metallo-, and serine-peptidases, (c) transporters including the ABC-type transporter superfamily, the FAT transporter family, and the VGP family, and (d) proteins with proposed roles in formation of metabolites that can act as growth-promoting molecules or those normally contain antimicrobial activity (e.g., indoles, terpenes, <i>&#x3b2;</i>-lactones, lanthipeptides, iturins, and ectoines). The findings will provide novel insights into bacterial-fungal interactions during mycelial growth and fruiting body formation. Our results can be utilized for the selection of growth-promoting bacteria to improve the cultivation process of <i>A. cornea</i> with a high production yield, thus conveying potentially high socio-economic impact to mushroom agriculture.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Pseudonocardia mangrovi, Auricularia cornea

### Affiliations
The National Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology

### Submitter
Paopit Siriarchawatana

### Lab Head
Dr Paopit Siriarchawatana
The National Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology


