### Accession
PXD001816

### Title
Quantitative proteomics of rat and human pancreatic beta cells

### Description
Quantitative proteomics of rat and human pancreatic beta cells

### Sample Protocol
Freshly isolated rat cells were washed trice with PBS (4°C), and soluble protein was extracted in 50 µl 0.5% (w/v) RapiGest detergent in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA.) in the presence of Complete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (F. Hoffmann–La Roche Ltd, Basel, Switserland) as specified by manufacturer's protocol and bovine DNAse II (Boehringer Ingelheim GmbH, Ingelheim am Rhein, Germany, 2 µg/mL) solution, followed by ultracentrifugation to remove cellular debris. 25 µl protein extract was reduced with 2.5 µl 100 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at room temperature for 60 min, followed by 3 subsequent washes with 400 µl 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 4 µl 100 mM DTT using a 5 KDa cut-off membrane filter. This step removes protease inhibitors and most of reduced insulin molecules. Proteins were denatured by heating at 80°C for 15 min, followed by 30 min at 60°C after addition of 2.5 µl 100 mM DTT and another 30 min at ambient temperature in the dark after addition of 2.5 µl 200 mM iodoacetamide. Trypsinization was carried out overnight at 37°C (1:25 w/w trypsin ratio) in final volume of 100 µl. Finally, RapiGest detergent was removed by acidifying digest to pH = 2 with trifluoroacetic acid and incubation for 15 min at 37°C.

### Data Protocol
Continuum LC-MS data were processed and searched using ProteinLynx GlobalSERVER v3.0.2 (Waters Corporation). Protein identifications were obtained by searching a species specific Rattus norvegicus databases (Feb 2015, 8,024 entries). Sequence information of Alcohol dehydrogenase Saccharomyces cerevisiae was added to the databases to afford the ability to normalize the data sets and to estimate amounts and concentration [11] and that of known contaminant proteins (serum albumin Bos taurus and trypsin Sus scrofa). A decoy was generated on the fly with every database search experiment conducted to estimated the protein false positive rate of identification [43]. Data independent scanning protein identifications were accepted when more than three fragment ions per peptide, seven fragment ions per protein and more than 2 peptides per protein were identified. Furthermore, the identification of the protein had to occur in at least 2 out of 3 replicate injections. Typical search criteria used for protein identification included automatic peptide and fragment ion tolerance settings (approximately 10 and 25 ppm, respectively), 1 allowed missed cleavage, fixed carbamidomethyl-cysteine modification and variable methionine oxidation.

### Publication Abstract
Data set description: This data set is composed by label-free alternate-scanning LC-MS/MS proteomics analysis human and Wistar rat pancreatic islet endocrine cells. The mass spectrometry data of the human and rat pancreatic beta cells and the resulting proteome search output from ProteinLynx GlobalSERVER (PLGS) have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium [1] via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifiers PXD001539 (human) and PXD001816 (rat). From these mass spectrometry data, 'relative molar amount units' between cell types and across species were calculated. Biological relevance: These data provide a quantitative view on the unfractionated proteomes of human and rat beta and alpha cells. It is likely biased towards the proteins with higher molar abundance, relating to core functional pathways, but also includes several proteins with an islet-enriched expression. The quality of the cell preps is state-of-the-art, and the label-free quantitation is both precise and accurate, allowing detailed quantitative analysis.

### Keywords
Pancreatic beta  cell, Rattus norvegicus, Pancreatic alpha cell

### Affiliations
Diabetes Research Center, Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB), Belgium
Waters Corporation

### Submitter
Hans Vissers

### Lab Head
Dr Geert Martens
Diabetes Research Center, Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB), Belgium


