### Accession
PXD043619

### Title
Quantitative Multi-Omics Atlas of the Model Chordate Ciona

### Description
We present a comprehensive proteome atlas of the model chordate Ciona, covering eight developmental stages and ~7k translated genes as well as a deep quantitative atlas of maternal proteins found in the Ciona egg.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were prepared by lysing frozen embryos in lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 7.2, 2% SDS, and 1x protease in artificial saltwater) followed by clarification via centrifugation. Lysates were diluted to 2 ug/μL with 100 mM HEPES (pH 7.2). DTT was added to a concentration of 5 mM and samples incubated for 20 mins at 60 °C. After cooling to RT, N-ethylmaleimide (NEM) was added to a concentration of 20 mM and samples incubated for 20 mins at RT. 10 mM DTT was added and samples incubated for 10 mins at RT to quench NEM. To 200 μL of each sample were brought up to 2 mL with 800 μL MeOH, 400 μL chloroform, and 600 μL water. Samples were centrifuged at 20,000 g for 2 minutes at RT. Upper layer was discarded and 600 μL MeOH was added. Samples were centrifuged at 20,000 g for 2 minutes at RT. Supernatant was discarded and 500 μL MeOH was added. Samples were centrifuged at 20,000 g for 2 minutes at RT. Supernatant was discarded and the pellet was air dried. Pellet was resuspended in 6 M GuaCl, 10 mM EPPS pH 8.5 to ~5 mg/mL.   For the label-free samples, UPS2 standards were added to a final concentration of 27 ng/μL in the 450 μg protein samples. Samples were diluted with 10 mM EPPS pH 8.5 to 2 M Guanidine hydrochloride. Samples were digested in LysC (Wako) at a concentration of 20 ng/μL incubated at RT overnight. Samples were further diluted with 10 mM EPPS pH 8.5 to 0.5 M Guanidine hydrochloride. 20 ng/μL LysC and 10 ng/μL Trypsin (Promega) were added to each sample and incubated for 16 hours at 37 °C. Peptide supernatant was cleared by ultracentrifugation at 100,000 g for 1 hour at 4 °C (Beckman Coulter, 343775), then vacuum-dried overnight.   For TMTpro-labeling, samples were digested with LysC and Trypsin as above, then resuspended in 200 mM EPPS pH 8.0. pre-mixed TMTpro tags (8-plex Thermo Fisher Scientific 20 μg/μL in dry acetonitrile stored at -80 °C) at a 5 μg TMTpro: 1 μg peptide ratio. Tags are as follows: 126 - Unfertilized egg; 128C – 1-cell; 129N – 16-cell; 130C – 110-cell; 131N – Late neurula; 131C – mid tailbud; 133C – late tailbud; 134N – larva. Samples were incubated for 2 hours at RT. Reactions were quenched by addition of hydroxylamine (Sigma, HPLC grade) to a final concentration of 0.5% for 30 minutes at RT. Samples were pooled into a single tube, cleared by ultracentrifugation at 100,000 g for 1 hour at 4 °C (Beckman Coulter, 343775), then and vacuum-dried overnight.   For either label-free or TMTpro-labeled, samples were resuspended with 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.0) with 5% acetonitrile to 1 μg/μL. Samples were separated by medium pH reverse phase HPLC (Zorbax 300Extend C18, 4.6 x 250 mm column) into 96 fractions as described previously (Johnson et al. 2021a; Nguyen et al. 2022). The fractions were then pooled into 24 fractions (Edwards and Haas 2015), dried, and resuspended in HPLC grade water. Samples were then desalted via homemade stage tips with C18 material (Empore) and resuspended to 1 μg/μL in 1% formic acid.

### Data Protocol
Approximately 1 µg of the sample was analyzed by LC-MS, essentially as previously described (Nguyen et al. 2022). LC-MS experiments were analyzed on an nLC-1200 HPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on an Aurora Series emitter column (25 cm × 75 µm ID, 1.6 µm C18) (Ionopticks, Australia), held at 60 °C during separation by an in-house built column oven. Separation was achieved by applying a 12% to 35% acetonitrile gradient in 0.125% formic acid and 2% DMSO over 90 minutes for fractionated samples. Electrospray ionization was enabled by applying a voltage of 2.6 kV through a MicroTee at the inlet of the microcapillary column. For the TMTpro samples, we used the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos with the TMTproC method previously described (Johnson et al. 2021a). For the label-free samples, we used the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos with the label-free method previously described (Wühr et al. 2014).  Mass spectrometry data analysis was performed essentially as previously described (Sonnett et al. 2018b) with the following modifications. The raw MS files were analyzed using the Gygi Lab software platform (GFY Core) licensed through Harvard University. MS2 spectra assignment was performed using the SEQUEST algorithm by searching the data against either our reference protein dataset described above, the KY21 Ciona proteome (Satou et al. 2021), or the Uniprot Ciona proteome. To control for peptide false discovery rate, reverse sequences were searched in parallel with forward sequences (Elias and Gygi 2007). For label-free analysis, these proteomes were merged with the UPS2 Proteomics Standards FASTA file (Sigma-Aldrich) along with common contaminants. Peptides that matched multiple proteins were assigned to the proteins with the greatest number of unique peptides. TMTproC data were analyzed as previously described (Johnson et al. 2021a).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Embryogenesis, Proteomics, Development, Ciona

### Affiliations
Princeton University
Lewis-Sigler Institute for Integrative Genomics, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA; Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA

### Submitter
Alexander Frese

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Wühr
Lewis-Sigler Institute for Integrative Genomics, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA; Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA


