### Accession
PXD016098

### Title
LC-MS/MS Data of Skeletal Muscle and Plasma of Preruminant Calves fed with Leucine and Threonine Supplemented Diets

### Description
The objective of present work is to use foodomics approaches in calves’ skeletal muscle and plasma to fully assess the effects of the supplementations of leucine and threonine in the MR during preweaning period (5.6 days to 53.6 days) under the hypothesis that AA supplementation will modify the energy metabolism, especially of the muscle tissue. This study extends our understanding on the metabolism in dairy calves and help to optimize their nutritional status.

### Sample Protocol
Sample Collection At 53.6 ± 0.67 days of age and 81.8 ± 3.49 kg of BW, blood was obtained from the jugular vein 4 h after the morning MR feeding, and plasma and serum were obtained by centrifugation at 1,500 g for 10 min and stored in aliquots at −80 °C. Biopsies were obtained from the semitendinosus muscle and kept at −80 °C. Prior to assay, frozen muscle tissues were ground into fine powder in liquid nitrogen and at least two ~0.5 g aliquots were made and kept in a 15 ml polypropylene at -80 °C.  Protein Extraction and Quantification One aliquot of semitendinosus muscle fine powder in a 15 mL tube was sonicated in 3 mL extraction buffer (137 mM NaCl, 50 mM HEPES, 2% SDS, 1% NP-40, 10% glycerol, 2 mM Na3VO4, 100 mM NaF and 1% protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma), pH 7.4) at 40% amplitude following a sequence of 10-s on and 5-s off, three times on ice. The homogenate was centrifuged at 12,000 g for 15 min at 4°C and the supernatant (muscle extract) was kept. Protein concentration was determined by the Bradford method. Samples were kept at -80°C until analyses.  Muscle samples were processed using Filter-Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) with some modifications. In short, for each sample and internal standard (pooled sample), 35 μg of proteins were diluted in UA buffer (8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris/HCl, pH 8.5) to 200 µL, added to a 10 kDa filter unit (Microcon YM-10, Merck Millipore), centrifuged at 13,000 g for 15 min at 20 0C and washed by adding 200 µL of UA buffer followed by centrifugation. Samples were alkylated with 100 µL iodoacetamide (0.05 M IAA in UA buffer) for 20 min in the dark at RT. Additional series of washes with 100 µL of UA buffer (twice) and 100 µl TEAB (0.1 M triethylammonium bicarbonate) (twice) with subsequent centrifugation were conducted. Overnight digestion at 37 °C was performed with 50 µL of 0.1 M TEAB containing 2% trypsin (v/v). Tryptic peptides were eluted by centrifugation at 13,000 g for 10 min and washed with 50 µL of buffer (50% acetonitrile in 0.1 M TEAB, v/v). Collected flowthrough was dried and used for TMT labelling. Before labelling, pellets were dissolved in 50 µL of 0.1 M TEAB.  Plasma-EDTA samples were prepared as described [14] with some modifications. Briefly, 35 μg of proteins per sample or internal standard were diluted with 100 μL 0.1 M TEAB containing 1% SDS, reduced, alkylated and acetone precipitated overnight. Protein pellets were collected by centrifugation and dissolved in 50 μL TEAB containing 1 μg trypsin for overnight digestion at 37°C.  Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) Labelling for Muscle and Plasma Proteins TMTsixplex™ Isobaric Label Reagent Set (#90061) was used for peptide labelling as reported previously [1]. In short, for the labelling, 19 µl of reconstituted TMT reagent was added to each tryptic digested sample and incubated for 1 h, RT. Internal standard was labelled with the TMT m/z 126 while other tags were randomized. The reaction was quenched by adding 8 µl of 5% hydroxylamine to each sample and incubating for 15 min. For each sixplex, samples were combined at equal amounts, aliquoted, dried in a vacuum centrifuge and kept in -80°C for future analysis. High Resolution LC-MS/MS Analyses and Bioinformatics Mass spectrometric analysis was conducted on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex, Germering, Germany) and Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) as reported [14]. In short, after desalting on the trap column, TMT-labelled peptides were separated on the analytical column (PepMap™ RSLC C18, 50 cm x 75 μm) using a 120-min linear gradient of 5 - 45% mobile phase B (0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN) at the flow rate of 300 nL/min. Peptides were introduced into the mass spectrometer using a 10 μm-inner diameter SilicaTip emitter (New Objective, USA) within a nanospray Flex ion source. For DDA analysis Top-8 method was used.  1  A. Horvatić, N. Guillemin, H. Kaab, D. McKeegan, E. O’Reilly, M. Bain, J. Kuleš, P.D. Eckersall, Quantitative proteomics using tandem mass tags in relation to the acute phase protein response in chicken challenged with Escherichia coli lipopolysaccharide endotoxin, J. Proteomics. 192 (2019) 64–77. doi:10.1016/j.jprot.2018.08.009.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer (version 2.0, Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used for peptide identification and relative quantification. SEQUEST algorithm database search against Bos taurus FASTA files (NCBI database, 7/12/2017, 46105 entries) was performed. Proteins with at least two unique peptides and 5% FDR were reported as validly identified. Furthermore, for reporter ion-based protein quantification, internal standards were used to compare the data between the TMT sixplexes.

### Publication Abstract
In pre-weaning calves, both leucine and threonine play important roles in growth and muscle metabolism. In this study, metabolomics, proteomics and clinical chemistry were used to assess the effects of leucine and threonine supplementation added to milk replacer on 14 newborn Holstein male calves: 7 were fed a control diet (Ctrl) and 7 were fed the Ctrl diet supplemented with 0.3% leucine and 0.3% threonine (LT) from 5.6&#x202f;days of age to 53.6&#x202f;days. At this time, blood and semitendinosus muscle biopsies were collected for analysis. Integrated metabolomics and proteomics showed that branched-chain amino acids (BCAA) degradation and mitochondrial oxidative metabolism (citrate cycle and respiratory chain) were the main activated pathways in muscle because of the supplementation. BCAA derivatives and metabolites related to lipid mobilization showed the major changes. The deleterious effects of activated oxidative phosphorylation were balanced by the upregulation of antioxidant proteins. An increase in protein synthesis was indicated by elevated aminoacyl-tRNA biosynthesis and increased S6 ribosomal protein phosphorylation in skeletal muscle. In conclusion, LT group showed greater BCAA availability and mitochondrial oxidative activity; as the muscle cells undergo greater aerobic metabolism, antioxidant defenses were activated to compensate for possible cell damage. Data are available via ProteomeXchange (PXD016098). SIGNIFICANCE: Leucine and threonine are essential amino acids for the pre-weaning calf, being of high importance for growth. In this study, we found that leucine and threonine supplementation of milk replacer to feed pre-weaning calves led to differences in the proteome, metabolome and clinical chemistry analytes in skeletal muscle and plasma, albeit no differences in productive performance were recorded. This study extends our understanding on the metabolism in dairy calves and helps optimizing their nutritional status.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Tmt, Amino acid; calf; leucine; threonine; muscle; plasma;  proteomics

### Affiliations
VetMedZg Laboratory,Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia    Institute of Biodiversity, Animal Health & Comparative Medicine, College of Medicine, Veterinary Medicine and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK
University of Zagreb, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine

### Submitter
Anita Horvatic

### Lab Head
Dr Peter David Eckersall
VetMedZg Laboratory,Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia    Institute of Biodiversity, Animal Health & Comparative Medicine, College of Medicine, Veterinary Medicine and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK


