### Accession
PXD006856

### Title
Naa80 acetylates the actin N-terminus impacting the actin cytoskeleton and cell motility

### Description
Eukaryotic actins undergo several post-translational modifications during their maturation to enable a fully functional cytoskeletal network. A unique N-terminal processing is conserved in the animal kingdom and includes the removal of the first one or two amino acids as well as N-terminal acetylation of the newly exposed acidic N-termini. These events have been known for decades, but the mechanism and function of actin N-terminal acetylation are not well understood due to the lack of information on the catalysing N-terminal acetyltransferase (NAT). Here, we show that NAA80, previously known as NAT6 or FUS-2,is a unique, animal kingdom-specific NAT that exclusively N-terminally acetylates actins. In vitro, the lack of actin N-terminal acetylation impedes the actin polymerization rate due to decreased formin-mediated filament elongation, while the depolymerisation rate is unaffected. Human NAA80 knockout cells display a complete loss of actin N-terminal acetylation and a reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton. We reveal Naa80 as the enzyme that specifically N-terminally acetylates actin the most abundant protein in animal cells, and that this modification controls cellular dynamics and cytoskeletal functions. In this project acetylation of actins was investigated with the use of LC-MS/MS and MS1 quantitation of the Total Ion Current signal.

### Sample Protocol
SCX enrichment of N-terminal peptides from Naa80 WT and KO cells was performed as described previously (PMID: 28315243). To enable the assignment of in vivo Nt-acetylation events (Ac), all primary protein amines were blocked at the protein level making use of a N-hydroxysuccinimide ester of acetic acid encoded with stable heavy isotopes (i.e. NHS ester of 13C2D3-acetic acid (AcDC)). In this way, it is possible to distinguish between in vivo (Ac) and in vitro (AcDC) acetylated N-termini and to calculate the degree of in vivo Nt-acetylation as described below. After trypsin digestion, N-terminally blocked peptides were enriched by Strong Cation Echange (SCX) as such peptides will not bind to the SCX resin at low pH. From both samples, approximately 2 µg of the resulting peptide mixture was injected for LC-MS/MS analysis on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo) in-line connected to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo) equipped with a Nanospray Flex Ion source (Thermo). Trapping was performed at 10 μl/min for 4 min in loading solvent (0.1% TFA in water/acetonitrile (98:2, v/v)) on a 20 mm trapping column (made in-house, 100 μm internal diameter (I.D.), 5 μm beads, C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch, Germany) and the sample was loaded on a 400 mm analytical column (made in-house, 75 µm I.D., 1.9 µm beads C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch). Peptides were eluted by a non-linear increase from 2 to 56% solvent B (0.1% FA in water/acetonitrile (2:8, v/v)) over 140 minutes at a constant flow rate of 250 nl/min, followed by a 10-minutes wash reaching 99% solvent B and re-equilibration with solvent A (0.1% FA in water/acetonitrile (2:8, v/v)). The column temperature was kept constant at 50°C in a column oven (CoControl 3.3.05, Sonation). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 16 most abundant ion peaks per MS spectrum. Full-scan MS spectra (375-1500 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 in the orbitrap analyser after accumulation to a target value of 3,000,000. The 16 most intense ions above a threshold value of 13,000 were isolated (window of 1.5 Th) for fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 28% after filling the trap at a target value of 100,000 for maximum 80 ms. MS/MS spectra (200-2000 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 15,000 in the orbitrap analyser. The S-lens RF level was set at 55 and we excluded precursor ions with single and unassigned charge states from fragmentation selection. Trapping was performed at 10 μl/min for 4 min in loading solvent (0.1% TFA in water/acetonitrile (98:2, v/v)) on a 20 mm trapping column (made in-house, 100 μm internal diameter (I.D.), 5 μm beads, C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch, Germany) and the sample was loaded on a 400 mm analytical column (made in-house, 75 µm I.D., 1.9 µm beads C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch). Peptides were eluted by a non-linear increase from 2 to 56% solvent B (0.1% FA in water/acetonitrile (2:8, v/v)) over 140 minutes at a constant flow rate of 250 nl/min, followed by a 10-minutes wash reaching 99% solvent B and re-equilibration with solvent A (0.1% FA in water/acetonitrile (2:8, v/v)). The column temperature was kept constant at 50°C in a column oven (CoControl 3.3.05, Sonation). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 16 most abundant ion peaks per MS spectrum. Full-scan MS spectra (375-1500 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 in the orbitrap analyser after accumulation to a target value of 3,000,000. The 16 most intense ions above a threshold value of 13,000 were isolated (window of 1.5 Th) for fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 28% after filling the trap at a target value of 100,000 for maximum 80 ms. MS/MS spectra (200-2000 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 15,000 in the orbitrap analyser. The S-lens RF level was set at 55 and we excluded precursor ions with single and unassigned charge states from fragmentation selection.

### Data Protocol
Mascot generic files were created using the Mascot Distiller software (version 2.5.1.0, Matrix Science Ltd.). Peak lists were searched with the Mascot search engine using the Mascot Daemon interface (version 2.5.1, Matrix Science) against the SwissProt database restricted to human proteins (database release version of January 2017 containing 20,246 human protein sequences). Spectra were first searched with semi-ArgC/P enzyme settings, allowing 1 missed cleavage. Heavy acetylation (13C2D3) of lysine residues and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues were set as fixed modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues was set as a variable modification. Mass tolerance of the precursor ions was set to 10 ppm (with Mascot’s C13 option set to 1) and of fragment ions to 20 mmu. The instrument setting was set to ESI-QUAD. To allow identification and quantification of acetylated N-terminal peptides, a quantitation method with two different components was made defining light (12C2H3) and heavy (13C2D3) acetylation of peptide N-termini as respectively light and heavy exclusive modification groups. Only peptides that were ranked first and scored above the threshold score set at 99% confidence were withheld. In a second search, peptides without N-terminal acetylation were identified using a similar search parameter set, including the cyclization of N-terminal glutamine residues to pyroglutamine residues as a variable modification. The FDR was calculated as described previously (PMID: 18067246) and found to be 0.96%. Identified peptides were quantified using the Mascot Distiller Toolbox version 2.3.2.0 (MatrixScience) in the precursor mode. To validate the calculated ratio, the standard error on the least square fit has to be below 0.16 and correlation coefficient of the isotopic envelope should be above 0.97.  For processing of all MS data the ms_lims software platform was used (PMID 20058248). Peptides shorter than 8 amino acid residues, peptides not starting at position 1 or 2 in the protein sequence and non-tryptic peptides were removed for downstream analysis. The degree of in vivo acetylation was calculated separately in both samples using the light/heavy (Ac/AcDC) ratio reported by the Mascot Distiller Toolbox by the equation Ac % = ratio (Ac/AcDC) / (ratio (Ac/AcDC) + 1). In those cases were N-terminal peptides were identified and quantified multiple times, the median and standard deviation of the acetylation degrees of the individual peptides was calculated.

### Publication Abstract
Actin, one of the most abundant proteins in nature, participates in countless cellular functions ranging from organelle trafficking and pathogen motility to cell migration and regulation of gene transcription. Actin's cellular activities depend on the dynamic transition between its monomeric and filamentous forms, a process exquisitely regulated in cells by a large number of actin-binding and signaling proteins. Additionally, several posttranslational modifications control the cellular functions of actin, including most notably N-terminal (Nt)-acetylation, a prevalent modification throughout the animal kingdom. However, the biological role and mechanism of actin Nt-acetylation are poorly understood, and the identity of actin's N-terminal acetyltransferase (NAT) has remained a mystery. Here, we reveal that NAA80, a suggested NAT enzyme whose substrate specificity had not been characterized, is Nt-acetylating actin. We further show that actin Nt-acetylation plays crucial roles in cytoskeletal assembly in vitro and in cells. The absence of Nt-acetylation leads to significant differences in the rates of actin filament depolymerization and elongation, including elongation driven by formins, whereas filament nucleation by the Arp2/3 complex is mostly unaffected. <i>NAA80</i>-knockout cells display severely altered cytoskeletal organization, including an increase in the ratio of filamentous to globular actin, increased filopodia and lamellipodia formation, and accelerated cell motility. Together, the results demonstrate NAA80's role as actin's NAT and reveal a crucial role for actin Nt-acetylation in the control of cytoskeleton structure and dynamics.

### Keywords
Nat, Human, Actin, N-terminal acetylation

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Biology, University of Bergen, N-5020 Bergen
Ghent University - VIB

### Submitter
Evy Timmerman

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Arnesen
Department of Molecular Biology, University of Bergen, N-5020 Bergen


