### Accession
PXD029605

### Title
Adaptive evolution of Methylotuvimicrobium alcaliphilum to grow in the presence of rhamnolipids improves fatty acid and rhamnolipid production from CH4

### Description
Rhamnolipids (RL) are well-studied biosurfactants naturally produced by pathogenic strains of P. aeruginosa. Current methods to produce RLs in native and heterologous hosts have focused on carbohydrates as production substrate; however CH4 provides an intriguing alternative as a substrate for RL production because it is low-cost and may mitigate greenhouse gas emissions. Here we demonstrate RL production from CH4 by Methylotuvimicrobium alcaliphilum 20Z.  RLs were inhibitory to M. alcaliphilum growth at low concentrations (<0.05 g/L), so adaptive evolution was performed by growing M. alcaliphilum  in increasing concentrations of RLs, producing a strain that grew in the presence of 5 g/L of RLs. Metabolomics and proteomics of the adapted strain grown on CH4 in the absence of  RLs revealed metabolic changes increase in fatty acid production and secretion, alterations in gluconeogenesis, and increased secretion of lactate and osmolyte products compared to the parent strain. Expression of plasmid-borne RL production genes in the parent M. alcaliphilum strain resulted in cessation of growth and cell death. In contrast, the adapted strain transformed with the RL production genes showed no growth inhibition and produced up to 1 M of RLs, a 600-fold increase compared to the parent strain. This work has promise for developing technologies to produce fatty acid-derived bioporducts, including biosurfactants, from CH4.

### Sample Protocol
M. alcaliphilum cell cultures were grown in batch in 10 mL Pi medium in 50 mL serum vials under a methane-air atmosphere. Cell cultures were incubated at 30° shaking at 220 rpm. Both strains were grown for proteomic analysis in triplicates. Cells were harvested at 24 h and 48h and stored at -80°C until use. Samples for proteomic analysis were processed and whole proteome was analyzed as described by Yan et.al. (dx.doi.org/10.17504/protocols.io.bf9xjr7n).

### Data Protocol
Normalized Spectral Abundance Factor (NSAF) values obtained were processed to categorize upregulated and downregulated proteins of M. alcaliphilum strain DASS and WT. p value <0.05 for FC >0.1 were considered significant and are presented in heat map table or as specified.

### Publication Abstract
Rhamnolipids (RLs) are well-studied biosurfactants naturally produced by pathogenic strains of Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Current methods to produce RLs in native and heterologous hosts have focused on carbohydrates as production substrate; however, methane (CH4) provides an intriguing alternative as a substrate for RL production because it is low cost and may mitigate greenhouse gas emissions. Here, we demonstrate RL production from CH4 by Methylotuvimicrobium alcaliphilum DSM19304. RLs are inhibitory to M. alcaliphilum growth (&lt;0.05&#xa0;g/l). Adaptive laboratory evolution was performed by growing M. alcaliphilum in increasing concentrations of RLs, producing a strain that grew in the presence of 5&#xa0;g/l of RLs. Metabolomics and proteomics of the adapted strain grown on CH4 in the absence of RLs revealed metabolic changes, increase in fatty acid production and secretion, alterations in gluconeogenesis, and increased secretion of lactate and osmolyte products compared with the parent strain. Expression of plasmid-borne RL production genes in the parent M. alcaliphilum strain resulted in cessation of growth and cell death. In contrast, the adapted strain transformed with the RL production genes showed no growth inhibition and produced up to 1&#xa0;&#x3bc;M of RLs, a 600-fold increase compared with the parent strain, solely from CH4. This work has promise for developing technologies to produce fatty acid-derived bioproducts, including biosurfactants, from CH4.

### Keywords
Methylotuvimicrobium alcaliphilum, Adaptive laboratory evolution, Rhamnolipids, Ch4

### Affiliations
Staff Scientist Biological Systems & Engineering Division Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory Berkeley CA 94720
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory

### Submitter
Christopher Petzold

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher J. Petzold
Staff Scientist Biological Systems & Engineering Division Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory Berkeley CA 94720


