### Accession
PXD029300

### Title
Detection of mutated peptides of SARS-CoV-2 from COVID-19-infected patients

### Description
This project involves the identification of mutated peptides from swab and plasma samples using an in-house developed Mutant Peptide Database (MPD)

### Sample Protocol
Heat-inactivated swabs and plasma samples were used. Proteins present in the sample were extracted, of which 30 microgram was quantified and digested using trypsin. Digested peptides were desalted using C-18 material before taking samples forward for MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw datasets obtained from the MS were processed with MaxQuant (Tyanova, Temu, and Cox 2016) (v 2.0.0.) against the Human Swiss-Prot Database (downloaded on 13.8.2021). Raw files were processed using Label-Free-Quantification (LFQ) parameters and setting label type as "standard" with a multiplicity of 1. The Orbitrap was set to Orbitrap Fusion mode. Trypsin was used for digestion with a maximum missed cleavage of 2 for Human and COVID. Carbamido-methylation of Cysteine was set as the fixed modification, whereas oxidation of Methionine was set as the variable modification. The False-Discovery-Rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 for the protein and peptide levels to ensure high reliability of the protein detection.

### Publication Abstract
Equipped with a dramatically high mutation rate, which happens to be a signature of RNA viruses, SARS-CoV-2 trampled across the globe infecting individuals of all ages and ethnicities. As the variants of concern (VOC) loomed large, definitive detection of SARS-CoV-2 strains became a matter of utmost importance in epidemiological and clinical research. Besides, unveiling the disease pathogenesis at the molecular level and deciphering the therapeutic targets became key priorities since the emergence of the pandemic. Mass spectrometry has been largely used in this regard. A critical part of mass spectrometric analyses is the proteome database required for the identification of peptides. Presently, the mutational information on proteins available on SARS-CoV-2 databases cannot be used to analyze data extracted from mass spectrometers. Hence, we developed the novel Mutant Peptide Database (MPD) for the mass spectrometry (MS)-based identification of mutated peptides, which contains information from 11 proteins of SARS-CoV-2 from a total of 21,549 SARS-CoV-2 variants across different regions of India. The database was validated using clinical samples, and its applicability was also demonstrated with the mutated peptides extracted from the literature. We believe that MPD will support broad-spectrum MS-based studies like viral detection, disease pathogenesis, and therapeutics with respect to SARS-CoV-2 and its variants.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Covid-19, Mutant peptides, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
IIT Bombay
Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay

### Submitter
Abhilash Barpanda

### Lab Head
Dr Sanjeeva Srivastava
Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay


