### Accession
PXD024655

### Title
Whole-genome transformation for industrial yeast strain development

### Description
tRNAs are encoded by a large gene family, usually with several isogenic tRNAs interacting with the same codon. Mutations in the anticodon region of other tRNAs can overcome specific tRNA deficiencies. Phylogenetic analysis suggests that such mutations have occurred in evolution, but the driving force is unclear. We show that in yeast suppressor mutations in other tRNAs are able to overcome deficiency of the essential TRT2-encoded tRNAThrCGU at high temperature (40°C). Surprisingly, these tRNA suppressor mutations were obtained after whole-genome transformation with DNA from thermotolerant Kluyveromyces marxianus or Ogataea polymorpha strains, but from which the mutations did apparently not originate. We suggest that transient presence of donor DNA in the host facilitates proliferation at high temperature and thus increases the chances for occurrence of spontaneous mutations suppressing defective growth at high temperature. Whole-genome sequence analysis of three transformants revealed only four to five non-synonymous mutations of which one causing TRT2 anticodon stem stabilization and two anticodon mutations in non-threonyl-tRNAs, tRNALysCUU and tRNAeMetCAU, were causative. Both anticodon mutations suppressed lethality of TRT2 deletion and apparently caused the respective tRNAs to become novel substrates for threonyl-tRNA synthetase. LC-MS/MS data could not detect any significant mistranslation and RT-qPCR results contradicted induction of the unfolded protein response. We suggest that stress conditions have been a driving force in evolution for the selection of anticodon-switching mutations in tRNAs as revealed by phylogenetic analysis. Importance of the work In this work we have identified for the first time the causative elements in a eukaryotic organism introduced by applying whole-genome transformation and responsible for the selectable trait of interest, i.e. high temperature tolerance. Surprisingly, the whole-genome transformants contained just a few SNPs, which were unrelated to the sequence of the donor DNA. In each of three independent transformants, we have identified a SNP in a tRNA, either stabilizing the essential tRNAThrCGU at high temperature or switching the anticodon of tRNALysCUU or tRNAeMetCAU into CGU, which is apparently enough for in vivo recognition by threonyl-tRNA synthetase. LC-MS/MS analysis indeed indicated absence of significant mistranslation. Phylogenetic analysis showed that similar mutations have occurred throughout evolution and we suggest that stress conditions may have been a driving force for their selection. The low number of SNPs introduced by whole-genome transformation may favor its application for improvement of industrial yeast strains.

### Sample Protocol
For protein extraction, fermentations at 42°C were performed in cylindrical tubes with an extrusion, sealed with a membrane. Samples were taken in mid-exponential phase (about 10h at 42°C). The amount of protein in a culture aliquot was determined by the Lowry method and an equivalent of about 2mg protein in cell mass was taken for further analysis. The cell suspensions were immediately placed on ice and spun down for 10 min at 14,000 rpm. The supernatant was removed and the cell pellet was washed twice with PBS and stored at -80°C after freeze-drying in liquid nitrogen. Each strain was analyzed in triplicate by the VIB Proteomics Core (https://corefacilities.vib.be/pec).  The yeast cell pellet was dissolved in 8M urea buffer (in 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0) and added to a 2 ml microcentrifuge tube containing lysing matrix Y (MP Biomedicals, California, USA). Cell disruption was carried out after transfer to cooled holders on a Tissue Lyser II instrument (Qiagen, Venlo, Netherlands), for 5 min at 30 Hz. Samples were then sonicated and spun down. Protein concentrations were measured on recovered supernatants, using the Bradford method and from each sample 100 µg protein was used to continue the protocol. Samples were diluted with 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0 to a urea concentration of 4 M and proteins were digested with 1 µg LysC (Wako) (1/100, w/w) for 4 h at 37°C. Samples were further diluted to a urea concentration of 2 M and digested with 1 µg trypsin (Promega) (1/100, w/w) overnight at 37˚C. The resulting peptide mixture was acidified by addition of 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and after 15 min incubation on ice, samples were centrifuged for 15 min at 1,780 x g at room temperature to remove insoluble components. Next, peptides were purified on OMIX C18 tips (Agilent). The tips were first washed 3 times with 200 µl pre-wash buffer (0.1% TFA in water/ acetonitrile (ACN) (20:80, v/v)) and pre-equilibrated 5 times with 200 µl of solvent A (0.1% TFA in water/ACN (98:2, v/v)) before the samples were loaded on the tip. After peptide binding, the tip was washed 3 times with 200 µl of solvent A and peptides were eluted twice with 150 µl elution buffer (0.1% TFA in water/ACN (40:60, v/v)). Purified peptides were re-dissolved in 50 µl loading solvent A (0.1% TFA in water/ACN (98:2, v/v)) and the peptide concentration determined on a Lunatic spectrophotometer (Unchained Labs, Ghent, Belgium) [50]. 2 µg peptide material of each sample was injected for LC-MS/MS analysis in an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano LC (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) connected in-line to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nanospray flex ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  Trapping was performed at 10 μl/min for 4 min in loading solvent A on a 20 mm trapping column (made in-house, 100 μm internal diameter (I.D.), 5 μm beads, C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch, Germany). The peptides were separated on a nanoEase MZ C18 HSS T3 Column (100Å, 1.8 μm, 75 μm × 250 mm, Waters). The column was kept at a constant temperature of 50°C. Peptides were eluted by a non-linear gradient from 1 to 55% MS solvent B (0.1% FA in water/ACN (2:8, v/v)) over 145 min, at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min, followed by a 5-min washing phase plateauing at 99% MS solvent B. Re-equilibration with 99% MS solvent A (0.1% FA in water) was performed at 300 nl/min for 45 min The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 16 most abundant ion peaks per MS spectrum. Full-scan MS spectra (375-1500 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 (at 200 m/z) in the Orbitrap analyzer after accumulation to a target value of 3,000,000. The 16 most intense ions above a threshold value of 13,000 were isolated for fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 28% after filling the trap at a target value of 100,000 for maximum 80 ms. MS/MS spectra (200-2000 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 15,000 in the Orbitrap analyzer.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed with MaxQuant (version 1.6.11.0) using the Andromeda search engine with default search settings including a false discovery rate set at 1% on both the peptide and protein level [79, 80]. Spectra were searched against the Saccharomyces cerevisiae (taxonomy id 559292) Uniprot reference proteome ([www.uniprot.orgwww.uniprot.org], database version: January 2020 with 6,049 entries). The mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions was set to 4.5 and 20 ppm, respectively, during the main search. Enzyme specificity was set to C-terminal arginine and lysine, also allowing cleavage next to prolines with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionine residues as well as acetylation of protein N-termini. Matching between runs was enabled with a matching time window of 0.7 min and an alignment time window of 20 min. Only proteins with at least one unique or razor peptide were retained leading to the identification of 2,604 proteins. Proteins and peptides were quantified by the MaxLFQ algorithm, integrated in the MaxQuant software. A minimum ratio count of two unique or razor peptides was required for quantification. In addition, a second equivalent MaxQuant search was carried out, in which T->K or T->M amino acid substitutions were set as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
tRNAs are encoded by a large gene family, usually with several isogenic tRNAs interacting with the same codon. Mutations in the anticodon region of other tRNAs can overcome specific tRNA deficiencies. Phylogenetic analysis suggests that such mutations have occurred in evolution, but the driving force is unclear. We show that in yeast suppressor mutations in other tRNAs are able to overcome deficiency of the essential <i>TRT2</i>-encoded tRNA<sup>Thr</sup><sub>CGU</sub> at high temperature (40&#xb0;C). Surprisingly, these tRNA suppressor mutations were obtained after whole-genome transformation with DNA from thermotolerant <i>Kluyveromyces marxianus</i> or <i>Ogataea polymorpha</i> strains but from which the mutations did apparently not originate. We suggest that transient presence of donor DNA in the host facilitates proliferation at high temperature and thus increases the chances for occurrence of spontaneous mutations suppressing defective growth at high temperature. Whole-genome sequence analysis of three transformants revealed only four to five nonsynonymous mutations of which one causing <i>TRT2</i> anticodon stem stabilization and two anticodon mutations in non-threonyl-tRNAs, tRNA<sup>Lys</sup><sub>CUU</sub> and tRNA<sup>eMet</sup><sub>CAU</sub>, were causative. Both anticodon mutations suppressed lethality of <i>TRT2</i> deletion and apparently caused the respective tRNAs to become novel substrates for threonyl-tRNA synthetase. Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) data could not detect any significant mistranslation, and reverse transcription-quantitative PCR results contradicted induction of the unfolded protein response. We suggest that stress conditions have been a driving force in evolution for the selection of anticodon-switching mutations in tRNAs as revealed by phylogenetic analysis.<b>IMPORTANCE</b> In this work, we have identified for the first time the causative elements in a eukaryotic organism introduced by applying whole-genome transformation and responsible for the selectable trait of interest, i.e., high temperature tolerance. Surprisingly, the whole-genome transformants contained just a few single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), which were unrelated to the sequence of the donor DNA. In each of three independent transformants, we have identified a SNP in a tRNA, either stabilizing the essential tRNA<sup>Thr</sup><sub>CGU</sub> at high temperature or switching the anticodon of tRNA<sup>Lys</sup><sub>CUU</sub> or tRNA<sup>eMet</sup><sub>CAU</sub> into CGU, which is apparently enough for <i>in vivo</i> recognition by threonyl-tRNA synthetase. LC-MS/MS analysis indeed indicated absence of significant mistranslation. Phylogenetic analysis showed that similar mutations have occurred throughout evolution and we suggest that stress conditions may have been a driving force for their selection. The low number of SNPs introduced by whole-genome transformation may favor its application for improvement of industrial yeast strains.

### Keywords
Yeast, Trna, Thermotolerance, Anticodon, Whole-genome transformation

### Affiliations
VIB/KU LEUVEN Center for Microbiology
VIB Proteomics Core

### Submitter
Teresa Mendes Maia

### Lab Head
Dr Johan Thevelein
VIB/KU LEUVEN Center for Microbiology


