### Accession
PXD024687

### Title
Oxidation of peroxiredoxin-4 induces oligomerization and promotes interaction with endoplasmic reticulum proteins

### Description
The family of peroxiredoxins catalyzes the reduction of hydrogen peroxide (H2O2). Peroxiredoxin 4 (PRDX4) is the only peroxiredoxin located within the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and is the highest expressed ER H2O2 scavenger. PRDX4 has emerged as an important player in numerous diseases and its over-oxidation is a potential indicator of ER redox stress. The interactome of PRDX4 as well as the dynamics of its oligomerization have largely been unstudied. Therefore, the goal of this study was to determine the effect of oxidation on PRDX4 oligomerization and interaction with binding partners. We report that the oxidation of PRDX4 in lung epithelial cells treated with tertbutyl hydroperoxide (TBuOOH) caused a shift of PRDX4 from monomer/dimer to high molecular weight(HMW) species which are composed of PRDX4 containing sulfonic acid residues (PRDX4-SO3) as well as a complement of ER-associated proteins. Treatment of recombinant PRDX4 with TBuOOH also led to HMW complexes, showing that interactions with client proteins are not required for PRDX4 HMW complex formation.

### Sample Protocol
Mouse lung epithelial cells grown in 10cm dishes were transfected with pCMV or PRDX4-SBP constructs. 24 hours after transfection cells were treated with 500uM H2O2 or TBuOOH for 2 minutes before being harvested in Co-IP buffer (20mM Tris, pH 7.4, 150mM NaCl, 0.5%NP-40, 10% glycerol, 20mM NEM, 200U catalase). PRDX4 was then immunoprecipitated from 1.5mg total protein with high-affinity streptavidin agarose beads (Invitrogen) as described previously(19). PRDX4 and bound proteins were eluted using 4mM biotin in TBS and run on a non-reducing SDS-PAGE gel. The gel was stained with Coomassie blue, the protein was excised from the gel and the gel bands were washed with 50% methanol and 5% acetic acid to remove the Coomassie blue stain. The protein was reduced with 10 mM DTT and alkylated with 100 mM iodoacetamide followed by digestion with Promega sequencing grade modified trypsin (20 ng/µL), (Promega, Madison, WI, V5113),  for 16 hours (Promega, Madison, WI).

### Data Protocol
The digested samples were analyzed on the Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer coupled to an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Mass spectrometry data was acquired in a data-dependent acquisition mode with lock mass function activated in which a survey scan from m/z 350-1600 at 70, 000 resolution was followed by 10 higher-energy collisional dissociation tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) scans on the most abundant ions at 17,500 resolution. The data-dependent data was analyzed using Proteome Discover 2.4 and SEQUEST software for protein identification within the uniprot_ref_mouse database containing 63,368 sequences (downloaded on November, 2019). Spectra with more than 2 missed cleavages were removed from the analysis. Mass tolerance of precursor ions was 10ppm and mass tolerance for fragment ions was 0.02 Da. Target Decoy PSM Validator was included in the workflow to limit the false discovery rate to less than 1%. Variable modification of methionine oxidation, cysteine alkylation with iodoacetamide and NEM and cysteine oxidation were considered. All protein identification results were filtered to include only high confidence peptides

### Publication Abstract
Peroxiredoxins (PRDXs) catalyze the reduction of hydrogen peroxide (H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub>). PRDX4 is the only peroxiredoxin located within the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and is the most highly expressed H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> scavenger in the ER. PRDX4 has emerged as an important player in numerous diseases, such as fibrosis and metabolic syndromes, and its overoxidation is a potential indicator of ER redox stress. It is unclear how overoxidation of PRDX4 governs its oligomerization state and interacting partners. Herein, we addressed these questions via nonreducing Western blots, mass spectrometry, and site-directed mutagenesis. We report that the oxidation of PRDX4 in lung epithelial cells treated with tertbutyl hydroperoxide caused a shift of PRDX4 from monomer/dimer to high molecular weight (HMW) species, which contain PRDX4 modified with sulfonic acid residues (PRDX4-SO<sub>3</sub>), as well as of a complement of ER-associated proteins, including protein disulfide isomerases important in protein folding, thioredoxin domain-containing protein 5, and heat shock protein A5, a key regulator of the ER stress response. Mutation of any of the four cysteines in PRDX4 altered the HMW species in response to tertbutyl hydroperoxide as well as the secretion of PRDX4. We also demonstrate that the expression of ER oxidoreductase 1 alpha, which generates H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> in the ER, increased PRDX4 HMW formation and secretion. These results suggest a link between SO<sub>3</sub> modification in the formation of HMW PRDX4 complexes in cells, whereas the association of key regulators of ER homeostasis with HMW oxidized PRDX4 point to a putative role of PRDX4 in regulating ER stress responses.

### Keywords
Prdx4, Tert-butyl hydroperoxide

### Affiliations
University of Vermont, Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine
University of Vermont

### Submitter
Evan Elko

### Lab Head
Dr Yvonne Janssen-Heininger
University of Vermont, Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine


