### Accession
PXD026653

### Title
Anaerobic peroxisomes in Entamoeba histolytica metabolize myo-inositol

### Description
E. histolytica is believed to be devoid of peroxisomes, like most anaerobic protists. In this work, we provided the first evidence that peroxisomes are present in E. histolytica, although the set of proteins (peroxins) responsible for peroxisome biogenesis was reduced to only seven members (Pex1, Pex6, Pex5, Pex11, Pex14, Pex16, and Pex19). Targeting matrix proteins to peroxisomes is reduced to the PTS1-dependent pathway mediated via the soluble Pex5 receptor, while the PTS2 receptor Pex7 is absent. Immunofluorescence microscopy showed that peroxisomal markers (Pex5, Pex14, Pex16, Pex19) are present in vesicles distinct from mitosomes, the endoplasmic reticulum and the endosome/phagosome system, except Pex11, which has dual localization in peroxisomes and mitosomes. Immunoelectron microscopy revealed that Pex14 localized to vesicles of approximately 90-100 nm in diameter. Proteomic analyses of affinity-purified peroxisomes and in silico PTS1 predictions provided datasets of 655 and 56 peroxisomal candidates, respectively; however, only six proteins were shared by both datasets, including myo-inositol dehydrogenase (myo-IDH). Peroxisomal NAD-dependent myo-IDH appeared to be a dimeric enzyme with high affinity to myo-inositol (Km 0,044 mM) and can utilize also scyllo-inositol, D-glucose and D-xylose as substrates. Phylogenetic analyses revealed that orthologs of myo-IDH with PTS1 are present in E. dispar, E. nutalli and E. moshkovskii but not in E. invadens, and form a monophyletic clade of mostly peroxisomal orthologs with free-living M. balamuthi and P. schiedti. The presence of peroxisomes in E. histolytica and other archamoebae breaks the paradigm of peroxisome absence in anaerobes and provides a new potential target for the development of antiparasitic drugs.

### Sample Protocol
Affinity enrichment of peroxisomes Peroxisomes were pulled down via C-terminally tagged Pex14 using a recombinant E. histolytica B2-5 strain expressing His-tagged or V5-tagged Pex14 and the untagged control. Cells were harvested and washed with NaPBS, and 10 mg of protein was used for pull-down experiments. The cells were resuspended in MES buffer supplemented with protease inhibitors with or without 0.05% Tween-20. The cells were homogenized on ice using a Dounce homogenizer, and the unbroken cells were removed. The cell lysate or the crude peroxisomal fraction (obtained from the homogenate ultracentrifugation at 150,000 x g for 15 min) was incubated with 50 µl of magnetic beads coupled with either anti-His or anti-V5 mouse antibody (MBL Life Science, Japan) for 90 min at 4°C on an overhead rotator. The beads were washed three times in 20 volumes of MES buffer. The proteins were identified by label-free quantitative-mass spectrometry.  Mass spectrometry and data processing Label-free quantitative mass spectrometry (LFQ-MS) was performed according to standard procedures as described previously [61]. Briefly, the samples were digested with trypsin, and the peptides obtained were subjected to nanoliquid chromatography-MS. The MS/MS spectra were acquired using Thermo Orbitrap Fusion (Q-OT- qIT, Thermo Fisher Scientific), processed in Proteome Discoverer 2.1. (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and searched against the E. histolytica database (downloaded from AmoebaDB.org, containing 8,306 entries). The quantifications were performed with label-free algorithms using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.2.1) [88], and the data were analyzed using Perseus 1.6.1.3 software [89].

### Data Protocol
Dataset processing Altogether 13 independent experiments were performed. The datasets were filtered using the following criteria: (i) the ratio of LFQ values for a given protein between cells expressing tagged Pex14 and wild-type cells was greater than 1, (ii) the protein was identified with at least 2 peptides, and (iii) the protein was identified in at least two independent experiments. The dataset from each experiment was sorted according to relative LFQ values, and each protein was scored: the protein with the highest relative LFQ was scored 100, and scores for other proteins were calculated successively [a_n=100-(n-1)×100/x; x is the total number of proteins in a given dataset]. Annotations of the proteins were based on   Release 51 (https://amoebadb.org/amoeba/app). The MS data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange consortium via the PRIDE partner repository [90].

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Peroxisomes, Pex, Inositol dehydrogenase, Pts1, Entamoeba histolytica

### Affiliations
Charles University
Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Science, Charles University, BIOCEV, Prague, Czech Republic  ORCID logohttp://orcid.org/0000-0001-6976-8446

### Submitter
Karel Harant

### Lab Head
Dr prof. RNDr. Jan Tachezy, Ph.D.
Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Science, Charles University, BIOCEV, Prague, Czech Republic  ORCID logohttp://orcid.org/0000-0001-6976-8446


