### Accession
PXD025687

### Title
Insulin and 5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide Ribonucleotide (AICAR) Differentially Regulate the Skeletal Muscle Cell Secretome

### Description
Skeletal muscle is a major contributor to whole-body glucose homeostasis and is an important endocrine organ. To date, few studies have undertaken the large-scale identification of skeletal muscle-derived secreted proteins (myokines), particularly in response to stimuli that activate pathways governing energy metabolism in health and disease. Whereas the AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) and insulin-signaling pathways have received notable attention for their ability to independently regulate skeletal muscle substrate metabolism, little work has examined their ability to re-pattern the secretome. The present study coupled the use of high-resolution MS-based proteomics and bioinformatics analysis of conditioned media derived from 5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide ribonucleotide (AICAR – an AMPK activator)- and insulin-treated differentiated C2C12 myotubes. We quantified 858 secreted proteins, including cytokines and growth factors such as fibroblast growth factor-21 (Fgf21). We identified 377 and 118 proteins that were significantly altered by Insulin and AICAR treatment, respectively. Notably, the family of insulin growth factor binding-proteins (Igfbp) was differentially regulated by each treatment. Insulin- but not AICAR-induced conditioned media increased the mitochondrial respiratory capacity of myotubes, potentially via secreted factors. These findings may serve as an important resource to elucidate secondary metabolic effects of insulin and AICAR stimulation in skeletal muscle.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for secretome analysis Following 6h of treatment, the conditioned media was collected, subjected to centrifugation (8000g x 10 min), and filtered (0.22 µm filters) to remove cellular debris. Urea (Sigma) was added to 900 µL of conditioned media to yield a final concentration of 2 M, and 90 µL of Tris HCl (1 M, pH 8.5) was added to ensure proper pH for enzymatic digestion. Sample preparation proceeded using a modified version of the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol (Wiśniewski et al., 2009). Briefly, samples were incubated at 56°C for 10 min, prior to centrifugation (7000g, 10 min), and the supernatant was transferred to a centrifugal filter unit (Microcon-30kDa, Millipore), spun down, and washed two times with urea buffer (2 M urea in 0.1 M Tris HCl, pH 8.5). DTT (10 µmol) and IAA (5.5 µmol) in urea buffer were added for reduction and 30 min alkylation in the dark, respectively. Proteins were digested with LysC (1 µg) for 3h at 37°C, and trypsin was then added for overnight digestion (1 µg). Peptides were eluted with an additional elution step with H2O ensured optimal peptide recovery. The samples were acidified with 100% trifluoroacetic acid to halt enzymatic digestion. Peptides were then desalted on reverse-phase C18 StageTips (Rappsilber et al., 2007) and eluted in two steps 1) 40% acetonitrile in 0.5% acetic acid and 2) 60% acetonitrile in 0.5% acetic acid. The organic solvents were evaporated at 45ºC in a sample concentrator and peptides were re-suspended in 2% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. Sample preparation for proteome analysis The cellular proteome was examined in cell lysate. Proteins were acetone-precipitated (with 4 volumes of ice-cold acetone), vortexed and left overnight at -20°C. Samples were subjected to centrifugation to generate a pellet and then washed with 100% acetone, twice with 80% acetone, and left to dry. The pellet was resuspended with a urea/thiourea (U/T) buffer (6 M/ 2 M, respectively). Proteins (20 µg) underwent 1h digestion with LysC (2.5 µg) at 37ºC. The sample was then diluted 1:4 with 25 mM Tris (pH 8.5) before overnight digestion with Trypsin (2.5 µg). The enzymatic reaction was terminated, and the peptides were desalted as described above. LCMS/MS Analysis LCMS instrumentation consisted of an Easy Nanoflow UHPLC coupled via a nano-electrospray ion source to a QExactive mass spectrometer-HFX (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on a 50 cm column with 75µm inner diameter packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-aq 1.9 µm resin (Dr. Maisch). For the conditioned media analysis, peptides were loaded in 0.5% formic acid buffer and eluted with a 140 min  linear gradient with acetonitrile (80%) and formic acid (0.5%)-containing buffer at 250 nL/min. Mass spectra were acquired in a data-dependent manner (Full MS/dd-MS2 Top 12 scan mode), with the following parameters for full MS: mass range 300−1750 m/z, resolution 60000 at m/z 200 , AGC target 3e6, maximum injection time of 45ms; and for dd-MS2: resolution 60000 at m/z 200 , AGC target 1e5, maximum injection time of 120ms, NCE of 28%. For the cell lysate analysis, peptides were loaded in 0.5% formic acid buffer and eluted with a 100 min  linear gradient with acetonitrile (98%) and formic acid (0.5%)-containing buffer at 350 nL/min. Mass spectra were acquired in a data-dependent manner (Full MS/dd-MS2 Top 15 scan mode), with the following parameters for full MS: mass range 300−1650 m/z, resolution 60000 at m/z 200 , AGC target 3e6, maximum injection time of 25ms; and for dd-MS2: resolution 60000 at m/z 200 , AGC target 1e5, maximum injection time of 25ms, NCE of 27%; For the cell lysate, a Top 15 scan was used with a 100 min gradient was used and the scan range was 300-1650m/z and CE of 27.   Data were acquired using Xcalibur software.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were analyzed using MaxQuant (v1.5.3.30) and the built-in label-free quantification algorithm was used for protein quantification (Cox et al., 2014). The initial maximum tolerance for mass deviation was set to 6 ppm for monoisotopic precursor ions and 20 ppm for MS/MS peaks. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, defined as C-terminal to arginine and lysine (excluding proline). A maximum of two missed cleavages was permitted and a minimum peptide length of seven amino acids was required. Carbamidomethyl cysteine was set as a fixed modification, while N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications. The spectra were queried in the Andromeda search engine against the mouse UniProt sequence database, 248 common contaminants and the reverse of all sequences. The false discovery rate (FDR) for protein/peptide identification was set to 1%. To match identifications across different runs, the “match between runs” option in MaxQuant was enabled with a retention time window of 30s. In the case of identified peptides that were shared between two or more proteins, these were combined and reported in the protein group.

### Publication Abstract
Skeletal muscle is a major contributor to whole-body glucose homeostasis and is an important endocrine organ. To date, few studies have undertaken the large-scale identification of skeletal muscle-derived secreted proteins (myokines), particularly in response to stimuli that activate pathways governing energy metabolism in health and disease. Whereas the AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) and insulin-signaling pathways have received notable attention for their ability to independently regulate skeletal muscle substrate metabolism, little work has examined their ability to re-pattern the secretome. The present study coupled the use of high-resolution MS-based proteomics and bioinformatics analysis of conditioned media derived from 5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide ribonucleotide (AICAR-an AMPK activator)- and insulin-treated differentiated C2C12 myotubes. We quantified 858 secreted proteins, including cytokines and growth factors such as fibroblast growth factor-21 (Fgf21). We identified 377 and 118 proteins that were significantly altered by insulin and AICAR treatment, respectively. Notably, the family of insulin growth factor binding-proteins (Igfbp) was differentially regulated by each treatment. Insulin- but not AICAR-induced conditioned media increased the mitochondrial respiratory capacity of myotubes, potentially via secreted factors. These findings may serve as an important resource to elucidate secondary metabolic effects of insulin and AICAR stimulation in skeletal muscle.

### Keywords
Aicar, Lcms, Muscle, Secretome, Metabolism, Insulin

### Affiliations
Copenhagen University
Novo Nordisk Center For Basic Metabolic Research, University of Copenhagen.

### Submitter
atul shahaji deshmukh

### Lab Head
Dr Atul S Deshmukh
Novo Nordisk Center For Basic Metabolic Research, University of Copenhagen.


