### Accession
PXD031867

### Title
In Streptococcus thermophilus, ammonia from urea hydrolysis paradoxically boosts acidification and reveals a new regulatory mechanism of glycolysis

### Description
This study aimed to assess the effect of urease activity on the growth and energy metabolism of Streptococcus thermophilus in milk.

### Sample Protocol
S. thermophilus cells grown in M17 lactose were collected in late exponential growth phase (O.D. 600 nm 2.5), washed and suspended in solution A (9 g/L NaCl, 100 µg/ml chloramphenicol, 20 µg/ml rifamycin). Cell suspension was de-energized through incubation at 37 °C in the presence of urea. After incubation, the cell suspension was washed several times with solution A to remove the excess ammonia until reaching a stable pH. Cells prepared as described above, concentrated to reach a final density of 109 FU/ml, were called energetically discharged cells and were subjected to mechanical lysis using a Precellys 24 Tissue Homogenizer. Total protein cell extract was then subjected to proteomic analysis at UNITECH OMICs (University of Milan, Italy). After reduction in 5 mM DTT at 52 °C for 30 min, the sample was subjected to alkylation in 15 mM IAA for 30 min in the dark. Trypsin digestion was performed at 37 °C, pH 8, for 18 h using 1 µg of trypsin (Merck, Milan, Italy). The reaction was stopped by adding 50% TFA. The sample was then analyzed using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano-LC system (Sunnyvale CA, USA) connected to an Orbitrap FusionTM TribridTM Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a nano electrospray ion source. Peptide mixtures were preconcentrated onto an Acclaim PepMap 100 – 100 μm x 2 cm C18 (Thermo Scientific) and separated on an EASY-Spray ES802 column, 25 cm x 75 μm ID packed with Thermo Scientific Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18, 3 μm, 100 Å. The temperature was set to 35°C. The peptides were eluted with gradient: from 96% buffer A (0.1% formic acid in water) to 40% buffer B (0.1% formic acid in water/acetonitrile (2/8)). Total gradient: 110 min. Constant flow rate: 300 nL min−1. Total run: 144 min. MS spectra were collected over an m/z range of 375 – 1500 Da at 120,000 resolutions, operating in the data-dependent mode, with a cycle time of 3 sec between master scans. HCD was performed with collision energy set at 35 eV. Polarity: positive.

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 software by setting the uniprot-Streptococcus Thermophilus fasta and trypsin databases as digestion enzymes.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ammonia, Homolactic fermentation, S. thermophilus, Glycolysis, Urease, Phosphofructokinase

### Affiliations
UNiversità degli studi di Milano
University of Milan, DeFENS

### Submitter
Giorgio Gargari

### Lab Head
Dr Diego Mora
University of Milan, DeFENS


