### Accession
PXD010532

### Title
Platynereis head proteome -  Combined transcriptome and proteome profiling reveals specific molecular brain signatures for sex, maturation and circalunar clock phase

### Description
A maturation, sex and lunar phase locked Platynereis head proteome was generated by sampling six heads per biological replicate from male and female Platynereis at defined stages of sexual maturation (immature, premature and mature) at two different moon phases; New moon and Free-running Full moon, meaning the animals would expect a nocturnal light stimulus, Full moon, which was not given. From these heads RNA and protein were extracted simultaneously and used for both transcriptomics (ENA accession no. PRJEB27496) and quantitative proteomics. In total 2290 proteins were identified with two unique peptides as requirement; of these, 1064 proteins were found to be quantifiable (identification in two out of three biological replicates and three out of five technical replicates). Relative quantification revealed that the majority of quantifiable proteins changed during maturation (693 out of 1064 proteins), sexual differences accounted for only 17 differentially expressed proteins, whereas lunar phase differences showed 261 differentially expressed proteins. This finding is in contrast to what was found on the transcriptome levels where differences in between the lunar phases only accounted for only 64 out of 52059 transcripts. To confirm this high degree of lunar regulated proteins a second proteome from immature animals at New moon and Free-running Full moon was undertaken. In this second set, we identified 2095 proteins of which 1671 were considered quantifiable. Of these 173 proteins showed significant differences between the New moon and the Free running full moon phase, thus confirming the previous results of a higher regulation on the protein compared to the transcript levels.

### Sample Protocol
Platynereis heads were broken by a steel mill and used for simultaneous RNA and protein extraction. The head lysate was applied to SiO2 based RNA-extraction columns and the flow throughs were collected, snap frozen in liquid N2 and finally lyophilised and stored at -80°C. The lyophilisate was reconstituted in 1 mL water and proteins precipitated by the addition of four volumes ice-cold acetone over night at -20°C. The precipitate was then collected by centrifugation for 30 minutes at 3500xg at 4°C. The resulting pellet and a quarter of the supernatant were transferred in to a fresh tube and the remaining supernatant split into 3 equal parts which were then centrifuged for 30 Min at 14,000xg and 4°C. Pellets were then washed with 20°C-cold EtOH to remove the co-precipitated GuSCN from the RNA-extraction buffer and allowed to dry over-night, dissolved in UA-buffer by sonification, and finally re-pooled. Proteins were digested using the FASP method .Briefly, the samples were reduced with 10 mM DTT for 30 Min at RT in UA, applied to an YM-30 filter membrane, centrifuged and washed. Thiols were alkylated for 30 Min with 50 mM iodoacetamide at RT in UA centrifuged and washed with TEAB. Proteins were digested with trypsin (1:50 trypsin : protein ratio) overnight at in TEAB. Digested peptides were eluted from filters by centrifugation, washed and acidified by the addition of trifluoro-acetic acid, and desalted by solid phase extraction with Sep-Pak C18 columns. Eluates were dried in vacuo and the resulting pellets were dissolved in TEAB and labelled with TMT isobaric tags. Labelling efficiency was assessed by a LC-MS/MS run on Q Exactive plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer for each label separately and found to be complete when semi- or unlabelled peptides were less than 1% of total PSMs. Once maximal labelling efficiency was confirmed the reaction was quenched with hydroxylamine. FASP-digested and labelled samples were combined in a 5-plex multiplex format and analysed on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano-flow chromatography system coupled to a Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap equipped with a Proxeon nanospray source operated in data dependent mode. Peptides were separated using a pre-column for sample loading and a C18 analytical column applying a linear gradient over for 4 hours from 1.6 to 28% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 230 nL/min. Survey scans were obtained in a mass range of 380–1,650 m/z with lock mass off, at a resolution of 70,000 at 200 m/z and an AGC target value of 3 x 106. The 12 most intense ions were selected with an isolation window width of 1.2 Da, fragmented in the HCD cell at 35% collision energy and the spectra recorded at a target value of 1 x 105 and a resolution of 17,500. The peptide match and exclude isotope features were enabled and selected precursors were dynamically excluded from repeated sampling for 40 s

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed with Proteome Discoverer 2.1 using Sequest to search against the Platynereis proteome database (Pdu_HeadRef_prot_v4) and sequences of common contaminants. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines, TMT-labelling on peptide N-termini and lysines were selected as fixed modifications, oxidation of methionine as variable modification. Precursor tolerance was set to 10 ppm, fragment ion tolerance to 0.02 Da. Data were filtered for an FDR of 1% at PSM and protein level. Quantification was performed via the reporter ions quantifier node in PD 2.1 based on the signal/noise values. Spectra with isolation interference greater 30% were not used for quantification. Protein intensity values were calculated for each biological replicate as the average intensity of all peptides per protein across all 5 technical replicates. Mean intensities per protein were then normalised between isobaric ion channels to obtain a 1:1:1:1:1 ratio of reporter ion intensities based on the summed reporter intensities across all proteins per channel, within each set of 5 multiplexed samples. Quantifiable proteins were further defined as those with at least 2 uniquely mapping peptides and detected in at least 2/3 biological replicates per sample group. To normalise for variation in protein intensity distributions between individual samples, an additional channel median normalisation was applied, whereby the median protein intensity value was calculated for each sample (‘channel median value’) and all individual protein values per sample were then divided by this channel median value. We performed an additional inter-replicate median normalisation to account for inter-run variation between biological replicate sets within each of the NM and FRFM experiments, by: i) calculating for each biological replicate set; the median intensity across all 5 samples per protein, ii) calculating conversion factors to equalize the median intensity per protein between biological replicate sets. Conversion factors were calculated for the NM set relative to BR1 and relative to BR3 for the FRFM set. All intensity values per protein per biological replicate were then multiplied by the respective conversion factor. The effect of normalisation resulted in median-centred data and decreased variability in the distribution of protein intensity values between biological replicates. Differential expression analysis was then performed on these normalised proteins abundances using the R packages LIMMA and ROTS.

### Publication Abstract
Many marine animals, ranging from corals to fishes, synchronise reproduction to lunar cycles. In the annelid <i>Platynereis dumerilii,</i> this timing is orchestrated by an endogenous monthly (circalunar) clock entrained by moonlight. Whereas daily (circadian) clocks cause extensive transcriptomic and proteomic changes, the quality and quantity of regulations by circalunar clocks have remained largely elusive. By establishing a combined transcriptomic and proteomic profiling approach, we provide first systematic insight into the molecular changes in <i>Platynereis</i> heads between circalunar phases, and across sexual differentiation and maturation. Whereas maturation elicits large transcriptomic and proteomic changes, the circalunar clock exhibits only minor transcriptomic, but strong proteomic regulation. Our study provides a versatile extraction technique and comprehensive resources. It corroborates that circadian and circalunar clock effects are likely distinct and identifies key molecular brain signatures for reproduction, sex and circalunar clock phase. Examples include prepro-whitnin/proctolin and ependymin-related proteins as circalunar clock targets.

### Keywords
Labelled proteomics, Head, Quantitative proteomics, Platynereis dumerilii, Maturation, Circalunar, Shotgun proteomics, Sex bias

### Affiliations
Max F. Perutz Laboratories, Vienna
Max F. Perutz Laboratories, University of Vienna, Austria

### Submitter
Sven Schenk

### Lab Head
Dr Florian Raible
Max F. Perutz Laboratories, University of Vienna, Austria


