### Accession
PXD000084

### Title
Honey Bee Proteome Atlas -  Honey bee protein atlas at organ-level resolution

### Description
Complex organisms are composed of organs and tissues which evolved to their present state as they function together to improve an organism's overall reproductive fitness. Studies of individual organs help us understand their basic functions but this reductionist approach misses the larger context of the whole organism. This problem can be circumvented if all the organs in an organism were comprehensively studied by the same methodology and analyzed together. Using honey bees (Apis mellifera L.) as a model system,we report here the first whole proteome of a complex organism,measuring 29 different tissue types among the three honey bee castes: queen,drone,and worker. The data reveal that,e.g.,workers have a heightened capacity to deal with environmental toxins and queens have a far more robust immune system than their nestmates. Most intriguingly,our analysis reveals the path by which organs of complex organisms probably evolved.Raw data were processed by MaxQuant (v1.2.0.13) using default parameters, plus lysine and N-terminal dimethylation for three isotopologues for relative quantitation. Data were searched against the Apis Official Gene Set version 2 with common contaminants, containing a total of 22037 sequences. Normalized intensity ratios were used for relative quantitation.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
Genome sequencing has provided us with gene lists but cannot tell us where and how their encoded products work together to support life. Complex organisms rely on differential expression of subsets of genes/proteins in organs and tissues, and, in concert, evolved to their present state as they function together to improve an organism's overall reproductive fitness. Proteomics studies of individual organs help us understand their basic functions, but this reductionist approach misses the larger context of the whole organism. This problem could be circumvented if all the organs in an organism were comprehensively studied by the same methodology and analyzed together. Using honey bees (Apis mellifera L.) as a model system, we report here an initial whole proteome of a complex organism, measuring 29 different organ/tissue types among the three honey bee castes: queen, drone, and worker. The data reveal that, e.g., workers have a heightened capacity to deal with environmental toxins and queens have a far more robust pheromone detection system than their nestmates. The data also suggest that workers altruistically sacrifice not only their own reproductive capacity but also their immune potential in favor of their queen. Finally, organ-level resolution of protein expression offers a systematic insight into how organs may have developed.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Proteome, Honey bee

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology

### Submitter
Queenie Chan

### Lab Head


