### Accession
PXD002063

### Title
MPP profiling in yeast -  Quantitative profiling for substrates of the mitochondrial presequence processing protease reveals a set of non-substrate proteins increased upon proteotoxic stress

### Description
The majority of mitochondrial preproteins is targeted via N-terminal presequences that are cleaved upon import into the organelle. The essential mitochondrial processing protease (MPP) is assumed to cleave the majority of incoming precursors. However, only few substrate proteins of MPP have been experimentally determined and analysis of a broad range of substrates is missing so far. Here, we present the first systematic approach to identify substrate proteins of MPP. We used a temperature-sensitive mutant of the MPP subunit Mas1 grown at non-permissive temperature. Analysis of highly purified mitochondria by quantitative N-terminal ChaFRADIC led to the identification of 85 potential MPP substrate proteins. Deduction of the cleaved presequences shows that arginine in position -2 is the main determinant of MPP recognition. Interestingly, several non-processed proteins were increased in mas1 mutant mitochondria revealing a novel mitochondrial proteotoxic stress response that ultimately leads to an increased membrane potential presumably to balance/compensate the impairment of the major presequence processing peptidase.

### Sample Protocol
Step 1: Cell lysis of yeast sphaeroblast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) and carbamidomethylation. Step 2: Isotopic labeling with dimethylation (light + medium). Step 3: Proteolytic digestion with trypsin (ArgC specificity because of blocked lysines by dimethylation). Step 4: Enrichment via ChaFRADIC method Step 5: Nano-LC-MS/MS measurements Step 6: Data interpretation. Step 7: Biochemical validation.

### Data Protocol
Identification + Quantification: PD version 1.4. Search engine: Mascot 2.4. SGD database (Sep 2011), 6717 target sequences.

### Publication Abstract
The majority of mitochondrial preproteins are targeted via N-terminal presequences that are cleaved upon import into the organelle. The essential mitochondrial processing protease (MPP) is assumed to cleave the majority of incoming precursors; however, only a small fraction of mitochondrial precursors have been experimentally analyzed limiting the information on MPP recognition and substrate specificity. Here we present the first systematic approach for identification of authentic MPP substrate proteins using a temperature-sensitive mutant of the MPP subunit Mas1. Inactivation of MPP at nonpermissive temperature leads to accumulation of immature precursors in mitochondria, which were measured by quantitative N-terminal ChaFRADIC. This led to the identification of 66 novel MPP substrates. Deduction of the cleaved presequences determines arginine in position -2 of the cleavage site as a main factor for MPP recognition. Interestingly, a set of nonprocessed proteins was also increased in mas1 mutant mitochondria. Additionally, mas1 mitochondria respond to temperature elevation with an increase in membrane potential and oxygen consumption. These changes might indicate that mas1 cells exert a response to balance the proteotoxic stress induced by MPP dysfunction.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Mitochondrial processing protease mpp, Chafradic, Mitochondrial stress response, Presequence import pathway

### Affiliations
Department of bioanalytics
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften - ISAS - e.V.

### Submitter
Julia Maria Burkhart

### Lab Head
Dr René Zahedi
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften - ISAS - e.V.


