### Accession
PXD014166

### Title
Proteomics of Gammarus fossarum A individuals sampled from the wild

### Description
Next-generation proteomics of Gammarus fossarum A animals sampled from the Seebach river in north-eastern France.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were loaded on a SDS-PAGE for a short migration, excised from a single polyacrylamide band, digested by trypsin, and the resulting peptides were analyzed by Q-Exactive HF tandem mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were assigned to peptide sequences with the MASCOT Daemon 2.3.2 search engine (Matrix Science). Peptide mass tolerance was set at 5 ppm; fragment mass tolerance was set at 0.02 Da, and missed cleavages were allowed until a maximum of 2. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was searched as a fixed modification. Deamination of Asparagine or Glutamine and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications. Peptide-to-spectrum matches were extracted with the Perl MASCOT script fdr_stats.pl with specific p value threshold defined for a given FDR threshold value with the corresponding decoyPyrat search.

### Publication Abstract
Proteogenomics is gaining momentum as, today, genomics, transcriptomics, and proteomics can be readily performed on any new species. This approach allows key alterations to molecular pathways to be identified when comparing conditions. For animals and plants, RNA-seq-informed proteomics is the most popular means of interpreting tandem mass spectrometry spectra acquired for species for which the genome has not yet been sequenced. It relies on high-performance de novo RNA-seq assembly and optimized translation strategies. Here, several pre-treatments for Illumina RNA-seq reads before assembly are explored to translate the resulting contigs into useful polypeptide sequences. Experimental transcriptomics and proteomics datasets acquired for individual Gammarus fossarum freshwater crustaceans are used, the most relevant procedure is defined by the ratio of MS/MS spectra assigned to peptide sequences. Removing reads with a mean quality score of less than 17-which represents a single probable nucleotide error on 150-bp reads-prior to assembly, increases the proteomics outcome. The best translation using Transdecoder is achieved with a minimal open reading frame length of 50 amino acids and systematic selection of ORFs longer than 900 nucleotides. Using these parameters, transcriptome assembly and translation informed by proteomics pave the way to further improvements in proteogenomics.

### Keywords
Sentinel, Ecotoxicoproteomics, Population, Shotgun proteomics, Gammarids

### Affiliations
CEA-Marcoule, ProGénoMIX platform, DRF-Li2D, 30207 Bagnols-sur-Cèze, France
Li2D

### Submitter
Jean ARMENGAUD

### Lab Head
Dr Jean Armengaud
CEA-Marcoule, ProGénoMIX platform, DRF-Li2D, 30207 Bagnols-sur-Cèze, France


