### Accession
PXD019240

### Title
Proteomics/phosphoproteomics of human iPSC derived lung alveolar epithelial type 2 cells with/without dox-induced activation of oncogenic KRAS G12D

### Description
Lung adenocarcinoma is responsible for significant global mortality with limited effective treatments. Although some studies suggest that these tumors arise from alveolar epithelial type 2 cells (AEC2s), there is scant information regarding the early events that might occur in human AEC2s at the inception of oncogenesis. This limitation, is partially due to a lack of human model systems that recapitulate the initiation of oncogenesis in AEC2s. Unfortunately, primary AEC2s from patients are difficult to access in vivo or stably maintain in cell cultures. Hence, we sought to develop an in vitro system to model the early stages of oncogenesis utilizing human induced AEC2s (iAEC2s) generated through the directed differentiation of induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs). To this end, we selected a normal human iPSC line we have previously engineered to carry fluorochrome reporters targeted to lung epithelial-specific loci, NKX2-1GFP and SFTPCtdTomato that enable monitoring and purification of alveolar lung epithelial cells.  To test the effects of adenocarcinoma oncogene induction in these cells, we targeted a third locus, AAVS1 using gene editing to engineer a doxycycline-inducible cassette encoding mutant KRASG12D, the most commonly found oncogene in lung adenocarcinomas. Successful induction of KRASG12D with doxycycline was demonstrated in both the targeted undifferentiated iPSCs as well as in the iAEC2s derived from these cells. We profiled the downstream effects of KRASG12D induction in iAEC2s, comparing dox vs vehicle exposed cells by cell counting, FACS for NKX2-1GFP/SFTPCtdTomato, RT-qPCR, deep proteomic and phosphoproteomic analyses, and scRNA-sequencing. Through this characterization, we found that induction of KRASG12D robustly activates MAPK signaling resulting in a shift of iAEC2s away from their mature alveolar program towards a distal lung epithelial progenitor phenotype. Successful modeling of lung adenocarcinoma with this model system has a variety of future applications, including testing unknown mechanisms for oncogenesis, discovery of novel biomarkers of disease, or development of new effective treatment methods through drug screening.

### Sample Protocol
Eight samples were tryptically digested, labeled with TMT 10-plex tags and pooled. Peptide mixture was fractionated via basic reversed-phase HPLC into 12 fractions, and each fraction was split to both directly analyze proteome and be individually phosphoenriched.

### Data Protocol
We used the MaxQuant (version 1.6) software package for protein identification by searching with the UniProt Human database, and relative quantification of the TMT reporter labels. Standard search parameters included allowing for two missed trypsin cleavage sites, variable modifications of methionine oxidation, and N-terminal acetylation, and fixed modification of carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues. Protein phosphorylation at S, T, and Y residue data was included as a variable modification for the phosphoproteomic data. Ion tolerances of 20 and 6 ppm were set for first and second searches respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Mutant KRAS is a common driver in epithelial cancers. Nevertheless, molecular changes occurring early after activation of oncogenic KRAS in epithelial cells remain poorly understood. We compared transcriptional changes at single-cell resolution after KRAS activation in four sample sets. In addition to patient samples and genetically engineered mouse models, we developed organoid systems from primary mouse and human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived lung epithelial cells to model early-stage lung adenocarcinoma. In all four settings, alveolar epithelial progenitor (AT2) cells expressing oncogenic KRAS had reduced expression of mature lineage identity genes. These findings demonstrate the utility of our in&#xa0;vitro organoid approaches for uncovering the early consequences of oncogenic KRAS expression. This resource provides an extensive collection of datasets and describes organoid tools to study the transcriptional and proteomic changes that distinguish normal epithelial progenitor cells from early-stage lung cancer, facilitating the search for targets for KRAS-driven tumors.

### Keywords
Human, Q exactive hf-x

### Affiliations
Boston University
Center for Network Systems Biology, Boston University, USA

### Submitter
Christian Heckendorf

### Lab Head
Dr Andrew Emili
Center for Network Systems Biology, Boston University, USA


