### Accession
PXD008400

### Title
Direct analysis of IFITM3 S-fatty-acylation, part 1

### Description
Given our laboratory interest in IFITM3 S-fatty-acylation and antiviral activity, we sought to directly characterize fatty acids that are covalently attached to the Cys residues of IFITM3. IFITM3 comprises two S-fatty-acylation sites (C71 and C72) in proximity of a intramembrane domain, and another site adjacent to a transmembrane domain (C105). We directly identified the S-fatty-acylation sites of IFITM3 and further demonstrated that the highly conserved Cys residues are primarily modified by palmitic acid.

### Sample Protocol
Human HA-IFITM3 was overexpressed in Hek293T cells, immunoprecipitated, eluted on a SDS-PAGE. The IFITM3 band was cut, the sample was reduced/alkylated and digested overnight with chymotrypsin in the presence of invitrosol. Alternatively, human HA-IFITM3 was overexpressed in Hek293T cells, immunoprecipitated, eluted from the beads and dried in a speed vac. IFITM3 was resuspended, the sample was reduced/alkylated and digested overnight with chymotrypsin in the presence of invitrosol.

### Data Protocol
Samples were solubilized in 10 µl formic acid, followed by the addition of 40 µl of 50% isopropanol/10% methanol/0.1% Formic Acid. Peptides were desalted on a trap column and separated on a 12 cm/75 μm reversed phase C18 column (Nikkyo Technos Co., Ltd. Japan). A 120 minutes method increasing from 5%B to 30%B in 70 minutes, and 30%B to 45%B in 7 minutes (A: 0.1% Formic Acid, B: Acetonitrile/0.1% Formic Acid) were delivered at 200 nL/min.  The liquid chromatography setup (Dionex, Boston, MA, USA) was coupled to an Orbitrap XL (Thermo, San Jose, CA, USA) mass spectrometer operated in top-8-CID-mode. Mass spectra were collected in a 300-1800 m/z mass range using 60,000 resolution. The data were processed with MaxQuant version 1.5.3.8, and the peptides were identified from the MS/MS spectra searched against IFITM3 human sequence (Uniprot) using the Andromeda search engine. The data were processed as set-up in the software, with the following modifications: Chymotrypsin was used as the digestion enzyme (F/W/Y/L/M cleavage sites), allowing 10 missed cleavage sites.  Carbamidomethylation on Cys, Acetyl on protein N-terminus and oxidation of Met, addition of palmitate, myristate (C14; exact mass 210.1983656), oleate (C18:1; exact mass 264.2453156), stearate (C18; exact mass 266.2609657) and palmitoleate (C16:1; exact mass 236.2140155) were used as variable modifications (maximum 5 modifications per peptide).

### Publication Abstract
S-Fatty-acylation is the covalent attachment of long chain fatty acids, predominately palmitate (C16:0, S-palmitoylation), to cysteine (Cys) residues via a thioester linkage on proteins. This post-translational and reversible lipid modification regulates protein function and localization in eukaryotes and is important in mammalian physiology and human diseases. While chemical labeling methods have improved the detection and enrichment of S-fatty-acylated proteins, mapping sites of modification and characterizing the endogenously attached fatty acids are still challenging. Here, we describe the integration and optimization of fatty acid chemical reporter labeling with hydroxylamine-mediated enrichment of S-fatty-acylated proteins and direct tagging of modified Cys residues to selectively map lipid modification sites. This afforded improved enrichment and direct identification of many protein S-fatty-acylation sites compared to previously described methods. Notably, we directly identified the S-fatty-acylation sites of IFITM3, an important interferon-stimulated inhibitor of virus entry, and we further demonstrated that the highly conserved Cys residues are primarily modified by palmitic acid. The methods described here should facilitate the direct analysis of protein S-fatty-acylation sites and their endogenously attached fatty acids in diverse cell types and activation states important for mammalian physiology and diseases.

### Keywords
S-palmitoylation, Modification site identification, Post translational modifications, S-fatty-acylation, Ifitm3

### Affiliations
The Francis Crick Institute
Laboratory of chemical biology and microbial pathogenesis, The Rockefeller University, New York, USA

### Submitter
Emmanuelle Thinon

### Lab Head
Dr Howard C Hang
Laboratory of chemical biology and microbial pathogenesis, The Rockefeller University, New York, USA


