### Accession
PXD007123

### Title
Human A549 CD38, part 2 -  Decreased NAD Activates STAT3 and Integrin Pathways to Drive Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition

### Description
SILAC-Labeled proteomic analysis of A549 CD38 human lung cancer cell

### Sample Protocol
A549 empty vector cells were cultured in SILAC culture media designated as CD38(-) cells, and CD38-transfected cells were cultured in normal RMPI-1640 media designated as CD38(+) cells. 200 μg of proteins were extracted from a CD38 (-) cells and CD38 (+) cells and mixed together. Protein disulfides were reduced by dithiothreitol at 5 mM for 60 min at room temperature. And alkylated with iodoacetamide at 12 mM for 60min in the dark at room temperature. The protein samples were digested with trypsin for 14 h at 37°C and stopped with trifluoracetic acid. Peptides were desalted with Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (Thermo-Pierce Biotechnology, Rockford, IL). The elution extracts were centrifuged with a speedvac and followed by HPLC separation. The collected elutions were combined into 12 fractions using speedvac and analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
The peak lists from LC-MS/MS analysis were generated with the SEQUESTTM searching algorithm in the Proteome Discoverer software (version 2.1). The spectra were searched against the Uniprot human reference proteome (release 17/03/2017, containing 21042 entries) using an in-house Proteome Discoverer Searching Algorithm (version 2.1, Thermo Fisher). The search criteria were the followings: full tryptic specificity was required; two missed cleavage sites were allowed; the oxidation (M), 13C(6)15N(2) Lysine (+8.014 Da at Lysine), and 13C(6) Arginine (+6.020 Da at Arginine) were set as the variable modifications; carbamidomethylation (C) was set as the fixed modification; precursor ion mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm for all MS and 20 mmu for all MS2 spectra. The peptide false discovery rate (FDR) was estimated using percolator function provided by Proteome Discoverer, and the cutoff score was accepted as 1% based on the decoy database.           Proteome Discoverer Searching Algorithm (Version 2.1) was used for protein quantification. Briefly, ratios of relative protein expressions for each lysine/arginine-containing peptide were calculated using the peak area of Lys0Arg0 divided by the peak area of Lys8Arg6. Peptides that were only assigned to a given protein group were considered as a unique peptide. Proteins with unique peptides were regarded as confident identifications and were further quantified. Protein ratios were calculated as the median of all peptide hits belonging to a protein. Quantitative precision was expressed as protein ratio variability.

### Publication Abstract
Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) plays an essential role in all aspects of human life. NAD levels decrease as humans age, and supplementation with NAD precursors plays a protective role against aging and associated disease. Less is known about the effects of decreased NAD on cellular processes, which is the basis for understanding the relationship between cellular NAD levels and aging-associated disease. In the present study, cellular NAD levels were decreased by overexpression of CD38, a NAD hydrolase, or by treating cells with FK866, an inhibitor of nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase (NAMPT). Quantitative proteomics revealed that declining NAD levels downregulated proteins associated with primary metabolism and suppressed cell growth in culture and nude mice. Decreased glutathione synthesis caused a 4-fold increase in cellular reactive oxygen species levels, and more importantly upregulated proteins related to movement and adhesion. In turn, this significantly changed cell morphology and caused cells to undergo epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT). Secretomic analysis also showed that decreased NAD triggered interleukin-6 and transforming growth factor beta (TGF&#x3b2;) secretion, which activated integrin-&#x3b2;-catenin, TGF&#x3b2;-MAPK, and inflammation signaling pathways to sustain the signaling required for EMT. We further revealed that decreased NAD inactivated sirtuin 1, resulting in increased signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) acetylation and phosphorylation, and STAT3 activation. Repletion of nicotinamide or nicotinic acid inactivated STAT3 and reversed EMT, as did STAT3 inhibition. Taken together, these results indicate that decreased NAD activates multiple signaling pathways to promote EMT and suggests that age-dependent decreases in NAD may contribute to tumor progression. Consequently, repletion of NAD precursors has potential benefits for inhibiting cancer progression.

### Keywords
Human, Lung, Cd38

### Affiliations
tsinghua university
School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China

### Submitter
weixuan wang

### Lab Head
Dr haiteng deng
School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China


