### Accession
PXD001795

### Title
Arabidopsis seedling FFE-purified plasma membrane LC-MS/MS

### Description
Plasma membranes from 7-day old wild type Arabidopsis seedlings were enriched by two-phase partitioning and further purified by free-flow electrophoresis prior to analysis of fractions by LC-MS/MS. Data from two independent replicates were analyzed, with two  fractions analyzed from each replicate.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma membranes were enriched using  two-phase partitioning and further purified by free-flow electrophoresis (FFE). Enriched plasma membrane fractions after FFE were concetrated by ultracentrifugation. Protein concentration was estimated by Bradford and approximately 5ug protein was digested with trypsin (1:10 w/w) overnight at 37ºC in 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5) and 50% methanol. Resultant tryptic peptides were purified and concentrated using C18 spin columns. Approximately 1 ug of each fraction (total 4 fractions) were analyzed by by nano-ESI-Q-TOF (TripleTOF® 5600 System, AB SCIEX) coupled to an Eksigent nano LC system (AB Sciex). Peptide samples were injected onto a Pepmap100 µ-guard column (Dionex-LC Packings) via a Famos Autosampler (Dionex-LC Packings). Peptides were eluted onto an Acclaim Pepmap100 C18 column (75 µm x 150 mm, 300 nL/min flow rate; Dionex-LC Packings) and into the MS via a standard gradient employing acetonitrile, water and 0.1 % formic acid. Peptides were introduced to the MS using a Nanospray III source (AB SCIEX) with a nano-tip emitter (New Objective) operating in positive-ion mode (2400 V).

### Data Protocol
Data was processed using the Protein Pilot Software package v.4.0 (AB Sciex, Foster City, CA) using the Paragon Algorithm against the latest Arabidopsis protein set (TAIR10) and common contaminant proteins (keratin, trypsin, BSA) and contained 35,397 total sequences comprising 14,487,047 residues. The software was subsequently used to export the processed and matched data as recalibrated peak lists (.mgf) for further analysis using third party software. Recalibrated data were interrogated with the Mascot search engine version 2.3.02 (Matrix Science) with a peptide tolerance of ±50 ppm and MS/MS tolerance of ±0.1 Da; variable modification was Oxidation (M); up to one missed cleavage for trypsin; and the instrument type was set to ESI-QUAD-TOF. Searches were performed against the in-house database (essentially comprising TAIR10) as detailed above. A false discovery rate and ions score or expected cut-off was calculated for each experiment using the Decoy feature of Mascot on the MS/MS Ions Search interface. A significance threshold corresponding to a false discovery rate of = 5% (p<0.05) was used to determine the ‘Ions score or expect cut-off’ for peptide matches. As a result, ‘Ions score or expect cut-off values’ of 29 (AtPM1-1), 28 (AtPM1-2), 27 (AtPM2-1) and 28 (AtPM2-2) were used. Ions score is -10log(P), where P is the probability that the observed match is a random event. Ions scores = than those stated indicate identity or extensive homology (p<0.05).

### Publication Abstract
The plant plasma membrane is the interface between the cell and its environment undertaking a range of important functions related to transport, signaling, cell wall biosynthesis, and secretion. Multiple proteomic studies have attempted to capture the diversity of proteins in the plasma membrane using biochemical fractionation techniques. In this study, two-phase partitioning was combined with free-flow electrophoresis to produce a population of highly purified plasma membrane vesicles that were subsequently characterized by tandem mass spectroscopy. This combined high-quality plasma membrane isolation technique produced a reproducible proteomic library of over 1000 proteins with an extended dynamic range including plasma membrane-associated proteins. The approach enabled the detection of a number of putative plasma membrane proteins not previously identified by other studies, including peripheral membrane proteins. Utilizing multiple data sources, we developed a PM-confidence score to provide a value indicating association to the plasma membrane. This study highlights over 700 proteins that, while seemingly abundant at the plasma membrane, are mostly unstudied. To validate this data set, we selected 14 candidates and transiently localized 13 to the plasma membrane using a fluorescent tag. Given the importance of the plasma membrane, this data set provides a valuable tool to further investigate important proteins. The mass spectrometry data are available via ProteomeXchange, identifier PXD001795.

### Keywords
Seedling, Arabidopsis, Plasma membrane, Free-flow electrophoresis

### Affiliations
The University of Melbourne
University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Joshua Heazlewood

### Lab Head
Dr Joshua Heazlewood
The University of Melbourne


