### Accession
PXD019425

### Title
Altered N-linked Glycosylation in Endometrial Cancer

### Description
It has been recognised for a long time that cell surface glycans plays a vital role in the biological process and their altered form can lead to cancer. However, the molecular details and regulatory mechanism between the glycans and cancer is yet not clear. Over the past decade mass spectrometry-based techniques has become a prominent method for analysing glycans especially N-glycan matrix assisted laser desorption/ionisation mass spectrometry imaging (MALDI MSI). It is a powerful technique that combines mass spectrometry with histology, enabling the visualisation and label free detection of N-linked glycans on a single tissue section. Here, we carried out N-glycan MALDI MSI on six endometrial cancer (EC) formalin fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) tissue sections including the adjacent normal endometrium, and tissue microarrays (TMA) consisting of 8 EC patients with lymph node metastasis (LNM) and 20 without LNM. By doing that several m/z values were detected that can significantly distinguish normal endometrium from cancerous. Also, detected a m/z value that can discriminate the primary tumour with LNM from those without. Identification of those discriminative m/z values was performed using porous graphitized carbon liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (PGC-LC-MS/MS). Overall, we observed higher abundance of oligomannose in tumour regions compared to normal with AUC ranges from 0.85-0.99. Whereas, complex N-glycans were detected in lower abundance with AUC ranges from 0.03-0.28. Comparison of N-glycans between the primary tumours with LNM and without LNM indicates reduced abundance of a complex core-fucosylated N-glycan in patients with metastasis relative to without. In summary, N-glycan MALDI MSI can be used to characterize the cancerous endometrium from the normal, also patients with LNM from those without. Identification of those discriminative m/z values was performed using porous graphitized carbon liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (PGC-LC-MS/MS).

### Sample Protocol
N-glycan MALDI MSI on six endometrial cancer (EC) formalin fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) tissue sections including the adjacent normal endometrium, and tissue microarrays (TMA) consisting of 8 EC patients with lymph node metastasis (LNM) and 20 without LNM.

### Data Protocol
For relative quantification, MALDI MSI data was imported into SCiLS lab v2016b (Bruker Daltonik) software. Here the data was processed, and ion intensity maps were generated by applying weak denoising, automatic hotspot removal and normalization by TIC. Regions of interests, tumour and normal (on tissue sections) or with LNM and without LNM (on TMA) were created based on the pathologist annotations and discriminatory m/z values between the two regions were calculated by receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves and quantified using the area under the ROC curve (AUC) values. Hypothesis T-test was performed to find the significance rating.

### Publication Abstract
It is well established that cell surface glycans play a vital role in biological processes and their altered form can lead to carcinogenesis. Mass spectrometry-based techniques have become prominent for analysing N-linked glycans, for example using matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization mass spectrometry (MALDI MS). Additionally, MALDI MS can be used to spatially map N-linked glycans directly from cancer tissue using a technique termed MALDI MS imaging (MALDI MSI). This powerful technique combines mass spectrometry and histology to visualise the spatial distribution of N-linked glycans on a single tissue section. Here, we performed N-glycan MALDI MSI on six endometrial cancer (EC) formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue sections and tissue microarrays (TMA) consisting of eight EC patients with lymph node metastasis (LNM) and twenty without LNM. By doing so, several putative N-linked glycan compositions were detected that could significantly distinguish normal from cancerous endometrium. Furthermore, a complex core-fucosylated N-linked glycan was detected that could discriminate a primary tumour with and without LNM. Structural identification of these putative N-linked glycans was performed using porous graphitized carbon liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (PGC-LC-MS/MS). Overall, we observed higher abundance of oligomannose glycans in tumour compared to normal regions with AUC ranging from 0.85-0.99, and lower abundance of complex N-linked glycans with AUC ranges from 0.03-0.28. A comparison of N-linked glycans between primary tumours with and without LNM indicated a reduced abundance of a complex core-fucosylated N-glycan (Hex)<sub>2</sub>(HexNAc)<sub>2</sub>(Deoxyhexose)<sub>1</sub>+(Man)<sub>3</sub>(GlcNAc)<sub>2</sub>, in primary tumour with associated lymph node metastasis. In summary, N-linked glycan MALDI MSI can be used to differentiate cancerous endometrium from normal, and endometrial cancer with LNM from endometrial cancer without.

### Keywords
Lymph node metastasis, Biomarker, Endometrial cancer, Glycan imaging

### Affiliations
Future Industries Institute, Mawson Lakes Campus, University of South Australia, Adelaide, South Australia, 5095
Research associate

### Submitter
Parul Mittal

### Lab Head
Dr Prof Peter Hoffmann
Future Industries Institute, Mawson Lakes Campus, University of South Australia, Adelaide, South Australia, 5095


