### Accession
PXD019495

### Title
TMT-proteomics of sorted MC38+ tumor cells with high-fat diet

### Description
Obesity is a major cancer risk factor, but the underlying molecular mechanisms are not always known. In this study, we look at proteome remodeling in cancer cells with obesity, comparing tumor cells sorted from mice fed high-fat versus control diet. We conducted 10-plex TMT-proteomics on GFP+ MC38 colorectal adenocarcinoma tumor cells, sorted from subcutaneously implanted tumors 12 days after implantation. This study reveals molecular pathways that change in cancer cells with obesity that promote tumor growth.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were processed using the streamlined TMT labelling protocol. Samples were lysed in 8M urea in 200mM EPPS pH 8.5 with protease (Pierce A32953) and phosphatase (Pierce A32957) inhibitors, and passed through a 21-guage needle 10x. Samples were reduced with 5mM TCEP, alkylated with 10mM iodoacetamide, and quenched with 5mM DTT, followed by methanol/chloroform precipitation of protein. Pellets were reconstituted in 200mM EPPS pH 8.5, digested overnight with LysC (Wako 129-02541) at 1:100 while shaking at room temperature, followed by digestion with trypsin (Pierce 90305) at 1:100 while shaking at 37°C. Anhydrous acetonitrile (Honeywell AS017-0100) was added to ~30%, followed by labelling with TMT10 (Thermo 90110) reagent. 1% of each labeled sample was combined and analyzed unfractionated to ensure labeling efficiency was >97%. After confirmation, the reaction was quenched by adding ~0.3% hydroxylamine, and incubating at RT for 15min. The samples were then mixed at a 1:1 (total amount) ratio across all conditions. After mixing, labelled peptide samples were de-salted using a 200mg Sep-Pak cartridge (Waters WAT054925), followed by drying in a rotary evaporator. Samples were then reconstituted in 5% ACN 10mM ammonium bicarbonate for basic reverse phase fractionation on an Agilent 300extend-C18 column (3.5μm, 4.6x250mm) using an Agilent Infinity 1260 HPLC. Peptides were subjected to a 75 min linear gradient from 13% to 42% of Buffer B (10 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 90% ACN, pH 8) at a flow rate of 0.6 mL/min, resulting in a total of 96 fractions which were consolidated into 24 by combining (in a chessboard pattern) four alternating wells down columns of the 96-well plate. Assuming adjacent fractions contain overlapping peaks, only 12 non-adjacent samples were analyzed by the mass spectrometer. Each eluted fraction was desalted via StageTip for SPS-MS3 analysis.  Mass spectra were collected on Orbitrap Lumos mass spectrometer equipped with a FAIMS device coupled to a Proxeon EASY-nLC 1200 LC pump (ThermoFisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on a 35 cm column (i.d. 100 μm, Accucore, 2.6 μm, 150 Å) packed in-house using a 90 min gradient (from 5% -30% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid) at 500 nl/min. A multi-notch FAIMS method was used to additionally separate peptides at 40, 60 and 80 CV3,4. Each analysis used an SPS-MS3-based TMT method which has been shown to reduce ion interference compared to MS2-based quantification. MS1 data were collected using the Orbitrap (120,000 resolution; maximum injection time 50 ms; AGC 4e5, 400-1400 m/z). Determined charge states between 2 and 5 were required for sequencing and a 90 s dynamic exclusion window was used. MS2 scans consisted of collision-induced dissociation (CID), quadrupole ion trap analysis, automatic gain control (AGC) 2E4, NCE (normalized collision energy) 45, q-value 0.25, maximum injection time 35 ms, and isolation window of 0.7 Da using a Top10 method. MS3 scans were collected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 50,000, NCE of 45%, maximum injection time of 100 ms, and AGC of 1.5e5. Data from all 12 fractions were combined to achieve a <1% false discovery rate (FDR) at the protein level.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed using a SEQUEST-based software pipeline. Data were searched against the UniProt Mouse database (December 2018), using a 20-ppm precursor ion tolerance for total protein-level analysis and 0.9 Da product ion tolerance. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+229.163 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) was set as a variable modification. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were identified, quantified, and filtered to a 1% peptide false discovery rate (FDR) and then collapsed further to a final protein-level FDR of 1%. Proteins were quantified by summing reporter ion counts across all matching PSMs. Briefly, a 0.003 Da (3 millidalton) window around the theoretical m/z of each reporter ion was scanned and the maximum intensity nearest the theoretical m/z was used. Reporter ion intensities were adjusted to correct for the isotopic impurities of the different TMT reagents according to manufacturer specifications and adjusted to normalize ratios across labelling channels. Lastly, for each protein, signal-to-noise (S:N) measurements of the peptides were summed and then normalized to 100.

### Publication Abstract
Obesity is a major cancer risk factor, but how differences in systemic metabolism change the tumor microenvironment (TME) and impact anti-tumor immunity is not understood. Here, we demonstrate that high-fat diet (HFD)-induced obesity impairs CD8<sup>+</sup> T&#xa0;cell function in the murine TME, accelerating tumor growth. We generate a single-cell resolution atlas of cellular metabolism in the TME, detailing how it changes with diet-induced obesity. We find that tumor and CD8<sup>+</sup> T&#xa0;cells display distinct metabolic adaptations to obesity. Tumor cells increase fat uptake with HFD, whereas tumor-infiltrating CD8<sup>+</sup> T&#xa0;cells do not. These differential adaptations lead to altered fatty acid partitioning in HFD tumors, impairing CD8<sup>+</sup> T&#xa0;cell infiltration and function. Blocking metabolic reprogramming by tumor cells in obese mice improves anti-tumor immunity. Analysis of human cancers reveals similar transcriptional changes in CD8<sup>+</sup> T&#xa0;cell markers, suggesting interventions that exploit metabolism to improve cancer immunotherapy.

### Keywords
Obesity, Mouse, Colorectal cancer, Biological

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School
Harvard University, Department of Cell Biology

### Submitter
Brandon Gassaway

### Lab Head
Dr Steven Gygi
Harvard University, Department of Cell Biology


