### Accession
PXD004971

### Title
Carbene Footprinting Accurately Maps Binding Sites in Protein-Ligand and Protein-Protein Interactions

### Description
Specific interactions between proteins and their binding partners are fundamental to life processes. Differential protein footprinting using a new and efficient, photo-activated aryltrifluromethylcarbene probe together with mass spectrometry has been employed to identify protein-ligand and protein-protein interaction sites. In a model protein-small molecule system, the location of a penta-N-acetylchitopentaose carbohydrate substrate was accurately mapped to the binding cleft of lysozyme. As a fine detail, footprinting revealed disruption of an intramolecular hydrogen-bond network within lysozyme, which is known to be associated with substrate binding. In a more complex example, the interactions between a 100 kDa, multi-domain deubiquitinating enzyme, USP5, and a diubiquitin substrate were located to different functional domains thus clarifying uncertainties from an X-ray crystal structure of USP5. The much improved properties of this bespoke diazirine probe make differential carbene footprinting a viable method for rapid and accurate identification of protein binding sites utilizing benign, near-UV photoactivation.

### Sample Protocol
For the labelling efficiency experiments, solutions of Calmodulin, Myoglobin, Cytochrome C, Ubiquitin or Melittin were incubated with a novel aryldiazirine and snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen before irradiation with a ND:YLF laser at 349 nm.  For the footprinting experiments, solutions of lysozyme and USP5, free and in complex respectively with NAG5 and diubiquitin, were incubated with a novel aryldiazirine reagent for 5 minutes at room temperature followed by snap-freezing in liquid nitrogen. The labelling reaction was initiated by irradiation of the mixtures using a ND:YLF laser operating at 349 nm. Labelled proteins were then separated by SDS-PAGE, protein bands were excised, reduced, alkylated and digested at 37 °C with either trypsin or AspN overnight. Formic acid was added to the supernatant to quench the reaction.   All samples were separated in load-trapping mode using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 Nano LC equipped with a commercially available C4 trapping column and a custom packed WP C4 column (5 μm, 100 Å) with a Picofrit tip (75 μm i.d. x 150 mm). The mobile phases A and B consisted of 95/5 water/acetonitrile (v/v) and 5/95 water/acetonitrile (v/v), respectively, and both contained 0.1% formic acid. The samples (1 L) were injected in load-trapping mode. Peptides were eluted using a 30 min linear gradient of mobile phase B from 0% to 70% at a flow rate of 0.3 μL/min followed by column equilibration. The HPLC system was coupled to a Thermo Scientific LTQ FT Ultra mass spectrometer equipped with a commercial nanoelectrospray ionization source. A 1.7 kV voltage was applied to a coated PicoTip emitter (New Objective). The capillary temperature was set at 275 °C, with inner capillary voltage value set on 37 V and tube lens value of 145 V. Spectra were acquired in positive ion mode over a 400-2000 m/z range at a nominal resolution of 100000 (at m/z = 400). The instrument was controlled by Xcalibur software. Identification of USP5 peptides was conducted using an automated data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode, followed by manual examination of the raw data. For DDA the four most intense ions for each scan were isolated within a window of 8 Th and subjected to CID using a nominal energy of 35.0. Signals with +1 charge state were rejected. The data was searched against a custom database including the C335A USP5 sequence using Bioworks software. CID targeted experiments for residue-level labelling identification/quantitation were performed at a nominal energy of 15.0. Each manually-selected labeled precursor ion was isolated within a window of 10.0 Th and the activation time was set at 30  ms with an activation Q-value of 0.250. The scans for each labeled peptide were combined to give an average spectrum containing labeled and unlabeled fragments.

### Data Protocol
A previously described method was used to quantitate the fraction modified of each peptide. Briefly, the chromatograms for each singly-labelled and unlabelled peptide were extracted within a range of ±0.1 m/z and the spectrum for each peak was manually inspected to ensure the sampling of the correct ion only. The peptide fractional modification was calculated as the ratio between each labelled peptide extracted ion chromatogram peak area and the sum of the labelled and unlabelled extracted ion chromatograms peak areas.  Modification sites on the peptides were investigated using tandem MS. On every mono-labelled peptide the label is distributed over the sequence and after undergoing fragmentation it will generate labelled and unlabeled fragments. The data has been averaged over all the chromatographic features of the precursor and the ratio between the intensity of the ni labelled fragment and the sum of the intensities of ni labelled and ni unlabelled allows the calculation of the fractional modification on the ni residue. The difference in fractional modification between two consecutive fragments multiplied by the fractional amount of labelling on the peptide will give the absolute level of modification on the ni residue. The raw data files for the all the experiments are provided.

### Publication Abstract
Specific interactions between proteins and their binding partners are fundamental to life processes. The ability to detect protein complexes, and map their sites of binding, is crucial to understanding basic biology at the molecular level. Methods that employ sensitive analytical techniques such as mass spectrometry have the potential to provide valuable insights with very little material and on short time scales. Here we present a differential protein footprinting technique employing an efficient photo-activated probe for use with mass spectrometry. Using this methodology the location of a carbohydrate substrate was accurately mapped to the binding cleft of lysozyme, and in a more complex example, the interactions between a 100&#x2009;kDa, multi-domain deubiquitinating enzyme, USP5 and a diubiquitin substrate were located to different functional domains. The much improved properties of this probe make carbene footprinting a viable method for rapid and accurate identification of protein binding sites utilizing benign, near-UV photoactivation.

### Keywords
Carbene footprinting, Usp5, Covalent labelling, Lysozyme

### Affiliations
School of Chemistry, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK
University of Nottingham

### Submitter
Lucio Manzi

### Lab Head
Dr Neil J. Oldham
School of Chemistry, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK


