### Accession
PXD023740

### Title
Altered glycosylation in the ageing heart

### Description
Heart failure is one of the leading causes of death in an ageing population. Hallmarks are cardiac hypertrophy, fibrosis and inflammation. The molecular mechanisms, however, are poorly understood. Glycosylation is one of the most common posttranslational modifications of proteins, which can have important consequences for protein folding, function and turnover. We hypothesized that changes in glycoprotein abundance and glycosylation patterns may contribute to cardiac aging. Western Blot analysis suggests increased protein mannosylation in the aging heart. Glycoprotein pull-downs from heart lysates of young (3 months) and old (2 years) mice in combination with quantitative mass spectrometry support widespread alterations of the glycoproteome in aged hearts.

### Sample Protocol
For glycoprotein enrichment 3 mg total protein from total heart lysates was incubated with either Con A or PNA coupled agarose beads at 4°C over night, washed and glycoproteins were eluted with 200 mM glycine buffer pH 2.5. After elution 1M Tris buffer pH 10.4 was added and samples were stored at -20°C.  For proteomics analysis, samples were sonicated (Bioruptor Plus, Diagenode, Belgium) for 10 cycles (30 sec ON/60 sec OFF) at high setting, at 20 °C, followed by boiling at 95°C for 5 min. Reduction was followed by alkylation with 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA, final concentration 15 mM) for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Protein amounts were estimated, following an SDS-PAGE gel of 10 µL of each sample against an in-house cell lysate of known quantity. 30 µg of each sample was taken along for digestion. Proteins were precipitated overnight at -20 °C after addition of 4x volume of ice-cold acetone. The following day, the samples were centrifuged at 20800x g for 30 min at 4 °C and the supernatant carefully removed (Eppendorf 5810R, Eppendorf AG, Germany). Pellets were washed twice with 300 µL ice-cold 80% (v/v) acetone in water then centrifuged at 20800x g at 4 °C for 10 min. After removing the acetone, pellet were air-dried before addition of 25 µL of digestion buffer (1M Guanidine, 100 mM HEPES, pH 8). Samples were resuspended with sonication as explained above, then LysC (Wako) was added at 1:100 (w/w) enzyme:protein ratio and digestion proceeded for 4 h at 37 °C under shaking (1000 rpm for 1 h, then 650 rpm). Samples were then diluted 1:1 with MilliQ water and trypsin (Promega) added at at 1:100 (w/w) enzyme:protein ratio. Samples were further digested overnight at 37 °C under shaking (650 rpm). The day after, digests were acidified by the addition of TFA to a final concentration of 10% (v/v), heated at 37 °C and then desalted with Waters Oasis® HLB µElution Plate 30 µm (Waters Corporation, MA, USA) under a soft vacuum following the manufacturer instruction. Briefly, the columns were conditioned with 3x100 µL solvent B (80% (v/v) acetonitrile; 0.05% (v/v) formic acid) and equilibrated with 3x100 µL solvent A (0.05% (v/v) formic acid in Milli-Q water). The samples were loaded, washed 3 times with 100 µL solvent A, and then eluted into 0.2 mL PCR tubes with 50 µL solvent B. The eluates were dried down using a speed vacuum centrifuge (Eppendorf Concentrator Plus, Eppendorf AG, Germany) . Dried samples were stored at -20°C until analysis.

### Data Protocol
Prior to analysis, samples were reconstituted in in MS Buffer (5% acetonitrile, 95% Milli-Q water, with 0.1% formic acid) and spiked with iRT peptides (Biognosys, Switzerland). Peptides were separated in trap/elute mode using the nanoAcquity MClass Ultra-High Performance Liquid Chromatography system (Waters, Waters Corporation, Milford, MA,USA ) equipped with a trapping (nanoAcquity Symmetry C18, 5 μm, 180 μm × 20 mm) and an analytical column (nanoAcquity BEH C18, 1.7 μm, 75 μm × 250 mm). Solvent A was water and 0.1% formic acid, and solvent B was acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. 8 µl of the sample (∼μg) were loaded with a constant flow of solvent A at 5 μl/min onto the trapping column. Trapping time was 6 min. Peptides were eluted via the analytical column with a constant flow of 0.3 μl/min. During the elution, the percentage of solvent B increased in a nonlinear fashion from 0–40% in 90 min. Total run time was 115 min. The LC was coupled to rhe Orbitrap Exploris 480 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) using the Proxeon nanospray source. The peptides were introduced into the mass spectrometer via a Pico-Tip Emitter 360-μm outer diameter × 20-μm inner diameter, 10-μm tip (New Objective) heated at 300 °C, and a spray voltage of 2.2 kV was applied. The capillary temperature was set at 300°C. The radio frequency ion funnel was set to 30%. %. For DIA data acquisition, full scan mass spectrometry (MS) spectra with mass range 350–1650 m/z were acquired in profile mode in the Orbitrap with resolution of 120,000 FWHM. The default charge state was set to 3+. The filling time was set at maximum of 60 ms with limitation of 3 × 106 ions. DIA scans were acquired with 30 mass window segments of differing widths across the MS1 mass range. Higher collisional dissociation fragmentation (stepped normalized collision energy; 25.5, 27, and 30%) was applied and MS/MS spectra were acquired with a resolution of 30,000 FWHM with a fixed first mass of 200 m/z after accumulation of 3 × 106 ions or after filling time of 47 ms (whichever occurred first). Data were acquired in profile mode. For data acquisition and processing of the raw data, Xcalibur 4.4 (Thermo Fisher) and Orbitrap Exploris 480 Tune version 2.0 were used.  DIA raw data were analyzed using the directDIA pipeline in Spectronaut (v.13, Biognosysis, Switzerland). The data were searched against a species specific (Mus Muculus, 16.747 entries) and a contaminants (247 entries) Swissprot database. The data were searched with the following modifications: Carbamidomethyl (C) (Fixed) and Oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein N-term). A maximum of 2 missed cleavages for trypsin and 5 variable modifications were allowed. The identifications were filtered to satisfy FDR of 1 % on peptide and protein level. Relative quantification was performed in Spectronaut for each paired comparison using the replicate samples from each condition. The data (candidate table) and data reports (protein quantities) were then exported and further data analyses and visualization were performed with Rstudio using in-house pipelines and scripts. To select significant proteins, a log2FC cutoff of 0.58 and a qvalue<0.05 were defined.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cardiac glycoproteome, Post-translational modifications, Mannosylation, Cardiac ageing, Glycosylation

### Affiliations
Functional Genetics, Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital Jena, Friedrich Schiller University, Jena, Germany
Leibniz Institute on Ageing Fritz Lipmann Institute Jena

### Submitter
Emilio Cirri

### Lab Head
Dr Christian Huebner
Functional Genetics, Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital Jena, Friedrich Schiller University, Jena, Germany


