### Accession
PXD006497

### Title
DDX3X interactome -  The helicase, DDX3X, interacts with poly(A)-binding protein 1 (PABP1) and caprin-1 at the leading edge of migrating fibroblasts and is required for efficient cell spreading

### Description
As DDX3X can regulate Rac1 levels, cell motility and metastasis, we have examined DDX3X protein interactions and localisation using a number of complementary approaches.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitates were reduced, alkylated and digested with trpsin. Tryptic peptides were differentially labelled with formaldehyd. quantification  Samples were analysed using an EASY-nLC 1000 liquid chromatography system coupled to a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (LC-MS). The separation column and emitter was an EASY-Spray column, 50 cm x 75 µm ID, PepMap C18, 2 µm particles, 100Å pore size. Buffer A was 2% (v/v) Acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid and buffer B was 100% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. A gradient from 5% to 40% acetonitrile over 120 minutes was used to elute peptides for ionisation by electrospray ionisation (ESI) and data dependent MS/MS acquisition consisting of 1 full MS1 (R=70K) scan acquisition from 350-1500m/z, and 10 HCD type MS2 scans (R=15K). MS/MS charge targets were limited to 1E6 and the isolation window was set to 2.0 m/z, monoisotopic precursor selection, charge state screening and dynamic exclusion were enabled, charge states of +1, >4 and unassigned charge states were not subjected to MS2 fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
. Raw mass spectra were identified and quantified using Maxquant 1.5.15 using a 1% peptide and protein FDR. Searches were conducted against the uniprot SwissProt database. The database was supplemented with common contaminant proteins introduced during proteomic experiments. Searches were specified as tryptic with 1 missed cleavage, 7 ppm precursor ion mass tolerance, 0.05 Da fragment ion mass tolerance, fixed modifications of carbamidomethylation (C), and variable modification of oxidation (M), acetylation (N-term, Protein).

### Publication Abstract
DDX3X, a helicase, can interact directly with mRNA and translation initiation factors, regulating the selective translation of mRNAs that contain a structured 5' untranslated region. This activity modulates the expression of mRNAs controlling cell cycle progression and mRNAs regulating actin dynamics, contributing to cell adhesion and motility. Previously, we have shown that ribosomes and translation initiation factors localise to the leading edge of migrating fibroblasts in loci enriched with actively translating ribosomes, thereby promoting steady-state levels of ArpC2 and Rac1 proteins at the leading edge of cells during spreading. As DDX3X can regulate Rac1 levels, cell motility and metastasis, we have examined DDX3X protein interactions and localisation using many complementary approaches. We now show that DDX3X can physically interact and co-localise with poly(A)-binding protein 1 and caprin-1 at the leading edge of spreading cells. Furthermore, as depletion of DDX3X leads to decreased cell motility, this provides a functional link between DDX3X, caprin-1 and initiation factors at the leading edge of migrating cells to promote cell migration and spreading.

### Keywords
Human mrc5 q-exactive mass spectrometer (lc-ms)

### Affiliations
University of Sussex
Sussex University

### Submitter
Alice Copsey

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Simon Morley
University of Sussex


