### Accession
PXD009897

### Title
IKK Promotes Cytokine-Induced and Cancer-Associated AMPK Activity and Attenuates Phenformin-Induced Cell Death in LKB1-Deficient Cells

### Description
The 5' AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) is a master energy sensing kinase that is regulated by phosphorylation of Thr172 in its activation loop.  Three kinases can phosphorylate AMPK at Thr172: the tumor suppressor LKB1, CAMKK2 and TAK1.  While LKB1- and CAMKK2-mediated AMPK Thr172 phosphorylation have been well-characterized, much less is known about TAK1-dependent AMPK phosphorylation.  An important target of TAK1 is IκB kinase (IKK) which controls NF-B transcription factor activation.  Here, we tested the hypothesis that IKK acted downstream of TAK1 to activate AMPK by phosphorylating Thr172. IKK was required for phosphorylation of Thr172 in AMPK in response to treatment with IL-1 or TNF- treatment or by TAK1 overexpression.  Additionally, IKK regulated basal AMPK Thr172 phosphorylation in several cancer cell types independently of TAK1, indicating that other modes of IKK activation could lead to AMPK activation.  We found that IKK directly phosphorylated AMPK at Thr172 independently of LKB1 or energy stress.  This finding indicated that while LKB1 activates AMPK as a sensor of energetic stress, IKK activated AMPK in response to extracellular inflammatory signals and through distinct pathways downstream of IKK activation.  Accordingly, in LKB1-deficient cells, IKK inhibition caused a reduction in AMPK Thr172 phosphorylation in response to the mitochondrial inhibitor phenformin.  This response led to enhanced apoptosis and suggests that IKK inhibition in combination with phenformin could be used clinically to treat patients with LKB1-deficient cancers.

### Sample Protocol
The gel sections corresponding to AMPKa1 were excised and the protein bands were reduced, alkylated, and digested with trypsin.  The peptides were extracted and dried.  The peptides were resuspended in 2% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid/97.9% water, and loaded onto a 2 cm long X 360 µm o.d. × 100 µm i.d. microcapillary fused silica precolumn packed with Magic 5 µm C18AQ resin (Michrom Biosciences, Inc.).   After sample loading, the precolumn was washed with 95% Solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) /5% Solvent B (0.1% formic acid in Acetonitrile) for 20 min at a flow rate of 2 uL/min.  The pre-column was then connected to a 360 µm o.d. × 75 µm i.d. analytical column packed with 22 cm of 5 µm C18 resin.  The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 250 nL/min by increasing the percentage of solvent B to 40% with a Nano-Acquity HPLC solvent delivery system (Waters Corp.).  The LC system was directly connected through an electrospray ionization source interfaced to an LTQ Orbitrap Velos ion trap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).   The mass spectrometer was controlled by Xcalibur software and operated in the data-dependent mode in which the initial MS scan recorded the mass to charge (m/z) ratios of ions over the range 400–2000.  The 10 most abundant ions were automatically selected for subsequent collision-activated dissociation. Each sample was analyzed 2 times and the two runs are denoted R1 (run 1) and R2 (run 2).

### Data Protocol
The Raw file for was searched using MASCOT (Matrix Science, Ver. 2.3.02) via Proteome Discoverer (Thermo., Ver. 1.3.0.339) against the FASTA sequence for 5'-AMP-activated protein kinase catalytic subunit alpha-1 downloaded from Uniprot (Q13131).  The search parameters included peptide mass tolerance of 10 ppm, fragment ion tolerance of 0.6 mass unit, and variable modifications for methionine oxidation, and phosphorylation of Ser, Thr, and Tyr residues.  Complete parameters are on tab “Search Param”. Peptides with a Mascot Exp Value of less than 0.01 are considered high confidence and are reported.

### Publication Abstract
The 5' AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) is an energy sensor that is activated upon phosphorylation of Thr<sup>172</sup> in its activation loop by the kinase LKB1, CAMKK2, or TAK1. TAK1-dependent AMPK phosphorylation of Thr<sup>172</sup> is less well characterized than phosphorylation of this site by LKB1 or CAMKK2. An important target of TAK1 is I&#x3ba;B kinase (IKK), which controls the activation of the transcription factor NF-&#x3ba;B. We tested the hypothesis that IKK acted downstream of TAK1 to activate AMPK by phosphorylating Thr<sup>172</sup> IKK was required for the phosphorylation of Thr<sup>172</sup> in AMPK in response to treatment with the inflammatory cytokine IL-1&#x3b2; or TNF-&#x3b1; or upon TAK1 overexpression. In addition, IKK regulated basal AMPK Thr<sup>172</sup> phosphorylation in several cancer cell types independently of TAK1, indicating that other modes of IKK activation could stimulate AMPK. We found that IKK directly phosphorylated AMPK at Thr<sup>172</sup> independently of the tumor suppressor LKB1 or energy stress. Accordingly, in LKB1-deficient cells, IKK inhibition reduced AMPK Thr<sup>172</sup> phosphorylation in response to the mitochondrial inhibitor phenformin. This response led to enhanced apoptosis and suggests that IKK inhibition in combination with phenformin could be used clinically to treat patients with LKB1-deficient cancers.

### Keywords
Ikk;ampk; inflammation; il-1; phenformin

### Affiliations
Mr.
Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center UNC Chapel Hill

### Submitter
Ricardo Antonia

### Lab Head
Dr Albert Baldwin
Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center UNC Chapel Hill


