### Accession
PXD006283

### Title
An Integrated OMICs Approach of Assembly and Annotation of Indian Sandalwood (Santalum album L.) plant genome provides insights into an array of genes involved in Santalol biosynthesis

### Description
Indian sandalwood (Santalum album) is an economically important plant known for its aromatic wood. This highly valued plant has also been reported as an endangered species. Despite its economic value, the genome sequence of this plant is not yet available. In the current study,we report the draft genome sequence of sandalwood generated using Illumina HiSeq1000 sequencing  platform. Genome annotation was carried out using InterProScan tool and Uniprot database,which was further facilitated using in-house RNA-Seq data. Further, we carried out in-depth proteome analysis of samples derived from four tissues viz., shoot meristem, leaf, stem and fruit using high-resolution tandem mass spectrometry. Proteogenomics analysis was performed to identify novel gene models, revise the predicted gene structures and provide experimental evidence for the predicted genes. Our analysis resulted in the identification of 72,325 peptides mapping to 10,076 genes predicted in the sandalwood genome thereby validating the expression of these gene models. Additionally, this study also provides evidence for 53 novel protein coding genes and revision of 121existing gene models.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from four plant tissues viz., shoot meristem, leaf, stem and fruit using phenol extraction method  and subjected to trypsin overnight digestion followed by fractionation using basic pH Reversed Phase Liquid Chromatography. For each tissue sample, 96 fractions were collectedand finally pooled into 10 fractions, dried and desalted using C18StageTips.LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out using Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to Easy-nLC1200 nano-flow UHPLC (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data obtained from all LC-MS/MS analysis were searched against Sandalwood protein database generated using RNA-seq data and ESTs. The MS/MS data were searched using Proteome Discoverer (version 2.1) software (Thermo Scientific) using the Mascot and Sequest MS/MS search algorithms. Enzyme specificity was set as trypsin with maximum one missed cleavage allowed. The mass error of parent ions was set to 10ppm and 0.05Da for fragment ions. The unannotated spectra were searched against the 6 frame translated Santalum album genome, 3 frame translated RNA-seq transcripts and hypothetical N-terminal peptide databasewith the above mentioned parameters.

### Publication Abstract
Indian sandalwood (<i>Santalum album</i>) is an important tropical evergreen tree known for its fragrant heartwood-derived essential oil and its valuable carving wood. Here, we applied an integrated genomic, transcriptomic, and proteomic approach to assemble and annotate the Indian sandalwood genome. Our genome sequencing resulted in the establishment of a draft map of the smallest genome for any woody tree species to date (221 Mb). The genome annotation predicted 38,119 protein-coding genes and 27.42% repetitive DNA elements. In-depth proteome analysis revealed the identities of 72,325 unique peptides, which confirmed 10,076 of the predicted genes. The addition of transcriptomic and proteogenomic approaches resulted in the identification of 53 novel proteins and 34 gene-correction events that were missed by genomic approaches. Proteogenomic analysis also helped in reassigning 1,348 potential noncoding RNAs as bona fide protein-coding messenger RNAs. Gene expression patterns at the RNA and protein levels indicated that peptide sequencing was useful in capturing proteins encoded by nuclear and organellar genomes alike. Mass spectrometry-based proteomic evidence provided an unbiased approach toward the identification of proteins encoded by organellar genomes. Such proteins are often missed in transcriptome data sets due to the enrichment of only messenger RNAs that contain poly(A) tails. Overall, the use of integrated omic approaches enhanced the quality of the assembly and annotation of this nonmodel plant genome. The availability of genomic, transcriptomic, and proteomic data will enhance genomics-assisted breeding, germplasm characterization, and conservation of sandalwood trees.

### Keywords
Santalum album

### Affiliations
Institute of Bioinformatics, Bangalore, Karnataka, India.
Institute of Bioinformatics, Discoverer-7th Floor, Unit-1, International Technology Park, Whitefield, Bangalore - 560066, India

### Submitter
Keshava Prasad T. S.

### Lab Head
Dr T. S. Keshava Prasad
Institute of Bioinformatics, Discoverer-7th Floor, Unit-1, International Technology Park, Whitefield, Bangalore - 560066, India


