### Accession
PXD002152

### Title
Comparative analysis of mouse muscles types

### Description
The dataset presents FASP- and LC-MS/MS-based analysis of whole lysates of tree types of mouse muscle tissue: white and red muscle fibers and heart muscle. The measurements were performed using five biological replicates for each tissue type. The dataset cover 7200 proteins.  The data were used for calculation of protein titers using the 'total protein method' (TPA) method.

### Sample Protocol
The soleus and the superficial, white part of gastrocnemius, heart muscles were dissected from sacrificed 10-week-old female C57BL/6 mice.Tissues were homogenized in 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 7.8, 0.05M DTT using a T10 basic Ultraturrax dispenser (IKA). The ratio of tissue to the buffer was 1:5-1:10 (g/mL). After addition of SDS to a final concentration of 2% (w/v) the homogenates were sonicated in a Branson type instrument, Heinemann Sonifier 250 (Schwäbisch Gmünd), operating at 20% duty cycle and 3-4 output for 1 min, and were then incubated in a boiling-water-bath for 5 min.  After cooling to room temperature, lysates were clarified by centrifugation at 16,000 × g for 10 min. The lysates were processed by MED-FASP protocol using consecutive digestion with LysC and trypsin.

### Data Protocol
The peptides (8  g) were separated on a reverse phase column (50 cm × 75  m inner diameter) packed with 1.8  m of C18 using a 3 h acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. The LC was coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany) via a nanoelectrospray source (Proxeon Biosystems, now Thermo Fisher Scientific). The Q Exactive was operated in data-dependent mode with survey scans acquired at a resolution of 50 000 at m/z 400 (transient time 256 ms). Up to the top 10 most abundant isotope patterns with charge ? +2 from the survey scan were selected with an isolation window of 1.6 Th and fragmented by HCD with normalized collision energies of 25. The maximum ion injection times for the survey scan and the MS/MS scans were 20 and 60 ms, respectively. The ion target value for both scan modes was set to 10E6. The dynamic exclusion was 25 s and 10 ppm. The spectra were searched using the MaxQuant software version 1.2.6.20.

### Publication Abstract
Quantitative mapping, given in biochemically interpretable units such as mol per mg of total protein, of tissue-specific proteomes is prerequisite for the analysis of any process in cells. We applied label- and standard-free proteomics to characterize three types of striated muscles: white, red, and cardiac muscle. The analysis presented here uncovers several unexpected and novel features of striated muscles. In addition to differences in protein expression levels, the three muscle types substantially differ in their patterns of basic metabolic pathways and isoforms of regulatory proteins. Importantly, some of the conclusions drawn on the basis of our results, such as the potential existence of a "fibroblast-cardiomyocyte lactate shuttle" and the "hexokinase paradox" point to the necessity of reinterpretation of some basic aspects of striated muscle metabolism. The data presented here constitute a powerful database and a resource for future studies of muscle physiology and for the design of pharmaceutics for the treatment of muscular disorders.

### Keywords
Skeletal muscle proteome, Quantitative proteomics, Heart muscle proteome, 'total protein approach', Glycolysis, Protein titer, Med fasp, Metabolism

### Affiliations
Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry Martinsried
Proteomics

### Submitter
Jacek Wisniewski

### Lab Head
Dr Jacek R Wisniewski
Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry Martinsried


