### Accession
PXD039183

### Title
The autophagy receptor NBR1 directs the clearance of photodamaged chloroplasts

### Description
The ubiquitin-binding NBR1 autophagy receptor plays a prominent role in recognizing ubiquitylated protein aggregates for vacuolar degradation during macroautophagy. Here, we show that upon exposing Arabidopsis plants to intense light, NBR1 associates with photodamaged chloroplasts independently of ATG7, a core component of the canonical autophagy machinery. NBR1 coats both the surface and interior of chloroplasts which is then followed by direct engulfment of the organelle into the central vacuole via a microautophagy-type process. The relocalization of NBR1 into chloroplasts does not require the chloroplast translocon complexes embedded in the envelope but is instead greatly enhanced by removing the self-oligomerization mPB1 domain of NBR1. The delivery of NBR1-decorated chloroplasts into vacuoles depends on the ubiquitin-binding UBA2 domain of NBR1 but is independent of the E3 ligases SP1 and PUB4, known to direct the ubiquitylation of chloroplast surface proteins. Compared to wild type plants, nbr1 mutants have altered levels of a subset of chloroplast proteins and display abnormal chloroplast density and sizes upon high light exposure. We postulate that, as photodamaged chloroplasts lose envelope integrity, cytosolic ligases reach the chloroplast interior to ubiquitylate thylakoid and stroma proteins which are then recognize by NBR1 for autophagic clearance. This study uncovers a new function of NBR1 in the degradation of damaged chloroplasts by microautophagy.

### Sample Protocol
Seven-day-old wild type (Col-0), nbr1-2, atg7-2, and nbr1-2 atg7-2 Arabidopsis seedlings were either grown under LL or left to recover for 24h after HL exposure as explained above. Whole were frozen in liquid nitrogen and grinded; protein extraction buffer (50 mM HEPES pH7.5, 5 mM Na2 EDTA, 2mM DTT, 1x protease inhibitor cocktail) was added to the samples. After mixing, samples were left on ice for 15 min, and transferred to a homogenizer for gentle homogenization. The homogenate was left on ice for 15 min and centrifugated at 14,000 g for 1 min at 4°C; 150 L of the supernatant was transferred to clean 1.5mL plastic tubes, mixed well by vortexing with 600 L of methanol and 150 L of chloroform. Then, 450 L of milliQ water was added to the sample and mixed by vortexing, followed by centrifugation at 14,000 g for 2 min. The top aqueous layer was removed and the proteins in the interphase collected with a pipette and transferred to a clean plastic tube followed by addition of 400 L of methanol, vortexing, and centrifugation at 14,000 g for 3 min. Methanol was removed from the tube withoutdisturbing the pellet, which was left to dry in a vacuum concentrator. Protein pellets were resuspended in 100 µL of 8M urea. Then,100 ug protein of each sample was reduced for 1h at room temperate with 10 mM dithiothreitol, followed by alkylation with 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 1h. The reaction was quenched with 20 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and diluted with 900 µL 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate to reduce the urea concentration below 1 M, digested overnight at 37°C in the presence of 1.5 µg of sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega). The resulting peptides were vacuum-dried in a vacuum concentrator to approximately 200 µL, acidified with 10% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) (pH < 3), desalted and concentrated on a 100-µL Bond Elut OMIX C18 pipette tip (Agilent Technologies A57003100) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Peptides were eluted in 50 µL of 75% acetonitrile, 0.1% acetic acid, vacuum-dried, and resuspended in 15 µL 5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid.

### Data Protocol
All samples were injected in two technical duplicates, and the protein abundances reflected the average of two technical replicates if proteins were detected in two technical replicates or used directly if the proteins were only detected in one technical replicate. Protein abundances were normalized using the median values of 150 proteins considered the least variable among each sample. Using the Perseus platform (Tyanova et al., 2016), intensity values from mass spectrometry were log2 mputed and missing values were replaced with random numbers from a Gaussian distribution with a width of 0.3 and a downshift of 1.8. Statistical significance was determined using t-tests. Only proteins with at least 2 peptide spectrum matches (one is the unique peptide) were selected for further analysis (PCA and volcano plot).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nbr1, Ubiquitin., Chlorophagy, Microautophagy

### Affiliations
Biology department, Washington University in Saint Louis, Saint Louis, MO, USA
Department of Biology, Washington University in St. Louis

### Submitter
Kuo-En Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Richard D. Vierstra
Biology department, Washington University in Saint Louis, Saint Louis, MO, USA


