### Accession
PXD020081

### Title
Phosphorylation level of SIRT1 in proliferating and senescent IMR90 cells

### Description
Mammalian SIRT1 is a central regulator of metabolism and aging. This project is to analyze global phosphorylation levels of mammalian SIRT1 in proliferating and senescence states using human lung fibroblast IMR90, in order to explore the post-translational regulation of SIRT1 protein upon cellular senescence and its potential roles in the regulatory mechanisms of SIRT1 homeostasis.

### Sample Protocol
Proliferating and senescent IMR90 cells are lysed and cell lysates are subjected to endogenous SIRT1 IP (anti-SIRT1，Cell Signaling，CST2496). IP samples are processed for Commassie blue staining and bands around 98kDa (confirmed by Western blotting) are cut for sample preparation for mass spectrometry (MS) using standard in-gel digestion protocol. After C18 stage tip trytic peptides were analyzed by a Thermo-Fisher Orbitrap Fusion equipped with a Dionex UHPLC. Samples were separated on a home-packed capillary column (75 µm * 20 cm) containing C18-AQ resin (3 µm) at a flow rate of 400 nl/min using 1 hour gradient. Full scan mass range of m/z 300-1800 was analyzed in the Orbitrap at 60,000 FWHM (200 m/z) resolution and 4.0e5 AGC target value with maximum injection time to 100 ms. Determined charge states between 2 and 6 were required, and 30 s dynamic exclusion window was used with isotopes excluded. MS/MS was performed in the ion trap in the Rapid mode with the TopSpeed mode (3 s) using data-dependent acquisition. HCD collision energy was set to 30%, AGC target to 1.0e4 and maximum injection time to 150 ms.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed by MaxQuant 1.6.0.16 against SIRT2 and common contaminant database. The search included fixed modification of carbamidomethyl cysteine and variable modifications of methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation and serine/threonine/tyrosine phosphorylation. All other values used default settings. The results generated by MaxQuant was sent to Skyline software for label-free quantification. All peptides from SIRT1 were manually checked before extracting the peak area for computing relative abundance of unmodified and phosphorylated status.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Imr90, Senescence, Phosphorylation, Sirt1

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics Penn Epigenetics Institute University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine

### Submitter
Congcong Lu

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin A. Garcia
Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics Penn Epigenetics Institute University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine


