### Accession
PXD013940

### Title
Temporal proteomic analysis of BK polyomavirus infection reveals virus-induced G2 arrest and highly effective evasion of innate immune sensing

### Description
BK polyomavirus (BKPyV) is a small DNA virus that establishes a life-long persistent infection in the urinary tract of most people. BKPyV is known to cause severe morbidity in renal transplant recipients and can lead to graft rejection. The simple 5.2 kilobase pair dsDNA genome expresses just seven known proteins, thus it relies heavily on host machinery to replicate. How the host proteome changes over the course of infection is key to understanding this host:virus interplay. Here for the first time quantitative temporal viromics has been used to quantify global changes in >9,000 host proteins in two types of primary human epithelial cell throughout 72 hours of BKPyV infection. These data demonstrate the importance both of cell cycle progression and pseudo-G2 arrest in effective BKPyV replication, along with a surprising lack of innate immune response throughout the whole virus replication cycle. BKPyV thus evades pathogen recognition to prevent activation of innate immune responses in a sophisticated manner.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were washed twice with PBS, and 250 ul lysis buffer added (6M Guanidine/50 mM HEPES pH 8.5). Cell lifters (Corning) were used to scrape cells in lysis buffer, which was removed to an eppendorf tube, vortexed extensively then sonicated. Cell debris was removed by centrifuging at 21,000 g for 10 min twice. Dithiothreitol (DTT) was added to a final concentration of 5 mM and samples were incubated for 20 mins. Cysteines were alkylated with 14 mM iodoacetamide and incubated 20 min at room temperature in the dark. Excess iodoacetamide was quenched with DTT for 15 mins. Samples were diluted with 200 mM HEPES pH 8.5 to 1.5 M Guanidine followed by digestion at room temperature for 3 h with LysC protease at a 1:100 protease-to-protein ratio. Samples were further diluted with 200 mM HEPES pH 8.5 to 0.5 M Guanidine. Trypsin was then added at a 1:100 protease-to-protein ratio followed by overnight incubation at 37°C. The reaction was quenched with 5% formic acid, then centrifuged at 21,000 g for 10 min to remove undigested protein. Peptides were subjected to C18 solid-phase extraction (SPE, Sep-Pak, Waters) and vacuum-centrifuged to near-dryness. In preparation for TMT labelling, desalted peptides were dissolved in 200 mM HEPES pH 8.5. Peptide concentration was measured by microBCA (Pierce), and 25μg labelled with TMT reagent. TMT reagents (0.8 mg) were dissolved in 43 μl anhydrous acetonitrile and 3 μl added to peptide at a final acetonitrile concentration of 30% (v/v). Samples were labelled as follows. Experiment 1 (10-plex); 126 – HU cells mock infection 24 hpi, 127N – HU cells mock infection 72 hpi, 127C – HU cells BKPyV infection 24 hpi, 128N – HU cells BKPyV infection 48 hpi, 128C – HU cells BKPyV infection 72 hpi, 129N – RPTE cells mock infection 24 hpi, 129C – RPTE cells mock infection 72 hpi, 130N – RPTE cells BKPyV infection 24 hpi, 130C – RPTE cells BKPyV infection 48 hpi, 131N – RPTE cells BKPyV infection 72 hpi. Experiment 2 (9-plex); 126 – mock infection 12 hpi, 127N – mock infection 24 hpi, 127C – mock infection 48 hpi, 128N – BKPyV infection 12 hpi, 128C – BKPyV infection 24 hpi, 129N – BKPyV irradiated – 48 hpi, 129C – BKPyV irradiated 12 hpi, 130N – BKPyV irradiated 24 hpi, 130C – BKPyV infection 48 hpi. Following incubation at room temperature for 1 h, the reaction was quenched with hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 0.3% (v/v). TMT-labelled samples were combined at a 1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1 ratio (experiment 1) and 1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1 ratio (experiment 2). The sample was vacuum-centrifuged to near dryness and subjected to C18 SPE (Sep-Pak, Waters). An unfractionated singleshot was initially analysed to ensure similar peptide loading across each TMT channel, to avoid the need for excessive electronic normalization. Quantities of each TMT labelled sample were adjusted prior to high pH reversed-phase (HpRP) so that normalisation factors were >0.67 and <1.5. Normalisation is discussed in ‘Data Analysis’, and fractionation is discussed below. TMT-labelled tryptic peptides were subjected to HpRP fractionation using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a 2.1 mm internal diameter (ID) x 25 cm long, 1.7 µm particle Kinetix Evo C18 column (Phenomenex). Mobile phase consisted of A: 3% acetonitrile (MeCN), B: MeCN and C: 200 mM ammonium formate pH 10. Isocratic conditions were 90% A / 10% C, and C was maintained at 10% throughout the gradient elution. Separations were conducted at 45°C. Samples were loaded at 200 µl/minute for 5 minutes. The flow rate was then increased to 400 µl/minute over 5 minutes, after which the gradient elution proceed as follows: 0-19% B over 10 minutes, 19-34% B over 14.25 minutes, 34-50% B over 8.75 minutes, followed by a 10 minutes wash at 90% B. UV absorbance was monitored at 280 nm and 15 s fractions were collected into 96 well microplates using the integrated fraction collector. Fractions were recombined orthogonally in a checkerboard fashion, combining alternate wells from each column of the plate into a single fraction, and commencing combination of adjacent fractions in alternating rows. Wells prior to the start or after the stop of elution of peptide-rich fractions, as identified from the UV trace, were excluded. This yielded two sets of 12 combined fractions, A and B, which were dried in a vacuum centrifuge and resuspended in 10 µl MS solvent (4% MeCN / 5% formic acid) prior to LC-MS3. 11 set ‘A’ fractions were used for experiment 1 and 12 set ‘A’ and 9 set ‘B’ fractions were used for experiment 2.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed using a Sequest-based software pipeline for quantitative proteomics, “MassPike”, through a collaborative arrangement with Professor Steve Gygi’s laboratory at Harvard Medical School. MS spectra were converted to mzXML using an extractor built upon Thermo Fisher’s RAW File Reader library (version 4.0.26). In this extractor, the standard mzxml format has been augmented with additional custom fields that are specific to ion trap and Orbitrap mass spectrometry and essential for TMT quantitation. These additional fields include ion injection times for each scan, Fourier Transform-derived baseline and noise values calculated for every Orbitrap scan, isolation widths for each scan type, scan event numbers, and elapsed scan times. This software is a component of the MassPike software platform and is licensed by Harvard Medical School.  A combined database was constructed from (a) the human UniProt database (4th February 2014), (b) the BK polyomavirus database (6th October, 2014), (c) common contaminants such as porcine trypsin and endoproteinase LysC. The combined database was concatenated with a reverse database composed of all protein sequences in reversed order. Searches were performed using a 20 ppm precursor ion tolerance (Haas et al., 2006). Product ion tolerance was set to 0.03 Th. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (229.162932 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (57.02146 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (15.99492 Da) was set as a variable modification.  To control the fraction of erroneous protein identifications, a target-decoy strategy was employed (Elias and Gygi, 2007, 2010). Peptide spectral matches (PSMs) were filtered to an initial peptide-level false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% with subsequent filtering to attain a final protein-level FDR of 1% (Kim et al., 2011; Wu et al., 2011). PSM filtering was performed using a linear discriminant analysis, as described (Huttlin et al., 2010). This distinguishes correct from incorrect peptide IDs in a manner analogous to the widely used Percolator algorithm (Kall et al., 2007), though employing a distinct machine learning algorithm. The following parameters were considered: XCorr, ΔCn, missed cleavages, peptide length, charge state, and precursor mass accuracy. Protein assembly was guided by principles of parsimony to produce the smallest set of proteins necessary to account for all observed peptides (Huttlin et al., 2010).  Proteins were quantified by summing TMT reporter ion counts across all matching peptide-spectral matches using ”MassPike”, as described (McAlister et al., 2012; McAlister et al., 2014). A minimum one unique or shared peptide per protein was used for quantitation. Briefly, a 0.003 Th window around the theoretical m/z of each reporter ion (126, 127n, 127c, 128n, 128c, 129n, 129c, 130n, 130c, 131n, 131c) was scanned for ions, and the maximum intensity nearest to the theoretical m/z was used. The primary determinant of quantitation quality is the number of TMT reporter ions detected in each MS3 spectrum, which is directly proportional to the signal-to-noise (S:N) ratio observed for each ion (Makarov and Denisov, 2009). Conservatively, every individual peptide used for quantitation was required to contribute sufficient TMT reporter ions (minimum of ~1250 per spectrum) so that each on its own could be expected to provide a representative picture of relative protein abundance (McAlister et al., 2012). Additionally, an isolation specificity filter was employed to minimise peptide co-isolation (Ting et al., 2011). Peptide-spectral matches with poor quality MS3 spectra (more than 9 TMT channels missing and/or a combined S:N ratio of less than 250 across all TMT reporter ions) or no MS3 spectra at all were excluded from quantitation. Peptides meeting the stated criteria for reliable quantitation were then summed by parent protein, in effect weighting the contributions of individual peptides to the total protein signal based on their individual TMT reporter ion yields. Protein quantitation values were exported for further analysis in Excel. For protein quantitation, reverse and contaminant proteins were removed, then each reporter ion channel was summed across all quantified proteins and normalised assuming equal protein loading across all channels. For further analysis and display in figures, fractional TMT signals were used (i.e. reporting the fraction of maximal signal observed for each protein in each TMT channel, rather than the absolute normalised signal intensity). This effectively corrected for differences in the numbers of peptides observed per protein. For all TMT experiments, normalised S:N values are presented in ‘Table S1’ in the associated manuscript.

### Publication Abstract
BK polyomavirus (BKPyV) is a small DNA virus that establishes a life-long persistent infection in the urinary tract of most people. BKPyV is known to cause severe morbidity in renal transplant recipients and can lead to graft rejection. The simple 5.2-kbp double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) genome expresses just seven known proteins; thus, it relies heavily on the host machinery to replicate. How the host proteome changes over the course of infection is key to understanding this host-virus interplay. Here, for the first time quantitative temporal viromics has been used to quantify global changes in &gt;9,000 host proteins in two types of primary human epithelial cells throughout 72&#x2009;h of BKPyV infection. These data demonstrate the importance of cell cycle progression and pseudo-G<sub>2</sub> arrest in effective BKPyV replication, along with a surprising lack of an innate immune response throughout the whole virus replication cycle. BKPyV thus evades pathogen recognition to prevent activation of innate immune responses in a sophisticated manner.<b>IMPORTANCE</b> BK polyomavirus can cause serious problems in immune-suppressed patients, in particular, kidney transplant recipients who can develop polyomavirus-associated kidney disease. In this work, we have used advanced proteomics techniques to determine the changes to protein expression caused by infection of two independent primary cell types of the human urinary tract (kidney and bladder) throughout the replication cycle of this virus. Our findings have uncovered new details of a specific form of cell cycle arrest caused by this virus, and, importantly, we have identified that this virus has a remarkable ability to evade detection by host cell defense systems. In addition, our data provide an important resource for the future study of kidney epithelial cells and their infection by urinary tract pathogens.

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics; tandem mass tag; systems virology; polyomavirus; interferon; immune evasion; innate immunity; cell cycle

### Affiliations
Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University of Cambridge, Hills Road, Cambridge, CB2 0XY, UK
University of Cambridge

### Submitter
Michael Weekes

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Weekes
Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University of Cambridge, Hills Road, Cambridge, CB2 0XY, UK


