### Accession
PXD037321

### Title
β-OHB Reduces Reinstatement of Cocaine Conditioned Place Preference Through Hippocampal CaMKII-α β-Hydroxybutyrylation

### Description
Studies have shown the therapeutic effects of a ketogenic diet (KD) on epilepsy, but the effect of KD on drug reinstatement is largely unclear. This study aims to investigate whether KD consumption possesses therapeutic potential for cocaine reinstatement and the molecular mechanism. We find that KD significantly reduce cocaine induced-reinstatement in mice, which is accompanied by a markedly elevated level of β-hydroxybutyrate (β-OHB), the most abundant ketone body, in the hippocampus. The underlying mechanism is that β-OHB posttranslationally modify CaMKII-α with β-hydroxybutyrylation, resulting in significant inhibition of T286 autophosphorylation and downregulation of CaMKII activity. Collectively, our results reveal that β-hydroxybutyrylation is a posttranslational modification of CaMKII-α that plays a critical role in mediating the effect of KD consumption in reducing cocaine reinstatement.

### Sample Protocol
LC-MS/MS Analysis of protein β-hydroxybutyrylation Protein extraction Hippocampal tissues were transferred to a 5 mL centrifuge tube. Lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail) was added to the tubes, followed by sonication 3 times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor. The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. The supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit. Trypsin Digestion Protein was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion.  Peptide fractionation and immunoaffinity enrichment Enrichment of kbhb peptides from different fractions by immunoprecipitation with Pan anti-kbhb antibody was carried out as described previously(Huang et al., 2021). Briefly, the peptides were first dissolved in NETN buffer [100 mM NaCl, 50 mM tris-HCl, 1 mM EDTA, and 0.5% NP-40 (pH 8.0)] and incubated with pan anti-kbhb beads at 4°C overnight. Then, the beads were washed three times with NETN buffer and twice with ddH2O. The combined peptides were eluted with 0.1% (v/v) TFA. The isolated kbhb peptides were dried in SpeedVac. LC-MS/MS Analysis The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A) and then directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 26 min, 23% to 35% in 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system.  The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Database Search The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v1.6.6.0). Tandem mass spectra were searched against Human uniprot database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 4 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in first search and 5 ppm in main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and acetylation modification and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for modified peptides was set > 40. Bioinformatics Methods Gene Ontology (GO) annotation proteome was derived from the UniProt-GOA database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/). The identified Kbhb sites were matched with the recorded binding and mutation sites extracted from the UniProt database (www.uniprot.org). We used wolfpsort, a subcellular localization predication soft, to predict subcellular localization. For protokaryon species, subcellular localization prediction soft CELLO was used. Soft MoMo (motif-x algorithm) was used to analysis the model of sequences constituted with amino acids in specific positions of modify-21-mers (10 amino acids upstream and downstream of the site) in all protein sequences. All differentially expressed modified protein database accession or sequence were searched against the STRING database version 10.1 for protein-protein interactions. STRING defines a metric called “confidence score” to define interaction confidence. We fetched all interactions that had a confidence score ≥ 0.7 (high confidence). The interaction network identified using STRING was visualized with Cytoscape.

### Publication Abstract
Studies have shown the therapeutic effects of a ketogenic diet (KD) on epilepsy, but the effect of a KD on drug reinstatement is largely unclear. This study aims to investigate whether KD consumption possesses therapeutic potential for cocaine reinstatement and the molecular mechanism. We find that a KD significantly reduces cocaine-induced reinstatement in mice, which is accompanied by a markedly elevated level of &#x3b2;-hydroxybutyrate (&#x3b2;-OHB), the most abundant ketone body, in the hippocampus. The underlying mechanism is that &#x3b2;-OHB posttranslationally modifies CaMKII-&#x3b1; with &#x3b2;-hydroxybutyrylation, resulting in significant inhibition of T286 autophosphorylation and downregulation of CaMKII activity. Collectively, our results reveal that &#x3b2;-hydroxybutyrylation is a posttranslational modification of CaMKII-&#x3b1; that plays a critical role in mediating the effect of KD consumption in reducing cocaine reinstatement.

### Keywords
Β-ohb; cocaine reinstatement; camkii-α β-hydroxybutyrylation

### Affiliations
West China Hospital, Sichuan University
National Chengdu Center for Safety Evaluation of Drugs, State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy/Collaborative Innovation Center for Biotherapy, West China Hospital, Sichuan University

### Submitter
Hongchun Li

### Lab Head
Dr Hongchun Li
National Chengdu Center for Safety Evaluation of Drugs, State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy/Collaborative Innovation Center for Biotherapy, West China Hospital, Sichuan University


