### Accession
PXD026104

### Title
Heterogeneous Expression of Nuclear Encoded Mitochondrial Genes Distinguishes Inhibitory and Excitatory Neurons.

### Description
Mitochondrial composition varies by organ and their constituent cell types. This mitochondrial diversity likely determines variations in mitochondrial function. However, the heterogeneity of mitochondria in the brain remains underexplored despite the large diversity of cell types in neuronal tissue. Here, we used molecular systems biology tools to address whether mitochondrial composition varies by brain region and neuronal cell type. We reasoned that proteomics and transcriptomics of microdissected brain regions combined with analysis of single cell mRNA sequencing could reveal the extent of mitochondrial compositional diversity. We selected nuclear encoded gene products forming complexes of fixed stoichiometry, such as the respiratory chain complexes and the mitochondrial ribosome, as well as molecules likely to perform their function as monomers, such as the family of SLC25 transporters. We found that only the proteome encompassing these nuclear-encoded mitochondrial genes and obtained from microdissected brain tissue segregated the hippocampus, striatum, and cortex from each other.  Nuclear-encoded mitochondrial transcripts could only segregate cell types and brain regions when the analysis was performed at the single cell level. In fact, single cell mitochondrial transcriptomes were able to distinguish glutamatergic and distinct types of GABAergic neurons from one another. Within these cell categories, unique SLC25A transporters were able to identify distinct cell subpopulations. Our results demonstrate heterogeneous mitochondrial composition across brain regions and cell types. We postulate that mitochondrial heterogeneity influences regional and cell type specific mechanisms in health and disease.

### Sample Protocol
Sample Processing Each tissue piece was individually homogenized in 500 uL of urea lysis buffer (8M urea, 100 mM NaHPO4, pH 8.5), including 5 uL (100x stock) HALT protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Pierce). All homogenization was performed using a Bullet Blender (Next Advance) according to manufacturer protocols. Briefly, each tissue piece was added to Urea lysis buffer in a 1.5 mL Rino tube (Next Advance) harboring 750 mg stainless steel beads (0.9-2 mm in diameter) and blended twice for 5 minute intervals in the cold room (4°C). Protein supernatants were transferred to 1.5 mL Eppendorf tubes and sonicated (Sonic Dismembrator, Fisher Scientific) 3 times for 5 s with 15 s intervals of rest at 30% amplitude to disrupt nucleic acids and subsequently vortexed. Protein concentration was determined by the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) method, and samples were frozen in aliquots at −80°C.  Protein homogenates (100 ug) were diluted with 50 mM NH4HCO3 to a final concentration of less than 2M urea and then treated with 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 25°C for 30 minutes, followed by 5 mM iodoacetimide (IAA) at 25°C for 30 minutes in the dark. Protein was digested with 1:100 (w/w) lysyl endopeptidase (Wako) at 25°C for 2 hours and further digested overnight with 1:50 (w/w) trypsin (Promega) at 25°C. Resulting peptides were desalted with a Sep-Pak C18 column (Waters) and dried under vacuum. Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) Labeling For each tissue type, 10 individual samples and one composite sample were labeled using the TMT 11-plex kit (ThermoFisher 90406). Labeling was performed as previously described (1, 2).  Briefly, each sample (containing 100 μg of peptides) was re-suspended in 100 mM TEAB buffer (100 μL). The TMT labeling reagents were equilibrated to room temperature, and anhydrous ACN (256 μL) was added to each reagent channel. Each channel was gently vortexed for 5 min, and then 41 μL from each TMT channel was transferred to the peptide solutions and allowed to incubate for 1 h at room temperature. The reaction was quenched with 5% (vol/vol) hydroxylamine (8 μl) (Pierce). All 10 channels were then combined and dried by SpeedVac (LabConco) to approximately 150 μL and diluted with 1 mL of 0.1% (vol/vol) TFA, then acidified to a final concentration of 1% (vol/vol) FA and 0.1% (vol/vol) TFA. Peptides were desalted with a 200 mg C18 Sep-Pak column (Waters). Each Sep-Pak column was activated with 3 mL of methanol, washed with 3 mL of 50% (vol/vol) ACN, and equilibrated with 2×3 mL of 0.1% TFA. The samples were then loaded and each column was washed with 2×3 mL 0.1% (vol/vol) TFA, followed by 2 mL of 1% (vol/vol) FA. Elution was performed with 2 volumes of 1.5 mL 50% (vol/vol) ACN. The eluates were then dried to completeness.

### Data Protocol
All raw files were searched using Thermo's Proteome Discoverer suite  (version 2.1.1.21) with Sequest HT. The spectra were searched against a mouse uniprot database downloaded July 2018 (98225 target sequences).  Search parameters included 20ppm precursor mass window, 0.05 Da product mass window, dynamic modifications methione (+15.995 Da), deamidated asparagine and glutamine (+0.984 Da), phosphorylated serine, threonine and tyrosine (+79.966 Da), and static modifications for carbamidomethyl cysteines(+57.021 Da) and N-terminal and Lysine-tagged TMT (+229.26340 Da). Percolator was used filter PSMs to 0.1%. Peptides were group using strict parsimony and only razor and unique peptides were used for protein level quantitation. Reporter ions were quantified from MS2 scans using an integration tolerance of 20 ppm with the most confident centroid setting. Only unique and razor (i.e., parsimonious) peptides were considered for quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Mitochondrial composition varies by organ and their constituent cell types. This mitochondrial diversity likely determines variations in mitochondrial function. However, the heterogeneity of mitochondria in the brain remains underexplored despite the large diversity of cell types in neuronal tissue. Here, we used molecular systems biology tools to address whether mitochondrial composition varies by brain region and neuronal cell type in mice. We reasoned that proteomics and transcriptomics of microdissected brain regions combined with analysis of single-cell mRNA sequencing (scRNAseq) could reveal the extent of mitochondrial compositional diversity. We selected nuclear encoded gene products forming complexes of fixed stoichiometry, such as the respiratory chain complexes and the mitochondrial ribosome, as well as molecules likely to perform their function as monomers, such as the family of SLC25 transporters. We found that the proteome encompassing these nuclear-encoded mitochondrial genes and obtained from microdissected brain tissue segregated the hippocampus, striatum, and cortex from each other. Nuclear-encoded mitochondrial transcripts could only segregate cell types and brain regions when the analysis was performed at the single-cell level. In fact, single-cell mitochondrial transcriptomes were able to distinguish glutamatergic and distinct types of GABAergic neurons from one another. Within these cell categories, unique SLC25A transporters were able to identify distinct cell subpopulations. Our results demonstrate heterogeneous mitochondrial composition across brain regions and cell types. We postulate that mitochondrial heterogeneity influences regional and cell type-specific mechanisms in health and disease.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Neurons, Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Tmt

### Affiliations
Professor, Director of Graduate Studies Neuroscience Program Department of Cell Biology, Emory University
Center of Neurodegenerative Diseases

### Submitter
Duc Duong

### Lab Head
Dr Victor Faundez
Professor, Director of Graduate Studies Neuroscience Program Department of Cell Biology, Emory University


