### Accession
PXD030843

### Title
Effects of plasticizers on adult human adipocytes (SGBS) using global proteomics

### Description
SGBS cells were used as a model system to investigate the cellular mode of action of a variety of plasticizers in human adipocytes. In brief, cells were cultured at 5% CO2 and 37°C in 95% humidity. Cells of generation 40 and passage 3 after thawing were grown to confluence with DMEM/F12 containing 33 µM biotin, 17 µM pantothenate, 100 U/l penicillin, and 0.1 mg/l streptomycin (basal medium) supplemented with 10% FCS (Gibco, Carlsbad, CA, USA). According to the standard differentiation protocol, differentiation was initiated (day 0) after changing to serum-free basal medium supplemented with 0.1 μM cortisol, 0.01 mg/ml apo-transferrin, 0.2 nM triiodothyronine, and 20 nM human insulin (differentiation medium) with the addition of 2 µM rosiglitazone, 25 nM dexamethasone, and 200 µM 3-isobutyl-1-methylxanthine for the first four days.  SGBS cells were first differentiated according to the standard protocol for 12 days. Obtained adult adipocytes were then exposed to the plasticizers for 8 days with medium changes every second day. The control contained equivalent amounts of solvent (0.01% MeOH). Additinally, a control on day 12 before exposure was sampled. All SGBS cell culture experiments were conducted in quadruplets.

### Sample Protocol
After growth and treatment in 12-well plates, SGBS cells were washed once with 3 ml ice-cold PBS and harvested with lysis buffer containing 150 mM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100, 50 mM Tris HCl pH 7.4, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, and 0.1% sodium dodecyl sulfate in ddH2O supplemented with cOmplete Roche protease inhibitor (Sigma Aldrich, Darmstadt, Germany). Lysates were incubated for 1 h on ice and centrifuged for 15 min at 4 ◦C and 16,000× g. Protein concentration was determined by Pierce BCA assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Samples were prepared by single-pot solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation (SP3) in combination with a tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling strategy (TMT-16-plex for the dataset of the preadipocytes and TMT-10-plex for the dataset of adult adipocytes) for protein quantification (10.1080/17435390.2019.1684592; 10.15252/msb.20145625; 10.1038/s41596-018-0082-x). Samples were prepared as described before (10.3390/cells10092367), except that 15 µM protein per sample was used and acidification for binding to the magnetic beads was not applied. Obtained peptides were separated using an Ultimate 3000 nano ultra-performance liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) as described before (10.1016/j.tox.2020.152652). Samples were first trapped on an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 column, nanoViper, 2 μm, 75 μm × 5 cm column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) and subsequently separated on an analytical reverse-phase column Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, nanoViper, 3 μm, 75 μm × 25 cm column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) using a non-linear gradient of a hydrophilic solution (0.1% FA in H2O, v/v) and a hydrophobic solution (80% ACN, 0.1% FA in H2O, v/v) at a flow rate of 0.3 μL/min. The separated peptides were injected into a Q Exactive HF Hybrid Quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) equipped with a TriVersa NanoMate system (Advion, Ithaca, NY USA). The samples were analyzed using MS parameters as previously described, except for selecting the top 15 precursor ions of each MS1 scan for fragmentation (10.1016/j.tox.2020.152652).

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using Proteome Discoverer (2.5.0.400, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The database search was performed using the UniprotKB/Swissprot reference proteome of Homo sapiens (3 May 2020). The analysis resulted in replicate-wise TMT-reporter ion intensity fold changes (FCs) of treatment vs. vehicle control (0.01% MeOH)which were used for subsequent analyses.

### Publication Abstract
The obesity pandemic is presumed to be accelerated by endocrine disruptors such as phthalate-plasticizers, which interfere with adipose tissue function. With the restriction of the plasticizer di-(2-ethylhexyl)-phthalate (DEHP), the search for safe substitutes gained importance. Focusing on the master regulator of adipogenesis and adipose tissue functionality, the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPAR&#x3b3;), we evaluated 20 alternative plasticizers as well as their metabolites for binding to and activation of PPAR&#x3b3; and assessed effects on adipocyte lipid accumulation. Among several compounds that showed interaction with PPAR&#x3b3;, the metabolites MINCH, MHINP, and OH-MPHP of the plasticizers DINCH, DINP, and DPHP exerted the highest adipogenic potential in human adipocytes. These metabolites and their parent plasticizers were further analyzed in human preadipocytes and mature adipocytes using cellular assays and global proteomics. In preadipocytes, the plasticizer metabolites significantly increased lipid accumulation, enhanced leptin and adipsin secretion, and upregulated adipogenesis-associated markers and pathways, in a similar pattern to the PPAR&#x3b3; agonist rosiglitazone. Proteomics of mature adipocytes revealed that both, the plasticizers and their metabolites, induced oxidative stress, disturbed lipid storage, impaired metabolic homeostasis, and led to proinflammatory and insulin resistance promoting adipokine secretion. In conclusion, the plasticizer metabolites enhanced preadipocyte differentiation, at least partly mediated by PPAR&#x3b3; activation and, together with their parent plasticizers, affected the functionality of mature adipocytes similar to reported effects of a high-fat diet. This highlights the need to further investigate the currently used plasticizer alternatives for potential associations with obesity and the metabolic syndrome.

### Keywords
Sgbs, Tmt, Adipocytes, Xenobiotics, Global proteomics, Untargeted proteomics

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Systems Biology, Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research (UFZ), Leipzig, Germany
Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research

### Submitter
Alexandra Schaffert

### Lab Head
Dr Kristin Schubert
Department of Molecular Systems Biology, Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research (UFZ), Leipzig, Germany


