### Accession
PXD030778

### Title
∆glnA Enterococcus faecalis V583 - data analysis

### Description
A group of gram positive bacteria that share the characteristic of fermenting hexose sugars to lactic acid are generally referred to as lactic acid bacteria (LAB). Enterococcus faecalis is one of the widely studied LABs due to a multiutude of reasons. On the one hand, it plays an important role in dairy industry, being for example a starter in cheese cultures. On the other hand, it accounts for a large part of the infections caused by the LABs in hospital environments. During the past few years, it developed resistance against most of the major antibiotics. Here, in an attempt to study its adaptive metabolism, a glutamine synthetase mutant (∆glnA) of E. faecalis was subjected to pH shift and the results from the integrative analysis of its metabolic network were compared to those of the wild type. The proteome data generated in this study were used to constrain the genome-scale metabolic network at two pH level, aiming to reduce the solution space and improve the accuracy of model simulation. This data particularly helped to come up with a new design for the amino acid transport system in the genome-scale model, resulting in an accurate reproduction of the metabolic behaviour of E. faecalis.

### Sample Protocol
We integrated both chemostat and proteome data into the genome-scale model of ∆glnA Enterococcus faecalis V583, previously reconstructed in our group. We conducted a pH shift experiment to study the adaptive metabolism of ∆glnA E. faecalis and investigate the role of glutamine auxotrophy in pH adaptation. The pH of the chemostat culture was shifted from 7.5 to 6.5 over an hour. In this experiment we quantified the behavior of both wild type (Enterococcus faecalis V583, Part 1, PRIDE PXD002869) and a glutamine synthetase mutant (glnA). The proteome samples of ∆glnA E. faecalis were measured using SWATH-MS² and analyzed using openSWATH³. We managed to cover 70% of the detectable proteome. We used PySCeS CBMpy to calculate potential flux ⁴ distributions through the genome-scale models using FBA and FVA.

### Data Protocol
Spectral and assay library generation All raw instrument data were centroided and processed as described before {Rost, 2014 #225}. The assay library was generated using an established protocol (olga’s paper): The Trans-Proteomic Pipeline {Keller, 2005 #235} (4.7.0) and SpectraST {Lam, 2007 #236} (5.0) were used to analyse the DDA proteomics runs. Datasets were searched individually using X!Tandem{Craig, 2003 #241} (2011.12.01.1) with k-score plugin{MacLean, 2006 #242}, Mascot 2.4 and Comet{Eng, 2013 #238} (2013.02r2) against the reference proteome of Enterococcus faecalis (strain ATCC 700802 / V583) annotated in UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot{Magrane, 2011 #243} (2014_02) with xxx ORFs and appended iRT peptide and decoy sequences. Carbamidomethyl (C) was used as a fixed modification; Oxidation (M), the only variable modification. Two peptide missed cleavages were allowed. Parent mass error was set to ±50 ppm, fragment mass error to ±0.1 Da. The search identifications were combined and statistically scored using PeptideProphet{Keller, 2002 #244} and iProphet{Shteynberg, 2011 #245} within TPP{Keller, 2005 #235}. MAYU {Reiter, 2009 #226} (1.07) was used to control for peptide FDR at 1% (corresponding to protein FDR 4%) with an iProphet cutoff of 0.915593. SpectraST was used in library generation mode with CID-QTOF settings and iRT normalisation at import against the iRT Kit peptide sequences (-c_IRTirt.txt -c_IRR) , where the empirical retention times were transformed into the normalized iRT space using a linear regression with the iRT peptides, and a consensus library was consecutively generated {Lam, 2008 #246}. The script spectrast2tsv.py(olga’s paper) (msproteomicstools 0.2.2) was then used to generate the assay library with the following settings: : -l 350,2000 -s y,b -g -18.010565,-17.026549,-63.998287,-79.966333,-97.976898 -x 1,2,3,4 -o 6 -n 6 -p 0.05 -e -d -w swaths_64w.txt -k openswath. The OpenSWATH tool, ConvertTSVToTraML converted the TSV file to TraML format; OpenSwathDecoyGenerator generated the decoy assays in shuffle mode and appended them to the TraML assay library. SWATH-MS targeted data extraction The SWATH targeted data analysis was carried out using (OpenMS 1.12) analysis workflow (OpenSwathWorkflow ) (http://www.openswath.org) running on an internal computing cluster and consists of the following steps. First, fragment-ion chromatograms were extracted for each peptide precursor in its appropriate SWATH-MS data file based on the target and decoy assays in TraML format, with an m/z extraction width of 50 ppm (OpenSwath ChromatogramExtractor) and an RT extraction window of ±210 seconds around the expected RT. Additionally, ion chromatograms for the iRT retention time standard peptides were extracted to facilitate linear retention alignment projection of the assays from the normalized iRT retention time space into the retention time space for each individual run (OpenSwath RTNormalizer). Peak groups from the extracted fragment-ion chromatograms were formed and scored according to their elution profiles, similarity to the target assay in terms of RT and relative fragment-ion intensity, as well as features from the full MS2 SWATH spectrum extracted at the chromatographic peak apex (OpenSwath Analyzer). Finally, the optimal separation between true and false peak groups was achieved using a linear discriminant model training with 100-fold semi-supervised learning iterations; and the score distribution from the shuffled decoy assays was used to estimate the false discovery rate using pyprophet (0.9.2) (https://pypi.python.org/pypi/pyprophet){Rost, 2014 #225} based the mProphet algorithm{Reiter, 2011 #257} and filtered using 1% FDR at the peptide feature level. Further, peak-groups were aligned among all 36 runs using the OpenSwath feature_aligner to annotate signals (peptide features) that could not be confidently assigned using data from a single run alone. Dataset Processing with MSstats Protein quantification was computed using R package, MSStats.daily 2.3.5 (M.Choi et al., 2014). Briefly, we filtered the dataset to only include high confidence identifications at protein FDR 1%. We determined the FDR at protein level by analysing the OpenSWATH/pyprophet results with Mayu which returned the appropriate peptide feature FDR at which to filter in a row-wise fashion (i.e. minimum peptide feature FDR per row should meet the Mayu threshold equivalent to 1% protein FDR) to achieve an experiment wide protein FDR of 1%. We preprocessed the filtered dataset by log2 transformation and quantile normalization and generated the protein abundance matrix from the fragment ion level data using the ‘quantification’ function of MSstats .

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Enterococcus faecalis, Proteomics, Swath, ∆glna

### Affiliations
ETH Zurich
Department of Modeling of Biological Processes COS, Heidelberg University, Germany

### Submitter
Ludovic Gillet

### Lab Head
Dr Ursula Kummer
Department of Modeling of Biological Processes COS, Heidelberg University, Germany


