### Accession
PXD014888

### Title
Protein compositions of extracellular vesicles released from Staphylococcus aurues JE2 and its lgt mutant

### Description
This project detected the protein composition of extracellular vesicles (EV) produced by S. aureus WT JE2 strain and its lgt mutant (lipoprotein deficient mutant). Our recent study found that mutation of lgt in S. aureus USA300 JE2 strain significantly increased EV production in S. aureus and decreased the pore-forming toxin content of vesicles, indicatiung that lipoproteins modulate the EV biogenesis of S. aureus. To gain a better understanding of this process, we detected the protein compositions associated with EVs purified from both WT and lgt mutant EVs by LC-MS/MS. Compared to WT EVs, more cytosoli proteins and less extracellular proteins were identified in lgt mutant EVs. A total of 180 and 198 proteins were identified from WT and lgt mutant EVs, respectively.In addition 27.2% and 33.8% of identified proteins were unique to WT or lgt mutant EVs respectively.

### Sample Protocol
10 ug of each EV proteins were subjected to SDS-PAGE GEL and stained by coommassie blue. Bands cotaining EV proteins were cut and sent to Taplin Mass Spect facilicity in Harvard Medical School for processing using an LTQ Orbitrap Velons Pro ion-trap mass spectrometer (thermo Fisher).

### Data Protocol
Peptide sequences were determined by matching protein databases with the acquired fragmentation pattern using the software program Sequest (thermo Fisher). Sequence analysis was performed with a database cotaining protein sequences of the S. aureus USA300 FPR3757 genome downloaded from NCBIprot. Lgt mutant and WT EVs were independently tested 3 times, and EV proteins were reported only when they were identified in at least two of three replicates.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Staphylococcus aureus</i> generates and releases extracellular vesicles (EVs) that package cytosolic, cell-wall associated, and membrane proteins, as well as glycopolymers and exoproteins, including alpha hemolysin, leukocidins, phenol-soluble modulins, superantigens, and enzymes. <i>S. aureus</i> EVs, but not EVs from pore-forming toxin-deficient strains, were cytolytic for a variety of mammalian cell types, but EV internalization was not essential for cytotoxicity. Because <i>S. aureus</i> is subject to various environmental stresses during its encounters with the host during infection, we assessed how these exposures affected EV production in vitro. Staphylococci grown at <i>37 &#xb0;C or 40 &#xb0;C</i> did not differ in <i>EV production, but cultures incubated at</i> 30 <i>&#xb0;C yielded more EVs when grown to the same optical density.</i><i>S. aureus</i> cultivated in the presence of oxidative stress, in iron-limited media, or with subinhibitory concentrations of ethanol, showed greater EV production as determined by protein yield and quantitative immunoblots. In contrast, hyperosmotic stress or subinhibitory concentrations of erythromycin reduced <i>S. aureus</i> EV yield. EVs represent a novel <i>S. aureus</i> secretory system that is affected by a variety of stress responses and allows the delivery of biologically active pore-forming toxins and other virulence determinants to host cells.

### Keywords
Vesicle, Lgt, Staphylococcus aureus

### Affiliations
Department of Medicine (Infectious Diseases) Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School
Harvard Medical school

### Submitter
Xiaogang Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Jean C. Lee
Department of Medicine (Infectious Diseases) Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School


