### Accession
PXD009655

### Title
Microvesicle Proteomic profiling of Uterine Liquid Biopsy for Ovarian Cancer Early Detection

### Description
High-grade ovarian cancer (HGOC) is the leading cause of mortality from gynecological malignancies, due to diagnosis at a metastatic stage. Current screening options fail to improve mortality due to the absence of early-stage-specific biomarkers. We postulated that a liquid biopsy, such as utero-tubal lavage (UtL), may identify localized lesions better than systemic approaches of serum/plasma analysis. Furthermore, while mutation-based assays are challenged by the rarity of tumor DNA within non-mutated DNA, analyzing the proteomic profile, is expected to enable earlier detection, as it reveals perturbations in both the tumor as well as in its microenvironment. To attain deep proteomic coverage and overcome the high dynamic range of this body fluid, we applied our method for microvesicle proteomics to the UtL samples. Liquid biopsies from HGOC patients (n=49), controls (n=127) and healthy BRCA mutation carriers (n=25), were divided into a discovery and validation sets. Data-dependent analysis of the samples on the Q-Exactive mass spectrometer provided depth of 8,578 UtL proteins in total, and on average ~3,000 proteins per sample. We used support vector machine algorithms for sample classification, and crossed three feature-selection algorithms, to construct and validate a 9-protein classifier with 70% sensitivity and 76.2% specificity. The signature correctly identified all Stage I lesions and highlighted increased risk in healthy BRCA carriers. These results demonstrate the potential power of microvesicle-based proteomic biomarkers for early cancer diagnosis.

### Sample Protocol
Microvesicle pellets were solubilized in 8M urea in 100mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5), reduced with 1mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at RT for 30 min and alkylated with 5mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30min in the dark. The lysates were diluted 4-fold with 50mM ammonium bicarbonate, followed by overnight  digestion with Trypsin/Lys-C mix (MS grade Promega, 1:100 enzyme to protein ratio)  and sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega, 1:50 enzyme to protein ratio). Resulting peptides were acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), purified on C18 StageTips (3M Empore™) and vacuum dried. The dried peptides were resuspended in 2% acetonitrile / 0.1% TFA prior to the LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptides were analyzed by liquid-chromatography using the EASY-nLC1000 HPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to the Q-Exactive (QE) Plus or Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometers (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Peptides were separated on 75µm i.d. x 50cm long EASY-spray PepMap columns (Thermo Fisher Scientific) packed with 2µm, C18 material with 100Å pore size. The peptides were loaded with Buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and eluted with a gradient of 7-28% Buffer B (80% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid), at a flow rate of 300nl/min, over a gradient of 210 min. MS acquisition was performed in a data-dependent manner, positive-ion mode with selection of the top 10 peptides from each MS spectrum for fragmentation and MS/MS analysis. Full MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 (QE-Plus) or 60,000 (QE-HF), m/z range of 300-1800 Th, with AGC target of 3E+06 ions and maximal injection time of 20 ms (QE-Plus) or 100 ms (QE-HF). Peptides were isolated for fragmentation with a window of 1.6 m/z. Higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation was performed with normalized collisional energy of (NCE) 25 (QE-Plus) or 27 (QE-HF). MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 17,500 (QE-Plus) or 30,000 (QE-HF), with AGC target of 1E+05 (QE-Plus) or 5E+04 (QE-HF) and maximal injection time of 60 ms (QE-Plus) or 50ms (QE-HF).  Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 sec.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were analyzed in the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.2.18) and the Andromeda search engine. MS/MS spectra were searched against the Uniprot database (version Apr2014 with 92,179 entries), a decoy, reverse database of the same size, and a list of common contaminants (245 entries). The peptide search included carbamidomethyl-cysteine as a fixed modification, and N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. MaxQuant search parameters for the initial mass recalibration of the precursors were 20 ppm, and in the main search, the mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions was 4.5 and 20 ppm, respectively. Trypsin was the specified protease and the maximal number of missed cleavages allowed was two. The minimal peptide length was set to seven amino acids and a minimum of one razor peptide per protein. The search results were filtered with false discovery rate of 0.01 for peptide-spectrum matches and 0.01 for protein identifications. The label-free quantification algorithm (LFQ) in MaxQuant was used for relative quantification, and the ‘match between runs’ feature was enabled. All proteins that could not be discriminated based on the identified peptides were merged into a single protein group. All statistical analyses were performed with the Perseus software (1.5.1.16)

### Publication Abstract
High-grade ovarian cancer (HGOC) is the leading cause of mortality from gynecological malignancies, because of diagnosis at a metastatic stage. Current screening options fail to improve mortality because of the absence of early-stage-specific biomarkers. We postulated that a liquid biopsy, such as utero-tubal lavage (UtL), may identify localized lesions better than systemic approaches of serum/plasma analysis. Further, while mutation-based assays are challenged by the rarity of tumor DNA within nonmutated DNA, analyzing the proteomic profile, is expected to enable earlier detection, as it reveals perturbations in both the tumor as well as in its microenvironment. To attain deep proteomic coverage and overcome the high dynamic range of this body fluid, we applied our method for microvesicle proteomics to the UtL samples. Liquid biopsies from HGOC patients (<i>n</i> = 49) and controls (<i>n</i> = 127) were divided into a discovery and validation sets. Data-dependent analysis of the samples on the Q-Exactive mass spectrometer provided depth of 8578 UtL proteins in total, and on average &#x223c;3000 proteins per sample. We used support vector machine algorithms for sample classification, and crossed three feature-selection algorithms, to construct and validate a 9-protein classifier with 70% sensitivity and 76.2% specificity. The signature correctly identified all Stage I lesions. These results demonstrate the potential power of microvesicle-based proteomic biomarkers for early cancer diagnosis.

### Keywords
Utero-tubal lavage, Biomarker, Q-exactive, Lc-ms/ms, Microvesicles, Ovarian cancer

### Affiliations
Weizmann Institute of Science
Department of Human Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Ramat Aviv, Israel

### Submitter
Tamar Geiger

### Lab Head
Dr Tamar Geiger
Department of Human Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Ramat Aviv, Israel


