### Accession
PXD015549

### Title
LCMS quantification of internal crosslink in WT and G68L mutant R2lox proteins from Geobacillus kaustophilus.

### Description
A heterobimetallic Mn/Fe cofactor is found in the R2 subunit of class Ic ribonucleotide reductases (R2c) and R2-like ligand-binding oxidases (R2lox). Although the protein-derived metal ligands are the same in both groups of proteins, the connectivity of the two metal ions and the chemistry each cofactor performs are different: in R2c, a one-electron oxidant, the Mn/Fe dimer is linked by two oxygen bridges (μ-oxo/μ-hydroxo), whereas in R2lox, a two-electron oxidant, it is linked by a single oxygen bridge (μ-hydroxo) and a fatty acid ligand. Here we identify a second coordination sphere residue which directs the divergent reactivity of the protein scaffold. The residue that directly precedes the N-terminal carboxylate metal ligand is conserved as a glycine within the R2lox group, but not in R2c. Mutation of the glycine to leucine converts the resting state R2lox cofactor into an R2c-like cofactor, a µ-oxo/µ-hydroxo bridged MnIII/FeIII dimer. This species has recently been observed as an intermediate of the oxygen activation reaction in wild-type R2lox, demonstrating that it is physiologically relevant. Cofactor maturation in R2c and R2lox therefore follows the same pathway, with structural and functional divergence of the two cofactor forms following oxygen activation. We also show that the leucine mutant no longer functions as a two-electron oxidant. Specifically the mass spectrometry data here deposited tracks the abundance of the cross-linked peptide AVIRAATVYNMIVE-AVTLD, which was used as surrogate marker for the abundance of the internal V72-Y162 ether cross-link, which is directly impacted by the metalation state of the protein as well as the residue present in position 68 (G or L). Taken together, our data demonstrate that the residue preceding the N-terminal metal ligand directs the cofactor’s reactivity towards one- or two-electron redox chemistry, presumably by setting the protonation state of the bridging oxygens and thereby perturbing the redox potential of the Mn ion.

### Sample Protocol
The purified R2lox apoproteins (both WT and G68L mutant) were incubated with metal salts so as to generate four types of metalloprotein samples: WT_MnFe; WT_FeFe; G68L_MnFe; G68L_FeFe. The four protein types were produced in triplicates. Samples were kept in the dark at all times during sample preparation, which included SP3-based cleanup and digestion by Glu-C in phosphate buffer pH 7.6 (leading to high cleavage rates at the c-terminal side of both glutamate and aspartate residues). LCMS in triplicate technical runs (in addition to the biological triplicates of the four protein types: 3x3x4=36 runs) was carried out on a HPLC 1200 system (Agilent Technologies) with a 15 cm long C18 picofrit analytical column (100 µm internal diameter, 5 µm bead size, Nikkyo Technos Co., Tokyo, Japan) connected to a LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). WT_MnFe samples comprise mass spectrometry raw files files named S01-S03, WT_FeFe correspond to S04-S06, G68L_MnFe to S07-S09 and finally G68L_FeFe to S10-S12.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were then searched against a FASTA database containing only the R2lox protein sequence using Proteome Discoverer (PD) 1.4 (Thermo Scientific). PD 1.4 can calculate protein areas based on the MS1 peak area integration of the three most abundant identified peptides. The MS1 peak area (as calculated using the Termo Qual browser) in each LCMS run of m/z 689.038, z=3 (which corresponds to the cross-linked peptide AVIRAATVYNMIVE-AVTLD), normalized to the protein area of the same run, was used as surrogate marker for the abundance of the internal V72-Y162 ether cross-link.

### Publication Abstract
The electronic structure of the Mn/Fe cofactor identified in a new class of oxidases (R2lox) described by Andersson and H&#xf6;gbom [Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2009, 106, 5633] is reported. The R2lox protein is homologous to the small subunit of class Ic ribonucleotide reductase (R2c) but has a completely different in vivo function. Using multifrequency EPR and related pulse techniques, it is shown that the cofactor of R2lox represents an antiferromagnetically coupled Mn(III)/Fe(III) dimer linked by a &#x3bc;-hydroxo/bis-&#x3bc;-carboxylato bridging network. The Mn(III) ion is coordinated by a single water ligand. The R2lox cofactor is photoactive, converting into a second form (R2loxPhoto) upon visible illumination at cryogenic temperatures (77 K) that completely decays upon warming. This second, unstable form of the cofactor more closely resembles the Mn(III)/Fe(III) cofactor seen in R2c. It is shown that the two forms of the R2lox cofactor differ primarily in terms of the local site geometry and electronic state of the Mn(III) ion, as best evidenced by a reorientation of its unique (55)Mn hyperfine axis. Analysis of the metal hyperfine tensors in combination with density functional theory (DFT) calculations suggests that this change is triggered by deprotonation of the &#x3bc;-hydroxo bridge. These results have important consequences for the mixed-metal R2c cofactor and the divergent chemistry R2lox and R2c perform.

### Keywords
Ferritin; metalloprotein; ribonucleotide reductase; r2-like ligand-binding oxidase; r2lox; crosslink

### Affiliations
Clinical Proteomics Unit, Dep. of Oncology-Pathology
Dept. Oncology Pathology, Karolinska Institutet and Scilifelab, Stockholm, Sweden

### Submitter
Rui Branca

### Lab Head
Dr Janne Lehtiö
Dept. Oncology Pathology, Karolinska Institutet and Scilifelab, Stockholm, Sweden


