### Accession
PXD014937

### Title
Isotopic-labelled Clickable Glutathione to Quantify Protein S-Glutathionylation

### Description
Investigated protein glutathionylation in HL-1 cardiomyocyte cells in response to hydrogen peroxide using a clickable glutathione approach. After exposure, or not, to hydrogen peroxide the glutathionylated proteins with heavy or light azido glutathione were enriched and subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis followed by quantification.

### Sample Protocol
HL-1 cardiomyocyte cells transfected with glutathione synthetase mutant were incubated with heavy or light azido alanine to generate azido glutathione and were treated with or without hydrogen peroxide. Then the cells were lysed in presence of thiol blocking reagent, NEM. Cell lysates were treated with silane containing acid cleavable biotin-alkyne derivative followed by the incubation with streptavidin beads. Proteins were subjected to on-bead digestion followed by elution with formic acid. Resulted peptides were then used for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
UHPLC reverse phase chromatography with an EASY-nLC 1000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo) and an Orbitrap FUSION mass spectrometer (Thermo) were used for the separation and analysis of glutathionylated peptides. MS1 scans were between 375-1600 m/z and at 240,000 orbitrap resolution. Abundant peptides with +2 or +3 charges were fragmented by CID at 35% collision energy, and peptides with charges between +3 and +7 were fragmented by ETD using calibrated charge-dependent ETD parameters. All MS2 fragmentations were scanned at 30,000 orbitrap resolution. All MS/MS samples were analyzed using MaxQuant (Max-Planck-Institute of Biochemistry, version 1.6.2.10). MaxQuant was set up to search the Uniprot_Mus_Compl_20170714 database, assuming the digestion enzyme as trypsin. MaxQuant was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.60 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 PPM. Oxidation of Met, acetylation of the n-terminus, and glutathionylation of cysteine (+444 Da light, and +448 Da heavy) were specified in MaxQuant as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Protein S-glutathionylation is one of the important cysteine oxidation events that regulate various redox-mediated biological processes. Despite several existing methods, there are few proteomic approaches to identify and quantify specific cysteine residues susceptible to S-glutathionylation. We previously developed a clickable glutathione approach that labels intracellular glutathione with azido-Ala by using a mutant form of glutathione synthetase. In this study, we developed a quantification strategy with clickable glutathione by using isotopically labeled heavy and light derivatives of azido-Ala, which provides the relative quantification of glutathionylated peptides in mass spectrometry-based proteomic analysis. We applied isotopically labeled clickable glutathione to HL-1 cardiomyocytes, quantifying relative levels of 1398 glutathionylated peptides upon addition of hydrogen peroxide. Importantly, we highlight elevated levels of glutathionylation on sarcomere-associated muscle proteins while validating glutathionylation of two structural proteins, &#x3b1;-actinin and desmin. Our report provides a chemical proteomic strategy to quantify specific glutathionylated cysteines.

### Keywords
Cardiomyocyte, Glutathionylation, Clickable glutathione

### Affiliations
Wayne State University Chemistry Department, Ahn Lab, United States of America ( lab head )
wayne state university

### Submitter
Maheeshi Yapa Abeywardana

### Lab Head
Dr Young-Hoon Ahn
Wayne State University Chemistry Department, Ahn Lab, United States of America ( lab head )


