### Accession
PXD011051

### Title
On the mechanism and origin of isoleucyl-tRNA synthetase editing against norvaline

### Description
Aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases (aaRSs), the enzymes responsible for coupling tRNAs to their cognate amino acids, minimize translational errors by intrinsic hydrolytic editing. Here, we compared the propensity of norvaline (Nva), a linear amino acid not coded for protein synthesis, to the proteinogenic, branched valine (Val) to mistranslate isoleucine (Ile) in proteins. We show that in the synthetic site of isoleucyl-tRNA synthetase (IleRS), aminoacylation and pre-transfer editing with Nva and Val occur at similar rates. Post-transfer editing was, however, more efficient with Nva as IleRS misaminoacylates Nva-tRNAIle at slower rate than Val-tRNAIle. Accordingly, an Escherichia coli strain lacking IleRS post-transfer editing misincorporated Nva and Val in the proteome to a similar extent and at the same Ile positions. However, Nva mistranslation inflicted higher toxicity than Val, in agreement with IleRS post-transfer editing domain being optimized for hydrolysis of Nva-tRNAIle. Furthermore, we found that the evolutionary related IleRS, leucyl- and valyl-tRNA synthetases (I/L/VRSs), all efficiently hydrolyze Nva-tRNAs even when editing of Nva seems redundant. Thus, we hypothesize that editing of Nva-tRNAs had already existed in the last common ancestor of I/L/VRSs, and that the editing domain of I/L/VRSs had primarily evolved to prevent infiltration of Nva into modern proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Wild-type E. coli strain MG1655 was obtained from The Coli Genetic Stock Center (Yale University). An E. coli strain deprived of IleRS post-transfer editing (PS7066, herein named IleRS ED-) was kindly provided by P. Schimmel (Pezo, PMID: 15163798). Standard growth conditions for testing mistranslation included M9 media enriched with Ile, Leu, Val each at 100 µM. To assay mistranslation, the growth was supplemented with various concentrations of Nva or Val. The bacteria were grown at 37 °C in enriched M9. Mistranslation was assayed in the presence of 0.5 and 2 mM Nva or Val. Bacteria from 10 ml culture (OD600 = 0.2 - 0.6) were pelleted, resuspended in 0.5 ml buffer containing 4 % SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8,0 and 10 mM EDTA and disrupted by sonication. The samples were heated 5 min at 95 °C and cleared by centrifugation. The proteins were precipitated using methanol/chloroform and resuspended in a denaturation buffer (6 M urea, 2 M thiourea and 10 mM Tris pH 8.0).  Protein samples (10 µg of each) were digested in-solution. Protein mixture was predigested with endoproteinase Lys-C (1:100 w/w) for 3 hours, then diluted with 4 volumes of 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8 and supplemented with trypsin (1:100 w/w) for overnight digestion at room-temperature. Desalted and purified peptide samples (using C18 stage tips, SciRep) were separated by an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Scientific) coupled on-line to an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) through a nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Scientific). Chromatographic separation was performed on a 20 cm long, 75 μm inner diameter analytical column packed in-house with reversed-phase ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 μm particles (Dr. Maisch GmbH). The column temperature was maintained at 40 °C using an integrated column oven. Peptides were loaded onto the column at a flow rate of 1 µL/min under maximum back-pressure of 850 bar. The peptides were eluted using 113 min linear gradient of 5 - 33 % solvent B at a constant flow rate of 200 nL/min. Peptides were ionized at 2.3 kV and the capillary temperature of 275 °C. The mass spectrometer was operated as previously described.

### Data Protocol
Acquired data (60 MS raw files) were processed using the MaxQuant software suite (version 1.5.2.8). Derived peak list was searched using Andromeda search engine integrated in MaxQuant against a reference E. coli K12 proteome (taxonomy ID 83333) obtained from UniProt (4313 protein entries, released in October 2015) and a file containing 245 common laboratory contaminants implemented in MaxQuant. During the first search, peptide mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm and in the main search to 4.5 ppm. Ile substitution by Nva or Val was defined as variable modification with a loss of a CH2 group (−14.0156500642 Da) at Ile position and named Ixx. Leu substitution by Nva or Val were searched alongside and was defined as variable modification with a loss of a CH2 group (−14.0156500642 Da) at Leu position (Lxx). This was done as a control for the assignment of mistranslation because Ile and Leu are isobaric. Peptide, protein and modification site identifications were filtered using a target-decoy approach at FDR set to 0.01. We also used an unbiased protein modification search algorithm to verify that Nva and Val misincorporated with high localization accuracy at Ile positions. Frequencies of Val and Nva misincorporations were determined by spectral counting approach. All contaminants and reverse hits were removed during data analysis. MS/MS spectra in msms.txt file were filtered for PEP scores of ≤ 0.01 and Andromeda score of ≥ 40. Only Nva/Val substitution events with a localization probability of ≥ 0.9 were considered as localized at Ile or Leu positions. The number of occurrences of Ixx substitutions were counted in Ixx-containing MS/MS spectra and divided by the number of theoretical isoleucine positions extracted from the unmodified version of peptide sequence of all MS/MS spectra. The same approach was used to determine mistranslation at Leu positions.

### Publication Abstract
Aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases (aaRSs), the enzymes responsible for coupling tRNAs to their cognate amino acids, minimize translational errors by intrinsic hydrolytic editing. Here, we compared norvaline (Nva), a linear amino acid not coded for protein synthesis, to the proteinogenic, branched valine (Val) in their propensity to mistranslate isoleucine (Ile) in proteins. We show that in the synthetic site of isoleucyl-tRNA synthetase (IleRS), Nva and Val are activated and transferred to tRNA at similar rates. The efficiency of the synthetic site in pre-transfer editing of Nva and Val also appears to be similar. Post-transfer editing was, however, more rapid with Nva and consequently IleRS misaminoacylates Nva-tRNA<sup>Ile</sup> at slower rate than Val-tRNA<sup>Ile</sup>. Accordingly, an Escherichia coli strain lacking IleRS post-transfer editing misincorporated Nva and Val in the proteome to a similar extent and at the same Ile positions. However, Nva mistranslation inflicted higher toxicity than Val, in agreement with IleRS editing being optimized for hydrolysis of Nva-tRNA<sup>Ile</sup>. Furthermore, we found that the evolutionary-related IleRS, leucyl- and valyl-tRNA synthetases (I/L/VRSs), all efficiently hydrolyze Nva-tRNAs even when editing of Nva seems redundant. We thus hypothesize that editing of Nva-tRNAs had already existed in the last common ancestor of I/L/VRSs, and that the editing domain of I/L/VRSs had primarily evolved to prevent infiltration of Nva into modern proteins.

### Keywords
Mistranslation, Isoleucyl-trna synthetase, E. coli

### Affiliations
Tuebingen University
Quantitative Proteomics & Proteome Center Tuebingen Interfaculty Institute for Cell Biology University of Tuebingen Tuebingen Germany

### Submitter
Nicolas Nalpas

### Lab Head
Dr Boris Macek
Quantitative Proteomics & Proteome Center Tuebingen Interfaculty Institute for Cell Biology University of Tuebingen Tuebingen Germany


