### Accession
PXD006545

### Title
Sequential Peptide Immunopurification Methodology to Monitor the Crosstalk between SUMOylation and Ubiquitylation

### Description
We describe a method that permits the identification of proteins that are modified by both SUMOylation and ubiquitylation to better understand the role of this crosstalk. The procedure requires 3 days when starting from cell pellets and can yield more than 8000 SUMO sites and 3500 ubiquitin sites from 16 mg of cell extract.

### Sample Protocol
Cells expressing our SUMO3m protein are cultured and harvested using standard protocols. The cells are subsequently lysed in a highly chaotropic buffer and the SUMOylated proteins are enriched with Ni-NTA resin by means of the 6xHis tag on the SUMO3m construct. The Ni-NTA bound protein are digested directly on the beads with trypsin. The ubiquitylated peptides are purified from the Ni-NTA enriched sample using the anti-K(GG) antibody that is crosslinked to the protein A agarose beads.  Anti-K(NQTGG) antibody that is crosslinked to magnetic beads is used on the flow through from the anti-K(GG) immunoprecipitations to isolate the SUMOylated peptides from the complex peptides mixture. Due to the abundance of the resulting SUMOylated peptides and their hydrophilic nature an SCX fractionation step using StageTips is used to garner a greater coverage of the SUMO proteome. The ubiquitylated peptides and SCX fractionated SUMO peptides are then analyzed separately by LC-MS/MS to identify ubiquitylation and SUMOylation sites using the MaxQuant software.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification from the raw files are searched using MaxQuant (version 1.5.5.1). MS/MS spectra are searched against Uniprot/SwissProt database that include Isoforms (released on March 10, 2015). The first search peptide tolerance is set to 20 ppm, the main search to 4.5 ppm, and fragment ion tolerance to 7.5 ppm. The maximum allowed number of missed cleavages by trypsin is set to 3 with a maximum of 5 modifications per peptide. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues is set as a fixed modification, while methionine oxidation, asparagine and glutamine deamidation, phosphorylation (ST), lysine ubiquitin(GG), lysine SUMO3(NQTGG), and protein N-acetylation are set as variable modifications. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide and protein is set to 1%, and the minimum peptide length is set to 6.

### Publication Abstract
Ubiquitin and ubiquitin-like modifiers (UBLs) such as small ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO) can act as antagonists to one another by competing to occupy similar residues in the proteome. In addition, SUMO and ubiquitin can be coupled to each other at key lysine residues to form highly branched protein networks. The interplay between these modifications governs important biological processes such as double-strand break repair and meiotic recombination. We recently developed an approach that permits the identification of proteins that are modified by both SUMOylation and ubiquitylation. This protocol requires cells that express a mutant 6&#xd7;His-SUMO3m protein that has had its C terminus modified from QQQTGG to RNQTGG, enabling the purification of SUMOylated peptides and their identification by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS). Cells are lysed under denaturing conditions, and the SUMOylated proteins are purified on nickel-nitrilotriacetic acid (Ni-NTA) resin via the 6&#xd7;His on the SUMO3m construct. After on-bead digestion using trypsin, ubiquitylated peptides are enriched by immunoprecipitation, and the flow-through from this step is subjected to anti-SUMO immunoprecipitation. The SUMOylated peptides are fractionated on strong cation exchange (SCX) StageTips to enhance the coverage of the SUMO proteome. The ubiquitylated and SUMOylated peptides are analyzed separately by liquid chromatography (LC)-MS/MS and identified with MaxQuant. We demonstrate how this approach can be used to identify temporal changes in SUMOylated and ubiquitylated proteins in response to, for instance, heat shock and proteasome inhibition. The procedure requires 3 d when starting from cell pellets and yields &gt;8,000 SUMO sites and &gt;3,500 ubiquitin sites from 16 mg of cell extract.

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Sumo, Shotgun proteomics

### Affiliations
University of Montreal
University of Montréal, Department of Chemistry, Québec, Canada

### Submitter
Francis McManus

### Lab Head
Dr Pierre Thibault
University of Montréal, Department of Chemistry, Québec, Canada


