### Accession
PXD005500

### Title
Orthogonal ubiquitin transfer identifies ubiquitination substrates under differential control by the two ubiquitin enzymes

### Description
Protein ubiquitination is mediated sequentially by ubiquitin activating enzyme E1, ubiquitin conjugating enzyme E2, and ubiquitin ligase E3. Uba1 was thought to be the only E1 until the recent identification of Uba6 as an alternative. To differentiate the biological functions of Uba1 and Uba6, we applied a novel orthogonal ubiquitin transfer (OUT) technology to profile their ubiquitination targets in mammalian cells. By expressing pairs of an engineered ubiquitin and engineered Uba1 or Uba6 that were generated for exclusive interactions, we identified 697 Uba6 targets and 529 Uba1 targets with 258 overlaps. Bioinformatics revealed substantial differences in pathways involving Uba1- and Uba6-specific targets. We demonstrated that polyubiquitination and proteasomal degradation of ezrin and CUGBP1 require Uba6, but not Uba1, and Uba6 is involved in the control of ezrin localization and epithelial morphogenesis. These data reveal the distinctive substrate pools for Uba1 and Uba6 and manifest non-redundant biological roles for Uba6

### Sample Protocol
LC-MS/MS was performed generally as previously described 24. After on bead digestion, the beads were washed four times with buffer A (5% acetonitrile 0.1% formic acid buffer). All the washes were pooled and were desalted using reverse phase C18 spin columns (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL).  After desalting the peptides were concentrated to dryness in vaccuo. After drying the peptides were suspended in 5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. The samples were loaded directly onto a 15 cm long, 75 µM reversed phase capillary column (ProteoPep™ II C18, 300 Å, 5 µm size, New Objective, Woburn MA) and separated with a 200 minute gradient from 5% acetonitrile to 100% acetonitrile on a Proxeon Easy n-LC II (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA).  The peptides were directly eluted into an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer at Northwestern University (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) or XXXXX at Emroy University, with electrospray ionization at 350 nl/minute flow rate.  The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent mode, and for each MS1 precursor ion scan the ten most intense ions were selected from fragmentation by CID (collision induced dissociation).  The other parameters for mass spectrometry analysis were:  resolution of MS1 was set at 60,000, normalized collision energy 35%, activation time 10 ms, isolation width 1.5, and +4 and higher charge states were rejected. The mass spectrometer cycle was programmed to collect at the top speed for 3 second cycles. The MS scans (400-1600 m/z range, 200,000 AGC, 50 ms maximum ion time) were collected at a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200 in profile mode and the HCD MS/MS spectra (0.7 m/z isolation width, 30% collision energy, 10,000 AGC target, 35 ms maximum ion time) were detected in the ion trap. Dynamic exclusion was set to exclude previous sequenced precursor ions for 20 seconds within a 10 ppm window. Precursor ions with +1, and +8 or higher charge states were excluded from sequencing.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were searched using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) and embedded SEQUEST HT search engine against human Uniprot database (90,300 target sequences The other parameters were as follows: (i) enzyme specificity: trypsin; (ii) fixed modification: cysteine carbamidomethylation; (iv) variable modification: methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation; (v) precursor mass tolerance was ±10 ppm; and (vi) fragment ion mass tolerance was ±0.8 Da. All the spectra were searched against target/decoy databases and results were used to estimate the q values in Percolator algorithm as embedded in Proteome discoverer 1.4.   The peptide identification was considered valid at q value < 0.1 and peptides were grouped for protein inference to satisfy the rule of parsimony. Further, in the final protein list protein identification was considered only valid if supported by minimum of one unique peptide

### Publication Abstract
Protein ubiquitination is mediated sequentially by ubiquitin activating enzyme E1, ubiquitin conjugating enzyme E2 and ubiquitin ligase E3. Uba1 was thought to be the only E1 until the recent identification of Uba6. To differentiate the biological functions of Uba1 and Uba6, we applied an orthogonal ubiquitin transfer (OUT) technology to profile their ubiquitination targets in mammalian cells. By expressing pairs of an engineered ubiquitin and engineered Uba1 or Uba6 that were generated for exclusive interactions, we identified 697 potential Uba6 targets and 527 potential Uba1 targets with 258 overlaps. Bioinformatics analysis reveals substantial differences in pathways involving Uba1- and Uba6-specific targets. We demonstrate that polyubiquitination and proteasomal degradation of ezrin and CUGBP1 require Uba6, but not Uba1, and that Uba6 is involved in the control of ezrin localization and epithelial morphogenesis. These data suggest that distinctive substrate pools exist for Uba1 and Uba6 that reflect non-redundant biological roles for Uba6.

### Keywords
Lc/ms, Ubquitin

### Affiliations
Professor of Pharmacology and Pathology Northwestern Univeristy, Feinberg School of Medcine, Ward Building Room 9-176 303 E Chicago Avenue Chicago IL 60611
Abbvie

### Submitter
Dhaval Nanavati

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Hiroaki Kiyokawa
Professor of Pharmacology and Pathology Northwestern Univeristy, Feinberg School of Medcine, Ward Building Room 9-176 303 E Chicago Avenue Chicago IL 60611


