### Accession
PXD040236

### Title
Interactome of intact chromatosome variants with site-specifically ubiquitylated and acetylated linker histone H1.2

### Description
Post-translational modifications (PTMs) of histones have fundamental effects on chromatin structure and function. While the impact of PTMs on the function of core histones are increasingly well understood, this is much less the case for modifications of linker histone H1, which is at least in part due to a lack of proper tools. In this work, we establish the assembly of intact chromatosomes containing site-specifically ubiquitylated and acetylated linker histone H1.2 variants obtained by a combination of chemical biology approaches. We then use these complexes in a tailored affinity enrichment mass spectrometry workflow to identify and comprehensively characterize chromatosome-specific cellular interactomes and the impact of site-specific linker histone modifications on a proteome-wide scale. We validate and benchmark our approach by western-blotting and by confirming the involvement of chromatin-bound H1.2 in the recruitment of proteins involved in DNA double-strand break repair using an in vitro ligation assay. We relate our data to previous work and in particular compare it to data on modification-specific interaction partners of free H1. Taken together, our data supports the role of chromatin-bound H1 as a regulatory protein with distinct functions beyond DNA compaction and constitutes an important resource for future investigations of histone epigenetic modifications.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for MS measurements Affinity enrichment of interacting proteins was performed as described. Lyophilized elution fractions of affinity enrichment procedure were subjected to a tryptic in solution digest. First, samples were resuspended in urea (8 M ) followed by reduction with TCEP (5 mM, 30 min, 37 °C with shaking) and alkylation of cysteines with 2-chloroacetamide (10 mM, 30 min, room temperature). After dilution to 1 M urea with 50 mM NH4HCO3 2.5 µg sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) was added. The mixture was incubated overnight at 37 °C with gentle shaking before the digest was stopped by addition of 10 % TFA followed by lyophilization. Before LC-MS/MS measurement, the samples were resuspended in 0.1% TFA, acidified with 10% TFA and desalted using µC18 Zip Tips (Merck). MS measurement of affinity enrichment samples Desalted samples from affinity enrichment were analyzed on a UHPLC-MS system consisting of an EASY-nLC 1200 UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a 50 µm x 15 cm C18 Acclaim PepMap RSLC column with 2 µm beads and 100 Å pore size (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated over a total gradient length of 120 min: after 4 min at 5% ACN the concentration was increased to 35% ACN in 100 min, then to 45% ACN in 5 min followed by a washing step at 80% ACN. Samples were measured in technical duplicates in data independent acquisition (DIA) mode with 22 isolation windows of variable window size. MS1 scans were acquired from 300 to 1650 m/z with a resolution of 120’000 (at 200 m/z), a maximum injection time of 60 ms and an AGC target of 3e6. After one MS1 scan, the mass spectrometer cycled once through the indicated 22 DIA windows. Isolated ions were fragmented via HCD with stepped normalized collision energies of 25.5, 27 and 30 eV and fragment ion spectra were acquired with automatic injection time at a resolution of 30’000 (at 200 m/z) and with an AGC target of 3e6. Spectra were recorded from a fixed first mass of 200 m/z and with a default charge state of 4.

### Data Protocol
Raw data from MS measurements was converted to htrms format using HTRMS converter V16 (Biognosis)13 with default settings. Identification and label free quantification of proteins was performed using Spectronaut V16 (Biognosys) in library-free directDIA mode. Default settings were used, only the minimum peptide length was adjusted to 5. As protein database, ‘uniprot_sprot_2021-01-04_HUMAN’ as downloaded from the built-in ‘Biognosys Protein Databases Online Repository’ was used. Further statistical analysis of raw LFQ data was performed with Perseus 1.6.15.0.

### Publication Abstract
Post-translational modifications (PTMs) of histones have fundamental effects on chromatin structure and function. While the impact of PTMs on the function of core histones are increasingly well understood, this is much less the case for modifications of linker histone H1, which is at least in part due to a lack of proper tools. In this work, we establish the assembly of intact chromatosomes containing site-specifically ubiquitylated and acetylated linker histone H1.2 variants obtained by a combination of chemical biology approaches. We then use these complexes in a tailored affinity enrichment mass spectrometry workflow to identify and comprehensively characterize chromatosome-specific cellular interactomes and the impact of site-specific linker histone modifications on a proteome-wide scale. We validate and benchmark our approach by western-blotting and by confirming the involvement of chromatin-bound H1.2 in the recruitment of proteins involved in DNA double-strand break repair using an in&#xa0;vitro ligation assay. We relate our data to previous work and in particular compare it to data on modification-specific interaction partners of free H1. Taken together, our data supports the role of chromatin-bound H1 as a regulatory protein with distinct functions beyond DNA compaction and constitutes an important resource for future investigations of histone epigenetic modifications.

### Keywords
Post-translational modification, Chemical biology, Linker histone, :  proteomics, Affinity enrichment, Chromatosome

### Affiliations
University of Konstanz
Laboratory of Biochemistry and Mass Spectrometry, Department of Biology, University of Konstanz

### Submitter
Philip Saumer

### Lab Head
Professor Florian Stengel
Laboratory of Biochemistry and Mass Spectrometry, Department of Biology, University of Konstanz


