### Accession
PXD006883

### Title
A proteomics analysis of adventitious root formation after leaf removal in lotus (Nelumbo nucifera Gaertn.)

### Description
Lotus (Nelumbo nucifera Gaertn) belongs to the family Nymphaeaceae, and is a popular aquatic vegetable that is rich in nutrients. It is widely cultivated in China, and many varieties of lotus are used for different purposes, suited to different climates, and consumed in different ways. Lotus is commonly produced by asexual propagation, so mutation through hybridization and variation fixed by asexual propagation are the main ways to create new varieties. Therefore, the formation of adventitious roots (ARs) in lotus, which does not have a well-developed principal root, is an important part of growth and development. It would be very useful to control ARs formation for lotus production and breeding.

### Sample Protocol
Seeds of lotus root were harvested from the open cultivated field of YangZhou University, Yangzhou, south-eastern China. For each treatment, the seed coats of approximately 50 seeds were broken and then the seeds were placed in a container with water to germinate (4–6 days). The germinated seeds for each experiment were transferred to a bottle with about 5-cm-deep water and maintained at a temperature of 28°C /day and 20°C /night.  In each treatment, at least 50 seedlings grown in containers in 5-cm-deep water were used to count the number of ARs. Leaves were removed in two ways: (1) from above the water line, where a leaf at least 2 cm above the water surface was cut at the stem, leaving the cut edge of the stem above the water; and (2) from below the water line, where the stem of a leaf was cut approximately 1 cm below the water line. The containers with the treated seedlings were kept in a light incubator with 28°C days and 20°C nights, a 16-h light/8-h dark photoperiod, and light intensity of 200 m-2s-2.

### Data Protocol
iTRAQ labeling LC-MS/MS A 100-µg portion of the protein extracted as described above was digested with trypsin gold (protein: trypsin =20:1), and then incubated at 37°C for 4 h. This step was repeated with an 8-h digestion, and 0.5 M TEAB was added to reconstitute the digested peptides, according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). One unit of iTRAQ reagent was thawed and reconstituted in 24 µl isopropanol. The digested peptides were labeled with isobaric tags at room temperature for 2 h, and then dried and pooled after vacuum centrifugation. The labeled peptides were fractionated by strong cationic exchange (SCX) chromatography using an LC-20AB high-pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC) pump system (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan). For each sample, the digested peptides were reconstituted in 4 ml buffer A (pH 2.7, 25 mM NaH2PO4 in 25% acetonitrile (ACN)), and then loaded onto a 4.6 9 250-mm Ultremex SCX column (particle size, 5-µm; Phenomenex, Torrance, CA, USA). A 1 mL/min flow rate was used to elute peptides using the following gradient: buffer A for 10 min, then buffer B (pH 2.7, 25 mM NaH2PO4, 1 M KCl in 25% ACN) for 11 min, 35–80% buffer B for 1 min. The column was equilibrated with buffer A for 10 min before the next injection. The whole system was kept in 80% buffer B for 3 min. The absorbance of the eluent was monitored at 214 nm. Fractions were collected each minute and then pooled as 10 fractions. Samples were vacuum dried and desalted on a Strata X C18 column (Phenomenex). LC–ESI–MS/MS analysis Each fraction was re-suspended in a certain volume of buffer A (2% ACN, 0.1% FA) and centrifuged at 20000 × g for 10 min. In each fraction, the final concentration of peptides was approximately 0.5 µg/µl; 10 µl of supernatant was loaded onto a 2-cm C18 trap column (inner diameter, 200 μm; Shimadzu LC-20AD nano-HPLC), and the peptides were eluted onto a revolving 10-cm analytical C18 column (inner diameter, 75 μm) made in-house. The samples were loaded at 15 μL/min for 4 min, then the 44-min gradient was run at 400 nL/min starting from 2% to 35% B (98% ACN, 0.1% FA), followed by a 2-min linear gradient to 80% B, maintained at 80% B for 4 min, and then returned to 2% B in 1 min. Data acquisition was performed with a Triple TOF 5600 System (AB SCIEX, Concord, ON, Canada) fitted with a Nanospray III source (AB SCIEX) and a pulled quartz tip as the emitter (New Objectives, Woburn, MA, USA). Data were acquired using an ion spray voltage of 2.5 kV, curtain gas of 30 PSI, nebulizer gas of 15 PSI, and interface heater temperature of 150°C. The MS was operated with an RP of greater than or equal to 30 000 FWHM for the TOF MS scans. For IDA, survey scans were acquired at 250 ms and up to 30 product ion scans were collected if they exceeded a threshold of 120 counts per second (counts/s) and with a 2+ to 5+ charge-state. The total cycle time was fixed to 3.3 s. The Q2 transmission window was 100 Da for 100%. Four time bins were summed for each scan at a pulse frequency value of 11 kHz by monitoring the 40 GHz multichannel TDC detector with a four-anode channel detect ion. A sweeping collision energy setting of 35 ± 5 eV adjusted rolling collision was applied to all precursor ions for collision-induced dissociation. Dynamic exclusion was set for half of the peak width (18 s), and the precursor was refreshed off the exclusion list. Protein identification and bioinformatics analysis We used Mascot protein identification software, as recommended by the Frost/Sullivan research organization. The MGF files were searched using Mascot version 2.3.02 against the NCBInr, SwissProt, and UniProt databases. The peptide and protein data were extracted using high peptide confidence and top one peptide rank filters. Proteins showing differences in abundance between the two leaf removal treatments were identified based on abundance (>1.5-fold change in abundance) and p-value (<0.05). Proteins were confirmed by BLAST searches against the NCBI database, and then gene ontology (GO) analysis was performed using Blast2 GO. Using the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) tool, the differentially expressed proteins were further annotated into biological pathways. The differentially abundant proteins were classified according to their function using Blast2 Go with default parameters (https://blast2go.com).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Leaf removal, Lotus root, Qpcr, Adventitious root, Itraq, Protein

### Affiliations
Yangzhou university
School of Horticulture and Plant Protection, Yangzhou University, Jiangsu, P. R. China

### Submitter
cheng libao

### Lab Head
Dr lab of aquatic vegetable research
School of Horticulture and Plant Protection, Yangzhou University, Jiangsu, P. R. China


