### Accession
PXD033250

### Title
Virulence induction in Pseudomonas aeruginosa under inorganic phosphate limitation: a proteomics perspective

### Description
Inorganic phosphate (Pi) is a central nutrient and signal molecule for bacteria. Pi limitation was shown to increase the virulence of a number of phylogenetically diverse pathogenic bacteria with different in lifestyles. Hypophosphatemia enhances the risk of death in patients due to general bacteremia and was observed after the surgical injury in humans and animals. Phosphate therapy, or the reduction of bacterial virulence by the administration of Pi or phosphate-containing compounds, is a promising anti-infective therapy approach that will not cause cytotoxicity nor the emergence of antibiotic-resistant strains. The proof of concept of phosphate therapy has been obtained using primarily Pseudomonas aeruginosa (PA) as a model. However, a detailed understanding of Pi-induced changes at protein levels is missing. Using pyocyanin production as proxy, we show that the Pi-mediated induction of virulence is a highly cooperative process that occurs between 0.2 to 0.6 mM  Pi. We present a proteomics study of PA grown in minimal medium supplemented with either 0.2 or 1 mM Pi and rich medium. About half of the predicted PA proteins could be quantified. Among the 1,471 dysregulated proteins comparing growth in 0.2 mM to 1 mM Pi, 1100 were depleted  under Pi-deficient conditions. Most of these proteins are involved in general and energy metabolism, different biosynthetic and catabolic routes, or transport. Pi depletion caused accumulation of proteins that belong to all major families of virulence factor categories, including pyocyanin synthesis, secretion systems, quorum sensing, chemosensory signaling and the secretion of proteases, phospholipases and phosphatases.

### Sample Protocol
Overnight cultures of PA PAO1 grown in MM containing 1 mM phosphate (K2HPO4/KH2PO4, pH 7.0) were washed twice with phosphate-free MM. Washed cultures were then used to inoculate flasks with 50 mL MM containing high (1 mM) and low (0.2 mM) Pi concentrations at an OD660 of 0.075 and grown at 37 ºC with orbital shaking (200 rpm). At an OD660 of 0.6, 40 ml cultures were centrifuged at 9,000 x g for 10 min. The resulting pellets were resuspended in 2 ml extraction buffer (6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 50 mM Tris-Cl, pH 7.5) and cells were broken by sonication. After centrifugation at 9,200 x g for 10 min, supernatants were collected and protein concentration was determined by the Bradford assay (Bio-Rad, Ref. 500-0006). Supernatant aliquots were subsequently mixed with 5X Laemmli sample buffer containing 1 mM β-mercaptoethanol as reducing agent. After 1 h of incubation at room temperature, aliquots corresponding to 25 µg of protein were run on a 4-20% pre-cast polyacrylamide gel (Bio-Rad, Ref. 4561094) at 95 V. The polyacrylamide gel was fixed with solution A [40% (v/v) methanol, 7% (v/v) acetic acid] for 10 min and stained with solution B [0.1% (w/v) Coomassie Brilliant Blue R (Sigma-Aldrich, Ref. B7920), 40% (v/v) methanol, 10% (v/v) acetic acid]. The gel was finally destained with solution A. Proteins were prepared for tandem mass spectrometry MS/MS analyses, as previously described (Bonn F, Bartel J, Buttner K, Hecker M, Otto A, Becher D. 2014. Picking vanished proteins from the void: how to collect and ship/share extremely dilute proteins in a reproducible and highly efficient manner. Anal Chem 86:7421-7). Briefly, gel lanes were fractionated into 10 gel pieces, cut into smaller blocks and transferred into low binding tubes. Samples were washed until gel blocks were destained and dried in a vacuum centrifuge before they were covered with trypsin solution. Digestion took place at 37 °C overnight before peptides were eluted in water by ultrasonication. The peptide-containing supernatant was transferred into fresh tubes, desiccated in a vacuum centrifuge and peptides were resolubilized in 0.1 % (v/v) acetic acid for mass spectrometric analysis

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS analyses were performed on an LTQ Orbitrap VelosPro (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts, USA) using an EASY-nLC II liquid chromatography system. Tryptic peptides were subjected to liquid chromatography (LC) separation and electrospray ionization-based MS applying exactly the same injected volumes in order to allow for label-free relative protein quantification between and within samples. Therefore, peptides were loaded on a self-packed analytical column (OD 360 μm, ID 100 μm, length 20 cm) filled with 3 µm diameter C18 particles (Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) and eluted by a binary nonlinear gradient of 5 - 99 % acetonitrile in 0.1 % (v/v) acetic acid over 87 min with a flow rate of 300 nL/min. For MS analysis, a full scan in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 30,000 was followed by collision-induced dissociation (CID) of the twenty most abundant precursor ions. MS/MS experiments were acquired in the linear ion trap. Database search against a database of PA PAO1 downloaded from the Pseudomonas Genome DB (Winsor GL, Griffiths EJ, Lo R, Dhillon BK, Shay JA, Brinkman FS. 2016. Enhanced annotations and features for comparing thousands of Pseudomonas genomes in the Pseudomonas genome database. Nucleic Acids Res 44:D646-53.) on 10/06/2021 (5,587 entries) as well as label-free quantification (LFQ) was performed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.17.0) (Cox, J and Mann, M (2008). MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Common laboratory contaminants and reversed sequences were included by MaxQuant. Search parameters were set as follows: Trypsin/P specific digestion with up to two missed cleavages, methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation as variable modification, match between runs with default parameters enabled. The FDRs (false discovery rates) of protein and PSM (peptide spectrum match) levels were set to 0.01. Two identified unique peptides were required for protein identification. LFQ was performed using the following settings: LFQ minimum ratio count 2 considering only unique for quantification. Results were filtered for proteins quantified in at least two out of three biological replicates before statistical analysis. Here, protein from PAO1 grown in MM supplemented with 0.2 mM and 1 mM Pi were compared by a student’s t-test applying a threshold p-value of 0.01, which was based on all possible permutations. Proteins were considered to be differentially abundant if the log2 fold-change was greater than |0.8|. “ON/OFF proteins” were defined as being identified in all bioreplicates of one condition whereas the protein was not identified in any replicate of the other condition.

### Publication Abstract
Staphylococcus aureus carriage is a risk factor for invasive infections. Unique genetic elements favoring the transition from colonizing to invasive phenotype have not yet been identified, and phenotypic adaptation traits are understudied. We therefore assessed phenotypic and genotypic profiles of 11 S. aureus isolate pairs sampled from colonized patients simultaneously suffering from invasive S. aureus infections. Ten out of 11 isolate pairs displayed the same <i>spa</i> and multilocus sequence type, suggesting colonization as an origin for the invasive infection. Systematic analysis of colonizing and invasive isolate pairs showed similar adherence, hemolysis, reproductive fitness properties, antibiotic tolerance, and virulence in a Galleria mellonella infection model, as well as minimal genetic differences. Our results provide insights into the similar phenotypes associated with limited adaptation between colonizing and invasive isolates. Disruption of the physical barriers of mucosa or skin was identified in the majority of patients, further emphasizing colonization as a major risk factor for invasive disease. <b>IMPORTANCE</b> S. aureus is a major pathogen of humans, causing a wide range of diseases. The difficulty to develop a vaccine and antibiotic treatment failure warrant the exploration of novel treatment strategies. Asymptomatic colonization of the human nasal passages is a major risk factor for invasive disease, and decolonization procedures have been effective in preventing invasive infections. However, the transition of S. aureus from a benign colonizer of the nasal passages to a major pathogen is not well understood, and both host and bacterial properties have been discussed as being relevant for this behavioral change. We conducted a thorough investigation of patient-derived strain pairs reflecting colonizing and invasive isolates in a given patient. Although we identified limited genetic adaptation in certain strains, as well as slight differences in adherence capacity among colonizing and invasive isolates, our work suggests that barrier breaches are a key event in the disease continuum of S. aureus.

### Keywords
Pyocyanin, Virulence, Phosphate starvation, Anti-infective therapy, Proteomics, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Quorum sensing

### Affiliations
University of Greifswald,
Department for Microbial Proteomics
Department of Microbial Proteomics, Institute of Microbiology, University of Greifswald, D-17489 Greifswald, Germany

### Submitter
Sandra Maass

### Lab Head
Dr Dörte Becher
Department of Microbial Proteomics, Institute of Microbiology, University of Greifswald, D-17489 Greifswald, Germany


