### Accession
PXD017514

### Title
Integrated seed proteome and phosphoproteome analyses reveal interplay of nutrient dynamics, carbon-nitrogen partitioning and oxidative signaling in chickpea, part 1

### Description
To understand nutrient dynamics during embryonic and cotyledonary photoheterotrophic  transition to mature and germinating autotrophic seeds, 2-DE based proteomics study in six sequential seed developmental stages in chickpea was performed.

### Sample Protocol
Seed tissue was ground with mortar-pestle in liquid nitrogen with 0.3% (w/w) polyvinylpolypyrollidone (PVPP). Immediately, tissue powder was mixed with low ionic strength homogenizing buffer (30% sucrose, 2% SDS, 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 5% 2-mercaptoethanol, 1 mM PMSF) for 2 min. The extract was then resuspended in equal volume of Tris-phenol (pH 8.0). The mixture was vortexed for 5 min and homogenized using homogenizer for 30 s three times followed by centrifugation at 10,000g for 10 min. The upper phenol phase was transferred to fresh tubes and at least 5 volumes of cold methanol in 0.1 M ammonium acetate was added and stored at -20ºC overnight. Precipitated proteins were recovered by centrifuging at 10,000 g for 5 min. Protein pellet was then washed twice with cold methanolic ammonium acetate and cold 80% acetone, respectively. The final pellet was dried and dissolved in 2-DE rehydration buffer (8 M urea, 4% CHAPS, 2% IPG buffer, 20 mM dithiothreitol) and quantified. Extracted proteins were separated by isoelectric focusing (IEF) using immobilized pH gradient gel strips (ImmobilineDryStrip, pH 4−7, 24 cm; GE Healthcare) followed by SDS-PAGE using 12.5% polyacrylamide gels. 2-D gels were fixed overnight in fixation solution (50% methanol, 10% glacial acetic acid) and washed thrice with deionized water for 30 min with shaking. The gels were then stained with a silver stain plus kit (Bio-Rad) to detect total proteins. Protein spots were excised from silver-stained gels and subjected to trypsin digestion as described by Ghosh et al., 2016. For each liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry run, trypsin-digested and eluted peptides were loaded onto a C18 Pep-Map100 column using a linear gradient of water/acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid (v/v) and analyzed by ESI using the Ultimate 3000 Nano HPLC system coupled to a QSTAR Elite mass spectrometer and peptides were eluted using a 33 min 10-40% acetonitrile gradient.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS data was extracted using Analyst software version 1.5.1. Peptides were identified by searching the peak list against MSPnr100 Q315 database (75925788 sequences; 27045014025 residues) using the Mascot version 2.1 search engine. The database search criteria were as follows: taxonomy, Viridiplantae; peptide tolerance, 100ppm; MS/MS tolerance, ±0.4 D; peptide charge, +1, +2, or +3; maximum allowed missed cleavage, 1; fixed modification, carbamidomethylation; variable modification, oxidation (M); and instrument type, ESI-QUAD-TOF. Protein scores were derived from ion scores as a nonprobabilistic basis for ranking protein hits and as the sum of a series of peptide scores. The score threshold to achieve p < 0.05 was set by the Mascot algorithm and was based on the size of the database used in the search.

### Publication Abstract
Nutrient dynamics in storage organs is a complex developmental process that requires coordinated interactions of environmental, biochemical, and genetic factors. Although sink organ developmental events have been identified, understanding of translational and post-translational regulation of reserve synthesis, accumulation, and utilization in legumes is limited. To understand nutrient dynamics during embryonic and cotyledonary photoheterotrophic transition to mature and germinating autotrophic seeds, an integrated proteomics and phosphoproteomics study in six sequential seed developmental stages in chickpea is performed. MS/MS analyses identify 109 unique nutrient-associated proteins (NAPs) involved in metabolism, storage and biogenesis, and protein turnover. Differences and similarities in 60 nutrient-associated phosphoproteins (NAPPs) containing 93 phosphosites are compared with NAPs. Data reveal accumulation of carbon-nitrogen metabolic and photosynthetic proteoforms during seed filling. Furthermore, enrichment of storage proteoforms and protease inhibitors is associated with cell expansion and seed maturation. Finally, combined proteoforms network analysis identifies three significant modules, centered around malate dehydrogenase, HSP70, triose phosphate isomerase, and vicilin. Novel clues suggest that ubiquitin-proteasome pathway regulates nutrient reallocation. Second, increased abundance of NAPs/NAPPs related to oxidative and serine/threonine signaling indicates direct interface between redox sensing and signaling during seed development. Taken together, nutrient signals act as metabolic and differentiation determinant governing storage organ reprogramming.

### Keywords
2de, Seed, Chickpea, Nutrient, Proteome, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
National Institute of Plant Genome Research
National Institute of Plant Genome Research, JNU Campus, Aruna Asaf Ali Marg, New Delhi-110067, India

### Submitter
Subhra Chakraborty

### Lab Head
Dr Subhra Chakraborty
National Institute of Plant Genome Research, JNU Campus, Aruna Asaf Ali Marg, New Delhi-110067, India


