### Accession
PXD008996

### Title
Impact of biomechanical stimulation in the toxicity of deoxynivalenol in A431 cells: impairment of “dynamic” cell functions

### Description
Morphology together with the capability to respond to surrounding stimuli are the key elements governing the spatial interaction of a living cell with the environment. In this respect, biomechanical stimulation can trigger significant physiological cascades that can potentially modulate or interact with toxicity. Deoxynivalenol (DON, vomitoxin) is one of the most prevalent mycotoxins produced by Fusarium spp. and it was used to explore the delicate interaction between biomechanical stimulation and cytotoxic processes in A431 cells. In fact, in addition of being a well-known food contaminant, DON is becoming a relevant toxin also for other organ systems. The combination between biomechanical stimulation and the mycotoxin revealed how DON can impair crucial functions like cellular morphology and lysosome trafficking at concentrations far below those known to be cytotoxic in routine toxicity studies. Moreover, sub-toxic concentrations of DON (0.1-1 μM) impaired the capability of A431 cells to respond to a biomechanical stimulation that normally sustains trophic effects in this cell line. Ultimately, the effects of DON (0.1-10 μM) were partially modulated by the application of uniaxial stretching (0.5Hz, 24h, 15% deformation) suggesting a deep cross-talk between the cytotoxic potential of the mycotoxin and the biomechanical stimulation.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture For the characterization of the toxicity of DON in the biomechanical stimulated environment the epidermoid carcinoma cell line A431 was used. Cells were cultivated in Minimum Essential Medium (MEM) supplemented with L-glutamine (4.5 g/L), 10% (v/v) heat inactivated fetal bovine serum (FBS) and 1% (v/v) penicillin/streptomycin and maintained in humidified incubators at 37°C and 5% CO2. For the performance of the biomechanical stimulation experiments, cells were seeded on a polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) membrane functionalized with Matrigel Matrix (Corning, Discovery Labware, MA; USA). At the day of the experiments, medium was substituted by phenol-red free medium D-2909 supplemented with 10% (v/v) heat inactivated fetal serum (FBS), 1% (v/v) penicillin/streptomycin and 25mM HEPES (pH 7.4). If not otherwise specified, cell culture media and supplements were purchased from GIBCO Invitrogen (Karlsruhe, Germany), Sigma-Aldrich Chemie GmbH (Munich, Germany) and Sarstedt AG & Co (Nuembrecht, Germany), VWR International GmbH (Vienna, Austria) and Thermo Fisher Scientific GmbH (Vienna, Austria). Deoxynivalenol DON was purchased from Romer Labs Diagnostic GmbH (Tulln, Austria). For cellular experiments, solid substance was dissolved in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO; Carl Roth GmbH, Karlsruhe, Germany) at the respective stock solutions were stored at -80°C and dilutes in cell culture medium (1:1000) for the performance of the experiments.  Proteomic analysis For the proteomic analysis cells were seeded in 6-well plates, allowed to settle for 48h and incubated with DON (0.1, 1, 10µM) or solvent control (DMSO 1:1000) for 24h. At the end of the incubation, cells were lysed in isotonic lysis buffer (10 mM HEPES/NaOH, pH 7.4, 0.25 M sucrose, 10 mM NaCl, 3 mM MgCl2, 0.5% Triton X-100) supplemented with Protease and Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail  (Sigma-Aldrich, Vienna, Austria) and 1 mM PMSF under mechanical shear stress. By centrifugation at 3500 g and 4 ° C for 5 min, the cytoplasmic proteins were separated from the nuclei and precipitated overnight with ice-cold ethanol at −20 °C. MS-sample preparation 50 μg of each sample was loaded on an SDS-PAGE and allowed to separate for 0.3 cm, after what proteins in the gel were stained by an MS-compatible silver staining procedure. Afterward, each protein band was cut into pieces. Upon reduction with DTT (37°C, 30 min) and alkylation with IAA (30°C, 30 min in the dark), the proteins were digested for 14 h and 4 h at 37 °C using Trypsin/Lys-C Mix (MS grade; Promega Corporation, Madison, WI). The digested peptides were eluted, three times with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and twice with 5% FA. The eluted peptide samples were collected and dried. LC-MS analysis Dried samples were reconstituted in 5µl 30% formic acid (FA) containing 10fmol each of four synthetic standard peptides and diluted with 40µl mobile phase A (98% H2O, 2% ACN, 0.1% FA). 5µl of this solution were then injected into the Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano LC-system coupled to a QExactive orbitrap mass spectrometer equipped with a nanospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria). As a pre-concentration step, peptides were loaded on a 2cm x75µm C18 Pepmap100 pre-column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria) at a flow rate of 10µl/min using mobile phase A. Elution from the pre-column to a 50cm x75µm Pepmap100 analytical column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria) and subsequent separation was achieved at a flow rate of 300nl/min using a gradient of 8% to 40% mobile phase B (80% ACN, 2% H2O, 0.1% FA) over 90min. For mass spectrometric detection, MS scans were performed in the range from m/z 400-1400 at a resolution of 70000 (at m/z =200). MS/MS scans of the 8 most abundant ions were achieved through HCD fragmentation at 30% normalized collision energy and analyzed in the orbitrap at a resolution of 17500 (at m/z =200).

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria) running Mascot 2.4 (Matrix Science, UK) was used for protein identification searching against the SwissProt Database (version 01/2018 with 20 258 entries) allowing a mass tolerance of 50ppm for MS spectra and 100mmu for MS/MS spectra, a FDR < 0.01 and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Furthermore, search criteria included carbamidomethylation on cysteins as fixed modification and methionine oxidation as well as N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Morphology together with the capability to respond to surrounding stimuli are key elements governing the spatial interaction of living cells with the environment. In this respect, biomechanical stimulation can trigger significant physiological cascades that can potentially modulate toxicity. Deoxynivalenol (DON, vomitoxin) is one of the most prevalent mycotoxins produced by Fusarium spp. and it was used to explore the delicate interaction between biomechanical stimulation and cytotoxicity in A431 cells. In fact, in addition of being a food contaminant, DON is a relevant toxin for several organ systems. The combination between biomechanical stimulation and the mycotoxin revealed how DON can impair crucial functions affecting cellular morphology, tubulin and lysosomes at concentrations even below those known to be cytotoxic in routine toxicity studies. Sub-toxic concentrations of DON (0.1-1&#x2009;&#x3bc;M) impaired the capability of A431 cells to respond to a biomechanical stimulation that normally sustains trophic effects in these cells. Moreover, the effects of DON (0.1-10&#x2009;&#x3bc;M) were partially modulated by the application of uniaxial stretching (0.5&#x2009;Hz, 24&#x2009;h, 15% deformation). Ultimately, proteomic analysis revealed the potential of DON to alter several proteins necessary for cell adhesion and cytoskeletal modulation suggesting a molecular link between biomechanics and the cytotoxic potential of the mycotoxin.

### Keywords
Vomitoxin); uniaxial cell stretching; a431 cells; biomechanical stimulation, Deoxynivalenol (don

### Affiliations
University of Vienna
University of Vienna, Faculty of Chemistry, Department of Analytical Chemistry

### Submitter
Christopher Gerner

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher Gerner
University of Vienna, Faculty of Chemistry, Department of Analytical Chemistry


