### Accession
PXD018976

### Title
Mapping specificity, entropy, allosteric changes and substrates in blood coagulation proteases by a high-throughput protease screen

### Description
Proteases are crucial physiologic regulators of protein structure and function. While proteomic methods contributed extensively to protease characterization efforts, technical challenges remain in terms of throughput, scalability and large datasets of protease cleavages remain scarce. Here, we describe a high-throughput protease screen (HTPS) which allows simultaneous characterization of multiple proteases under various conditions on a microscale 96FASP format. After benchmarking the performance with Trypsin, LysC, GluC, AspN, Chymotrypsin, MMP-2 and MMP-3, we applied it to profile proteases of the blood coagulation cascade (Factors VIIa, IXa, Xa, XIa, Thrombin α, β and γ, Plasmin and Protein C). The large dataset enabled us to map activity, specificity, cleave entropy, allosteric changes of blood cascade proteases induced by Na+ and to predict potential substrates in a data-driven way.

### Sample Protocol
Human Embryonic Kidney 293 cells (Hek293) were grown under standard conditions and lysed with HNN buffer (50 mM HEPES, 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM NaF, pH 7.8) supplemented with 0.5 % NP-40 as described (Heusel et al., 2019). Non-soluble material was removed, the buffer was exchanged for 20 mM AMBIC pH 7.8 using a filter device with MWCO of 30 kDa. Concentration of the native lysate was set to 1 mg/ml. All digestions were performed in 96FASP MWCO 10 kDa (Acroprep AdvanceTM). First, the filters were washed with 100 µl of 20 mM AMBIC pH 7.8 to remove residual glycerol. Afterwards, 50 µg of native cell lysate was digested with the investigated proteases at 1/50 [E]/[S] ratio at 37 °C for 4 hours and the flow-through was collected by a 15 min centrifugation at 1300g. This step was repeated by adding 100 µl of MS-grade water and the fractions were transferred to low-binding tubes (Eppendorf), dried on SpeedVac and stored at -80 °C. For analysis, the samples were re-suspended in MS-grade water with 0.1 % formic acid at concentration of 1 µg/µl. The LC-MS/MS analysis of the protease-digested samples was performed on an Orbitrap Elite interfaced with an Easy 1000 nano-LC unit and operated with the Xcalibur software package (Thermo Fischer Scientific). For the analysis, 1 µg of sample was loaded directly on the analytical column (Acclaim PepMapTM RSLC, 75 µm x 15 cm, nanoViper C18, 2µm, 100A, Thermo Fischer Scientific). The flow rate on the nano-LC was set to 300 nl/min and the peptides were chromatographically separated with a 5 – 35 % 120 minute linear ACN/water gradient in 0.1% formic acid. During the entire run, the MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap in positive ion mode at 2.0 kV in the mass range of 350 to 1600 m/z, profile mode, resolution of 120.000 at 400 m/z. For peptide fragmentation, CID method was used and the MS/MS spectra were obtained from the 15 most intense precursors from the full MS spectra. During the entire run, precursors with repeat count of 1 were dynamically excluded for 30 seconds. Precursors with charges +2, +3 and +4 were considered and the MS/MS spectra were recorded in the ion trap analyzer in the centroid mode with normal scan rate and standard settings.

### Data Protocol
The raw data was searched with MaxQuant (Cox et al., 2008) (version 1.5.2.8) using the human UniprotKB database (Homo sapiens, Uniprot release 2018_10, 20382 entries) and the in-house generated abundance-focused HTPS_DB.fasta database (2557 entries). For specific database searches we used standard MaxQuant settings (Tyanova et al., 2016), the searches without a defined enzyme specificity were performed as described elsewhere (Vidmar et al., 2017). Our searches considered only two natural PTMs, acetylation of N-termini (+42.0106 Da) and the oxidation of methionine (+15.9949 Da) as variable modifications. First search peptide mass tolerance was 20 ppm and main search peptide mass tolerance was 4.5 ppm, as set by default. MS/MS match tolerance was set to 0.5 Da. For the peptide identification via peptide-spectrum matching the FDR was controlled with a standard target-decoy approach (Tyanova et al., 2016). A 1 % peptide FDR was applied at PSM level and peptide hits with a PEP score ≤ 0.05 and a score > 40 were retained. Potential contaminants were not included in the analysis. For generation of the HTPS_DB.fasta abundance-focused database, we combined the lists of proteins that were identified in the samples after treatment with Trypsin, LysC, AspN, GluC and Chymotrypsin. The final list of was the union of proteins identified in the respective samples with a global protein PEP ≤ 0.01. Data analysis was performed in R (version 3.4.3) using the workflow deposited on Github (https://github.com/fossatiA/HTPS_script). A frequency matrix counting the abundance of amino acids per position (P8-P8') normalized for all identified peptides and a random frequency matrix of the same size was generated by sampling from the amino acid distribution in HTPS_DB.fasta. We compared proteases in terms of numbers of generated peptides under different tested conditions and used the iceLogo program (Colaert et al., 2009, Maddelein et al., 2015) with p-value set to 0.01 to visualize the specificity features. We used a two-side paired t-test to evaluate similarity between the differential frequency matrices. The calculation of cleavage entropy was performed as a Shannon entropy (Fuchs et al., 2013). The block entropy calculation was performed as described elsewhere (Qi et al., 2017).

### Publication Abstract
Proteases are among the largest protein families and critical regulators of biochemical processes like apoptosis and blood coagulation. Knowledge of proteases has been expanded by the development of proteomic approaches, however, technology for multiplexed screening of proteases within native environments is currently lacking behind. Here we introduce a simple method to profile protease activity based on isolation of protease products from native lysates using a 96FASP filter, their analysis in a mass spectrometer and a custom data analysis pipeline. The method is significantly faster, cheaper, technically less demanding, easy to multiplex and produces accurate protease fingerprints. Using the blood cascade proteases as a case study, we obtain protease substrate profiles that can be used to map specificity, cleavage entropy and allosteric effects and to design protease probes. The data further show that protease substrate predictions enable the selection of potential physiological substrates for targeted validation in biochemical assays.

### Keywords
Specificity, High-throughput protease screen, Allostery, Blood coagulation proteases, Entropy, Substrates

### Affiliations
Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland.  Faculty of Science, University of Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland
ETH Zurich, Inst. f. Molekulare Systembiologie
Otto-​Stern-Weg 3
8093 Zürich
Switzerland

### Submitter
Matej Vizovisek

### Lab Head
Dr Ruedi Aebersold
Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland.  Faculty of Science, University of Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland


