### Accession
PXD019270

### Title
Proteomics analysis of human pre-40S ribosomal particles

### Description
Proteomics analysis of late human pre-40S particles purified using a catalytically-inactive RIO1 as bait. Analysis of RIO1(kd)-StHA pre-40S particles composition upon RPS26 depletion with siRNA.

### Sample Protocol
Analysis of RIO1(kd)-StHA pre-40S particles composition  Following TAP purification, 100 μl of concentrated RIO1 pre-40S particles, corresponding to 3.5 µg of protein were reduced by incubation for 5 min at 95°C with 5 µL of Laemmli buffer containing 30 mM DTT, then alkylated with 90 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. The reduced/alkylated sample was then loaded onto SDS-PAGE gel (stacking 4% and separating 12% acrylamide). For one-shot analysis of the entire mixture, no fractionation was performed, and the electrophoretic migration was stopped as soon as the protein sample entered the separating gel as one single band. The proteins, revealed with Instant Blue (Expedeon) for 20 minutes, were found in one blue band of around 5 mm width. Single slice containing the whole sample was cut and washed before the in-gel digestion of the proteins overnight at 37°C with a solution of modified trypsin (sequence grade, Promega). The resulting peptides were extracted from the gel by one round of incubation (15 min, 37°C) in 1% formic acid–acetonitrile (40%) and two rounds of incubation (15 min each, 37°C) in 1% formic acid–acetonitrile (1:1). The extracted fractions were air-dried. Tryptic peptides were resuspended in 14 µl of 2% acetonitrile and 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). NanoLC-MS/MS analysis was performed in duplicate injections using an Ultimate® 3000 nanoRS system (Dionex, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer operating in positive mode. 5 μL of each sample were loaded onto a C18-precolumn (300 μm inner diameter x 5 mm) at 20 μL/min in 2% ACN, 0.05% TFA. After 5 min of desalting, the precolumn was switched online with the analytical C18 nanocolumn (75 μm inner diameter x 15 cm, packed in-house) equilibrated in 95 % solvent A (5 % ACN, 0.2% FA) and 5% solvent B (80% ACN, 0.2% FA). Peptides were eluted by using a 5-50% gradient of solvent B for 105 min, at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The LTQ-Orbitrap Velos was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode with the XCalibur software. Survey scans MS were acquired in the Orbitrap, on the 300-2000 m/z (mass to charge ratio) range, with the resolution set to a value of 60,000 at m/z 400. Up to twenty of the most intense multiply charged ions (> 2+) per survey scan were selected for CID (collision-induced dissociation) fragmentation, and the resulting fragments were analyzed in the linear ion trap (LTQ). Dynamic exclusion was used within 60 s to prevent repetitive selection of the same peptide.  Analysis of RIO1(kd)-StHA pre-40S particles composition upon RPS26 depletion  Each protein sample corresponding to RIO1(kd)-StHA pre-40S particles purified from RPS26 depleted cells and from control cells (64 and 94 µg of proteins in 300µl of 40 mM Tris HCl, 4% SDS, respectively) was reduced with 6 µL of 1 M DTT (20 mM final) during 10 min at 95°C under agitation, cooled to room temperature and alkylated with 19 µL of 1 M iodoacetamide (60 mM final) during 30 min in the dark. Then, each sample was digested with trypsin using the S-Trap™ Micro spin column protocol according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The pooled digested peptide extracts were dried down and resuspended with 0.05% TFA in 2% ACN at a concentration of 3.8 μg/μl, vortexed and sonicated for 10 min before injection. Peptides samples were analysed in triplicate injections using an UltiMate® 3000 RSLCnano LC system coupled to an  Orbitrap Fusion™ Tribrid™ mass spectrometer operating in positive mode. Five microliters of each sample were loaded onto a 300 μm ID × 5mm PepMap C18 pre-column at 20 µL/min in 2% ACN, 0.05% TFA. After 5 min of desalting, peptides were on-line separated on a 75 μm ID × 50 cm C18 column (in-house packed with Reprosil C18-AQ Pur 3 μm resin) equilibrated in 95% of buffer A (0.2% formic acid (FA)), with a gradient of 5 to 25% of buffer B (80% ACN, 0.2% FA) for 75 min then 25% to 50% for 30 min at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The instrument was operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode using a top-speed approach (cycle time of 3 s). Survey scans MS were acquired in the Orbitrap over 400–2000 m/z with a resolution of 120,000 (at 200 m/z), an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 4e5, and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Most intense multiply charged ions (2+ to 7+) per survey scan were selected at 1.6 m/z with quadrupole and fragmented by Higher Energy Collisional Dissociation (HCD). The monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on, the intensity threshold for fragmentation was set to 50,000 and the normalized collision energy was set to 35%. The resulting fragments were analysed in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 30,000 (at 200 m/z), an AGC target value of 5e4, and a maximum injection time of 60 ms. Dynamic exclusion was used within 60 s with a 10 ppm tolerance, to prevent repetitive selection of the same peptide. For internal calibration the 445.120025 ion was used as lock mass.

### Data Protocol
Mascot (Mascot server v2.6.1; http://www.matrixscience.com) database search engine was used for peptide and protein identification using automatic decoy database search to calculate a false discovery rate (FDR). MS/MS spectra were compared to the SwissProt H. sapiens database (supplemented with the sequence of the D324A RIO1 mutant). MS mass tolerance was set at 5 ppm  and MS/MS mass tolerance was set at 0.8 Da and 0.02 Da for data acquired on  LTQ-Orbitrap Velos and  Orbitrap Fusion™ Tribrid™ mass spectrometers, respectively. The enzyme selectivity was set to full trypsin with two missed cleavages allowed. Protein modifications were fixed carbamidomethylation of cysteines, variable phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine, variable oxidation of methionine, variable acetylation of protein N-terminus. Proline software was used for the validation and the label-free quantification of identified proteins in each sample. Mascot identification results were imported into Proline. Search results were validated with a peptide rank=1 and at 1 % FDR both at PSM level (on Adjusted e-Value criterion) and protein sets level (on Modified Mudpit score criterion). Label-free quantification was performed for all proteins identified: peptides were quantified by extraction of MS signals in the corresponding raw files, and post-processing steps were applied to filter, normalize, and compute protein intensities. For analysis of RIO1(kd)-StHA pre-40S particles composition, protein abundances were summarized in iBAQ values by dividing the protein intensities by the number of observable peptides. Proteins with a ratio of observed peptide sequences over observable peptide sequences inferior to 30% were filtered out. For analysis of RIO1(kd)-StHA pre-40S particles composition upon RPS26 depletion, after log2-transformation of the data, an unpaired two-tailed Student’s t-test was performed and proteins were considered significantly enriched when their absolute log2-transformed fold change was higher than 2 and their p-value lower than 0.01. A volcano plot was drawn to visualize significant protein abundance variations between the two compared conditions and represents -log10 (p-value) according to the log2 ratio.

### Publication Abstract
Preventing premature interaction of pre-ribosomes with the translation apparatus is essential for translational accuracy. Hence, the final maturation step releasing functional 40S ribosomal subunits, namely processing of the 18S ribosomal RNA 3' end, is safeguarded by the protein DIM2, which both interacts with the endoribonuclease NOB1 and masks the rRNA cleavage site. To elucidate the control mechanism that unlocks NOB1 activity, we performed cryo-electron microscopy analysis of late human pre-40S particles purified using a catalytically inactive form of the ATPase RIO1. These structures, together with in vivo and in vitro functional analyses, support a model in which ATP-loaded RIO1 cooperates with ribosomal protein RPS26/eS26 to displace DIM2 from the 18S rRNA 3' end, thereby triggering final cleavage by NOB1; release of ADP then leads to RIO1 dissociation from the 40S subunit. This dual key lock mechanism requiring RIO1 and RPS26 guarantees the precise timing of pre-40S particle conversion into translation-competent ribosomal subunits.

### Keywords
Ribosomal particles

### Affiliations
Institut de Pharmacologie et Biologie Structurale (IPBS), Université de Toulouse, CNRS, UPS, 205 route de Narbonne, 31077 Toulouse CEDEX
IPBS

### Submitter
Julien Marcoux

### Lab Head
Dr Julien Marcoux
Institut de Pharmacologie et Biologie Structurale (IPBS), Université de Toulouse, CNRS, UPS, 205 route de Narbonne, 31077 Toulouse CEDEX


