### Accession
PXD024417

### Title
Immunopeptidome of HeLa-CIITA cells silenced for TAX1BP1(T6BP) expression

### Description
CD4+ T lymphocytes play a major role in the establishment and maintenance of immunity. They are activated by antigenic peptides derived from extracellular or newly synthesized (endogenous) proteins presented on the surface of antigen presenting cells (APCs) by the MHC-II molecules. The pathways leading to endogenous MHC-II presentation remain poorly characterized. We demonstrate here that the autophagy receptor, T6BP, influences both autophagy-dependent and -independent endogenous presentation of HIV- and HCMV-derived peptides. By studying the immunopeptidome of MHC-II molecules, we show that T6BP affects both the quantity and quality of peptides presented. T6BP silencing induces mislocalization of the MHC-II-loading compartments and a rapid degradation of the invariant chain (CD74) without altering the expression and internalization kinetics of MHC-II molecules. T6BP also controls the ER localization of the chaperone calnexin that we identified as a T6BP partner. Remarkably, calnexin silencing in APCs replicates the functional consequences of T6BP silencing: decreased CD4+ T cell activation and exacerbated CD74 degradation. Altogether, we unravel T6BP as a key player of the MHC-II-restricted endogenous presentation pathway and we propose one potential mechanism of action.

### Sample Protocol
Isolation of HLA ligands  HLA class-I and -II molecules of HeLa-CIITA cells were isolated using standard immunoaffinity purification [Falk, 1991 #258][Nelde, 2019 #259]. Snap-frozen samples were lysed in 10 mM CHAPS/PBS (AppliChem, Gibco) with 1x protease inhibitor (Roche). HLA class-I and -II-associated peptides were isolated using the pan-HLA class I-specific mAb W6/32, the pan-HLA class II-specific mAb Tü39, and the HLA-DR-specific mAb L243 (mouse monoclonal, in-house) covalently linked to CNBr-activated Sepharose (GE Healthcare). HLA-peptide complexes were eluted by repeated addition of 0.2% TFA (trifluoroacetic acid, Merck). Eluted HLA ligands were purified by ultrafiltration using centrifugal filter units (Millipore). Peptides were desalted using ZipTip C18 pipette tips (Millipore), eluted in 35 μl 80% acetonitrile (Merck)/0.2% TFA, vacuum-centrifuged and resuspended in 25 μl of 1% acetonitrile/0.05% TFA and samples stored at -20 °C until LC-MS/MS analysis.  Analysis of HLA ligands by LC-MS/MS Isolated peptides were separated by reversed-phase liquid chromatography (nano-UHPLC, UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano; ThermFisher) and analysed in an online-coupled Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). Samples were analysed in five technical replicates and sample shares of 20% trapped on a 75 μm × 2 cm trapping column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC; Thermo Fisher) at 4 μl/min for 5.75 min. Peptide separation was performed at 50 °C and a flow rate of 175 nl/min on a 50 μm × 25 cm separation column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC; Thermo Fisher) applying a gradient ranging from 2.4 to 32.0% of acetonitrile over the course of 90 min. Samples were analysed on the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos implementing a top-speed CID method with survey scans at 120k resolution and fragment detection in the Orbitrap (OTMS2) at 60k resolution. The mass range was limited to 400–650 m/z with precursors of charge states 2+ and 3+ eligible for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS results were processed using Proteome Discoverer (v.1.3; Thermo Fisher) to perform database search using the Sequest search engine (Thermo Fisher) and the human proteome as reference database annotated by the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot. The search-combined data of five technical replicates was not restricted by enzymatic specificity, and oxidation of methionine residues was allowed as dynamic modification. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 5 ppm, and fragment mass tolerance to 0.02 Da. False discovery rate (FDR) was estimated using the Percolator node [Käll, 2007 #296] and was limited to 5%. For HLA class-I ligands, peptide lengths were limited to 8–12 amino acids. For HLA class-II, peptides were limited to 12–25 amino acids of length. HLA class-I annotation was performed using NetMHCpan 4.0 [Jurtz, 2017 #260] annotating peptides with percentile rank below 2% as previously described [Ghosh, 2019 #261].  For HLA class-II peptides, the Peptide Lansdscape Antigenic Epitope Alignment Utility (PLAtEAU) algorithm [Alvaro-Benito, 2018 #251] was used to identify and to estimate the relative abundance of the core epitopes based on the LC-MS/MS intensities. The results are presented as Volcano plots using Perseus software [Tyanova, 2016 #266]. The relative affinities of the core epitope to HLA-DRβ1*0102, expressed by HeLa-CIITA cells, was estimated using NetMHCIIpan 4.0 [Reynisson, 2020 #262].

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Autophagy receptor, Lc-msms

### Affiliations
Institute for Integrative Biology of the Cell
CNRS, CEA, Université Paris-Saclay
Institute for Integrative Biology of the Cell UMR 9198 CNRS, CEA, Université Paris-Saclay 1 Avenue de la Terrasse, 91190 Gif-sur-Yvette, France

### Submitter
Arnaud Moris

### Lab Head
Dr Arnaud Moris
Institute for Integrative Biology of the Cell UMR 9198 CNRS, CEA, Université Paris-Saclay 1 Avenue de la Terrasse, 91190 Gif-sur-Yvette, France


