### Accession
PXD039469

### Title
Proteomic profiling of advanced melanoma to predict therapeutic response to anti-PD-1 therapy

### Description
Despite high clinical need, hardly any biomarker can accurately predict if patients with metastatic melanoma will respond to anti-PD-1 therapy. In this multicenter study we applied depletion and enrichment methods prior to different proteomic techniques to analyze the discovery cohort (n=56) and discovered several significantly regulated proteins as well as commonly enriched processes such as neutrophil degranulation, cell-substrate adhesion, and extracellular matrix organization. We then analyzed two independent serum cohorts (n=96; n=17) confirming significant differences between R and NR. In addition, literature-based validation revealed 30 markers overlapping with previously published signatures, and survival analysis revealed that overexpression of 17 markers correlated with lower overall survival in melanoma patients. Primary melanoma tumor cells from NR also exhibit a distinctive immunophenotype characterized by CD29, CD49e, CD91, CD105, CD151, CD157, CD248 and CD280, and the TME could represent a potential target for therapy. Ultimately, this led to a potential marker signature with 8 key markers identified in at least two independent serum cohorts: CFHR3, CRP, LRG1, LYVE1, MMRN1, S100A8, SAA2, and TIMP1.

### Sample Protocol
All samples were collected after written informed consent and approval by the ethics committees in accordance with Good Clinical Practice guidelines and the Declaration of Helsinki. For validation analyses, we collected two independent baseline serum cohorts, one from Zurich (validation cohort A, n=96; Supplementary Table S1B) and one from Vienna (validation cohort B, n=17; Supplementary Table S1C) including melanoma patients treated with anti-PD-1 or combination therapy at University Hospital Zurich (Switzerland) and Vienna General Hospital (Austria) approved by Swissethics, Kantonale Ethikkommission Zürich, BASEC-Nr.PB.2017-00494 and the ethics committee of the Medical University of Vienna, EK1890/2018.  Protein concentrations were determined (Thermo Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit) and 20 µg protein of each sample used for enzymatic protein digestion. Enzymatic digestion of the independent validation cohort was performed, employing an in-solution digestion. After sample clean-up via SDB-RPS StageTips, peptides were eluted, dried and stored at -20°C until LC-MS/MS analyses.  LC-MS/MS analyses Reconstitution of dried peptide samples was achieved by adding 5µl of 30% formic acid (FA) containing 4 synthetic standard peptides. Afterwards, samples were diluted with 40µl of loading solvent (97.9% H2O, 2% ACN, 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid). Of this solution, 500 nl were injected into the Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano HPLC-system (Thermo). Peptides were concentrated onto a pre-column (2 cm × 75 μm C18 Pepmap100, Thermo) at 10 μl/min flow rate, using mobile phase A (97.9% H2O, 2% ACN, 0.1% FA). By elution from the pre-column, they were separated to an analytical column (25 cm × 75 μm Aurora Series emitter column; Ionopticks), applying a flow rate of 300 nl/min and using a gradient of 7% to 40% mobile phase B (80% ACN, 20% H2O, 0.1% FA) over 55 min, resulting in a total LC run time of 85 min including washing and equilibration steps. MS analyses were accomplished using a timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer (Bruker), equipped with a captive spray ion source run at 1650V, which was operated in Parallel Accumulation-Serial Fragmentation (PASEF) mode. Trapped ion mobility separation was achieved by applying a 1/k0 scan range from 0.60–1.60 V.s/cm2 resulting in a ramp time of 166 ms. All experiments were performed with 10 PASEF MS/MS scans per cycle, leading to a total cycle time of 1.88 s. MS and MS/MS spectra were recorded using a scan range (m/z) from 100 to 1700. Collision energy was ramped as a function of increasing ion mobility from 20 to 52 eV and quadrupole isolation width was set to 2Th for m/z<700 and 3Th for m/z>700.

### Data Protocol
The publicly available software package MaxQuant 1.6.17.0 running the Andromeda search engine was used for protein identification as well as label-free quantification (LFQ). Therefore, raw data were searched against the SwissProt database homo sapiens (version 141219 with 20380 entries). Search parameter included an allowed peptide tolerance of 20 ppm, a maximum of 2 missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation on cysteins as fixed modification as well as methionine oxidation and N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modification. A minimum of one unique peptide per protein was used as search criterium. In addition, the “match between runs” option was applied, using a 0.7 min match time window and a match ion mobility window of 0.05 as well as a 20 min alignment time window and an alignment ion mobility of 1. An FDR≤0.01 was set for all peptide and protein identification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Glycoproteomics, Immunotherapy, Proteomics, Swath/dia mass spectrometry, Serum depletion, Timstof, Predictive biomarker

### Affiliations
University of Vienna
University of Vienna, Faculty of Chemistry, Department of Analytical Chemistry

### Submitter
Christopher Gerner

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher Gerner
University of Vienna, Faculty of Chemistry, Department of Analytical Chemistry


