### Accession
PXD031699

### Title
Parallel kinase pathways stimulate actin polymerization at depolarized mitochondria

### Description
Mitochondrial damage (MtD) represents a dramatic change in cellular homeostasis, necessitating metabolic changes and stimulating mitophagy. One rapid response to MtD is rapid peri-mitochondrial actin polymerization, termed ADA (acute damage-induced actin). The activation mechanism for ADA is unknown. Here, we use mitochondrial depolarization or the complex I inhibitor metformin to induce ADA.  We show that two parallel signaling pathways are required for ADA.  In one pathway, increased cytosolic calcium activates in turn PKC-β, Rac, WAVE regulatory complex, and Arp2/3 complex.  In the other pathway, a drop in cellular ATP activates in turn AMPK (through LKB1), Cdc42, and FMNL formins. We also identify putative guanine nucleotide exchange factors for Rac and Cdc42, Trio and Fgd1 respectively, whose phosphorylation states increase upon mitochondrial depolarization and whose suppression inhibits ADA.  The depolarization-induced calcium increase is dependent on the mitochondrial sodium-calcium exchanger NCLX, suggesting initial mitochondrial calcium efflux.  We also show that ADA inhibition results in enhanced mitochondrial shape changes upon mitochondrial depolarization, suggesting that ADA inhibits these shape changes.  These depolarization-induced shape changes are not fragmentation but a circularization of the inner mitochondrial membrane, dependent on the inner mitochondrial membrane protease Oma1.  ADA inhibition increases proteolytic processing of an Oma1 substrate, the dynamin GTPase Opa1.  These results show that ADA requires the combined action of Arp2/3 complex and formin proteins to polymerize a network of actin filaments around mitochondria, and that the ADA network inhibits the rapid mitochondrial shape changes that occur upon mitochondrial depolarization.

### Sample Protocol
MEFs (1 x 107 cells) were plated on 10 cm plates 24 hrs before stimulation. Two different methods for stimulation were used. In Method 1, cells were kept in normal medium (DMEM+10% NCS) and stimulated with either 20μM CCCP or DMSO control for 2 min. In Method 2, cells were washed in serum-free DMEM 6 hrs post-plating, incubated in serum-free medium overnight, and stimulated with either 1μM CCCP or DMSO control for 2 min. Subsequent procedures were the same. Following respective treatments, cells were quickly washed with 15 ml of PBS and rapidly extracted with 1mL of extraction buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 4% SDS, 10 mM DTT). Lysates were quickly boiled for 5 min and then frozen prior to the phospho-proteomic work-up and analysis, which was conducted at the IDeA National Resource for Quantitative Proteomics (University of Arkansas, Little Rock AR).  Proteins were reduced, alkylated, and purified by chloroform/methanol extraction prior to digestion with sequencing grade trypsin and LysC (Promega). The resulting peptides were labeled using a tandem mass tag 10-plex isobaric label reagent set (Thermo), then enriched using High-Select TiO2 and Fe-NTA phosphopeptide enrichment kits (Thermo) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Both enriched and un-enriched labeled peptides were separated into 46 fractions on a 100 x 1.0 mm Acquity BEH C18 column (Waters) using an UltiMate 3000 UHPLC system (Thermo) with a 50 min gradient from 99:1 to 60:40 buffer A:B ratio under basic pH conditions, then consolidated into 18 super-fractions (Buffer A = 0.1% formic acid, 0.5% acetonitrile. Buffer B = 0.1% formic acid, 99.9% acetonitrile.  Both buffers adjusted to pH 10 with ammonium hydroxide). Each super-fraction was then further separated by reverse phase XSelect CSH C18 2.5 μm resin (Waters) on an in-line 150 x 0.075 mm column using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo). Peptides were eluted using a 75 min gradient from 98:2 to 60:40 buffer A:B ratio. Eluted peptides were ionized by electrospray (2.2 kV) followed by mass spectrometric analysis on an Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo) using multi-notch MS3 parameters. MS data were acquired using the FTMS analyzer in top-speed profile mode at a resolution of 120,000 over a range of 375 to 1500 m/z. Following CID activation with normalized collision energy of 31.0, MS/MS data were acquired using the ion trap analyzer in centroid mode and normal mass range. Using synchronous precursor selection, up to 10 MS/MS precursors were selected for HCD activation with normalized collision energy of 55.0, followed by acquisition of MS3 reporter ion data using the FTMS analyzer in profile mode at a resolution of 50,000 over a range of 100-500 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified and reporter ions quantified by searching the UniprotKB database using MaxQuant (Max Planck Institute) with a parent ion tolerance of 3 ppm, a fragment ion tolerance of 0.5 Da, a reporter ion tolerance of 0.001 Da, trypsin/P enzyme with 2 missed cleavages, variable modifications including oxidation on M, Acetyl on Protein N-term, and phosphorylation on STY, and fixed modification of Carbamidomethyl on C. Protein identifications are accepted if they could be established with less than 1.0% false discovery. Proteins identified only by modified peptides were removed. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm92. TMT MS3 reporter ion intensity values are analyzed for changes in total protein using the unenriched lysate sample. Phospho(STY) modifications are identified using the samples enriched for phosphorylated peptides. The enriched and un-enriched samples are multiplexed using two TMT10-plex batches, one for the enriched and one for the un-enriched samples.  Following data acquisition and database search, the search results were normalized using an in-house ProteiNorm app, a user-friendly tool for a systematic evaluation of normalization methods, imputation of missing values and comparisons of different differential abundance methods. ProteiNorm evaluates popular normalization methods including log2 normalization (Log2), median normalization (Median), mean normalization (Mean), variance stabilizing normalization (VSN), quantile normalization (Quantile, https://www.bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/preprocessCore.html), cyclic loess normalization (Cyclic Loess), global robust linear regression normalization (RLR), and global intensity normalization (Global Intensity). The individual performance of each method can be evaluated by comparing of the following metrices: total intensity, Pooled intragroup Coefficient of Variation (PCV), Pooled intragroup Median Absolute Deviation (PMAD), Pooled intragroup estimate of variance (PEV), intragroup correlation, sample correlation heatmap (Pearson), and log2-ratio distributions.   The normalized data is imported into ProteoViz to perform statistical analysis using Linear Models for Microarray Data (limma) with empirical Bayes (eBayes) smoothing to the standard errors. A similar approach is used for differential analysis of the phosphopeptides, with the addition of a few steps. The phosphosites are filtered to retain only peptides with a localization probability > 75%, filter peptides with zero values, and log2 transformed. Limma is also used for differential analysis. Proteins and phosphopeptides with an FDR-adjusted p-value < 0.05 and an absolute fold change > 2 are considered significant.

### Publication Abstract
Mitochondrial damage (MtD) represents a dramatic change in cellular homeostasis, necessitating metabolic changes and stimulating mitophagy. One rapid response to MtD is a rapid peri-mitochondrial actin polymerization termed ADA (acute damage-induced actin). The activation mechanism for ADA is unknown. Here, we use mitochondrial depolarization or the complex I inhibitor metformin to induce ADA. We show that two parallel signaling pathways are required for ADA. In one pathway, increased cytosolic calcium in turn activates PKC-&#x3b2;, Rac, WAVE regulatory complex, and Arp2/3 complex. In the other pathway, a drop in cellular ATP in turn activates AMPK (through LKB1), Cdc42, and FMNL formins. We also identify putative guanine nucleotide exchange factors for Rac and Cdc42, Trio and Fgd1, respectively, whose phosphorylation states increase upon mitochondrial depolarization and whose suppression inhibits ADA. The depolarization-induced calcium increase is dependent on the mitochondrial sodium-calcium exchanger NCLX, suggesting initial mitochondrial calcium efflux. We also show that ADA inhibition results in enhanced mitochondrial shape changes upon mitochondrial depolarization, suggesting that ADA inhibits these shape changes. These depolarization-induced shape changes are not fragmentation but a circularization of the inner mitochondrial membrane, which is dependent on the inner mitochondrial membrane protease Oma1. ADA inhibition increases the proteolytic processing of an Oma1 substrate, the dynamin GTPase Opa1. These results show that ADA requires the combined action of the Arp2/3 complex and formin proteins to polymerize a network of actin filaments around mitochondria and that the ADA network inhibits the rapid mitochondrial shape changes that occur upon mitochondrial depolarization.

### Keywords
Mefs, Mitochondria, Rac gef, Phosphoproteomics, Actin, Cdc42 gef

### Affiliations
Dartmouth College

### Submitter
Tak Shun Fung

### Lab Head
Dr Henry N Higgs
Dartmouth College


