### Accession
PXD017965

### Title
Sex estimation of human remains using the results of tooth enamel peptidomic analyses, LC-MSMS

### Description
Sex of individuals, estimated on human remains, is important information in anthropological, archaeological and forensic researches. In forensic anthropology, this is one of the key points for identifying a person. In archeology and paleoanthropology, information about sex is important for reconstructing the social and biological structure of a group, lifestyle, and for modeling demographic and growth processes in the past. Sex estimation of adult individuals is possible according to morphological criteria when metric and descriptive features are used. In case of poor preservation of the adult skeletons, as well as on children's remains, sex estimation by morphological criteria has some limitations. Therefore regular attempts are made to attract alternative methods for sexing human remains. As one of such methods a liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry analysis of tooth enamel peptides can be used. The result of this analysis is the identification of certain fragments of amelogenins - the main structural proteins of the organic matrix of tooth enamel, which make up more than 90% of its protein content. Amelogenin genes are located on both the X- and Y-chromosomes and the products of these genes have structural differences that allow them to be differentiated from each other. In the process of maturation of tooth enamel, its protein matrix undergoes proteolytic degradation, as a result enamel already contains proteins in the form of their peptide fragments. Reliable and reproducible detection of unique peptide fragments of amelogenins encoded on the X- and Y-chromosomes in human enamel will make it possible to estimate sex of human remains. The work presents a peptidomic analysis of tooth enamel using chromatography-mass spectrometry. Experiments were carried out on a series of teeth of various archaeological data, tafonomic condition of crown and different biological generations of teeth (deciduous and permanent ones).

### Sample Protocol
Samples Teeth from 23 individuals (15 deciduous and 8 permanent ones) were obtained from several anthropological collections, most of which are stored in the funds of the Research Institute and the Museum of Anthropology of Moscow State University. They are distinguished by archaeological antiquity and taphonomic preservation.   Etching of a tooth enamel  The tooth was successively washed with ethanol and deionized water. To etch tooth enamel, a 1.5 M hydrochloric acid solution was used. 0.5 ml microtube caps were used as etching reactors. 80 μl of hydrochloric acid solution was introduced into the reactor, the tooth was fixed with tweezers, clamping it in the legs of a tripod, and placed over the reactor so that the enamel was immersed in an acid solution. Used 2 etching schemes: 1. 3 consecutive incubations of the same part of the tooth enamel in 1.5 M hydrochloric acid for 4 minutes each (2 teeth); 2. An incubation of the tooth enamel in 1.5 M hydrochloric acid for 10 minutes (21 teeth). The solutions obtained by enamel etching were frozen in liquid nitrogen, dried using SpeedVac and stored until use at -85°C.  Desalting of peptides StageTips for desalting of peptides were made from a P200 of pipette tip (200 μl) and two pieces of Empore SDB-XC (3M) membrane cut with a 14 gauge needle. The dried tooth enamel etching product was dissolved in 100 μl of 1% TFA and applied to a microcolumn by centrifugation at 200 g for ~ 6 min, washed with 100 μl of 0.2% TFA and eluted with 50 μl of a solution containing 50% acetonitrile in 0.05% TFA. The eluate was dried on a centrifugal vacuum evaporator to dryness and stored until LC-MSMS analysis at -85oC. Before analysis, the peptides were dissolved either in 30 μl (for products of 4-minute etching of enamel) or 15 μl (for products of 10-minute etching of enamel) in an aqueous solution containing 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% TFA.  LC-MSMS analyses Peptides were separated on a 50-cm 100m inner diameter column packed in-house with Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 m (Dr. Maisch GmbH). Reverse-phase chromatography was performed with an Ultimate 3000 Nano LC System (Thermo Fisher Scientific), which was coupled to the Q Exactive Plus benchtop Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) via a nanoelectrospray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded in buffer A (97% 0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 3% (v/v) acetonitrile) and eluted with a linear gradient: 3–35% buffer B (0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 80% (v/v) acetonitrile) for 55 min; 35-55% B for 5 min, and 55-100% B for 1 min at a flow rate of 440 nl/min. After each gradient, the column was washed with 100% buffer B for 5 min and reequilibrated with buffer A for 5 min. Peptides were analyzed on a mass spectrometer, with one full scan (350–2000 m/z, R = 70,000 at 200 m/z) at a target of 3e6 ions and max ion fill time 50 ms, followed by up to 5 data-dependent MS/MS scans with higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) (target 2e5 ions, max ion fill time 80 ms, isolation window 1.4 m/z, normalized collision energy (NCE) 29%), detected in the Orbitrap (R = 17,500 at fixed first mass 100 m/z). Other settings: charge exclusion - unassigned, 1, >6; peptide match – preferred; exclude isotopes – on; dynamic exclusion - 30 s was enabled.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were analyzed by Peaks studio 8.0 (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc.). Identification of proteins was made by searching against the Human UniProt-Swiss-Prot FASTA database version of 23.02.2019 (20417 entries) with deamidation Asn/Gln, Met oxidation and Thr/Ser/Tyr phosphorylation as variable modifications. False discovery rate for peptide-spectrum matches was set to 0.01 and was determined by searching a reverse database. Enzyme specificity was set to non-specific digestion. Peptide identification was performed with an allowed initial precursor mass deviation up to 10 p.p.m. and an allowed fragment mass deviation 0.05 Da.

### Publication Abstract
Determination of biological sex to human remains is a fundamental requirement in anthropological, archeological, and forensic anthropological studies. Sex determination based on morphological criteria is significantly limited in the cases of juvenile remains and adult skeletons in a poor state of preservation. Regular attempts have been made to use alternative techniques to resolve this issue, including analysis of tooth enamel peptides by liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry. Optimization of this method involving acid etching of tooth enamel for 10 min followed by desalting of the products of etching on SDB-RPS StageTips microcolumns and analysis of desalted sample (1/3) by liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry allowed reliable sex determination to fossil remains within a wide range of archeological and biological ages without destructing analyzed teeth. Increasing the duration of enamel etching ensured a 2 to 3-fold increase in the total number of identified peptides and, more importantly, in the number of identified fragments of amelogenin Y isoform specific for male teeth, which facilitated reliable sex determination of fossil remains. The suggested technique was tested with 8 permanent and 15 deciduous teeth of different archaeological age and different degree of preservation. Two amelogenin Y-specific peptide sequences were identified. One of these peptides [SM(+15.99)IRPPYS)] was found in all male-derived samples without exception; the other peptide [IRPPYSS(+79.97)], which contained phosphorylated Ser66 residue, was found only in the enamel from deciduous teeth, which suggests that phosphorylation of Ser66 plays a role in the enamel formation in deciduous teeth.

### Keywords
Tooth enamel, Amelogenins, Lc-msms, Sex estimation, Peptides

### Affiliations
Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of bioorganic chemistry Russian Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Rustam Ziganshin

### Lab Head
Dr Rustam H. Ziganshin
Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of bioorganic chemistry Russian Academy of Sciences


