### Accession
PXD037992

### Title
The Small GTPase Rab7 Regulates Release of Mitochondria in Extracellular Vesicles in Response to Lysosomal Dysfunction

### Description
Deletion of the small GTPase Rab7 in cells or adult mouse heart leads to increased secretion of EVs containing ubiquitinated cargos, including intact mitochondria. Mass spectrometry data of extracellular vesicles was obtained for proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
The proteomics analysis was done in collaboration with the Biomolecular/Proteomics Mass Spectrometry Facility at UCSD. Briefly, proteins in isolated large and small EV fractions were separated by SDS–PAGE gel,  subjected to in-gel tryptic digest and identified by ultra-high pressure liquid chromatography (UPLC) coupled with tandem mass spectroscopy (LC-MS/MS) using nano-spray ionization.

### Data Protocol
All plots were generated using the ggplot2 package in R. All Venn diagrams were generated using the VennDiagram package in R. Results were filtered by the number of unique peptide sequences detected. Proteins were used for analysis only if 2 or more unique peptides were detected. To account for low and missing values in the dataset, a background threshold value was calculated by taking the mean of all protein abundance values in the first quartile of the dataset, and this background value replaced missing values and all values lower than this threshold. Protein abundances were compared between large EV samples from WT and Rab7-/- MEFs, and the -log10 adjusted p-values were plotted against the log2 fold changes. GO analysis was performed using the PANTHER statistical overrepresentation test (released 2022-02-02)52 on proteins significantly enriched in Rab7-/- MEFs (t-test, p<0.05). The whole Mus musculus genome was used as background. Pathway overrepresentation was calculated using Fisher’s Exact test with a Benjamini-Hoechberg multiple testing correction for a false discovery rate of 5%. The top hits from GO biological process complete and cellular component complete were plotted according to -log10 false discovery rate. To compare our dataset to previously existing proteins found in different types of extracellular vesicles, data from Vesiclepedia (Version 4.1, 2018-08-15) and ExoCarta (2015-07-29) were downloaded and compared to the set of proteins common to all WT and Rab7-/- MEFs. The DeepLoc2.0 web tool was used to predict subcellular localization of proteins in WT vs. Rab7-/- MEFs.

### Publication Abstract
Mitochondrial quality control is critical for cardiac homeostasis as these organelles are responsible for generating most of the energy needed to sustain contraction. Dysfunctional mitochondria are normally degraded via intracellular degradation pathways that converge on the lysosome. Here, we identified an alternative mechanism to eliminate mitochondria when lysosomal function is compromised. We show that lysosomal inhibition leads to increased secretion of mitochondria in large extracellular vesicles (EVs). The EVs are produced in multivesicular bodies, and their release is independent of autophagy. Deletion of the small GTPase Rab7 in cells or adult mouse heart leads to increased secretion of EVs containing ubiquitinated cargos, including intact mitochondria. The secreted EVs are captured by macrophages without activating inflammation. Hearts from aged mice or Danon disease patients have increased levels of secreted EVs containing mitochondria indicating activation of vesicular release during cardiac pathophysiology. Overall, these findings establish that mitochondria are eliminated in large EVs through the endosomal pathway when lysosomal degradation is inhibited.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Extracellular vesicles

### Affiliations
university of california, San Diego
University of California, San Diego

### Submitter
Wenjing Liang

### Lab Head
Dr Wenjing Liang
University of California, San Diego


