### Accession
PXD026045

### Title
Endolysosomal protease leakage reprograms macrophage mitochondrial metabolism

### Description
Organelle crosstalk plays important functions in metabolic processes and is relevant to immunity, neurodegeneration, and cancer. The permeabilisation and rupture of endolysosomes during stress can induce inflammation and cell death. There is growing evidence that endomembrane damage does not always result in cell death and that important cellular functions can be regulated by limited endolysosomal damage. However, the effect of limited cytosolic leakage of endolysosomal contents on the function of other cytoplasmic organelles is poorly understood. Here, we show that sterile and non-sterile endolysosomal damage triggers remodelling of the mitochondrial proteome and metabolic reprogramming of human macrophages. Mitochondrial metabolic reprogramming was associated with endolysosomal leakage independently of proteasome degradation and mitophagy. Furthermore, single-cell RNA-sequencing and metabolic analysis of lung macrophages undergoing endomembrane damage showed altered mitochondrial metabolism in mice. We, therefore, uncover an inter-organelle communication mechanism between mitochondria and endolysosomes with limited proteolytic leakage, providing a general mechanism by which macrophages undergo mitochondrial metabolic reprogramming in response to infection or injury.

### Sample Protocol
Human iPSC-derived macrophages (iPSDM) expressing either HA-GFP-OMP25 or 3XMyc-GFP-OMP25 were treated with L-leucyl-L-leucine methyl ester (LLOMe), bortezomib (BTZ), a protease inhibitor cocktail (PI) or were left untreated (Ctrl). Immunopurifications were performed, the MITO-tag samples were eluted in 5% SDS in 50 mM TEAB pH 7.5 and sored at -80 °C until further use. Samples were sonicated using an ultrasonic homogenizer for 1 minute and further processed for proteomic analysis. Samples were reduced by incubation with 20 mM TCEP for 15 minutes at 47 °C, and subsequently alkylated with 20 mM IAA for 30 minutes at room temperature in the dark. Proteomic sample preparation was performed using the suspension trapping (S-Trap) sample preparation method, with minor modifications as recommended by the supplier (ProtiFi). Briefly, 2.5 µl of 12% phosphoric acid was added to each sample, followed by the addition of 165 µl S-Trap binding buffer (90% methanol in 100 mM TEAB pH 7.1). The acidified samples were added, separately, to S-Trap micro-spin columns and centrifuged at 4,000 xg for 1 minute until all the solution has passed through the filter. Each S-Trap micro-pin column was washed with 150 µl S-trap binding buffer by centrifugation at 4,000 xg for 1 minute. This process was repeated for a total of five washes. Twenty-five µl of 50 mM TEAB containing 1 µg trypsin was added to each sample, followed by proteolytic digestion for 2 hours at 47 °C using a thermomixer (Eppendorf). Peptides were eluted with 50 mM TEAB pH 8.0 and centrifugation at 1,000 xg for 1 minute. Elution steps were repeated using 0.2% formic acid and 0.2% formic acid in 50% acetonitrile, respectively. The three eluates from each sample were combined and dried using a speed-vac before storage at -80°C. Peptides were dissolved in 2% acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid, and each sample was independently analysed on an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), connected to an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano System (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were injected on a PepMap 100 C18 LC trap column (300 μm ID × 5 mm, 5 μm, 100 Å) followed by separation on an EASY-Spray nanoLC C18 column (75 μm ID × 50 cm, 2 μm, 100 Å) at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. Solvent A was water containing 0.1% formic acid, and solvent B was 80% acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid. The gradient used for analysis was as follows: solvent B was maintained at 3% B for 5 min, followed by an increase from 3 to 35% B in 110 min, 35% to 50% B in 10 min, 50-90% B in 0.5 min, maintained at 90% B for 4 min, followed by a decrease to 3% in 0.5 min and equilibration at 2% for 20 min. The Orbitrap Exploris 480 was operated in positive-ion data-dependent mode. The precursor ion scan (full scan) was performed in the Orbitrap (OT) in the range of 400-1,600 m/z with a resolution of 120,000 at 200 m/z, an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 1E6 and an ion injection time of 50 ms. MS/MS spectra were acquired in the OT using the Top 20 precursors fragmented by high-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation. An HCD collision energy of 30% was used, the AGC target was set to 7.5E4 and an ion injection time of 40 ms was allowed. Dynamic exclusion of ions within a ± 10 ppm m/z window was implemented using a 35 s exclusion duration. An electrospray voltage of 1.5 kV and capillary temperature of 280°C, with no sheath and auxiliary gas flow, was used.

### Data Protocol
All spectra were analysed using MaxQuant 1.6.10.43, and searched against the reviewed Homo sapiens Uniprot proteome database containing isoforms (downloaded on 11 January 2021) and the HA-GFP protein sequence (42,369 protein database entries in total). Peak list generation was performed within MaxQuant and searches were performed using default parameters and the built-in Andromeda search engine. The enzyme specificity was set to consider fully tryptic peptides, and two missed cleavages were allowed. Oxidation of methionine, N-terminal acetylation and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine were allowed as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was allowed as a fixed modification. A protein and peptide false discovery rate (FDR) of less than 1% was employed in MaxQuant. Reverse hits, contaminants, and proteins only identified by site modifications were removed before downstream analysis. For label-free quantification, protein group intensities were extracted, median normalized, and filtered to contain at least three quantified values in one of the groups. Only proteins with at least two unique peptides were considered for relative quantification. Statistical testing was performed in the R statistical programming language (https://www.r-project.org/) using the LIMMA package and Benjamini-Hochberg correction for multiple hypothesis testing was implemented. Mitochondrial proteins were annotated based on annotations retrieved from Mitocarta 3.0.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mitochondrial metabolic reprogramming, Endolysosomal damage, Organelle crosstalk, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Biosciences Institute, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom
Newcastle University

### Submitter
Matthias Trost

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Trost
Biosciences Institute, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom


