### Accession
PXD002572

### Title
MStern Blot vs. FASP - Different sample types

### Description
Three different sample types (HeLa lysate, human CSF and human Urine) that were prepared with MStern Blot and FASP. For each sample type there are four replicates.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were denatured with urea. Disulfide bonds were reduced with DTT and alkylated with IAA. For digestion, proteins were either physically retained (FASP) by a filter or adsorbed to a PVDF membrane (MStern Blot) and digested there on. Resulting peptides were eluted either with sodium chloride (FASP) and desalted (C-18) or just eluted with acetonitrile (MStern Blot).

### Data Protocol
Samples were analyzed on a Sciex TripleTOF 5600, Acquired WIFF/WIFF.SCAN files were analyzed in ProteinPilot. Resulting GROUP files are provided as "compressed file" (*.zip).

### Publication Abstract
We describe a 96-well plate compatible membrane-based proteomic sample processing method, which enables the complete processing of 96 samples (or multiples thereof) within a single workday. This method uses a large-pore hydrophobic PVDF membrane that efficiently adsorbs proteins, resulting in fast liquid transfer through the membrane and significantly reduced sample processing times. Low liquid transfer speeds have prevented the useful 96-well plate implementation of FASP as a widely used membrane-based proteomic sample processing method. We validated our approach on whole-cell lysate and urine and cerebrospinal fluid as clinically relevant body fluids. Without compromising peptide and protein identification, our method uses a vacuum manifold and circumvents the need for digest desalting, making our processing method compatible with standard liquid handling robots. In summary, our new method maintains the strengths of FASP and simultaneously overcomes one of the major limitations of FASP without compromising protein identification and quantification.

### Keywords
Hela, Urine, Mstern blot, Csf, Fasp

### Affiliations
Boston Children's Hospital and Harvard Medical School
Department of Pathology, Boston Children's Hospital and Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Sebastian Berger

### Lab Head
Dr Hanno Steen, PhD
Boston Children's Hospital and Harvard Medical School


