### Accession
PXD021956

### Title
Investigating proteome constraints of Lactococcus lactis grown in a nutrient-rich environment

### Description
Proteomics comparison of wild type Lactococcus lactis MG1363 with a mutant strain that has a point mutation in the global carbon catabolite repression regulator (CcpA) grown under glucose-limited chemostat conditions at D = 0.5 /h.

### Sample Protocol
Four biological replicates of L. lactis MG1363 and its derivative 445C1 were grown under chemostat conditions in chemically defined medium for prolonged cultivation (CDMpc) supplemented with 25mM glucose as the limiting carbon source. Chemostat cultivation was set at a dilution rate of 0.5h-1 with a controlled pH of 6.5 at 30°C under continuous stirring. Cells were harvested after at least 8 volume changes by pelleting and flash freezing. Cell pellets were dissolved in 100 mM TRIS pH 8 and lysed by needle sonication. Proteins obtained from 4.5E8 lysed cells were reduced (15 mM dithiothreitol for 30 minutes at 45 °C) and subsequently alkylated (20 mM acrylamide for 10 minutes at room temperature) under denaturing conditions (100 mM TRIS pH8 + 8 M Urea). The alkylated sample was transferred to an ethanol-washed Pall 3K omega filter (Sigma-Aldrich, The Netherlands) and centrifuged for 36 minutes at 12000 rpm. The filters were washed with 130 µl 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and centrifuged again before overnight digestion with 100 µl 5 ng/µl trypsin (Roche) at room temperature. The digested peptides were eluted by centrifugation for 30 min, subsequent addition of 100 µl 1 ml/l HCOOH in water and again centrifugation for 30 min. pH was adjusted to pH 3 using trifluoroacetic acid. The resulting peptides were measured by nLC – LTQ-OrbitrapXL MSMS.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (1.6.1.0) with Andromeda search engine was used for identification and relative quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
Cells adapt to different conditions via gene expression that tunes metabolism for maximal fitness. Constraints on cellular proteome may limit such expression strategies and introduce trade-offs. Resource allocation under proteome constraints has explained regulatory strategies in bacteria. It is unclear, however, to what extent these constraints can predict evolutionary changes, especially for microorganisms that evolved under nutrient-rich conditions, i.e., multiple available nitrogen sources, such as Lactococcus lactis. Here, we present a proteome-constrained genome-scale metabolic model of L.&#xa0;lactis (pcLactis) to interpret growth on multiple nutrients. Through integration of proteomics and flux data, in glucose-limited chemostats, the model predicted glucose and arginine uptake as dominant constraints at low growth rates. Indeed, glucose and arginine catabolism were found upregulated in evolved mutants. At high growth rates, pcLactis correctly predicted the observed shutdown of arginine catabolism because limited proteome availability favored lactate for ATP production. Thus, our model-based analysis is able to identify and explain the proteome constraints that limit growth rate in nutrient-rich environments and thus form targets of fitness improvement.

### Keywords
Lactococcus lactis, Ccpa mutant, Proteome constraint, Metabolic modelling, Laboratory evolution

### Affiliations
Biochemistry
Wageningen University

### Submitter
Sjef Boeren

### Lab Head
Dr Sjef Boeren
Wageningen University


