### Accession
PXD043732

### Title
Profiling nuclear cysteine ligandability and effects on nuclear localization using proximity labeling-coupled chemoproteomics  

### Description
The nucleus controls cell growth and reproduction by well-orchestrated interactions between nuclear proteins and chromatin. Mutations that result in the dysregulation of these chromatin-associated proteins are known to lead to the onset of numerous diseases. Many of these nuclear proteins have remained recalcitrant to traditional non-covalent small-molecule ligand discovery. Covalent ligands can provide a promising approach for targeting proteins such as transcription factors that lack ordered small-molecule binding pockets. Here, we present a chemoproteomic platform that couples proximity labeling (PL) using a Histone-TurboID (His-TID) construct with competitive isoTOP-ABPP to identify ligandable nuclear cysteines. Application of covalent scout fragments, KB02 and KB05, revealed ligandable cysteine sites on diverse proteins involved in transcriptional regulation, spindle assembly, and DNA repair. To identify functional liganding events that alter target-protein association with chromatin, we monitor the effects of KB02 and KB05 on the chromatin-associated proteome. Importantly, we identify proteins that show both increased and decreased association with chromatin in the presence of the covalent fragments. Notably, the Parkinson disease protein 7 (PARK7) showed increased nuclear localization and association with chromatin upon covalent liganding at Cys106 by KB02. Together, our PL-assisted nuclear-focused chemoproteomic platform provides us insights into nuclear cysteine ligandability and the functional effects of ligand binding on chromatin association, thereby furthering our understanding of the potentially druggability of the nuclear proteome.

### Sample Protocol
For trypsin digest samples, 1 mL of 2 mg /mL protein lysates from His-TID-1 cells treated with DMSO or biotin were precipitated using 10% trichloroacetic acid (TCA), and then pelleted proteins were washed with ice-cold acetone and resuspended in 1.2% SDS/DPBS. The protein solution was further diluted to 0.2% SDS using DPBS and combined with streptavidin agarose resin to incubate overnight at 4˚C with rotation. The slurry was further incubated at room temperature for 2-3 hours to resolubilize SDS, and washed with 1x 0.2% SDS/DPBS, 3x DPBS, and 3x H2O. The beads were resuspended in 6 M urea with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) to reduce oxidized cysteine residues, and then 20 mM final concentration of iodoacetamide (IA) was added to alkylate cysteines. The reaction was diluted 3-fold and the pelleted beads were resuspended in 2 M urea with 1 mM CaCl2 and 2 µg trypsin to digest overnight at 37˚C with rotation. The supernatant was collected and combined with 3x 50 µL DPBS washes of the beads, generating a total sample volume of 350 µL. 17.5 µL formic acid was added to make a final concentration of 5%. 
For fragment labeling in lysates, lysates from His-TID-1 cells treated with biotin were labeled with DMSO, IA, KB02, or KB05 in vitro before TCA precipitation. The protein pellets were washed with ice-cold acetone and resuspended in denaturing alkylation buffer (DAB). Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP) and N-ethylmaleimide (NEM) or D5-NEM was added sequentially to reduce and alkylate cysteines, respectively. The reactions were diluted 3-fold with water and then 5-fold with ice-cold acetone to pellet proteins at -20˚C for 2 hours or overnight. The protein pellets were washed with ice-cold acetone and resuspended in 1.2% SDS/DPBS. Light and heavy-NEM labeled protein solutions were combined, diluted to 0.2% SDS, and incubated with streptavidin beads overnight at 4˚C. The slurry was incubated at room temperature for 2-3 hours, washed with 1x 0.2% SDS/DPBS, 3x DPBS, and 3x H2O before resuspending in 2 M urea containing 1 mM CaCl2 and 2 µg trypsin. The supernatant containing digested peptides was combined with 3x washes of the beads, and 17.5 µL formic acid was added to quench trypsin digest. 
For TMT labeling of in situ fragment treatment, His-TID-1 cells were treated with DMSO, KB02, or KB05 in serum-free DMEM for 1 hour, and then in complete DMEM containing 500 µM biotin for 5 hours. Proteins underwent TCA precipitation, acetone wash, streptavidin beads incubation, cysteine reduction and alkylation. The resin was washed 3 times with 100 mM TEAB to get rid of residual urea and resuspended in 200 µL 100 mM TEAB with 1 mM CaCl2 and 2 µg trypsin. The digested peptides were combined with 17.5 µL formic acid and dried on SpeedVac. Dried peptides were resuspended in 70 µL 200 mM EPPS buffer and 30 µL acetonitrile, and then labeled with TMT sixplex (DMSO-126, 127; KB02-128, 129; KB05-130, 131) for 1 hour at room temperature. 5% hydroxylamine was added to quench the reaction by incubating in the dark for 15 min. 5 µL formic acid was added to each condition, and all conditions were combined into one sample and dried on SpeedVac. The dried peptides were resuspended in high-pH buffer and loaded onto HPLC. The injected peptides were further separated on an Agilent Extend C18 column, and fractions were collected into a 96-deep-well plate. Samples in every sixth well were combined resulting in six pooled fractions to be dried on SpeedVac.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS was performed on an Orbitrap Exploris 240 mass spectrometer with Xcalibur version 4.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system. MS samples were desalted using Sep-Pak C18 cartridges and dried on SpeedVac. Desalted peptides were resuspended in 100% water buffer A (100% H2O and 0.1% formic acid) and 5 µL of samples were loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 loading column for further elution onto an Acclaim PepMap RSLC column, where the peptides were separated with a 2-hour gradient ranging from 5 to 25% buffer B (20% H2O, 80% acetonitrile, and 0.1% formic acid) in buffer A at a flow rate of 0.3 µL/min. The spray voltage was set at 2.1 kV. One full MS1 scan (120,000 resolution, 350-1,800 m/z, RF lens 65%, automatic gain control (AGC) target 300%, automatic maximum injection time, profile mode) was obtained every 2 s with dynamic exclusion (repeat count 2, duration 10 s), isotope exclusion (assigned), and apex detection (30% desired apex window) enabled. A variable number of MS2 scans (15,000 resolution, AGC 75%, maximum injection time 100 ms, centroid mode) were obtained between each MS1 scan based on the highest precursor masses, filtered for monoisotopic peak determination, theoretical precursor isotopic envelope fit, intensity (5E4), and charge state (2-6). MS2 analysis included the isolation of precursor ions (isolation window 2 m/z) followed by higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) (collision energy 30%). 
LC-MS/MS data were analyzed on Thermo Proteome Discoverer version 2.4 and searched using SequestHT and Percolator algorithms against Homo sapiens proteome database from Uniprot Protein Knowledgebase (UniProtKB). The protease for data analysis was specified as trypsin with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Peptide precursor tolerance was set to 10 ppm with a fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 ppm. For trypsin digest samples, cysteine alkylation (+57.021) was set as a static modification, methionine oxidation (+15.995), acetylation (+42.011) and methionine loss (+131.040) of the protein N-terminus were set as dynamic modifications. For lysate labeling samples, cysteine alkylation by either light NEM (+125.048) or heavy NEM (+130.079) were included as dynamic modifications for two independent searches, and cysteine alkylation by IA was excluded from static modifications. For TMT labeling samples, TMT 6plex (+229.163) modification on lysine residues and protein N terminus was set as static modifications in addition to cysteine alkylation (+57.021). The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% for peptide identification.

### Publication Abstract
The nucleus controls cell growth and division through coordinated interactions between nuclear proteins and chromatin. Mutations that impair nuclear protein association with chromatin are implicated in numerous diseases. Covalent ligands are a promising strategy to pharmacologically target nuclear proteins, such as transcription factors, which lack ordered small-molecule binding pockets. To identify nuclear cysteines that are susceptible to covalent liganding, we couple proximity labeling (PL), using a histone H3.3-TurboID (His-TID) construct, with chemoproteomics. Using covalent scout fragments, KB02 and KB05, we identified ligandable cysteines on proteins involved in spindle assembly, DNA repair, and transcriptional regulation, such as Cys101 of histone acetyltransferase 1 (HAT1). Furthermore, we show that covalent fragments can affect the abundance, localization, and chromatin association of nuclear proteins. Notably, the Parkinson disease protein 7 (PARK7) showed increased nuclear localization and chromatin association upon KB02 modification at Cys106. Together, this platform provides insights into targeting nuclear cysteines with covalent ligands.

### Keywords
Nuclear cysteine ligandability, Chromatin association, Turboid, Proximity labeling

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry, Boston College
Department of Chemistry, Boston College, USA

### Submitter
Qianni Peng

### Lab Head
Dr Eranthie Weerapana
Department of Chemistry, Boston College, USA


