### Accession
PXD026580

### Title
HXMS on PARP1+DNA+HPF1 to study the dynamics of PARP1

### Description
The project is about studying the dynamics of PARP1 when bound to DNA and HPF1.

### Sample Protocol
His-tagged PARP1 and N-terminal SMT sumo-like tag was purified uisng Nickel, heparin and gel filtration  chromatography.

### Data Protocol
Prior to HXMS, peptide pool for PARP1 was genearted through LTQ orbitrap XL for tandem MS. ExMS was used to identify non-deuterated peptides through centriod vlaues and chromatographic elution times. Later, a full-time course HXMS was carried out. HDExaminer was used next to process all the raw files generated through thermo's exactive.

### Publication Abstract
PARP1 and PARP2 produce poly(ADP-ribose) in response to DNA breaks. HPF1 regulates PARP1/2 catalytic output, most notably permitting serine modification with ADP-ribose. However, PARP1 is substantially more abundant in cells than HPF1, challenging whether HPF1 can pervasively modulate PARP1. Here, we show biochemically that HPF1 efficiently regulates PARP1/2 catalytic output at sub-stoichiometric ratios matching their relative cellular abundances. HPF1 rapidly associates/dissociates from multiple PARP1 molecules, initiating serine modification before modification initiates on glutamate/aspartate, and accelerating initiation to be more comparable to elongation reactions forming poly(ADP-ribose). This "hit and run" mechanism ensures HPF1 contributions to PARP1/2 during initiation do not persist and interfere with PAR chain elongation. We provide structural insights into HPF1/PARP1 assembled on a DNA break, and assess HPF1 impact on PARP1 retention on DNA. Our data support the prevalence of serine-ADP-ribose modification in cells and the efficiency of serine-ADP-ribose modification required for an acute DNA damage response.

### Keywords
Hpf1, Hxms, Dna, Parp1

### Affiliations
Univeristy of Pennsylvania
Dr. Ben E Black, Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of Pennsylvania

### Submitter
Ramya Billur

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Ben E Black
Dr. Ben E Black, Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of Pennsylvania


