### Accession
PXD016827

### Title
Novel Conformation Specific Inhibitors of Activated GTPases reveal Ras-dependency of Patient-Derived Cancer Organoids

### Description
The small GTPases H, K, and NRAS are molecular switches that are indispensable for proper regulation of cellular proliferation and growth. Mutations in this family of proteins are associated with cancer and result in aberrant activation of signaling processes caused by a deregulated recruitment of downstream effector proteins. In this study, we engineered novel variants of the Ras-binding domain (RBD) of the kinase CRAF. These variants bound with high affinity to the effector binding site of active Ras. Structural characterization showed how the newly identified mutations cooperate to enhance affinity to the effector binding site compared to RBDwt. The engineered RBD variants closely mimic the interaction mode of naturally occurring Ras effectors and as dominant negative affinity reagent block their activation. Experiments with cancer cells showed that expression of these RBD variants inhibits Ras signaling leading to a reduced growth and inductions of apoptosis. Using the optimized RBD variants, we stratified patient-derived colorectal cancer organoids according to Ras dependency, which showed that the presence of Ras mutations was insufficient to predict sensitivity to Ras inhibition

### Sample Protocol
Hemagglutinin (HA)-tagged RBD variants and HA-RBDwt were inducibly expressed in stably transduced colon carcinoma HCT 116 cells. After immunoprecipitation samples were prepared forin-gel digest using standard protocols. In brief, supernatants were loaded onto SDS-polyacrylamide gel and the gel was stained using InstantBlue (Expedeon). Gel lanes were cut into pieces and subsequently washed, destained and dehydrated. Proteins were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) and digested overnight with sequencing-grade Trypsin (Promega). Peptides were extracted using an increasing concentration of acetonitrile. Finally, peptides were concentrated and desalted using the Stop and Go Extraction (STAGE) technique.  A binary buffer system consisting of buffer A (0.1 % formic acid) and buffer B (80 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid) was used for peptide separation on an Easy-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). This system was coupled via a nano electrospray ionization source to the quadrupole-based Q Exactive HF benchtop mass spectrometer.Peptide elution from the in-house packed 18 cm (1.9 µm C18 Beads, Dr. Maisch, Germany) column was achieved by increasing the relative amount of B from 10 % to 38 % in a linear gradient within 23 min at a column temperature of 40 °C. Followed by an increase to 100 % B within 7 min, gradients were completed by a re-equilibration to 5 % B. Q Exactive HF settings: MS spectra were acquired using 3E6 as an AGC target, a maximal injection time of 20 ms and a 60,000 resolution at 300 m/z. The mass spectrometer operated in a data dependent Top15 mode with subsequent acquisition of higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation MS/MS spectra of the top 15 most intense peaks. Resolution for MS/MS spectra was set to 30,000 at 200 m/z, AGC target to 1E5, maximal injection time to 64 ms and the isolation window to 1.6 Th

### Data Protocol
All acquired raw files were processed using MaxQuant (1.5.3.30) and the implemented Andromeda search engine. For protein assignment, electrospray ionization-tandem mass spectrometry (ESI-MS/MS) fragmentation spectra were correlated with the Uniprot human database (v. 2016) including 4 manually added sequences of the RBD variants and KRAS G13D (RBDwt: MGYPYDVPDYAGQGPDPSTNSADITSLYK KAGFSNTIRVFLPNKQRTVVNVRNGMSLHDCLMKALKVRGLQPECCAVFRLLHEHKGKKARLDWNTDAASLIGEELQVDFL; RBDv1: MGYPYDVPDYAGQGPDPSTNSADIT SLYKKAGFSNTIRVLLPNQEWTVVKVRNGMSLHDSLMKALKRHGLQPESSAVFRLLHEHKGKKARLDWNTDAASLIGEELQVDFL; RBDv12: MGYPYDVPDYAGQGPDPST NSADITSLYKKAGFSNTIRVLLPNHERTVVKVRNGMSLHDSLMKALKRHGLQPESSAVFRLLHEHKGKKARLDWNTDAASLIGEELQVDFL; KRAS G13D: MTEYKLVVVGAGD VGKSALTIQLIQNHFVDEYDPTIEDSYRKQVVIDGETCLLDILDTAGQEEYSAMRDQYMRTGEGFLCVFAINNTKSFEDIHHYREQIKRVKDSEDVPMVLVGNKCDLPSRTVDTKQAQDLARSYGIPFIETSAKTRQGVDDAFYTLVREIRKHKEKMSKDGKKKKKKSKTKCVIM). The total number of entries of the database  searched was 92169. Searches were performed with tryptic specifications [max. missed cleavages = 2] and default settings for mass tolerances for MS and MS/MS spectra [20ppm for first search, 4.5ppm for main search (precursor mass tolerance) and 20ppm fragment mass tolerance]. Carbamidomethyl at cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification, while oxidation at methionine and acetylation at the N-terminus were defined as variable modifications. The minimal peptide length was set to seven amino acids and the false discovery rate for proteins and peptide-spectrum matches to 1 %. The match-between-run feature was used with a time window of 0.7 min. Relative label-free quantification of proteins was done using the MaxLFQ algorithm integrated into MaxQuant. The minimum LFQ ratio count was set to 2 and the FastLFQ option was enabled.  For subsequent analysis, the Perseus software (1.5.3.0) was used and first filtered for contaminants and reverse entries and proteins that were only identified by site. The LFQ intensities were logarithmized to base 2 and grouped into duplicates. To overcome the missing value problem in immunoprecipitation data, proteins that were quantified less than 2 times in one of the experimental groups were discarded from further analysis. Missing values were imputed column-wise by a down-shifted (median-1.8) Gaussian distribution mimicking thedetection limit of the mass spectrometer.

### Publication Abstract
The small GTPases H, K, and NRAS are molecular switches indispensable for proper regulation of cellular proliferation and growth. Several mutations in the genes encoding members of this protein family are associated with cancer and result in aberrant activation of signaling processes caused by a deregulated recruitment of downstream effector proteins. In this study, we engineered variants of the Ras-binding domain (RBD) of the C-Raf proto-oncogene, Ser/Thr kinase (CRAF). These variants bound with high affinity with the effector-binding site of Ras in an active conformation. Structural characterization disclosed how the newly identified RBD mutations cooperate and thereby enhance affinity with the effector-binding site in Ras compared with WT RBD. The engineered RBD variants closely mimicked the interaction mode of naturally occurring Ras effectors and acted as dominant-negative affinity reagents that block Ras signal transduction. Experiments with cancer cells showed that expression of these RBD variants inhibits Ras signaling, reducing cell growth and inducing apoptosis. Using these optimized RBD variants, we stratified patient-derived colorectal cancer organoids with known Ras mutational status according to their response to Ras inhibition. These results revealed that the presence of Ras mutations was insufficient to predict sensitivity to Ras inhibition, suggesting that not all of these tumors required Ras signaling for proliferation. In summary, by engineering the Ras/Raf interface of the CRAF-RBD, we identified potent and selective inhibitors of Ras in its active conformation that outcompete binding of Ras-signaling effectors.

### Keywords
Ras-binding domain, Ip-ms, Protein-engineering

### Affiliations
Institute of Biochemistry, Brandenburg Medical School (MHB) Theodor Fontane, Neuruppin and Brandenburg an der Havel, Germany
Institute of Biochemistry II, Goethe University Frankfurt - Medical Faculty, University Hospital, Frankfurt am Main, Germany and Fraunhofer Institute for Molecular Biology and Applied Ecology IME, Project Group Translational Medicine and Pharmacology TMP, Theodor-Stern-Kai 7, 60590 Frankfurt am Main, Germany.

### Submitter
Meike Hoffmeister

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Ernst
Institute of Biochemistry II, Goethe University Frankfurt - Medical Faculty, University Hospital, Frankfurt am Main, Germany and Fraunhofer Institute for Molecular Biology and Applied Ecology IME, Project Group Translational Medicine and Pharmacology TMP, Theodor-Stern-Kai 7, 60590 Frankfurt am Main, Germany.


