### Accession
PXD011860

### Title
Eukaryotic translation is modulated by natural mRNA nucleotide derivatives

### Description
RNA modifications are crucial factors for efficient protein synthesis. All classes of RNAs that are involved in translation are modified to different extents. Recently, mRNA modifications and their impact on gene regulation became a focus of interest because they can exert a variety of effects on the fate of mRNAs. mRNA modifications within coding sequences can either directly or indirectly interfere with protein synthesis. In order to investigate the role of various natural occurring modified nucleotides, we site-specifically introduced them into the coding sequence of reporter mRNAs and subsequently translated them in HEK293T cells. The analysis of the respective translation products revealed a strong position-dependent impact of RNA modifications on translation efficiency and accuracy. Whereas a single 5-methylcytosine (m5C) or pseudouridine (Ψ) did not reduce product yields, 1-methyladenosine (m1A) generally impeded the translation of the respective modified mRNA. An inhibitory effect of 2’O-methlyated nucleotides (Nm) and 6-methyladenosine (m6A) was strongly dependent on their position within the codon. Finally, we could not attribute any miscoding potential to the set of mRNA modifications tested in HEK293T cells.

### Sample Protocol
Pulled down proteins were extensively washed with 50 mM ammonium acetate and were directly digested on the beads. Therefore, washed beads were resuspended in ammonium bicarbonate buffer (100 mM, pH 8.0). Proteins were reduced with dithiothreitol (10 mM) for 30 min at 56 °C, digested for 6 h at 37 °C by adding 0.5 µg Trypsin and alkylated with iodoacetamide (55 mM) at room temperature for 20 min. Peptides were analyzed using a Dionex, UltiMate 3000 nano-HPLC system (Germering, Germany) coupled via nanospray ionization source to a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Vienna, Austria) using instrument settings as described previously (1). (1) Faserl, K., Sarg, B., Sola, L. & Lindner, H. H. Enhancing Proteomic Throughput in Capillary Electrophoresis–Mass Spectrometry by Sequential Sample Injection. Proteomics 17, (2017).

### Data Protocol
Database search was performed using ProteomeDiscoverer (Version 2.1, Thermo Scientific) with search engine Sequest HT. MS/MS spectra were searched against a human protein database (Uniprot, reference proteome, last modified Feb 2018, 20939 entries) to which 21 different ErmCL protein sequences were added. The following settings were applied: Enzyme for protein cleavage was trypsin; two missed cleavages were allowed. Fixed modification was carbamidomethylcysteine; variable modifications were N-terminal protein acetylation and methionine oxidation. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm; fragment mass tolerance was 20 mmu. Maximum false discovery rate (FDR) for proteins and peptides was 1%.

### Publication Abstract
RNA modifications are crucial factors for efficient protein synthesis. All classes of RNAs that are involved in translation are modified to different extents. Recently, mRNA modifications and their impact on gene regulation became a focus of interest because they can exert a variety of effects on the fate of mRNAs. mRNA modifications within coding sequences can either directly or indirectly interfere with protein synthesis. In order to investigate the roles of various natural occurring modified nucleotides, we site-specifically introduced them into the coding sequence of reporter mRNAs and subsequently translated them in HEK293T cells. The analysis of the respective protein products revealed a strong position-dependent impact of RNA modifications on translation efficiency and accuracy. Whereas a single 5-methylcytosine (m&#x2075;C) or pseudouridine () did not reduce product yields, <i>N</i>&#xb9;-methyladenosine (m&#xb9;A) generally impeded the translation of the respective modified mRNA. An inhibitory effect of 2'<i>O</i>-methlyated nucleotides (Nm) and <i>N</i>&#x2076;-methyladenosine (m&#x2076;A) was strongly dependent on their position within the codon. Finally, we could not attribute any miscoding potential to the set of mRNA modifications tested in HEK293T cells.

### Keywords
Ribosome, Translation elongation, Nucleotide modifications, Decoding, Biological

### Affiliations
Medical University of Innsbruck - Biocenter, Division of Genomics & RNomics

### Submitter
Thomas Hoernes

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias David Erlacher
Medical University of Innsbruck - Biocenter, Division of Genomics & RNomics


