### Accession
PXD020018

### Title
Identification of SAMD9 and SAMD9L interactome in HEK293T cells

### Description
Recently, heterozygous germline mutations were identified in sterile alpha motif (SAM) domain-9 (SAMD9) and its paralog, SAMD9-like (SAMD9L) in children with monosomy 7 mediated MDS. Expression of SAMD9 and SAMD9L is induced by interferons and other inflammatory stimuli and causes reduced cell division and cell growth and most pathogenic mutations found in patients dramatically enhance these effects. The goal of this project is to identify the interactome of SAMD9 and SAMD9L to better understand their role in cell cycle and proliferation regulation

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T cell line was used. Cells were plated and transfected with APEX2-GBP and GFP-tagged constructs and biotinylating, quenching, and cell harvest was performed. Streptavidin eluates from immunoprecipitation are processed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
The SEQUEST searching engine and the UniProt human database were used.  Searches were performed using 25 ppm mass tolerance for precursor ions and 0.5 Da for fragment ions, allowing up to two missed trypsin cleavage sites. Carbamidomethylation (+57.02146) of Cysteine was used for static modifications and the dynamic modifications include oxidation of methionine residues (+15.99492 Da). The assigned peptides were filtered to reduce protein FDR to below 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Pediatric myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) are a heterogeneous disease group associated with impaired hematopoiesis, bone marrow hypocellularity, and frequently have deletions involving chromosome 7 (monosomy 7). We and others recently identified heterozygous germline mutations in SAMD9 and SAMD9L in children with monosomy 7 and MDS. We previously demonstrated an antiproliferative effect of these gene products in non-hematopoietic cells, which was exacerbated by their patient-associated mutations. Here, we used a lentiviral overexpression approach to assess the functional impact and underlying cellular processes of wild-type and mutant SAMD9 or SAMD9L in primary mouse or human hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells (HSPC). Using a combination of protein interactome analyses, transcriptional profiling, and functional validation, we show that SAMD9 and SAMD9L are multifunctional proteins that cause profound alterations in cell cycle, cell proliferation, and protein translation in HSPCs. Importantly, our molecular and functional studies also demonstrated that expression of these genes and their mutations leads to a cellular environment that promotes DNA damage repair defects and ultimately apoptosis in hematopoietic cells. This study provides novel functional insights into SAMD9 and SAMD9L and how their mutations can potentially alter hematopoietic function and lead to bone marrow hypocellularity, a hallmark of pediatric MDS.

### Keywords
Samd9; samd9l; pediatric mds; proteomics

### Affiliations
St. Jude Children's Research Hospital
Associate Member, Hematological Malignancies Program St. Jude Children's Research Hospital Memphis-TN UA

### Submitter
Vishwajeeth Pagala

### Lab Head
Dr Jeffery Klco
Associate Member, Hematological Malignancies Program St. Jude Children's Research Hospital Memphis-TN UA


