### Accession
PXD005454

### Title
Comparative proteomic analysis of kidney distal convoluted tubule and cortical collecting duct cells following long-term hormonal stimulation

### Description
The distal convoluted tubule (DCT) and the cortical collecting ducts (CCD) are portions of renal tubule that are partly responsible for maintaining the systemic concentrations of potassium, sodium, calcium and magnesium. Despite being structurally similar, DCT and CCD cells have different transport capabilities due to a variety of different membrane-associated transport proteins. However, DCT and CCD cells appear to be modulated via the same hormones. The objective of this study was assess the differential response of DCT and CCD cells to long-term exposure to the hormones vasopressin or angiotensin II, both of which modulate DCT and CCD cells differently. Mass spectrometry based quantitative proteomics was used to profile the differential proteome between DCT and CCD.

### Sample Protocol
Mouse kidney distal convoluted tubule cells (mpkDCT) were cultured in heavy SILAC medium (Lys+6, Arg+10) while cortical collecting duct cells (mpkCCD) were cultured in light SILAC medium (Lys+0, Arg+0). Four passages of labelled cells were used to generate four biological replicates for statistical analysis. In addition to control conditions, cells were also stimulated for 4 days with the vasopressin type II receptor agonist 1-desamino-8-D-arginine vasopressin (dDAVP, 1nM) or angiotensin II (ANGII, 1nM). Cells were harvested, equally pooled and subjected to offline high-pH fractionation based two dimensional LC-MS/MS analysis (Q-Exactive).

### Data Protocol
Identification and quantification were done by MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8). Raw files from each passage (biological replicate) under each treatment condition were searched together to generate a combined result. Data were searched against RefSeq mouse database (58513 sequences, downloaded Oct. 2014) plus normal contaminants. Multiplicity was set to 2, with Arg10 and Lys6 as heavy labels. Acetylation of Protein N-term, oxidation of methionine, and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine were set as variable modifications, and they were also included in protein quantification. iBAQ calculation was turned on. All other parameters, including precursor and fragment mass tolerances, were set as default values of MaxQuant.

### Publication Abstract
The importance of the kidney distal convoluted tubule (DCT) and cortical collecting duct (CCD) is highlighted by various water and electrolyte disorders that arise when the unique transport properties of these segments are disturbed. Despite this critical role, little is known about which proteins have a regulatory role in these cells and how these cells can be regulated by individual physiologic stimuli. By combining proteomics, bioinformatics, and cell biology approaches, we found that the E3 ubiquitin ligase CHIP is highly expressed throughout the collecting duct; is modulated in abundance by vasopressin; interacts with aquaporin-2 (AQP2), Hsp70, and Hsc70; and can directly ubiquitylate the water channel AQP2 <i>in vitro</i> shRNA knockdown of CHIP in CCD cells increased AQP2 protein <i>t</i><sub>1/2</sub> and reduced AQP2 ubiquitylation, resulting in greater levels of AQP2 and phosphorylated AQP2. CHIP knockdown increased the plasma membrane abundance of AQP2 in these cells. Compared with wild-type controls, CHIP knockout mice or novel CRISPR/Cas9 mice without CHIP E3 ligase activity had greater AQP2 abundance and altered renal water handling, with decreased water intake and urine volume, alongside higher urine osmolality. We did not observe significant changes in other water- or sodium-transporting proteins in the gene-modified mice. In summary, these results suggest that CHIP regulates AQP2 and subsequently, renal water handling.

### Keywords
Hormone, Mouse, Cortical collecting duct, Long-term, Distal convoluted tubule, Kidney

### Affiliations
Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University
Center for Interactions of Proteins in Epithelial Transport, Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University, Denmark

### Submitter
Qi Wu

### Lab Head
Dr Robert A. Fenton
Center for Interactions of Proteins in Epithelial Transport, Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University, Denmark


