### Accession
PXD023753

### Title
RGS10L phosphorylation site determination Bottom-Up

### Description
RGS10L phosphorylatin site was determined.  Trypsin is not good for generating a peptide containing the potential site, and the initial study was done using the intact protein.  From the Top-Down study, the phosphorylatin site of the A->S variant was ambiguous.  The firnal confirmation was done using AspN digest.

### Sample Protocol
Each of the purified recombinant RGS10L variants was incubated with the recombinant catalytic subunit of PKA (NEB) at the 500units-to-1µg ratio for 45 minutes at 30°C, then digested using AspN and the peptide sample was cleaned using an OMIX C18 solid phase extraction tip. The peptide sample was separated using a Reprosil-PUR AQ-C18 nano-column. The MS method contains a survey MS1 scan with Orbitrap at the 120,000 resolution every 3 second and data-dependent MS2 scans with Orbitrap at the 30,000 resolution setting. For each selected precursor ion, HCD, ETD, and EThcD were performed.

### Data Protocol
The data were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4 SP1, with Sequest HT.  MS1 mass tolerance is 10 ppm.  MS2 mass tolerance is 0.02 Da. Enzyme is set AspN(semi).

### Publication Abstract
We report the clinical and molecular phenotype of three siblings from one family, who presented with short stature and immunodeficiency and carried uncharacterized variants in <i>RGS10</i> (c.489_491del:p.E163del and c.G511T:p.A171S). This gene encodes regulator of G protein signaling 10 (RGS10), a member of a large family of GTPase-activating proteins (GAPs) that targets heterotrimeric G proteins to constrain the activity of G protein-coupled receptors, including receptors for chemoattractants. The affected individuals exhibited systemic abnormalities directly related to the RGS10 mutations, including recurrent infections, hypergammaglobulinemia, profoundly reduced lymphocyte chemotaxis, abnormal lymph node architecture, and short stature due to growth hormone deficiency. Although the GAP activity of each RGS10 variant was intact, each protein exhibited aberrant patterns of PKA-mediated phosphorylation and increased cytosolic and cell membrane localization and activity compared to the wild-type protein. We propose that the RGS10 p.E163del and p.A171S mutations lead to mislocalization of the RGS10 protein in the cytosol, thereby resulting in attenuated chemokine signaling. This study suggests that RGS10 is critical for both immune competence and normal hormonal metabolism in humans and that rare <i>RGS10</i> variants may contribute to distinct systemic genetic disorders.

### Keywords
Rgs10l, Phosphorylation, Bottom-up

### Affiliations
NIAID
Lung and Vascular Inflammation Section, Laboratory of Allergic Diseases, NIAID/NIH Bethesda, MD 20892, USA

### Submitter
Motoshi Suzuki

### Lab Head
Dr Kirk M. Druey
Lung and Vascular Inflammation Section, Laboratory of Allergic Diseases, NIAID/NIH Bethesda, MD 20892, USA


