### Accession
PXD014849

### Title
Obesity significantly alters the human sperm proteome, with implications for fertility

### Description
While obesity has links to poor semen parameters and reduced fertility, the causative links between obesity and male infertility are unclear, particularly on a molecular level. We investigated how obesity impacts the human sperm proteome, to further understand any implications for fertility. Sperm protein lysates from 5 healthy weight (BMI < 25) or obese (BMI>30) men were FASP digested, analysed by LC-MS/MS and quantitatively compared by label free quantification. Findings were confirmed for representative proteins by immunofluorescence staining. 2034 proteins were confidently identified, with 24 significantly less abundant (fold change <0.5) and 3 significantly more abundant (fold change >1.5)in sperm of obese men. These proteins were involved in a range of biological processes, including oxidative stress (GSS, NDUFS2, JAGN1, USP14, ADH5), inflammation (SUGT1, LTA4H), translation (EIF3F, EIF4A2, CSNK1G1), DNA damage repair (UBEA4) and sperm function (NAPA, RNPEP, BANF2). These results suggest that oxidative stress and inflammation are closely tied to reproductive dysfunction in obese men. These processes likely impact protein translation and folding during spermatogenesis, leading to poor sperm function and subfertility. The observation of these changes in normozoospermic men further suggests that traditional clinical semen assessment fails to detect important biological changes in spermatozoa which may compromise fertility.

### Sample Protocol
Sperm was lysed in 1% SDS lysis buffer, with the pellet undergoing further lysis with 8M urea. Isolated proteins were FASP digested, with trypsin as the protease and peptides underwent a final cleanup with STAGE tips. Samples were analyzed on a Q Exactive HF quadrupole orbitrap mass spectrometer coupled to an Easy nLC 1000 UHPLC through a nanospray ion source. Peptides were separated on a self made C18 analytical column, by a 240 min linear gradient. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode, in data-dependent acquisition mode. Full MS scans were obtained with a range of m/z 300-1600, mass resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200 and a target value of 1.00E+06, with a maximum injection time of 50ms. HCD collision was performed on the 15 most significant peaks, and tandem mass spectra were acquired at a mass resolution of 30,000 at m/z 200 and a target value of 1.00E+05, with a maximum injection time of 100ms. Isolation of precursors was performed with a window of 1.2 Th. The dynamic exclusion time was 20s and normalized collision energy was 32. Precursor ions with single, unassigned or eight or higher charge states were excluded from fragmentation selection.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were extracted from raw data files and converted to MGF using Proteome Discoverer. MGF files were batch searched using an in house Mascot server, against the Swissprot database, with taxonomy set to Homo Sapiens. Search parameters included trypsin as the protease, allowing 1 missed cleavage, carbamidomethyl cysteine as a fixed modification, acetylation of N-terminal proteins, oxidation of methionine and proline and N-terminal pyroglutamate as variable modifications, MS peak tolerance of 15ppm, MS/MS fragment ion tolerance of 25ppm, peptide charges of 1+, 2+ and 3+ and #C13C of 1. Mascot DAT files were imported into Scaffold for further analysis. Peptide and protein identifications were validated based on 95/99% probability by Peptide and Protein Prophet algorithms respectively, and a minimum of 2 peptides. Proteins with similar peptides undifferentiated by MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. FDR was calculated using Peptide and Protein Prophet algorithms. Quantitative comparison employed normalized weight spectra (NWS), using experiment wide proteins grouping. Treatment groups were compared by Student's two-tailed t test within Scaffold and were further refined by applying a fold change cut off of >0.5. Only proteins with NWS > 5 in at least one treatment group were considered during quantitative analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Obesity, Sperm, Lfq, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Colorado Center for Reproductive Medicine, CO, USA
University of Sydney

### Submitter
Taylor Pini

### Lab Head
Dr Taylor Pini
Colorado Center for Reproductive Medicine, CO, USA


