### Accession
PXD024442

### Title
Regulation of the HTRA2 protease activity by PDZ domain-binding peptide ligands and the influence on HTRA2-specific protein interaction networks in retinal tissues

### Description
For the identification of HTRA2-specific protein interaction partners in retinal tissues of the house swine (Sus scrofa), we performed co-immunoprecipitation experiments with recombinant 6His-tag HTRA2 followed by quantitative LC-MS-based proteomics (see Fig. 2A and File S1). In brief, 2 µg recombinant 6His-tag HTRA2 (HTRA2 group) were spiked into 5 mg homogenized porcine retina and was subsequently enriched with the bounded protein interaction partners via Ni-NTA affinity purification (n=3). In addition, two further sample groups were treated with 10 µg UCF 101 (UCF-101 group) or 10 µg synthetic CDR peptide (CDR group) to unravel the influence of both molecules on the HTRA2-specific protein interactome in the retinal tissues (n=3 for each group). Eluate fractions of each group were separated by 1-D SDS PAGE (Fig. S1) and subsequently subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion. To distinguish unspecific from HTRA2 specific binders, we also included a control Ni-NTA bead group (CTRL group) for the quantitative MS analysis (n=3).

### Sample Protocol
The recombinant protein HTRA2 with a C-terminal 6xHis-tag motif (Novoprotein Scientific INC., China) was spiked into 5 mg homogenized porcine retina. The experiment comprised in total 4 groups (n=3 per group): Control homogenate (CTRL group), homogenate with 2 μg recombinant HTRA2 (HTRA2 group), homogenate with 2 μg recombinant HTRA2 and 10 μg UCF-101 (UCF-101 group) as well as homogenate with 2 μg recombinant HTRA2 and 10 μg synthetic CDR peptide (CDR group). After incubation at 4 °C overnight, the tagged protein HTRA2 with the bounded protein interaction partners (co-immunoprecipitation) were isolated using 40 μL HisPurTM Ni-NTA magnetic beads  (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instruction. Each bead group was washed twice with 400 μL PBS and bounded HTRA2 incl. protein interaction partners eluted by pH shift. The protein concentration of each eluate fraction was determined as described above. Afterwards, 50 μg of each eluate fraction  was dried using a speed vacuum concentrator (SpeedVac) (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany) for 45 min at 30° C and stored at -20° C. Eluate fractions were separated by 1D-SDS PAGE and further subjected to in-gel trysin digestion. All samples were measured by LC-MS/MS

### Data Protocol
The statistical analysis of the MS data was processed using Perseus software version 1.6.6.0 (Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried). Protein identifications were filtered for contaminants, reversed hits and “only identified by site”. For the identification of significant protein interaction partner of HTRA2, we used the MaxQuant-specific iBAQ (Intensity Based Absolute Quantification) values of the proteins for the statistical quantitative analysis. IBAQ values were obtained by dividing the raw intensities of each protein by the number of theoretical peptides and were already used for label-free immunoprecipitation experiments.  At first, the intensities of all detected proteins were log2 transformed. In order to identify only true interaction partners of HTRA2, the quantitative data of each group (HTRA2 group, UCF-101 group and CDR group) were ‘normalized’ to the control bead group (CTRL, see Fig. 2). All true protein hits needed to be detected in in at least three biological replicates of the CTRL or the other three experimental groups (HTRA2, UCF-101 or CDR). Missing protein intensity values were imputed on the basis of the normal distribution of the data (width: 0.3, down shift: 1.8). For the identification of HTRA2-specific interaction partners only missing values of the CTRL group were imputed in accordance with previous publications.  Volcano plot analysis with the following filtering criteria (P<0.01; log2 fold change > 1.5) revealed significantly enriched protein interaction partners of HTRA2 in all three experimental groups (HTRA2 group, UCF-101 group and CDR group).

### Publication Abstract
The mitochondrial serine protease HTRA2 has many versatile biological functions ranging from being an important regulator of apoptosis to being an essential component for neuronal cell survival and mitochondrial homeostasis. Loss of HTRA2 protease function is known to cause neurodegeneration, whereas overactivation of its proteolytic function is associated with cell death and inflammation. In accordance with this, our group verified in a recent study that the synthetic peptide ASGYTFTNYGLSWVR, encoding the hypervariable sequence part of an antibody, showed a high affinity for the target protein HTRA2 and triggered neuroprotection in an in vitro organ culture model for glaucoma. To unravel this neuroprotective mechanism, the present study showed for the first time that the synthetic CDR1 peptide significantly (<i>p</i> &lt; 0.01) inhibited the proteolytic activity of HTRA2 up to 50% using a specific protease function assay. Furthermore, using state-of-the-art co-immunoprecipitation technologies in combination with high-resolution MS, we identified 50 significant protein interaction partners of HTRA2 in the retina of house swine (<i>p</i> &lt; 0.01; log<sub>2</sub> fold change &gt; 1.5). Interestingly, 72% of the HTRA2-specific interactions (23 of 31 binders) were inhibited by additional treatment with UCF-101 (HTRA2 protease inhibitor) or the synthetic CDR peptide. On the other hand, the remaining 19 binders of HTRA2 were exclusively identified in the UCF101 and/or CDR group. However, many of the interactors were involved in the ER to Golgi anterograde transport (e.g., AP3D1), aggrephagy (e.g., PSMC1), and the pyruvate metabolism/citric acid cycle (e.g., SHMT2), and illustrated the complex protein interaction networks of HTRA2 in neurological tissues. In conclusion, the present study provides, for the first time, a comprehensive protein catalogue of HTRA2-specific interaction partners in the retina, and will serve as reference map in the future for studies focusing on HTRA2-mediated neurodegeneration.

### Keywords
Htra2; neuroprotection; retina; interaction partners; co-immunoprecipitation; mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Universitätsmedizin Mainz
Translational and Experimental Ophthalmology, University Medical Center in Mainz

### Submitter
Carsten Schmelter

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Carsten Schmelter
Translational and Experimental Ophthalmology, University Medical Center in Mainz


