### Accession
PXD018546

### Title
Greenbug (Schizaphis graminum) Herbivory Effect on Switchgrass (Panicum virgatum) PhosphoProteomeGreenbug (Schizaphis graminum) Herbivory Effect on Switchgrass (Panicum virgatum) PhosphoProteome

### Description
Cereal aphids can successfully colonize and damage switchgrass (Panicum virgatum) plants. Among the aphids tested, greenbugs (Schizaphis graminum, GB) caused significant plant damage likely through a combination of aphid-salivary proteins that are injected into plants during feeding and a strong host response elicited by herbivory. In this study, changes in protein phosphorylation present in GB-infested and uninfested control plants was determined. These data were compared against transcriptome changes recently published for this system.

### Sample Protocol
Total protein was extracted from four biological replicates of two treatments: C10 (controls) and I10 (infested). Ground leaf tissues were extracted with 600 μL of Tris-buffered phenol (pH 8.8). Proteins were collected by centrifugation at 16,000 × g and washed twice with 0.1 M ammonium acetate in 100% methanol, once with 80% acetone and once with 70% methanol. 800 µg of total protein from each sample was reduced at 37°C for 2 h, alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide for 45 min at room temperature in darkness. Samples were diluted 10-fold and trypsin digestion carried out for 24 h at a ratio of 1:50 enzyme: substrate (E:S). Digests were acidified with 20% TFA to pH 3, then desalted using 50 mg Sep-Pak® C18 reverse-phase SPE columns (Waters Corp, Milford, MA). Approximately, 0.75 mg of digested, desalted, dry peptide was dissolved in 2 M lactic acid, 60% acetonitrile to 3 mg/mL and shaken violently with TiO2 beads (Titansphere, 5µm, GL Sciences, Tokyo, Japan) in a ratio of 1:4 sample:beads (w/w) for 1 h at 24°C as described previously. Phosphopeptides were eluted into 1.5 mL Lo-Bind tubes by 2 x 100 µL additions of ammonium hydroxide (5% v/v) at 1000 x g, frozen and immediately lyophilized. A further elution with 2 x 100 µL pyrrolidine (5% v/v) at 1000 x g was performed, and this pooled eluate was frozen and immediately lyophilized. Both eluates were combined and analyzed on an RSLCnano system (ThermoFisher Scientific) coupled to a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). The samples were first injected onto a cartridge trap column (PepMap™ 100, C18, 0.3 x 5 mm, ThermoFisher Scientific) for 3.3 min at a flow rate of 5 µL/min, 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid before switching in line with the main column. Separation was performed on a C18 nano column (Acquity UPLC® M-class, Peptide CSH™ 130A, 1.7 µm 75 µm x 250 mm, Waters Corp) at 260 nL/min with a linear gradient from 5-35% over 96 min. The LC aqueous mobile phase contained 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water and the organic mobile phase contained 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in 80% (v/v) acetonitrile. Mass spectra for the eluted peptides were acquired on a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer in data-dependent mode using a mass range of m/z 375–1500, resolution 120,000, AGC target 3 x 106, maximum injection time 60 ms for the MS1 peptide measurements. Data-dependent MS2 spectra were acquired by HCD as a Top20 experiment with a normalized collision energy (NCE) set at 28%, AGC target set to 1 x 105, 15,000 resolution, intensity threshold 1 x 104 and a maximum injection time of 250 ms.

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed in Proteome Discoverer 2.2 software (ThermoFisher Scientific). Three different database search tools were used, Mascot 2.6.2, MS Amanda 2.0 and SeQuest HT. The databases searched were the common contaminants database cRAP (116 entries, www.theGPM.org) and the Pvi5 (79335 entries, www.phytozome.org). For the phosphoproteomics experiment, methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal and lysine acetylation, and Ser/Thr and Tyr phosphorylation were set as variable modifications, whilst Cys carbamidomethylation was specified as a fixed modification. A maximum of two trypsin missed cleavages were permitted and the precursor and fragment mass tolerances were set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. Peptides were validated by Percolator with a 0.01 posterior error probability (PEP) threshold. The data were searched using a decoy database to set the false discovery rate to 1% (high confidence). The localization probabilities of the PTMs were obtained using ptmRS. The peptides were quantified using the precursor abundance based on intensity. The peak abundance was normalized using total peptide amount. The peptide group abundances are summed for each sample and the maximum sum for all files is determined. The normalization factor used is the factor of the sum of the sample and the maximum sum in all files.

### Publication Abstract
Switchgrass (Panicum virgatum L.) is an important crop for biofuel production but it also serves as host for greenbugs (Schizaphis graminum Rondani; GB). Although transcriptomic studies have been done to infer the molecular mechanisms of plant defense against GB, little is known about the effect of GB infestation on the switchgrass protein expression and phosphorylation regulation. The global response of the switchgrass cultivar Summer proteome and phosphoproteome was monitored by label-free proteomics shotgun in GB-infested and uninfested control plants at 10&#xa0;days post infestation. Peptides matching a total of 3,594 proteins were identified and 429 were differentially expressed proteins in GB-infested plants relative to uninfested control plants. Among these, 291 and 138 were up and downregulated by GB infestation, respectively. Phosphoproteome analysis identified 310 differentially phosphorylated proteins (DP) from 350 phosphopeptides with a total of 399 phosphorylated sites. These phosphopeptides had more serine phosphorylated residues (79%), compared to threonine phosphorylated sites (21%). Overall, KEGG pathway analysis revealed that GB feeding led to the enriched accumulation of proteins important for biosynthesis of plant defense secondary metabolites and repressed the accumulation of proteins involved in photosynthesis. Interestingly, defense modulators such as terpene synthase, papain-like cysteine protease, serine carboxypeptidase, and lipoxygenase2 were upregulated at the proteome level, corroborating previously published transcriptomic data.

### Keywords
Greenbug, Switchgrass, Lc-ms/ms, Shotgun, Phosphoproteome, Label-free

### Affiliations
University of Nebraska - Lincoln

### Submitter
Sophe Alvarez

### Lab Head
Dr Sophie Alvarez
University of Nebraska - Lincoln


