### Accession
PXD002480

### Title
Facile Discovery of Cell-surface Protein Targets of Cancer Cell Aptamers

### Description
Cancer biomarker discovery constitutes a frontier in cancer research. In recent years, cell-binding aptamers have become useful molecular probes for biomarker discovery. However, there are few successful examples, and the critical barrier resides in the identification of the cell-surface protein targets for the aptamers, where only a limited number of aptamer targets have been identified so far. Herein, we developed a universal SILAC-based quantitative proteomic method for target discovery of cell-binding aptamers. The method allowed for distinguishing specific aptamer-binding proteins from non-specific proteins based on abundance ratios of proteins bound to aptamer-carrying bait and control bait. In addition, we employed fluorescently labeled aptamers for monitoring and optimizing the binding conditions. We were able to identify and validate selectin L and integrin 4 as the protein targets for two previously reported aptamers, Sgc-3b and Sgc-4e, respectively. This strategy should be generally applicable for the discovery of protein targets for other cell-binding aptamers, which will promote the applications of these aptamers.

### Sample Protocol
Aptamers were dissolved in the binding buffer, which contained PBS with 5 mM MgCl2, 1 mM CaCl2, and 0.1 mg/mL herring sperm DNA, and annealed by heating to 95C for 5 min and cooled on ice for 15 min. The aptamers were kept at 25C for 5 min prior to use. For the binding experiments, the aptamer (Sgc-3b or Sgc-4e, 100 nM) was incubated, on ice with gentle shaking, with 2108 heavy- or light-labeled Jurkat E6-1 cells in a 4-mL binding buffer for 30 min, after which 4 mL of PBS buffer containing 2% formaldehyde was added. The mixture was incubated at 4C for 15 min to induce cross-linking. The reaction was subsequently quenched with a 400-L solution of 2.5 M glycine. The cells were then washed twice with washing buffer, which contained PBS with 5 mM EDTA. Subsequently, the cells were incubated, at 4C for 1 h with shaking, in a lysis buffer containing PBS (pH 7.4), 2% Triton X-100 (v/v), 0.4% SDS (w/v), 5 mM EDTA, 1 mM PMSF, and a protease inhibitor cocktail. The cell lysate was centrifuged at 8000g at 4C for 5 min. The supernatant was transferred to a new tube and incubated with 20 L high-capacity streptavidin agarose resin (Thermo) at 4C for 1 h. The resin was washed sequentially with lysis buffer, washing buffer and water twice. In the forward SILAC experiment, the light- and heavy-labeled cells were cross-linked with aptamers Sgc-3b and Sgc-4e, respectively, and the cells were subsequently lysed. The lysates were incubated separately with the resin and subsequently combined. On the other hand, the resins incubated with the lysates of light- and heavy-labeled cells that were cross-linked with aptamers Sgc-4e and Sgc-3b, respectively, were mixed in the reverse SILAC experiment.  The resin was subsequently resuspended in 50 mM NH4HCO3 and incubated at 65C overnight to remove nonspecific proteins. To the resultant mixture was added 4× reducing SDS loading buffer (500 mM Tris-HCl, pH 6.8, 8% SDS, 40% glycerol, 20% -mercaptoethanol, 5 mg/mL bromophenol blue) and the suspension was heated at 95C for 1 h. The sample was run on 12% SDS-PAGE at 150 V for 15 min to about 9-10 mm and the gel band was cut out. The proteins were digested in-gel with trypsin following published procedures (17). The resulting peptides were collected, dried in a Speed-vac, and stored at -20C until LC-MS and MS/MS analyses.    For pulling down endogenously biotinylated proteins, streptavidin beads and biotin-saturated streptavidin beads were employed to pull down heavy and light lysates, respectively, in the forward SILAC experiment. In the reverse SILAC experiment, streptavidin beads and biotin-saturated streptavidin beads were utilized to pull down light and heavy lysates, respectively. Other experimental procedures were the same as the aptamer pull-down experiment.<br><br>LC-MS and MS/MS experiments were performed on an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer equipped with a nanoelectrospray ionization source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). Samples were automatically loaded from a 48-well microplate autosampler using an EASY-nLC II system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 3 μL/min onto a home-made trapping column (150 μm*60 mm) packed with 5 μm C18 120 Å reversed-phase material (ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, Dr. Maisch). The peptides were then separated on a 150 μm*200 mm column packed with the same type of material using a 180-min linear gradient of 8-35% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid and at a flow rate of 230 nL/min. The LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent scan mode, where one scan of MS was followed with MS/MS of the top 20 abundant ions found in MS.

### Data Protocol
For peptide identification, the raw MS data were processed with the MaxQuant search engine (1.3.0.5) against human IPI protein database version 3.68. Common contaminants were added to this database. Initial precursor ion mass tolerance of 20 ppm and fragment ion mass deviation of 0.5 Da were set as the search criteria. The maximum number of miss-cleavages for trypsin was set as two per peptide. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was considered as a fixed modification, and N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were considered as variable modifications. For statistical evaluation of the data obtained, the posterior error probability and false discovery rate were used. The false discovery rate was determined by searching a reverse database. A false discovery rate of 0.01 was required for proteins and peptides. To match identifications across different replicates, the “match between runs” option in MaxQuant was enabled within a time window of 2 min.  For the candidate protein targets for the aptamers, two or more unique peptides had to be identified and the posterior error probability (PEP) had to be lower than 10-5. In addition, the protein had to be identified in both forward and reverse SILAC labeling experiments and the product of the paired forward and reverse “H/L ratio” had to be between 0.5 the 2.0. The intensity ratios for light/heavy-labeled peptides of the candidate aptamer targets were further validated by manual analysis, where the intensity ratios were taken across the peaks found in the selected-ion chromatograms for precursor ions of the unique peptides derived from the candidate aptamer targets. Protein ratios were calculated as the mean values for the observed ratios of the comprising peptides. For the aptamer target identification experiment, we normalized the protein ratios against the average ratio observed for endogenously biotinylated proteins, including pyruvate carboxylase, isoform 4 of acetyl-CoA carboxylase 1, propionyl-coenzyme A carboxylase and methylcrotonoyl-CoA carboxylase subunit  to correct for potential incomplete SILAC labeling and/or inequality in loading of light and heavy lysates to the aptamer-immobilized streptavidin beads. Ratio data are calculated as mean±S.D. using Origin 8.0 Software (Microcal Software, Northampton, MA) according to two forward and reverse SILAC labeling experiments (n=4).

### Publication Abstract
Cancer biomarker discovery constitutes a frontier in cancer research. In recent years, cell-binding aptamers have become useful molecular probes for biomarker discovery. However, there are few successful examples, and the critical barrier resides in the identification of the cell-surface protein targets for the aptamers, where only a limited number of aptamer targets have been identified so far. Herein, we developed a universal SILAC-based quantitative proteomic method for target discovery of cell-binding aptamers. The method allowed for distinguishing specific aptamer-binding proteins from nonspecific proteins based on abundance ratios of proteins bound to aptamer-carrying bait and control bait. In addition, we employed fluorescently labeled aptamers for monitoring and optimizing the binding conditions. We were able to identify and validate selectin L and integrin &#x3b1;4 as the protein targets for two previously reported aptamers, Sgc-3b and Sgc-4e, respectively. This strategy should be generally applicable for the discovery of protein targets for other cell-binding aptamers, which will promote the applications of these aptamers.

### Keywords
Biomarker, Ms, Aptamer

### Affiliations
Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences
Department of Chemistry, University of California, Riverside, CA92521-0403, USA.

### Submitter
Tao Bing

### Lab Head
Dr Yinsheng Wang
Department of Chemistry, University of California, Riverside, CA92521-0403, USA.


