### Accession
PXD039646

### Title
Plasmepsin X activates function of the PCRCR complex in P. falciparum by processing PfRh5 for binding to basigin and invasion of human erythrocytes

### Description
Plasmodium falciparum causes the most severe form of malaria in humans. The protozoan parasite develops within erythrocytes to mature schizonts, that contain more than 16 merozoites, which egress and invade fresh erythrocytes. The aspartic protease plasmepsin X (PMX), processes proteins and proteases essential for merozoite egress from the schizont and invasion of the host erythrocyte, including the leading vaccine candidate PfRh5. PfRh5 is anchored to the merozoite surface through a 5-membered complex (PCRCR), consisting of Plasmodium thrombospondin-related apical merozoite protein (PTRAMP), cysteine-rich small secreted protein (CSS), Rh5-interacting protein (PfRipr) and cysteine-rich protective antigen (CyRPA). We show that PCRCR is processed by PMX in micronemes to remove the N-terminal prodomain and this activates the function of the complex unmasking a form that can bind basigin on the erythrocyte membrane and mediate merozoite invasion.  The ability to activate PCRCR at a specific time in merozoite invasion ensures invasion inhibitory epitopes are exposed to the immune system for a minimal time but also mask potential deleterious effects of its function until they are required. These results provide an important understanding of the essential roles of PMX and the fine regulation of PCRCR function in P. falciparum biology.

### Sample Protocol
Eluates of HA-captured proteins derived from each biological replicate were prepared for mass spectrometry analysis using the FASP (filter aided sample preparation) method, with the following modifications. Proteins were reduced with 10 mM Tris-(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP), alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide, then digested with 1 μg sequence-grade modified trypsin gold (Promega) in 50 mM NH4HCO3 and incubated overnight at 37°C. Peptides were eluted with 50 mM NH4HCO3 in two 40 μl sequential washes and acidified in 1% formic acid (FA, final concentration).

### Data Protocol
The extracted peptide solutions from immunoprecipitation experiments were acidified (0.1% formic acid) and concentrated by centrifugal lyophilisation using a SpeedVac AES 1010 (Savant). Peptides were reconstituted in 80 μl 2% ACN/0.1% FA and 3 μl separated by reverse-phase chromatography on a C18 fused silica column (inner diameter 75 µm, OD 360 µm × 25 cm length, 1.6 µm C18 beads) packed into an emitter tip (IonOpticks, Australia), using a nano-flow HPLC (M-class, Waters). The HPLC was coupled to a timsTOF Pro (Bruker) equipped with a CaptiveSpray source. Peptides were loaded directly onto the column at a constant flow rate of 400 nl/min with buffer A (99.9% Milli-Q water, 0.1% FA) and eluted with a 90-min linear gradient from 2 to 34% buffer B (99.9% ACN, 0.1% FA). The timsTOF Pro was operated in PASEF mode using Compass Hystar 5.1. Settings for the 11 samples per day method were as follows: Mass Range 100 to 1700m/z, 1/K0 Start 0.6 V·s/cm2 End 1.6 V·s/cm2, Ramp time 110.1ms, Lock Duty Cycle to 100%, Capillary Voltage 1600V, Dry Gas 3 l/min, Dry Temp 180°C, PASEF settings: 10 MS/MS scans (total cycle time 1.27sec), charge range 0-5, active exclusion for 0.4 min, Scheduling Target intensity 10000, Intensity threshold 2500, CID collision energy 42eV. Raw files consisting of high-resolution tandem mass spectrometry spectra were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.6.17) for feature detection and protein identification using the Andromeda search engine 43. Extracted peak lists were searched against the P. falciparum 3D7 database and a separate reverse decoy database to empirically assess the FDR using a strict trypsin specificity allowing up to two missed cleavages. The minimum required peptide length was set to seven amino acids. The modifications included: carbamidomethylation of Cys was set as a fixed modification, whereas N-acetylation of proteins and the oxidation of Met were set as variable modifications. The ‘match between runs’ option in MaxQuant was used to transfer the identifications made between runs based on matching precursors with high mass accuracy. LFQ quantification was selected, with a minimum ratio count of 2. Peptide-spectrum match (PSM) and protein identifications were filtered using a target-decoy approach at an FDR of 1%. In the main search, precursor mass tolerance was 0.006 Da and fragment mass tolerance was 40 ppm. Differential expression analysis was performed using the LFQ-Analyst platform (https://bioinformatics.erc.monash.edu/apps/LFQ-Analyst/. To adjust for multiple testing, p-values were corrected using the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure. Proteins were deemed to have significant differential expression if the p-values ≤ 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Malaria, Ip-ms, Pcrcr, Plasmepsin x

### Affiliations
WEHI
Deputy Director – Science Strategy The Walter and Eliza Hall institute of Medical Research Professor, Department of Medical Biology Faculty of Medicine, Dentistry and Health The University of Melbourne Australia

### Submitter
Laura Dagley

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Alan Cowman
Deputy Director – Science Strategy The Walter and Eliza Hall institute of Medical Research Professor, Department of Medical Biology Faculty of Medicine, Dentistry and Health The University of Melbourne Australia


