### Accession
PXD045004

### Title
LC-MS/MS analysis of isolated murine brain endothelial cells (BECs) from ARF6-KO and WT mice followed by label-free quantification (LFQ)

### Description
Age-related decline in brain endothelial cell (BEC) function critically contributes to cerebrovascular and neurodegenerative disease. Comprehensive atlases of the BEC transcriptome have become available but results from proteomic profiling are lacking. To gain insights into endothelial pathways affected by aging, we developed a magnetic-activated cell sorting (MACS)-based mouse BEC enrichment protocol compatible with high-resolution mass-spectrometry and analysed the profiles of protein abundance changes across multiple time points between 3 and 18 months of age and identified Arf6 as one of the most prominently downregulated vesicle-mediated transport protein during BEC aging.  To better understand the role of Arf6 in BECs, in this experiment we have compared MACS sorted BECs from Arf6-KO and WT 3-months-old mice and found 140 and 172 proteins to be significantly down- and upregulated, respectively. Enrichment analyses of significantly downregulated proteins showed mRNA processing to be among the most affected biological processes consistent with our findings on the aged BEC proteome.

### Sample Protocol
The entire brain of 3-months old Arf6-KO and WT mice without the olfactory bulb was used for BEC isolation. First, the brain was transferred to a Petri Dish placed on ice and minced with a scalpel. BECs were isolated using a modified version of the Adult Brain Dissociation kit (Miltenyi Biotec, Cat# 130-107-677), which allows for mechanical and enzymatic tissue dissociation. After tissue homogenization and filtration through 70 µm cell strainers (Corning, Cat# 431751), myelin was removed using a 30 % Percoll gradient (GE Healthcare Cat# 17-5445-02) followed by removal of erythrocytes using the Red Blood Cell Removal Solution (Miltenyi Biotec, Cat# 130-094-183). BECs were enriched from the single cell suspension using CD31 MicroBeads (Miltenyi Biotec, Cat# 130-097-418) and magnetic activated cell sorting (MACS) using a modified MACS buffer with low bovine serum albumin (BSA) content (L-MACS buffer; containing 0.25 % BSA (BSA Fraction V, Sigma-Aldrich, Cat#10735096001) and 2 mM EDTA (ThermoFisher, Cat# 15575020) in PBS with calcium and magnesium (Corning, Cat#21-030-CV)). Following CD31 enrichment, the cell suspension was washed twice with PBS to remove residual L-MACS buffer and subsequently pelleted cells were used for further protein extraction. Protein was extracted from isolated BECs with RIPA buffer containing 150 mM NaCl (Roth, Cat# 3957.1), 1 M Tris-HCl pH 7.5 (Roth, Cat# 9090.3), 1 % NP40 (Sigma Alrich Cat# 74385), 0.5 % Deoxycholate (Roth, Cat# 3484.3), and 0.1 % SDS (Serva, Cat# 20765.03) and protein inhibitors cocktail (Roche, Cat# 4693159001). Samples were incubated in RIPA buffer for 30min on ice followed by centrifugation at 18,000 g for another 30 min at 4 °C. Supernatants were collected and kept at -80 °C for further analysis. The whole sample of acutely isolated BECs (~5 µg) was subjected to proteolytical digestion. After 1:2 dilution with water, a benzonase digestion with 12.5 units was performed to remove remaining DNA/RNA the single-pot solid-phase enhanced sample preparation (SP3) was used for protein digestion according to a previously published protocol (Hughes et al., Nat Prot, 2019) Samples were filtered with 0.22 µm spin filters (Costar Spin-x, Corning, USA) to remove remaining beads, and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Dried peptides were dissolved in 20 µL 0.1% formic. The peptide concentration after proteolytic digestion was estimated using the Qubit protein assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, US). Samples were analyzed on a nanoElute nanoHPLC which was coupled to a TimsTOF pro mass spectrometer with a CaptiveSpray ion source (Bruker, Germany). An amount of 350 ng of peptides were separated on a on an in-house packed C18 analytical column (15 cm × 75 µm ID, ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm, Dr. Maisch GmbH) using a binary gradient of water and acetonitrile (B) containing 0.1% formic acid at flow rate of 250 nL/min (0 min, 2 % B; 2 min, 5% B; 70 min, 24 % B; 85 min, 35 % B; 90 min, 60 % B) and a column temperature of 50°C. A Data Independent Acquisition Parallel Accumulation–Serial Fragmentation (DIA-PASEF) method was used for spectrum acquisition. Ion accumulation and separation using Trapped Ion Mobility Spectrometry (TIMS) was set to a ramp time of 100 ms. One scan cycle included one TIMS full MS scan and with 26 windows with a width of 27 m/z covering a m/z range of 350-1002 m/z. Two windows were recorded per PASEF scan. This resulted in a cycle time of 1.4 s.

### Data Protocol
The DIA-PASEF raw data was analyzed with the software DIA-NN version 1.8 (https://github.com/vdemichev/DiaNN) using a library-free search against a one protein per gene database from Mus musculus (murine DB: download date: 2023-01-17, 21976 entries). Trypsin was defined as protease and 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Oxidation of methionines and acetylation of protein N-termini were defined as variable modifications, whereas carbamidomethylation of cysteines was defined as fixed modification. The precursor and fragment ion m/z ranges were limited from 350 to 1001 and 200 to 1700, respectively. Precursor charge states of 2-4 were considered. The optimal mass accuracy for peptides and peptide fragments as well as the ion mobility tolerances were automatically determined by DIA-NN. A FDR threshold of 1% was applied for peptide and protein identifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Arf6, Brain endothelial cells

### Affiliations
DZNE Munich Neuroproteomics
DZNE Munich, Neuroproteomics, Feodor-Lynen Str. 17, 81377 Munich, Germany

### Submitter
Stephan Mueller

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan F. Lichtenthaler
DZNE Munich, Neuroproteomics, Feodor-Lynen Str. 17, 81377 Munich, Germany


