### Accession
PXD020699

### Title
Haemonchus contortus ESPs  LS-MS/MS

### Description
Haemonchus contortus has developed complexed and multifaceted mechanisms of immune evasion to enable the survival in the host. Generating excretion and secretion products (ESPs) to subvert or suppress the functions of host cytokines is a newly immune regulatory pattern found during recent years. TGF-β1 has critical immune regulatory functions in nematode infections. In this study, the co-immunoprecipitation was used to collect the molecules which bound to the goat TGF-β1 from ESPs, and the precipitates were identified by mass spectrometry using shotgun LC-MS / MS.

### Sample Protocol
In order to acquire the binding proteins of the goat TGF-β1 from HcESPs, 100 μg TGF-β1 (Genscript Biotech, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China) and 300 μg HcESPs were incubated at 4 °C. After 12 h incubation, 40 μL of Protein A/G PLUS-Agarose beads (Santa cruz biotechnology, Dallas, TX, USA) and 1.5 μg normal mouse IgG (Santa cruz biotechnology, Dallas, TX, USA) were added and then incubated at 4 °C for 30 min. The extraneous proteins in the precipitate were discarded after centrifugation and the supernatant was divided equally and transferred to individual tubes. One sample was incubated with mouse anti TGF-β1 (Santa cruz biotechnology, Dallas, TX, USA) and another sample was incubated with normal mouse IgG as the negative control for 4 h at 4 °C. Each sample was then incubated with 20 μL Protein A/G plus agarose overnight at 4 °C to isolate the immune complexes. Immunoprecipitates were collected carefully after centrifugation and then washed 4 times with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). FASP enzymatic hydrolysis was used in this study: Take 30 μL of immunoprecipitates, add DTT to the final concentration of 100 mM, boil water for 5 minutes, and cool to room temperature. Add 200 μL UA buffer to mix well, transfer to a 10kD ultrafiltration centrifuge tube, centrifuge at 14000g for 15 minutes, discard the filtrate (repeat this step once). Add 100μL IAA buffer (100mM IAA in UA), shake at 600rpm for 1min, react at room temperature for 30min in the dark, and centrifuge at 14000g for 15min. Add 100μL UA buffer and centrifuge at 14000g for 15min, repeat this step twice. Add 100μL of 25mM NH4HCO3 solution, centrifuge at 14000g for 15min, repeat this step twice. Add 40μL Trypsin buffer (4μg Trypsin in 40μL 100mM NH4HCO3), shake at 600rpm for 1min, and place at 37°C for 16-18h. Replace the collection tube, centrifuge 14000g for 15min; add 40μL 25mM NH4HCO3, centrifuge 14000g for 15min, and collect the filtrate. The peptides were desalted using C18 Cartridge, the peptides were lyophilized and reconstituted with 40μL 0.1% formic acid solution, and the peptides were quantified (OD280). The samples were separated using the HPLC liquid system Easy nLC with nanoliter flow rate. Buffer A solution is 0.1% formic acid aqueous solution, and B solution is 0.1% formic acid acetonitrile aqueous solution (acetonitrile is 84%). The chromatographic column is balanced with 95% A liquid, and the sample is loaded by the autosampler onto the loading column (Thermo Scientific Acclaim PepMap100, 100μm*2cm, nanoViper C18), and passes through the analytical column (Thermo scientific EASY column, 10cm, ID75μm, 3μm, C18-A2) separation, the flow rate is 300 nL/min. 1 hour gradient is used: 0min-50min, the linear gradient of liquid B is from 0%-35%; 50min-55min, the linear gradient of liquid B is from 35%-100%; 55min-60min, the liquid B is maintained at 100%. After chromatographic separation, the samples were analyzed by Q-Exactive mass spectrometer. The analysis time is 1 h, the detection method is positive ion, the precursor ion scan range is 300-1800 m/z, the resolution of the primary mass spectrum is 70,000 at 200 m/z, AGC( Automatic gain control) target is 1e6, Maximum IT is 50ms, and Dynamic exclusion is 60.0s. The mass-to-charge ratios of peptides and peptide fragments are collected according to the following method: 20 fragment maps (MS2 scan) are collected after each full scan, MS2 Activation Type is HCD, Isolation window is 2 m/z, and MS MS resolution. The rate is 17,500 at 200 m/z, the Normalized Collision Energy is 30eV, and the Underfill is 0.1%.

### Data Protocol
The raw file of the mass spectrometry test was used to search the corresponding database with Proteome Discoverer1.4 software, and finally the identified protein results were obtained. The search parameters are as follows: Enzyme ： Trypsin Database： uniprot_Haemonchus_contortus_21902_20170720 Fixed modifications： Carbamidomethyl (C) Dynamical modifications： Oxidation (M) Max Missed Cleavages： 2 Filter by Peptide Confidence=High：

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Esps, Haenmonchus contortus, Ls-ms/ms, Goat tgf-β1

### Affiliations
College of Veterinary Medicine Nanjing Agricultural University，China
College of Veterinary Medicine
Nanjing Agricultural University


### Submitter
Bu Yongqian

### Lab Head
Dr Li Xiangrui
College of Veterinary Medicine Nanjing Agricultural University，China


