### Accession
PXD029307

### Title
Novel tissue-specific markers revealed by in-depth proteome analysis of human myotendinous junction

### Description
Force is transmitted between skeletal muscle and tendon via a highly specialized tissue interface: the myotendinous junction (MTJ). Despite its crucial role in mechano-transduction and involvement in muscle strain injury, knowledge about the molecular composition of the MTJ is incomplete. We performed LCMS-based proteomic analysis of human MTJ by progressive removal of the muscle component in the human semitendinosus muscle-tendon complex. Patellar tendon, which does not contains muscle tissue, was used as control. We quantified >3000 proteins across all samples and 112 proteins were significantly increased in MTJ. Of these, 24 proteins have previously been identified as MTJ proteins, including the MTJ-marker collagen XXII. Moreover, an overrepresentation of proteins related to sarcoglycan complex, laminin complex, cell junction, membrane, adhesion and extracellular matrix was observed among these proteins. We further confirmed the presence of newly identified MTJ proteins by immunofluorescence in human MTJ: Xin actin-binding repeat-containing protein 2 (XIRP2), thrombospondin-4 (THBS4), tetraspanin-24 (CD151), kindlin-2 (FERMT2), cartilage intermediate layer protein 1 (CILP) and integrin-alpha10 (ITGA10). Altogether, these data provide the first detailed proteomics resource of human MTJ.

### Sample Protocol
For the LCMSMS analysis, proteins (50 g protein/sample, or all the sample if less) were digested using in-solution digestion protocol. Samples were reduced with 0.1 M DTT for 30 min, and alkylated with 55 mM of IAA for 20 min in the dark, both steps taking place at room temperature. For the digestion, samples were digested using endoproteinase LysC (1 µg enzyme/50 µg protein) for 1 h at room temperature. The samples were then diluted 1:4 with 25 mM Tris pH 8.5 and further digested with endoproteinase trypsin (1 µg enzyme/50 µg protein) for overnight at 37ºC with shaking. For the digestion of insoluble pellet fraction, double amount of enzymes was used and the samples were sonicated (15 min, Bioruptor, 30 s on/off cycles) after the addition of each enzymes. Samples were incubated overnight at 37°C with shaking. Digested proteins were spun down (2000 rpm, 5 min) and the supernatant containing extracted peptides was collected. Samples were acidified by adding 5x volumes of 1% TFA in isopropanol. Peptides were purified using StageTips containing a poly-styrene-divinylbenzene copolymer modified with sulfonic acid groups (SDB-RPS) material (3M, St. Paul, MN, USA). Briefly, peptides were loaded on 3x SDB-RPS discs, washed once with 1% TFA in isopropanol and twice with 0.2%TFA and eluted in a microtiter plate in a single step with 60uL of 1% ammonia in 80% acetonitrile (ACN). For the washes and elution, the samples were spun down at 700 g for 3-10 min. The elution buffer was evaporated in a concentrator (Eppendorf) and the peptides resuspended in 10 µL of 0.1% TFA in 5% ACN buffer.   Peptides were analyzed on the LCMS instrumentation consisting of an Easy nanoflow UHPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled via a nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer - HFX (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on 50cm column with 75 µm inner diameter packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-aq 1.9 µm resin (Dr Maisch). Peptides were loaded in 0.5% formic acid buffer and eluted with a 100 min linear gradient with 80% acetonitrile and 0.5% formic acid (v/v) containing buffer at 350 n L/min. Mass spectra were acquired in a data-dependent manner, with an automatic switch between MS and MS/MS using a top 15 method. MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with a mass range of 300−1650 m/z and 60 000 resolution at m/z 200. HCD peptide fragments were acquired with normalized collision energy of 27. The maximum ion injection times for the survey scan and the MS/ MS scans were 45 ms, and the ion target values were set to 3e6 and 1e4, respectively. Data were acquired using Xcalibur software.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were analyzed using MaxQuant (version -1.6.01) with the integrated Adromeda search engine (Tyanova et al., 2016a). The initial maximum allowed mass deviation was set to 6 ppm for monoisotopic precursor ions and 20 ppm for MS/MS peaks. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, defined as C-terminal to arginine and lysine excluding proline, and a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. A minimal peptide length of six amino acids was required. Carbamidomethylcysteine was set as a fixed modification, while N-terminal acetylation and methio- nine oxidation were set as variable modifications. The spectra were searched by the Andromeda search engine against the Human UniProt sequence database combined with 248 common contaminants and concatenated with the reversed versions of all sequences. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% for peptide and protein identifications. To match the identifications across different LC-MS runs,the “match between runs” option in MaxQuant was enabled with a retention time window of 30s. In the case of identified peptides that were shared between two or more proteins, these were combined and reported in protein group. Label free protein quantification was performed using built in MaxLFQ algorithm in MaxQuant software. The raw files were processed twice. First, to evaluate the extraction efficiency of different buffers (Figure 1B, S2A, E, F), each raw files were treated as individual experiment. For the second/main analysis, the raw MS files for the proteins extracted with different buffers were treated as individual fractions of respective samples.

### Publication Abstract
Proteomics analysis of skeletal muscle has recently progressed from whole muscle tissue to single myofibers. Here, we further focus on a specific myofiber domain crucial for force transmission from muscle to tendon, the myotendinous junction (MTJ). To overcome the anatomical constraints preventing the isolation of pure MTJs, we performed in-depth analysis of the MTJ by progressive removal of the muscle component in semitendinosus muscle-tendon samples. Using detergents with increasing stringency, we quantified &gt;3000 proteins across all samples, and identified 112 significantly enriched MTJ proteins, including 24 known MTJ-enriched proteins. Of the 88 novel MTJ markers, immunofluorescence analysis confirmed the presence of tetraspanin-24 (CD151), kindlin-2 (FERMT2), cartilage intermediate layer protein 1 (CILP), and integrin-alpha10 (ITGA10), at the human MTJ. Together, these human data constitute the first detailed MTJ proteomics resource that will contribute to advance understanding of the biology of the MTJ and its failure in pathological conditions.

### Keywords
Myotendinous junction, Lc-ms/ms, Proteome, Tendon

### Affiliations
Copenhagen University
Novo Nordisk Center For Basic Metabolic Research, University of Copenhagen.

### Submitter
atul shahaji deshmukh

### Lab Head
Dr Atul S Deshmukh
Novo Nordisk Center For Basic Metabolic Research, University of Copenhagen.


