### Accession
PXD003749

### Title
Quantitative Proteomics analysis of Prostate Cancer Mice Model

### Description
The entire prostates from transgenetic mice and normal mice were quantitatively analysis with MS-based Label free proteomics approach.

### Sample Protocol
The entire prostate were isolated. Homogenized with Buffer and were tryptic degisted.

### Data Protocol
the raw files were identified and quantified with Maxquant. a grouped 2-side student t test was performed between cancer group and normal group.

### Publication Abstract
Transgenic adenocarcinoma of the mouse prostate (TRAMP) mice is a widely used transgenic animal model of prostate cancer (PCa). We performed a label-free quantitative proteomics analysis combined with a bioinformatics analysis on the entire prostate protein extraction from TRAMP mice and compared it with WT littermates. From 2379 total identified proteins, we presented a modest mice prostate reference proteome containing 919 proteins. 61 proteins presented a significant expression difference between two groups. The integrative bioinformatics analysis predicted the overexpression of platelet-derived growth factor B (PDGF-B) in tumor tissues and supports the hypothesis of the PDGF-B signaling network as a key upstream regulator in PCa progression. Furthermore, we demonstrated that Crenolanib, a novel PDGF receptor inhibitor, inhibited PCa cell proliferation in a dose-dependent manner. Finally, we revealed the importance of PDGF-B regulatory network in PCa progression, which will assist us in understanding the role and mechanisms of PDGF-B in promoting cancer growth and provide valuable knowledge for future research on anti-PDGF therapy.

### Keywords
Mouse, Prostate, Prostate cancer

### Affiliations
Uppsala University
Binzhou Medical University

### Submitter
Jia Mi

### Lab Head
Dr Geng Tian
Binzhou Medical University


