### Accession
PXD023956

### Title
Proteome remodeling in the Mycobacterium tuberculosis PknG knockout: molecular hints for the role of this kinase in cell envelope biogenesis and hypoxia.

### Description
Tuberculosis, a pulmonary disease caused by the etiological agent Mycobacterium tuberculosis, is the leading cause of death by a single infectious agent among human beings. One of M. tuberculosis's pathogenic hallmarks is its ability to persist in a dormant state in the host for long periods, reinitiating the infectious cycle when favorable environmental conditions are found. Thus, it is not surprising that this pathogen has developed different mechanisms to withstand the stressful conditions found in the host. In particular, the Ser/Thr protein kinase PknG has gained special relevance since it regulates nitrogen metabolism and facilitates bacterial survival inside macrophages. Nevertheless, the molecular mechanisms underlying these effects are far from being elucidated. To further investigate these issues, we performed quantitative proteomics analyses of protein extracts from M. tuberculosis H37Rv and a mutant derivative lacking PknG. Our results show that in the absence of PknG the mycobacterial proteome was remodeled since 6.5% of the proteins encoded by M. tuberculosis presented significant changes in its relative abundance when compared to the wild-type strain. The main biological processes affected by PknG deletion were the biosynthesis of cell envelope components and the response to hypoxic conditions. Altogether, the results presented here allow us to postulate that PknG regulation of bacterial fitness to stress conditions in host macrophages might be an essential mechanism underlying its reported effect on intracellular bacterial survival.

### Sample Protocol
To generate the spectral library, 5 uL of each sample were mixed and separated using a nano-HPLC (Ultimate 3000, Thermo) coupled to a Q-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q-Exactive Plus, Thermo). Tryptic peptides (5 ug) were injected into an Acclaim PepMapTM 100 C18 nano-trap column (75 um x 2 cm, 3 um particle size, Thermo) and separated in a 75 um x 50 cm, PepMapTM RSLC C18 analytical column (2 um particle size, 100 Å, Thermo) at a constant flow rate of 200 nL/min and 40 °C. The column was equilibrated with 1% of mobile phase B, and the elution was performed using a gradient from 1% to 50% of mobile phase B over 180 min and 50% to 99% over 15 min. The ion spray voltage setting was 1.7 kV, the capillary temperature was set at 250 °C and S-lens RF level at 50. Mass analysis was performed in a data-dependent mode in two-step: 1. acquisition of full MS scan in a 200 to 2000 m/z range; 2. fragmentation of the 12 most intense ions in each segment by HCD using a stepped normalized collision energy of 25, 30, and 35. The following settings were used for full MS scans: a resolution of 70,000 at 200 m/z, an AGC target value of 1E06, and a maximum ion injection time of 100 ms. For MS/MS acquisition the resolution was 17,500 at 200 m/z, AGC target value of 1E05, and maximum injection time of 50 ms. Precursor ion with unassigned, single, and higher than five charges were excluded. The dynamic exclusion time was set at 10 s. Two technical replicates of the sample mix were used to generate the library.  Taking into account the M. tuberculosis H37Rv background proteome downloaded from the UniProt server (www.uniprot.org) and the generated spectral library data, 23 peptides derived from the 11 chosen proteins were selected using using Skyline (v. 20.1.0.155). An unscheduled isolation list was generated, loaded into Thermo Xcalibur 4.0.27.19 and used to carry out a PRM analysis on the Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer. Five ug of  WT and DpknG samples were injected in duplicates and peptides were separated using the same gradient used for spectral library generation. The mass spectrometer settings were as follows: positive polarity, a resolution of 17,500 at 200 m/z, ACG target value of 2E04, maximum injection time of 50 ms, 2.0 m/z of isolation window, stepped normalized collision energy of 25, 30, and 35.

### Data Protocol
For peptide library generation: Thermo raw files were searched against the target-decoy M. tuberculosis H37Rv database as described above but using PatternLab (v5). Search was performed with 40 ppm for precursor mass accuracy and results were afterwards filtered using 5 ppm error tolerance. The result file was saved in SSL format as .raw file (Thermo), with carbamidomethylation of Cys as a fixed modification, to interface with Skyline software. Resulting PRM raw data was extracted and imported into Skyline software (v20.2) for analysis. Data were manually refined using the spectral library as a reference, taking into account the dotp values for each peptide, and the comparison of peak areas for each transition. For quantitative comparative analyses between WT and DpknG peptides, the sum of the peak areas of the transitions of each peptide and the equalization to medians were employed. Peptides with a significant difference showing an adjusted p-value < 0.05 were considered.

### Publication Abstract
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, the etiological agent of tuberculosis, is among the deadliest human pathogens. One of M. tuberculosis's pathogenic hallmarks is its ability to persist in a dormant state in the host. Thus, this pathogen has developed mechanisms to withstand stressful conditions found in the human host. Particularly, the Ser/Thr-protein kinase PknG has gained relevance since it regulates nitrogen metabolism and facilitates bacterial survival inside macrophages. Nevertheless, the molecular mechanisms underlying these effects are far from being elucidated. To further investigate these issues, we performed quantitative proteomic analyses of protein extracts from M. tuberculosis H37Rv and a mutant lacking pknG. We found that in the absence of PknG the mycobacterial proteome was remodeled since 5.7% of the proteins encoded by M. tuberculosis presented significant changes in its relative abundance compared with the wild-type. The main biological processes affected by pknG deletion were cell envelope components biosynthesis and response to hypoxia. Thirteen DosR-regulated proteins were underrepresented in the pknG deletion mutant, including Hrp-1, which was 12.5-fold decreased according to Parallel Reaction Monitoring experiments. Altogether, our results allow us to postulate that PknG regulation of bacterial adaptation to stress conditions might be an important mechanism underlying its reported effect on intracellular bacterial survival. SIGNIFICANCE: PknG is a Ser/Thr kinase from Mycobacterium tuberculosis with key roles in bacterial metabolism and bacterial survival within the host. However, at present the molecular mechanisms underlying these functions remain largely unknown. In this work, we evaluate the effect of pknG deletion on M. tuberculosis proteome using different approaches. Our results clearly show that the global proteome was remodeled in the absence of PknG and shed light on new molecular mechanism underlying PknG role. Altogether, this work contributes to a better understanding of the molecular bases of the adaptation of M. tuberculosis, one of the most deadly human pathogens, to its host.

### Keywords
Pkng, Serine/threonine protein kinase, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Hrp-1, Hypoxia, Msl3, Parallel reaction monitoring, Mas

### Affiliations
Institut Pasteur de Montevideo, Proteomic and Analytical Biochemistry Unit
Insitut Pasteur de Montevideo & Instituto de Investigaciones Biológicas Clemente Estable, Analytical Biochemistry and Proteomics Unit, Montevideo, Uruguay

### Submitter
Analía Lima

### Lab Head
Dr Rosario Durán
Insitut Pasteur de Montevideo & Instituto de Investigaciones Biológicas Clemente Estable, Analytical Biochemistry and Proteomics Unit, Montevideo, Uruguay


