### Accession
PXD033673

### Title
Neddylation tunes peripheral blood mononuclear cells immune response in COVID-19 patients

### Description
The COVID-19 pandemic caused by SARS-CoV-2 has reached 5.5 million deaths worldwide, causing a huge impact globally. This highly contagious viral infection produces a severe acute respiratory syndrome that includes cough, mucus, fever and pneumonia. Likewise, many hospitalized patients develop severe pneumonia associated with acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), besides an exacerbated and uncontrolled systemic inflammation which in some cases induce lethal cytokine storm. Although vaccines have clearly had a beneficial effect on disease development, there is still a high percentage of patients who develop pathology related to ineffective immune system response. Therefore, a thorough understanding of the modulatory mechanisms that regulate the response to SARS-CoV-2 is crucial to find effective therapeutic alternatives. Previous studies describe the relevance of Neddylation in immune system activation further its implications in viral infection. In this context, the present study postulates Neddylation, a reversible ubiquitin-like post-translational modification of proteins and controls their stability, localization and activity, as a key regulator in the immune response against SARS-CoV-2. For the first time, we describe an increase of serum global neddylation levels of COVID-19 patients particularly associated in the early response of the infection. In addition, the results showed that overactivation of neddylation control activation, proliferation, and response of peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) derived from COVID-19 patients. Inhibition of neddylation and subsequent avoidance of activation of PBMCs, which reduces cytokine production and proteome modulation, may therefore be a critical mechanism and an efficient therapeutic approach to immunomodulate COVID -19 patients and avoid the much-feared cytokine storm.

### Sample Protocol
Protein was extracted using 7M urea, 2M thiourea, 4% CHAPS. Samples were incubated for 30 min at RT under agitation and digested following the SP3 protocol described by Hughes et al. 2014 21 with minor modifications. Trypsin was added to a trypsin:protein ratio of 1:10, and the mixture was incubated 2h at 37oC. After recovery, peptides were dried out in a RVC2 25 speedvac concentrator (Christ), and resuspended in 0.1% FA. Peptides were desalted and resuspended in 0.1% FA using C18 stage tips (Millipore) prior to acquisition.

### Data Protocol
Samples were analyzed in a hybrid trapped ion mobility spectrometry – quadrupole time of flight mass spectrometer (timsTOF Pro with PASEF, Bruker Daltonics) coupled online to a EvoSep ONE liquid chromatograph (EvoSep). Sample (200ng) was directly loaded in a EVOSEP ONE chromatograph and acquired using the 30 spd protocol. Protein identification and quantification was carried out using MaxQuant software 22 using default settings except for an LFQ min. ratio count of 1. Searches were carried out against a database consisting of human protein entries (Uniprot/Swissprot), with precursor and fragment tolerances of 20ppm and 0.05 Da. Only proteins identified with at least two peptides at FDR<1% were considered for further analysis. Data (LFQ intensities) was loaded onto Perseus platform23and further processed (log2 transformation, imputation).

### Publication Abstract
The COVID-19 pandemic caused by SARS-CoV-2 has reached 5.5 million deaths worldwide, generating a huge impact globally. This highly contagious viral infection produces a severe acute respiratory syndrome that includes cough, mucus, fever and pneumonia. Likewise, many hospitalized patients develop severe pneumonia associated with acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), along an exacerbated and uncontrolled systemic inflammation that in some cases induces a fatal cytokine storm. Although vaccines clearly have had a beneficial effect, there is still a high percentage of unprotected patients that develop the pathology, due to an ineffective immune response. Therefore, a thorough understanding of the modulatory mechanisms that regulate the response to SARS-CoV-2 is crucial to find effective therapeutic alternatives. Previous studies describe the relevance of Neddylation in the activation of the immune system and its implications in viral infection. In this context, the present study postulates Neddylation, a reversible ubiquitin-like post-translational modification of proteins that control their stability, localization and activity, as a key regulator in the immune response against SARS-CoV-2. For the first time, we describe an increase in global neddylation levels in COVID-19 in the serum of patients, which is particularly associated with the early response to infection. In addition, the results showed that overactivation of neddylation controls activation, proliferation, and response of peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) isolated from COVID-19 patients. Inhibition of neddylation, and the subsequent avoidance of activated PBMCs, reduces cytokine production, mainly IL-6 and MCP-1 and induce proteome modulation, being a critical mechanism and a potential approach to immunomodulate COVID-19 patients.

### Keywords
Neddylation, Pbmc, Coid-19

### Affiliations
Proteomics Service CIC bioGUNE Bizkaia Tech. Park Build. 800 erio 48160 Spain
Proteomics Platform CIC bioGUNE

### Submitter
Mikel Azkargorta

### Lab Head
Dr Felix Elortza
Proteomics Service CIC bioGUNE Bizkaia Tech. Park Build. 800 erio 48160 Spain


