### Accession
PXD010059

### Title
Reversible SAHH inhibitor protects against glomerulonephritis in lupus-prone NZB/NZW F1 mice by modulating α-actinin-4 associated skeleton organization of podocytes

### Description
Glomerulonephritis is one of the major complications and causes of death in systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). Podocytes can be injured in many forms of glomerular disease, characteristic changes are actin cytoskeleton reorganization of involved foot process. ACTN4, encodes α-actinin-4, an actin-binding and crosslinking protein localized to podocytes in renal glomerulus. Abnormal expression of α-actinin-4 in mice leads to proteinuria and podocyte damage. DZ2002, a reversible S-adenosyl-L-homocysteine hydrolase (SAHH) inhibitor with immunosuppressive properties and potent therapeutic activity against various autoimmune diseases in mice. Here, we found that DZ2002 could significantly ameliorate nephritis of lupus-prone mice. Our results showed that DZ2002 decreased the accumulation of α-actinin-4, inhibited expression of integrin-linked kinase and downstream phosphorylation of β1-integrin.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction, Digestion and Peptide Purification Kidney tissue samples for proteomic analysis were washed several times by PBS, reconstituted in SDT lysis buffer (100 mM dithiothreitol [DTT], 4% sodium SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.6). Then the samples were mechanically disrupted. Concentration of the extracted proteins was determined using a tryptophan-fluorescence assay [24], and confirmed by sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) on a 12% gel. An equal amount of protein (50 μg) from each sample was digested using the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method [25]. Briefly, an equal amount of protein (50 μg) from each sample was mixed with UA solution (8 M urea in 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5 ) in a 10 kDa filter (Microcon, Millipore, Germany), and centrifuged at 12 000g for 25 min at 20°C. Proteins were alkylated with iodoacetamide (final concentration 50 mM IAA) at room temperature for 30 min. Proteins were digested by trypsin (Promega) at an enzyme to substrate ratio of 1:50 (w/w) at 37 °C for 16 h. Finally, 200 μL of 50 mM NH4HCO3 (Sigma-Aldrich) was added to elute the resulting peptides. Digested peptides were desalted and evaporated to dryness in a Speed-Vac sample concentrator. Finally, the peptides were subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS Analysis LC-MS/MS was performed as previously described with some modifications (Liu et al. 2016; Chen et al. 2017). LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out by coupling an Easy nano-UPLC1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) to a Q Exactive (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Peptides (2 μg) were loaded on to a in-house packed analytical column (75 μm i.d. × 15 cm, ReproSil-Pur C18-Pur, 3μm, Dr. MaischGmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany), operating a 240 min gradient at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1%formic acid and mobile phase B consisted of 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. The ionization of the resulting peptides was conducted at a capillary temperature of 320 °C using 2.2 kV ion spray voltage. The mass spectrometer operated in data dependent acquisition mode. Full scan MS1 spectra (300−1500 m/z) were acquired in the Orbitrap for a maximum ion injection time of 60 ms at a resolution of 70 000 (at m/z=200), and the subsequent MS/MS analyses were performed in the same analyzer at a resolution of 17500 (at m/z=200). Up to 20 precursor ions were allowed to be selected for fragmentation, whereby the isolation window was set to 2 m/z, normalized collision energy (NCE) to 28%.  Database searching and analysis For protein identification and quantification, we used MaxQuant [9] (http://maxquant.org/, version 1.5.1.0) to analyze the MS data. Carbamidomethyl cysteine (C) was set as a fixed modification, and oxidation (M, +15.99492 Da) was set as a variable modification. Proteins were identified by searching MS and MS/MS data of peptides against a decoy mouse proteome sequence (Mus musculus C57BL/6; UP000000589; Uniprot proteome database). Trypsin/P was selected as the digestive enzyme with two potential missed cleavages. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptides and protein groups was rigorously controlled to be <1%. FDR was calculated by the number of hits from the reverse database divided by the number of forward hits (Cox et al. 2011). Label-free quantification was carried out in MaxQuant using intensity determination and a normalization algorithm. The “LFQ intensity” of each protein in different samples was calculated as the best estimate, satisfying all of the pairwise peptide comparisons, and this LFQ intensity was almost on the same scale of the summed-up peptide intensities (Cox et al. 2014).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Glomerulonephritis, Integrin-linked kinase, Podocyte injury, Skeleton organization, Sahh inhibitor, Α-actinin-4

### Affiliations
Department of Analytical Chemistry and CAS Key Laboratory of Receptor Research, Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 201203, China
None

### Submitter
Xing Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Hu Zhou
Department of Analytical Chemistry and CAS Key Laboratory of Receptor Research, Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 201203, China


