### Accession
PXD021133

### Title
Comparative proteomics of common allergenic tree pollens of birch, alder and hazelComparative proteomics of common allergenic tree pollens of birch, alder and hazel

### Description
It is known that, in addition to known allergens, other proteins in pollen can aid the development of an immune response in allergenic individuals. The contribution of the “unknown” protein allergens becomes especially prominent in phylogenetically related species where, despite of high homology of the lead allergens, the degree of allergenic potential can greatly vary. The aim of this study was to identify other potentially allergenic proteins in pollen of three common and very related allergenic tree species: birch (Betula pendula), hazel (Corylus avellana) and alder (Alnus glutinosa). For that purpose, we carried out a comprehensive, comparative proteomic screening of the pollen from the three species. In order to maximize protein recovery and coverage, different protein extraction and isolation strategies during sample preparation were employed.  As a result, we report 2500 - 3000 identified proteins per each of the pollen species. Identified proteins were further used for a number of annotation steps, providing insight into differential distribution of peptidases, peptidase inhibitors and other potential allergenic proteins across the three species. Moreover, we carried out functional enrichment analysis that, interestingly, corroborated high species similarity in spite of their relatively distinct protein profiles.  We provide to our knowledge first insight into proteomes of three very important allergenic pollen types, which is particularly vital for pollen of hazel and alder where not even transcriptomics data is available. Datasets provided in this study can be readily used as protein databases, and as such serve as an excellent starting point for further allergenic studies.

### Sample Protocol
Pollen from birch (BP), alder (AG) and hazel (CA) were collected in Styria, Austria during the pollen season. Water-soluble protein pollen extracts were prepared by shaking for 4 h at room temperature in PBS containing 0.1 % Triton X-100. Due to difficulties with extraction, birch pollen had to be shaken for 10 h instead of 4 h. Pollen extracts were then left overnight at - 20 °C. The following day, extracts were centrifuged at 18,000 g for 20 min at 4 °C and the supernatants were collected for proteomics analysis. Pollen extract preparation with harsh lysis: Additionally, pollen from all 3 species (each in triplicates) were lysed with 500 µm Zirconium beads (Sigma) and MagNAlyser (Roche, Switzerland) for 3 min in 500 µL of 100 mM Tris-HCl (containing 10 mM TCEP and 40 mM CAA). After removal of the beads, the extracts were adjusted to 1 % SDS, left shaking for 10 min, followed by 10 min incubation at 95 °C. Consequently, extracts were centrifuged at 18,000 g for 20 min at 4 °C and the supernatants were collected for proteomics analysis. Protein sample preparation: Mild lysis: Aliquots of 50 µg protein were subjected to either acetone or trichloroacetic acid (TCA) precipitation or modified Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) 1 using Amicon Ultra 3kDa cut-off filters (Millipore, USA). For acetone precipitation, samples were diluted with four volumes of acetone, then incubated over-night at - 20 °C. For TCA precipitation, samples were diluted up to 100 µl with 50 % TCA prior overnight incubation at - 20 °C. The following day, protein pellets from acetone and TCA precipitations obtained after centrifugation were re-solubilized in TFE buffer (25 % trifluoroethanol (TFE), 100 mM Tris-HCl, 10 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP) and 40 mM chloroacetamide (CAA)), then incubated for 10 min at 95 °C. Consequently, samples were diluted with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate to reach 10 % TFE and digested overnight with trypsin. For FASP, in brief, the acetone precipitate was re-solubilized with FASP buffer (100 mM TrisHCl pH 8.5, 1 % SDS, 10 mM TCEP and 40 mM CAA). The FASP buffer (on cut-off filters) was exchanged three times with 8 M Urea, 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5), after which samples were predigested with rLysC (Promega, USA; enzyme/protein 1:100) for 4 hours at 37 °C. Samples were then diluted to 2 M Urea with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate and digested with trypsin (Promega, USA; enzyme/ protein 1:50) overnight. Peptides were collected by centrifugation for 45 min at 14,000 g at room temperature (RT) and acidified with formic acid (FA; final concentration 0.1 %). For desalting, 3 µg of all digests were brought to a volume of 100 μl with 1 % trifluoroacetic acid in water and loaded onto self-packed 2-layer (18 gauge) 200 μl SDB-RPS Stage Tips (Empore SPE Disks, Sigma-Aldrich). The samples were passed through the stage tips by centrifugation (5 min, 1,500 g, RT), washed with 0.2 % trifluoroacetic acid, eluted with 5 % NH4OH / 80 % acetonitrile into a new tube and dried using a vacuum concentrator. harsh lysis:Proteins were precipitated with four volumes of acetone over-night and obtained protein pallets were re-solubilized in TFE buffer (25 % TFE, 100 mM Tris HCl pH 8.5), then diluted with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (to reach 10 % TFE). Next, diluted samples were predigested with rLysC (Promega, USA; enzyme/protein 1:100) for 4 hours at 37 °C and, lastly, digested overnight with trypsin (Promega, USA; enzyme/ protein 1:50) overnight. Desalting was performed as described above. 500 ng per sample (re-dissolved in 2 % acetonitrile / 0.1 % formic acid in water) was subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis. Protein digests were separated by nano-HPLC (Dionex Ultimate 3000, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) equipped with an Aurora (Ionoptics, Australia) nanocolumn (C18, 1.6 µm, 250 x 0.075 mm) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min at 50 °C using the following gradient, where solvent A is 0.1 % FA in water and solvent B is acetonitrile containing 0.1 % FA: 0-18 min: 2 % B; 18-100 min: 2-25 % B; 100-107 min: 25-35 % B; 107-108 min: 35-95 % B; 108-118 min: 95 % B; 118-118 min: 95-2 % B; 118-133 min: 2 % B. The maXis II ETD mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics, Germany) was operated with the captive source in positive mode employing following settings: mass range: 200 - 2000 m/z, 2 Hz, capillary 1600 V, dry gas flow 3 L/min at 150 °C, nanoBooster 0.2 bar, precursor acquisition control top 20 (collision induced dissociation (CID)). Mass spectrometry of FASP prepared samples was carried out on an Orbitrap Velos Pro (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) operated in positive mode with top 10 precursors fragmentation mode by alternating full scan MS (m/z 300 to 2000, 60000 resolution) in the ion cyclotron resonance (ICR) cell and MS/MS by CID of the 10 most intense peaks in the ion trap with dynamic exclusion enabled.

### Data Protocol
As there were no comprehensive pollen protein databases available, pollen transcriptomes obtained from public RNA-seq runs from NCBI Sequence Read Archive (SRA) had to be taken as sources for database generation: SRR5485724 for birch 3, SRR513138 for hazel 4 and for alder SRR3486362, SRR3486361 (from project: White Alder - pooled seedling leaf RNAs from ozone treatments), SRR3486364 and SRR3486363  (from project: Red Alder - pooled seedling leaf RNAs from ozone treatments). Trinity 5 pipeline was employed for de novo transcriptome assembly. After six frame translation with Emboss, the generated protein databases were used for data analysis using MaxQuant 1.6.6.0 6. Additionally, common contaminants were considered in the search. The following search settings were used: Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification and methionine oxidation was considered as variable. Digestion enzyme was trypsin with a maximum of two missed-cleavage sites allowed. Acceptance parameters for identification were set to 1 % false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide-spectrum matching (PSM), protein as well as site decoy fraction. In order to obtain further information regarding the role of “translated” proteins, the assembled transcripts were annotated by blastx using the NCBI non-redundant protein sequences of the following taxonomies (TXID: 3505 [Betula pendula], TXID: 3517: [Alnus glutinosa], TXID 3814 [Papilionoideae], TXID 13451 [Corylus avellana], TXID 16718 [Juglans], TXID 171637 [Amygdaloideae], TXID 235631 [Crotonoideae] and TXID 238069 [Saliceae]) as database. The e-value cut off for blastx was set to 0.001. For the Pfam (version 30) based annotations we used the Pfam annotator (PfamScan). For the gene ontology (GO) classification the Pfam2go mapping was used (http://geneontology.org/Pfam2go). The GO terms were tracked back up to GO level 2 using CateGOrizer 7. For the MEROPS 8 based annotations a blastx was done against all peptides classified, with an e-value cut off of 0.001. Allergens were further annotated using the AllFam database 9.  It is noteworthy to mention that for the different sample preparation methods of the soluble fraction as well as for the total proteome, reported number of identified proteins represents the sum of all identified protein obtained from measuring triplicates or quadruplicates per each pollen species.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Alder, Birch, Proteomics, Pollen, Hazel

### Affiliations
Full Professor for Analytical Chemistry Vienna University of Technology Institute of Chemical Technologies and Analytics Getreidemarkt 9/E164 A-1060 Vienna Austria
Omics Center Graz

### Submitter
Barbara Darnhofer

### Lab Head
Dr Ruth Birner-Gruenberger
Full Professor for Analytical Chemistry Vienna University of Technology Institute of Chemical Technologies and Analytics Getreidemarkt 9/E164 A-1060 Vienna Austria


