### Accession
PXD033122

### Title
Ribosome impairment regulates intestinal stem cell identity via ZAKa activation.

### Description
The small intestine is a rapidly proliferating organ that is maintained by a small population of Lgr5-expressing intestinal stem cells (ISCs). However, several Lgr5-negative ISC populations have been identified, and this remarkable plasticity allows the intestine to rapidly respond to both the local environment and to damage. The mediators of such plasticity are still largely unknown. Using intestinal organoids and mouse models, we show that upon ribosome impairment (driven by Rptor deletion, amino acid starvation, or low dose cyclohexamide treatment) ISCs gain an Lgr5-negative, fetal-like identity. This is accompanied by a rewiring of metabolism. Our findings suggest that the ribosome can act as a sensor of nutrient availability, allowing ISCs to respond to the local nutrient environment. Mechanistically, we show that this phenotype requires the activation of ZAKɑ, which in turn activates YAP, via SRC. Together, our data reveals a central role for ribosome dynamics in intestinal stem cells, and identify the activation of ZAKɑ as a critical mediator of stem cell identity.

### Sample Protocol
For mass spectrometry, peptide mixtures were prepared and measured as previously described, with the following exceptions. Peptide mixtures (10% of total digest) were loaded directly onto the analytical column and analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer equipped with a Proxeon nLC1200 system (Thermo Scientific). Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid/water and solvent B was 0.1% formic acid/80% acetonitrile. Peptides were eluted from the analytical column at a constant flow of 250 nl/min in a 104-min gradient, containing a 84-min stepped increase from 2% to 24% solvent B, followed by an 20-min wash at 80% solvent B.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analyzed by MaxQuant (version 2.0.3.0) using standard settings for label-free quantitation (LFQ). MS/MS data were searched against the Swissprot Mus musculus database (17,073 entries, release 2021_04) complemented with a list of common contaminants and concatenated with the reversed version of all sequences. The maximum allowed mass tolerance was 4.5ppm in the main search and 0.5Da for fragment ion masses. False discovery rates for peptide and protein identification were set to 1%. Trypsin/P was chosen as cleavage specificity allowing two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, while oxidation and deamidation were used as variable modifications. LFQ intensities were Log2-transformed in Perseus (version 1.6.15.0), after which proteins were filtered for 2 out of 2 valid values in at least one sample group.  A quantile normalization was performed using R and missing values were group specific imputated. Differentially expressed proteins were determined using a t-test.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Intestinal stem cells, Zaka, Proteomics

### Affiliations
The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
Proteomics Facility, Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, Netherlands; Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research, Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University and Netherlands Proteomics Centre, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

### Submitter
Liesbeth Hoekman

### Lab Head
Dr Maarten Altelaar
Proteomics Facility, Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, Netherlands; Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research, Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University and Netherlands Proteomics Centre, Utrecht, The Netherlands.


