### Accession
PXD015243

### Title
Proteome Composition of Lysosomes and Autophagosomes after Proteasome Inhibition

### Description
Lysosomes are a major site of intracellular acidic hydrolase-mediated proteolysis and cellular degradation in a membrane-enclosed organelle. Alternatively, soluble, ubiquitin-bound proteins are degraded via the proteasome, a megadalton protein complex within the cytoplasm. The interplay between both degradation pathways has been of increasing interest in recent years. To determine the effects of proteasome inhibition on the lysosomal compartment, we investigated enriched lysosomal fractions, autophagosomal fractions and immunoprecipitated proteasomes from HEK293 cells after proteasome inibition by MG132 or bortezomib in comparison to the respective fractions from control cells.

### Sample Protocol
Stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) and isolation of lysosomes with magnetic beads: All SILAC reagents were obtained from Thermo Fisher Scientific and Eurisotop. For lysosomal proteome analysis, HEK293 cells were cultivated for six passages in SILAC-DMEM supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum containing either 87.8 mg/ml l-arginine HCl, 181.2 mg/ml l-lysine for light labeling of or l-arginine13C615N4 and l-lysine13C615N2 for heavy labeling of cells. The isolation of lysosomal fractions with magnetic beads was performed as described recently 6.  Isolation of autophagosomes SILAC labeled HEK cells were seeded on Poly-L-Lysine coated dishes one day before transfection with pEGFP-LC3. 48 hours post-transfection, cells were treated with either 1 µM  BTZ or DMSO control for 5 h. Cells were washed with PBS twice and harvested in PBS and pelleted 10 min at 4°C and 500 x g. The supernatant was removed and cells were suspended in isolation buffer (20 mM HEPES, 1mM EDTA, 0,25 M sucrose, pH: 7,4). Cells were homogenized 20-times by a dounce homogenizer and centrifuged down for 10 min at 4°C and 1000 x g. The protein amount of the supernatants was determined by DC protein assay and equal protein amounts of BTZ-treated and –untreated samples were mixed with 50 µL of isolation buffer pre-washed GFP-Trap MA magnetic agarose bead slurry. Mixed samples rotated for 1 h. Beads were again washed 3 times and GFP-LC3 was eluted by boiling the beads for 5 Min at 95°C in Laemmli-buffer7.             Isolation of proteasomes The immunoprecipitation of proteasome complexes was performed with the proteasome purification kit (Enzo Life Sciences, BML-PW1075A-0001) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. In brief, HEK cells were treated with 25 μm MG132 for 5h, harvested by scraping in binding buffer (25 mM HEPES, pH 7.4, 10% glycerol, 5 mM MgCl2, 1 mM ATP, 1mM DTT) and homogenized in a dounce homogenizer 25 times. 100 μg of protein were used for incubation with proteasome binding affinity matrix containing immobilized anti-20S β5 antibody. Elution was performed by boiling the beads for 5 Min at 95°C in 1 x Laemmli-buffer7. Sample preparation for mass spectrometry: For proteome analysis of lysosomal, autophagosomal and proteasomal fractions, lysosomal eluates as well as both other fractions were processed for mass spectrometry analysis using in gel digestion as described previously6. In brief, isolated fractions were acetylated with acrylamide to a final concentration of 1% for 30 min at RT before separation into different fractions by a SDS-gel. The gel was then washed twice withwater and stained with Coomassie Blue for one hour. After destaining the gel with destilled water, the eluate band profile was divided into 10 fragments. Slices were excised and subjected to tryptic in gel digestion. In brief, slices were washed consecutively with water, 50% acetonitrile (ACN), and 100% ACN. The slices were washed again and dehydrated with ACN. Dried slices were incubated with 400 ng sequencing grade trypsin at 37°C overnight. The peptide extract was separated and remaining peptides extracted with 50% ACN. Peptides were dried in a vacuum concentrator and stored at -20°C.  For mass spectrometric measurement, the samples were loaded directly onto the analytical column (ESI spray tip produced in house with a Sutter P2000 laser puller device from 360 µm OD, 100 µm ID fused silica capillary packed with 5 µm particles [Dr. Maisch, reprosile C-18 AQ]) in 100 % A (water with 0.1 % FA) using a Thermo EASY-nLC 1000 at a flow rate of 1 µl/min. The column was washed for 10 min with 100 % A at a flow rate of 1 µl/min. Peptides were eluted with a linear gradient from 100 % A to 65 % A/35 % B (ACN with 0.1 % FA) in 60 min. Peptides eluting from the column were ionized in the positive ion mode using a capillary voltage of 1600 V and analyzed using a Thermo Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer. One survey scan at a mass range of m/z 400 to m/z 1200 and a resultion of 30000 was acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer followed by fragmentation of the 10 most abundand ions in the ion trap part of the instrument. The repeat count was set to one and the dynamic exclusion window to 60 s.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were processed with Proteome Discoverer (Thermo Scientific, Version 2.3.0.523) and searched with the Mascot search engine (Version 2.6.1) against Swissprot database swissprot_2018_07 containing 557992 sequences, taxonomy: Homo sapiens, and cRAP database Version 2015_01. Propionamide was set as fixed modification, as variable modifications protein N-acetylation, methionine oxidation, arginine (13 C (6) 15 N (4)) and lysine (13 C (6) 15 N (2)) isotopic labeling were considered. Up to two missed cleavages was accepted. The search was performed with a mass tolerance of 8 p.p.m mass accuracy for the precursor ion and 0.6 Da for the fragment ions. Search results were processed with Proteome Discoverer filtered with a false discovery rate of 0.01. Low scoring spectrum matches were searched again with semitryptic specificity with up to one missed cleavage and a mass tolerance of 10 p.p.m mass accuracy for the precursor ion and 0.6 Da for the fragment ions. Consensus workflow in Proteome discoverer was performed with a normalization on total peptide amount (lysosomal fraction), on the specific protein amount of LC3 (isolated autophagosomes) or the specific protein amount of PSMB5 (isolated proteasomes). Quantification was based on pairwise ratio based ratio calculation for which modified peptides with oxidation (M) and propionamide (C), and N-terminal acetylation were included. Proteins were excluded with at least two peptides with a FDR <1%. Statistical significance was determined using background-based student’s t-test with Benjamini-Hochberg correction as performed by proteome discoverer.

### Publication Abstract
The degradation of intra- and extracellular proteins is essential in all cell types and mediated by two systems, the ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS) and the autophagy-lysosome pathway. This study investigates the changes in autophagosomal and lysosomal proteomes upon inhibition of proteasomes by bortezomib (BTZ) or MG132. We find an increased abundance of more than 50 proteins in lysosomes of cells in which the proteasome is inhibited. Among those are dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR), &#x3b2;-Catenin and 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzym-A (HMGCoA)-reductase. Because these proteins are known to be degraded by the proteasome they seem to be compensatorily delivered to the autophagosomal pathway when the proteasome is inactivated. Surprisingly, most of the proteins which show increased amounts in the lysosomes of BTZ or MG132 treated cells are proteasomal subunits. Thus an inactivated, non-functional proteasome is delivered to the autophagic pathway. Native gel electrophoresis shows that the proteasome reaches the lysosome intact and not disassembled. Adaptor proteins, which target proteasomes to autophagy, have been described in Arabidopsis, Saccharomyces and upon starvation in mammalians. However, in cell lines deficient of these proteins or their mammalian orthologues, respectively, the transfer of proteasomes to the lysosome is not impaired. Obviously, these proteins do not play a role as autophagy adaptor proteins in mammalian cells. We can also show that chaperone-mediated autophagy (CMA) does not participate in the proteasome delivery to the lysosomes. In autophagy-related (ATG)-5 and ATG7 deficient cells the delivery of inactivated proteasomes to the autophagic pathway was only partially blocked, indicating the existence of at least two different pathways by which inactivated proteasomes can be delivered to the lysosome in mammalian cells.

### Keywords
Lysosome, Proteaphagy, Proteasome

### Affiliations
University of Bonn Insitute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Nussallee 11 53115 Bonn Germany
Institute for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University Bonn, Germany 

### Submitter
Melanie Thelen

### Lab Head
Dr Volkmar Gieselmann
University of Bonn Insitute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Nussallee 11 53115 Bonn Germany


