### Accession
PXD014215

### Title
Trypanosoma brucei global proteome changes upon suramin exposure

### Description
To understand how suramin kills Trypanosoma brucei, we examined the impact on proteome at different timepoints

### Sample Protocol
HMI9 for SILAC was prepared as described previously (Zoltner et al., 2015). Either normal L-Arginine and L-Lysine (HMI11-R0K0), or L-Arginine U−13C6 and L-Lysine 4,4,5,5-2H4 (HMI11-R6K4) (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories) were added at 120 μM and 240 μM respectively. Cells treated with 35 nM suramin were grown in parallel with non-treated cells, in the presence of HMI11-R0K0 or HMI11-R6K4, respectively. Cultures in logarithmic growth phase were mixed after 24 hours and 48 hours, respectively, immediately harvested by centrifugation, washed twice with PBS containing Complete Mini Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche), resuspended in Laemmli buffer containing 1 mM dithiothreitol and stored at -80 °C. Samples were generated in triplicate and one label swap was performed. Samples were sonicated and aliquots containing 5×106 cells separated on a NuPAGE bis-tris 4–12% gradient polyacrylamide gel (Invitrogen). The sample lane was divided into eight slices that were excised from the Coomassie stained gel, destained, then subjected to tryptic digest and reductive alkylation. Liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) was performed by the Proteomic Facility at the University of Dundee. The eight fractions obtained from SDS-PAGE were subjected to LC-MS/MS on a UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano System (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Q Exactive HF (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The 24 hours suramin treatment set were run on a Orbitrap Velos Pro (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were analysed using MaxQuant version 1.5 (Cox and Mann, 2008) searching the T. b. brucei 927 annotated protein database (release 39.0) from TriTrypDB (Aslett et al., 2010). Minimum peptide length was set at six amino acids, isoleucine and leucine were considered indistinguishable and false discovery rates (FDR) of 0.01 were calculated at the levels of peptides, proteins and modification sites based on the number of hits against the reversed sequence database. SILAC ratios were calculated using only peptides that could be uniquely mapped to a given protein. When the identified peptide sequence set of one protein contained the peptide set of another protein, these two proteins were assigned to the same protein group. P values were calculated applying t-test based statistics using Perseus (Tyanova et al., 2016).

### Publication Abstract
Introduced about a century ago, suramin remains a frontline drug for the management of early-stage East African trypanosomiasis (sleeping sickness). Cellular entry into the causative agent, the protozoan parasite <i>Trypanosoma brucei</i>, occurs through receptor-mediated endocytosis involving the parasite's invariant surface glycoprotein 75 (ISG75), followed by transport into the cytosol via a lysosomal transporter. The molecular basis of the trypanocidal activity of suramin remains unclear, but some evidence suggests broad, but specific, impacts on trypanosome metabolism (<i>i.e.</i> polypharmacology). Here we observed that suramin is rapidly accumulated in trypanosome cells proportionally to ISG75 abundance. Although we found little evidence that suramin disrupts glycolytic or glycosomal pathways, we noted increased mitochondrial ATP production, but a net decrease in cellular ATP levels. Metabolomics highlighted additional impacts on mitochondrial metabolism, including partial Krebs' cycle activation and significant accumulation of pyruvate, corroborated by increased expression of mitochondrial enzymes and transporters. Significantly, the vast majority of suramin-induced proteins were normally more abundant in the insect forms compared with the blood stage of the parasite, including several proteins associated with differentiation. We conclude that suramin has multiple and complex effects on trypanosomes, but unexpectedly partially activates mitochondrial ATP-generating activity. We propose that despite apparent compensatory mechanisms in drug-challenged cells, the suramin-induced collapse of cellular ATP ultimately leads to trypanosome cell death.

### Keywords
Suramin, Trypanosoma brucei, Drug mode of action

### Affiliations
Division of Biological Chemistry & Drug Discovery School of Life Sciences University of Dundee Dundee DD1 5EH United Kingdom
Division of Biological Chemistry & Drug Discovery
School of Life Sciences
University of Dundee
Dundee DD1 5EH

### Submitter
Martin Zoltner

### Lab Head
Dr Mark C. Field
Division of Biological Chemistry & Drug Discovery School of Life Sciences University of Dundee Dundee DD1 5EH United Kingdom


