### Accession
PXD016093

### Title
Location of Neonatal Microglia Drives Small Extracellular Vesicles Content and Biological Functions

### Description
Combining proteomics and systems biology analyses, we demonstrated that neonatal microglial cells derived from two different CNS locations (cortex and spinal cord) displayed different phenotypes upon different physiological or pathological conditions. These cells also exhibited great variability in terms of both cellular and small extracellular vesicles (sEVs) protein contents and levels. Bioinformatics data analysis showed that the cortical microglia had anti-inflammatory and neurogenesis/tumorigenesis properties, while the spinal cord microglia was rather involved in inflammatory response process. Of interest, while both sEVs microglia sources enhanced growth of DRGs axons, only the spinal cord-derived sEVs microglia under LPS stimulation significantly attenuated glioma proliferation. These results were confirmed through neurite outgrowth assays in DRGs cell line and glioma proliferation analysis in 3D spheroid cultures. Results from these in vitro assays indicated that the microglia localized at different CNS regions can ensure different biological functions. Together, these works indicate that neonatal microglia locations regulate their physiological and pathological functional fates, and could explain the high prevalence of brain vs. spinal cord glioma in adults.

### Sample Protocol
For protein processing, a shotgun bottom-up approach was applied. In summary, 30 µls volume of each sample were prepared after the normalization in the previous step to obtain a final concentration of 1.5 µg/µl per sample. An equal volume of reduction solution (DTT 0.1 M) was added to each sample then incubated 40 min at 56 °C. Using the FASP method (Wiśniewski et al. 2009), the samples were processed. This technique utilizes a filter with a nominal molecular weight limit of 30,000 (Amicon Ultra-0.5 30k, Millipore). After transferring the samples into the FASP filters, alkylation step was done using IAA solution (0.05 M) for 20 min in the dark at room temperature. Digestion was then carried overnight at an incubation temperature of 37°C using LysC/trypsin (40 µg/ml in 50 mM Tris-HCL solution at pH 8). The filters containing the digests were then rinsed using 50 µl of saline solution (0.5 M) and the enzyme activity was stopped with 10 µl of TFA 5% for each tube. Enrichment and desalting were then performed for each sample with a ZipTip C-18 (Millipore) before undergoing LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The analyses were carried out by an Easy-nLC 1000 nano-UPLC chromatography (Thermo Scientific) interfaced with a Q-Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) with a nano-electrospray ion source. The analysis was performed in reverse phase and the sample was loaded into a pre-concentration column (75 μm DI × 2 cm, 3 μm, Thermo Scientific). Using an analytical column (Acclaim PepMap C18, 75 μm ID × 50 cm, 2 μm, Thermo Scientific) by applying a linear gradient of acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid (5% to 35%, for 2 hours) at 300 nL/min flow rate the peptides were separated. MS analysis was performed by Orbitrap mass analyzer with a resolution of 70,000 FWHM, a mass range of m/z 300-1600, an AGC of 3e6 ions and a maximum injection time of 120 ms. The MS/MS was performed in dependent data mode, defined to analyze the 10 most intense ions of MS analysis (Top 10). For MS/MS parameters, the resolution is set to 17,500 FWHM, a mass range of 200-2000 m/z, an AGC of 5e4 ions, and a maximum injection time of 60 ms. The isolation window is set at 4.0 m/z. All data were analyzed by MaxQuant software version 1.5.8.3 (Wiśniewski et al. 2009). Proteins were identified by comparing all the spectra with the proteome reference database of Rattus norvegicus (Uniprot, release April 2017, 7983 entries). The digestion enzyme used was LysC/trypsin and the maximum of missed cleavages allowed was two, in addition to oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation selected as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was selected as fixed modifications. For protein identification, a minimum of 2 peptides of which 1 was unique was defined. In MS mode, an initial mass tolerance of 6 ppm was selected, and the MS/MS tolerance was set to 20 ppm for fragmentation data. The false discovery rate (FDR) was specified to 0.01 for protein and peptide. The label-free quantification (LFQ) has been realized with keeping the default parameters of MaxQuant. The statistical analysis of identified proteins was performed by Perseus software version 1.5.2.6. The matrix was filtered by removing the potential contaminant, reverse and only identified by site. Then, the samples were grouped into 4 categories: Cortex Control, Cortex LPS, Spinal Cord Control, and Spinal Cord LPS. Statistical analysis was performed by ANOVA test with a p-value of 5%. Hierarchical clustering and profile plot were performed and visualized by Perseus.

### Publication Abstract
Combining proteomics and systems biology approaches, we demonstrate that neonatal microglial cells derived from two different CNS locations, cortex and spinal cord, and cultured <i>in vitro</i> displayed different phenotypes upon different physiological or pathological conditions. These cells also exhibited greater variability in terms of cellular and small extracellular vesicles (sEVs) protein content and levels. Bioinformatic data analysis showed that cortical microglia exerted anti-inflammatory and neurogenesis/tumorigenesis properties, while the spinal cord microglia were more inflammatory. Interestingly, while both sEVs microglia sources enhanced growth of DRGs processes, only the spinal cord-derived sEVs microglia under LPS stimulation significantly attenuated glioma proliferation. These results were confirmed using the neurite outgrowth assay on DRGs cells and glioma proliferation analysis in 3D spheroid cultures. Results from these <i>in vitro</i> assays suggest that the microglia localized at different CNS regions can ensure different biological functions. Together, this study indicates that neonatal microglia locations regulate their physiological and pathological functional fates and could affect the high prevalence of brain vs spinal cord gliomas in adults.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Vesicles, Proteomics, Exosomes, Microglia

### Affiliations
PRISM - Unite INSERM U1192 Universite de Lille France
PRISM

### Submitter
Soulaimane Aboulouard

### Lab Head
Dr Michel Salzet
PRISM - Unite INSERM U1192 Universite de Lille France


