### Accession
PXD019637

### Title
The Viral Polymerase Complex Mediates the Interaction of vRNPs with Recycling Endosomes During SeV Assembly

### Description
Paramyxoviruses are negative sense single-stranded RNA viruses that comprise many important human and animal pathogens, including human parainfluenza viruses. These viruses bud from the plasma membrane of infected cells after the viral ribonucleoprotein complex (vRNP) is transported from the cytoplasm to the cell membrane via Rab11a marked recycling endosomes. The viral proteins that are critical for mediating this important initial step in viral assembly are unknown. Here we use the model paramyxovirus, murine parainfluenza virus 1, or Sendai virus (SeV), to investigate the roles of viral proteins in Rab11a-driven virion assembly. We previously reported that infection with SeV containing high levels of copy-back defective viral genomes (DVGs) generates heterogenous populations of cells, with cells enriched in full-length virus producing viral particles containing standard or defective viral genomes, while cells enriched in DVGs did not, despite high levels of defective viral genome replication. Here we take advantage of this heterogenous cell phenotype to identify proteins that mediate interaction of vRNPs with Rab11a. We examine the role of matrix protein and nucleoprotein and determine that they are not sufficient to drive interaction of vRNPs and recycling endosomes. Then, using a combination of mass spectrometry and comparative protein abundance and localization in DVG- and FL-high cells, we identify viral polymerase complex components L and, specifically, its cofactor C proteins as interactors with Rab11a. We find that accumulation of these proteins within the cell is the defining feature that differentiates cells that proceed to viral egress from cells which remain in replication phases.  Paramyxoviruses are a family of viruses that include a number of pathogens with significant burdens on human health. Particularly, human parainfluenza viruses are an important cause of pneumonia and bronchiolitis in children and do not have any vaccines or direct acting antivirals. These cytoplasmic replicating viruses bud from the plasma membrane and coopt cellular endosomal recycling pathways to traffic viral ribonucleoprotein complexes from the cytoplasm to the membrane of infected cells, yet the viral proteins required for viral engagement with the recycling endosome pathway is not known. Here we use the model paramyxovirus Sendai virus, or murine parainfluenza virus 1, to investigate the role of viral proteins in this initial step in viral assembly. We find that viral polymerase components large protein L and accessory C proteins are necessary for engagement with recycling endosomes. These findings are important in identifying viral targets for the development of antivirals.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for proteomic analysis  All chemicals used for preparation of nanoflow liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (nLC-MS/MS) samples were sequencing grade and purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO), unless otherwise stated. Immunoprecipitated Rab11a-GFP interacting proteins (Rab11a-GFP IP) were eluted from the magnetic beads by the on-beads tryptic digestion. Briefly, the beads were resuspended in 50µl of 50mM triethylammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.5 (TEAB, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) and proteins were reduced using 10mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 1 h at room temperature and alkylated with 20mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in the dark for 30 min at room temperature. Proteins were digested with trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) at an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of ∼1:50 for 12 h in a thermomixer, shaking at 900 rpm, at room temperature. After digestion, the supernatant was removed and collected into fresh, labelled tubes. Beads were washed twice with 50µl of the wash buffer (50mM TEAB pH 8.5, 5% acetonitrile) and all supernatants were merged. The samples were concentrated to the volume of ∼100μl by lyophilization and acetified with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 0.1%. The tryptic peptides were desalted using Poros Oligo R3 RP (PerSeptive Biosystems, Framingham, MA) P200 columns with C18 3 M plug (3 M Bioanalytical Technologies, St. Paul, MN) prior to nLC–MS/MS analysis. The whole cell proteome samples were processed using the suspension trap (S-Trap, Protifi, Huntington, NY)(64) mini spin column digestion protocol with minor modifications. Briefly, cells were lysed in 300μl of lysis buffer (5% SDS, 50mM TEAB pH 7.55, Halt™ protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA)) by vortexing and probe tip sonication at 4 °C. The lysate was clarified by centrifugation at 13,000×g for 10 min, at 4 °C. Protein concentration was measured by Bradford protein assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and ~300µg of reduced and alkylated proteins was subjected to trypsin digestion following the S-Trap manufacturer’s procedure. The peptide solution was pooled, lyophilized, and desalted prior to nLC–MS/MS.   Nanoflow Liquid Chromatography Tandem Mass Spectrometry (nLC-MS/MS) The peptide mixture was separated using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a two-column setup, consisting of a reversed-phase trap column (Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 5μm, 100 Å, 300μm i.d. × 5 mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a reversed-phase analytical column (30cm, 75μm i.d. 360μm o.d., in-house packed with Pur C18AQ 3μm; Dr Maisch). Loading buffer was 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (Merck Millipore) in water. Buffer A was 0.1% formic acid, and Buffer B was 80% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid. The HPLC was coupled online with an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). The gradient was 135 min from 2% to 36% buffer B at a flow rate of 300 nl/min for Rab11a-GFP IP samples, and 180 min for whole cell proteome samples. The MS instrument was controlled by the Xcalibur software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used with a spray voltage of 2.2 kV. The ion transfer tube temperature was 275°C. Data acquisition was performed in the Orbitrap for precursor ions. MS survey scans were obtained for the m/z range of 350-1200 in the Orbitrap with maximum ion injection time of 100 ms, automatic gain control target 5 × 105 and a mass resolution of 120,000. MS/MS was performed with a TopSpeed duty cycle set to 3 s. Dynamic exclusion was set to 4 sec. Charge state enabled was 2-6+. Higher Collisional Dissociation (HCD) was set to 30. MS/MS was acquired in the ion trap using the Rapid scan mode, an automatic gain control set to 10,000 and a maximum injection time set to 120 msec.

### Data Protocol
Proteins Identification and Quantification  The raw mass spectrometer files were processed for protein identification using the Proteome Discoverer (v2.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the Sequest HT algorithm with a peptide mass tolerance of 10 ppm, fragment m/z tolerance of 0.25 Da, and a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% for proteins and peptides. All peak lists were searched against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database of Human (January 2020; 20,367 entries) and UniProtKB/TrEMBL Sendai virus (Cantell); February 2020; 8 entries) sequences using the parameters as follows: enzyme, trypsin; maximum missed cleavages, 2; fixed modification, carbamidomethylation (C); variable modifications, oxidation (M), protein N-terminus acetylation. Protein quantifications were log2 transformed and normalized using the median of the distribution for each sample. To estimate an enrichment of proteins detected only in mock or infection, missing values were imputed using a distribution of values of 30% width and two standard deviations lower than the average of the distribution of valid values. Statistical analyses were performed on three different biological replicates. The sample size was chosen to provide enough statistical power to apply parametric tests (either homoscedastic or heteroscedastic one-tailed t test, depending on the statistical value of the F-test; heteroscedastic if F-test p value<0.05). The t test was considered as valuable statistical test because binary comparisons were performed, and the number of replicates was limited. No samples were excluded as outliers (this applies to all proteomics analyses described in this manuscript). Proteins with t test p value smaller than 0.05 were considered as significantly altered between the two tested conditions. Data distribution was assumed to be normal, but this was not formally tested.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
A549 cells, Sendai virus cantell, Rab11a

### Affiliations
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia
The Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania Epigenetics Institute Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics Philadelphia, USA

### Submitter
Katarzyna Kulej

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin A. Garcia
The Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania Epigenetics Institute Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics Philadelphia, USA


