### Accession
PXD028575

### Title
Comparative proteomics of Eubacterium maltosivorans: reveal of propionogenic metabolism and bacterial microcompartments in a human intestinal bacterium.

### Description
This study was conducted in order to explore proteins involved in 1,2-propanediol utilization and microcompartments formation of E. maltosivorans. We also identified the maltose specific ABC transporter in E. maltosivorans when it was grown with this substrate.

### Sample Protocol
E. maltosivorans was grown in basal medium supplemented with 20 mM 1,2- propanediol or 20 mM maltose, and each condition was performed in 3 biological replicates. Cells were harvested at late exponential growth and pelleted (10 mg), washed and re-suspended in 500 µL lysis buffer (100 mM Tris HCl, pH 8.0). Cells were lysed by sonication and 40 ug protein was transferred to a 2 mL low binding tube. Proteins were reduced with 15 mM dithiotreitol (DDT), unfolded with 6 M urea and alkylated with 20 mM AcrylAmide and proteins were cleaned up by using a PAC method using speedbeads. The proteins were washed with 1 ml 70% ethanol and then 1 ml 100% acetonitrile, and digested with 100 µl 0.5 pg/µl trypsin in 50 mM ABC overnight. 10% TFA in water was added to the samples to stop the digestion. After filtering the peptide samples, volumes were adjusted to 50 µl with 0.1% formic acid. The resulting peptides were measured by nLC – Orbitrap Exploris 480 MSMS.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (1.6.3.4) with Andromeda search engine was used for identification and relative quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
Eubacterium maltosivorans YI<sup>T</sup> is a human intestinal isolate capable of acetogenic, propionogenic and butyrogenic growth. Its 4.3-Mb genome sequence contains coding sequences for 4227 proteins, including 41 different methyltransferases. Comparative proteomics of strain YI<sup>T</sup> showed the Wood-Ljungdahl pathway proteins to be actively produced during homoacetogenic growth on H<sub>2</sub> and CO<sub>2</sub> while butyrogenic growth on a mixture of lactate and acetate significantly upregulated the production of proteins encoded by the recently identified lctABCDEF cluster and accessory proteins. Growth on H<sub>2</sub> and CO<sub>2</sub> unexpectedly induced the production of two related trimethylamine methyltransferases. Moreover, a set of 16 different trimethylamine methyltransferases together with proteins for bacterial microcompartments were produced during growth and deamination of the quaternary amines, betaine, carnitine and choline. Growth of strain YI<sup>T</sup> on 1,2-propanediol generated propionate with propanol and induced the formation of bacterial microcompartments that were also prominently visible in betaine-grown cells. The present study demonstrates that E. maltosivorans is highly versatile in converting low-energy fermentation end-products in the human gut into butyrate and propionate whilst being capable of preventing the formation of the undesired trimethylamine by converting betaine and other quaternary amines in bacterial microcompartments into acetate and butyrate.

### Keywords
Microcompartments, Maltose phosphoenolpyruvate phosphotransferase, Propionate, Butyrate, Eubacterium maltosivorans

### Affiliations
Biochemistry
Wageningen University

### Submitter
Sjef Boeren

### Lab Head
Dr Sjef Boeren
Wageningen University


