### Accession
PXD003224

### Title
Proteomic analysis of sweat samples from tuberculosis patients

### Description
We performed a global proteomic profile of eccrine sweat sampled from patients with active pulmonary TB, other lung diseases (non-TB disease), and healthy controls.  A comparison of proteomics results between Active-TB, Non-TB and Healthy Controls was done in search for proteins unique to the active TB-patient cohort as well as proteins unique to those without TB disease. We conclude tthat global proteomic profiling of eccrine sweat collected from TB and non-TB patients is a viable approach for the identification of unique proteins differentially present based on clinical cohort. These proteins may represent unique biomarker profiles that upon further verification and validation could be used to develop a non-sputum based test for diagnosis of active TB.

### Sample Protocol
Volumes of collected sweat varied from less than 10 µL to ~ 30 µL volume. Proteins were precipitated out of solution by adding 4X volume of ice-cold 70% methanol, incubated overnight at -80oC and centrifuged for 30 minutes at 13,000xg, 4oC. Precipitated pellets were resuspended in 15 µL of 8M urea and samples pooled (or excluded) according to clinical cohort (Supplementary Table 1).     Protein concentrations of pooled samples were not determined to conserve sample volume.   Samples were solubilized in 8 M urea, 0.2% protease max, then reduced with dithiothreitol, alkylated with iodoacetamide, and digested with 1% Protease Max (Promega, Madison, WI) and trypsin (1.8µg) at 37oC for 3 hours.  Samples were dried in a Speed Vac® vacuum centrifuge, desalted using Pierce PepClean C18 spin columns (Pierce, Rockford, IL), dried and resuspended in 30 μl  3% ACN, 0.1% formic acid.  All solvents, water, and acid were LC-MS/MS grade from Sigma (St. Louis, MO).   Each digested sample was analyzed in duplicate via LC-MS/MS.  Peptides (1.00.5μl injection) were purified and concentrated using an on-line enrichment column (Thermo Scientific 5μm, 100 μm ID x 2 cm C18 column).  Subsequent chromatographic separation was performed on a reverse phase nanospray column (Thermo Scientific EASYnano-LC, 3µm, 75 µm ID x 100 mm C18 column) using a 30 minute linear gradient from 10%-30% buffer B (100% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 400 nanoliters/min.   Peptides were eluted directly into the mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Velos Pro) and spectra were collected over a m/z range of 400-2000 Da using a dynamic exclusion limit of 2 MS/MS spectra of a given peptide mass for 30 seconds (exclusion duration of 90 seconds).  The instrument was operated in FT mode for MS detection (resolution of 60,000) and ion trap mode for MS/MS detection with a normalized collision energy set to 35%.  Compound lists of the resulting spectra were generated using Xcalibur 2.2 software (Thermo Scientific) with a S/N threshold of 1.5 and 1 scan/group.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched against a Uniprot human database concatenated to a reverse database (176,946 entries) using the Mascot database search engine (Matrix Science, version 2.3.02).  The following search parameters were used: monoisotopic mass, parent mass tolerance of 20 ppm, fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.8 Da, complete tryptic digestion allowing two missed cleavages, variable modification of methionine oxidation, and a fixed modification of cysteine carbamidomethylation.  Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.3.4, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 90.0% probability by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm (Peptide False Discovery Rate 1.75%). Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides (Protein False Discovery Rate 4.9%).  Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins were annotated with GO terms from NCBI (downloaded Aug 8, 2014) (23).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tuberculosis, Eccrine, Proteomics, Sweat, Tb

### Affiliations
Proteomics & Metabolomics Facility, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO 80523, USA
Colorado State University

### Submitter
Lisa Wolfe

### Lab Head
Dr Jessica E. Prenni
Proteomics & Metabolomics Facility, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO 80523, USA


