### Accession
PXD043342

### Title
RAVER1 interconnects lethal EMT and miR/RISC activity by the control of alternative splicing

### Description
The RAVER1 protein was proposed to serve as a co-factor in guiding the PTBP-dependent  control of alternative splicing (AS). Whether RAVER1 solely acts in concert with PTBPs and  how it affects cancer cell fate remained elusive. Here we provide the first comprehensive  investigation of RAVER1-controlled AS in cancer cell models and reveal a pro-oncogenic role  of RAVER1 in tumor growth. This unravels that RAVER1 guides AS in synergy with PTBPs but  more prominently serves PTBP1-independent roles in splicing. In cancer cells, one major  function of RAVER1 is the control of proliferation and apoptosis, which involves the modulation  of AS events within the miR/RISC pathway. Associated with this regulatory role, RAVER1  antagonizes lethal, TGFB-driven epithelial-mesenchymal-transition (EMT) by limiting TGFB  signaling. RAVER1-modulated splicing events affect the insertion of protein interaction  modules in factors guiding miR/RISC-dependent gene silencing. Most prominently, in all three  human TNRC6 proteins, RAVER1 controls AS of GW-enriched motifs, which are essential for  AGO2-binding. Disturbance of RAVER1-guided AS events in TNRC6 proteins and other  facilitators of miR/RISC activity compromise miR/RISC activity which is essential to restrict  TGFB signaling and lethal EMT.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitation  For immunoprecipitations of SBP-tagged RAVER1 constructs, nuclei were first extracted from cell lysate (1x 107 cells per condition) using SBP-IP buffer (150mM KCl, 50mM TRIS-pH 7.5, 5% (v/v) Glycerol, 5mM EDTA-pH 8, 0.25% (v/v) NP-40) supplemented with 100µg/ml digitonin (Sigma). Cells were lysed for seven minutes at room temperature, following centrifugation for three minutes (4000 rpm). Cell pellets were again resuspended in SBP-IP buffer with digitonin, directly centrifuged and supernatant were discarded. Nuclear extracts were then prepared on ice using SBP-IP buffer. Cleared cell lysates were incubated with Dynabeads MyOne streptavidin beads (Life Technologies) for 2 hours at 4°C. After three washing steps with SBP IP buffer, protein-protein complexes were eluted by addition of NuPage LDS sample buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with 50mM DTT and incubation at 65°C for 10 min. Protein enrichment were analyzed by Western blotting. Co-immunoprecipitations with following LC MS/MS Analysis (see below) were essentially performed as described above. Instead of SBP IP, an SBP-IP-MS-buffer (150mM KCl, 50mM TRIS-pH 7.5, 5% (v/v) Glycerol, 5mM EDTA-pH 8, 0.1% (v/v) DDM) was used. For Co-immunoprecipitations of GFP-AGO2 and HA-constructs, cell extracts were prepared using Co-IP buffer (150mM NaCl, 20 mM TRIS-pH 7.5, 1mM EDTA pH 8, 0.5% (v/v) Triton). Cleared whole cell lysates were incubated with GFP-antibody and Protein G Dynabeads (Life Technologies) as described above.   Identification of RAVER1 associated proteins by LC-MS/MS  Pulldown samples (three replicates; see immunoprecipitation above) were prepared for liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) following a modified FASP (filter aided sample preparation) protocol (26). Briefly, protein samples were incubated and washed with 8 M urea in 50 mM HEPES (4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid), 10 mM TCEP, pH 8.5. Washing steps were performed using 0.5 mL centrifugal filter units (30-kDa cutoff, Sigma Aldrich, Darmstadt, Germany) and two centrifugation steps (14,000× g, 10 min). Afterwards, alkylation of proteins was performed with 50 mM iodoacetamide in 8 M urea, 50 mM HEPES, pH 8.5 at room temperature (20 min in the dark). Samples were washed twice with 50 mM HEPES, pH 8.5 (18,000× g, 2 x 10 min) before they were incubated with 1 µg trypsin in 50 mM HEPES, pH 8.5 at 37 °C overnight. After enzymatic digestion, samples were acidified with trifluoro acetic acid (TFA) at 0.5 % (v/v) final concentration. Peptide solutions were analyzed by (LC-MS/MS) on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano-HPLC system coupled to a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer with a Nanospray Flex ion source (all from Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were loaded onto an RP C18 pre-column (Acclaim PepMap, 300 μm × 5 mm, 5 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and washed with 0.1% (v/v) TFA for 15 min at 30 μL/min. Peptides were eluted from the pre-column and separated on a 200 cm µPAC C18 separation column (Pharmafluidics) that had been equilibrated with 3% solvent B (solvent A: 0.1% (v/v) FA (formic acid), solvent B: ACN, 0.1 % (v/v) FA). A linear gradient from 3–35% solvent B within 180 min at 600 nL/min (0-30 min) and 300 nL/min (30- 180 min) was used to elute peptides from the separation column. Data were acquired in data dependent MS/MS mode, HCD (higher-energy collision-induced dissociation) with a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 28% was used for fragmentation. Each high-resolution full MS scan (m/z 375 to 1799, R = 140,000, target value (TV) 3,000,000, max. injection time(IT) 50 ms) was followed by high-resolution (R = 17,500, TV 200,000, IT 120 ms, isolation window 2 Th) product ion scans, starting with the most intense signal in the full scan MS, dynamic exclusion (duration 30 s, window ± 3 ppm) was enabled.

### Data Protocol
For peptide identification and quantification, data were searched against the Swiss-Prot  database (tax. Homo sapiens, version 11/19; 20,315 entries) using Proteome Discoverer,  version 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). A maximum mass deviation of 10 ppm was applied for  precursor ions, while for product ions, max. 0.02 Da were allowed. Oxidation of Met and  acetylation of protein N-termini were set as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation of  cysteines was included as fixed modification. A maximum of two missed cleavage sites were  considered for peptides. Peptides were quantified via LFQ (label-free quantitation) and data  were finally subjected to quantile normalization to derive protein enrichment by RAVER1.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Alternative splicing, Risc, Microrna, Ptbp, Raver1, Tgfb, Emt, Cancer

### Affiliations
Martin Luther University (MLU) Institute of Molecular Medicine (IMM)  Sect. Molecular Cell Biology
MLU Halle, Inst. f. Pharmacy

### Submitter
Christian Ihling

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan Hüttelmaier
Martin Luther University (MLU) Institute of Molecular Medicine (IMM)  Sect. Molecular Cell Biology


