### Accession
PXD017031

### Title
LC-MS/MS analysis of immunoprecipitated NAA15-V5 variants

### Description
The human N-terminal acetyltransferase E (NatE) including its associated NatA co-translationally acetylates the N-terminus of about 40-60% of the proteome to mediate diverse biological processes including protein half-life, localization and protein interaction. In eukaryotes, the NatE complex contains the NAA50 catalytic subunit with substrate specificity for N-terminal methionine acetylation and NatA, which facilitates ribosomal targeting of the complex for co-translational activity. NatA, contains NAA10 catalytic and NAA15 auxiliary subunits, and forms a complex with a protein with intrinsic NAA10 inhibitory activity, HYPK. The molecular basis for how the human NAA10 and NAA50 catalytic subunits within NatE complex coordinate function and how HYPK regulates NatE activity is unknown. Here, we characterize the biochemical interplay between the human NAA10 and NAA50 catalytic subunits of NatE and its regulation by HYPK and correlate this to the cryo-EM structures of the human NatE and NatE/HYPK complexes. We show that NAA50 and HYPK exhibit negative cooperative binding to NatA in vitro and in human cells, by inducing NAA15 shifts in opposing directions. NAA50 and HYPK each contributes to NAA10 activity inhibition through structural alteration of the NAA10 substrate binding site. NatE is about 8-fold more active than NAA50, likely due to a reduced entropic cost for substrate binding through NatA tethering, but is inhibited by HYPK through structural alteration of the NatE substrate binding site. Taken together, these studies reveal the molecular basis for coordinated N-terminal acetylation by the NAA10 and NAA50 catalytic subunits of NatE and its modulation by HYPK.

### Sample Protocol
The samples used for LC-MS/MS analysis were V5-immunoprecipitation samples enriched for NAA15-WT-V5, NAA15-T406Y-V5 or NAA15-L814P-V5. Immunocomplexes retrieved by V5-immunoprecipitaiton were eluted in FASP buffer (2% SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6, 0.1 M DTT) and heated for 5 min at 95 °C. Filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method was performed to process the eluates. The protein samples were mixed with 200 µl UA buffer (8 M urea, 100 Mm Tris-HCl pH 8.0), transferred to Microcon 30kDa MWCO filters and centrifuged. All centrifugation steps were carried out at 23 °C and 14 000 x g for 15 min. The filters were washed three times with 200 µl UA by spinning. Proteins were then Cys-alkylated by incubation with 100 µl 50 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in UA for 20 min, before IAA was removed by centrifugation. Filters were washed three times with 100 µl UA. The UA buffer was then exchanged by three washes with 100 µl 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC), before 500 ng trypsin (Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin, Promega) was added to the filters and incubated overnight at 37 °C. Digested proteins were collected by centrifugation and the filter was washed once with 75 µl ABC. Peptides were acidified with 5% formic acid (FA) and desalted using PierceTM C18-Tips (Thermo Scientific) according to manufacturer´s protocol. The final eluates were dried by speed vacuum and diluted to desired concentration with 5% FA. Mass spectrometric analysis was performed with an Ultimate 3000 RSLC system (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) equipped with EASY-spray nano-electrospray ion source (Thermo Scientific). About 1 µg tryptic peptides were loaded and desalted on a pre-column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 2cm x 75µm ID nanoViper column, packed with 3 µm C18 beads) with 0.1% TFA (flow rate 5 µl/min, 5 min). Peptides were separated during a biphasic ACN gradient from two nanoflow UPLC pumps (flow rate of 200 nl/min) on an analytical column (PepMap RSLC, 50cm x 75 µm i.d. EASY-spray column, packed with 2 µm C18 beads). Solvent A and B were 0.1% FA (vol/vol) in water and 100% ACN respectively. The gradient composition was 5% B for 5 min, 5-8% B for 0.5 min, 8–24% B for 109.5min, 24–35% B for 25min, and 35–80% B for 15 min, 80% B over 15 min for isocratic elution and 5% B over 20 min for conditioning. The eluting peptides were ionized in the electrospray and analyzed by the Q-Exactive HF. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode to automatically switch between full scan MS and MS/MS acquisition. MS spectra (m/z 375-1500) were obtained with a resolution of 120 000 at m/z 200, automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3 x 106 and maximum injection time (IT) of 100 ms. The twelve most intense peptides above a threshold of 50 000 counts and charge states 2 to 5 were isolated (window of 1.6 m/z, AGC target of 1 x 105 and maximum IT of 110 ms) for fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 28%. Fragments were detected in the orbitrap at a resolution of 15 000 at m/z 200, with first mass fixed at m/z 100. Precursor masses selected for MS/MS analysis were excluded by dynamic exclusion for 25 s with “exclude isotopes” enabled. Lock-mass internal calibration (m/z 445.12003) was used.

### Data Protocol
The raw data acquired was processed with MaxQuant v. 1.6.2.6 and Andromeda search engine. The spectra were searched against a database of Swiss-Prot annotated human protein sequences (20431 sequences, retrieved 25.06.2019) and a reverse decoy database. Cystein carbamidomethylation was selected as a fixed modification and variable modifications included methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% for peptide and protein identification, minimum peptide length allowed was 7 and match between runs (0.7 min match time window, 20 min alignment time window) was enabled. Label-free quantification (LFQ) and intensity-based absolute quantification (IBAQ) were selected. All other parameters were set to default values. The resulting proteingroups.txt file was analysed using Perseus software v. 1.6.5.0. Proteins only identified by site, common contaminants and reverse hits were filtered away. The IBAQ intensities of NAA10, NAA50 and HYPK were normalized to the IBAQ intensity of NAA15 in each IP sample. Thereafter, the IBAQ intensity of NAA15, NAA10, NAA50 and HYPK in each sample was normalized to the IBAQ intensity of the corresponding protein in the NAA15-WT-V5 IP sample.

### Publication Abstract
The human N-terminal acetyltransferase E (NatE) contains NAA10 and NAA50 catalytic, and NAA15 auxiliary subunits and associates with HYPK, a protein with intrinsic NAA10 inhibitory activity. NatE co-translationally acetylates the N-terminus of half the proteome to mediate diverse biological processes, including protein half-life, localization, and interaction. The molecular basis for how NatE and HYPK cooperate is unknown. Here, we report the cryo-EM structures of human NatE and NatE/HYPK complexes and associated biochemistry. We reveal that NAA50 and HYPK exhibit negative cooperative binding to NAA15 in vitro and in human cells by inducing NAA15 shifts in opposing directions. NAA50 and HYPK each contribute to NAA10 activity inhibition through structural alteration of the NAA10 substrate-binding site. NAA50 activity is increased through NAA15 tethering, but is inhibited by HYPK through structural alteration of the NatE substrate-binding site. These studies reveal the molecular basis for coordinated N-terminal acetylation by NatE and HYPK.

### Keywords
Nate, Naa50, Naa10, N-terminal acetylation, Lc-ms/ms, Naa15, Hypk

### Affiliations
University of Bergen
Department of Biomedicine, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway Department of Biological Sciences, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway Department of Surgery, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway

### Submitter
Nina McTiernan

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Arnesen
Department of Biomedicine, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway Department of Biological Sciences, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway Department of Surgery, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway


