### Accession
PXD039997

### Title
Integrated phosphoproteome, ubiquitinome, and acetylome analyses uncovering the post-translational modifications crosstalk during MSP1-induced signaling in rice

### Description
Magnaporthe oryzae snodprot1 homologous protein (MSP1) has been shown to act as a pathogen-associated molecular pattern (PAMPs) and trigger PAMP-triggered immunity (PTI) response involving programmed cell death and expression of various defense-related genes in rice. The involvement of several post-translational modifications (PTMs) in the regulation of plant immune response, especially PTI, during pathogen infection is well established, however, the information on the regulatory roles of these PTMs in response to MSP1-induced signaling in rice is currently elusive. Here, we report the phosphoproteome, ubiquitinome, and acetylproteome to investigate the MSP1-induced PTMs alterations in MSP1 overexpressed rice. Our analysis identified a total of 4,666 PTM modified sites in rice leaves including 4,292 phosphosites, 189 ubiquitin sites, and 185 acetylation sites. Among these, PTM status of 437 phosphorylated, 53 ubiquitinated, and 68 acetylated peptides were significantly changed by MSP1. Functional annotation of MSP1 modulated peptides by MapMan analysis revealed that these were majorly associated with cellular immune responses such as signaling, transcription factors, DNA and RNA regulation, and protein metabolism, among others. Taken together, this study uncovers the MSP1-induced PTMs changes in rice proteins and identified several novel components of rice-MSP1 interaction.

### Sample Protocol
In-solution trypsin digestion was performed using a filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method. Acetone precipitated proteins were re-dissolved in denaturation buffer [4% SDS and 100 mM DTT in 0.1 M tetraethylammonium tetrahydroborate (TEAB), pH 8.5] and quantified using 2-D Quant kit (Cytiva, MA, USA). Sequentially, 400 μg of proteins employed the sonication for 3 min and heating at 99 °C for 30 min. The denatured proteins were loaded onto the 30K spin filter (Merck Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany) and diluted with urea buffer [8 M urea in 100 mM TEAB, pH 8.5]. The protein-bound spin filter was washed three times with urea buffer to remove SDS. Cysteine alkylation was accomplished for 1 hour at room temperature in the dark condition using alkylation buffer [50 mM iodoacetamide (IAA), 8 M urea in 0.1 M TEAB, pH 8.5]. After alkylation, trypsin (Promega, Madison, USA) solution dissolved in 50 mM TEAB containing 5% acetonitrile (ACN) (enzyme to substrate ratio [w/w] of 1:50) was added and proteins were digested overnight at 37°C. Digested peptides were collected by centrifugation and measured total concentration with the Pierce Quantitative Fluorometric Peptide Assay (Thermo Scientific, MA, USA) according to kit instructions. Enrichment of phosphopeptides was performed. Briefly, lyophilized peptides were re-dissolved in the binding buffer provided in TiO2 phosphopeptide enrichment kit (Thermo Scientific, MA, USA). Dissolved peptides were sonicated for 3 min and applied centrifugation. Subsequently, TiO2 spin tip equilibration was prepared with buffer A [90% ACN containing 0.4% (v/v) Trifluoroacetic Acid (TFA)] and buffer B [25.65% (v/v) of buffer A containing lactic acid]. Re-suspended peptide samples in 150μL of buffer B were loaded onto TiO2 spin tip and washed with buffer B and buffer A as described in manufacturer’s protocol. Then, enriched phosphopeptides were eluted with elution buffer I [1.5% ammonium hydroxide] and elution buffer II [2.5% TFA]. Modified Peptides by ubiquitination and acetylation were sequentially enriched and purified using PTMScan® ubiquitin remnant motif (K-ε-GG) kit and acetyl-lysine motif (Ac-K) kit (Cell Signaling, MA, USA) as followed manufacturer’s instruction. Lyophilized peptides were re-suspended in immunoaffinity purification (IAP) buffer and vial of antibody-bead slurry was washed with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) buffer. The antibody-bead slurry was transferred to each sample and incubated on a rotator for 2 hr at 4 °C. The, each sample applied washing with ice-chilled ddH2O and elution using elution buffer [0.15% TFA]. The eluted peptides were lyophilized and stored at -70 °C until further LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Peptides dissolved in solvent-A (2% ACN and 0.1% formic acid) were separated by reverse phase chromatography using ultra-high-performance liquid chromatography (UHPLC) Dionex UltiMateTM 3000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Massachusetts, United States) instruments. Acclaim PepMap 100 trap column (100 μm × 2 cm, nanoViper C18, 5 μm, 100 Å) was used for trapping of peptides and washed with 98% solvent A for 6 min at a flow rate of 6 μL/min. For separation of peptides, Acclaim PepMap 100 capillary column (75 μm × 15 cm, nanoViper C18, 3 μm, 100 Å) was used at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The LC analytical gradient was run at 2% to 35% solvent-B (100% ACN and 0.1% formic acid) for 150 min, 40% to 95% for 10 min, followed by 95% solvent-B for 5 min, and finally 5% solvent B for 15 min. The electrospray ionization source was coupled to a quadrupole-based mass spectrometer (MS) QExactive™ Orbitrap high-resolution MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) by the Top15 method using the same parameters.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Signaling, Msp1, Post-translational modifications, Rice

### Affiliations
Department of Plant Bioscience, Pusan National University, Miryang 50463, South Korea
Pusan National University

### Submitter
Sun Tae Kim

### Lab Head
Dr Sun Tae Kim
Department of Plant Bioscience, Pusan National University, Miryang 50463, South Korea


