### Accession
PXD036862

### Title
Quantitative proteomics analysis of COVID-19 infected hamster lung tissue

### Description
The mechanistic interplay between SARS-CoV-2 infection, inflammation, and oxygen homeostasis is not well defined.  Here we show that the hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF-1α) transcriptional pathway is activated, perhaps due to a lack of oxygen or an accumulation of mitochondrial reactive oxygen species (ROS) in the lungs of adult Syrian hamsters infected with SARS-CoV-2. Prominent nuclear localization of HIF-1 and increased expression of HIF-1α target proteins, including glucose transporter 1 (Glut1), lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), and pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase-1 (PDK1), were observed in areas of lung consolidation filled with infiltrating monocytes/macrophages. Upregulation of these HIF-1α target proteins was accompanied by a rise in glycolysis as measured by extracellular acidification rate (ECAR) in lung homogenates.  A concomitant marginal reduction in mitochondrial respiration was also observed as seen by a partial loss of oxygen consumption rates (OCR) in both coupled and uncoupled states of respiration in isolated mitochondrial fractions of SARS-CoV-2 infected hamster lungs. Proteomics analysis revealed specific deficits in the mitochondrial ATP synthase (Atp5a1) within complex V and in the ATP/ADP translocase (Slc25a4). The activation of HIF-1 in inflammatory macrophages may also drive proinflammatory cytokines production, complement activation, and oxidative stress in infected lungs. Together, these findings support a role for HIF-1 as a central mediator of the metabolic reprogramming, inflammation, and mitochondrial dysfunction associated with COVID-19 disease.

### Sample Protocol
Whole hamster lung tissues were placed in sodium dodecyl sulfide (SDS) to a final concentration of 1 % (v/v).  The samples were homogenized by pipetting each sample through ten cycles of resuspension with a 200 µL pipette until the tissues were solubilized.  Each sample was then boiled for 5 minutes at 99°C. An amount corresponding to 50 µg of total protein estimated by the BCA assay from each sample was subjected to SDS-PAGE electrophoresis for 5 minutes followed by an in-gel trypsin digestion with iodoacetamide alkylation.  Peptide digestions from each sample were analyzed by LC-MS/MS on a Q-Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA) in conjunction with an EASY nLC 1200 HPLC (Thermo) and an EASY-Spray nano-electrospray ionization source operating in positive ion mode. Peptides were separated using a 75 µm x 250 mm 2 µm C18 reverse phase analytical column (Thermo Scientific).  Peptide elution was performed with an increasing percentage of acetonitrile over a 120-minute gradient with a flow rate of 300 mL/minute.  The mass spectrometer was operated in data-independent acquisition (DIA) mode with MS2 spectra acquired at 34 distinct 16 m/z shifted mass windows stepping from 400-940 m/z with an MS survey scan obtained once every duty cycle from 400-950 m/z.  MS and MS2 spectra were acquired with an Orbitrap scan resolution of 140,000 and 15,000, respectively.  The accumulation gain control (AGC) was set to 1x106 and 1x105 ions with a maximum injection time of 100 and 80 milliseconds for MS and MS2 scans, respectively.  The precursor ions in MS2 fragment ion scans were selected across a mass isolation window of 24 m/z and dissociated by HCD (High Energy Collisional Dissociation) with a 30% normalized collision energy.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectra were analyzed using Protalizer µDIA software (v1.1.3.2) from Vulcan Biosciences (Birmingham, AL.  Peptide and protein identifications were made using the Protein Farmer search engine against the reviewed and unreviewed forward and reversed Mesocricetus auratus UniProt database (2021-10 release).  Mass spectra were identified and quantified with a 12ppm fragment ion mass tolerance after mass calibration.  Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was searched as a fixed modification in all analyses.  Peptides with one trypsin missed cleavage were included in the analysis.  A strict false discovery rate (FDR) based on a reversed database search of 1% at the peptide level and 5% at the protein level was applied for each sample analyzed.  Normalized peptide and protein quantitative relative abundance values were calculated by normalizing the MS2 chromatogram sum intensity of each peptide to the total sum intensity of all peptide MS2 chromatograms in each sample followed by Log2 transforming the values and applying a two-tailed unpaired t-test.

### Publication Abstract
The mechanistic interplay between SARS-CoV-2 infection, inflammation, and oxygen homeostasis is not well defined. Here, we show that the hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF-1&#x3b1;) transcriptional pathway is activated, perhaps due to a lack of oxygen or an accumulation of mitochondrial reactive oxygen species (ROS) in the lungs of adult Syrian hamsters infected with SARS-CoV-2. Prominent nuclear localization of HIF-1&#x3b1; and increased expression of HIF-1&#x3b1; target proteins, including glucose transporter 1 (Glut1), lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), and pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase-1 (PDK1), were observed in areas of lung consolidation filled with infiltrating monocytes/macrophages. Upregulation of these HIF-1&#x3b1; target proteins was accompanied by a rise in glycolysis as measured by extracellular acidification rate (ECAR) in lung homogenates. A concomitant reduction in mitochondrial respiration was also observed as indicated by a partial loss of oxygen consumption rates (OCR) in isolated mitochondrial fractions of SARS-CoV-2-infected hamster lungs. Proteomic analysis further revealed specific deficits in the mitochondrial ATP synthase (Atp5a1) within complex V and in the ATP/ADP translocase (Slc25a4). The activation of HIF-1&#x3b1; in inflammatory macrophages may also drive proinflammatory cytokine production and complement activation and oxidative stress in infected lungs. Together, these findings support a role for HIF-1&#x3b1; as a central mediator of the metabolic reprogramming, inflammation, and bioenergetic dysfunction associated with SARS-CoV-2 infection.

### Keywords
Covid-19, Lung tissue

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Biochemistry and Vascular Biology  Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research  Food and Drug Administration
CSO

### Submitter
Michael Heaven

### Lab Head
Dr Abdu Alayash
Laboratory of Biochemistry and Vascular Biology  Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research  Food and Drug Administration


