### Accession
PXD019995

### Title
The effect of skyrin in normoxia and hypoxia on HCT 116 cell line

### Description
Skyrin is a plant secondary metabolite from Hypericum genus with potential in anticancer therapy. It is structurally very similar to hypericin. The mechanism of its action in normoxia as well as in hypoxia, when cells are expressing multiple adaptive mechanisms connected to poor prognosis, could be very interesting. To achieve it, label-free comparative proteomic analysis of HCT 116 cell lines samples was performed.

### Sample Protocol
Human colorectal adenocarcinoma cell line HCT 116 cells (ATCC) were after seeding allowed to settle for 8 hrs at standard conditions in incubator. Then, cells were moved to hypoxic and normoxic chambers of glovebox with controlled conditions. The oxygen concentration in the hypoxic cabinet was set to 1% (partially 1% of O2, 5% of CO2, 94% of N2) and in the normoxic cabinet to 20% (partially 20% of O2, 5% of CO2, 75% of N2). Humidity and temperature were the same for both cabinets, i.e. 95% and 37°C.  Then, after 16 hrs in hypoxic or normoxic conditions, medium with 10 µM skyrin in DMSO or with the same concentration of DMSO as samples were added (0.2% v/v).   After 48 hrs of cultivation, samples were washed three times with ice-cold PBS, harvested by scraping in PBS on ice and centrifuged. Pellets were resuspended in 50 µL od SDT buffer and homogenized by mixing for 120 minutes at 95°C. After homogenization, samples were stored at -80°C. Samples for LC-MS analyses were prepared using FASP (30 kDa cut-off) from 5 µL of the protein mixture. Proteins were reduced and alkylated with iodoacetamide. Subsequently, they were incubated with trypsin at 37 °C for 18 hrs and extracted to 15 µL of the final solution.   Mass spectrometry analysis of the peptide mixture was performed using RSLCnano system on-line connected to Orbitrap Q-Exactive HF-X system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Tryptic digests were concentrated and desalted online using a cartridge trapping column (300 mm × 5 mm) filled with 5-mm particles C18 PepMap100 sorbent (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Acclaim Pepmap100 C18 analytical column (3-mm particles, 75 mm × 500 mm; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) was used. Peptides were separated by the following gradient program at a flow rate of 300 nL/min: the gradient elution started at 2% (0 – 5th min) of mobile phase B (0.1% formic acid and 5% DMSO in 80% acetonitrile) and 98% of mobile phase A (0.1% formic acid in 5% DMSO water), increased from 2% to 35% (5th –105th min), then increased linearly to 90% (105th – 110th min) of mobile phase B and remained at this state for the next 10 min. Equilibration of the trapping column and the column was done before sample injection to sample loop. The samples were measured in random order with a blank analysis among the samples.   For each analysis, approximately 2000 ng was subjected to LC-MS per each sample. The Digital PicoView 550 (New Objective, Woburn, MA, USA) ion source with sheath gas option, SilicaTip emitter (New Objective, Woburn, MA, USA) and ABIRD (ESI Source Solutions, Woburn, MA, USA) was installed.  MS data were acquired in a DDA mode selecting up to top 20 precursors based on precursor abundance in the survey scan (350 - 2000 m/z). The resolution of the survey scan was 120 000 (at 200 m/z) with a target value of 3.106 ions and a maximum injection time of 100 ms. HCD MS/MS spectra were acquired with a target value of 1.105 and resolution of 15 000 (at 200 m/z). The maximum injection time for MS/MS was 50 ms. Dynamic exclusion was enabled for 40 s after one MS/MS spectra acquisition. The isolation window for MS/MS fragmentation was set to 1.2 m/z.

### Data Protocol
The data were analyzed using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.2.10) and searched against the human UniProt fasta database using Andromeda search engine. The search parameter settings include trypsin as protease with two misscleavages, oxidation of methionine, carbamidomethylation of cysteine as static modificaton. Matches between runs were used across biological replicates datasets to improve peptide matching. Results were set to follow a 1% false discovery rate of peptide-to-spectrum matches and protein levels. The minimal number of unique and razor peptides was set to 1.

### Publication Abstract
Skyrin (SKR) is a plant bisanthraquinone secondary metabolite from the <i>Hypericum</i> genus with potential use in anticancer therapy. However, its effect and mechanism of action are still unknown. The negative effect of SKR on HCT 116 and HT-29 cancer cell lines in hypoxic and normoxic conditions was observed. HCT 116 cells were more responsive to SKR treatment as demonstrated by decreased metabolic activity, cellularity and accumulation of cells in the G1 phase. Moreover, an increasing number of apoptotic cells was observed after treatment with SKR. Based on the LC-MS comparative proteomic data from hypoxia and normoxia (data are available via ProteomeXchange with the identifier PXD019995), SKR significantly upregulated Death receptor 5 (DR5), which was confirmed by real-time qualitative PCR (RT-qPCR). Furthermore, multiple changes in the Tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL)-activated cascade were observed. Moreover, the reversion of TRAIL resistance was observed in HCT 116, HT-29 and SW620 cell lines, even in hypoxia, which was linked to the upregulation of DR5. In conclusion, our results propose the use of SKR as a prospective anticancer drug, particularly as an adjuvant to TRAIL-targeting treatment to reverse TRAIL resistance in hypoxia.

### Keywords
Colorectal cancer, Skyrin, Lc-ms/ms, Hypoxia, Label-free

### Affiliations
Proteomics Core Facility and Research Group Proteomics
CEITEC-MU
Masaryk University
Brno, Czech Republic
Proteomics Core Facility and Research Group Proteomics, CEITEC-MU, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic

### Submitter
David Potesil

### Lab Head
Dr Zbynek Zdrahal
Proteomics Core Facility and Research Group Proteomics, CEITEC-MU, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic


