### Accession
PXD008381

### Title
ProteomeGenerator analysis of K052

### Description
To improve identification of canonical and non-canonical protein isoforms, we introduced ProteomeGenerator, a  framework for reference-guided and de novo proteogenomic database generation from transcriptomic sequencing dataset. The proteomic databases output by ProteomeGenerator contain only proteins encoded by actively transcribed genes, and includes sample-specific protein isoforms resulting from non-canonical transcription and mRNA editing. We applied this workflow to the proteogenomic analysis of spliceosome-defective K052 SRSF2(P95H) cells, demonstrating high-confidence identification of proteins isoforms arising from intron inclusion and non-canonical splicing, as well as improved overall estimation of false-discovery rate from the focused database assembled by ProteomeGenerator.

### Sample Protocol
K052 proteome was tandem digested in solution using LysC and Trypsin. Peptides were indipendently fractionated by SCX and PH9 reverse phase chromatography into a total of 48 fractions. Each fraction was resolved by capillary reverse phase chromatography in line with electrospray ionization source. Peptides were analyzed using an Orbitrap Fusion MS set to first acquire full-range HR precursor scans, and then perform data dependent MS2 analysis in the linear ion trap after HCD fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Raw spectra were submitted to Peaks 8.0 for peptide-spectral matching and target-decoy FDR estimation. Mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm for MS1 and 0.6 Da for MS2. Two missed cleavages were allowed, as well as variable oxidation of Met and deamidation of N residues. Cys carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification.

### Publication Abstract
Modern mass spectrometry now permits genome-scale and quantitative measurements of biological proteomes. However, analysis of specific specimens is currently hindered by the incomplete representation of biological variability of protein sequences in canonical reference proteomes and the technical demands for their construction. Here, we report ProteomeGenerator, a framework for de novo and reference-assisted proteogenomic database construction and analysis based on sample-specific transcriptome sequencing and high-accuracy mass spectrometry proteomics. This enables the assembly of proteomes encoded by actively transcribed genes, including sample-specific protein isoforms resulting from non-canonical mRNA transcription, splicing, or editing. To improve the accuracy of protein isoform identification in non-canonical proteomes, ProteomeGenerator relies on statistical target-decoy database matching calibrated using sample-specific controls. Its current implementation includes automatic integration with MaxQuant mass spectrometry proteomics algorithms. We applied this method for the proteogenomic analysis of splicing factor SRSF2 mutant leukemia cells, demonstrating high-confidence identification of non-canonical protein isoforms arising from alternative transcriptional start sites, intron retention, and cryptic exon splicing as well as improved accuracy of genome-scale proteome discovery. Additionally, we report proteogenomic performance metrics for current state-of-the-art implementations of SEQUEST HT, MaxQuant, Byonic, and PEAKS mass spectral analysis algorithms. Finally, ProteomeGenerator is implemented as a Snakemake workflow within a Singularity container for one-step installation in diverse computing environments, thereby enabling open, scalable, and facile discovery of sample-specific, non-canonical, and neomorphic biological proteomes.

### Keywords
Proteomegenerator proteogenomics shotgun k052 non-canonical isoforms

### Affiliations
Molecular Pharmacology Program, Sloan Kettering Institute, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center

### Submitter
Alex Kentsis

### Lab Head
Dr Alex Kentsis
Molecular Pharmacology Program, Sloan Kettering Institute, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY


