### Accession
PXD038834

### Title
Proteomic elucidation of fructose-diet associated molecular alterations in hypothalamus of adolescent rats

### Description
The crucial role of nutrition for cerebral health and the impact of dietary habits on brain structure and function have been long far recognized. To date a major health concern is associated with the increased consumption of fructose as added sugar in many types of drinks and processed foods, especially among young people. High-fructose intake has been pointed out as the possible culprit for the raised incidence of chronic diseases, such as obesity, cardiovascular disease, nonalcoholic fatty liver disease, and type 2 diabete. Further, it has been reported that high-fructose intake is associated with the over-activation of its cerebral metabolism, which was proposed to negatively impact on whole brain physiology and cognitive function. Notably, we previously reported that short-term fructose-rich diet induces mitochondrial dysfunction, oxidative stress, and neuroinflammation in hippocampus of young rats, as well as the imbalance of redox homeostasis, autophagic mechanisms and representation of synaptic markers in frontal cortex of both adult and young rats. Animal studies have also revealed the damaging effect of high-fructose diets on hippocampal functions during periods of neurocognitive development, such as childhood and adolescence.  Hypothalamus plays a crucial role in maintaining whole body homeostasis. Long-term fructose overfeeding was reported to alter hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis, leading to elevations in glucocorticoids in peri-adolescent rats [22]. Further, fructose overconsumption was associated with impairment of hypothalamic insulin signalling, oxidative stress and inflammation , and it was proposed that fructose-driven perturbations of hypothalamic function may compromise the potential for satiety, thereby increasing the prospect of developing obesity.  Data currently available on hypothalamic dysfunctions related to a high-fructose diet essentially refer to the effects of long-term sugar feeding, while information on corresponding alterations associated with a short-term dietary treatment, particularly in the critical period of adolescence, is still lacking. Due to complexity and multiplicity of hypothalamic functions, there is also the need for a holistic characterization aimed at unveiling the general picture of hypothalamic dysfunctions associated with a high-fructose diet. To fill this gap, we investigated adolescent rats fed a fructose-rich or control diet, for 3 weeks. To verify whether the fructose-driven changes are rescued after the switch to a control diet, half of the rats from both animal groups were then fed a control diet for additional 3 weeks until young adulthood phase. Quantitative proteomics on hypothalamic extracts of all animal groups was used to identify molecular alterations triggered by fructose-rich diet and to obtain insights into the relationship between sugar feeding and possible dysfunctions of hypothalamus.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction  Aliquots of hypothalamus (about 40 mg) were homogenized in six volumes (w/v) of cold RIPA buffer, as previously published [29]; protein concentration was evaluated by the colorimetric Bio-Rad Bradford protein assay, using a commercial kit (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA). Protein extracts were used for proteomic investigations, ELISA and Western blotting analysis.  Proteomic analysis For quantitative proteomic analysis, protein concentration of pooled samples was determined using the BCA Protein assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific), according to manufacturer’s instructions. An aliquot of each protein sample (100 μg) was adjusted to a 100 μl-final volume with 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), and then reduced with 5 μl of 200 mM tris(2-carboxyethylphosphine), for 60 min, at 55 °C. Protein samples were then alkylated by adding 5 μl of 375 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min, at 25 °C, in the dark. Alkylated proteins were then precipitated by addition of 6 vol of cold acetone to remove chemicals. After precipitation, proteins were pelleted by centrifugation at 8000 g, for 10 min, at 4 °C, and air-dried. Each sample was digested with freshly prepared trypsin (ratio of enzyme to protein 1:50) in 100 mM TEAB, at 37 °C, overnight. Resulting peptides from each protein sample were labelled with the TMT Label Reagent Set (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, USA) according to the matching C-TMT6-126, CR-TMT6-127, F-TMT6-128, FR-TMT6-129, at 25 °C, in agreement to manufacturer’s instructions. After 1 h of reaction, 8 μl of 5% w/v hydroxylamine was added in each tube and mixed for 15 min, in order to quench the derivatization reaction. For a set of comparative experiments, tagged peptide mixtures were mixed in equal molar ratios (1:1) and vacuum-dried under rotation. Then, pooled TMT-labelled peptide mixtures were suspended in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, and fractionated by using the Pierce™ High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide fractionation kit (Thermo-Fisher Scientific) to remove unbound TMT reagents and reduce sample complexity, according to manufacturer’s instructions. After fractionation, eight fractions of TMT-labelled peptides were collected, vacuum-dried and finally reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid for subsequent mass spectrometric analysis.  TMT-labelled peptide fractions were analyzed on a nanoLC-ESI-Q-Orbitrap-MS/MS platform consisting of an UltiMate 3000 HPLC RSLC nano system (Dionex, USA) coupled to a Q-ExactivePlus mass spectrometer through a Nanoflex ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded on an Acclaim PepMap TM RSLC C18 column (150 mm ×75 μm ID, 2 μm particles, 100 Å pore size) (Thermo-Fisher Scientific), and eluted with a gradient of solvent B (19.92/80/0.08 v/v/v water/acetonitrile/formic acid) in solvent A (99.9/0.1 v/v water/formic acid), at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The gradient of solvent B started at 5%, increased to 60% over 125 min, raised to 95% over 1 min, remained at 95% for 8 min, and finally returned to 5% in 1 min, with a column equilibrating step of 20 min before the subsequent chromatographic run. The mass spectrometer operated in data-dependent mode, using a full scan (m/z range 375–1500, nominal resolution of 70,000), followed by MS/MS scans of the 10 most abundant ions. MS/MS spectra were acquired in a scan m/z range 110–2000, using a normalized collision energy of 32%, an automatic gain control target of 100,000, a maximum ion target of 120 ms, and a resolution of 17,500. A dynamic exclusion value of 30 s was also used.

### Data Protocol
All MS and MS/MS raw data files per sample were merged for protein identification and relative protein quantification into ProteomeDiscoverer 2.4 software (Thermo Scientific), enabling the database search by Mascot algorithm v. 2.4.2 (Matrix Science, UK) using the following criteria: UniProtKB protein database (Rattus norvegicus, 36206 protein sequences 11/2021) including the most common protein contaminants; carbamidomethylation of Cys and TMT6plex modification of lysine and peptide N-terminal as fixed modifications; oxidation of Met, deamidation of Asn and Gln, pyroglutamate formation of Gln as variable modifications. Peptide mass tolerance was set to ± 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance to ± 0.02 Da. Proteolytic enzyme and maximum number of missed cleavages were set to trypsin and 2, respectively. Protein candidates assigned according to at least two sequenced peptides and an individual Mascot Score ≥ 25 were considered confidently identified. For quantification, ratios of TMT reporter ion intensities in the MS/MS spectra from raw datasets were used to calculate fold change values between samples. Results were filtered to 1% false discovery rate.  Functional enrichment analysis including GO and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway was performed by using EnrichR (https://amp.pharm.mssm.edu/Enrichr) and FunRich 3.1.3 (http://www.funrich.org). STRING (https://string-db.org) was used to visualize and integrate complex networks of proteomics data.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Adolescence, Mitochondria, Inflammation., Fructose-rich diet, Proteomics, Hypothalamus

### Affiliations
ISPAAM CNR
Institute for the Animal Production System in the Mediterranean Environment, National Research Council, 80055 Portici (Naples), Italy

### Submitter
CHIARA D'AMBROSIO

### Lab Head
Dr Andrea Scaloni
Institute for the Animal Production System in the Mediterranean Environment, National Research Council, 80055 Portici (Naples), Italy


