### Accession
PXD028742

### Title
Identification and characterization of Formate dehydrogenases (FDHs) from Bacillus subtilis

### Description
The Mo/W-bisPGD Formate Dehydrogenases (FDHs) family interplays in several metabolic pathways ranging from carbon fixation to energy harvesting owing to their reaction with a wide variety of redox partners. Here, we have unveiled two non-canonical FDHs in Bacillus subtilis which are organized into two-subunit complexes, as shown by mass spectrometry, with unique features, ForCE1 and ForCE2. The ForC catalytic subunit interacts with an unprecedented partner subunit ForE and its amino acid sequence within the active site deviates from the consensus residues typically associated to FDH activity, with an histidine residue naturally substituted by a glutamine. The ForE essential subunit mediates the utilization of menaquinone as electron acceptor as shown by the formate:menadione oxidoreductase activity of both enzymes, their copurification with menaquinone and the distinctive detection of a protein-bound neutral menasemiquinone radical by multifrequency EPR experiments on the purified enzymes. Moreover, EPR characterization of both FDHs reveals the presence of several [Fe-S] clusters with distinct relaxation properties and a weakly anisotropic Mo(V) EPR signature consistent with the characteristic Mo-bisPGD cofactor of this enzyme family. Altogether, this work enlarges our representation of the FDH family by deciphering a non-canonical FDH, which differs both in terms of architecture, amino acid conservation around the Mo cofactor and reactivity.

### Sample Protocol
For overproduction of recombinant proteins B. subtilis 168 derivatives (4088 amyE::pSHP1-6hisyjgCD, 4233 amyE::pSHP2-yjgC8his, 4230 amyE::pSHP-6hisyrhED, 4192 amyE::pSHP-yrhE8his) were grown in 4.8 L of LB medium with 2 µM sodium molybdate at 37°C until OD 0.3, cells were then submitted to a salt shock (0.4 M NaCl) for 30 min, followed by induction with 0.8% xylose for 3 hours (4088 and 4233 strains) and expression overnight (4230 and 4192 strains) at 37C. Harvested cells were washed once in 20 mM sodium phosphate pH 7.5 50 mM Na2SO4 and cells were kept at -80°C. Frozen cells (10-15 g of wet weight) were thawed, suspended in 90 mL of 20 mM sodium phosphate pH 7.5 50 mM Na2SO4 (buffer A). Cell suspension was treated with proteases inhibitor cocktail (Roche), lysozyme (1 mg/mL during 30 min at 37°C), DNase I and EDTA 0.5 mM and disrupted by 1-2 passages through a French pressure cell at 1 bar. Cells debris were removed by centrifugation for 40 min at 100,000 x g. The supernatant was applied onto 15 mL Ni-NTA affinity column (GE healthcare). Column was washed with buffer A supplemented with 50 mM imidazole and the enzyme eluted in buffer A supplemented with 500 mM imidazole and 10 mM KNO3. Protein solutions were desalted on a PD-10 desalting column (Pharmacia), by washes of 50 mM MES pH 6, 50 mM Na2SO4, 5% glycerol and 10 mM KNO3, concentrated with Amicon 100 kDa (Millipore) and then frozen in liquid nitrogen. Purified proteins were loaded and stacked on an SDS-PAGE and the excised stacking gel band was then submitted to in-gel trypsin digestion for proteomic analysis as previously described by Santin et al (2018, Nat. Microbiol. 3, 1304–1313). Tryptic peptides were solubilized with 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid /2% acetonitrile in water and analyzed by liquid chromatography (LC)-tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) using an ESI-Q-Exactive plus Mass Spectrometer (ThermoFisher) online with an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano chromatography system (ThermoFisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Raw Spectra were processed by Proteome Discoverer software (ThermoFisher, version 2.4.1.15) using the Sequest HT algorithm with the Bacillus subtilis database (Taxonomy ID: 224308 version 2016-08-20 modified 2020-10-02, downloaded from NCBI by Protein Center including 5,573 entries).The following parameters were selected : enzyme used: trypsin (2 missed cleavages); fixed modification: carbamidomethyl (Cys); one variable modification: oxidation (Met); mass values specific for monoisotopic; precursor mass tolerance: ± 10 ppm; fragment mass tolerance: ± 0.02 Da. In this study, reported proteins in tables were also filtered by a minimum number of Peptide Spectral Match of 10.  The complete list of identified proteins is supplied here, in the Results file.

### Publication Abstract
The molybdenum/tungsten-bis-pyranopterin guanine dinucleotide family of formate dehydrogenases (FDHs) plays roles in several metabolic pathways ranging from carbon fixation to energy harvesting because of their reaction with a wide variety of redox partners. Indeed, this metabolic plasticity results from the diverse structures, cofactor content, and substrates used by partner subunits interacting with the catalytic hub. Here, we unveiled two noncanonical FDHs in Bacillus subtilis, which are organized into two-subunit complexes with unique features, ForCE1 and ForCE2. We show that the formate oxidoreductase catalytic subunit interacts with an unprecedented partner subunit, formate oxidoreductase essential subunit, and that its amino acid sequence within the active site deviates from the consensus residues typically associated with FDH activity, as a histidine residue is naturally substituted with a glutamine. The formate oxidoreductase essential subunit mediates the utilization of menaquinone as an electron acceptor as shown by the formate:menadione oxidoreductase activity of both enzymes, their copurification with menaquinone, and the distinctive detection of a protein-bound neutral menasemiquinone radical by multifrequency electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) experiments on the purified enzymes. Moreover, EPR characterization of both FDHs reveals the presence of several [Fe-S] clusters with distinct relaxation properties and a weakly anisotropic Mo(V) EPR signature, consistent with the characteristic molybdenum/bis-pyranopterin guanine dinucleotide cofactor of this enzyme family. Altogether, this work enlarges our knowledge of the FDH family by identifying a noncanonical FDH, which differs in terms of architecture, amino acid conservation around the molybdenum cofactor, and reactivity.

### Keywords
Purification, Lc-msms, Bacillus subtilis, Bacteria

### Affiliations
CNRS
Aix-Marseille Univ, CNRS,FR3479, Proteomics facility of Institut de Microbiologie de la Mediterranee, Marseille Proteomique, Marseille, France

### Submitter
Regine Lebrun

### Lab Head
Dr Regine Lebrun
Aix-Marseille Univ, CNRS,FR3479, Proteomics facility of Institut de Microbiologie de la Mediterranee, Marseille Proteomique, Marseille, France


