### Accession
PXD031813

### Title
Plasma Proteomics Reveal COVID-19 Associated Network and Severity Biomarkers

### Description
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) has been threatening public health for the last 3 years globally. So far, the pathophysiology of the disease and therapeutic strategies have not clearly known yet. In this project, performing label-free plasma proteomics analysis, we aimed at identifying severity biomarkers for COVID-19 prognosis and proposing potential drugs against the disease symptoms by building the signaling network of significantly regulated proteins and finding the corresponding virus-host interactions. A total of 38 plasma samples from 13 COVID-19 PCR positive individuals and 5 plasma samples from healthy individuals were collected for the analysis. According to the WHO criteria, the severity of our patients was categorized as moderate (n=4), severe (n=3), and critical (n=6). Also, blood samples were collected in different time points after the symptom onset: (1) 1-5 day (± 2 days); early infection,  (2) 5-15 days (± 2 days); inflammatory response, and after 15 days (± 2 days); recovery which shows the first PCR negative result from a nasal swab. In summary, we found significantly regulated proteins between COVID-19 patients and uninfected individuals and proposed some critical patient-specific prognostic biomarkers, which can be used as an early predictor of the disease severity. Also, we created a COVID-19 related plasma protein network modulated by SARS-CoV2 viral proteins and indicated clinically significant targets for the disease symptoms.

### Sample Protocol
Thirteen adult patients who had a positive SARS -COV-2 nasopharyngeal PCR test and were diagnosed with different severity of COVID-19 were included in this study. Blood samples were collected at three different time periods after the onset of symptoms: (1) 1-5 days; early infection, (2) 5-15 days; inflammatory response, and (3) after 15days; recovery which indicates first negative PCR test from a nasal swab. The control group comprised six healthy adult patients who have not had COVID-19, influenza, or bacterial infection in the last six months and have no chronic disease (Diabetes, MS, Asthma, Hypertension, etc.). A single blood sample was collected from healthy volunteers. Then, the plasma of these blood samples was supplemented with %1 Sodium deoxycholate in 100 mM Tris pH 8.5. Then, samples were sonicated in a water bath ultrasonicator for 2 min at 50% cycle duty. The protein concentration of the samples was measured using the BCA assay. Reduction and alkylation were performed using TCEP and ChAA for 5 minutes at 45 °C at 1000 rpm. Then, tryptic digestion was done using 1:50 trypsin (enzyme: protein) at 37 °C overnight and stopped by acidification with 0.1% TFA. Before fractionation, samples were desalted using SDB-RPS cartridges. Lastly, each sample was fractionated into 11 by high-pH fractionation using 15 mM Ammonium hydroxide. The collected 11 fractions were reconstituted in 20 µl MS loading buffer (5% FA and 5% ACN) and analyzed with 60 min linear gradients on an UltiMate 3000 RSLC-nano reversed-phase chromatographic platform coupled to a Q Exactive HF hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The plasma proteome data sets were searched against Homo sapiens (UP000005640) retrieved from UNIPROT database version 2021. Analysis of the raw files was performed by Thermo Proteome Discoverer (v2.3, Thermo Scientific) employing the SequestHT search engine for peptide identification. Hydrolytic enzyme for the cleavage was selected as trypsin with the highest missed cleavage of 2. A mass tolerance of ±10 ppm for precursor masses and ±0.02 Da for-fragment mass tolerance was chosen for peptide identification. Cysteine Carbamidomethylation was used as a fixed modification and phosphorylation and oxidation were employed as dynamic modifications.  Also, both peptide and protein False Discovery Rates (FDRs) were set to 0.01. For the peptide identification, sequence length was set between 7 and 25 with a minimum peptide rank of 1 to allow for protein identification with medium confidence. The other parameters were employed with their default settings.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Severity biomarkers, Covid-19 associated network, Mass-spectrometry based plasma proteomics, Covid-19 disease, Label-free quantification

### Affiliations
Koc University
Istanbul

### Submitter
Ali Yurtseven

### Lab Head
Dr Nurhan Ozlu
Koc University


