### Accession
PXD013103

### Title
Comammox -  Complete nitrification by Nitrospira bacteria

### Description
Nitrification, the oxidation of ammonia via nitrite to nitrate, has always been considered to be a two-step process catalysed by chemolithoautotrophic microorganisms oxidizing either ammonia or nitrite. No known nitrifier carries out both steps, although complete nitrification should be energetically advantageous. This functional separation has puzzled microbiologists for a century. Here we report on the discovery and cultivation of a completely nitrifying bacterium from the genus Nitrospira, a globally distributed group of nitrite oxidizers. The genome of this chemolithoautotrophic organism encodes the pathways both for ammonia and nitrite oxidation, which are concomitantly activated during growth by ammonia oxidation to nitrate. Genes affiliated with the phylogenetically distinct ammonia monooxygenase and hydroxylamine dehydrogenase genes of Nitrospira are present in many environments and were retrieved on Nitrospira contigs in new metagenomes from engineered systems. These findings fundamentally change our picture of nitrification and point to completely nitrifying Nitrospira as key components of nitrogen-cycling microbial communities.

### Sample Protocol
Enrichment of conspicuous Nitrospira A microbial biofilm developing on the walls of a pipe under the flow of hot (56 °C, pH 7.5) water raised from a 1,200 m deep oil exploration well (Aushiger, North Caucus, Russia) was sampled and incubated in ammonia-containing mineral medium to enrich moderately thermophilic AOB. After a series of subcultivation steps, we obtained enrichment culture “ENR4” that oxidized ammonia to nitrate and contained a dense population of cells morphologically resembling described Nitrospira species. Protein extraction from concentrated ENR4 biomass, proteolytic digestion, analysis of peptide lysates by mass spectrometry (MS), processing of MS raw files, and analysis of MS spectra were carried out as described in the supplement.

### Data Protocol
MS spectra were searched against a database of predicted gene products on the ENR4 metagenome scaffolds containing 12,234 sequence entries and a common Repository of Adventitious Proteins (cRAP) database using the Sequest HT algorithm. The PROPHANE pipeline (http://www.prophane.de/index.php) was used to classify the lowest common phylogenetic ancestor of each protein group and to calculate the normalized spectral abundance factor (NSAF).

### Publication Abstract
Nitrification, the oxidation of ammonia via nitrite to nitrate, has always been considered to be a two-step process catalysed by chemolithoautotrophic microorganisms oxidizing either ammonia or nitrite. No known nitrifier carries out both steps, although complete nitrification should be energetically advantageous. This functional separation has puzzled microbiologists for a century. Here we report on the discovery and cultivation of a completely nitrifying bacterium from the genus Nitrospira, a globally distributed group of nitrite oxidizers. The genome of this chemolithoautotrophic organism encodes the pathways both for ammonia and nitrite oxidation, which are concomitantly activated during growth by ammonia oxidation to nitrate. Genes affiliated with the phylogenetically distinct ammonia monooxygenase and hydroxylamine dehydrogenase genes of Nitrospira are present in many environments and were retrieved on Nitrospira-contigs in new metagenomes from engineered systems. These findings fundamentally change our picture of nitrification and point to completely nitrifying Nitrospira as key components of nitrogen-cycling microbial communities.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Nitrification, Nitrogen, Culture, Microbes

### Affiliations
Department Molekulare Systembiologie Helmholtz-Zentrum für Umweltforschung GmbH - UFZ Permoserstraße 15 | 04318 Leipzig
Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ

### Submitter
Nico Jehmlich

### Lab Head
Dr Nico Jehmlich
Department Molekulare Systembiologie Helmholtz-Zentrum für Umweltforschung GmbH - UFZ Permoserstraße 15 | 04318 Leipzig


