### Accession
PXD024004

### Title
Understanding condensation domain selectivity in non-ribosomal peptide biosynthesis: structural characterization of the acceptor bound state

### Description
Non-ribosomal peptide synthetases are important enzymes for the assembly of complex peptide natural products. Within these multi-modular assembly lines, condensation domains perform the central function of chain assembly, typically by forming a peptide bond between two peptidyl carrier protein (PCP)-bound substrates. In this work, we report the first structural snapshots of a condensation domain in complex with an aminoacyl-PCP acceptor substrate. These structures allow the identification of a mechanism that controls access of acceptor substrates to the active site in condensation domains. The structures of this previously uncharacterized complex also allow us to demonstrate that condensation domain active sites do not contain a distinct pocket to select the side chain of the acceptor substrate during peptide assembly but that residues within the active site motif can instead serve to tune the selectivity of these central biosynthetic domains.

### Sample Protocol
PCP-domain loading. All proteins containing PCP-domains were expressed and purified in their apo form, which were converted into their holo form using the phosphopantetheinyl transferase Sfp (R4-4 mutant) and desired CoAs. 5 The loading reaction utilized a 1 : 2 : 0.1 molar ratio of the PCP domain, peptidyl-/aminoacyl-CoA and Sfp (R4-4 mutant), respectively. Peptidyl-CoA (200 µM) was loaded onto the PCP-containing construct (100 µM) for 1 h at 30 °C using the Sfp (10 µM) in PCP-loading buffer (50 mM HEPES, pH 7.0; 50 mM NaCl; 10 mM MgCl2). After the loading reaction, the remaining peptidyl-CoA and Sfp were removed by three concentration/ dilution steps using centrifugal concentrators (Amicon® Ultra-0.5 mL centrifugal filters units (30 kDa MWCO for PCP2-C3 Constructs or 3 kDa MWCO for PCP3 constructs, Merck Millipore) in gel filtration buffer (50 mM HEPES, pH 7.4; 300 mM NaCl, 1 mM DTT). Holo-PCP constructs were then immediately used for in vitro reconstitution assays or crystallization experiments.  In vitro reconstitution of NRPS. The peptide loaded PCP2-C3 Spy-Catcher construct was incubated with unloaded PCP3 Spy-tag construct (both 100 µM) for 10 min at 30 °C, which was followed by loading of the desired aminoacyl-CoA on the PCP3 as described above. The reaction was then incubated for an additional 1 h at 30 °C to allow for the condensation reaction to occur. For thioether tethered amino acid loaded PCP3 substrates, reaction mixtures were directly analyzed using nano LC ESI MS (see below Ppant ejection section).6 For thioester tethered amino acid loaded PCP3 substrates, chemical cleavage by an addition of 15 μL of methylamine liberated the methylamide peptides; reaction mixtures were incubated for 15 min at room temperature. The peptide products were then purified from the reaction mixture using solid phase extraction (Strata™-X-33 μm Polymeric Reversed Phase Tubes; 30 mg / mL; Phenomenex). Before loading the sample, cartridges were activated with 0.1% formic acid (FA) in methanol (1 mL) and subsequently equilibrated with 0.1% FA in water. Samples were loaded onto equilibrated cartridges and the solution passed through the column bed under gravity. Once the samples were loaded, the cartridge was washed with 0.1% FA in water (1 mL) before the peptides were eluted with 0.1% FA in MeCN/water (50/50, v/v). The samples were then dried by freeze dryer at -50 °C and analyzed by LCMS.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry measurements were performed on a MicroTOFq mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics) coupled online to a 1200 series capillary/nano-LC (Agilent Technologies) via a Bruker nano ESI sprayer. Proteins were separated on a 150 mm reverse-phase column (ZORBAX 300SB-C18, 3.5 µm, 0.075 x 150 mm; Agilent Technologies) after binding to a trap column (ZORBAX 300SB-C18, 5 µm, 0.30 x 5 mm cartridges; Agilent Technologies). Elution was performed on-line with a gradient from 4% MeCN to 60% MeCN in 0.1% FA over 30 min at 300 nL / min. Proteins greater than 20 kDa were separated on a MabPac SEC-1 5 µm 300 Å 50 x 4 mm (Thermo Scientific) column with an isocratic gradient of 50% MeCN, 0.05% TFA and 0.05% FA at a flow rate of 50 µL / minute. The protein is eluted over a 20-minute run-time monitored by UV detection at 254 nm. After 20 minutes the flow path is switched to infuse Low concentration Tune mix (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA) to calibrate the spectrum post acquisition. The eluent is nebulized and ionized using the Bruker electrospray source with a capillary voltage of 4500 V dry gas at 180 °C, flow rate of 4 L / minute and nebulizer gas pressure at 0.6 bar. MSMS spectra were acquired by manual selection of isolation mass and isolation width with a collision energy of 32. The spectra were extracted and deconvoluted using Data explorer software version 3.4 build 192 (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany).

### Publication Abstract
Non-ribosomal peptide synthetases are important enzymes for the assembly of complex peptide natural products. Within these multi-modular assembly lines, condensation domains perform the central function of chain assembly, typically by forming a peptide bond between two peptidyl carrier protein (PCP)-bound substrates. In this work, we report structural snapshots of a condensation domain in complex with an aminoacyl-PCP acceptor substrate. These structures allow the identification of a mechanism that controls access of acceptor substrates to the active site in condensation domains. The structures of this complex also allow us to demonstrate that condensation domain active sites do not contain a distinct pocket to select the side chain of the acceptor substrate during peptide assembly but that residues within the active site motif can instead serve to tune the selectivity of these central biosynthetic domains.

### Keywords
Non-ribosomal peptide; biosynthesis; condensation domain; peptidyl carrier protein; biocatalysis

### Affiliations
Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Monash University, Clayton 3800, Victoria, Australia 
Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Monash University, Clayton 3800, Victoria, Australia

### Submitter
david Steer

### Lab Head
Dr Max Cryle
Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Monash University, Clayton 3800, Victoria, Australia


