### Accession
PXD000399

### Title
Quantitative LC-MS/MS Analysis of Apical Membrane Proteome of mpkCCD Cells

### Description
This is a 2-plex SILAC-based quantitative proteomic study.  It quantifies abundance changes of the apical membrane proteins of the kidney collecting duct model cells (mpkCCD) in response to vasopressin.  Cells were labeled with normal or heavy lysine and arginine and then exposed to vehicle or the vasopressin analogy dDAVP (1 nM, 1 hour).   Apical membrane proteins of vehicle and dDAVP-treated cells were enriched via surface biotinylation and affinity purification prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.        Database search and protein quantification were performed using the SEQUEST algorithm included in the Proteome Discover Version 1.3 (Thermo Scientific). The database used for the spectral searching was prepared from the mouse RefSeq database plus common contaminants.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
In kidney collecting duct cells, filamentous actin (F-actin) depolymerization is a critical step in vasopressin-induced trafficking of aquaporin-2 to the apical plasma membrane. However, the molecular components of this response are largely unknown. Using stable isotope-based quantitative protein mass spectrometry and surface biotinylation, we identified 100 proteins that showed significant abundance changes in the apical plasma membrane of mouse cortical collecting duct cells in response to vasopressin. Fourteen of these proteins are involved in actin cytoskeleton regulation, including actin itself, 10 actin-associated proteins, and 3 regulatory proteins. Identified were two integral membrane proteins (Clmn, Nckap1) and one actin-binding protein (Mpp5) that link F-actin to the plasma membrane, five F-actin end-binding proteins (Arpc2, Arpc4, Gsn, Scin, and Capzb) involved in F-actin reorganization, and two actin adaptor proteins (Dbn1, Lasp1) that regulate actin cytoskeleton organization. There were also protease (Capn1), protein kinase (Cdc42bpb), and Rho guanine nucleotide exchange factor 2 (Arhgef2) that mediate signal-induced F-actin changes. Based on these findings, we devised a live-cell imaging method to observe vasopressin-induced F-actin dynamics in polarized mouse cortical collecting duct cells. In response to vasopressin, F-actin gradually disappeared near the center of the apical plasma membrane while consolidating laterally near the tight junction. This F-actin peripheralization was blocked by calcium ion chelation. Vasopressin-induced apical aquaporin-2 trafficking and forskolin-induced water permeability increase were blocked by F-actin disruption. In conclusion, we identified a vasopressin-regulated actin network potentially responsible for vasopressin-induced apical F-actin dynamics that could explain regulation of apical aquaporin-2 trafficking and water permeability increase.

### Keywords
Aquaporin-2, Actin dynamics, Silac, Collecting duct, Vasopressin

### Affiliations
Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology

### Submitter
Ming-Jiun Yu

### Lab Head


