### Accession
PXD021393

### Title
Multivalent lipid targeting by the calcium-independent C2A domain of Slp-4/granuphilin

### Description
Synaptotagmin-like protein 4 (Slp-4), also known as granuphilin, is a Rab effector responsible for docking insulin secretory vesicles to the plasma membrane prior to exocytosis.  Slp-4 binds vesicular Rab proteins via an N-terminal Slp homology (SHD) domain, interacts with plasma membrane SNARE complex proteins via a central linker region, and contains tandem C-terminal C2 domains (C2A and C2B) with affinity for phosphatidylinositol-(4,5)-bisphosphate (PIP2).  Its C2A domain has previously been shown to bind PIP2 or its soluble analogues with low micromolar affinity; however, the domain docks with low nanomolar apparent affinity to PIP2 in lipid vesicles that also contain background anionic lipids such as phosphatidylserine (PS).  Here we show using a combination of computational and experimental approaches that this high-affinity membrane interaction arises from concerted interaction at multiple sites on the C2A domain.  In addition to the previously identified, PIP2-selective lysine cluster, a larger cationic surface surrounding the cluster contributes substantially to the affinity for physiologically relevant lipid compositions.  While mutations at the PIP2-selective site decreases affinity for PIP2, multiple mutations are needed to decrease binding to physiologically relevant lipid compositions.  Docking and molecular dynamics simulations indicate several conformationally flexible loops that contribute to the nonspecific cationic surface.  In addition, we identify and characterize a covalently modified variant in the bacterially expressed protein, which arises through reactivity of the PIP2-binding lysine cluster with endogenous bacterial compounds and has a low membrane affinity.  Overall, multivalent lipid binding by the Slp-4 C2A domain provides selective recognition and high affinity docking of large dense-core secretory vesicles to the plasma membrane.

### Sample Protocol
Purified bacterially expressed and cation exchange separated Slp-4 samples were desalted using C18 ZipTips (EMD Millipore). Desalted samples were diluted with 3% acetonitrile (ACN) in 0.1% formic acid to a final concentation of 100 ng/uL to be analyzed. Samples were chromatographically resolved on-line using a 2.1 x 50 mm, 5.0µ PLRP-S 1000A column (Agilent Technologies) using a 1290 Infinity II LC system (Agilent Technologies). Mobile phases consisted of water + 0.1% formic acid (A) and 90% aq. acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid (B). Samples were chromatographically separated using a flow rate of 0.3 mL/min using a gradient holding 5% B for 2 minutes and 5-95% B over 3 minutes for a total 5 minute gradient. The gradient method was followed by a column wash at 95% B for 2 minutes before returning to intial condition over 2 minutes.  Data was collected on a 6550 Q-TOF equipped with a dual agilent jet stream source (Agilent Technologies) operated in MS-only mode. MS data was collected in positive ion polarity over mass ranges 100– 3200 m/z at a scan rate of 1.5 spectra/sec.  Purified Slp-4 samples were tryptically digested using a protein digestion method previously described (Reisdorph N, Armstrong M, Powell R, et al. Quantitation of peptides from non-invasive skin tapings using isotope dilution and tandem mass spectrometry. J Chromatogr B Analyt Technol Biomed Life Sci. 2018;1084:132–140. doi:10.1016/j.jchromb.2018.03.031). Samples were reconstituted in 3% Acetonitrile 0.1% formic acid and were chromatographically resolved on-line using a 2.1 x 250 mm, 2.7µ AdvanceBio peptide mapping Column (Agilent Technologies) using a 1290 Infinity II LC system (Agilent Technologies). Mobile phases consisted of water + 0.1% formic acid (A) and 90% aq. acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid (B). Samples were chromatographically separated using a flow rate of 0.2 mL/min using a gradient holding 5% B over 1 minute, 5-40% B over 9 minutes, and 40-90% B over 2 minutes,  for a total 12 minute gradient. The gradient method was followed by a column wash at 90% B for 3 minutes before returning to intial condition over 2 minutes.  Data was collected on a 6550 Q-TOF equipped with a dual agilent jet stream source (Agilent Technologies) operated using intensity dependent CID MS/MS to generate peptide ID’s. MSMS Data was collected in positive ion polarity over mass ranges 270– 1700 m/z at a scan rate of 10 spectra/sec for MS scans and mass ranges 50-1700 m/z at a scan rate of 3 spectra/sec for MSMS scans. All charge states were allowed except singly charged species were excluded from being selected during MS/MS acquisition and charge states 2 and 3 were given preference.

### Data Protocol
Intact protein spectra were deconvoluted using maxium entropy in MassHunter Bioconfirm software (Agilent Technologies) to determine the accurate mass of unmodified and modified protein species if present.    SpectrumMill software (Agilent Technologies) was used to extract, search, and summarize peptide identity results. Spectra were searched against a custom database containing the Slp-4 protein amino acid sequence allowing up to 2 missed tryptic cleavages with fixed carbamidomethyl (C) and variable deamidated (NQ), oxidation (M) and phosphogluconoyl (K) modifications. The monoisotopic peptide mass tolerance allowed was ± 20.0 ppm and the MS/MS tolerance was ± 50 ppm. A minimum peptide score of 8, scored peak intensity  of 50% were used as cut-offs for identification of peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Synaptotagmin-like protein 4 (Slp-4), also known as granuphilin, is a Rab effector responsible for docking secretory vesicles to the plasma membrane before exocytosis. Slp-4 binds vesicular Rab proteins via an N-terminal Slp homology domain, interacts with plasma membrane SNARE complex proteins via a central linker region, and contains tandem C-terminal C2 domains (C2A and C2B) with affinity for phosphatidylinositol-(4,5)-bisphosphate (PIP<sub>2</sub>). The Slp-4 C2A domain binds with low nanomolar apparent affinity to PIP<sub>2</sub> in lipid vesicles that also contain background anionic lipids such as phosphatidylserine but much weaker when either the background anionic lipids or PIP<sub>2</sub> is removed. Through computational and experimental approaches, we show that this high-affinity membrane binding arises from concerted interaction at multiple sites on the C2A domain. In addition to a conserved PIP<sub>2</sub>-selective lysine cluster, a larger cationic surface surrounding the cluster contributes substantially to the affinity for physiologically relevant lipid compositions. Although the K398A mutation in the lysine cluster blocks PIP<sub>2</sub> binding, this mutated protein domain retains the ability to bind physiological membranes in both a liposome-binding assay and MIN6 cells. Molecular dynamics simulations indicate several conformationally flexible loops that contribute to the nonspecific cationic surface. We also identify and characterize a covalently modified variant that arises through reactivity of the PIP<sub>2</sub>-binding lysine cluster with endogenous bacterial compounds and binds weakly to membranes. Overall, multivalent lipid binding by the Slp-4 C2A domain provides selective recognition and high-affinity docking of large dense core secretory vesicles to the plasma membrane.

### Keywords
Phosphogluconate, Intact protein, Granuphilin, Lcms

### Affiliations
Residorph Lab, Mass Spectrometry Core - Skaggs School of Pharmacy, University of Colorado - Anschutz Medical Campus
Univeristy of Colorado - Skaggs School of Pharmacy

### Submitter
Cole Michel

### Lab Head
Dr Cole Robert Michel
Residorph Lab, Mass Spectrometry Core - Skaggs School of Pharmacy, University of Colorado - Anschutz Medical Campus


