### Accession
PXD031984

### Title
Single-copy locus isolation identifies distinct proteomes of early- and late-firing DNA replication origin chromatin

### Description
The chromatin at origins of replication is the template for DNA replication initiation in eukaryotic genomes. However, whether the chromatin composition instructs individual origins to fire early-efficiently (EE) or late-inefficiently (LI) remains to be investigated. Here, we used site-specific recombination and a single-locus chromatin isolation approach to purify selected EE and LI replication origins from chromosome III of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Using mass spectrometry, we define the histone modification landscape and identify the protein composition of defined ~1kb native chromatin regions surrounding the EE and LI replication start sites. We confirm expected origin interactors but also find unexpected interactions, such as the Ask1 subunit of the kinetochore-associated DASH complex. Strikingly, we show that Ask1 is a critical factor in the replication timing control of specific origins in yeast. These results highlight that our unbiased approach can specifically identify the functionally-relevant proteome at a single-copy locus of interest and provide a detailed view of histone modification and protein interaction networks on replication origin chromatin.  The current dataset contains proteomic data used for the histone PTM analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Bulk histones from asynchronous and G1-arrested cells were extracted from a 50ml yeast culture in YPR at OD600 of 0.8.  Cells were harvested by centrifugation (3000rpm, 5min at 4°C). Pellets are washed twice with water, followed by two washing steps with buffer 1 (1M sorbitol, 50mM Tris HCl pH7.5, 5mM MgCl2). The supernatant is then discarded and the pellets are snapfrozen in liquid nitrogen. Cells are washed three times in 0.9 mL cold buffer A (15mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 80mM KCl, 2mM EDTA pH 8, 2mM EGTA pH 8, 0.5mM spermidine, 0.2mM spermine, 0.5µM Trichostatin A, 25µM Sirtinol, 1× Protease and Phophatase inhibitors (Protease and Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail 100x, Thermo Fisher Scientific). After each wash, cells are pelleted for 2 min with 16000g at 4°C, and the supernatant is discarded. Cells are resuspended in 350µl buffer A before addition of 500µl glass beads (1mm diameter) until the cell suspension is completely immersed in the beads. Cell lysis is then performed using a Vibrax shaker at 2200rpm (full speed) for 10min at 4°C. To remove the glass beads and collect the cell lysate, the microtubes are inverted and the tube tips pierced with a hot syringe needle. The tubes are placed with the tip to the bottom in a 15 mL falcon tube which is then centrifuged for 2min at 4°C  with 130g to recover the cell lysate. Subsequently, the lysate is transferred to a new 1.5ml tube where crude nuclei are pelleted for 1min at 4°C with 16000g. The supernatant is removed and the pellet is washed once with 900µl cold buffer A before pelleting again for 1min at 4°C with 16000g. After removing the supernatant, the crude nuclei were snapfrozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C until further use. For bulk histone extraction, nuclei were resuspended in 5X nuclei pellet volumes of ice-cold 0.2M sulfuric acid and mixed on a rotation wheel overnight at 4○C. Insolubilized nuclear debris was pelleted by centrifugation (16,000g, 10 min, 4○C). Supernatant was transferred to a fresh low-protein binding Eppendorf tube and histone proteins were precipitated by adding ice-cold trichloroacetic acid (TCA) to the final concentration of 20% (v/v) followed by 120 min incubation on ice. Precipitated histone proteins were pelleted by centrifugation  (16,000g, 10 min, 4○C), washed 3 times with acetone (-20○C) and resuspended in MS grade water. Extracted histones were prepared for LC-MS/MS analysis using hybrid chemical derivatization method as described previously (Maile et al, 2015 ) .  For the histone PTM analysis of the origin chromatin domains, the affinity purification was performed as described above with minor modifications. Instead of 3g wet weight of yeast cells, 6g of cells were used and the IP was performed with 400µl of magnetic bead slurry with coupled IgGs. After the washing step with buffer AC, the supernatant was discarded and the beads were directly snapfrozen in liquid nitrogen. Histones were then directly extracted from the beads by boiling them at 95°C for 5 min in 40µl 1X laemmli buffer. Eluted protein were then resolved on 4-20% polyacrylamide gels followed by Coomassie staining. Histone protein bands were excised from the gel, destained in a destaining buffer (100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate in 50% acetonitrile), and prepared for LC-MS analysis using the hybrid derivatization method (Maile et al, 2015 ) adopted for in-gel digestion.  The resulting peptide mixtures were analyzed using nano-flow liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) on a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer coupled to an Ultimate 3000 nano- UPLC (Ultimate 3000, Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA) in data-dependant acquisition (DDA) mode. ~300 ng peptide aliquot was used per one sample per one injection. Peptides were loaded automatically on a trap column (300 µm inner diameter ×5 mm, Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 5 µm, 100 Å; LC Packings, Sunnyvale, USA) prior to C18 reversed phase chromatography on the analytical column (nanoEase MZ HSS T3 Column, 100 Å, 1.8 µm, 75 µm × 250 mm; Waters, Milford, USA). Peptides were separated at flowrate of 0.250 μl per minute by a linear gradient from 1% buffer B (0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 98% (v/v) acetonitrile) to 25% buffer B over 40 min followed by a linear gradient to 40% B in 20 min, then to 85% B in 5 min. After 5 min at 85% buffer B , the gradient was reduced to 1% buffer B over 2 min and then allowed to equilibrate for 8 min. Full mass range spectra were at 60,000 resolution (at m/z 400), and product ions spectra were collected in a “top 15” data dependent scan cycle at 15,000 resolution.

### Data Protocol
RAW MS data were analyzed using an open-source Skyline software.

### Publication Abstract
The chromatin environment at origins of replication is thought to influence DNA replication initiation in eukaryotic genomes. However, it remains unclear how and which chromatin features control the firing of early-efficient (EE) or late-inefficient (LI) origins. Here, we use site-specific recombination and single-locus chromatin isolation to purify EE and LI replication origins in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Using mass spectrometry, we define the protein composition of native chromatin regions surrounding the EE and LI replication start sites. In addition to known origin interactors, we find the microtubule-binding Ask1/DASH complex as an origin-regulating factor. Strikingly, tethering of Ask1 to individual origin sites advances replication timing (RT) of the targeted chromosomal domain. Targeted degradation of Ask1 globally changes RT of a subset of origins, which can be reproduced by inhibiting microtubule dynamics. Thus, our findings mechanistically connect RT and chromosomal organization via Ask1/DASH with the microtubule cytoskeleton.

### Keywords
Histone ptms, Locus-specific chromatin isolation, Dna replication origin, Replication timing, Affinity purification, Replication efficiency, Site-specific recombination

### Affiliations
Institute of Functional Epigenetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg 85764, Germany
Chromosome dynamics and genome stability, Institute of Epigenetics and Stem Cells, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Feodor-Lynen-Strasse 21, 81377 München, Germany

### Submitter
Andrey Tvardovskiy

### Lab Head
Dr Stephan Hamperl
Chromosome dynamics and genome stability, Institute of Epigenetics and Stem Cells, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Feodor-Lynen-Strasse 21, 81377 München, Germany


