### Accession
PXD002999

### Title
Changes in the nuclear proteome of developing wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) grain

### Description
Nuclear proteins of developing wheat grains collected during the cellularization, effective grain-filling and maturation phases of development were analysed.. Nuclear proteins were extracted and separated by two-dimensional gel electrophoresis. Image analysis revealed 371 and 299 reproducible spots in gels with first dimension separation along pH 4-7 and pH 6-11 isoelectric gradients, respectively. The relative abundance of 464 (67%) protein spots changed during grain development. Abundance profiles of these proteins clustered in six groups associated with the major phases and phase transitions of grain development. Using nano liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry to analyse 387 variant and non-variant protein spots, 114 different proteins were identified that were classified into 16 functional classes. We noted that some proteins involved in the regulation of transcription, like HMG1/2-like protein and histone deacetylase HDAC2, were most abundant before the phase transition from cellularization to grain-filling, suggesting that major transcriptional changes occur during this key developmental phase. The maturation period was characterized by high relative abundance of proteins involved in ribosome biogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
Nuclei proteins were extracted from wheat grain according to (Bancel et al., 2015). Dried pellets containing nuclear proteins were dissolved in 50 µL of 2D gel sample buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% (w/v) CHAPS, 70 mM dithiothreitol, 1% (v/v) immobilized pH gradient (IPG) buffer and 0.34% (v/v) protease inhibitor (Sigma-Aldrich)). Isoelectric focusing was carried out with 150 µg of proteins, made up to 250 µL with the 2D buffer containing 0.05% (w/v) bromophenol blue and used to passively rehydrate 13-cm immobilized pH gradient strips (pH range 4-7 or 6-11 Immobilin Dry Strips, GE Healthcare) overnight at 20°C. Isoelectric focusing was performed for a total of 60,000 voltage hours (Vhr) on a IPGphor II apparatus (GE Healthcare). Focused proteins on strips were then reduced with 2% (w/v) dithiothreitol in 0.1 M Tris-HCl buffer (pH 8.8) containing 6 M urea, 30% (v/v) glycerol, and 2% (w/v) SDS for 15 min, followed by alkylation with 2.5% (w/v) iodoacetamide in the same buffer for 15 min. The strips were then loaded onto 12.5% polyacrylamide gels for SDS-PAGE separation in the second dimension. The migration conditions were 10 mA per gel for the first 30 min, then 35 mA per gel for 2.5 h. Gels were stained using Coomassie Brilliant Blue G250 (CBB, Sigma-Aldrich). Protein spots were excised manually from 2D gels. For 2D gels stained with CBB, protein spots were destained once with 25 mM NH4HCO3 containing 5% (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN) for 30 min and twice with 25 mM NH4HCO3, 50% (v/v) ACN for 30 min. Spots were then dehydrated in 100% ACN for 10 min and dried for 15 min under an extraction hood at room temperature. Proteins were digested overnight at 37°C by adding 120 ng of trypsin (Promega). After extracting peptides with ACN, 8 µL of hydrolysate were injected into an Ultimate® 3000 HPLC system (Dionex) coupled to an electrospray ionization ion trap mass spectrometer (ESI-IT-MS/MS; LTQ Velos, ThermoScientific).

### Data Protocol
Protein identity was sought by using Mascot v2.3 (Matrix Science) software against a custom database containing 249,032 sequences from Aegilops tauschii, A. thaliana, Brachypodium distachyon, Hordeum vulgare, O. sativa, T. aestivum, and T. urartu and sequences from the wheat transcription factor database wDBFT (Romeuf et al., 2010). Proteins were considered to be identified if at least two non-redundant peptides were found to match a single reference in the databases. A cut-off was applied for individual peptide ion scores according to the significance threshold of the MASCOT program (P < 0.05). Curated protein sequences which had no functional information were submitted as BLASTP searches against the National Center for Biotechnology Information non-redundant database (http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov). Proteins were then classified in functional classes according to the KEGG PATHWAY database (Kanehisa et al., 2014) and gene ontology (Ashburner et al., 2000).  Images (300 dpi, 16-bit greyscale pixel depth) of two-dimensional gels were acquired with a GS-800 (Biorad) scanner and analyzed using SameSpots v4.5 (TotalLab) 2D gel image analysis software. Statistical analyses were performed on normalized protein spot volume values. Differences in normalized protein spot volume due to grain development were analyzed using one-way ANOVA. P-values and adjusted P-values (q-value) were calculated using SameSpots procedures. The abundance of a protein spot was considered to have changed during grain development when its P-value and q-value were both < 0.05. In this case, the protein spot was considered as ‘variant’ and others as ‘non variant’. Principal component analysis was performed using the FactoMineR (Husson et al., 2014) package for R v3.0.1 (R Core Team, 2013) statistical software on the set of spots detected on 2D gels and hierarchical clustering on principal components was computed on significant spots to build protein abundance profiles.

### Publication Abstract
Wheat grain end-use value is determined by complex molecular interactions that occur during grain development, including those in the cell nucleus. However, our knowledge of how the nuclear proteome changes during grain development is limited. Here, we analyzed nuclear proteins of developing wheat grains collected during the cellularization, effective grain-filling, and maturation phases of development, respectively. Nuclear proteins were extracted and separated by two-dimensional gel electrophoresis. Image analysis revealed 371 and 299 reproducible spots in gels with first dimension separation along pH 4-7 and pH 6-11 isoelectric gradients, respectively. The relative abundance of 464 (67%) protein spots changed during grain development. Abundance profiles of these proteins clustered in six groups associated with the major phases and phase transitions of grain development. Using nano liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry to analyse 387 variant and non-variant protein spots, 114 different proteins were identified that were classified into 16 functional classes. We noted that some proteins involved in the regulation of transcription, like HMG1/2-like protein and histone deacetylase HDAC2, were most abundant before the phase transition from cellularization to grain-filling, suggesting that major transcriptional changes occur during this key developmental phase. The maturation period was characterized by high relative abundance of proteins involved in ribosome biogenesis. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD002999.

### Keywords
Nuclear proteins, Lc-ms/ms, Developing grain, Wheat

### Affiliations
UMR GDEC
UMR 1095 GDEC, INRA Clermont Ferrand, Blaise Pascal University Aubière, FRANCE

### Submitter
Titouan Bonnot

### Lab Head
Dr Emmanuelle Bancel
UMR 1095 GDEC, INRA Clermont Ferrand, Blaise Pascal University Aubière, FRANCE


