### Accession
PXD035883

### Title
Human chorionic gonadotropin promotes murine Treg cells and restricts pregnancy-harmful proinflammatory Th17 responses – proteomics data

### Description
In this study, the participation of fetal factors in maintaining the immune balance during gestation was investigated by assessing the effects of human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) on murine Treg cells and Th17 cells.

### Sample Protocol
Mouse-derived naïve CD4+ T cells were forced to polarize into Th17 cells and treated with either recombinant or urinary hCG. Not polarized and/or not hCG-treated cells served as controls. For each sample, 30 µg protein were further processed using paramagnetic beads that allow for single-pot sample processing. Thus, two fractions were obtained, which were analyzed on a nano-UPLC system (Ultimate 3000, Dionex, USA) coupled online to the mass spectrometer (QExactive HF, Thermo Scientific, USA) via a chip-based electrospray ionization source (Nanomate, Advion, USA).

### Data Protocol
Obtained raw data were processed using MaxQuant 1.6.2.10 and UniprotKB reference entries (reviewed and unreviewed) of Mus Musculus (18th February 2018).

### Publication Abstract
An equilibrium between proinflammatory and anti-inflammatory immune responses is essential for maternal tolerance of the fetus throughout gestation. To study the participation of fetal tissue-derived factors in this delicate immune balance, we analyzed the effects of human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) on murine Treg cells and Th17 cells <i>in vitro</i>, and on pregnancy outcomes, fetal and placental growth, blood flow velocities and remodeling of the uterine vascular bed <i>in vivo</i>. Compared with untreated CD4<sup>+</sup>CD25<sup>+</sup> T cells, hCG increased the frequency of Treg cells upon activation of the LH/CG receptor. hCG, with the involvement of IL-2, also interfered with induced differentiation of CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells into proinflammatory Th17 cells. In already differentiated Th17 cells, hCG induced an anti-inflammatory profile. Transfer of proinflammatory Th17 cells into healthy pregnant mice promoted fetal rejection, impaired fetal growth and resulted in insufficient remodeling of uterine spiral arteries, and abnormal flow velocities. Our works show that proinflammatory Th17 cells have a negative influence on pregnancy that can be partly avoided by <i>in vitro</i> re-programming of proinflammatory Th17 cells with hCG.

### Keywords
Mouse, Lfq, Fetus, Treg cells, Hcg, Th17 cells

### Affiliations
Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ

### Submitter
Isabel Karkossa

### Lab Head
Dr Kristin Schubert
Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ


