### Accession
PXD004323

### Title
Sulfurihydrogenibium proteomics

### Description
To understand the ecophysiology of Sulfurihydrogenibium spp. in situ, integrated metagenomic, metatranscriptomic and metaproteomic analyses were conducted on a microbial community from Narrow Gauge at Mammoth Hot Springs, Yellowstone National Park.

### Sample Protocol
Total bacterial proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE, folowed by in-gel trypsination. The extracted peptides  were analyzed by mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry data was analyzed by an automated proteomics pipeline (APP, (Malm et al, 2014), which first utilizes several open source search engines (e.g. X!tandem, MyriMatch, MSGFplus and Comet), followed by validation and compilation of peptides/proteins using PeptideProphet, iProphet and ProteinProphet.

### Publication Abstract
The evolutionarily ancient Aquificales bacterium <i>Sulfurihydrogenibium</i> spp. dominates filamentous microbial mat communities in shallow, fast-flowing, and dysoxic hot-spring drainage systems around the world. In the present study, field observations of these fettuccini-like microbial mats at Mammoth Hot Springs in Yellowstone National Park are integrated with geology, geochemistry, hydrology, microscopy, and multi-omic molecular biology analyses. Strategic sampling of living filamentous mats along with the hot-spring CaCO<sub>3</sub> (<i>travertine</i>) in which they are actively being entombed and fossilized has permitted the first direct linkage of <i>Sulfurihydrogenibium</i> spp. physiology and metabolism with the formation of distinct travertine streamer microbial biomarkers. Results indicate that, during chemoautotrophy and CO<sub>2</sub> carbon fixation, the 87-98% <i>Sulfurihydrogenibium</i>-dominated mats utilize chaperons to facilitate enzyme stability and function. High-abundance transcripts and proteins for type IV pili and extracellular polymeric substances (EPSs) are consistent with their strong mucus-rich filaments tens of centimeters long that withstand hydrodynamic shear as they become encrusted by more than 5&#x2009;mm of travertine per day. Their primary energy source is the oxidation of reduced sulfur (<i>e.g.,</i> sulfide, sulfur, or thiosulfate) and the simultaneous uptake of extremely low concentrations of dissolved O<sub>2</sub> facilitated by bd-type cytochromes. The formation of elevated travertine ridges permits the <i>Sulfurihydrogenibium</i>-dominated mats to create a shallow platform from which to access low levels of dissolved oxygen at the virtual exclusion of other microorganisms. These ridged travertine streamer microbial biomarkers are well preserved and create a robust fossil record of microbial physiological and metabolic activities in modern and ancient hot-spring ecosystems.

### Keywords
Yellowstone national park, Sulfurihydrogenibium, Proteomics, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Biotechnology
Division of Glycoscience, School of Biotechnology, Royal Institute of Technology (KTH),Stockholm, Sweden

### Submitter
Vaibhav Srivastava

### Lab Head
Dr Vincent bulone
Division of Glycoscience, School of Biotechnology, Royal Institute of Technology (KTH),Stockholm, Sweden


