### Accession
PXD043011

### Title
Direct 3D sampling of the embryonic mouse head:  Layer-wise nanosecond infrared laser (NIRL) ablation from scalp to cortex for spatially resolved proteomics

### Description
Common workflows in bottom-up proteomics require homogenization of tissue samples giving to get access to the biomole-cules within the cells. The homogenized tissue samples often contain many different cell types, thereby representing an average of the natural proteome composition and rare cell types are not sufficiently represented. To overcome this problem, small vol-ume sampling and spatial resolution is needed to maintain a better representation of the sample composition and their proteo-me signatures. Using nanosecond infrared laser ablation, the region of interest can be targeted in a three dimensional (3D) fash-ion whereby the spatial information is maintained during the simultaneous process of sampling and homogenization. In this study, we ablated 40 µm thick consecutive layers directly from the scalp through the cortex of the embryonic mouse heads and analyzed them by subsequent bottom-up proteomics. Extra- and intracranial ablated layers showed distinct proteome profiles comprising expected cell specific proteins. Additionally, known cortex markers like SOX2, KI67, NESTIN and MAP2 showed a layer specific spatial protein abundance distribution. We propose potential new marker proteins for cortex layers such as MTA1 and NMRAL1. The obtained data confirm that the new 3D -tissue sampling and homogenization method is well suited for investigating the spatial proteome signature of tissue samples in a layer-wise manner. Characterization of the proteome composition of embryonic skin and bone structures, meninges, and cortex lamination in situ, enables to a better understanding of molecular mechanisms of development during embryogenesis and disease pathogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
Laser ablation and sample collection. A nanosecond infrared laser (NIRL) system was used for tissue ablation. The general laser system build-up is published [16], the main experiment-specific parameters will be further described. The wavelength of the laser was set to 2940 nm using a pulse width of 7 ns, puls-ing with the maximum repetition rate of 20 Hz. A pulse energy of 1 mJ was measured at sample position. A scan lens with a focal length of 100 mm was used for focusing the beam. The glass slide with the tissue was placed on a cooling stage, which was set to -5 °C during the ablation. The cooling stage was mounted onto a translation stage composed of two motorized linear stages (MLT25, Newport Corp., CA, USA). A PTFE coated glass slide with 12 wells (Epredia™ X5XER202WAD1, catalog-no. 17342650) was placed in short distance (<1 mm) above the ROI (800 µm x 800 µm). Single wells were used to collect the plume material of a single layer. In total nine layers were ablated from five hemisphere, and each layer was 2x25 µm deep and consisted of 112 laser pulses. Sample processing. Further sample processing was done with the protocol published by Tsai et al. [30]. The condensed sam-ple aerosol was resuspended in 10 µl of 0.01 % DDM (n-dodecyl β-D-maltoside) and transferred from the well into a protein low binding tube (Protein LoBind® Tubes, Eppendorf SE, catalog-no. 0030108116). All other sample preparation steps were adapted from the mentioned protocol with the change to 20 ng trypsin for tryptic digestion [30]. The samples were dried in a vacuum centrifuge and stored at -20 °C. Prior to mass spectro-metric measurement, tryptic peptides were resuspended in 10 µL of 0.1 % FA.
Fraction library preparation. Beside NIRL based laser ablation of four different mouse heads, brain tissue was conventionally homogenized for building a fraction library to improve the search engine results in later data processing by match between runs function. Brain tissue was lysed in 1 % w/v sodium deoxycholate and 0.1 M TEAB (triethylammonium bicarbonate) buffer (SDC buffer). The sample was boiled at 98 °C for 5 min to denature proteins. Afterwards, DNA and RNA molecules were destroyed with a Probe Sonificator for 6 cycles at 30 % power. According to a protein assay (Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit, Thermo Fisher Scientific™, catalog no. 23227), protein amount of 100 µg was taken and diluted to 100 μL with SDC buffer. For reduction of disulfide bonded cysteine residues 10 mM DTT was added to the sample and incubated for 30 min at 60 °C. After that 20 mM IAA was added for alkylation of the reduced cysteine residues and incubated for 30 min at 37 °C in the dark. Trypsin was added in a ratio of 1:100 trypsin to protein for 16 hours at 37 °C. To quench trypsin and precipitate SDC 100 % FA were added to a final concentration of 1 % FA v/v. The samples were centrifuged for 5 min at 16,000 g at RT. The supernatant was removed and dried in SpeedVac. Tryptic peptides were resuspended in 100 μL of 10 mM Ambica and an aliquot of 50 μL was taken for basic reversed phase chromatography (High pH RP-HPLC). The Agilent 1200 series HPLC system (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA) was used for performing High pH RP-HPLC on a 25 cm ProSwift™ RP-4H capillary monolithic column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). In a 45 min run tryptic peptides were separated based on their hydrophobicity. Therefore, a flow rate of 0.2 mL/min with eluent A consisting of 10 mM Ambica and eluent B of 10 mM Ambica in 90 % acetonitrile (ACN). In total, 13 fractions were achieved, dried in a vacuum centrifuge, and stored at -20 °C until further use. For LC-MS/MS measurement the fractions were previously resuspended in 10 µl of 0.1 % FA.
Mass spectrometric data acquisition.  Liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometer (LC–MS/MS) measurements were performed on a Tribrid Mass spectrometer (Orbitrap Fusion, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) coupled to a nano-UPLC (Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLC system, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Separation and elution of peptides were achieved by a linear gradient from 2 to 30 % solvent B in 30 min at a flow rate of 0.3 µL/min. Eluting peptides were ionized by using a nano-electrospray ionization source (nano-ESI) with a spray voltage of 1800 V, transferred into the MS and analyzed in data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. For each MS1 scan, ions were accumulated for a maximum of 120 ms or until a charge density of 2.0e5 ions (AGC target) was reached. Fourier-transformation-based mass analysis of the data from the orbitrap mass analyzer was performed by covering a mass range of 400–1300 m/z with a resolution of 120,000. For MS2 scans, precursor selection was set to peptides with charge states between 2+–5+ above an intensity threshold of 10,000. HCD fragmentation was performed with a quadrupole isolation window of 1.6 m/z and a collision energy of 30 %. Data were acquired using an ion trap mass analyzer in auto scan range mode with a fixed first mass of 120 m/z. Fragment ions were accumulated for 60 ms or to an AGC target of 1.0e4. Already fragmented peptides were excluded for 30 s.


### Data Protocol
Data processing and analyses. Database search was performed with Proteome Discoverer (version 2.4.1.15). Spectra were searched using Sequest HT against a reviewed murine Swissprot FASTA database obtained in December 2021 containing 17,085 entries. Further data processing and analysis were done in R studio (version 4.2.3). The log2-transformed data was used for the HarmonizR framework (version 0.0.0.9000) [31] for batch effect reduction of pseudo batches (p batch) with the ComBat method (mode 1). Processing step was performed separately for both measured peptides of laser samples and fraction library with the same workflow. Trypsin was specified as enzyme and two missed cleavages were allowed for the identification in Sequest HT. Further, the carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification. Methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modification. Peptides with a minimum length of 6 amino acids and a maximum mass of 5000 Da were identified with a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm. For matching fragment peaks, the mass tolerance was set to 0.6 Da. For the percolator, the concatenated mode was used with target FDR < 0.01 for highly confident peptide hits and target FDR < 0.05 for peptide hits with medium confidence. Both processed data sets were combined in the consensus step under applying the feature mapper node. For the chromatographic alignment, the maximum RT shift was set to 10 min with a mass tolerance of 10 ppm. For feature linking and mapping, both RT tolerance and mass tolerance were determined automatically. For quantification, unique and razor peptides were considered. Quantified abundances were normalized to the same total peptide amount per sample and scaled. Five hemispheres from four replicates (FB1-4) were ablated on four different days, considering this as the laser ablation batch effect (LA batches). Nine layers per hemisphere were ablated resulting in 45 samples. All samples were treated equally for the analyses. These samples were measured with the mass spectrometer in five different measurement batches (m batches). Both batch effects were combined and assigned into six p batches. One sample would have been a single sample in a separate batch, this sample was assigned to p batch 4 (Supplementary Table 1). The pheatmap package (version 1.0.12) was used for producing heatmaps and hierarchical clustering (cluster method = complete, distance = euclidean, scaled rows). Dendograms were rotated in Adobe Illustrator (version 27.5) without changing clustering order. The Non-linear Iterative Partial Least Squares (NIPALS) principal component analysis (PCA) function from the mixOmics package (version 6.21.0) was used for analysis of housekeeping proteins [32] and the whole dataset with 70% valid values. For dimension reduction the method Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection (UMAP) (version 0.2.9.0) was used with 100 % valid values. The limma package (version 3.54.0) was used for ANOVA (significant difference was considered as p < 0.05). For the gene set analysis, we created gene lists of cortex structures (Supplementary Table4) from https://www.informatics.jax.org/vocab/gxd/anatomy/EMAPA:16039 (accessed Oct. 18, 2022) [33]. We examined forebrain and head structures and selected genes that were shown to occur between embryonic day E11 and the postnatal day P0 based on immunohistochemistry and RNA in situ assays. The broader age filter was chosen due to the unknown relation from RNA to protein translation. We searched in each gene set for the corresponding proteins (assigned with gene names, Supplementary Table 5) and calculated the layer-specific mean abundance (n = 5 hemispheres). The mean value of all found proteins of the specific gene list were plotted in a heatmap. Potential marker proteins were determined based on the top 10 % of most variant proteins with 70 % valid values for either all 9 layers (APOE and DLG4) or from layer 3 to 9 (MTA1 and NMRAL1). GraphPad Prism 7 (version 7.03, GraphPad Software Inc., La Jolla, California, USA) was used for visualization for PCA and UMAP scatter plots.

### Publication Abstract
Common workflows in bottom-up proteomics require homogenization of tissue samples to gain access to the biomolecules within the cells. The homogenized tissue samples often contain many different cell types, thereby representing an average of the natural proteome composition, and rare cell types are not sufficiently represented. To overcome this problem, small-volume sampling and spatial resolution are needed to maintain a better representation of the sample composition and their proteome signatures. Using nanosecond infrared laser ablation, the region of interest can be targeted in a three-dimensional (3D) fashion, whereby the spatial information is maintained during the simultaneous process of sampling and homogenization. In this study, we ablated 40 &#x3bc;m thick consecutive layers directly from the scalp through the cortex of embryonic mouse heads and analyzed them by subsequent bottom-up proteomics. Extra- and intracranial ablated layers showed distinct proteome profiles comprising expected cell-specific proteins. Additionally, known cortex markers like SOX2, KI67, NESTIN, and MAP2 showed a layer-specific spatial protein abundance distribution. We propose potential new marker proteins for cortex layers, such as MTA1 and NMRAL1. The obtained data confirm that the new 3D tissue sampling and homogenization method is well suited for investigating the spatial proteome signature of tissue samples in a layerwise manner. Characterization of the proteome composition of embryonic skin and bone structures, meninges, and cortex lamination in situ enables a better understanding of molecular mechanisms of development during embryogenesis and disease pathogenesis.

### Keywords
Nirl ablation, Spatial proteomics, Bottom-up proteomics, Tissue sampling

### Affiliations
Section / Core Facility Mass Spectrometryic and Proteomics, Center of Diagnostics, University Medical Center Hamburg–Eppendorf, Martinistraße 52, 20246 Hamburg, Germany
Institute of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine
Section / Core Facility Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics

### Submitter
Manuela Moritz

### Lab Head
Dr Hartmut Schlueter
Section / Core Facility Mass Spectrometryic and Proteomics, Center of Diagnostics, University Medical Center Hamburg–Eppendorf, Martinistraße 52, 20246 Hamburg, Germany


