### Accession
PXD030715

### Title
Activation of STAT3 through SRC and EGFR Drives Resistance to a Mitotic Kinesin Inhibitor in Glioblastoma

### Description
The outcome for patients afflicted with glioblastoma (GBM), the most common and malignant of primary brain tumors in adults, has changed little despite decades of clinical, translational, and basic research. Any effective, systemically administered GBM therapy needs to target cellular components that are indispensable for the malignant phenotype with drugs that cross the blood brain barrier (BBB) and have manageable toxicities. However, while a number of signaling pathways have been shown to drive the malignant phenotype in GBM, and while relatively non-toxic, CNS permeant inhibitors of several of these have been identified, their efficacy in GBM has been disappointing. In this study, we examine the mechanism of resistance to the Kif11 inhibitor ispinesib in murine and human GBM.  We find that development of resistance in these tumors occurs by a mechanism not previously described for Kif11 inhibitors, is associated with broad scale transcriptomic and phenotypic changes, and can be reversed with drugs that are FDA approved or in clinical investigation.  Our findings also point to ways of enhancing the efficacy of Kif11 inhibitors that are directly translatable into a clinical setting.The outcome for patients afflicted with glioblastoma (GBM), the most common and malignant of primary brain tumors in adults, has changed little despite decades of clinical, translational, and basic research. Any effective, systemically administered GBM therapy needs to target cellular components that are indispensable for the malignant phenotype with drugs that cross the blood brain barrier (BBB) and have manageable toxicities. However, while a number of signaling pathways have been shown to drive the malignant phenotype in GBM, and while relatively non-toxic, CNS permeant inhibitors of several of these have been identified, their efficacy in GBM has been disappointing. In this study, we examine the mechanism of resistance to the Kif11 inhibitor ispinesib in murine and human GBM.  We find that development of resistance in these tumors occurs by a mechanism not previously described for Kif11 inhibitors, is associated with broad scale transcriptomic and phenotypic changes, and can be reversed with drugs that are FDA approved or in clinical investigation.  Our findings also point to ways of enhancing the efficacy of Kif11 inhibitors that are directly translatable into a clinical setting.

### Sample Protocol
pTyr peptides were isolated by imunoprecipitation & immobilized metal affinity purification prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. Exact methodological details can be found in the associated manuscript.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectral data files were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer version 2.5 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and searched against the human SwissProt database using Mascot version 2.4 (Matrix Science). Spectra were matched using an initial mass tolerance of 10 ppm on precursor masses and 15 mmu for fragment ions, with fixed modifications of cysteine carbamidomethylation, TMT-labeled lysine and TMT-labeled protein N-terminals. Variable modifications were oxidized methionine and serine, threonine, and tyrosine phosphorylation. Peptides were filtered using the following criteria: Ion score ≥ 20, 1 tyrosine phosphorylated residue, reporter ion quantification across all replicates. TMT reporter ions were added together across scans of the same pTyr peptide, and relative quantification was calculated as the log2 fold change for each sample over the average signal from the DMSO control.

### Publication Abstract
Inhibitors of the mitotic kinesin Kif11 are anti-mitotics that, unlike vinca alkaloids or taxanes, do not disrupt microtubules and are not neurotoxic. However, development of resistance has limited their clinical utility. While resistance to Kif11 inhibitors in other cell types is due to mechanisms that prevent these drugs from disrupting mitosis, we find that in glioblastoma (GBM), resistance to the Kif11 inhibitor ispinesib works instead through suppression of apoptosis driven by activation of STAT3. This form of resistance requires dual phosphorylation of STAT3 residues Y705 and S727, mediated by SRC and epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), respectively. Simultaneously inhibiting SRC and EGFR reverses this resistance, and combined targeting of these two kinases in&#xa0;vivo with clinically available inhibitors is synergistic and significantly prolongs survival in ispinesib-treated GBM-bearing mice. We thus identify a translationally actionable approach to overcoming Kif11 inhibitor resistance that may work to block STAT3-driven resistance against other anti-cancer therapies as well.

### Keywords
Phosphotyrosine, Glioblastoma, Therapeutic resistance

### Affiliations
Department of Biological Engineering, MIT
MIT

### Submitter
Lauren Stopfer

### Lab Head
Dr Forest White
Department of Biological Engineering, MIT


