### Accession
PXD030594

### Title
Intercepting IRE1 Kinase-FMRP Signaling Prevents Atherosclerosis Progression

### Description
Fragile X Mental Retardation protein (FMRP), widely known for its role in hereditary intellectual disability, is an RNA-binding protein (RBP) that controls translation of select mRNAs. We discovered that endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress induces phosphorylation of FMRP on a site that is known to enhance translation inhibition of FMRP-bound mRNAs. We show ER stress-induced activation of Inositol requiring enzyme-1 (IRE1), an ER-resident stress-sensing kinase/endoribonuclease, leads to FMRP phosphorylation and to suppression of macrophage cholesterol efflux and apoptotic cell clearance (efferocytosis). Conversely, FMRP-deficiency and pharmacological inhibition of IRE1 kinase activity enhances cholesterol efflux and efferocytosis, reducing atherosclerosis in mice. Our results provide mechanistic insights into how ER stress-induced IRE1 kinase activity contributes to macrophage cholesterol homeostasis and suggest IRE1 inhibition as a promising new way to counteract atherosclerosis.

### Sample Protocol
Two in vitro kinase reactions of hFMRP and ERN1, worth 4.5 µg protein each were methanol-chloroform precipitated. Dried pellets were dissolved in either 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, Thermo Scientific 90114), pH 8.5, or 100 mM ammonium acetate (Sigma-Aldrich A1542), with or without 8 M urea. Proteins were reduced with 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP-HCl, Thermo Scientific C4709) and alkylated with 10 mM 2-chloroacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich 22790). Proteins dissolved in urea/TEAB were digested at 37°C in 0.8 M urea/100 mM TEAB, pH 8.5, sequentially with 500 ng Trypsin (Promega V5117) for 17 hours, followed by 500 ng Endoproteinase GluC (NEB P8100S) for 4.5 h and quenched with formic acid, 5 % final concentration, while proteins dissolved in urea/TEAB or urea/ammonium acetate were digested with 200 ng Proteinase K (Sigma-Aldrich P2308) at 37°C for 4 h and heat-quenched at 90°C for 15 min (similar reactions in ammonium acetate without urea were performed for 30 min or 15 min followed by 16 h digestion with trypsin). The digest was injected directly onto a 20 cm, 100 µm ID column packed with BEH 1.7 µm C18 resin (Waters 186005225). Samples were separated at a flow rate of 400 nl/min on an nLC 1000 (Thermo LC120). Buffer A and B were 0.1% formic acid in 5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile, respectively. A gradient of 1–25% B over 110 min, an increase to 40% B over next 20 min, an increase to 90% B over another 10 min and a hold at 90% B for the final 10 min was used for a total run time of 140 min. The column was re-equilibrated with 20 µl of buffer A prior to the injection of sample. Peptides were eluted directly from the tip of the column and nano-sprayed into the mass spectrometer by application of 2.8 kV voltage at back of the column. The Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo) was operated in data dependent mode. Full MS1 scans were collected in the Orbitrap at 120K resolution with a mass range of 400 to 1500 m/z and an AGC target of 4e5. The cycle time was set to 3 s, and within these 3 s, the most abundant ions per scan were selected for CID MS/MS in the ion trap with an AGC target of 2e4 and minimum intensity of 5000. Maximum fill times were set to 50 ms and 35 ms for MS and MS/MS scans, respectively. Quadrupole isolation at 1.6 m/z was used, monoisotopic precursor selection was enabled, charge states of 2–7 were selected, and dynamic exclusion was used with an exclusion duration of 5 s. Samples were also analyzed with HCD fragmentation (35 NCE) and detection at 7500 resolution.

### Data Protocol
Protein and peptide identification were done with Integrated Proteomics Pipeline – IP2 (Integrated Proteomics Applications). Tandem mass spectra were extracted from raw files using RawConverter and searched with ProLuCID against a concatenated database comprising of amino acid sequences from vendors for FMRP, hERN1 and Endoproteinase GluC, UniProt reference proteome of Escherichia coli K12 (UP000000625) Homo sapiens (UP000005640). The search space included all fully-tryptic and half-tryptic peptide candidates (no enzyme specificity for sample treated with Proteinase K). Carbamidomethylation (+57.02146) was considered a static modification on cysteine, and phosphorylation (+79.966331) was considered a differential modification on serine/threonine/tyrosine. Data was searched with 50 ppm precursor ion tolerance and 500 ppm fragment ion tolerance. Identified proteins were filtered to using DTASelect and utilizing a target-decoy database search strategy to control the false discovery rate at 1%, at the spectrum level. A minimum of 1 peptide per protein and 1 tryptic end per peptide (no tryptic ends in case of Proteinase K treatment) were required and precursor delta mass cut-off was fixed at 10 ppm. Localization scores were assigned to identified sites of phosphorylation using A-Score.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Atherosclerosis, Efferocytosis, Kinase-substrate, Translational regulation, Cholesterol homeostasis

### Affiliations
The Scripps Research Institute, Department of Molecular Medicine, La Jolla, California, USA
The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, California

### Submitter
Sabyasachi Baboo

### Lab Head
Dr John R Yates III
The Scripps Research Institute, Department of Molecular Medicine, La Jolla, California, USA


