### Accession
PXD036889

### Title
Wood degradation by Fomitiporia mediterranea M. Fischer: physiologic, metabolomic and proteomic approaches

### Description
Fomitiporia mediterranea (Fmed) is one of the main fungal species found in grapevine wood rot, also called “amadou”, one of the most typical symptoms of grapevine trunk disease Esca. This fungus is functionally classified as a white-rot, able to degrade all wood structure polymers, i.e., hemicelluloses, cellulose, and the most recalcitrant component, lignin. Specific enzymes are secreted by the fungus to degrade those components, namely carbohydrate active enzymes for hemicelluloses and cellulose, which can be highly specific for given polysaccharide, and peroxidases, which enable white-rot to degrade lignin, with specificities relating to lignin composition as well. Furthermore, besides polymers, a highly diverse set of metabolites often associated with antifungal activities is found in wood, this set differing among the various wood species. Wood decayers possess the ability to detoxify these specific extractives and this ability could reflect the adaptation of these fungi to their specific environment. The aim of this study is to better understand the molecular mechanisms used by Fmed to degrade wood structure, and in particular its potential adaptation to grapevine wood. To do so, Fmed was cultivated on sawdust from different origins: grapevine, beech, and spruce. Carbon mineralization rate, mass loss, wood structure polymers contents, targeted metabolites and secreted proteins were measured. We used the well-known white-rot model Trametes versicolor for comparison. Whereas no significant degradation was observed with spruce, a higher mass loss was measured on Fmed grapevine culture compared to beech culture. Moreover, on both substrates, a simultaneous degradation pattern and the degradation of wood extractives were demonstrated, and proteomic analyses identified a relative overproduction of oxidoreductases involved in lignin and extractive degradation on grapevine cultures, and only few differences in carbohydrate active enzymes. These results could explain at least partially the adaptation of Fmed to grapevine wood structural composition compared to other wood species and suggest that other biotic and abiotic factors should be considered to fully understand the potential adaptation of Fmed to its ecological niche.

### Sample Protocol
At 1 and 3 months of culture, for beech and grapevine cultures, extracellular proteins were extracted from three flasks per culture condition. Each flask was agitated with 30 mL of 30 mM potassium-acetate buffer at pH 4.5 for 2 hours at 60 rpm at room temperature. Extracts were centrifuged 20 minutes at 4000 rpm at 4°C and supernatants were precipitated overnight at -20°C in cold acetone 80%. Precipitated proteins were dried after centrifugation 20 minutes at 4000 rpm at 4°C and diluted in 40 µL of concentrated Laemmli blue (2-mercaptoethanol 24% (w/v), bromophenol blue 17.3 M, glycerol 20% (v/v), sodium dodecyl sulfate 10% (w/v) and Tris-base 0,4M). Samples were heated for10 minutes at 95°C and 15 µL of each sample were deposited on 1 mm 15% SDS-PAGE gels for short-migration. Gels were revealed with Coomassie blue coloration and gel pieces were sent for proteomic analyses. Proteomic analyses were achieved by PAPPSO platform, INRAE, Jouy-en-Josas. The analyses of peptides were obtained using an UltiMateTM 3000 RSLCnano System (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) coupled to an Orbitrap FusionTM LumosTM TribridTM mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were digested with trypsin and resuspended in 2% ACN and 0.1% TFA buffer. 4µL were injected on an Acclaim PepMap C18 precolumn (5 μm x 300 µm × 5 mm) at 20µL/min and separated on an Acclaim PepMap RSLC nanoViper C18 column (2µm x 75 µm × 500 mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Mobile phase was composed of A: 98% H2O in 0.1% formic acid (HCOOH) and B: 80% ACN in 0.1% HCOOH. A gradient from 1.0% B during 2 min, to 30% B for 48 min and to 40% B for 5 min, followed by regeneration step at 98% B in 2 min for 5 min and equilibration at 1.0% B in 0.5 min for 4.5 min, was applied at 300nL/min. Peptide ions were analysed using Xcalibur 4.1, Tune 3.0.

### Data Protocol
RAW data were converted to mzXML data with proteowizard software (Chambers et al., 2012) Proteomic analyses were achieved by PAPPSO platform, INRAE, Jouy-en-Josas. The analyses of peptides were obtained using an UltiMateTM 3000 RSLCnano System (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) coupled to an Orbitrap FusionTM LumosTM TribridTM mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were digested with trypsin and resuspended in 2% ACN and 0.1% TFA buffer. 4µL were injected on an Acclaim PepMap C18 precolumn (5 μm x 300 µm × 5 mm) at 20µL/min and separated on an Acclaim PepMap RSLC nanoViper C18 column (2µm x 75 µm × 500 mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Mobile phase was composed of A: 98% H2O in 0.1% formic acid (HCOOH) and B: 80% ACN in 0.1% HCOOH. A gradient from 1.0% B during 2 min, to 30% B for 48 min and to 40% B for 5 min, followed by regeneration step at 98% B in 2 min for 5 min and equilibration at 1.0% B in 0.5 min for 4.5 min, was applied at 300nL/min. Peptide ions were analysed using Xcalibur 4.1, Tune 3.0. RAW data were converted to mzXML data with proteowizard software (Chambers et al., 2012)

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Fomitiporia mediterranea, Grapevine wood, White rot, Esca, Adaptation

### Affiliations
University of Lorraine
INRAE

### Submitter
Céline Henry

### Lab Head
Dr Eric Gelhaye
University of Lorraine


