### Accession
PXD025290

### Title
Proteomic data of Stenotrophomonas maltophilia

### Description
S. maltophilia was exposed to a simulated microgravity (SMG) environment in high-aspect ratio rotating-wall vessels bioreactors for 14 days, while the control group was performed in the same bioreactors under normal gravity (NG) environment. After that, combined phenotypic, genomic, transcriptomic and proteomic analyses were conducted to compare the influence of the SMG and NG on S. maltophilia.

### Sample Protocol
The frozen bacteria samples were transferred to the shaking tube, and lysis buffer was added to the samples to mix well. High-throughput tissue grinder was applied and shaked 3 times for 40s each time. The suspension was placed on ice for 30 min and sonicated every 5 min for 10s. After incubating at 100°C for 10 min, samples were refrigerated on ice, and centrifuged at 12,000g for 20 min at 4°C. Pre-cooled acetone was added to the supernatant in a ratio of 1:4, and precipitated overnight at -20°C. The next day, the mixture was centrifuged at 12,000g for 20 min, then discarded the supernatant and added 90% pre-cooled acetone to the pellet and mixed well, this step was repeated twice. Then, the protein lysis solution was added to the precipitation, after centrifuged at 12,000g for 20 min at 4°C, the supernatant was obtained. The proteins were quantified by BCA and subsequently confirmed using SD-PAGE. After reductive alkylation and enzymatic hydrolysis, the processed peptides were labeled with Tandem Mass Tag™ (TMT™), reconstituted the peptide sample with UPLC loading buffer and perform high-pH liquid fractionation with a reversed-phase C18 column (Thermo, USA). Then, purified peptides were subjected to the EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo, USA) and Q_Exactive HF-X (Thermo, USA) to obtain raw data.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were converted into MGF format by the Thermo Scientific tool Proteome Discoverer software (Version 2.4), and the exported MGF files were searched against the established database using the Sequest and Mascot module. Eventually, data statistics and bioinformatics analysis were performed according to the previous search results

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Stenotrophomonas maltophilia; proteomic

### Affiliations
Depart of Respiratory and Clinical Care Medicine, The Second Center & National Clinical Research Center for Geriatic Disease, Medical School of Chinese PLA, China.
Medical School of Chinese PLA

### Submitter
Xiaolei Su

### Lab Head
Dr Chagnting Liu
Depart of Respiratory and Clinical Care Medicine, The Second Center & National Clinical Research Center for Geriatic Disease, Medical School of Chinese PLA, China.


