### Accession
PXD007623

### Title
Effect of nitroprusside on the proteomic expression of Desulfovibrio vulgaris Hildenborough

### Description
In this study, the effect of nitroprusside on protein expression of the model sulfate reducing bacterial isolate (Desulfovibrio vulgaris Hildenborough) was investigated. Three different experiments were done with different exposure time to nitroprusside (30 min, 1 hour, and 3 hours). In each experiment, the culture was grown in quadruplet of serum bottles containing 40 ml complex medium (Postgate medium B) under anaerobic condition at 30oC. At mid-log growth phase, each of the quadruplet culture was divided into two (20 ml each) and nitroprusside (0.25 mM) was added to one of each bottle while the other bottles were used as controls. After 30 min, 1 hour, and 3 hours of exposure to nitroprusside, the culture (1 ml) was pelleted and used for proteomic analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were lysed in SDT-lysis buffer (4% (w/v) SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6, 0.1 M DTT). SDT lysis buffer was added in a 1:10 sample/buffer ratio to the sample pellets. Pipetting up and down was used to dissolve the pellet.  Cells were incubated at 95° C for 10 minutes followed by pelleting of debris for 5 min at 21,000 x g. We prepared tryptic digests following the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol described by Wisniewski et al.  (2009, Nat. Meth. 6(5)). In brief, 30 µl of the cleared lysate were mixed with 200 µl of UA solution (8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris/HCl pH 8.5) in a 10 kDa MWCO 500 µl centrifugal filter unit (VWR International) and centrifuged at 14,000 x g for 40 min. 200 µl of UA solution were added again and centrifugal filter spun at 14,000 x g for 40 min. 100 µl of IAA solution (0.05 M iodoacetamide in UA solution) were added to the filter and incubated at 22° C for 20 min. The IAA solution was removed by centrifugation and the filter was washed three times by adding 100 µl of UA solution and then centrifuging. The buffer on the filter was then changed to ABC (50 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate), by washing the filter three times with 100 µl of ABC. 1 to 2 µg of MS grade trypsin (Thermo Scientific Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA) in 40 µl of ABC were added to the filter and filters incubated overnight in a wet chamber at 37° C. The next day, peptides were eluted by centrifugation at 14,000 x g for 20 min, followed by addition of 50 µl of 0.5 M NaCl and again centrifugation. Approximate peptide concentrations were determined using the Pierce Micro BCA assay (Thermo Scientific Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Samples were analyzed by 1D-LC-MS/MS. Two wash runs and one blank run were done between samples to reduce carry over. 1200 ng of peptide were loaded onto a 5 mm, 300 µm ID C18 Acclaim® PepMap100 pre-column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using an UltiMateTM 3000 RSLCnano Liquid Chromatograph (Thermo Fisher Scientific). After loading, the pre-column was switched in line with a 50 cm x 75 µm analytical EASY-Spray column packed with PepMap RSLC C18, 2µm material (Thermo Fisher Scientific), which was heated to 45° C. The analytical column was connected via an Easy-Spray source to a Q Exactive Plus hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on the analytical column and mass spectra acquired in the Orbitrap using 260 minute gradients as described by Petersen et al. (2016, Nat. Microb. 2(16195)).

### Data Protocol
For protein identification, a database was created using all protein sequences downloaded from Uniprot. The cRAP protein sequence database (http://www.thegpm.org/crap/) containing protein sequences of common laboratory contaminants was appended to the database. The final database contained 3634 protein sequences. For protein identification MS/MS spectra were searched against the database using the Sequest HT node in Proteome Discoverer version 2.0.0.802 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as described previously (Petersen et al. 2016, Nat. Microb. 2(16195)).

### Publication Abstract
Sodium nitroprusside (SNP) disrupts microbial biofilms through the release of nitric oxide (NO). The actions of SNP on bacteria have been mostly limited to the genera <i>Pseudomonas</i>, <i>Clostridium</i>, and <i>Bacillus</i>. There are no reports of its biocidal action on sulfate-reducing bacteria (SRB), which couple the reduction of sulfate to sulfide with the oxidation of organic electron donors. Here, we report the inhibition and kill of SRB by low SNP concentrations [0.05 mM (15 ppm)] depending on biomass concentration. Chemical reaction of SNP with sulfide did not compromise its efficacy. SNP was more effective than five biocides commonly used to control SRB. Souring, the SRB activity in oil reservoirs, is often controlled by injection of nitrate. Control of SRB-mediated souring in oil-containing bioreactors was inhibited by 4 mM (340 ppm) of sodium nitrate, but required only 0.05 mM (15 ppm) of SNP. Interestingly, nitrate and SNP were found to be highly synergistic with 0.003 mM (1 ppm) of SNP and 1 mM (85 ppm) of sodium nitrate being sufficient in inhibiting souring. Hence, using SNP as an additive may greatly increase the efficacy of nitrate injection in oil reservoirs.

### Keywords
Sulfide, Sulfate reduction, Proteomic, Nitroprusside, Growth inhibition, Souring

### Affiliations
PhD student
University of Calgary, Microbiology

### Submitter
Maryam Ataeian

### Lab Head
Dr Gerrit Voordouw
University of Calgary, Microbiology


