### Accession
PXD044071

### Title
The divergent ER-mitochondria encounter structures (ERMES) are conserved in parabasalids but lost in several anaerobic lineages with hydrogenosomes.

### Description
The endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-mitochondria membrane contact sites (MCS) are extensively studied in aerobic eukaryotes, however, little is known about MCS in anaerobes with reduced forms of mitochondria named hydrogenosomes. In several eukaryotic lineages, the direct physical tether between ER and the outer mitochondrial membrane is formed by ER-mitochondria encounter structure (ERMES). The complex consists of four core proteins (Mmm1, Mmm2, Mdm12, and Mdm10) which are involved in phospholipid trafficking. Here we investigated ERMES distribution in organisms bearing hydrogenosomes and employed Trichomonas vaginalis as a model to estimate ERMES cellular localization, structure, and function. Homology searches revealed that Parabasalia-Anaeramoebae, anaerobic jakobids, and anaerobic fungi are lineages with hydrogenosomes that retain ERMES, while ERMES components were gradually lost in Fornicata, and are absent in Preaxostyla, and Archamoebae. In T. vaginalis and other parabasalids, three ERMES components were found with the expansion of Mmm1. Immunofluorescence microscopy confirmed that Mmm1 localized in ER, while Mdm12 and Mmm2 were partially localized in hydrogenosomes. Pull-down assays and mass spectrometry of the ERMES components identified a parabasalid-specific Porin2 as a substitute for the Mdm10. ERMES modeling showed a formation of a continuous hydrophobic tunnel of TvMmm1-TvMdm12-TvMmm2 that is anchored via Porin2 to the hydrogenosomal outer membrane. Phospholipid-ERMES docking and Mdm12-phospholipid dot-blot indicated that ERMES is involved in the transport of phosphatidylinositol phosphates. However, the absence of enzymes involved in mitochondrial phospholipid metabolism, Psd1, and cardiolipin synthase, indicates that ERMES is not involved in the exchange of substrates for lipid metabolism between ER and hydrogenosomes.

### Sample Protocol
Materials & methods Co-immunoprecipitation (coIP) of protein complexes CoIP was performed as described (Makki et al., 2019). Briefly, T.vaginalis T1 strain and transfected cell lines expressing HA-tagged proteins (baits) were incubated with 1 mM of the crosslinker dithiobis(succinimidyl propionate)(DSP, Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, Missouri, USA) at room temperature for 30 minutes. The reaction was stopped with 50 mM tris(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane (TRIS), pH 7.5. Cells were washed with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS, pH 7) and solubilized in IP buffer (500 mM TRIS, 150 mM NaCl, pH 7.2) with 1% Triton X-100. The suspension was incubated with Dynabeads (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts, USA) coupled with anti-HA Ab (ExBio, Prague, Czech Republic) for 90 minutes on a rotator at room temperature. The beads were washed with IP buffer and proteins were eluted in 100mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) containing 1% sodium deoxycholate (Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, Missouri, USA). Three independent coIP experiments were performed for each bait.  Label-free quantitative (LFQ) MS analysis Eluted proteins were digested with trypsin and peptides were purified as described (Masuda et al. 2008). Peptides were separated by nano-scale liquid chromatography (UltiMate 3000 RSLC, Thermo Scientific) using reversed-phase column (EASY-Spray column, 50 cm x 75 μm ID, PepMap C18, 2 μm particles, 100 Å pore size) that was coupled with an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed with the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.3.4)(Cox et al. 2014). The precursor ion mass tolerance in the initial search was 20 ppm, the tolerance in the main search was 4.5 ppm, and the fragment ion mass tolerance was 0.5 Da. Genomic sequences and gene annotation were obtained from database TrichDB (release 2020-05-27,60,330 entries)(Aurrecoechea et al. 2010). Quantifications were performed with the label-free algorithm and data was evaluated using Perseus 1.6.2.3 software with a false discovery rate (FDR) for proteins 0.05, and S=1. Protein interactions network was visualized with Cytoscape v3.9.1. (Shannon et al. 2003).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Trichomonas vaginalis, Anaerobiosis, Hydrogenosomes, Endoplasmatic reticulum, Ermes

### Affiliations
Charles University
Charles University in Prague, Faculty of Science Department of Parasitology Biocev, Průmyslová 595, Vestec 252 42

### Submitter
Karel Harant

### Lab Head
Dr prof. RNDr. Jan Tachezy, Ph.D.
Charles University in Prague, Faculty of Science Department of Parasitology Biocev, Průmyslová 595, Vestec 252 42


