### Accession
PXD024632

### Title
Conditions for maintenance of hepatocyte differentiation and function in 3D cultures

### Description
3D spheroid cultures of primary human hepatocytes (PHH) are used in studies of hepatic drug metabolism and toxicity. However, the 3D spheroids are maintained under different conditions, with possible cofounding results. Here we performed an in-depth analysis of how various culture conditions influence 3D spheroids. Our aim was to find optimal conditions for the maintenance of a normal PHH phenotype.

### Sample Protocol
Primary human hepatocyte spheroid cultured at different timepoints and in different media. the samples were lysed and the final concentration of the lysates contained 50mM DTT and 2% SDS in 100mM Tris/HCL at pH 7.8. Protein concentrations were quantified using the tryptophan fluorescence method (Wiśniewski and Gaugaz, 2015), and sequential proteolytic digestion with trypsin and LysC was performed using the MED-FASP protocol (Wiśniewski and Mann, 2012). The peptides were separated on an easy spray C18 reverse phase column (50cm long, 75 μm inner diameter) on a 145min water/Acetonitrile gradient. Eluted peptides where analysed using the TopN method (full MS followed by ddMS2 scans) on an Orbitrap Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The MS data was analysed with MaxQuant version 1.6.10.43 with the complete human proteome extracted from UniProtKB, version of 2019-10. Protein concentration was calculated using the total protein approach

### Publication Abstract
Spheroid cultures of primary human hepatocytes (PHH) are used in studies of hepatic drug metabolism and toxicity. The cultures are maintained under different conditions, with possible confounding results. We performed an in-depth analysis of the influence of various culture conditions to find the optimal conditions for the maintenance of an <i>in&#xa0;vivo</i> like phenotype. The formation, protein expression, and function of PHH spheroids were followed for three weeks in a high-throughput 384-well format. Medium composition affected spheroid histology, global proteome profile, drug metabolism and drug-induced toxicity. No epithelial-mesenchymal transition was observed. Media with fasting glucose and insulin levels gave spheroids with phenotypes closest to normal PHH. The most expensive medium&#xa0;resulted in PHH features most divergent from that of native PHH. Our results provide a protocol for culture of healthy PHH with maintained function - a prerequisite for studies of hepatocyte homeostasis and more reproducible hepatocyte&#xa0;research.

### Keywords
Primary human hepatocyte culture, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Uppsala University, Department of Pharmacy, Drug Delivery
Department of Pharmacy, Uppsala University, SE-75123 Uppsala

### Submitter
Niklas Handin

### Lab Head
Dr Per Artursson
Department of Pharmacy, Uppsala University, SE-75123 Uppsala


