### Accession
PXD004215

### Title
p140Cap Interactome -  Synaptic Interactome Mining Reveals p140Cap as a New Hub for PSD Proteins Involved in Psychiatric and Neurological Disorders

### Description
p140Cap is an adapter protein that is highly expressed in the brain. In particular, p140Cap localizes at dendritic spines where it contributes to the regulation of spine shape and maturation. We recently described that p140Cap knock-out mice present cognitive deficits, impaired long-term potentiation and long-term depression, and immature filopodia-like dendritic spines, indicating that p140Cap is relevant for synaptic plasticity. Although a few p140Cap interacting proteins have been identified in the brain, a comprehensive view of its molecular partners remains largely unknown. Thus, we performed a mass spectrometry-based proteomic analysis of the p140Cap interactome.

### Sample Protocol
p140Cap monoclonal antibody was coupled to Dynabeads protein G and used for co-immunprecipitation experiments starting from crude synaptosomes prepared from WT and p140Cap KO mice (3 biological replicates per condition). Pproteins from co-IP eluates were stacked in the top of a 4-12% NuPAGE gel (Invitrogen) and stained with R-250 Coomassie blue. Gel bands were manually excised and in-gel digested using trypsin. Resulting peptides analyzed by online nanoLC-MS/MS (UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano and Q-Exactive Plus, Thermo Scientific) with 2 analytical replicates per sample.Peptides were sampled on a 300 µm x 5 mm PepMap C18 precolumn and separated on a 75 µm x 250 mm C18 column (PepMap, Dionex). The nanoLC method consisted of a 120-minutes gradient at a flow rate of 300 nl/min, ranging from 5% to 37% acetronitrile in 0.1% formic acid for 114 min, before reaching 72% acetronitrile in 0.1% formic acid for the last 6 min. Spray voltage was set at 1.6 kV; heated capillary was adjusted to 270°C. Survey full-scan MS spectra (m/z = 400–1600) were acquired with a resolution of 70,000 after accumulation of 106 ions (maximum filling time 200 ms). The ten most intense ions were fragmented by higher-energy collisional dissociation after accumulation of 105 ions (maximum filling time 50 ms). MS and MS/MS data were acquired using the software Xcalibur (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
RAW files were processed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.1.2). Spectra were searched against the Uniprot database (Mus musculus taxonomy, March 2015 version) and the frequently observed contaminants database embedded in MaxQuant. The I=L option was activated. Trypsin was chosen as the enzyme and 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Peptide modifications allowed during the search were: carbamidomethylation (C, fixed), acetyl (Protein N-ter, variable) and oxidation (M, variable). Minimum number of unique peptides was set to 1. The matching between runs option was activated.

### Publication Abstract
Altered synaptic function has been associated with neurological and psychiatric conditions including intellectual disability, schizophrenia and autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Amongst the recently discovered synaptic proteins is p140Cap, an adaptor that localizes at dendritic spines and regulates their maturation and physiology. We recently showed that p140Cap knockout mice have cognitive deficits, impaired long-term potentiation (LTP) and long-term depression (LTD), and immature, filopodia-like dendritic spines. Only a few p140Cap interacting proteins have been identified in the brain and the molecular complexes and pathways underlying p140Cap synaptic function are largely unknown. Here, we isolated and characterized the p140Cap synaptic interactome by co-immunoprecipitation from crude mouse synaptosomes, followed by mass spectrometry-based proteomics. We identified 351 p140Cap interactors and found that they cluster to sub complexes mostly located in the postsynaptic density (PSD). p140Cap interactors converge on key synaptic processes, including transmission across chemical synapses, actin cytoskeleton remodeling and cell-cell junction organization. Gene co-expression data further support convergent functions: the p140Cap interactors are tightly co-expressed with each other and with p140Cap. Importantly, the p140Cap interactome and its co-expression network show strong enrichment in genes associated with schizophrenia, autism, bipolar disorder, intellectual disability and epilepsy, supporting synaptic dysfunction as a shared biological feature in brain diseases. Overall, our data provide novel insights into the molecular organization of the synapse and indicate that p140Cap acts as a hub for postsynaptic complexes relevant to psychiatric and neurological disorders.

### Keywords
P140cap, Synaptosome, Nanolc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
EDyP

### Submitter
Yohann Couté

### Lab Head
Dr Bruley  
EDyP


