### Accession
PXD005559

### Title
Proteome profiling of human neutrophil granule subsets, secretory vesicles, and cell membrane

### Description
In the present work neutrophil subcellular fractionation by density gradient centrifugation was conducted in order to perform a quantitative proteomic profiling of human neutrophil granule subsets, secretory vesicles, and cell membrane

### Sample Protocol
After preparation of four granula fractions, a secretory vesicle fraction and a cell membrane fraction each of the six resulting samples were loaded on an SDS-PAGE gel for protein separation. After gel-electrophoresis each lane were cut into 10 pieces and the proteins were digested in-gel by trypsin. The generated peptides were extracted from the gel, dried in a speedvac and reconstituted in 5% formic acid before desalting in-line using a C18 trap column followed by nano-LC-tandem mass spectrometry analysis using an LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
The generated RAW files were analysed by the MaxQuant software version 1.1.1.36 for quantification of peptides by MS1 intensity and for identification of proteins using the Andromeda search engine included in MaxQuant.

### Publication Abstract
Human neutrophil elastase (HNE) is an important <i>N</i>-glycosylated serine protease in the innate immune system, but the structure and immune-modulating functions of HNE <i>N</i>-glycosylation remain undescribed. Herein, LC-MS/MS-based glycan, glycopeptide and glycoprotein profiling were utilized to first determine the heterogeneous <i>N</i>-glycosylation of HNE purified from neutrophil lysates and then from isolated neutrophil granules of healthy individuals. The spatiotemporal expression of HNE during neutrophil activation and the biological importance of its <i>N</i>-glycosylation were also investigated using immunoblotting, cell surface capture, native MS, receptor interaction, protease inhibition, and bacteria growth assays. Site-specific HNE glycoprofiling demonstrated that unusual paucimannosidic <i>N</i>-glycans, particularly Man&#x3b1;1,6Man&#x3b2;1,4GlcNAc&#x3b2;1,4(Fuc&#x3b1;1,6)GlcNAc&#x3b2;, predominantly occupied Asn124 and Asn173. The equally unusual core fucosylated monoantenna complex-type <i>N</i>-sialoglycans also decorated these two fully occupied sites. In contrast, the mostly unoccupied Asn88 carried nonfucosylated paucimannosidic <i>N</i>-glycans probably resulting from low glycosylation site solvent accessibility. Asn185 was not glycosylated. Subcellular- and site-specific glycoprofiling showed highly uniform <i>N</i>-glycosylation of HNE residing in distinct neutrophil compartments. Stimulation-induced cell surface mobilization demonstrated a spatiotemporal regulation, but not cell surface-specific glycosylation signatures, of HNE in activated human neutrophils. The three glycosylation sites of HNE were located distal to the active site indicating glycan functions other than interference with HNE enzyme activity. Functionally, the paucimannosidic HNE glycoforms displayed preferential binding to human mannose binding lectin compared with the HNE sialoglycoforms, suggesting a glycoform-dependent involvement of HNE in complement activation. The heavily <i>N</i>-glycosylated HNE protease inhibitor, &#x3b1;1-antitrypsin, displayed concentration-dependent complex formation and preferred glycoform-glycoform interactions with HNE. Finally, both enzymatically active HNE and isolated HNE <i>N</i>-glycans demonstrated low micromolar concentration-dependent growth inhibition of clinically-relevant <i>Pseudomonas aeruginosa</i>, suggesting some bacteriostatic activity is conferred by the HNE <i>N</i>-glycans. Taken together, these observations support that the unusual HNE <i>N</i>-glycosylation, here reported for the first time, is involved in modulating multiple immune functions central to inflammation and infection.

### Keywords
Secretory vesicles, Quantitative proteomic profiling, Lc-msms, Human neutrophil granules

### Affiliations
Statens Serum Institut
The Granulocyte Research Laboratory, Department of Hematology, Rigshospitalet, University of Copenhagen, Denmark

### Submitter
Ole Østergaard

### Lab Head
Dr Niels Borregaard
The Granulocyte Research Laboratory, Department of Hematology, Rigshospitalet, University of Copenhagen, Denmark


