### Accession
PXD031606

### Title
Sequence and structural Sequence and structural variations determining the recruitment of WNK kinases to the KLHL3 E3 ligase

### Description
The BTB-Kelch protein KLHL3 is a Cullin3-dependent E3 ligase that mediates the ubiquitin-dependent degradation of kinases WNK1-4 to control blood pressure and cell volume.  A crystal structure of KLHL3 has defined its binding to an acidic degron motif containing a PXXP sequence that is strictly conserved in WNK1, WNK2 and WNK4. Mutations in the second proline abrograte the interaction causing the hypertension syndrome pseudohypoaldosteronism type II. WNK3 shows a diverged degron motif containing 4 amino acid substitutions that remove the PXXP motif raising questions as to the mechanism of its binding. To understand this atypical interaction, we determined the crystal structure of the KLHL3 Kelch domain in complex with a WNK3 peptide. The electron density enabled the complete 11-mer WNK-family degron motif to be traced for the first time revealing several conserved features not captured in previous work, including additional salt bridge and hydrogen bond interactions. Overall, the WNK3 peptide adopted a conserved binding pose except for a subtle shift to accommodate bulkier amino acid substitutions at the binding interface. At the centre, the second proline was substituted by WNK3 Thr541, providing a unique phosphorylatable residue among the WNK-family degrons. Fluorescence polarisation and structural modelling experiments revealed that its phosphorylation would abrogate the KLHL3 interaction similarly to hypertension-causing mutations. Together, these data reveal how the KLHL3 Kelch domain can accommodate the binding of multiple WNK isoforms and highlight a potential regulatory mechanism for the recruitment of WNK3.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T cells were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM, Gibco/Invitrogen) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS, Sigma Aldrich), 100 U/mL penicillin sodium and 100 lg/mL streptomycin sulphate (Sigma Aldrich) in a humidified incubator at 37°C with 5% CO2.  For phospho-mapping experiments, full length human WNK3 (isoform 2) was cloned into a pCMV5-FLAG vector providing an N-terminal Flag affinity tag (MRC-PPU plasmid DU4949).  Cells were split into 150 mm dishes and transfected with 14 µg Flag-WNK3 construct using polyethylenimine (Polysciences).  Some 36 hours post-transfection, culture medium was removed and the cells were treated with either isotonic buffer or hypotonic buffer to allow for phosphorylation under different stimuli.  Isotonic high potassium buffer contained 20 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 95 mM NaCl, 50 mM KCl, 1 mM CaCl2, 1 mM MgCl2, 1 mM Na2HPO4, 1 mM Na2SO4.  Hypotonic high potassium buffer contained 20 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 80 mM KCl, 1 mM CaCl2, 1 mM MgCl2, 1 mM Na2HPO4, 1 mM Na2SO4.  Following 30 min incubation, cells were washed in PBS buffer and harvested for analysis.  WNK3 was immunoprecipitated by anti-Flag M2 affinity resin (Sigma-Aldrich, A2220) and eluted with 3xFlag peptide. Protein samples were digested in elastase after DTT reduction, iodoacetamide alkylation and methanol-chloroform precipitation. The samples were then desalted using a SOLA HRP SPE Cartridge (Thermo Fisher, 60109-001) following the manufacturer’s instruction.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data were analysed with PEAKS 7.0 against the Uniprot database using an Elastase digest pattern and 10 ppm/0.5 Da (MS/ MS/MS) mass tolerance. Peptide level false discovery rate was adjusted to 1% and modifications were set according to the experimental parameters described above.

### Publication Abstract
The BTB-Kelch protein KLHL3 is a Cullin3-dependent E3 ligase that mediates the ubiquitin-dependent degradation of kinases WNK1-4 to control blood pressure and cell volume. A crystal structure of KLHL3 has defined its binding to an acidic degron motif containing a PXXP sequence that is strictly conserved in WNK1, WNK2 and WNK4. Mutations in the second proline abrograte the interaction causing the hypertension syndrome pseudohypoaldosteronism type II. WNK3 shows a diverged degron motif containing four amino acid substitutions that remove the PXXP motif raising questions as to the mechanism of its binding. To understand this atypical interaction, we determined the crystal structure of the KLHL3 Kelch domain in complex with a WNK3 peptide. The electron density enabled the complete 11-mer WNK-family degron motif to be traced for the first time revealing several conserved features not captured in previous work, including additional salt bridge and hydrogen bond interactions. Overall, the WNK3 peptide adopted a conserved binding pose except for a subtle shift to accommodate bulkier amino acid substitutions at the binding interface. At the centre, the second proline was substituted by WNK3 Thr541, providing a unique phosphorylatable residue among the WNK-family degrons. Fluorescence polarisation and structural modelling experiments revealed that its phosphorylation would abrogate the KLHL3 interaction similarly to hypertension-causing mutations. Together, these data reveal how the KLHL3 Kelch domain can accommodate the binding of multiple WNK isoforms and highlight a potential regulatory mechanism for the recruitment of WNK3.

### Keywords
Klhl3-wnk3 complex, Structure

### Affiliations
Discovery Proteomics Facility Target Discovery Institute University of Oxford
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Roman Fischer

### Lab Head
Dr Roman Fischer
Discovery Proteomics Facility Target Discovery Institute University of Oxford


