### Accession
PXD020225

### Title
Silica-cSilica-coated-magnetic-nanoparticle-induced cytotoxicity is reduced in microglia by glutathione and citrate discovered using integrated omics analysisoated-magnetic-nanoparticle-induced cytotoxicity is reduced in microglia by glutathione and citrate discovered using integrated omics analysis

### Description
Exposure to nanoparticles leads to their accumulation in the brain, but drug development to counteract this nanotoxicity remains challenging. Here we assessed the effect of silica-coated-magnetic nanoparticles containing the rhodamine B isothiocyanate dye [MNPs@SiO2(RITC)] on microglia through integration of transcriptomics, proteomics, and metabolomics. Intracellular reactive oxygen species production, an inflammatory response, and morphological activation of cells were greater, but glucose uptake was lower in MNPs@SiO2(RITC)-treated BV2 microglia and primary rat microglia. Expression of 121 genes, and levels of 45 proteins and 17 metabolites related to the above phenomena changed in MNPs@SiO2(RITC)-treated microglia. We integrated the three omics datasets and generated a single network using a machine learning algorithm. We screened 19 compounds and predicted their effects on nanotoxicity within the triple-omics network. A combination of glutathione and citrate attenuated nanotoxicity induced by MNPs@SiO2(RITC) and ten other nanoparticles in vitro and in the murine brain, protecting mostly the hippocampus and thalamus.

### Sample Protocol
BV2 cells were treated with 0.01 and 0.1 µg/µl MNPs@SiO2(RITC) for 12 h. Cells were lysed with RIPA buffer. Lysates were cleared by centrifugation, and the centrifuged proteome samples were denatured with 8 M urea and reduced with 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine at room temperature for 10 and 60 min. Samples were alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature in the dark for 60 min, and the buffer was replaced with 200 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer. The total amount of proteins was measured by the Qubit Assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific) following the manufacturer’s protocol. Three biological replicate samples of control and of 0.01 and 0.1 µg/µl MNPs@SiO2(RITC)-treated groups were pooled as the respective groups. Proteins were digested with trypsin at 37°C for 16 h (Promega, Madison, WI, USA). Total peptide concentration was re-quantified by the Qubit Assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific) following the manufacturer’s protocol. Each sample of 100 µg was divided into two fractions. Samples were individually labelled using TMT-126 and 127 (Control), TMT-128 and -129 [0.01 µg/µl MNPs@SiO2(RITC)–treated group], and TMT-130 and -131 [0.1 µg/µl MNPs@SiO2(RITC)–treated group] following the manufacturer’s protocol. An aqueous hydroxylamine solution (5% w/v) was added to quench the reaction. The six TMT-labelled samples were then combined, speed-vacuum dried, and then resuspended in 30 μl of water for fractionation by high-pH reversed-phase liquid chromatography.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification. MS/MS spectra were analyzed using the following software analysis protocols with the Uniprot mouse database (Dec/11st/2017 released). The reversed sequences of all proteins were appended into the database for calculation of false discovery rate (FDR). ProLucid was used to identify the peptides1, a precursor mass error of 10 ppm, and a fragment ion mass error of 600 ppm. Trypsin was selected as the enzyme, with one potential missed cleavage. TMT modification (+ 229.1629) at the N-terminus and lysine residue by the labeling reagent and carbamidomethylation at cysteine were chosen as static modifications. Oxidation at methionine was chosen as variable modification. Reporter ions were extracted from small windows (± 20 ppm) around their expected m/z in the HCD spectrum. The output data files were filtered and sorted to compose the protein list using the DTASelect (The Scripps Research Institute, USA) with two and more peptides assignments for a protein identification and a false positive rate less than 0.012.  A quantitative analysis was conducted using Census in IP2 pipeline (Integrated Proteomics, USA). The intensity at a reporter ion channel for a protein was calculated as the average of this reporter ion’s intensities from all constituent peptides from the identified protein3. In order to control the quality in protein quantification, we labeled the same sample with two different TMT reagents. Since every protein was expected to have an abundance ratio of 1:1, in comparisons of different TMT labeled samples for the same sample, the data with more than 30% variation was excluded.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Machine learning, Silica-coated- magnetic nanoparticles; nanotoxicity; integrated omics, Microglia

### Affiliations
Korea Basic Science Institute
Department of Physiology and Department of Biomedical Sciences, Ajou University School of Medicine, Suwon, Republic of Korea  Immune-network pioneer research center, Ajou University School of Medicine, Suwon, Republic of Korea

### Submitter
Ju Yeon Lee

### Lab Head
Dr Gwang Lee
Department of Physiology and Department of Biomedical Sciences, Ajou University School of Medicine, Suwon, Republic of Korea  Immune-network pioneer research center, Ajou University School of Medicine, Suwon, Republic of Korea


