### Accession
PXD017321

### Title
Proteomics Using Proteases Alternative to Trypsin Benefits from Sequential Digestion with Trypsin

### Description
High specificity and ease of use make trypsin the most used enzyme in proteomics. Proteases with complementary cleavage specificity to trypsin have been applied to obtain additional data. However, use of proteases with broad specificity proved especially challenging. In this work, we analyzed the characteristics of five protease alternatives to trypsin for protein identification and sequence coverage when applied to S. pombe whole cell lysates. The specificity of the protease heavily impacted on the number of proteins identified. Proteases with higher specificity let to the identification of more proteins than proteases with lower specificity. However, AspN, GluC, chymotrypsin and proteinase K largely benefited from being paired with trypsin in sequential digestion, as had been shown by us for elastase before. In the most extreme case, the addition of trypsin to a proteinase K digest increased the number of identified proteins by 524 %. Also, AspN (82 %) and GluC (74 %) protein identifications largely improved following the additional digestion with trypsin. In general, protein identifications improved most over the use of the single protease when the enzymes followed on an initial digestion with trypsin. In the most extreme case, the sequential digest with trypsin and AspN yielded even higher number of protein identifications than digesting with trypsin alone.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation  One gram of frozen and ground S. pombe cells were resuspended in 2 ml RIPA (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) supplemented with cOmplete™ (Roche, Basel). To remove the cell debris the samples were centrifugated at 1200 g for 15 minutes. The lysates were subjected to gel electrophoresis on a 4-12% Bis Tris gel (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA) for 5 minutes and stained using Imperial Protein Stain (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL). After excising the stained gel area as a single fraction, the proteins were first reduced with dithiothreitol and then alkylated with iodoacetamide.  The first protease (trypsin (13 ng/µl), elastase (15 ng/µl), AspN (1:100), GluC (1:50), chymotrypsin (1:50) and proteinase K (1:50)) were incubated for 16 hours at 37°C (besides chymotrypsin at RT). The second protease was added for 4 hours at 37°C (besides elastase for 30 minutes). We used a standardized protocol to desalt and concentrate the peptides on C18 StageTips for subsequent analysis [15,16]. LC-MS/MS  All samples were analyzed on a linear iontrap-orbitrap mass spectrometer (Orbitrap Elite, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL) coupled online to a liquid chromatograph (Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano Systems, Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK) with a C18-column (EASY-Spray LC Column, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL). The flow rate was 0.2 μL/min using 98% mobile phase A (0.1% formic acid) and 2% mobile phase B (80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid). To elute the peptides, the percentage of mobile phase B was first increased to 40% over a time course of 110 minutes followed by a linear increase to 95% in 11 minutes. Full MS scans were recorded in the orbitrap at 120,000 resolution for MS1 with a scan range of 300-1700 m/z. The 20 most intense ions (precursor charge ≥2) were selected for fragmentation by collision-induced disassociation and MS2 spectra were recorded in the ion trap (20,000 ions as a minimal required signal, 35 normalized collision energy, dynamic exclusion for 40 s).

### Data Protocol
Data analysis  MaxQuant software [17] (version 1.5.2.8) employing the Andromeda search engine [18] in combination with the PombeBase database [19] was used to analyze the samples. The following parameters were used for the search: carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification, oxidation of methionine as a variable modification, MS accuracy of 4.5 ppm and MS/MS tolerance of 20 ppm. Up to 6 miscleavages were allowed for digests involving trypsin, AspN, GluC or chymotrypsin and up to 10 miscleavages for digests containing elastase or proteinase K. Frequency of amino acids were taken from the statistics of the UniProtKB/TrEMBL protein database release 2019_11 (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/uniprot/TrEMBLstats).

### Publication Abstract
Trypsin is the most used enzyme in proteomics. Nevertheless, proteases with complementary cleavage specificity have been applied in special circumstances. In this work, we analyzed the characteristics of five protease alternatives to trypsin for protein identification and sequence coverage when applied to <i>S. pombe</i> whole cell lysates. The specificity of the protease heavily impacted the number of proteins identified. Proteases with higher specificity led to the identification of more proteins than proteases with lower specificity. However, AspN, GluC, chymotrypsin, and proteinase K largely benefited from being paired with trypsin in sequential digestion, as had been shown by us for elastase before. In the most extreme case, predigesting with trypsin improves the number of identified proteins for proteinase K by 731%. Trypsin predigestion also improved the protein identifications of other proteases, AspN (+62%), GluC (+80%), and chymotrypsin (+21%). Interestingly, the sequential digest with trypsin and AspN yielded even a higher number of protein identifications than digesting with trypsin alone.

### Keywords
Sequential digest, Alternative proteases

### Affiliations
University of Edinburgh
Bioanalytics, Institute of Biotechnology, Technische Universität Berlin, 13355, Berlin, Germany  Wellcome Centre for Cell Biology, School of Biological Sciences, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, EH9 3BF, Scotland, UK

### Submitter
Therese Dau

### Lab Head
Dr Juri Rappsilber
Bioanalytics, Institute of Biotechnology, Technische Universität Berlin, 13355, Berlin, Germany  Wellcome Centre for Cell Biology, School of Biological Sciences, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, EH9 3BF, Scotland, UK


