### Accession
PXD032768

### Title
proteomic data of exosomes derived from NIT-1 cells treated with and without high glouse

### Description
NIT-1 cells treated with high glucose were detected by RNAseq to explore the molecular mechanism of high glucose accelerating the onset of type 1 diabetes and the proteome of NIT-1-cells-derived exosomes were also discussed.

### Sample Protocol
proteins were extracted and digested into peptides by Trypsin enzyme, then peptide liquid was freeze-dried after saltr emoval. The dried peptide samples were reconstituted with mobile phase A (2% ACN, 0.1% FA), centrifuged at 20,000g for 10 minutes, and the supernatant was taken for injection. Separation was performed by Thermo UltiMate 3000 UHPLC.The nanoliter liquid phase separation end was directly connected to the mass spectrometer. The peptides separated by liquid phase chromatography were ionized by a nanoESI source and then passed to a tandem mass spectrometer Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) for DDA (Data Dependent Acquisition) mode detection. The main parameters were set: ion source voltage was set to 2kV, MS1 mass spectrometer scanning range was 350~1,500m/z; resolution was set to 60,000; MS2 starting m/z was fixed at 100; resolution was 15,000. The ion screening conditions for MS2 fragmentation: charge 2+ to 6+, aynd the top 30 parent ions with the peak intensity exceeding 20,000.The ion fragmentation mode was HCD, and the fragment ions were detected in Orbitrap. The dynamic exclusion time was set to 30 seconds. The AGC was set to: MS1 1E5, MS2 2E4.

### Data Protocol
The MS data were identified using the MaxQuant's integrated Andromeda engine. UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot subset were used for protein identification .At the spectrum level, filtering was performed with PSM-level FDR ≤ 1%, and at the protein level, further filtering was performed with Protein-levelFDR ≤ 1% to obtain significant identification result.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nit-1 cell exosomes type 1 diabetes

### Affiliations
Army Military Medical University

### Submitter
li xiangqian

### Lab Head
Dr Xiang Qian LI
Army Military Medical University


