### Accession
PXD036505

### Title
Global analysis of lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation in Glycine max

### Description
Lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation (Khib) is a novel naturally occurring PTM, which is firstly discovered in histone. The system Khib detection at proteomics level has been performed in various species and tissues for the function and role characterization of Khib in biological activities. However, the Khib study in plant species is relatively less and the plant leaf, one of the critical plant organ, haven’t been studied. In the present study, the first root tissues lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylome analysis was performed in soybean specie with antibody immunoprecipitation affinity and high resolution mass spectrometry-based proteomics. Bioinformatics analyses including function classification, subcellular location predication, gene ontology enrichment and pathway enrichment were conducted to demonstrate the roles of these Khib sites and proteins in soybeanleaf.

### Sample Protocol
The protein extraction was conducted according to previous report with some modifications20. Briefly, clean soybean root tissues were grinded into powder in a mortar with liquid nitrogen. Then the powder were transfer to a tube and re-suspended in ice cold extraction buffer (250 mM sucrose, 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 1% Triton X-100, 2 mM EDTA, 3μM TSA, 50 mM NAM, 10 mM DTT and 1% protease Inhibitor Cocktail). After and 5 minutes sonication on ice, the extraction buffer was mixed with same volume ice-cold Tris buffer phenol (pH 8.0) and agitated for 15 minutes. After centrifugation at 15000 g for 20 min, transfer the phenolic phase to a new tube and add four volumes of 100 mM ammonium acetate in methanol to the tube and keep the tube at -20°C for 12 hours. Following centrifugation (15 min, 15000 g), the precipitated protein pellet was rinsed three times with ice-cold acetone, vacuum-dried and stored at −80°C.

### Data Protocol
The function classification and enrichment analysis was performed based on gene ontology (GO) annotation and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database23,24. Subcellular localization analysis was performed with Wolfpsort subcellular localization predication software25. GO, KEGG pathway and domain enrichment analyses were carried out by DAVID tool with corrected p-value below 0.0526.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Post-translational modification, Lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation, Protein metabolism, Glycine max

### Affiliations
Shandong 250100;  Shandong Agricultural University, Tai’an,
Micrometer Biotech

### Submitter
Xianliang Ma

### Lab Head
Dr Geng Li
Shandong 250100;  Shandong Agricultural University, Tai’an,


