### Accession
PXD022789

### Title
Transcriptomic and proteomic landscape of SARS-CoV-2 liver tropism

### Description
Extrapulmonary manifestations of COVID-19 have gained attention, not only due to their links to clinical outcomes, but also due to their potential long-term sequelae1. Recent evidence has shown multi-organ tropism of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), including heart, kidney and liver2. Previous studies have shown that close to 20% of hospitalized patients with COVID-19 develop liver injury, showing an association to disease severity3. Here, we identified a high frequency of liver enzyme alterations at admission in COVID-19 patients who required hospitalization. Then, we characterized SARS-CoV-2 liver tropism in autopsy samples, based on the expression of cell-entry facilitators in parenchymal cells, clinical polymerase chain reaction (PCR) positivity, subgenomic SARS-CoV-2 identification using RNA sequencing, and viral RNA detection by in situ hybridization. Next, we unraveled the transcriptomic and proteomic landscape of SARS-CoV-2 liver tropism, revealing significant increases in interferon alpha and gamma signaling and compensatory liver-specific metabolic regulation. While these results reflect changes in tissues from patients with severe SARS-CoV-2 infection, these profound molecular alterations raise questions about the potential long-term consequences of COVID-19 infection.

### Sample Protocol
Paraffin-embedded liver samples were deparaffinized, resuspended in 100ul Lysis buffer (50% TFE; 300 mM Tris-HCl pH=8.0) and processed as described before [1]. Samples were sonicated at 4 °C for 15’ (“high” settings on a Bioruptor, Diagenode), boiled at 95°C for 90’, and sonicated again as described above. Cleared lysates were reduced/alkylated (5 mM DTT, 25 mM CAA) for 1h in the dark, concentrated on a vacuum centrifuge (45’, 60°C) and 50µg of proteins were digested overnight in digestion buffer (10% TFE containing Trypsin/LysC (1:50 protein/protein ratio). Digestion was stopped with 1% TFA, and peptides were purified on stage tips with two SDB-RPS Empore filter discs (3M, Maplewood, MN, USA) and resuspended in 2% ACN/0.1%TFA to a final concentration of 250 ng/µl.  Samples were analyzed on a nanoElute (Bruker, Germany) coupled to a timsTOF Pro (Bruker) equipped with a CaptiveSpray source. Peptides (500 ng) were injected on to a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18; Thermo-Fisher, Germany) and next separated on a 25cm X 75μm analytical column with a packed emitter tip (IonOpticks, Australia). The column temperature was maintained at 50°C using an integrated column oven. The column was equilibrated using 5 column volumes before loading samples in 100% buffer A (97.9% ddH20, 2% ACN, 0.1% FA). Samples were separated at 400nl/min using a linear gradient from 2% to 25% buffer B (99.9% ACN, 0.1% FA) over 90min before ramping to 37% (10min) and 95% of buffer B (10min) and sustained for 10min (total separation method time 120min). The timsTOF Pro (Bruker) was operated in PASEF mode using Compass Hystar5.1.8.1. Settings were as follows: Mass Range 100 to 1700m/z, 1/K0 Start 0.6 V⋅s/cm2End 1.6 V⋅s/cm2, Ramp time 100ms, Lock Duty Cycle to 100%, Capillary Voltage 1500V, Dry Gas 3 l/min, Dry Temp 180°C, PASEF settings: 10 MS/MS scans (total cycle time 1.16sec), charge range 0-5, active exclusion for 0.4 min, Scheduling Target intensity 20000, Intensity threshold 2500, CID collision energy 20-59eV.

### Data Protocol
Raw data processing and analysis. Raw MS data were processed with the MaxQuant software package, version 1.6.17 using the built-in Andromeda search engine to search against the human proteome (UniprotKB, release 2019_10) containing forward and decoy sequences concatenated with the SARS CoV-2 polyprotein with the individual viral open reading frames manually annotated, and the label-free quantitation algorithm as described previously [2]. Additionally, the intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) algorithm and Match Between Runs option were used. In MaxQuant, carbamidomethylation was set as fixed and methionine oxidation and N-acetylation as variable modifications. Search peptide tolerance was set at 70ppm and main search set at 30ppm (other settings left as default). Experiment type was set as TIMS-DDA with no modification to default settings. Search results were filtered with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 for peptide and protein identifications. The Perseus software package, version 1.6.10.4 was used to further process the data. Protein tables were filtered to eliminate the identifications from the reverse database and common contaminants. In analyzing MS data, only proteins identified on the basis of at least one peptide and a minimum of three quantitation events in at least one experimental group were considered. IBAQ protein intensity values were normalized against the median intensity of each sample (using only peptides with recorded intensity values across all samples and biological replicas), log-transformed and missing values filled by imputation with random numbers drawn from a normal distribution calculated for each sample [3].

### Publication Abstract
Extrapulmonary manifestations of COVID-19 have gained attention due to their links to clinical outcomes and their potential long-term sequelae<sup>1</sup>. Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) displays tropism towards several organs, including the heart and kidney. Whether it also directly affects the liver has been debated<sup>2,3</sup>. Here we provide clinical, histopathological, molecular and bioinformatic evidence for the hepatic tropism of SARS-CoV-2. We find that liver injury, indicated by a high frequency of abnormal liver function tests, is a common clinical feature of COVID-19 in two independent cohorts of patients with COVID-19 requiring hospitalization. Using autopsy samples obtained from a third patient cohort, we provide multiple levels of evidence for SARS-CoV-2 liver tropism, including viral RNA detection in 69% of autopsy liver specimens, and successful isolation of infectious SARS-CoV-2 from liver tissue postmortem. Furthermore, we identify transcription-, proteomic- and transcription factor-based activity profiles in hepatic autopsy samples, revealing similarities to the signatures associated with multiple other viral infections of the human liver. Together, we provide a comprehensive multimodal analysis of SARS-CoV-2 liver tropism, which increases our understanding of the molecular consequences of severe COVID-19 and could be useful for the identification of organ-specific pharmacological targets.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Hepatic, Liver tropism

### Affiliations
Systems Arbovirology - Leibniz Institute for Experimental Virology
Systems Arbovirology, Leibniz Institute of Virology

### Submitter
Pietro Scaturro

### Lab Head
Dr Pietro Scaturro
Systems Arbovirology - Leibniz Institute for Experimental Virology


### SDRF

