### Accession
PXD042501

### Title
Cross-linked amyloidogenic proteins as potential aggregation inhibitors

### Description
Amyloidogenic proteins, characterized by their ability to form fibrillar aggregates with β sheet structure play an important role in several degenerative diseases, including Parkinson’s disease. Numerous amyloidogenic proteins, such as α synuclein, are intrinsically disordered (or contain ID regions, hence they also present as highly dynamic conformational ensembles in these regions. Aggregation is an inherent property of the polypeptide chains and under non physiological, appropriate conditions most of the proteins can aggregate and form polymers of various structures. Since amyloid fib ril s and oligomers are associated with a great variety of human diseases, inhibition of protein aggregation has great importance and it can be addressed by using small molecules, peptides or proteins. Our research aim was to study the potential application of modified forms of different amyloidogenic proteins as inhibitor molecules by introducing structural constraints in them. Under various conditions, different amyloidogenic proteins’ (α-synuclein and β2-microglobulin) monomer molecules have been cross linked intramolecularly and the heterogeneous mixtures has been fractionated by HPLC. The inhibitory potential of the isolated and effective molecules has been experimentally investigated by various methods ThT assay, TEM, CD spectroscopy). Furthermore, the locations of the crosslinks in the molecules were determined by mass spectrometry, and their structures are modeled in silico. Our results revealed that conformational constrains applied by cross linking on amyloidogenic proteins block their amyloid formation. Moreover, these molecules exhibited inhibitory effect on the aggregation of the unmodified proteins, as well.

### Sample Protocol
20 µg protein of samples were denatured with 0.01 % Rapigest, then (with the exception of the DTSSP cross-linked samples) reduced with 10 mM TCEP at 37 oC for 30 min and alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 30 min in dark. Samples were treated with trypsin at an enzyme-to-protein ratio of 1:100 (wt/wt), digestion was allowed at 37 oC, 4 h. Enzymatic digestion was quenched by adding formic acid to reach final concentration of ~1 %. Peptides were purified and enriched using Pierce C18 Spin Columns according to manufacturer’s description. Eluted samples were dried using SpeedVac and kept at -20 oC.

### Data Protocol
Samples were reconstituted in 25 µL 2 % ACN, 0.1 % FA before injection to a Waters Acquity I-Class UPLC system connected to Waters Select Series Cyclic IMS (Waters Corporation, Milford, UK). For peptide separation, samples were loaded on Waters Acquity Premier CSH column (150x1 mm, 1.7 µm) for multi-step gradient elution. Mobile phase (A) was composed of 0.1 % formic acid in water, mobile phase (B) was composed of 0.1 % formic acid in acetonitrile. The elution method at flow rate 20 µL/min included the following: 1 min: 5 % B, 45 min: 35 % B, 46 min: 85 % B at 45 oC. MS data acquisition was performed with the following parameters: m/z 50-2000, V-mode, scan time: 0.5 sec, single Lock Mass: leucine-enkephalin. HDMSe fragmentation was performed in the transfer cell: low energy: 6 V, high energy: ramping 19-45 V, after one ion-mobility separation cycle. MSe fragmentation was performed in the transfer cell: low energy: 6 V, high energy: ramping 19-45 V.

### Publication Abstract
The aggregation and amyloid formation of &#x3b1;-synuclein is associated with Parkinson's disease and other synucleinopathies. In its native, monomeric form &#x3b1;-synuclein is an intrinsically disordered protein represented by highly dynamic conformational ensembles. Inhibition of &#x3b1;-synuclein aggregation using small molecules, peptides, or proteins has been at the center of interest in recent years. Our aim was to explore the effects of cross-linking on the structure and aggregation/amyloid formation properties of &#x3b1;-synuclein. Comparative analysis of available high-resolution amyloid structures and representative structural models and MD trajectory of monomeric &#x3b1;-synuclein revealed that potential cross-links in the monomeric protein are mostly incompatible with the amyloid forms and thus might inhibit fibrillation. Monomeric &#x3b1;-synuclein has been intramolecularly chemically cross-linked under various conditions using different cross-linkers. We determined the location of cross-links and their frequency using mass spectrometry and found that most of them cannot be realized in the amyloid structures. The inhibitory potential of cross-linked proteins has been experimentally investigated using various methods, including thioflavin-T fluorescence and transmission electron microscopy. We found that conformational constraints applied by cross-linking fully blocked &#x3b1;-synuclein amyloid formation. Moreover, DTSSP-cross-linked molecules exhibited an inhibitory effect on the aggregation of unmodified &#x3b1;-synuclein as well.

### Keywords
Cross-linking ms, Lc-ms/ms, Α-synuclein

### Affiliations
MTA-ELTE Lendület Ion Mobility Mass Spectrometry Research Group, Eotvos Lorand University, Hungary
MTA-ELTE Lendület Ion Mobility Mass Spectrometry Research Group, Department of Analytical Chemistry, Institute of Chemistry, ELTE Eötvös Loránd University, 1117 Budapest, Hungary

### Submitter
Gabriella Gellen

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Gitta Schlosser
MTA-ELTE Lendület Ion Mobility Mass Spectrometry Research Group, Eotvos Lorand University, Hungary


