### Accession
PXD022833

### Title
Discovering the N-terminal Methylome by the Repurposing of Proteomic Datasets

### Description
Protein ⍺-N-methylation is a cryptic and relatively unexplored post-translational modification involving the covalent addition of methyl groups to the free a-amino group at protein N-termini. To systematically explore the extent of ⍺-N-terminal methylation in yeast and humans, we utilized a repurposing method optimized for ⍺-N-terminome identification to take advantage of publicly accessible proteomic datasets. Searching of four datasets indicated the ⍺-N-methylation of established and novel substrates with canonical N-terminal motifs of established ⍺-N-terminal methyltransferases, NTMT1/2 for humans and Tae1 for yeast. Moreover, ⍺-N-methylation of non-canonical sequences was more prevalent than expected, suggesting unappreciated and cryptic methylation events. Analysis of the amino acid frequencies of ⍺-methylated peptides revealed enrichment of serine, alanine, proline and glycine at the first position for both yeast and human, suggesting amino acid sequence conservation is not required for some types of ⍺-methylation events. We delineated numerous amino acids in which there is evidence of competition between acetylation and methylation. We tested three potentially methylated proteins and confirmed the ⍺-N-terminal methylation of Hsp31. The other two proteins, Vma1 and Ssa3, were found to be predominantly acetylated. This study demonstrates the feasibility of reprocessing proteomic data for global ⍺-N-terminal methylome investigations.

### Sample Protocol
Yeast culturing and protein overexpression Candidate proteins were purified using the Dharmacon ORF collection where yeast genes were Gateway cloned into pBG1805 in frame with a C-terminal triple affinity tag, 6xHis-HA-3C protease site-Protein A. Protein expression is regulated by the GAL promotor. Yeast storage, culture and protein purification protocol was slightly modified from the Dharmacon technical manual.Yeast strains were streaked and stored on a synthetic complete agar plate with uracil dropout. On day 1, a single colony was inoculated into 2 mL SC-URA plus 2% glucose liquid media for overnight culture. On day 2, the culture was diluted into 20 mL SC-URA plus 2% raffinose at OD600=0.1 and incubated overnight. The culture was diluted into 800 mL of SC-URA plus 2% raffinose at day 3. When OD600 reached 0.8-1.2, 400 mL of 3X YP (3% yeast extract, 6% peptone and 6% galactose) media was added to induce the protein expression for 6 h. The yeast pellet was harvested by centrifuging at 4200 rpm for 10 min at 4 °C. The pellet was washed with 10 mL sterilized deionized water once. Cell pellets were stored at -80 °C. Protein purification Frozen yeast pellets were thawed from -80 °C and resuspended in 4 mL CE buffer (50 mM pH 7.5 Tris-Cl, 1 mM EDTA, 4 mM MgCl2, 5 mM DTT, 10% glycerol, 0.75 M NaCl) and PMSF (Promega) was added to 1 mM. The cell suspension was distributed into microcentrifuge tubes with an equal volume of 0.5 mm glass beads (Biospec). Yeast cells were lysed by bead beater (Biospec) for 7 cycles of 25 s interspersed with cooling on ice for 30 s. The lysate was centrifuged at 13000 rpm for 15 min. Clarified lysate supernatant was diluted into IPP0 buffer (10 mM pH 8 Tris-Cl, 0.1% NP40) and incubated with triple-washed 100 ml IgG Sepharose 6 Fast Flow bead (Cytiva) for 2 h. IgG bead was separated, washed twice with IPP150 buffer (10 mM pH 8 Tris-Cl, 0.1% NP40, 150 mM NaCl) and subsequently wash twice with 3C cleavage buffer (10 mM pH8 Tris, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, and 0.1% NP40). Bead was resuspended in 200 ml 3C cleavage buffer and protein of interest was cleaved from bead using 3C Protease (Acro Biosystems) with overnight digestion. The 3C protease was removed by glutathione agarose (Scientific). The eluent was passed through a 0.22 M Spin-X centrifuge tube filter (Corning). Protein concentration was determined by BCA assay (Thermo Scientific). In solution digestion for Mass Spectrometry The sample preparation protocol was adjusted from the literature Protein purified and eluted from protein A agarose bead was used for sample preparation. Cold acetone (-20 °C) was added into the protein solution and stored at -20 °C overnight. Precipitated protein was collected by centrifugation at 15,000 x g for 10 min at 4 °C. The protein pellet was washed once with cold acetone and resuspended in 10 ml of 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT, Sigma) in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate and incubate at 37 °C for 1 h. 10 µl of alkylation reagent mixture (97.5% acetonitrile, 0.5% triethylphosphine and 2% ethanol) was added to each sample and incubated at 37 °C for 1 h. The sample was dried in a vacuum centrifuge and digested using a barocycler (PBI). Hsp31, SSA3 and VMA1 was digested by AspN (Sigma), GluC (Promega) and Trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich) respectively. Digested protein was cleaned with a UltraMicroSpin C18 column (The Nest Group) and dried into a pellet. The peptide pellet was reconstituted in 97% deionized water, 3% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid (v/v). An aliquot of 2-3 ml was run into the Q Exactive HF hybrid Quadrupole Orbitrap instrument (Thermo Scientific). The ⍺-N-acetylation on Ssa3 was confirmed by Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher).Sample preparation, mass spectrometry analysis, bioinformatics and data evaluation were performed in collaboration with the Proteomics Core Facility at the Indiana University School of Medicine (IUSM). Methods described below in brief were adaptations from literature reports and vendor provided protocols. 8 M urea was added to approximately 4 ug purified protein, reduced with 5 mM TCEP at room temperature for 30 min, and then alkylated with 10 mM chloroacetamide for 30 min in the dark at room temperature. Samples were diluted to 0.5 M Urea with 50 mM ammonium carbonate, pH 7.8, and digestions were carried out using GluC (Sigma Aldrich cat. num. 11420399001) at a 1:2 protease to substrate ratio, overnight at 25 °C. The reaction was quenched with 0.5 % TFA, and samples were desalted on 50 mg SepPak columns (Waters). Samples were dried down by speed vacuum.

### Data Protocol
For SSA3 data generated by Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer: Data analysis, including de novo and database searches were performed using PEAKS X plus software (Bioinformatics Solutions), with Orbi-Orbi parameters (10ppm precursor and 0.02 Da fragment tolerance), including variable modifications in the database search of: carbamidomethylation (C), phosphorylation (S, T, Y), Protein N-terminal Acetylation, Protein N-terminal trimethylation, Protein N-terminal demethylation, Protein N-terminal methylation, trimethylation (K), dimethylation (K, R), methylation (K, R). The search database included Uniprot Saccharomyces cerevisiae proteins (downloaded 021917), common contaminants, and including the sequence of SSA3 without the N-terminal methionine and with C-terminal tags. Results were filtered for peptide FDR of ≥ 1%, A-Score≥ 12, mutation ion intensity ≥ 1%, and de novo confidence ≥80%. The intact protein analysis of SSA3 was performed in Q-Exactive HFX and resolved by BioPharma Finder by BGI. For Hsp31 and VMA1 data generated from Q Exactive HF hybrid Quadrupole Orbitrap: Data analysis were performed using Mascot Daemon software (2.5.1 Matrix Science), with 0.5Da precursor tolerance and 0.05Da fragment tolerance. Variable modifications are acetylation (Protein N-terminal), monomethylation (Protein N-terminal), dimethylation (protein N-terminal) and trimethylation (Protein N-terminal) and fixed modifications are carbamidomethyl (C). Results were filtered by decoy search FDR threshold 0.01% and significance threshold p<0.01.

### Publication Abstract
Protein &#x3b1;-N-methylation is an underexplored post-translational modification involving the covalent addition of methyl groups to the free &#x3b1;-amino group at protein N-termini. To systematically explore the extent of &#x3b1;-N-terminal methylation in yeast and humans, we reanalyzed publicly accessible proteomic datasets to identify N-terminal peptides contributing to the &#x3b1;-N-terminal methylome. This repurposing approach found evidence of &#x3b1;-N-methylation of established and novel protein substrates with canonical N-terminal motifs of established &#x3b1;-N-terminal methyltransferases, including human NTMT1/2 and yeast Tae1. NTMT1/2 are implicated in cancer and aging processes but have unclear and context-dependent roles. Moreover, &#x3b1;-N-methylation of noncanonical sequences was surprisingly prevalent, suggesting unappreciated and cryptic methylation events. Analysis of the amino acid frequencies of &#x3b1;-N-methylated peptides revealed a [S]<sub>1</sub>-[S/A/Q]<sub>2</sub> pattern in yeast and [A/N/G]<sub>1</sub>-[A/S/V]<sub>2</sub>-[A/G]<sub>3</sub> in humans, which differs from the canonical motif. We delineated the distribution of the two types of prevalent N-terminal modifications, acetylation and methylation, on amino acids at the first position. We tested three potentially methylated proteins and confirmed the &#x3b1;-N-terminal methylation of Hsp31 by additional proteomic analysis and immunoblotting. The other two proteins, Vma1 and Ssa3, were found to be predominantly acetylated, indicating that proteomic searching for &#x3b1;-N-terminal methylation requires careful consideration of mass spectra. This study demonstrates the feasibility of reprocessing proteomic data for global &#x3b1;-N-terminal methylome investigations.

### Keywords
Post-translational modification, Repurposing, ⍺-n-terminal methylation, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Purdue University
Department of Medicinal Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN47907

### Submitter
Panyue Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Tony Hazbun
Department of Medicinal Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN47907


