### Accession
PXD008498

### Title
Cisplatin induces the rearrangement of RBPs on CDKN1B/p27 mRNA

### Description
Cisplatin (CP) is a chemotherapeutic drug that is used to cure different types of cancer. CP induces DNA damage and leads to cell cycle arrest. The cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 1B (CDKN1B), also termed p27, plays an important role in the drug response ; and increased levels of p27 correlated with CP resistance. In HEK293 cells, we observed that p27 mRNAs levels increased whereas protein level drastically decreased in cells treated with CP; suggesting post-transcriptional regulatory events. To further understand the underlying mechanisms, we applied a biochemical approach combined with mass-spectrometry to systematically identify the RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) that are bound to the 3’UTR of p27 mRNAs in CP-treated versus non-treated cells in vivo. We found that 24 proteins, most of them known RBPs such HuR, hNRNPD, changed their association with p27 mRNA upon CP treatement. Furthermore, knock-down of a subset of the identified RBPs led to the inhibition of the CP-induced increase of p27 mRNA levels. In conclusion, these results highlight substantial rearrangement between RBPs and p27 mRNA upon CP treatment and corroborate the importance of post-transcriptional control in cellular drug response.

### Sample Protocol
Three 15cm petri dishes of GFP-T-CDKN1B/p27 HEK293 cells (60x106 cells) were treated for 48h with 1µg/ml of tetracycline and for the last 15h with 20µM of cisplatin (CP). After the incubation time the cells were washed twice with 10 ml PBS and after removal the final rinse,10 ml of PBS was added, then the cells were exposed to UV light (254 nm) at 150 mJ/cm2 in a Stratalinker 1800 (Stratagene) in ice. The cells were then scraped from the plate and transferred to a 15 ml Falcon tube and centrifuged at 235g for 10 min at 4°C. PBS was removed and 2 ml of lysis buffer (100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 500 mM LiCl, 10 mM EDTA, 1% Triton X-100, 5 mM DTT, 20 U ml-1 DNase I (Promega, M6101), 100 U ml-1 RNasin (Promega, N2611), complete EDTA-free protease-inhibitor cocktail (Roche, 11836170001) was added to the pellet. The cell lysate was pulled together at the final volume of 6ml and it was subjected to 3 rounds of sonication (Soniprep150, MSE) consisting of 20 sec burst at 10 amplitude microns and 30 sec cooling periods on ice to fragment cellular DNA. The lysate was clarified by centrifugation at 15,000g for 10 min at 4°C. Protein concentration of the extract was determined using Bradford assay. First step purification: The cellular polyadenylated mRNAs were purified using Dynabeads mRNA purification kit (Ambion #61006) following the manufactory’s protocol. The dynabeads (1.2ml) were washed twice with 3ml of lysis buffer and incubated with 5.5 ml of cellular lysed for 10 min at 25°C in continuous shaking. The supernatant was saved and the beads were collected with magnetic stand, washed once with buffer A (10 mM Tri-HCl pH 7.5, 300 mM LiCl, 1mM EDTA and 0.1 % Triton) and twice with buffer B (10 mM Tri-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM LiCl, 1mM EDTA) and resuspended in 300 ul of 10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5 for the elution that was carried out at 90°C for 2 min. Everything was repeated for 3 times (final elution was 900lµ). Second step purification: The exogenous mRNA (GFP-T-CDKN1B/p27) was captured using the RNA aptamer tobramycin. Stage1: Tobramycin coupling Tobramycin was freshly prepared on the day (100mM solution) by dissolving in coupling buffer pH 8.3 (0.2M NaHCO3, 0.5M NaCl). The NHS activated magnetic beads (Pierce #88826) were equilibrated at room temperature, vortexed for 10 seconds and 300µl were placed in low binding tubes. The beads were collected using a magnetic stand, the supernatant was discarded and the beads were washed with 1ml of ice cold Wash buffer A (1mM hydrochloric acid) gently mixed for 15 secs. Immediately after 1ml of 5mM of Tobramycin solution was added and incubate over night at 4°C with shaking. Then the beads were collected and washed twice with 1 ml of wash buffer B (0.1M Glycine, pH 2.0) by vortexed for 15 secs, and washed once with 1ml Ultrapure water (SIGMA) by vortexing for 15 secs. The quenching was obtained by incubating the beads for 2 hs with 1ml quenching buffer solution (3M ethanolamine HCl pH 9) at room temperature in rotation. Finally the beads were washed once with 1ml of ultrapure water and twice with 1 ml of coupling buffer. Stage 2: Blocking In order to block the beads it was added 1ml of blocking solution (1mM CaCl2, 1mM MgCl2, 0,2mM DTT, 20mM Tris pH8.1, 300mM KCl, 0.1mg/ml t-RNA, 0.5 mg/ml of BSA and 0.01% of nonidet P40) overnight at 4°C in rotation. Stage 3: exogenous mRNA capturing 800µl of the eluate obtained from the first step (~ 70µg RNA from 60x106 cells) was adjusted to the volume of 900ul with RNA binding buffer (145mM KCl, 0.1mg/ML tRNA 20mM Tris-HCL pH 8.1 1mM CaCL2 1mM MgCL2 0.2mM DTT) and added to the blocked beads that were previously washed twice with RNA binding buffer and incubated for 2hs in rotation at room temperature. Then the beads were collected using the magnetic stand and the supernatant was saved for further analysis. The beads were washed six times with 500 ul of wash buffer W (0.2mM DTT, 125mM KCl, 0.1% nonidet P40, 1mM CaCl2, 1mM MgCl2, 0,2mM DTT, 20mM Tris pH 8.1). The elution was carried out at 50°C for 10 min at 1000rpm in 300 ul of Elution buffer (0.2mM DTT, 5mM Tobramycin, 145mM KCl, 2mM MgCl2, 1mM CaCl2, 1mM CaCl2, 0,2mM DTT, 20mM Tris pH 8.1). Finally, the elution sample was split: 250 µl sent for Mass Spectrometry analysis and 50 µl used for western blot and RT-qPCR validation analysis

### Data Protocol
LC-MS Analysis Samples were run into an SDS-PAGE gel and each gel lane cut as a single. Each slice was subjected to in-gel tryptic digestion using a DigestPro automated digestion unit (Intavis Ltd.) to minimise manual handling. The resulting peptides were fractionated using an Ultimate 3000 nanoHPLC system in line with an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). In brief, peptides in 1% (vol/vol) formic acid were injected onto an Acclaim PepMap C18 nano-trap column (Thermo Scientific). After washing with 0.5% (vol/vol) acetonitrile 0.1% (vol/vol) formic acid peptides were resolved on a 250 mm × 75 μm Acclaim PepMap C18 reverse phase analytical column (Thermo Scientific) over a 150 min organic gradient, using 7 gradient segments (1-6% solvent B over 1min., 6-15% B over 58min., 15-32%B over 58min., 32-40%B over 5min., 40-90%B over 1min., held at 90%B for 6min and then reduced to 1%B over 1min.) with a flow rate of 300 nl min−1. Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid and Solvent B was aqueous 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were ionized by nano-electrospray ionization at 2.2 kV using a stainless steel emitter with an internal diameter of 30 μm (Thermo Scientific) and a capillary temperature of 250°C. All spectra were acquired using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer controlled by Xcalibur 2.0 software (Thermo Scientific) and operated in data-dependent acquisition mode. FTMS1 spectra were collected at a resolution of 120 000 over a scan range (m/z) of 350-1550, with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 400 000 and a max injection time of 100ms. The Data Dependent mode was set to TopSpeed and the most intense ions were selected for MS/MS. Precursors were filtered according to charge state (to include charge states 2-7) and with monoisotopic precursor selection. Previously interrogated precursors were excluded using a dynamic window (40s +/-10ppm). The MS2 precursors were isolated with a quadrupole mass filter set to a width of 1.6m/z. ITMS2 spectra were collected with an AGC target of 5000, max injection time of 50ms and HCD collision energy of 35%. Data Analysis The raw proteomic mass spectrometry data files were processed using Proteome Discoverer software v1.4 (Thermo Scientific) to run a Mascot search agaisnt the SwissProt Human database. Peptide precursor mass tolerance was set at 10ppm, and MS/MS tolerance was set at 0.6Da. Search criteria included carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.0214) as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine (+15.9949) as a variable modification. Searches were performed with full tryptic digestion and a maximum of 1 missed cleavage was allowed. The reverse database search option was enabled and all peptide data was filtered to satisfy false discovery rate (FDR) of 5%.

### Publication Abstract
Post-transcriptional control of gene expression is mediated via RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) that interact with mRNAs in a combinatorial fashion. While recent global RNA interactome capture experiments expanded the repertoire of cellular RBPs quiet dramatically, little is known about the assembly of RBPs on particular mRNAs; and how these associations change and control the fate of the mRNA in drug-treatment conditions. Here we introduce a novel biochemical approach, termed tobramycin-based tandem RNA isolation procedure (tobTRIP), to quantify proteins associated with the 3'UTRs of cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 1B (<i>CDKN1B/p27<sup>Kip1</sup></i>) mRNAs <i>in vivo</i>. P27<sup>Kip1</sup> plays an important role in mediating a cell's response to cisplatin (CP), a widely used chemotherapeutic cancer drug that induces DNA damage and cell cycle arrest. We found that <i>p27<sup>Kip1</sup></i> mRNA is stabilized upon CP treatment of HEK293 cells through elements in its 3'UTR. Applying tobTRIP, we further compared the associated proteins in CP and non-treated cells, and identified more than 50 interacting RBPs, many functionally related and evoking a coordinated response. Knock-downs of several of the identified RBPs in HEK293 cells confirmed their involvement in CP-induced <i>p27</i> mRNA regulation; while knock-down of the KH-type splicing regulatory protein (KHSRP) further enhanced the sensitivity of MCF7 adenocarcinoma cancer cells to CP treatment. Our results highlight the benefit of specific <i>in vivo</i> mRNA-protein interactome capture to reveal post-transcriptional regulatory networks implicated in cellular drug response and adaptation.

### Keywords
Cdkn1b/p27, Rbps, Rna aptamer, Tobramaycin

### Affiliations
University of Surrey

### Submitter
Valentina Iadevaia

### Lab Head
Dr Valentina Iadevaia
University of Surrey


