### Accession
PXD020592

### Title
Comparison of the rodlet layer proteins of Aspergillus flavus and Aspergillus fumiguatus

### Description
Atomic force microscopy (AFM) imaging showed that the rodlet layer of A. fumigatus and A. flavus was different.  The objective of this project was to examine the differences in the rodlet layer of these two pathogenic Aspergillus species.

### Sample Protocol
Fifty milligram of Aspergillus condia was resuspended in 400 ul of formic acid and incubated in ice for 1 h for A. flavus and 2.5 h for A. fumigatus.  The formic acid extract was collected by centrifuging at 10,000 rpm for 10 min and the supernatant was dried under nitrogen gas stream.  The dried proteins were washed with deionized water and dried again before taking for MS analysis. The formic acid extracted proteins were resuspended in 1 M urea in 100 mM Ammonium bicarbonate and incubated at 37 deg for 15 mins. Proteins were reduced and alkylated and subjected to in-solution tryptic digestion.  The tryptic peptides were desalted using C18 columns and taken for analysis by nanoLC-Orbitrap Mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
The MS data was searched against the A. flavus NRRL3357, or A. fumigatus Af293 protein database using Proteome Discoverer software using Sequest and Mascot search engines. The database search was performed with the following parameters: peptide tolerance of 10 PPM and fragment tolerance of 0.60 Da to 0.80 Da, allowing two missed cleavages.  Cysteine carbamidomethylation was given as fixed modification while methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation and phosphorylation (S, T, Y) as variable modifications. The peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) from SequestHT and Mascot were post-processed using the Percolator algorithm (Käll, Lukas, et al 2005.). The peptides having a q-value lesser than the threshold of 0.01 were considered for protein identification.

### Publication Abstract
Although belong to the same genus, <i>Aspergillus fumigatus</i> is primarily involved in invasive pulmonary infection, whereas <i>Aspergillus flavus</i> is a common cause of superficial infection. In this study, we compared conidia (the infective propagules) of these two <i>Aspergillus</i> species. In immunocompetent mice, intranasal inoculation with conidia of <i>A. flavus</i> resulted in significantly higher inflammatory responses in the lungs compared to mice inoculated with <i>A. fumigatus</i> conidia. <i>In vitro</i> assays revealed that the dormant conidia of <i>A. flavus</i>, unlike <i>A. fumigatus</i> dormant conidia, are immunostimulatory. The conidial surface of <i>A. fumigatus</i> was covered by a rodlet-layer, while that of <i>A. flavus</i> were presented with exposed polysaccharides. <i>A. flavus</i> harbored significantly higher number of proteins in its conidial cell wall compared to <i>A. fumigatus</i> conidia. Notably, &#x3b2;-1,3-glucan in the <i>A. flavus</i> conidial cell-wall showed significantly higher percentage of branching compared to that of <i>A. fumigatus</i>. The polysaccharides ensemble of <i>A. flavus</i> conidial cell wall stimulated the secretion of proinflammatory cytokines, and conidial cell wall associated proteins specifically stimulated IL-8 secretion from the host immune cells. Furthermore, the two species exhibited different sensitivities to antifungal drugs targeting cell wall polysaccharides, proposing the efficacy of species-specific treatment strategies. Overall, the species-specific organization of the conidial cell wall could be important in establishing infection by the two <i>Aspergillus</i> species.

### Keywords
A. fumigatus, Rodlet layer, Roda, A.flavus

### Affiliations
Aravind Medical Research Foundation
Director-Research Aravind Medical Research Foundation

### Submitter
Jeya Maheshwari Jayapal

### Lab Head
Dr K. Dharmalingam
Director-Research Aravind Medical Research Foundation


