### Accession
PXD019773

### Title
Streptococcus pneumoniae metal homeostasis alters cellular metabolism

### Description
Streptococcus pneumoniae parental T4R and Δ1434-8 strains were cultured in quadruplicated in C+Y medium. Proteins were isolated, quantified, trypsin digested, and analyzed by 1D LC ESI MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Four cultures of T4R and Δ1434-8 were grown in C+Y medium to OD600nm 0.5 medium and proteins were isolated from bacterial pellets sonicated in NP-40 lysis buffer (0.5% NP-40, 150 mM NaCl, 20 mM CaCl2∙2H2O, 50 mM Tris, pH 7.4) supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail (c0mplete™, Sigma-Aldrich) using a Covaris S220 focused-ultrasonicator. Protein concentration was determined using Thermo Scientific Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit. Precipitation of 30 µg of protein was performed with methanol and chloroform (4:1), solubilized in 8 M urea, reduced (5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 65 ˚C for 10 m) and alkylated (0.01 M iodoacetamide at 37 ˚C for 30 m) and digested with porcine trypsin (at 37 ˚C, overnight, 50:1 ratio of protein. Tryptic peptides were desalted using a C18 spin column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and analyzed by linear trap quadropole (LTQ) Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer equipped with an Advion nanomate electrospray ionization (ESI) source (Advion). Peptides (500 ng) were eluted from a C18 column (100 µm id × 2 cm) onto an analytical column (75 µm ID × 10 cm, C18) using a 180 m gradient with 99.9% acetonitrile, 0.1% formate at a flow rate of 400 nL/m and introduced into an LTQ-Orbitrap.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified at 99% confidence with XCorr score cutoffs based on a reversed database search. The protein and peptide identification results were visualized with Scaffold v 3.6.1 (Proteome Software Inc.). Protein identifications with a minimum of two peptides identified at 0.1% peptide false discovery rate (FDR) were deemed correct. Significant changes in protein expression between T4R and Δ1434-8 were identified by Fisher’s exact test at a p-value of ≤0.054 and fold change of ±1.3. Fold changes in protein expression were calculated using weighted normalized spectra with 0.5 imputation value. Various bioinformatics resources such as DAVID, KEGG, and STRING were utilized to determine the functions of the identified proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Streptococcus pneumoniae colonizes the human nasopharyngeal mucosa and is a leading cause of community-acquired pneumonia, acute otitis media, and bacterial meningitis. Metal ion homeostasis is vital to the survival of this pathogen across diverse biological sites and contributes significantly to colonization and invasive disease. Microarray and qRT-PCR analysis revealed an upregulation of an uncharacterized operon (SP1433-1438) in pneumococci subjected to metal-chelation by N,N,N',N'-tetrakis-(2-pyridylmethyl)ethylenediamine (TPEN). Supplementation of zinc, cobalt, and nickel following TPEN treatment significantly abrogated induction. BLASTP comparisons and protein topology analysis predicted this locus to encode components of ATP binding cassette (ABC) transporters involved in multidrug resistance (SP1434-1435) and energy-coupling factor (ECF) transporters (SP1436-1438). Inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) analysis identified differences in intracellular metal content in a &#x394;1434-8 mutant strain compared to parental T4R. Further, analysis of the secreted metabolome of WT and &#x394;1434-8 strains identified significant changes in pneumococcal glycolytic and amino acid metabolic pathways, indicating a shift towards mixed acid fermentation. Additionally, proteomic analysis revealed differentially expressed proteins in the &#x394;1434-8 mutant strain, with nearly 20% regulated by the global catabolite repressor, CcpA. Based on these findings, we propose that the transporters encoded by SP1433-1438 are involved in regulating the central metabolism of S. pneumoniae and contributing to bacterial survival during metal stress.

### Keywords
Metallostasis, Proteomics, Metabolism, Pneumococcus, Zinc

### Affiliations
Mississippi State University
Department of Biological Sciences, Mississippi State University, Mississippi State, MS, USA 39762. (Lab Head)

### Submitter
Justin Thornton

### Lab Head
Dr Justin Thornton
Department of Biological Sciences, Mississippi State University, Mississippi State, MS, USA 39762. (Lab Head)


