### Accession
PXD004539

### Title
Proteome of Erythropoietin-induced mouse CFU-E cells

### Description
Time-resolved CFU-E proteome was analyzed by time collapsed super-SILAC with erythropoietin-stimulated BaF3-mEpoR proteome as internal heavy standard.

### Sample Protocol
Cellular lysates from EpoR-/- and EpoR+/+ CFU-E cells were mixed with BaF3-mEpoR tcSuper-SILAC mix and subsequently fractionated by 10% 1D-PAGE for 90 minutes. Gels were then stained with Coomassie (Invitrogen) and each lane was divided in five segments and each segment was cut into smaller pieces. In-gel digestion was performed. Samples were injected into the instrument via the auto-sampler and subsequently loaded into 25 cm analytical c-18 reverse phase columns (Thermo) for separation and eluted with nano-flow with easy-nLC 1000 (Thermo) liquid chromatographic system coupled with mass-spectrometer. Eluted peptides were sprayed into Q-ExactiveM plus using a nano-electrospray ion source.

### Data Protocol
Individual raw files obtained from LC-MS/MS measurements were then analyzed by MaxQuant (version: 1.5.0.12). Briefly, the MS/MS spectra were searched by Andromeda search engine implemented in Maxquant against the mouse uniprot database. MaxQuant analysis included an initial search with a precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm, the results of which were used for mass recalibration. In the main Andromeda search precursor mass and fragment mass had an initial mass tolerance of 6 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively. The search included variable modifications of methionine oxidation, phosphorylation (serine, threonine and tyrosine) and N-terminal acetylation, and fixed modification of carbamidomethyl cysteine. Minimal peptide length was set to six amino acids and a maximum of two missed-cleavages were allowed. The false discovery rate was set to 0.01 for peptide and protein identifications. In the case of identified peptides that are all shared between two proteins, these peptides are combined and reported as one protein group. The amino acid labeling information was set up in MaxQuant (Arg 10 and Lys6) to allow the comparison between light and heavy peptides. Missing values were replaced using data imputation strategy in case of EpoR-/- proteome. Briefly the rational of the imputation algorithm is that the missing values are replaced  by numbers from a suitable probability distribution that should represents the low abundant proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Erythropoietin (Epo) ensures survival and proliferation of colony-forming unit erythroid (CFU-E) progenitor cells and their differentiation to hemoglobin-containing mature erythrocytes. A lack of Epo-induced responses causes embryonic lethality, but mechanisms regulating the dynamic communication of cellular alterations to the organismal level remain unresolved. By time-resolved transcriptomics and proteomics, we show that Epo induces in CFU-E cells a gradual transition from proliferation signature proteins to proteins indicative for differentiation, including heme-synthesis enzymes. In the absence of the Epo receptor (EpoR) in embryos, we observe a lack of hemoglobin in CFU-E cells and massive iron overload of the fetal liver pointing to a miscommunication between liver and placenta. A reduction of iron-sulfur cluster-containing proteins involved in oxidative phosphorylation in these embryos leads to a metabolic shift toward glycolysis. This link connecting erythropoiesis with the regulation of iron homeostasis and metabolic reprogramming suggests that balancing these interactions is crucial for protection from iron intoxication and for survival.

### Keywords
Mouse, Epo, Cfu-e, Tcsuper-silac

### Affiliations
DKFZ Heidelberg
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ)

### Submitter
Alexander Held

### Lab Head
Dr Marcel Schilling
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ)


