### Accession
PXD027715

### Title
Myeloid-derived suppressor cells and tolerogenic dendritic cells are distinctively induced by PI3K and Wnt signaling pathways

### Description
Understanding the molecular mechanisms that initiate and control immunosuppression by myeloid cells is essential to overcoming the myeloid-induced disbalance of the immune system observed in patients. Myeloid cells are implicated in aggravated suppression of immunity as seen in cancer as well as in defective modulation of immune responses as observed in autoimmunity. Therefore, signaling pathways controlling immunomodulation by myeloid cells are an attractive target to potentially restore immune homeostasis and increase clinical benefit for a large number of patients. Here, we used label-free quantitative proteomics to identify proteins that are differentially expressed between different myeloid cells (myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs), tolerogenic dendritic cells (TolDCs), monocyte-derived dendritic cells (MoDCs) and precursor monocytes.

### Sample Protocol
Whole cell extracts were prepared from monocytes and M-MDSCs isolated from head-and-neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) patients as well as from monocytes from healthy donors and in vitro generated monocyte derived cell types (moDC, TolDC and M-MDSCs). Protein lysates were subjected to Filter Aided Sample‐Preparation (FASP). Samples were applied to on‐line Easy‐nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) separation using two hour gradients. Mass spectra were collected on an Orbitrap Exploris 480 (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectra were analyzed in MaxQuant 1.6.0.1  with match between runs and label-free quantification enabled. The fragmentation spectra were searched against the Uniprot human protein database (downloaded 2017-06).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Mdscs, Monocytes, Toldc, Modc, Hnscc, Fasp

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science Radboud Institute for Molecular Like Sciences, Radboud University Nijmegen, Nijmegen, 6525 GA, The Netherlands 
Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Nijmegen, Nijmegen, 6525 GA, The Netherlands

### Submitter
S Stelloo

### Lab Head
Dr Michiel Vermeulen
Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Nijmegen, Nijmegen, 6525 GA, The Netherlands


