### Accession
PXD017481

### Title
Proteome Dynamics of the Cotyledonary Haustorium and Endosperm in the Course of Germination of Euterpe oleracea Seeds

### Description
The role of the cotyledonary haustorium (CH) in the mobilization of nutrient reserves in the endosperm of species of the palm family Arecaceae is a moot question. To shed light on this matter, we present here an analysis of the quantitative proteome changes associated with four developmental stages of CH and three of endosperm during germination. Together, a total of 1965 proteins were identified, being 1538 in the CH and 960 in the endosperm. Both in the CH and endosperm proteomes, we observed an increase in the diversity of hydrolases as the CH and endosperm develops. Qualitative proteomics analysis of four CH developmental stages indicated that each stage is populated by a unique set of proteins and the quantitative analysis data showed an increase in the relative abundance of hydrolases, particularly mannan degrading enzymes, as development progresses. These results add weight to the hypothesis that the CH in the seeds of E. oleracea acts both as a conduit of carbon and nitrogen sources generated by the hydrolysis of the reserves in the endosperm and as a source of hydrolases that will contribute to the mobilization of these reserves.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction was carried with 40 mg of sample added of 800 µL of extraction buffer (500mM Tris-HCl, 50mMEDTA, 700mM sucrose, 100mM KCl, pH 8.0), agitated for 10 min at 4 ºC, added of phenol saturated with Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), agitated for 10 min and centrifuged at 5500g at 4 ºC.  The phenol phase was collected and re-extracted. The phenol phase was precipitated with ice-cold 0.1M ammonium acetate in methanol at -20 ºC. Protein pelleting was carried out by centrifugation at 5500g 4ºC, and the pellet washed in precipitation solution three times, followed by one wash in cold acetone and dried at room temperature. Proteins were subjected to in-solution trypsin digestion. Peptides were solubilized in 0.5% formic acid, adjusted to a concentration of 0.5µg/µL. Cotyledonary haustorium peptides were injected in a nano-LC–MS/MS system consisting of an EASY II-nano LC system (Proxeon Biosystem) coupled to a nanoESI LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific. The gradient applied consisted of phase A (0.1% formic acid, 5% ACN) and phase B (0.1% formic acid, 95% ACN). The gradient started with 5% solvent B and increased to 20% for 125 min, 20-40% phase B for 42 min and 95% phase B for 13 minutes. Mass spectra were acquired in a positive mode top 10 data-dependent acquisition (DDA) method. MS1 scan was acquired in an Orbitrap analyzer set for a 350-1800 m/z range, 30000 resolution (at m/z 400) with a minimal signal required of 5000, isolation width of 2.0. The 10 most intense ions were fragmented by collision-induced dissociation (CID) at 30 normalized collision energy (NCE) with a dynamic exclusion of 30s. Other mass spectrometric conditions were sheath and auxiliary gas flow 0.0, capillary temperature at 200 °C. Endosperm peptides were injected in an Easy n-LC 1000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA) connected to a Thermo Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA). The gradient used the same solutions mentioned above, starting with a 2% phase B increased to 20% for 133 min, 20% to 40% phase B for 34 min, 40% to 95% phase B for 10 min. Mass spectra were obtained in positive mode using a top 15 DDA method. MS1 scan was acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with a 375–1650 m/z interval, 70,000, AGC target of 3e6. The 15 most intense ions were further fragmented in a Higher Energy Collisional Dissociation (HCD) cell at 30 NCE and a dynamic exclusion of 60s. Other conditions were as follows: spray voltage of 2.76 kV, sheath and auxiliary gas flow of 0.0, capillary temperature of 250 °C.Every biological replicate was run in triplicates so three raw data files were originated. Samples were randomly analyzed. In between samples, a blank injection (0.1% formic acid) with a 35 min gradient was performed to avoid any residues from the previous sample.

### Data Protocol
The raw data files were examined in Xcalibur v.2.1 (Thermo Scientific) and protein identification was carried out by the Proteome Discoverer 2.1 software (Thermo Scientific). The Sequest algorithm was used to obtain the PSM for the analyzed peptides against an Arecaceae family database available at NCBI ttps://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ July 2017 combined with an Arabidopsis database downloaded from http://www.uniprot.org/ July 2017. The parameters used were tryptic cleavage with a maximum of two missed cleavages, methionine oxidation (+15,995 Da), carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+ 57,021 Da). The Target Decoy PSM Validator was set to target FDR (strict) 0.01. Only protein identified in a minimum of two replicates were considered for qualitative analysis.

### Publication Abstract
The role of the cotyledonary haustorium (CH) in the mobilization of nutrient reserves in the endosperm of species of the palm family Arecaceae is a moot question. To shed light on this matter, we present here an analysis of the quantitative proteome changes associated with four developmental stages of CH and three of endosperm during germination. Together, a total of 1965 proteins were identified, being 1538 in the CH and 960 in the endosperm. Both in the CH and endosperm proteomes, we observed an increase in the diversity of hydrolases as the CH and endosperm develops. Qualitative proteomics analysis of four CH developmental stages indicated that each stage is populated by a unique set of proteins and the quantitative analysis showed an increase in the relative abundance of hydrolases, particularly mannan degrading enzymes, as development progresses. These results add weight to the hypothesis that the CH in the seeds of E. oleraceaacts both as a conduit of carbon and nitrogen sources generated by the hydrolysis of the reserves in the endosperm and as a source of hydrolases that will contribute to the mobilization of these reserves.

### Keywords
Thermo q exactive, Cotyledonary haustorium, Euterpe oleracea, Endosperm, Nanoesi ltq-orbitrap velos

### Affiliations
Federal University of Rio de Janeiro
UFRJ

### Submitter
Proteomics Unit

### Lab Head
Dr Fabio Nogueira
Federal University of Rio de Janeiro


