### Accession
PXD002488

### Title
Age effects in the extracellular matrix (ECM) proteome of the mouse left ventricle

### Description
Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) collectively degrade all extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins. MMP-9 has the strongest link to development of cardiac dysfunction. Aging is associated with increased MMP-9 expression in the left ventricle (LV) and reduced cardiac function. We investigated the effect of MMP-9 deletion on the cardiac ECM in aged mice. Based on label-free mass spectrometry analyses, MMP-9 dependent age-related changes were found in the mouse cardiac ECM proteome, suggesting MMP-9 as a possible therapeutic target for the aging patient

### Sample Protocol
After decellularization in SDS-containing buffer, the LV were homogenized in Protein Extraction Reagent 4 (Sigma Aldrich), centrifuged and the supernatants transferred to new tubes. The insoluble pellets were solubilized in DMSO and added to the corresponding supernatant. Proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE (12% gel; 1 cm separation) and each gel lane was divided into two slices. Proteins were digested in-gel with trypsin. The digests were analyzed by HPLC-ESI-MS/MS on a Thermo Fisher LTQ Orbitrap Velos fitted with a New Objective Digital PicoView 550 NanoESI source. On-line HPLC separation was accomplished with an Eksigent NanoLC micro HPLC: column, PicoFrit™ (New Objective; 75 μm i.d.) packed to 15 cm with C18 adsorbent (Vydac; 218MSB5, 5 μm, 300 Å); mobile phase A, 0.5% acetic acid (HAc)/0.005% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA); mobile phase B, 90% acetonitrile/0.5% HAc/0.005% TFA; gradient 2 to 42% B in 30 min; flow rate, 0.4 μl/min. Precursor ions were acquired in the Orbitrap in profile mode at 60,000 resolution (m/z 400); data-dependent collision-induced dissociation (CID) spectra of the six most intense ions in the precursor scan above a signal of 3,000 units were acquired at the same time in the linear trap (30% relative collision energy). No charge state screening was utilized; background ions from a reject list were not selected for fragmentation. Dynamic exclusion parameters were: repeat count, 1; repeat duration, 30 sec; exclusion list size, 500; exclusion duration, 30 sec; exclusion mass width, ± 10 ppm.

### Data Protocol
Peak lists (mgf) were produced from the individual Xcalibur raw files by Mascot Distiller (v 2.5.1; Matrix Science). Mascot (v 2.3.02; Matrix Science) was used to search the mgf files against a combination of the mouse subset of the NCBInr database (NCBInr_20130102; Mus. musculus subset; 144,347 entries) and a database of common contaminants (179 sequences). Methionine oxidation was considered as a variable modification; trypsin was specified as the proteolytic enzyme, with one missed cleavage allowed. The two Mascot results (dat) files for each gel lane were subsequently combined and processed in "MudPIT" format in Scaffold (v 4.0.5; Proteome Software) as follows: subset search using X! Tandem; cross correlation of the X! Tandem and Mascot results; and determination of protein and peptide identity probabilities based on the PeptideProphet and ProteinProphet algorithms. The thresholds for acceptance of peptide and protein assignments in Scaffold were 95% and 99%, respectively, with minimum two unique peptides.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ecm proteome, Aging hplc-esi-ms/ms, Mouse, Left ventricle

### Affiliations
University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio
UT Health Science Center at San Antonio

### Submitter
Susan Weintraub

### Lab Head
Dr Susan T. Weintraub
University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio


