### Accession
PXD037122

### Title
Interactome of Sec13 paralogs in Paradiplonema papillatum

### Description
The acquisition of new functions is frequently the result of gene duplication and is a major driver of evolutionary complexity. The β-propeller protein Sec13  plays roles in at least three distinct processes by virtue of being a component of the COPII endoplasmic reticulum export vesicle coat, the nuclear pore complex (NPC) and the Seh1-associated (SEA)/GATOR nutrient-sensing complex, suggesting that regulatory mechanisms coordinating these cellular activities may operate via Sec13. COPII, SEA and the NPC are ancient features of eukaryotic cells. We analyzed the Sec13 interactome in diplonemids, widespread marine protists, and found that Sec13 functions are divided between two paralogs, Sec13a and Sec13b. Sec13a interacts with COPII and the NPC, but by contrast Sec13b interacts with Sec16 and components of the SEA/GATOR complex. Hence, we infer that Sec13a is responsible for NPC functions and canonical anterograde transport activities while Sec13b acts within nutrient and autophagy-related pathways. Furthermore, duplication of Sec13 is near universal across the Euglenozoa, providing a potent exemplar of paralogy expansion and functional diversification.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitation For protein A tagged cell line, 5x108 cells (PpSec13a-PrA+NeoR) were grown at 27 °C in media with selection antibiotic (see above). Cells were harvested at 1,000 g for 10 minutes and subsequently resuspended either in 1 ml ice cold either 1/ IPP150 buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl pH 6.8, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% IGEPAL CA-630; Sigma I8896) buffer or 2/ CHAPS buffer (20mM HEPES pH 7.4, 100mM NaCl, 0.5 % CHAPS; Roche 10810118001) both supplemented with 1× cOmplete EDTA-free protease inhibitors (Sigma, 11873580001) and five times passed through a 30-gauge needle. The lysate was subsequently cleared twice by centrifugation (12,000 g, 10 minutes, 4°C) and the supernatant was incubated with 75 µl of IgG Sepharose 6 Fastbeads (GE Healthcare, 52-2083-00 AH) by rotating at 4 °C for 2 to 3 hours to enable binding of the tagged protein. The beads were washed five times using the same buffer as for cell lysis and the complex of Sec13a-PrA together with its potential interaction partners were eluted using 100 µl of 0.1 M glycine (pH 3.0) by rotating for 5 minutes at room temperature and immediately neutralized with 10 µl of 1 M Tris-HCl (pH 9.0). Aliquots of input, flow through and elution fractions were processed for immunoblotting. The elution fraction was subsequently sent for mass spectrometry (MS) analysis.  For V5 tagged cell lines, 5x108 cells (PpHyp24-V5+HygR or PpSec13a-PrA+NeoR/PpSec13b-V5+HygR) were grown at 27 °C in media with appropriate selection antibiotics. Cells were harvested at 1,000 g for 10 minutes, resuspended in 1 ml ice cold IPP150 buffer and subsequently processed using similar protocol as above with following exceptions – 1/ supernatant was incubated with 50 µl of V5-Trap magnetic Particles M-270 (Chromotek, v5td-20; the advantage of these beads is that there are no heavy and light antibody chains present in the bound fraction and therefore even proteins of 25/50kDa can be seen on immunoblot), 2/ last two washes of beads were done using a buffer without detergent and the beads were sent for MS analysis .  For all IP experiments three replicates of each sample were prepared and sent for MS analysis. Wild type cells were used as a control.   Mass spectrometry of immunoprecipitated samples Trypsin-digestion of the eluted protein A-tagged bait and wildtype control samples or the V5-paramagnetic beads incubated with V5-tagged bait and wildtype control samples was performed prior to liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectroscopy (LC-MS/MS) as follows. IP samples were resuspended in 100 mM TEAB containing 2% SDC. Cysteins were reduced with 10 mM final concentration of TCEP and blocked with 40 mM final concentration of chloroacetamide (60 °C for 30 minutes). Samples were cleaved on beads with 1 µg of trypsin at 37 °C overnight. After digestion, samples were centrifuged, and supernatants were collected and acidified with TFA to 1% final concentration. SDC was removed by extraction to ethylacetate (Masuda et al., 2008). Peptides were desalted using in-house made stage tips packed with C18 disks (Empore) according to Rappsilber et al., 2007. Nano Reversed phase column (EASY-Spray column, 50 cm x 75 µm ID, PepMap C18, 2 µm particles, 100 Å pore size) was used for LC/MS analysis. Mobile phase buffer A was composed of water and 0.1% formic acid. Mobile phase B was composed of acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Samples were loaded onto the trap column (Acclaim PepMap300, C18, 5 µm, 300 Å Wide Pore, 300 µm x 5 mm, 5 Cartridges) for 4 minutes at 15 μl/min. Loading buffer was composed of water, 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. Peptides were eluted with Mobile phase B gradient from 4% to 35% B in 60 minutes. Eluting peptide cations were converted to gas-phase ions by electrospray ionization and analysed on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion (Q-OT- qIT, Thermo). Survey scans of peptide precursors from 350 to 1,400 m/z were performed at 120K resolution (at 200 m/z) with a 5 × 105 ion count target. Tandem MS was performed by isolation at 1,5 Th with the quadrupole, HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 30, and rapid scan MS analysis in the ion trap. The MS/MS ion count target was set to 104 and the max injection time was 35 ms. Only those precursors with charge state 2–6 were sampled for MS/MS. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 45 s with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on. The instrument was run in top speed mode with 2 s cycles (Hebert et al., 2014).

### Data Protocol
Data were processed using MaxQuant v1.6.14 (Cox and Mann, 2008), which incorporates the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011). A custom protein sequence database of P. papillatum (43,871 sequences) supplemented with frequently observed contaminants was used to identify proteins. Search parameters were the default ones employed by MaxQuant for Orbitrap analyzers with full trypsin specificity and allowing for up to two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation were allowed as variable modifications. Match between runs for biological replicates was part of the experimental design. Peptides were required to be at least seven amino acids long, with false discovery rates (FDRs) of 0.01 calculated at the levels of peptides, proteins, and modification sites based on the number of hits against the reversed sequence database. iBAQ indices (raw intensities divided by the number of theoretical peptides) were used for protein quantification, which allows comparing of protein abundances both within samples and between them. After filtering to remove any protein IDs with less than two unique peptides, an Andromeda score of less than 20 and less than two valid values in the respective bait replicates, the obtained data were processed in Perseus v1.6.14 as described previously (Zoltner et al., 2020).

### Publication Abstract
The &#x3b2;-propeller protein Sec13 plays roles in at least three distinct processes by virtue of being a component of the COPII endoplasmic reticulum export vesicle coat, the nuclear pore complex (NPC) and the Seh1-associated (SEA)/GATOR nutrient-sensing complex. This suggests that regulatory mechanisms coordinating these cellular activities may operate <i>via</i> Sec13. The NPC, COPII and SEA/GATOR are all ancient features of eukaryotic cells, and in the vast majority of eukaryotes, a single Sec13 gene is present. Here we report that the Euglenozoa, a lineage encompassing the diplonemid, kinetoplastid and euglenid protists, possess two Sec13 paralogues. Furthermore, based on protein interactions and localization studies we show that in diplonemids Sec13 functions are divided between the Sec13a and Sec13b paralogues. Specifically, Sec13a interacts with COPII and the NPC, while Sec13b interacts with Sec16 and components of the SEA/GATOR complex. We infer that euglenozoan Sec13a is responsible for NPC functions and canonical anterograde transport activities while Sec13b acts within nutrient and autophagy-related pathways, indicating a fundamentally distinct organization of coatomer complexes in euglenozoan flagellates.

### Keywords
Evolutionary mechanisms, Paralog expansion, Diplonema; coatomer; membrane-trafficking; sec13; nuclear pore complex (npc); sea/gator complex

### Affiliations
Institute of Parasitology, Biology Centre, Czech Academy of Sciences, České Budějovice (Budweis), Czech Republic; Faculty of Sciences, University of South Bohemia, České Budějovice (Budweis), Czech Republic
Institute of Parasitology
Biology Center, Czech Academy of Sciences
Branišovská 31
370 05 České Budějovice



### Submitter
Corinna Benz

### Lab Head
Dr Julius Lukes
Institute of Parasitology, Biology Centre, Czech Academy of Sciences, České Budějovice (Budweis), Czech Republic; Faculty of Sciences, University of South Bohemia, České Budějovice (Budweis), Czech Republic


