### Accession
PXD012058

### Title
Defining the T cell proteome and the role of mTORC1 during differentiation using quantitative proteomics

### Description
High-resolution quantitative mass-spectrometry reveals similarities and disparities in how murine naïve CD4 and CD8 T cells respond to immune activation and re-structure proteomes as they differentiate to effector cells. The data map core transcriptional, metabolic and protein synthesis machinery, nutrient transporters and environment sensing molecules and reveal differences in the biosynthetic capacity of CD4 and CD8 T cells. One key nutrient sensing kinase is mammalian target of rapamycin complex1 (mTORC1). The current study identifies common and distinct mTORC1 regulated processes and divergent outcomes of mTORC1 inhibition in naïve versus effector CD4 and CD8 T cell populations. The data provide a resource that maps how immune activation and mTORC1 reshape CD4 and CD8 T cell proteomes and highlights that a deep understanding of T cell phenotype requires modelling of the impact of immune regulators on protein copy number, cellular protein concentrations and the subunit stoichiometry of key protein complexes.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation and TMT labelling The following murine T cell populations were generated – naïve CD4 and CD8, 24 hour TCR activated CD4 and CD8 and effector TH1 and CTL. The impact of inhibiting mTORC1 during T cell differentiation was also examined by treating naïve cells undergoing TCR stimulation and effector cells with rapamycin. Cell pellets were lysed in 400 μL lysis buffer (4% SDS, 50 mM TEAB pH 8.5, 10 mM TCEP). Lysates were boiled and sonicated with a BioRuptor (30 cycles: 30 sec on, 30 sec off) before alkylation with iodoacetamide for 1 h at room temperature in the dark. The lysates were subjected to the SP3 procedure for protein clean-up (Hughes:2014) before elution into digest buffer (0.1% SDS, 50 mM TEAB pH 8.5, 1mM CaCl2) and digested with LysC and Trypsin, each at a 1:50 (enzyme:protein) ratio. TMT labelling and peptide clean-up were performed according to the SP3 protocol. Samples were eluted into 2% DMSO in water, combined and dried in vacuo.   Peptide fractionation The TMT samples were fractionated using off-line high pH reverse phase chromatography: samples were loaded onto a 4.6 x 250 mm XbridgeTM BEH130 C18 column with 3.5 µm particles (Waters). Using a Dionex BioRS system, the samples were separated using a 25-minute multistep gradient of solvents A (10 mM formate at pH 9 in 2% acetonitrile) and B (10 mM ammonium formate pH 9 in 80% acetonitrile), at a flow rate of 1 mL/min. Peptides were separated into 48 fractions which were consolidated into 24 fractions. The fractions were subsequently dried and the peptides dissolved in 5% formic acid and analysed by LC-MS.   Liquid chromatography electrospray tandem mass spectrometry analysis (LC-ES-MS/MS) 1 μg per fraction was analysed using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a Dionex ultra high-pressure liquid chromatography system (nano RSLC). RP-LC was performed using a Dionex RSLC nano HPLC (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were injected onto a 75 μm × 2 cm PepMap-C18 pre-column and resolved on a 75 μm × 50 cm RP- C18 EASY-Spray temperature controlled integrated column-emitter (Thermo) using a four hour multistep gradient from 5% B to 35% B with a constant flow of 200 nL min-1. The mobile phases were: 2% ACN incorporating 0.1% FA (Solvent A) and 80% ACN incorporating 0.1% FA (Solvent B). The spray was initiated by applying 2.5 kV to the EASY-Spray emitter and the data were acquired under the control of Xcalibur software in a data dependent mode using top speed and 4 s duration per cycle, the survey scan is acquired in the Orbitrap covering the m/z range from 400 to 1400 Th with a mass resolution of 120,000 and an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 2.0 e5 ions. The most intense ions were selected for fragmentation using CID in the ion trap with 30 % CID collision energy and an isolation window of 1.6 Th. The AGC target was set to 1.0 e4 with a maximum injection time of 70 ms and a dynamic exclusion of 80 s. During the MS3 analysis for more accurate TMT quantifications, 10 fragment ions were co-isolated using synchronous precursor selection using a window of 2 Th and further fragmented using HCD collision energy of 55%.  The fragments were then analysed in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 60,000. The AGC target was set to 1.0 e5 and the maximum injection time was set to 300 ms.

### Data Protocol
The data were processed, searched and quantified with the MaxQuant software package, version 1.5.8.3, Proteins and peptides were identified using the UniProt mouse reference proteome database (SwissProt and Trembl) and the contaminants database integrated in MaxQuant using the Andromeda search engine (Cox:2008, Cox:2011) with the following search parameters: carbamidomethylation of cysteine and TMT modification on peptide N-termini and lysine side chains were fixed modifications, while methionine oxidation, acetylation of N-termini of proteins. The false discovery rate was set to 1% for positive identification of proteins and peptides with the help of the reversed mouse Uniprot database in a decoy approach.

### Publication Abstract
Immune activated T lymphocytes modulate the activity of key metabolic pathways to support the transcriptional reprograming and reshaping of cell proteomes that permits effector T cell differentiation. The present study uses high resolution mass spectrometry and metabolic labelling to explore how murine T cells control the methionine cycle to produce methyl donors for protein and nucleotide methylations. We show that antigen receptor engagement controls flux through the methionine cycle and RNA and histone methylations. We establish that the main rate limiting step for protein synthesis and the methionine cycle is control of methionine transporter expression. Only T cells that respond to antigen to upregulate and sustain methionine transport are supplied with methyl donors that permit the dynamic nucleotide methylations and epigenetic reprogramming that drives T cell differentiation. These data highlight how the regulation of methionine transport licenses use of methionine for multiple fundamental processes that drive T lymphocyte proliferation and differentiation.

### Keywords
Mtorc1, Mouse, T cell, Tmt, Rapamycin, Fusion, Mtor

### Affiliations
Cantrell Lab, Cell Signalling & Immunology, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee
University of Dundee

### Submitter
Alejandro Brenes

### Lab Head
Dr Doreen Cantrell
Cantrell Lab, Cell Signalling & Immunology, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee


