### Accession
PXD003577

### Title
Open-Gate Mutants of the Mammalian Proteasome Show Enhanced Ubiquitin-Conjugate Degradation

### Description
When in the closed form, the axial substrate translocation channel of the proteasome core particle (CP) is topologically blocked by the convergent N-termini of  subunits. To probe the role of channel gating in mammalian proteasomes, we have deleted the N-terminal tail of 3. The resulting 3N proteasomes are intact but hyperactive in the hydrolysis of fluorogenic peptide substrates and degradation of polyubiquitinated Sic1. Cells expressing the hyperactive proteasomes show markedly elevated degradation of established proteasome substrates and resistance to oxidative stress, and multiplexed quantitative proteomics reveal ~ 200 proteins with reduced levels in the mutant cells. Potentially toxic proteins such as tau exhibit reduced accumulation and aggregate formation. These data demonstrate that the CP gate is a key negative regulator of proteasome function in mammals, and that opening the CP gate may be an effective strategy to increase proteasome activity and reduce levels of toxic proteins in cells.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were prepared from wt and a3dN cells in three separate 150 mm dishes. Cells were washed three times with ice-cold PBS, then scraped in PBS, spun down, and lysed in 8 M Urea lysis buffer (8 M urea, 75 mM NaCl, 50 mM HEPES pH 8.0, with added Complete protease inhibitors (Roche) and PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitors (Roche)). Cell debris was spun down for 10 min at 13,000 rpm at 4 °C, after which protein concentrations were determined using the BCA assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Subsequently, 400 µg of lysate was reduced with 5 mM TCEP for 30 min, and alkylated with 14 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark. Proteins were precipitated using methanol/chloroform precipitation and resuspended in digestion buffer (8 M urea, 50 mM HEPES pH 8.5, and 1 mM CaCl2). The protein extracts were diluted to 4 M urea, after which they were digested for two hours at 37°C with LysC (Wako) at a 1:250 LysC/protein ratio. They were then further diluted to 2 M urea, and incubated overnight at 37 °C with LysC. The next day, urea was further diluted to 1 M and trypsin (Promega) was added at a 1:50 trypsin/protein ratio for 6 h at 37 °C. The samples were acidified with formic acid (FA) to a pH of <2, and then desalted using Sep-Pak C18 solid-phase extraction cartridges (Waters). Peptide concentrations were determined using the micro-BCA assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific), after which the samples were labeled with the 6-plex TMT reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific). TMT labeling and subsequent MS analysis were performed largely as described previously59. Briefly, 0.8 mg of TMT reagents was dissolved in 40 µl anhydrous acetonitrile (ACN) and 10 µl was added to 100 µg peptides in 90 µl 200 mM HEPES, pH 8.5. After 2 h, the reaction was quenched with 8 µl of 5 % hydroxylamine (Sigma). Labeled peptides were combined at a ratio of 1:1:1:1:1:1 for the six channels, acidified with formic acid, diluted to a final concentration of 3% ACN, and then desalted with a Sep-Pak column. The peptides were then subjected to basic-pH reverse-phase HPLC fractionation as described60 and fractionated into 24 fractions. Half of these fractions were dissolved in 3% FA/3% ACN, desalted via StageTip, dried in a SpeedVac, and then dissolved in 8 µl 3% FA/3% ACN for LC-MS/MS analysis on an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as described previously. Briefly, peptides were separated on an in-house packed column using a gradient of 85 minutes from 6%-24% ACN in 0.125% FA at 575 nl/min. FTMS1 spectra were collected at a resolution of 120k with a maximum injection time of 100 ms and a 200k automated gain control (AGC) target. A top-ten method was used to select the ten most intense ions for MS/MS. ITMS2 spectra were collected with a maximum injection time of 150 ms with an AGC target of 4k and CID collision energy of 35 %. FTMS3 spectra were collected using the multi-notch method described previously to reduce interference and to increase quantitative sensitivity and accuracy. In brief, synchronous-precursor-selection was used to include ten MS2 fragment ions in the FTMS3 scan. To create TMT reporter ions, the HCD collision energy was set at 55 %. An AGC target of 50k and maximum injection time of 250 ms were used.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed using an in-house software pipeline as described previously. In short, mass spectra were searched against the human Uniprot database (February 2014) and a reverse decoy database. Precursor ion tolerance was set at 20 ppm and product ion tolerance at 0.9 Da. Addition of a TMT tag (+229.1629 Da) on lysine residues and peptide N-termini, and cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57.0215 Da) were added as static modifications, and methionine oxidation (+15.9949 Da) was set as a variable modification. A separate search was done for the ubiquitin linkages, in which a differential modification of +114.0429 Da for the GG-peptide on lysine residues was added. False discovery rate was set at 1 %, and peptide spectral match filtering was performed using linear discriminant analysis as described previously. After exporting the protein quantification values, the data was further analyzed in Excel and Perseus 1.5.1.6. For protein quantitation, the signal-to-noise values for each reporter ion channel were summed across all quantified peptides, and then normalized assuming equal peptide loading across all samples. A two-tailed t-test was then performed to identify significantly changed proteins between the wt and a3dN cells triplicates, after which the p-values were corrected for multiple testing using the Benjamini-Hochberg method. For the ubiquitin linkage searches, GG-sites were localized using a modified version of the Ascore algorithm, using a localization threshold of 13. The relative ubiquitin linkage abundance was determined by normalizing the quantified linkage-specific peptide to the amount of total ubiquitin in each channel. GO analysis was performed using the DAVID Bioinformatics Resource 6.7 functional annotation tool (http://david.abcc.ncifcrf.gov/).

### Publication Abstract
When in the closed form, the substrate translocation channel of the proteasome core particle (CP) is blocked by the convergent N termini of &#x3b1;-subunits. To probe the role of channel gating in mammalian proteasomes, we deleted the N-terminal tail of &#x3b1;3; the resulting &#x3b1;3&#x394;N proteasomes are intact but hyperactive in the hydrolysis of fluorogenic peptide substrates and the degradation of polyubiquitinated proteins. Cells expressing the hyperactive proteasomes show markedly elevated degradation of many established proteasome substrates and resistance to oxidative stress. Multiplexed quantitative proteomics revealed &#x223c; 200 proteins with reduced levels in the mutant cells. Potentially toxic proteins such as tau exhibit reduced accumulation and aggregate formation. These data demonstrate that the CP gate is a key negative regulator of proteasome function in mammals, and that opening the CP gate may be an effective strategy to increase proteasome activity and reduce levels of toxic proteins in cells.

### Keywords
Aggregation, Oxidative stress, Proteomics, Tau, Gate, Proteasome

### Affiliations
Department of Biomedical Sciences, Seoul National University Graduate School, Seoul 03080, Korea.
Seoul National University College of Medicine

### Submitter
Min Jae Lee

### Lab Head
Dr Min Jae Lee
Department of Biomedical Sciences, Seoul National University Graduate School, Seoul 03080, Korea.


