### Accession
PXD003126

### Title
Proteomic investigation of a mixed microbial culture synthesizing polyhydroxyalkanoates from fermented dairy manure under aerobic feast-famine conditions

### Description
Polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHAs) are bio-based, biodegradable polyesters that can be produced from organic-rich waste streams using mixed microbial cultures.  To maximize PHA production, mixed microbial cultures may be enriched for PHA-producing bacteria with a high storage capacity through the imposition of cyclic, aerobic feast-famine conditions in a sequencing batch reactor (SBR).  Though enrichment SBRs have been extensively investigated a bulk solutions-level, little evidence at the proteome level is available to describe the observed SBR behavior to guide future SBR optimization strategies.  As such, the purpose of this investigation was to characterize proteome dynamics of a mixed microbial culture in an SBR operated under aerobic feast-famine conditions using fermented dairy manure as the feedstock for PHA production.  At the beginning of the SBR cycle, excess PHA precursors were provided to the mixed microbial culture (i.e., feast), after which followed a long duration devoid of exogenous substrate (i.e., famine).  Two-dimensional electrophoresis was used to separate protein mixtures during a complete SBR cycle, and proteins of interest were identified.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial proteins were extracted and purified from SBR biomass and resolved using two-dimensional gel electrophoresis.  Proteins of interest were manually excised from gels and subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion.  Peptides were separated using reverse-phase LC using a nano-ACQUITY Ultra Performance Liquid Chromatograph (Waters) before analysis using a QTOF Premier tandem MS system.

### Data Protocol
Raw data from the LC-MS/MS were converted to peak lists using ProteinLynx Global Server (Waters).  For MS/MS and protein matching, the peak list files were searched using Mascot (Matrix Science) against the NCBInr database with no species restriction and the following search parameters: specific enzyme, trypsin; peptide window tol., +/- 0.4; fragment mass tol., +/- 0.4; missed cleavage sites, 1; and variable modifications carbamidomethyl C, deamidated NQ, and oxidized M.  For an acceptable protein identification, protein hits with at least two unique peptide matches and individual protein scores above the significance score calculated by Mascot were required.

### Publication Abstract
Polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHAs) are bio-based, biodegradable polyesters that can be produced from organic-rich waste streams using mixed microbial cultures (MMCs). To maximize PHA production, MMCs are enriched for bacteria with a high polymer storage capacity through the application of aerobic dynamic feeding (ADF) in a sequencing batch reactor (SBR), which consequently induces a feast-famine metabolic response. Though the feast-famine response is generally understood empirically at a macro-level, the molecular level is less refined. The objective of this study was to investigate the microbial community composition and proteome profile of an enriched MMC cultivated on fermented dairy manure. The enriched MMC exhibited a feast-famine response and was capable of producing up to 40&#xa0;% (wt. basis) PHA in a fed-batch reactor. High-throughput 16S rRNA gene sequencing revealed a microbial community dominated by Meganema, a known PHA-producing genus not often observed in high abundance in enrichment SBRs. The application of the proteomic methods two-dimensional electrophoresis and LC-MS/MS revealed PHA synthesis, energy generation, and protein synthesis prominently occurring during the feast phase, corroborating bulk solution variable observations and theoretical expectations. During the famine phase, nutrient transport, acyl-CoA metabolism, additional energy generation, and housekeeping functions were more pronounced, informing previously under-determined MMC functionality under famine conditions. During fed-batch PHA production, acetyl-CoA acetyltransferase and PHA granule-bound phasin proteins were in increased abundance relative to the SBR, supporting the higher PHA content observed. Collectively, the results provide unique microbial community structural and functional insight into feast-famine PHA production from waste feedstocks using MMCs.

### Keywords
Two-dimensional electrophoresis, Polyhydroxyalkanoates, Mixed microbial culture

### Affiliations
University of Idaho, Department of Civil Engineering
University of Idaho

### Submitter
Andrea Hanson

### Lab Head
Dr Erik Coats
University of Idaho, Department of Civil Engineering


