### Accession
PXD038953

### Title
Shotgun proteomics of quinoa seeds from plants grown under irrigated and rainfed conditions

### Description
Quinoa is an Andean crop whose cultivation has been extended to many different parts of the world in the last decade. It shows a great capacity for adaptation to diverse climate conditions, including environmental stressors, and moreover, the seeds are very nutritious in part due to their high protein content which is rich in essential amino acids. They also contain good amounts of other nutrients such as unsaturated fatty acids, vitamins, or minerals and are gluten-free seeds. Also, the use of quinoa hydrolysates and peptides has been linked to numerous health benefits. Altogether, these aspects have situated quinoa as a crop able to contribute to food security worldwide. Aiming to deepen our understanding of the protein quality and function of quinoa seeds and how they can vary when this crop is subjected to water-limiting conditions, a shotgun proteomics analysis was performed to obtain the proteomes of quinoa seeds harvested from two different water regimes in field: rainfed and irrigated conditions. Also, a quantitative analysis was developed to determine the total number of proteins identified in both samples, which of them are present in both conditions, and also, which ones were present exclusively in seeds under rainfed or irrigated conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Quinoa (Chenopodium quinoa Willd.) seeds belonging to the cultivar F14 provided by Algosur SL (Seville, Spain), were grown in the field under two environmental conditions: irrigated and rainfed conditions at two experimental stations belonging to the Center for Scientific and Technological Research of Extremadura (CICYTEX, Extremadura, Spain). Sowing was conducted at a dose of 6 kg ha-1 using a mechanical plot drill. Harvesting was conducted at physiological maturity of the plants. The sampling area was 3 m2 per elemental plot. Plants were manually cut at ground level and the seeds were separated using a stationary thresher (Wintersteiger LD 352, Ried, Austria).   Three biologically independent pools of quinoa seeds obtained from rainfed and irrigated conditions were dried and milled. Fifty mg were solubilized in urea 8 M. Proteins were precipitated by adding cold chloroform/methanol 1/3 and finally resuspended in 2 ml urea 8 M.  50 µl of each protein sample were loaded on a 10% acrylamide gel. Protein bands were cut, and trypsin (Roche, Mannheim, Germany) 1:100 (v/v) in ammonium bicarbonate 25 mM was added for digestion at 37º C overnight. Samples were concentrated using a precolumn PEPMAP100 C18 NanoViper Trap (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Massachusetts, United States). Then, samples were separated through a 50 cm column PEPMAP RSLC C18 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Massachusetts, United States) on a gradient of ACN 5% to 40% (v/v) and formic acid 0.1% (v/v) for 120 min.  One µg of each protein extraction was injected into a nano-HPLC Easy-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Massachusetts, United States). Peptide fractions were electrospray ionized in positive mode and analyzed by a quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer Q Exactive HF (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Massachusetts, United States) in DDA mode. From each mass spectrometry (MS) scan (between 390 and 1700 Da), the 15 most intense precursors (charged between 2+ and 5+) were selected for their high collision energy dissociation (HCD) fragmentation. Then, the corresponding tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) spectra was acquired.

### Data Protocol
Data generated by LC-MS/MS for each quinoa seed sample was analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Massachusetts, United States). Each MS/MS spectra was identified by peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) comparing them to theoretical masses obtained from the original precursor mass fragmentation, using JGI-Phytozome database (https://phytozome-next.jgi.doe.gov/; Phytozome genome ID: 392) taxonomically restricted to Chenopodium quinoa v1.0. Identified peptides were assigned to the annotated C. quinoa proteins. Whether a peptide may be assigned to different proteins, the software used parsimony principle to generate a master protein. Percolator algorithm was used to estimate false discovery rate (FDR). High-confidence proteins were identified filtering by p-adj < 0.05.  Proteome Discoverer™ 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Massachusetts, United States) was used to determine peptide and protein abundance. Firstly, mass recalibration was performed with Sequest HT comparing data base and identified proteins, getting a chromatography alignment of the samples with a tolerance up to 10 min. Then, an alignment of the retention time of all samples was performed to quantify precursor ions (considering unique peptides that were present in, at least, two of the three replicates). Finally, total protein amount was normalized among samples using peptide total abundance.  Three biological replicates were analyzed for each treatment (irrigated and rainfed conditions) using a No Nested/Pairwise design. Quantified proteins were obtained from peptide ratios calculated as a geometric median of the peptide ratio in each biological replicate.  Analysis of variance (ANOVA) was performed to estimate differentially abundant proteins between quinoa seeds harvested from irrigated and rainfed conditions with a significance level of 0.05. P-values obtained with this analysis were corrected (p-adj), taking into account the False Discovery Rate (FDR) applying Benjamin&Hochberg (BH) test.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Quinoa, Rainfed, Seed, Proteome, Shotgun proteomics, Drought

### Affiliations
UCM
Biology Department, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain

### Submitter
Concha Gil

### Lab Head
Dr María Reguera Blázquez
Biology Department, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain


