### Accession
PXD012667

### Title
Oxidative Stress Biomarker of Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus

### Description
In this project, using discovery-based mass spectrometry approach and adopting data-dependent LC-MS/MS, we detected and identified modified peptides in complex clinical plasma samples and developed first-level biomarker verification strategy. Further, using liquid chromatography-multiple reaction monitoring mass spectrometry (LC-MRM-MS) based targeted approach which virtually quantifies irreversible oxidation at any targeted cysteine, we quantified cysteine tri-oxidation in HSA in diabetes patients. Site-specific tri-oxidized HSA could be a potential biomarker of diabetes and provide directive of disease mechanism.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma proteins (100 µg) were separated on 12% SDS-PAGE gel and protein bands were visualized by staining with Coomassie blue. Albumin band was excised, cut into small pieces of approximately 1 mm2 and de-stained completely. The gel pieces were reduced with 10 mM DDT for 60 min at 37°C, alkylated using 55 mM iodoacetamide, dehydrated with 100% acetonitrile and then subjected to overnight digestion at 37 °C with sequencing-grade modified trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI). The peptides were extracted, vacuum dried, and reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were separated and analyzed on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC NanoLC system coupled to a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, MA). 5 µL of peptide sample was injected into an Acclaim peptide trap column via the autosampler of a Dionex RSLC NanoLC system. Mobile phase A (0.1% FA in 5% ACN) and mobile phase B (0.1% FA in ACN) were used to establish a 60-min gradient with a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Injected peptides were analyzed on a Dionex EASY-spray column (PepMap® C18, 3um, 100 A) using an EASY nanospray source at an electrospray potential of 1.8 kV. A full MS scan (350–1600 m/z range) was acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z with a maximum ion accumulation time of 100 ms with instrument setting as described earlier(1).  For MRM analysis, both modified and unmodified peptides, and transitions for selected peptides were extracted from the MS/MS data derived from Q-Exactive. LC-MRM-MS analysis was performed on a TSQ Vantage triple quadrupole mass spectrometer coupled to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC NanoLC system (Thermo Scientific Inc., Bremen, Germany). Peptides were injected onto an Acclaim® PepMap100 trap column (75μm x 2cm; nanoViper C18, 3μm, 100Å) and resolved on an Acclaim® PepMap RSLC C18 column (75μm x 15cm; nanoViper C18, 2μm, 100Å) (Thermo Scientific, USA), at a flow rate of 300nL/min. A 60 min gradient was established using mobile phase A (0.1% FA in HPLC water) and mobile phase B (0.1% FA in acetonitrile).  The TSQ Vantage was set to perform data acquisition in positive ion mode. An electrospray potential of 1.1kV, the capillary temperature of 250° C and collision gas pressure of argon for Q2 was set at 1.2mTorr. The selectivity for both Q1 and Q3 were set to 0.8 Da. TSQ Vantage generated data files were processed using Skyline (31). The quality of chromatogram and targeted transitions were assessed by visual inspection for relative quantification. Quantification was performed using the area under the curve of all transitions.

### Publication Abstract
Metabolic disorders in T2DM generate multiple sources of free radicals and oxidative stress that accelerate nonenzymatic degenerative protein modifications (DPMs) such as protein oxidation, disrupt redox signaling and physiological function, and remain a major risk factor for clinical diabetic vascular complications. In order to identify potential oxidative biomarkers in the blood plasma of patients with T2DM, we used LC-MS/MS-based proteomics to profile plasma samples from patients with T2DM and healthy controls. The results showed that human serum albumin (HSA) is damaged by irreversible cysteine trioxidation, which can be a potential oxidative stress biomarker for the early diagnosis of T2DM. The quantitative detection of site-specific thiol trioxidation is technically challenging; thus, we developed a sensitive and selective LC-MS/MS workflow that has been used to discover and quantify three unique thiol-trioxidized HSA peptides, ALVLIAFAQYLQQC<sub>(SO3H)</sub>PFEDHVK (m/z 1241.13), YIC<sub>(SO3H)</sub>ENQDSISSK (m/z 717.80) and RPC<sub>(SO3H)</sub>FSALEVDETYVPK (m/z 951.45), in 16 individual samples of healthy controls (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;8) and individuals with diabetes (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;8). Targeted quantitative analysis using multiple reaction monitoring mass spectrometry revealed impairment of the peptides with m/z 1241.13, m/z 717.80 and m/z 951.45, with significance (P&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.02, P&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.002 and P&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.03), in individuals with diabetes. The results demonstrated that a set of three HSA thiol-trioxidized peptides, which are irreversibly oxidatively damaged in HSA in the plasma of patients with T2DM, can be important indicators and potential biomarkers of oxidative stress in T2DM.

### Keywords
Human plasma

### Affiliations
Nanyang Technological University

### Submitter
Sunil Adav

### Lab Head
Dr Prof Sze S K
Nanyang Technological University


