### Accession
PXD019731

### Title
Probing the biogenesis pathway and dynamics of thylakoid membranes_C4PR_LIV

### Description
Thylakoid membranes are the specialized internal membrane system produced in plants, algae, and cyanobacteria to convert sunlight to chemical energy via oxygenic photosynthesis. Cyanobacterial thylakoid membranes harbor the protein complexes and electron transport molecules that are necessary for photosynthetic light reactions and respiratory electron flow. The thylakoid membranes sit between the plasma membrane and the central cytoplasm, leading to intricate cellular compartmentalization. How thylakoid membranes are generated to form the functional network and how protein complexes are recruited into thylakoids remain elusive. Here, we developed a method to modulate thylakoid biogenesis in the model cyanobacterium Synechococcus elongatus PCC7942 and probed the spatial-temporal stepwise biogenesis process of cyanobacterial thylakoid membranes, using electron microscopy, in situ cryo-electron tomography, confocal microscopy, mass spectroscopy, and biochemical approaches. Our results revealed that the plasma membrane and regularly-arranged concentric thylakoid layers have no physical connections. The newly synthesized thylakoid membrane fragments commerce between the plasma membrane and pre-existing thylakoids, where the initial biogenesis of Photosystem II occurs. Photosystem I monomers appear in thylakoid membranes earlier than other photosystem assemblies. Redistribution of photosynthetic protein complexes during thylakoid biogenesis ensures establishment of the spatial organization of the functional thylakoid membrane network. This study provides insights into the molecular processes of the photosynthetic machinery biosynthesis and organization.

### Sample Protocol
Synechococcus elongatus PCC 7942 (WT) were grown in BG11 medium under continuous white light of 40 µmol photons m-2 s-1 at 30°C in culture flasks with constant shaking. Experimental cultures were grown in a photobioreactor Multi‐Cultivator MC 1000 (Photon Systems Instruments, Brno, Czech Republic). Parallel 80-ml cultures were started from pre-experimental cultures by inoculating cells to the starting OD750 = 0.2 in fresh BG11 medium. Cells were first cultured at 30°C for 14 days either under 40 µmol photons m-2 s-1 (growth light, GL) or under 300 µmol photons m-2 s-1 (high light, HL). After this, OD750 of the HL culture was adjusted to 0.6 with fresh BG11 and transferred to under 20 µmol photons m-2 s-1 (LL, low light) for 5 days. Optical densities were measured using DS-11 FX+ spectrophotometer (DeNovix). For physiological and structural measurements, as well as for protein extraction, cells were harvested after 14 days of growth under both GL and HL conditions along with five consecutive days after transferring cells from HL to LL conditions. Isolated thylakoid membrane cell pellets were resuspended in 25mM ammonium bicarbonate containing Rapigest surfactant and digested in-solution. The digests were de-salted on StageTips and analysed by high resolution LC-MSMS on a QExactive quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometer

### Data Protocol
Digests were analysed by high resolution LC-MSMS on 2h data-dependent Top10 methods uisng a QExactive quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometer. Database searches were carried out against the Synechococcus elongatus 7942 (UniProt ID: UP000002717) using an in-house Mascot server. A precursor ion tolerance of 10ppm and a fragment ion tolerance of 0.01Da were used with carbamidomethyl cysteine set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine as a variable modification. Lable-free quantification was carried out using Progenesis QI for Proteomics (Ver 4.1).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Light regulation, Cyanobacteria, Thylakoid membrane, Biogenesis, Photosynthesis, Synechococcus elongatus

### Affiliations
University of Liverpool
Institute of Systems, Molecular and Integrative Biology University of Liverpool Liverpool L69 7ZB UK

### Submitter
Deborah Simpson

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Lu-Ning Liu
Institute of Systems, Molecular and Integrative Biology University of Liverpool Liverpool L69 7ZB UK


