### Accession
PXD037230

### Title
Scleraxis-lineage cells are required for tendon homeostasis and their depletion induces an accelerated extracellular matrix aging phenotype

### Description
Aged tendons have disrupted homeostasis, increased injury risk, and impaired healing capacity. Understanding mechanisms of homeostatic disruption is crucial for developing therapeutics to retain tendon health through the lifespan. Here, we developed a novel model of accelerated tendon extracellular matrix (ECM) aging via depletion of Scleraxis-lineage (ScxLin) cells in young mice (DTR). DTR recapitulates many aspects of tendon aging including comparable declines in cellularity, alterations in ECM structure, organization, and composition. Single cell RNA-sequencing demonstrated a conserved decline in tenocytes associated with ECM biosynthesis in aged and DTR tendons, identifying the requirement for ScxLin cells during homeostasis. However, the remaining cells in aged and DTR tendons demonstrate functional divergence. Aged tenocytes become pro-inflammatory and lose proteostasis. In contrast, DTR tenocytes demonstrate enhanced remodeling capacity. Collectively, this study defines DTR a novel model of accelerated tendon ECM aging and identifies novel biological intervention points to maintain tendon function through the lifespan.

### Sample Protocol
Homogenization of each tendon tissue was performed by adding 150 uL of 5% Sodium Dodecyl Sulphate (SDS), 100 mM Triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB). Samples were vortexed and then sonicated (QSonica) for 5 cycles, with a 1 minute resting period on ice after each cycle. Lysates were then centrifuged at 15,000 x g for 5 minutes to collect cellular debris, and the supernatant was collected. Next, the total protein concentration was determined by bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA; Thermo Scientific), after which samples were diluted to 1 mg/mL in 5% SDS, 50 mM TEAB. 25 μg of protein from each sample was reduced with dithiothreitol to 2 mM, followed by incubation at 55°C for 60 minutes. Iodoacetamide was added to 10 mM and incubated for 30 minutes in the dark at room temperature to alkylate the proteins. Phosphoric acid was added to 1.2%, followed by six volumes of 90% methanol, 100 mM TEAB. The resulting solution was added to S-Trap micros (Protifi) and centrifuged at 4,000 x g for 1 minute. S-Traps with the trapped protein were washed twice by centrifuging through 90% methanol, 100 mM TEAB. 1 ug of trypsin was brought up in 20 μL of 100 mM TEAB and added to the S-Trap, followed by 20 μL of TEAB to ensure the sample did not dry out. The cap to the S-Trap was loosely screwed on but not tightened to ensure the solution was not pushed out of the S-Trap during digestion. Samples were placed in a humidity chamber at 37°C overnight. The next morning, the S-Trap was centrifuged at 4,000 x g for 1 minute to collect the digested peptides. Sequential additions of 0.1% Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) in acetonitrile and 0.1% TFA in 50% acetonitrile were added to the S-trap, centrifuged, and pooled. Samples were frozen and dried down in a Speed Vac (Labconco), then re-suspended in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid prior to analysis. Three tendons per genotype per timepoint were used for proteomic analysis. Data Acquisition: Peptides were injected onto a homemade 30 cm C18 column with 1.8 um beads (Sepax), with an Easy nLC-1200 HPLC (Thermo Fisher), connected to a Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid in water, while solvent B was 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile. Ions were introduced to the MS using a Nanospray Flex source operating at 2 kV. The gradient began at 3% B and held for 2 minutes, increased to 10% B over 6 (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted September 8, 2022.;https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.01.20.477119doi:bioRxiv preprint minutes, increased to 38% B over 95 minutes, then ramped up to 90% B in 5 minutes and was held for 3 minutes, before returning to starting conditions in 2 minutes and re-equilibrating for 7 minutes, for a total run time of 120 minutes. The Fusion Lumos was operated in data-dependent mode, with MS1 scans acquired in the Orbitrap, and MS2 scans acquired in the ion trap. The cycle time was set to 2 seconds. Monoisotopic Precursor Selection (MIPS) was set to Peptide. The full scan was done over a range of 375-1400 m/z, with a resolution of 120,000 at m/z of 200, an AGC target of 4e5, and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Peptides with a charge state between 2-5 were picked for fragmentation. Precursor ions were fragmented by collision-induced dissociation (CID) using a collision energy of 30% with an isolation width of 1.1 m/z. The Ion Trap Scan Rate was set to Rapid, with a maximum injection time of 35 ms, an AGC target of 1e4. Dynamic exclusion was set to 45 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Data Analysis: Raw data was searched using the SEQUEST search engine within the Proteome Discoverer software platform, version 2.4 (Thermo Fisher), using the SwissProt mus musculus database. Trypsin was selected as the enzyme allowing up to 2 missed cleavages, with an MS1 mass tolerance of 10 ppm, and an MS2 mass tolerance of 0.6 Da. Carbamidomethyl was set as a fixed modification, while oxidation of methionine was set as a variable modification. The Minora node was used to determine elative protein abundance between samples using the default settings. Percolator was used as the FDR calculator, filtering out peptides which had a q-value greater than 0.01.To identify proteins that were significantly different between two groups, the log2 fold change (FC) and the -log10 of the p-value were plotted in a volcano plot and we utilized the most stringent cut-off parameters of log2FC> 1 and -log10(p-value) >1.3. Significantly decreased proteins among two groups were inserted in PANTHER classification system (http://pantherdb.org/) to classify protein type. To understand what types of biological processes (BPs), molecular functions (MFs), and cellular components (CCs) were shifted on each condition, we inserted all significantly decreased proteins in the gene ontology classification tool DAVID [31] (https://david.ncifcrf.gov/). Protein network analysis was performed using the Search Tool for Retrieval of Interacting Genes/Proteins (STRING), v11.0, and ECM-related proteins were further classified using MatrisomeDB (https://web.mit.edu/hyneslab/matrisome/).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse, Aging, Lc-ms/ms, Extracellular matrix, Scleraxis, Tendon

### Affiliations
Center for Musculoskeletal Research, Department of Orthopaedics & Rehabilitation, University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY, 14642 Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY, 14627
University of Rochester Medical Center Mass Spectrometry Shared Resource Laboratory

### Submitter
Kyle Swovick

### Lab Head
Dr Alayna E. Loiselle
Center for Musculoskeletal Research, Department of Orthopaedics & Rehabilitation, University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY, 14642 Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY, 14627


