### Accession
PXD039263

### Title
Proteome analysis of ctrl and Borcs7 Hoxb8 macrophages

### Description
Hyperactive TLR7 signaling has long been appreciated as a driver of autoimmune disease in mouse models by breaking tolerance to self-nucleic acids1-5. Recently, the first monogenic mutations within TLR7 or its associated regulator Unc93b16,7 have been identified as causative agents of human lupus. The unifying feature of these mutations is TLR7 gain-of-function resulting from increased ligand binding. TLR7 is an intracellular transmembrane receptor, localized to late endosomes, that senses RNA breakdown products within these hydrolytic compartments8,9. Hence, its function depends on a complex interplay between specialized organelles, transport mechanisms and membrane interactions. Whether perturbations of any of these endosome-related processes can give rise to TLR7 gain-of-function and facilitate self-reactivity has not been investigated. Here we show that a dysregulated endosomal compartment can result in TLR7 gain-of-function and lupus disease in humans. Mechanistically, the late endosomal protein complex BORC-Arl8b controls TLR7 protein levels by mediating the receptor's final sorting step towards lysosomal degradation. A direct interaction between Arl8b and Unc93b1 is required to regulate the turnover of TLR7. We identified an amino acid insertion in Unc93b1 in a patient with childhood-onset lupus, which results in loss of interaction with the BORC-Arl8b complex and an accumulation of functional TLR7. Our results highlight the importance of an intact endomembrane system to prevent autoimmune disease. Disrupting the proper progression of TLR7 through its endocytic life cycle is sufficient to break immunological tolerance to nucleic acids. Our work expands the repertoire of cellular mechanisms important to restrict pathological TLR7 activity. Identifying and stratifying lupus patients based on a TLR7-driven pathology opens the way for precision medicine specifically targeting TLR7.

### Sample Protocol
Eight biological replicates of Borcs7-/- and vector control cells (2 million per sample) were lysed under denaturing conditions in a buffer containing 3 M guanidinium chloride (GdmCl), 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP), 40 mM chloroacetamide and 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5. Lysates were denatured at 95°C for 10 min shaking at 1000 rpm in a thermal shaker and sonicated in a water bath for 10 min. Each lysate was diluted with a dilution buffer containing 10% acetonitrile and 25 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, to reach a 1 M GdmCl concentration. Then, proteins were digested with LysC (Roche, Basel, Switzerland; enzyme to protein ratio 1:50, MS-grade) shaking at 700 rpm at 37°C for 2.5 hours. The digestion mixture was diluted again with the same dilution buffer to reach 0.5 M GdmCl, followed by a tryptic digestion (Roche, enzyme to protein ratio 1:50, MS-grade) and incubation at 37°C overnight in a thermal shaker at 700 rpm. Peptide desalting was performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Pierce C18 Tips, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA). Desalted peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid in water and further separated into four fractions by strong cation exchange chromatography (SCX, 3M Purification, Meriden, CT). Eluates were first dried in a SpeedVac, then dissolved in 5% acetonitrile and 2% formic acid in water, briefly vortexed, and sonicated in a water bath for 30 seconds before injection to nano-LC-MS.
LC-MS/MS was carried out by nanoflow reverse phase liquid chromatography (Dionex Ultimate 3000, Thermo Scientific) coupled online to a Q-Exactive HF Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Briefly, the LC separation was performed using a PicoFrit analytical column (75 μm ID × 50 cm long, 15 µm Tip ID; New Objectives, Woburn, MA) in-house packed with 3-µm C18 resin (Reprosil-AQ Pur, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany). Peptides were eluted using a gradient from 3.8 to 38% solvent B in solvent A over 120 min at 266 nL per minute flow rate. Solvent A was 0.1 % formic acid and solvent B was 79.9% acetonitrile, 20% H2O, and 0.1% formic acid. Nanoelectrospray was generated by applying 3.5 kV. A cycle of one full Fourier transformation scan mass spectrum (300−1750 m/z, resolution of 60,000 at m/z 200, automatic gain control (AGC) target 1 × 106) was followed by 12 data-dependent MS/MS scans (resolution of 30,000, AGC target 5 × 105) with a normalized collision energy of 25 eV. To avoid repeated sequencing of the same peptides, a dynamic exclusion window of 30 sec was used. In addition, only peptide charge states between two to eight were sequenced.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data were processed with MaxQuant software (v2.0.1.0) and searched against the mouse proteome database UniProtKB with 55,366 entries, released in March 2021. Parameters of MaxQuant database searching were a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 for proteins and peptides, a minimum peptide length of seven amino acids, a first search mass tolerance for peptides of 20 ppm and a main search tolerance of 4.5 ppm, and using the function “match between runs”. A maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed for the tryptic digest. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification, while N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Borcs7, Endosome dysfunction

### Affiliations
Mass Spectrometry Facility MPIMG
Max Planck Institute for Infection Biology, Berlin, Germany

### Submitter
David Meierhofer

### Lab Head
Dr Olivia Majer
Max Planck Institute for Infection Biology, Berlin, Germany


