### Accession
PXD012737

### Title
Tools for flesh quality and shelf life monitoring of high pressure processed European sea bass (Dicentrarchus labrax) fillets

### Description
Fresh fish are highly perishable food products and their short shelf-life limits their commercial exploitation, leads to waste and has a negative impact on aquaculture sustainability. New non-thermal food processing methods, such as High pressure (HP), are being investigated to prolong shelf-life while assuring high food quality. We applied several tools to evaluate the impacts of HP processing on European sea bass (Dicentrarchus labrax) fillets quality and shelf life. The data here presented includes visual and physical measurements of flesh quality and the microbiome and proteome profiles of control and HP-processed sea bass fillets (600MPa, 25ºC, 5min), after isothermal storage (2°C) for different periods ranging from 1 to 67 days. Color (L-, a- and b- values) change and texture (hardness, cohesiveness and adhesiveness) parameters were obtained by using appropriate colorimeter and texture analyser, respectively, during refrigerated storage. Bacterial diversity was analysed by Illumina high-throughput sequencing of the 16S rRNA gene in five pooled DNAs from control or HP-processed fillets after 1, 11 or 67 days and the raw reads were deposited in the NCBI-SRA database with accession number PRJNA517618. In addition, high-throughput sequencing of the internal transcribed spacer (ITS) region targeting yeast and moulds was run for control or HP-processed fillets at the end of storage (11 or 67 days, respectively), being deposited under SRA accession PRJNA517779. Quantitative label-free proteomics profiles were analysed by SWATH-MS (Sequential Windowed data independent Acquisition of the Total High-resolution-Mass Spectra) in myofibrillar or sarcoplasmic enriched protein extracts pooled for control or HP-processed filets after short (1d) or long-term (11-67 days) storage. These data support the findings reported in “High pressure processing of European sea bass (Dicentrarchus labrax) fillets and tools for flesh quality and shelf life monitoring” (Tsironi et al. 2019).

### Sample Protocol
Differences in protein levels in control (C) or HP fillets (C1, HP1, C11, HP67) were analyzed by SWATH-MS (Sequential Window data independent Acquisition of the Total High-resolution-Mass Spectra) using pools of 6 individuals/sampling point. Two types of protein extracts were carried out from muscle tissue (n=6 individuals/sampling point), the myofibrillar and sarcoplasmic enriched protein extracts (based on Pazos et al., 2015 with modifications). The extraction buffers used for myofibrillar extracts was 50 mM Tris buffer pH 7.2, 100 mM DTT, 1.7% SDS and for sarcoplasmic extracts was 10 mM Tris buffer pH 7.2 and both buffers contained a protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma, US). 0.5 g of muscle was reduced to a powder in liquid nitrogen and then ≈0.1g was solubilized in extraction buffer (ratio: 1 g of tissue/8 ml of buffer), and exposed to mechanical disruption using 0.5 mm zirconia/silica beads (Biospec) in a Bertin Precellys 24 homogeniser using 2 cycles of 20s at 6,800 rpm. The homogenates were boiled at 95 ºC for 10 min and allowed to cool at room temperature. The soluble protein fraction was separated by centrifugation at 28,000×g for 15 min at 20 ºC, alkylated with acrylamide solution (40%) in a ratio of 1 acrylamide: 15 protein solution (v/v) and stored at -80 ºC. The soluble protein concentration was determined using a Bradford assay.For SWATH-MS proteomic analysis the protein extracts were subjected to in gel digestion following the short-GeLC method as described in Anjo et al., 2015.Briefly, the volume corresponding to 50 μg of each pooled sample/sampling point, as well as a pooled mixture of all samples (10 μg/sample pool of C1+HP1+C11+HP67), were partially fractionated by SDS- PAGE. Selected gel regions were excised and processed as in Santa et al. 2016 for destaining, dehydration, rehydration, in-gel protein digestion using trypsin, peptide extraction and solid phase extraction with C18 sorbent (OMIX tip, Agilent Technologies). Samples were analysed using LC-SWATH-MS acquisition on a Triple TOF™ 5600 System (Sciex®, Framingham, MA) using information-dependent acquisition (IDA) of the pooled mixture of all samples; followed by SWATH acquisition of each individual pool per treatment per sampling point. Peptide separation was performed using liquid chromatography (nanoLC Ultra 2D, Eksigent) on a ChromXP C18CL reverse phase column (300 µm × 15 cm, 3 µm, 120Å, Eksigent) at 5 µL/min with a 45 min gradient from 2% to 35% acetonitrile in 0.1% FA with 5% DMSO, and the peptides were eluted into the mass spectrometer using an electrospray ionization source (DuoSpray™ Source, Sciex). IDA experiments were performed by analysing each fraction of the mixture of all samples. The mass spectrometer was set for IDA scanning full spectra (350-1250 m/z) for 250 ms, followed by up to 100 MS/MS scans (100–1500 m/z from a dynamic accumulation time – minimum 30 ms for precursors above the intensity threshold of 1000 counts per second (cps) – in order to maintain a cycle time of 3.3 s). Candidate ions with a charge state between +2 and +5 and counts above a minimum threshold of 10 cps were isolated for fragmentation and one MS/MS spectra was collected before adding those ions to the exclusion list for 25 seconds (mass spectrometer operated by Analyst® TF 1.7, Sciex). Rolling collision energy was used with a collision energy spread (CES) of 5. The SWATH setup was as in Gillet et al, 2012 with the same chromatographic conditions used for IDA acquisitions. Briefly, the mass spectrometer was operated in a looped product ion mode. The SWATH-MS setup was designed specifically for the samples to be analysed, in order to adapt the SWATH windows to the complexity of this batch of samples. A set of 60 windows of variable width (containing 1 m/z for window overlap) was constructed covering the precursor mass range of 350-1250 m/z. A 200 ms survey scan (350-1250 m/z) was acquired at the beginning of each cycle for instrument calibration and SWATH MS/MS spectra were collected from 100–1500 m/z for 50 ms resulting in a cycle time of 3.3 s from the precursors ranging from 350 to 1250 m/z. The collision energy for each window was determined according to the calculation for a charge +2 ion centered upon the window with variable CES according to the window.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification and library generation were carried out using Protein Pilot software (v5.0, Sciex®) and the following search parameters: 1) comparison against the predicted proteins from the sea bass genome database (June 2012 draft assembly dicLab v1.0c with annotation from July 2013; file diclab1_pep.faa.gz downloaded from http://seabass.mpipz.mpg.de/DOWNLOADS/; Tine et al., 2014); 2) acrylamide alkylation; 3) trypsin digestion. The SWATHTM processing plug-in for PeakViewTM (v2.0.01, ABSciex®) was used for SWATH data processing. Peptides were selected automatically from the library following the criteria: i) unique peptides for a specific targeted protein were ranked by the intensity of the precursor ion from the IDA analysis; ii) peptides that contained biological modifications and/or were shared between different protein entries/isoforms were excluded. Up to 15 peptides were chosen per protein, and SWATHTM quantification was attempted for all proteins considered as positive identifications. Peptide retention time was adjusted using the malE-GFP peptides. Up to 5 target fragment ions per peptide were automatically selected and the peak groups were scored following the criteria described in Lambert et al., 2013. Protein levels were estimated by summing all the transitions from all the peptides for a given protein as described by Collins et al 2013 and normalized to the total intensity of the sample at the protein level.

### Publication Abstract
Fresh fish are highly perishable food products and their short shelf-life limits their commercial exploitation and leads to waste, which has a negative impact on aquaculture sustainability. New non-thermal food processing methods, such as high pressure (HP) processing, prolong shelf-life while assuring high food quality. The effect of HP processing (600MPa, 25&#xa0;&#xb0;C, 5min) on European sea bass (<i>Dicentrarchus labrax</i>) fillet quality and shelf life was investigated. The data presented comprises microbiome and proteome profiles of control and HP-processed sea bass fillets from 1 to 67 days of isothermal storage at 2&#xa0;&#xb0;C. Bacterial diversity was analysed by Illumina high-throughput sequencing of the <i>16S rRNA</i> gene in pooled DNAs from control or HP-processed fillets after 1, 11 or 67 days and the raw reads were deposited in the NCBI-SRA database with accession number PRJNA517618. Yeast and fungi diversity were analysed by high-throughput sequencing of the internal transcribed spacer (ITS) region for control and HP-processed fillets at the end of storage (11 or 67 days, respectively) and have the SRA accession number PRJNA517779. Quantitative label-free proteomics profiles were analysed by SWATH-MS (Sequential Windowed data independent Acquisition of the Total High-resolution-Mass Spectra) in myofibrillar or sarcoplasmic enriched protein extracts pooled for control or HP-processed fillets after 1, 11 and 67 days of storage. Proteome data was deposited in the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifiers PXD012737. These data support the findings reported in the associated manuscript "High pressure processing of European sea bass (<i>Dicentrarchus labrax</i>) fillets and tools for flesh quality and shelf life monitoring", Tsironi et&#xa0;al., 2019, JFE 262:83-91, doi.org/10.1016/j.jfoodeng.2019.05.010.

### Keywords
European sea bass; fillet; high pressure; metagenomics; proteomics; swath

### Affiliations
Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology

### Submitter
Cátia Santa

### Lab Head
Dr Bruno Manadas
Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology


