### Accession
PXD008522

### Title
Proteomic analysis of triple negative breast cancer cell lines

### Description
We analysed aquired chemotherapeutic resistance of two different triple negative breast cancer cell lines BT-549 (Doxorubicin resistance) and MDA-MB-468 (5-Fluorouracil) by comparing the proteome of the parental cell line with the resistant cell line.

### Sample Protocol
Whole cell proteomes were prepared by LysC/ Trypsin digest according to the iSt protocol, but in eppendorf tubes without further fractionation. Samples were analysed on a QExactive HF, after RP separation over 135 minutes on a easy nLc12000 with a in-house prepared 15 cm column packed with 1.9 µm C18 particles

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed with MaxQuant with essentially standard settings, but at least one unique peptide for protein identification. In addtion LFQ quantification was actived and performed also based on match between runs.

### Publication Abstract
Target-specific treatment modalities are currently not available for triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC), and acquired chemotherapy resistance is a primary obstacle for the treatment of these tumors. Here we employed derivatives of BT-549 and MDA-MB-468 TNBC cell lines that were adapted to grow in the presence of either 5-Fluorouracil, Doxorubicin or Docetaxel in an aim to identify molecular pathways involved in the adaptation to drug-induced cell killing. All six drug-adapted BT-549 and MDA-MB-468 cell lines displayed cross resistance to chemotherapy and decreased apoptosis sensitivity. Expression of the anti-apoptotic co-chaperone BAG3 was notably enhanced in two thirds (4/6) of the six resistant lines simultaneously with higher expression of HSP70 in comparison to parental controls. Doxorubicin-resistant BT-549 (BT-549<sup>r</sup>DOX<sup>20</sup>) and 5-Fluorouracil-resistant MDA-MB-468 (MDA-MB-468<sup>r</sup>5-FU<sup>2000</sup>) cells were chosen for further analysis with the autophagy inhibitor Bafilomycin A1 and lentiviral depletion of ATG5, indicating that enhanced cytoprotective autophagy partially contributes to increased drug resistance and cell survival. Stable lentiviral BAG3 depletion was associated with a robust down-regulation of Mcl-1, Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL, restoration of drug-induced apoptosis and reduced cell adhesion in these cells, and these death-sensitizing effects could be mimicked with the BAG3/Hsp70 interaction inhibitor YM-1 and by KRIBB11, a selective transcriptional inhibitor of HSF-1. Furthermore, BAG3 depletion was able to revert the EMT-like transcriptional changes observed in BT-549<sup>r</sup>DOX<sup>20</sup> and MDA-MB-468<sup>r</sup>5-FU<sup>2000</sup> cells. In summary, genetic and pharmacological interference with BAG3 is capable to resensitize TNBC cells to treatment, underscoring its relevance for cell death resistance and as a target to overcome therapy resistance of breast cancer.

### Keywords
Chemotherapy resistance, Triple negative breast cancer

### Affiliations
University of Frankfurt
Experimental Neurosurgery, University Hospital,Goethe University, Frankfurt, Germany

### Submitter
Florian Bonn

### Lab Head
Dr Donat Kögel
Experimental Neurosurgery, University Hospital,Goethe University, Frankfurt, Germany


