### Accession
PXD016591

### Title
Functional Analysis of the Francisella Lysine Decarboxylase

### Description
Lysine decarboxylases (Ldc) are widely distributed enzymes that catalyse the decarboxylation of L-lysine to form cadaverine, a natural polyamine playing a key role in a wide range of physiological process. The Gram-negative bacterium Francisella tularensis is the etiological agent of tularemia.  A previous report showed that F. novicida transposon mutant with insertions in cadA (FTT0406) which encodes a putative lysine decarboxylase (herein designed as LdcF) was attenuated in mouse spleen. Here, to address the role of this protein, we compared the proteomes of bacterial strains expressing or not LdcF.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial cultures were grown in MMH at 37°C under shaking to late logarithmic phase. Five independent replicates were prepared for each sample type. Aliquots corresponding to 1x109 cells were centrifuged (8,000 rpm; 10 min; 4°C) and the resulting pellets were resuspended in 50 µl BugBuster® Reagent to improve the release of soluble proteins before addition of 50 µl Laemmli buffer and storage at -20°C until further use. Samples solubilized in Laemmli buffer were stacked in the top of a SDS-PAGE gel (4-12% NuPAGE, Life Technologies) and stained with Coomassie blue R-250 before in-gel digestion using modified trypsin (Promega, sequencing grade) as previously described (Casabona et al., 2013, Proteomics). Resulting peptides were analyzed by online nanoliquid chromatography coupled to tandem MS (UltiMate 3000 and Q Exactive Plus, Thermo Scientific). Peptides were sampled on a 300 µm x 5 mm PepMap C18 precolumn and separated on a 75 µm x 250 mm C18 column (ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 1.9µm, Dr. Maisch GmbH) using a 120-min gradient.

### Data Protocol
MS and MS/MS data were acquired using Xcalibur (Thermo Scientific). Data were processed automatically using Mascot Distiller software (version 2.7.1.0, Matrix Science). Peptides and proteins were identified using Mascot (version 2.6) through concomitant searches against the Francisella novicida U112 database from MicroScope (Vallenet et al., 2019, Nucleic Acids Res.), the classical contaminants database (homemade) and the corresponding reversed databases. The Proline software (http://proline.profiproteomics.fr) was used to filter the results: minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids, conservation of rank 1 peptides, peptide-spectrum match identification FDR < 1% as calculated on scores by employing the reverse database strategy, minimum peptide score of 25, and minimum of 1 specific peptide per identified protein group. Proline was then used to perform a compilation, grouping and MS1-based label-free quantification of the protein groups from the different samples.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nanolc-ms/ms, Lysine decarboxylase, Francisella tularensis

### Affiliations
EDyP

### Submitter
Yohann Couté

### Lab Head
Dr Virginie Brun
EDyP


