### Accession
PXD028282

### Title
Microdissected pyramidal cell proteomics of Alzheimer brain reveals alterations in Creatine Kinase B, 14-3-3-g and Heat Shock Cognate 71

### Description
Novel insights on proteins involved in Alzheimer disease (AD) are needed. Since multiple cell types and matrix components are altered in AD, bulk analysis of brain tissue may be difficult to interpret. In the current study, we isolated pyramidal cells from the CA1 region of the hippocampus from five AD and five neurologically healthy donors using laser capture microdissection. The samples were analysed by proteomics using 18O labeled internal standard and nano-HPLC MS/MS for relative quantification. Fold change between AD and control was calculated for the proteins that were identified in at least two individual proteomes from each group. From the ten cases analyzed, sixty-two proteins were identified in at least two AD cases and two control cases. Creatine Kinase B-type (CKB), 14-3-3-g and Heat Shock Cognate 71 (Hsc71) which have not been extensively studied in the context of human AD brain previously, were selected for further studies by immunohistochemistry (IHC). In hippocampus, semi-quantitative measures of IHC staining of the three proteins confirmed the findings from our proteomic analysis. Studies of the same proteins in frontal cortex revealed that the alterations remained for CKB and 14-3-3-g but not for Hsc71. Protein upregulation in CA1 neurons of final stage AD is either a result from detrimental, pathological effects, or from cell specific protective response mechanisms in surviving neurons. Based on previous findings from experimental studies, CKB and Hsc71 likely exhibit protective effects, whereas 14-3-3-g represents a detrimental path. These new players could represent pathways of importance for development of new therapeutic strategies.

### Sample Protocol
Human brain samples of hippocampus and frontal cortex of AD and control were obtained from the Netherlands brain bank (NBB), Netherlands institute for Neuroscience, Amsterdam. For LCM followed by proteomic analysis, fresh frozen hippocampal tissue was analyzed. The dissected neurons were captured in 30 µl autoclaved water applied in the cap of low binding tubes (Axygen, CA, USA). After the dissection of 1000 CA1 pyramidal cells from each subject (originating from 3-5 different brain sections per case) tubes were centrifuged briefly in a mini desk-top centrifuge (VWR, PA, USA) to collect the sample at the bottom of the tube. All samples were kept at −80°C until further sample preparation and analysis. The microdissected neurons were digested by trypsin (Promega Biotech, Stockholm, Sweden) (1:50 trypsin:protein ratio) in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (eluent for LC-MS, Sigma-Aldrich), 2 mM calcium chloride (anhydrous, free-flowing, Redi-Dri³ 97%, Sigma-Aldrich), 0.2% RapiGest (Waters Corporation, WI, USA) for 12 hours in an incubator set at 37 °C. The reaction was acidified by addition of 1.5 l 37% hydrogen chloride (Sigma-Aldrich) in order to hydrolyze RapiGest, and centrifuged for 10 min at 15 000 rpm at +4 C (Eppendorf, Centrifuge 5417C, rotor FA45) to separate hydrophobic debris from hydrolyzed RapiGest and lipids. An internal 18O labelled protein standard was prepared from pooling equal sized pieces of microdissected CA1 from all individual samples which were then dried by speedvac (MAXI dry lyo) and digested with trypsin in the presence of  18O-labeled water (97 atom% 18O, Sigma-Aldrich) (by reconstituting ammonium bicarbonate, calcium chloride , RapiGest and trypsin in 18O-labeled water).  Protein amount in the dissected brain cells was estimated by calculating the dissected volumes from the tissue and appreciating a 10% protein content from the mass. Approximately 0.4 g of tryptic peptides from each individual LCM sample of microdissected neurons was dissolved in 7.5 l of 0.2% formic acid (99%, for LC/MS, VWR) and sonicated for 5 minutes in an ice-cold water bath. Then, an equal amount of 18O labeled internal standard was added to each sample in order to allow a relative quantification. Each sample + standard mixture was subsequently purified by ZipTipC18 chromatography (Millipore, MA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The samples were dried by speedvac and stored at −80°C until LC-MS/MS analyses. The samples were dissolved in 0.2% formic acid and a volume of 9 μl were injected to the LC-MS/MS (Q Exactive, ThermoScientific) coupled to a high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) system (EASY-nLC 1000, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid, mobile phase B was acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. The peptides were eluted by a 120 min long gradient; 0−100 min 30% B, 100-120 min, 65% B, at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The analytical column was a NANO-HPLC capillary C18 column, 0.075 150 mm (Nikkyo Technos, Tokyo, Japan) and the trap column was an Acclaim® PepMap100 pre-column, 100 μm  2 cm (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA).

### Data Protocol
Peptide selection was set at m/z 350–1800 and 5% FDR (false discovery rate) was used as criteria. The masspectrum data were subjected to Proteome Discoverer (Ver.1.4) with the MASCOT search engine (Ver. 2.5.1) against SwissProt database 2015_04 with search criteria;, Trypsin: max 1 missed cleavage site; taxonomy: Homo sapiens; dynamic modifications: Oxidation (M), Label 18O (1 or 2) C-term (18O incomplete labeling (Heavy+Medium)/Light)). Data was normalized by setting the median ratio to 1 for each analysis, meaning that equal numbers of proteins had a ratio higher and lower than one.

### Publication Abstract
Novel insights on proteins involved in Alzheimer's disease (AD) are needed. Since multiple cell types and matrix components are altered in AD, bulk analysis of brain tissue maybe difficult to interpret. In the current study, we isolated pyramidal cells from the cornu ammonis 1 (CA1) region of the hippocampus from five AD and five neurologically healthy donors using laser capture microdissection (LCM). The samples were analyzed by proteomics using <sup>18</sup>O-labeled internal standard and nano-high-performance liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (HPLC-MS/MS) for relative quantification. Fold change between AD and control was calculated for the proteins that were identified in at least two individual proteomes from each group. From the 10 cases analyzed, 62 proteins were identified in at least two AD cases and two control cases. Creatine kinase B-type (CKB), 14-3-3-&#x3b3;, and heat shock cognate 71 (Hsc71), which have not been extensively studied in the context of the human AD brain previously, were selected for further studies by immunohistochemistry (IHC). In hippocampus, semi-quantitative measures of IHC staining of the three proteins confirmed the findings from our proteomic analysis. Studies of the same proteins in the frontal cortex revealed that the alterations remained for CKB and 14-3-3-&#x3b3; but not for Hsc71. Protein upregulation in CA1 neurons of final stage AD is either a result of detrimental, pathological effects, or from cell-specific protective response mechanisms in surviving neurons. Based on previous findings from experimental studies, CKB and Hsc71 likely exhibit protective effects, whereas 14-3-3-&#x3b3; may represent a detrimental pathway. These new players could reflect pathways of importance for the development of new therapeutic strategies.

### Keywords
Q exactive, Alzheimer disease, O18 labelling, Homo sapiens, Quantitative ms

### Affiliations
Karolinska Institutet
PhD

### Submitter
Anna Matton

### Lab Head
Dr Lars Tjernberg
Karolinska Institutet


