### Accession
PXD014696

### Title
Arabidopsis thaliana leaf / E.coli / MEF proteomes label-free shotgun

### Description
Proteomic comparison of Arabidopsis thaliana leaf / E.coli / MEF proteomes generated by digestion with legumain, GluC and trypsin.

### Sample Protocol
Arabidopsis thaliana columbia (Col-8) proteome extract were harvested from 10 week old plant leaves. E. coli Dh5α cells were grown 200 ml LB media until an optical density of OD600nm of 0.7 and harvested by centrifugation. Mouse embryonic fibroblast (MEF) cells were cultured in DMEM GlutaMax™ high glucose (Gibco 61965-026) supplemented with 10% FBS and 1x Penicilin/Streptomycin (Gibco 15140-122) at 37°C, 5% CO2. Once the cells reached a confluency of up to 90 % the media was removed, washed with warm PBS and trypsinized (Gibco 25300-054). The proteomes were digested individually by legumain, GluC and trypsin in parallel. The digestion of 100 µg of Arabidopsis proteome by legumain at protease to proteome ratio of 1:50 was carried out in a reaction containing 0.1 M MES pH 6.0, 0.1 M NaCl, 2 mM DTT, unless otherwise stated. For GluC digestion, same amount of proteome was digested in PBS pH 7.4 with a protease to proteome ratio of 1:50, whereas 1:100 ratio was used for trypsin digestion in 0.1 M HEPES pH 7.4 supplemented with 5% acetonitrile and 5 mM CaCl2. The digestions were carried in triplicate for each protease at 37 ºC overnight. For pH shift assays with legumain, the pH was lowered to approximately pH 4.0 by addition of 1 M HCl after 5 h incubation at 37°C at pH 6.0. Additional 2 µg Legumain and 1 mM DTT were added and incubated for another 5 h at 37°C. All samples were pre-cleaned using C18 stage tip. Peptides were separated on a two-column nano-HPLC setup (ThermoFisher, Dreieich, Germany) with a binary gradient from 5-35% B for 80 minutes coupled online to a high resolution Q-TOF mass spectrometer (ImpactII, Bruker) as described (Rinschen et al., 2017).

### Data Protocol
The MaxQuant software package (v1.6.0.16) was used for identification and quantification of peptides & proteins with default settings for LFQ quantification and match between runs applied (Tyanova et al., 2016). Protein identification required at least 2 unique peptides and LFQ quantification in at least 2 out of 3 biological replicates. Databases used for the search were A. thaliana, M. musculus and E. coli reference proteome as downloaded from UniProt including canonical + all isoform entries. Statistical analysis was done by the Perseus (Tyanova and Cox, 2018) software package (v1.6.1.1).

### Publication Abstract
Bottom-up mass spectrometry-based proteomics utilizes proteolytic enzymes with well characterized specificities to generate peptides amenable for identification by high-throughput tandem mass spectrometry. Trypsin, which cuts specifically after the basic residues lysine and arginine, is the predominant enzyme used for proteome digestion, although proteases with alternative specificities are required to detect sequences that are not accessible after tryptic digest. Here, we show that the human cysteine protease legumain exhibits a strict substrate specificity for cleavage after asparagine and aspartic acid residues during in-solution digestions of proteomes extracted from <i>Escherichia coli</i>, mouse embryonic fibroblast cell cultures, and <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i> leaves. Generating peptides highly complementary in sequence, yet similar in their biophysical properties, legumain (as compared to trypsin or GluC) enabled complementary proteome and protein sequence coverage. Importantly, legumain further enabled the identification and enrichment of protein N-termini not accessible in GluC- or trypsin-digested samples. Legumain cannot cleave after glycosylated Asn residues, which enabled the robust identification and orthogonal validation of N-glycosylation sites based on alternating sequential sample treatments with legumain and PNGaseF and vice versa. Taken together, we demonstrate that legumain is a practical, efficient protease for extending the proteome and sequence coverage achieved with trypsin, with unique possibilities for the characterization of post-translational modification sites.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana mouse ecoli mef legumain digestion

### Affiliations
Forschungszentrum Juelich GmbH ZEA-3 Analytics Wilhelm-Johnen-Str D-52425 Juelich Germany
Forschungszentrum Juelich
ZEA-3 Analytics
Wilhelm-Johnen-Str
D-52425 Juelich

### Submitter
Fatih Demir

### Lab Head
Dr Pitter Florian Huesgen
Forschungszentrum Juelich GmbH ZEA-3 Analytics Wilhelm-Johnen-Str D-52425 Juelich Germany


