### Accession
PXD018772

### Title
Dissecting the molecular mechanisms of mother-to-egg immune protection in the mealworm beetle Tenebrio molitor

### Description
In a number of species, individuals exposed to pathogens can mount an immune response and transmit this immunological experience to their offspring, thereby protecting them against persistent threats. Such vertical transfer of immunity, named trans-generational immune priming (TGIP), has been described in both vertebrates and invertebrates. Although increasingly studied during the last decade, the mechanisms underlying TGIP in invertebrates are still elusive, especially those protecting the earliest offspring life stage, i.e. the embryo developing in the egg. In the present study, we took the mealworm beetle Tenebrio molitor as a biological model, and combined different proteomic and transcriptomic approaches to determine whether mothers transfer a “signal” (such as fragments of infecting bacteria), mRNA and/or protein/peptide effectors to protect their eggs against two natural bacterial pathogens, namely the Gram-positive Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt) and the Gram-negative Serratia entomophila (Se). We demonstrated that eggs are mainly protected by an active direct transfer of a restricted number of immune proteins and of antimicrobial peptides. In contrast, the present data clearly reject the involvement of mRNA transfer while the transmission of a “signal”, if it happens, is marginal and only occurs within 24h after maternal exposure to bacteria. This work exemplifies the power of combining global multidisciplinary approaches to disentangle the different scenarios of a complex trait, providing a comprehensive characterization of TGIP mechanisms in T. molitor. It also paves the way for future alike studies focusing on TGIP in a wide range of invertebrates and vertebrates to identify additional candidates that could be specific to TGIP and to investigate whether the TGIP mechanisms found herein are specific or common to all insect species.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics analysis of eggs laid by mothers after Bt and Se priming compared to PBS-primed ones. Two replicates consisting of 51 and 31 eggs and 49 and 43 eggs were prepared for the control and B. thuringiensis conditions, respectively. Only 52 eggs were available from S. entomophila-primed mothers and they constituted the only replicate for this condition. Eggs originated from a total of 54 different females primed at 8 different dates (Table S4). Due to the limited number of replicates, only qualitative differences were extrapolated from data to identify candidate proteins. We first incubated each egg pool in trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) 0.1% to perform an acidic extraction of peptides that were then purified using a Sep-Pak C18 Plus Light Cartridge (Waters) following manufacturer’s instructions. Peptides were eluted in 5 mL acetonitrile (MeCN) 60% / TFA 0.1% and lyophilized overnight. samples were diluted in ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) 100 mM, reduced by adding DTT (11 mM final concentration, incubation 30 min 56°C), and alkylated with iodoacetamide (34 mM final, 1 hr room temperature, in the dark). Samples were then acidified with diluted trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), centrifuged 10 min 15000 rcf 4°C, and the supernatant volume was reduced by speed-vacuum. The supernatant were then analyzed by top-down LC-MS/MS: one-tenth of each sample were injected on an Ultimate 3000 nanoHPLC system equipped with a 75-µm C18 column and connected to a Q-Exactive Orbitrap high resolution mass spectrometer operated in data-dependent acquisition positive mode (all from Thermo Scientific, Germany). Components, solvents, and operating parameters for nanoLC-MS/MS analysis were as described elsewhere (Deshoux M et al., J Proteome Research 2020).

### Data Protocol
Spectra from the acquired MS/MS files were matched to the sequences of the database of T. molitor proteins we built for this study, using the software Proteome Discoverer vs 1.4 set with the following parameters: no enzyme and 12 / 144 amino acids as minimum / maximum peptide lengths, respectively, tolerance of 10 ppm / 0.02 Da for precursors and fragment ions, carbamidomethylation of cysteine set as a fixed modification, C-terminal protein amidation, and methionine and tryptophan oxidation set as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Trans-generational immune priming; invertebrate immunity; host-pathogens interaction; molecular mechanisms; omics; antimicrobial peptides

### Affiliations
Plateforme BioPark of Archamps
CR Université Grenoble Alpes, Institute for Advanced Biosciences, INSERM U1209, CNRS UMR5309, La Tronche, France. Plateforme BioPark d'Archamps, ArchParc, Saint Julien en Genevois, France

### Submitter
Sebastien Voisin

### Lab Head
Dr Philippe Bulet
CR Université Grenoble Alpes, Institute for Advanced Biosciences, INSERM U1209, CNRS UMR5309, La Tronche, France. Plateforme BioPark d'Archamps, ArchParc, Saint Julien en Genevois, France


