### Accession
PXD009990

### Title
Direct proteome labelling in fruit flies with SILAF reveals differential phosphorylation of mitochondrial proteins upon loss of OXPHOS subunits

### Description
Drosophila melanogaster has been a workhorse of genetics and cell biology for more than a century. However, proteomic-based methods have been limited due to the complexity and dynamic range of the fly proteome and the lack of efficient labelling methods. Here, we advanced a chemically defined food source into direct stable-isotope labelling of amino acids in flies (SILAF). It allows for the rapid and cost-efficient generation of a large number of larvae or flies, with full incorporation of lysine-[13C6] after six labelling days. SILAF followed by fractionation and enrichment gave proteomic insights at a depth of 7,196 proteins and 8,451 phosphorylation sites, which substantiated metabolic regulation on enzymatic level. We applied SILAF to quantify the mitochondrial phosphoproteome of an early-stage leucine-rich PPR motif-containing protein (LRPPRC)-knockdown fly model of mitochondrial disease that almost exclusively affects protein levels of the oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) system. While the mitochondrial compartment was hypo-phosphorylated, two conserved phospho-sites on OXPHOS subunits NDUFB10 and NDUFA4 were significantly upregulated upon impaired OXPHOS function. The ease and versatility of the method actuates the fruit fly as an appealing model in proteomic and post-translational modification studies and it enlarges potential metabolic applications based on heavy amino acid diets.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were covered with 6M guanidine hydrochloride (Sigma-Aldrich G3272) in 20mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride pH 8.0 and homogenised with a teflon pestle. Samples were incubated at room temperature (RT) for 20 min, including a sonication step. After centrifugation, supernatant without any visible fly chitin was transferred and proteins were reduced for 30 minutes at 55°C with 5mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and then alkylated for 15 minutes at room temperature with 15mM 2-chloroacetamide. 50µg of each light (Lys-0 or Lys-0/Arg-0) and heavy (Lys-6 or Lys-6/Arg-10) protein sample was then mixed and diluted 1:10 with 110mM Tris pH 8.5. Label-free samples were used at 100µg. Either Pierce lysyl edopeptidase LysC, MS grade (ThermoFisher Scientific Cat. No. 90307) or Pierce trypsin, MS grade (ThermoFisher Scientific Cat. No. 90057) was added at 1:50 and incubated over night at 37°C. Samples were acidified with 1.2% formic acid, centrifuged and desalted on 3mL EmporeTM SPE cartridges (Sigma-Aldrich 66872-U). The peptides were eluted off the column with 300µL of 40% acetonitrile two times and lyophilised in a SpeedVac (Savant SC110A vacuum concentrator with refrigerated vacuum trap). Peptides were stored at -80°C. Twenty micrograms of peptides derived from the SILAF comparison of male and female fly were separated on a 150mm, 300µm, 2µm C18, Acclaim PepMap (Product No. 164537, Thermo Fisher Scientific) column using a Ultimate 3000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Buffer A was 5% acetonitrile 0.01M ammonium bicarbonate, buffer B was 80% acetonitrile 0.01M ammonium bicarbonate. Separation was performed using a segmented gradient from 1% to 50% buffer B, for 85min and 50% to 95% for 20 min with a flow of 4µL. Fractions were collected every 150 sec and combined into nine fractions by pooling every ninth fraction. Pooled fractions were dried, resuspended in 5 µL 0.1% formic acid from which 2 µL analysed by LC-MS/MS. Peptides aimed at phosphopeptide enrichment were separated on a 4.6 x 250 mm ZORBAX 300 Extend-C18, 5µm, column (Agilent Technologies) at a 1 ml flow. Buffer A was 5% acetonitrile 0.01M ammonium bicarbonate, buffer B was 80% acetonitrile 0.01M ammonium bicarbonate. Peptide separation was performed using a segmented gradient from 5% to 27% buffer B for 65 min and from 27% to 45% buffer B for 30 min. Eluting peptides were collected for 72min. In total, 96 fractions were collected in a 1.2ml V-shaped 96 well plate (Biotix). Upon sample collection, plates were dried overnight and peptides were resuspended in 20 µL 80% acetonitrile, 2% trifluoroacetic acid. All 96 fractions were concatenated into 12 fractions by combining every 12th fraction. One-tenth of the volume was dried, resuspended in 5 µL 0.1% formic acid from which 2 µL analysed by LC-MS/MS. The remaining solution was diluted with lactic acid (GL Sciences) and phosphopeptides were enriched with 3mg TiO2 tips (GL Sciences) using the manufacturer’s instructions. Enriched phosphopeptides samples were dried and resuspended in 5 µL 0.1% formic acid from which 2 µL were used for analysis by LC-MS/MS. Peptides were separated on a 25 cm, 75 μm internal diameter PicoFrit analytical column (New Objective) packed with 1.9 μm ReproSil-Pur media (Dr. Maisch) using an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Buffer A and B were 0.1% formic acid in water and 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid, respectively. Peptides were separated on a segmented gradient from 6% to 31% buffer B for 82 min, and from 31% to 44% buffer B for 5 min at 200nl / min. Eluting peptides were analysed on a QExactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide precursor mass to charge ratio (m/z) measurements (MS1) were carried out at 120000 resolution in the 350 to 1500 m/z range. The top seven most intense precursors, with charge state from two to six only, were selected for HCD fragmentation using 27% normalised collision energy. The m/z of the peptide fragments (MS2) were measured at 30000 resolution, in profile mode, using an AGC target of 2e5 and 80 ms maximum injection time. Upon fragmentation precursors were put on an exclusion list for 45 sec. Phosphopeptide enriched samples were analysed using two technical replicates. For the first replicate, peptides were separated with a gradient from 6% to 31% buffer B for 70 min, and from 31% to 44% buffer B for 17 min, using MS parameters as described above. For the second replicate, peptides were separated with a gradient from 6% to 31% buffer B for 53 min, and from 31% to 44% buffer B for 4 min. The MS parameters were as described, except that the MS2 of the top five most intense precursors were measured at 60000 resolution with 110 ms injection time. Peptide fractions from the small-scale high pH reversed phase separation were analysed on an Orbitrap Tribrid Fusion (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with the same MS parameters as described above, except for centroid mode of acquisition in MS2.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were mapped in batches for either female/male comparison, the holidic phosphorylome and proteome, quality control and proline-6 conversion or DmLRPPRC1 KD with MaxQuant version 1.6.1.0 (18) against the canonical and isoform sequences of the fruit fly proteome (UP000000803_7227 from UniProt, downloaded in September 2018 with 21,939 entries). The reference database was complemented by MaxQuant’s own default contaminant library. Methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications, cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification. The maximum number of modifications per peptide was set to five. In silico digestion was performed with LysC/P as a protease with maximum two missed cleavages. A false discovery rate of 0.01 was chosen protein identification and for peptide spectra matches. Database searching was done using a tolerance of 20 ppm was for the first search, and 4.5 ppm as main search tolerance. Label-free samples were quantified with default LFQ settings.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Fly, Fruit fly, Bsf, Methods development, Drosophila, Holidic, Silaf, Silac, Oxphos, Lrpprc, Drosophila melanogaster

### Affiliations
MMK, Karolinska Institute
MBB, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm/Sweden

### Submitter
Florian Schober

### Lab Head
Dr Anna Wredenberg
MBB, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm/Sweden


