### Accession
PXD008624

### Title
E2~dID: A versatile approach to identify substrates modified with ubiquitin and ubiquitin-like molecules by specific E3 enzymes

### Description
Covalent modifications of proteins with ubiquitin and ubiquitin-like molecules are instrumental to most, if not all biological processes. However, identifying the E3 ligase responsible for these modifications remains a major bottleneck in ubiquitin research. Here, we have developed an E2-thioester-driven identification (E2~dID) method for the targeted identification of substrates of specific E2 and E3 enzyme pairs. E2~dID exploits the central position of E2 conjugating enzymes in the ubiquitination cascade and provides in vitro generated biotinylated E2~ubiquitin thioester conjugates as the sole source for ubiquitination in extracto. This enables purification and identification of modified proteins by mass spectrometry under stringent conditions independently of the biological source of the extract. We demonstrate the sensitivity and specificity of E2-dID by identifying and validating substrates of the APC/C in human cells. Finally, performing E2~dID with SUMO in S. cerevisiae we show that E2-dID can be easily adapted to other ubiquitin-like modifiers and experimental models.

### Sample Protocol
Biotinylated targeted proteins were purified by NeutrAvidin beads, washed extensively, then re-suspended in an equal volume of 100 mM TEAB pH=8.5, 10 mM TCEP), 10mM IAA, incubated at RT for 60 min, and digested with 2 µg MS grade Trypsin (Thermofisher over night at 37 0C. The digested off peptides were filtered in C8 filter-tip (in-house made) to remove possible magnetic beads, dried in a SpeedVac and labelled with TMT10plex as instructed by the manufacturer (Thermo Fisher). Labelled peptides were mixed, dried in a SpeedVac and fractionated on a U3000 HPLC system (Thermo Fisher) using an XBridge BEH C18 column (2.1 mm id x 15 cm, 130 Å, 3.5 µm, Waters) at pH=10, and a flow rate at 200 ul/min in 30 min linear gradient from 5 - 35% acetonitrile /NH4OH. The fractions were collected at every 30 sec into a 96-wellplate by columns, concatenated by rows to 8 pooled fractions and dried in a SpeedVac. Dried peptides were resuspended in 0.5% formic acid (FA) before LC-MS/MS analysis. The LC-MS/MS analyses were performed on the Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid or Orbitrap Lumos mass spectrometer coupled with U3000 RSLCnano UHPLC system. Both instrument and columns used below are from Thermo Fisher. The peptides were first loaded to a PepMap C18 trap (100 µm i.d. x 20 mm, 100 Å, 5 µm) for 10 min at 10 µl/min with 0.1% FA/H2O, then separated on a PepMap C18 column (75 µm i.d. x 500 mm, 100 Å, 2 µm) at 300 nl/min and a linear gradient of 4-28% ACN/0.1%FA in 180 min/cycle at 210 min for each fraction. The data acquisition used the SPS10-MS3 method with Top Speed at 3s per cycle time. The full MS scans (m/z 380-1500) were acquired at 120,000 resolution at m/z 200 with a lock mass at 445.12003, and the AGC was set at 4e5 with 50 ms maximum injection time. Then the most abundant multiply-charge ions (z = 2-6, above 5000 counts) were subjected to MS/MS fragmentation by CID (35% CE) and detected in ion trap for peptide identification. The isolation window by quadrupole was set m/z 1.0, and AGC at 1e4 with 35 ms maximum injection time. The dynamic exclusion window was set ±10 ppm with a duration at 40 sec, and only single charge status per precursor was fragmented. Following each MS2, the 10-notch MS3 was performed on the top 10 most abundant fragments isolated by Synchronous Precursor Selection (SPS). The precursors were fragmented by HCD at 65% CE then detected in Orbitrap at m/z 100-500 with 50K resolution to for peptide quantification data. The AGC was set 1e5 with maximum injection time at 105 ms.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS data were processed in Proteome Discoverer 2.1 or 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using the SequestHT search engine to search against the reviewed Uniprot protein database of Homo sapiens (20,238 entries, Swiss-prot), or Saccharomyces cerevisiae (7,904 entries, Swiss-Prot), plus the in-house contaminate database. The precursor mass tolerance was set at 20 ppm and the fragment ion mass tolerance was set at 0.5 Da. Spectra were searched for fully tryptic peptides with maximum 2 miss-cleavages. Carbamidomethyl at Cys was set as static modifications, and the dynamic modifications included N-acetylation (Protein N-terminus), Deamidation (N, Q), Oxidation (M), TMT6plex (Peptide N-terminus, K, and GlyGly), and GlyGly (K) for ubiquitination and SUMO samples, or the above GlyGly (GG) replaced by VG for UFM1 (Ubiquitin-fold modifier 1) samples. Peptides were validated by Percolator with q value set at 0.05 for the Decoy database search. The search result was filtered by the Consensus step where the protein FDR was set at 0.01 (strict) and 0.05 (relaxed). The TMT10plex reporter ion quantifier used 20 ppm integration tolerance on the most confident centroid peak at the MS3 level. Both unique and razor peptides were used for quantification. Peptides with average reported S/N>3 were used for protein quantification. Only master proteins were reported.

### Publication Abstract
Covalent modifications of proteins with ubiquitin and ubiquitin-like molecules are instrumental to many biological processes. However, identifying the E3 ligase responsible for these modifications remains a major bottleneck in ubiquitin research. Here, we present an E2-thioester-driven identification (E2~dID) method for the targeted identification of substrates of specific E2 and E3 enzyme pairs. E2~dID exploits the central position of E2-conjugating enzymes in the ubiquitination cascade and provides in vitro generated biotinylated E2~ubiquitin thioester conjugates as the sole source for ubiquitination in extracts. This enables purification and mass spectrometry-based identification of modified proteins under stringent conditions independently of the biological source of the extract. We demonstrate the sensitivity and specificity of E2-dID by identifying and validating substrates of APC/C in human cells. Finally, we perform E2~dID with SUMO in S. cerevisiae, showing that this approach can be easily adapted to other ubiquitin-like modifiers and experimental models.

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Ap-ms, Tmt

### Affiliations
The Institute of Cancer Research
Functional Proteomics, Institute Cancer Research
&
Proteomic Mass Spectrometry, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute

### Submitter
James Wright

### Lab Head
Dr Jyoti Choudhary
The Institute of Cancer Research


