### Accession
PXD042773

### Title
Mechanism of orphan subunit recognition during assembly quality control_BioMass@LMB

### Description
Cells contain numerous abundant molecular machines assembled from multiple subunits. Imbalances in subunit production and failed assembly generate orphan subunits that are eliminated by poorly defined pathways. Here, we determined how orphan subunits of the cytosolic chaperonin CCT are recognized. Several unassembled CCT subunits recruited the E3 ubiquitin ligase HERC2 using ZNRD2 as an adaptor. Both factors were necessary for orphan CCT subunit degradation in cells, sufficient for CCT subunit ubiquitination with purified factors, and necessary for optimal cell fitness. Domain mapping and structure prediction defined the molecular features of a minimal HERC2-ZNRD2-CCT module. The structural model, whose key elements were validated in cells using point mutants, shows why ZNRD2 selectively recognizes multiple orphaned CCT subunits without engaging assembled CCT. Our findings reveal how failures during CCT assembly are monitored and provide a paradigm for the molecular recognition of orphan subunits, the largest source of quality control substrates in cells.

### Sample Protocol
Affinity-purified protein samples on beads were resuspended in 50 µl of 20 mM HEPES, followed by reduction in DTT at 56°C and alkylation with iodoacetamide in the dark at room temperature. Samples were then digested with 200 ng of trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37°C. After centrifugation at 10,000 x g for 5 minutes, the supernatant was transferred to a new tube. The beads were washed once with 30 µl of 5% formic acid (FA), and the solution was combined with the corresponding supernatant. The resulting peptide mixtures were desalted using a home-made C18 (3M Empore) stage tip that contained 2 µl of Poros Oligo R3 resin (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Bound peptides were eluted from the stage tip with 30–80% acetonitrile (MeCN) and partially dried in a SpeedVac (Savant). Peptides were separated on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano System (Thermo Scientific) fitted with a 75 μm x 25 cm nanoEase C18 T3 column (Waters), using mobile phases buffer A (2% MeCN, 0.1% FA) and buffer B (80% MeCN, 0.1% FA). Eluted peptides were introduced directly via a nanospray ion source into a Q Exactive Plus hybrid quadrupoleOrbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent mode. MS1 spectra were acquired from 380–1600 m/z at a resolution of 70K, followed by MS2 acquisitions of the 15 most intense ions with a resolution of 17.5K and NCE of 27%. MS target values of 1e6 and MS2 target values of 5e4 were used. Dynamic exclusion was set for 40 sec

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw data files were processed for protein identification and quantification with MaxQuant software (version 1.6.17.0) 70 employing the Andromeda search engine71. The data were searched against the Homo sapiens reviewed UniProt FASTA database (Dec 2020). Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification, while oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Up to two missed cleavage sites of trypsin were allowed. Protein quantification was performed using the label-free quantitation (LFQ) algorithm in MaxQuant, and MaxQuant output was further processed with Perseus software (version 1.6.15.0). Briefly, potential contaminants, reverse hits, hits only identified by site, and hits with only 1 unique and razor peptide were filtered out prior to log2 transformation of the LFQ intensities. Replicate samples were grouped, and the data was filtered to retain proteins with three valid values in at least one group. Missing values were then imputed from a normal distribution with a width of 0.3 and a downshift of 1.8.

### Publication Abstract
Cells contain numerous abundant molecular machines assembled from multiple subunits. Imbalances in subunit production and failed assembly generate orphan subunits that are eliminated by poorly defined pathways. Here, we determined how orphan subunits of the cytosolic chaperonin CCT are recognized. Several unassembled CCT subunits recruited the E3 ubiquitin ligase HERC2 using ZNRD2 as an adaptor. Both factors were necessary for orphan CCT subunit degradation in cells, sufficient for CCT subunit ubiquitination with purified factors, and necessary for optimal cell fitness. Domain mapping and structure prediction defined the molecular features of a minimal HERC2-ZNRD2-CCT module. The structural model, whose key elements were validated in cells using point mutants, shows why ZNRD2 selectively recognizes multiple orphaned CCT subunits without engaging assembled CCT. Our findings reveal how failures during CCT assembly are monitored and provide a paradigm for the molecular recognition of orphan subunits, the largest source of quality control substrates in cells.

### Keywords
Subunit composition, Chaperonin cct

### Affiliations
MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology
MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge, United Kingdom

### Submitter
Catarina Franco

### Lab Head
Dr Ramanujan S. Hegde
MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge, United Kingdom


