### Accession
PXD015672

### Title
Histone demethylase JMJD3 is a key epigenetic activator of FGF21 signaling-induced hepatic autophagy and lipolysis

### Description
Autophagy is essential for cellular survival and energy homeostasis under nutrient deprivation. Despite the emerging importance of nuclear events in autophagy regulation, epigenetic control of autophagy gene transcription remains unclear. Here, we identify Jumonji-D3 (JMJD3/KDM6B) histone demethylase as a key epigenetic activator of hepatic autophagy. Upon fasting-induced fibroblast growth factor-21 (FGF21) signaling, JMJD3 epigenetically upregulated global autophagy-network genes, including Tfeb, Atg7, Atgl, and Fgf21, through demethylation of histone H3K27-me3, resulting in autophagy-mediated lipid degradation. Mechanistically, phosphorylation of JMJD3 at Thr-1044 by FGF21 signal-activated PKA increased its nuclear localization and interaction with the nuclear receptor PPARto transcriptionally activate autophagy. Chronic administration of FGF21 in obese mice improved defective autophagy and hepatosteatosis in a JMJD3-dependent manner. Remarkably, in non-alcoholic fatty liver disease patients, hepatic expression of JMJD3, ATG7, LC3, and KL were substantially decreased. These findings demonstrate that FGF21-JMJD3 signaling epigenetically links nutrient deprivation with hepatic autophagy and lipid degradation in mammals

### Sample Protocol
Flag-mouse JMJD3 was expressed in primary mouse hepatocytes isolated from C57BL/6 mice and 48 h later, the cells were treated with 5 µM MG132 for 4 h to inhibit proteasomal degradation of JMJD3 and then, treated with FGF21 (100 ng/ml) for 30 min. Flag-JMJD3 was purified by binding to M2 agarose, the beads were washed 10 times with IP buffer (50 mM Tris–HCl, pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM EDTA, 0.5% NP‐40, 5% glycerol), and the bound proteins were analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric analyses were carried out using a Thermo LTQ Fusion Orbitrap connected to a Thermo Dionex 3000 nano RSLC.  Chromatography was accomplished using a 15 cm Thermo Acclaim PepMap 100 C-18 column with mobile phase of 0.1% FA in water (A) and acetonitrile with 0.1% FA (B) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min and temperature at 40 °C.  Peptides were eluted from 5% B to 60% B in 60 minutes.  The mass spectrometer was operating in the data dependent mode, and precursor scans from 300 to 1500 m/z (120,000 resolution) were followed by collision (35% NCE, 1.6 m/z isolation window, 60s exclusion window). Raw data were analyzed by in house Mascot Server (version 2.5.1) against the NCBIProt Mus muculus database 0829 (September 1, 2019) containing 150,813 sequences.  Search parameters were: peptide mass tolerance 10 ppm; fragment tolerance 0.6 Da; cleavage agent was trypsin; miscleaves 2,3,4; variable modifications were set for Acetyl (Protein-term), Oxidation (M), Phospho (ST), Phospho (Y); FDR 1%. Protein identification and PTM cutoff were set for p <0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Autophagy is essential for cellular survival and energy homeostasis under nutrient deprivation. Despite the emerging importance of nuclear events in autophagy regulation, epigenetic control of autophagy gene transcription remains unclear. Here, we report fasting-induced Fibroblast Growth Factor-21 (FGF21) signaling activates hepatic autophagy and lipid degradation via Jumonji-D3 (JMJD3/KDM6B) histone demethylase. Upon FGF21 signaling, JMJD3 epigenetically upregulates global autophagy-network genes, including Tfeb, Atg7, Atgl, and Fgf21, through demethylation of histone H3K27-me3, resulting in autophagy-mediated lipid degradation. Mechanistically, phosphorylation of JMJD3 at Thr-1044 by FGF21 signal-activated PKA increases its nuclear localization and interaction with the nuclear receptor PPAR&#x3b1; to transcriptionally activate autophagy. Administration of FGF21 in obese mice improves defective autophagy and hepatosteatosis in a JMJD3-dependent manner. Remarkably, in non-alcoholic fatty liver disease patients, hepatic expression of JMJD3, ATG7, LC3, and ULK1 is substantially decreased. These findings demonstrate that FGF21-JMJD3 signaling epigenetically links nutrient deprivation with hepatic autophagy and lipid degradation in mammals.

### Keywords
Mouse, Histone demethylase jmjd3, Lypolysis, Autophagy, Fgf21

### Affiliations
University of Illinois at Urbana/Champaign
Department of Molecular Integrative Physiology University of Illinois at Urbana/Champaign Urbana, IL 61801

### Submitter
PETER YAU

### Lab Head
Dr Jongsook Kim Kemper
Department of Molecular Integrative Physiology University of Illinois at Urbana/Champaign Urbana, IL 61801


