### Accession
PXD014533

### Title
Identification of nutrient dependend PIK3C2B regulators

### Description
To identify factors responsible for the differential localization and activity of PIK3C2Bin the presence or absence of serum mitogens we took a quantitative functional proteomics approach based on stable isotope labeling of amino acids in cell culture (SILAC). Genome-engineered HEK293T cells endogenously expressing eGFP-PI3KC15were cultured in serum-containing or serum-deprived media containing heavy or light amino acids, and subjected to affinity capture using a GFP trap matrix and LC-MS/MS

### Sample Protocol
For the quantitative analysis of interaction partners of PI3KC2β, HEK293T knock-in cells endogenously expressing eGFP- PI3KC2β were grown in SILAC media for 14 days. SILAC media was prepared from DMEM without arginine and lysine by addition of 10% dialyzed FBS, 100 U/ml penicillin, 100 μg/ml streptomycin, 0.115 mm light or heavy arginine, and 0.275 mm light or heavy lysine, respectively expanded and prior to lysis refed with fresh SILAC medium or fresh SILAC medium lacking FBS for 2h. Endogenous eGFP-PIK3C2B was immunoprecipitated, the beads of the heavy and light labeled conditions were mixed after the first wash, bound proteins eluted in Laemmli sample buffer, resolved by SDS-PAGE. Each lane was cut by hand into 11 slices, and in-gel tryptic digestion was performed. Tryptic peptides were analyzed by a reversed-phase capillary liquid chromatography system (Ultimate 3000 nanoLC system (Thermo Scientific)) connected to an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific.

### Data Protocol
To identify factors responsible for the differential localization and activity of PI3KCin the presence or absence of serum mitogens (Fig. 1a) we took a quantitative functional proteomics approach based on stable isotope labeling of amino acids in cell culture (SILAC). Genome-engineered HEK293T cells endogenously expressing eGFP-PI3KC15were cultured in serum-containing or serum-deprived media containing heavy or light amino acids, and subjected to affinity capture using a GFP trap matrix and LC-MS/MS

### Publication Abstract
Mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR) kinase functions in two multiprotein complexes: lysosomal mTOR complex 1 (mTORC1) and mTORC2 at the plasma membrane. mTORC1 modulates the cell response to growth factors and nutrients by increasing protein synthesis and cell growth, and repressing the autophagy-lysosomal pathway<sup>1-4</sup>; however, dysfunction in mTORC1 is implicated in various diseases<sup>3,5,6</sup>. mTORC1 activity is regulated by phosphoinositide lipids<sup>7-10</sup>. Class I phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI3K)-mediated production of phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-trisphosphate<sup>6,11</sup> at the plasma membrane stimulates mTORC1 signalling, while local synthesis of phosphatidylinositol-3,4-bisphosphate by starvation-induced recruitment of class II PI3K-&#x3b2; (PI3KC2-&#x3b2;) to lysosomes represses mTORC1 activity<sup>12</sup>. How the localization and activity of PI3KC2-&#x3b2; are regulated by mitogens is unknown. We demonstrate that protein kinase N (PKN) facilitates mTORC1 signalling by repressing PI3KC2-&#x3b2;-mediated phosphatidylinositol-3,4-bisphosphate synthesis downstream of mTORC2. Active PKN2 phosphorylates PI3KC2-&#x3b2; to trigger PI3KC2-&#x3b2; complex formation with inhibitory 14-3-3 proteins. Conversely, loss of PKN2 or inactivation of its target phosphorylation site in PI3KC2-&#x3b2; represses nutrient signalling via mTORC1. These results uncover a mechanism that couples mTORC2-dependent activation of PKN2 to the regulation of mTORC1-mediated nutrient signalling by local lipid signals.

### Keywords
Pik3c2b

### Affiliations
Leibniz-Forschungsinstitut für Molekulare Pharmakologie (FMP), 13125 Berlin, Germany. 2Freie Universität Berlin, Faculty of Biology, Chemistry, Pharmacy, 14195 Berlin, Germany.
FMP

### Submitter
Alexander Wallroth

### Lab Head
Dr Volker Haucke
Leibniz-Forschungsinstitut für Molekulare Pharmakologie (FMP), 13125 Berlin, Germany. 2Freie Universität Berlin, Faculty of Biology, Chemistry, Pharmacy, 14195 Berlin, Germany.


