### Accession
PXD013821

### Title
Impairment of autophagic flux by combined EGFR and ROCK inhibition leads to triple-negative breast cancer cell death

### Description
Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is an aggressive subtype of breast cancer with very limited therapeutic options. We have recently shown that the combined inhibition of EGFR and ROCK in TNBC cells results in cell cycle arrest and ultimately cell death. However, the underlying mechanisms by which co-inhibition of EGFR and ROCK induces cell death remain unclear. To investigate the synergistic effect of the combination treatment on TNBC cells, in the present study we applied a mass spectrometry-based proteomic approach to identify proteins altered upon single and combination treatments.

### Sample Protocol
TNBC cells were harvested in triplicates in cold PBS after a 2-day treatment with DMSO, EGFRi, ROCKi or combination (EGFRi+ROCKi). The cellular pellets were resuspended in lysis buffer containing 1% (w/v) sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 10 mM TCEP, 40 mM chloroacetamide, 100 mM Tris, pH 8.5, supplemented with 1 tablet of Complete mini EDTA-free mixture (Roche) and 1 tablet of PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor cocktail mixture (Roche) per 10ml of lysis buffer, and subsequently lysed by boiling for 5 min at 95℃ and sonication (Bioruptor, model ACD-200, Diagenode) for 15 min at level 5 (30 sec ON, 30 sec OFF).  Cell debris was then removed by centrifugation at 20,000 × g for 15min at 4℃. Prior to in-solution digestion, the total protein concentration was quantified by Bradford assay (Bio-Rad). For label-free quantification, input amounts were normalized based on the total protein contents (50 μg of total protein lysate per sample). The lysate was diluted 1:10 with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate for Lys-C and trypsin digestion. Protein digestion was performed overnight at 37 ℃ with Lys-C (Wako) at an enzyme/protein ratio 1:75 and trypsin (Sigma) at an enzyme/protein ration of 1:50. The digest was acidified by adding 4% formic acid (FA) to precipitate SDC and samples were subsequently desalted using Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (Waters Corporation) and further submitted to phosphorylation enrichment or high pH fractionation for in-depth proteome analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.3). MS/MS spectra were searched by Andromeda against a reviewed homo sapiens Uniprot database using the following parameters: trypsin digestion; maximum of 2 missed cleavages; cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification; oxidized methionine, protein N-terminal acetylation, and serine/threonine/tyrosine phosphorylation (for the phosphoproteome data analysis only) as variable modifications. Mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm and 20 ppm for the MS1 and MS2 respective. The protein and PSM False Discovery Rate (FDR) were set to 1%. Label free quantification (LFQ) was performed using the MaxLFQ algorithm integrated into MaxQuant with the following parameters: LFQ minimum ratio count was set to 2, the Fast LFQ option was enabled, LFQ minimum number of neighbors was set to 3, and the LFQ average number of neighbors to 6. The “match between runs” feature was enabled with a match time window of 0.7 min and an alignment time window of 20 min.

### Publication Abstract
Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is an aggressive subtype of breast cancer with very limited therapeutic options. We have recently shown that the combined inhibition of EGFR and ROCK in TNBC cells results in cell death, however, the underlying mechanisms remain unclear. To investigate this, here we applied a mass spectrometry-based proteomic approach to identify proteins altered on single and combination treatments. Our proteomic data revealed autophagy as the major molecular mechanism implicated in the cells' response to combinatorial treatment. We here show that EGFR inhibition by gefitinib treatment alone induces autophagy, a cellular recycling process that acts as a cytoprotective response for TNBC cells. However, combined inhibition of EGFR and ROCK leads to autophagy blockade and accumulation of autophagic vacuoles. Our data show impaired autophagosome clearance as a likely cause of antitumor activity. We propose that the inhibition of the autophagic flux on combinatorial treatment is attributed to the major cytoskeletal changes induced on ROCK inhibition, given the essential role the cytoskeleton plays throughout the various steps of the autophagy process.

### Keywords
Rock, Targeted therapy, Proteomics, Label-free, Autophagy, Egfr, Triple-negative breast cancer

### Affiliations
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Group, Utrecht University
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Stamatia Rontogianni

### Lab Head
Dr A. F. Maarten Altelaar
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Group, Utrecht University


