### Accession
PXD019826

### Title
The mitochondrial transporter SFXN1 is critical for Complex III integrity and cellular metabolism

### Description
Mutations in acylglycerol kinase (AGK) leads to Sengers syndrome, a rare disease characterized by skeletal myopathy, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, and cataracts. AGK, in vitro, produces lysophosphatidic acid and phosphatidic acid via phosphorylation of monoacylglycerol and diacylglycerol, accordingly. AGK is also a component of the TIM22 import machinery in the inner mitochondrial membrane and, independent of its kinase activity, has been shown to mediate the import of mitochondrial carrier family (SLC25) members. We compared the proteomes of mitochondria from HEK293 WT and AGK KO cells in order to identify additional candidate substrates of the TIM22 translocase that relies on AGK.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293 WT and 2 AGK KOs were subjected to three-plex SILAC. For set 1, WT was grown in “light” media (K0R0), AGK KO1 in “medium” media (K4R6), and AGK KO2 in “heavy” media (K8R10). For set 2, the media for AGK KO1 and KO2 were swapped. Mitochondria were then isolated from each sample. Mitochondrial extracts were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at -80°C until further use. Mitochondrial preparations were lysed in 8 M urea lysis buffer containing 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.0). Protein estimation was carried out using BCA assay and equal amount of protein from three states were mixed and processed for in-solution digestion. Briefly, the sample was reduced using 10 mM dithiothreitol followed by alkylation using 20 mM iodoacetamide and subjected to in-solution trypsin digestion at 1:50 enzyme to protein ratio overnight at 37°C. The digest was purified using C18 cartridge followed by offline fractionation using basic-pH reversed-phase liquid chromatography (bRPLC) and LC-MS/MS analysis on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer interfaced with EasyNanoLC 1200 system.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS/MS data were searched using SEQUEST search algorithm against a Human RefSeq database (Release 85 containing 33,249 entries) containing common contaminants. The search parameters included: maximum of one missed cleavage; carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification and protein N-terminus acetylation; oxidation at methionine and SILAC labelling  of 13C6,15N2-lysine, 2H4-lysine, 13C6-arginine and 13C6,15N2-arginine as variable modifications. The MS tolerance was set at 10 ppm and MS/MS tolerance to 0.1 Da. The peptides and proteins were filtered at 1% false discovery rate.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Agk

### Affiliations
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905
Department of Physiology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 725 N Wolfe St, Baltimore, Maryland, USA 21205

### Submitter
Akhilesh Pandey

### Lab Head
Dr Steven Claypool
Department of Physiology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 725 N Wolfe St, Baltimore, Maryland, USA 21205


