### Accession
PXD031342

### Title
The structural dynamics of full length divisome transmembrane proteins FtsQ, FtsB, and FtsL in FtsQBL complex formation

### Description
Bacterial divisome is a group of proteins governing cell division. Out of the 15 critical proteins in Escherichia coli, the transmembrane protein complex FtsQBL plays an essential role in regulating the action. Although extensive efforts have been made, there is limited information regarding the interaction within this three-member complex. Here, HDX-MS was used to study the dynamic change of the full-length protein FtsQ, FtsB, and FtsL. Direct experimental evidence shows that FtsB and FtsL form a stable complex by the transmembrane and periplasmic regions. After the complex formation, the structural feature in FtsB properly becomes more defined. This transition may also bring the constriction control domains (CCDs) close to the one in FtsL. Furthermore, with the helical interaction between two proteins, the CCDs have a more determined location relative to the membrane surface. On the other hand, the FtsQ in the FtsQBL complex showed rigidity enhancement in two regions. The interaction with FtsB would fix a significant portion of the FtsQ β-domains. Interestingly, the formation of the FtsQBL complex also stiffens the sequence connecting the two domains in FtsQ. Overall, this study provides important experimental evidence on the conformational dynamic change of the FtsQ, FtsB, and FtsL upon the complex formation and insights into the FtsQBL function in the divisome.

### Sample Protocol
Full-length Individual and protein complexes were (co-)purified in the same manal in DDM. In addition, soluble proteins and protein complex FtsQpBp were (co-)purified similarly without detergent. All deuterium labeling was conducted with an automated HDX manager(Leap technologies). Deuterium labeling was done by adding 5 µL of protein sample (40 µM) to 95 µL of deuterium buffer (pD 7.0, 50 mM potassium phosphate in 99.9 % D2O). Proteins were deuterated at room temperature in selected on-exchange periods. After each interval, the exchange reaction was quenched by transferring the deuterated sample to quenching buffer (pH 2.5, 50 mM potassium phosphate) in a 1:1 volume ratio that was kept at 0°C. A 50 µL portion of the quenched sample was injected immediately into UPLC-MS. To avoid hydrogen back exchange, except for the pepsin column (Waters EnzymateTM BEH Pepsin Column, 300 Å, 5 µm, 2.1 mm x 30 mm) kept room temperature, all parts of the Acquity UPLC M-Class dual-pump LC system were placed in a 0°C chamber. Proteins were first digested online, followed by 3 min of concentration and desalting at the guard column (ACQUITY UPLC BEH C18 VanGuard Pre-column, 130Å, 1.7 µm, 2.1 mm x 5 mm). The digested peptides were then separated through the C18 reverse-phase column (ACQUITY UPLC BEH C18 Column, 130 Å, 1.7 µm, 1 mm x 100 mm) using 10 to 95 % deionized water: acetonitrile (with 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid) gradient as the mobile phase. The MS and MS/MS data of the eluted peptides were recorded by a Synapt G2-Si mass spectrometer (MSE data acquisition mode) using leucine enkephalin as the internal standard. The mass spectrometer conditions are listed: 3 kV capillary voltage, 150 °C source temperature, 350 °C desolvation temperature, 600 L/h of desolvation gas flow, 6.5 bar nebulizer gas flow, and 2.0 mL/min trap gas flow. The deuterium exchange experiments for each protein in different on-exchange periods were conducted in triplicate. Six CV of pepsin wash solution (1.5 M guanidine hydrochloride/acetonitrile/formic acid in 4.0/95.2/0.8 % (v/v)) was applied to clean the pepsin column, and a blank was run subsequently to remove the residual peptides in the C18 column after each protein sample injection.

### Data Protocol
The MS and MS/MS spectra of the protein samples were aligned to the corresponding sequences of Fts-proteins by ProteinLynx Global Server (PLGS, version 3.0.2, Waters). Only peptides that fulfilled the following parameters were selected to construct the peptide lists: the PLGS score >6, the precursor ion (MH+) mass error <10 ppm, and the number of product ions per amino acid >0.33. The HDX-MS data of the free and complexed Fts-proteins were processed by DynamX (Version 3.0.0, Waters), and the results were manually inspected. The average deviation of the deuterium uptake was below 0.1 Da. Back exchange was estimated to be an average rate of 50% by analyzing fully deuterated peptides and was not corrected when carrying out comparisons studies.

### Publication Abstract
FtsQBL is a transmembrane protein complex in the divisome of Escherichia coli that plays a critical role in regulating cell division. Although extensive efforts have been made to investigate the interactions between the three involved proteins, FtsQ, FtsB, and FtsL, the detailed interaction mechanism is still poorly understood. In this study, we used hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry to investigate these full-length proteins and their complexes. We also dissected the structural dynamic changes and the related binding interfaces within the complexes. Our data revealed that FtsB and FtsL interact at both the periplasmic and transmembrane regions to form a stable complex. Furthermore, the periplasmic region of FtsB underwent significant conformational changes. With the help of computational modeling, our results suggest that FtsBL complexation may bring the respective constriction control domains (CCDs) in close proximity. We show that when FtsBL adopts a coiled-coil structure, the CCDs are fixed at a vertical position relative to the membrane surface; thus, this conformational change may be essential for FtsBL's interaction with other divisome proteins. In the FtsQBL complex, intriguingly, we show only FtsB interacts with FtsQ at its C-terminal region, which stiffens a large area of the &#x3b2;-domain of FtsQ. Consistent with this, we found the connection between the &#x3b1;- and &#x3b2;-domains in FtsQ is also strengthened in the complex. Overall, the present study provides important experimental evidence detailing the local interactions between the full-length FtsB, FtsL, and FtsQ protein, as well as valuable insights into the roles of FtsQBL complexation in regulating divisome activity.

### Keywords
Hdx-ms, Membrane protein, Hydrogen/deuterium exchange mass spectrometry, Ftsl, Ddivisome, Ftsb, Ftsq

### Affiliations
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
Department of Applied Biology and Chemical Technology, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University

### Submitter
Wai Po Kong

### Lab Head
Dr Kwok-yin Wong
Department of Applied Biology and Chemical Technology, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University


