### Accession
PXD016221

### Title
2019 Brecht et al. RAG1 vAbl BioID LC-MS/MS

### Description
To identify mechanisms that regulate V(D)J recombination, we used proximity-dependent biotin identification to analyze the interactomes of full length and truncated forms of RAG1 in pre-B cells. This revealed an association of RAG1 with numerous nucleolar proteins in a manner dependent on amino acids 216-383 and allowed identification of a motif required for nucleolar localization.  Experiments in transformed pre-B cell lines and cultured primary pre-B cells reveal a strong correlation between disruption of nucleoli, reduced association of RAG1 with a nucleolar marker, and increases in V(D)J recombination activity. Mutation of the RAG1 nucleolar localization motif boosts recombination while removal of the first 215 amino acids of RAG1, which are required for efficient egress from nucleoli, reduces recombination activity.  Our findings indicate that nucleolar sequestration of RAG1 is a negative regulatory mechanism in V(D)J recombination and identify regions of the RAG1 N-terminal region that control nucleolar association and egress.

### Sample Protocol
Various RAG1-BirM fusion proteins, including FLRAG1, cRAG1, and Δ215 RAG1, were inducibly expressed in RAG1-/- vAbl cells. Treatment with STI-571 and doxycycline induced RAG1 expression, while concurrent addition of biotin enabled promiscuous biotinylation of RAG1-proximal proteins by the conjugate BirM biotin ligase, as described by Roux et al. (37). A construct in which BirM was fused to a nuclear localization sequence was constitutively expressed in WT vAbl cells and treated in the same manner. Cells were grown to a density of 7.5 x 105/mL and induced with 5 µM STI-571 (Selleckchem) for three hours before initiating labeling with the addition of 50 µM Biotin (Sigma) and 600ng/mL doxycycline (Sigma). Labeling was carried out for 24 hours under normal growth conditions. After labeling, 30 x 106 cells per sample were lysed and enriched on streptavidin beads (Pierce™ Streptavidin Magnetic Beads, Thermo) as described by Hung et al. (55). After washing, the beads were subjected to an on-bead trypsin digest as described by Turriziani et al. (56). Trypsinized peptides were desalted before being run on an Orbitrap-Elite LC-MS/MS to generate interactome datasets corresponding to each of the BirM-RAG1 constructs and the NLS-BirM control. Biological replicates were done for a total of eight samples.

### Data Protocol
Various RAG1-BirM fusion proteins, including FLRAG1, cRAG1, and Δ215 RAG1, were inducibly expressed in RAG1-/- vAbl cells. Treatment with STI-571 and doxycycline induced RAG1 expression, while concurrent addition of biotin enabled promiscuous biotinylation of RAG1-proximal proteins by the conjugate BirM biotin ligase, as described by Roux et al. (37). A construct in which BirM was fused to a nuclear localization sequence was constitutively expressed in WT vAbl cells and treated in the same manner. Cells were grown to a density of 7.5 x 105/mL and induced with 5 µM STI-571 (Selleckchem) for three hours before initiating labeling with the addition of 50 µM Biotin (Sigma) and 600ng/mL doxycycline (Sigma). Labeling was carried out for 24 hours under normal growth conditions. After labeling, 30 x 106 cells per sample were lysed and enriched on streptavidin beads (Pierce™ Streptavidin Magnetic Beads, Thermo) as described by Hung et al. (55). After washing, the beads were subjected to an on-bead trypsin digest as described by Turriziani et al. (56). Trypsinized peptides were desalted before being run on an Orbitrap-Elite LC-MS/MS to generate interactome datasets corresponding to each of the BirM-RAG1 constructs and the NLS-BirM control. Biological replicates were done for a total of eight samples.

### Publication Abstract
V(D)J recombination assembles and diversifies Ig and T cell receptor genes in developing B and T lymphocytes. The reaction is initiated by the RAG1-RAG2 protein complex which binds and cleaves at discrete gene segments in the antigen receptor loci. To identify mechanisms that regulate V(D)J recombination, we used proximity-dependent biotin identification to analyze the interactomes of full-length and truncated forms of RAG1 in pre-B cells. This revealed an association of RAG1 with numerous nucleolar proteins in a manner dependent on amino acids 216 to 383 and allowed identification of a motif required for nucleolar localization. Experiments in transformed pre-B cell lines and cultured primary pre-B cells reveal a strong correlation between disruption of nucleoli, reduced association of RAG1 with a nucleolar marker, and increased V(D)J recombination activity. Mutation of the RAG1 nucleolar localization motif boosts recombination while removal of the first 215 amino acids of RAG1, required for efficient egress from nucleoli, reduces recombination activity. Our findings indicate that nucleolar sequestration of RAG1 is a negative regulatory mechanism in V(D)J recombination and identify regions of the RAG1 N-terminal region that control nucleolar association and egress.

### Keywords
Bioid, Vabl cell, Pre b cell, V(d)j recombination, Rag1

### Affiliations
Yale University
Chair of Immunobiology, Yale University

### Submitter
Ryan Brecht

### Lab Head
Dr David Schatz
Chair of Immunobiology, Yale University


