### Accession
PXD009203

### Title
Integrated FTIR imaging and proteomics for identification of a candidate histochemical biomarker in bladder cancer

### Description
A quantitative label-free proteome analysis of cystitis and high-grade bladder cancer tissue priorly annotated and isolated via FTIR-guided lasermicrodissection.

### Sample Protocol
Vials containing lasermicrodissected tissue were sonicated upside down on ice for one minute and subsequently centrifuged for one minute in the upright position to transfer the sample from the lid into the vial itself. 3.7 µl DTT (20 mM) were then added to the sample for reduction (30 min, 60°C) followed by 2.2 µl IAA (100mM) for alkylation (30 min, RT, dark). Afterwards, lysed proteins were tryptically digested over night at 37°C (0.6 µl Trypsin; 0.033 µg/µl). For acidification, 1.3 µl TFA (10%) were added (30 min, 37°C), samples were transferred into glass vials, dried in a vacuum centrifuge and dissolved in 0.1% TFA. Sample amount corresponding to approximately 0.5 mm2 of laser microdissected tissue area was taken for one MS measurement.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on an LTQ Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled online to an upstream connected Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC System (Dionex, Idstein, Germany). In summary, pre-concentration of peptides was carried out on a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 100 μm x 2 cm, C18, 5 μm, 100 Å) within 7 min at a flow rate of 30 μl/min with 0.1% TFA. Peptides were then transferred onto an analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, 75 μm x 50 cm, nano Viper, C18, 2 μm, 100 Å). There, peptide separation was achieved with a gradient from 5-40% solvent B over 98 min at 400 nl/min at 60°C (solvent A: 0.1% FA, solvent B: 0.1% FA, 84% acetonitrile). MS/MS spectra were acquired in a data-dependent mode. Full scan mass spectra in the Orbitrap analyzer were acquired in profile mode at a resolution of 60,000 at 400 m/z and within a mass range of 350-2000 m/z. For MS/MS measurements, the twenty most abundant peptide ions were fragmented by CID and measured for tandem mass spectra in the linear ion trap. Protein identification happened via Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The spectra were searched against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database (Release 2015_10; 70,075 entries) via Mascot (ver.2.5, Matrix Science). For taxonomy the chosen setting was homo sapiens and for mass tolerance it was 5 ppm for precursor ions and 0.4 Da for fragment ions. Dynamic modifications were considered for methionine (oxidation) and static modifications for cysteine (carbamidomethyl). Calculation of the false discovery rate was performed by Proteome Discoverer’s Percolator function and identifications with an FDR greater than 1 % were rejected. The software Progenesis QI (ver. 2.0.5387.52102, Nonlinear Dynamics) was used for label-free quantification. The obtained .raw files were aligned to a reference run and a master map of common features was applied to all experimental runs for adjustment of retention time differences. Ion charge states of 2+, 3+ and 4+ with minimum three isotope peaks were considered and raw ion abundances were normalized for automatic correction of technical or experimental variations between runs. Quantified features were identified with the obtained Proteome Discoverer identifications. For protein quantification, all non-conflicting peptides were considered. An in-house written R-script was applied to the normalized protein abundances obtained from the software for t-test calculations. Fold changes between groups were determined based on normalized abundances, whereas t-test calculations used arcsinh-transformed data for consistency with the Progenesis QI software. Adjustment of t-test p-values for FDR control happened with the method of Benjamini and Hochberg. Proteins were considered differentially abundant between groups with an absolute fold change ≥ 1.5 and a pFDR≤ 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Histopathological differentiation between severe urocystitis with reactive urothelial atypia and carcinoma in situ (CIS) can be difficult, particularly after a treatment that deliberately induces an inflammatory reaction, such as intravesical instillation of Bacillus Calmette-Gu&#xe8;rin. However, precise grading in bladder cancer is critical for therapeutic decision making and thus requires reliable immunohistochemical biomarkers. Herein, an exemplary potential biomarker in bladder cancer was identified by the novel approach of Fourier transform infrared imaging for label-free tissue annotation of tissue thin sections. Identified regions of interest are collected by laser microdissection to provide homogeneous samples for liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry-based proteomic analysis. This approach afforded label-free spatial classification with a high accuracy and without interobserver variability, along with the molecular resolution of the proteomic analysis. Cystitis and invasive high-grade urothelial carcinoma samples were analyzed. Three candidate biomarkers were identified and verified by immunohistochemistry in a small cohort, including low-grade urothelial carcinoma samples. The best-performing candidate AHNAK2 was further evaluated in a much larger independent verification cohort that also included CIS samples. Reactive urothelial atypia and CIS were distinguishable on the basis of the expression of this newly identified and verified immunohistochemical biomarker, with a sensitivity of 97% and a specificity of 69%. AHNAK2 can differentiate between reactive urothelial atypia in the setting of an acute or chronic cystitis and nonmuscle invasive-type CIS.

### Keywords
['Human', 'Tissue', 'Bladder', 'Lc-ms/ms']

### Affiliations
['Clinical Proteomics', 'Medical Proteome Center, Ruhr-University Bochum, Bochum, Germany']

### Submitter
['Thilo Bracht']

### Lab Head
[{'title': 'Dr', 'affiliation': 'Medical Proteome Center, Ruhr-University Bochum, Bochum, Germany', 'email': 'barbara.sitek@rub.de', 'country': '', 'orcid': '', 'name': 'Barbara Sitek', 'id': '155040100'}]

### SDRF
characteristics[organism]: ['homo sapiens']
characteristics[organism part]: ['urinary bladder']
characteristics[cell type]: ['bladder cell']
characteristics[disease]: ['not applicable' 'AC=EFO:1000025;NT=cystitis'
 'AC=MONDO:0001187;NT=urinary bladder cancer']
characteristics[disease].1: ['not applicable' 'AC=PATO:0000396;NT=severe'
 'AC=NCIT:C14158;NT=high grade']
characteristics[disease].2: ['not applicable' 'severe cystitis with reactive urothelial atypia'
 'invasive high-grade bladder cancer']
comment[label]: ['AC=MS:1002038;NT=label free sample']
comment[instrument]: ['LTQ Orbitrap Elite']
comment[modification parameters]: ['AC=UNIMOD:35;NT=Oxidation;TA=M;MT=Variable']
comment[modification parameters].1: ['AC=UNIMOD:4;NT=Carbamidomethyl;TA=C;MT=Fixed']
factor value[disease]: ['control / alignment reference map for quantification' 'cystitis'
 'high grade']

