### Accession
PXD002130

### Title
Spatial differentiation of gene expression in Aspergillus niger colony grown for sugar beet pulp utilization

### Description
Degradation of plant biomass to fermentable sugars is of critical importance for the use of plant materials for biofuels. Filamentous fungi are ubiquitous organisms and major plant biomass degraders. Single colonies of some fungal species can colonize massive areas as large as five soccer stadia.During growth, the mycelium encounters heterogeneous carbon sources. Here we assessed whether substrate heterogeneity is a major determinant of spatial gene expression in colonies of Aspergillus niger. We analyzed whole-genome gene expression in five concentric zones of 5-day-old colonies utilizing sugar beet pulp as a complex carbon source. Growth, protein production and secretion occurred throughout the colony. Genes involved in carbon catabolism and nitrate utilization were expressed uniformly from the centre to the periphery whereas genes encoding plant biomass degrading enzymes were expressed differentially across the colony. A combined adaptive response of carbon-catabolism and enzyme production to locally available monosaccharides was observed. Finally, our results demonstrate a fine-tuning of the different enzymatic tools available in A. niger and reveal how this fungus adapts as it colonizes complex environments.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were 4 times concentrated using a vacuum concentrator (Thermo Scientific, Bremen) and 30 µl of each of the samples were run on a 12% Bis-Tris 1D SDS-PAGE gel (Biorad) for 2-3 cm and stained with colloidal coomassie dye G-250 (Gel Code Blue Stain Reagent, Thermo Scientific). The lane was cut into two bands, which were treated with 6.5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 1 h at 60 °C for reduction and 54 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min for alkylation. The proteins were digested overnight with trypsin (Promega) at 37 °C. The peptides were extracted with 100% acetonitrile (ACN) and dried in a vacuum concentrator. Samples were analyzed with LC-MS/MS on a Agilent 1200 system coupled to Orbitrap Discovery at a flow rate of 100 nl/min.

### Data Protocol
Data was searched with an Aspergillus Niger database using Mascot and Proteome Discoverer 1.4. Percolator used with 1% FDR. Additional was mascot score >20.

### Publication Abstract
Degradation of plant biomass to fermentable sugars is of critical importance for the use of plant materials for biofuels. Filamentous fungi are ubiquitous organisms and major plant biomass degraders. Single colonies of some fungal species can colonize massive areas as large as five soccer stadia. During growth, the mycelium encounters heterogeneous carbon sources. Here we assessed whether substrate heterogeneity is a major determinant of spatial gene expression in colonies of Aspergillus niger. We analyzed whole-genome gene expression in five concentric zones of 5-day-old colonies utilizing sugar beet pulp as a complex carbon source. Growth, protein production and secretion occurred throughout the colony. Genes involved in carbon catabolism were expressed uniformly from the centre to the periphery whereas genes encoding plant biomass degrading enzymes and nitrate utilization were expressed differentially across the colony. A combined adaptive response of carbon-catabolism and enzyme production to locally available monosaccharides was observed. Finally, our results demonstrate that A. niger employs different enzymatic tools to adapt its metabolism as it colonizes complex environments.

### Keywords
Aspergillus niger, Heterogeneity; sugar beet pulp, Plant biomass degrading enzymes, Spatial gene expression

### Affiliations
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Group
Fungal Physiology, CBS-KNAW Fungal Biodiversity Centre Institute of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences(KNAW) Fungal Molecular Physiology, Utrecht University, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Harm Post

### Lab Head
Dr Ronald Peter de Vries
Fungal Physiology, CBS-KNAW Fungal Biodiversity Centre Institute of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences(KNAW) Fungal Molecular Physiology, Utrecht University, The Netherlands


