### Accession
PXD012406

### Title
ARGLU1 RIME experiment in N2a cells

### Description
ARGLU1 is a Transcriptional Coactivator and Splicing Regulator Important for Stress Hormone Signaling and Development  Stress hormones bind and activate the glucocorticoid receptor (GR) in many tissues including the brain. We identified arginine and glutamate rich 1 (ARGLU1) in a screen for new modulators of glucocorticoid signaling in the CNS. Biochemical studies show that the glutamate rich C-terminus of ARGLU1 coactivates multiple nuclear receptors including the glucocorticoid receptor (GR) and the arginine rich N-terminus interacts with splicing factors and binds to RNA. RNA-seq of neuronal cells depleted of ARGLU1 revealed significant changes in the expression and alternative splicing of distinct genes involved in neurogenesis. Loss of ARGLU1 is embryonic lethal in mice, and knockdown in zebrafish causes neurodevelopmental and heart defects. Treatment with dexamethasone, a GR activator, also induces changes in the pattern of alternatively spliced genes, many of which were lost when ARGLU1 was absent. Importantly, the genes found to be alternatively spliced in response to glucocorticoid treatment were distinct from those under transcriptional control by GR, suggesting an additional mechanism of glucocorticoid action is present in neuronal cells. Our results thus show that ARGLU1 is a novel factor for embryonic development that modulates basal transcription and alternative splicing in neuronal cells with consequences for glucocorticoid signaling.

### Sample Protocol
Rapid Immunoprecipitation Mass spectrometry of Endogenous proteins (RIME) was performed in N2a cells as previously described [1] using 8 μg of normal rabbit IgG (Santa Cruz, sc-2027), anti-ARGLU1 (Novus Biologicals, NBP1-87921) or anti-GR antibody (Santa Cruz, sc-1004). In brief, 2x106 N2a cells were treated with either vehicle or dexamethasone 4 hours prior to chemical crosslinking using 1% FA and 2 mM DSG and quenched with 0.1M glycine. The cells were harvested and lysed first in Buffer 1 (50 mM HEPES-KOH (pH 7.5), 140 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 10% glycerol, 0.5% NP-40 and 0.25% Triton X-100), then in Buffer 2 (10 mM Tris-HCL (pH 8.0), 200 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA and 0.5 mM EGTA), and lastly in Buffer 3 (10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8), 100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0.5 mM EGTA, 0.1% Na-deoxycholate and 0.5% N-lauroylsarcosine). The lysate was sonicated using Bioruptor Standard. The lysates were incubated with the bead-bound antibody overnight at 4C. Next, on-bead tryptic digest was performed with TPCK-trypsin (Promega) for 16 h at 37°C. Digested samples were desalted on C18 tips using an acetonitrile and water buffer system. Ten µL of the tryptic mixture was injected for LC-MS/MS analysis (Easy nLC-1200 with a QExactive HF mass spectrometer, Thermo Scientific). The peptides were separated on an easy spray C18 column (75 µm x 50 cm, 2µm) with a 0.1% formic acid (A) and 90% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid (B) solvent system. The gradient was as follows: 11%B – 17%B (5 minutes), 17%B-33%B (95 minutes), 33%-100%B (10 minutes), 100%B (10 minutes). The MS data collection was done using a data-dependent top 20 method. [1] Mohammed, H., Taylor, C., Brown, G.D., Papachristou, E.K., Carroll, J.S. and D'Santos, C.S. (2016) Rapid immunoprecipitation mass spectrometry of endogenous proteins (rime) for analysis of chromatin complexes. Nat Protoc, 11, 316-326.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS data were analyzed using MaxQuant software. Proteins were identified by searching either the mouse (UP000000589) or human (UP000005640) proteomes from UniProtKB (March 2018). Peptide spectral matches, and protein FDRs were set to 1%, and requiring a minimum of 1 unique peptide for identification. To increase the number of identified matches, “match between runs” was enabled with a match time window of 0.7 minutes. Protein abundancies were calculated using the iBAQ algorithm in MaxQuant.

### Publication Abstract
Stress hormones bind and activate the glucocorticoid receptor (GR) in many tissues including the brain. We identified arginine and glutamate rich 1 (ARGLU1) in a screen for new modulators of glucocorticoid signaling in the CNS. Biochemical studies show that the glutamate rich C-terminus of ARGLU1 coactivates multiple nuclear receptors including the glucocorticoid receptor (GR) and the arginine rich N-terminus interacts with splicing factors and binds to RNA. RNA-seq of neural cells depleted of ARGLU1 revealed significant changes in the expression and alternative splicing of distinct genes involved in neurogenesis. Loss of ARGLU1 is embryonic lethal in mice, and knockdown in zebrafish causes neurodevelopmental and heart defects. Treatment with dexamethasone, a GR activator, also induces changes in the pattern of alternatively spliced genes, many of which were lost when ARGLU1 was absent. Importantly, the genes found to be alternatively spliced in response to glucocorticoid treatment were distinct from those under transcriptional control by GR, suggesting an additional mechanism of glucocorticoid action is present in neural cells. Our results thus show that ARGLU1 is a novel factor for embryonic development that modulates basal transcription and alternative splicing in neural cells with consequences for glucocorticoid signaling.

### Keywords
Nr3c1, Arglu1, Splicing, Gr

### Affiliations
University of Toronto
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Leslie Dan Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Toronto

### Submitter
Michael Saikali

### Lab Head
Dr Carolyn Cummins
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Leslie Dan Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Toronto


