### Accession
PXD017762

### Title
The proteome of Rickettsia akari revealed a 44kDa-OMP as novel biomarker for Rickettsialpox

### Description
Our study aimed to investigate the proteome structure of R. akari and unveil immunoreactive surface-exposed proteins using the latest proteomics techniques. To achieve these goals, we applied the Shotgun protein identification approach; membrane surface protein enrichment methods combined with liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) and immunoblotting techniques. We identified aroun 300 unique proteins from the whole-cell extract exhibiting that the most represented proteins were those involved in translation, post-translational modifications, energy production, and cell wall development. A significant part belongs to amino acid transport and intracellular trafficking. Besides, several proteins affecting virulence were detected. Then, in silico analysis from detected surface proteins revealed that 25 putative predicted outer membrane proteins contain beta-barrel structure and 11 proteins were predicted to have secretion signal peptide sequence.

### Sample Protocol
The bacterial cells of R. akari cultured on eggs (4 mg/mL in PBS pH 7.2 and in ALT lysis buffer, buffer 15.12.14) and VERO celll lines infected by R. akari were pelleted by centrifugation (18 000 x g; 20 min; 4˚C) and washed with 300 µl PBS. The resulting pellets were resuspended in 0.1% RapiGestTM SF (Waters, UK) [52] in 100 µl of 50  mM Tris pH 7.5, resuspended and heated for 10 min at 95°C. After cooling down, 200 µl of 0.1% RapiGestTM SF in 8 M guanidinium chloride (Sigma-Aldrich) was added an incubated for 20 min. The protein sample(s) were stored at -80°C until samples were proven free of viable bacteria. Because of the potential of interfering substances in the supernatant, the following sample preparation workflow was applied and based on Filter aided sample preparation – (FASP) [53]. Briefly, inactivated samples were transferred onto Amicon® Ultra – 10 kDa filters (Millipore) and washed twice with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma-Aldrich). Subsequently, proteins were quantified by bicinchoninic acid assay, (QuantiPro™ BCA Assay Kit, Sigma – Aldrich) [54]. The samples were then reduced with 100 mM Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP, Sigma-Aldrich) and alkylated with 300 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich). Finally, the samples were digested with 2 μg of sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37 °C. Empore™ SPE Cartridges, C18, standard density, bed I.D. 4 mm (Sigma-Aldrich) were used to desalt peptide mixtures before drying to completion in a speed-vac. Before mass spectrometry analysis, the samples were resuspended in 30 μl of 2% acetonitrile (ACN)/0.1% trifluoroacteic acid. The samples were further analyzed by LC-MS/MS techniques involving targeted mass spectrometry and LFQ.  An UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system controlled by Chromeleon software (Dionex, USA) was used for chromatography separation. Each sample was loaded onto a PepMap100 C18, 3 µm, 100 Å, 0.075 × 20 mm trap column (Dionex) at 5 µl/min for 5 min. Peptides were separated on a PepMap RSLC C18, 2 µm, 100 Å, 0.075 × 150 mm analytical column (Dionex) by a gradient formed by mobile phase A (0.1% formic acid, FA) and mobile phase B (80% ACN, 0.1% FA), running from 4 to 34% in 68 min, and from 34 to 55% of mobile phase B in 21 min at a flow rate of 0.3 µl/min at 40°C. Eluted peptides were on-line electrosprayed into Q-Exactive mass spectrometer using a Nanospray Flex ion source (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Positive ion full scan MS spectra (m/z 350-1650) were acquired using a 1×106 AGC target in the Orbitrap at 70 000 resolution. Top 12 precursors of charge state ≥2 and threshold intensity of 5×104 counts were selected for HCD fragmentation, with a dynamic exclusion window of 60 s. The isolation window of 1.6 Da and normalized CE of 27 was used. Each MS/MS spectrum was acquired at resolution of 17 500, with a 105 AGC target and a maximum 100 ms injection time.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed in MaxQuant  (version 1.6.7.0) and the Andromeda was used as search engine to search the detected features against the Rickettsia akari (strain Hartford),  databases downloaded from Uniprot (September 21st, 2019). Tryptic peptides with minimal length of seven amino acids and up to two missed cleavages were considered only. The initial allowed mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm at the MS level and 0.5 Da at the MS/MS level. The oxidation of methionine was set as variable modification and carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 1 % was imposed for peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) and protein identification using a target–decoy approach. Relative quantification was performed using the default parameters of the MaxLFQ algorithm with the minimum ratio count set to 2. The “proteinGroups.txt” MaxQuant output file was uploaded into Perseus (version 1.5.6.0) for further filtering and statistical analysis. Decoy hits, proteins only identified by site, and potential contaminants were removed and log2 transformation of LFQ intensities was applied.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Q-exactive, Egg culture, Vero cell line, Rickettsia akari

### Affiliations
Military Health Institute, Prague/Czech Republic
Military Health Institute, Prague, Czech Republic

### Submitter
Jiri DRESLER

### Lab Head
Dr Jiri Dresler
Military Health Institute, Prague, Czech Republic


