### Accession
PXD014467

### Title
ITRAQ-based quantitative proteomics reveals the first proteome profiles of piglets infected with porcine circovirus type 3

### Description
This study attempted for the first time to investigate the protein profile of PCV3-infected piglets using iTRAQ technology; our findings provide valuable information to better understand the mechanisms underlying the host responses to PCV3 infection in piglets.

### Sample Protocol
LC-MS/MS detection was carried out on a hybrid quadrupole-time of flight LC-MS/MS mass spectrometer coupled with a nanospray source. Peptides were loaded onto a C18 trap column and then eluted into a C18 analytical column, Three independent biological replicates were conducted, and peptides from these biological replicates were independently analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
The quantitative protein ratios were counted and normalized by the median ratio in MASCOT. For accurate comparison between samples, a fold change > 1.5 or < 0.667 and a p-value < 0.05 were considered indicative of significantly different expression according to a t-test.

### Publication Abstract
Porcine circovirus type 3 (PCV3) infection induces porcine dermatitis and nephropathy syndrome, reproductive failure, and multisystemic inflammatory lesions in piglets and sows. To better understand the host responses to PCV3 infection, isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ) labeling combined with LC-MS/MS analysis was used for quantitative determination of differentially regulated cellular proteins in the lungs of specific-pathogen-free piglets after 4&#xa0;weeks of PCV3 infection. Totally, 3429 proteins were detected in three independent mass spectrometry analyses, of which 242 differential cellular proteins were significantly regulated, consisting of 100 upregulated proteins and 142 downregulated proteins in PCV3-infected group relative to control group. Bioinformatics analysis revealed that these higher or lower abundant proteins involved primarily metabolic processes, innate immune response, MHC-I and MHC-II components, and phagosome pathways. Ten genes encoding differentially regulated proteins were selected for investigation via real-time RT-PCR. The expression levels of six representative proteins, OAS1, Mx1, ISG15, IFIT3, SOD2, and HSP60, were further confirmed by Western blotting and immunohistochemistry. This study attempted for the first time to investigate the protein profile of PCV3-infected piglets using iTRAQ technology; our findings provide valuable information to better understand the mechanisms underlying the host responses to PCV3 infection in piglets. SIGNIFICANCE: Our study identified differentially abundant proteins related to a variety of potential signaling pathways in the lungs of PCV3-infected piglets. These findings provide valuable information to better understand the mechanisms of host responses to PCV3 infection.

### Keywords
Tissue, Lung, Lc-ms/ms, Pig

### Affiliations
15802126584
Beijing Key Laboratory for Prevention and Control of Infectious Diseases in Livestock and Poultry, Institute of Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Medicine, Beijing Academy of Agriculture and Forestry Sciences, Haidian District, Beijing, China.

### Submitter
rain gao

### Lab Head
Dr Jue Liu
Beijing Key Laboratory for Prevention and Control of Infectious Diseases in Livestock and Poultry, Institute of Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Medicine, Beijing Academy of Agriculture and Forestry Sciences, Haidian District, Beijing, China.


