### Accession
PXD004320

### Title
Phosphoproteomics of PDT treated SK-ChA-1 cells

### Description
(Phospho)proteomic study of the cell survival pathways induced by ZnPC-encapsulating PEGylated cationic liposomes (ZPCLs) in SK-ChA-1 cells.

### Sample Protocol
Treated cells at different doses were lysed, proteins were digested en peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS on a QExactive. Phophopeptides were enriched by Ti-IMAC enrichment and analyzed by LC-MS/MS on a QExactive.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using MaxQuant v1.5.2.8 (and the integrated search engine Andromeda . For peptide and protein identification, raw files were searched against the human Swissprot database (20,201 entries) with carbamidomethylated cysteine as fixed modification and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine, oxidation of methionine as variable modifications. Trypsin/P was set as the proteolytic enzyme for which up to two missed cleavage sites were allowed. Precursor tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm and fragment ion tolerance to 0.05 Da. Peptide identifications required a minimal length of 7 amino acids and all datasets were adjusted to 1 % PSM FDR.

### Publication Abstract
Photodynamic therapy (PDT) is an established palliative treatment for perihilar cholangiocarcinoma that is clinically promising. However, tumors tend to regrow after PDT, which may result from the PDT-induced activation of survival pathways in sublethally afflicted tumor cells. In this study, tumor-comprising cells (i.e., vascular endothelial cells, macrophages, perihilar cholangiocarcinoma cells, and EGFR-overexpressing epidermoid cancer cells) were treated with the photosensitizer zinc phthalocyanine that was encapsulated in cationic liposomes (ZPCLs). The post-PDT survival pathways and metabolism were studied following sublethal (LC<sub>50</sub>) and supralethal (LC<sub>90</sub>) PDT. Sublethal PDT induced survival signaling in perihilar cholangiocarcinoma (SK-ChA-1) cells via mainly HIF-1-, NF-&#x43a;B-, AP-1-, and heat shock factor (HSF)-mediated pathways. In contrast, supralethal PDT damage was associated with a dampened survival response. PDT-subjected SK-ChA-1 cells downregulated proteins associated with EGFR signaling, particularly at LC<sub>90</sub>. PDT also affected various components of glycolysis and the tricarboxylic acid cycle as well as metabolites involved in redox signaling. In conclusion, sublethal PDT activates multiple pathways in tumor-associated cell types that transcriptionally regulate cell survival, proliferation, energy metabolism, detoxification, inflammation/angiogenesis, and metastasis. Accordingly, tumor cells sublethally afflicted by PDT are a major therapeutic culprit. Our multi-omic analysis further unveiled multiple druggable targets for pharmacological co-intervention.

### Keywords
Pdt

### Affiliations
NPC
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research Utrecht University

### Submitter
Simone Lemeer

### Lab Head
Dr Simone Lemeer
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research Utrecht University


