### Accession
PXD044821

### Title
TAF15 amyloid filaments in neurodegenerative disease

### Description
Frontotemporal dementia (FTD) is the most common form of dementia after Alzheimer's disease and results from frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD). The pathological hallmarks of FTLD are neuronal inclusions of specific, abnormally assembled proteins1. In the majority of cases, the inclusions contain amyloid filament assemblies of TAR DNA-binding protein 43 (TDP-43) or tau, with distinct filament structures characterising different FTLD subtypes2,3. The presence, identities and structures of amyloid filaments in the remaining ~10% of FTLD cases are unknown, but are widely believed to be composed of the protein fused in sarcoma (FUS). As such, these cases are commonly referred to as FTLD-FUS. Here, we used cryogenic electron microscopy (cryo-EM) to determine the structures of amyloid filaments extracted from the prefrontal and temporal cortices of four individuals with FTLD-FUS. Unexpectedly, we found abundant amyloid filaments of the FUS homologue TATA-binding protein-associated factor 15 (TAF15), rather than of FUS itself. The filament fold is formed from residues 7 to 99 in the low-complexity domain (LCD) of TAF15 and was identical between individuals. The formation of TAF15 amyloid filaments with a characteristic fold in FTLD establishes TAF15 proteinopathy in neurodegenerative disease. Furthermore, we found TAF15 filaments with the same fold in the motor cortex and brainstem of two of the individuals, who also showed changes associated with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), suggesting that TAF15 proteinopathy may underlie a disease spectrum of FTLD and ALS. The structure of TAF15 amyloid filaments provides a basis for the development of model systems of neurodegenerative disease, as well as for the design of diagnostic and therapeutic tools targeting TAF15 proteinopathy.

### Sample Protocol
Sarkosyl-insoluble proteins were extracted from 0.2 g of grey matter. The final pellet was dried by vacuum centrifugation (Savant), then soaked in 20 μl hexafluoroisopropanol, incubated at 37 °C for 1 h, resuspended, and topped up to 100 µL solvent. Samples were sonicated three times for three minutes each at 50% amplitude in a waterbath (QSonica Q700). Any non-disassembled filaments were removed by centrifugation at 166,000g for 30 min. The supernatant was dried by vacuum centrifugation. Dried protein samples were resuspended in 8 M urea, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide. Samples were diluted to 1 M urea with 5 0mM ammonium bicarbonate and incubated with chymotrypsin (Promega) overnight at 25 °C. Digestion was stopped by the addition of formic acid to a final concentration of 0.5% and then centrifuged at 16,000g for 5 min. The supernatants were desalted using home-made C18 stage tips (3M Empore) packed with poros oligo R3 (Thermo Scientific) resin. Bound peptides were eluted with 5-60% MeCN in 0.5% formic acid, and partially dried down in a Speed Vac (Savant).  Peptide mixtures were analysed by LC-MS/MS using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano System (Thermo Scientific), coupled to an Orbitrap Q Exactive HFX mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).  Peptides were trapped by a 100 μm x 2 cm PepMap100 C18 nano trap column (Thermo Scientific) and separated on a 75 μm×50 cm, EASY-Spray HPLC Column, using a binary gradient consisting of buffer A (2% MeCN, 0.1% FA) and buffer B (80% MeCN, 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min for 190 min. For DIA (Data independent Acquisition), MS1 spectra were acquired at a resolution of 60 K, mass range of 385–1015 m/z, maximum injection time of 60 ms. MS2 analysis was carried out with resolution of 15 K, and 25 MS2 scans with 24 m/z isolation window.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data were processed using DIA-NN software (version 1.8.1) in library-free mode54. The sequence database was automatically generated from the UP000005640_9606 human proteome fasta file (March 2023). Two chymotrypsin missed cleavages were allowed in the search parameters. Carbamidomethyl cysteine was set as static modification and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. Precursor mass range was set as 370-1100 m/z and default settings were used for other parameters. The report.pg_matrix.tsv (protein) and report.pr_matrix.tsv (peptide) were used for analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) causes frontotemporal dementia (FTD), the most common form of dementia after Alzheimer's disease, and is often also associated with motor disorders<sup>1</sup>. The pathological hallmarks of FTLD are neuronal inclusions of specific, abnormally assembled proteins<sup>2</sup>. In the majority of cases the inclusions contain amyloid filament assemblies of TAR DNA-binding protein&#x2009;43 (TDP-43) or tau, with distinct filament structures characterizing different FTLD subtypes<sup>3,4</sup>. The presence of amyloid filaments and their identities and structures in the remaining approximately 10% of FTLD cases are unknown but are widely believed to be composed of the protein fused in sarcoma (FUS,&#xa0;also known as translocated in liposarcoma). As such, these cases are commonly referred to as FTLD-FUS. Here we used cryogenic electron microscopy (cryo-EM)&#xa0;to determine the structures of amyloid filaments extracted from the prefrontal and temporal cortices of four individuals with FTLD-FUS. Surprisingly, we found abundant amyloid filaments of the FUS homologue TATA-binding protein-associated factor&#x2009;15 (TAF15,&#xa0;also known as TATA-binding protein-associated factor 2N) rather than of FUS itself. The filament fold is formed from residues 7-99 in the low-complexity domain (LCD)&#xa0;of TAF15 and was identical between individuals. Furthermore, we found TAF15 filaments with the same fold in the motor cortex and brainstem of two of the individuals, both showing upper and lower motor neuron pathology. The formation of TAF15 amyloid filaments with a characteristic fold in FTLD establishes TAF15 proteinopathy in neurodegenerative disease. The structure of TAF15 amyloid filaments provides a basis for the development of model systems of neurodegenerative disease, as well as for the design of diagnostic and therapeutic tools targeting TAF15 proteinopathy.

### Keywords
Neurodegeneration frontotemporal dementia frontotemporal lobar degeneration ftld-fet

### Affiliations
MRC-LMB
MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology,  Neurobiology division, Cambridge, UK

### Submitter
Sew Peak-Chew

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin Ryskeldi-Falcon
MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology,  Neurobiology division, Cambridge, UK


