### Accession
PXD011318

### Title
Chronic shisha exposure alters phosphoproteome of oral keratinocytes

### Description
Shisha smoking has been epidemiologically linked to development of oral lesions as well as various cancers. However, few molecular studies investigate the pathobiology of shisha induced cancer. In this study we investigate the effects of chronic shisha exposure in an in vitro model using normal, immortalized, non-transformed oral keratinocytes. Quantitative proteomic and phosphoproteomic analyses were performed on OKF6/TERT1 cells exposed to shisha for a period of 8 months. Gene Ontology and pathway analysis of dysregulated proteins and phosphoproteins were carried out to identify significantly enriched biological processes and pathways in shisha exposed cells compared to parental cells. Chronic shisha exposure resulted in increased cell scattering phenomenon in OKF6/TERT1 cells. Quantitative data analysis revealed differential phosphorylation of 164 phosphopeptides (fold change ≥1.5, p≤0.05) corresponding to 136 proteins. Kinases such as PRKCD were seen to be hyperphosphorylated. Pathway analysis revealed an enrichment of hyperphosphorylated and/or overexpressed proteins involved in the mTORC1 and EIF4F complexes. These complexes are associated with initiation of protein translation and are known to the affected in cancers. Network analysis also highlighted a downregulation of proteins associated with Type I interferon signaling in shisha exposed cells. High throughput phosphoproteomic analysis revealed global perturbations to the molecular milieu of oral keratinocytes upon shisha exposure. Further studies are needed to validate putative targets in oral cancer patients with shisha smoking history.

### Sample Protocol
OKF6/TERT1 were grown and maintained in keratinocyte serum free medium (KSFM) (supplemented with bovine pituitary extract (25 µg/ml), epidermal growth factor (EGF) (0.2 ng/ml) (ThermoFisher Scientific, MA), 1% penicillin/streptomycin and calcium chloride (0.4 mM). The cells were cultured at 37°C in a humidified air incubator with 5% CO2. Shisha extract was prepared and used to treat OKF6/TERT1 cells chronically for up to a period of 8 months.  OKF6/TERT1-Parental and OKF6/TERT1-Shisha-8M cells were grown to 80% confluence followed by serum starvation for 8 h. The cells were washed with 1X PBS thrice and harvested in lysis buffer (2% SDS, 5 mM sodium fluoride, 1 mM β-glycerophosphate, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate in 50 mM Triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEABC)). The cell lysates were sonicated, centrifuged and protein concentration was determined by BCA (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany).  Equal amount of protein was collected from both conditions for further processing. Samples were reduced using dithiothreitol (DTT) at 60ºC for 20 min and alkylated using iodoacetamide (IAA) for 10 min at room temperature. The samples were then precipitated using 6 volumes of chilled acetone at -80oC overnight. Following this, the samples were centrifuged for 15 min at 12,000 rpm, acetone was removed and the pellet was air-dried. This was followed by reconstitution of protein pellets from both conditions in 4M urea. Protein samples were digested using Lysyl Endopeptidase®, Mass Spectrometry Grade (Catalog#125-05061, Wako, Richmond, VA) in an enzyme-to-protein ratio of 1:100 for 4 h at 37 o C. Subsequently, the urea concentration was reduced from 4M to 2M using 50mM TEABC. The samples were then digested using TPCK-treated trypsin (Worthington, NJ) at an enzyme-to-protein ratio of 1:20 for 16 h at 37ºC. This was followed by sample clean-up using Sep-Pak Classic C18 columns (Catalog#WAT051910, Waters, Milford, MA). The samples were then vacuum-dried and reconstituted in 50mM TEABC for TMT-labeling. Peptide samples were labelled using Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) labels (ThermoScientific, Bremen, Germany) as per manufacturer’s instructions. Peptides derived from OKF6/TERT1- Parental and OKF6/TERT1-Shisha-8M were labelled with TMT tags 130C and 131, respectively.  TMT labelled peptides were pooled and subjected to basic pH reverse phase chromatography (bRPLC), as previously described. The 96 fractions obtained were concatenated into 6 fractions. From the pooled fractions, one-tenth volume equivalent peptides were taken for total proteome analysis. The remaining samples were subjected to immobilized metal affinity chromatography (IMAC) based phosphopeptide enrichment. The enriched samples were desalted and used for mass spectrometry-based analysis.  Both phosphopeptide enriched and total proteome fractions were analysed on Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) interfaced with Easy nLC-1000 system (Thermo Scientific, Odense, Denmark). The peptide fractions were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid (Solvent A) and loaded onto a trap column (75 μm x 2 cm, Magic C18AQ, 5 μm, 100 Å, Michrom Biosciences Inc., Auburn, CA) at a flow rate of 3 µl/min. The peptides were then resolved on an in-house packed analytical column 75 μm x 20 cm, Magic C18 AQ, 3 μm, 100 Å, (Michrom Biosciences Inc., Auburn, CA) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min with back pressure of 275 bar using a gradient of 10% –35% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 95% acetonitrile) for 100 min. Data acquisition on the Orbitrap Fusion was carried out using a data-dependent method with MS 2 scanning for TMT tags. The scan sequence was started with the acquisition of a full MS 1 spectrum acquired in the Orbitrap (m/z range, 350-1600; resolution, 1.2x10 5 ; AGC target, 4x10 5 ; maximum injection time, 50 ms). MS2 scans were done in Orbitrap mass analyser using the following settings: quadrupole isolation at an isolation width of 1.6 m/z; fragmentation method, HCD; normalized collision energy, 34%). The peptide fractions were analysed in triplicate on the mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Identification and quantification of proteins was carried out using Proteome Discoverer (version 2.1) software suite (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Raw files were searched against NCBI human RefSeq protein database (version 81) containing common contaminants, using Sequest HT search algorithm. In the search parameters, carbamidomethylation of cysteine, and TMT label at peptide N-termini and lysine were set as static modifications; while oxidation of methionine was set as a dynamic modification. For phosphoproteomic data, phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine were defined as additional dynamic modifications. Trypsin was chosen as the protease with a maximum allowed missed cleavage of 2. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.05 Da. Decoy database search was carried out and peptide spectrum matches with a false discovery rate (FDR) cut-off of 1% was considered for peptide identification.

### Publication Abstract
Shisha smoking has been epidemiologically linked to oral cancer. However, few studies have investigated the pathobiology of shisha-induced cellular transformation. We studied the effects of chronic shisha exposure (8&#xa0;months) in an in vitro model using immortalized, non-neoplastic oral keratinocytes (OKF6/TERT1). Quantitative proteomic and phosphoproteomic analyses were performed on OKF6/TERT1 cells treated with shisha extract for a period of 8&#xa0;months. Pathway analysis was carried out to identify significantly enriched biological processes in shisha-treated cells. Chronic shisha exposure resulted in increased cell scattering phenomenon in OKF6/TERT1 cells. Data analysis revealed differential phosphorylation of 164 peptides (fold change &#x2265;1.5, p&#x2009;&#x2264;&#x2009;0.0.5) corresponding to 136 proteins. Proteins associated with mTORC1 and EIF4F complexes involved in initiating protein translation were seen to be enriched upon shisha treatment. Network analysis also highlighted downregulation of proteins involved in Type I interferon signaling in shisha-treated cells. Quantitative phosphoproteomic approach elucidated global perturbations to the molecular milieu of oral keratinocytes upon shisha exposure. Further studies are needed to validate putative targets in oral cancer patients with shisha smoking history.

### Keywords
High-throughput, Oscc, Oral cancer, Hookah, Waterpipe tobacco smoking, Carcinogenesis, Narghile tobacco, Orbitrap fusion

### Affiliations
Institute of Bioinformatics, Bangalore, Karnataka, India
Institute of Bioinformatics, 7th floor, Discoverer building, International Tech Park, Bangalore 560 066

### Submitter
Aditi Chatterjee

### Lab Head
Dr Aditi Chatterjee
Institute of Bioinformatics, 7th floor, Discoverer building, International Tech Park, Bangalore 560 066


