### Accession
PXD024644

### Title
LMTK3 inhibition affects microtubule stability

### Description
Elucidating the global proteomic alterations in MCF7 breast cancer cells, following pharmacological inhibition of LMTK3 using the C28 inhibitor

### Sample Protocol
TMT sample preparation  The TMT experiment and subsequent analysis was performed by DC Biosciences (https://dcbiosci.com/). Stably LMTK3-overexpressing MCF7 cell pellets were lysed by resuspension of the cell pellet in 200 µL lysis buffer (PBS, 4% SDS, 25 mM TCEP supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitors) and sonicated for 3*5s on ice followed immediately by heating at 95°C for 10 minutes. Samples were allowed to cool down, alkylated with N-Ethylmaleimide (50 mM) in the dark for 30 min at RT, then centrifuged for 5 minutes at 17,000 g and pellets discarded. Cleared lysates were methanol-chloroform precipitated, re-dissolved in 100 µL of 0.1 M TEAB, 8 M urea, diluted 1:4 (urea to 2 M), digested at 37°C overnight with 6 µg LysC, further diluted 1:2.5 (urea 0.8 M) then digested at 37°C overnight with 6 µg Trypsin. The digestion was stopped by adding TFA (final 1%) and tryptic peptides were then desalted on a tC18 SepPak 96-well plate. Peptide concentration was determined using the Pierce Fluorometric Peptides Assay. Equal amounts of each sample were labelled with TMT-10plex, combined and fractionated (4 fractions) by High pH Reversed Phase chromatography. Peptides were cleaned-up as above and re-dissolved in 5% formic acid.  Mass spectrometry analysis For MS analysis, samples were separated on an Ultimate 3000 nano-LC system coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). For online Reversed Phase chromatography, solvent A was 0.1% (V:V) formic acid and Solvent B was aqueous 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. Samples were loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap C18 nano-trap column, washed with 0.5% acetonitrile 0.1%, then resolved on a 250 mm × 75 μm Acclaim PepMap C18 reversed phase analytical column (Thermo Scientific) over a 150 minutes organic gradient, using 7 gradient segments (1-6% solvent B over 1 minute, 6-15% B over 58 min, 15-32% B over 58 min, 32-40% B over 5minutes, 40-90% B over 1minute, held at 90% B for 6 minutes and then reduced to 1% B over 1 minute) with a flow rate of 300 nL/min. For MS analysis, peptides were ionized by nano-electrospray ionization at 2.0 kV using a stainless-steel emitter with an internal diameter of 30 μm (Thermo Scientific) and a capillary temperature of 275°C. All spectra were acquired using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer controlled by Xcalibur 2.0 software (Thermo Scientific) operating in data-dependent acquisition mode. FTMS1 spectra were acquired at a resolution of 120,000 over a scan range (m/z) of 375-1550, with an AGC target of 2E5 and a max injection time of 50 milliseconds. Precursors were filtered to only include charge states 2-7. Dynamic exclusion was set to 60 seconds. Up to 12 dependent ITMS2 scans were acquired for precursors with intensities between 5000 and 1E20. The quadrupole isolation window was set to of 1.2 m/z. FirstMass was set 120, the AGC target was 1E4, max injection time was 70 milliseconds and CID collision energy was 35%. FTMS3 scans (Reagant (sic.) Tag Type set to TMT) were acquired at 50,000 resolution over a 100-500 m/z range, using a MultiNotch (5) method, HCD activation with 60% collision energy, AGC target 5E4 and 105 ms max injection time.with 60% collision energy, AGC target 5E4 and 105 ms max injection time.

### Data Protocol
Data Analysis           Acquired raw files were searched in MaxQuant (Version 1.6.17.0) against a human database from UniProt (ID: UP000005640). The search criteria were including oxidation of methionine and acetylation of the protein N-terminus as variable modifications and N-Ethylmaleimide (NEM) modification of cysteine (+125.048) as fixed modification. For digestion mode enzyme specifity was Trypsin/P with a maximum of two missed cleavages per peptide. All FDRs were set to 1%. TMT label purity correction was performed in MaxQuant.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tubulin, Nusap1, Lmtk3, Breast cancer, Kinase inhibitor

### Affiliations
University of Sussex
School of Life Sciences
Department for Biochemistry and Biomedicine University of Sussex -School of Life Sciences

### Submitter
Murat Eravci

### Lab Head
Dr Georgios Giamas
Department for Biochemistry and Biomedicine University of Sussex -School of Life Sciences


