### Accession
PXD032801

### Title
NanoLC-MSMS TMT whole cell comparison of ex vivo derived macrophage subtypes.

### Description
Triplicate samples of donor matched ex vivo generated macrophage subtypes M1, M2a, M2c compared against the M0 control analysed using TMT-based 11plex quantitative proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
For the whole cell proteomics, 100µg of each sample was reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin as above. The resulting peptides were then labelled with TMT eleven-plex reagents according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Loughborough, LE11 5RG, UK) and the labelled samples pooled and desalted using a SepPak cartridge according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Waters, Milford, Massachusetts, USA). Eluate from the SepPak cartridge was evaporated to dryness and resuspended in buffer A (20 mM ammonium hydroxide, pH 10) prior to fractionation by high pH reversed-phase chromatography using an Ultimate 3000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific). In brief, the sample was loaded onto an XBridge BEH C18 Column (130Å, 3.5µm, 2.1mm X 150 mm, Waters, UK) in buffer A and peptides eluted with an increasing gradient of buffer B (20 mM Ammonium Hydroxide in acetonitrile, pH 10) from 0-95% over 60 minutes. The resulting fractions (4 for the surfaceome analysis and 15 for the whole cell analysis) were evaporated to dryness and resuspended in 1% formic acid prior to analysis by nano-LC MSMS using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).  High pH RP fractions were further fractionated using an Ultimate 3000 nano-LC system in line with an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). In brief, peptides in 1% (vol/vol) formic acid were injected onto an Acclaim PepMap C18 nano-trap column (Thermo Scientific). After washing with 0.5% (vol/vol) acetonitrile 0.1% (vol/vol) formic acid, peptides were resolved on a 250mm × 75μm Acclaim PepMap C18 reverse phase analytical column (Thermo Scientific) over a 150 min organic gradient with a flow rate of 300nL min−1. Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid and Solvent B was aqueous 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were ionized by nano-electrospray ionization at 2.0kV using a stainless-steel emitter with an internal diameter of 30μm (Thermo Scientific) and a capillary temperature of 275°C. All spectra were acquired using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer controlled by Xcalibur 2.1 software (Thermo Scientific) and operated in data-dependent acquisition mode using an SPS-MS3 workflow. FTMS1 spectra were collected at a resolution of 120 000, with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 200 000 and a max injection time of 50ms. Precursors were filtered with an intensity threshold of 5000, according to charge state (to include charge states 2-7) and with monoisotopic peak determination set to peptide. Previously interrogated precursors were excluded using a dynamic window (60s +/-10ppm). The MS2 precursors were isolated with a quadrupole isolation window of 1.2m/z. ITMS2 spectra were collected with an AGC target of 10 000, max injection time of 70ms and CID collision energy of 35%. For FTMS3 analysis, the Orbitrap was operated at 50 000 resolution with an AGC target of 50, 000 and a max injection time of 105ms. Precursors were fragmented by high energy collision dissociation (HCD) at a normalized collision energy of 60% to ensure maximal TMT reporter ion yield. Synchronous Precursor Selection (SPS) was enabled to include up to 10 MS2 fragment ions in the FTMS3 scan.

### Data Protocol
The raw data files were processed and quantified using Proteome Discoverer software v2.1 (Thermo Scientific) and searched against the UniProt Human database (downloaded March 2020: 165104 entries) using the SEQUEST HT algorithm. Peptide precursor mass tolerance was set at 10ppm, and MS/MS tolerance was set at 0.6Da. Search criteria included oxidation of methionine (+15.995Da), acetylation of the protein N-terminus (+42.011Da) and Methionine loss plus acetylation of the protein N-terminus (-89.03Da) as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.021Da) and the addition of the TMT mass tag (+229.163Da) to peptide N-termini and lysine as fixed modifications. Searches were performed with full tryptic digestion and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages were allowed. The reverse database search option was enabled and all data was filtered to satisfy false discovery rate (FDR) of 5%.

### Publication Abstract
Macrophages have previously been characterized based on phenotypical and functional differences into suggested simplified subtypes of M&#xd8;, M1, M2a and M2c. These macrophage subtypes can be generated in a well-established primary monocyte culture model that produces cells expressing accepted subtype surface markers. To determine how these subtypes retain functional similarities and better understand their formation, we generated all four subtypes from the same donors. Comparative whole-cell proteomics confirmed that four distinct macrophage subtypes could be induced from the same donor material, with &gt; 50% of 5435 identified proteins being significantly altered in abundance between subtypes. Functional assessment highlighted that these distinct protein expression profiles are primed to enable specific cell functions, indicating that this shifting proteome is predictive of meaningful changes in cell characteristics. Importantly, the 2552 proteins remained consistent in&#x2009;abundance across all macrophage subtypes examined, demonstrating maintenance of a stable core proteome that likely enables swift polarity changes. We next explored the cross-polarization capabilities of preactivated M1 macrophages treated with dexamethasone. Importantly, these treated cells undergo a partial repolarization toward the M2c surface markers but still retain the M1 functional phenotype. Our investigation of polarized macrophage subtypes therefore provides evidence of a sliding scale of macrophage functionality, with these data sets providing a valuable benchmark resource for further studies of macrophage polarity, with relevance for cell therapy development and drug discovery.

### Keywords
Human, Polarisation, Macrophage

### Affiliations
University of Bristol 
Professor of Cell Biology and NHSBT Principal Investigator, School of Biochemistry, Unitversity of Bristol

### Submitter
Charlotte Severn

### Lab Head
Dr Ash Toye
Professor of Cell Biology and NHSBT Principal Investigator, School of Biochemistry, Unitversity of Bristol


