### Accession
PXD038117

### Title
Sortilin Drives Valvular Interstitial Cells to a Combined Inflammatory Myofibroblast-Osteogenic Phenotype in Calcific Aortic Valve Disease as Revealed by Single-cell Analysis

### Description
Background: Calcific aortic valve disease (CAVD), the most common valve disease is comprised of a chronic interplay of inflammation, fibrosis, and calcification. In this study, sortilin (SORT1) was identified as a novel key player in the pathophysiology of CAVD, and its role in the transformation of valvular interstitial cells (VICs) into pathological phenotypes is explored. Methods: An aortic valve (AV) wire injury (AVWI) mouse model with sortilin deficiency was used to determine the effects of sortilin on AV stenosis, fibrosis and calcification. In vitro experiments employed human primary VICs cultured in osteogenic conditions for 7, 14 and 21 days; and processed for imaging, proteomics, transcriptomics and single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq). Results: The AVWI mouse model showed reduced AV fibrosis, calcification, and stenosis in sortilin-deficient mice versus littermate controls. We identified the transition of human VICs into a myofibroblast-like phenotype mediated by sortilin and p-38 MAPK signaling. Sortilin loss-of-function decreased in vitro VIC calcification. ScRNA-seq identified 12 differentially expressed cell clusters in human VIC samples, where a novel combined inflammatory myofibroblastic-osteogenic VIC (IMO-VIC) phenotype was detected with increased expression of SORT1, COL1A1, WNT5A, IL-6 and SAA1. VICs sequenced with sortilin deficiency showed decreased IMO-VIC phenotype. Conclusions: Sortilin promotes experimental CAVD by mediating valvular fibrosis and calcification, and newly identified phenotype (IMO-VIC). This is the first study to examine the role of sortilin in aortic valve calcification and it may render it a therapeutic target to inhibit IMO-VIC emergence by simultaneously reducing inflammation, fibrosis, and calcification, the three key pathological processes underlying CAVD.

### Sample Protocol
Proteolysis of human VIC cultures was done using the iST Kit (PreOmics, P.O.00027) in which 30 μg of protein per sample was used as per manufacturer’s directions. A total of 60 VIC culture conditions were processed: n=5 donor VICs with each having control media sicontrol, osteogenic media sicontrol, and osteogenic media siSORT1; sampled at days 7, 14 and 21 of culture. The tryptic peptides were diluted 4-fold to acquire a constant ion current. Peptide samples were analyzed with the high resolution/accuracy Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer fronted with an Easy-Spray ion source coupled to an Easy-nLC1000 HPLC pump (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides were separated using a dual column set-up: an Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 trap column, 75 μm X 20 mm; and an EASY-Spray LC heated (45 oC) column, 75 μm X 250 mm (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The gradient flow rate was 300 nl/min from 5 to 21% solvent B (acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid) for 75 minutes, 21 to 30 % Solvent B for 15 minutes, followed by ten minutes of a ‘jigsaw wash’, alternating between 5 and 95 % Solvent B. Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid. The instrument was set to 120 K resolution, and the top N precursor ions in a 3 second cycle time (within a scan range of 400-1500 m/z; isolation window, 1.6 m/z; ion trap scan rate, rapid) were subjected to collision induced dissociation (collision energy 30%) for peptide sequencing (or MS/MS). Dynamic exclusion was enabled (60 seconds).

### Data Protocol
The 60 mass spectral files were queried against the Human UniProt database (downloaded September 09, 2020; 96,816 entries) using the HT-SEQUEST search algorithm, via the Proteome Discoverer (PD) Package (version 2.2, Thermo Fisher Scientific), using a 10-ppm tolerance window in the MS1 search space and 0.6 Da for CID data (with trypsin as the enzyme). Methionine oxidation was set as a variable modification, and cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a static modification. The peptide false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was calculated using Percolator provided by PD. For quantification of proteins across 60 VIC datasets, the Feature Mapper node was used. For chromatographic alignment, the maximum retention shift was set to 10 minutes and mass tolerance 10 PPM. For feature linking and mapping, the retention time tolerance was set to 0 minutes and the mass tolerance 10 PPM, and the signal-to-noise threshold set to 5. Peptides assigned to a given protein group, and not present in any other protein group, were considered as unique. Consequently, each protein group is represented by a single master protein (PD Grouping feature). We used unique and razor peptides per protein for quantification, normalized by total peptide amount, and filtered for proteins with 2 or more unique peptides. Before analyzing the proteomic data using the statistical software Qlucore Omics 2.2 (Qlucore, Sweden), a median normalization step was applied (custom script using Python) to fill missing quantification values with ‘0’ and rescale the data.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Aortic stenosis, Single-cell rna sequencing, Sortilin, Fibrosis, Calcification, Inflammation

### Affiliations
The Center for Excellence in Vascular Biology, Cardiovascular Division The Center for Interdisciplinary Cardiovascular Sciences, Cardiovascular Division Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA
Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, 02115, USA

### Submitter
Adrien Lupieri

### Lab Head
Dr Elena Aikawa
The Center for Excellence in Vascular Biology, Cardiovascular Division The Center for Interdisciplinary Cardiovascular Sciences, Cardiovascular Division Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA


