### Accession
PXD027968

### Title
Anatomic position determines oncogenic specificity in melanoma

### Description
Oncogenic alterations to DNA are not transforming in all cellular contexts. This may be due to pre-existing transcriptional programs in the cell of origin. Here, we define anatomic position as a major determinant of why cells respond to specific oncogenes. Cutaneous melanoma arises throughout the body, whereas the acral subtype arises on the palms of the hands, soles of the feet, or under the nails. We sequenced the DNA of cutaneous and acral melanomas from a large cohort of human patients and found a specific enrichment for BRAF mutations in cutaneous melanoma but CRKL amplifications in acral melanoma. We modeled these changes in transgenic zebrafish models and found that CRKL-driven tumors predominantly formed in the fins of the fish. The fins are the evolutionary precursors to tetrapod limbs, indicating that melanocytes in these acral locations may be uniquely susceptible to CRKL. RNA profiling of these fin/limb melanocytes, compared to body melanocytes, revealed a positional identity gene program typified by posterior HOX13 genes. This positional gene program synergized with CRKL to drive tumors at acral sites. Abrogation of this CRKL-driven program eliminated the anatomic specificity of acral melanoma. These data suggest that the anatomic position of the cell of origin endows it with a unique transcriptional state that makes it susceptible to only certain oncogenic insults.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation Two cell lines were used for IP-MS/MS: Human melanoma cell line WM3918 with V5-tagged CRKL overexpression and a control cell line with wildtype (no V5-tag) CRKL overexpression. For each cell line IP was performed in six replicates. 100 x 106 cells were thawed at 37C for 30 sec lysed in 2ml of ice cold 50mM EPPS pH 7.5, 150mM NaCl, 1% triton, cOmplete™, EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (1 tablet per 20mL of lysis buffer), 1:100 of of sigma phosphatase inhibitors 2 and 3 cocktails and 250U/ul of benzonase. Lysates were incubated on ice for 5 min to allow DNA digestion, centrifuged at 20K g for 5 min, to remove insoluble material and filtered through acroprep 1.0um glass filter plate at 2000g for 1 minute. The concentration of protein was then estimated by BCA and immunoprecipitation was performed in 2ml deep well plates with 1mg of protein material, 5.75ug of V5 antibody (Invitrogen #R960-25)  bound to 5.75ul of Protein G Sepharose (17-0618-02). The final volume of IP reaction was 300ul. The incubation was performed at 4C shaking at 1100 rpm for 1 hour. The beads were then transferred to OF 1100 filter plate (Orochem) and washed 5 times with ice cold 50mM EPPS pH 7.5, 150mM NaCl using vacuum manifold. 18ul of 10mM EPPS pH 8.5 with 20ng/ul trypsin, 10ng/ul LysC was added to the beads in each well and digestion was performed for 2 hours at 37C at 2000rpm. The partial digest was then collected into 96 well PCR plate and left overnight at room temperature to complete digestion. 4uls of 22g/L 11 plex TMT tags were added to each sample (6 replicates of IP for V5-tagged CRKL overexpression sample and 5 replicates of IP from wildtype CRKL overexpression cell line was combined in the TMT 11 plex experiment). The samples were then pulled and 20 ul of the combined sample was set aside, while the rest was fractionated into 8 fractions using High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit, as suggested by manufacturer. The fractions were concatenated into 4 fractions (1st and 5th fractions, 2nd and 6th and so on) and evaporated in speed vac (1ul of DMSO was added to each sample to prevent complete evaporation) and resuspended in 20 ul 0.1%TFA Data acquisition 5 ul of unfractionated sample and every fraction was analyzed by EASY-nLC 1200 System with 2mm particle size, 75mm x 500 mm easyspray column in direct injection mode. The samples were separated using the following gradient at 300nl/min of buffer A (0.1% formic acid in water) and buffer B (0.1%formic acid in acetonitrile): 0%–5% in 10 min, 5%–25% in 92 min, 25%–50% in 18min, the column was then washed with 95% B for 10 min at 400nl/min. Eluting peptides were analyzed on Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer using MS3 SPS with the settings recommended by the instrument manufacturer for TMT11 plex analysis. Cycle time was set at 3 sec and exclusion time was set at 45 sec.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis Data were analyzed in Proteome Discoverer 3.1 software. A database search was performed with Sequest HT search engine using Human UniProt database containing only reviewed entries and canonical isoforms (retrieved on 14/06/2019). Oxidation (M) was set as a variable modification, while TMT6plex was set as fixed modification. A maximum of two missed cleavages were permitted. The precursor and fragment mass tolerances were 10 ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively. PSMs were validated by percolator with a 0.01 posterior error probability (PEP) threshold. Only PSMs with isolation interference < 25% and at least 5 MS2 fragments matched to peptide sequence among the 10 selected for MS3 were considered. The quantification results of PSMs were combined into protein-level quantitation using MSstatsTMT R package. Only proteins with at least 3 peptides were reported. Proteins were then analyzed for previously described SH2 and SH3 binding motifs.

### Publication Abstract
Oncogenic alterations to DNA are not transforming in all cellular contexts<sup>1,2</sup>. This may be due to pre-existing transcriptional programmes in the cell of origin. Here we define anatomic position as a major determinant of why cells respond to specific oncogenes. Cutaneous melanoma arises throughout the body, whereas the acral subtype arises on the palms of the hands, soles of the feet or under the nails<sup>3</sup>. We sequenced the DNA of cutaneous and acral melanomas from a large cohort of human patients and found a specific enrichment for BRAF mutations in cutaneous melanoma and enrichment for CRKL amplifications in acral melanoma. We modelled these changes in transgenic zebrafish models and found that CRKL-driven tumours formed predominantly in the fins of the fish. The fins are the evolutionary precursors to tetrapod limbs, indicating that melanocytes in these acral locations may be uniquely susceptible to CRKL. RNA profiling of these fin and limb melanocytes, when compared with body melanocytes, revealed a positional identity gene programme typified by posterior HOX13 genes. This positional gene programme synergized with CRKL to amplify insulin-like growth factor (IGF) signalling and drive tumours at acral sites. Abrogation of this CRKL-driven programme eliminated the anatomic specificity of acral melanoma. These data suggest that the anatomic position of the cell of origin endows it with a unique transcriptional state that makes it susceptible to only certain oncogenic insults.

### Keywords
Human, Ip-ms, Melanoma

### Affiliations
Syddansk University
Microchemistry and Proteomics Core Facility, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065, USA

### Submitter
Pavel Shliaha

### Lab Head
Dr Ronald Hendrickson
Microchemistry and Proteomics Core Facility, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065, USA


