### Accession
PXD046470

### Title
Mechanotransduction coordinates extracellular matrix protein homeostasis  promoting longevity in C. elegans

### Description
Although it is postulated that dysfunctional extracellular matrices (ECM) drive aging and disease, how ECM integrity assures longevity is unknown. Here, using proteomics and in-vivo monitoring of fluorescently tagged ECM proteins, we systematically examined the ECM composition during Caenorhabditis elegans aging revealing three distinct collagen dynamics. We show that age-dependent stiffening of inert collagen was slowed by longevity interventions through prolonged replenishing of collagens. In genetic and automated lifespan screens for the regulators that drive this remodeling, we identify hemidesmosome-containing structures that span from the exoskeletal ECM through the hypodermis, basement membrane ECM, to the muscles, coupling mechanical forces to adjust ECM gene expression across tissues. The hemidesmosome tension-induced adaptation is mediated via transcriptional co-activator YAP. Our data reveal a novel mechanism of mechano-coupling and synchronizing of two functionally distinct and spatially distant ECMs that is indispensable for longevity. Thus, besides signaling molecules, mechanotransduction-coordinated ECM remodeling systemically promotes healthy aging.

### Sample Protocol
1492 C. elegans proteomics  1493 Approximately 1000 - 3000 C. elegans were harvested and washed 4 times by  1494 centrifugation and resuspension in physiological M9 buffer. Samples were then frozen at  1495 -80°C until extraction for all samples in parallel. 500 μL of extraction solution (8 M Urea,  1496 25 mM NH4HCO3, Protease inhibitor (cOmplete tab, Roche Switzerland, 0.25 tablets per  1497 1 ml of extraction solution) and 2 mM Na3VO4, 1mM PMSF) was added to each C.  1498 elegans pellet on ice. The samples were then processed by bead bouncing for three times  1499 150 seconds using pre-chilled sample holders (-20°C). After centrifugation at 15000 g for  1500 15 minutes (4°C), the supernatant was subjected to total protein quantification and the  1501 sample was adjusted to 100 μg of protein. TCEP (Sigma-Aldrich) was added to 5 mM  1502 final concentration and the samples were incubated at RT for 30 minutes. Reduced  1503 cysteines were alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) for 1 hr in the dark  1504 at room temperature. Samples were diluted 8x in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate to  1505 reduce the urea concentration to 1 M and protein digestion was performed overnight at  1506 37 C by addition of 2 µg of trypsin (Promega) per sample. 1507 The day after the samples were acidified with the addition of 5% TFA to achieve  1508 pH < 3. Desalting was performed using C18 spin columns (Nest group) as suggested by  available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license. (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made  bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.08.30.505802; this version posted August 30, 2022. The copyright holder for this preprint 91 1509 the manufacturer. Columns were wetted with 200 ul (1 CV) of 100% ACN and then  1510 equilibrated with 2 CV of 0.1% FA. Following sample loading, the resin was washed three  1511 times with 1 CV of 0.1% FA and 5% ACN. Peptides were eluted twice with 0.5 CV of 50%  1512 ACN in 0.1% FA and dried under vacuum. The dried peptides of MS-buffer (0.1% FA)  1513 with 1:30 iRT peptides (Biognosys) spiked in. The samples were then injected on a  1514 TripleTOF 5600 (Sciex, Concord, Canada). Peptides were separated at nano-flow liquid  1515 chromatography (NanoLC Ultra 2D, Eksigent) with a flow rate of 300 nL/min using a  1516 NanoSpray III source with a heated interface (Sciex, Concord, Canada). The source  1517 voltage was 2 kV. The used emitter (Peek 30 cm) was manually packed with 3 μm  1518 Reprosil pur (Maisch) beads. The peptides were separated using a 90 min linear gradient  1519 from 5% to 30% Buffer B (98% ACN and 0.1% formic acid in HPLC grade H2O) in Buffer  1520 A (2% ACN and 0.1% formic acid in H2O).

### Data Protocol
Data was searched with Spectronaut using BGS factory settings

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dia

### Affiliations
ETH Zurich
University of California San Francisco, Quantitative Biosciences Institute (QBI), San Francisco, CA, 94158, USA

### Submitter
Andrea Fossati

### Lab Head
Dr Ewald Colin
ETH Zurich


