### Accession
PXD003510

### Title
Platelet proteomics profiling in transfusion adverse events, part 2

### Description
Blood platelets destined for transfusion release panoply of molecules during preparation and storage. The leukoreduction process made the transfusion safer but did not completely abolish the adverse events. The rationale is to study the proteome profile of platelet components PPC (platelet pellets) involved in transfusion adverse events.

### Sample Protocol
Platelet pellets from leukodepleted PCs were sampled from 3 platelet components (PCs) implicated in transfusion adverse events and 3 PCs matched controls. Platelet pellets were washed twice with sterile PBS and resuspended in 80 µl of PBS and 20 μL of Laemmli buffer then immediately heated at 100 °C for 3 min and then frozen at -80 ° C

### Data Protocol
Data were searched by SEQUEST through Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) against the the Human Reference Proteome Set protein database (uniprot 2015-07). Spectra from peptides higher than 5000 Da or lower than 350 Da were rejected. The search parameters were as follows: mass accuracy of the monoisotopic peptide precursor and peptide fragments was set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. Only b- and y-ions were considered for mass calculation. Oxidation of methionine (+16 Da), propionamide (+71 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57 Da) were considered as variable modifications. Two missed trypsin cleavages were allowed. Peptide validation was performed using Percolator algorithm and only “high confidence” peptides were retained corresponding to a 1% false positive rate at peptide level. Raw LC-MS/MS data were imported in Progenesis LC-MS QI 2.0 (Nonlinear Dynamics Ltd, Newcastle, UK). Data processing included the following steps: (i) Features detection, (ii) Features alignment across the samples, (iii) Volume integration for 2-6 charge-state ions, (iv) Normalization on ratio median, (v) Import of sequence information, (vi) ANOVA test at peptide level and filtering for features p <0.05, (vii) Calculation of protein abundance (sum of the volume of corresponding peptides), (viii) ANOVA test at protein level and filtering for features p <0.05. Noticeably, only non-conflicting features and unique peptides were considered for calculation at protein level. Quantitative data were considered for proteins quantified by a minimum of 2 peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Platelet components (PCs) are occasionally associated with adverse transfusion reactions (ATRs). ATRs can occur regardless of the type of PC being transfused, whether it is a single-donor apheresis PC (SDA-PC) or a pooled PC (PPCs). The purpose of this study was to investigate the proteins and dysregulated pathways in both of the main types of PCs. The proteomic profiles of platelet pellets from SDA-PCs and PPCs involved in ATRs were analysed using the label-free LC-MS/MS method. Differentially expressed proteins with fold changes &gt;|1.5| in clinical cases versus controls were characterised using bioinformatic tools (RStudio, GeneCodis3, and Ingenuity Pathways Analysis (IPA). The proteins were confirmed by western blotting. The common primary proteins found to be dysregulated in both types of PCs were the mitochondrial carnitine/acylcarnitine carrier protein (SLC25A20), multimerin-1 (MMRN1), and calumenin (CALU), which are associated with the important enrichment of platelet activation, platelet degranulation, and mitochondrial activity. Furthermore, this analysis revealed the involvement of commonly dysregulated canonical pathways, particularly mitochondrial dysfunction, platelet activation, and acute phase response. This proteomic analysis provided an interesting contribution to our understanding of the meticulous physiopathology of PCs associated with ATR. A larger investigation would assist in delineating the most relevant proteins to target within preventive transfusion safety strategies. BIOLOGICAL SIGNIFICANCE: Within platelet transfusion strategies, the two primary types of PCs predominantly processed in Europe, include (i) single donor apheresis PCs (SDA-PCs) from one donor and (ii) pooled PCs (PPCs). The current study used PCs from five buffy coats derived from five whole blood donations that were identical in ABO, RH1 and KEL1 groups. Both PC types were shown to be associated with the onset of an ATR in the transfused patient. Several common platelet proteins were found to be dysregulated in bags associated with ATR occurrences regardless of the type of PCs transfused and of their process. The dysregulated proteins included mitochondrial carnitine/acylcarnitine carrier protein (SLC25A20), which is involved in a fatty acid oxidation disorder; calumenin (CALU); and multimerin-1 (MMRN1), which is chiefly involved in platelet activation and degranulation. Dysregulated platelet protein pathways for ATRs that occurred with SDA-PCs and PPCs could support the dysregulated functions found in association with those three proteins. Those common platelet proteins may become candidates to define biomarkers associated with the onset of an ATR from PC transfusions, including monitoring during the quality steps of PC manufacturing, provided that the results are confirmed in larger cohorts. This study enriches our knowledge of platelet proteomics in PCs under pathological conditions.

### Keywords
Transfusion, Buffy-coat-derived pooled pc (ppc), Proteomics, Platelet concentrates (pc)

### Affiliations
Plateforme Proteome
Plateforme Proteome, University of Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France

### Submitter
Stephane Claverol

### Lab Head
Dr Marc Bonneu
Plateforme Proteome, University of Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France


