### Accession
PXD021639

### Title
Mitochondrial proteome from liver and intestinal organoids from WT, Nrf2 knockout and Keap1 knockdown mice

### Description
Transcription factor nuclear factor erythroid 2 p45-related factor 2 (Nrf2) and its main negative regulator, Kelch-like ECH associated protein 1 (Keap1), are at the interface between redox and intermediary metabolism, allowing adaptation and survival under conditions of oxidative, inflammatory and metabolic stress. Nrf2 is the principal determinant of redox homeostasis, and contributes to mitochondrial function and integrity, and cellular bioenergetics. Using proteomics and lipidomics, we show that genetic downregulation of Keap1 in mice, and the consequent Nrf2 activation to pharmacologically-relevant levels, leads to upregulation of carboxylesterase 1 (Ces1) and acyl-CoA oxidase 2 (Acox2), decreases triglycerides levels, and alters the lipidome. This is accompanied by downregulation of hepatic ATP-citrate lyase (Acly) and decreased levels of acetyl-CoA, a trigger for autophagy. These findings suggest that downregulation of Keap1 confers features of a fasted metabolic state, which is an important consideration in the drug development of Keap1-targeting pharmacologic Nrf2 activators.

### Sample Protocol
Animals Wild-type, Nrf2-knockout (Nrf2-/-, N0) and Keap1-knockdown (Keap1flox/flox, KD) mice (Taguchi et al., 2010) were maintained on either C57BL/6 or Skh-1 hairless genetic backgrounds. Both male and female mice were used.  Isolation of mitochondria-enriched fractions from liver 3 individual 20-22-week-old female mice of each genotype, all on the Skh-1 hairless genetic background, were used. Excised fresh whole livers were rinsed in 100 ml of ice-cold PBS and then in 50 ml of ice-cold Mitochondrial Isolation Buffer (MIB, 250 mM sucrose, 1mM EGTA, 20 mM Tris-Cl pH 7.4), transferred into a fresh beaker with 15 ml MIB on ice, chopped with scissors and then homogenised using Dounce homogeniser for 5 min on ice. Homogenates were clarified by centrifugation at 400 x g for 6 min (Sorvall T21, SL50T), and the resultant supernatants were transferred into fresh tubes and subjected to centrifugation, first at 1,200 x g for 6 min, followed by 8,000 x g for 10 min. The resulting pellets were gently re-suspended in 25 ml MIB, transferred into fresh tubes and subjected to centrifugation at 8,000 x g for 12 min. The supernatants were discarded and pellets washed twice by gently swirling the tube walls with 25 ml of MIB. The pellets were then carefully re-suspended in 1 ml MIB, frozen in aliquots in liquid nitrogen, and stored at -80°C until further use.   Preparation of mitochondrial proteins Mitochondrial-enriched fractions were thawed on ice and diluted 1:1 with MIB containing 1x Protease Inhibitors Cocktail (Roche). LDS loading buffer (4x, Thermo) and Sample Reducing Agent (Thermo) were added at 1:4 and 1:10 ratios, respectively, and the samples were incubated at 95°C for 5 min and sonicated for 25 sec at 25% amplitude. The insoluble material was removed by centrifugation for 10 min at 16,000 x g, the supernatant was transferred to a fresh tube. Proteins (24 μg) per lane were resolved on 10% Novex Bis-Tris NuPAGE gel, which was then stained with Coomassie R.  Organoids Organoids were generated from isolated intestinal crypts as described (Carroll et al., 2017; Sato et al., 2009). To obtain mitochondria-enriched preparations from organoids for proteomic analysis, cultured organoids from 3 individual 7-10 week-old animals of each genotype, all on the C57BL/6 genetic background, were used. The organoids were harvested with CorningTM Cell Recovery Solution (Fisher Scientific) following the manufacturer's instructions. Mitochondria-enriched fractions were prepared from WT, N0 and KD C57/BL6 mice (n=3) as described (Frezza et al., 2007). The mitochondria-enriched fractions were mixed with NuPAGE LDS Sample Buffer (Thermo) and heated at 70°C for 10 min. NuPAGE™ Sample Reducing Agent (Thermo) was added into the samples, and proteins (14 g) were resolved on 10% SDS-PAGE gel (with NuPAGE – MOPS buffer, Thermo).   Proteomics For both proteomic experiments, proteins from mitochondrial preparations of three types, namely WT control (WT), Nrf2 knockout (Nrf2-KO), and Keap1 knockdown (Keap1-KD), were fractionated by SDS-PAGE and excised into two gel sections per lane. Peptides were extracted by tryptic digestion (Shevchenko et al., 2006), including alkylation with iodoacetamide. Peptide samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 liquid chromatography system via an EASY-Spray ion source (Thermo Scientific) running a 75 μm x 500 mm EASY-Spray column at 45°C. Data were acquired in the data-dependent mode. Full scan spectra (m/z 300–1800) were acquired with resolution R = 70,000 at m/z 200 (after accumulation to a target value of 1,000,000 with maximum injection time of 20 ms). The 10 most intense ions were fragmented by HCD and measured with a resolution of R = 17,500 at m/z 200 (target value of 500,000, maximum injection time of 60 ms) and intensity threshold of 2.1x104. Peptide match was set to ‘preferred’ and a 40 second dynamic exclusion list was applied. For each experiment two elution gradients were used: Liver – 60 min and 240 min, Intestinal organoids – 140 min and 180 min.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data files were processed using MaxQuant (v 1.6.1.0) with the built-in Andromeda peptide search engine (version 1.3.0.5) (Cox and Mann, 2008; Cox et al., 2011). The mouse uniprot protome was searched (downloaded October 2019 – 55153 entries). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin-P. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was selected as a fixed modification with methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. Initial maximum allowed mass deviation was set to 20 parts per million (ppm) for peptide masses and 0.5 Da for MS/MS peaks. The minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and maximum size 4600 Da. A maximum of two missed cleavages were considered. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was required at both the protein and peptide levels. Label-free quantification was selected and the ‘match between runs’ option was applied with a time window of two minutes.   The unfiltered proteinGroups.txt file contained 6259 protein group entries, which after filtering for decoy proteins, those identified only by modified peptide(s), putative contaminants and those without a complete set of three LFQ values in at least one set of triplicates in at least one MS run, left 3752 proteins. Prior to further statistical analysis, LFQ values were further manually normalized within each MS run by median ratio of lane protein intensity/average of all lanes protein intensity for all common proteins for each slice (upper or lower). Once normalized, a single normalized LFQ value for each replicate in each MS run was calculated by the sum of the two slices normalized LFQ intensity for each peptide. This was necessary as output LFQ values were apparently not appropriately normalized when replicates were compared. Statistical analyses were performed using Perseus (v 1.6.1.1) (Tyanova et al., 2016). Data were separated into the four MS runs (two for liver and two for organoids samples). Zero values were replaced using Perseus default settings, and comparisons among cell types was performed using a two-tailed Student’s t-test with cutoffs set at 10% FDR with an S0 value of 0.1.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Organoids, Mitochondrial, Mouse, Nrf2, Liver, Keap1

### Affiliations
University of Dundee
Professor of Molecular Biology. Centre for Gene Regulation and Expression, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee ,Dundee, DD1 5EH, Scotland, UK

### Submitter
Mike Tatham

### Lab Head
Dr Ronald Thomas Hay
Professor of Molecular Biology. Centre for Gene Regulation and Expression, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee ,Dundee, DD1 5EH, Scotland, UK


