### Accession
PXD015579

### Title
The cytosolic DNA sensor cGAS recognizes Neutrophil Extracellular Traps

### Description
Neutrophil Extracellular Traps (NETs) are structures consisting of chromatin and antimicrobial molecules that are released by neutrophils during a form of regulated cell death called NETosis. NETs trap invading pathogens, promote coagulation and activate myeloid cells to produce Type I interferons (type I IFN), proinflammatory cytokines that regulate the immune system. The mechanism of NET recognition by myeloid cells is not yet clearly identified. Here we show that macrophages and other myeloid cells phagocytose NETs. Once in phagosomes, NETs translocate to the cytosol, where they activate the DNA sensor cyclic GMP-AMP synthase (cGAS) and induce type I IFN expression. cGAS recognizes the DNA backbone of NETs. Interestingly, the NET associated serine protease Neutrophil Elastase (NE) mediates the activation of the pathway. We confirmed that NETs activate cGAS in vivo. Thus, our findings identify cGAS as a major sensor of NETs, mediating the  immune activation during infection and in auto-immune diseases.

### Sample Protocol
All samples were subjected to SP3 sample preparation (pubmed 30464214). Briefly, proteins were denatured, reduced and alkylated, and subsequently digested with Trypsin and Lys-C proteases. TMT 11plex (Pierce) labeling was used for peptide multiplexing and quantification. Samples were mixed, desalted using solid phase extraction (Seppak 1cc/50mg, Waters), and fractionated using basic reversed phase fractionation on a quaternary Agilent 1290 Infinity II UPLC system equipped with a Kinetex Evo-C18 column (150 x 2.1 mm, 2.6µm, 100 Å, Phenomenex). Fractions were concatenated into 8 final samples, dried down and resuspended in 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) prior MS analysis. All samples were analyzed on a Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Scientific) that was coupled to a 3000 RSLC nano UPLC (Thermo Scientific). Samples were loaded on a pepmap trap cartridge (300 µm i.d. x 5 mm, C18, Thermo) with 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA at a flow rate of 20 µL/min. Peptides were separated over a 50 cm analytical column (Picofrit, 360 µm O.D., 75 µm I.D., 10 µm tip opening, non-coated, New Objective) that was packed in-house with Poroshell 120 EC-C18, 2.7 µm (Agilent). Solvent A consists of 0.1% formic acid in water. Elution was carried out at a constant flow rate of 250 nL/min using a 180 minute method: 8-33% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile) within 120 minutes, 33-48% solvent B within 25 minutes, 48-98% buffer B within 1 minute, followed by column washing and equilibration. The Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer was equipped with a FAIMS Pro device, which was operated at standard resolution using two alternating CVs of -50V and -70V (cycle time for each was set to 1.5 seconds). Data acquisition was carried out using a MS3-based data-dependent method in positive ion mode. Advanced peak determination was deactivated. MS survey scans were acquired from 375-1500 m/z in profile mode at a resolution of 120,000. AGC target was set to 4e5 charges, allowing a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Peptides with charge states 2-6 were subjected to CID fragmentation (fixed CE = 35%, AGC = 1e4) and analyzed in the linear ion trap at a resolution of 125,000 Da/second. The isolation window for peptides with charge states 2, 3, and ≥4 were set to 1.2, 0.7 and 0.5 m/z, respectively. For MS3 acquisition, synchronous precursor selection (SPS) was enabled to select five (2+ peptides) or ten (3+ - 6+ peptides) fragment ions for HCD fragmentation (NCE = 65%, AGC = 1e5, max. injection time = 105 ms). MS3 scans were acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 30,000. Precursors were dynamically excluded for 45 s.

### Data Protocol
. Raw files were processed with Proteome Discoverer 2.3 (Thermo Scientific) using SEQUEST HT for peptide identification. Peptide-spectrum-matches (PSMs) were filtered to a 1% FDR level using Percolator employing a target/decoy approach. The protein FDR was set to 1%. Further data processing was carried out in R and Perseus (v. 1.6.2.3). Only proteins identified with at least two peptides were included in the analysis. All contaminant proteins were filtered out. A three step normalization procedure was applied. First, the total intensity of each TMT channel was normalized to correct for mixing errors. Next, the common channel in both TMT sets was used for internal reference scaling (pubmed ref 28325852) in order to correct for batch effects. Afterwards the data was normalized applying trimmed mean of M values (TMM) using the edgeR package. Statistical analysis was performed using two-sample t-tests (fudge factor s0 (pubmed ref 11309499) was set to 0.1). Resulting p-values were corrected for multiple testing using a permutation-based FDR approach.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Neutrophil extracellular traps, Cgas, Type i ifn, Macrophages

### Affiliations
Max Planck Unit for the Science of Pathogens
Max Planck Unit for the Science of Pathogens Charitéplatz 1, D-10117 Berlin, Germany

### Submitter
Christian Frese

### Lab Head
Dr Christian K. Frese
Max Planck Unit for the Science of Pathogens Charitéplatz 1, D-10117 Berlin, Germany


