### Accession
PXD005337

### Title
Fractions of cat serum, LC-MS/MS

### Description
Today immunoassays are widely used in veterinary medicine, but lack of species specific assays often necessitates the use of assays developed for human applications. Mass spectrometry (MS) is an attractive alternative due to high specificity and versatility, allowing for species-independent analysis. Targeted MS-based quantification methods are valuable complements to large scale shotgun analysis. A method referred to as parallel reaction monitoring (PRM), implemented on Orbitrap MS, has lately been presented as an excellent alternative to more traditional selected reaction monitoring/multiple reaction monitoring (SRM/MRM) methods. The insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-system is not well described in the cat but there are indications of important differences between cats and humans. In feline medicine IGF–I is mainly analyzed for diagnosis of growth hormone disorders but also for research, while the other proteins in the IGF-system are not routinely analyzed within clinical practice. Here, a PRM method for quantification of IGF–I, IGF–II, IGF binding protein (BP) –3 and IGFBP–5 in feline serum is presented. Selective quantification was supported by the use of a newly launched internal standard named QPrEST™. Homology searches demonstrated the possibility to use this standard of human origin for quantification of the targeted feline proteins. Excellent quantitative sensitivity at the attomol/µL (pM) level and selectivity were obtained. As the presented approach is very generic we show that high resolution mass spectrometry in combination with PRM and QPrEST™ internal standards is a versatile tool for protein quantitation across multispecies.

### Sample Protocol
Serum from one cat was separated with size exclusion chromatography on a Superdex 75 column (17-5174-01, GE Healthcare, Little Chalfont, U.K.) in acidic conditions to separate IGFs from IGFBPs. Three of the fractions (Fraction I, II and III) were selected for analysis with mass spectrometry. The fractions were reduced, alkylated and digested by trypsin. Online nano-LC separations were obtained with an EASY-nLC II system (ThermoFisher). The EASY-nLC II system was connected via a nano-flex ion source to a LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro ETD mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification of the shotgun runs was performed using Proteome Discoverer, version 1.4.1.14 (ThermoFischer Scientific). Searches were performed using Sequest HT including the Percolator [33]. The searches were done against a feline reference proteome without isoforms (taxonomy 9685), downloaded from www.uniprot.org. The parameters for the search were set to: fixed modifications: Carbamidomethyl (C), variable modifications: Deamidated (N, Q) and Oxidation (M), precursor mass tolerance: 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance: 0.6 Da and maximum two missed cleavage sites.

### Publication Abstract
Today immunoassays are widely used in veterinary medicine, but lack of species specific assays often necessitates the use of assays developed for human applications. Mass spectrometry (MS) is an attractive alternative due to high specificity and versatility, allowing for species-independent analysis. Targeted MS-based quantification methods are valuable complements to large scale shotgun analysis. A method referred to as parallel reaction monitoring (PRM), implemented on Orbitrap MS, has lately been presented as an excellent alternative to more traditional selected reaction monitoring/multiple reaction monitoring (SRM/MRM) methods. The insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-system is not well described in the cat but there are indications of important differences between cats and humans. In feline medicine IGF-I is mainly analyzed for diagnosis of growth hormone disorders but also for research, while the other proteins in the IGF-system are not routinely analyzed within clinical practice. Here, a PRM method for quantification of IGF-I, IGF-II, IGF binding protein (BP) -3 and IGFBP-5 in feline serum is presented. Selective quantification was supported by the use of a newly launched internal standard named QPrEST&#x2122;. Homology searches demonstrated the possibility to use this standard of human origin for quantification of the targeted feline proteins. Excellent quantitative sensitivity at the attomol/&#x3bc;L (pM) level and selectivity were obtained. As the presented approach is very generic we show that high resolution mass spectrometry in combination with PRM and QPrEST&#x2122; internal standards is a versatile tool for protein quantitation across multispecies.

### Keywords
Igf-i, Igfbp, Cat, Lc-ms/ms, Serum

### Affiliations
Uppsala University
Analytical Chemistry, Department of Chemistry – BMC and Science for Life Laboratory, Uppsala University, Box 599, 751 24 Uppsala, Sweden

### Submitter
Margareta Ramstrom

### Lab Head
Dr Margareta Ramstrom
Analytical Chemistry, Department of Chemistry – BMC and Science for Life Laboratory, Uppsala University, Box 599, 751 24 Uppsala, Sweden


