### Accession
PXD006551

### Title
Lactobacillus delbrueckii subspecies characterization by MudPIT analysis

### Description
We have characterized three strains belonging to L. delbrueckii subspecies (bulgaricus, B; lactis, L; L.delbrueckii 23, M) highlighting their divergent origin, different galactose metabolic capabilities and we have demonstrated potential probiotic features.

### Sample Protocol
Total extract of each Lactobacillus samples (4 biological replicates for each condition) was resuspended in Rapigest 0.2% v/v (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, USA) and after incubation at 100°C for 15min and quantification, each sample was digested first with trypsin (1:50) at 37°C o/n and then a second aliquot of trypsin (1:100) was added to samples. Finally, after acidification with TFA 0.5% (v/v) and precipitation of Rapigest, samples were desalted by PepClean C-18 spin column (Pierce Biotechnology, Rockford, IL, USA). MudPIT analyse were conducted with a linear ion trap mass spectrometer LTQ (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The separation of peptides was obtained in the first dimension with eight steps of increasing ammonium chloride concentration, and in the second dimension through an acetonitrile gradient.

### Data Protocol
Experimental mass spectra were correlated to tryptic peptide sequences by comparing with theoretical mass spectra, obtained by in silico digestion of a protein database downloaded from the NCBI website (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Ftp/index.htlm) containing Lactobacillus delbrueckii subsp. bulgaricus and Lactobacillus delbrueckii subsp. lactis sequences. Data processing was performed using the 3.3.1. Bioworks version, based on SEQUEST algorithm (University of Washington, licensed to Thermo Finnigan Corp., San Josè, CA, USA), and the following parameters: Xcorr scores greater than 1.5 for singly charged peptide ions and 2.0 and 2.5 for doubly and triply charged ions, respectively, the peptide probability ≤0.001 and the protein consensus score value ≥10. These filters guaranteed that the resulting proteins have a probability value p≤0.001.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Lactobacillus delbrueckii</i> represents a technologically relevant member of lactic acid bacteria, since the two subspecies <i>bulgaricus</i> and <i>lactis</i> are widely associated with fermented dairy products. In the present work, we report the characterization of two commercial strains belonging to <i>L. delbrueckii</i> subspecies <i>bulgaricus</i>, <i>lactis</i> and a novel strain previously isolated from a traditional fermented fresh cheese. A phenomic approach was performed by combining metabolomic and proteomic analysis of the three strains, which were subsequently supplemented as food source to the model organism <i>Caenorhabditis elegans</i>, with the final aim to evaluate their possible probiotic effects. Restriction analysis of 16S ribosomal DNA revealed that the novel foodborne strain belonged to <i>L. delbrueckii</i> subspecies <i>lactis</i>. Proteomic and metabolomic approaches showed differences in folate, aminoacid and sugar metabolic pathways among the three strains. Moreover, evaluation of <i>C. elegans</i> lifespan, larval development, brood size, and bacterial colonization capacity demonstrated that <i>L. delbrueckii</i> subsp. <i>bulgaricus</i> diet exerted beneficial effects on nematodes. On the other hand, both <i>L. delbrueckii</i> subsp. <i>lactis</i> strains affected lifespan and larval development. We have characterized three strains belonging to <i>L. delbrueckii</i> subspecies <i>bulgaricus</i> and <i>lactis</i> highlighting their divergent origin. In particular, the two closely related isolates <i>L. delbrueckii</i> subspecies <i>lactis</i> display different galactose metabolic capabilities. Moreover, the <i>L. delbrueckii</i> subspecies <i>bulgaricus</i> strain demonstrated potential probiotic features. Combination of <i>omic</i> platforms coupled with <i>in vivo</i> screening in the simple model organism <i>C. elegans</i> is a powerful tool to characterize industrially relevant bacterial isolates.

### Keywords
Lactobacillus characterization, Mudpit

### Affiliations
Institute for Biomedical Technologies (ITB-CNR)

### Submitter
Sara Motta

### Lab Head
Dr Pierluigi Mauri
Institute for Biomedical Technologies (ITB-CNR)


