### Accession
PXD003216

### Title
In vitro calpainolysis assays -  Myofibrillar Z-discs are a protein phosphorylation hot spot with PKC α modulating protein dynamics

### Description
In vitro calpainolysis in combination with top down mass spectrometry reveals the calpain-1 cleavage sites in human and murine carboxy terminal regions of FLNc

### Sample Protocol
In vitro calpainolysis assays were performed essentially as described (Mandic et al, 2002). In brief, recombinantly expressed mouse and human FLNc d23-24 WT and phosphosite mutants with a carboxyterminal EEF- and His6-tag were coupled to Ni2+-NTA agarose beads and washed 2x with 1 ml calpain reaction buffer (20 mM HEPES, pH 7.4, 50 mM KCl, 2 mM MgCl2, 5 mM CaCl2, 1 mM DTT). Subsequently, the bound protein fragments were incubated for 30 min with 5 µg calpain-1 (Merck) in 200 µl reaction buffer at 37°C and 200 rpm . Pre-equilibrated gravity-flow columns were used to separate the beads from the supernatant. For top down analysis of FLNc proteolysis products, supernatants were acidified to a final concentration of 0.1% TFA.

### Data Protocol
For top-down experiments, mass spectrometric raw data were converted into 32-bit .mzXML files using the MSConvert tool embedded in ProteoWizard 3.0.6965 (Chambers et al, 2012) with default parameters. mzXML files were further processed with MSDeconv (Liu et al, 2010) into a .msalign file with standard parameters and used for peptide search with TopPIC (Liu et al, 2014). The search parameters used were as follows: fragmentation mode read from the input file, no cysteine protection group, an error tolerance of 10 ppm, an e-value of 0.01 as cutoff and a maximal PTM mass of 1000. Searches of the mouse and human FLNc isoforms were performed against fasta files containing the sequences of the corresponding proteins.

### Publication Abstract
The Z-disc is a protein-rich structure critically important for the development and integrity of myofibrils, which are the contractile organelles of cross-striated muscle cells. We here used mouse C2C12 myoblast, which were differentiated into myotubes, followed by electrical pulse stimulation (EPS) to generate contracting myotubes comprising mature Z-discs. Using a quantitative proteomics approach, we found significant changes in the relative abundance of 387 proteins in myoblasts <i>versus</i> differentiated myotubes, reflecting the drastic phenotypic conversion of these cells during myogenesis. Interestingly, EPS of differentiated myotubes to induce Z-disc assembly and maturation resulted in increased levels of proteins involved in ATP synthesis, presumably to fulfill the higher energy demand of contracting myotubes. Because an important role of the Z-disc for signal integration and transduction was recently suggested, its precise phosphorylation landscape further warranted in-depth analysis. We therefore established, by global phosphoproteomics of EPS-treated contracting myotubes, a comprehensive site-resolved protein phosphorylation map of the Z-disc and found that it is a phosphorylation hotspot in skeletal myocytes, underscoring its functions in signaling and disease-related processes. In an illustrative fashion, we analyzed the actin-binding multiadaptor protein filamin C (FLNc), which is essential for Z-disc assembly and maintenance, and found that PKC&#x3b1; phosphorylation at distinct serine residues in its hinge 2 region prevents its cleavage at an adjacent tyrosine residue by calpain 1. Fluorescence recovery after photobleaching experiments indicated that this phosphorylation modulates FLNc dynamics. Moreover, FLNc lacking the cleaved Ig-like domain 24 exhibited remarkably fast kinetics and exceedingly high mobility. Our data set provides research community resource for further identification of kinase-mediated changes in myofibrillar protein interactions, kinetics, and mobility that will greatly advance our understanding of Z-disc dynamics and signaling.

### Keywords
Top down ms, Calpain, Flnc

### Affiliations
AG Warscheid
Biologie II
Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg
Schänzlestr. 1
79104 Freiburg
Germany

Department of Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Institute of Biology II, Faculty of Biology and BIOSS Centre for Biological Signalling Studies  University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg, Germany

### Submitter
Friedel Drepper

### Lab Head
Dr Bettina Warscheid
Department of Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Institute of Biology II, Faculty of Biology and BIOSS Centre for Biological Signalling Studies  University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg, Germany


