### Accession
PXD000208

### Title
AP-MS analysis of human histone deacetylase interactions in CEM-T cells

### Description
Affinity purification-mass spectrometry (AP-MS) datasets of eleven human histone deacetylases (HDACs). Affinity-tagged (GFP) HDACs were expressed in a human CEM-T cell line. For label-free analysis, proteins were digested by trypsin in-solution and peptides separated across a linear 180 min gradient by a one-dimensional LC-MS/MS analysis.  For label-free analysis, MS data (RAW files) were converted into mzXML format using the Proteowizard conversion tool. mzXML files were searched using the X!Tandem/k-score database search tool against the human subset of the UniProt protein sequence database, appended with a list of common sample contaminants. The search results were processed using PeptideProphet and ProteinProphet tools. The data from individual experiments across 7 biological replicates of GFP controls and 23 HDAC-GFP-tagged biological replicates were merged, and the spectral counts were extracted using the software, ABACUS. The combined list of protein identifications (protein groups) was filtered to achieve a protein-level FDR of less than 1%. When computing the spectral counts in individual experiments, proteins were quantified (i.e. spectra counted) if they were identified with a probability equal or greater than 0.9 in that particular replicate. For metabolic labeling IDIRT experiments, isolated proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE, digested by trypsin in-gel, and peptides were separated across a linear 90 min gradient. RAW files were processed and peptides were identified (less than 1% FDR) and quantified using SEQUEST/Percolator in the Proteome Discoverer software (v1.3). IDIRT protein ratios were normalized by the median SILAC protein ratio determined from 1D-LC-MS/MS analysis of input lysates. Protein interactions have been submitted to the IMEx consortium through IntAct with the identifier IM-18733.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are a diverse family of essential transcriptional regulatory enzymes, that function through the spatial and temporal recruitment of protein complexes. As the composition and regulation of HDAC complexes are only partially characterized, we built the first global protein interaction network for all 11 human HDACs in T cells. Integrating fluorescence microscopy, immunoaffinity purifications, quantitative mass spectrometry, and bioinformatics, we identified over 200 unreported interactions for both well-characterized and lesser-studied HDACs, a subset of which were validated by orthogonal approaches. We establish HDAC11 as a member of the survival of motor neuron complex and pinpoint a functional role in mRNA splicing. We designed a complementary label-free and metabolic-labeling mass spectrometry-based proteomics strategy for profiling interaction stability among different HDAC classes, revealing that HDAC1 interactions within chromatin-remodeling complexes are largely stable, while transcription factors preferentially exist in rapid equilibrium. Overall, this study represents a valuable resource for investigating HDAC functions in health and disease, encompassing emerging themes of HDAC regulation in cell cycle and RNA processing and a deeper functional understanding of HDAC complex stability.

### Keywords
Ap-ms, Idirt, Hdac, Protein interactions

### Affiliations
Molecular Biology, Princeton University

### Submitter
Todd Greco

### Lab Head


