### Accession
PXD022379

### Title
GLUTAMINE METABOLISM VIA TRANSAMINATION REGULATES VEGFR2 TRANSLATION DURING ANGIOGENESIS

### Description
Angiogenesis, the formation of new blood vessels from pre-existing ones, is a complex and demanding biological process that plays an important role in physiological as well as pathological settings such as cancer and ischemia. Given its critical role, the regulation of endothelial growth factor receptor (e.g. VEGFR2, FGFR1) represents important mechanisms for the control of angiogenesis. Recent evidences support cell metabolism as a critical regulator of angiogenesis. However, it is unknown how glutamine metabolism regulates growth factor receptor expression. Here, by using genetic and pharmacological approaches, we show that glutaminolysis and glutamate-dependent transaminases (TAs) support alpha-ketoglutarate (αKG) levels and are critical regulators of angiogenic response during pathological conditions. Indeed, the endothelial specific blockage of GLS1 impairs ischemic and tumor angiogenesis by suppressing VEGFR2 translation via mTORC1-dependent pathway. Lastly, we discover that ECs catabolized the glutamine-derived glutamate via phosphoserine aminotransferase 1 (PSAT1) as crucial to support VEGFR2 translation. These findings identify glutamine anaplerosis and TA activity as a critical regulator of growth factor receptor translation in normal and pathological angiogenesis. We anticipate our studies to be a starting point for novel anti-angiogenesis approaches based on GLS1/PSAT1 inhibitor treatments to overcome anti-VEGF therapies resistance.

### Sample Protocol
All the experiments have been performed in a labeling free setting. Samples have been prepared using the iST Sample Preparation Kit (Preomics). Instruments for LC MS/MS analysis consisted of a NanoLC 1200 coupled via a nano-electrospray ionization source to the quadrupole-based Q Exactive HF benchtop mass spectrometer. Peptide separation was carried out according to their hydrophobicity on a PicoFrit column, 75m ID, 8Um tip, 250mm bed packed with Reprosil-PUR, C18-AQ, 1.9m particle size, 120 Angstrom pore size (New Objective, Inc., cat. PF7508-250H363), using a binary buffer system consisting of solution A: 0.1% formic acid and B: 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. Runs of 120 min after loading were used for proteome samples, with a constant flow rate of 300nl/min. After sample loading, run start at 5% buffer B for 5min, followed by a series of linear gradients, from 5% to 30% B in 90min, then a 10 min step to reach 50% and a 5 min step to reach 95%. This last step was maintained for 10 min. Q Exactive HF settings: MS spectra were acquired using 3E6 as an AGC target, a maximal injection time of 20ms and a 120,000 resolution at 200m/z. The mass spectrometer operated in a data dependent Top20 mode with sub sequent acquisition of higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation MS/MS spectra of the top 20 most intense peaks. Resolution, for MS/MS spectra, was set to 15,000 at 200m/z, AGC target to 1E5, max injection time to 20ms and the isolation window to 1.6Th. The intensity threshold was set at 2.0 E4 and Dynamic exclusion at 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
All acquired raw files were processed using MaxQuant (1.6.2.10) and the implemented Andromeda search engine. For protein assignment, spectra were correlated with the Uniprot Homo sapiens (v 2019) including a list of common contaminants. Searches were performed with tryptic specifications and default settings for mass tolerances for MS and MS/MS spectra. Fixed modifications Carbamidomethyl; Variable modifications: oxidation and Acetylation. Minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and false discovery for proteins and peptide-spectrum matches to 1%.For further analysis, the Perseus software (1.6.2.3) was used and first filtered for contaminants and reverse entries as well as proteins that were only identified by a modified peptide. The LFQ Ratios were logarithmized , grouped and filtered for min. valid number(min. 3 in at least one group). Two sample t-test was performed using FDR=0.05.Proteins with Log 2 Difference ≥ 1 and -Log 10 p-value &gt; 1.3 were considered significantly enriched.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Angiogenesis, Vegfr2, Glutamine

### Affiliations
University of Padua

### Submitter
Massimo Santoro

### Lab Head
Dr Massimo Santoro
University of Padua


