### Accession
PXD017343

### Title
Analysis of CD5 signalosome in primary T cells

### Description
CD5 is characterized as an inhibitory co-receptor with important regulatory role during T cell development. To study the molecular mechanism by which CD5 operates, we used quantitative mass spectrometry to analyze the components of the CD5 signaling machinery in primary T cells. In a first set of experiments, CD5-containing complexes were immunoprecipitated from thymocytes of wild-type (WT) C57BL/6 mice. Thymocytes were treated with pervanadate to induce widespread activation of protein tyrosine kinases. Corresponding samples prepared from thymocytes of Cd5−/− mice were used as controls, to discriminate CD5-binding molecules from the background of contaminant proteins. Eight biological replicates were prepared for both conditions, and samples were analyzed in duplicate LC-MS runs. This first set of experiment is presented in TableS1 of the paper, and is associated to the MaxQuant result file “Interactome WT” in the present PX dataset. We analyzed the CD5 interactome at different time of stimulation with pervanadate (1min and 10min) using thymocytes from wild-type (WT) C57BL/6 mice. Corresponding samples prepared from thymocytes of Cd5−/− mice were used as controls. Three biological replicates were prepared for both conditions (WT and KO) and each time point (1min and 10min). This set of experiments is presented in TableS2 of the paper and is associated to the MaxQuant result file “Interactome at 1min and 10min” in the present PX dataset. We checked that the activation of CD5 (phosphorylation sites) and the formation of the signaling complex was comparable in different stimulatory conditions (comparison of WT thymocytes stimulated with either pervanadate or anti-CD3+anti-CD4 antibodies). We also analyzed the binding of CD5 interactors in thymocytes from a c-Cbl-/-  mouse model (comparison of WT and c-Cbl-/-thymocytes stimulated with pervanadate). These experiments and the associated experimental design of the comparisons are summarized in TableS3 of the paper, and are based on the MaxQuant result file “Comparison of different stimulatory conditions” in this dataset.  To check the phosphorylation status of the CD5 tyrosine residues at different time of stimulation, we analyzed samples immunoprecipitated from thymocytes of wild-type (WT) C57BL/6 mice, following stimulation with anti-CD3+anti-CD4 antibodies for 1min, 3min and 10min. This set of experiment is presented in TableS4 of the paper and is associated to the MaxQuant result file “CD5 pY kinetics” in the present PX dataset. To determine the role of Y429 in the context of CD5 signaling, we expressed a wild-type (CD5tgWt) or a mutated form of CD5, containing a tyrosine to phenylalanine substitution at position 429 (CD5tgY429F) in transgenic mice. We analyzed the CD5 interactome by comparing samples immunoprecipitated from thymocytes of these 2 mice models (following pervanadate stimulation, 6 and 5 biological replicates respectively) with samples prepared in the same way from Cd5−/− mice as controls (6 biological replicates). The results are shown in TableS5 of the paper, and correspond to the MaxQuant result file “interactome CD5tgWt_CD5tgY429F”.

### Sample Protocol
Cell stimulation and immunoprecipitation. For MS analysis, 2 × 108 thymocytes from CD57BL/6, CD5tgWt, CD5tgY429F,, c-Cbl-/- and Cd5−/−  mice were left untreated or treated with 100 nM pervanadate or preformed complexes of anti-CD3 + anti-CD4 antibodies for 1 or 5 min at 37°C. The treatment was stopped on ice, and cells were immediately centrifuged and resuspended in 2 ml of ice-cold lysis buffer (10 mM tris-HCl pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1% Triton, 2 mM Na3VO4, 5 mM NaF, 1 mM EDTA, and protease inhibitor cocktail tablet (Roche)) and incubated for 20 min on ice. Lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 18,000g for 15 min at 4°C, and CD5 was subjected to immunoprecipitation from cleared lysates for 2 hours at 4°C with 30 μl of protein G–Sepharose resin coated with 12μg of polyclonal rabbit anti-CD5 antibodies. For Western blot analysis, CD5 was subjected to single (thymocytes) or three serial (CD4+ T cells) immunoprecipitations from cleared lysates, for 2 hours or 3 times 1 hour respectively, at 4°C with 30 μl of protein G–Sepharose resin coated with 20 μg of polyclonal rabbit anti-CD5 antibodies. The resin was washed three times and incubated for 10 min at 95°C with Laemmli buffer prior further processed for mass spectrometry analysis. To analyze TCR signaling, thymocytes or peripheral CD4+ T cells were resuspended at a density of 107 cells per 50 μl and incubated at 37°C for 10 min before being stimulated. Antibody complexes were prepared at a 2× concentration before being used to stimulate cells at 37°C for 10 min with biotin-conjugated anti-CD3 and anti-CD4 antibodies mixed with equal concentrations of streptavidin. Cells were stimulated with 50 μl of antibody complexes (60 μg/ml) for the times indicated in the figure legends. Cell lysates were prepared as described above. Mass spectrometry analysis. Protein samples were reduced with DTT, alkylated with iodoacetamide in Laemli buffer and loaded on a 1D SDS-PAGE gel. Proteins were isolated in a single gel band which was excised and washed with several cycles of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate-acetonitrile (1:1). Proteins were in-gel digested using 0.6 μg of modified sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate overnight at 37°C. Resulting peptides were extracted from the gel by successive incubations in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 10% formic acid-acetonitrile (1:1), then dried in a speed-vac, and resuspended with 5% acetonitrile, 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) for MS analysis. Peptides were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) coupled to a LTQ-Velos Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Separation was performed on a C-18 column (75 μm ID x 15 cm, Reprosil C18) equilibrated in 95% solvent A (5% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid) and 5% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid), using a gradient from 5 to 50% gradient of solvent B over 105 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The LTQ Orbitrap Velos was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode with Xcalibur software. Survey scan MS was acquired in the Orbitrap on the 350–2,000 m/z range, with the resolution set to a value of 60,000. The 20 most intense ions survey scans were selected for fragmentation by collision-induced dissociation, and the resulting fragments were analyzed 229 in the linear trap. Dynamic exclusion was used within 60s to prevent repetitive selection of the same peptide. Technical LC-MS measurement replicates were performed for each sample.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry files were processed either with the MaxQuant software (version1.5.2.8) including Andromeda database search and MaxLFQ protein quantification. Alternatively, a workflow based on the Mascot and Proline software tools was also used to validate the quantitative results. Data were searched against Mouse entries of the Swissprot protein database (UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot Knowledgebase release 2017_01, Mouse taxonomy,16813 entries). Protein identification results were validated by the target-decoy approach using a reverse database at a both a peptide and protein FDR of 1%. To perform relative quantification between proteins identified after immuno-affinity capture of CD5 across samples, we used the “LFQ intensity” metric from the MaxQuant “proteingroup.txt” output. For each protein, a mean intensity value was computed from technical LC-MS replicate runs. Missing protein intensity values were replaced by a noise value randomly drawn using the Perseus software (version 1.5.3.0) for each sample. Bona fide CD5 interactors were identified by comparing CD5 immuno-purified samples (from either C57BL/6, CD5tgWt, CD5tgY429F or c-Cbl-/- mice) and control samples (from Cd5−/− mice). For each protein, an enrichment ratio relative to the control and a Student test p-value were calculated based on the protein intensities derived from n independent biological replicate experiments. Relevant interactors were selected based on an enrichment ratio higher than 2 and a Student t-test p-value lower than 0.001 (interactome of CD5 in C57BL/6 thymocytes: n=8) or lower than 0.05 (interactome in CD5tgWt thymocytes: n=6; interactome in CD5tgY429F thymocytes: n=5). To eliminate false-positive hits occurring from quantification of low intensity signals, an additional criterion was applied on the MS spectral counts metric, reflecting 254 absolute protein abundance (total number of MS spectral counts>15 in CD5 immuno-purified samples). The iBAQ metric,which corresponds to the sum of all of the peptide intensities divided by the number of observable peptides from a given protein, was used to estimate absolute protein abundance (for each protein, correction of background level was performed by subtracting the iBAQ of the protein in the control Cd5−/− sample from its iBAQ in CD5 immuno-purified samples). The complete unfiltered lists of proteins identified in immunopurified samples and analyzed according to this statistical procedure is described in Table S1 (CD5 interactome in C57BL/6 thymocytes upon pervanadate stimulation) and Table S3 (CD5 interactome in CD5tgWt and CD5tgY429F thymocytes upon pervanadate stimulation). The result of additional comparisons involving unstimulated thymocytes and thymocytes stimulated with either pervanadate or anti-CD3ε, anti-CD4 antibodies, as well as thymocytes from c-Cbl-/- mice, is contained in Table S2. To evaluate the phosphorylation status of the different tyrosine residue of CD5 in unstimulated or stimulated thymocytes, we used the MaxQuant “evidence.txt” output, containing MS data for all ions, and retrieved intensity data for all CD5 peptide ions encompassing specific tyrosine residues detected as phosphorylated. Phosphorylation level was roughly estimated by calculating, for a particular charge state, the percentage of signal of ions (summed intensities) corresponding to phosphotyrosine-containing forms.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tcr, Tyrosine phosphorylation, Cd5, Interactomics

### Affiliations
CNRS/IPBS
Institute of Pharmacology and Structural Biology (IPBS), CNRS, Toulouse

### Submitter
Anne Gonzalez de Peredo

### Lab Head
Dr Odile Schiltz
Institute of Pharmacology and Structural Biology (IPBS), CNRS, Toulouse


