### Accession
PXD018935

### Title
Structural Analysis of 70S Ribosomes by Cross-Linking/Mass Spectrometry Reveals Conformational Plasticity

### Description
We analyzed 143 E. coli ribosomal structures, mapping a total of 10,771 intramolecular distances for 126 cross-link-pairs and 3,405 intermolecular distances for 97 protein pairs. Our study might serve as benchmark for conducting biochemical experiments on newly modeled protein regions, guided by XL-MS.

### Sample Protocol
E. coli ribosome was purchased from New England Biolabs, cat. no. P0763S20. and cross-linked with DSAU cross-linker. The resulting mixture were reduced alkylated, and digestd with trypsin. The resulting peptide mixttures were analyzed by nanoLC-nanoESI/MS/MS on an Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo).

### Data Protocol
For cross-linking analysis, mass spectrometric raw files were converted to mzML using Proteome Discoverer 2.0. MeroX 2.0 analysis was performed using the E. coli proteins as database (uniprot.org) (FASTA file is included in the Supporting Information). The following settings was applied: Proteolytic cleavage: C-ter at Lys and Arg with 3 missed cleavages, peptide length 4 to 30 aa, static modification: alkylation of Cys by IAA, variable modification: oxidation of Met, cross-linker: DSBU with specificity towards Lys, Ser, Thr, Tyr, N-ter for site 1 and Lys and N-ter for site 2, analysis mode: RISEUP mode, maximum missing ions: 2, precursor mass accuracy: 4 ppm, product ion mass accuracy: 8 ppm (performing mass recalibration, average of deviations), signal-to-noise ratio: 2, precursor mass correction activated, prescore cut-off at 10% intensity, FDR cut-off: 1%, and minimum score cut-off: 50. The CRAP database was included for a more stringent FDR estimation.

### Publication Abstract
The ribosome is not only a highly complex molecular machine that translates the genetic information into proteins, but also an exceptional specimen for testing and optimizing cross-linking/mass spectrometry (XL-MS) workflows. Due to its high abundance, ribosomal proteins are frequently identified in proteome-wide XL-MS studies of cells or cell extracts. Here, we performed in-depth cross-linking of the E. coli ribosome using the amine-reactive cross-linker disuccinimidyl diacetic urea (DSAU). We analyzed 143 E. coli ribosomal structures, mapping a total of 10,771 intramolecular distances for 126 cross-link-pairs and 3,405 intermolecular distances for 97 protein pairs. Remarkably, 44% of intermolecular cross-links covered regions that have not been resolved in any high-resolution E. coli ribosome structure and point to a plasticity of cross-linked regions. We systematically characterized all cross-links and discovered flexible regions, conformational changes, and stoichiometric variations in bound ribosomal proteins, and ultimately remodeled 2,057 residues (15,794 atoms) in total. Our working model explains more than 95% of all cross-links, resulting in an optimized E. coli ribosome structure based on the cross-linking data obtained. Our study might serve as benchmark for conducting biochemical experiments on newly modeled protein regions, guided by XL-MS. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD018935.

### Keywords
Ribosome; cross-linking mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Martin-Luther-University Halle-Wittenberg (MLU)  Institute of Pharmacy Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry and Bioanalyitics
Martin Luther University of Halle-Wittenberg

### Submitter
Daniele Ubbiali

### Lab Head
Dr Andrea Sinz
Martin-Luther-University Halle-Wittenberg (MLU)  Institute of Pharmacy Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry and Bioanalyitics


