### Accession
PXD005297

### Title
Proteomics and comparative genomics of Nitrososphaera viennensis

### Description
Ammonia-oxidizing archaea (AOA) are among the most abundant microorganisms and key players in the global nitrogen and carbon cycles. They share a common energy metabolism but represent a heterogeneous group with respect to their environmental distri- bution and adaptions, growth requirements, and genome contents. We report here the genome and proteome of Nitrososphaera viennensis EN76, the type species of the archaeal class Nitrososphaeria of the phylum Thaumarchaeota encompassing all known AOA. N. viennensis is a soil organism with a 2.52-Mb genome and 3,123 predicted protein-coding genes. Proteomic analysis revealed that nearly 50% of the predicted genes were translated under standard laboratory growth conditions. Comparison with genomes of closely related species of the predominantly terrestrial Nitrososphaerales as well as the more streamlined marine Nitrosopumilales (Candidatus order) and the acidophile Nitrosotalea devanaterra revealed a core genome of AOA comprising 860 genes, which allowed for the reconstruction of central metabolic pathways common to all known AOA and expressed in the N. viennensis and Nitrosopelagicus brevis proteomes. Concomitantly, we were able to identify candidate proteins for as yet unidentified crucial steps in central metabolisms. In addition to unraveling aspects of core AOA metabolism, we identified specific metabolic innovations associated with the Nitrososphaerales mediating growth and survival in the soil milieu, including the capacity for biofilm formation, cell surface modifications and cell adhesion, and carbohydrate conversions as well as detoxification of aromatic compounds and drugs.

### Sample Protocol
Sample Preparation for Proteomics: Frozen cell pellets (200–500 mg)from three biological replicate culture batches were resuspended in 20 mM NaHPO4,pH7.4,500mMNaCl,1mMEDTA, 10% Glycerol, and Protease Inhibitor (Pefabloc SC; Roche) and lysed by homogenization and sonication. The total cellular lysate was fractionated in membrane and cytoplasmic fractions by ultracentrifugation in 60% sucrose gradient at 133,000×g for 2 h at 4 °C. Proteins were extracted from both fractions using methanol/chloroform with an additional phenol cleaning step as described in the work by Valledor and Weckwerth (94). Tryptic digestion of proteins from the enriched membrane fractions was enhanced by the addition of 0.2% cleavable detergent RapiGest SF Surfactant (Waters). Purified peptides were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile before analysis. MS analysis was performed on an LC-LTQ- Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific Inc.) coupled to ultrahigh-pressure nanoliquid chromatography (nano-LC) according to the work by Valledor and Weckwerth (94). Peptides were loaded onto a 1D Nanoflow LC-MS/MS System (Eksigent) equipped with an inline premicrofilter (Sciex). Peptides were eluted using a monolithic C18 column Chromolith RP-18r (Merck) of 15 cm in length and 0.1 mm i.d. during a 90-min gradient from 5 to 40% B with a controlled flow rate of 400 nL/min. LC was coupled to MS using an ESI source: mobile phase A: 0.1% formic acid; mobile phase B: 90% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Specific tune settings for the MS were set as follows: spray voltage was set to 1.8 kV using a 30-μm i.d. needle (PicoTip Emitter; NewObjective), and temperature of the heated transfer capillary was set to 180 °C. FTMS was operated as follows: full-scan mode, centroid, resolution of 30,000, covering the range 300–1,800 m/z, and Cyclomethicone used as lock mass. Each full MS scan was followed by 10 dependent MS/MS scans, in which the 10 most abundant peptide molecular ions were dynamically selected, with a dynamic exclusion window set to 90 s and an exclusion list set to 500. Dependent fragmentations were performed in CID mode, with a normalized collision energy of 35, iso width of 1.0, activation Q of 0.250, and activation time of 30 ms. Ions with unassigned charge or +1 were excluded for fragmentation. The minimum signal threshold was set to 750.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectral libraries were searched using the SEQUEST algorithm within the Thermo Proteome Discoverer software against a six-frame translation of the genome and the translated sequences of all ORFs predicted on the Microscope platform (89). Precursor and fragment ion mass tolerances were set to 10 ppm and 0.8 Da, respectively. Minimum precursor ion size was set to 350 Da. The following dynamic modifications because of sample preparation were taken into account: N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation, and carbamidomethylation. For protein identifications, high-confidence peptides (FDR 0.01) were considered, and the following score vs. charge state parameters were applied (charge state:minimal score): 1:1.5; 2:2.3; 3:3; 4:4; 6:6; 7:7; and > 7:7. Protein identifications based on a single peptide match with score (Xcorr) below 2.3 were checked manually. Relative quantification of detected proteins relied on a spectral counting method [i.e., the calculation of normalized spectral abundance factors]. The sum of peptide-spectrum matches for each identified protein from each fraction/replicate was used for relative quantification across all samples, resulting in a final combined dataset. In total, 1,503 proteins were iden- tified based on the detection of 9,274 peptides derived from the automated analysis of 214,786 spectra.

### Publication Abstract
Ammonia-oxidizing archaea (AOA) are among the most abundant microorganisms and key players in the global nitrogen and carbon cycles. They share a common energy metabolism but represent a heterogeneous group with respect to their environmental distribution and adaptions, growth requirements, and genome contents. We report here the genome and proteome of Nitrososphaera viennensis EN76, the type species of the archaeal class Nitrososphaeria of the phylum Thaumarchaeota encompassing all known AOA. N. viennensis is a soil organism with a 2.52-Mb genome and 3,123 predicted protein-coding genes. Proteomic analysis revealed that nearly 50% of the predicted genes were translated under standard laboratory growth conditions. Comparison with genomes of closely related species of the predominantly terrestrial Nitrososphaerales as well as the more streamlined marine Nitrosopumilales [Candidatus (Ca.) order] and the acidophile "Ca. Nitrosotalea devanaterra" revealed a core genome of AOA comprising 860 genes, which allowed for the reconstruction of central metabolic pathways common to all known AOA and expressed in the N. viennensis and "Ca Nitrosopelagicus brevis" proteomes. Concomitantly, we were able to identify candidate proteins for as yet unidentified crucial steps in central metabolisms. In addition to unraveling aspects of core AOA metabolism, we identified specific metabolic innovations associated with the Nitrososphaerales mediating growth and survival in the soil milieu, including the capacity for biofilm formation, cell surface modifications and cell adhesion, and carbohydrate conversions as well as detoxification of aromatic compounds and drugs.

### Keywords
Ammonia oxidation, Archaea, Biofilm

### Affiliations
Department of Ecogenomics and Systems Biology, University of Vienna; Vienna Metabolomics Centre, University of Vienna, Austria
University of Vienna

### Submitter
Melina Kerou

### Lab Head
Dr Wolfram Weckwerth
Department of Ecogenomics and Systems Biology, University of Vienna; Vienna Metabolomics Centre, University of Vienna, Austria


