### Accession
PXD023231

### Title
Activity of the novel BTK inhibitor TG-1701 is associated with the disruption of the Ikaros signaling pathway in responder B-NHL patients and with sensitization to anti-CD20 therapy in B-NHL xenografts

### Description
Covalent Bruton's tyrosine kinase inhibitors (BTKis) have transformed the treatment of B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma (B-NHL), including chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) and mantle cell lymphoma (MCL), but their activity has been limited by off-target toxicity and acquired drug resistance. TG-1701 is a novel irreversible and highly specific BTKi being presently under study in a phase 1 clinical trial in patients with relapsed/refractory B-NHL  alone and in combination with ublituximab, a CD20 antibody, and umbralisib, a dual PI3Kδ and CK1ε inhibitor. Here we show, for the first time that phosphoproteomic analysis of CLL patients receiving a BTKi (TG-1701) led to a non-supervised clustering that matched the clinical outcomes and separated a group of “responders” from a group of “non-responders”. This clustering was based on a selected list of 96 phosphosites, with Ikaros-Ser442/445 phosphorylation as a potential marker for TG-1701 efficacy. RNA-seq analysis followed by qPCR and western blot validation further revealed that TG-1701 treatment blunted the Ikaros gene signature only in responder patients, as well as in BTKi-sensitive, but not BTKi-insensitive, B-NHL cell lines and xenografts. Importantly, and in contrast with ibrutinib, TG-1701 did not impair FcγR-driven antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC) and phagocytosis (ADCP) triggered by the anti-CD20 antibodies rituximab and ublituximab in a multicellular MCL co-culture system. In addition, TG-1701 cooperated with ublituximab coupled to umbralisib (also referred as the U2 regimen) in reducing the tumor growth in both ibrutinib-sensitive and ibrutinib-insensitive mouse models of MCL. Altogether, these data validate phosphoproteomic as a broken thread to omics analysis in the clinic and support the use of TG-1701-U2 combination in R/R B-NHL patients, irrespective of prior response to ibrutinib.

### Sample Protocol
CLL primary samples Peripheral Blood Mononuclear Cells (PBMCs) were obtained from a total of six patients before (PRE) and after 4h treatment (POST) with TG-1701. Proteins were extracted adding a Urea-based buffer (6 M Urea, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5) followed by sonication in a bioruptor (10 ON/OFF cycles, 30s each). The supernatants were recovered and the proteins precipitated by adding 100% trichloroacetic acid (TCA) for 1h at 4ºC. The resulting proteins pellets were washed twice with chilled acetone (30 min each). The samples were quantified with the RCDC® Protein Assay Kit (Biorad). All the proteins samples were sequentially digested with Lys-C (1:25, enzyme-to-protein ratio for 18h at 30ºC) and Trypsin (1:25 for 8h at 30ºC) following standard procedures. The resulting peptides were desalted with a reverse phase C18 chromatography, dried in a speedvac and kept at -80ºC until further use. The proteomics quantitative analyses were performed using thirteen (126, 127N, 127C, 128N, 128C, 129N, 129C, 130N, 130C, 131N, 131C, 132N and 132C) of the sixteen channels available in a 16plex - Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) system. The labelling was performed according to the manufacturer instructions (Thermo Fisher).  Finally, all the channels were mixed in one single tube obtaining a total of 2.21 mg of TMT-labeled peptides. A small part of the sample (260 µg) was used to analyze the total proteome. The rest, was enriched for phosphopeptides using the High-Select™ TiO2 Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit (Thermo Fisher) according to the manufacturer instructions. Before to inject the samples into the mass spectrometer both the total proteome and phosphopeptides fraction were fractionated in 24 and 9 fractions using a Zorbax Extent-C18 (2.1 x 150 mm 3.5 µm 300Å) column and the High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Fisher) kit, respectively. MCL cell lines REC-1 and REC-BTKC481S cells were cultured for 4h in the absence or the presence of 1 µM ibrutinib or TG-1701, in triplicates. The resulting eighteen samples were labelled using two sets of TMT10plex. For each TMT set, the channels 126, 127N, 127C, 128N, 128C, 129N, 129C, 130N and 130C were assigned to the samples while the 131N was used to label a pool of all the samples. Protein extraction as well as TMT fractionation were performed as above.  LC-MS/MS Acquisition Samples were loaded to 300 μm × 5 mm C18 PepMap100, 5m, 100Å (Thermo Scientific) at a flow rate of 15 μL/min using a Thermo Scientific Dionex Ultimate 3000 chromatographic system (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated using a C18 analytical column (nanoEaseTM M/Z HSS C18 T3 (75 μm × 25 cm, 100Å, Waters) with a 150 min run, comprising three consecutive steps with linear gradients from 3% to 35 % B in 120 min, from 35 % to 50 % B in 5 min, from 50 % to 85% B in 2min, followed by isocratic elution at 85 % B in 5 min and stabilization to initial conditions (A=0.1% FA in water, B= 0.1% FA in CH3CN) at 250 nL/min flow rate. The column outlet was directly connected to an Advion TriVersa NanoMate (Advion) fitted on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos™ Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo). The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. Survey MS scans were acquired in the orbitrap with the resolution (defined at 200 m/z) set to 120,000. The lock mass was user-defined at 445.12 m/z in each Orbitrap scan. The top speed (most intense) ions per scan were fragmented by HCD. The MSMS was detected in the Orbitrap (with 30,000 resolution). The ion count target value was 400,000 for the survey scan and 10,000 (CID) for the MS/MS scan. Target ions already selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 15 s. Spray voltage in the NanoMate source was set to 1.70 kV. RF Lens were tuned to 30%. Minimal signal required to trigger MS to MS/MS switch was set to 5000 and activation Q was 0.250. The spectrometer was working in positive polarity mode and singly charge state precursors were rejected for fragmentation. Data was acquired with Xcalibur software vs 4.0.27.10 (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
For data analysis, MaxQuant software (1.6.7.0) and its built-in search engine Andromeda were used to search the raw files against a Swisprot/Uniprot human database downloaded from the www.uniprot.org web site (October, 2019). A target and decoy database were used to assess the false discovery rate (FDR) which was set to 1% at both peptide and protein level. Trypsin was chosen as enzyme and a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation (C) and TMT-16plex (K, peptide N-ter) were set as a fixed modification, whereas oxidation (M), acetylation (N-terminal) and phosphorylation (STY) were used as variable modifications. For MCL cell lines, the TMT-16plex (K, peptide N-ter) was replaced by TMT-10plex (K, peptide N-ter) and the phosphorylation was removed from the variable modifications. Searches were performed using a peptide tolerance of 7 ppm and a product ion tolerance of 0.5 Da. Proteins and peptides classified as “Identified Only by Site”, “Potential Contaminant” and “Reverse” were removed from the final list. The total proteome analysis was performed using only the proteins quantified in all the samples while for phosphoproteome we used the peptides quantified in more than 80% of the samples. The missing values were imputated by using the kNN algorithm (k = 10). The differential analyses were performed by using the R package called “limma” (33) considering paired samples. The normalization of both total proteome and phosphoproteome was done using the median. For CLL primary cultures, the phosphoproteome was normalized using the R package called “phosphonormalizer”.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Maxquant, Phosphoproteomics, Ikaros, Xenografts, Btk, Tmt, Tg-1701, B-nhl

### Affiliations
Proteomics Unit - Josep Carreras Leukaemia Research Institute
Lymphoma Translational Group, Josep Carreras Leukaemia Research Institute, Badalona, Spain

### Submitter
Joan Josep Bech-Serra

### Lab Head
Dr Gael Roue
Lymphoma Translational Group, Josep Carreras Leukaemia Research Institute, Badalona, Spain


