### Accession
PXD005470

### Title
Proteomes and Ubiquitylomes Analysis Reveals the Involvement of Ubiquitination in Protein Degradation

### Description
Petal senescence is a complex programmed process. It has been previously demonstrated   that treatment with ethylene, a plant hormone involved in senescence, can extensively alter   transcriptome and proteome profiles in plants. However, little is known regarding the impact   of ethylene on post-translational modification (PTM) or the association between PTM and   the proteome. Protein degradation is one of the hallmarks of senescence, and ubiquitination,   a major PTM in eukaryotes, plays important roles in protein degradation. In this study, we   first obtained reference petunia transcriptome data via RNA sequencing. Next, we   quantitatively investigated the petunia proteome, ubiquitylome, and the association between   them in petunia corollas following ethylene treatment. In total, 51,799 unigenes, 3,606   proteins, and 2,270 ubiquitination sites were quantified 16 hours after ethylene treatment.   Treatment with ethylene resulted in 14,448 down-regulated and 6,303 up-regulated unigenes   (absolute log2-fold change >1 and FDR<0.001), 284 down-regulated and 233 up-regulated   proteins, and 320 up-regulated and 127 down-regulated ubiquitination sites using a 1.5-fold   threshold (P<0.05), indicating that global ubiquitination levels increase during   ethylene-mediated corolla senescence in petunia. Several putative ubiquitin ligases were   up-regulated at the protein and transcription levels. Our results showed that the global   proteome and ubiquitylome were negatively correlated and that ubiquitination could be   involved in the degradation of proteins during ethylene-mediated corolla senescence in  petunias. Ethylene regulates hormone signaling transduction pathways at both the protein  and ubiquitination levels in petunia corollas. In addition, our results revealed that ethylene  increases the ubiquitination levels of proteins involved in ER-associated degradation   (ERAD).

### Sample Protocol
Protein Extraction Sample was first grinded by liquid nitrogen, then transferred to 5 mL centrifuge tube  and sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Triton-100, 65 mM DTT, 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail and PR619). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 20,000g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the protein was precipitated with cold 15% TCA for 2 h at -20 °C. After centrifugation at 4 °C for 10 min, the supernatant was discarded. The remaining precipitate was washed with cold acetone for three times. The protein was redissolved in buffer (8 M urea, 100 mMNH4HCO3, pH 8.0) and the protein concentration was determined with 2-D Quant kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Trypsin Digestion For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 37 °C and alkylated with 20 mM IAA for 45 min at room temperature in darkness. For trypsin digestion, the protein sample was diluted by adding 100 mMNH4HCO3 to urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion. HPLC Fractionation The sample was then fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Agilent 300Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated with a gradient of 2% to 60% acetonitrile in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 10 over 80 min into 80 fractions, Then, the peptides were combined into 4 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS Analysis Three parallel analyses for each fraction was performed. Peptides were dissolved in 0.1% FA, directly loaded onto a reversed-phase pre-column (Acclaim PepMap 100, Thermo Scientific). Peptide separation was performed using a reversed-phase analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, Thermo Scientific). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 22% solvent B (0.1% FA in 98% ACN) for 22 min, 22% to 36% for 10 min and climbing to 80% in 5 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system, the resulting peptides were analyzed by Q ExactiveTM Plus hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. Intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 30; ion fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans was applied for the top 20 precursor ions above a threshold ion count of 2.0E4 in the MS survey scan with 10.0s dynamic exclusion. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. Automatic gain control (AGC) was used to prevent overfilling of the ion trap; 5E4 ions were accumulated for generation of MS/MS spectra. For MS scans, the m/z scan range was 350 to 1800.  Database Search The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.4.1.2). Tandem mass spectra were searched against petunia hybrida database (40,341 sequences) concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 4 missing cleavages. First search range was set to 20 ppm for precursor ions, Main search range set to 5 ppm and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethyl on Cys were specified as fixed modification and GlyGly on lysine and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. Label-free quantification method was LFQ, FDR was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for modified peptides score was set > 40.

### Publication Abstract
Petal senescence is a complex programmed process. It has been demonstrated previously that treatment with ethylene, a plant hormone involved in senescence, can extensively alter transcriptome and proteome profiles in plants. However, little is known regarding the impact of ethylene on posttranslational modification (PTM) or the association between PTM and the proteome. Protein degradation is one of the hallmarks of senescence, and ubiquitination, a major PTM in eukaryotes, plays important roles in protein degradation. In this study, we first obtained reference petunia (Petunia hybrida) transcriptome data via RNA sequencing. Next, we quantitatively investigated the petunia proteome and ubiquitylome and the association between them in petunia corollas following ethylene treatment. In total, 51,799 unigenes, 3,606 proteins, and 2,270 ubiquitination sites were quantified 16 h after ethylene treatment. Treatment with ethylene resulted in 14,448 down-regulated and 6,303 up-regulated unigenes (absolute log<sub>2</sub> fold change &gt; 1 and false discovery rate &lt; 0.001), 284 down-regulated and 233 up-regulated proteins, and 320 up-regulated and 127 down-regulated ubiquitination sites using a 1.5-fold threshold (P &lt; 0.05), indicating that global ubiquitination levels increase during ethylene-mediated corolla senescence in petunia. Several putative ubiquitin ligases were up-regulated at the protein and transcription levels. Our results showed that the global proteome and ubiquitylome were negatively correlated and that ubiquitination could be involved in the degradation of proteins during ethylene-mediated corolla senescence in petunia. Ethylene regulates hormone signaling transduction pathways at both the protein and ubiquitination levels in petunia corollas. In addition, our results revealed that ethylene increases the ubiquitination levels of proteins involved in endoplasmic reticulum-associated degradation.

### Keywords
Ethylene; ubiquitination; senescence; petunia; protein degradation;lc-msms

### Affiliations
Guangdong Key Laboratory for Innovative Development and Utilization of Forest Plant Germplasm, College of Forestry and Landscape Architecture, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou 510642, China
PTM biolab (Hangzhou)

### Submitter
zhu taotao

### Lab Head
Dr Yixun Yu
Guangdong Key Laboratory for Innovative Development and Utilization of Forest Plant Germplasm, College of Forestry and Landscape Architecture, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou 510642, China


