### Accession
PXD001905

### Title
A quantitative model for macrophage activation predicts tunable distance thresholds for propagation of inflammationes in response LPS stimulation

### Description
Label free analysis of the secretome of RAW264.7 murine macrophages in response to LPS stimulation.

### Sample Protocol
All chemicals used were from Sigma – Aldrich unless otherwise stated. Media samples were digested using a modified FASP method with the following modification: The samples were concentrated to approximately 50 µL with Microcon - 10 kDa centrifugal filter units (Merck Millipore) at a speed of 14,000 g. This was then buffer – exchanged by washing and centrifuging three times with the addition of 100 µL of 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate before the proteins were reconstituted in 50 µL of 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate. The protein concentration was determined using Millipore Direct Detect® spectrometer and 50 µg of protein was added to a fresh 10 kDa filter tube with reduction, alkylation and digestion occurring using the filter tubes. After digestion peptides were collected by centrifugation and the samples were desalted with OLIGO™ R3 reversed-phase media on a microplate system and reconstituted in 5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Digested samples were analysed by LC-MS/MS using an UltiMate® 3000 Rapid Separation LC (RSLC, Dionex Corporation, Sunnyvale, CA) coupled to an Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) mass spectrometer. Peptide mixtures were separated using a gradient from 92% A (0.1% FA in water) and 8% B (0.1% FA in acetonitrile) to 33% B, in 44 min at 300 nL min-1, using a 250 mm x 75 μm i.d. 1.7 mM BEH C18, analytical column (Waters). Peptides were selected for fragmentation automatically by data dependant analysis. FASP reference: Universal sample preparation method for proteome analysis, Wisniewski, Jacek R.; Zougman, Alexandre; Nagaraj, Nagarjuna; Mann, Mathias. NATURE METHODS, 6 (5) 359-U60, 2009).

### Data Protocol
The acquired MS data was analysed using Progenesis LC-MS (v4.1, Nonlinear Dynamics). The retention times in each sample were aligned using one LC-MS run as a reference, then the “Automatic Alignment” algorithim was used to create maximal overlay of the two-dimensional feature maps. Features with charges ≥ +5 were masked and excluded from further analyses, as were features with less than 3 isotope peaks. The resulting peaklists were searched against the Uniprot Mouse database (version 2013 -5) using Mascot v2.4, (Matrix Science). Search parameters included a precursor tolerance of 5 ppm and a fragment tolerance of 0.5 Da. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and one missed cleavage was allowed. Carbamidomethyl modification of cysteine was set as a fixed modification while methionine oxidation was set to variable. The Mascot results were imported into Progenesis LC-MS for annotation of peptide peaks.

### Publication Abstract
Toll-like receptor (TLR) signaling regulates macrophage activation and effector cytokine propagation in the constrained environment of a tissue. In macrophage populations, TLR4 stimulates the dose-dependent transcription of nuclear factor &#x3ba;B (NF-&#x3ba;B) target genes. However, using single-RNA counting, we found that individual cells exhibited a wide range (three orders of magnitude) of expression of the gene encoding the proinflammatory cytokine tumor necrosis factor-&#x3b1; (TNF-&#x3b1;). The TLR4-induced <i>TNFA</i> transcriptional response correlated with the extent of NF-&#x3ba;B signaling in the cells and their size. We compared the rates of TNF-&#x3b1; production and uptake in macrophages and mouse embryonic fibroblasts and generated a mathematical model to explore the heterogeneity in the response of macrophages to TLR4 stimulation and the propagation of the TNF-&#x3b1; signal in the tissue. The model predicts that the local propagation of the TLR4-dependent TNF-&#x3b1; response and cellular NF-&#x3ba;B signaling are limited to small distances of a few cell diameters between neighboring tissue-resident macrophages. In our predictive model, TNF-&#x3b1; propagation was constrained by competitive uptake of TNF-&#x3b1; from the environment, rather than by heterogeneous production of the cytokine. We propose that the highly constrained architecture of tissues enables effective localized propagation of inflammatory cues while avoiding out-of-context responses at longer distances.

### Keywords
Raw264.7 murine macrophages, Label free, Secretome, Lps

### Affiliations
the university of manchester
University of Manchester

### Submitter
william rowe

### Lab Head
Dr Pawel Paszek
University of Manchester


