### Accession
PXD032928

### Title
Characterization of pathogenic Candida glabrata and their effectiveness against systemic candidiasis in BALB/c mice

### Description
Candida glabrata is a common opportunistic fungal pathogen of humans, with the emergence of resitant strains being of particulary concern. The cell wall associated and secretory proteins are intrinsically involved in vital functions during the fungal-host interactions. These proteins are responsible for eliciting immune response in host during candidiasis and therefore can be a promising candidates for vaccine development. BALB/c mice were broadly divided into unimmunized, immunized groups and the designated groups were immunized with β-mercaptoethanol (β-ME) call wall extract, and secretory protein extract from C. glabrata via intraperitoneal route. All the animals were then challenged with a lethal dose of C. glabrata. Furthermore, we applied a liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS) -based approach for the characterization of β-ME extract and secretory protein extract from C. glabrata, which resulted in a comprehensive cell wall and secretory proteome map.portunistic fungal pathogen of humans, with the emergence of resitant strains being of particulary concern. The cell wall associated and secretory proteins are intrinsically involved in vital functions during the fungal-host interactions. These proteins are responsible for eliciting immune response in host during candidiasis and therefore can be a promising candidates for vaccine development. BALB/c mice were broadly divided into unimmunized, immunized groups and the designated groups were immunized with β-mercaptoethanol (β-ME) call wall extract, and secretory protein extract from C. glabrata via intraperitoneal route. All the animals were then challenged with a lethal dose of C. glabrata. Furthermore, we applied a liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS) -based approach for the characterization of β-ME extract and secretory protein extract from C. glabrata, which resulted in a comprehensive cell wall and secretory proteome map.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were incubated with Bolt™ LDS sample buffer and sample reducing agent (Invitrogen, USA) and electrophoresed on a Bolt™ 4 to 12%, Bis-Tris, 1.0 mm, Mini Protein Gel (Invitrogen, USA). The polyacrylamide gels were stained with GelCode™ Blue Stain Reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) and destained with Milli-Q water. Proteins were digested from gel fractions according to 1. Each sample was prepared in 6 separate gel fractions (based on approximated molecular weight ranges: >100 kDa, 60-100 kDa, 40-60 kDa, 25-40 kDa, 15-25 kDa and <15 kDa). Briefly, the proteins were reduced in gel with 10 mM DTT in 25 mM AMBIC for 1 hour at sixty degrees. Samples were cooled to room temperature, then 100 % acetonitrile was added and incubated for 10 minutes. The supernatant was discarded and 55 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in 25 mM AMBIC was added to the gel pieces. The reaction proceeded in the dark for 20 minutes at room temperature. The supernatant was discarded and gels were dehydrated with 25 mM AMBIC in 50% acetonitrile, vortexed and the supernatant was removed. The gel pieces were dried to completeness and freshly prepared trypsin was added, protein digestion was allowed to proceed overnight at 37 °C. The digestion was quenched by adding formic acid to a final of 0.1% and the samples were dried under vacuum. Dried samples were re-suspended in 2 % acetonitrile and 0.2 % formic acid for mass spectrometry analysis.  LC-MS data acquisition  Tryptic peptides from each gel fraction were analyzed using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC system coupled to an AB Sciex 6600 TripleTOF mass spectrometer. Injected peptides were inline de-salted using an Acclaim PepMap C18 trap column (75 μm × 2 cm; 2 min at 5 μl.min 1 using 2% ACN/0.2% FA). Trapped peptides were gradient eluted and separated on a Waters nanoEase CSH C18 column (75 μm × 25 cm, 1.7 µm particle size) at a flow-rate of 0.3 µl.min 1 with a gradient of 10-55% B over 10 min (A: 0.1% FA; B: 80% ACN/0.1% FA). The 6600 TripleTOF mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode. Data-dependent acquisition (DDA) was employed; precursor (MS) scans were acquired from m/z 400-1500 (2+-5+ charge states) using an accumulation time of 100 ms followed by 40 fragment ion (MS/MS) scans, acquired from m/z 100-1800 with 20 ms accumulation time each.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS database searching  Raw data files (.wiff) were searched with Protein Pilot V5.0 software (SCIEX), using a database containing sequences from Candida glabrata reference proteome (downloaded from UniProt on 15 November 2021) and common contaminants. Trypsin was set as the digestion enzyme, cysteine alkylation (iodoacetamide) was allowed as a fixed modification and biological modifications allowed in the search parameters. A 1% false discovery rate filter was applied at the protein level for refinement of identifications.  Bioinformatic and functional analyses  The list gene names for the identified proteins were used to obtain the protein sequences (ORF translation) from the Candida Genome Database (http://www.candidagenome.org/) 2 using the CGD Batch Download tool and gene ontology enrichment analysis done using the CGD GO Slim Mapper tool using the default settings. The complete list of sequences were submitted to the VaxiJen v2.0 server (http://www.ddg-pharmfac.net/vaxijen/VaxiJen/VaxiJen.html) 3 to predict the presence of protective antigens, a threshold score of 0.9 was applied. The DeepLoc - 1.0 (https://services.healthtech.dtu.dk/service.php?DeepLoc-1.0) 4 server was used to accurately (profile setting) predict subcellular localization of the predicted antigens.

### Publication Abstract
Infections by non-albicans <i>Candida</i> species have increased drastically in the past few decades. <i>Candida glabrata</i> is one of the most common opportunistic fungal pathogens in immunocompromised individuals, owing to its capability to attach to various human cell types and medical devices and being intrinsically weakly susceptible to azoles. Immunotherapy, including the development of antifungal vaccines, has been recognized as an alternative approach for preventing and treating fungal infections. Secretory proteins play a crucial role in establishing host-pathogen interactions and are also responsible for eliciting an immune response in the host during candidiasis. Therefore, fungal secretomes can provide promising protein candidates for antifungal vaccine development. This study attempts to uncover the presence of immunodominant antigenic proteins in the <i>C. glabrata</i> secretome and delineate their role in various biological processes and their potency in the development of antifungal vaccines. LC-MS/MS results uncovered that <i>C. glabrata</i> secretome consisted of 583 proteins, among which 33 were identified as antigenic proteins. The protection ability of secretory proteins against hematogenously disseminated infection caused by <i>C. glabrata</i> was evaluated in BALB/c mice. After immunization and booster doses, all the animals were challenged with a lethal dose of <i>C. glabrata</i>. All the mice showing signs of distress were sacrificed post-infection, and target organs were collected, followed by histopathology and <i>C. glabrata</i> (CFU/mg) estimation. Our results showed a lower fungal burden in target organs and increased survival in immunized mice compared to the infection control group, thus revealing the immunogenic property of secreted proteins. Thus, identified secretome proteins of <i>C. glabrata</i> have the potential to act as antigenic proteins, which can serve as potential candidates for the development of antifungal vaccines. This study also emphasizes the importance of a mass-spectrometry approach to identifying the antigenic proteins in <i>C. glabrata</i> secretome.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Mouse model, Candida glabrata

### Affiliations
Council for Scientific and Industrial Research
NextGen Health CSIR South Africa

### Submitter
Previn Naicker

### Lab Head
Dr Stoyan Stoychev
NextGen Health CSIR South Africa


