### Accession
PXD014678

### Title
PALB2 ChAM acetylation mapping in human cells

### Description
The Chromatin Association Motif (ChAM) of the PArtner and Localizer of BRCA2 (PALB2) is essential for DNA repair function by homologous recombination in human cells. Molecular mechanisms governing ChAM interaction with chromatin remain unexplored. In this study, we have mapped acetylated lysines within ChAM domain, which are contained within a region essential to regulate its association with chromatin. GFP-ChAM sample submitted for proteomics analysis for acetylated lysines mapping was purified from HEK293T transiently expressing GFP-ChAM. GFP-ChAM was purified by GFP pull down using GFP-Trap agarose beads (Chromotek) and washed at 250mM NaCl.

### Sample Protocol
GFP-CHAM samples were digested following a filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocole: samples were loaded onto a FASP filter pre-washed with 0.1% Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) in 50% acetonitrile (ACN), by centrifugation for 10 minutes at 14,3000xg at room temperature (RT). Proteins were further denaturated in 8 M urea dissolved into 100 mM triethylamonium bicarbonate (TEAB) for 30 minutes at RT, reduced with 10 mM tris-(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine for 30 minutes at RT and alkylated with 50 mM chloroacetamide for 30 minutes at RT. After two washing steps into 50 mM TEAB by centrifugation for 10 minutes at 14,3000 x g at RT, proteins were digested by trypsin in 50mM TEAB after overnight incubation at 37°C. After spinning through the trypic digest by centrifugation for 10 minutes at 14,3000xg at RT, the FASP filter was washed with 50% ACN and 0.1%TFA solution. Samples were further dried-down in speed-vac, resuspended in 5% formic acid and 5% DMSO, trapped on a C18 PepMap100 pre-column (300µm i.d. x 5mm, 100 Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using solvent A (0.1% Formic Acid in water) at a pressure of 500 bar and separated on an Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system (Thermo Fischer Scientific) coupled to a QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific). The peptides were separated on an in- house packed analytical column (360µm x 75µm i.d. packed with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9µm,120 Å, Dr.Maisch GmbH) and then electrosprayed directly into an QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific) through an EASY-Spray nano-electrospray ion source (Thermo Fischer Scientific) using a linear gradient (length: 60 minutes, 15% to 35% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile), flow rate: 200 nL/min). The raw data was acquired on the mass spectrometer in a data-dependent mode (DDA). Full scan MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap (scan range 350-2000 m/z, resolution 70000, AGC target 3e6, maximum injection time 50 ms). After the MS scans, the 20 most intense peaks were selected for HCD fragmentation at 30% of normalised collision energy. HCD spectra were also acquired in the Orbitrap (resolution 17500, AGC target 5e4, maximum injection time 120 ms) with first fixed mass at 180 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were searched using SEQUEST HT and MASCOT within Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (ThermoFischer Scientific, version 1.4.0.288), against a non-redundant protein sequence database for Homo sapiens containing 20248 protein sequence entries (Uniprot, release 2013-12-08). During database searches, acetylation (N-terminus and lysines, K), Oxidation (Methionine, M) were set at variable modifications while carbamidomethylation (Cysteine, C). Three missed cleavages were permitted. Peptide mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm and 0.05 Da on the precursor and fragment ions respectively.

### Publication Abstract
The tumour suppressor PALB2 stimulates RAD51-mediated homologous recombination (HR) repair of DNA damage, whilst its steady-state association with active genes protects these loci from replication stress. Here, we report that the lysine acetyltransferases 2A and 2B (KAT2A/2B, also called GCN5/PCAF), two well-known transcriptional regulators, acetylate a cluster of seven lysine residues (7K-patch) within the PALB2 chromatin association motif (ChAM) and, in this way, regulate context-dependent PALB2 binding to chromatin. In unperturbed cells, the 7K-patch is targeted for KAT2A/2B-mediated acetylation, which in turn enhances the direct association of PALB2 with nucleosomes. Importantly, DNA damage triggers a rapid deacetylation of ChAM and increases the overall mobility of PALB2. Distinct missense mutations of the 7K-patch render the mode of PALB2 chromatin binding, making it either unstably chromatin-bound (7Q) or randomly bound with a reduced capacity for mobilisation (7R). Significantly, both of these mutations confer a deficiency in RAD51 foci formation and increase DNA damage in S phase, leading to the reduction of overall cell survival. Thus, our study reveals that acetylation of the ChAM 7K-patch acts as a molecular switch to enable dynamic PALB2 shuttling for HR repair while protecting active genes during DNA replication.

### Keywords
Chromatin, Dna repair, Acetylation

### Affiliations
University of Oxford
University of Oxford, Sir William Dunn School of Pathology South Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3RE, UK

### Submitter
Marjorie Fournier

### Lab Head
Dr Fumiko Esashi
University of Oxford, Sir William Dunn School of Pathology South Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3RE, UK


