### Accession
PXD001489

### Title
Protein 2DE reference map of Rhodnius prolixus's anterior midgut, part 2

### Description
Rhodnius prolixus is one of the most important vectors of Chagas’ disease caused by the parasite Trypanosoma cruzi. Vector control is the principal combat method of this disease. It is inside of intestine that T. cruzi completes his life cycle to become infectious. On this work a 2D protein map of R. prolixus intestine was performed. On the 2D-map, soluble proteins from crop were separated by two-dimensional gel electrophoresis using 18cm IPG strips pH 4-7 and 12.5% SDS-PAGE gels. After Coomassie blue staining all visible spots were excised, proteins were trypsin digested and analyzed by nano-LC MS/MS. Peptides were identified using in-house Mascot software (Matrixscience) and searched against genomic and transcriptomic databases. 692 spots were picked. Mascot analysis resulted in a total of 476 spots (69%) with a set of 490 proteins identified. These data provide experimental evidence for R. prolixus proteins that were predicted by genome and transcriptome. These proteomic data, together with transcriptomic and genomic information, will contribute in the comprehension of the physiology of R. prolixus midgut.

### Sample Protocol
Anterior midguts were dissected in 2 conditions: starved and after meal (5 days after blood feeding). The organs were washed with cold PBS (0.15M NaCl, 43mM Na2HPO4, 1.4mM KH2PO4, 2.7mM KCl,pH 7.4) and stored in STE buffer (0.1M Tris, 0.05M NaCl, 0.05M EDTA, pH 7.4) with 1% v/v protease inhibitor cocktail and 1% phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich Co., St. Louis, USA) The organs were macerated and sonicated 3 times by 10 seconds. Soluble proteins were extracted using Triton X114 method [1]. Proteins were precipitated and resuspended in IEF rehydration buffer (7M Urea, 2M Thiourea, 2% CHAPS, 0.001% bromophenol blue). Three gels were made and 300 or 500 ?g of proteins were loaded on an Immobiline Drystrip gel of 18cm pH 4-7 (Amersham Bioscience, Uppsala, Sweden). The first dimension was run on the ETTAN IPGphor 3 (GE Healthcare, Uppsala, Sweden) following manufacturer’s instructions. After first dimension, the strip was incubated with equilibration buffer (Serva Electrophoresis GmbH, Heidelberg, Germany) containing 65mM DTT followed by 135mM iodoacetamide for 15 minutesn. After reduction and alkylation the second dimension was run using 2D HPE large gels 12.5% (Serva Electrophoresis GmbH, Heidelberg, Germany) on the HPE Flat Top Tower device (GelCompany Inc., San Francisco, USA) following manufacturer’s instructions. After gel staining with Imperial Protein Stain (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, USA), the gel was scanned on the Image Scanner (Amersham Bioscience, Uppsala, Sweden) and spots were picked manually. After excision, spots were washed with MiliQ water for 10 minutes at room temperature, incubated with 40% acetonitrile for 15 minutes at 37°C for destaining and dehydrated using 100% acetonitrile for 10 minutes at room temperature. Proteins were digested using 30 ng of Trypsin (Sequencing Grade Modified Promega, Madison, WI, USA) in 25mM NH4HCO3 overnight at 37°C. Subsequently to incubation, each supernatant was transferred to a polypropylene auto sampler tube. Peptides were separated on the Easy-nLC II system (Proxeon Biosystems, Odense, Denmark), using a 15cm column packed with C18 (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany) following these conditions: Buffer A (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in MiliQ water) and Buffer B (98% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in MilliQ water) with a linear gradient of 10 – 40% B in 50 minutes reaching 100% of B in 55 minutes. A flow rate of 300 ?L/min was used and the LC system was coupled to a nanoelectrospray tip (Picotip emitter, Silicatip, USA) and an electrospray source of a Q-TOF Ultima Global instrument (Waters, Zellik, Belgium). The nanoelectrospray voltage was set to 4.5 kV. The full MS scan was collected in the mass range of 300-1200 m/z. The three most intense doubly and triply charged ions were submitted to CID with 15-40 V collision energy. The data were collected by MassLynx v.4.0 software (Waters, Zellik, Belgium)

### Data Protocol
Acquired MS data were processed by Mascot Distiller (v.2.3.2.0) using default settings in order to generate peak lists that can be submitted to database search. Derived peak lists were searched with Mascot software v.2.3.0 (Matrix science Ltd., UK) through two Rhodnius prolixus databases: predicted proteins from the genome and ESTs from the transcriptome. Search parameters included trypsin as the selected enzyme (one missed cleavage permitted), cysteine carbamidomethyl as fixed modification, Gln-pyro-Glu (Nterminal Q) and methionine oxidation as variable modifications, peptide mass tolerance of 50 ppm and 0.8 Da for fragments mass tolerance. Only proteins that matched to a minimum of two different peptides identified with highly significant database matching scores (p-value of 0.05) were assigned as conclusively identified.

### Publication Abstract
Rhodnius prolixus is an important vector of Trypanosoma cruzi, the causative agent of Chagas' disease, an illness that affects 20% of Latin America population. The obligatory course of the parasite in the vector digestive tract has made it an important target for investigation in order to control the parasite transmission and thus interrupt its biological cycle in the insect vector. Therefore, an insight into the vector midgut physiology is valuable for insect control as well as to provide potential novel targets for drugs and vaccines development and thus disease treatment. In this study, the first 2DE map of R. prolixus anterior midgut is described. Proteins were separated by 2DE and analyzed by nano-LC MS/MS. The results yielded 489 proteins from 475 spots. These proteins were classified into 28 functional groups and their physiological roles in the insect midgut are discussed. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifiers PXD001488 and PXD001489 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD001488, http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD001489).

### Keywords
Midgut, 2d-map, Rhodnius prolixus

### Affiliations
PhD student
Proteomic Platform, Laboratory of Molecular Parasitology, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Belgium

### Submitter
Larissa Rezende Vieira

### Lab Head
Dr Sabrina Bousbata
Proteomic Platform, Laboratory of Molecular Parasitology, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Belgium


