### Accession
PXD020666

### Title
Protein interactome profiling of ER alpha by RIME assay from the human hepatocellular cancer HepG2 stable cells

### Description
Estrogeh insensitivity syndrome (EIS) arises from rare mutations in ERα resulting in the inability of estrogen to exert its biological effects. Due to the rarity, mutations in ESR1 gene and the underlying molecular mechanisms of EIS have not been thoroughly studied. We used RIME (Rapid Immunoprecipitation Mass spectrometry of Endogenous proteins) analysis to compare the interactions for ER alpha between the WT ER alpha and Q375H clinical mutant in HepG2 stable cells.

### Sample Protocol
HepG2 stable cells (HepG2/WT ERα and HepG2/Q375H lines) were seeded in 150 x 25 mm dishes at 1 x107 cells per dish (total 10 dishes for each sample) in phenol red-free MEM medium with 10% FBS overnight.  The cells were starved in phenol red-free MEM medium with 5% sFBS for 48 hours and then treated with vehicle control (< 0.1% DMSO) and 10 nM E2 for 18 hours.  Binding was detected using  ER⍺ antibody  + fluorescently labeled secundary antibody and quantified as arbitrary unit’s fluorescence using Bionavigator Software (PamGene).

### Data Protocol
For the data analysis, duplicate run samples (R1 and R2) for each group were performed for completion of the RIME analysis. The common enriched protein lists were used in further analysis. These protein lists were uploaded into Pertek Genomics Suite 7.0 for comparing the overlap proteins among the four group samples.

### Publication Abstract
A homozygous missense mutation in the gene encoding the estrogen receptor &#x3b1; (ER&#x3b1;) was previously identified in a female patient with estrogen insensitivity syndrome. We investigated the molecular features underlying the impaired transcriptional response of this mutant (ER&#x3b1;-Q375H) and four other missense mutations at this position designed to query alternative mechanisms. The identity of residue 375 greatly affected the sensitivity of the receptor to agonists without changing the ligand binding affinity. Instead, the mutations caused changes in the affinity of coactivator binding and alterations in the balance of coactivator and corepressor recruitment. Comparisons among the transcriptional regulatory responses of these six ER&#x3b1; genotypes to a set of ER agonists showed that both steric and electrostatic factors contributed to the functional deficits in gene regulatory activity of the mutant ER&#x3b1; proteins. ER&#x3b1;-coregulator peptide binding in vitro and RIME (rapid immunoprecipitation mass spectrometry of endogenous) analysis in cells showed that the degree of functional impairment paralleled changes in receptor-coregulator binding interactions. These findings uncover coupling between ligand binding and coregulator recruitment that affects the potency rather than the efficacy of the receptor response without substantially altering ligand binding affinity. This highlights a molecular mechanism for estrogen insensitivity syndrome involving mutations that perturb a bidirectional allosteric coupling between ligand binding and coregulator binding that determines receptor transcriptional output.

### Keywords
Er alpha mutation, Cell model, Protein interactome

### Affiliations
NIEHS/NIH
Reproductive & Developmental Biology Laboratory, NIEHS, NIH, USA.

### Submitter
Yin Li

### Lab Head
Dr Yin Li
Reproductive & Developmental Biology Laboratory, NIEHS, NIH, USA.


