### Accession
PXD008766

### Title
Hepatic mitochondrial proteome dynamics in NAFLD mice

### Description
Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is associated with hepatic mitochondrial dysfunction characterized by reduced ATP synthesis. We applied the 2H2O-metabolic labeling approach to test the hypothesis that the reduced stability of oxidative phosphorylation proteins contributes to mitochondrial dysfunction in a diet-induced mouse model of NAFLD. A high fat diet containing cholesterol (a so-called Western diet (WD)) led to hepatic oxidative stress, steatosis, inflammation and mild fibrosis, all markers of NAFLD, in LDLR-/- mice. In addition, compared to controls, livers from NAFLD mice had reduced citrate synthase activity and ATP content, suggesting reduced mitochondrial oxidative capacity. Proteome dynamics analysis revealed that mitochondrial dysfunction is associated with reduced average half-lives of mitochondrial proteins in NAFLD mice (5.41±0.46 vs. 5.15±0.49 day, P<0.05). In particular, the WD reduced stability of oxidative phosphorylation subunits, including cytochrome c oxidase subunit 4 isoform 1 of complex III (5.9 ± 0.1 vs 3.4 ± 0.8 day), ATP synthase subunit α (6.3±0.4 vs. 5.5±0.4 day) and ATP synthase F(0) complex subunit B1 of complex V (8.5±0.6 vs. 6.5±0.2 day) (P<0.05). These changes were associated with impaired complex III and F0F1-ATP synthase activities, suggesting that increased degradation of mitochondrial proteins contributed to hepatic mitochondrial dysfunction in NAFLD mice.  Autophagy, but not proteasomal degradation, contributed to increased clearance of hepatic mitochondrial proteins in NAFLD mice. In conclusion, the proteome dynamics approach suggests that alterations in mitochondrial proteome dynamics is involved in hepatic mitochondrial dysfunction in NAFLD.

### Sample Protocol
Protein fractionation and sample preparation for proteomics analysis: Hepatic mitochondrial proteins  (30 µg) were fractionated with SDS-PAGE using AnyKD gel (BioRad, Hercules, CA) for 45 minutes at 180V. After staining, twelve gel bands corresponding to specific molecular weight proteins fractions were cut and processed for proteomic analyses. Extracted gel bands were reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT), alkylated with iodoacetamide and digested with trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) at 37°C overnight. The tryptic peptides were extracted from polyacrylamide gel bands in a sonication bath with 100 µl of 40% acetonitrile with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and 100 µl of 70% acetonitrile with 0.1% TFA, consecutively. These extracts were combined, dried in a SpeedVac and analyzed by nanospray LC-MS/MS after reconstitution in 0.1% formic acid. LC-MS/MS analysis: A solution containing the tryptic peptides was analyzed by Ultimate 3000 UHPLC (Thermo Scientific, CA) coupled online to Q Exactive™ Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, CA). The samples were first loaded on an Acclaim PepMap100 precolumn (300 μm x 5 mm, C18, 5 μm, 100Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific) for desalting, and then directed to an Acclaim PepMap RSLC reverse phase nanocolumn (75 μm x 15 cm, C18, 2 μm, 100Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 200 nL/min with a mobile phase A (0.1% formic acid in water) and B (20% water in acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid). For a chromatographic fractionation of tryptic peptides, a 120-minute stepwise gradient was employed with 2% of mobile phase B. After 4 minutes of de-salting, mobile phase B was linearly increased to 40% in 100 minutes. Mobile phase B was then ramped to 90% in 5 minutes and then held at 90% B for 10 minutes. Subsequently, mobile phase B was decreased to 2% for 2 minutes and equilibrated for 13 minutes with 2% of phase B.  Mass spectrometry analysis was performed at m/z 380–1300 (MS) with 70,000 resolution (200 m/z). MS/MS spectra were collected in data-dependent acquisition mode for the 12 most abundant product ions with an isolation window of 1.5±0.4 m/z and 17,500 resolution (200 m/z). MS and MS/MS spectra were acquired for 100 ms with the automatic gain control (AGC) target set at 1.0 x 106 and 2.0 x 104 ions for MS and MS/MS scans, respectively. Higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) was performed at normalized collision energy of 25%. Dynamic exclusion was enabled for a duration of 17 s.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification, all the MS/MS spectra obtained from the mass spectrometer were transformed into a Mascot Generic Format (MGF) peak list file using ProteoWizard MSconvert (http://proteowizard.sourceforge.net/tools), and the MGF file was searched using the Mascot 2.3 (Matrix Science, London, UK) software against the Mouse MitoCarta 2.0 mitochondrial protein database released on  2015 (containing 1158 entries) with cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification and methionine oxidation and lysine acetylation as variable modifications, respectively, and trypsin digestion with a maximum of two missed cleavages per peptide. The mass tolerance of the parent and product ions was set at 10 ppm and 0.2 Da, respectively. A custom-built software application (http://ispace.utmb.edu/users/rgsadygo/proteomics/heavywater) was employed to calculate 2H isotopic enrichment (E) in the proteins of interest.

### Publication Abstract
Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is associated with hepatic mitochondrial dysfunction characterized by reduced ATP synthesis. We applied the <sup>2</sup>H<sub>2</sub>O-metabolic labeling approach to test the hypothesis that the reduced stability of oxidative phosphorylation proteins contributes to mitochondrial dysfunction in a diet-induced mouse model of NAFLD. A high fat diet containing cholesterol (a so-called Western diet (WD)) led to hepatic oxidative stress, steatosis, inflammation and mild fibrosis, all markers of NAFLD, in low density cholesterol (LDL) receptor deficient (LDLR<sup>-/-</sup>) mice. In addition, compared with controls (LDLR<sup>-/-</sup> mice on normal diet), livers from NAFLD mice had reduced citrate synthase activity and ATP content, suggesting mitochondrial impairment. Proteome dynamics study revealed that mitochondrial defects are associated with reduced average half-lives of mitochondrial proteins in NAFLD mice (5.41 &#xb1; 0.46 <i>versus</i> 5.15 &#xb1; 0.49 day, <i>p</i> &lt; <i>0.05</i>). In particular, the WD reduced stability of oxidative phosphorylation subunits, including cytochrome b-<i>c1</i> complex subunit 1 (5.9 &#xb1; 0.1 <i>versus</i> 3.4 &#xb1; 0.8 day), ATP synthase subunit &#x3b1; (6.3 &#xb1; 0.4 <i>versus</i> 5.5 &#xb1; 0.4 day) and ATP synthase F(0) complex subunit B1 of complex V (8.5 &#xb1; 0.6 <i>versus</i> 6.5 &#xb1; 0.2 day) (<i>p</i> &lt; <i>0.05</i>). These changes were associated with impaired complex III and F0F1-ATP synthase activities. Markers of mitophagy were increased, but proteasomal degradation activity were reduced in NAFLD mice liver, suggesting that ATP deficiency because of reduced stability of oxidative phosphorylation complex subunits contributed to inhibition of ubiquitin-proteasome and activation of mitophagy. In conclusion, the <sup>2</sup>H<sub>2</sub>O-metabolic labeling approach shows that increased degradation of hepatic oxidative phosphorylation subunits contributed to mitochondrial impairment in NAFLD mice.

### Keywords
Heavy water metabolic labeling, Oxidative stress, Energy metabolism, Nafld, Mitochondrial dysfunction, Oxidative phosphorylation, Turnover, Proteome dynamics, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
NEOMED

### Submitter
Kwangwon Lee

### Lab Head
Dr Takhar Kasumov
NEOMED


