### Accession
PXD027925

### Title
Effect of zinc on bacterial cells: Multi-omics approach for risk assessment of evolution of antibiotic resistance and virulence of Escherichia coli

### Description
Escherichia coli (ATCC 25922) was cultured with sub-inhibitory doses of ZnO and ZnO nanoparticles for up to 40 subculture cycles, and the effect on the bacteria proteome was analyzed.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial pellets were extracted by sonication in tert-butyl methyl ether:methanol mixture (3:1). The resulting protein pellets were solubilized (8 M urea, 10 mM DTT, 100 mM AMBIC) and digested with trypsin. Portions of samples corresponding to 5 µg of peptide were analyzed by nanoflow reverse-phase liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry using a 15 cm C18 Zorbax column (Agilent), a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano-UPLC system and the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo) as described previously (e.g., Berková et al., 2020).

### Data Protocol
The measured spectra were recalibrated and searched against the E.coli UniProt protein database (83333, strain K12) and common protein contaminants by Proteome Discoverer 2.5 (Thermo). Only proteins with at least two unique peptides were considered for the quantitative analyses. For each point, five biologically distinct samples were analyzed. The quantitative analysis was performed by Minora, employing precursor ion quantification followed by normalization and calculation of relative protein abundances.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nanoparticles, E.coli, Evolution, Zinc

### Affiliations
Mendel University in Brno

### Submitter
Martin Cerny

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Cerny
Mendel University in Brno


