### Accession
PXD032814

### Title
Notoginsenoside R1 regulates ischemic myocardial lipid metabolism through activating AKT/mTOR signaling pathway

### Description
Radix notoginseng is widely used to treat ischemic heart disease in China and other Asian countries, and notoginsenoside R1 (NGR1) is its characteristic and large-amount ingredient. However, the potential molecular mechanisms of NGR1 improving ischemic heart diseases are unclear. Our results revealed that NGR1 improved the echocardiographic, tissue pathological and serum biochemical perturbations in myocardial ischemic rats. The network pharmacology studies indicated that NGR1 mainly regulated smooth muscle cell proliferation, vasculature development and lipid metabolism signaling, especially PI3K/AKT pathway. The myocardial proteomics revealed that the function of NGR1 was focused on regulating metabolic progresses and energy supply processes. The combining research of reverse-docked targets and differential proteins demonstrated that NGR1 modulated lipid metabolism in ischemic myocardial and mTOR and AKT were key targets. Conventional MD simulation was adopted to investigate the interference effect of NGR1 on the structure stabilization of mTOR and AKT complex. The results suggested that NGR1 can strengthen the affinity stabilization of mTOR and AKT.

### Sample Protocol
The protein extractions were performed by first pulverizing the aortas in liquid nitrogen and lysing the fragments in ice-cold lysis buffer (8 mol/L urea, 1% protease inhibitor cocktail). The homogenates were centrifuged at 15,000 rpm, 4°C for 10 min, and the supernatants were quantified by a bicinchoninic acid (BCA) kit in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions (Beyotime Biotechnology, Shanghai, China). Equivalent protein solutions from different groups were digested by trypsin, and the peptides were labelled using a TMT kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Scientific, USA).TMT labeled peptides were fractionated by SCX chromatography using the AKTA Purifier system (GE Healthcare, MA, USA).Each fraction was concentrated by vacuum centrifugation and reconstituted in 40µL of 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid. Experiments were performed on a Q Exactive HF-X orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) coupled with Easy nLC (Proxeon Biosystems, Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA). 5μL of each fraction was injected for nano-LC-MS/MS analysis. The peptide mixture (2μg) was loaded onto a C18 reversed-phase column packed in-house with RP-C18 5μm resin in buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and separated with a linear gradient of buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 250nL/min over 60min. MS data were then acquired using a data-dependent top 20 method, dynamically choosing the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (300-1800m/z) for HCD fragmentation. Determination of the target value was based on predictive Automatic Gain Control (pAGC). Dynamic exclusion duration was 60s. The scans were obtained at the resolution of 70000 at m/z 200, the value of resolution for high energy collisional dissociation spectra was set at 60000 at m/z 200 (TMT 16 plex), and the width of isolation was 2m/z. The normalized collision energy was 30eV, and the AGC Target was 200000. The instrument was run with peptide recognition mode enabled. 

### Data Protocol
Mascot 2.2 and Proteome Discoverer 1.4 were used to analyze the LC-MS/MS raw data for library identification and quantitative analysis. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set as ≤ 0.01. Proteome Discoverer determined quantitative analysis of the ionic peak strength values of peptide segment. Differentially expressed proteins were identified through ratio-fold change as well as P value (< 0.01) calculated with a t-test. The differentially expressed proteins were performed for future bioinformatics analysis. After obtaining the differentially expressed protein, the Gene Ontology (GO) program Blast2GO (https://www. blast2go. com) was used to annotate DEPs (differential expression proteins) to create histograms of GO annotation, including cell component, biological process (BP) and molecular function (MF). The number of differential proteins included in each GO entry was counted, and the significance of differential protein enrichment in each GO entry was calculated using the hypergeometric distribution test. For pathway analysis, the differential proteins were mapped to the terms in the KEGG (Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes) database by using the KAAS program (http://www. genome. jp/kaas-bin/kaas_main). Protein-protein interaction networks were analyzed using the publicly available program STRING (http: //string-db. org), and the minimum required interaction score was set at 0.400. STRING is a database of known and predicted protein-protein interactions. The interactions include direct (physical) and indirect (functional) associations, and they are derived from four sources: the genomic context, high-throughput experiments, co-expression, and previous knowledge.

### Publication Abstract
Ischemic heart diseases are responsible for more than one-third of all deaths worldwide. <i>Radix notoginseng</i> is widely used to treat ischemic heart disease in China and other Asian countries, and notoginsenoside R1 (NGR1) is its characteristic and large-amount ingredient. However, the potential molecular mechanisms of NGR1 in improving ischemic heart diseases are unclear. In this study, we combined pharmacological evaluation with network pharmacology, myocardial proteomics, and conventional molecular dynamics (MD) simulation to explore the cardio-protection mechanisms of NGR1. Our results revealed that NGR1 improved the echocardiographic, tissue pathological, and serum biochemical perturbations in myocardial ischemic rats. The network pharmacology studies indicated that NGR1 mainly regulated smooth muscle cell proliferation, vasculature development, and lipid metabolism signaling, especially in the PI3K/AKT pathway. Myocardial proteomics revealed that the function of NGR1 was focused on regulating metabolic and energy supply processes. The research combined reverse-docked targets with differential proteins and demonstrated that NGR1 modulated lipid metabolism in ischemic myocardia by interacting with mTOR and AKT. Conventional MD simulation was applied to investigate the influence of NGR1 on the structural stabilization of the mTOR and AKT complex. The results suggested that NGR1 can strengthen the affinity stabilization of mTOR and AKT. Our study first revealed that NGR1 enhanced the affinity stabilization of mTOR and AKT, thus promoting the activation of the AKT/mTOR pathway and improving lipid metabolic abnormity in myocardial ischemic rats.

### Keywords
Notoginsenoside r1; ischemic heart disease; cardioprotection; lipid metabolism; akt/mtor pathway

### Affiliations
Key Laboratory of Pharmacology of Traditional Chinese Medical Formulae, Ministry of Education, Tianjin University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, 10 Poyanghu Road, Jinghai District,Tianjin 301617, China.
shanghai

### Submitter
yanzhen Zhao

### Lab Head
Dr Yuhong Li
Key Laboratory of Pharmacology of Traditional Chinese Medical Formulae, Ministry of Education, Tianjin University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, 10 Poyanghu Road, Jinghai District,Tianjin 301617, China.


