### Accession
PXD005123

### Title
Somatic increase of CCT8 mimics proteostasis of human pluripotent stem cells and extends C. elegans lifespan

### Description
Human embryonic stem cells can replicate indefinitely while maintaining their undifferentiated state and, therefore, are immortal in culture. This capacity may demand avoidance of any imbalance in protein homeostasis (proteostasis) that would otherwise compromise stem cell identity. Here we show that human pluripotent stem cells exhibit enhanced assembly of the TRiC/CCT complex, a chaperonin that facilitates the folding of 10% of the proteome. We find that ectopic expression of a single subunit (CCT8) is sufficient to increase TRiC/CCT assembly. Moreover, increased TRiC/CCT complex is required to avoid aggregation of mutant Huntingtin protein. We further show that increased expression of CCT8 in somatic tissues extends Caenorhabditis elegans lifespan in a TRiC/CCT-dependent manner. Ectopic expression of CCT8 also ameliorates the age-associated demise of proteostasis and corrects proteostatic deficiencies in worm models of Huntington’s disease. Our results suggest proteostasis is a common principle that links organismal longevity with hESC immortality.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were scratched in urea buffer (containing 8 M urea, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 1x complete protease inhibitor mix with EDTA (Roche)), homogenized with a syringe and cleared using centrifugation (16,000g, 20 min). Supernatants were reduced (1 mM DTT, 30 min), alkylated (5 mM IAA, 45 min) and digested with trypsin at a 1:100 w/w ratio after diluting urea concentration to 2 M. The day after, samples were cleared (16,000g, 20 min) and supernatant was acidified. Peptides were cleaned up using stage tip extraction. In short, peptides were eluted from C18 tips with 30 µL of 0.1% formic acid in 80 % acetonitrile (ACN), concentrated in a speed vac to complete dryness and re-suspended in 10 µL buffer A (0.1% formic acid). The Liquid Chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) equipment consisted out of an EASY nLC 1000 coupled to the quadrupole based QExactive instrument (Thermo Scientific) via a nano-spray electroionization source. Peptides were separated on an in-house packed 50 cm column (1.9 µm C18 beads, Dr. Maisch) using a binary buffer system: A) 0.1% formic acid and B) 0.1 % formic acid in ACN.  The content of buffer B was raised from 7 % to 23 % within 120 min and followed by an increase to 45 % within 10 min. Then, within 5 min buffer B fraction was raised to 80 % and held for further 5 min after which it was decreased to 5 % within 2 min and held there for further 3 min before the next sample was loaded on the column. Eluting peptides were ionized by an applied voltage of 2.2 kV. The capillary temperature was 275°C and the S-lens RF level was set to 60. MS1 spectra were acquired using a resolution of 70,000 (at 200 m/z), an Automatic Gain Control (AGC) target of 3e6 and a maximum injection time of 20 ms in a scan range of 300-1750 Th. In a data dependent mode, the 10 most intense peaks were selected for isolation and fragmentation in the HCD cell using a normalized collision energy of 25 at an isolation window of 2.1 Th. Dynamic exclusion was enabled and set to 20 s. The MS/MS scan properties were: 17.500 resolution at 200 m/z, an AGC target of 5e5 and a maximum injection time of 60 ms.

### Data Protocol
All proteomics data sets (at least 5 biological replicates per condition) were analyzed with the MaxQuant software (release 1.5.3.30). Spectra were searched against the „all peptides“ database from EnsEMBL release 79 (Homo_sapiens.GRCh38.pep.all.fasta). We employed the label-free quantitation mode and used MaxQuant default settings for protein identification and LFQ quantification. All downstream analyses were carried out on LFQ values, which have been subjected to the variance stabilization transformation method (limma). We identified differentially abundant protein groups by linear modeling including cell type and experimental batch as variable using limma's moderated t-statistics framework. We retain all protein groups with an adjusted p-value (q-value) of less than 0.05. For the characterization of protein-level differences in the chaperome network, we extracted the annotated human chaperome from Brehme et al.11 and intersected this dataset with our computed protein abundance fold changes and test for differential abundance. All tables and figures were generated with custom R scripts.

### Publication Abstract
Human embryonic stem cells can replicate indefinitely while maintaining their undifferentiated state and, therefore, are immortal in culture. This capacity may demand avoidance of any imbalance in protein homeostasis (proteostasis) that would otherwise compromise stem cell identity. Here we show that human pluripotent stem cells exhibit enhanced assembly of the TRiC/CCT complex, a chaperonin that facilitates the folding of 10% of the proteome. We find that ectopic expression of a single subunit (CCT8) is sufficient to increase TRiC/CCT assembly. Moreover, increased TRiC/CCT complex is required to avoid aggregation of mutant Huntingtin protein. We further show that increased expression of CCT8 in somatic tissues extends Caenorhabditis elegans lifespan in a TRiC/CCT-dependent manner. Ectopic expression of CCT8 also ameliorates the age-associated demise of proteostasis and corrects proteostatic deficiencies in worm models of Huntington's disease. Our results suggest proteostasis is a common principle that links organismal longevity with hESC immortality.

### Keywords
Neural progenitors cells, Neurons, Chaperome, Embryonic stem cells

### Affiliations
Cologne Excellence Cluster for Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD), University of Cologne, Joseph Stelzmann Strasse 26, 50931 Cologne, Germany.
University of Cologne

### Submitter
David Vilchez

### Lab Head
Dr David Vilchez
Cologne Excellence Cluster for Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD), University of Cologne, Joseph Stelzmann Strasse 26, 50931 Cologne, Germany.


