### Accession
PXD006412

### Title
Gastrointestinal digestion of hazelnut allergens on molecular level: Elucidation of degradation kinetics and resistant immunoactive peptides using mass spectrometry

### Description
Allergy to hazelnut seeds ranks among the most prevalent food allergies in Europe. The aim of this study was to elucidate the gastrointestinal digestion of hazelnut allergens on molecular level. Hazelnut flour was digested in vitro following the Infogest consensus model. For six allergenic proteins, the time-dependent course of digestion was monitored by SDS-PAGE and HPLC−MS/MS, and degradation products were characterized by a bottom-up proteomics approach. Depending on the molecular structure, a specific biochemical fate was observed for each allergen, and degradation kinetics were traced back to the peptide level. 1183 peptides were characterized, including 130 peptides that carry known IgE-binding epitopes and may represent sensitizers for hazelnut allergy. The kinetics of peptide formation and degradation were determined by label free quantification and follow a complex multi-stage mechanism.

### Sample Protocol
Hazelnut kernels were purchased unroasted from a local food store and ground with a cutting mill (Grindomix GM 200, Retsch) to simulate chewing. In vitro simulated human digestion was then carried out on the basis of the standardized static model proposed by the COST Infogest action with simulated salivary fluid (SSF), simulated gastric fluid (SGF), and simulated intestinal fluid (SIF) prepared according to the authors’ instructions. To allow for quick and contamination-free sampling, the sample material was split into aliquots of 500 mg in preparation for the experiment, and all digestion steps were performed under agitation at 37 °C. To simulate all consecutive stages of human digestion (oral, gastric, and intestinal), each aliquot was first mixed with 1 mL of SSF containing 75 U/mL α-Amylase (α-Amylase from Bacillus licheniformis, A3403, Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO, USA), and incubated for 2 min. Then, 1 mL of SGF was added to the oral bolus, together with pepsin (pepsin from porcine gastric mucosa, P6887, Sigma-Aldrich), yielding an activity of 1950 U/mL in the final mixture. The pH was adjusted to 3 by the addition of HCl, and digestion was stopped after 0, 5, 10, 15, 20, 25, 30, 60, 90, and 120 min by raising the sample’s pH to 10 with NaOH, followed by sample preparation for SDS PAGE or HPLC−MS/MS. For intestinal digestion, the gastric digesta (t = 120 min) were mixed with 2 mL of SIF containing bile salts (sodium glycodeoxycholate and sodium taurocholate, each concentrated 5 mmol/L in the final mixture) and pancreatin (pancreatin from porcine pancreas, P7545, Sigma-Aldrich). The concentration of pancreatin was adjusted on the activity of trypsin, determined by TAME assay, to yield 100 U/mL in the final mixture, and the pH was adjusted to 7 with NaOH. Digestion was inhibited after 5, 10, 15, 20, 25, 30, 60, 90, and 120 min by raising the pH to 10, which did not stop pancreatin activity entirely, and was thus immediately followed by sample preparation for SDS-PAGE or HPLC−MS/MS analysis. Given the resulting time delay, the intestinal 0 min sample was obtained using previously heat-denatured pancreatin. Peptides from GI digestion samples were purified by solid-phase extraction (SPE), using Strata-X 33u RP 30 mg/mL columns (Phenomenex, Aschaffenburg, Germany). The cartridges were activated and equilibrated according to the manual. Supernatants of the gastric (200 µL) and intestinal (411 µL, compensating for previous dilution steps) digesta were loaded onto the cartridges, washed with 1 mL of 1% formic acid (FA), and eluted with 1 mL of 90 % MeOH + 1% FA. Eluates were dried under a gentle flow of nitrogen at 40 °C, redissolved in acetonitrile/water (3:97), and stored at 4 °C before being subjected to HPLC−MS/MS analysis within 24 hours. Data were acquired on a LTQ Orbitrap XLTM mass spectrometer coupled to an Accela HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany). LC separation was carried out on an Accucore C18 column (2.1 x 150 mm, 2.6 µm, guard cartridge of the same material, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with an injection volume of 10 µL for the purified GI digesta. For the analysis of in-gel digesta, the complete supernatant of each sample was injected. A gradient of acetonitrile/water + 1% FA was employed at a flow rate of 250 µL/min, ranging from 3−42 % acetonitrile over 100 min for GI digesta, and from 3−45 % over 70 min for the tryptic in-gel digesta. In each case, the mass spectrometer was run in data-dependent positive ion mode. Full scan mass spectra (m/z 300−1500) were acquired in the Orbitrap (r=30000), and the two most intense ions were sequentially isolated, fragmented, and analyzed in the linear ion trap by collision-activated dissociation with 30% normalized collision energy and 30 ms activation time. No charge states were rejected from fragmentation, and target ions were dynamically excluded from repeated fragmentation for 45 s. Electrospray ionization conditions were: Vaporizer temperature 350 °C; capillary temperature 225 °C; sheath gas flow 40 (arbitrary units); auxiliary gas flow 20 (arbitrary units); sweep gas flow 10 (arbitrary units); source voltage 3.5 kV and tube lens 135 V. To ensure reproducibility, HPLC−MS/MS analysis was carried out on three biological replicates, which were prepared by in vitro simulated digestion and analyzed on three different days.

### Data Protocol
The raw spectra files were loaded into PEAKS 7.0 (Bioinfor, Waterloo, Canada), and searched against a hazelnut protein database (Uniprot, Corylus avellana, created 2016-02-26, 394 entries), using the enhanced target-decoy method (“decoy-fusion”) for false discovery rate (FDR) estimation and result validation. For the analysis of in-gel digest data, a pig protein database (Uniprot, Sus scrofa, created 2016-06-02, 63599 entries) was also employed. Search parameters for peptide identification were: parent mass tolerance 5.0 ppm, fragment mass tolerance 1.0 Da, monoisotopic precursor, unspecific cleavage, methionine oxidation allowed as variable modification. Results were limited to 1% FDR. Label free quantification of the peptides identified in the GI digesta was performed with PEAKS Q via integration of peptide precursor ions, using automatic retention time alignment with peak identification allowing for a 5.0 ppm mass error tolerance, 6.0 min retention time tolerance, and a 1% FDR threshold. All quantification results considered for this publication were validated by manual inspection.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Food allergy, Hazelnut, Digestion, Allergen

### Affiliations
Analytical Food Chemistry, University of Stuttgart, Germany
University of Münster, Germany

### Submitter
Robin Korte

### Lab Head
Dr Jens Brockmeyer
Analytical Food Chemistry, University of Stuttgart, Germany


