### Accession
PXD002204

### Title
Ubiquitin S65 proteomics:  S65E Ubiquitin full replacement protein quantitation

### Description
Ubiquitylation is an essential post-translational modification that regulates numerous cellular processes, most notably protein degradation.  Ubiquitin itself can be post-translationally modified by phosphorylation, with nearly every serine, threonine, and tyrosine residue having the potential to be phosphorylated.  However, the effect of this modification on ubiquitin function is largely unknown. Here, we performed in vivo and in vitro characterization of the effects of phosphorylation of yeast ubiquitin at position serine 65.  We find ubiquitin S65 phosphorylation to be regulated under oxidative stress, occurring in tandem with the restructuring of the ubiquitin landscape into a highly polymeric state.  Phosphomimetic mutation of S65 recapitulates the oxidative stress phenotype, causing a dramatic accumulation of ubiquitylated proteins and a proteome-wide reduction of protein turnover rates.  Importantly, this mutation impacts ubiquitin chain disassembly, chain linkage distribution, and substrate targeting.  These results demonstrate that phosphorylation represents an additional mode of ubiquitin regulation with broad implications in cellular physiology.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic analysis of mutant ubiquitin strains.  Yeast was grown in lysine-free synthetic complete media supplemented with 436 μM lysine.  Culture for strain DS181 was supplemented with K0 lysine, DS147 was supplemented with K4 lysine (4,4,5,5-D4), and DS182 was supplemented with K8 lysine (13C6, 15N2) {Ong:2002}.  Cells were grown in a 100 mL volume in biological triplicate, and harvested at a density of ~1.0 (OD600).  Cells were resuspended at 4°C in proteomics lysis buffer consisting of 8 M urea, 75 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris, pH 8.2, 50 mM NaF, 50 mM Na-β-glycerophosphate, 10 mM Na-pyrophosphate, 1 mM Na-orthovanadate and 1x mini protease inhibitor (Roche).  Cell suspensions were lysed by four repetitions of bead beating (1 min beating, 1.5 min rest). Tubes were spun first at 100 x g to remove beads and subsequently at 10,000 x g to pellet cellular debris.  Supernatants were mixed 1:1:1 for each biological replicate.  Each sample was reduced in 3 mM DTT at RT for 45 min, alkylated at RT in 8 mM iodoacetamide for 45 min in the dark, and finally the reaction was quenched by the addition of 8 mM DTT for 15 min at RT.  A 100 μg aliquot was removed from each replicate, diluted 5-fold in 50 mM Tris, pH 8.9, and digested with 5 μg of LysC at RT overnight.  This aliquot was used for analysis of protein differences between the yeast strains.  The remaining ~20 mg of protein from each aliquot was diluted 5-fold with 50 mM Tris, pH 8.2 and digested with 100 μg of Trypsin at 37°C overnight (Promega).  This larger aliquot was used for characterization of differences in ubiquitylation between the yeast strains.  After digestion, all samples were desalted on tC18 SepPak cartridges (Waters).  LysC digested peptides were directly analyzed by mass spectrometry, while tryptic peptides were enriched for di-glycyl peptides prior to MS analysis, exactly as described elsewhere{Kim:2011, Wagner:2011}.  Eluates enriched in diGly peptides were loaded onto styrene divinylbenzene stage tips (3M) and washed with 50 μL of 0.15% TFA.  Peptides were fractionated by step-wise elution from the stage tip under basic pH reversed-phase conditions.  Four fractions were collected after the addition of 30 μL volumes of 20 mM ammonia with increasing acetonitrile concentration (6%, 12%, 18%, and 80% acetonitrile, respectively).  Fractions were lyophilized, resuspended in 4% formic acid, 3% acetonitrile, and directly analyzed by mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry analysis.  Peptides were resuspended in 4% formic acid, 3% acetonitrile and loaded onto a 100 μm ID x 3 cm precolumn packed with Reprosil C18 1.9 μm, 120Å particles (Dr. Maisch).  Peptides were eluted over a 100 μm ID x 30 cm analytical column packed with the same material.  Peptides were eluted into either a Velos Orbitrap or a Q-Exactive (Thermo Fisher) mass spectrometer by gradient elution delivered by an EasyII nLC or Easy1000 nLC system (Thermo Fisher).  The exact gradient conditions were tailored to the complexity and chemical properties of each sample.  Generally, the gradient was 8-30% acetonitrile in 0.15% formic acid over the course of 90-120min.  All MS spectra were collected with orbitrap detection, while MS/MS spectra of the 20 most abundant ions were collected either with ion trap detection and resonant excitation collision-activated dissociation (CAD), or with orbitrap detection and beam-type CAD. Identification and quantification of peptides, protein, and modifications.  All data was searched against the Saccharomyces cerevisiae database supplemented as appropriate with either the His-tagged ubiquitin sequence, or with the S65A and S65E mutated ubiquitin sequence.  Searches and peptide quantifications were performed with the MaxQuant data analysis software{Cox:2008}.  All peptide, protein, and PTM site identifications were filtered to a 1% false-discovery rate{Elias:2007}.  To account for any errors in mixing of cells,WT to mutant pulldowns ratios were normalized to ubiquitin to account for differences in the amount of bait used. For experiments involving biological replicates, only ubiquitylation sites identified in at least 2 replicates were included, and the statistical significance of quantitative measurements was calculated by performing a two-sided pairwise t-test between replicate results from S65A/WT and replicate results of S65E/WT.

### Publication Abstract
Ubiquitylation is an essential post-translational modification that regulates numerous cellular processes, most notably protein degradation. Ubiquitin can itself be phosphorylated at nearly every serine, threonine, and tyrosine residue. However, the effect of this modification on ubiquitin function is largely unknown. Here, we characterized the effects of phosphorylation of yeast ubiquitin at serine 65 in vivo and in vitro. We find this post-translational modification to be regulated under oxidative stress, occurring concomitantly with the restructuring of the ubiquitin landscape into a highly polymeric state. Phosphomimetic mutation of S65 recapitulates the oxidative stress phenotype, causing a dramatic accumulation of ubiquitylated proteins and a proteome-wide reduction of protein turnover rates. Importantly, this mutation impacts ubiquitin chain disassembly, chain linkage distribution, ubiquitin interactions, and substrate targeting. These results demonstrate that phosphorylation is an additional mode of ubiquitin regulation with broad implications in cellular physiology.

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Phosphorylation, Yeast, Orbitrap

### Affiliations
UCSF
University of Washington

### Submitter
Danielle Swaney

### Lab Head
Dr Judit Villen
University of Washington


