### Accession
PXD043979

### Title
The LARP1 homolog Slr1p controls the stability and expression of proto-5’TOP mRNAs in fission yeast

### Description
In an attempt to determine the function of the S. pombe La-related protein 1 (Slr1p), we set out to identify factors that associate with Slr1p by integrating a protein-A (PrA) tag into the endogenous Slr1p locus followed by immunoprecipitation and characterization of Slr1p complexes by LC/MS-MS.

### Sample Protocol
Mass Spectrometry was performed according to Oeffinger et al. (Nature Methods, 2007)45. S. pombe yAS99 and yLS001 liquid cultures were grown in YES at 32°C, 200 rpm, to OD600=~0.6. Cells were harvested and lysed using a mortar and pestle under liquid nitrogen as explained earlier. 0.5 g of yAS99 or 1.5 g of yLS001 yeast grindate was used per immunoprecipitation per biological replicate. Dynabeads™ M-270 Epoxy (Invitrogen 14301) conjugated to rabbit IgG (Sigma I5006-100MG) were pre-washed 3 times with 1X RNP buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 7.4 (Fisher BP310-500), 110 mM KOAc (Bioshop POA303.1), 100 mM NaCl (Fisher S271-10), 0.5% Triton X-100 (Sigma T8787-100ML), 0.1% Tween-20 (Sigma P9416-100ML), 1mM PMSF (Bioshop PMS123.5), 1% v/v Halt™ Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Thermo Scientific 78425), 4 U/mL SUPERase•In™ RNase Inhibitor (Invitrogen AM2694), 0.02% Antifoam B (Sigma A5757-250ML)) by pipetting up and down. 25 μl of beads were used per 0.5 g of grindate. 4.5 mL of room temperature 1X RNP buffer was used to resuspend 0.5 g of grindate by vortexing for 30 seconds followed by centrifugation at 1500xg for 10 minutes, 4°C. Clear lysates were added onto beads previously washed with 1x RNP buffer. This was followed by nutation at 4°C for 30 minutes. Flowthroughs were removed next, and beads were washed in 1 mL of 1X RNP buffer, 4 times. Beads were then washed with 1 mL of Wash buffer (100 mM NH4OAc (Sigma A1542-250G), 0.1 mM MgCl2 (Bioshop MAG520.500), 0.02% Tween-20 (Sigma P9416-100ML)) with 5 minutes of nutation. Sample preparation for mass spectrometry was performed as follows: 4 more washes (last one with 5 minutes of nutation) were performed in Wash buffer without Tween-20. Lastly, immunoprecipitated Slr1p-PrA were eluted twice with 500 μl of Elution buffer (500 mM NH4OH (Sigma 221228-100ML-A), 0.5 mM EDTA (Sigma E5134-100G)) each time, by nutation at room temperature for 20 minutes. Pooled elutions were lyophilized using a SpeedVac Concentrator (Thermo Scientific, Savant DNA 120) overnight, without heat or radiant cover. Lyophilized samples were then subjected to mass spectrometry (in-solution trypsin digestion, LC/MS-MS) at Montreal Clinical Research Institute (IRCM, Montréal, Canada).

### Data Protocol
Exclusive Spectrum Count indicated by Scaffold (Version: 5.1.1) was used to compare interactions mapped in each yAS99 and yLS001 sample. Significance was determined using a Fisher’s Exact Test per biological replicate (total of 2). 21 interactions were deemed significantly enriched over the untagged control in both biological replicates and are reported in Supplementary Table 1. A Gene Ontology analysis was also performed using the GO Consortium as explained earlier. GO terms that were computed were sorted according to False Discovery Rate (FDR). A Bubble Plot was generated using Prism (GraphPad, Version 9.3.1) and the following setting: Graph Type: Multiple Variables, X-axis variable: Fold Enrichment according to GO analysis, Y-axis variable: FDR according to GO analysis, Bubble size (area): number of genes in our analysis that fell under the computed GO term.

### Publication Abstract
Messenger RNAs (mRNAs) in higher eukaryotes that encode proteins important for the assembly of the translational apparatus (e.g., ribosomal proteins) often harbor a pyrimidine-rich motif at the extreme 5' end known as a 5' terminal oligopyrimidine (5'TOP) sequence. Members of the La-related protein 1 (LARP1) family control 5'TOP expression through a conserved DM15 motif, but the mechanism is not well understood. 5'TOP motifs have not been described in many lower organisms, and fission yeast harbors a LARP1 homolog that also lacks a DM15 motif. In this work, we show that the fission yeast LARP1 homolog, Slr1p, controls the translation and stability of mRNAs encoding proteins analogous to 5'TOP mRNAs in higher eukaryotes, which we thus refer to as proto-5'TOPs. Our data suggest that the LARP1 DM15 motif and the mRNA 5'TOP motif may be features that were scaffolded over a more fundamental mechanism of LARP1-associated control of gene expression.

### Keywords
Larp1, Fission yeast, Lc/ms-ms

### Affiliations
York University
Department of Biology, York University, Toronto, Canada

### Submitter
Farnaz Mansouri-Noori

### Lab Head
Dr Mark A Bayfield
Department of Biology, York University, Toronto, Canada


