### Accession
PXD001631

### Title
Quinoa seed proteome -  Characterization of quinoa seed proteome combining different protein precipitation techniques: Improvement of knowledge of nonmodel plant proteomics

### Description
A shotgun proteomics approach was used to characterize the quinoa seed proteome. To obtain comprehensive proteomic data from quinoa seeds three different precipitation procedures were employed: MeOH/CHCl3/ddH2O, acetone either alone or with trichloroacetic acid; the isolated proteins were then in-solution digested and the resulting peptides analyzed bynano liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry. However, since quinoa is a non model plant species, only a few protein sequences are included in the most widely known protein sequence databases. To improve the data reliability a UniProt subdatabase, containing only proteins of Caryophillales order, was used.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction with Tris-HCl pH 8.8, protein quantification, 3 different type of precipitation, Urea 8M + DTT + IAA, digestion with trypin over night, analysis of peptides by nanoHPLC-Orbitrap-MS/MS

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discovere 1.3 + Mascot 2.3 (only high confidence peptides), Validation and label free quantification (with spectral counts) by Scaffold 3.4

### Publication Abstract
A shotgun proteomics approach was used to characterize the quinoa seed proteome. To obtain comprehensive proteomic data from quinoa seeds three different precipitation procedures were employed: MeOH/CHCl3 /double-distilled H2 O, acetone either alone or with trichloroacetic acid; the isolated proteins were then in-solution digested and the resulting peptides were analyzed by nano-liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry. However, since quinoa is a nonmodel plant species, only a few protein sequences are included in the most widely known protein sequence databases. To improve the data reliability a UniProt subdatabase, containing only proteins of Caryophillales order, was used. A total of 352 proteins were identified and evaluated both from a qualitative and quantitative point of view. This combined approach is certainly useful to increase the final number of identifications, but no particular class of proteins was extracted and identified in spite of the different chemistries and the different precipitation protocols. However, with respect to the other two procedures, from the relative quantitative analysis, based on the number of spectral counts, the trichloroacetic acid/acetone protocol was the best procedure for sample handling and quantitative protein extraction. This study could pave the way to further high-throughput studies on Chenopodium Quinoa.

### Keywords
Protein precipitation, Quinoa proteins- chenopodium quinoa, Non-model plants, Plant proteomics, High resolution mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
university la Sapienza, Roma
Department of Chemistry, Sapienza Università di Roma, Piazzale Aldo Moro 5, 00185 Rome, Italy

### Submitter
Riccardo Zenezini Chiozzi

### Lab Head
Dr Laganà Aldo
Department of Chemistry, Sapienza Università di Roma, Piazzale Aldo Moro 5, 00185 Rome, Italy


