### Accession
PXD027162

### Title
Identification of new interaction partners of D. discoideum BirA-UBXD9

### Description
The largest family of p97 cofactors is the UBXD protein family, whose members all carry an Ubiquitin Regulatory X (UBX) domain that enables binding to p97. We analysed one member of this family, the largely uncharacterised UBXD9 protein. To shed a light on the UBXD9 interactome, we used independent approaches to identify new interacting proteins. As a result, we confirmed p97 (also known as valosin-containing protein, VCP) as an interaction partner of UBXD9 and identified new interaction partners.

### Sample Protocol
The BioID method was essentially performed as described (Batsios et al., 2016). Briefly, log phase AX2 and BirA-UBXD9 expressing AX2 cells were cultured in the presence of 50 µM Biotin for 16 h. 2 x 10^8 cells were harvested and the cells further processed as for co-immunoprecipitation. Soluble proteins were incubated with streptavidin coupled sepharose beads (GE Healthcare GmbH) for 2 h at 4°C. After washing of the beads bound proteins were either analysed by Western blot analysis or further processed for mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
The samples were analysed using an EASY nLC 1000 UPLC (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a Q-Exactive Plus (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer. Peptides were loaded with solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) onto an in-house packed analytical column (50 cm × 75 μm I.D., packed with 2.7 μm C18 Poroshell beads, Agilent) and were chromatographically separated. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode, where the Orbitrap acquired full MS scans (300-1750 m/z) at a resolution of 70,000 with an automated gain control (AGC) target of 3x106 ions collected with 20 ms. Precursors were dynamically excluded for 20 s. The 10 most intense peaks were subjected to HCD fragmentation. All mass spectrometric raw data were processed with Maxquant (version 1.5.3.8) and its implemented Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011). Two-sample two-tailed Student’s t-test were performed in Perseus (version 1.6.5) for pairwise comparisons.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bioid, Ubxd9, D. discoideum

### Affiliations
Center for Biochemistry- University Hospital Cologne
center for biochemistry, University of cologne

### Submitter
Jana Riehl

### Lab Head
Dr Ludwig Eichinger
center for biochemistry, University of cologne


