### Accession
PXD028785

### Title
Salmonella effector SopB reorganizes cytoskeletal vimentin to maintain replication vacuoles for efficient infection

### Description
Subversion of the host cytoskeleton is a critical virulence mechanism used by a variety of intracellular bacterial pathogens during their infectious life cycles. Growing evidence suggests that the tactics employed by pathogens are surprisingly diverse. Using proteomic and biochemical methods, we demonstrate that the S. Tm type III effector protein SopB potently interacts specifically with host cell IFs vimentin. After host cell entry, Salmonella replicates in Salmonella containing vacuoles (SCVs), which accumulate a dense meshwork of vimentin through the Salmonella SPI-1 type III secretion effector SopB. We also demonstrate an important role for SopB-vimentin interaction, in the cellular responses including pro-inflammatory cytokine production induced by Salmonella. Vimentin interacts with the N-terminus of the S. Tm T3SS effector protein SopB. Vimentin and its interaction with SopB are dispensable for S. Tm invasion, but are required for stable formation of SCVs which are essential for bacteria replication. Moreover, SopB lacking of N-terminus cdc42-binding domain loses the interaction with vimentin, suggesting that the small GTPase is critical in SopB triggered vimentin recruitment to form integrative SCVs. These findings establish that SCVs integrity of the bacterium specifically requires intermediate filaments vimentin, which is a prerequisite for highly efficient S. Tm replication.

### Sample Protocol
Human pulmonary epithelial A549 cells which express highly amount of endogenous vimentin were lysis with NP40 buffer (50mM pH8.0 Tris-HCl; 150mM NaCl; 0.5%NP40; 1mM EDTA; protease Inhibitor) on ice for 15 min. Scrape cells and harvest the supernatant by centrifuge at 13,000 rpm for 10 min at 4 ℃.  Then proceed immunoprecipitation according to the protocol of Dynabeads Protein G (Thermo Fisher, #10004D). Briefly, incubate Dynabeads Protein G with anti-vimentin antibody (Abcam, #ab137321) with rotation for 30 min at RT. Place the tube with Dynabeads-Ab complex on the magnet to remove the supernatant. Then add the cell supernatant and incubate with rotation for 30 min at RT or overnight at 4 ℃ to allow antigen to bind to the beads-Ab complex. Wash the Dynabeads-Ab-Ag complex 3 times. Then elute target antigen with SDT buffer (4%SDS; 100mM pH8.0 Tris-HCl; 1mM DTT) for further Mass spectrometry analyses by Q Exactive (Thermo Fisher).

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS was performed by Shanghai Applied Protein Technology Co. Ltd. (Shanghai, China). Briefly, each fraction was injected for nanoLC-MS/MS analysis. The peptide mixture was loaded onto a reverse phase trap column (Thermo Scientific Acclaim PepMap100, 100 μm×2 cm, nanoViper C18) connected to the C18-reversed phase analytical column (Thermo Scientific Easy Column, 10 cm long, 75 μm inner diameter, 3 μm resin) in buffer A (0.1% Formic acid) and separated with a linear gradient of buffer B (84% acetonitrile and 0.1% Formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min controlled by IntelliFlow technology. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) that was coupled to Easy nLC (Proxeon Biosystems, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode. MS data was acquired using a data-dependent top10 method dynamically choosing the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (300–1800 m/z) for HCD fragmentation. Automatic gain control (AGC) target was set to 3e6, and maximum inject time to 10 ms. Dynamic exclusion duration was 40.0 s. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200 and resolution for HCD spectra was set to 17,500 at m/z 200, and isolation width was 2 m/z. Normalized collision energy was 30 eV and the underfill ratio, which specifies the minimum percentage of the target value likely to be reached at maximum fill time, was defined as 0.1%. The instrument was run with peptide recognition mode enabled.

### Publication Abstract
A variety of intracellular bacteria modulate the host cytoskeleton to establish subcellular niches for replication. However, the role of intermediate filaments, which are crucial for mechanical strength and resilience of the cell, and in bacterial vacuole preservation remains unclear. Here, we show that Salmonella effector SopB reorganizes the vimentin network to form cage-like structures that surround Salmonella-containing vacuoles (SCVs). Genetic removal of vimentin markedly disrupts SCV organization, significantly reduces bacterial replication and cell death. Mechanistically, SopB uses its N-terminal Cdc42-binding domain to interact with and activate Cdc42 GTPase, which in turn recruits vimentin around SCVs. A high-content imaging-based screening identified that MEK1/2 inhibition led to vimentin dispersion. Our work therefore elucidates the signaling axis SopB-Cdc42-MEK1/2 as mobilizing host vimentin to maintain concrete SCVs and identifies a mechanism contributing to Salmonella replication. Importantly, Trametinib, a clinically-approved MEK1/2 inhibitor identified in the screen, displayed significant anti-infection efficacy against Salmonella both in vitro and in vivo, and may provide a therapeutic option for treating drug-tolerant salmonellosis.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms, Vimentin, S.tm

### Affiliations
Institut Pasteur of Shanghai

### Submitter
Shuangshuang Zhao

### Lab Head
Dr Yaming Jiu
Institut Pasteur of Shanghai


