### Accession
PXD039651

### Title
Immunoreactive proteins of Capsicum-based spices as a threat to human health: mass spectrometry analysis and in silico mapping 

### Description
The identification of allergenicity of paprika proteins is important, especially those that could trigger a severe allergic reaction in patients with an equivocal clinical picture. In this study two types of protein extracts extracted from 3 different paprika spices were immunoblotted with the sera of patients displaying severe allergic symptoms, presumably to paprika. Proteins from the IgE-reactive bands obtained were subjected to LC-MS/MS identification and then to in silico analysis to verify their allergenicity and characterise their proinflammatory activity using online tools.

### Sample Protocol
SDS-PAGE electrophoresis of protein extracts from mild, spicy and chili paprika spices was conducted with a Mini PROTEAN 3 Cell device (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA, USA). Immunoblotting was performed using a wet electrotransfer method and anti-human IgE antibodies. Signal detection was carried out with ChemiDoc Imaging System (Bio-Rad Laboratories) and analyzed in Image Lab software (Bio-Rad Laboratories). Bands determined as IgE-reactive were cut out of the gel for trypsin digestion and subsequent LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using a nanoACQUITY UPLC system (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, USA) coupled to a LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Eluted peptides were directly electrosprayed into the mass spectrometer operating in positive ion mode with a voltage of 2 kV. Spectra were recorded in full MS mode in profile mode at 60,000 resolution with a scan range of 400-2000 m/z. Raw data were searched by MASCOT (Matrix Science Ltd., London, UK) against the SwissProt database - taxa Green Plants (Viridiplantae) but also for all entries. Search parameters were: enzyme, trypsin; peptides mass tolerance, 20 ppm; fragment ion tolerance, 0.1 Da; fixed modifications, carbamidomethyl (C); variable modifications, oxidation (M). For each identified protein, the significance threshold p < 0.05, ions score or expect cut-off-43 and the highest emPAI value were considered as significant.

### Publication Abstract
Dietary patterns are changing severely, especially the consumption of highly processed foods with lots of spices is increasing, carrying an increased risk of immediate hypersensitivity (type I), in sensitised individuals, due to the possible presence of allergens, especially the hidden ones. Paprika is a fruit of the Capsicum genus, which belongs to the Solanaceae family and is commonly consumed fresh or as a spice. Despite recorded cases of anaphylaxis, its allergenicity has yet to be clearly investigated. In this study, we research to identify proteins that could trigger a severe allergic reaction in patients with an equivocal clinical picture. Two types of protein extracts extracted from 3 different paprika spices were immunoblotted with sera from patients with severe allergic symptoms, presumably to paprika. Proteins from the IgE reactive bands obtained were subjected to LC-MS/MS identification and then in silico analysis to assess their possible sensitising capacity and proinflammatory potential using online tools. The spices were shown to contain a number of incompletely investigated highly immunoreactive allergenic proteins, including proteins of foreign origin (contaminants), the presence of which can stimulate inflammatory mechanisms and cross-reactivity with other food allergens, which can threaten life and health and should be investigated in detail.

### Keywords
Allergy, Paprika, Protein

### Affiliations
Institute of Animal Reproduction and Food Research Polish Academy of Sciences
Institute of Animal Reproduction and Food Research, Polish Academy of Sciences


### Submitter
Anna Ogrodowczyk

### Lab Head
Dr Barbara Wróblewska
Institute of Animal Reproduction and Food Research Polish Academy of Sciences


