### Accession
PXD046264

### Title
Proteolysis Targeting Chimeras With Reduced Off-targets

### Description
Proteolysis Targeting Chimeras (PROTACs) are molecules that induce proximity between target proteins and E3 ligases triggering target protein degradation. Pomalidomide, a widely used E3 ligase recruiter in PROTACs, can independently degrade other proteins, including zinc-finger (ZF) proteins, with vital roles in health and disease. This off-target degradation hampers the therapeutic applicability of pomalidomide-based PROTACs, requiring development of PROTAC design rules that minimize off-target degradation. Here we developed a highthroughput platform that interrogates off-target degradation and found that reported pomalidomide-based PROTACs induce degradation of several ZF proteins. We generated a library of pomalidomide analogs to understand how functionalising different positions of the phthalimide ring, hydrogen bonding, steric and hydrophobic effects impact ZF protein degradation. Modifications of appropriate size on the C5 position reduced off-target ZF degradation, which we validated through target engagement and proteomics studies. By applying these design principles, we developed ALK oncoprotein-targeting PROTACs with enhanced potency and minimal offtarget degradation.

### Sample Protocol
MOLT4 or Kelly or SU-DHL-1 cells were treated with DMSO or IMiD analogues (1 μM) or PROTACs (0.1 μM) for 5 h. Cells were harvested by centrifugation and washed with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) before snap freezing in liquid nitrogen. Cells were lysed by the addition of lysis buffer (8 M Urea, 50 mM NaCl, 50 mM 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid (EPPS) pH 8.5, Protease and Phosphatase inhibitors) and homogenization by bead beating (BioSpec) for three repeats of 30 seconds at 2400. Bradford assay was used to determine the final protein concentration in the clarified cell lysate. 50 μg of protein for each sample was reduced, alkylated, and precipitated using methanol/ chloroform as previously described, and the resulting washed precipitated protein was allowed to air dry. Precipitated protein was resuspended in 4 M Urea, 50 mM HEPES pH 7.4, followed by dilution to 1 M urea with the addition of 200 mM EPPS, pH 8. Proteins were first digested with LysC (1:50; enzyme:protein) for 12 h at RT. The LysC digestion was diluted to 0.5 M Urea with 200 mM EPPS pH 8 followed by digestion with trypsin (1:50; enzyme:protein) for 6 h at 37 °C. Sample digests were acidified with formic acid to a pH of 2-3 prior to desalting using C18 solid phase extraction plates (SOLA, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Desalted peptides were dried in a vacuum-centrifuged and reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid for LC-MS analysis. Data were collected using a TimsTOF Pro2 (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) coupled to a nanoElute LC pump (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) via a CaptiveSpray nano-electrospray source. Peptides were separated on a reversedphase C18 column (25 cm x 75 μm ID, 1.6 μM, IonOpticks, Australia) containing an integrated captive spray emitter. Peptides were separated using a 50 min gradient of 2 - 30% buffer B (acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid) with a flow rate of 250 nL/min and column temperature maintained at 50 ºC. DDA was performed in Parallel Accumulation-Serial Fragmentation (PASEF) mode to determine effective ion mobility windows for downstream diaPASEF data collection.40 The ddaPASEF parameters included: 100% duty cycle using accumulation and ramp times of 50 ms each, 1 TIMS-MS scan and 10 PASEF ramps per acquisition cycle. The TIMS-MS survey scan was acquired between 100 – 1700 m/z and 1/k0 of 0.7 - 1.3 V.s/cm2. Precursors with 1 – 5 charges were selected and those that reached an intensity threshold of 20,000 arbitrary units were actively excluded for 0.4 min. The quadrupole isolation width was set to 2 m/z for m/z <700 and 3 m/z for m/z >800, with the m/z between 700-800 m/z being interpolated linearly. The TIMS elution voltages were calibrated linearly with three points (Agilent ESI-L Tuning Mix Ions; 622, 922, 1,222 m/z) to determine the reduced ion mobility coefficients (1/K0). To perform diaPASEF, the precursor distribution in the DDA m/z-ion mobility plane was used to design an acquisition scheme for DIA data collection which included two windows in each 50 ms diaPASEF scan. Data was acquired using sixteen of these 25 Da precursor double window scans (creating 32 windows) which covered the diagonal scan line for doubly and triply charged precursors, with singly charged precursors able to be excluded by their position in the m/z-ion mobility plane. These precursor isolation windows were defined between 400 - 1200 m/z and 1/k0 of 0.7 - 1.3 V.s/cm2.

### Data Protocol
The diaPASEF raw file processing and controlling peptide and protein level false discovery rates, assembling proteins from peptides, and protein quantification from peptides was performed by analysis in DIA-NN 1.8 using library or library free methods. For library analysis: targeted cell line specific spectral libraries were generated by searching offline fractionated DDApasef data against a Swissprot human database (January 2021) For library free methods: an in silico digestion of a given protein sequence database is performed alongside deep learning-based predictions to extract the DIA precursor data into a collection of MS2 spectra. The Search results are then sued to generate a spectral library which is then employed for the targeted analysis of the DIA data searched against a Swissprot human database (January 2021).41 Database search criteria largely followed the default settings for DIA including: tryptic with two missed cleavages, carbomidomethylation of cysteine, and oxidation of methionine and precursor Q-value (FDR) cut-off of 0.01. Precursor quantification strategy was set to Robust LC (high accuracy) with RT-dependent cross run normalization. Proteins with missing values in any of the treatments and with poor quality data were excluded from further analysis (summed abundance across channels of <100 and mean number of precursors used for quantification <2). Protein abundances were scaled using in-house scripts in the R framework 42 and statistical analysis was carried out using the limma package within the R framework.43

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Protein degradation, E3 ligase, Zinc finger, Protac, Crbn, Off-targets

### Affiliations
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute
Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215, USA., Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA

### Submitter
Eric Fischer

### Lab Head
Dr Eric Fischer
Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215, USA., Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA


