### Accession
PXD010878

### Title
DT2216 is a specific BCL-XL PROTAC

### Description
To validate the specificity of DT2216, we used the stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) and liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS)-based proteomics to analyze the changes in proteins in WI-38 normal human diploid fibroblasts after DT2216 and DT2216NC treatment. The results show that DT2216, but not DT2216NC, reduced the levels of BCL-XL, but none of other proteins were significantly affected by either agent, demonstrating that DT2216 is a specific BCL-XL PROTAC.

### Sample Protocol
To label cells with stable isotopic amino acids, WI38 cells were propagated in DMEM SILAC media deficient in both L-lysine and L-arginine (Cat #88364; Thermo Fisher Scientific) and supplemented with light lysine (12C614N2-K) and arginine (12C614 N4-R) for light state (Cat # 89987 and #89989; Thermo Fisher Scientific), and 13C615N2-K and 13C615N4-R for heavy state labeling (Cat # 88209 and #89990; Thermo Fisher Scientific). Cells were cultured for at least six doubling times for complete incorporation. The light-labeled WI38 cells were untreated (DMSO) and the heavy-labeled WI38 cells were treated with 1 M DT2216 or DT2216NC for 6 hrs, respectively. Reverse labeling was used in the second biological replicate. The untreated and DT2216 or DT2216NC-treated cells were harvested by centrifugation at 500 g for 5 min. Pellets were washed twice by resuspending in 1 ml of prechilled PBS (Cat #20012027; Gibco). The cell pellets were resuspended in 20 mL freshly prepared Lysis Buffer (2% SDS, 100 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.6) containing MS-SAFE Protease and Phosphatase Inhibitor (Cat #MSSAFE-5VL, Sigma) for sonication. The lysate was centrifuged at 15,000 g for 10 min at 18°C. The supernatant was stored at −80°C for proteomic analysis. Protein concentration was measured by BCA assay (Cat #23227; Pierce) and SILAC pairs were mixed in equimolar amounts. Purified proteins were reduced, alkylated, and digested using filter-aided sample preparation 1. Tryptic peptides were separated into 36 fractions on a 100 x 1.0 mm Acquity BEH C18 column (Waters) using an UltiMate 3000 UHPLC system (Thermo) with a 40 min gradient from 99:1 to 60:40 buffer A (0.1% formic acid, 0.5% acetonitrile):B (0.1% formic acid, 99.9% acetonitrile) ratio under basic pH conditions, and then consolidated into 12 super-fractions. Each super-fraction was then further separated by reverse phase XSelect CSH C18 2.5 um resin (Waters) on an in-line 150 x 0.075 mm column using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo). Peptides were eluted using a 60 min gradient from 97:3 to 60:40 buffer A:B ratio. Eluted peptides were ionized by electrospray (2.15 kV) followed by MS/MS analysis using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo) in top-speed data-dependent mode. MS data were acquired using the FTMS analyzer in profile mode at a resolution of 240,000 over a range of 375 to 1500 m/z. Following HCD activation, MS/MS data were acquired using the ion trap analyzer in centroid mode and normal mass range with precursor mass-dependent normalized collision energy between 28.0 and 31.0.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified and SILAC ratios determined using MaxQuant with a parent ion tolerance of 3 ppm and a fragment ion tolerance of 0.5 Da. The derived peak list was searched with the built-in Andromeda search engine against the reference human proteome downloaded from Uniprot (http://www.uniprot.org/) on 03-13-2018. The search parameters for both algorithms included carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues as a fixed modification and N-terminal acetylation, oxidation at methionine, and SILAC labeling 13C615N2-K and 13C615N4-R as variable modifications. Trypsin was specified as the protease and a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. The data were screened against a target decoy database and the false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% at the peptide level and contained at least 2 identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm 2. Proteins with ratios greater than 1.5-fold change in each biological replicate were used for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
B-cell lymphoma extra large (BCL-X<sub>L</sub>) is a well-validated cancer target. However, the on-target and dose-limiting thrombocytopenia limits the use of BCL-X<sub>L</sub> inhibitors, such as ABT263, as safe and effective anticancer agents. To reduce the toxicity of ABT263, we converted it into DT2216, a BCL-X<sub>L</sub> proteolysis-targeting chimera (PROTAC), that targets BCL-X<sub>L</sub> to the Von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) E3 ligase for degradation. We found that DT2216 was more potent against various BCL-X<sub>L</sub>-dependent leukemia and cancer cells but considerably less toxic to platelets than ABT263 in vitro because VHL is poorly expressed in platelets. In vivo, DT2216 effectively inhibits the growth of several xenograft tumors as a single agent or in combination with other chemotherapeutic agents, without causing appreciable thrombocytopenia. These findings demonstrate the potential to use PROTAC technology to reduce on-target drug toxicities and rescue the therapeutic potential of previously undruggable targets. Furthermore, DT2216 may be developed as a safe first-in-class anticancer agent targeting BCL-X<sub>L</sub>.

### Keywords
Dt2216 bcl-xl protac silac lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
University of Florida
Department of Pharmacodynamics, University of Florida

### Submitter
Dongwen Lv

### Lab Head
Dr Daohong Zhou
Department of Pharmacodynamics, University of Florida


