### Accession
PXD017060

### Title
N-Glycosylation of the Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR) Derived from Human Oral Squamous Carcinoma Cells with beta-Catenin/CREB-Binding Protein (CBP) Inhibition

### Description
Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is the sixth most common malignancy in the world; oral squamous cell carcinomas (OSCC) account for the majority of HNSCC cases. A major driver of OSCC is the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), a receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) with 12 N-glycosylation sites whose activity is aberrantly upregulated in 80-90% of tumors. EGFR antennary-fucosylated glycans have been shown to suppress EGFR dimerization and signaling in lung adenocarcinoma. High levels of fucosylated glycan epitopes have also been observed in OSCC, but invasive regions lose expression of linkage-specific fucosylated epitopes, suggesting that certain fucosylated glycans are involved in the suppression of cell growth and invasion. We found that EGFR from metastatic HSC-3 cells has low levels of fucosylated N-glycans, while EGFR from non-metastatic CAL27 cells shows higher levels of fucosylation at multiple EGFR glycosylation sites including sites N420 and N579, via nUPLC-MS/MS. In cell culture and in mouse tumor xenografts, treatment with ICG-001, a small molecule inhibitor of the interaction between nuclear -catenin and CREB-binding protein (CBP) resulted in higher expression of FUT2 and FUT3, higher fucosylation of EGFR at sites N420 and N579, and decreased EGFR abundance. In addition, we have performed in-depth characterization of multiply-fucosylated N-glycans via glycopeptide tandem mass spectrometry to understand which fucosylated glycan epitopes are involved in the observed effect.

### Sample Protocol
Proteolysis. Each EGFR sample was suspended in 50 mM NH4HCO3, pH 7.8, reduced with 5 mM DTT, and alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide. Iodoacetamide was quenched by addition of 20 mM DTT.  Following reduction and alkylation, samples were incubated with trypsin at a ratio of 1:50 to total protein at 37 C for 18 h. Samples were dried to remove volatile buffers, and peptides were purified using C18 tips.   PNGase F/H218O. GlycoBuffer 2 (NEB, 50 mM sodium phosphate, pH 7.5) was aliquoted and dried under vacuum; next, 20 L of H218O (99%, Cambridge Isotopes, Andover, MA) was added. Next, 1 L of PNGase F was added to one tube of peptides in each pair of aliquots; the second tube was not treated with the glycosidase and served as the control. The contents were gently mixed by vortexing, and the tubes were placed on the Thermomixer at 37 C for 16 h. Samples were dried under vacuum and cleaned via C18 ZipTip (Millipore, Billerica, MA) according to the manufacturers protocol. NanoLC-MS/MS of Peptides. After PNGase F/H218O treatment, peptide samples were analyzed on a Q Exactive Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters) and a Triversa Nanomate (Advion, Ithaca, NY). For chromatographic separation, a nanoACQUITY UPLC Symmetry C18 Trap Column (100 , 5 m; 180 m  20 mm, Waters) column was used for trapping, and an ACQUITY UPLC Peptide BEH C18 nanoACQUITY Column (130 , 1.7 m; 150 m  100 mm, Waters) column was used for separation. MS scans were acquired with the following settings: 70000 resolution @ m/z 400, scan range m/z 3701880, 1 scan/MS, AGC target 1e6, and a maximum injection time of 100 ms. MS2 scans were acquired with the following settings: 17500 resolution at m/z 400, AGC target of 5e5, maximum injection time of 60 ms, isolation window of 2.0 m/z, isolation offset of 0.4 m/z, normalized collision energy (NCE) of 27%, exclusion of charge states 1 and >8, underfill ratio of 1.2%, and dynamic exclusion of 8 s. Profile data were recorded for MS and MS2 scans. Glycopeptide nanoLC-MS/MS. For the initial characterization of glycosylation, EGFR glycopeptides were enriched, separated, and analyzed using a 6550 Q-TOF MS with a 1200 series nanoflow HPLC-Chip-ESI source fitted with a custom HPLC-Chip with a 360 nL TSK Gel Amide-80 5 m trapping and enrichment column and a 150 mM  75 m Polaris C18-A 3 m analytical column (all from Agilent Corp., Santa Clara, CA). EGFR digests were initially dissolved in 50% acetonitrile with 0.1% TFA (46). Immediately prior to injection, the concentration of acetonitrile was adjusted to 80% acetonitrile and 0.1% TFA. After each injection of the sample onto the Amide-80 enrichment column, the column was washed at a flow rate of 1.5 L/min for 4 min using 80% acetonitrile and 0.1% TFA, followed by elution of the sample onto the C18 analytical column with 1% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Finally, glycopeptides were separated on the analytical column using a gradient from 1% to 40% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 0.2 L/min. The 6550 Q-TOF mass spectrometer was operated in positive mode using the high-resolution, extended dynamic range (2 GHz) setting. MS spectra were collected from m/z 1502000, and MS2 spectra were collected from m/z 503000. The ion source gas temperature was set to 225 C, and the flow was set at 11 L/min, with a capillary voltage of 1900 V. Precursors 1200 counts and charge states 2 were selected for fragmentation, and the collision energy was set according to the equation y = mx + b, with y being the collision energy, slope m = 5, x representing the charge state, and the offset b = 4.8. Spectra were collected in profile mode. The error for all peaks with signal-to-noise (S-to-N) ratio of  >10 is within 5 ppm. Glycopeptide Analysis for MS (only), HCD Oxonium Ion-Triggered Low-Energy HCD, and EThcD. For MS only, low-energy HCD, and EThcD analyses, EGFR tryptic peptides were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) equipped with an ACQUITY UPLC M-Class system (Waters) and a TriVersa NanoMate (Advion). All analyses were performed in positive mode, with the RF lens set to 30%. For low-energy HCD analyses, initial MS scans (30% collision energy) were acquired with the following settings: 30,000 resolution @ m/z 400, scan range m/z 1002000, 1 scan/MS, AGC target 5 x 105, and a maximum injection time of 60 ms. Based on the initial HCD (30%) MS2 scans, a second low-energy fragmentation step was triggered if at least two glycopeptide oxonium ions were detected. For each sample, three (triggered) MS2: 10%, 15%, or 20% collision energy.

### Data Protocol
Analysis of Peptide and Glycopeptide nUPLC-MS/MS Data. To confirm protein identity, nano LC-MS/MS data were processed using Mascot search algorithm with the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot Homo sapiens protein sequence database (modified September 29, 2019). For all data sets, cleavage rules were applied for each specific protease (trypsin: K, R, P1  P) and peptides with up to two missed cleavages were considered. The following peptide modifications were considered: methionine oxidation (variable), deamidation (variable), deamidation with 18O (variable), and carbamidomethylation (fixed). To assign glycopeptide tandem mass spectra, nanoLC-MS/MS data were processed using Byonic (Protein Metrics), with a custom protein sequence database consisting of the forward and reverse protein sequence of human EGFR. Cleavage rules were consistent with those used in Mascot searches (trypsin). The following peptide modifications were considered: methionine oxidation (variable), carbamidomethylation (fixed), and an N-glycan database consisting of 300+ mammalian N-glycans, including multiply-fucosylated glycans.

### Publication Abstract
Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is a major driver of head and neck cancer, a devastating malignancy with a major sub-site in the oral cavity manifesting as oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC). EGFR is a glycoprotein receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) whose activity is upregulated in &gt;80% OSCC. Current anti-EGFR therapy relies on the use of cetuximab, a monoclonal antibody against EGFR, although it has had only a limited response in patients. Here, we uncover a novel mechanism regulating EGFR activity, identifying a role of the nuclear branch of the Wnt/&#x3b2;-catenin signaling pathway, the &#x3b2;-catenin/CBP axis, in control of post-translational modification of N-glycans on the EGFR. Genomic and structural analyses reveal that &#x3b2;-catenin/CBP signaling represses fucosylation on the antennae of N-linked glycans on EGFR. By employing nUPLC-MS/MS, we determined that malignant human OSCC cells harbor EGFR with a paucity of N-glycan antennary fucosylation, while indolent cells display higher levels of fucosylation at sites N420 and N579. Additionally, treatment with either ICG-001 or E7386, which are both small molecule inhibitors of &#x3b2;-catenin/CBP signaling, leads to increased transcriptional expression of fucosyltransferases FUT2 and FUT3, with a concomitant increase in EGFR N-glycan antennary fucosylation. In order to discover which fucosylated glycan epitopes are involved in the observed effect, we performed in-depth characterization of multiply-fucosylated N-glycans via tandem mass spectrometry analysis of the EGFR tryptic glycopeptides. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD017060. We propose that &#x3b2;-catenin/CBP signaling promotes EGFR oncogenic activity in OSCC by inhibiting its N-glycan antennary fucosylation through transcriptional repression of FUT2 and FUT3.

### Keywords
Human, Oscc, Oral squamous cell carcinoma, Egfr, Epidermal growth factor receptor, Cal27, Glycoproteomics, Hsc-3, Glycopeptide, Lc-ms/ms, Head and neck cancer, Beta-catenin/cbp inhibition, Creb-binding protein

### Affiliations
Center for Biomedical Mass Spectrometry Boston University School of Medicine 670 Albany St, Rm 511 Boston, MA 02118-2646 USA
Boston University School of Medicine

### Submitter
Kevin Chandler

### Lab Head
Dr Catherine E Costello
Center for Biomedical Mass Spectrometry Boston University School of Medicine 670 Albany St, Rm 511 Boston, MA 02118-2646 USA


