### Accession
PXD006457

### Title
Lipid droplet-associated Drosophila protein CG9186 interacting proteins

### Description
Intracellular lipids are stored in dedicated organelles called lipid droplets (LDs). While the primary purpose of the storage lipids is fueling the energy demands of cells and organisms, LDs additionally participate in multifmultivarious cellular functions such as the production of lipid hormones, or the role as protein storage depots. The proteins associated with LDs are key to the diverse LD functions. Lipid deposits not only reflect the nutritional status of an organism, but they also affect many organismic parameters such as vitality, food intake, or signaling pathway activities. Currently, we only incompletely understand the mechanism(s) of this cross talk. Here, we functionally characterize the evolutionary conserved LD-associated protein CG9186.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins from anti GFP-immunoprecipitations (9186 GFP, GFP, 9186 GFP + oleate, GFP + oleate, each n=5) were prepared for mass spectrometric analysis essentially as already described (Kolkhof et al., 2017). Briefly, samples were shortly separated in a polyacrylamide gel, after silver staining protein containing bands were cut out, destained, washed and proteins reduced with dithiothreitol, alkylated with chloroacetamide (immunoprecipitations), digested with trypsin and after peptide extraction finally resuspended in 0.1% Trifluoroacetic acid.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was carried out within the MaxQuant 1.5.5.1 environment (MPI for Biochemistry, Planegg, Germany) using standard parameters if not otherwise stated. Searched were carried out in the UP000000803 drosophila proteome downloaded from UniprotKB on 10th October 2016 supplemented by an entry for GFP (P42212) for the searches of the immunoprecipitation samples. Tryptic cleavage specificity was considered as well as carbamidomethyl on cysteines as fixed and methionine and N-terminal acetylation as well as ubiquitinylation (glygly) as variable modifications. Allowed mass tolerances for peptides were 20 ppm for the initial search and 4.5 ppm after recalibration. For fragment spectra the mass tolerances were 20 ppm for spectra recorded in the Orbitrap and 0.5 Da for spectra recorded in the linear ion trap part of the instrument. Peptides and proteins were accepted at a false positive rate of 1% and only proteins considered for which at least two different peptides were identified. The “match between runs” option was enabled as well as label free quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Lipid droplets (LDs) are the universal cellular storage organelles for esterified neutral lipids. The increasing number of characterized LD-associated proteins attained LDs with hitherto unexpected functions on top of their classical role as energy depot. Here, we characterize the LD-associated protein CG9186 of Drosophila by a CRISPR/Cas9-derived mutant fly line. While the mutant flies only showed a mild triacylglycerol storage phenotype, they were highly protected from desiccation stress, likely linked to a reduced locomotor activity and altered cuticular hydrocarbons. Both parameters depend on juvenile hormone (JH) signaling. Together with an observed interaction between CG9186 and JH-degrading enzymes, our results suggest that CG9186 participates in endocrine physiology regulation. In support of this hypothesis, CG9186 mutant flies show an altered expression of JH target genes and fail to adjust their developmental rate to dietary yeast-to-sugar ratio changes. Our results thus link LDs to organismic physiology regulation.

### Keywords
Lipid droplet, Shotgun mass spectrometry, Drosophila, Cgc9186, Protein interaction, Affinity purification

### Affiliations
Molecular Proteomics Laboratory
Molecular Proteomics Laboratory (MPL) Biologisch-Medizinisches Forschungszentrum (BMFZ) Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf

### Submitter
Gereon Poschmann

### Lab Head
Dr Gereon Poschmann
Molecular Proteomics Laboratory (MPL) Biologisch-Medizinisches Forschungszentrum (BMFZ) Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf


