### Accession
PXD008483

### Title
Crotonylome profiling reveals extensive lysine crotonylation in common wheat

### Description
Histone lysine crotonylation (Kcr) is a newly discovered protein post-translational modification (PTM), which was detected from yeast to humans and is mainly related with active transcription. With the development of proteomics technologies, high abundance of non-histone proteins modified by Kcr was also found recently. Here, we first report that lysine Kcr also occurs on cytoplasmic and mitochondrial proteins in common wheat (Triticum aestivum L.). We identified 4,696 Lys-acetylated sites on 1,726 proteins which involved in a wide variety of biological processes, such as chromatin-associated processes, Calvin-Benson cycle, glycolysis, protein metabolism and transport, which representing the largest dataset of lysine acylation proteome reported in the plant kingdom. Interestingly, 98 proteins were involved in multiple processes of photosynthesis, suggesting an important role of lysine Kcr in processes. In addition, 21 potentially specific Kcr motifs in wheat were detected. The protein interaction network analysis revealed that diverse interactions are modulated by protein Kcr. The overlap between Kcr and acetylation (Kac) indicated that they may coordinately regulate the function of some proteins in common wheat. Futhermore, comparative analysis indicated that lysine Kcr is conserved between common wheat and Nicotiana tabacum. Taken together, this study provided the first global survey of Kcr in wheat, making a promising starting point for further functional analysis of Kcr in plants.

### Sample Protocol
Plant material and growth conditions The wheat cultivar Aikang58 were grown in an illuminated incubator (RTOP-1000D, Zhejiang, China) at 25°C/15°C day/night temperatures under a 16 h/8 h light/dark photoperiod with 5500 Lx light intensity. In short, the leaf stage 3 of wheat seedlings from 10 single plants with three biological replicates were freshly harvested, then frozen in liquid nitrogen rapidly for protein extraction. The extracted proteins were digested by Lys-C and trypsin for subsequent procedures.  Leaf of wheat seedlings collection, protein extraction and trypsin bdigestion The sample was grinded by liquid nitrogen into cell powder and then transferred to a 5-mL centrifuge tube. After that, four volumes of lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Triton-100, 10 mM dithiothreitol, and 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail) was added to the cell powder, followed by sonication three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 20,000g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the protein was precipitated with cold 20% trichloroacetic acid (TCA) for 2 h at -20 °C. After centrifugation at 12,000g 4 °C for 10 min, the supernatant was discarded. The remaining precipitate was washed with cold acetone for three times. The protein was redissolved in 8 M urea and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions.   For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM NH4HCO3 to urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion.  Affinity Enrichment To enrich crotonylation modified peptides, tryptic peptides dissolved in NETN buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0) were incubated with pre-washed antibody beads (Lot number 104, PTM Bio) at 4°C overnight with gentle shaking. Then the beads were washed four times with NETN buffer and twice with deionized water. The bound peptides were eluted from the beads with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. Finally, the eluted fractions were combined and vacuum-dried. For LC-MS/MS analysis, the resulting peptides were desalted with C18 ZipTips (Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  LC- MS/MS analysis Three parallel analyses for each fraction were performed. Peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (FA) and directly loaded onto a reversed-phase pre-column (Acclaim PepMap 100, Thermo Scientific). Peptide separation was performed using a reversed-phase analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, Thermo Scientific) at a constant flow rate of 400 nl/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The gradient was as follows: 0 min–42min, 7%–25% solvent B; 42 min–54 min, 25%–40% solvent B; 54 min–57 min, 56%-60% solvent B; 57~60min，80% solvent B.    The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by MS/MS in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4. For MS scans, the m/z scan range was 350 to 1800.  Database Search The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against Uniprot_Triticum_aestivum_20170318.fasta (released at March 18, 2017, 136884 sequences) concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 4 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Minimum peptide length was set at 7. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and crotonylation on Lys, acetylation on protein N-terminal and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) thresholds for protein, peptide and modification sites were specified at 1%.

### Data Protocol
Bioinformatics analysis. The Motif-X software was used to analyze the model of sequences with amino acids in specific positions of crotonyl-21-mers (seven amino acids upstream and downstream of the crotonylation site) in all of the protein sequences. And all the database protein sequences were used as background database parameter, other parameters with default. Lys-crotonylated motifs were analyzed by motif-x at a significance level of 0.000001 [55]. Secondary structures of proteins were predicted by NetSurfP [56]. The Gene Ontology (GO) annotation proteome was derived from http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA. The lysine crotonylation (Kcr) proteins were classified by GO annotation based on three categories: biological processes, cellular components and molecular functions. WoLFPSORT (http://www.genscript.com/wolf-psort.html) was used to predict subcellular localization. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database was used to annotate protein pathway [57]. GO term and KEGG pathway enrichment were performed using the DAVID bioinformatics resources 6.7. Identified proteins domain functional description were annotated by InterProScan (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/) based on protein sequence alignment method. For enrichment or depletion (right-tailed test) of specifc annotation terms among the members of resulting protein clusters, Fisher’s exact test was used to obtain the p values. In all of the clusters, any terms with p values below 0.05 were treated as signifcant.  The identified crotonylated protein were searched against the STRING database version 10.0 for protein-protein interactions. Interaction network form STRING was visualized in Cytoscape [58].

### Publication Abstract
Here, we reported the complete profiling of the crotonylation proteome in common wheat. Through a combination of crotonylation and multi-omics analysis, we identified a TaPGK associated with wheat cold stress. Then, we confirmed the positive role of TaPGK-modulating wheat cold tolerance. Meanwhile, we found that cold stress induced lysine crotonylation of TaPGK. Moreover, we screened a lysine decrotonylase TaSRT1 interacting with TaPGK and found that TaSRT1 negatively regulated wheat cold tolerance. We subsequently demonstrated TaSRT1 inhibiting the accumulation of TaPGK protein, and this inhibition was possibly resulted from decrotonylation of TaPGK by TaSRT1. Transcriptome sequencing indicated that overexpression of TaPGK activated glycolytic key genes and thereby increased pyruvate content. Moreover, we found that exogenous application of pyruvate sharply enhanced wheat cold tolerance. These findings suggest that the TaSRT1-TaPGK model regulating wheat cold tolerance is possibly through mediating pyruvate. This study provided two valuable cold tolerance genes and dissected diverse mechanism of glycolytic pathway involving in wheat cold stress.

### Keywords
Triticum aestivum l.; post-translational modification; lysine crotonylation; proteomics; mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Agronomy College, Henan Agricultural University, China
PTM

### Submitter
suzhen huang

### Lab Head
Dr Feng Chen
Agronomy College, Henan Agricultural University, China


