### Accession
PXD028646

### Title
Epstein-Barr Virus+ B Cells in the Breast Cancer Immune Response: A Case Report.

### Description
Tumor-Infiltrating Lymphocytes (TILs) are composed by several immune subpopulations including NK, NKT, Tab, Tgd and B cells. Although some of these cells can have antitumoral activities, there is also a large number of cells which are not tumor-specific,known as bystander cells. These cells may not have a direct role in the antitumoral response but could lead to a modulation of the immune response after time. Recent studies have described fatal encephalitis and myocarditis in cancer patients after immune checkpoint therapies, in which EBV-specific T cells may be involved. Since EBV is able to infect B cells and epithelial cells, both present in the primary tumor site, the first events of these fatal responses could be a consequence of a dysregulation of the immune system in the tumor microenvironment, although this have not been deeply studied. Thus, the main objectives of this study are (i) to use EBV-transformed B cells from the tumor site as a model to study the tumor-infiltrating EBV+ B cells and (ii) to use these EBV-derived B cells to study the relationship with autologous T cells isolated from the tumor site. T cells from TILs have been isolated from a triple negative breast cancer patient before neoadjuvancy and were expanded directly from the biopsy. A Patient-Derived Xenograft (PDX) generated from the breast tumor, progressed into a lymphocytic neoplasm. EBVtransformed B cells were obtained from this PDX (PDX-derived B cells). T Cell Receptor high-throughput sequencing has been used to monitor the clonotypes present in the different samples. We have found 43 clonotypes infiltrating the PDX-562 tissue and 18 of them were also present in the human biopsy or in the biopsy-derived T cell cultures. 5 of these sequences were found in one of the biopsy-derived T cells analyzed. Thus, PDXderived B cells have been used as antigen presenting cells to expand these cells. Few clonotypes were obtained after expansions, although the analysis of the middle CDR3 have revealed a similar pattern with the 18 sequences from the PDX sample. Furthermore, peptides presented by HLA have been eluted from PDX-derived B cells, followed by MS analysis. Peptides obtained derived from 31 different proteins and >40% are cancerrelated in terms of expression.

### Sample Protocol
Purification of peptide-HLA-DR complexes: A PDX-562-derived B cells 40 x 106 pellet was used to elute peptides presented by HLADR as described by Heyder et al.54. Cell pellet was resuspended in lysis buffer (50mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 150 mM NaCl, 1x Complete protease inhibitor (Roche) and 5mM EDTA). Nuclei and cell debris were cleared by 2x 12 min centrifugations at 5500 x g after sonication (40% of amplitude of max. 130W) and incubation 10 min at 4ºC. Membranes collected from the supernatant were pelleted with 1h ultracentrifugation at 72000 x g and 4ºC and resuspended in a solubilization buffer (1% n-Dodecyl-b-Dmaltoside, 50mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 150 mM NaCl, 1x Complete protease inhibitor (Roche) and 5mM EDTA). Solubilized pelleted membranes were sonicated 4 x 5 sec (20% amplitude of max. 130W) and incubated overnight at 4ºC. Unsolubilized membranes were pelleted by ultracentrifugation at 55000 x g for 1h at 4ºC. HLA-DR complexes in the supernatant were then purified from the soluble fraction based on the Spetniak et al. protocol55. Solubilized membranes were incubated overnight with 100 μl CNBr-activated Sepharose beads (GE Healthcare Life Sciences) coupled to anti-HLADR B8.11.2 antibody. Antibody conjugated sepharose beads were washed 3x with with 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 150 mM NaCl, 0,5% n-Dodecyl-β-D-maltoside and 3x with 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 150 mM NaCl. Unspecific interactions were avoided by washing with a high salt concentration buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 0.5M NaCl). Peptide-HLA-DR complexes were eluted with 0,25% TFA after washing 3x with 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 150 mM NaCl and 1x with 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0). Eluted complexes were cleared by SCX and a C18 tip before mass spectrometry. Peptide identification by Mass Spectrometry: Samples were analyzed by Liquid Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS). The LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) equipped with a nanoESI source and coupled to a nanochromatographic 1200 Agilent system was used.LC separation was performed using a 140-min acetonitrile gradient. Analyses were performedin Data Dependent mode (10 most abundant ions) using a CID (MS1 Orbitrap resolution 60.000, MS/MS in the ion-trap).

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed using the Proteome Discoverer (v. 1.4.0.288) against the human and Epstain viurs proteomes UniProt/SwissProt) with the following parameters: no enzyme, 20 ppm precursor mass tolerance, 0,6 Da fragment tolerance and variable modifications for oxidized methionine (+16 Da). Peptide spectral matches were filtered at 1% FDR using Percolator.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Immunopeptidomics, Tcr, Tumor-infiltrating ebv+ b cells, Tils, Cancer

### Affiliations
IIBB-CSIC
Institut de Biotecnologia i Biomedicina, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Cerdanyola del Vallés, Barcelona, Spain.

### Submitter
Montserrat Carrascal

### Lab Head
Dr Mercè Martí
Institut de Biotecnologia i Biomedicina, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Cerdanyola del Vallés, Barcelona, Spain.


