### Accession
PXD002830

### Title
Arginine sensing in Leishmania

### Description
Abstract Protozoa of the genus Leishmania are the causative agents of leishmaniasis in humans. These parasites cycle between promastigotes in the sand fly mid-gut and amastigotes in phagolysosome of mammalian macrophages. During infection, they up-regulate host nitric oxide synthase and arginase expression, both of which use arginine as a substrate. These elevated activities deplete macrophage arginine pools, a situation that invading Leishmania must overcome since it is an essential amino acid. Leishmania donovani imports exogenous arginine via a mono-specific amino acid transporter (AAP3) and utilizes it primarily through the polyamine pathway to provide precursors for trypanothione biosynthesis.  Here we report the discovery of a pathway whereby promastigote and amastigote forms of the Leishmania sense the lack of environmental arginine and respond with rapid up-regulation in AAP3 expression and activity, as well as several other transporters. Significantly, this arginine deprivation response is also activated in parasites during macrophage infection. Phosphoproteomic analyses of L. donovani promastigotes have implicated a mitogen activated protein kinase 2 (MPK2)-mediated signaling cascade in this response and L. mexicana mutants lacking MPK2 are unable to respond to arginine deprivation.  In addition, these mutants cannot differentiate into amastigotes in axenic culture or in peritoneal macrophages, and fail to establish an infection in mice. We propose that sensing arginine levels plays a critical role in Leishmania virulence by activating a rapid metabolic reaction for salvaging this amino acid in response to the lower arginine concentration in the macrophage phagolysosome.

### Sample Protocol
Leishmania cell cultures;Arginine starvation; Transport assays; Immunofluorescence ; Antibodies; Western Blot Analyses; Northern Blot Analyses; Determination of cellular arginine Content; Sucrose fractionation; Proteomic analysis of starvation response: Protein isolation, Proteolysis, Dimethyl labeling, Phospho-enrichment, Mass spectrometry analysis; In-vitro infection of macrophages; Purification of intracellular amastigotes

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry data was analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 1.3 (Thermo) searching against the Leishmania infantum database from Trytrip version 4. The results were filtered with rank 1 and 1% false discovery rate. Phosphorilated peptides were filtered with pRS probability of >0.65.

### Publication Abstract
Amino acid sensing is an intracellular function that supports nutrient homeostasis, largely through controlled release of amino acids from lysosomal pools. The intracellular pathogen Leishmania resides and proliferates within human macrophage phagolysosomes. Here we describe a new pathway in Leishmania that specifically senses the extracellular levels of arginine, an amino acid that is essential for the parasite. During infection, the macrophage arginine pool is depleted due to its use to produce metabolites (NO and polyamines) that constitute part of the host defense response and its suppression, respectively. We found that parasites respond to this shortage of arginine by up-regulating expression and activity of the Leishmania arginine transporter (LdAAP3), as well as several other transporters. Our analysis indicates the parasite monitors arginine levels in the environment rather than the intracellular pools. Phosphoproteomics and genetic analysis indicates that the arginine-deprivation response is mediated through a mitogen-activated protein kinase-2-dependent signaling cascade.

### Keywords
Leishmania, Arginine sensing, Phosphoproteome

### Affiliations
Faculty of Biology, Technion
Technion

### Submitter
Keren Bendalak

### Lab Head
Dr Dan Zilberstein
Faculty of Biology, Technion


