### Accession
PXD013969

### Title
Structural proteomics based investigation of DNA binding domain (DBD) of FOXO4 transcription factor in complex with DNA binding element (DNA)

### Description
The limited information available on the structure of complexes involving transcription factors and cognate DNA response elements represents a major obstacle in the quest to understand their mechanism of action at the molecular level. We implemented a concerted structural proteomics approach, which combined hydrogen-deuterium exchange (HDX), quantitative protein-protein and protein-nucleic acid cross-linking (XL), and homology analysis, to model the structure of the complex between the full-length DNA binding domain (DBD) of FOXO4 and its DNA binding element (DBE).

### Sample Protocol
Hydrogen-deuterium exchange FOXO4-DBD (20µM) or FOXO4-DBD/DBE complex (20µM, 1:1 molar ratio) were pre-incubated for 1 hr at 20°C in an H2O-based buffer at pH 7.4 consisting of 10mM HEPES and 50mM NaCl. Deuterium exchange was initiated by 10-fold dilution of such samples into an equivalent D2O-based buffer (10mM HEPES, 50mM NaCl, pD 7.4). The reaction was allowed to proceed at 20°C and quenched at pre-determined intervals (i.e., 0.33, 2, 5, 10, 30, 60, 180, 300 min) by mixing aliquots containing 100 pmol of protein with a 1M glycine/HCl buffer at pH 2.35. Each sample was injected into a home-built LC system based on a LC-20AD pump (Shimadzu corp., JPN), which was maintained at 0°C to minimize hydrogen back-exchange. Protein digestion was carried out in column(s) with immobilized protease(s) at a flow rate of 100 µL/min of 0.4% formic acid (FA) in water. The ensuing peptide products were trapped and desalted on a C8 reversed-phase microtrap for 3 min under the same flow rate and solvent composition. Trapped peptides were with the use of MeCN gradient in 0.4% FA separated on a C18 reversed-phase analytical column. The same protocol was used to accomplish the peptide mapping of non-deuterated samples, except that H2O-based buffer was used instead of the D2O-based equivalent and that 300 pmol of protein was injected into the LC system. Separated peptides were introduced into the ESI source of a Bruker Daltonics (Billerica, USA) 9.4T Apex Ultra Qe FTICR mass spectrometer. Peptide mapping was carried out in positive ion mode by performing data-dependent broadband analysis. In this experiment, each MS scan was followed by six MS/MS scans, in which the six most abundant peptide ions detected in the MS scan were submitted to collision-induced dissociation. Quantitative chemical cross-linking FOXO4-DBD (20µM) or FOXO4-DBD/DBE complex (1:1 molar ratio) in a 10mM HEPES, 50mM NaCl solution at pH 7.4 were pre-incubated for 1 hr at 20°C and then mixed with 10-fold molar excess of either DSG or DSS cross-linking reagents. Unbound FOXO4-DBD samples were mixed with the non-labelled cross-linkers (DSGd0 or DSSd0), whereas bound FOXO4-DBDDBE complex was mixed with the deuterium-labelled cross-linkers (DSGd4 or DSSd4). After 2 hr of cross-linking reaction, corresponding unlabelled and deuterium-labelled samples (e.g., DSSd0- and DSSd4-traeted) were mixed in 1:1 ratio to enable direct quantification. Samples treated with 1:1 mixtures of cross-linkers (e.g., DSGd0/DSGd4 or DSSd0/DSSd4) were handled in the same manner. The pH of samples was adjusted to 8.3 by addition of 100mM ethylmorpholine with 20% of MeCN. Trypsin digestion was performed overnight at 37°C and quenched by adjusting the solution to an acidic pH with 1% FA. Peptide samples were on-line desalted on a C18 trap column by a 10 µL/min flow of 0.1% FA in water for 3 min. Desalted peptides were then with the use of MeCN gradient in 0.1% FA separated on-line on a C18 reverse-phase analytical column. Finally, the peptide products were introduced into the ESI source of a Bruker Daltonics (Billerica, USA) 15T-solarix XR FTICR mass spectrometer. Mass spectral data was acquired in positive mode across a 250 - 2000 m/z range. Protein-DNA chemical cross-linking FOXO4-DBD (25µM) or FOXO4-DBDDBE complex in 150mM ammonium acetate (AA) at pH 6.85 and reagent solutions containing 1mM trans-platinum(II)diammine dichloride (transplatin) were mixed to obtain final concentrations of 20µM substrate and 200µM reagent in 150mM AA and 1% DMF. The reaction was carried out for 14 hr at 18°C. All samples were analysed by ESI-FTICR MS and HPLC/ESI-FTICR MS. The nucleic acid component of the FOXO4-DBDDBE complex was digested with specific Bal-31 nuclease (0.15 U per 1 µg of duplex DNA). The digestion mixtures were analysed in positive and negative ion mode. The former was accomplished as described above for trypsin digests. The analysis in negative ion mode was accomplished as described above, but with the following variations: 0.375 µg of material per injection; 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate at pH 7.5 for trapping and desalting operations; separation accomplished on a C18 reversed-phase analytical column by using gradient of MeOH, hexafluoroisopropyl alcohol (HFIP) and 0.1% triethylammonium acetate (TEAA) in water at pH 7.5. Positive and negative mass spectral data were acquired in data-independent mode over the 250 - 2500 m/z range. In this experiment, each MS scan was followed by an MS/MS scan with a broad isolation window (250 - 2500 m/z) and a fixed 15eV CID energy.

### Data Protocol
Hydrogen-deuterium exchange The MS/MS data acquired in the 300 - 1800 m/z range were processed by DataAnalysis 4.2 (Bruker Daltonics, USA) and then searched by MASCOT 2.2 search engine against a library of possible digestion products obtained from the FOXO4-DBD sequence. The hits were further processed by using the MSTools package (1). Deuteration rate was determined in the course of positive broadband MS mode analysis (300 - 1800 m/z range) and the ensuing data were processed by using the home-built DeutEx software (unpublished). For each product, the relative deuteration rate was determined as a percentage of maximum possible number of exchangeable amide hydrogens in each peptide. Quantitative chemical cross-linking MS data were processed by DataAnalysis 4.2 (Bruker Daltonics, USA). In particular, the SNAP 2.0 algorithm was used to generate deconvoluted spectra and corresponding lists of singly-charged monoisotopic masses. Data obtained from control and cross-linked samples were compared with theoretical libraries by using the home-built LinX (2) software (available online) to identify the sough-after cross-linking products. All spectra containing the signal of identified cross-links were summed and further processed by mMass 5.4.1 (3). For each cross-linking product, the ratio between light (d0) and heavy (d4) cross-linker incorporation was calculated by using the envelope fit tool, which operated by generating theoretical profiles and then fitting them to the experimental data according to linear combination and least-square fitting. Control samples were also checked for possible 1:1 ratios of light and heavy forms. Protein-DNA chemical cross-linking MS and MS/MS data were processed by using DataAnalysis 4.2 (Bruker Daltonics, USA). In particular, the SNAP 2.0 algorithm was employed to generate deconvoluted spectra of detected species to be compared to a theoretical library of putative peptide-oligonucleotide conjugates. The process required combining the average content of biogenic isotopes in average peptides with a fictitious additional constant corresponding to C129H160N54O74P12PtN2H4, which represented a single strand of the DBE component conjugated by the transplatin cross-linker. This expedient ensured the proper determination of monoisotopic masses of putative protein-DNA cross-links products. The lists of monoisotopic masses provided by the MS determinations were searched for possible protein-DNA cross-links by using the home-built LinX (2) software (available online). Further validation of initial hits was achieved by manually comparing the experimental isotopic patterns with the model isotopic patterns suggested by LinX (2), which were expected to manifest unique features conferred by the phosphate and platinum contributions from the oligonucleotide and cross-linker moieties. The MS/MS data were visually inspected in similar fashion to identify fragmentation products corresponding to the sought-after protein-DNA cross-links. 1. Kavan,D. and Man,P. (2011) MSTools—Web based application for visualization and presentation of HXMS data. Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 302, 53–58. (available at http://peterslab.org/MSTools) 2. LinX - available at http://peterslab.org/MSTools 3. Strohalm,M., Kavan,D., Novák,P., Volný,M. and Havlícek,V. (2010) mMass 3: a cross-platform software environment for precise analysis of mass spectrometric data. Anal. Chem., 82, 4648–51.

### Publication Abstract
The limited information available on the structure of complexes involving transcription factors and cognate DNA response elements represents a major obstacle in the quest to understand their mechanism of action at the molecular level. We implemented a concerted structural proteomics approach, which combined hydrogen-deuterium exchange (HDX), quantitative protein-protein and protein-nucleic acid cross-linking (XL), and homology analysis, to model the structure of the complex between the full-length DNA binding domain (DBD) of Forkhead box protein O4 (FOXO4) and its DNA binding element (DBE). The results confirmed that FOXO4-DBD assumes the characteristic forkhead topology shared by these types of transcription factors, but its binding mode differs significantly from those of other members of the family. The results showed that the binding interaction stabilized regions that were rather flexible and disordered in the unbound form. Surprisingly, the conformational effects were not limited only to the interface between bound components, but extended also to distal regions that may be essential to recruiting additional factors to the transcription machinery. In addition to providing valuable new insights into the binding mechanism, this project provided an excellent evaluation of the merits of structural proteomics approaches in the investigation of systems that are not directly amenable to traditional high-resolution techniques.

### Keywords
Cross-linking, Hydrogen-deuterium exchange, Dna, Transplatinum, Protein

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Structural Biology and Cell Signaling, Institute of Microbiology, The Czech Academy of Sciences, Prague, 14220, Czech Republic
Institute of Microbiology, The Czech Academy of Sciences, Prague, 14220, Czech Republic

### Submitter
Lukáš Slavata

### Lab Head
Dr Petr Novak
Laboratory of Structural Biology and Cell Signaling, Institute of Microbiology, The Czech Academy of Sciences, Prague, 14220, Czech Republic


