### Accession
PXD029052

### Title
Proteomics profiling to distinguish DOCK8 deficiency from atopic dermatitis

### Description
Background: DOCK8 deficiency is an autosomal recessive form of hyperimmunoglobulinemia E syndrome (HIES). Severe atopic dermatitis (AD) shares with DOCK8 deficiency some clinical symptoms, including eczema, eosinophilia, and increased serum IgE levels. The deficiency of DOCK8 protein is potentially a life-threatening autosomal recessive HIES and only curable with bone marrow transplantation. Despite identified metabolomics and cytokine biomarkers, novel proteomics biomarkers need to be identified, as the connecting networks are critical to our understanding of this disease. Hence we performed serum proteomics profiling using LC-MSE SynaptG2. Method: Label-free untargeted proteomics analysis was used to identify potentially reliable, sensitive, and specific protein biomarkers in serum collected from DOCK8 (n=10), AD (n=9) patients, which were compared to ctrls (n=5). Results: From a total of 275 quantifiable proteins, binary comparisons between AD vs. Ctrl, DOCK8 vs. Ctrl, and DOCK8 vs. AD revealed 109, 105 and 85 dysregulated proteins, respectively. 24 among 85 proteins were specific potential biomarkers among the DOCK8 and AD groups. The sensitivity and specificity of few proteins like Claspin, Immunoglobulin kappa and heavy, complement components as potential biomarkers to distinguish between DOCK8 and AD patients were evaluated using the receiver operating characteristic curve. DOCK8 deficiency and AD groups' profiling revealed a shared role of ERK1/2  among the commonly dysregulated proteins. Conclusion: In this study, we have identified potential proteomics biomarkers and profile to distinguish between DOCK8 and AD, with possible diagnostic and therapeutic applications to help create effective interventions for managing these diseases. Further studies to confirm these associations in prospective cohorts are warranted.

### Sample Protocol
The serum samples were diluted and protein concentrations of all samples were normalized as described in detail previously (16) and  prepared for label-free protein in-solution digestion followed by proteomics analysis. Briefly, each sample, 100 µg of total (depleted) protein, was subjected to in-solution tryptic digestion as previously described (15, 16). The proteins were denatured in 0.1% RapiGest SF (Waters, UK) at 80°C for 15 minutes, reduced in 10 mM Dithiothreitol (DTT) at 60°C for 30 min, and alkylated in 10 mM Iodoacetamide (IAA) (1.0 µL IAA/10µL) in the dark for 40 min at room temperature. Samples' proteins were trypsin-digested overnight at 37°C, and the RapiGest reaction was quenched and removed with 1% formic acid, at 30ºC, and spundown for 5 min at 14000 rpm, and diluted before LC-MS analysis.  Label-free quantitative 1-dimensional Nano Acquity liquid-chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry on Synapt G2 (Waters, Manchester, UK) was used to generate expression protein profiles between the sample groups. The instrument settings were optimized as described previously. (15, 16, 18) Briefly, the detector was set up using 2 ng/µL Leucine Enkephalin. A separate infusion of 500 fmol. All analyses were performed on Triazaic Nano source and ionization in the positive ion mobility mode nano ESI (Waters, Manchester, UK). Data-independent acquisition (MSE)/ion mobility separation was performed and data acquired over a range of m/z 50 – 1300 Da using the Mass Lynx programs (version. 4.1, SCN833, Waters, Manchester, UK). Each sample was analyzed in triplicate runs, and all samples were analyzed in the same batch run as previously described

### Data Protocol
Samples were analyzed in triplicate runs. Automated data processing and database search were performed using the Uniprot protein sequence database on Progenesis QI for proteomics (QIfP V 3.0.6039) for differential expression analysis (Waters, Manchester, UK).  The raw data were normalized, log-transformed, and Pareto scaled, and then, based on a fold-change (FC) criterion of greater than 2 and a false discovery rate (FDR) adjusted p-value less than 0.05, a univariate analysis (volcano plot) was performed for each binary comparison to identify significantly differentially expressed proteins. Multivariate analysis, partial least square-discriminant analysis (PLS-DA) was performed using MetaboAnalyst V4 (McGill University, QC, Canada). (22) Further analysis, including receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves, were constructed using the random forest method was performed on GraphPad Prism v6.0, ( LA Jolla, CA).

### Publication Abstract
Dedicator of cytokinesis 8 deficiency is an autosomal recessive primary immune deficiency disease belonging to the group of hyperimmunoglobulinemia E syndrome (HIES). The clinical phenotype of dedicator of cytokinesis 8 (DOCK8) deficiency, characterized by allergic manifestations, increased infections, and increased IgE levels, overlaps with the clinical presentation of atopic dermatitis (AD). Despite the identification of metabolomics and cytokine biomarkers, distinguishing between the two conditions remains clinically challenging. The present study used a label-free untargeted proteomics approach using liquid-chromatography mass spectrometry with network pathway analysis to identify the differentially regulated serum proteins and the associated metabolic pathways altered between the groups. Serum samples from DOCK8 (<i>n</i> = 10), AD (<i>n</i> = 9) patients and healthy control (Ctrl) groups (<i>n</i> = 5) were analyzed. Based on the proteomics profile, the PLS-DA score plot between the three groups showed a clear group separation and sample clustering (<i>R</i>2 = 0.957, <i>Q</i>2 = 0.732). Significantly differentially abundant proteins (<i>p</i> &lt; 0.05, FC cut off 2) were identified between DOCK8-deficient and AD groups relative to Ctrl (<i>n</i> = 105, and <i>n</i> = 109) and between DOCK8-deficient and AD groups (<i>n</i> = 85). Venn diagram analysis revealed a differential regulation of 24 distinct proteins from among the 85 between DOCK8-deficient and AD groups, including claspin, haptoglobin-related protein, immunoglobulins, complement proteins, fibulin, and others. Receiver-operating characteristic curve (ROC) analysis identified claspin and haptoglobin-related protein, as potential biomarkers with the highest sensitivity and specificity (AUC = 1), capable of distinguishing between patients with DOCK8 deficiency and AD. Network pathway analysis between DOCK8-deficiency and AD groups revealed that the identified proteins centered around the dysregulation of ERK1/2 signaling pathway. Herein, proteomic profiling of DOCK8-deficiency and AD groups was carried out to determine alterations in the proteomic profiles and identify a panel of the potential proteomics biomarker with possible diagnostic applications. Distinguishing between DOCK8-deficiency and AD will help in the early initiation of treatment and preventing complications.

### Keywords
Multiple-reaction monitoring, Atopic dermatitis, Dedicator of cytokinesis (dock8), Hyper ige syndrome (hies), Lc-mse synaptg2, Label-free proteomics

### Affiliations
Therapeutics & Biomarker Discovery for Clinical Applications, Stem Cell Program,  King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Center, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia
King faisal Specialist Hospital and esearch Center

### Submitter
Ayodele Alaiya

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Ayodele Alaiya
King faisal Specialist Hospital and esearch Center


