### Accession
PXD032074

### Title
Larch microsporocytes cytosplasmic fraction

### Description
Proteomic analysis of different stages of larch microsporocytes middle diplotene.

### Sample Protocol
For proteomics analysis of the contents from the cytoplasmic fraction of cells, larch anthers were ground in liquid nitrogen and homogenized in protein extraction buffer (extraction buffer: 200 mM Tris-HCl pH 9.0, 110 mM potassium acetate, 0.5% (v / v) Triton X-100, 0.1% (v / v) Tween 20, 2.5 mM DTT , Roche Complete protease inhibitor Cat # 04 693 116 001).   in the proportion of 0.3 mL per 0.1 g of plant material. The mixture was centrifuged twice at 14,000 × g at 4ºC, then centrifugated at 16,000 × g for 30 min at 4ºC to obtain native cytosolic protein extract. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed by the Mass Spectrometry Laboratory (IBB PAS, Warsaw) using an Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher).

### Data Protocol
Mascot server v. 2.4.1 was used with TAIR10 database and the results were analyzed and exported with MScan v. 2.0. emPAI values were calculated in Mascot.

### Publication Abstract
Gene regulation ensures that the appropriate genes are expressed at the proper time. Nuclear retention of incompletely spliced or mature mRNAs is emerging as a novel, previously underappreciated layer of posttranscriptional regulation. Studies on this phenomenon indicated that it exerts a significant influence on the regulation of gene expression by regulating export and translation delay, which allows the synthesis of specific proteins in response to a stimulus or at strictly controlled time points, for example, during cell differentiation or development. Here, we show that transcription in microsporocytes of European larch (Larix decidua) occurs in a pulsatile manner during prophase of the first meiotic division. Transcriptional activity was then silenced after each pulse. However, the transcripts synthesized were not exported immediately to the cytoplasm but were retained in the nucleoplasm and Cajal bodies (CBs). In contrast to the nucleoplasm, we did not detect mature transcripts in CBs, which only stored nonfully spliced transcripts with retained introns. Notably, the retained introns were spliced at precisely defined times, and fully mature mRNAs were released into the cytoplasm for translation. As similar processes have been observed during spermatogenesis in animals, our results illustrate an evolutionarily conserved mechanism of gene expression regulation during generative cells development in Eukaryota.

### Keywords
Microsporocytes, Meiosis, Cytoplasm, Larch

### Affiliations
Nicolaus Copernicus University in Toruń
Nicolaus Copernicus University in Torun, Torun, Poland

### Submitter
Dariusz Jan Smoliński

### Lab Head
Dr Dariusz Smolinski
Nicolaus Copernicus University in Torun, Torun, Poland


