### Accession
PXD006816

### Title
mitochondria cross-linking mass spectrometry

### Description
We performed cross-linking mass spectrometry experiments on intact mitochondria isolated from mouse heart in two conditions, native-state and high-salt treatment to disrupt electrostatic interactions. Both conditions were provided in biological replicates.

### Sample Protocol
Mitochondria were directly isolated from mouse heart using centrifugation. Subsequently, they were cross-linking using DSSO cross-linker, followed by standard bottom-up proteomics sample prepration, strong cation exchange (SCX) and LC/MS analysis. Only the later fractions of SCX were analyzed by LC/MS, with MS2 triggering on only speices containing +4 charge and above.

### Data Protocol
Data was analyzed using XlinkX v2.0 (Liu et al., Nature Commun, 2017).

### Publication Abstract
Mitochondria exert an immense amount of cytophysiological functions, but the structural basis of most of these processes is still poorly understood. Here we use cross-linking mass spectrometry to probe the organization of proteins in native mouse heart mitochondria. Our approach provides the largest survey of mitochondrial protein interactions reported so far. In total, we identify 3,322 unique residue-to-residue contacts involving half of the mitochondrial proteome detected by bottom-up proteomics. The obtained mitochondrial protein interactome gives insights in the architecture and submitochondrial localization of defined protein assemblies, and reveals the mitochondrial localization of four proteins not yet included in the MitoCarta database. As one of the highlights, we show that the oxidative phosphorylation complexes I-V exist in close spatial proximity, providing direct evidence for supercomplex assembly in intact mitochondria. The specificity of these contacts is demonstrated by comparative analysis of mitochondria after high salt treatment, which disrupts the native supercomplexes and substantially changes the mitochondrial interactome.

### Keywords
Heart, Mitochondria, Mouse, Cross-linking mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Leibniz-Forschungsinstitut für Molekulare Pharmakologie (FMP)
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Fan Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Albert J.R. Heck
Utrecht University


