### Accession
PXD016443

### Title
OT1 T cell activation time course

### Description
Time course of OT1 T cell activation with SIINFEKL peptide.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were lysed at room temperature in 4% SDS, 50 mM TEAB pH 8.5, 10 mM TCEP under agitation (5 min, 1200 rpm on tube shaker), boiled (5 min, 500 rpm on tube shaker), then sonicated with a BioRuptor (30 sec on, 30 sec off x30 cycles). Lysates were alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide for 1 hour at room temperature in the dark, before protein clean up by SP3 procedure (Hughes et al., 2014) before elution into digest buffer, 0.1% SDS 50 mM TEAB pH 8.5, 1 mM CaCl2 and digested overnight with LysC followed by overnight digestion with Trypsin, each at a 1:50 enzyme to protein ratio. Peptide clean up was performed as per SP3 procedure (Hughes et al., 2014) and peptides were eluted in 2% DMSO. Formic acid was added to 5% final concentration. Samples were fractionated using high pH reverse phase liquid chromatography. Samples were loaded onto a 2.1 mm x 150 mm XBridge Peptide BEH C18 column with 3.5 μm particles (Waters). Using a Dionex Ultimate3000 system, the samples were separated using a 25-minute multistep gradient of solvents A (10 mM formate at pH 9 in 2% acetonitrile) and B (10mM ammonium formate pH 9 in 80% acetonitrile), at a flow rate of 0.3 mL/min. Peptides were separated into 16 fractions which were consolidated into 8 fractions. Fractionated peptides were dried in vacuo then dissolved in 5% Formic Acid for analysis by LC-ES-MS/MS. Proteomics samples clean up was performed on the 8th fraction of each sample using HIPPR detergent removal spin column kit (ThermoFisher Scientific). < 1 µg of peptide was analysed per fraction. samples were injected onto a nanoscale C18 reverse-phase chromatography system (UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano, Thermo Scientific) before being electrosprayed into a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The chromatography buffers used were as follows: HPLC buffer A (0.1% formic acid), HPLC buffer B (80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid) and HPLC buffer C (0.1% formic acid). Samples (15 µL) were injected and washed with Buffer C (10ul/min) for 5 min prior to valve switch on an Acclaim PepMap100 nanoViper C18 trap column (100 µm inner diameter, 2 cm; Thermo Scientific). After trap enrichment, peptides were eluted onto an EASY-Spray PepMap RSLC nanoViper, C18, 2 µm, 100Å column (75 µm, 50 cm; Thermo Scientific) using the following buffer gradient: 2% to 5% B (0 to 5 min), 5% to 35% B (5 to 130 min), 35% to 98% B (130 to 132 min), 98% B (132 to 152 min), 98% to 2% B (152 to 153 min), and equilibrated in 2% B (153 to 170 min) at a flow rate of 0.3 µl/min. The eluting peptide solution was automatically electrosprayed into the Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer using an EASY-Spray nanoelectrospray ion source at 50º and a source voltage of 2.0 kV (Thermo Scientific). The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode. Data were collected using data- dependent acquisition: the 15 most intense peptide ions from the preview scan in the Q Exactive Plus were fragmented by higher-energy collisional dissociation. The following settings were applied: MS1 scan resolution: 70 000; MS1 AGC target: 1e6; MS1 maximum IT: 20 ms; MS1 scan range: 350–1600 Th; MS2 scan resolution: 17 500; MS2 AGC target: 2e5; MS2 maximum IT: 100 ms; isolation window: 1.4 Th; first fixed mass: 200 Th; NCE: 27; minimum AGC target: 2e3; only charge states 2 to 6 considered; peptide match: preferred; exclude isotopes: on; dynamic exclusion: 45 s.

### Data Protocol
The data were processed, searched and quantified with the MaxQuant software package, Version 1.6.2.6. For the protein and peptide searches we generated a hybrid database from databases in Uniprot release 2019 07. This consisted of all manually annotated mouse SwissProt entries, combined with mouse TrEMBL entries with protein level evidence available and a manually annotated homologue within the human SwissProt database. The following MaxQuant search parameters were used: protein N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation, glutamine to pyroglutamate, and glutamine and asparagine deamidation were set as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was selected as a fixed modification; Trypsin and LysC were selected as the enzymes with up to two missed cleavages permitted; the protein and PSM false discovery rate was set to 1%; matching of peptides between runs was switched off.

### Publication Abstract
T cell expansion and differentiation are critically dependent on the transcription factor c-Myc (Myc). Herein we use quantitative mass-spectrometry to reveal how Myc controls antigen receptor driven cell growth and proteome restructuring in murine T cells. Analysis of copy numbers per cell of &gt;7000 proteins provides new understanding of the selective role of Myc in controlling the protein machinery that govern T cell fate. The data identify both Myc dependent and independent metabolic processes in immune activated T cells. We uncover that a primary function of Myc is to control expression of multiple amino acid transporters and that loss of a single Myc-controlled amino acid transporter effectively phenocopies the impact of Myc deletion. This study provides a comprehensive map of how Myc selectively shapes T cell phenotypes, revealing that Myc induction of amino acid transport is pivotal for subsequent bioenergetic and biosynthetic programs and licences T cell receptor driven proteome reprogramming.

### Keywords
T cell activation, Mouse, T lymphocyte

### Affiliations
School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee
Cell Signalling and Immunology Division, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee

### Submitter
Julia Marchingo

### Lab Head
Dr Doreen Ann Cantrell
Cell Signalling and Immunology Division, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee


