### Accession
PXD010207

### Title
TMEM41B is a novel regulator of autophagy and lipid mobilization

### Description
Autophagy maintains cellular homeostasis by targeting damaged organelles, pathogens or misfolded protein aggregates for lysosomal degradation. The autophagic process is initiated by the formation of autophagosomes, which can selectively enclose cargo via autophagy cargo receptors. A machinery of well-characterized autophagy-related proteins orchestrate the biogenesis of autophagosomes, however, the origin of the required membranes is incompletely understood.  Here, we applied sensitized pooled CRISPR screens and identified the uncharacterized transmembrane protein TMEM41B as a novel regulator of autophagy. In the absence of TMEM41B, autophagosome biogenesis is stalled, LC3 accumulates at WIPI2- and DFCP1-positive isolation membranes, and lysosomal flux of autophagy cargo receptors and intracellular bacteria is impaired. In addition to defective autophagy, we found that TMEM41B knockout cells display significantly enlarged lipid droplets and reduced mobilization and β-oxidation of fatty acids. TMEM41B localizes to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and interacts with SIGMAR1, a chaperone which regulates calcium and lipid transfer at ER contact sites with mitochondria and lipid droplets. Taken together, we propose that TMEM41B is a novel regulator of autophagosome biogenesis and ER lipid mobilization.

### Sample Protocol
107 H4 Cas9 cells or H4 Cas9 cells stably expressing TMEM41B-Myc or Myc-TMEM41B were seeded in 3*15cm dishes. Cells were harvested 48 h after seeding in lysis buffer (50mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 150mM NaCl, 1mM EDTA, 1% TritonX) using protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma). Lysates were kept on ice for 30 min and then centrifuged at 13000 rpm for 10 min at 4° C. 2 mg of supernatant was used for immunoprecipitation (IP) using Myc-Trap_MA (Chromotek) magnetic beads following manufacturer’s protocol. Beads were boiled in 2x Laemmli buffer (Sigma), and eluates were used either for immunoblot analysis or for mass spectrometry. For identification of TMEM41B-interacting proteins by mass spectrometry, IP eluates were separated by SDS gel. Each gel lane was excised in 16 bands and digested overnight with trypsin (Promega) as described [46]. Dried peptides were then labelled with TMT reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Reagents 129, 130 and 131 were used for the corresponding H4 Cas9, H4 Cas9 Myc-TMEM41B and H4 Cas9 TMEM41B-Myc conditions. Afterwards, peptides from corresponding gel bands were pooled into 16 TMT peptide mixtures and analyzed by LC-MS. Labeled peptides were loaded onto a 25 cm × 75 µm (ID) Acclaim PepMap EASY-Spray LC column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) by an EASY-nLC 1200 system. The peptides were separated using a 100 min gradient from 3% to 35% buffer B (80% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid) equilibrated with buffer A (0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Eluted TMT peptides were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer. MS1 scans were acquired at resolution 120,000 with 350-1500 m/z scan range, AGC target 2x105, maximum injection time 50 ms. Then, MS2 precursors were isolated using the quadrupole (0.7 m/z window) with AGC 1x104 and maximum injection time 50 ms. Precursors were fragmented by CID at a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 35% and analyzed in the ion trap. Following MS2, synchronous precursor selection (SPS) MS3 scans were collected and fragmented by high energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) and analyzed using Orbitrap (NCE65, max AGC 1x105, maximum injection time 120 ms, resolution 60,000).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification were performed using Proteome Discoverer 2.1.0.81 with the SEQUEST algorithm and Uniprot human database. Precursor mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm and at 0.6 Da for fragment mass tolerance. Maximum of 3 missed cleavages were allowed. Methionine oxidation was set as dynamic modification, while TMT tags on peptide N termini/lysine residues and cysteine alkylation (+57.02146) were set as static modifications. The list of protein identified and quantified by proteome discoverer is included as Dataset EV2. Proteins were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate with a minimum of 2 peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs).

### Publication Abstract
Autophagy maintains cellular homeostasis by targeting damaged organelles, pathogens, or misfolded protein aggregates for lysosomal degradation. The autophagic process is initiated by the formation of autophagosomes, which can selectively enclose cargo via autophagy cargo receptors. A machinery of well-characterized autophagy-related proteins orchestrates the biogenesis of autophagosomes; however, the origin of the required membranes is incompletely understood. Here, we have applied sensitized pooled CRISPR screens and identify the uncharacterized transmembrane protein TMEM41B as a novel regulator of autophagy. In the absence of TMEM41B, autophagosome biogenesis is stalled, LC3 accumulates at WIPI2- and DFCP1-positive isolation membranes, and lysosomal flux of autophagy cargo receptors and intracellular bacteria is impaired. In addition to defective autophagy, TMEM41B knockout cells display significantly enlarged lipid droplets and reduced mobilization and &#x3b2;-oxidation of fatty acids. Immunostaining and interaction proteomics data suggest that TMEM41B localizes to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). Taken together, we propose that TMEM41B is a novel ER-localized regulator of autophagosome biogenesis and lipid mobilization.

### Keywords
Autophagy/ contact sites/ crispr/ lipid droplets/ tmem41b

### Affiliations
Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research, Novartis Campus, CH-4056 Basel, Switzerland
Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research

### Submitter
Debora Bonenfant

### Lab Head
Dr Bonenfant Debora
Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research, Novartis Campus, CH-4056 Basel, Switzerland


