### Accession
PXD031918

### Title
Comparison of in-solution and SP3 sample processing workflows on HeLa cell samples

### Description
Comparison of in-solution and single-pot, solid-phase-enchanced sample preparation (SP3) sample processing workflows on HeLa cell samples, using different lysis buffers based on SDS and guanidine hydrochloride, for optimal analysis by liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LC-MS)

### Sample Protocol
Standard in-solution with guanidine hydrochloride lysis buffer and  solid-phase-enchanced sample preparation (SP3) sample with guanidine hydrochloride and SDS lysis buffer processing workflows on HeLa cell samples. Samples are desalted and then analyzed unfractionated and after fractionation with high-pH reversed chromatography on an Eclipse Tribrid mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Samples were run individually with Proteome Discoverer software according to DDA and label-free workflows. Output reports were further analysed in Excel. Results were displayed in bar plots.

### Publication Abstract
The use of a proper sample processing methodology for maximum proteome coverage and high-quality quantitative data is an important choice to make before initiating a liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS)-based proteomics study. Popular sample processing workflows for proteomics involve in-solution proteome digestion and single-pot, solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation (SP3). We tested them on both HeLa cells and human plasma samples, using lysis buffers containing SDS, or guanidinium hydrochloride. We also studied the effect of using commercially available depletion mini spin columns before SP3, to increase proteome coverage in human plasma samples. Our results show that the SP3 protocol, using either buffer, achieves the highest number of quantified proteins in both the HeLa cells and plasma samples. Moreover, the use of depletion mini spin columns before SP3 results in a two-fold increase of quantified plasma proteins. With additional fractionation, we quantified nearly 1400 proteins, and examined lower-abundance proteins involved in neurodegenerative pathways and mitochondrial metabolism. Therefore, we recommend the use of the SP3 methodology for biological sample processing, including those after depletion of high-abundance plasma proteins.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Hela, Proteomics, Sp3, In-solution digestion

### Affiliations
Institute of Biomedicine, University of Bergen
University of Bergen

### Submitter
Maria Hernandez-Valladares

### Lab Head
Dr Frode Berven
Institute of Biomedicine, University of Bergen


