### Accession
PXD021492

### Title
Characterisation of the adhesome of patient-derived cutaneous squamous carcinoma cells

### Description
Interactions between cells and the extracellular matrix, mediated by integrin adhesion complexes (IACs), play key roles in cancer progression and metastasis. We report here systems-level changes in the adhesome during progression of a patient-derived cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma (cSCC). We found that the actin regulatory protein Mena is enriched in IACs in metastatic cSCC cells and is connected within a subnetwork of actin-binding proteins to the LINC complex component nesprin-2.

### Sample Protocol
IAC isolation was performed as previously described (Kuo et al., 2012, Methods Mol. Biol. 757, 297–323; Jones et al., 2015, Curr. Protoc. Cell Biol. 66, 9.8.1–9.8.15). Briefly, 3 × 10^6 cSCC cells were seeded on 15-cm cell culture dishes coated with 10 μg/ml human fibronectin and incubated overnight. Cells were crosslinked (3 mM DTBP), quenched (200 mM Tris-HCl, pH 6.8), washed (200 mM Tris-HCl, pH 6.8) and lysed (0.05% (w/v) NH4OH, 0.5% (w/v) Triton X-100 in PBS). Cell bodies were removed by hydrodynamic pressure (Waterpik device), and IAC proteins were isolated (125 mM Tris-HCl, pH 6.8, 1% (w/v) SDS, 150 mM dithiothreitol). For proteomic analysis, isolated IACs were precipitated with acetone as previously described (Jones et al., 2015, Curr. Protoc. Cell Biol. 66, 9.8.1–9.8.15). Protein pellets were resuspended in 0.2% (w/v) RapiGest for 2 h, incubated at 90°C for 10 min and subjected to in-solution tryptic digestion at 37°C overnight. Peptides were acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (~1% (v/v) final concentration), desalted on homemade C18 StageTips and resuspended in 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid. Peptides were analysed by LC-MS/MS using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system coupled online to a Q Exactive Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer. Peptides were injected onto a C18-packed emitter in buffer A (2% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.5% (v/v) acetic acid) and eluted with a linear 120-min gradient of 2%–45% (v/v) buffer B (80% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.5% (v/v) acetic acid). Eluting peptides were ionised in positive ion mode before data-dependent analysis. The target value for full scan MS spectra was 3 × 10^6 charges in the 300–1,650 m/z range, with a resolution of 70,000. Ions were fragmented with normalised collision energy of 26, selecting the top 12 ions. A dynamic exclusion window of 30 s was enabled to avoid repeated sequencing of identical peptides. The target value for MS/MS spectra was 5 × 10^4 ions in the 200–2,000 m/z range, with a resolution of 17,500. All spectra were acquired with 1 microscan and without lockmass. Two technical replicate injections were performed per sample for each of three independent biological experiments.

### Data Protocol
Label-free quantitative analysis of MS data was performed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.17). Peptide lists were searched against the human UniProtKB database (version 2015_09) and a common contaminants database using the Andromeda search engine. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification; methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications (up to five modifications per peptide). MS data from two technical replicate analyses were merged for each corresponding independent biological experiment in the peptide search. Peptide and protein FDRs were set to 1%, determined by applying a target-decoy search strategy using MaxQuant. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine, except when followed by proline, and a maximum of two missed cleavages were permitted in the database search. Minimum peptide length was seven amino acids, and at least one peptide ratio was required for label-free quantification. Proteins matching to the reversed or common contaminants databases were omitted. Label-free quantification intensities for proteins quantified in at least two out of three biological replicate analyses of either Met1 or Met4 IACs were binary-logarithm-transformed. Data were normalised globally by robust linear regression using Normalyzer (version 1.1.1). Values missing in all biological replicates of an experimental group were imputed using a first-pass single-value imputation, whereby the local minimum logarithm-transformed intensity value across a given replicate was used to impute missing-not-at-random missing values. Remaining missing values were imputed using a second-pass predictive mean matching imputation using the MICE R package (version 3.9.0).

### Publication Abstract
Interactions between cells and the extracellular matrix, mediated by integrin adhesion complexes, play key roles in fundamental cellular processes, including the sensing and transduction of mechanical cues. Here, we investigate systems-level changes in the integrin adhesome in patient-derived cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma cells and identify the actin regulatory protein Mena as a key node in the adhesion complex network. Mena is connected within a subnetwork of actin-binding proteins to the LINC complex component nesprin-2, with which it interacts and co-localises at the nuclear envelope. Moreover, Mena potentiates the interactions of nesprin-2 with the actin cytoskeleton and the nuclear lamina. CRISPR-mediated Mena depletion causes altered nuclear morphology, reduces tyrosine phosphorylation of the nuclear membrane protein emerin and downregulates expression of the immunomodulatory gene PTX3 via the recruitment of its enhancer to the nuclear periphery. We uncover an unexpected role for Mena at the nuclear membrane, where it controls nuclear architecture, chromatin repositioning and gene expression. Our findings identify an adhesion protein that regulates gene transcription via direct signalling across the nuclear envelope.

### Keywords
Human, Adhesome, Adhesion, Cancer

### Affiliations
University of Edinburgh
University of Manchester

### Submitter
Adam Byron

### Lab Head
Dr Margaret Frame
University of Edinburgh


