### Accession
PXD026793

### Title
Tissue-specific in vivo mitochondrial matrix proteome profiling in mouse

### Description
Targeting proximity labeling enzymes to specific cellular locations is a viable strategy for profiling subcellular proteomes with minimal perturbance to normal physiology. Here, we generate transgenic mice expressing a mitochondrial matrix-targeted ascorbate peroxidase (MTS-APEX2) to enable analysis of tissue-specific matrix proteomes. Desthiobiotin-phenol labeling of the mitochondrial proteome revealed 263 mitochondrial-localized proteins in mouse muscle tissues. Comparison with the MTS-APEX2-labeled proteome in HEK293T cells revealed enrichment in mitochondrial proteins related to energy production in the muscle tissues of transgenic mice. We found Reticulon 4 Interacting Protein 1(RTN4IP1) or Optic Atrophhy-10 (OPA10) was highly enriched in cardiac and soleus muscle and contained a strong mitochondrial matrix-targeting sequence. Structural analysis shows RTN4IP1 is an NADPH oxidoreductase with protein structure resembling quinone oxidoreductase (QOR) in bacterial species. Enzymatic activity assays, interactome analysis, and metabolite profiling confirmed that RTN4IP1 functions in coenzyme Q biosynthesis in the mitochondria. Due to reduced CoQ9 levels, Rtn4ip1-knockout C2C12 cells were vulnerable to oxidative stress and had decreased oxygen consumption rates and ATP production.

### Sample Protocol
Peptide sample preparation and enrichment of biotinylated peptides. All prepared in vivo biotinylated plasma samples were first subjected to buffer exchange with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) buffer to completely remove residual free biotin via 10k MWCO filtration for three times. The biotin depleted plasma samples were transferred and denatured with 500 µL of 8 M urea in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) for 1 hour at 37°C, and followed by reduction of disulfide bonds with 10 mM dithiothreitol for 1 hour at 37°C. The reduced thiol groups in the protein samples were subsequently alkylated with 40 mM iodoacetamide for 1 hour at 37°C in the dark. The resulting alkylated samples were diluted eight times using 50 mM ABC and subjected to trypsinization at 2% (w/w) trypsin concentration under 1 mM CaCl2 concentration for overnight in Thermomixer (37°C and 500 rpm). Samples were centrifuged at 10,000 × g for 3 min to remove insoluble material. Then, 150 µL of streptavidin beads (Pierce) per replicate was washed with 2 M urea in 1× TBS for four times and combined with the individual digested sample. The combined samples were rotated for 1 hour at room temperature. The flow-through fraction was kept, and the beads were washed twice with 2 M urea in 50 mM ABC and finally with pure water in new tubes. The bound biotinylated peptides were eluted with 400 µL of 80% acetonitrile containing 0.2% TFA and 0.1% formic acid after mixing and heating the beads slurry at 60°C. Each eluate was collected into a new tube. Repeat the elution process four more times. Combined elution fractions were dried using Speed vac (Eppendorf) and reconstituted with 10 µL of 25 mM ABC for further LC-MS/MS experiment.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data processing and the identification of biotinylated peptides. All MS/MS datasets were first subject to peak picking and mass recalibration processed with RawConverter18 (http://fields.scripps.edu/rawconv) and MZRefinery19 (https://omics.pnl.gov/software/mzrefinery) software, respectively, and then were searched by MS-GF+20 algorithm (v.9979) at 10 ppm precursor ion mass tolerance against the UniProt reference proteome database (55,152 entries, Mouse). The following search parameters were applied: semi-tryptic digestion, fixed carbamidomethylation on cysteine, dynamic oxidation of methionine, and dynamic biotinylation of a lysine residue (delta monoisotopic mass: +226.07759 Da). The False discovery rate (FDR) was set at < 0.5 % for non-redundantly labeled peptide level and the resulting protein FDR was near or less than 1%. MS/MS spectrum annotation for biotinylated peptides was carried out using LcMsSpectator software (https://omics.pnl.gov/software/lcmsspectator).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mitochondrial proteome, Nadph, Lc-ms/ms, Coenzyme q, Rtn4ip1, Muscle, Apex, Proximity labeling

### Affiliations
School of Biological Sciences, Seoul National University
Assistant professor, School of Biological Sciences, Seoul National University

### Submitter
Jong-Seo Kim

### Lab Head
Dr Jong-Seo Kim
Assistant professor, School of Biological Sciences, Seoul National University


