### Accession
PXD005168

### Title
Persulfidated subproteome reveals the regulation of protein function by hydrogen sulfide in diverse biological processes and nuclear translocation of glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase in plants.

### Description
Hydrogen sulfide-mediated signaling pathways regulates many physiological andpathophysiological processes in mammalian and plant systems. The molecular mechanism bywhich hydrogen sulfide exerts its action involves the oxidative post-translational modificationof cysteine residues to form a persulfidated thiol motif, named as protein S-sulfhydration orpersulfidation. We have developed a comparative and quantitative proteomic analysisapproach for the detection of endogenous S-sulfhydrated proteins in wild-type Arabidopsisand L-CYSTEINE DESULFHYDRASE 1 mutant leaves by using the tag-switch method.Bioinformatic analysis of the identified proteins revealed that S-sulfhydrated cysteines arepart of a wide range of biological functions regulating important processes such as carbonmetabolism, plant responses to abiotic and biotic stresses, plant growth and development, andRNA translation. Quantitative analysis in both genetic backgrounds reveals hydrogen sulfidemediatedprotein sulfhydration as a new regulatory component in primary metabolic pathwayssuch as tricarboxylic acid cycle, glycolysis or Calvin cycle. In addition, studies on thesubcellular localization of glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase show that sulfideregulates the cytosolic/nuclear partitioning by enhancing the nuclear localization of theprotein and appears to be a critical step for reprogramming cellular metabolism.

### Sample Protocol
The protein extracts, were suspended in a volume up to 100 μl of sample buffer, and then applied onto 1.2-cm wide wells of a conventional SDS-PAGE gel (1mm-thick, 4% stacking, and 12% resolving). Then run was stopped as soon as the front entered 1 cm into the resolving gel, so that the whole proteome became concentrated in the stacking/resolving gel interface. The unseparated protein bands were visualized by Coomassie staining, excised, cut into cubes (1mm2), deposited in 96-well plates and processed automatically in a Proteineer DP (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany). The digestion protocol used was based on Schevchenko et al. with minor variations: gel plugs were washed firstly with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and secondly with ACN prior to reduction with 10 mM DTT in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution, and alkylation was carried out with 55 mM IAA in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution. Gel pieces were then rinsed firstly with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and secondly with ACN, and then were dried under a stream of nitrogen. Proteomics Grade Trypsin (Sigma Aldrich) at a final concentration of 16 ng/μl in 25% ACN/50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution was added and the digestion took place at 37°C for 4h. The reaction was stopped by adding 50%ACN/0.5%TFA for peptide extraction. The tryptic eluted peptides were dried by speed-vacuum centrifugation and then desalted onto StageTip C18 Pipette tips (Thermo Scientific) until the mass spectrometric analysis. A 1 µg aliquot of each sample was subjected to 1D-nano LC ESI-MSMS analysis using a nano liquid chromatography system (Eksigent Technologies nanoLC Ultra 1D plus, AB SCIEX, Foster City, CA) coupled to high speed Triple TOF 5600 mass spectrometer (AB SCIEX , Foster City, CA) with a Nanospray III source. The analytical column used was a silica-based reversed phase column C18 ChromXP 75 µm × 15 cm, 3 µm particle size and 120 Å pore size (Eksigent Technologies, AB SCIEX, Foster City, CA). The trap column was a C18 C18 ChromXP (Eksigent Technologies, AB SCIEX, Foster City, CA), 3 m particle diameter, 120 Å pore size, switched on-line with the analytical column. The loading pump delivered a solution of 0.1% formic acid in water at 2 µl/min. The nano-pump provided a flow-rate of 300 nl/min and was operated under gradient elution conditions. Peptides were separated using a 250 minutes gradient ranging from 2% to 90% mobile phase B (mobile phase A: 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid; mobile phase B: 100% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). Injection volume was 5 µl.  Data acquisition was performed with a TripleTOF 5600 System (AB SCIEX, Concord, ON). Data was acquired using an ionspray voltage floating (ISVF) 2800 V, curtain gas (CUR) 20, interface heater temperature (IHT) 150, ion source gas 1 (GS1) 20, declustering potential (DP) 85 V. All data was acquired using information-dependent acquisition (IDA) mode with Analyst TF 1.5 software (AB SCIEX, USA). For IDA parameters, 0.25 s MS survey scan in the mass range of 350–1250 Da were followed by 35 MS/MS scans of 100ms in the mass range of 100–1800 (total cycle time: 4 s). Switching criteria were set to ions greater than mass to charge ratio (m/z) 350 and smaller than m/z 1250 with charge state of 2–5 and an abundance threshold of more than 90 counts (cps). Former target ions were excluded for 20 s. IDA rolling collision energy (CE) parameters script was used for automatically controlling the CE.

### Data Protocol
MS and MS/MS data obtained for individual samples were processed using Analyst® TF 1.5.1 Software (AB SCIEX). Raw data file conversion tools generated mgf files which were also searched against the Arabidopsis thaliana protein database from Uniprot, containing 66814 protein coding genes and their corresponding reversed entries using the Mascot Server v. 2.5.1 (Matrix Science, London, UK). Search parameters were set as follows: acetyl (Protein N-term), CN-Biotin-Na-Sulfide (C), CN-Biotin-Sulfide (C), Methylthio (C), MSBT (C), Oxidation (M) and Sulfide (C) as variable modifications.  Peptide mass tolerance was set to 25 ppm and 0.05 Da for fragment masses, also 2 missed cleavages were allowed. False Discovery Rates (FDR ≤ 1% at PSM level) for peptide identification were manually calculated.

### Publication Abstract
Hydrogen sulfide-mediated signaling pathways regulate many physiological and pathophysiological processes in mammalian and plant systems. The molecular mechanism by which hydrogen sulfide exerts its action involves the post-translational modification of cysteine residues to form a persulfidated thiol motif, a process called protein persulfidation. We have developed a comparative and quantitative proteomic analysis approach for the detection of endogenous persulfidated proteins in wild-type Arabidopsis and L-CYSTEINE DESULFHYDRASE 1 mutant leaves using the tag-switch method. The 2015 identified persulfidated proteins were isolated from plants grown under controlled conditions, and therefore, at least 5% of the entire Arabidopsis proteome may undergo persulfidation under baseline conditions. Bioinformatic analysis revealed that persulfidated cysteines participate in a wide range of biological functions, regulating important processes such as carbon metabolism, plant responses to abiotic and biotic stresses, plant growth and development, and RNA translation. Quantitative analysis in both genetic backgrounds reveals that protein persulfidation is mainly involved in primary metabolic pathways such as the tricarboxylic acid cycle, glycolysis, and the Calvin cycle, suggesting that this protein modification is a new regulatory component in these pathways.

### Keywords
Hydrogen sulfide, Nuclear localization, Arabidopsis, S-sulfhydration, Gapdh, Postranslational modification

### Affiliations
Instituto de Bioquímica Vegetal y Fotosíntesis (IBVF-CSIC)
Proteomics Unit

### Submitter
Sergio Ciordia Higuera

### Lab Head
Dr Luis C. Romero
Instituto de Bioquímica Vegetal y Fotosíntesis (IBVF-CSIC)


