### Accession
PXD002279

### Title
SLC12A3 isoforms in human urine exosomes

### Description
The thiazide-sensitive NaCl cotransporter (NCC) is an important pharmacological target in the treatment of hypertension. Human SLC12A3 gene encoding NCC gives rise to three isoforms. Only the isoform 3 has been extensively investigated. The goal of the present study was, therefore, to determine the abundance and localization of NCC1 and NCC2 in comparison to NCC3 in the human kidney as well as their functional properties in physiological and pathological conditions. To this end, the presence of NCC1, NCC2, and NCC3 in the human urinary exosomes was assessed by mass spectrometric analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Urinary exosome isolation The spot urine samples were collected from patients. Only second morning urine samples were collected (between 8:30 a.m. and 9:30 a.m.).  Ten ml of collected urine was centrifuged at 17,000 × g for 15 minutes at 24°C in ultracentrifuge (Sorvall™ WX Floor Ultra Centrifuges, Thermo Scientific, Asheville, NC, USA) with 70.1Ti rotor. Supernatant was stored at room temperature for 25 minutes. The pellet was resuspended in 200 μl isolation solution (250 mM sucrose and 10 mM triethanolamine-HCl, pH 7.6) and 50 μl 3.24 M dithiothreitol (DTT), subsequently centrifuged at 17,000 × g for 15 minutes at 24°C. Thereafter, supernatant was collected, combined with supernatant obtained from the previous step and centrifuged at 200,000 × g for 1 hour 54 minutes at 24°C. Exosome pellet was dissolved in 50 µl of 1.5 × Laemmli (0.6% w/v SDS, 3% v/v glycerol, 18 mM Tris-HCl pH 6.8 and 0.003% w/v bromophenol blue). All the samples were stored in -20°C for further use.  LC-MS/MS Peptides were separated by an Ultimate 3000 nanoLC-MS/MS system (Dionex LC-Packings, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) equipped with a 20 cm × 75 μm ID fused silica column custom packed with 1.9 μm 120 Å ReproSil Pur C18 aqua (Dr Maisch GMBH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). After injection (15/50 µl Lys-C digest; 20/50 µl trypsin digest), peptides were trapped at 6 μl/min on a 10 mm × 100 μm ID trap column packed with 5 μm 120 Å ReproSil Pur C18 aqua at 2% buffer B (buffer A: 0.5% acetic acid in MQ; buffer B: 80% ACN + 0.5% acetic acid in MQ) and separated at 300 nl/min in a 10–40% buffer B gradient in 60 min (90 min inject-to-inject) at 50˚C. Eluting peptides were ionized at a potential of +2 kVa into a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany). Intact masses were measured at resolution 70.000 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 3 × 106 charges. The top 10 peptides signals (charge-states 2+ and higher) were submitted to MS/MS in the HCD (higher-energy collision) cell (1.6 amu isolation width, 25% normalized collision energy). MS/MS spectra were acquired at resolution 17.500 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 1 × 106 charges, an underfill ratio of 0.1%, and a maximum injection time (IT) of 60 ms. Dynamic exclusion was applied with a repeat count of 1 and an exclusion time of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification MS/MS spectra were searched against the Uniprot human reference proteome FASTA file, release January 2014, no fragments; 42104 entries using MaxQuant 1.5.2.8 (47). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin or Lys-C, depending on the protease used, and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Cysteine carboxamidomethylation (Cys, +57.021464 Da) was treated as fixed modification and methionine oxidation (Met, +15.994915 Da), Gln-> pyroglutamate (pyr-Gln, -17.026549 Da) and N-terminal acetylation (N-terminal, +42.010565 Da) as variable modifications. Peptide precursor ions were searched with a maximum mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and fragment ions with a maximum mass deviation of 20 ppm (default MaxQuant settings). Peptide and protein identifications were filtered at an FDR of 1% using the decoy database strategy. Proteins that could not be differentiated based on MS/MS spectra alone were grouped to protein groups (default MaxQuant settings).

### Publication Abstract
The thiazide-sensitive NaCl cotransporter (NCC) is an important pharmacological target in the treatment of hypertension. The human SLC12A3 gene, encoding NCC, gives rise to three isoforms. Only the third isoform has been extensively investigated. The aim of the present study was, therefore, to establish the abundance and localization of the almost identical isoforms 1 and 2 (NCC1/2) in the human kidney and to determine their functional properties and regulation in physiological conditions. Immunohistochemical analysis of NCC1/2 in the human kidney revealed that NCC1/2 localizes to the apical plasma membrane of the distal convoluted tubule. Importantly, NCC1/2 mRNA constitutes &#x223c; 44% of all NCC isoforms in the human kidney. Functional analysis performed in the Xenopus laevis oocyte revealed that thiazide-sensitive (22)Na(+) transport of NCC1 was significantly increased compared with NCC3. Mimicking a constitutively active phosphorylation site at residue 811 (S811D) in NCC1 further augmented Na(+) transport, while a nonphosphorylatable variant (S811A) of NCC1 prevented this enhanced response. Analysis of human urinary exosomes demonstrated that water loading in human subjects significantly reduces the abundance of NCC1/2 in urinary exosomes. The present study highlights that previously underrepresented NCC1/2 is a fully functional thiazide-sensitive NaCl-transporting protein. Being significantly expressed in the kidney, it may constitute a unique route of renal NaCl reabsorption and could, therefore, play an important role in blood pressure regulation.

### Keywords
Human, Urine, Isoforms, Exosomes, Label-free

### Affiliations
OncoProteomics Laboratory, Dept of Medical Oncology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
OncoProteomics Laboratory, dept of Medical Oncology, VUmc Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Sander Piersma

### Lab Head
Dr Connie Ramona Jimenez
OncoProteomics Laboratory, Dept of Medical Oncology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands


