### Accession
PXD006329

### Title
Determination of the specificity profiling of native and synthetic cardosin B using proteomic identification of protease cleavage sites (PICS)

### Description
We performed an analysis of the substrate specificity preferences of native and synthetic cardosin B using the Proteomic Identification of protease Cleavage Sites methodology and some differences regarding preference and stringency of the subsite binding pockets were observed. Results clearly suggest that synthetic cardosin B is more stringent than native cardosin B explaining the observed suitability of the synthetic protein as biotechnological tool in cheese industry.

### Sample Protocol
Proteome-derived peptide libraries were generated by digestion of cultured human TPH-1 cell lysates with trypsin or GluC. Both libraries were independently incubated at 37 °C with synthetic and native cardosin B at protease-to-library ratios of 1:90 (wt/wt), in 50 mM sodium acetate buffer pH 4.5, 100 mM NaCl for 5 h. After incubation, samples were analyzed on a Triple TOFTM 5600 System (ABSciex®) in information-dependent acquisition (IDA) mode. Peptides were resolved by liquid chromatography (nanoLC Ultra 2D, Eksigent®) on a MicroLC column Halo Fused-Core C18 (300 μm ID × 15 cm length, 2.7 μm particles, 90 Å pore size, Eksigent®) at 5μL/min with a 110 min linear gradient from 2% to 30% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were ionized into the mass spectrometer using an electrospray ionization source (DuoSprayTM Source, ABSciex®) with a 50 μm internal diameter (ID) stainless steel emitter (NewObjective).For IDA experiments was performed (as described in Anjo et al (2015)), the mass spectrometer was set for IDA scanning full spectra (350-1250 m/z) for 250 ms, followed by up to 30 MS/MS scans (100-1500 m/z for 100 ms each). Candidate ions with a charge state between +2 and +5 and counts above a minimum threshold of 70 counts per second were isolated for fragmentation, and 1 MS/MS spectra was collected before adding those ions to the exclusion list for 15 sec (mass spectrometer operated by Analyst® TF 1.6, ABSciex®). Rolling collision energy was used with a collision energy spread of 5.

### Data Protocol
Analysis of the peptide sequences was performed using MS Converter (ProteoWizard) converting the L into C-MS/MS raw data files (.wiff) , into .mzxml files applying MS1 level filter (Darren Kessner D, et al. (2008) Bioinformatics).  Peptide sequences were then identiﬁed with X!Tandem (Craig R & Beavis RC (2004) Bioinformatics), in conjunction with IProphet [Shteynberg D, et al. (2011) Mol. Cell Proteomics) at a conﬁdence level > 99%. Analysis parameters were established such as mass tolerances at 0.05 Da for parent ions and 0.1 Da for fragment ions, as well as for identification of the following static modifications: carboxyamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+ 57.02 Da), dimethylation of lysines (+ 28.03 Da) and thioacylation of peptide amino termini (+ 88.00 Da). Semi-style cleavage searches were applied with no constraints for the orientation of the specific terminus. The Web-based PICS service (Schilling et al 2011a) was used to derive nonprime sequences and to reconstruct the cleavage sites.

### Publication Abstract
The potential of using a synthetic cardosin-based rennet in cheese manufacturing was recently demonstrated with the development and optimization of production of a recombinant form of cardosin B in Kluyveromyces lactis. With the goal of providing a more detailed characterization of this rennet, we herein evaluate the impact of the plant-specific insert (PSI) on cardosin B secretion in this yeast, and provide a thorough analysis of the specificity requirements as well as the biochemical and structural properties of the isolated recombinant protease. We demonstrate that the PSI domain can be substituted by different linker sequences without substantially affecting protein secretion and milk clotting activity. However, the presence of small portions of the PSI results in dramatic reductions of secretion yields in this heterologous system. Kinetic characterization and specificity profiling results clearly suggest that synthetic cardosin B displays lower catalytic efficiency and is more sequence selective than native cardosin B. Elucidation of the structure of synthetic cardosin B confirms the canonical fold of an aspartic protease with the presence of two high mannose-type, N-linked glycan structures; however, there are some differences in the conformation of the flap region when compared to cardosin A. These subtle variations in catalytic properties and the more stringent substrate specificity of synthetic cardosin B help to explain the observed suitability of this rennet for cheese production.

### Keywords
Cardosin, Pics

### Affiliations
Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology
CNC-Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology, University of Coimbra, 3004-517 Coimbra, Portugal; Biocant, Biotechnology Innovation Center, 3060-197 Cantanhede, Portugal;

### Submitter
Rui Cruz

### Lab Head
Dr Isaura Simões
CNC-Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology, University of Coimbra, 3004-517 Coimbra, Portugal; Biocant, Biotechnology Innovation Center, 3060-197 Cantanhede, Portugal;


