### Accession
PXD012728

### Title
Direct quantification of viral epitope abundance reveals the importance of direct and cross-presentation in driving CTL responses during influenza infection

### Description
The magnitude of CD8+ T lymphocyte (CTL) responses to infection is a function of the available naïve T cell repertoire, combined with the context and duration of antigen presentation. Whilst T cell repertoires are relatively easily studied, the context and abundance of epitopes presented on infected cells and dendritic cells (DCs) and their subsequent impact on CTL responses are generally poorly understood. Using quantitative mass spectrometry, we identified and quantified the abundance of 21 class 1 Major Histocompatibility Complex molecule (MHCI)-restricted influenza A virus (IAV)-derived peptides following either direct presentation or cross-presentation. All identified peptides, including seven novel epitopes, elicited T cell responses in infected C57BL/6 mice. Quantitation of IAV epitopes displayed via direct presentation showed a maintenance of relative epitope abundance across distinct cell types, reflecting common antigen processing mechanisms. Comparison of epitope levels displayed via direct presentation and cross-presentation revealed a broad range of directly presented epitope abundances, which was normalised during cross-presentation. Further, we observed a clear disparity in the abundance of the two key immunodominant IAV antigens, wherein direct infection drove optimal nucleoprotein (NP)366-374 presentation, while cross-presentation was optimal for acid polymerase (PA)224-233 presentation. This study provides a detailed dissection of viral pMHCI abundance after infection and reveals the importance of both direct and cross-presentation in driving dominant CTL responses. The study also demonstrates how empirical assessment of epitope abundance in both modes of antigen presentation is necessary to fully understand the immunogenicity and response magnitude to T cell epitopes.

### Sample Protocol
Peptide-MHC were isolated from infected cells using immunoprecipitation and eluted, RP-HPLC fractionated and analysed by either DDA (SCIEX TripleTOF 5600) or MRM (SCIEX QTRAP 5500). Tryptic digests of remaining cell lysate were analysed by either LFQ (Thermo QExactive Plus) or SWATH-MS (SCIEX TripleTOF 5600).

### Data Protocol
Data were processed by ProteinPilot v5, Maxquant and Skyline.

### Publication Abstract
The magnitude of T cell responses to infection is a function of the na&#xef;ve T cell repertoire combined with the context and duration of antigen presentation. Using mass spectrometry, we identify and quantify 21 class 1 MHC-restricted influenza A virus (IAV)-peptides following either direct or cross-presentation. All these peptides, including seven novel epitopes, elicit T cell responses in infected C57BL/6 mice. Directly presented IAV epitopes maintain their relative abundance across distinct cell types and reveal a broad range of epitope abundances. In contrast, cross-presented epitopes are more uniform in abundance. We observe a clear disparity in the abundance of the two key immunodominant IAV antigens, wherein direct infection drives optimal nucleoprotein (NP)<sub>366-374</sub> presentation, while cross-presentation is optimal for acid polymerase (PA)<sub>224-233</sub> presentation. The study demonstrates how assessment of epitope abundance in both modes of antigen presentation is necessary to fully understand the immunogenicity and response magnitude to T cell epitopes.

### Keywords
Influenza, Mrm, Mhc, Peptide, Srm

### Affiliations
Monash University
Infection and Immunity Program, Biomedicine Discovery Institute & Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria 3800, Australia

### Submitter
Nathan Croft

### Lab Head
Dr Anthony Purcell
Infection and Immunity Program, Biomedicine Discovery Institute & Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria 3800, Australia


