### Accession
PXD044152

### Title
Effect of diet and association with fertility outcomes in semen proteome and transcriptome from wild and captive Black-footed ferrets

### Description
The black-footed ferret (Mustela nigripes) is a star example of the efforts of conservation programs in bringing endangered species back from the brink of extinction. As one of the world’s most endangered mammals, the vast majority of black-footed ferrets living in the wild today are the offspring of a founding captive population. The success of this ongoing breeding program, however, is threatened by inbreeding depression and the observed decline in pregnancy rates since its founding. As the wild and modern captive populations share a genetic history, the greatest difference between the two groups is the captive environment of the breeding program. In this study, we used RNA sequencing and proteomics for the first time in black-footed ferrets to explore whether the diet of wild ferrets versus captive diet variants could explain the differences in fertility and sperm characteristics observed between each population. We find that changes in both the transcriptional and proteomic profile of black-footed ferret ejaculate are strongly associated with differences in fertility, especially in pathways associated with innate immunity and metabolism; that transcriptional changes are further exacerbated by diet. Overall, our results support the hypothesis of ongoing environmental-dependent inbreeding depression in the black-footed ferret, with a need to re-evaluate dietary and environmental parameters of the conservation program; and also illustrates the value of multi-level genomics for conservation management programs.

### Sample Protocol
A small volume from each collected semen sample was processed and stored for proteomics and/or transcriptome analyses. Samples were spun down at 1000xG for 5 minutes, followed by resuspension in 50uL RIPA buffer (Thermo 89901) supplemented with 1x Halt Protease and Phosphatase Inhibitor cocktail (Thermo 78443). Samples were lysed overnight, followed by flash-freezing in liquid nitrogen. For transcriptome analysis, 3-5 μl of semen was collected using a micropipette after electroejaculation and directly added to vials of RNA-later solution (Invitrogen). Samples were allowed to equilibrate at room temperature for 5 minutes and then directly frozen in liquid nitrogen or placed on dry ice for future use. Semen samples for proteomics analysis were sent to the proteomics core at the University of California, Davis for processing and sequencing. Proteins were subjected to tryptic digestion via suspension-trap (S-Trap) devices (ProtiFi).  The obtained peptides were submitted to LCMS analysis; specifically, peptides were separated on a Thermo Scientific Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLC system with a PepMap 75 µm x 25 cm C18 analytical column (PepMap, Denmark) preceded by a PepSep C18 guard column, all heated to 40 °C.  A volume of 5 μL was injected corresponding to 0.6 μg of total peptide and separation was performed in a total run time of 60 min with a flow rate of 600 μL/min with mobile phases A: water/0.1% formic acid and B: 80%ACN/0.1% formic acid. Separated peptides were eluted directly into an Orbitrap Exploris 480 instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The full MS resolution was set to 60,000 at m/z 200, and full MS AGC target was 300% with an IT set to Auto. Mass range was set to 350–1500. For fragmentation spectra, a resolution of 15,000, Isolation width was set at 1.6 m/z, normalized collision energy was set at 30%. The AGC target value was set to Standard, with max injection time of 40 msec and TopN=30 scans.

### Data Protocol
All analysis for proteomics data , including quality control and statistical testing, was performed by the UC David proteomics core using the SimpliFi analysis platform (ProtiFi). Briefly, proteomics data was uploaded to the SimpliFi platform alongside proteome annotations from NCBI for the domestic ferret (Mustela putorius furo, GCF_011764305.1) supplemented with predicted protein sequences for Protamine 1 and Protamine 3 specifically from the black-footed ferret.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Diet, Fertility, Genomics, Conservation, Black-footed ferret

### Affiliations
Department of Integrative Biology, University of California Berkeley
Department of Integrative Biology
University of California, Berkeley

### Submitter
Juan Vazquez

### Lab Head
Dr Juan Manuel Vazquez
Department of Integrative Biology, University of California Berkeley


