### Accession
PXD025971

### Title
Rapid Highly-Efficient Digestion and Peptide Mapping of Adeno-Associated Viruses

### Description
[15:18] Toole, Estee      Adeno-Associated Viruses (AAVs) comprise an area of rapidly growing interest due to their ability to act as a gene delivery vehicle in novel gene therapy strategies and vaccine development.  Peptide mapping is a common technique in the biopharmaceutical industry to confirm the correct sequence, product purity, PTMs, and stability. However, conventional peptide mapping is time-consuming and has proven difficult to reproduce with viral capsids because of their high structural stability and the suboptimal localization of trypsin cleavage sites in the AAV protein sequences.  In this study, we present an optimized workflow that provides thorough characterization within one day.  This workflow is also highly reproducible due to its simplicity having very few steps, and easy to perform proteolytic digestion utilizing thermally-stable pepsin, active at 70°C in acidic conditions.  The acidic conditions of the peptic digestions drive viral capsid denaturation and improve cleavage site accessibility.  We characterized the efficiency and ease of digestion through peptide mapping of the AAV2 viral capsid protein.  Using nanoflow liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry, we achieved 100% sequence coverage of the low abundance VP1 capsid protein with a digestion process taking only 10 minutes to prepare and 30 minutes to complete the digestion.

### Sample Protocol
25 µL of water were added to the 25 µL AAV sample and then diluted 1:4 (v/v) with the Pepsin or Trypsin SMART Digest buffer (pH 2) provided with the kit.  5 µL of 0.5 M TCEP were added to the digestion mixture.   To initiate digestion, 15 µL of the Magnetic SMART digest resin were then added to the sample (corresponding to 14 µg of heat-stable immobilized pepsin), and the reaction vessels were placed on an Eppendorf thermomixer equilibrated at 70 °C.  In all samples, the  digestion was allowed to proceed at 70 °C for 45 minutes at 1400 rpm.  After the digestion, the digestion vessel was placed in a side magnetized plate, and the supernatant was transferred to a fresh tube.  To ensure no residual resin was present in the sample, the side magnetic attraction of enzymatic beads and transfer of supernatant was repeated.  All samples were diluted with 0.1% formic acid (FA) in water to a final protein concentration of 1 µg in 200 µL, and 5 µL of this digest mixture were loaded on the column for each chromatographic analysis.  LC-MS of Digest Mixtures: Nanoflow liquid chromatography with tandem high-resolution accurate mass spectrometry (nano-LC/MS/MS) peptide mapping analysis for AAV2 was performed on an EASY nLC-1200TM nano-HPLC online with an Orbitrap QE PlusTM hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The separation was performed using an EASY SprayTM column (ES803A), packed with Acclaim PepMap C18 stationary phase which has an ID of 75µm, an OD of 500mm and a particle size of 2µm with 100 Å pore size.  A flow rate of 300 nL/min and a column temperature of 40 °C were the conditions used throughout the separation. The peptides were eluted using a linear gradient from 2% to 60% B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) over 100 min. The source parameters for the mass spectrometer were as follows: source voltage: 1.8 kV, capillary temperature 320 °C, S-lens RF level of 70%. Data were acquired using a top 10 data-dependent method with a full scan resolution of 70,000 (300 – 2000 m/z), and MS/MS was done using higher energy collisional excitation (HCD) at a normalized collision energy of 30 at a resolution of 17,500. The full scan data accuracy was improved by mass locking on the 445.1200 m/z ambient air contaminant.   Mass spectrometer parameters were set for an AGC target of 5e5 with a maximum IT of 55 ms.  Minimum intensity required for MS2 was set to 2e4 wit a dynamic exclusion time of 60s.  Singly charged ions are typically excluded, however, as pepsin digests produce an abundance of singly charged ions these were not excluded.

### Data Protocol
The peptide identification was performed using Biopharma Finder for mass fingerprinting against the AAV2 VP1 viral capsid protein sequences with MS and MS/MS tolerance of 10 ppm.  The sequence of VP1 was used for the sequence analysis as the sequence of VP2 and VP3 are contained in VP1.  N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation, glycation, and asparagine deamidation were included as variable modifications.  Cleavage specificity for trypsin was defined as highly specific for cleavage at KR residues.  Cleavage specificity for pepsin was defined as low specificity for cleavage at residues CDEFLMTWY.

### Publication Abstract
Adeno-associated viruses (AAVs) comprise an area of rapidly growing interest due to their ability to act as a gene delivery vehicle in novel gene therapy strategies and vaccine development. Peptide mapping is a common technique in the biopharmaceutical industry to confirm the correct sequence, product purity, post-translational modifications (PTMs), and stability. However, conventional peptide mapping is time-consuming and has proven difficult to reproduce with viral capsids because of their high structural stability and the suboptimal localization of trypsin cleavage sites in the AAV protein sequences. In this study, we present an optimized peptide mapping-based workflow that provides thorough characterization within 1 day. This workflow is also highly reproducible due to its simplicity having very few steps and is easy to perform proteolytic digestion utilizing thermally stable pepsin, which is active at 70 &#xb0;C in acidic conditions. The acidic conditions of the peptic digestions drive viral capsid denaturation and improve cleavage site accessibility. We characterized the efficiency and ease of digestion through peptide mapping of the AAV2 viral capsid protein. Using nanoflow liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry, we achieved 100% sequence coverage of the low-abundance VP1 capsid protein with a digestion process taking only 10 min to prepare and 45 min to complete the digestion.

### Keywords
Estee      gene therapy, Trypsin, Viral therapies, Proteolysis, Aav, [15:18] toole, Pepsin, Peptide mapping, Nanolc

### Affiliations
Thermo Fisher Scientific

### Submitter
Andrew Williamson

### Lab Head
Dr Estee Toole
Thermo Fisher Scientific


