### Accession
PXD006119

### Title
Human WIPI interactome (LC-MSMS)

### Description
Analysis of the WIPI protein interactome using nanoLC-MS/MS analysis upon the immunopurification of GFP-tagged WIPI1, WIPI2B, WIPI2D, WIPI3, WIPI4 and GFP alone from U2OS cells. Prior to immunopurifications, cells were either kept under fed (DMEM/FCS) or starved conditions (EBSS), or were treated with wortmannin (200 nM) for 3 h.

### Sample Protocol
Monoclonal U2OS cell lines stably expressing GFP-WIPI1, GFP-WIPI2B, GFP-WIPI2D, GFP-WIPI3, GFP-WIPI4 proteins or GFP alone were subjected to anti-GFP immunoprecipitations. Purified protein complexes were separated in a 12% NUPAGE Novex Bis-Tris Gel (Invitrogen) in MOPS SDS running buffer (Invitrogen) for 10 min at 200 V and the gel was stained with Colloidal Blue Staining Kit (Invitrogen).  Project 0539 (internal reference): R1: GFP-WIPI3 (starved conditions, 3 h EBSS)  R2: GFP-WIPI3 (fed conditions, 3 h DMEM/FCS)  R3: GFP (starved conditions, 3 h EBSS)  R2: GFP (fed conditions, 3 h DMEM/FCS)   Project 287 (internal reference): R07: GFP-WIPI1 (fed conditions) R08: GFP-WIPI2B (fed conditions) R09: GFP-WIPI2D (fed conditions) R10: GFP-WIPI4 (fed conditions)  Project 0316 (internal reference): R01: GFP-WIPI1 (fed conditions) R02: GFP-WIPI2B (fed conditions) R03: GFP-WIPI2D (fed conditions) R04: GFP-WIPI4 (fed conditions) R05: GFP (fed conditions) R06: GFP-WIPI1 (starved conditions, 3 h EBSS)  R07: GFP-WIPI2B (starved conditions, 3 h EBSS)  R08: GFP-WIPI2D (starved conditions, 3 h EBSS)  R09: GFP-WIPI4 (starved conditions, 3 h EBSS)  R10: GFP (starved conditions, 3 h EBSS) R11: GFP-WIPI1 (wortmannin treatment, 3 h)  R12: GFP-WIPI2B (wortmannin treatment, 3 h)  R13: GFP-WIPI2D (wortmannin treatment, 3 h)  R14: GFP-WIPI4 (wortmannin treatment, 3 h)  R15: GFP (wortmannin treatment, 3 h)  Protein eluates were purified by SDS-PAGE (Invitrogen). Coomassie-stained gel pieces were cut and digested in gel with trypsin as described previously. Peptide mixtures were desalted using C18 StageTips and separated on the EasyLC nano-HPLC (Proxeon Biosystems) coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap XL (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Binding and chromatographic separation of the peptides was performed on a 15 cm fused silica emitter with an inner diameter of 75 µm (Proxeon Biosystems),  in-house packed with reversed-phase ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 3 µm resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH). The peptide mixtures were injected in HPLC solvent A (0.5% acetic acid) at a flow rate of 500 nl/min and subsequently eluted with an 127 minute segmented gradient of 5–33-50-90% of HPLC solvent B (80% acetonitrile in 0.5% acetic acid) at a flow rate of 200 nl/min. The 10 most intense precursor ions were sequentially fragmented in each scan cycle using collision-induced dissociation (CID). In all measurements, sequenced precursor masses were excluded from further selection for 90 s. The target values were 5000 charges for MS/MS fragmentation and 106 charges for the MS scan.

### Data Protocol
Acquired MS spectra were processed with MaxQuant software package versions 1.2.2.9 with integrated Andromeda search engine. Database search was performed against a target-decoy H. sapiens database obtained from Uniprot (downloaded 25th of February 2014), containing 88,692 protein entries, and 245 commonly observed contaminants. Trypsin was defined as the protease with a maximum missed cleavage of two. Oxidation of methionines, N-terminal acetylation, and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine were specified as variable modifications, whereas carbamidomethylation on cysteines was defined as a fixed modification. Initial maximum allowed mass tolerance was set to 6 ppm (for the survey scan) and 0.5 Da for CID fragment ions. A false discovery rate of 1% was applied at the peptide and protein level.  WIPI1, WIPI2, WIPI4: For the identification of WIPI-interaction proteins data processing was conducted a) by combining results achieved from the different treatments (fed, starved, wortmannin) for each WIPI member, and b) by combining WIPI2B and WIPI2D data for WIPI2. Further data processing was conducted by using the criteria: 1) nuclear proteins (Uniprot gene ontology) identified were excluded, 2) proteins identified in GFP control complexes were excluded unless the peptide count of proteins identified in GFP-WIPI immunocomplexes divided by the peptide counts of proteins of the GFP control samples was higher than 10, 3) the sum of all peptide counts in independent sets was higher than 2, 4) peptides were identified in at least two independent experiments.  WIPI3: For the identification of WIPI3-interacting proteins data from the different treatments (fed, starved) were combined and the proteins with peptide counts present in the GFP control samples were excluded.  WIPI1, WIPI2, WIPI3, WIPI4: Finally, GeneMANIA was used to visualise interactions identified in our study and to distinguish from previously reported or predicted interactions (network category 'physical interactions', weighting over 10).

### Publication Abstract
Autophagy is controlled by AMPK and mTOR, both of which associate with ULK1 and control the production of phosphatidylinositol 3-phosphate (PtdIns3P), a prerequisite for autophagosome formation. Here we report that WIPI3 and WIPI4 scaffold the signal control of autophagy upstream of PtdIns3P production and have a role in the PtdIns3P effector function of WIPI1-WIPI2 at nascent autophagosomes. In response to LKB1-mediated AMPK stimulation, WIPI4-ATG2 is released from a WIPI4-ATG2/AMPK-ULK1 complex and translocates to nascent autophagosomes, controlling their size, to which WIPI3, in complex with FIP200, also contributes. Upstream, WIPI3 associates with AMPK-activated TSC complex at lysosomes, regulating mTOR. Our WIPI interactome analysis reveals the scaffold functions of WIPI proteins interconnecting autophagy signal control and autophagosome formation. Our functional kinase screen uncovers a novel regulatory link between LKB1-mediated AMPK stimulation that produces a direct signal via WIPI4, and we show that the AMPK-related kinases NUAK2 and BRSK2 regulate autophagy through WIPI4.

### Keywords
Wipi4, Wipi3, Lc-msms, Wipi2, Autophagy, Wipi1

### Affiliations
Tuebingen University
Eberhard Karls University Tübingen Faculty of Science Interfaculty Institute of Cell Biology  Department of Molecular Biology Auf der Morgenstelle 15 72076 Tübingen Germany

### Submitter
Nicolas Nalpas

### Lab Head
Dr Tassula Proikas-Cezanne
Eberhard Karls University Tübingen Faculty of Science Interfaculty Institute of Cell Biology  Department of Molecular Biology Auf der Morgenstelle 15 72076 Tübingen Germany


