### Accession
PXD011241

### Title
Exosomes of p53 mutant H1299 cells

### Description
Proteome of exosomes purified from H1299-p53R273H (mutant) and H1299-p53-/- cells, which found the levels of Podocalyxin altered in p53-mutant cells.

### Sample Protocol
H1299-p53-/- cells were cultured in heavy SILAC (lysine8, arginine10 – Cambridge Isotope Labs) and H1299-p53R273H in light SILAC medium. Conditioned media from these labelled cells were mixed and exosomes isolated by differential centrifugation. The exosome pellet was re-suspended in 6M urea for mass spectrometry analysis. Exosome proteins were reduced (10 mM dithiothreitol), alkylated (55 mM iodoacetamide) and digested (Lys C and trypsin). Peptides were cleaned using stage tips and re-dissolved in 5 % acetonitrile/0.25 % formic acid. Protein samples were then applied directly to an Orbitrap Elite (LC-MS).

### Data Protocol
Data was searched and quantified using Swissprot (Human) database and MaxQuant software (version 1.5.0.36).

### Publication Abstract
Mutant p53s (mutp53) increase cancer invasiveness by upregulating Rab-coupling protein (RCP) and diacylglycerol kinase-&#x3b1; (DGK&#x3b1;)-dependent endosomal recycling. Here we report that mutp53-expressing tumour cells produce exosomes that mediate intercellular transfer of mutp53's invasive/migratory gain-of-function by increasing RCP-dependent integrin recycling in other tumour cells. This process depends on mutp53's ability to control production of the sialomucin, podocalyxin, and activity of the Rab35 GTPase which interacts with podocalyxin to influence its sorting to exosomes. Exosomes from mutp53-expressing tumour cells also influence integrin trafficking in normal fibroblasts to promote deposition of a highly pro-invasive extracellular matrix (ECM), and quantitative second harmonic generation microscopy indicates that this ECM displays a characteristic orthogonal morphology. The lung ECM of mice possessing mutp53-driven pancreatic adenocarcinomas also displays increased orthogonal characteristics which precedes metastasis, indicating that mutp53 can influence the microenvironment in distant organs in a way that can support invasive growth.

### Keywords
Human; h1299; cancer; podocalyxin; p53

### Affiliations
CRUK Beatson Institute
Tumour Microenvironment & Proteomics

### Submitter
Sara Zanivan

### Lab Head
Dr Sara Zanivan
CRUK Beatson Institute


