### Accession
PXD024734

### Title
Comparative proteomics of human visceral and subcutaneous adipocytes

### Description
Adipose tissue (AT) distribution is an important determinant of cardiometabolic health. Increased visceral adiposity has been associated with a higher risk of obesity-related diseases. An important step in deciphering the molecular complexity of subcutaneous AT (SAT) and visceral AT (VAT) is to elucidate the molecular composition of the principal AT cell type, adipocytes. We present a comprehensive protein expression profile of abdominal subcutaneous (SA) and omental visceral adipocytes (VA). We isolated adipocytes from paired AT biopsies obtained during bariatric surgery of 19 morbidly obese women (BMI > 30 kg/m2) and performed state-of-the-art mass spectrometry to investigate their proteome profiles. We identified 3,686 proteins groups and found 1,140 differentially expressed proteins (adj. p-value < 0.05), of which 576 proteins were upregulated in SA and 564 in VA samples. In addition to providing a global protein profile of abdominal SA and omental VA, we also present the most differentially expressed pathways and processes distinguishing SA from VA. We show that SA are significantly more active in processes linked to vesicular transport and secretion, and also to increased lipid metabolism activity. Conversely, the expression of proteins involved in the mitochondrial energy metabolism and translational or biosynthetic activity is higher in VA. We also performed prediction analyses of differentially expressed putative secreted proteins, which revealed a significantly higher number of potentially secreted proteins in SA compared to VA. Our analysis represents a valuable resource of protein expression profiles in abdominal SA and omental VA, highlighting key differences in their role in obesity. Additionally, we predict possible protein targets among secreted proteins, which may be utilized for the further investigation of the role of different AT depots in obesity using peripheral blood.

### Sample Protocol
All adipocyte samples isolated from visceral and subcutaneous adipose tissue were completely thawed and vortexed with an SDT lysis buffer (4 % Sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS; Sigma-Aldrich, Cat# 436143), 0.1 M Dithiothreitol (DTT; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat# R0862), 0.1 M Tris/HCl (Sigma-Aldrich, Cat# 10812846001), pH = 7.6) in a Thermomixer® (Eppendorf) for one minute. The mixtures were subsequently heated at 95 °C for 30 min while mixing at high speed. The supernatant was cleared by centrifugation (20,000×g, 15 min) and the solution below the lipid layer was collected for further processing. Protein extract quality and its concentration were assessed by 1D SDS-PAGE (Gallagher, 2012) to ensure comparable conditions for all samples during filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) (Wiśniewski et al., 2009; Wiśniewski and Rakus, 2014). Protein lysates (50 mg) were mixed with 8 M UA buffer (8 M urea (Sigma-Aldrich, Cat# U1250) in 0.1 M Tris/HCl (Sigma-Aldrich, Cat# 10812846001), pH 8.5) on Microcon-30kDa cut-off filters (Merck Millipore, Cat# MRCF0R030) and centrifuged at 14,000×g for 30 minutes at 20 °C. The retained proteins were washed with 200 μl UA buffer. The final protein precipitate in the Microcon devices was mixed with 100 μl of UA buffer containing 50 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich, Cat# I1149) and incubated in the dark for 20 minutes at room temperature. Subsequently, the samples were washed three times with 100 μl UA buffer and three times with 100 μl of 50 mM NH4HCO3 (Sigma-Aldrich, Cat# A6141). Finally, trypsin (enzyme:protein ratio of 1:50; sequencing grade, Promega, Cat# V5111) was added onto the filter and the mixture was incubated for 18 hours at 37 °C. The tryptic peptides were then eluted by centrifugation followed by two additional elution steps with 50 μl of 50 mM NH4HCO3. Peptides were then cleaned by liquid-liquid extraction (3 iterations) using water saturated ethyl acetate (Yeung et al., 2008). Cleaned FASP eluates were evaporated completely in a SpeedVac concentrator (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The resulting peptides were extracted into LC-MS vials by 2.5 % formic acid (FA) in 50 % acetonitrile (ACN) and 100% ACN with an addition of polyethylene glycol (20,000; final concentration 0.001 %) (Stejskal et al., 2013) and concentrated in a SpeedVac concentrator (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The samples were processed in two batches (12 sample pairs per batch).   Peptide mixtures were measured using an LC-MS/MS system consisting of an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (SRD-3400, NCS-3500RS CAP, WPS-3000 TPL RS; Thermo Fisher Scientific) combined with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with Digital PicoView 550 nanospray ion source. Tryptic digests (~2 µg/injection) were online concentrated and desalted on a trapping column (100 μm × 30 mm, filled with 3.5 μm X-Bridge BEH 130 C18 sorbent (Waters, Milford)) using 0.1% formic acid (FA) in water. The peptides were eluted from the trapping column onto an Acclaim Pepmap100 C18 analytical column (3 µm particles, 75 μm × 500 mm; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat# 164570). Peptides were separated using a 120-minute gradient (mobile phase A – 0.1% FA in water; mobile phase B – 0.1 % FA in 80% (v/v) acetonitrile. Peptides were eluted with a linear 75 min gradient of 1–30 % of mobile phase B, followed by a 30 min increase to 56 % of mobile phase B and a 5 min increase to 80 % of mobile phase B, and a 10 min wash of 80 % mobile phase B at a flow rate of 300 nl/min.  MS data were acquired using data-dependent acquisition. Target values for full scan MS spectra were 4 × 10e5 charges in m/z range 350–2,000 with a maximum injection time of 54 ms and a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 200. MS/MS scans after HCD fragmentation with 30% collision energy were performed at a resolution of 30,000 at m/z 200 with an ion target value of 5 × 10e4 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. All peptide mixtures were analysed separately in a randomized manner; VA and SA samples from each patient were analysed together.

### Data Protocol
MS raw data files were analysed using MaxQuant software (v. 1.6.1.0) (Cox and Mann, 2008) using default settings unless otherwise noted. MS/MS ion searches were performed against the UniProtKB Human FASTA database (Homo sapiens, taxon ID 9606, version 2018-05 from 28.05.2018) and cRAP contaminant database (version 170518; thegpm.org/crap) using the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011). Carbamidomethylation on cysteine was set as a fixed modification and N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation, and asparagine/glutamine deamination as variable modifications. Trypsin/P enzyme with 2 allowed missed cleavages and minimal peptide length of 6 amino acids were set. The false discovery rate (FDR) was 0.01 for both protein and peptide levels. The match-between-runs algorithm was used across the whole dataset to improve peptide matching. Tissue type label (VAT/SAT) for sample pair 10 raw files was swapped and corrected within the MaxQuant search. The raw files naming was also corrected for the Pride submission.  Protein intensities reported in the proteinGroups.txt file (output of MaxQuant) were further processed using the software container environment (https://github.com/OmicsWorkflows) version 3.7.2a and R software (Team and R Development Core Team, 2016). Processing workflow is available upon request. Briefly, it included the following: a) removal of decoy hits and contaminant protein groups; b) exclusion of 4 male sample pairs and an outlying sample pair; b) protein group intensities log2 transformation, c) LoessF normalization, and d) missing values imputation using the imp4p package. The study originally included 20 women and 4 men; however, the male samples were under-represented and thus excluded from the study – data available at the Pride repository. One female patient was excluded due to the outlying data pattern of visceral adipocyte protein intensities. Protein groups were only considered for subsequent analysis if they contained measured intensity value in at least 8 samples of VA or SA and were identified to at least 2 peptides. The imputed normalized protein intensities were used for differential expression analyses using the LIMMA R package (Ritchie et al., 2015). The linear model used to compare paired differences between SA and VA samples was adjusted for batch effect by adding batch number as a variable in the model. The correlation between sample pairs was included in the linear model using appropriate functions from the LIMMA package (Smyth et al., 2005). Subsequently, the results were adjusted for multiple hypothesis testing using the Benjamini and Hochberg procedure (Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995) implemented in the LIMMA package.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Obesity, Adipose tissue, Lc-msms, Visceral adipose tissue, Adipocytes, Subcutaneous adipose tissue

### Affiliations
Central European Institute of Technology, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic
Research Centre for Toxic Compounds in the Environment, Environmental Physiology, Faculty of Science, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic 

### Submitter
Pavel Hruška

### Lab Head
Dr Julie Dobrovolna
Research Centre for Toxic Compounds in the Environment, Environmental Physiology, Faculty of Science, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic 


