### Accession
PXD035398

### Title
Diptoindonesin G is a middle domain HSP90 modulator for cancer treatment

### Description
HSP90 inhibitors can target many oncoproteins simultaneously, but none have made it through clinical trials due to dose-limiting toxicity and induction of heat shock response, leading to clinical resistance. We identified diptoindonesin G (dip G) as an HSP90 modulator that can promote degradation of HSP90 clients by binding to the middle domain of HSP90 without inducing heat shock response. Although dip G does not bind to the ligand binding domain (LBD) of estrogen receptor (ER), it promotes degradation of ER in breast cancer cells. We further showed that treatment of ER LBD mutantexpressing cells with dip G promoted degradation of wild type and mutant ER with similar efficacy, downregulated ER-regulated gene expression, and inhibited cell proliferation. Our data suggest that dip G circumvents some obstacles associated with HSP90 inhibition and may be developed as a new therapeutic avenue to various cancers, particularly endocrine resistant breast cancer harboring ESR1 mutations

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction and trypsin digestion The lysis buffer containing 8M urea and protease and phosphatase inhibitors were added into biological samples at a 1:10 (w/v) ratio. Samples were laced on ice and sonicated 1 min with a 3-s interval at amplitude 25%. Then the lysate was reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 37°C for 1 h, and alkylated with 20mM iodoacetamide at room temperature in the dark for an additional 15 min. BCA assay (Thermo Fisher) was performed to determine the proteins concentration and around 100 μg of protein was then digested using trypsin at an enzyme to protein ratio of 1:100 (w/w) at 37 °C overnight. Digested peptides were desalted using C18 cartridges (Waters) and dried in SpeedVac. The concentrations of peptide mixture were measured by peptide assay (Thermo Fisher). Samples were lyophilized and stored at -80 °C. LC-MS/MS analysis The liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis was performed on a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) coupled to a nanoflow high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) (Dionex UltiMate 3000 UPLC system, Thermo Fisher) with a nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher). Peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid (FA) and about 0.5 μg of peptides were loaded onto a 75 μm x 15 cm self-fabricated column packing with 1.7 μm Ethylene Bridged Hybrid packing materials (130 Å, Waters). A 126-min linear gradient of 3–45% Mobile Phase B (buffer A, 0.1% FA in water; buffer B, 0.1% FA in ACN) at a flow rate of 0.3 ul/min. The MS analysis was performed in a data-dependent manner using an Orbitrap mass analyzer. For a full mass spectrometry survey scan, the automatic gain control (AGC) value was 1e5, and the scan ranged from 300 to 2,000 m/z at a resolution of 60,000, with a maximum injection time of 100 ms. For the MS2 scan, up to 15 of the most intense precursor ions from a survey scan were selected for MS/MS and detected by the Orbitrap at a mass resolution of 15,000 at m/z 400. Only spectra with a charge state of 2–6 were selected for fragmentation by higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) with normalized collision energy (NCE) of 30%. The AGC for MS/MS was set to 8e3, with maximum ion injection times of 100ms. Dynamic exclusion time was 30 s, and the isolation window of the precursors was 1.4 Th.

### Data Protocol
Label-free based MS quantification for proteins MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.8) with the integrated Andromeda search engine was used for database searching and protein identification and quantification. The false discovery rate (FDR) was controlled below 1% at both peptide and protein level. The tandem mass spectra were searched against the human UniProt database (version 20200219, 20,193 sequences). A reverse database for the decoy search was generated automatically in MaxQuant. Trypsin was selected as the enzyme in specificity, and a minimum number of seven amino acids were required for peptide identification. For label-free protein quantification (LFQ), the MaxQuant LFQ algorithm was enabled to quantitate the MS signals, and the proteins’ intensities were represented in LFQ intensity. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as the fixed modification, and methionine oxidation, as well as protein N-terminal acetylation, were set as the variable modifications. The first search mass tolerance was set as 20 ppm, and the main search peptide tolerance was 4.5 ppm. The FDR of the peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) and proteins were set to less than 1%.

### Publication Abstract
HSP90 inhibitors can target many oncoproteins simultaneously, but none have made it through clinical trials due to dose-limiting toxicity and induction of heat shock response, leading to clinical resistance. We identified diptoindonesin G (dip G) as an HSP90 modulator that can promote degradation of HSP90 clients by binding to the middle domain of HSP90 (K<sub>d</sub>&#xa0;= 0.13&#xa0;&#xb1; 0.02&#xa0;&#x3bc;M) without inducing heat shock response. This is likely because dip G does not interfere with the HSP90-HSF1 interaction like N-terminal inhibitors, maintaining HSF1 in a transcriptionally silent state. We found that binding of dip G to HSP90 promotes degradation of HSP90 client protein estrogen receptor &#x3b1; (ER), a major oncogenic driver protein in most breast cancers. Mutations in the ER ligand-binding domain (LBD) are an established mechanism of endocrine resistance and decrease the binding affinity of mainstay endocrine therapies targeting ER, reducing their ability to promote ER degradation or transcriptionally silence ER. Because dip G binds to HSP90 and does not bind to the LBD of ER, unlike endocrine therapies, it is insensitive to ER LBD mutations that drive endocrine resistance. Additionally, we determined that dip G promoted degradation of WT and mutant ER with similar efficacy, downregulated ER- and&#xa0;mutant ER-regulated gene expression, and inhibited WT and mutant cell proliferation. Our data suggest that dip G is not only a molecular probe to study HSP90 biology and the HSP90 conformation cycle, but also a new therapeutic avenue for various cancers, particularly endocrine-resistant breast cancer harboring ER LBD mutations.

### Keywords
Esr1; hsp90; heat shock; lbd mutations; diptoindonesin g; hsp90 inhibitor; y537s; hsp90 middle domain; er alpha

### Affiliations
UW madison
Marian A. Messerschmidt Professor of Oncology Associate Director, McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research,UW Madison

### Submitter
Min Ma

### Lab Head
Dr Wei Xu
Marian A. Messerschmidt Professor of Oncology Associate Director, McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research,UW Madison


