### Accession
PXD016370

### Title
Cell-based and multi-omics profiling reveals dynamic metabolic repurposing of  mitochondria to drive developmental progression of Trypanosoma brucei

### Description
Mitochondrial metabolic remodeling is a hallmark of the Trypanosoma brucei digenetic life cycle since the insect stage utilizes the cost-effective oxidative phosphorylation to generate ATP, while bloodstream cells switch to less energetically efficient aerobic glycolysis. Due to difficulties in acquiring enough parasites from the tsetse fly vector for biochemical analysis, the dynamics of the parasite´s mitochondrial metabolic rewiring in the vector have remained obscure. Here, we took advantage of in vitro-induced differentiation to follow changes at the RNA, protein and metabolite levels. This multi-omics and cell-based profiling showed an immediate redirection of electron flow from the cytochrome mediated pathway to a mitochondrial alternative oxidase, an increase in proline consumption and its oxidation, elevated activity of complex II and certain TCA cycle enzymes, which led to mitochondrial inner membrane hyperpolarization and increased ROS levels in both mitochondrion and cytosol. Interestingly, these ROS molecules acted as signaling molecules driving developmental progression since exogenous expression of catalase, a ROS scavenger, halted the in vitro-induced cell differentiation. Our results provide insights into the mechanisms of the parasite´s mitochondrial rewiring and reinforce the emerging concept that mitochondria act as signaling organelles through release of ROS to drive cellular differentiation.

### Sample Protocol
T. brucei at different stages (1 × 10^8 cells/replicate) were washed three times in 10 ml of  phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and lysed in 6% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), 300 mM DTT, and 150 mM Tris-HCl (pH 6.8), 30% glycerol and 0.02% Bromophenol Blue. Samples were loaded on a NOVEX NuPage 4-12% gradient gel (Thermo), run for 10 minutes at 180V and stained with Coommassie G250. Each lane was cut and the minced gel pieces were transferred to an Eppendorf tube for destaining with 50% ethanol/50 mM ABC buffer pH8.0. The gels pieces were dried and subsequently reduced (10 mM DTT/50 mM ABC buffer pH8.0), alkylated (55 mM iodoacetamide/50 mM ABC buffer pH 8.0) and digested with 1 μg trypsin overnight at 37 °C. The tryptic peptides were eluted from the gel pieces with pure acetonitrile and stored on a StageTip. The proteomic measurement was performed on a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo) with an online-mounted C18-packed capillary column (New Objective) by eluting along a 225 minute gradient of 2 to 40% acetonitrile using an EasyLC 1000 uHPLC system (Thermo). The mass spectrometer was operated with a top10 data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed in MaxQuant version 1.5.8.2 using the tritrypDB- 43_TbruceiLister427_2018_AnnotatedProteins database (16,869 entries) and standard settings, except activating the match between run feature and the LFQ algorithm. Protein groups marked as contaminants, reverse entries and only identified by site were removed prior to bioinformatics analysis. Additional information like gene names and descriptions where extracted from the fasta header and attached to the individual protein groups. Additionally, we identified the best ortholog to Tb927 by using the inparanoid algorithm. Imputation of missing values was performed using a beta distribution within 0.2 and 2.5 percentile of measured values for individual replicates  separately. PCA was created using R package ggbiplot-0.55, the heatmap was produced by  heatmap.2 command frm gplots-3.0.1.1 package. Clustering was performed using the pamk function from fpc-2.2-1 package with “usepam” deactivated and a “krange” between 5 and 9. GO enrichment was performed using Fisher’s Exact Test and p-values were corrected using Benjamini Hochberg method.

### Publication Abstract
Mitochondrial metabolic remodeling is a hallmark of the Trypanosoma brucei digenetic life cycle because the insect stage utilizes a cost-effective oxidative phosphorylation (OxPhos) to generate ATP, while bloodstream cells switch to aerobic glycolysis. Due to difficulties in acquiring enough parasites from the tsetse fly vector, the dynamics of the parasite's metabolic rewiring in the vector have remained obscure. Here, we took advantage of in vitro-induced differentiation to follow changes at the RNA, protein, and metabolite levels. This multi-omics and cell-based profiling showed an immediate redirection of electron flow from the cytochrome-mediated pathway to an alternative oxidase (AOX), an increase in proline consumption, elevated activity of complex II, and certain tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle enzymes, which led to mitochondrial membrane hyperpolarization and increased reactive oxygen species (ROS) levels. Interestingly, these ROS molecules appear to act as signaling molecules driving developmental progression because ectopic expression of catalase, a ROS scavenger, halted the in vitro-induced differentiation. Our results provide insights into the mechanisms of the parasite's mitochondrial rewiring and reinforce the emerging concept that mitochondria act as signaling organelles through release of ROS to drive cellular differentiation.

### Keywords
Trypanosomes

### Affiliations
Quantitative Proteomics
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB)
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB) Ackermannweg 4

### Submitter
F Butter

### Lab Head
Dr Falk Butter
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB) Ackermannweg 4


