### Accession
PXD018169

### Title
Extracellular Vesicles proteind in vascular calcification

### Description
Vascular Calcification (VC) is a life threatening cardiovascular complication that accounts for high death rates particularly in association with diabetes, atherosclerosis and Chronic Kidney Disease (CKD. during VC, Vascular Smooth Muscle Cells (VSMCs) undergo reprogramming into osteoblast-like cells in response to calcium and phosphate mineral imbalance in CKD patients. This osteogenic switch is driven by the expression of several bone markers such as Runt- related transcription factor 2 (Runx2), Alkaline Phosphatase (ALP), Osteopontin (OPN), Matrix-Gla Protein (MGP), Osteocalcin (OCN), Type I Collagen (COL1), and Bone Sialo Proteins (BSPs). Recent studies showed that VSMCs secrete heterogeneous populations of Extracellular Vesicles (EVs)11 that are enriched under physiological conditions by calcification inhibitors such as Fetuin-A and MGP12,13,14. Interestingly, under pathological conditions, secreted EVs have a pro-calcifying profile and thereby act as nucleating foci for hydroxyapatite crystallization and propagation11,15. Electron Microscopy based studies revealed that EVs were embedded between collagen and elastin fibrils of arterial walls suggesting that calcification can be initiated through the EVs’ direct physical interaction with them13,16.   We previously showed that a specific oligogalacturonic acid with a degree of polymerization of 8 (DP8) was able to inhibit vascular calcification. This inhibition was partly due to a decrease of osteogenic markers’s expression but also to the masking of a consensus sequence found in COL1  i.e. GFOGER sequence, thus  preventing EVs from binding to COL1. Although the use of DP8 in-vivo seems to be compromised due to probable enzymatic digestion, these results suggested that the inhibition of VSMCs’ osteogenic switch and the prevention of EVs-COL1 interaction could represent new potential therapeutic targets for inhibiting VC17. Since we have already showed that the triple-helical GFOGER consensus sequence forms a preferential binding site for EVs17, we thereby chemically synthesized a GFOGER peptide in order to determine its ability to inhibit VC on VSMCs and on an aortic ring ex-vivo model. We also aim to decipher the mechanisms of inhibition by investigating the osteogenic markers’ expression as well as the protein content of secreted EVs in the presence of the GFOGER peptide.

### Sample Protocol
S-TrapTM micro spin column (ProtiFI, Huntington, USA) digestion was performed on 10 µg of exosomes’ lysates according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Samples were re-suspended in 20 µL of 10% Acetonitrile 0.1% Trifluoroacetic acid  in HPLC-grade water. For each sample, three runs of 1 µL injection were performed in a nanoRSLC-Q Exactive PLUS (RSLC Ultimate 3000) (Thermo Scientific, Waltham MA, USA). Peptides were loaded on a micro-pre-column (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, cartridge, 300 µm i.d.×5 mm, 5 µm) (Thermo Scientific, Waltham MA, USA), and were separated on a 50 cm reversed-phase liquid chromatographic column (0.075 mm ID, Acclaim PepMap 100, C18, 2 µm) (Thermo Scientific, Waltham MA, USA). Chromatography solvents were (A) 0.1% formic acid in water, and (B) 80% acetonitrile, 0.08% formic acid. Peptides were eluted from the column with the following gradient 5% to 40% B (120 minutes), 40% to 80% (1 minutes). At 121 minutes, the gradient stayed at 80% for 5 minutes and, at 127 minutes, it returned to 5% to re-equilibrate the column for 20 minutes before the next injection. Two blanks were run between each series and one blank was run between each sample to prevent sample carryover. Peptides eluting from the column were analyzed by data dependent MS/MS, using top-10 acquisition method and they were fragmented using Higher-energy Collisional Dissociation (HCD). Briefly, the instrument settings were as follows: resolution was set to 70,000 for MS scans and 17,500 for the data dependent MS/MS scans in order to increase the speed. The MS AGC target was set to 3.106 counts with maximum injection time set to 60 ms, while MS/MS AGC target was set to 1.105 with maximum injection time set to 120 ms. The MS scan range was from 400 to 2000 m/z and dynamic exclusion was set to 30 seconds duration.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were processed with the MaxQuant software version 1.5.3.30 and searched with Andromeda search engine against the Mus musculus Uniprot KB/Swiss-Prot v.06/2016. To search for parent mass and fragment ions, we set an initial mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and 20 ppm respectively. The minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and strict specificity for trypsin cleavage was required, allowing up to two missed cleavage sites. Carbamidomethylation (Cys) was set as fixed modification, whereas oxidation (Met) and N-term acetylation were set as variable modifications. The false discovery rates (FDRs) at the protein and peptide level were set to 1%. Scores were calculated in MaxQuant as previously described23. The reverse and common contaminants hits were removed from MaxQuant output. Proteins were quantified according to the MaxQuant label-free algorithm using LFQ intensities [Luber, 2010 #1907; Cox, 2008 #1906]. Protein quantification was obtained using at least two peptides per protein.   Three independent isolations of microvesicles and four independent isolation of extracellular vesicles from MOVAS-1 cells treated with Pi and non-treated (used as control) were analyzed with Perseus software (version 1.6.2.3) freely available at www.perseus-framework.org. The LFQ (Label-Free Quantification) data were transformed in log2, and proteins identified in at least 3 out of 3 replicates were retained for statistical test. The missing valued were imputed using a Gaussian distribution of random numbers with a standard deviation of 30% relative to the standard deviation of the measured values and 1.8 standard deviation downshift of the mean to simulate the distribution of low signal valuesFour groups of samples were defined: non treated (ctrl), treated with Pi (Pi), treated with the peptide (GFOGER), and with both (Pi and GFOGER).  We performed T-test between each group and the control, using FDR=0,05 and S0=0,1, and represented the data on  was represented on a volcano plots.  Statistical analysis  Results were expressed as mean ± Standard Error of the Mean (SEM) using GraphPad Prism software (version 7.0, San Diego, CA, USA) and statistical significance was determined by One-way ANOVA test or T-test where P-value < 0.05 was considered significant.  

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Oligogalacturonic acid, Extracellular vesicles, Vascular calcification, Type i collagen

### Affiliations
Necker proteomics, INSERM
Proteomics platform Necker, Université de Paris - Structure Fédérative de Recherche Necker, INSERM US24/CNRS UMS3633, Paris 75015, France.

### Submitter
Chiara guerrera

### Lab Head
Dr Chiara Guerrera
Proteomics platform Necker, Université de Paris - Structure Fédérative de Recherche Necker, INSERM US24/CNRS UMS3633, Paris 75015, France.


