### Accession
PXD037163

### Title
Yangyinqingfei Decoction attenuates PM2.5-induced lung injury by enhancing arachidonic acid metabolism

### Description
Yangyinqingfei Decoction (YYQFD), a traditional Chinese prescription, is well known in the treatment of diphtheria and lung-related diseases in clinic. However, the underlying mechanism how to treat lung-related diseases remains unclear. In the present study, the intervention effect of YYQFD on PM2.5-induced lung injury mice and its potential mechanism were investigated by metabolomics and proteomic techniques. The results showed that YYQFD could significantly improve pulmonary functions, relieve lung injury, as well as reduce IL-6, TNF-α and MDA, and increase SOD levels in serum and BALF of PM2.5-induced lung injury mice. Furthermore, the protein-metabolite joint analysis presented that YYQFD regulated the pathways of arachidonic acid metabolism, linoleic acid metabolism, and biosynthesis of unsaturated fatty acids with significantly down-regulating arachidonic acid, 20-HETE, prostaglandin E2, lecithin, linoleic acid, α-linolenic acid, eicosatetraenoic acid, and γ-linolenic acid, and up-regulating PTGES2, GPX2 and CBR3 protein expressions in lung tissue. A regulatory metabolic network map was further constructed, which provide us a better understanding about the role of YYQFD on PM2.5-induced lung injury mice and new insight into YYQFD application for the treatment of lung-related diseases.

### Sample Protocol
Protein was extracted from lung tissue using the SDT (4% (W/V) SDS, 100 mM Tris/HCl pH7.6, 0.1 M DTT) lysis method, and then quantified by the BCA method. The protein samples were digested by trypsin using Filter Aided Proteome Preparation[15], and the peptide segment was desalted using a C18 column. After lyophilized, the peptide was dissolved in 40 μL 0.1% formic acid solution and quantified (OD280). Then, the quantified samples were labeled with TMT. RP grading: Each labeled peptide was mixed in equal quantities and graded using the high pH reversed-phase peptide fractionation Kit. The column was equilibrated with acetonitrile and 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, and the mixed labeled peptides were desalted. At last, the column-bound peptides were gradient eluted with a high pH acetonitrile solution with increasing concentrations. Each eluted peptide sample was lyophilized and dissolved with 12 μL 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. The concentration of the peptide was determined by OD280. SCX grading: Each group of labeled peptides was mixed and graded using Akta Purifier 100. Buffer solution A (pH 3.0) consisted of 10 mM KH2PO4 and 25%ACN. Buffer solution B (pH 3.0) consisted of 10 mM KH2PO4, 500 mM KCl and 25%ACN. The chromatographic column was balanced with liquid A, and the sample was loaded from the sampler to the column for separation at a flow rate of 1 mL/min. The gradient of liquid phase is as follows: 0-25 min, the linear gradient of liquid B is from 0%-10%; 25-32 min, the linear gradient of liquid B ranged from 10%-20%; 32-42 min, the linear gradient of liquid B ranged from 20%-45%; 42-47 min, the linear gradient of liquid B ranged from 45%-100%; 47-60 min, liquid B was maintained at 100%; After 60 min, liquid B was reset to 0%. During the elution process, the absorbance value of 214 nm was monitored, and the eluted components were collected every 1 min. After lyophilized, the C18 Cartridge was used for desalination.The samples were separated by HPLC liquid phase system Easy NLC with nanolitre flow rate. Buffer solution A was 0.1% formic acid aqueous solution, and buffer solution B was 0.1% formic acid acetonitrile aqueous solution (the concentration of acetonitrile was 84%). The chromatographic column was balanced with 95% A, and the sample was loaded from the automatic sampler to the loading column (Thermo Scientific Acclaim Pepmap100, 100 μm*2 cm, Nanoviper C18). The samples were separated by a Thermo scientific EASY column (10 cm, ID75 μm, 3 μm, C18 A2) with a flow rate 300 nL/min.  After chromatographic separation, the samples were analyzed by Q Exactive mass spectrometer. The positive ion is adopted, the scanning range of the mother ion is 300-1800 m/z, and the resolution of primary mass spectrometry is 70,000 at 200 m/z. The precursors were selected for HCD MS2 analysis with an automatic gaining control target of 1e6, maximum injection time of 50 ms, dynamic exclusion 60.0 s, isolation window of 2 m/z, and normalized collision energy of 30 eV.

### Data Protocol
Mascot 2.2 and Proteome Discoverer 1.4 were used for database identification and quantitative analysis. Data were analyzed using SPSS 23.0 statistical software, and the measurement data were compared between groups using t-test or one-way analysis of variance. P<0.05 was considered significant.

### Publication Abstract
Yangyinqingfei Decoction (YYQFD), a traditional Chinese prescription, is well known in the treatment of diphtheria and lung-related diseases in clinic. However, whether it can be used to block the lung injury caused by air pollutant remains unclear. In the present study, the effect of YYQFD was addressed using a PM<sub>2.5</sub>-induced lung injury mice model. It was shown that YYQFD significantly improved pulmonary functions of mice exposed to PM<sub>2.5</sub>, the levels of IL-6, TNF-&#x3b1; and MDA were decreased while SOD levels were increased in serum and bronchoalveolar fluid. The potential mechanism of YYQFD was then delved using metabolomic and proteomic techniques. The protein-metabolite joint analysis showed that YYQFD regulated the biosynthesis of unsaturated fatty acids, linoleic acid and arachidonic acid metabolism, causing a significant decrement of pro-inflammatory mediator arachidonic acid with its downstream metabolites like 20-HETE, prostaglandin E<sub>2</sub>, accompanied by the up-regulation of PTGES2, GPX2 and CBR3 in lung tissue. These data were used to construct a regulatory metabolic network map in terms of the therapeutic role of YYQFD in PM<sub>2.5</sub>-induced lung injury, thereby provided a novel insight into potential application in the respiratory diseases caused by air pollutants.

### Keywords
Metabolomics, Proteomics, Arachidonic acid metabolism, Yangyinqingfei decoction, Lung injury

### Affiliations
Ningbo University
School of Medicine, Ningbo University

### Submitter
Chunlan Tang

### Lab Head
Dr Chunlan Tang
Ningbo University


