### Accession
PXD011428

### Title
Mouse brain proteome map of Experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) mouse model

### Description
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is an autoimmune disease of the central nervous system (CNS); its cause is unknown. To understand the pathogenesis of MS, researchers often use the experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) mouse model. Here, our aim was to build a proteome map of the biological changes that occur during MS at the major onset sites—the brain and the spinal cord. We performed quantitative proteome profiling in five specific brain regions and the spinal cord of EAE and healthy mice with high-resolution mass spectrometry based on tandem mass tags.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue samples were prepared with the FASP procedure described previously. Before TMT labeling, the protein concentration of each sample was measured with the tryptophan assay. TMT labeling was then performed with several modifications to the manufacturer’s protocol. Briefly, the TMT reagent (0.8 mg) was dissolved in acetonitrile, and 10 µl of the reagent was added to 30 µl of peptides along with ACN to give a final concentration of 30% v/v. The peptides were then pooled after incubating at room temperature for 2 hours. The pooled sample was dried almost completely and desalted with an in-house C18 stage-tip.Before TMT labeling, the protein concentration of each sample was measured with the tryptophan assay. TMT labeling was then performed with several modifications to the manufacturer’s protocol [22]. Briefly, the TMT reagent (0.8 mg) was dissolved in acetonitrile, and 10 µl of the reagent was added to 30 µl of peptides along with ACN to give a final concentration of 30% v/v. The peptides were then pooled after incubating at room temperature for 2 hours. The pooled sample was dried almost completely and desalted with an in-house C18 stage-tip.

### Data Protocol
After the MS analysis, all raw files were processed in Proteome Discoverer 2.1 software based on the SEQUEST-HT search engine against the Mouse Uniprot FASTA database.Parameters were as follows: enzyme, full-trypsin; precursor ion tolerance, 10 ppm; MS/MS ion tolerance, 20 ppm; fixed modifications, TMT tags (N-term and Lys, +229.163 Da) and carbamidomethylation (Cys, +57.021 Da); and variable modifications, oxidation (Met, +15.995 Da). The false discovery rate (FDR) for all peptide-spectrum match (PSM) were adjusted to a 1%, and protein assignments were performed by the Percolator software package. Only the PSMs that contained all six reporter ions. Protein quantitation values were exported for further analysis in Microsoft Excel. Each reporter ion channel was summed across all quantified proteins and normalized assuming equal protein loading of all six samples.

### Publication Abstract
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is an autoimmune disease of the central nervous system (CNS); its cause is unknown. To understand the pathogenesis of MS, researchers often use the experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) mouse model. Here, the aim is to build a proteome map of the biological changes that occur during MS at the major onset sites-the brain and the spinal cord. Quantitative proteome profiling is performed in five specific brain regions and the spinal cord of EAE and healthy mice with high-resolution mass spectrometry based on tandem mass tags. On average, 7400 proteins per region are quantified, with the most differentially expressed proteins in the spinal cord (1691), hippocampus (104), frontal cortex (83), cerebellum (63), brainstem (50), and caudate nucleus (41). Moreover, region-specific and commonly expressed proteins in each region are identified and bioinformatics analysis is performed. Pathway analysis reveals that protein clusters resemble their functions in disease pathogenesis (i.e., by inducing inflammatory responses, immune activation, and cell-cell adhesion). In conclusion, the study provides an understanding of the pathogenesis of MS in the EAE animal model. It is expected that the comprehensive proteome map of the brain and spinal cord can be used to identify biomarkers for the pathogenesis of MS.

### Keywords
Brain, Quantitative proteomics, Mouse, Eae, Tmt

### Affiliations
Proteomics Core Facility, Biomedical Research Institute, Seoul National University Hospital
Proteomics core facility, Biomedical Research Institute, Seoul National University Hospital

### Submitter
Dohyun Han

### Lab Head
Dr Dohyun Han
Proteomics core facility, Biomedical Research Institute, Seoul National University Hospital


