### Accession
PXD029743

### Title
To identify the nuclear partner(s) of TYRO3 in colon cells using LC-Quadrupole Time-of-Flight Mass Spectrometry.

### Description
Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the most common death-related cancers worldwide. Aberrant expression of oncogenes is regarded as a predominant factor in CRC development. In our study, we found that TYRO3 intracellular domain nuclear translocation promotes CRC cell proliferation, metastasis, and tumor progression. To identify downstream effector that transmits the cellular functions of nuclear TYRO3, we performed nuclear TYRO3 co-immunoprecipitation.

### Sample Protocol
Normal colon cells (CCD-841CoN) were transfected with GFP or nuclear TYRO3-GFP for 1 day. The nuclear fractions were isolated, immunoprecipitated with GFP, and subjected to proteomic analysis.

### Data Protocol
Data acquisitions in positive mode were executed with ESI Compass for otofSeries 1.6 for Impact HD (tofControl Version 3.3) (Bruker Daltonik). Analyses of the data were performed using the Compass DataAnalysis (Version 4.1 SR1) (Bruker Daltonik), and generated peak listed in mgf format. The protein identifications were executed with tandem mass spectrometry peak lists using Mascot software Version 2.5 (Matrix Science, London, UK). The peptide sequences were searched against Homo sapiens (human) taxonomy (326053 sequences obtained from NCBI as on 15th Jan 2019) in Uniprot protein database. Mass tolerances for peptide and product ions were set to 50 ppm and 0.5 Da; the instrument setting was specified as “ESI-QUAD-TOF”. Semi-trypsin was designated as the protease with two missing cleavages was allowed. Carboxymethylation on cysteine was set as the fixed modification while oxidation of methionine was searched as variable modifications. Proteins were accepted if they had at least one Rank 1 peptide with a Mascot ion score of more than 40.0 (p < 0.05).

### Publication Abstract
Metastasis is the main cause of death in many cancers including colorectal cancer (CRC); however, the underlying mechanisms responsible for metastatic progression remain largely unknown. We found that nuclear TYRO3 receptor tyrosine kinase is a strong predictor of poor overall survival in patients with CRC. The metastasis-promoting function of nuclear TYRO3 requires its kinase activity and matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2)-mediated cleavage but is independent of ligand binding. Using proteomic analysis, we identified bromodomain-containing protein 3 (BRD3), an acetyl-lysine reading epigenetic regulator, as one of nuclear TYRO3's substrates. Chromatin immunoprecipitation-sequencing data reveal that TYRO3-phosphorylated BRD3 regulates genes involved in anti-apoptosis and epithelial-mesenchymal transition. Inhibition of MMP-2 or BRD3 activity by selective inhibitors abrogates nuclear TYRO3-induced drug resistance and metastasis in organoid culture and in orthotopic mouse models. These data demonstrate that MMP-2/TYRO3/BRD3 axis promotes the metastasis of CRC, and blocking this signaling cascade is a promising approach to ameliorate CRC malignancy.

### Keywords
Human, Tyro3, Lc-quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometry, Colon

### Affiliations
Department of Physiology, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan 70101, Taiwan
Department of Physiology, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung University

### Submitter
Pei-Ling Hsu

### Lab Head
Dr Shaw-Jenq Tsai
Department of Physiology, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan 70101, Taiwan


