### Accession
PXD010110

### Title
Stoichiometry of Nucleosome Remodelling and Deacetylase (NuRD) complex

### Description
The Nucleosome Remodeling and Deacetylase (NuRD) complex is essential for development in complex animals but has been refractory to detailed analysis because of its low abundance and resistance to recombinant production. As part of a larger project, absolute quantification using isotopically-labelled AQUA peptides was performed on natively-purified NuRD and six recombinantly-expressed NuRD subcomplexes. This is the first time the NuRD complex has been quantified using the AQUA strategy.

### Sample Protocol
Isotopically-labelled heavy peptides were spiked into purified NuRD or NurD subcomplexes. The samples were then digested with endo-lysC and trypsin, C18 purified and analysed by data-independent acquisition MS (DIA-MS). The Q-Exactive was used for all mass analyses. Additional details are provided in the accompanying publication.

### Data Protocol
Data generated was processed and analysed by the Skyline software platform (MacLean 2010). All quality control checks were performed in Skyline. Standard curves were done for each tested peptide to assess peptide response linearity under the conditions used. Endogenous NuRD peptides were then quantified using the heavy spiked in peptides, within the bounds of the standard curves. Additional details are provided in the accompanying publication.

### Publication Abstract
The nucleosome remodeling and deacetylase (NuRD) complex is essential for metazoan development but has been refractory to biochemical analysis. We present an integrated analysis of the native mammalian NuRD complex, combining quantitative mass spectrometry, cross-linking, protein biochemistry, and electron microscopy to define the architecture of the complex. NuRD is built from a 2:2:4 (MTA, HDAC, and RBBP) deacetylase module and a 1:1:1 (MBD, GATAD2, and Chromodomain-Helicase-DNA-binding [CHD]) remodeling module, and the complex displays considerable structural dynamics. The enigmatic GATAD2 controls the asymmetry of the complex and directly recruits the CHD remodeler. The MTA-MBD interaction acts as a point of functional switching, with the transcriptional regulator PWWP2A competing with MBD for binding to the MTA-HDAC-RBBP subcomplex. Overall, our data address the long-running controversy over NuRD stoichiometry, provide imaging of the mammalian NuRD complex, and establish the biochemical mechanism by which PWWP2A can regulate NuRD composition.

### Keywords
Aqua, Quantitative ms, Nurd

### Affiliations
The University of Sydney
School of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of Sydney, NSW Australia

### Submitter
Jason Low

### Lab Head
Dr Joel Mackay
School of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of Sydney, NSW Australia


