### Accession
PXD002381

### Title
Comparison between matched microdissected and whole tissue breast cancer specimen

### Description
A total of 38 flash-frozen breast cancer tissues were collected from three medical centers in the Netherlands (i.e. National Cancer institute: n=19; Radboud University Medical Center: n=4; Erasmus University Medical Center: n=15). All tissues were analyzed as laser capture microdissected (LCM) and whole samples (whole tissue lysate: WTL). All  gathered samples were primary estrogen receptor (ER) tumors, which were subdivided in two patient groups according to outcome to first line (i.e. recurrent disease setting) tamoxifen therapy based on time-to-progression (TTP): patients which manifested progression of disease before (i.e. TTP <=) 6 months were defined as "poor outcome", while patients which manifested progression after (i.e. TTP>) 6 months were defined as "good outcome". All patients did not receive adjuvant hormonal therapy (i.e. tamoxifen or aromatase inhibitors post-surgical resection of primary tumor). The LCM subset derives from PXD000484 (Erasmus Medical Center samples) and PXD000485 (National Cancer Institute and Radboud University Medical Center).

### Sample Protocol
All samples were processed as follows: - 8 µm sections were cut at the cryostat (3 to 4 section for LCM, 10-15 for WTL). - sections for LCM were collected on UV sterylized polyethylene naphtalate (PEN) slides and dried in 70% (1 minute)-100%(1 minute) ethanol; sections for WTL were collected in Eppendorf 1.5mL LoBind tubes. - all samples were frozen at -80C. LCM samples were prcessed as follows: - hematoxylin staining - LCM on a Zeiss Axio Observer: collection of 500,000 µm2  (area; ~4,000 cells) per sample. Dissected tissue was collected in 20µl of 0.1% w/V Rapigest in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate. WTL samples were processed as follows: - collected tissue sections were suspended in 100µl of 0.1% w/V Rapigest in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate.  All samples were processed as follows: - collected material was disrupted in a horn sonifier bath using an Ultrasonic Disruptor Sonifier II (Bransons Ultrasonic, USA) at 70% amplitude for 1 minute. -Proteins were denatured at 95°C, reduced with 100 mM DTT for 30 min at room temperature, and alkylated in the dark with 300 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature. Samples were then digested for 4 h at 37°C after addition of MS grade trypsin at a 1:4 enzyme-protein ratio (i.e. 100 ng/µl). Samples were acidified with TFA, and spun down at 14,000 RPM. Supernatants were collected and transferred to HPLC vials. High resolution MS was run as follows: Mass spectrometry measurements were performed with a nano liquid chromatography system (Ultimate 3000, Dionex, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) coupled online to a linear Ion Trap – Orbitrap XL™ mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron, Bremen, Germany). Samples were first loaded on a trap column (PepMap C18, 300 μm ID × 5 mm length, 5 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size; Dionex), then washed and desalted in 0.1% TFA acidified water. Trap column and analytical column (PepMap C18, 75 μm ID × 50 cm, 3 μm particle size and 100 Å pore size; Dionex) were then coupled and peptides were eluted in a 3 h binary gradient (flow: 300 nl/min; mobile phase A: 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in H2O; mobile phase B: 80% acetonitrile and 0.08% formic acid). Gradient was run as follows: 0% to 25% mobile phase B for 2 h, increase to 50% mobile phase B in 1 h. For ESI, metal-coated nano ESI emitters (New Objective, Woburn, MA) were used and a spray voltage of 1.6 kV was applied. High-resolution scan was acquired from 400 to 1,800 Th and was used for MS detection. Automatic gain was set at 106 ions and lock mass was set at 445.120025 u protonated with (Si(CH3)2O)6. The 5 most intense peaks in full scan were selected and fragmented by collision induced dissociation (CID) applying 35% normalized collision energy and detected in the ion trap. Ions falling out of the ±5 ppm window or for which precursor intensity fell below 1.5 signal-to-noise ratio during 10 scans were excluded.

### Data Protocol
High resolution proteome profiles were previously generated from roughly 250 ng protein lysate. MaxQuant (1.5.2.8) with Andromeda as search engine was used for protein identification and quantitation. LCM and WTL sets were analyzed both as one set and separately. Analysis of MS spectra was performed by selecting acetylation of the N-terminus and oxidation of methionine as variable modifications. UniProt-SwissProt human canonical database (version 2015-02, human canonical proteome; 20.198 identifiers) was selected as FASTA file. A minimum of 7 amino acids was selected as minimum peptide length. Match between runs option was kept as default (match time window: 0.7 minutes; alignment time window: 20 minutes; match unidentified features: OFF). LFQ was enabled and LFQ minimum ratio count was set to 1. Remaining options were kept as default (e.g. false discovery rate = 0.01; enzyme: trypsin).

### Publication Abstract
We recently reported on the development of a 4-protein-based classifier (PDCD4, CGN, G3BP2, and OCIAD1) capable of predicting outcome to tamoxifen treatment in recurrent, estrogen-receptor-positive breast cancer based on high-resolution MS data. A precise and high-throughput assay to measure these proteins in a multiplexed, targeted fashion would be favorable to measure large numbers of patient samples to move these findings toward a clinical setting. By coupling immunoprecipitation to multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) MS and stable isotope dilution, we developed a high-precision assay to measure the 4-protein signature in 38 primary breast cancer whole tissue lysates (WTLs). Furthermore, we evaluated the presence and patient stratification capabilities of our signature in an independent set of 24 matched (pre- and post-therapy) sera. We compared the performance of immuno-MRM (iMRM) with direct MRM in the absence of fractionation and shotgun proteomics in combination with label-free quantification (LFQ) on both WTL and laser capture microdissected (LCM) tissues. Measurement of the 4-proteins by iMRM showed not only higher accuracy in measuring proteotypic peptides (Spearman r: 0.74 to 0.93) when compared with MRM (Spearman r: 0.0 to 0.76) but also significantly discriminated patient groups based on treatment outcome (hazard ratio [HR]: 10.96; 95% confidence interval [CI]: 4.33 to 27.76; Log-rank P &lt; 0.001) when compared with LCM (HR: 2.85; 95% CI: 1.24 to 6.54; Log-rank P = 0.013) and WTL (HR: 1.16; 95% CI: 0.57 to 2.33; Log-rank P = 0.680) LFQ-based predictors. Serum sample analysis by iMRM confirmed the detection of the four proteins in these samples. We hereby report that iMRM outperformed regular MRM, confirmed our previous high-resolution MS results in tumor tissues, and has shown that the 4-protein signature is measurable in serum samples.

### Keywords
Human, Whole tissue, Estrogen receptor positive breast cancer, Lcm

### Affiliations
Medical Oncology
Department of medical Oncology Laboratory of translational breast cancer genomics and proteomics

### Submitter
Tommaso De Marchi

### Lab Head
Dr Arzu Umar
Department of medical Oncology Laboratory of translational breast cancer genomics and proteomics


