### Accession
PXD033916

### Title
Chlorocebus sabaeus vero E6 and and eIF4E(S209A) Vero cells (S209A-Vero) LC-MSMS upon infection by coronavirus PEDV

### Description
Two rounds of TMT relative quantitative proteomics were performed to detect cellular factors involved in p-eIF4E regulation of the synthesis of viral proteins.our first round of screening identified differentially expressed proteins in PEDV-infected cells and mock-infected cells; the cellular pathways involved were mainly the estrogen, cAMP, and calcium signaling pathways. Second round screening identified differentially expressed proteins in the PEDV-infected S209A-Vero cells vs. the PEDV-infected WT-Vero cells; the regulated cellular pathways were found to be mainly in the PI3K-Akt, focal adhesion, and mTOR signaling pathways, and the biological processes and molecular functions in which p-eIF4E played a role were related mainly to metabolism and biogenesis, catalytic activity, and stimuli response.4006 host factors were detected, of which 193 (in brown) were significantly upregulated (ratio ≥1.2, P＜0.05) and 191 (in green) were down-regulated upon PEDV infection (ratio ≤0.83, P＜0.05). 29 of the 191 down-regulated proteins were susceptible to a low level of p-eIF4E . Notably, among the 193 upregulated cellular proteins, 77 were upregulated in the WT-Vero over the S209A-Vero cells , suggesting that the WT-Vero cells are more susceptible to a high level of p-eIF4E.

### Sample Protocol
Generation of eIF4E(S209A)-Vero (S209A-Vero) cells Single guide RNA (sgRNA) was designed to target the area near a specific site using the online CRISPR design tool (http://crispr.mit.edu/) to generate S209A-Vero cells, and a donor template containing the mutation site was designed. The sgRNA, donor template, and Cas9 plasmids were co-transfected into Vero cells, and the cells were cultured in 96-well plates, 10 times diluted. The clones were picked via screening by a restriction endonuclease and identified by Sanger sequencing. Lastly, the Ser was mutated to Ala at amino acid 209 of eIF4E. The sequences of sgRNA and the donor template were designed as follows: SgRNA: GCAGACACAGCTACTAAGAG (with 80.3% cleavage efficiency as analyzed using the online tool TIDE). Protein extraction, digestion, and labeling with TMT reagents Cultures of mock-infected and PEDV-infected cells 24 h post-infection (hpi) (0.1 MOI), including two independent biological replicates, were collected using a cell scraper, centrifuged, and washed twice with ice-cold PBS. All samples were treated with SDT buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl, 1 mM DTT, pH 7.6) and heated for 15 min at 100°C. The cell suspensions were sonicated for 5 min (10 s of sonication at 15 s intervals) on ice, and the protein concentration in the supernatants was determined using the Bradford protein assay. Each sample (200 μg) was digested with 3 μg trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich Corporation) at 37°C for 16 h, and the resulting tryptic peptides were labeled following the protocol of the TMT Reagent Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA), and the labeled peptides were combined and fractionated by strong cation exchange (SCX) chromatography.

### Data Protocol
Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis After separation by SCX chromatography, equal amounts of digested protein were loaded into a Thermo Scientific EASY column (2 cm*100 μm; 5 μm-C18) and then washed with Solvent A (99% H2O, and 0.1% formic acid). By applying Solvent B (84% acetonitrile, 16% H2O, and 0.1% formic acid), the peptides were eluted from the trapping column over an EASY-Column™ (75 μm × 100 mm, 3 μm, C18-A2; Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a gradient (0-50% solvent B for 50 min, 50-100% solvent B for 5 min, hold in 100% solvent B for 5 min at 300 nL/min) using the Easy nLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For MS analysis, peptides were analyzed in positive ion mode. MS/MS was carried out with a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Finnigan LLC, San Jose, CA, USA) in the positive ion mode and a data-dependent manner choosing the most abundant precursor ions with a full MS scan from 300 to 1,800 m/z and resolution of 70,000 at m/z of 200. Target value determination was based on automatic gain control, and dynamic exclusion duration was 60 s. MS/MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 35,000 at m/z of 200. The normalized collision energy was 30 eV, and the underfill ratio was set at 0.1%. Proteomic data analysis The data files produced by 6 fractions MS/MS were processed using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 and searched using Mascot 2.2 (Matrix Science, MA) against Chlorocebus sabaeus protein-coding sequences deposited in the Uniprot database. The search was conducted with trypsin applied as a specific enzyme and parameters for normal peptides as follows: peptide mass tolerance, 20 ppm; fragment mass tolerance, 0.1 Da; max missed cleavages, 2; fixed modifications, carbamidomethyl (C), TMT 6/10plex (N-term), TMT 6/10plex (K); variable modifications: oxidation (M), TMT 6/10plex (Y); database pattern, decoy; and false-discovery rate ≤ 0.01. Each of the identified proteins involved at least two unique peptides. Protein quantification was accomplished by correlating the relative intensities of reporter ions extracted from tandem mass spectra with that of the peptides selected for MS/MS fragmentation. To evaluate the DEPs between different groups, a fold change > 1.2 and < 0.83 and a P-value of <0.05 were considered to represent up/down-regulation, respectively. Bioinformatics analysis was conducted using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis software (IPA, www.ingenuity.com), GO, and UniProt.

### Publication Abstract
Viral mRNA of coronavirus translates in an eIF4E-dependent manner, and the phosphorylation of eIF4E can modulate this process, but the role of p-eIF4E in coronavirus infection is not yet entirely evident. p-eIF4E favors the translation of selected mRNAs, specifically the mRNAs that encode proteins associated with cell proliferation, inflammation, the extracellular matrix, and tumor formation and metastasis. In the present work, two rounds of TMT relative quantitative proteomics were used to screen 77 cellular factors that are upregulated upon infection by coronavirus PEDV and are potentially susceptible to a high level of p-eIF4E. PEDV infection increased the translation level of ribosomal protein lateral stalk subunit RPLp2 (but not subunit RPLp0/1) in a p-eIF4E-dependent manner. The bicistronic dual-reporter assay and polysome profile showed that RPLp2 is essential for translating the viral mRNA of PEDV. RNA binding protein and immunoprecipitation assay showed that RPLp2 interacted with PEDV 5'UTR via association with eIF4E. Moreover, the cap pull-down assay showed that the viral nucleocapsid protein is recruited in m<sup>7</sup>GTP-precipitated complexes with the assistance of RPLp2. The heterogeneous ribosomes, which are different in composition, regulate the selective translation of specific mRNAs. Our study proves that viral mRNA and protein utilize translation factors and heterogeneous ribosomes for preferential translation initiation. This previously uncharacterized process may be involved in the selective translation of coronavirus.

### Keywords
Chlorocebus sabaeus vero e6, And eif4e(s209a) vero cells (s209a-vero), Pedv, Lc-msms, Phosphorylation of eif4e

### Affiliations
2 Yuanmingyuan West Road, Haidian District, Beijing, P.R. China 100193Yuanmingyuan West Road, Haidian District, Beijing, P.R. China 100193
school


### Submitter
jing wang

### Lab Head
Dr XiaoJia Wang
2 Yuanmingyuan West Road, Haidian District, Beijing, P.R. China 100193Yuanmingyuan West Road, Haidian District, Beijing, P.R. China 100193


