### Accession
PXD002844

### Title
Quantitative analysis to the subcellular proteome in response to cathepsin D knockdown in HeLa cells

### Description
Cathepsin D is reportedly to be closely associated with tumor development, migration and invasion, but its pathological mechanism is not fully elucidated. We aimed to evaluate phenotypic changes and molecular events in response to cathepsin D knockdown. Lowering endogenous cathepsin D abundance (CR) induced senescence in HeLa cells, leading to reduced rate of cell proliferation and impaired tumorigenesis in a mouse model. Quantitative proteomics revealed that compared with control cells (EV), the abundances of several typical lysosomal proteases were decreased in the lysosomal fraction in CR cells. We further showed that cathepsin D knockdown caused increased permeability of lysosomal membrane and ROS accumulation in CR cells, and the scavenging of ROS by antioxidant was able to rescue cell senescence. Despite the increased ROS, the proteomic data suggested a global reduction of redox-related proteins in CR cells. Subsequent analysis indicated that the transcriptional activity of nuclear factor erythroid-related factor 2 (Nrf2), which regulates the expression of groups of antioxidant enzymes, was down-regulated by cathepsin D knockdown. Importantly, Nrf2 over-expression significantly reduced cell senescence. Although transient oxidative stress promoted the accumulation of Nrf2 in the nucleus, we showed that the Nrf2 protein exited nucleus if oxidative stress persisted. In addition, when cathepsin D was transiently knocked down, the cathepsin-related events followed a sequential order, including lysosomal leakage during the early stage, followed by oxidative stress augmentation, and ultimately Nrf2 down-regulation and senescence. Our results suggest the roles of cathepsin D in cancer cells in maintaining lysosomal integrity, redox balance and Nrf2 activity, thus promoting tumorigenesis.

### Sample Protocol
To differentially label the CR and EV cells, the SILAC Protein Quantitation Kit (Thermo Scientific Pierce, USA) was used according to the manufacturer's instruction. Cells were centrifuged at 300x g and the cell pellets were resuspended in isotonic buffer followed by the treatment with the syringe to break up the cells. Organelle preparation for nucleus, cytosol and lysosome was implemented according to a protocol described previously (1,38). The protein concentration was determined using the BCA assay. Equal amounts of EV and CR proteins from each fraction were mixed and further separated with 12% SDS-PAGE. The proteins in the gel were cut into 15 small slices per lane and tryptic digestion was then performed according the in-gel digestion protocol (44). The tryptic peptides were extracted with acetonitrile, dried in a vaccum and reconstituted with 0.1% FA.  Peptides were delivered onto a C18 reverse phase column using a linear 65 min gradient of 0-80% ACN in 0.05% FA in a prominence nano HPLC (Shimzu). The eluted fractions directly entered the LTQ-Orbitrap-Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA), in which full MS scan from 300–2000 m/z was acquired in the Orbitrap. The following MS/MS scans were collected in the ion trap for the top eight most intense ions using collision-induced dissociation (CID). Two biological replicates were analyzed independently.

### Data Protocol
The raw mass spectrometry files acquired from all the fractions in each of replication were combined and processed with MaxQuant 1.5.0.28 (Maxplank Institute, Germany). Peak lists were extracted and searched against the database of ipi.human.v.3.68 (87083 entries). The search parameters were set as follows: carbamidomethyl as the fixed modification, pyro-Glu/Gln (N-term) and Oxidation (M) as variable modifications, 20ppm for peptide tolerance and 0.5 Da for MS/MS tolerance. The enzyme was set as trypsin and the maximum missed cleavage was set to 2. The false discovery rate for both proteins and peptides was set as 1%. Proteins with at least two ratio counts, as generated from either unique or razor peptides, were considered as quantified proteins for further analysis. The median values of the SILAC ratios H/L were taken as protein abundance (HeLa-CR/HeLa-EV) ratios to minimize the effects of outlier values. Contaminations were removed from the final list of identification and quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Cathepsin D is reportedly to be closely associated with tumor development, migration, and invasion, but its pathological mechanism is not fully elucidated. We aimed to evaluate phenotypic changes and molecular events in response to cathepsin D knockdown. Lowering endogenous cathepsin D abundance (CR) induced senescence in HeLa cells, leading to reduced rate of cell proliferation and impaired tumorigenesis in a mouse model. Quantitative proteomics revealed that compared with control cells (EV), the abundances of several typical lysosomal proteases were decreased in the lysosomal fraction in CR cells. We further showed that cathepsin D knockdown caused increased permeability of lysosomal membrane and reactive oxygen species accumulation in CR cells, and the scavenging of reactive oxygen species by antioxidant was able to rescue cell senescence. Despite the increased reactive oxygen species, the proteomic data suggested a global reduction of redox-related proteins in CR cells. Subsequent analysis indicated that the transcriptional activity of nuclear factor erythroid-related factor 2 (Nrf2), which regulates the expression of groups of antioxidant enzymes, was down-regulated by cathepsin D knockdown. Importantly, Nrf2 overexpression significantly reduced cell senescence. Although transient oxidative stress promoted the accumulation of Nrf2 in the nucleus, we showed that the Nrf2 protein exited nucleus if oxidative stress persisted. In addition, when cathepsin D was transiently knocked down, the cathepsin-related events followed a sequential order, including lysosomal leakage during the early stage, followed by oxidative stress augmentation, and ultimately Nrf2 down-regulation and senescence. Our results suggest the roles of cathepsin D in cancer cells in maintaining lysosomal integrity, redox balance, and Nrf2 activity, thus promoting tumorigenesis. The MS Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD002844.

### Keywords
Nucleus, Subcellular fractionation, Lysosome, Silac, Cytosol

### Affiliations
Beijing Institute of Genomics, CAS
Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Siyuan Su

### Lab Head
Dr Siqi Liu
Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences


