### Accession
PXD004825

### Title
Social exchange of chemical cues, growth proteins and hormones through trophallaxis

### Description
Social insects frequently engage in oral fluid exchange – trophallaxis – between adults, and between adults and larvae. Although trophallaxis is normally considered a simple food-sharing mechanism, we hypothesized that endogenous components of this fluid might underlie a novel means of chemical communication that directly influences colony organization. Through protein and small-molecule mass spectrometry and RNA sequencing in the ant Camponotus floridanus, we found that trophallactic fluid contains a set of specific proteins, hydrocarbons, microRNAs, and Juvenile Hormone, an important insect growth regulator. Comparison of trophallactic fluid proteins across social insect species (ants Camponotus fellah and Solenopsis invictis, honeybees Apis mellifera) revealed that many are regulators of growth and development. These results raise the possibility that, in addition to its role in food transfer, trophallaxis is a mode of communication that enables communal control of colony phenotypes.

### Sample Protocol
To obtain and analyze the contents of trophallactic fluid without the confounding factors of social isolation and nutritional status, we developed a non-lethal method to collect the contents of the social stomach from lightly-squeezed CO2-anaesthetised ants (referred to as ‘forced’ samples). To determine whether the ‘forced’ fluid collected under anesthesia was similar to the fluid collected ‘in-act’ (‘voluntary’) and not contaminated with hemolymph or midgut contents, we also collected samples of these three possible fluid sources.  Protein samples were loaded on a 12% mini polyacrylamide gel and migrated about 2.5 cm. After Coomassie staining, regions of gel lanes containing visible bands were excised into 2-5 pieces, depending on the gel pattern of considered experiment. Gel pieces were digested with sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega). Extracted tryptic peptides were dried and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid, 2% (v/v) acetonitrile for mass spectrometry analyses. Tryptic peptide mixtures were injected on a Dionex RSLC 3000 nanoHPLC system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) interfaced via a nanospray source to a high resolution mass spectrometer based on Orbitrap technology (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany): LTQ-Orbitrap XL, LTQ-Orbitrap Velos  or QExactive Plus. Peptides were loaded onto a trapping microcolumn Acclaim PepMap100 C18 (20 mm x 100 μm ID, 5 μm, Dionex) before separation on a C18 reversed-phase analytical nanocolumn at a flowrate of 0.3 μL/min. The Q-Exactive Plus instrument was interfaced with an Easy Spray C18 PepMap nanocolumn (25 or 50 cm x 75µm ID, 2µm, 100Å, Dionex) using a 35 min gradient from 4 to 76% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid for peptide separation (total time: 65 min). Full MS survey scans were performed at 70,000 resolution. In data-dependent acquisition controlled by Xcalibur software (Thermo Fisher), the 10 most intense multiply charged precursor ions detected in the full MS survey scan were selected for higher energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD, normalized collision energy NCE=27%) and analyzed in the orbitrap at 17,500 resolution. The window for precursor isolation was of 1.6 m/z units around the precursor and selected fragments were excluded for 60 s from further analysis. The LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer was interfaced with a reversed-phase C18 Acclaim Pepmap nanocolumn (75 μm ID x 25 cm, 2.0 μm, 100 Å, Dionex) using a 65 min gradient from 5 to 72% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid for peptide separation (total time: 95 min). Full MS survey scans were performed at 60,000 resolution. In data-dependent acquisition controlled by Xcalibur software, the 20 most intense multiply charged precursor ions detected in the full MS survey scan were selected for CID fragmentation (NCE=35%) in the LTQ linear trap with an isolation window of 3.0 m/z and then dynamically excluded from further selection during 120s. The LTQ-Orbitrap XL instrument was interfaced with a reversed-phase C18 Acclaim Pepmap (75 μm ID x 25 cm, 2.0 μm, 100 Å, Dionex) or Nikkyo (75 μm ID x 15 cm, 3.0 μm, 120Å, Nikkyo Technos, Tokyo, Japan) nanocolumn using a 90 min gradient from 4 to 76% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid for peptide separation (total time: 125 min). Full MS survey scans were performed at 60,000 resolution. In data-dependent acquisition controlled by Xcalibur software, the 10 most intense multiply charged precursor ions detected in the full MS survey scan were selected for CID fragmentation (NCE=35%) in the LTQ linear trap with an isolation window of 4.0 m/z and then dynamically excluded from further selection during 60s.

### Data Protocol
MS data were analyzed using Mascot 2.5 (Matrix Science, London, UK) set up to search either the UniProt (www.uniprot.org) or NCBI (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov) database restricted to C. floridanus (UniProt, August 2014 version: 14’801 sequences; NCBI, July 2015 version: 34’390 sequences), S. invicta (UniProt, August 2014 version: 14’374 sequences; NCBI, January 2015 version: 21 118 sequences) or A. mellifera (UniProt, September 2015 version: 15’323 sequences; NCBI, February 2016 version: 21 772 sequences) taxonomy. For Mascot search of C. fellah samples, we used the database provided by the C. fellah transcriptome (27’062 sequences) and the UniProt C. floridanus reference proteome (January 2016 version, 14’287 sequences). Trypsin (cleavage at K,R) was used as the enzyme definition, allowing 2 missed cleavages. Mascot was searched with a parent ion tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.50 Da (LTQ-Orbitrap Velos / LTQ-Orbitrap XL) or 0.02 Da (QExactive Plus). Iodoacetamide derivative of cysteine was specified in Mascot as a fixed modification. N-terminal acetylation of protein, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, and oxidation of methionine were specified as variable modifications. Scaffold software (version 4.4, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications, and to perform dataset alignment. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 90.0% probability as specified by the Peptide Prophet algorithm with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability and contained at least two identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony and in most cases these proteins appear identical in annotations.  Quantitative spectral counting was performed using the normalized spectral abundance factor (NSAF), a measure that takes into account the number of spectra matched to each protein, the length of each protein and the total number of proteins in the input database. To compare relative abundance across samples with notably different protein abundance, we divided each protein’s NSAF value by the total sum of NSAF values present in the sample.

### Publication Abstract
Social insects frequently engage in oral fluid exchange - trophallaxis - between adults, and between adults and larvae. Although trophallaxis is widely considered a food-sharing mechanism, we hypothesized that endogenous components of this fluid might underlie a novel means of chemical communication between colony members. Through protein and small-molecule mass spectrometry and RNA sequencing, we found that trophallactic fluid in the ant <i>Camponotus floridanus</i> contains a set of specific digestion- and non-digestion related proteins, as well as hydrocarbons, microRNAs, and a key developmental regulator, juvenile hormone. When <i>C. floridanus</i> workers' food was supplemented with this hormone, the larvae they reared via trophallaxis were twice as likely to complete metamorphosis and became larger workers. Comparison of trophallactic fluid proteins across social insect species revealed that many are regulators of growth, development and behavioral maturation. These results suggest that trophallaxis plays previously unsuspected roles in communication and enables communal control of colony phenotypes.

### Keywords
Social insects, Camponotus floridanus, Trophallactic fluid, Ants

### Affiliations
University of Lausanne
Département d'écologie et évolution Université de Lausanne Bâtiment Biophore CH-1015 Lausanne Switzerland

### Submitter
Patrice Waridel

### Lab Head
Dr Laurent Keller
Département d'écologie et évolution Université de Lausanne Bâtiment Biophore CH-1015 Lausanne Switzerland


