### Accession
PXD028769

### Title
N-terminome analyses of the intramembrane-cleaving protease SPPL3

### Description
The intramembrane protease SPPL3 can specifically cleave select Golgi enzymes, enabling their secretion and concomitantly altering global cellular glycosylation, yet the entire range of Golgi glycan-modifying enzymes cleaved by SPPL3 under physiological conditions remains to be defined. Here, we established isogenic SPPL3-deficient HEK293 and HeLa cell lines and applied N-terminomics to identify substrates cleaved by endogenous SPPL3 and released into conditioned cell culture supernatants.

### Sample Protocol
Collection of conditioned medium samples for mass spectrometry and N-terminome analysis Cells (three T175 flasks per sample) were grown to 70% confluency as detailed earlier and washed extensively with pre-warmed PBS before adding serum-free DMEM for 24h. Culture medium was then changed to phenol red-free and serum-free DMEM and cells were incubated another 24h. CM samples were collected and proteins were concentrated and changed to 100mM HEPES, pH 7.0 using Millipore Amicon-Ultra-15 3k concentrators. Protein content was quantified using a Micro-BCA assay.   Supernatant samples were lyophilized, resuspended in 1% SDS and then cleaned via chloroform/methanol/water (CMW) precipitation to remove any interfering substances such as small primary amines which can impede labelling. Golgi samples were sonicated in the presence of 1% SDS and then CMW precipitated.  Samples were resuspended in 6M Guanidine x HCl in 100 mM TEAB and a BCA on a diluted fraction was performed to determine protein concentration. Approximately 100 µg of each sample were reduced with TCEP (5 mM final) for 30 min at 65°C and then alkylated with iodoacetamide (12.5 mM final) at room temperature for 30 min. Samples were then labeled with TMT reagent (either TMT-6-plex or TMT-10-plex) in equal volume of DMSO so that the final concentration of DMSO was 50%. The samples were left to react for 1h at 25 °C and then quenched with hydroxylamine (1% final) for 30 min at 37 °C. All channels were combined and the sample was CMW precipitated. The pellet was washed with methanol, re-dissolved in 3M Guanidine HCl and diluted to < 0.85M with 100mM TEAB. Trypsin was added (40:1, protein to enzyme) and the sample left to digest overnight at 37°C. The sample was cleaned using a C-18 column (50 mg, 1cc, SepPak, Waters, Milford, MA, USA) and eluted with 80% acetonitrile (ACN) in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). One tenth or one twentieth (approximately 30 µg) of the sample was set aside for “PRE-HYTANE” while the rest of the sample was taken and the neo N-termini generated as a result of trypsin digestion were depleted using HYTANE  All samples were injected in duplicate, except for 2D-LC which were measured only once. Samples were analyzed on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano-UHPLC coupled to either a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer, QExactive Plus or a Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (all Thermo Fisher Scientific). The samples were washed on a trap column (Acclaim Pepmap 100 C-18, 5 mm × 300 μm, 5 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 4 min with 3% ACN/0.1% TFA at a flow rate of 30 μl/min prior to peptide separation using an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 analytical column (50 cm × 75 μm, 2 μm, 100 Å). A flow rate of 300 nL/min using eluent A (0.05% FA) and eluent B (80% ACN/0.04% FA) was used for gradient separation (120 min for 2D-LC and 180 min for 1D-LC, 5-40% B). Spray voltage applied on a metal-coated PicoTip emitter (10 μm tip size, New Objective, Woburn, MA, USA) was 1.7-1.9 kV, with a source temperature of 250°C. MS and MS/MS parameters varied slightly between machines and between label-free and TMT-experiments (TMT-6-plex and TMT-10-plex).

### Data Protocol
The MS raw files were processed by Proteome Discoverer 2.2 and MS/MS spectra were searched using the Sequest HT algorithm against a database containing common contaminants and a canonical human database.  For label-free experiments, samples were searched with two search nodes: utilizing both tryptic and semi-tryptic enzyme specificity, both with two missed cleavages allowed. An MS1 tolerance of 10 ppm and a MS2 tolerance of 0.02 Da was implemented. Oxidation (15.995 Da) of Met residues was set as a variable modification while carbamidomethylation (57.02146 Da) on Cys was set as a static modification. In addition, acetylation (42.011 Da), loss of Met (-131.040 Da) and loss of Met and acetylation (-89.030 Da) at the protein level was also set as a variable modification. Minimal peptide length was set to 7 aa and the peptide false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1%. Label-free quantification was performed by using the Minora feature detection. Normalized protein abundances from Proteome Discoverer were exported. Technical injections were averaged, the data was log 2 transformed, filtered so that at each protein had to be present in at least 2 out of 3 biological replicates in one of the samples (WT or KO). Missing values were imputed in Perseus (Perseus_1.6.10.43). Imputed values were randomly drawn from a normal distribution with a width of 0.3 and down shifted by 1.8 standard deviations. Statistical analysis (t-test) was performed in Excel (two-tailed, unequal variance). For TMT experiments enzyme specificity was set to semi-ArgC with two missed cleavages allowed. An MS1 tolerance of 10 ppm and a MS2 tolerance of 0.02 Da was implemented. Oxidation (15.995 Da) of Met residues, acetylation (42.011 Da) and TMT-6-plex/TMT-10-plex (229.163 Da) on the peptide N-terminus was set as a variable modification while carbamidomethylation (57.02146 Da) on Cys residues and TMT on Lys residues was set as a static modification. Technical injection replicates were set as fractions. Minimal peptide length was set to 6 amino acids and the FDR was set to 1%. Normalized, scaled abundance from Proteome Discoverer were exported, log2-transformed and statistical analysis (t-test, standard student’s t-test assuming equal variance) were performed in Perseus (Perseus_1.6.10.43).

### Publication Abstract
Golgi membrane proteins such as glycosyltransferases and other glycan-modifying enzymes are key to glycosylation of proteins and lipids. Secretion of soluble Golgi enzymes that are released from their membrane anchor by endoprotease activity is a wide-spread yet largely unexplored phenomenon. The intramembrane protease SPPL3 can specifically cleave select Golgi enzymes, enabling their secretion and concomitantly altering global cellular glycosylation, yet the entire range of Golgi enzymes cleaved by SPPL3 under physiological conditions remains to be defined. Here, we established isogenic SPPL3-deficient HEK293 and HeLa cell lines and applied N-terminomics to identify substrates cleaved by SPPL3 and released into cell culture supernatants. With high confidence, our study identifies more than 20 substrates of SPPL3, including entirely novel substrates. Notably, our N-terminome analyses provide a comprehensive list of SPPL3 cleavage sites demonstrating that SPPL3-mediated shedding of Golgi enzymes occurs through intramembrane proteolysis. Through the use of chimeric glycosyltransferase constructs we show that transmembrane domains can determine cleavage by SPPL3. Using our cleavage site data, we surveyed public proteome data and found that SPPL3 cleavage products are present in human blood. We also generated HEK293 knock-in cells expressing the active site mutant D271A from the endogenous SPPL3 locus. Immunoblot analyses revealed that secretion of select novel substrates such as the key mucin-type O-glycosylation enzyme GALNT2 is dependent on endogenous SPPL3 protease activity. In sum, our study expands the spectrum of known physiological substrates of SPPL3 corroborating its significant role in Golgi enzyme turnover and secretion as well as in the regulation of global glycosylation pathways.

### Keywords
Hela, Hek293, N-terminomics, Label-free, Sppl3

### Affiliations
Systematic Proteome Research & Bioanalytics, Institute for Experimental Medicine, Kiel University, 24105 Kiel, Germany.
Systematic Proteome Research & Bioanalytics, University of Kiel

### Submitter
Andreas Tholey

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Tholey
Systematic Proteome Research & Bioanalytics, Institute for Experimental Medicine, Kiel University, 24105 Kiel, Germany.


