### Accession
PXD026743

### Title
A systematic analysis of Trypanosoma brucei chromatin factors  identifies novel protein interaction networks associated with sites  of transcription initiation and termination

### Description
Nucleosomes composed of histones are the fundamental units around which DNA is wrapped to form chromatin. Transcriptionally active euchromatin or repressive heterochromatin is regulated in part by the addition or removal of histone post-translational modifications (PTMs) by ‘writer’ and ‘eraser’ enzymes, respectively. Nucleosomal PTMs are recognised by a variety of ‘reader’ proteins which alter gene expression accordingly. The histone tails of the evolutionarily divergent eukaryotic parasite Trypanosoma brucei have atypical sequences and PTMs distinct from those often considered universally conserved. Here we identify 65 predicted readers, writers and erasers of histone acetylation and methylation encoded in the T. brucei genome and, by epitope tagging, systemically localize 60 of them in the parasite’s bloodstream form. ChIP-seq demonstrated that fifteen candidate proteins associate with regions of RNAPII transcription initiation. Eight other proteins exhibit a distinct distribution with specific peaks at a subset of RNAPII transcription termination regions marked by RNAPIII-transcribed tRNA and snRNA genes. Proteomic analyses identified distinct protein interaction networks comprising known chromatin regulators and novel trypanosome-specific components. Notably, several SET-domain and Bromo-domain protein networks suggest parallels to RNAPII promoter-associated complexes in conventional eukaryotes. Further, we identify likely components of TbSWR1 and TbNuA4 complexes whose enrichment coincides with the SWR1-C exchange substrate H2A.Z at RNAPII transcriptional start regions. The systematic approach employed provides detail of the composition and organization of the chromatin regulatory machinery in Trypanosoma brucei and establishes a route to explore divergence from eukaryotic norms in an evolutionarily ancient but experimentally accessible eukaryote.

### Sample Protocol
4 x 10^8 cells were lysed per IP in the presence of 0.2% NP-40 and 150 mM KCl. Lysates were sonicated briefly (3 cycles, 12 s on, 12 s off) at a high setting in a Bioruptor (Diagenode) sonicator. The soluble and insoluble fractions were separated by centrifugation, and the soluble fraction was incubated for 1 h at 4oC with beads crosslinked to mouse anti-GFP antibody (Roche). The IP samples were washed three times with the lysis buffer containing 150 mM KCl, and protein was eluted with RapiGest surfactant (Waters) at 55°C for 15 min. Next, filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) (Wiśniewski et al., 2009) was used to digest the protein samples for mass spectrometric analysis. Briefly, proteins were reduced with DTT and then denatured with 8 M Urea in Vivakon spin (filter) column 30K cartridges. Samples were alkylated with 0.05 M IAA and digested with 0.5 μg MS Grade Pierce Trypsin Protease (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Following overnight digestion, stage tips (Rappsilber et al., 2007) were prepared.Peptides were separated using RSLC Ultimate3000 system (Thermo Scientific) fitted with an EasySpray column (50 cm; Thermo Scientific) utilising 2-40-95% non-linear gradients with solvent A (0.1% formic acid) and solvent B (80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid). The EasySpray column was directly coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Scientific) operated in DDA mode. “TopSpeed” mode was used with 3 s cycles with standard settings to maximize identification rates: MS1 scan range - 350-1500 mz, RF lens 30%, AGC target 4.0e5 with intensity threshold 5.0e3, filling time 50 ms and resolution 60000, monoisotopic precursor selection and filter for charge states 2-5. HCD (27%) was selected as fragmentation mode. MS2 scans were performed using Ion Trap mass analyser operated in rapid mode with AGC set to 2.0e4 and filling time to 50 ms.

### Data Protocol
The resulting shot-gun data were processed using Maxquant 1.3.30 and visualized using Perseus 1.6.0.2.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Chromatin, Proteomics, Trypanosoma brucei

### Affiliations
Wellcome Centre for Cell Biology, The University of Edinburgh
WCB, 
The University of Edinburgh

### Submitter
Tania Auchynnikava

### Lab Head
Dr Robin Allshire
Wellcome Centre for Cell Biology, The University of Edinburgh


