### Accession
PXD003383

### Title
Proteomic analysis of TRAIL-induced endogenous RIPK3-dependent necrosome complex

### Description
Tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) is a well-known inducer of apoptosis via formation of the primary death-inducing signaling complex (TRAIL-DISC) at the level of membrane death receptors (DR4 and DR5) which recruit successively FADD and caspase-8. TRAIL can also induce necroptosis when caspases are inhibited. Necroptosis is a regulated cell death dependent on the formation of a cytosolic necrosome complex which includes RIPK1, RIPK3 and MLKL proteins. Elucidating the molecular mechanisms involved in TRAIL-induced necroptosis might provide new insights into the TRAIL death signaling pathway. Here, we report the analysis by mass spectrometry of endogenous RIPK3-dependent necrosome complex constituents upon necroptosis induced by TRAIL/z-VAD/Birinapant (TzB) in HT29 cells. Besides characterization of RIPK1, RIPK3, MLKL, FADD, caspase-8, we find TRIM21 as a new constituent of the necrosome complex.  Moreover RIPK1, RIPK3, MLKL, P-MLKL, FADD, caspase-8 and TRIM21 are also found associated to the native TRAIL-DISC upon TzB stimulation showing initiation of the necrotic pathway at the level of TRAIL death receptors in HT29 cells. Finally, TRIM21 may positively modulate necroptosis induction by downregulating NF-kB activation.

### Sample Protocol
HT29 cells were treated with 500 ng/ml of TRAIL-SK/25 µM zVAD/1µM Birinapant (TzB). Aliquot of 4 mg of cell lysates were immunoprecipitated with RIPK3 antibody. Eight RIPK3 immunoprecipitates were pooled and subjected to enzymatic digestion: proteins were reduced with DTT then alkylated with iodoacetamide. The sample was completed with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.5) and finally digested with modified trypsin for 5 h at 37°C. The peptide mixture was then desalted and concentrated using a micro spin-column C18 from Harvard Apparatus according to manufacturer’s instructions. The resulting sample was completely dried, then solubilized with 17 µL of 0.1% acid formic and injected in a nanoflow high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) system connected to a hybrid LTQ-OrbiTrap XLequipped with a nano-electrospray ionization (ESI) source. Mobile A (99.9 % water and 0.1% formic acid ) and B (99.9% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) phases for HPLC were delivered by an Ultimate 3000 nanoflow LC system. The sample was loaded onto a trapping precolumn then sepratated on an analytical column ermostated at 30°C. A gradient from 2% to 35% buffer B for the first 60 min, 35% to 60% buffer B from 60 to 85 min, and 60% to 90% buffer B from 85 to 105 min was used. Finally, the column was washed with 90% buffer B for 16 min, and with 2% buffer B for 19 min. The LTQ-Orbitrap XL instrument was operated in the data-dependent mode by automatically switching between full scan MS and consecutive MS/MS acquisitions. Full scan MS spectra were acquired in the OrbiTrap with a resolution of 60000 at m/z 400 in the mass range 400–2000; ion injection times were calculated to allow the accumulation of 106 ions in the OrbiTrap for each spectrum. The ten most intense ions of each full scan MS were sequentially isolated and fragmented in the linear ion trap by collision-induced dissociation (normalized collision energy at 35%, activation time of 30 ms). Peaks selected for fragmentation were automatically subjected to dynamic exclusion for 60 s with a mass tolerance of ± 10 ppm to avoid the selection of the same ion for fragmentation more than once. For OrbiTrap measurements, an external calibration was used before each injection series ensuring an overall error mass accuracy below 5 ppm for the detected ions. MS data were saved in RAW file format using XCalibur 2.0.7 with tune 2.4.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer 1.2 software supported by Mascot database search engine was used for peptide and protein identification using its automatic decoy database search to calculate a false discovery rate (FDR). MS/MS spectra were compared to the UniProt Human Reference proteome set database. Mass tolerance for MS and MS/MS was set at 10 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. The enzyme selectivity was set to full trypsin with one miscleavage allowed. Protein modifications were fixed carbamidomethylation of cysteines and variable oxidation of methionine.  Identification validation and spectral count label-free quantification Proline Studio 1.1 software was used for the validation and the spectral count comparison of the identified proteins in each samples(http://proline.profiproteomics.fr/). After importation of the mascot .dat files from each query, search results were validated with a peptide rank = 1 and a FDR of 1% on the e-value at the peptide spectrum match level. Proteins identified with exactly the same set of peptides or with a subset of the same peptides were grouped in a Protein Set. This Protein Set is then represented by a Typical Protein which is the best identified protein (best score) or in case of sameset proteins, the SwissProt one if possible. When proteins with shared peptides were identified with other peptides not belonging to the Protein Set, different Protein Sets were created, even if there are no specific peptides (i.e. if theses peptides were also shared by other Protein Sets). For the spectral count comparison, a parent dataset corresponding to the merge of the individual validated identification result was created. This parent dataset is used to define the shared and specific peptides and the Protein Set list to compare. For each protein we chose to calculate weighted spectral counts, as suggested in Abacus (fermin D. et al. Proteomics 2015, PMID: 21360675), where shared peptides are combined and weighted according to the associated Protein Sets. Briefly, for each shared peptide, we define which proportion of spectra is allocated to the different Protein Sets. These weights take into account the specific spectral counts of the different Protein Sets sharing the same peptide(s). To detect significant difference between samples, a beta-binomial test was performed on these weighed spectral counts and a p-value was calculated for each Protein Set using the R package BetaBinomial 1.2 implemented in Proline Studio

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ripk3-dependent necrosome; disc; mass spectrometry; trail; trim21

### Affiliations
Life Sciences
Protim, Inserm U1085 Irset

### Submitter
Melanie Lagarrigue

### Lab Head
Dr Charles Pineau
Protim, Inserm U1085 Irset


