### Accession
PXD029689

### Title
Amyloid-like aggregating proteins cause lysosomal defects in neurons via gain-of-function toxicity

### Description
Here, we combine cryo-electron tomography, proteomics and cell biology studies to investigate the effects of protein aggregates in primary neurons. We use artificial amyloid-like β-sheet proteins (β proteins) to focus on the gain-of-function aspect of aggregation. These proteins form fibrillar aggregates and cause neurotoxicity. We show that late stages of autophagy are impaired by the aggregates, resulting in lysosomal alterations reminiscent of lysosomal storage disorders.

### Sample Protocol
For interactome analysis, cortical neurons (500.000 cells/condition) were harvested in ice-cold lysis buffer (0,25% NP40, 5% glycerol, 50 mM Tris HCl, 150 mM NaCl) containing protease inhibitor (Roche), DNAse (5 µl/ml) and RNAse (0,5 µl/ml). Thermo Scientific™ Pierce™ Protein G Agarose (10 µl/100 µg IgG) was used for purification and immunoprecipitation of IgG antibodies. Serum samples containing IgG were incubated with Protein G agarose in a buffer that facilitates binding (20 mM sodium phosphate) for 1 h. Then, neuronal lysates were loaded onto IgG-protein G Agarose and incubated for 4 h. Non-IgG and non-antigen components were discarded from the sample by washing with 0,1% NP40, 5% Glycerol, 50 mM Tris HCl, 150 mM NaCl. Enriched proteins were next isolated and processed in a step-wise manner. First, proteins were denatured, digested and cysteines reduced for 1 hour at 20°C by adding 8 M Urea, 40 mM Hepes pH 8.0, 1 µg LysC and 10 mM DTT. Next, urea concentration was lowered to 2 M by adding 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate in MilliQ water. Trypsin (1 µg) was added to the protein-peptide mix and samples were subjected to 55 mM chloroacetamide for 1 h to alkylate cysteine residues. Alkylation was quenched by adding 2 M urea / 50 mM thiourea and overnight digestion was carried out after addition of 1 µg fresh trypsin. Complete proteomes were prepared as described in Hornburg et al. 2014 MCP.

### Data Protocol
To process MS raw files, we employed MaxQuant software (v. 1.5.7.10) (Cox & Mann, 2008). Andromeda (Cox et al., 2011), which is integrated into MaxQuant, was used to search MS/MS spectra against the UniProtKB FASTA database. For the standard immunoprecipitation and pre-loaded serum, enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and LysC. For all the experiments, N-terminal cleavage to proline and up to two miscleavages were allowed. Peptides with a minimum length of seven amino acids were considered for identification. Oxidation, acetylation and deamidation were set as variable modifications (maximum number of modifications per peptide was 5). A false discovery rate (FDR) cut-off of 1% was applied at the peptide and protein levels. Initial precursor mass deviation of up to 4.5 ppm and fragment mass deviation up to 20 ppm were allowed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Neurons, Neurodegeneration, Toxic proteins, Protein aggregates

### Affiliations
Stanford

### Submitter
Daniel Hornburg

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Hornburg
Stanford


