### Accession
PXD018787

### Title
Identification of phasin PhaF interaction partners and proteomic analysis of polyhydroxyalkanoate granules in Pseudomonas putida

### Description
Phasin PhaF is a multifunctional protein associated with the surface of polyhydroxyalkanoate (PHA) granules (carbonosomes) that contributes significantly to PHA biogenesis in pseudomonads. PhaF participates in PHA granule stabilization and segregation and its deletion has a notable impact on overall transcriptome, PHA accumulation and cell physiology, suggesting a more extensive function than simply being a simply granule structural protein. We followed a systematic approach to detect potential interactions of PhaF with other components of the cell, which could pinpoint unexplored functions of PhaF in the regulation of PHA production. We determined the PhaF interactome in Pseudomonas putida KT2440 using pull-down-mass spectrometry (PD-MS), in which proteins interacting with PhaF were determined. We separately determined the PHA granule proteome (all proteins associated with PHA granules) in Pseudomonas putida KT2440 using two granule preparation methods.

### Sample Protocol
Affinity purification chromatography: pull-down assays (Samples S1, S2, S3, N13, N20) To identify interacting partners of PhaF, an affinity pull-down followed by mass spectrometry (PD-MS) approach was used. His6-PhaF bait protein was recombinantly produced in E. coli,  purified using nickel affinity chromatography, and resuspended in buffer A (20 mM sodium phosphate pH 7.4, 300 mM NaCl, 30 mM imidazole). The pool of cellular proteins was prepared as follows. P. putida was grown in polyhydroxyalkanoate (PHA) accumulation conditions. Strains were pre-cultured in LB medium at 30 °C and 200 rpm; overnight growths were washed, transferred to a final OD600 0.3 in M63 0.1 N medium, and grown at 30 °C 200 rpm for 24 hours. M63 0.1 N is a nitrogen limited minimal medium composed of 13.6 g/L KH2PO4, 0.2 g/L NH42SO4, 0.5 mg/L FeSO4∙7H2O, 1 mM MgSO4 and a solution of trace elements (composition 1000X per liter: 2.78 g FeSO4∙7H2O, 1.98 g MnCl2∙4H2O, 2.81 g CoSO4∙7H2O, 1.47 g CaCl2∙2H2O, 0.17 g CuCl2∙2H2O, and 0.29 g ZnSO4∙7H2O). 15 mM sodium octanoate was included as the carbon source for PHA production. Cells were harvested, resuspended in buffer A supplemented with Roche cOmplete™ protease inhibitor cocktail (1 tablet per 50 ml of solution) and disrupted by three passages through a French pressure cell at 1000 psi. The sample was treated with 0.1 mg/ml DNase I (Turbo DNA-free™, Ambion) for 20 min at room temperature. The soluble protein fraction was separated from PHA granules and cell debris by centrifugation at 18,000 ×g for 30 min. The concentration of total protein was quantified by Bradford assay. For pull-down experiments (Samples S1, S2, S3), 100 μg of purified His6-PhaF was incubated with 1 mg of soluble protein lysate on a roller shaker for 1 hour with smooth agitation. The sample was passed through a column packed with affinity medium Ni-Sepharose charged with NiSO4 and washed with 25 ml of buffer A and then with 75 ml of a three-step gradient with 5, 10 and 20% of buffer B (20 mM sodium phosphate pH 7.4, 300 mM NaCl, 500 mM imidazole). The PhaF-interacting protein complexes were eluted with 265 mM of imidazole. A pull-down with P. putida lysate alone (no His6-PhaF) was used as a negative control for non-specific binding to the Ni-Sepharose column (Samples N13 and N20). The eluted fractions were analyzed by MS.  PHA granule-associated proteome (Samples G1, G2, SU1) To determine the polyhydroxyalkanoate (PHA) granule proteome of P. putida two variations on the granule preparation techniques were utilized. For samples G1 and G2, the glycerol granule preparations were from culture extracts treated with DNase I, washed twice with 150 mM NaCl and suspended in 15 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8. The suspension was layered on 55% glycerol, followed by centrifugation in a swinging-bucket rotor 1 hour at 10,000 ×g. Separated PHA granules were collected from the density interface and the centrifugation over glycerol was repeated two more times. For sample SU1, a second preparation technique was carried out with PHA granules isolated over a discontinuous sucrose gradient (0.43 and 0.58 M) in 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8. Cell lysate was centrifuged for 3.5 hours, 120,000 ×g at 4 ºC, the granule fraction was collected, resuspended in 15 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8, centrifuged for 20 min at 120,000 ×g and stored at -20 ºC. For this second method, the cell lysate sample was not treated with DNase I prior to granule preparation. The final granule preparations were analyzed by MS.  Mass spectroscopy A preparative 10% SDS-PAGE containing 500 μg of each elution sample (biological replicates) was run approximately 1 cm and stained with Colloidal Blue for protein visualization and spot picking. The gel section containing the whole protein fraction was cut-off into two slices and subjected to tryptic digestion. The peptide mixture was loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap 100 precolumn output onto an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 (3 μm  particle size, 75 μm inner diameter x 25 cm length) analytical column using an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher). Peptides were separated for 110 min. using the following gradient: 90 min. 0-35% buffer B, 10 min. 45-95% buffer B, 9 min. 95% buffer B and 1 min. 10% buffer B at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. Buffer A composition: 0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile; Buffer B composition: 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. Peptides were eluted directly into the nano-electrospray source. Samples were analyzed with a LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer in positive mode (Thermo Fisher). The mass spectra corresponding to the full scan (m/z 400-2000) were obtained with a resolution of 500,000 to 60,000 (for m/z = 200) and the 15 most intense ions of each scan were selected for their fragmentation by collision-induced dissociation (CID) in the ion trap, with collision energy normalized to 35%. Ions with single charge or without charge assignment were discarded. A dynamic exclusion with a duration of 45 sec. was carried out.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were processed with Discoverer software Version 1.1.1.14 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Pseudomonas putida database searching for protein identification was done using Sequest. In the search parameters, carbamidomethylation of cysteines and oxidation of methionine were established as fixed modifications. The tolerance of the selection of precursors and product ions was set at 10 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. Peptide matches were validated using the Percolator algorithm, where a peptide-spectrum match (PSM) was considered correct if it achieved a q value < 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
Phasin PhaF, a multifunctional protein associated with the surface of polyhydroxyalkanoate (PHA) granules that also interacts with the nucleoid, contributes significantly to PHA biogenesis in pseudomonads. As a protein present on the surface of PHA granules, PhaF participates in granule stabilization and segregation, whereas its deletion has a notable impact on overall transcriptome, PHA accumulation and cell physiology, suggesting more extensive functions besides solely being a granule structural protein. Here, we followed a systematic approach to detect potential interactions of PhaF with other components of the cell, which could pinpoint unexplored functions of PhaF in the regulation of PHA production. We determined the PhaF interactome in Pseudomonas putida KT2440 via pull-down-mass spectrometry (PD-MS) experiments. PhaF complexed with PHA-related proteins, phasin PhaI and the transcriptional regulator PhaD, interactions that were verified to be direct using in vivo two-hybrid analysis. The determination of the PHA granule proteome showed that PhaI and three other potential PhaF interacting partners, but not PhaD, were granule-associated proteins. Analysis of the interaction of PhaF and PhaD with the phaI promoter by EMSA suggested a new role for PhaF in interacting with PhaD and raises new questions on the regulatory system controlling pha gene expression.

### Keywords
Carbonosomes, Phasin interactome, Polyhydroxyalkanoate, Pha granules, Pseudomonas putida

### Affiliations
Polymer Biotechnology Lab Centro de Investigaciones Biologicas(CIB) Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas (CSIC) C/ Ramiro de Maeztu, 9. 28040 Madrid, Spain
Biological Research Center-Spanish National Research Council (CIB-CSIC)

### Submitter
Ryan Kniewel

### Lab Head
Dr M. Auxiliadora Prieto
Polymer Biotechnology Lab Centro de Investigaciones Biologicas(CIB) Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas (CSIC) C/ Ramiro de Maeztu, 9. 28040 Madrid, Spain


