### Accession
PXD031555

### Title
Global proteome of Atg16L1flox:CAG-CreTmx WT and KO neurons

### Description
The experiment was performed to identify autophagy targets in wildtype and autophagy-deficient primary neurons. Therefore, cortico-hippocampal neurons were isolated from Atg16L1flox:CAG-CreTmx mice and treated with Tamoxifen (Tmx) to induce the knockout (KO) or EtOH for wildtype (WT) in-vitro. WT and KO Neurons were harvested at day in-vitro (DIV) 15-16, and global proteome analysis was measured by LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation. For total proteome analysis Atg16L1flox:CAG-CreTmx were harvested at DIV15-16 in RIPA buffer. Supernatants were sonicated, and subsequently cleared by centrifugation. Protein concentration was determined for each lysate and 50µg protein of each sample taken for the experiment. Samples were prepared for proteomic analysis using an in-gel digestion protocol. In brief, samples were loaded onto an SDS-PAGE gel and run for 1-2 cm. The whole running line was chopped into small pieces and transferred in a 1.5 mL Eppendorf tube. Samples were reduced (10 mM DTT) and alkylated (55 mM CAA). Digestion of proteins were done overnight using Trypsin (10 ng/µL 90% Trypsin) and LysC (50 mM). Peptides were extracted and purified using Stagetips. Eluted peptides were dried in vacuo, resuspended in 1% formic acid/4% acetonitrile and stored at -20°C prior MS measurement.  LCMS data acquisition. Peptide digests were analyzed on a Q Exactive plus Orbitrap (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer coupled to an EASY nLC (Thermo Scientific). Samples were loaded onto an in-house packed analytical column (50 cm — 75 µm I.D., filled with 2.7 µm Poroshell EC120 C18, Agilent). Peptides were separated at a 250 nL/min flow rate using 2 hrs runs with data-independent acquisitions (DIA) or 4 hrs runs with the data-dependent acquisition (DDA). The gradients were: (2 hrs) 3-5% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80 % acetonitrile) within 1.0 min, 5-30% solvent B within 91.0 min, 30-50% solvent B within 17.0 min, 50-95% solvent B within 1.0 min, followed by washing with 95 % solvent B for 10 min or (4h) 4-5% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80 % acetonitrile) within 1.0 min, 5-28% solvent B within 200.0 min, 28-50% solvent B within 28.0 min, 50-95% solvent B within 1.0 min, followed by washing with 95 % solvent B for 10 min. DDA runs for spectrum library generation were acquired from each sample. MS1 survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000. The top 10 most abundant peptides were isolated within a 2.0 Th window and subjected to HCD fragmentation with a normalized collision energy of 27. The AGC target was set to 5e5 charges, allowing a maximum injection time of 55 ms. Product ions were detected in the orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. Precursors were dynamically excluded for 20.0 s. Sample runs were acquired in DIA mode using 10 variable windows covering the mass range from m/z 450 to m/z 1200. MS1 scans were acquired at 140,000 resolution, and maximum IT restricted to 120 ms and an AGC target set to 5e6 charges. The settings for MS2 scans were 17,500 resolution, maximum IT restricted to 60 ms and AGC target set to 5e6 charges. The default charge state for the MS2 was set to 4. Stepped normalized collision energy was set to 27. All spectra were acquired in profile mode.

### Data Protocol
An assay-specific hybrid spectrum library was generated in Spectronaut 13 (1) using DDA library runs, DIA sample runs, and a mouse sequence file (up000000589) downloaded from Uniprot. Spectronaut default settings were used for the analysis of the DIA runs. Protein identifications were filtered for q-values below 0.01, and normalized intensities were exported for subsequent statistical analysis in Perseus 1.6.1.1. Intensities were transformed to log2 values, and the dataset was filtered for at least 3 out of 3 values in at least one condition. The remaining missing values were imputed with random values from the left end of the intensity distribution (with 0.3 sd, downshift 2 sd). Two runs were removed from the analysis since the projection in the principal component analysis were outside median plus/minus 4 times inter quartile range for component 1 or 2. Two sample Student´s T-tests were calculated using permutation-based FDR estimation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Neurons, Atg16l1 ko, Autophagy

### Affiliations
CECAD Research Center
CECAD Excellence Center, University of Cologne, Germany, D-50931 Center for Physiology and Pathophysiology, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Cologne, University of Cologne, Germany, D-50931

### Submitter
Prerana Wagle

### Lab Head
Dr N.L. Kononenko
CECAD Excellence Center, University of Cologne, Germany, D-50931 Center for Physiology and Pathophysiology, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Cologne, University of Cologne, Germany, D-50931


