### Accession
PXD040939

### Title
Combination of in-vivo proximity labeling and co-immunoprecipitation identifies the host target network of a tumor-inducing effector in the fungal maize pathogen Ustilago maydis

### Description
Plant pathogens secrete effectors, which target host proteins to facilitate infection. The Ustilago maydis effector UmSee1 is required for tumor formation in the leaf during infection of maize. UmSee1 interacts with maize SGT1 and blocks its phosphorylation in-vivo. In the absence of UmSee1, U. maydis cannot trigger tumor formation in the bundle sheath. However, it remains unclear which host processes are manipulated by UmSee1 and the UmSee1-SGT1 interaction to cause the observed phenotype. Proximity-dependent protein labeling involving the turbo biotin ligase tag (TurboID) for proximal labeling of proteins is a powerful tool for identifying the protein interactome. We have generated transgenic U. maydis that secretes biotin ligase-fused See1 effector (UmSee1-TurboID-3HA) directly into maize cells. This approach, in combination with conventional co-immunoprecipitation allowed to identify additional UmSee1 interactors in maize cells. Collectively, our data identified three ubiquitin-proteasome pathway-related proteins (ZmSIP1, ZmSIP2, ZmSIP3) that either interact with or are close to UmSee1 during host infection of maize with U. maydis. ZmSIP3 represents a cell cycle regulator which degradation appears to be promoted in the presence of UmSee1. Our data provide a possible explanation for the requirement of UmSee1 in tumor formation during U. maydis - Zea mays interaction.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for mass spectrometry (MS) For each construct (SPUmSee1-mCherry-TurboID-3HA, UmSee1-TurboID-3HA), three biological replicates were performed and analyzed via MS. The biotin-treated maize leaves were harvested at three days post-infection (2 days post biotin treatment) and frozen in liquid nitrogen. Frozen plant material was ground to a fine powder for protein extraction. These plant powders are divided into different Ep tubes. For HA-IP, the frozen powder was added to 1.5 mL ice-cold protein-lysis buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.5,150 mM NaCl,10 % glycerol, 2 mM EDTA, 10 mM DTT, 0.5 % IGEPAL, 1 mM PMSF) with cOmplete™ Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche) and incubate on ice for half an hour after vortexing. The tubes were centrifuged at 13,300 x g for 10 min at 4°C, the upper soluble fraction was centrifuged again at 13,300 x g for 20 min at 4°C, the resulting supernatant was transferred to a fresh tube as total protein extract. HA magnetic beads (Pierce Anti-HA magnetic beads, Thermo Fisher Scientific) were separated on a magnetic separator. and washed three times by ice-cold wash buffer (50 mM Tris–HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol, 2 mM EDTA). After adding 10 µl beads to each cell extracts, the samples were incubated on a rolling wheel at 4°C for three hours. HA magnetic beads were magnetically separated and washed in 1 mL wash buffer three times. An aliquot of the beads was used for immunoblotting, the antibodies used were mouse anti-HA primary antibody (1:30,000 dilution; Sigma-Aldrich) and anti-mouse IgG secondary antibody (1:10,000 dilution; Thermo Fisher Scientific). For TurboID-based PL, the frozen powder was added to 500 µl SDT-lysis buffer (10 ml 10% SDS, 2.5 ml 1M DTT, 2.5 ml 1M Tris pH 7.5, 10 ml ddH2O)(Melkonian et al., 2022), and incubated 5 min at 95°C after vortex-mixing. The samples were sonicated for 10 min and centrifuged for 10min at 13, 300 x g. The resulting supernatant was transferred to a fresh tube as total proteins. Biotin depletion of the total proteins used the methanol-chloroform-precipitation method (Melkonian et al., 2022). 666 µl methanol and 166 µl chloroform were added to 500 µl total protein extracts and mixed with 300 µl ddH2O. The mix was centrifuged for 10 min at 1,500 g and discarded the supernatant, the protein pellets were washed by 600 µl methanol two times and air-dried for 5 min, then resuspended in 500 µl SDT-lysis buffer and incubated on Eppendorf Thermomixer for 30 min at 1,250 rpm while shaking. The biotin-depleted samples were diluted with PBS buffer (0.1 M phosphate, 0.15 M NaCl, pH 7.2) to a final concentration of 0.5% SDS. Streptavidin-agarose beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific) were washed with PBS buffer three times. After adding 50 µl beads to each sample, the samples were incubated on a rolling wheel at RT. The beads were centrifuged for three min at 3500 rpm and removed the supernatant, then washed once with 2 mL PBS buffer containing 2% SDS and six times with 10 mL PBS buffer. An aliquot of the beads was used for immunoblotting, the antibody used was Strep-HRP (1:1,000 dilution; Sigma-Aldrich). Sample preparation and LC-MS/MS data acquisition. Proteins from HA enrichment were submitted to an on-bead digestion. In brief, dry beads were re-dissolved in 25 µL digestion buffer 1 (50 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 2M urea, 1mM DTT, 5 ng/µL trypsin) and incubated for 30 min at 30 °C in a Thermomixer with 400 rpm. Next, beads were pelleted and the supernatant was transferred to a fresh tube. 50 µL digestion buffer 2 (50 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 2M urea, 5 mM CAA) was added to the beads, after mixing the beads were pelleted, the supernatant was collected and combined with the previous one. The combined supernatants were then incubated o/n at 32 °C in a Thermomixer with 400 rpm; samples were protected from light during incubation. The digestion was stopped by adding 1 µL TFA and desalted with C18 Empore disk membranes according to the StageTip protocol (Rappsilber et al, Anal. Chem. 2003, 75, 663.). For Streptavidin pulldown double amounts of buffers were used (Melkonian et. al., 2022))

### Data Protocol
Dried peptides were re-dissolved in 2% ACN, 0.1% TFA (10 µL) and diluted to 0.1 µg/µL for analysis. Samples were analyzed using an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher) coupled to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). Peptides were separated on 16 cm frit-less silica emitters (New Objective, 75 µm inner diameter), packed in-house with reversed-phase ReproSil-Pur C18 AQ 1.9 µm resin (Dr. Maisch). Peptides were loaded on the column and eluted for 115 min using a segmented linear gradient of 5% to 95% solvent B (0 min : 5%B; 0-5 min -> 5%B; 5-65 min -> 20%B; 65-90 min ->35%B; 90-100 min -> 55%; 100-105 min ->95%, 105-115 min ->95%) (solvent A 0% ACN, 0.1% FA; solvent B 80% ACN, 0.1%FA) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Mass spectra were acquired in data-dependent acquisition mode with a TOP15 method. MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with a mass range of 300–1750 m/z at a resolution of 70,000 FWHM and a target value of 3×106 ions. Precursors were selected with an isolation window of 1.3 m/z. HCD fragmentation was performed at a normalized collision energy of 25. MS/MS spectra were acquired with a target value of 105 ions at a resolution of 17,500 FWHM, a maximum injection time (max.) of 55 ms and a fixed first mass of m/z 100. Peptides with a charge of +1, greater than 6, or with unassigned charge state were excluded from fragmentation for MS2, dynamic exclusion for 30s prevented repeated selection of precursors.  Data analysis. Raw data were processed using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.3.4, http://www.maxquant.org/) (Cox et al., Nat. Biotechnol. 2008, 26, 1367.) with label-free quantification (LFQ) and iBAQ enabled (Cox et al., Nat. Protoc. 2016, 11, 2301.). MS/MS spectra were searched by the Andromeda search engine against a combined database containing the sequences from Zea mays (Zm-B73-REFERENCE-NAM-5.0) from EnsemblPlants (https://plants.ensembl.org/) and sequences of 248 common contaminant proteins and decoy sequences. Trypsin specificity was required and a maximum of two missed cleavages allowed. Minimal peptide length was set to seven amino acids. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed, oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. Peptide-spectrum-matches and proteins were retained if they were below a false discovery rate of 1%.  Statistical analysis of the MaxLFQ values was carried out using Perseus (version 1.5.8.5, http://www.maxquant.org/). Quantified proteins were filtered for reverse hits and hits “identified by site” and MaxLFQ values were log2 transformed. After grouping samples by condition only those proteins were retained for the subsequent analysis that had 2 valid values in one of the conditions. Two-sample t-tests were performed using a permutation-based FDR of 5%. Alternatively, quantified proteins were grouped by condition and only those hits were retained that had 3 valid values in one of the conditions. Missing values were imputed from a normal distribution (1.8 downshift, separately for each column). Volcano plots were generated in Perseus using an FDR of 5% and an S0=1. The Perseus output was exported and further processed using Excel. Relative iBAQ values were calculated per column from MaxQuant output, scaled by a factor of 106 and log10 transformed (Melkonian et al., 2022).

### Publication Abstract
Plant pathogens secrete effectors, which target host proteins to facilitate infection. The Ustilago maydis effector UmSee1 is required for tumor formation in the leaf during infection of maize. UmSee1 interacts with maize SGT1 (suppressor of G2 allele of skp1) and blocks its phosphorylation in vivo. In the absence of UmSee1, U. maydis cannot trigger tumor formation in the bundle sheath. However, it remains unclear which host processes are manipulated by UmSee1 and the UmSee1-SGT1 interaction to cause the observed phenotype. Proximity-dependent protein labeling involving the turbo biotin ligase tag (TurboID) for proximal labeling of proteins is a powerful tool for identifying the protein interactome. We have generated transgenic U. maydis that secretes biotin ligase-fused See1 effector (UmSee1-TurboID-3HA) directly into maize cells. This approach, in combination with conventional co-immunoprecipitation, allowed the identification of additional UmSee1 interactors in maize cells. Collectively, our data identified three ubiquitin-proteasome pathway-related proteins (ZmSIP1, ZmSIP2, and ZmSIP3) that either interact with or are close to UmSee1 during host infection of maize with U. maydis. ZmSIP3 represents a cell cycle regulator whose degradation appears to be promoted in the presence of UmSee1. Our data provide a possible explanation of the requirement for UmSee1 in tumor formation during U. maydis-Zea mays interaction.

### Keywords
Ustilago maydis, Plant-pathogen interaction, Zea mays, Effector, Turboid

### Affiliations
Plant Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry Group
Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research
Carl-von-Linné Weg 10
50829 Cologne
Basic Immune System of Plants / Protein Mass Spectrometry Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research Carl-von-Linne-Weg 10, 50829 Cologne, Germany

### Submitter
Sara Christina Stolze

### Lab Head
Dr Hirofumi Nakagami
Basic Immune System of Plants / Protein Mass Spectrometry Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research Carl-von-Linne-Weg 10, 50829 Cologne, Germany


