### Accession
PXD018129

### Title
NanoLC-MS/MS DDA Chroococcidiopsis thermalis PCC 7203 thylkoids WL vs. FRL

### Description
Chroococcidiopsis thermalis is an extremophilic cyanobacterium that is adaptable to a widerange of environments including deserts, where it can maintain viability after desiccation. This species is also capable of photoautotrophic growth under far-red light (FRL, 750 nm) The proteomic comparison in this study, in conjunction with topographical imaging of thylakoid membranes by atomic force microscopy, supports earlier findings that FRL growth is accompanied by the synthesis of alternative photosynthesis-related proteins. Under white light (WL), a number of phycobilisome (PBS) and photosystem (PS) subunits were predominant at levels 2 - 14-fold greater compared to FRL growth. Two antenna family proteins were markedly more abundant under WL, with a fold-difference of approximately 80. While WL-associated proteins persisted at relatively low abundance under FRL, an exclusive set of PBS and PS subunit isoforms was expressed under FRL. These proteins were undetectable under WL, in many cases encoded in a discrete FRL-associated gene cluster. In line with the expected higher energy capture rate under WL, complexes associated with electron transport (eg. cytochrome b6f) and the ATP synthase were 1.2 – 3.4 times more abundant than under FRL.

### Sample Protocol
Thylakoid membranes were prepared by sucrose density gradient centrifugation of cell lysates. Proteins were extracted from the membranes by precipitation using a 2-D clean-up kit (GE Healthcare) and the resultant pellets dissolved at 5 µg/µL in 8 M urea, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5. The proteins were reduced with 5 mM DTT at 37 C for 30 min and S-alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide at RT in the dark for 30 min. Protein digestion was performed with (1:25 w/w) endoproteinase Lys-C/trypsin mixture (Promega) for 2 h at 37 C. After 8.5-fold dilution with 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5, 10 mM CaCl2 the digestion was continued overnight at 37 C. Proteolysis was stopped by the addition of 0.5% TFA and the resultant peptides were desalted using C18 spin columns (Thermo Scientific) then dried in a vacuum centrifuge. For analysis by nanoLC-MS/MS the peptides were dissolved in 0.1% TFA, 3% ACN and 400 ng injected onto a Q Exactive HF quadrupole-Orbitrap system coupled to a Dionex RSLCnano LC (Thermo Scientific) delivering the following gradient profile: 97% solvent A (0.1% FA) to 10% solvent B (0.08% FA, 80% ACN) over 5 min, 10% to 50% solvent B over 3 h at 300 nL/min. The MS was programmed for data-dependent acquisition with profile full-scan MS (120 000 resolution) and up to 10 centroid product ion scans (30 000 resolution) per cycle.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified by searching the Chroococcidiopsis thermalis PCC 7203 reference proteome database (5740 proteins, downloaded from www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000010384 on 09-01-2018) using MaxQuant (v. 1.6.0.16) with the intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) option selected and all other parameters as per default. Protein identifications and associated iBAQ scores were processed using Perseus (v. 1.6.0.7). Normalization was by the sum of intra-analysis iBAQ abundance scores. Tryptic peptide ion intensities were extracted for quantification of homologous PS subunits by Top-N.

### Publication Abstract
Cyanobacteria are ubiquitous in nature and have developed numerous strategies that allow them to live in a diverse range of environments. Certain cyanobacteria synthesize chlorophylls d and f to acclimate to niches enriched in far-red light (FRL) and incorporate paralogous photosynthetic proteins into their photosynthetic apparatus in a process called FRL-induced photoacclimation (FaRLiP). We characterized the macromolecular changes involved in FRL-driven photosynthesis and used atomic force microscopy to examine the supramolecular organization of photosystem I associated with FaRLiP in three cyanobacterial species. Mass spectrometry showed the changes in the proteome of <i>Chroococcidiopsis thermalis</i> PCC 7203 that accompany FaRLiP. Fluorescence lifetime imaging microscopy and electron microscopy reveal an altered cellular distribution of photosystem complexes and illustrate the cell-to-cell variability of the FaRLiP response.

### Keywords
Photosystem, Phycobilisome, Chroococcidiopsis thermalis, Thylkoid

### Affiliations
School of Biosciences, University of Sheffield
Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, University of Sheffield

### Submitter
Philip Jackson

### Lab Head
Dr ChristopherNeil Hunter
Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, University of Sheffield


