### Accession
PXD020368

### Title
Identify proteins that interact with CDC25B

### Description
Identify proteins that interact with CDC25B in HS578T cells using Mass Spectrometry

### Sample Protocol
Cell extract from HS578T were prepared using a lysis buffer consisting of 50 mM HEPES, (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 2.5 mM EGTA, 10% glycerol, 0.1% Tween-20, 1 mM DTT, 1 mM NaF, 0.1 mM Na3VO4, 10 μg/ml leupeptin, 2 μg/ml Aprotinin, and 0.1 mM PMSF.  Briefly, the extract were sonicated for 10 s and then centrifuged at 14000 rpm at 4 °C for 15 min. Equal amount of total protein from the extract were incubated with 2 μg of CDC25B (Santa Cruz, sc-70825 ) overnight at 4 °C on a rotator. Protein A -conjugated agarose beads (Pierce Protein A Agarose, 20,333) (30 μl) were then added and incubated for 1 h on a rotator at 4 °C. The beads were pelleted at 4000 rpm at 4 °C and then were washed five times in 500 μl lysis buffer. Precipitated proteins were then dissolved in SDS-sample buffer and separated by SDS-PAGE for silver staining. Proteins were separated on Biorad precast polyacrylamide gel (Cat#4561084). Gels were stained with the Silver Stain Kit for Mass Spectrometry (Thermo Scientific Pierce, PI24600) following the vendor’s protocol. Protein bands were cut with a sterilized blade and detained with the same kit. Samples were sent to the Taplin Mass Spectrometry facility at Harvard Medical School for analysis of potential interacting proteins.

### Data Protocol
Initial identification of peptides and proteins were performed by the analysis pipeline of the Taplin Facility. MS data files were matched to entries in the human International Protein Index (IPI) database using the Sequest algorithm. All accepted peptides have a cross-correlation (Xcorr) score of at least 0.5. Identified peptides, proteins and Xcorr scores for each sample were presented as HTML tables accessible via a web browser, from which they were copied to Excel spreadsheets in Montpellier for further processing. Identified proteins were mapped from their IPI to equivalent Swiss-Prot identifiers using the ID mapping functionality of the UniProt website. Percentage sequence coverage and numbers of non-distinct and distinct peptides were calculated using the Protein Coverage Summarizer program from the Biological MS Data and Software Distribution Center of the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory.

### Publication Abstract
Cell division cycle 25 (CDC25) dual specificity phosphatases positively regulate the cell cycle by activating cyclin-dependent kinase/cyclin complexes. Here, we demonstrate that in addition to its role in cell cycle regulation, CDC25B functions as a regulator of protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A), a major cellular Ser/Thr phosphatase, through its direct interaction with PP2A catalytic subunit. Importantly, CDC25B alters the regulation of AMP-activated protein kinase signaling (AMPK) by PP2A, increasing AMPK activity by inhibiting PP2A to dephosphorylate AMPK. CDC25B depletion leads to metformin resistance by inhibiting metformin-induced AMPK activation. Furthermore, dual inhibition of CDC25B and PP2A further inhibits growth of 3D organoids isolated from patient derived xenograft model of breast cancer compared to CDC25B inhibition alone. Our study identifies CDC25B as a regulator of PP2A, and uncovers a mechanism of controlling the activity of a key energy metabolism marker, AMPK.

### Keywords
Cdc25b

### Affiliations
Mayo Clinic
Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, Mayo clinic

### Submitter
Xiaojia Tang

### Lab Head
Dr Liewei Wang
Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, Mayo clinic


