### Accession
PXD046970

### Title
Proteome of Control versus shKDM2B in MDA-MB-231 Cells

### Description
Project comparing the proteome between control and knockdown of KDM2B in MDA-MB-231 cell lines. Previous data demonstrated that knockdown of KDM2B induced transcriptional changes in ribosomal and metabolic gene targets and thus TMT proteomics was pursued to compare the protein level changes that occur after knockdown of KDM2B.

### Sample Protocol
MDA-MB-231 cell lines were extracted in proteomics lysis buffer (8M Urea, 50mM triethylamonium bicarbonate). The samples were sonicated for 30 seconds at an amplitude of 25% on ice and then quantified using Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit (ThermoFisher, Massachusetts, USA). In-solution digest samples were prepared for LC-MS/MS analysis at Bioinformatics Solutions Inc. (Waterloo, Ontario, Canada).  Briefly, samples were reduced with 10mM DTT (Sigma-Aldrich, Missouri, USA), alkylated with 20 mM Iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich, Missouri, USA) and precipitated in Acetone at -80○C. After removing the Acetone, the samples were then digested overnight with MS grade trypsin (Promega, Wisconsin, USA). Digested peptides were desalted with in-house made C18 spin columns and labeled with TMTpro 16plex (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Massachusetts, USA) following manufacturer’s protocol. The labeled samples were quenched with Hydroxylamine and pooled to dry down. The pooled sample was then fractionated by high pH reverse phase into 44 fractions, and then combined into 11 samples.  Samples were resuspended in 12 µl buffer A (0.1% FA). For each run, 6 µl of each sample was separated by nanoflow liquid chromatography using an Ultimate 3000 chromatography system (ThermoFisher, Massachusetts, USA), then injected into the Thermo Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (ThermoFisher, Massachusetts, USA).  Liquid chromatography was preformed using a constant flow of 0.25 µl/min and a 15 cm reversed-phased column with a 75 µm inner diameter filled with Reprosil C18 (PepSep, Bruker, Germany).  Mobile phase A was 0.1% Formic Acid and Mobile phase B was 99.9% Acetonitrile, 0.1% Formic Acid.  The separation was carried out over 120 minutes as follows: linearly 4% B to 35% B over 100 minutes with an increase to 95% B over 0.1 minute and held constant for 9.9 minutes to clean the column. Then the B percentage was set back to 4% in the final 10 minutes. Two rounds of MS data were acquired on Thermo Orbitrap Lumos for each sample to maximize the proteome coverage. Both rounds were carried out in data-dependent mode with a cycle time of three seconds. In the first round, MS1 scan data were obtained at 120,000 resolution (at 400 m/z) with a mass range of 500–1,800 m/z. The automatic gain control (AGC) was set to standard, with an auto maximum ion injection time. The radio frequency (RF) lens was set to 30%. The charge state filter was set to 2-6 and the dynamic exclusion was set to 30 seconds. Isolation for MS2 scans was performed in the quadrupole, with an isolation window of 0.7 Da. MS2 scan data were acquired in the ion trap with CID activation at 30% collision energy (CE) and 10 millisecond (ms) activation time. The scan rate was set at Turbo with a standard AGC target and 35 ms ion injection time. The scan range of MS2 was set to auto and the mass range was set to normal. MS3 scans were performed in Orbitrap with HCD at 55% CE. The Orbitrap resolution was set to 50,000 and 10 synchronous precursor selections were used. AGC Target was set at 200% and maximum injection time was set at 200 ms. The parameters used in the second-round data acquisition were the same as the first-round, except the mass range in MS1 was set at 300-1,600 m/z and the CE was set at 45% for MS3 activation.

### Data Protocol
MS Raw Files were processed using PEAKS Studio XPro (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Ontario, Canada).  The data was searched against the unreviewed human Uniprot database. Precursor ion mass error tolerance was set to 15 ppm and fragment ion mass error tolerance was set to 0.6 Da. Quantification mass error tolerance (MS3) was set to 0.02 Da. Semi-specific cleavage with trypsin was selected with a maximum of 3 missed cleavages.  A fixed modification of carbamidomethylation (+57.02 Da) on cysteine residues, and TMT16plex (+304.2072) on lysine and the peptide N-terminus were specified.  Variable modifications of deamidation (+0.98 Da) on asparagine and glutamine, as well as oxidation (15.99 Da) on methionine were specified. A 1% false discovery rate (FDR) was set for the database search, and only proteins having at least 1 unique peptide and a fold change greater than 1 were reported.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Breast cancer, Kdm2b, Tmt proteomics, Mda-mb-231

### Affiliations
Tufts University School of Medicine
Professor and Chair, Department of Cancer Biology and Genetics The Ohio State University College of Medicine Co-Leader, Cancer Biology Program The Ohio State University Comprehensive Cancer Center

### Submitter
Vollter Anastas

### Lab Head
Dr Philip N.
Professor and Chair, Department of Cancer Biology and Genetics The Ohio State University College of Medicine Co-Leader, Cancer Biology Program The Ohio State University Comprehensive Cancer Center


