### Accession
PXD028673

### Title
A proteomic landscape of the spatiotemporal influence of Interleukin-33 (IL-33) in monocytes

### Description
Interleukin-33 (IL-33), a member of the IL-1 superfamily cytokines, is an endogenous danger signal and a nuclear-associated cytokine. It is one of the essential mediators of both innate and adaptive immune responses. Aberrant IL-33 signaling has been demonstrated to play a defensive role against various infectious and inflammatory diseases. Although the signaling responses mediated by IL-33 have been previously reported, the temporal signalingdynamicsare yet to be explored. Towards this end,we applied quantitative temporal phosphoproteomics analysis to elucidate pathways and proteins induced by IL-33 in THP1 monocytes. Employing TMT labeling-based quantitation and titanium dioxide (TiO2)-based phosphopeptide enrichment strategy followed by mass spectrometry analysis, we identified 14,515 phosphorylation sites mapping to 4,174 proteins across (0 min to 240 mins)time points.

### Sample Protocol
THP-1 cells (ATCC®) were cultured in RPMI 1640 medium containing 10% (v/v) FBS and 1% (v/v) antibiotic- antimycotic and treated with IL-33 (50 ng/ml) for varying durations (0, 5, 10, 15, 30, 40, 60, 120 and 240 mins). Three biological replicate experiments were performed. Post-stimulation at indicated timepoints, the cells were harvested and proteins extracted using 4% SDS cell lysis buffer. An equal amount of proteins from each condition were reduced, alkylated, and subjected to in-solution digestion using sequencing grade trypsin. The peptide samples were labeled using a TMT 10-plex kit and subjected to high pH RPLC-based fractionation. Phosphopeptides were enriched using TiO2 beads from 36 fractions (3 biological replicates) and desalted using C18 Sep-Pak cartridges (Waters, Cat#WAT051910). The extracted peptides were lyophilized and stored at -80°C until further analysis. The labeled peptides were analyzed using LC-MS/MS using a high-resolution Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer interfaced with an Easy-nLC II nanoflow liquid chromatography system.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data (.raw) were searched against the human proteome database (Uniprot_human_UP000005640) appended with frequently observed contaminants using SEQUEST HT search algorithm through the Proteome Discoverer platform (v2.4, Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The search parameter for both algorithms included a maximum of one missed cleavage, carbamidomethylation at cysteine (+57.021 Daon C), TMT 6-plex Lysine (+229.163 Da on K), and TMT 6-plex N-terminal as fixed modifications (+229.163 Da), oxidation of methionine (+15.995 Da on M), deamidation of glutamine  and asparagine  (+0.984 Da N or Q),phosphorylation at serine, threonine, and tyrosine (+79.966 Da on S/T/Y), N-terminal protein acetylation (+42.011 Da),Met loss ((protein N-terminal Met), (-131.040 DaonM), Met loss + acetyl ((protein N-terminal Met),(-89.030 Da onM)), as dynamic modifications. The precursor mass error tolerance was set at 10 ppm, and the fragment mass error tolerance of 0.05 Da. The data were searched against a decoy database, and peptidesidentified at a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) were considered further for protein identification. The phosphorylation probability at each S/T/Y site was calculated using the IMP-ptmRS node in the Proteome Discoverer, and peptides with more than 75% site localization probability were considered for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Interleukin-33 (IL-33), a member of the IL-1 superfamily cytokines, is an endogenous danger signal and a nuclear-associated cytokine. It is one of the essential mediators of both innate and adaptive immune responses. Aberrant IL-33 signaling has been demonstrated to play a defensive role against various infectious and inflammatory diseases. Although the signaling responses mediated by IL-33 have been previously reported, the temporal signaling dynamics are yet to be explored. To this end, we applied quantitative temporal phosphoproteomics analysis to elucidate pathways and proteins induced by IL-33 in THP-1 monocytes. Employing a TMT labeling-based quantitation and titanium dioxide (TiO<sub>2</sub>)-based phosphopeptide enrichment strategy followed by mass spectrometry analysis, we identified and quantified 9448 unique phosphopeptides corresponding to 3392 proteins that showed differential regulation. Of these, 171 protein kinases, 60 phosphatases and 178 transcription factors were regulated at different phases of IL-33 signaling. In addition to the confirmed activation of canonical signaling modules including MAPK, NF&#x3ba;B, PI3K/AKT modules, pathway analysis of the time-dependent phosphorylation dynamics revealed enrichment of several cellular processes, including leukocyte adhesion, response to reactive oxygen species, cell cycle checkpoints, DNA damage and repair pathways. The detailed quantitative phosphoproteomic map of IL-33 signaling will serve as a potentially useful resource to study its function in the context of inflammatory and pathological conditions.

### Keywords
Signaling, Monocytes, Cytokines, Innate immunity, Inflammation, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Professor and Deputy Director Center for Systems Biology and Molecular Medicine Yenepoya Research Centre Yenepoya (Deemed to be University) University Road, Deralakatte Mangalore 575018, India
Institute of Bioinformatics, Bangalore, Karnataka, India.

### Submitter
Keshava Prasad T. S.

### Lab Head
Dr T. S. Keshava Prasad, Ph.D.
Professor and Deputy Director Center for Systems Biology and Molecular Medicine Yenepoya Research Centre Yenepoya (Deemed to be University) University Road, Deralakatte Mangalore 575018, India


