### Accession
PXD005077

### Title
APPLICATION OF A NOVEL PEPTIDE SPECTRAL LIBRARY USING SWATH ANALYSIS FOR THE QUANTITATION OF PROTEINS IN EX-DIAGNOSTIC CLINICAL SERUM SAMPLES FROM SHEEP

### Description
This project applies SWATH approach to analyse ex-diagnostic sheep serum samples from actual clinical cases submitted to The University of Queensland's School of Veterinary Science, Veterinary Laboratory Services (VLS) compared with serum of normal sheep.

### Sample Protocol
1.0 MATERIALS AND METHODS 1.1 Ethics statement The studies included in this dataset were conducted in accordance with the Australian Code of Practice for the Care and Use of Animals for Scientific Purposes [2]. Animal tissue samples for method development were acquired following approval from Queensland University of Technology (QUT) Confirmation number: 1400000591, QV reference number: 46375 and Ethics number TRIM 10/8428 issued to Serum Australis Pty Ltd (http://www.serumaustralis.com.au/blood/products/sheep_blood.asp), for bleeding live sheep and supply of blood products. Tissue from live animal experiments had animal ethics approval obtained from the University Animal Ethics Committee of QUT (reference 0800000555), which was ratified by The University of Queensland (UQ).  1.2 In-solution digestion of proteins workflow The method adapted here was based on the one established by Villén and Gygi [6]. Briefly, a known quantity of serum or plasma protein sample was thawed on ice at 4 oC after which freshly prepared 20 mM DTT (equal vol:vol % of sample) was added, vortexed and briefly centrifuged. The mixture was incubated for 1h at RT. An equivalent amount (v:v % of sample) of freshly prepared 55 mM IAA was added into the mixture and then incubated for 20 min in the dark at RT. Alkylation was quenched by adding threefold  the initial volume of  DTT (v:v % of sample), followed by further incubation for 20 min in the dark. The mixture was diluted fivefold with 25mM NH4HCO3 buffer (v:v %  of sample), followed by adding an equivalent (v:v %  of sample) of  aqueous 70 mM CaCl2. Trypsin was then added at enzyme to substrate (protein concentration of sample) ratio of 1:200¬-50. The contents were incubated for 16 h at 37 oC and then cooled to RT. Digestion was stopped by adding 50 µL of 10% TFA before vacuum concentrating the contents to dryness. The dried peptides were reconstituted in aqueous 0.1% TFA/2%ACN, followed by de-salting of the tryptic peptides. 1.3 Desalting of tryptic peptide digests 1.4 Generic desalting method  It is often necessary to remove salts and particulate matter from peptide digests prior to analysis to prevent blockage of LC columns and also to reduce noise artefacts of MS spectra [7-9]. Desalting of tryptic peptide digests was optimised and performed using either octadecyl carbon chain (C18) pipette tips (ZipTip® Pipette Tips, Millipore, or Pierce C18 Tips, Thermo Fisher Scientific) depending on the filter capacity according to manufacturer’s instructions, or by using in-house made StageTips by adapting an established strong cation exchange (SCX) technique [7]. Briefly for the C18 tips, the desalting pipette tip was conditioned using a solution of 50% ACN/0.05% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) in LC-MS water and then equilibrated with 2% ACN/ 0.1% TFA in LC-MS water. After carefully and gently pipetting the entire sample up and down for at least 10 times, the pipette tip was washed with 2% ACN/0.1% TFA in LC-MS water. The peptides were eluted using 70% ACN/0.1% TFA in LC-MS water, vacuum dried and reconstituted in 10 uL of 2% ACN/0.1% FA in LC-MS water and transferred into a polypropylene autosampler vial for nanoLC-nanoESI-MS/MS analysis.   Data independent acquisition (DIA) During data independent acquisition (DIA) using SWATH™ (AB Sciex Pte. Ltd.) extraction, the instrument was operated in DIA mode [160]. In SWATH mode, a wider window of ~25 m/z was passed in incremental steps over the full mass range (m/z 350-1250 with 36 SWATH segments, 0.045 s accumulation time each, yielding a cycle time of 1.7 s which included one MS1 scan with 0.05 s accumulation time over the range 350-1500 m/z).   SWATH MS2 produced hybrid MS/MS spectra that were a composite of all the analytes within each selected Q1 m/z window. Ions were fragmented for each MS/MS experiment in the collision cell using rolling collision energy, with CES set to 10. Raw data were stored in .wiff format.

### Data Protocol
Data Source and processing  Pooled serum and plasma samples from 10 aduld sheep in each group were subjected to the cyclic DIA using a variable windows calculator and the SWATH™ acquisition method editor (AB SCIEX; Framingham, USA) as previously described. The generated .wiff files were concurrently imported into PeakView v.2.2 with SWATH™ Micro-App software (AB SCIEX, Framingham, USA) incorporated for spectral alignment and targeted data extraction alongside the loaded reference spectral library built from composite DDA experiments on sheep serum and plasma generated using the quadrupole time-of-flight instrument (TripleTOF® 5600+ System, AB Sciex Pte. Ltd.). The parameters for SWATH™ data extraction were set as follows: six peptides per protein, six transitions per peptide, peptide confidence level of >95%, exclude shared peptides, and extracted ion chromatograph (XIC) width of 50 ppm. The processed data were amenable to exportation as quantitative output for the peak area under the intensity curve for individual ions, the summed intensity of individual ions for a given peptide, and the summed intensity of peptides for a given protein in .txt format. The exported data was then statistically analysed using MarkerView™ software (AB SCIEX, Framingham, USA).

### Publication Abstract
Scientists have injected endotoxin into animals to investigate and understand various pathologies and novel therapies for several decades. Recent observations have shown that there is selective susceptibility to Escherichia coli lipopolysaccharide (LPS) endotoxin in sheep, despite having similar breed characteristics. The reason behind this difference is unknown, and has prompted studies aiming to explain the variation by proteogenomic characterisation of circulating acute phase biomarkers. It is hypothesised that genetic trait, biochemical, immunological and inflammation marker patterns contribute in defining and predicting mammalian response to LPS. This review discusses the effects of endotoxin and host responses, genetic basis of innate defences, activation of the acute phase response (APR) following experimental LPS challenge, and the current approaches employed in detecting novel biomarkers including acute phase proteins (APP) and micro-ribonucleic acids (miRNAs) in serum or plasma. miRNAs are novel targets for elucidating molecular mechanisms of disease because of their differential expression during pathological, and in healthy states. Changes in miRNA profiles during a disease challenge may be reflected in plasma. Studies show that gel-based two-dimensional electrophoresis (2-DE) coupled with either matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionisation time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS) or liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) are currently the most used methods for proteome characterisation. Further evidence suggests that proteomic investigations are preferentially shifting from 2-DE to non-gel based LC-MS/MS coupled with data extraction by sequential window acquisition of all theoretical fragment-ion spectra (SWATH) approaches that are able to identify a wider range of proteins. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR), and most recently proteomic methods have been used to quantify low abundance proteins such as cytokines. qRT-PCR and next generation sequencing (NGS) are used for the characterisation of miRNA. Proteogenomic approaches for detecting APP and novel miRNA profiling are essential in understanding the selective resistance to endotoxin in sheep. The results of these methods could help in understanding similar pathology in humans. It might also be helpful in the development of physiological and diagnostic screening assays for determining experimental inclusion and endpoints, and in clinical trials in future.

### Keywords
Circulating acellular proteome, Sample preparation, Proteogenomics, Nanolc-nanoesi-ms/ms, Data independent acquisition, Swath, Sick sheep, Tripletof 5600+, Peptide spectral library

### Affiliations
Research Officer|Proteomics and Small Molecule Mass Spectrometry Laboratory | Central Analytical Research Facility (CARF)| Queensland University of Technology | Address: Level 6, P Block, Gardens Point Campus, 2 George St Brisbane QLD 4000.
School of Veterinary Science, The University of Queensland, Australia

### Submitter
Saul Chemonges

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Pawel Sadowski
Research Officer|Proteomics and Small Molecule Mass Spectrometry Laboratory | Central Analytical Research Facility (CARF)| Queensland University of Technology | Address: Level 6, P Block, Gardens Point Campus, 2 George St Brisbane QLD 4000.


