### Accession
PXD029361

### Title
TWIST1 methylation by SETD6 selectively antagonizes LINC-PINT expression in Glioblastoma multiforme

### Description
Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most common and aggressive malignant brain tumor among adults, which is characterized by high invasion, migration and proliferation abilities. One important process that contributes to the invasiveness of GBM is the epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT). EMT is regulated by a set of defined transcription factors which tightly regulate this process, among them is the basic helix-loop-helix family member, TWIST1. Here we show that TWIST1 is methylated on lysine-33 at chromatin by SETD6, a methyltransferase with expression levels correlating with poor survival in GBM patients. RNA-seq analysis in U251 GBM cells suggested that both SETD6 and TWIST1 regulate cell adhesion and migration processes. We further show that TWIST1 methylation attenuates the expression of the long-non-coding RNA, LINC-PINT, thereby suppressing EMT in GBM. Mechanistically, TWIST1 methylation represses the transcription of LINC-PINT by increasing the occupancy of EZH2 and the catalysis of the repressive H3K27me3 mark at the LINC-PINT locus. Under un-methylated conditions, TWIST1 dissociates from the LINC-PINT locus, allowing the expression of LINC-PINT which leads to increased cell adhesion and decreased cell migration. Together, our findings unravel a new mechanistic dimension for selective expression of LINC-PINT mediated by TWIST1 methylation.

### Sample Protocol
Sample of non-radioactive methylation assay containing 2μg His-TWIST1 and 4μg GST SETD6 were incubated with 3.2 mM SAM overnight at 30°C. An additional sample without SAM served as reference. For samples preparation (Weizmann Institute of Science), Proteins were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol (Sigma) for 1hr at room temperature, and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) in the dark for 45 min at room temperature. Proteins were then subjected to digestion with trypsin (Promega; Madison, WI, USA) overnight at 37°C at 50:1 protein:trypsin ratio, followed by a second trypsin digestion for 4 hr. The digestions were stopped by addition of trifluroacetic acid (1% final concentration). Following digestion, peptides were desalted using Oasis HLB, μElution format (Waters, Milford, MA, USA). The samples were vacuum dried and stored in -80˚C until further analysis. ULC/MS grade solvents were used for all chromatographic steps. Each sample was loaded using split-less nano-Ultra Performance Liquid Chromatography (10 kpsi nanoAcquity; Waters, Milford, MA, USA). The mobile phase was: A) H2O + 0.1% formic acid and B) acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid. Desalting of the samples was performed online using a reversed-phase Symmetry C18 trapping column (180 µm internal diameter, 20 mm length, 5 µm particle size; Waters). The peptides were then separated using a T3 HSS nano-column (75 µm internal diameter, 250 mm length, 1.8 µm particle size; Waters) at 0.35 µL/min. Peptides were eluted from the column into the mass spectrometer using the following gradient: 4% to 30%B in 50 min, 30% to 90%B in 5 min, maintained at 90% for 5 min and then back to initial conditions. The nanoUPLC was coupled online through a nanoESI emitter (10 μm tip; New Objective; Woburn, MA, USA) to a quadrupole orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive Plus, Thermo Scientific) using a FlexIon nanospray apparatus (Proxeon). Data was acquired in data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode, using a Top20 method. MS1 resolution was set to 70,000 (at 400 m/z), mass range of 300-1650  m/z, AGC of 3e6 and maximum injection time was set to 20 msec. MS2 resolution was set to 17,500, quadrupole isolation 1.7 m/z, AGC of 1e6, dynamic exclusion of 30 sec  and maximum injection time of 60 msec.

### Data Protocol
Data was analysed using Byonic search engine (Protein Metrics) against the Human protein database (SwissProt Dec20) allowing for the following modifications: fixed carbamidomethylation on C, variable protein N-terminal acetylation, oxidation on M, deamidation on NQ, methylation on K, demethylation on K and trimethylation on K. Protein FDR was set to 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Gliomas are one of the most common and lethal brain tumors among adults. One process that contributes to glioma progression and recurrence is the epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT). EMT is regulated by a set of defined transcription factors which tightly regulate this process, among them is the basic helix-loop-helix family member, TWIST1. Here we show that TWIST1 is methylated on lysine-33 at chromatin by SETD6, a methyltransferase with expression levels correlating with poor survival in glioma patients. RNA-seq analysis in U251 glioma cells suggested that both SETD6 and TWIST1 regulate cell adhesion and migration processes. We further show that TWIST1 methylation attenuates the expression of the long-non-coding RNA, LINC-PINT, thereby promoting EMT in glioma. Mechanistically, TWIST1 methylation represses the transcription of LINC-PINT by increasing the occupancy of EZH2 and the catalysis of the repressive H3K27me3 mark at the LINC-PINT locus. Under un-methylated conditions, TWIST1 dissociates from the LINC-PINT locus, allowing the expression of LINC-PINT which leads to increased cell adhesion and decreased cell migration. Together, our findings unravel a new mechanistic dimension for selective expression of LINC-PINT mediated by TWIST1 methylation.

### Keywords
Setd6, Glioblastoma, Methyltransferase, Methylation

### Affiliations
Weizmann institute
The Shraga Segal Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Genetics,National Institute for Biotechnology in the Negev, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, P.O.B. 653, Be'er-Sheva 84105, Israel

### Submitter
David Morgenstern

### Lab Head
Dr Dan Levy
The Shraga Segal Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Genetics,National Institute for Biotechnology in the Negev, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, P.O.B. 653, Be'er-Sheva 84105, Israel


