### Accession
PXD030797

### Title
Comparison of SPEED, S-Trap, and In-Solution based sample preparation methods for tandem mass spectrometry

### Description
Bottom-up proteomic analyses rely on efficient protein extraction from tissue and proteolysis into peptides for mass spectrometry. Commonly used detergent-based strategies aid cell lysis and protein solubilization but are poorly compatible with downstream protein digestion and liquid chromatography-coupled mass spectrometry. Consequently, additional sample purification and buffer exchange steps are required, which are time-consuming and introduce additional technical variability. This study provides the first direct quantitative comparison of two well-established detergent-based methods for protein extraction and solubilization (In-solution and suspension trapping, S-Trap) with the recently developed Sample Preparation by Easy Extraction and Digestion (SPEED) method, which uses a strong acid for denaturation. Identification rates and quantitative performance of each method were compared with data-dependent acquisition (DDA) and label-free SWATH-MS (sequential window acquisition of all theoretical mass spectra) in both sheep kidney cortical tissue and plasma. In kidney tissue, SPEED outperformed In-solution and S-Trap by quantifying the highest number of unique proteins (SPEED 1,250; S-Trap 1,202; In-solution 1,197) and displayed the most efficient proteolysis (SPEED 93.8% of peptides fully tryptic in DDA; S-Trap 88.5%; In-solution 87.3%). In plasma, S-Trap produced the most unique protein quantifications (S-Trap 151; In-solution 148; SPEED 138), indicating it may be the optimal method for this biofluid. Protein quantifications were reproducible across biological replicates in both tissue (R2 from 0.85 to 0.90), and in plasma (SPEED R2=0.84; In-solution R2=0.76, S-Trap R2=0.65). Our data suggest SPEED as the optimal method for proteomic preparation in kidney tissue and S-Trap or SPEED as the optimal method for plasma, depending on whether a higher number of protein quantifications or greater reproducibility is desired.

### Sample Protocol
SPEED, S-Trap, and SDC methods were performed on kidney (n=3) and plasma (n=3) samples, resulting in a total of 18 protein preparations for MS.  SPEED The SPEED protocol was performed as described by Doellinger et al. Samples were reduced using Tris (2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) at a final concentration of 10mM and simultaneously alkylated using 2-Chloroacetamide (CAA) at a final concentration of 40mM, and incubated at 95°C for 5 minutes. For kidney samples, the protein concentration in the mixture was determined by turbidity by measuring Absorbance (360 nm) and MacFarland turbidity standards. For kidney and plasma samples, a protein aliquot of 150 µg of was adjusted to 0.75 µg/µL in a 10:1 v/v mix of 2M TrisBase and TFA then diluted 1:5 using HPLC water. Digestion was carried out for 20 hours at 37°C at 600 rpm on a Thermomixer, using a protein:trypsin ratio of 25:1. To quench trpysinisation, TFA was added to a final concentration of 2%.  S-Trap Kidney and plasma samples were homogenized and sonicated in S-Trap lysis buffer. Homogenized samples were simultaneously reduced and alkylated using TCEP and CAA as described above. The ‘S-Trap midi protocol long 4.1’ (Protifi, Farmingdale, NY) was performed according to manufacturer’s instructions with minor adjustments. Samples were incubated for 1 hour at 47ºC for on-column trypsinization. Following incubation, peptides were eluted in three stages, all elutions pooled and peptides concentrated in a Speed-Vac at 37 ºC to near-dryness (~5 μL remaining).  In-solution Homogenized samples (150 µg protein) were diluted to a final volume of 62.5 μL with Denaturing Solution 1 (1.67% SDC, 333.3mM ammonium hydrogen carbonate, and PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor and cOmplete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail at the manufacturer’s recommended concentrations). Plasma (2.5 μL) was mixed with Denaturing Solution 1 (60 μL). Kidney and plasma samples were further denatured using 82 μL of Denaturing Solution 2 (37.6% ACN, 2.4mM CaCl2) and were briefly vortexed and incubated for 5 minutes at room temperature before and after addition of Denaturing Solution 2. Simultaneous alkylation and reduction were performed using TCEP and CAA as described above. Samples were digested using trypsin at a protein:trypsin ratio of 25:1, with half the trypsin added initially and samples incubated for 3 hours at 42°C, before the addition of the remaining trypsin and incubation at 37°C for a further 16 hours. Digestion was terminated and SDC precipitated simultaneously by adding formic acid to a final concentration of 0.2%. A final spin was performed, and the resulting supernatant was concentrated in a Speed-Vac at 37°C to near-dryness.  Desalting peptides Peptide samples from all three methods were further purified using reverse-phase Vydac C18 Silica 96-well MACROSpin plates. Peptides were concentrated in a Speed-Vac at 37°C to near-dryness.  Data-Dependent Mass Spectrometry  Retention time calibration peptides (iRT-Kit, Biognosys, Schlieren, Switzerland) were spiked into each sample at 75x dilution of the iRT stock solution. MS was performed on a 5600+ TripleTOF mass spectrometer coupled to an ekspert nanoLC 415 system (eksigent, AB Sciex, Dublin, CA, USA) equipped with an in-house packed emitter tip column filled with 2.6 µm Aeris C18 material (Phenomenex) on a length of 20 cm. Peptides were separated over a 120-minute gradient using a binary solvent system (solvent A: 1% ACN, 0.1 % FA in water, solvent B: 90% ACN, 0.1% FA in water) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The following linear gradient steps of solvent B were used across all samples: loading at 5%B, 3 min at 5% B, 90 min increase to 25% B, 10 min increase to 40% B, 10 min increase to 95% B, 1 min at 95% B, 1 min decrease to 5% B, 5 min at 5% B. For each sample, an MS1 survey scan was run (400 ms) followed by 22 MS2 scans in which the most abundant peptides were fragmented, covering a precursor mass range of 400-1300 m/z. All high-sensitivity fragment ion scans used an accumulation time of 140 ms, resulting in a total cycle time of ~3.5 seconds for all 23 scans.

### Data Protocol
Raw AB Sciex *.wiff files were converted to *.mgf files using the AB Sciex MS Data Converter (Beat1.3, AB ScieX, Dublin, CA, USA) for compatibility with SearchGUI software. DDA searches were conducted using SearchGUI version 3.3.20, and peak lists obtained from MS/MS spectra were identified using the X!Tandem Vengeance search engine (2015.12.15.2). Protein identification was conducted against a concatenated target/decoy version of the Ovis aries (27,638 entries, 99.8%), Ovis aries musimon (46 entries, 0.2%) and Ovis aries platyura (1 entry, < 0.1%) sheep proteomes from UniProtKB TrEMBL (27,685 target sequences, accessed 22 July 2020). Precursor mass tolerance was set to 50 ppm, fragment ion tolerance to 0.2 Daltons, trypsin was selected as the protein digestion enzyme with semi-specific activity, and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages was allowed. Carbamidomethylation (+57.02 Da, Unimod #4) of cysteine was included as a fixed modification, and the variable modifications included were oxidation of methionine (+15.99 Da, Unimod #35), acetylation of the protein N-terminal (+42.01 Da, Unimod #1), and carbamidomethylation of lysine (+57.02 Da, Unimod #4). Variable modifications included during the refinement procedure were pyrolidone from glutamic acid (-17.03 Da, Unimod #27), pyrrolidone from glutamine (+X Da, Unimod #28), and pyrolidone from carbamidomethylated cysteine (-17.03 Da, Unimod #385). PeptideShaker version 1.16.4525 was used to infer peptides and proteins from the spectrum identification results. Peptide spectrum matches, peptides, and proteins were validated at a 1.0% FDR using the decoy hit distribution. Post-translational modification localizations were scored using the phosphoRS score and the D-score with a threshold of 95.0 as implemented in the compomics-utilities package.

### Publication Abstract
Mass spectrometry is a powerful technique for investigating renal pathologies and identifying biomarkers, and efficient protein extraction from kidney tissue is essential for bottom-up proteomic analyses. Detergent-based strategies aid cell lysis and protein solubilization but are poorly compatible with downstream protein digestion and liquid chromatography-coupled mass spectrometry, requiring additional purification and buffer-exchange steps. This study compares two well-established detergent-based methods for protein extraction (in-solution sodium deoxycholate (SDC); suspension trapping (S-Trap)) with the recently developed sample preparation by easy extraction and digestion (SPEED) method, which uses strong acid for denaturation. We compared the quantitative performance of each method using label-free mass spectrometry in both sheep kidney cortical tissue and plasma. In kidney tissue, SPEED quantified the most unique proteins (SPEED 1250; S-Trap 1202; SDC 1197). In plasma, S-Trap produced the most unique protein quantifications (S-Trap 150; SDC 148; SPEED 137). Protein quantifications were reproducible across biological replicates in both tissue (R<sup>2</sup> = 0.85-0.90) and plasma (SPEED R<sup>2</sup> = 0.84; SDC R<sup>2</sup> = 0.76, S-Trap R<sup>2</sup> = 0.65). Our data suggest SPEED as the optimal method for proteomic preparation in kidney tissue and S-Trap or SPEED as the optimal method for plasma, depending on whether a higher number of protein quantifications or greater reproducibility is desired.

### Keywords
Dda, Speed, Plasma, Tripletof, S-trap, Sheep, Kidney

### Affiliations
Christchurch Heart Institute, Department of Medicine, University of Otago, Christchurch
University of Otago

### Submitter
Evie Templeton

### Lab Head
Dr Victoria Ann Cameron
Christchurch Heart Institute, Department of Medicine, University of Otago, Christchurch


