### Accession
PXD027780

### Title
Connecting multiple microenvironment proteomes uncovers the biology in head and neck cancer

### Description
The poor prognosis of head and neck cancer (HNC) is associated with metastasis within the lymph nodes (LNs). Herein, the proteome of 140 multisite samples from a 59-HNC patient cohort, including primary and matched LN-negative or -positive tissues, saliva, and blood cells, reveals insights into the biology and potential metastasis biomarkers that may assist in clinical decision-making. Protein profiles are strictly associated with immune modulation across datasets, and this provides the basis for investigating immune markers associated with metastasis. The proteome of LN metastatic cells recapitulates the proteome of the primary tumor sites. Conversely, the LN microenvironment proteome highlights the candidate prognostic markers. By integrating prioritized peptide, protein, and transcript levels with machine learning models, we identified nodal metastasis signatures in blood and saliva. We present a proteomic characterization wiring multiple sites in HNC, thus providing a promising basis for understanding tumoral biology and identifying metastasis-associated signatures. 

### Sample Protocol
Malignant cells from tumors (n = 27 samples), non-malignant cells from tumors (n = 27 samples), malignant cells from lymph nodes (n = 13 samples), non-malignant cells from lymph nodes (n = 27 samples), buffy coat samples (n = 24 samples), and saliva cells (n = 24 samples) were submitted to discovery proteomics. Proteins were isolated from buffy coat samples and saliva cells using TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen, USA) and resuspended in 200 μL of urea buffer (100 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 8 M urea, and 2 M thiourea). Ultrasound treatment was performed for 10 min in an iced water bath for homogenization. Micro- or macrodissected tissue samples were transferred to an 8 M urea solution. All tissue and fluid samples were treated with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 25 min at 56°C and 14 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature for cysteine reduction and alkylation, respectively. Urea was diluted to a final concentration of 1.6 M with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and 1 mM calcium chloride was added to the samples. For protein digestion, a total of 2.5 μg of trypsin (Promega, USA) was added in three steps that included 1 μg for 20h, 1 μg for an additional 20h, and 0.5 μg for the last 4h at 37°C. The reactions were quenched with 0.4% formic acid, and the peptides were desalted with C18 stage tips (3M, USA) (Rappsilber et al., 2007) and dried in a speed-vac instrument. Tissue samples were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid that was applied proportionally to the dissected area (10 μL of formic acid for 1,000,000 μm2), and iRT peptides were added to the digested tissue sample at a final concentration of 11.1 fmol/μL for LC-MS/MS quality control (Pierce™ Peptide Retention Time Calibration Mixture, Thermo Scientific, USA). A volume of 4.5 μL was used (50 fmol of iRT peptides). Peptides from the buffy coat and saliva samples were quantified using the Pierce™ Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay (Thermo Scientific, USA), and 2 μg of these proteins were subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis.Tissue and fluid samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using an ETD-enabled Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) connected to an EASY-nLC system (Proxeon Biosystem, USA) through a Proxeon nanoelectrospray ion source. Peptides were subsequently separated in a 2%–90% acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid using a PicoFrit analytical column (20 cm × ID75, 5 µm particle size, New Objective) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min over a 212 min gradient (35% acetonitrile at 175 min) for tissue and buffy coat samples or a 170 min gradient (35% acetonitrile at 123 min) for saliva samples. The nanoelectrospray voltage was set to 2.2 kV, and the source temperature was 275°C. All instrument methods were configured for data-dependent acquisition (DDA) in the positive ion mode. Full scan MS spectra (m/z 300-1,600) were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer after accumulation to a target value of 1e6 ions. Resolution in the Orbitrap was set to r=60,000, and the 20 most intense peptide ions with charge states ≥ 2 were sequentially isolated with an isolation window of m/z 3 to a target value of 5,000 and then fragmented in the linear ion trap by low-energy CID (normalized collision energy of 35%). The signal threshold for triggering an MS/MS event was set at 1,000 counts. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with an exclusion size list of 500, an exclusion duration of 60 s, and a repeat count of 1. An activation of q = 0.25 and an activation time of 10 ms were used.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified using MaxQuant v.1.5.8.0 (Cox and Mann, 2008; Cox et al., 2011) against the Uniprot Human Protein Database (92,646 protein sequences, 36,874,315 residues, release May 2017) using the Andromeda search engine. Carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification, and N-terminal acetylation and oxidation of methionine were used as variable modifications. Maximum 2 Trypsin/P missed cleavage, a tolerance of 4.5 ppm for precursor mass, and a tolerance of 0.5 Da for fragment ions were set for peptide identification. Protein groups (also referred to as proteins in the text) were automatically inferred by the Andromeda engine using the parsimony principle. A maximum of 1% FDR calculated using reverse sequences was set for both protein and peptide identification. Protein quantification was performed using the LFQ algorithm implemented in MaxQuant software to reflect a normalized protein quantity deduced from razor+unique peptide intensity values. A minimal ratio count of one and a 2-min window for matching between runs were both required for quantification. Protein identifications assigned as ‘Reverse’ were excluded from further analysis. Contaminants were not removed from the dataset, as keratins are of special interest in the study of squamous epithelial cells. LFQ intensities were log2 transformed in Perseus v. 1.3.0.4 (Tyanova et al., 2016) and used in subsequent analyses.

### Publication Abstract
The poor prognosis of head and neck cancer (HNC) is associated with metastasis within the lymph nodes (LNs). Herein, the proteome of 140 multisite samples from a 59-HNC patient cohort, including primary and matched LN-negative or -positive tissues, saliva, and blood cells, reveals insights into the biology and potential metastasis biomarkers that may assist in clinical decision-making. Protein profiles are strictly associated with immune modulation across datasets, and this provides the basis for investigating immune markers associated with metastasis. The proteome of LN metastatic cells recapitulates the proteome of the primary tumor sites. Conversely, the LN microenvironment proteome highlights the candidate prognostic markers. By integrating prioritized peptide, protein, and transcript levels with machine learning models, we identify nodal metastasis signatures in blood and saliva. We present a proteomic characterization wiring multiple sites in HNC, thus providing a promising basis for understanding tumoral biology and identifying metastasis-associated signatures.

### Keywords
Lymph node metastasis, Mouth neoplasms, Prognosis, Machine learning, Proteomics, Biomarkers, Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma, Buffy coat, Saliva, Immune system

### Affiliations
CNPEM
Laboratório Nacional de Biociências - LNBio; Centro Nacional de Pesquisa em Energia e Materiais - CNPEM; Campinas; SP; 13083-100; Brazil

### Submitter
Adriana Franco Paes Leme

### Lab Head
Dr Adriana Franco Paes Leme
Laboratório Nacional de Biociências - LNBio; Centro Nacional de Pesquisa em Energia e Materiais - CNPEM; Campinas; SP; 13083-100; Brazil


