### Accession
PXD017761

### Title
Serum proteomics in cats with cardiomyopathy and congestive heart failure

### Description
In this study, we aimed to identify novel serum biomarkers in feline primary cardiomyopathies with congestive heart failure, which can help to understand disease pathogenesis and assist the disease diagnosis, prognosis and management. The study included 15 cats diagnosed with CHF and CM, 5 cats with asymptomatic CM and 15 healthy cats.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic analysis was performed by TMT-based quantitative approach as described previously (Horvatić, Guillemin et al. 2018). In brief, after total protein concentration determination using Bradford assay (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, USA), 35 μg of total proteins from samples and internal standard (a pool of equal protein amount from all samples used as a reference for normalization) were diluted to a volume of 50 μL using 0.1 M triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, Thermo Scientific, Rockford, USA), reduced by adding 2.5 μL of 200 mM DTT (60 min, 55 °C) (Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA), alkylated by adding 2.5 μL of 375 mM IAA (30 min, room temperature in the dark) (Sigma Aldrich, St. Lois, MO, USA) and acetone-precipitated (addition of 300 μL, overnight, −20 °C). Protein pellets were collected subsequently by centrifugation (9000g, 4 °C), dissolved in 50 μL of 0.1 M TEAB and digested using 1 μL of trypsin (1 mg/mL, Promega; trypsin-to-protein ratio 1:35, at 37 °C overnight). TMT sixplex reagents (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA) were prepared according to the manufacturer's procedure and 19 μL of the appropriate TMT label was added to each sample used for the labelling reaction (60 min, room temperature) which was quenched by 5% hydroxylamine (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA). Five TMT-modified peptide samples were combined with the internal standard (labeled with TMT m/z 126) into the new tube, aliquoted, dried and stored at −20 °C for further analysis. High resolution LC-MS/MS analysis of TMT-labelled peptides was carried out using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex, Germering, Germany) coupled to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Peptides were dissolved in loading solvent (1% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) and loaded onto the trap column (C18 PepMap100, 5 μm, 100A, 300 μm×5 mm), desalted for 12 min at the flow rate of 15 μL/min and separated on the analytical column (PepMap™ RSLC C18, 50 cm×75 μm) using a linear gradient of 5–45% mobile phase B (0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN) over 120 min, 45% to 90% for 2 min, held at 80% for 2 min and re-equilibrated at 5% B for 20 min at the flow rate of 300 nL/min. Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water. Ionisation was achieved using nanospray Flex ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) containing a 10 μm-inner diameter SilicaTip emitter (New Objective, USA). The MS operated in positive ion mode using DDA Top8 method. Full scan MS spectra were acquired in range from m/z 350.0 to m/z 1800.0 with a resolution of 70,000, 110 ms injection time, AGC target 1×106, a ± 2.0 Da isolation window and the dynamic exclusion 30 s. HCD fragmentation was performed at step collision energy (29% and 35% NCE) with a resolution of 17,500 and AGC target of 2×105. Precursor ions with unassigned charge state, as well as charge states of +1 and more than +7 were excluded from fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Acquired MS/MS spectra were analysed for protein identification and quantification using the SEQUEST algorithm implemented into Proteome Discoverer (version 2.0., ThermoFisher Scientific). Database search against Felis catus FASTA files (downloaded from NCBI database on 15/09/2017, 44239 sequences) was performed according to the following parameters: two trypsin missed cleavage sites, precursor and fragment mass tolerances of 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively; carbamidomethyl (C) fixed peptide modification, oxidation (M), deamidation (N,Q) and TMT sixplex (K, peptide N-terminus) dynamic modifications. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide identification was calculated using the Percolator algorithm in the Proteome Discoverer workflow based on the search results against a decoy database and was set at 1% FDR.

### Publication Abstract
The pathogenesis of feline cardiomyopathy and congestive heart failure (CHF) requires further understanding. In this study, we assessed serum proteome change in feline CHF, aiming to identify novel biomarker for both research and clinical use. The study comprised 15 cats in CHF, 5 cats in preclinical cardiomyopathy and 15 cats as healthy controls. Serum proteome profiles were obtained by tandem mass tag labelling followed by mass spectrometry. Protein concentrations in CHF cats were compared with healthy controls. Western blot was performed for proteomic validation. Correlations were assessed between the altered proteins in CHF and clinical variables in cats with cardiomyopathy to evaluate protein-cardiac association. Bioinformatic analysis was employed to identify pathophysiological pathways involved in feline CHF. Sixteen serum proteins were significantly different between CHF and healthy control cats (P&#xa0;&lt;&#xa0;.05). These included serine protease inhibitors, apolipoproteins and other proteins associated with inflammation and coagulation. Clinical parameters from cats with cardiomyopathy significantly correlated with the altered proteins (P&#xa0;&lt;&#xa0;.05). Bioinformatic analysis identified 13 most relevant functional profiles in feline CHF, which mostly associated with extracellular matrix organization and metabolism. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD017761. SIGNIFICANCE: Cardiomyopathies affect both cats and humans, and they can cause serious consequence such as congestive heart failure (CHF). To date, the pathophysiological mechanism of CHF is not fully understood. In this study, for the first time, we used a proteomic approach combined with bioinformatic analysis to evaluate serum protein change in cats with CHF. Results indicate systemic inflammation, coagulation protein changes, innate immunity and extracellular matrix remodeling are involved in feline CHF, which are largely comparable with findings in previous human studies. Our study provides new insights into CHF and cardiomyopathy in cats, and the identified novel biomarkers and pathophysiological pathways provide valuable information for future studies.

### Keywords
Tmt-based proteomics, Cardiomyopathy, Cat, Lc-ms/ms, Congestive heart failure

### Affiliations
University of Zagreb, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine
VetMedZg Laboratory,Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia        Institute of Biodiversity, Animal Health & Comparative Medicine, College of Medicine, Veterinary Medicine and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK

### Submitter
Anita Horvatic

### Lab Head
Dr Peter David Eckersall
VetMedZg Laboratory,Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia        Institute of Biodiversity, Animal Health & Comparative Medicine, College of Medicine, Veterinary Medicine and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK


