### Accession
PXD005286

### Title
Use of a modified Multiplexed Inhibitor Bead assay to study kinome responses to cytostatic treatment in human cancer cell lines

### Description
In order to improve elution of proteins from the column, to reduce the cost as well as the hands on time of the analysis, we here present a modification of the Multiplexed Inhibitor Bead assay (MIB assay), where we elute the proteins from beads containing covalently bound inhibitors using trypsin digestion. Three human cancer cell lines treated with the same chemotherapeutics, cisplatin and docetaxel, were used to monitor and evaluate the performance of the assay. Using this method, we see a good coverage of the kinome as well as other important signaling proteins using only three kinase inhibitors. We demonstrate that the method is reproducible and that the column is re-usable for more than 10 times without loss in performance. The MIB assay revealed large differences in the cellular signaling responses between the cell lines.

### Sample Protocol
After the overnight trypsinization, the mobile phase was collected. The columns were washed with 0.5 mL of 200 mM NH4HCO3 and 0.5 mL of acetonitrile, which was also collected. This was then evaporated until dry and resuspended in 100 µL 0.1% formic acid. The eventual residual detergent removal was done using detergent removal 0.5 mL spin columns (Thermo Pierce, USA), according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The peptides were then desalted in pipet tip C18 columns, eluted with acetonitrile, evaporated and dissolved in 35 µL 0.1% formic acid for MS. After collecting the peptides, the columns were washed in between the runs as follows: 0.5 mL acetonitrile, 1.5mL deionized water, 1.5 mL 20% SDS, 3mL deionized water, 3 mL 5M NaCl, 10 mL deionized water, 3 mL 150 mM Na Cl. At this point the columns are ready to be reused, or may be stored by washing and filling with 20% ethanol and keeping at 4°C.

### Data Protocol
The raw files from the experiments were inspected with Preview 2.3.5 (Protein Metrics Inc.) to determine optimal search criteria (Kil, Becker et al. 2011). These were plugged in Max Quant v 1.5.30 (Cox and Mann 2008) mapping the spectra over Human canonical proteome with Isoforms downloaded in March 2016 from Uniprot (Boutet, Lieberherr et al. 2016). The following search parameters were used: enzyme specified as trypsin with maximum two missed cleavages allowed; Deamidation of Asparagine/Glutamine, Oxidation of Methionine, Protein N-terminal acetylation, and Dimethylation of Lysine/Arginine as variable modifications; precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm with fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da. False discovery rate was set to 0.01 (high confidence) for peptide as well as protein group identification. Label free quantification (LFQ) algorithm (Cox, Hein et al. 2014) was used to estimate the protein amounts in the sample using match between the runs with alignment time of 20 minutes and match time window of 1 minute.

### Publication Abstract
The Multiplexed Inhibitor Bead (MIB) assay is a previously published quantitative proteomic MS-based approach to study cellular kinomes. A rather extensive procedure, need for multiple custom-made kinase inhibitors and an inability to re-use the MIB-columns, has limited its applicability. Here we present a modified MIB assay in which elution of bound proteins is facilitated by on-column trypsinization. We tested the modified MIB assay by analyzing extract from three human cancer cell lines treated with the cytotoxic drugs cisplatin or docetaxel. Using only three immobilized kinase inhibitors, we were able to detect about 6000 proteins, including &#x223c;40% of the kinome, as well as other signaling, metabolic and structural proteins. The method is reproducible and the MIB-columns are re-usable without loss of performance. This makes the MIB assay a simple, affordable, and rapid assay for monitoring changes in cellular signaling.

### Keywords
Kinome, Mib

### Affiliations
Department of Cancer Research and Molecular Medicine Department of Language and Literature Erling Skjalgssons g 1, aboratoriesenteret * * Laboratoriesenter Norwegian University of Science and Technology Trondheim 7030 Norway
Engineer at NTNU, Norway

### Submitter
Animesh Sharma

### Lab Head
Dr Voin Petrovic
Department of Cancer Research and Molecular Medicine Department of Language and Literature Erling Skjalgssons g 1, aboratoriesenteret * * Laboratoriesenter Norwegian University of Science and Technology Trondheim 7030 Norway


