### Accession
PXD004648

### Title
ER-RIME in wt-MCF7 and MCF7-LTED

### Description
Wild type (wt) MCF7 cells, modelling breast cancer at primary diagnosis, were cultured in phenol red-free RPMI supplemented with 10% FBS and 1nM estradiol (E2). Long-term oestrogen deprived (LTED) cell lines, which model resistance to endocrine therapy, were cultured in phenol red-free RPMI in the absence of exogenous E2 and supplemented with 10% dextran charcoal-stripped bovine serum (DCC). Samples were harvested at baseline and at the point of resistance (LTED). In order to do comparative analysis in the ER-interactome of wt-MCF7 and MCF7-LTED cells, ER-RIME (rapid immunoprecipitation mass spectrometry of endogenous proteins) was conducted in these cells.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitation of ER (Santa cruz, Sc-543X) or IgG (Dako) on cross-linked WT and LTED MCF7 was conducted as previously described with slight modifications (Mohammed et al., 2013). In summary, the cross-linked samples were washed with ice-cold PBS and upon harvesting with cell scrapers, the nuclear fraction was extracted. The samples were sonicated using a water bath sonicator (Q700) using mild conditions. After sonication, 10% Triton X-100 was added to a final 1% and the sample was centrifuged to purify the debris. The supernatant was incubated with magnetic beads Protein G overnight at 4oC. The next day, the beads were washed ten times with RIPA buffer and five with ammonium bicarbonate (AMBIC). After reduction/alkylation, overnight on-bead digestion was followed using trypsin at 37oC (in a thermomixer with high rpm). The next day, trypsin was deactivated using trifluoroacetic acid and the samples were desalted and run through LC-MS/MS using LTQ Velos Orbitrap MS.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using MaxQuant 1.5.1.0 following the developers’ (Cox and Mann, 2008; Cox et al., 2009, 2011) guidelines. Peak lists were searched against the human Uniprot FASTA database and a common contaminant database by the Andromeda search engine (built in MaxQuant) (Cox et al., 2011). The automatic decoy search option was enabled. Resulting peptide lists were filtered to an estimated FDR of 1% and protein lists were filtered to an estimated FDR of 5%. Spectra were searched for a match to fully-tryptic peptides with up to two missed cleavage sites. Search parameters were chosen as follows: carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification on all cysteines and oxidation of methionines was considered as optional modification. Precursor ion mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the first search, fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.6 Da. The “re-quantify” and “match between runs” option were enabled with default settings.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mcf7, Lc-ms/ms, Rime, Breast cancer

### Affiliations
Breast Cancer Now The Institute of Cancer Research
BRFAA

### Submitter
Nikiana Simigdala

### Lab Head
Dr Lesley-Ann Martin
Breast Cancer Now The Institute of Cancer Research


