### Accession
PXD036884

### Title
Proteome-Wide Photo-Crosslinking Enables Residue-Level Visualization of Protein Interaction Networks in vivo

### Description
Crosslinking mass spectrometry (XL-MS) is emerging as a unique method at the crossroads of structural and cellular biology, uniquely capable of identifying protein-protein interactions with residue-level resolution and on the proteome-wide scale. With the development of crosslinkers that can form linkages inside cells and easily cleave during fragmentation on the mass spectrometer (MS-cleavable crosslinks), it has become increasingly facile to identify contacts between any two proteins in complex samples, including in live cells or tissues.  Photo-crosslinkers possess the advantages of high temporal resolution and high reactivity, thereby engaging all residue-types (rather than just lysine); nevertheless, photo-crosslinkers have not enjoyed widespread use, and have yet to be employed for proteome-wide studies, because their products are challenging to identify, and an MS-cleavable photo-crosslinker has not yet been reported. Here, we demonstrate the synthesis and application of two heterobifunctional photo-crosslinkers that feature diazirines and N-hydroxy-succinimidyl carbamate groups, the latter of which unveil MS-cleavable linkage upon acyl transfer to protein targets. Moreover, these crosslinkers demonstrate high water-solubility and cell-permeability. Using these compounds, we demonstrate the feasibility of proteome-wide photo-crosslinking mass spectrometry (photo-XL-MS), both in extracts and in cellulo. These studies provide a partial interaction map of the E. coli cytosol with residue-level resolution.  We find that photo-XL-MS has a propensity to capture protein-protein interactions, particularly involving low-abundance uncharacterized proteins, suggesting it could be a powerful tool to shed light on the “darker” corners of the proteome. Overall, we describe methods that enable the detection of protein quinary interaction networks in their native environment at residue-level resolution proteome-wide, and we expect they will prove useful toward the effort to explore the molecular sociology of the cell.

### Sample Protocol
In-Cell Photo-Crosslinking of E. coli. Overnight and day cultures were prepared identically to that described above. 50 mL LB cultures were pelleted in a 5910R swing-bucket benchtop centrifuge (Eppendorf) at 4000 g for 10 mins (4 °C), and the supernatant was discarded. Cells were resuspended and washed in 20 mL of HEPES reaction buffer four times. After the final centrifugation, cells were resuspended in 1 mL HEPES reaction buffer, and the NHS-carbamate coupling reactions were performed by the addition of DizSEC or DizSPC (10 mM final concentration). Cell suspensions were gently mixed by inversion, then incubated at room temperature on an end-over-end rotator for 2 h (10 rpm). Cell suspensions were diluted 10-fold by the addition of 9 mL HEPES reaction buffer before photolysis to prevent excessive scattering.  The photolysis apparatus consisted of the LED Spot W UV-LED array with a 1 mm pathlength quartz flow-cell (Starna Cells, PN: 45-Q-1) affixed directly to the LED array surface with tape. The flow cell was connected to a Masterflex L/S Model 77200-50 peristaltic pump via 1.6 mm ID C-Flex biocompatible tubing (Masterflex). The tubing and flow cell were primed with water at max speed to remove bubbles. The cell suspension was pumped through the flow cell at 50 rpm (approximately 1 s exposure time), collected, quenched by incubation with Tris pH 8 (100 mM, final concentration) for 15 minutes at room temperature, and centrifuged at 4000 g for 10 min (cf. Figure 4A). The crosslinked cells were resuspended in 1 mL HEPES reaction buffer, then lysed by sonication and normalized to 1.0 mg/mL protein using the BCA assay as described above.  MS Sample Preparation.  Crosslinked protein mixtures (typically 1 mL of 1.0 mg/mL) were denatured by addition of urea (1.92 g), ammonium bicarbonate (Ambic, 15.8 mg) and diluted to a final volume of 4 mL by addition of Millipore water to generate samples that are 0.25 mg/mL protein, 8 M urea, and 50 mM Ambic (pH :sunglasses:.  These samples were reduced by addition of dithiothreitol (DTT) to 10 mM final concentration and incubation at 37ºC with agitation (700 rpm) in a benchtop ThermoMixer (Eppendorf) for 45 minutes. Samples were then alkylated by addition of iodoacetamide (IAA) to 40 mM final concentration and incubation at room temperature in the dark for 30 min. Samples were either: (i) diluted with 3 volumes of 50 mM Ambic and digested with trypsin (1:50 enzyme:protein w/w ratio, Pierce) overnight (ca. 16 h) at 25ºC, 700 RPM in a ThermoMixer; or (ii) digested serially – first with Lys-C (1:100 enzyme:protein w/w ratio, Pierce) for 2 h at 37ºC, then diluted with 3 volumes of 50 mM Ambic followed by second digestion with trypsin overnight (ca. 16 h). Desalting of protein digests was performed using Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (Waters). Dried peptides were  reconstituted in 250 µL of 3% acetonitrile, 0.1% TF A with vigorous sonication. Peptides were fractionated on an AKTA Go FPLC (Cytiva) with a Superdex 200 10/300 GL gel filtration column. LC-MS/MS. This study utilized an UltiMate3000 UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher) coupled with a Q-Exactive HF-X Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). Peptide fractions were resuspended in 30 µL of 0.1% Optima formic acid (FA) in Optima water, vigorously vortexed, and sonicated for five minutes. The amount of peptide material in each resuspended sample was approximately quantified with a NanoDrop OneC microvolume UV-Vis spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and typically ~1 µg of the peptide was injected onto the LC-MS system for each run. If a fraction contained insufficient material to inject one µg of peptide, 10 µL of the sample (one-third) was injected instead. XL-MS data were acquired in positive ion mode with each full MS scan using a mass range of 350–1500 m/z. The resolution of the full MS scans was set to 120k, the automatic gain control (AGC) target was set to 3E6, the maximum injection time (IT) was set to 100 ms, and a stepped HCD fragmentation scheme using a three-tiered stepped normalized collisional energy (NCE) scheme. Various NCEs were tested to optimize these parameters for the different experiment types and documented in Tables S1-4; however, 22%, 25%, 28% proved optimal for most of the experiments (Supplementary Information). After each full MS scan, ten data-dependent MS2 scans were collected at a resolution of 15k, an AGC target of 2E5, a minimum AGC target of 8E3, a maximum IT of 250 ms, an isolation window of 1.0 m/z (some lysozyme samples used an isolation window of 1.4 and 2.0 m/z; see Table 1), and a dynamic exclusion time of 60.0 s. Ions with charges less than +3 or greater than +8 and isotopomeric peaks were excluded from data-dependent MS2 scans.

### Data Protocol
XL-MS Data Analysis Workflow. Raw files were converted to the mzML format as centroid spectra using the MSConvert GUI from the ProteoWizard toolkit,45 and a spectral search for crosslinked peptides was conducted with MeroX46 (version 2.0.1.4). For both DizSEC and DizSPC, protease cleavage sites were allowed after Arg and Lys, with Lys cleavage blocked by Pro, and a maximum of three missed cleavages were allowed.  The minimum peptide length was set to 3 residues, and the maximum peptide length was set to 30 residues. Static modifications included the carbamidomethylation of cysteine (C to B), and variable modifications included a maximum of 1 oxidation of methionine (M to m) per peptide (greater than 1 prohibitively expands the search space). The precursor precision was set to 10.0 ppm, and the fragment ion precision was set to 20.0 ppm. Mass recalibration for each sample was determined manually by performing a separate search on each raw file for linear peptides in Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) without spectrum recalibration, and the median Δm/z (typically between 5–8 Th) was relayed to the MeroX settings file for each individual search. The lower mass limit was set to 350 m/z, the upper mass limit was set to 1500 m/z, the signal-to-noise ratio was set to 2.0, b- and y- ions only were enabled, the minimum number of fragments per peptide was set to 3, the minimum MS1 charge was set to 3, and deisotoping mode was selected. We used a pre-score intensity of 10% and an FDR cutoff of 1%. Decoys were generated by shuffling sequences but keeping protease sites within the supplied FASTA files. Typical scores of identified peptides ranged between 20 and 120. Lysozyme samples used quadratic mode, whilst E. coli extracts and in-cell crosslinking samples utilized proteome-wide mode developed by Götze and co-workers.5 For the lysozyme sample, a FASTA file was prepared that contained the sequence of Hen egg white lysozyme (P00698).  For the E. coli lysates and in-cell crosslinked samples, the reference FASTA for E. coli K-12 substrain MG1655 (UP000000625) was used.  To encode the crosslinkers in MeroX, for the DizSEC-crosslinked samples, the composition mass was set to C5NOH7 (97.05276383 Da). The first specificity site for the NHS-carbamate was Lys and the N-terminus, and the second specificity site for the diazirine was set to all amino acids, both termini, carbamidomethylated cysteine, and oxidized methionine. Modifications at site 1 were CO with a composition mass of COH–2 (25.97926456 Da) and the unmodified peptide. Modifications at site 2 were amine modification C4NH9 (71.07349927 Da), isocyanate modification C5NOH7 (97.05276383 Da), and unmodified peptide.  For the DizSPC-crosslinked samples, the composition mass was set to C6NOH9 (111.06841389 Da). Specificity sites and modifications at site 1 were the same as in the DizSEC settings. Modifications at site 2 were amine modification C5NH11 (85.08914933 Da), isocyanate modification C6NOH9 (111.06841389 Da), and unmodified peptide.  Network Analysis.  The analyzed data were exported from MeroX in the XiView format, including identification and sequence files. These files were uploaded to XiView47 with a Met oxidation modification mass of 15.99491 Da and a Cys carbamidomethylation modification mass of 57.02146 Da. Each set of experimental data can be aggregated together on the XiView server to form illustrative network diagrams. By importing Protein Data Bank (PDB) codes into XiView, Euclidian crosslink distance measurements can be mapped onto PDB coordinate files, and a script for the crosslinks can be exported to PyMOL (Molecular Graphics System, Version 2.0 Schrödinger, LLC). Structures with mapped crosslinks were generated in PyMOL by importing a PDB file and running the appropriate crosslink script.

### Publication Abstract
Cross-linking mass spectrometry (XL-MS) is emerging as a method at the crossroads of structural and cellular biology, uniquely capable of identifying protein-protein interactions with residue-level resolution and on the proteome-wide scale. With the development of cross-linkers that can form linkages inside cells and easily cleave during fragmentation on the mass spectrometer (MS-cleavable cross-links), it has become increasingly facile to identify contacts between any two proteins in complex samples, including in live cells or tissues. Photo-cross-linkers possess the advantages of high temporal resolution and high reactivity, thereby engaging all residue-types (rather than just lysine); nevertheless, photo-cross-linkers have not enjoyed widespread use and are yet to be employed for proteome-wide studies because their products are challenging to identify. Here, we demonstrate the synthesis and application of two heterobifunctional photo-cross-linkers that feature diazirines and <i>N</i>-hydroxy-succinimidyl carbamate groups, the latter of which unveil doubly fissile MS-cleavable linkages upon acyl transfer to protein targets. Moreover, these cross-linkers demonstrate high water-solubility and cell-permeability. Using these compounds, we demonstrate the feasibility of proteome-wide photo-cross-linking <i>in cellulo</i>. These studies elucidate a small portion of <i>Escherichia coli</i>'s interaction network, albeit with residue-level resolution. With further optimization, these methods will enable the detection of protein quinary interaction networks in their native environment at residue-level resolution, and we expect that they will prove useful toward the effort to explore the molecular sociology of the cell.

### Keywords
Heterobifunctional crosslinker, Cleavable crosslinker, Proteome-wide, Nhs-carbamate, Escherichia coli, Xl-ms, Diazirine, Photo-crosslinking

### Affiliations
Johns Hopkins University
Johns Hopkins University, Chemistry

### Submitter
Stephen Fried

### Lab Head
Dr Stephen Fried
Johns Hopkins University, Chemistry


