### Accession
PXD030814

### Title
PIP2 promotes MLKL-derived pathogenic process through enhancing its channel activity

### Description
PIP2 enhances MLKL channel activity in a direct interaction manner and this gain of function promotes both necroptosis and inflammation. Previous studies have reported that phospholipids assisted MLKL recruitment and translocation which facilitates its mediated function like liposome leaking. Here, our result support MLKL act as ion channel and is finely tuned by PIP2. In the immune process especially, PIP2, as an important modulator, promotes intracellular potassium depletion and trigger inflammation which mediated bythrough MLKL channel function. Defining the role of MLKL channel function in MLKL-induced necroptosis or other potential necroptotic models will extend our understanding of the programmed cell death and critically inform the development and testing of new disease-specific, Anti-inflammatory, therapeutic strategies.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for proteome For each treatment group, BV2 cells were collected and washed in PBS and subjected to global protein extraction using 8M Urea (PH 8.0) containing protease inhibitor (phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride, PMSF), followed by 3min of sonication (3s on, 3s off, amplitude 25%). Then the protein concentration was obtained through Bradford quantification assay and 100 μg protein was digested overnight following filter-acid sample preparation (FASP) method with 3.5ug trypsin in 50mM ammonium acid carbonate (PH 8.0) overnight at 37℃. Finally, the purified peptides were acquired after extraction with 50% acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.1% formic acid (FA) following desalination in two layers of Empore 3M C18 disk with 2mg packing (3 μm, 150 Å, Agela) in a pipet tip and dried in a vacuum concentrator (Thermo Scientific).   Liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis of peptide mixture  Proteome analysis were processed on a nanoElute-HPLC System (Bruker Daltonics) coupled with a hybrid trapped ion mobility spectrometry quadrupole times-of-flight mass spectrometer (TIMS-TOF Pro Bruker Daltonics, Billerica, MA) via a Captive Spray nano-electrospray ion source. Peptide mixture were re-dissolved in solution A (0.1% FA) and loaded onto the analytical column (75 μm i.d. × 25 cm) and separated with a 60min gradient (2−22% solvent B (ACN with 0.1% formic acid) for 45 min, 22−37% B for 5 min, 37−80% B for 5 min, and then 80% B for 5 min) at a flow rate of 600 nl/min. The MS analysis was performed by scanning 100-1700 m/z in positive electrospray mode. The accumulation and ramp time were set as 100 ms each. Survey full-scan MS spectra (m/z 100–1700) were obtained. The ion mobility was scanned from 0.7 to 1.3 Vs/cm2. The overall acquisition cycle of 1.16s comprised one full TIMSMS scan and 10 parallel accumulation-serial frag-mentation (PASEF) MS/MS scans. During PASEF MSMS scanning, the collision energy was ramped linearly as a function of the mobility from 59 eV at 1/K0 = 1.6 Vs/cm2 to 20 eV at 1/K0 = 0.6 Vs/cm2.

### Data Protocol
Proteome identification and quantification with MaxQuant-based database searching MS raw files were searched against the Swiss-Prot database (downloaded on August 20, 2020, containing 20, 375 protein sequence entries) using PEAKS Online Xpro Software (v1.4) for peptide and protein identifications. Trypsin was selected as the proteolytic enzyme, and three missed cleavages sites were allowed. The mass tolerance was 15 ppm for precursor and 0.05 Da for production. The oxidation of Methionine and N-acetylation were set as the variable modifications. The false discovery rates of the peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) and proteins were set to less than 1%. For the proteome quantification, the area values under the curve (AUC) of a peptide feature were subjected to communication.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bv2 lps mlkl lc/msms pip2

### Affiliations
Fudan University

### Submitter
jingbo qie

### Lab Head
Dr Jingbo Qie
Fudan University


