### Accession
PXD032226

### Title
TMT6plex and phosphorylation analysis

### Description
Samples were analyzed by TMT6plex and subsequent enrichment for phosphorylation detection.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were reduced, alkylated and digested. Tryptic digests were labeled by TMT6plex isobaric reagents and analyzed by LC-MS/MS for global proteomics analysis. In addition, TMT6plex labeld peptides were enriched for subsequent phosphorylation analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched by Maxcot software by adding oxidation on M, deamindation on N and Q, acetylation on N-terminal as varible modifications. TMT6plex on K and N-terminal, carbanmidomethyl on C were specified as static modifications. 1% FDR was used for filtering confident peptides.

### Publication Abstract
The soybean <i>root necrosis 1</i> (<i>rn1</i>) mutation causes progressive browning of the roots soon after germination and provides increased tolerance to the soil-borne oomycete pathogen <i>Phytophthora sojae</i> in soybean. Toward understanding the molecular basis of the <i>rn1</i> mutant phenotypes, we conducted tandem mass tag (TMT)-labeling proteomics and phosphoproteomics analyses of the root tissues of the <i>rn1</i> mutant and progenitor T322 line to identify potential proteins involved in manifestation of the mutant phenotype. We identified 3,160 proteins. When the <i>p</i>-value was set at &#x2264;0.05 and the fold change of protein accumulation between <i>rn1</i> and T322 at &#x2265;1.5 or &#x2264;0.67, we detected 118 proteins that showed increased levels and 32 proteins decreased levels in <i>rn1</i> as compared to that in T322. The differentially accumulated proteins (DAPs) are involved in several pathways including cellular processes for processing environmental and genetic information, metabolism and organismal systems. Five pathogenesis-related proteins were accumulated to higher levels in the mutant as compared to that in T322. Several of the DAPs are involved in hormone signaling, redox reaction, signal transduction, and cell wall modification processes activated in plant-pathogen interactions. The phosphoproteomics analysis identified 22 phosphopeptides, the levels of phosphorylation of which were significantly different between <i>rn1</i> and T322 lines. The phosphorylation levels of two type II metacaspases were reduced in <i>rn1</i> as compared to T322. Type II metacaspase has been shown to be a negative regulator of hypersensitive cell death. In absence of the functional Rn1 protein, two type II metacaspases exhibited reduced phosphorylation levels and failed to show negative regulatory cell death function in the soybean <i>rn1</i> mutant. We hypothesize that Rn1 directly or indirectly phosphorylates type II metacaspases to negatively regulate the cell death process in soybean roots.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Proteomics, Tmt6pplex

### Affiliations
Cornell University

### Submitter
Sheng Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Sheng Zhang
Cornell University


