### Accession
PXD033962

### Title
The proteomic of IL-4 treated BMDMs from Wt and Elp3 KO mice

### Description
This experiement aims to know what the differences of protein translation are in the bone marrow derived macro-phages(BMDMs) from WT mice and Elp3 KO mice. We treated the BMDMs with or without IL-4 for 4 hours.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed in 100μL 8M urea, 50mM Tris HCl, pH 8.0, 1X Roche Complete Protease Inhibitor. Lysates were quantified by Qubit fluorometry. A 50μg aliquot of each sample was digested in solution using the following protocol: · Sample was diluted in 25mM ammonium bicarbonate. · Proteins were reduced with 10mM dithiothreitol at 60°C followed by alkylation with 50mM iodoacetamide at RT. · Proteins were digested with 1μg trypsin (Promega) at 37°C for 18h. · The digest was quenched with formic acid and peptides cleaned using solid phase extraction (SPE) using a Waters uHLB C18 plate.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed through the MaxQuant software v1.6.2.3 (www.maxquant.org) which served several functions: 1. Recalibration of MS data. 2. Filtering of database search results at the 1% protein and peptide false discovery rate (FDR). 3. Calculation of peak areas for detected peptides and proteins. 4. Data normalization using the LFQ algorithm. Data were searched using Andromeda with the following parameters: Enzyme: Trypsin Database: Swissprot Mouse Fixed modification: Carbamidomethyl (C) Variable modifications: Oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein N-term) Fragment Mass Tolerance: 20ppm  Pertinent MaxQuant settings were: Peptide FDR 0.01 Protein FDR 0.01 Min. peptide Length 7 Min. razor + unique peptides 1 Min. unique peptides 0 Min. ratio count for LFQ 1 Second Peptides^ TRUE Match Between Runs* TRUE

### Publication Abstract
Macrophage polarization is a process whereby macrophages acquire distinct effector states (M1 or M2) to carry out multiple and sometimes opposite functions. We show here that translational reprogramming occurs during macrophage polarization and that this relies on the Elongator complex subunit Elp3, an enzyme that modifies the wobble uridine base U34 in cytosolic tRNAs. Elp3 expression is downregulated by classical M1-activating signals in myeloid cells, where it limits the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines via FoxO1 phosphorylation, and attenuates experimental colitis in mice. In contrast, alternative M2-activating signals upregulate Elp3 expression through a PI3K- and STAT6-dependent signaling pathway. The metabolic reprogramming linked to M2 macrophage polarization relies on Elp3 and the translation of multiple candidates, including the mitochondrial ribosome large subunit proteins Mrpl3, Mrpl13, and Mrpl47. By promoting translation of its activator Ric8b in a codon-dependent manner, Elp3 also regulates mTORC2 activation. Elp3 expression in myeloid cells further promotes Wnt-driven tumor initiation in the intestine by maintaining a pool of tumor-associated macrophages exhibiting M2 features. Collectively, our data establish a functional link between&#xa0;tRNA modifications, mTORC2 activation, and macrophage polarization.

### Keywords
M2 macrophages; il-4; elp3

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Medical Chemistry, GIGA-Stem Cells, Interdisciplinary Cluster for Applied Genoproteomics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Liège, CHU, Sart-Tilman, Liège, 4000, Belgium
University of Liège

### Submitter
Dawei Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Alain Chariot
Laboratory of Medical Chemistry, GIGA-Stem Cells, Interdisciplinary Cluster for Applied Genoproteomics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Liège, CHU, Sart-Tilman, Liège, 4000, Belgium


