### Accession
PXD025268

### Title
Long-term adjustment of hepatic lipid metabolism after chronic stress and the role of FGF21

### Description
Chronic stress leads post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and to metabolic complications, including fatty liver. It is feasible, that stress immediately initiates molecular mechanisms to alter energy metabolism and glucose homeostasis which interfere with hepatic lipid accumulation after stress recovery. We aim to elucidate these molecular mechanisms of long term stress effects on metabolism and focus on physiological adaptation and the role of FGF21, which is protective in hepatic lipid accumulation. Methods  FGF21 knockout  and control mice were exposed to chronic variable stress (Cvs) and recovered for 3 months to simulate PTSD. We determined in vivo and ex vivo energy metabolism, mitochondrial function by extracellular flux analysis, alterations in DNA modifying enzymes and gene regulation immediately after stress and after the recovery period to determine long term alterations.  Results  Chronic stress leads to reduced insulin sensitivity and hepatic lipid accumulation with increased fatty acid uptake (FAU), stress-induced lipolysis, and reduction in NAD+/NAD ratio and Sirt activity. Immediately after stress, PPARa and SREBP-1 target genes are differentially regulated and are involved in the development of stress-induced fatty liver. After recovery, insulin sensitivity increases but insulin-induced de novo lipogenesis (DNL) is reduced and FAU is increased. HDAC and MT activity are suppressed, whereas HAT activity increases, linking metabolic adjustments to transcriptional regulators. Thus, key metabolic genes are differentially regulated and secreted proteins indicate the activation of liver disease by Cvs only in FGF21WT. GR binding to the Cd36 promoter is altered. After stress recovery, serum FGF21 is increased and protects against lipid accumulation. FGF21 interacts by attenuating DNL, increasing FAU and HAT activity, and balancing mitochondrial activity. Higher long-term stress-induced activation and binding of GR to the FGF21 promoter may contribute to the prolonged FGF21 release.  Conclusions  We show that previous stress exposure determines predisposition to fatty liver disease is regulated by FGF21. Immediately after Cvs, altered gene regulation and activity of DNA-modifying enzymes determine the metabolic late effects seen in PTSD. FGF21 functions after chronic stress exposure i) to protect against hepatic lipid accumulation, ii) to maintain mitochondrial capacity, and iii) to mediate in the modulation of DNA-modifying enzymes. These findings highlight the protective role of FGF21 even in stress-induced hepatic lipid accumulation.

### Sample Protocol
Fgf21 knockout (PMID: 19589869, DOI: 10.1210/en.2009-0119) (FGF21KO) and Wildtype (WT) male mice were bred and maintained in a regular 12h light/dark cycle (22°C ± 1°C, 50% ± 5% humidity). All mice were group housed (max. 5 mice per cage) with ad libitum access to standard chow (58% carbohydrates, 9% fat, 33% protein, R/M-H Extrudat, ssniff Spezialdiäten GmbH, Soest, Germany) and tap water. Animal protocols were approved (LANUV, NRW, Germany (81-02.04.2017.A421)) and performed according to the ‘Principle of laboratory animal care’ (NIH publication No. 85-23, revised 1996) and the German law on the protection of animals. The mice were stressed with our Cvs protocol as previously described (PMID: 29980484, DOI: 10.1016/j.molmet.2018.06.012). Cohorts of mice were analysed immediately after Cvs (FGF21KOCtrl, FGF21KOCvs, WTCtrl, WTCvs) and after Cvs with 3 months of reconvalescence (FGF21KOCtrl3m, FGF21KOCvs3m, WTCtrl3m, WTCvs3m). Secretome analyses was performed from supernatants of Ctrl3m and Cvs3m primary hepatocytes of each genotype. Processing, data collection and analyses were performed as described (PMID: 32184434, DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-61886-3; PMID: 30502511, DOI: 10.1016/j.bbapap.2018.11.009).

### Data Protocol
Pre-filtered secretomes were centrifuged (45 min, 85,000 × g, 4 °C) prior concentration processing by centrifugation in Amicon Ultra-15 Ultracel column tubes (Merck Millipore, Burlington, USA) with an exclusion of proteins <3 kDa. Protein profiling of the secretomes was performed using LC-MS instrumentation consisting of an Ultimate 3000 separation liquid chromatography system (Thermofisher Scientific, Germering, Germany) combined with an EASY-spray ion source and Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermofisher Scientific) as previously described53. Peptides were trapped on an Acclaim PepMap C18-LC-column (ID: 75 μm, 2 cm length; Thermofisher Scientific) and separated via EASY-Spray C18 column (ES802; ID: 75 μm, 25 cm length; Thermofisher Scientific). Each LC-MS run lasted 150 min and MS data were acquired with both data-dependent (DDA) and data-independent (DIA, 34 windows) MS/MS scan approaches. DDA runs were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 software (Thermofisher Scientific) and Sequest HT search (trypsin digestion, max. 2 miscleavages, 5–144 peptide length, max. 10 peptides per spectrum, carbamidomethylation as static and N-terminal acetylation/methionine oxidation as dynamic modifications) against the SwissProt FASTA database (Mus musculus (TaxID = 10900, version 2020-07-25)). Percolator node-based peptide-spectrum-match (PSM) analysis was restricted to q-values with 0.01 (strict) and 0.05 (relaxed) false discovery rate (FDR). Proteins were filtered using parsimony principle set to 0.01/0.05 (strict/relaxed) FDRs. For quantification, DIA runs were analyzed via Spectronaut PulsarX 11.01 software (Biognosys, Zürich, Switzerland) set to standard parameter settings and using a self-performed spectral library based on DDA runs. For retention time alignment, the secretomes were spiked with indexed Retention Time (iRT) standard.

### Publication Abstract
Chronic stress leads to post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and metabolic disorders including fatty liver. We hypothesized that stress-induced molecular mechanisms alter energy metabolism, thereby promoting hepatic lipid accumulation even after a stress-free recovery period. In this context, we investigated fibroblast growth factor-21 (FGF21) as protective for energy and glucose homeostasis. FGF21 knockout mice (B6.129S6(SJL)-Fgf21tm1.2Djm; FGF21KO) and control mice (C57BL6; WT) were subjected to chronic variable stress. Mice were examined directly after acute intervention (Cvs) and long-term after 3&#xa0;months of recovery (3mCvs). In WT, Cvs reduced insulin sensitivity and hepatic lipid accumulation, whilst fatty acid uptake increased. FGF21KO mice responded to Cvs with improved glucose tolerance, insulin resistance but liver triglycerides and plasma lipids were unaltered. Hepatic gene expression was specifically altered by genotype and stress e.g. by PPARa and SREBP-1 regulated genes. The stress-induced alteration of hepatic metabolism persisted after stress recovery. In hepatocytes at 3mCvs, differential gene regulation and secreted proteins indicated a genotype specific progression of liver dysfunction. Overall, at 3mCvs FGF21 was involved in maintaining mitochondrial activity, attenuating de novo lipogenesis, increased fatty acid uptake and histone acetyltransferase activity. Glucocorticoid release and binding to the FGF21 promoter may contribute to prolonged FGF21 release and protection against hepatic lipid accumulation. In conclusion, we showed that stress favors fatty liver disease and FGF21 protected against hepatic lipid accumulation after previous chronic stress loading by i) restored physiological function, ii) modulated gene expression via DNA-modifying enzymes, and iii) maintained energy metabolism.

### Keywords
Fatty liver, Mouse hepatocytes, Secreted proteins, Long-term effects of chronic stress

### Affiliations
Dr. rer. nat. Birgit Knebel Institute for Clinical Biochemistry and Pathobiochemistry German Diabetes Center (DDZ) Leibniz Center for Diabetes Research  at Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf Auf´m Hennekamp 65 40225 Düsseldorf, Germany Tel.: +49-(0)-211-33-82-536  birgit.knebel@ddz.de www.ddz.de
 Institute for Clinical Biochemistry and Pathobiochemistry
German Diabetes Center (DDZ)
Leibniz Center for Diabetes Research 
at Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf


### Submitter
Birgit Knebel

### Lab Head
Dr Birgit Knebel
Dr. rer. nat. Birgit Knebel Institute for Clinical Biochemistry and Pathobiochemistry German Diabetes Center (DDZ) Leibniz Center for Diabetes Research  at Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf Auf´m Hennekamp 65 40225 Düsseldorf, Germany Tel.: +49-(0)-211-33-82-536  birgit.knebel@ddz.de www.ddz.de


