### Accession
PXD041941

### Title
LC-MS/MS proteomic analysis of human tissues

### Description
This project is to identify the presence of bacterial flagellins in human liver samples. Human liver protein lysates were separated on SDS-PAGE gels and visualized with Coomassie stain. The positions at which flagellins were detected using anti-flagellin antibodies from Covalab Inc. (France) and Abcam Inc. (UK) were excised for flagellin identification.

### Sample Protocol
The gel slices were then subject to in-gel digestion by trypsin followed by LC-MS/MS analysis at Centre for PanorOmic Sciences, HKU. In brief, gel slices were subjected to reduction and alkylation by 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and 55 mM 2-chloroacetamide (CAA), respectively following by incubation with trypsin (1 ng/µl) overnight at 37 °C. Subsequent tryptic peptides were extracted from the gel with 50% acetonitrile (ACN)/5% formic acid (FA) and 100% ACN sequentially and desalted. The eluted peptide mixture was loaded onto an Aurora C18 UHPLC column (75 μm i.d. × 25 cm length × 1.6 μm particle size) (IonOpticks, Australia) and separated using a linear gradient of 2-30% of buffer B (0.1% FA in ACN) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min buffer A (0.1% FA and 2% ACN in H2O) for 27 or 100 min on nanoElute Nano-Flow UHPLC System coupled to timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer (Bruker, USA). MS data was collected over a m/z range of 100 to 1700, and MS/MS range of 100 to 1700. During MS/MS data collection, each TIMS cycle was 1.1 s and included 1 MS + an average of 10 PASEF MS/MS scans.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry data were processed using MaxQuant 2.0.1.0 (Max Planck Institute for Biochemistry, Germany). For the evaluation of flagellin, raw data were searched against human UniProt FASTA database (Apr 2020) containing 74,824 entries or a customized database containing flagellin proteins identified in the gut microbiota analysis of a population cohort with duplicates removed, using settings as below: oxidized methionine (M), acetylation (Protein N-term) were selected as dynamic modifications, and carbamidomethyl (C) as fixed modifications with minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids was enabled. For the evaluation of TLRs and NLRs, raw data were searched against databases containing all members from TLRs or NLRs, respectively. Confident proteins were identified using a target-decoy approach with a reversed database, strict false discovery rate of 1% at peptide and peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) level with minimum ≥1 unique peptide. To validate the detected peptides were truly bacterial flagellins, one of the samples was spiked with known amounts of purified flagellin from Bacillus subtilis, a species that was not identified in the population cohort, (InvivoGen, USA), followed by proteomic analysis, and the flagellin from B. subtilis was detected in the spiked samples. Moreover, the identified flagellin peptides were also subjected to Protein BLAST alignment (National Center for Biotechnology Information, USA) against human proteome for validation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Liver, Flagellin

### Affiliations
The University of Hong Kong
Department of Pharmacology and Pharmacy, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong

### Submitter
Jensen Yiu

### Lab Head
Dr Connie W. Woo
Department of Pharmacology and Pharmacy, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong


