### Accession
PXD033162

### Title
Differences in the proteomic and metabolomic response during the early stages of Phytophthora cinnamomi infection of two Quercus species with contrasting degrees of susceptibility.

### Description
Phytophthora cinnamomi Rands is a cosmopolite and phyllophagous pathogen of woody plants which during the last couple of centuries has spread all over the world from its center of origin in Southeast Asia. Despite Chinese cork tree (Quercus variabilis Blume) forests native to Asia being generally healthy, the populations of cork trees (Quercus suber L.) in Europe have been decimated by P. cinnamomi. The present study tries to identify the differences in the early proteomic and metabolomic response of these two tree species that lead to their contrasting susceptibility to P. cinnamomi attack. By using micropropagated clonal plants, we tried to minimize the plant-to-plant differences in the defense response that is maximized by the high intraspecific genetic variability inherent to the Quercus genus. The evolution on the content of Phytophthora proteins in the roots during the first 36 hours after inoculation suggest a slower infection process in Q. variabilis plants. These plants displayed a significant decrease in sugars in the roots, together with a downregulation of proteins related to carbon metabolism. In the leaves, the biggest changes in proteomic profiling were observed 16 hours after inoculation. and included increased abundance of peroxidases, superoxidedismutases and gluthatione S-transferases in Q. variabilis plants, which probably aided its resistance against P. cinnamomi attack.

### Sample Protocol
Total protein extracts were prepared as described previously (Saiz-Fernández et al., 2020), then portions of samples corresponding to 5 μg peptide were analysed by nanoflow reverse-phase liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry using a 15 cm C18 Zorbax column (Agilent), a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano-UPLC system and Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher).

### Data Protocol
Acquired spectra were recalibrated and searched against the Q. suber protein database. Only proteins represented by at least two unique peptides were considered for the quantitative analysis. The quantitative differences were determined by Minora, employing precursor ion quantification followed by normalization and calculation of relative protein abundances. PCA was employed to evaluate the reproducibility and for removing outliers.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Phytophthora cinnamomi</i> Rands is a cosmopolite pathogen of woody plants which during the last couple of centuries has spread all over the world from its center of origin in Southeast Asia. In contrast to Chinese cork oak (<i>Quercus variabilis</i> Blume) forests native to Asia, which are generally healthy despite the presence of the pathogen, the populations of Cork oaks (<i>Quercus suber</i> L.) in Europe have been severely decimated by <i>P. cinnamomi</i>. The present study aims at identifying the differences in the early proteomic and metabolomic response of these two tree species that lead to their differences in susceptibility to <i>P. cinnamomi</i>. By using micropropagated clonal plants, we tried to minimize the plant-to-plant differences in the defense response that is maximized by the high intraspecific genetic variability inherent to the <i>Quercus</i> genus. The evolution on the content of <i>Phytophthora</i> proteins in the roots during the first 36 h after inoculation suggests a slower infection process in <i>Q. variabilis</i> plants. These plants displayed a significant decrease in sugars in the roots, together with a downregulation of proteins related to carbon metabolism. In the leaves, the biggest changes in proteomic profiling were observed 16 h after inoculation, and included increased abundance of peroxidases, superoxide dismutases and glutathione S-transferases in <i>Q. variabilis</i> plants, which probably contributed to decrease its susceptibility to <i>P. cinnamomi</i>.

### Keywords
Resistance, Peroxidases, Plant pathogen, Gluthatione s-transferase, Phenylpropanoids, Micropropagation, Sugars

### Affiliations
Mendel University in Brno
Department of Molecular Biology and Radiobiology, Mendel University in Brno, CZ

### Submitter
Martin Cerny

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Cerny
Department of Molecular Biology and Radiobiology, Mendel University in Brno, CZ


