### Accession
PXD007918

### Title
LPS upregulates palmitoylated enzymes of the phosphatidylinositol cycle. An insight from proteomic studies.

### Description
The studies aim at revealing changes of the level of fatty-acylated proteins induced  by LPS in RAW264 macrophage-like cells

### Sample Protocol
RAW264 cells were metabolically labeled with 50 μM 17ODYA or 0.05% DMSO carrier in control samples. Labeled proteins were tagged with biotin-azide in Cu(I)-catalyzed click reaction followed by enrichment on streptavidin-coupled beads. Three independent experiments were performed eventually giving three lists of 17ODYA-labeled proteins in unstimulated cells, three lists in LPS-stimulated cells and corresponding lists of proteins found in DMSO-treated unstimulated and LPS-stimulated cells (two sets combining three lists each). Proteins adsorbed on streptavidin beads were subjected to standard procedure of trypsin digestion, during which proteins were reduced with TCEP (5 mM final concentration from 0.5 M stock in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer, pH 8.0) for 1 h at 600C, blocked with methyl methanethiosulfonate (10mM final concentration from 200 mM stock in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer, pH 8.0) for 10 min at room temperature and digested overnight with 10 ng/μl trypsin. The resulting peptide mixtures were applied to RP-18 pre-column (Waters, Milford, MA) using water containing 0.1% formic acid as a mobile phase and then transferred to a nano-HPLC RP-18 column (internal diameter 75 µM, Waters, Milford MA) using acetonitrile gradient (0 – 35% acetonitrile in 160 min) in the presence of 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. The column outlet was coupled directly to the ion source of Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron Corp., San Jose, CA) working in the regime of data-dependent MS to MS/MS switch. A blank run ensuring absence of cross-contamination from previous samples preceded each analysis.

### Data Protocol
The acquired MS/MS data were preprocessed with Mascot Distiller software (v. 2.5.1, MatrixScience, London, UK) and a search was performed with the Mascot Search Engine (MatrixScience, London, UK, Mascot Server 2.4.1) against the Mus sp.  proteins derived from SwissProt protein database (Swissprot 2017_02; 16,905 sequences). To reduce mass errors, the peptide and fragment mass tolerance settings were established separately for individual LC-MS/MS runs after a measured mass recalibration, as described previously (Malinowska et al., 2012, J. Proteomics, 75:4062). After recalibration, the mass tolerance for proteins was in a range 5-10 ppm and for peptides 0.01-0.05 Da. The Mascot search parameters were as follows: enzyme, Trypsin; missed cleavages, 1; fixed modifications, Methylthio (C); variable modifications, Oxidation (M); instrument, HCD; Decoy option, active. FDR was estimated with Mascot Decoy search and score threshold was adjusted for each sample to keep the FDR below 1%. Only proteins represented by at least two unique peptides in at least two 17ODYA-labeled samples were further considered. Subsequently, probable contaminates (keratin, albumin) were removed from the list and redundantly identified proteins were manually curated. For evaluation of the relative protein abundance in each sample spectral count values determined using emPAI scores were used. Only proteins which met the acceptance criteria: FDR<1%, at least two unique peptides, Mascot score over 25, non-redundant proteins, were taken for further analysis. Spectral counts of significantly identified peptides of a given protein were summed up over 3 experiments giving 4 data sets: A (sum of spectral counts in unstimulated cells labeled with 17ODYA), B (sum of spectral counts in unstimulated cells exposed to DMSO), C (sum of spectral counts in LPS-stimulated cells labeled with 17ODYA), D (sum of spectral counts in LPS-stimulated cells exposed to DMSO). At this point all zeros were replaced by 1. Subsequently,  for each protein a ratio of the sum of spectral counts A/B and C/D and next,  ln ratio of the ratio were calculated. Secondly, the statistical significance of the difference between the number of spectral counts summed up in A and B or C and D data sets for each protein was estimated with the unequal variance one tailed, heteroschedastic t-test. It was assumed that a fatty-acylated protein was identified with high confidence when the p value of the difference between 17ODYA- and DMSO-treated samples was ≤ 0.05 and with medium confidence when 0.05 < p ≤ 0.275. All proteins identified with the ln ratio of 17ODYA- to DMSO-treated samples (A/B and/or C/D) ≥ 2.5 had to meet at least the medium confidence criterion both in unstimulated and LPS-stimulated cells to be further considered. To identify fatty acylated protein upregulated by LPS, the ratio RL was calculated  by dividing the C/D ratio by the A/B ratio. Proteins with RL ≥ 1.5 were considered as upregulated, those with Rf ≤ 0.5 as downregulated in LPS-stimulated cells.

### Publication Abstract
Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) is a component of the outer membrane of Gram-negative bacteria that induces strong proinflammatory reactions of mammals. These processes are triggered upon sequential binding of LPS to CD14, a GPI-linked plasma membrane raft protein, and to the TLR4/MD2 receptor complex. We have found earlier that upon LPS binding, CD14 triggers generation of phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate [PI(4,5)P<sub>2</sub>], a lipid controlling subsequent proinflammatory cytokine production. Here we show that stimulation of RAW264 macrophage-like cells with LPS induces global changes of the level of fatty-acylated, most likely palmitoylated, proteins. Among the acylated proteins that were up-regulated in those conditions were several enzymes of the phosphatidylinositol cycle. Global profiling of acylated proteins was performed by metabolic labeling of RAW264 cells with 17ODYA, an analogue of palmitic acid functionalized with an alkyne group, followed by detection and enrichment of labeled proteins using biotin-azide/streptavidin and their identification with mass spectrometry. This proteomic approach revealed that 154 fatty-acylated proteins were up-regulated, 186 downregulated, and 306 not affected in cells stimulated with 100 ng/ml LPS for 60 min. The acylated proteins affected by LPS were involved in diverse biological functions, as found by Ingenuity Pathway Analysis. Detailed studies of 17ODYA-labeled and immunoprecipitated proteins revealed that LPS induces <i>S</i>-palmitoylation, hence activation, of type II phosphatidylinositol 4-kinase (PI4KII) &#x3b2;, which phosphorylates phosphatidylinositol to phosphatidylinositol 4-monophosphate, a PI(4,5)P<sub>2</sub> precursor. Silencing of PI4KII&#x3b2; and PI4KII&#x3b1; inhibited LPS-induced expression and production of proinflammatory cytokines, especially in the TRIF-dependent signaling pathway of TLR4. Reciprocally, this LPS-induced signaling pathway was significantly enhanced after overexpression of PI4KII&#x3b2; or PI4KII&#x3b1;; this was dependent on palmitoylation of the kinases. However, the <i>S</i>-palmitoylation of PI4KII&#x3b1;, hence its activity, was constitutive in RAW264 cells. Taken together the data indicate that LPS triggers <i>S</i>-palmitoylation and activation of PI4KII&#x3b2;, which generates PI(4)P involved in signaling pathways controlling production of proinflammatory cytokines.

### Keywords
S-palmitoylation. mass spectrometry, Proteomic, Lps

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Molecular Membrane Biology, Department of Cell Biology, Nencki Institute of Experimental Biology of the Polish Academy of Sciences, 3 Pasteur St., 02-093 Warsaw, Poland
Laboratory of Cell Biophysics, Nencki Institute of Experimental Biology, PAS

### Submitter
Monika Zareba-Koziol

### Lab Head
Dr Katarzyna Kwiatkowska
Laboratory of Molecular Membrane Biology, Department of Cell Biology, Nencki Institute of Experimental Biology of the Polish Academy of Sciences, 3 Pasteur St., 02-093 Warsaw, Poland


