### Accession
PXD003539

### Title
NCI60 proteome by PCT-SWATH -  Quantitative Proteome Landscape of the NCI-60 Cancer Cell Lines

### Description
We obtained quantitative analysis of the NCI-60 cell panels using pressure cycling technology (PCT) and SWATH-MS. Each cell was analyzed in duplicate. The data were analyzed using a cell line SWATH assay library and OpenSWATH, followed by SWATH-expert refinement.

### Sample Protocol
The cell pellets was a generous gift from National Cancer Instutite, USA. Each cell line was lyzed and digested using pressure cycling technology (PCT) (Pubmed ID: 25730263). Each digest was analyzed in a tripleTOF 5600 under SWATH mode. The conventional 32 window scheme was used (Pubmed ID: 22261725).

### Data Protocol
The SWATH data were first analyzed using OpenSWATH with a SWATH assay library built from cell lines, containing 86,209 proteotypic peptide precursors in 8,056 proteotypic SwissProt proteins. Then the results were refined using SWATH-expert (manuscript in preparation)

### Publication Abstract
Here we describe a proteomic data resource for the NCI-60 cell lines generated by pressure cycling technology and SWATH mass spectrometry. We developed the DIA-expert software to curate and visualize the SWATH data, leading to reproducible detection of over 3,100 SwissProt proteotypic proteins and systematic quantification of pathway activities. Stoichiometric relationships of interacting proteins for DNA replication, repair, the chromatin remodeling NuRD complex, &#x3b2;-catenin, RNA metabolism, and prefoldins are more evident than that at the mRNA level. The data are available in CellMiner (discover.nci.nih.gov/cellminercdb and discover.nci.nih.gov/cellminer), allowing casual users to test hypotheses and perform integrative, cross-database analyses of multi-omic drug response correlations for over 20,000 drugs. We demonstrate the value of proteome data in predicting drug response for over 240 clinically relevant chemotherapeutic and targeted therapies. In summary, we present a novel proteome resource for the NCI-60, together with relevant software tools, and demonstrate the benefit of proteome analyses.

### Keywords
Nci-60 cell; pct; swath; breast cancer; luekemia; colon cancer; melanoma; ovarian cancer; brain tumor; renal cancer; lung cancer; prostate cancer; drug sensitivity;

### Affiliations
Westlake University
1, Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH, Zurich, Switzerland 2, Faculty of Science, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland

### Submitter
Tiannan Guo

### Lab Head
Dr Ruedi Aebersold
1, Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH, Zurich, Switzerland 2, Faculty of Science, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland


