### Accession
PXD031570

### Title
GPR143 regulates ESCRT-dependent exosome biogenesis and promotes cancer metastasis (exosome proteomics)

### Description
Comparison of exsomal protein contents between MCF7shCtrl and MCF7shGPR143 cells.

### Sample Protocol
To identify exosomal proteins, purified exosomes were lysed and ultrasonicated and proteins subjected to SDS gel electrophoresis. After staining with colloidal Coomassie blue, the protein gels were sliced and followed by in-gel tryptic digestion, as described by Shevchenko et al [8]. The resulting tryptic peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS. All mass analyses were performed on a Q Exactive Plus orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source. To separate the peptide mixture, we used a C18 reverse-phase HPLC column (500 mm × 75 μm ID) using an acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid gradient from 2.4% to 24% for 120 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. For MS/MS analysis, the precursor ion scan MS spectra (m/z 400–2000) were acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 400 with an internal lock mass. The 15 most intensive ions were isolated and fragmented by high-energy collision induced dissociation.

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Sequest Sorcerer platform (Sagen-N Research, San Jose, CA, USA). Sequest was set up to search the Homo sapiens protein sequence database [20,612 entries, UniProt (http://www.uniprot.org/)], which includes frequently observed contaminants, assuming the digestion enzyme to be trypsin. Sequest was searched for with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 1.00 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 ppm. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified in Sequest as a fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine and acetyl of the n-terminus and phosphorous group of serine, threonine, and tyrosine was specified as variable modifications. Scaffold (Version 4.10.0, Proteome Software Inc.) was used to validate MS/MS-based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 97.0% probability to achieve a false discovery rate (FDR) less than 1.0% by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at a greater than 95.0% probability to achieve an FDR less than 1.0% and contained at least two identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the ProteinProphet algorithm [9]. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins were annotated with GO terms from NCBI.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Gpr143, Melanoma, Hrs, Mvb, Breast cancer, Exosomal protein sorting

### Affiliations
UNIST
Department of Biological Sciences, Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST), Ulsan, 44919, Republic of Korea

### Submitter
YU JIN LEE

### Lab Head
Dr Young Chan Chae
Department of Biological Sciences, Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST), Ulsan, 44919, Republic of Korea


