### Accession
PXD009646

### Title
Deep Dive in the Proteome of Human Cerebrospinal Fluid: A Valuable Data Resource for Biomarker Discovery and Missing Protein Identification

### Description
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) is a body fluid of choice for biomarker studies of brain disorders but remains relatively under-studied compared to other biological fluids such as plasma, partly due to the more invasive means of its sample collection. The present study establishes an in-depth CSF proteome through the analysis of a unique CSF sample from a pool of healthy donors. After immuno-affinity depletion, the CSF sample was fractionated using off-gel electrophoresis and analyzed with liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (MS) using the latest generation of hybrid Orbitrap mass spectrometers. The shotgun proteomic analysis allowed the identification of 20689 peptides mapping on 3379 proteins. To the best of our knowledge, the obtained dataset constitutes the largest CSF proteome published so far. Among the CSF proteins identified, 34% correspond to genes defined as elevated in the brain by The Human Protein Atlas. The principal Alzheimer disease biomarkers (e.g., tau protein, amyloid-β, apolipoprotein E and neurogranin) were detected. Importantly, our dataset significantly contributes to the Chromosome-Centric Human Proteome Project (C-HPP), and 13 proteins considered as missing are proposed for validation in accordance with the HPP guidelines.

### Sample Protocol
Ninety-six aliquots of 400 μL of the commercial pooled CSF sample (i.e., in total 38.4 mL of CSF) were evaporated. The dried samples were diluted in 125 μL of Buffer A containing 0.00965 mg/mL LACB. A volume of 120 μL was filtered with 0.22 μm filter plate from Millipore. Abundant CSF proteins were removed from the filtered CSF sample solutions (100 μL loaded on column), following the manufacturer instructions with slight modifications, using MARS columns and HPLC systems equipped with an HTC-PAL fraction collector. After immunodepletion, samples were snap-frozen and stored. Buffer exchange was performed with Strata-X 33u Polymeric RP (30 mg/1 mL) cartridges mounted on a 96-hole holder and a vacuum manifold, as previously described. Samples were subsequently evaporated and stored at −80 °C. Dried samples were subjected to reduction, alkylation, digestion, TMT 6-plex labeling, pooling and solid phase extraction (SPE) sample purification (Oasis HLB and SCX) using a 4-channels Microlab Star liquid handler workstation in a 96-well-plate format and according to a previously reported protocol. The sample was fractionated with OGE using the 3100 OFFGEL Fractionator. The twenty-four fractions were dissolved in 50 μL H2O/CH3CN/FA 96.9/3/0.1 for RP-LC MS/MS. RP-LC MS/MS was performed with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer and an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano system.  Proteolytic peptides (injection of 5 μL of sample) were trapped on an Acclaim PepMap 75 μm × 2 cm (C18, 3 μm, 100 Å) precolumn and separated on an Acclaim PepMap RSLC 75 μm × 50 cm (C18, 2 μm, 100 Å) column (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a stainless steel nanobore emitter (40 mm, OD 1/32 in.). The column was heated to 50 °C using a PRSO-V1 column oven (Sonation, Biberach, Germany). Peptides were separated using the following gradient of solvent A (H2O/CH3CN/FA 97.9/2/0.1) and solvent B (H2O/CH3CN/FA 19.92/80/0.08): from 1% B to 6.3% B in 1 min, from 6.3% B to 11% B in 11 min, from 11% B to 17.5% B in 71 min, from 17.5% B to 25.5% B in 46 min, from 25.5% B to 40% B in 28 min, and maintained at 98% B for 8 min; the column was reconditioned at 6.3% B for 15 min.  The flow rate was 220 nL/min with a total analysis time of 180 min. Data were acquired using a data-dependent method. A positive ion spray voltage of 1500 V and a transfer tube temperature of 275 °C were set up. For MS survey scans in profile mode, the Orbitrap resolution was 120000 at m/z = 200 (automatic gain control target of 2 × 105) with a m/z scan range from 300 to 1500, RF lens set at 30%, and maximum injection time of 100 ms. For MS/MS with higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) at 35% of the normalized collision energy, AGC target was set to 1 × 105 (isolation width of 1.2 in the quadrupole), with a resolution of 15000 at m/z = 200, first mass at m/z = 100, and a maximum injection time of 100 ms with Orbitrap acquiring in profile mode. A duty cycle time of 3 s (top speed mode) was used to determine the number of precursor ions to be selected for HCD-based MS/MS. Ions were injected for all available parallelizable time. Dynamic exclusion was set for 60 s within a ± 10 ppm window. A lock mass of m/z = 445.12002 was used.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer was used as data processing interface. Identification was performed against the human UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database (2017/07 release) including the LACB sequence (20225 sequences in total). Mascot was used as search engine. Variable amino acid modifications were oxidized methionine, deamidated asparagine/glutamine, and 6-plex TMT-labeled peptide amino terminus; 6-plex TMT-labeled lysine was set as fixed modifications as well as carbamidomethylation of cysteine. Trypsin was selected as the proteolytic enzyme, with a maximum of two potential missed cleavages. Peptide and fragment ion tolerance were set to10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. All Mascot result files were loaded into Scaffold Q+S 4.8.4 to be further searched with X! Tandem.

### Publication Abstract
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) is a body fluid of choice for biomarker studies of brain disorders but remains relatively under-studied compared with other biological fluids such as plasma, partly due to the more invasive means of its sample collection. The present study establishes an in-depth CSF proteome through the analysis of a unique CSF sample from a pool of donors. After immunoaffinity depletion, the CSF sample was fractionated using off-gel electrophoresis and analyzed with liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (MS) using the latest generation of hybrid Orbitrap mass spectrometers. The shotgun proteomic analysis allowed the identification of 20&#x202f;689 peptides mapping on 3379 proteins. To the best of our knowledge, the obtained data set constitutes the largest CSF proteome published so far. Among the CSF proteins identified, 34% correspond to genes whose transcripts are highly expressed in brain according to the Human Protein Atlas. The principal Alzheimer's disease biomarkers (e.g., tau protein, amyloid-&#x3b2;, apolipoprotein E, and neurogranin) were detected. Importantly, our data set significantly contributes to the Chromosome-centric Human Proteome Project (C-HPP), and 12 proteins considered as missing are proposed for validation in accordance with the HPP guidelines. Of these 12 proteins, 8 proteins are based on 2 to 6 uniquely mapping peptides from this CSF analysis, and 4 match a new peptide with a "stranded" single peptide in PeptideAtlas from previous CSF studies. The MS proteomic data are available to the ProteomeXchange Consortium ( http://www.proteomexchange.org/ ) with the data set identifier PXD009646.

### Keywords
Augurin; brain; cerebrospinal fluid; human proteome project; mass spectrometry;  proteomics; missing proteins; tandem mass tag

### Affiliations
Nestlé Research
Proteomics Team Leader, Nestlé Institute of Health Sciences SA

### Submitter
Charlotte Macron

### Lab Head
Dr Loïc Dayon
Proteomics Team Leader, Nestlé Institute of Health Sciences SA


