### Accession
PXD003678

### Title
Dam1 complex-microtubule interaction

### Description
we used cross-linking mass spectrometry to determine the molecular architecture of the Dam1 complex alone and bound to microtubules. Our data provide a map of the subunit  arrangement of the Dam1 complex.  Analysis of the Dam1 complex assembled around microtubules reveals that the Spc34 and Ask1 subunits are likely involved in  self -assembly whereas the Duo1 and Dam1 subunits both interact with microtubules. We also demonstrate that the C termini of Dam1 and Duo1 provide the microtubule binding properties to the Dam1 complex. Our data provides key information on the organization of the Dam1 complex around microtubules.

### Sample Protocol
The mixing ratio of BS3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) to complex was determined for the Dam1 complex using 5 mg aliquots and using a protein-to-cross-linker ratio (w/w) of 1:1, 1:2, 1:3, 1:4, 1:5, 1:6, 1:7 respectively. Low concentration of the Dam1 complex, at 0.05 mg/ml was used to minimize cross-linking of higher order structures. As the  best condition, we chose the ratio that was sufficient to convert most of the individual Dam1 subunits into a high molecular weight band corresponding to the monomeric and dimeric Dam1 complexes (1:5-1:7), but did not crosslink the Dam1 complex into aggregates, as judged by SDS-PAGE analysis. The reactions were resolved by  SDS–PAGE (4–12% Bis-365 Tris NuPAGE, Invitrogen) gel separation and stained using Instant Blue (Expedeon). The bands were then excised and the proteins therein were reduced using 5 mM BME for 30 minutes at room temperature, alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide for 20 minutes in the dark at room temperature and digested using trypsin (sequencing grade; Promega) overnight at 37 °C. Mass spectra were recorded at 100,000 resolution. The eight highest intensity peaks with a charge state of three or higher were selected in each cycle for ion-trap fragmentation. The fragments were produced using collision-induced dissociation with 35% normalized collision energy and detected by the Orbitrap at 7,500 resolution. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s and repeat count was 1.

### Data Protocol
The data were processed, generating peak lists by MaxQuant (Version 1.5.1.2) and matching crosslinked peptides to spectra using in-house developed Xi software.

### Publication Abstract
Mitosis is a highly regulated process that allows the equal distribution of the genetic material to the daughter cells. Chromosome segregation requires the formation of a bipolar mitotic spindle and assembly of a multi-protein structure termed the kinetochore to mediate attachments between condensed chromosomes and spindle microtubules. In budding yeast, a single microtubule attaches to each kinetochore, necessitating robustness and processivity of this kinetochore-microtubule attachment. The yeast kinetochore-localized Dam1 complex forms a direct interaction with the spindle microtubule. In vitro, the Dam1 complex assembles as a ring around microtubules and couples microtubule depolymerization with cargo movement. However, the subunit organization within the Dam1 complex, its higher-order oligomerization and how it interacts with microtubules remain under debate. Here, we used chemical cross-linking and mass spectrometry to define the architecture and subunit organization of the Dam1 complex. This work reveals that both the C termini of Duo1 and Dam1 subunits interact with the microtubule and are critical for microtubule binding of the Dam1 complex, placing Duo1 and Dam1 on the inside of the ring structure. Integrating this information with available structural data, we provide a coherent model for how the Dam1 complex self-assembles around microtubules.

### Keywords
Dam1 complex, Cross-linking, Microtubule, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
The University of Edinburgh
Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell Biology, Institute of Cell Biology, University of Edinburgh Michael Swann Building 4.18a, Max Born Crescent, Edinburgh EH9 3BF

### Submitter
Juan Zou

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Juri Rappsilber
Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell Biology, Institute of Cell Biology, University of Edinburgh Michael Swann Building 4.18a, Max Born Crescent, Edinburgh EH9 3BF


