### Accession
PXD035040

### Title
APEX2-proximity labelling of small heat shock protein condensates and aggregates

### Description
Small heat shock proteins are chaperones that are essential in preserving the integrity of the cellular proteome during stress conditions. The human genome encodes ten small heat shock proteins (HspB1-HspB10), which often form polydisperse multimeric functional structures. Uniquely, HspB2 and HspB3 form a tetrameric complex with a well-defined 3:1 subunit ratio, suggesting that precise control of their expression is crucial for their function as chaperones. Indeed, disruption of the HspB2-HspB3 interaction and stoichiometry has been linked to myopathic disorders. To gain insight in the molecular mechanisms involved in such disorders, we studied the intracellular behavior of HspB2 and HspB3 at varying ratios. In this study, we show that expression of HspB2 alone results in the formation of liquid nuclear condensates, while co-expression of a small amount of HspB3 results in a diffuse distribution of HspB2 in the nucleus. In contrast, co-expression of HspB3 in equimolar amounts to HspB2 resulted in the formation of large aggregates in both the cytoplasm and the nucleus. The condensates as well as the aggregates can be dissolved by shifting the HspB2:HspB3 balance, indicating that these structures are reversible and able to dynamically exchange biomolecules with the environment.  Both condensates and aggregates are expected to interact with, and potentially trap specific sets of proteins, which may be linked to associated pathologies. To identify these proteins and elucidate the composition of HspB2 condensates and aggregates, we performed proximity labelling using an engineered ascorbate peroxidase (APEX). We found a striking enrichment of disordered proteins in HspB2:HspB3 containing aggregates, as well as multiple autophagy factors, indicating that the cell is actively attempting to clear these aggregates. In contrast, very few proteins were specifically enriched in condensates, suggesting that most proteins interact only weakly and transiently with the liquid condensates.

### Sample Protocol
Plasmids encoding APEX-tagged small heat shock proteins (HspB2, HspB5) and appropriate controls were transfected into HEK293T cells. APEX2-mediated proximity labelling was performed by addition of biotin-phenol followed by enzyme activation using hydrogen peroxide. Biotinylated proteins were enriched on streptavidin-conjugated beads and digested to generate tryptic peptides. These peptides were analyzed using reverse phase chromatography and measured with an Orbitrap Exploris480 mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were analyzed using MaxQuant 1.6.6.0 using standard recommended settings. LFQ, IBAQ and match between runs were enabled. Data were mapped to the human proteome and further processed using Perseus 1.5.0.15.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Protein aggregation, Hspb5, Proximity labelling, Apex2, Hspb2, Small heat shock protein, Liquid-liquid phase separation, Hek293t cells

### Affiliations
Physical Organic Chemistry, Radboud University, Nijmegen, the Netherlands
Radboud University

### Submitter
Pascal Jansen

### Lab Head
Dr Evan Spruijt
Physical Organic Chemistry, Radboud University, Nijmegen, the Netherlands


