### Accession
PXD009389

### Title
Shotgun Proteomics and Quantitative Pathway Analysis Study of the Mechanisms of Action of Dehydroeffusol, a Bioactive Phyto-chemical in Medulla Junci with Anti-cancer Activity

### Description
Dehydroeffusol (DHE) is a rare compound of phenanthrene class isolated from Medulla Junci used in Traditional Chinese herbal medicines. Initial biological evaluation of this compound reveals in vitro and in vivo anticancer ac-tivities. We performed a shotgun proteomic analysis using Orbitrap liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry to investigate the changes in the protein profiles in cancer cells upon DHE treatment. DHE affected cancer-associated signaling pathways, including NF-B, β-catenin and endoplasmic reticulum stress. Through quantitative pathway and key-node analysis of the proteomics data, activating transcription factor 2 (ATF-2) and c-Jun kinase (JNK) were found to be the key components in DHE’s modulated biological pathways. Furthermore, based on the pathway analysis as well as chemical similarity, DHE is predicted to be a phytoestrogen. Our predictions derived from proteomic, bio-informatic and chemoinformatic analyses were validated with individual cell-based experiments. In addition to elucidating the major mechanisms of action of DHE, our study demonstrates an effective workflow for identifying the mechanisms of action of bioactive compounds through shotgun proteomic analysis.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa cells were seeded at a density of 3×105 cells/well in 6-well cell culture plates and treated with 20 µM DHE or DMSO vehicle for 6, 10 and 24 h. Cells were washed twice with cold PBS followed by the addition 100 µL lysis buffer (8 M urea, protease inhibitor cocktail in 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0) and sonicated with three 15-s pulses using a microprobe tip set at 20 W output. The resulting cell lysates from three biological replicates were collected and pooled together. The lysates were clarified by centrifugation at 15,000g for 15 minutes at 4°C. Protein concentrations were determined using the Bio-Rad protein assay.  100 µg of protein from each sample was incubated at 60°C for 10 minutes. Dithiothreitol (DTT) was added to a final concentration of 5 mM and the samples were incubated for 30 minutes at room temperature for disulfide bond reduction. Then iodoacetamide (final concentration of 25 mM) was added and kept in darkness for 30 minutes at room temperature. Subsequently, the protein extracts were precipitated with acetone at -20°C for 5 h, and then centrifuged at 15,000g for 20 minutes at 4°C. The supernatant was removed and the pellets were air dried. The dried samples were solubilized in 100 µL of 50 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) and digested by trypsin at a ratio of 1:33 (trypsin: protein) at 37°C for 16 h. The digested samples were quantified by Thermo ScientificTM PierceTM Quantitative Fluorometric Peptide Assay. Equal amount of each sample was taken for tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling (Pierce, Rockford IL, USA) as below, control 6 h (TMT-126), DHE 6 h (TMT-127), control 10 h (TMT-128), DHE 10 h (TMT-129), control 24 h (TMT-130) and DHE 24 h (TMT-131). Equal amount of each labeled sample was the mixed and stored at -80°C. 50 µg of mixed sixplex-TMT samples were subjected to an offline pH = 10 Hp-RP-STAGETip10 fractionations. RP chromatography was carried out on a homemade 200 𝜇L C18 STAGE tips11, 12. 5 mg of 5 μm C18-AQ beads was first suspended in 100 mM ammonium formate (NH4HCO2, pH10) with 50% ACN, followed by packing into a Gilson 200 μL tip with a C8 membrane frit and centrifuged at 1,500g for 2 min. After sufficient washing and condition-ing, digested TMT-labelled peptides were reconstituted with loading solution (20mM NH4HCO2, pH10), and load-ed onto the StageTips. The peptides were eluted through an ACN gradient as described on the suggested protocol of Thermo Scientific™ Pierce™ High pH Reversed-Phase Pep-tide Fractionation Kit and separated into eight fractions (Supporting Information Supplementary protocol). Each fraction was desalted with a low pH (pH=2) RP-STAGETip before applying to LC-MS/MS analysis. Each fraction was separately assessed by technical tripli-cate runs of RP-HPLC-MS/MS. For each run, around 2.5 µg of proteins were loaded onto an analytical column with a fused silica emitter (75 µm I.D.× 12 cm, 360 µm O.D., 15 µm Tip I.D.; New Objective, Inc.) packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 3 µm resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ger-many) and connected with the HPLC with a split-flow set-up. Then the column was connected to a NanoSpray Ionization (NSI) source (Shotgun Proteomics Inc., San Diego, CA, USA) at the orifice of the mass spectrometer. Mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid (FA) (v/v) in H2O. Mobile phase B was 0.1% FA (v/v) in acetonitrile (ACN). The sample was loaded onto the trap column (ZORBAX 300SB-C18, 5 µm, 5x0.3mm, Agilent Technologies, CA, USA) for 5 mins with 2% B at a 10 µL/min, and then eluted with a different gradient for different fractions for 120 mins at 0.28 µL/min, followed by a washing and equilibration time of 40 mins at 0.28 µL/min. (Detailed gradients described in Supporting Information Supplementary protocol) The HPLC eluate was directly electrosprayed into a linear ion trap (LTQ)-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo-Scientific, MA, U.S.A.) operated in automatic data-dependent acquisition mode. The instrument automatically switched between MS survey scan with Orbitrap with a m/z range from 300 to 1800 and MS/MS scans of higher energy collisionally activated dissociation (HCD) fragmentation with Orbitrap of the ten most intense ions with 30,000 resolution for MS1 and 15,000 resolution for MS/MS. The dynamic .exclusion list was set to 500 and exclusion time was 60 s. Singly-charged ions and ions with unassigned charge states were excluded. Selected ions for HCD were isolated with isolation width of 2.0 m/z, activated with collision energy of 40 (arb. units) for 0.1 ms.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were searched against the Uniprot human data-base (70939 entries, downloaded on May 19, 2017) with the MaxQuant search engine (version 1.6.0.1). Each search was specified to include trypsin digestion (allowed up to two missed cleavages); oxidation of methionine, deamination of asparagine and glutamine and N-terminal acetylation as a dynamic modification; the iodoacetamide derivative of cysteine and TMT reagent adducts on lysine and peptide amino termini as a static modification. The mass tolerance for monoisotopic peptide identification and fragmented ions were set to 4.5 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively. The final peptide false discovery rate (FDR) was < 1%, determined by a decoy search strategy.

### Publication Abstract
Dehydroeffusol (DHE) is a phenanthrene isolated from the Chinese medicinal plant Juncus effusus. Biological evaluation of DHE reveals in vitro and in vivo anticancer effects. We performed a shotgun proteomic analysis using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry to investigate the changes in the protein profiles in cancer cells upon DHE treatment. DHE affected cancer-associated signaling pathways, including NF-&#x3ba;B, &#x3b2;-catenin, and endoplasmic reticulum stress. Through quantitative pathway and key node analysis of the proteomics data, activating transcription factor 2 (ATF-2) and c-Jun kinase (JNK) were found to be the key components in DHE's modulated biological pathways. Based on the pathway analysis as well as chemical similarity to estradiol, DHE is proposed to be a phytoestrogen. The proteomic, bioinformatic, and chemoinformatic analyses were further verified with individual cell-based experiments. Our study demonstrates a workflow for identifying the mechanisms of action of DHE through shotgun proteomic analysis.

### Keywords
Phytoestrogen, Tmt-labeling, Signaling pathway analysis, Shotgun proteomics

### Affiliations
The University of Hong Kong
The University of Hong Kong, Department of Chemistry, Chemical Biology Centre and State Key Laboratory of Synthetic Chemistry

### Submitter
Yi Man Eva Fung

### Lab Head
Dr Chi-Ming Che
The University of Hong Kong, Department of Chemistry, Chemical Biology Centre and State Key Laboratory of Synthetic Chemistry


