### Accession
PXD043912

### Title
Quantitative proteomics analysis of different sources of hMSCs

### Description
Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) are an attractive therapeutic tool for tissue engineering and re-generative medicine due to their regenerative and trophic properties. The best-known and most widely used are bone marrow MSCs, but they are now being harvested and developed from a wide range of adult and perinatal tissues. MSCs from different sources are believed to have dif-ferent secretion potentials and production, which may influence their therapeutic effects. To prove it, we performed a quantitative proteomic analysis based on the TMT technique of MSCs from 3 different sources: wharton’s jelly (WJ), dental pulp (DP) and bone marrow (BM). Our analysis has focused on MSC biological properties of interest for tissue engineering. We identified a total of 611 human proteins differentially expressed. WJ-MSCs shown the greatest variation compared to the other sources. WJ produced more extra-cellular matrix (ECM) proteins and ECM-affiliated proteins and appeared to more able to modulate the inflammatory and immune response. BM-MSCs display enhanced differentiation and paracrine communication capabilities. DP-MSC appeared to promote exosome production. The results obtained confirm the existence of differences between WJ, DP and BM-MSC and the need to select the MSC origin according to the therapeutic objective sought.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted using EasyPrep sample preparation kit (Pierce, Ther-moFisher Scientific) using manufacturer’s recommendations. The proteins were quan-tified using the Micro BCA kit method (Pierce, San Jose, CA, USA). Twenty-five mi-crograms of proteins of each sample were digested and labeled with TMTpro™ 16-plex reagents (ThermoFisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA), mixed in equimolar amounts. A fractionation was purchased using the High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Pierce, San Jose, CA, USA) according to manufacturer's recommendations. The tryptic peptide solutions were dried under vacuum and reconstituted in 20 µL wa-ter/1% formic acid (v/v) each. The LC–MS/MS platform consisted of an Ultimate 3000 RSLC UPLC system coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (MS) (Ther-moFisher Scientific) with a nano-trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100 Å C18, 5 µm, 100 µm i.d. x 2 cm length, ThermoFisher Scientific) and an Easy-Spray column (Acclaim PepMap 100 Å C18, 2 µm, 75 µm i.d. x 50 cm length, ThermoFisher Scientific). Ten frac-tions of the TMT-labeled digest were separated by on-line nanoLC and analyzed by nano-electrospray tandem mass spectrometry. The overall workflow of the analysis is presented in Figure 1. The peptide mixtures were injected onto a nano-trap column with a flow of 5 µL/min and subsequently gradient eluted with a flow of 300 nL/min, from 4 to 30% acetonitrile (v/v) during 140 min. Each fraction was analyzed on an Or-bitrap Fusion MS using synchronous precursor selection (SPS) MS3 quantitation. The full scan was performed in the range of 375–2000 m/z at nominal resolution of 120,000 at 200 m/z and AGC set to 4.105, followed by selection of the most intense ions above an intensity threshold of 5000 for collision-induced dissociation (CID)-MS2 fragmenta-tion in the linear ion trap with 35% normalized collision energy. The isolation width for the frontal cortex samples was set to 0.7 m/z with no offset. The top 10 fragment ions for each peptide MS2 were notched out with an isolation width of 2 m/z and co-fragmented to produce MS3 scans analyzed in the MS at a nominal resolution of 50,000 after higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 65%.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.5 (ThermoFisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) before being run against Homo sapiens Uniprot database (release 2022_12). Parameters were specified as follows: trypsin enzyme, two miscleavages allowed, minimum peptide length of six amino acids, TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N-termini (+304.207 Da), carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) as fixed modifications, oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) and acetylation of protein N-termini (+42.011 Da) as variable modifications, precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.6 Da. Peptide spectral match (PSM) error rates were determined using the target-decoy strategy coupled to Percolator modeling of true and false matches. Reporter ions were quantified from MS3 scans using an integration tolerance of 20 ppm with the most confident centroid setting. An MS2 spectral assignment false discovery rate (FDR) of less than 1% was achieved by apply-ing the target-decoy strategy. Following spectral assignment, peptides were assembled into proteins and were further filtered, based on the combined probabilities of their constituent peptides to a final FDR of 1%. In addition, we only validated the proteins that were present in the five biological replicates. In cases of redundancy, shared pep-tides were assigned to the protein sequence with the most matching peptides; thus, adhering to principles of parsimony. The DAPs were identified based on t test with p-value less than 0.05 and with a fold change >2 or <0.5.

### Publication Abstract
Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) are an attractive therapeutic tool for tissue engineering and regenerative medicine owing to their regenerative and trophic properties. The best-known and most widely used are bone marrow MSCs, which are currently being harvested and developed from a wide range of adult and perinatal tissues. MSCs from different sources are believed to have different secretion potentials and production, which may influence their therapeutic effects. To confirm this, we performed a quantitative proteomic analysis based on the TMT technique of MSCs from three different sources: Wharton's jelly (WJ), dental pulp (DP), and bone marrow (BM). Our analysis focused on MSC biological properties of interest for tissue engineering. We identified a total of 611 differentially expressed human proteins. WJ-MSCs showed the greatest variation compared with the other sources. WJ produced more extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins and ECM-affiliated proteins and proteins related to the inflammatory and immune response processes. BM-MSCs expressed more proteins involved in osteogenic, adipogenic, neuronal, or muscular differentiation and proteins involved in paracrine communication. Compared to the other sources, DP-MSCs overexpressed proteins involved in the exocytosis process. The results obtained confirm the existence of differences between WJ, DP, and BM-MSCs and the need to select the MSC origin according to the therapeutic objective sought.

### Keywords
Tissue engineering, Regenerative medicine, Proteomics, Mesenchymal stem cells

### Affiliations
Université de Picardie Jules Verne
University of Picardie Jules Verne

### Submitter
Paulo MARCELO

### Lab Head
Dr Paulo MARCELO
University of Picardie Jules Verne


