### Accession
PXD045412

### Title
Tryps-IN: A streamlined palaeoproteomics workflow enables ZooMS analysis of 10,000-year-old petrous bones from Jordan rift-valley

### Description
Poor preservation of collagen in dry and/or arid environments has hindered the application of Zooarchaeology by mass spectrometry (ZooMS) analysis in many regions of the world. As a result many zooarchaeological investigations have relied exclusively on morphological assessment of fragmentary remains due to the inadequate preservation of biomolecules. The climatic conditions of Southwest Asia include extreme temperature fluctuations unconducive to preservation of proteins and DNA. We performed zooarchaeological analysis of remains from the 10,000-year-old site of Shkārat Msaied in Jordan and sub-sampled twenty-eight petrous bones, the hardest bone in the mammalian skeleton, for species identification by ZooMS. Using an unconventional and simplified extraction protocol we call Tryps-IN, in which digestion was performed without removal of the demineralising EDTA, we taxonomically identified several fragments, outperforming an established ZooMS work-flow. A subset of identifications was subsequently confirmed using liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) protein sequencing. The new methodology presented here opens the possibility of further bioarchaeological investigation of other fragmentary faunal assemblages within this region of archaeological significance.

### Sample Protocol
500 μL of 0.5 M Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) (Invitrogen) pH = 8 was added to each sample and demineralisation was performed for 24 hours at 4 oC with end-over-end rotation. Digestion was performed by the addition of  0.8 μg/μl of trypsin (Promega). The digestion was allowed to proceed for 16 hours at 37oC. The ability of trypsin to enzymatically cleave proteins in 0.5 M EDTA was confirmed beforehand and is shown in Supplementary Information (SI5, Figure S9). After digestion, the extractions were centrifuged at 16,000 RCF for 5 min without acidification with TFA as this causes precipitation of the EDTA. Purification and elution was performed as in Extraction Method 1.

### Data Protocol
Remaining peptide eluates were dried completely  using a centrifugal evaporator  (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany). LC-MS/MS  data acquisition was performed using an EASY-nLC 1200 (Proxeon, Odense, Denmark) connected to a Q Exactive HF-X for the ABC ZooMS extractions or to an Exploris 480 (both mass spectrometers: Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) for those extracted by the Tryps-IN method. Ten μL of each sample were transferred to a 96-well MS plate and evaporated using a centrifugal evaporator  until the volume was ~3 μL. Samples were then  topped up with 5 (ABC) or 8 μL (Tryps-IN) of 0.1% TFA, 5% ACN. Five μL of the ABC ZooMS extractions were injected, whereas 3 μL were used for those extracted by Tryps-IN. The parameters for LC-MS/MS were the same as previously used for palaeoproteomics samples (Brandt et al., 2022; Mackie et al., 2018).  Bioinformatics. The raw files generated were then searched using the software MaxQuant (v.1.6.3.4 and v.2.1.3.0) (Cox and Mann, 2008). MaxQuant settings were as described in (Jensen et al., 2020). Confident protein identification requires at least 2 razor+unique peptides covering separate areas. Manual assessment of MS/MS spectra was performed to confirm identifications.. Deamidation was measured as described in (Mackie et al., 2018). Raw files were then searched against a FASTA file database containing sequence data of alpha 1 and alpha 2 chain of type I collagen (COL1A1 and COL1A2) from species of interest, including Ovis aries and Capra hircus available in public repositories. We also included published COL1 sequences of wild bovids (antelopes), since these could be misidentified as caprine based on morphology, acquired from (Janzen et al., 2021) and Uniprot. Since only one wild Caprinae, the Alpine ibex Capra ibex, COL1 sequence is available as a reference, this species is the only wild representative included in our database, although not present in the area. Both COL1 chains sequences were concatenated and both signal peptides and propeptides were removed. Bovidae species type I collagen sequences included here present single amino acid polymorphisms (SAPs) at two different positions on COL1A1 and three positions on COL1A2 between sheep and goat.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Zoogeography; zooarchaeology; palaeoproteomics; mppnb; lc-ms/ms; zooms; shkārat msaied

### Affiliations
Section for Molecular Ecology and Evolution
Globe Institute
University of Copenhagen 
Denmark
Section for GeoGenetics Globe Institute University of Copenhagen Denmark

### Submitter
Louise Le Meillour

### Lab Head
Dr Alberto Taurozzi
Section for GeoGenetics Globe Institute University of Copenhagen Denmark


