### Accession
PXD024579

### Title
Ovalbumin antigen-specific activation of T cell receptor closely resembles antibody stimulation as revealed by BOOST phosphotyrosine proteomics

### Description
Here we provide a framework to qualtitatively evaluate the tyrosine phosphorylation-mediated signaling pathways triggered by antigen-independent antibody and antigen-specific OVA peptide-MHC using Jurkat T cells expressing OT-1 T cell receptors. Our data suggest that pTyr-mediated regulatory axis triggered by OVA antigen-specific activation of TCR closely resembled that of antigen-independent stimulation using anti-TCR antibody, albeit OVA could likely induce a relatively stronger signaling effect. While data from this study do not invalidate previous studies of T cell signaling using antibody-based stimulation, our data revealed potential advantages of using peptide-MHC tetramers in studying T cell signaling. Antigen-specific activation of the OT-1 TCR using a panel of peptide-MHC tetramers (OVA, T4 and G4) generated data that correlates well with the corresponding binding affinity of the peptide-MHC, consistent with predicted signaling strength. Importantly, the apparent correlation between signaling strength and peptide-MHC affinity enables us to fine-tune the signaling strength of T cell stimulation in future studies, allowing a more precise control of the experimental parameter instead of a more binary antibody-based activation. Overall, we demonstrate the utility of BOOST to reveal new biological insights in the immune system.

### Sample Protocol
The stimulation method of J.OT1 cells is based on a previously established study. For each replicate per condition, 15 million J.OT1 cells were washed and resuspended in serum-free RPMI at a concentration of 50 million cells per mL. Cells were then incubated with either 10 nM of H-2Kb MHC tetramer (Class I, human beta-2-microglobulin) or ~1 ug/mL of anti-CD3 IgM antibody C305 on ice for 1 h. C305 was diluted in Dulbecco’s phosphate-buffered saline (DPBS) prior to stimulation. MHC tetramers29 were synthesized by the NIH Tetramer Core Facility (Atlanta, GA) using custom peptides from GenScript. The peptide sequences are SIINFEKL (OVA), SIITFEKL (T4), SIIGFEKL (G4), and RGYVYQGL (VSV). Stimulation was initiated by transferring the cells from ice to 37°C. After 3 mins of stimulation at 37°C, cells were lysed with equal volume of lysis buffer (pH 7.6) containing 1% (w/v) sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), 100 mM Tris-HCl and 1X MS-SAFE Protease and Phosphatase Inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich MSSAFE). PV treatment was performed by incubating J.OT1 cells with 500 µM PV (prepared by mixing equal volume of 1 mM sodium orthovanadate and 1 mM hydrogen peroxide) for 10 minutes at 37°C and lysed with the lysis buffer as mentioned. Lysate was applied through QIAshredder Mini Spin Column to reduce the viscosity of lysate by centrifugation at 20,000 x g at 37°C for 5 mins. Protein concentration of the clarified lysate was determined using Pierce BCA Protein Assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 23225), after which it was reduced by 100 mM dithiothreitol at room temperature for 30-60 mins. Lysate was subsequently processed using the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method30 as described. Briefly, 8 M urea in 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5 (UA) was used to dilute the SDS concentration of lysate to no more than 0.2 % (w/v). Lysate containing 200 ug of protein was applied to each Microcon-30 Ultracel PL-30 Regenerated Cellulose 30000 NMWL (Millipore, MRCF0R030) filter unit (1 mg of protein using 5 filter units in total) via centrifugation. 50 mM of iodoacetamide in UA was added to the filter unit and incubated in dark for 30 mins to alkylate the protein. Filter units were subsequently washed by UA and 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, before the addition of trypsin (Promega, V5113) at 37°C overnight at a trypsin:protein ratio (w/w) of 1:40. Digested peptides were collected and acidified by trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and desalted using Sep-Pak C18 Cartridge (Waters WAT020515) as described.    For offline basic (pH 10) fractionation, peptides were separated on a 100 mm x 1.0 mm Acquity BEH C18 column (Waters) using an UltiMate 3000 UHPLC system (ThermoFisher Scientific) with a 40-minute gradient from 1% to 40% Buffer Bbasic into 36 fractions, which are subsequently consolidated into 12 super-fractions (Buffer Abasic = 10 mM ammonium hydroxide in 99.5% (v/v) HPLC-grade water, 0.5% (v/v) HPLC-grade acetonitrile; Buffer Bbasic = 10 mM ammonium hydroxide in 100% HPLC-grade acetonitrile). Each super-fraction was further separated on an in-line 150 mm x 75 µm reversed phase analytical column packed in-house with XSelect CSH C18 2.5 μm resin (Waters) using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (ThermoFisher Scientific), at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Peptides were eluted using a 65-minute gradient from 5% to 30% Buffer Bacidic, followed by a 6-minute gradient 30% to 90% Buffer Bacidic (Buffer Aacidic = 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in 99.4% (v/v) HPLC-grade water, 0.5% (v/v) HPLC-grade acetonitrile; Buffer Bbasic = 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in 99.9% (v/v) HPLC-grade acetonitrile). Data was acquired in DDA mode on a Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) with a positive spray voltage of 2.25 kV using multinotch TMT-MS3 settings33. Cycle time was set at 2.5 seconds. At the MS1 level scans, precursor ions (charge states 2-5) acquired on the Orbitrap detector with the scan range of 400-1600 m/z, 120,000 resolution, maximum injection time of 50 ms, automatic gain control (AGC) target of 800,000, and a dynamic exclusion time of 15 seconds. Top 9 MS1 precursor ions were isolated on the quadrupole using an isolation window of 0.7 m/z for MS2 scans. MS2 scans were acquired in centroid mode on the ion trap detector on a scan range of 400-1400 m/z via higher-energy dissociation (HCD, 33% energy) activation with an AGC target of 5000, maximum injection time of 75 ms. Using synchronous precursor selection (SPS)33, up to 10 MS2 precursor ions were further isolated on the quadrupole using an MS2 isolation window of 3 m/z for MS3 scans, which are acquired on the Orbitrap detector on a scan range of 100-500 m/z in a mass resolution of 50,000 via HCD activation (55% energy) with a AGC target of 250,000 and maximum injection time of 150 ms in centroid mode.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed in MaxQuant34 version 1.6.17.0 using the integrated peptide search engine Andromeda35. MS/MS spectra were searched against a human UniProt database (Homo sapiens, last modified 12/01/2019) comprised of 74,811 forward protein sequences. False discovery rate (FDR) for peptide spectrum matches (PSM) was set at 1% using a reverse decoy database approach. Carbamidomethylation (cysteine) was set as fixed modification, whereas oxidation (methionine), acetylation (protein N-termini) and phosphorylation (serine, threonine, tyrosine) were set as variable modifications. Trypsin enzyme specificity was used with up to 2 missed cleavages. Main search peptide tolerance was set as 3ppm, while FTMS and ITMS MS/MS match tolerances were set as 20 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. MS3 reporter ion mass tolerance was set at 3 mDa, using isotopic correction factors provided by the manufacturer (Lot UK291565, Lot UH283151). Match between runs was enabled with the default parameters. Search parameter file (mqpar.xml) of the MaxQuant run is provided as Supporting Information  For PSM level analysis, “evidence.txt” generated from MaxQuant was used, while “Phospho (STY)Sites.txt” from MaxQuant was used instead for site-level analysis. Unique PSM is defined by non-redundant peptide sequence including modifications and charge state. After removing reverse hits and potential contaminants, only Class I pTyr sites (localization probability >0.75) were included in the analysis. Reporter ions from TMT126 (PV-treated samples) and TMT127N-TMT127C (blanks) were excluded from all quantitative analyses, unless stated otherwise. Unpaired student’s t-test was performed using the corrected phosphosite intensities between up to 4 replicates of each paired condition within the same TMT mix to determine the p values, of which are adjusted to q values to account for FDR in multiple testing hypothesis36. Volcano plots were constructed using -log10(q values) and log2(fold change in mean pTyr site intensities), with a requirement that at least 3 out of 4 replicates for each of the pairwise condition for the same pTyr site contained a reporter ion intensity greater than zero. pTyr sites with q values less than 0.05 were considered statistically significant. The pTyr sites were also annotated to a KEGG database based on the Uniprot accession number of the corresponding protein using Perseus37. Intensity heatmap of pTyr site fold change was generated after performing hierarchical clustering based on the Euclidean distances between cluster means using the complete linkage method.. For PTM signature enrichment analysis (PTM-SEA), we adopted the methodology developed by Krug et al.38 and R scripts from Storey et al.39 using 7 amino acids flanking each pTyr site with the following modifications. The input for PTM-SEA was modified to be a vector of log-transformed q values multiplied by the sign of the mean log2 reporter ion ratio, instead of p values. The resulting formula is -log10(q value) * sign [log2(fold change in pY site)]. To fully capture the variance observed across replicates, we deployed a similar approach as Krug et al. to incorporate the magnitude of phosphosite q values into the determination of enrichment scores for each signature categories, with no rank normalization and by setting the weight parameter to 138. All analyses and plotting were performed in Microsoft Excel or using the statistical language R (version 4.0.3) in RStudio (version 1.1.447) using packages “tidyverse”, “qvalue”, “ggdendro”, “plotly”, “RColorBrewer” and “limma” downloaded from CRAN or Bioconductor.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
T cell receptor, Boost, Phosphotyrosine proteomics, Tmt, Ot-1, T cell signaling

### Affiliations
Brown University
Department of Molecular Biology, Cell Biology and Biochemistry, Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island, USA

### Submitter
Xien Yu Chua

### Lab Head
Dr Arthur R Salomon
Department of Molecular Biology, Cell Biology and Biochemistry, Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island, USA


