### Accession
PXD018179

### Title
Differential expression pattern of the proteome in response to cadmium stress based on proteomics analysis of wheat roots

### Description
Background: Heavy metal cadmium (Cd) is a common environmental pollutant in soils, which has an negative impacts on crop growth and development. At present, cadmium has become a major soil and water heavy metal pollutant, which not only causes permanent and irreversible health problems for humans, but also causes a significant reduction in crop yields.  Results: This study examined the chemical forms of Cd in the roots of two wheat varieties (M1019 and Xinong20) by continuous extraction and analyzed differences in distribution characteristics of Cd in the root cell wall, cytoplasm, and organelles by elemental content determination and subcellular separation. Furthermore, we conducted proteomics analysis of the roots of the two varieties under Cd pollution using mass spectrometry quantitative proteomics techniques. A total of 11,651 proteins were identified, of which 10,532 proteins contained quantitative information. In addition, the differentially expressed proteins in the two varieties were related to DNA replication and repair, protein metabolism, and the glutathione metabolism pathway.  Conclusion: The results of this study improve our understanding of the mechanism of plant responses to Cd stress.

### Sample Protocol
2.4 Protein extraction, trypsin digestion, and Tandem Mass Tags (TMT) labeling For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56°C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion. For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56°C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4-h digestion. After trypsin digestion, the peptide was desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. The peptide was reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the protocol provided in the TMT kit. Briefly, one unit of TMT reagent was thawed and reconstituted in acetonitrile [40]. The peptide mixtures were then incubated for 2 h at room temperature and pooled, desalted, and dried by vacuum centrifugation. 2.5 LC-MS/MS analysis and data analysis The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 26 min, 23% to 35% in 8 min and increasing to 80% in 3 min, then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in a Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1,800 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28, and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
The secondary mass spectrometry data were retrieved using Maxquant (v1.5.2.8). Parameter Settings: database search for UniProt Triticum estivum (136892 series), add the library to compute random matching caused by the false-positive rate (FDR), and joined the common pollution in database library, used to eliminate the influence of protein identification results of pollution; The enzyme cutting mode was set to Trypsin/P. The number of missed cut points was set to 2. The minimum length of the peptide segment was set to seven amino acid residues. The maximum number of peptide modification was set to 5. The quality error tolerance of primary parent ions in First search and Main search was set to 20 ppm; \   and 5 ppm; \   , respectively, and that of secondary fragment ions was set to 0.02 Da. Cysteine alkylation is set to fixed modification, which can be modified to oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N. The quantitative method was set to tmt-6plex, and the FDR for protein identification and PSM identification was set to 1%. The quantitative proteomic analysis was performed using a customer service by PTM-Biolabs Cd., Ltd (Hangzhou, China).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cd stress; wheat roots; chemical forms; proteomics analysis

### Affiliations
College of Horticulture, Northwest A&F University
Northwest A&F University, College of  Agronomy

### Submitter
maling Jian

### Lab Head
Dr Lingjian Ma
College of Horticulture, Northwest A&F University


