### Accession
PXD010787

### Title
Project Name: Functional proteomics of midostaurin in lung cancer cells: Chemical Proteomics

### Description
Lung cancer is associated with high prevalence and mortality, and despite significant successes with targeted drugs in genomically defined subsets of lung cancer and immunotherapy, the majority of patients currently does not benefit from these therapies. Through a targeted drug screen, we found the recently approved multi-kinase inhibitor midostaurin to have potent activity in several lung cancer cells independent of its intended target, PKC, or a specific genomic marker. To determine the underlying mechanism of action we applied a layered functional proteomics approach and a new data integration method. Using chemical proteomics, we identified multiple midostaurin kinase targets in these cells. Network-based integration of these targets with quantitative tyrosine and global phosphoproteomics data using protein-protein interactions from the STRING database suggested multiple targets are relevant for the mode of action of midostaurin. Subsequent functional validation using RNA interference and selective small molecule probes showed that simultaneous inhibition of TBK1, PDK1 and AURKA was required to elicit midostaurin’s cellular effects. Immunoblot analysis of downstream signaling nodes showed that combined inhibition of these targets altered PI3K/AKT and cell cycle signaling pathways that in part converged on PLK1. Furthermore, rational combination of midostaurin with the more potent PLK1 inhibitor BI2536, which is in advanced clinical trials, elicited strong synergy. Our results demonstrate that combination of complementary functional proteomics approaches and subsequent network-based data integration can reveal novel insight into the complex mode of action of multi-kinase inhibitors, actionable targets for drug discovery and cancer vulnerabilities. Finally, we illustrate how this knowledge can be utilized for the rational design of synergistic drug combinations with high potential for clinical translation.

### Sample Protocol
Drug affinity pulldowns were performed as two technical replicates representing independent drug affinity purifications on separate days using different lysate aliquots from a single cell pellet. Flow through of the i-midostaurin pulldown was reapplied to new i-midostaurin affinity resin for pull down of pull down (PDoPD) control samples. Competition control was performed by pre-incubating the lysate with varying concentrations of “free” drug for 30 minutes  (3-fold dilution series from 30 μM to 3 nM) to determine specificity and relative binding affinity. Drug cross-competition was performed with 20 μM sotrastaurin. Global and tyrosine phosphoproteomics experiments were performed as three biological replicates. Midostaurin treatment of 1 μM for 3 hours was compared to DMSO control. Reproducibility of all proteomics datasets was evaluated through correlation analysis using the PerformanceAnalytics and corrplot R (3.3.0) environment. All Western blots were performed as three biological replicates and representative images are shown. siRNA mediated knockdowns and cell viability assays were performed as three biological replicates with three technical replicates for each biological replicate. Briefly, i-midostaurin was immobilized on NHS-activated sepharose beads for fast flow resin (GE Healthcare). Coupling of the drug to the bead was monitored using LC-MS analysis (14 minutes 5-95% MeOH gradient). Beads were blocked with ethanolamine overnight. An aliquot (5 mg) of protein from the total cell lysate was added to the beads. Experiments were conducted as two technical replicates representing independent drug affinity purifications on separate days using different lysate aliquots from a single large cell pellet. After in-gel tryptic digest, peptides were analyzed using a nanoflow ultra-high performance liquid chromatograph (RSLC, Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA) coupled to a nanoelectrospray source-equipped bench top hybrid orbitrap mass spectrometer (QExactive Plus, Thermo, San Jose, CA). Samples were loaded on a pre-column (2 cm x 100 µm ID packed with C18 reversed-phase resin, 5 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size) and washed with 2% ACN/0.04% TFA for 8 minutes. Peptides were eluted onto an analytical column (C18, 75 µm ID x 50 cm, 2 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size, Dionex) applying a 90 minute gradient using LC-MS solvent A (2% ACN, 0.1% FA) and LC-MS solvent B (90% ACN, 0.1% FA). Solvent B was held at 5% for 8 minutes, increased from 5% to 38.5% over 60 minutes and from 38.5% to 90% in 7 minutes where it was held for 5 minutes to wash the column. Solvent B was decreased from 90% to 5% in 1 minute and the column was re-equilibrated for 10 minutes. The flow rate on the analytical column was set to 300 nL/minute. In each cycle, 16 MS/MS spectra were acquired in a data-dependent manner using a 60 second exclusion window. A lock mass correction was applied using a background ion (m/z 445.12003).

### Data Protocol
For the manuscript, data were searched using MaxQuant against annotated protein sequences in the UniProt human database (2018_05, 20350 entries). Carbamidomethylation of cysteine and oxidation of methionine were included as variable modifications. Trypsin/P was specified as the proteolytic enzyme and maximum 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Fragment ion tolerance was set to 20 ppm and match between runs was enabled. MaxQuant output was filtered for minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids, 1% protein and PSM FDR plus common contaminants. For PRIDE upload, data were searched using Mascot 2.5.1 (matrixscience.com) against the UniProt human database (2016_07, 20198 entries). Carbamidomethylation of cysteine and oxidation of methionine were included as possible modifications. Fragment ion m/z tolerance was set to 0.05 Da and parent/precursor m/z tolerance to 20 ppm. Maximum missed cleavages were set to 2. Mascot results were imported into Scaffold 4.3.4 (proteomesoftware.com) using a minimum of 95% confidence for peptide and protein identification and 2 unique peptides across replicates for protein identification. For quantification using spectral counting, only fully tryptic peptides were used.

### Publication Abstract
Lung cancer is associated with high prevalence and mortality, and despite significant successes with targeted drugs in genomically defined subsets of lung cancer and immunotherapy, the majority of patients currently does not benefit from these therapies. Through a targeted drug screen, we found the recently approved multi-kinase inhibitor midostaurin to have potent activity in several lung cancer cells independent of its intended target, PKC, or a specific genomic marker. To determine the underlying mechanism of action we applied a layered functional proteomics approach and a new data integration method. Using chemical proteomics, we identified multiple midostaurin kinase targets in these cells. Network-based integration of these targets with quantitative tyrosine and global phosphoproteomics data using protein-protein interactions from the STRING database suggested multiple targets are relevant for the mode of action of midostaurin. Subsequent functional validation using RNA interference and selective small molecule probes showed that simultaneous inhibition of TBK1, PDPK1 and AURKA was required to elicit midostaurin's cellular effects. Immunoblot analysis of downstream signaling nodes showed that combined inhibition of these targets altered PI3K/AKT and cell cycle signaling pathways that in part converged on PLK1. Furthermore, rational combination of midostaurin with the potent PLK1 inhibitor BI2536 elicited strong synergy. Our results demonstrate that combination of complementary functional proteomics approaches and subsequent network-based data integration can reveal novel insight into the complex mode of action of multi-kinase inhibitors, actionable targets for drug discovery and cancer vulnerabilities. Finally, we illustrate how this knowledge can be used for the rational design of synergistic drug combinations with high potential for clinical translation.

### Keywords
Drug pulldown, Lung cancer, Midostaurin, Chemical proteomics

### Affiliations
Moffitt Cancer Center
Moffitt Cancer Center Tampa, FL

### Submitter
John Koomen

### Lab Head
Dr Uwe Rix, PhD
Moffitt Cancer Center Tampa, FL


