### Accession
PXD037374

### Title
Biochemical and Structural Basif for Differential Inhibitor Sensitivity of EGFR with Distinct Exon 19 Mutaions

### Description
Tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) are used to treat non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLC) driven by epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations in the tyrosine kinase domain (TKD). We studied structural basis of differential TKI sensitivity among EGFR exon 19 mutants by HDX-MS.

### Sample Protocol
The purified exon 19 mutants were manually deuterium-labled right after their purification. The labeled samples were quenched and flash-frozen in liquid N2. The frozen samples were stored at -80C until UPLC-MS analysis. For further details, please see our 2022 Nature Communication manuscript entitled, "Biochemical and structural basis for differential inhibitor sensitivity of EGFR with distinct exon 19 mutations."

### Data Protocol
The peptide identification was carried out with MSe dataset using PLGS 3.01 (Waters). The deuterium uptake of each peptic peptide was determined using DynamX (Waters). For further details, please see our 2022 Nature Communication manuscript entitled, "Biochemical and structural basis for differential inhibitor sensitivity of EGFR with distinct exon 19 mutations."

### Publication Abstract
Tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) are used to treat non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLC) driven by epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations in the tyrosine kinase domain (TKD). TKI responses vary across tumors driven by the heterogeneous group of exon 19 deletions and mutations, but the molecular basis for these differences is not understood. Using purified TKDs, we compared kinetic properties of several exon 19 variants. Although unaltered for the second generation TKI afatinib, sensitivity varied significantly for both the first and third generation TKIs erlotinib and osimertinib. The most sensitive variants showed reduced ATP-binding affinity, whereas those associated with primary resistance retained wild type ATP-binding characteristics (and low K<sub>M, ATP</sub>). Through crystallographic and hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry (HDX-MS) studies, we identify possible origins for the altered ATP-binding affinity underlying TKI sensitivity and resistance, and propose a basis for classifying uncommon exon 19 variants that may have predictive clinical value.

### Keywords
Hdx-ms, Exon 19, Egfr

### Affiliations
Yale cancer biology institute
Yale Cancer Biology Institute

### Submitter
Yuko Tsutsui

### Lab Head
Dr Yuko Tsutsui
Yale cancer biology institute


