### Accession
PXD030864

### Title
Genetically targeted proteomics identify compositional and phosphoproteome trajectories of corticostriatal projections across postnatal development

### Description
Axonal development in mammals begins in the embryonic stage and continues postnatally. During early postnatal period, proteomic landscape of axons changes rapidly, coordinated by transcription, protein turnover, and post-translational modifications. Studying axonal proteome across development in complex tissue remains challenging. Axonal compartments from the brain cannot be isolated without substantial losses. Axons from different circuits are intermingled; isolation techniques that do not resolve cell types likely mask neuronal class specific features. Here, we create a Cre-dependent APEX2 reporter mouse line and demonstrate its utility to map cell-type specific proteome of corticostriatal projections across postnatal development. We define temporal patterns of axonal proteome and phosphoproteome levels, and their relevance to neurodegenerative and psychiatric diseases. This analysis workflow also identifies proline-directed kinases and phosphosites as major regulators for corticostriatal development. Altogether, APEX2 transgenic reporter-based proximity labeling approach offers a flexible strategy for mapping subcellular proteome, with cell type specificity, across neurodevelopment.

### Sample Protocol
Brain lysates (300 µg) were reduced with 20 µl 200 mM DTT for 1 hr and alkylated with 60 µl 200 mM IAA in the dark for 45 min at 37oC with shaking. No pooling was needed except for P5 neonatal striatal samples. Streptavidin magnetic beads (150 µl for each sample) were prewashed with 1ml no-SDS lysis buffer and incubated with 250 µl of reduced and alkylated lysates for 90 min at RT with shaking. Enriched beads were washed twice with 1 ml no-SDS lysis buffer, 1 ml 1 M KCl, and five times with 1 ml 100 mM TEAB buffer. Washed beads were digested with trypsin solution (~4 µg) overnight at 37oC. Digested supernatant was collected. Beads were rinsed with 50 µl 100 mM TEAB. Supernatant were combined. Trace amount of magnetic beads were removed twice by magnetization and tube changes. Peptides were frozen and dried in a vacuum concentrator before TMT labeling. To make reference channel samples, a separate set of P18 Rbp4Cre+;APEX+ samples were prepared and pooled to make two 900 µg samples. Each pooled lysates were enriched with 400 µl of streptavidin beads, followed by the same bead washing and tryptic digestion (~8 µg trypsin). Eluted peptides were pooled, and dried in a vacuum concentrator.  Dried peptide samples were reconstituted in 20 µl 100 mM TEAB and sonicated for 15 min at RT. Briefly, one set of 0.5 mg TMTPro 16plex reagents was warmed up to room temperature and dissolved in 20 µl Optima LC/MS-grade acetonitrile (ACN). 6 µl of ~59 mM TMTPro reagents was added to 20 µl reconstituted peptide. For reference channel sample, peptides were reconstituted in 80 µl. 40 µl was labeled with 12 µl TMTPro 134N. Labeling was performed at RT for 90 min with shaking at 400 rpm. The reaction was quenched by adding 3 µl 5% hydroxylamine/100 mM TEAB at RT for 15 min with shaking (6 µl for reference channel). All samples for each TMT set were mixed equally and dried in a vacuum concentrator. TMT-labeled peptide mixtures were cleaned up by high pH-reverse phase fractionation. Samples were resuspended and sonicated for 10 min in 300 µl buffer A (LC MS water 0.1% TFA). Resin was packed by centrifugation at 5,000 g for 2 min, activated twice with 300 µl ACN, and conditioned twice with 300 µl buffer A. Peptides were loaded once by centrifugation at 3,000 g for 2 min. Column was first washed with 300 µl water, and 300 µl 2% ACN 98% triethylamine (TEA). Peptides were eluted in 300 µl 25% ACN 75% TEA, and dried in a vacuum concentrator prior to phosphopeptide enrichment. Phosphopeptides were enriched using the AssayMAP Agilent Bravo instrument with Fe(III)-NTA IMAC resin. Peptides were resuspended in 210 µl 80% ACN 0.1% TFA, bath sonicated for 10 minutes, vortexed for 10 minutes, and quickly centrifuged. The resin was primed with 50% ACN 0.1% TFA and equilibrated with equilibration/wash buffer 80% ACN 0.1% TFA. Samples were loaded into the syringes then dispensed into the Flow Through Collection plate. Syringes were washed with the Cartridge Wash Buffer discarded into waste then repeated with Syringe Wash Buffer. Elution buffer was aspirated into the syringes and dispensed into the Eluate Collection plate. Phosphopeptides were eluted in 1% ammonium hydroxide solution and acidified to 1% formic acid for MS analysis. The flow through fraction was collected and fractionated by high pH-reverse phase columns as described above. Peptides were eluted by increasing percentage of acetonitrile in 0.1% triethylamine solution according to the manufacturer instructions. All fractions were dried in a vacuum concentrator. TMT labeled peptides (~1 µg) were resuspended in 2% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid prior to being loaded onto a heated PepMap RSLC C18 2 µm, 100 angstrom, 75 µm x 50 cm column and eluted over 180 min gradients optimized for each high pH reverse-phase fraction (Dumrongprechachan et al., 2021). Sample eluate was electrosprayed (2,000V) into a Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometer for analysis. MS1 spectra were acquired at a resolving power of 120,000. MS2 spectra were acquired in the Ion Trap with CID (35%) in centroid mode. Real-time search (max search time = 34 s; max missed cleavages = 1; Xcorr = 1; dCn = 0.1; ppm = 5) was used to select ions for synchronous precursor selection for MS3. MS3 spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap with HCD (60%) with an isolation window = 0.7 m/z and a resolving power of 60,000, and a max injection time of 400 ms. 4 µl (out of 20) of the TMT labeled phosphopeptide enrichments were loaded onto a heated PepMap RSLC C18 column and eluted over a 180 min gradient: 1 min 2% B, 5 min 5% B, 160 min 25% B, 180 min 35% B. Sample eluate was electrosprayed (2,000V) into a Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometer for analysis. MS1 spectra were acquired at a resolving power of 120,000. MS2 spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap with HCD (38%) in centroid mode with an isolation window = 0.4 m/z, a resolving power of 60,000, and a max injection time of 350 ms.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were processed in Proteome Discoverer version 2.4 (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA). MS spectra were searched against the Mus musculus Uniprot/SwissProt database. SEQUEST search engine was used (enzyme=trypsin, max. missed cleavage = 4, min. peptide length = 6, precursor tolerance = 10 ppm). Static modifications include carbamidomethyl (C, +57.021 Da), and TMT labeling (N-term and K, +304.207 Da for TMTpro16). Dynamic modifications include oxidation (M, +15.995 Da), Phosphorylation (S, T, Y, +79.966 Da, only for phosphopeptide dataset), acetylation (N-term, +42.011 Da), Met-loss (N-term, -131.040 Da), and Met-loss+Acetyl (N-term, -89.030 Da). PSMs were filtered by the Percolator node (max Delta Cn = 0.05, target FDR (strict) = 0.01, and target FDR (relaxed) = 0.05). Proteins were identified with a minimum of 1 unique peptide and protein-level combined q values < 0.05. Reporter ion quantification was based on corrected S/N values with the following settings: integration tolerance = 20 ppm, method = most confident centroid, co-isolation threshold = 70, and SPS mass matches = 65.

### Publication Abstract
Mammalian axonal development begins in embryonic stages and continues postnatally. After birth, axonal proteomic landscape changes rapidly, coordinated by transcription, protein turnover, and post-translational modifications. Comprehensive profiling of axonal proteomes across neurodevelopment is limited, with most studies lacking cell-type and neural circuit specificity, resulting in substantial information loss. We create a Cre-dependent APEX2 reporter mouse line and map cell-type-specific proteome of corticostriatal projections across postnatal development. We synthesize analysis frameworks to define temporal patterns of axonal proteome and phosphoproteome, identifying co-regulated proteins and phosphorylations associated with genetic risk for human brain disorders. We discover proline-directed kinases as major developmental regulators. APEX2 transgenic reporter proximity labeling offers flexible strategies for subcellular proteomics with cell type specificity in early neurodevelopment, a critical period for neuropsychiatric disease.

### Keywords
Apex2, Axon development, Proximity labeling

### Affiliations
Department of Neurobiology, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, USA
Northwestern University

### Submitter
Vasin Dumrongprechachan

### Lab Head
Dr Yevgenia Kozorovitskiy
Department of Neurobiology, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, USA


