### Accession
PXD031362

### Title
eIF4A3 interactome by IP-MS in mouse ESCs

### Description
RNA helicases are involved in multiple steps of RNA metabolism to direct their roles in gene expression, yet their functions in pluripotency control remain largely unexplored. Starting from an RNAi screen of RNA helicases, we identified that eIF4A3, a DEAD-box (Ddx) helicase component of the exon junction complex (EJC), is essential for the maintenance of embryonic stem cells (ESCs). We mapped the eIF4A3 interactomes in mouse ESCs, revealing that eIF4A3 is widely involved in the post-transcriptional regulation of gene expression. Mechanistically, we show that eIF4A3 post-transcriptionally controls the pluripotency-related cell cycle regulators and that its depletion causes cellular differentiation via cell cycle dysregulation.  Specifically, eIF4A3 is required for the efficient nuclear export of Ccnb1 mRNA, which encodes Cyclin B1, a key component of the pluripotency-promoting pathway during cell cycle progression of ESCs. Our results reveal a previously unappreciated role of eIF4A3 and its associated EJC in the post-transcriptional cell cycle control in maintaining stem cell pluripotency.

### Sample Protocol
IPed proteins were eluted with the SDS loading buffer by boiling for 5 min at 95°C and separated by an SDS-PAGE gel. The gel lanes were horizontally cut into 5 pieces and each piece was subjected to digestion with porcine trypsin (Promega). The samples were reconstituted in 5-10 ul of HPLC solvent A (2.5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). A nano-scale reverse-phase HPLC capillary column was created by packing 5um C18 spherical silica beads into a fused silica capillary (100 um inner diameter x 12 cm length) with a flame-draw tip. After equilibrating the column each sample was loaded onto the column. A gradient of acetonitrile from 2.5% to 97.5% was used to elute the peptides. As peptides eluted, they were subjected to electrospray ionization and then they entered into an LTQ-Orbitrap-Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Finnigan) with collision-induced dissociation (CID). Eluting peptide were detected, isolated, and fragmented to produce a tandem mass spectrum of specific fragment ions for each peptide.

### Data Protocol
MS data were processed by Thermo Proteome Discoverer software with SEQUEST engine against Swiss-Prot mouse protein sequence database. Outputs of protein identification from Proteome Discoverer were imported into a local Microsoft Access database. Duplicated records were removed by unique protein symbol. Common contamination proteins (trypsin, keratins) were removed, and Proteins were filtered by the minimal number of identified unique peptides (>=2). Spectral count (PSM, the number of peptide spectrum matches) ratio of eIF4A3 IP/IgG >=10 was applied. The list was further cleaned with CRAPome. The proteins present in all the three lists from the three cell lines were considered the final eIF4A3 interactome in ESCs.

### Publication Abstract
RNA helicases are involved in multiple steps of RNA metabolism to direct their roles in gene expression, yet their functions in pluripotency control remain largely unexplored. Starting from an RNA interference (RNAi) screen of RNA helicases, we identified that eIF4A3, a DEAD-box (Ddx) helicase component of the exon junction complex (EJC), is essential for the maintenance of embryonic stem cells (ESCs). Mechanistically, we show that eIF4A3 post-transcriptionally controls the pluripotency-related cell cycle regulators and that its depletion causes the loss of pluripotency via cell cycle dysregulation. Specifically, eIF4A3 is required for the efficient nuclear export of Ccnb1 mRNA, which encodes Cyclin B1, a key component of the pluripotency-promoting pathway during the cell cycle progression of ESCs. Our results reveal a previously unappreciated role for eIF4A3 and its associated EJC in maintaining stem cell pluripotency through post-transcriptional control of the cell cycle.

### Keywords
Eif4a3, Ip-ms, Escs

### Affiliations
Department of Medicine, Columbia University Irving Medical Center

### Submitter
Xin Huang

### Lab Head
Dr Jianlong Wang
Department of Medicine, Columbia University Irving Medical Center


