### Accession
PXD008783

### Title
Open-pFind enables precise, comprehensive and rapid peptide identification in shotgun proteomics, part 2

### Description
Shotgun proteomics has grown rapidly in recent decades, but a large fraction of tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) data in shotgun proteomics are not successfully identified. We have developed a novel database search algorithm, Open-pFind, to efficiently identify peptides even in an ultra-large search space which takes into account unexpected modifications, amino acid mutations, semi- or non-specific digestion and co-eluting peptides. Tested on two metabolically labeled MS/MS datasets, Open-pFind reported 50.5‒117.0% more peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) than the seven other advanced algorithms. More importantly, the Open-pFind results were more credible judged by the verification experiments using stable isotopic labeling. Tested on four additional large-scale datasets, 70‒85% of the spectra were confidently identified, and high-quality spectra were nearly completely interpreted by Open-pFind. Further, Open-pFind was over 40 times faster than the other three open search algorithms and 2‒3 times faster than three restricted search algorithms. Re-analysis of an entire human proteome dataset consisting of ~25 million spectra using Open-pFind identified a total of 14,064 proteins encoded by 12,723 genes by requiring at least two uniquely identified peptides. In this search results, Open-pFind also excelled in an independent test for false positives based on the presence or absence of olfactory receptors. Thus, a practical use of the open search strategy has been realized by Open-pFind for the truly global-scale proteomics experiments of today and in the future.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for Xu-Yeast-QEHF. Saccharomyces cerevisiae SUB 592 was used for all experiments in this work. 14N and 15N labeling media were prepared by adding 0.1% (15NH4)2SO4 (99.14% atom percent excess, SRICI, Shanghai, China) or 0.1% (NH4)2SO4 to Synthetic Dextrose (SD) Medium (0.7% Difco yeast nitrogen base, 2% dextrose, supplemented with adenine and uracil) as described previously51. Seed cultures of SUB 592 were grown at 30°C with shaking (200 rpm) in 14N and 15N SD media (5 mL). The same cells (OD600, 0.05) were transferred in a 50-mL flask that included 10 mL of liquid 14N and 15N labeling media when minimal growth cultures were grown to mid-log phase. The 14N and 15N labeling cells were mixed 1:1 based on OD600 measurements when growing cells reached mid-log phase. The mixed labeling cells (8OD) were lysed in buffer (8 M urea, 5 mM IAA, 50 mM NH4HCO3, 1× protease cocktail) by the vortex mixer method (vortexed vigorously for 1 min, iced for 1 min, 10 cycles). The unbroken debris was eliminated by centrifugation (13,300×g) at 4°C for 10 min. The supernatant was collected and resolved by short SDS-PAGE (10%, 0.7 cm), followed by staining with Coomassie Brilliant Blue. The gel lanes were excised and digested with trypsin at 37°C for 14 h.

### Data Protocol
Database Search. Open-pFind and seven other search engines, specifically MSFragger, MODa, PEAKS-PTM (referred to as PEAKS), Comet, MS-GF+, Byonic and pFind, were investigated in this study. The open search mode was adopted in MSFragger, MODa and PEAKS, while the restricted search mode was used for the other four engines (Supplementary Table 2). To be more precise, PEAKS considered hundreds of modifications in its built-in modification list, while MODa and MSFragger employed a blind search mode that considered any mass shifts within a tolerance rather than the modifications pre-stored in a list such as Unimod. Non-tryptic peptides were considered in the search space for all open search engines with the exception of MSFragger because it always crashed when creating the ion index, even when using a server with 128 GB RAM. Therefore, only semi-tryptic peptides were searched by MSFragger across the six datasets for the running time comparison. In addition, the sensitivity of MSFragger was the highest when only tryptic peptides were considered (Supplementary Table 8); hence the results of MSFragger from the database search against fully tryptic peptides were used for the performance evaluation across the six datasets in the Results section. The FDR was controlled, when possible, to be 1% at the peptide level for the engines based on the target-decoy strategy with their primary scores (Open-pFind, MSFragger, Comet and pFind) or based on the built-in methods (MS-GF+, MODa, PEAKS and Byonic). For example, Byonic first controlled proteins at 1% FDR or at a maximum of 20 decoy hits and then estimated FDR at the spectrum level (generally 0-5%). All MS/MS data were analyzed using a standard desktop computer (8-core CPU @ 2.90 GHz and 32 GB RAM), in which six threads were specified for Open-pFind, MSFragger, pFind, Comet, MS-GF+ and Byonic (Multicore: Normal). MODa performed single-threaded searches because multiple threading was not supported in this version, and Open-pFind was also tested additionally with a single thread for a fair comparison. PEAKS used its built-in strategy (about 6–8 threads by observation from the task manager of the operating system).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Yeast, Open-pfind, Q exactive hf, Metabolically label

### Affiliations
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS

### Submitter
Hao Chi

### Lab Head
Dr Si-Min He
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS


