### Accession
PXD040518

### Title
A ParDE toxin-antitoxin system is responsible for maintenance of the Yersinia virulence plasmid, but not for type III secretion-associated growth inhibition

### Description
Many Gram-negative pathogens utilize the type III secretion system (T3SS) to translocate virulence-promoting effector proteins into eukaryotic host cells. Activity of this system results in severe reduction of bacterial growth and division, summarized as secretion-associated growth inhibition (SAGI). In Y. enterocolitica, the T3SS and related proteins are encoded on a virulence plasmid. We identified a ParDE-like toxin-antitoxin system on this virulence plasmid in genetic proximity to yopE, encoding a T3SS effector. Effectors are strongly upregulated upon activation of the T3SS, indicating a potential role of the ParDE system in the SAGI or maintenance of the virulence plasmid. Expression of the toxin ParE in trans resulted in reduced growth and elongated bacteria, highly reminiscent of the SAGI. Nevertheless, activity of ParDE is not causal for the SAGI. T3SS activation did not influence ParDE activity; conversely, ParDE had no impact on T3SS assembly or activity itself. However, we found that ParDE ensures presence of the T3SS across bacterial populations by reducing loss of the virulence plasmid, especially under conditions relevant for infection. Despite this effect, a subset of bacteria lost the virulence plasmid and regained the ability to divide under secreting conditions, facilitating the possible emergence of T3SS-negative bacteria in late acute and persistent infections.

### Sample Protocol
LC-MS analysis was performed on an Exploris 480 Q-Exactive Plus instrument connected to an Ultimate 3000 rapid-separation liquid chromatography (RSLC) nano instrument and a nanospray flex ion source (all Thermo Scientific). Peptide separation was carried out on a reverse-phase high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) column (75 μm x 42 cm) packed in-house with C18 resin (2.4 μm; Dr. Maisch GmbH). First, peptides were loaded on a C18 precolumn (preconcentration set-up), For total proteome analysis, peptide elution was performed in backflush mode with a separating gradient from 98 % solvent A (0.15 % formic acid) and 2 % solvent B (99.85 % ACN, 0.15 % formic acid) to 25 % solvent B over 66 min, followed by up to 90 min with 25% to 40 % of solvent B at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. For DDA analysis mode for label-free quantification (LFQ) was set to perform a high-resolution MS 1 scan at a resolution of 60,000 (at m/z 200) with a scan range from 375 to 1500 m/z was acquired, followed by MS/MS scans within 2 s (Cycle 2s) of the most of the 10 most intense ions at a resolution of 15,000. Charge state inclusion was set between 2 and 6. The ion accumulation time was set to 25 ms for MS and AUTO for MS/MS. The automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 300% for MS survey scans and 200% for MS/MS scans.

### Data Protocol
DDA-LFQ analysis was performed using MaxQuant (Cox & Mann, 2008) in standard settings using a Y. enterocolitica protein database containing proteins of the closely related Y. enterocolitica strain W22703 (Fuchs et al, 2011) and of the pYVe227 virulence plasmid (GenBank entry AF102990.1). The statistical analysis of the MaxQuant LFQ data was performed on an updated SafeQuant R-script (Glatter et al, 2012; Ahrné et al, 2016) to routinely process MaxQuant “protein groups” outputs. The resulting output values were loaded into Perseus to adjust for not detected proteins using the imputation function (Tyanova et al, 2016) in default settings and implemented into the update SafeQuant script.

### Publication Abstract
Many Gram-negative pathogens utilize the type III secretion system (T3SS) to translocate virulence-promoting effector proteins into eukaryotic host cells. The activity of this system results in a severe reduction of bacterial growth and division, summarized as secretion-associated growth inhibition (SAGI). In <i>Yersinia enterocolitica</i>, the T3SS and related proteins are encoded on a virulence plasmid. We identified a ParDE-like toxin-antitoxin system on this virulence plasmid in genetic proximity to <i>yopE</i>, encoding a T3SS effector. Effectors are strongly upregulated upon activation of the T3SS, indicating a potential role of the ParDE system in the SAGI or maintenance of the virulence plasmid. Expression of the toxin ParE <i>in trans</i> resulted in reduced growth and elongated bacteria, highly reminiscent of the SAGI. Nevertheless, the activity of ParDE is not causal for the SAGI. T3SS activation did not influence ParDE activity; conversely, ParDE had no impact on T3SS assembly or activity itself. However, we found that ParDE ensures the presence of the T3SS across bacterial populations by reducing the loss of the virulence plasmid, especially under conditions relevant to infection. Despite this effect, a subset of bacteria lost the virulence plasmid and regained the ability to divide under secreting conditions, facilitating the possible emergence of T3SS-negative bacteria in late acute and persistent infections.

### Keywords
Yersinia enterocolitica, T3ss

### Affiliations
Max Planck Insitut for Terrestrial Microbiology Karl-von-Frisch Str. 10 35043 Marburg Germany
MPI Marburg

### Submitter
Timo Glatter

### Lab Head
Dr Timo Glatter
Max Planck Insitut for Terrestrial Microbiology Karl-von-Frisch Str. 10 35043 Marburg Germany


