### Accession
PXD024019

### Title
Effects of the IDH1 R132H mutation on the energy metabolism: a comparison between tissue and corresponding primary glioma cell cultures

### Description
The R132H mutation in the metabolic enzyme isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 (IDH1) is the most important prognostic factor for survival of glioma patients. This resulted in many studies investigating the effects of this mutation, including those on energy metabolism. This led to the discovery of a panel of enzymes mainly involved in glutamate anaplerosis and aerobic glycolysis that change in abundance as a result of the IDH1 mutation. To further study these changes and investigate the therapeutic value of inhibitors of IDH1 R132H-associated metabolic pathways, appropriate glioma models are required that mimic in vivo metabolism as good as possible. To investigate how metabolism is affected by in vitro cell culture, we here compared surgically obtained snap frozen glioma tissues with their corresponding primary glioma cell culture models with a previously developed targeted mass spectrometry proteomic assay. We determined the relative abundance of a panel of metabolic enzymes. Results confirmed increased glutamate use and decreased aerobic glycolysis in resected IDH1 R132H glioma tissue samples. However, these metabolic profiles were not reflected in the paired glioma culture samples. Analysis of orthotopic glioma xenograft samples with and without the IDH1 mutation revealed metabolic profiles that more closely resembled clinical counterparts. We suggest that culture conditions and tumor microenvironment play a crucial role in maintaining the in vivo metabolic situation in cell culture models. For this reason, new models that more closely resemble the in vivo microenvironment, such as 3-dimensional cell co-cultures or organotypic multicellular spheroid models, need to be developed and investigated.

### Sample Protocol
Cryosections of 5 µm were cut at -20 °C, stained with H&E and reviewed by a certified pathologist to determine the tumor cell percentage. Only samples with a minimum of 50% tumor cell content were included for analysis. For the proteomics analysis, consecutive 10 µm sections were cut corresponding to a total of approximately one square centimeter of tissue surface. The sections were stored at -80 °C until H&E staining and trypsin digestion. For the primary cell cultures, the cells from one 90% confluent T75 culture flask were dissociated with Accutase, centrifuged in an Eppendorf tube, washed with cold phosphate-buffered saline and subsequently stored at -80 °C until digestion. For digestion, 100 µL of lysis buffer containing 7.5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) with 5% (w/v) sodium deoxycholate (SDC) was added to each sample. The samples were then disrupted by a sonication probe for 2 minutes at 70% amplitude (Branson, Ultrasonic, Danbury, CT), afterwards the samples were incubated in a Thermomixer for 10 minutes at 80 °C (Eppendorf Thermomixer comfort). Then, 5 µL 100 mM DTT was added followed by a 20 minutes incubation at 60 °C. Next 5 µL 375 mM IAA (iodoacetamide) was added and the samples were incubated protected from light at room temperature. Then 900 µL of -20 °C acetone was added followed by centrifugation with an Eppendorf centrifuge at maximum speed for 10 minutes at 4 °C. The supernatant was removed and 80 µL of digestion buffer was added containing 50 mM Triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEAB) with 5% v/v acetonitrile and 0.5% w/v SDC, the pellet was dissolved and 2 µg of trypsin (1:100 ratio; Mass Spectrometry Grade, Promega Corporation) was added to each sample. The samples were then incubated overnight followed by acidification with 80 µL 1% v/v Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). The samples were centrifuged at 20,200 RCF for 10 minutes at 4 °C, then the supernatant was transferred to another tube. The samples were diluted 10-fold with 0.1% v/v TFA and measured on a nano-LC system (UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germering, Germany). The total protein content was calculated based on intensity of the absorbance at 214 nm over the span of a 15 minutes gradient. The samples were normalized based on this integrated UV_VIS intensity value and then stored at 4 °C until further use. A Pierce™ Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay (Thermo Scientific, Pierce™) was performed according to the manufactures recommendation to determine the total amount of peptides in the samples.

### Data Protocol
Of all samples, 300 ng of digested protein was measured either on an Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid MS or an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos™ Tribrid™ MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). A cross validation was performed between both systems to exclude a system bias. In both cases the Orbitrap MS was set up with a nano-LC system (Ultimate 3000, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germering, Germany) equipped with a reverse phase column (PepMap C18, 75 μm internal diameter, 25 cm in length, 2 μm particle size, and 100 Å pore size). A linear 90-minute gradient was used with 0.08% v/v formic acid in 80% v/v acetonitrile as organic solvent, starting at 4% organic solvent and increasing to 38% organic solvent with a flow of 300 nL/min. The MS parameters applied were similar for both systems. The Ion Source was set to nano spray ionization with a static spray voltage of 1800 V. The ion transfer tube temperature was set to 275 °C. The resolving power of the Orbitrap was 60,000 and the scan range mode was set to automatic. The automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 50,000 and the injection time was 118 ms. The isolation window was set to 0.6 m/z, as fragmentation method, HCD was used with a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 28%. In total 120 peptide targets were selected corresponding to 64 proteins (see supplementary Table S2). Of each peptide the retention time was determined based on a pilot run. Subsequently, all samples were analyzed with a retention time window set to five minutes in a scheduled method of 90 minutes. A separate PRM measurement was carried out targeting peptides specific for IDH1 to determine the IDH1 status of the tissue samples and primary cell culture samples (Table S3). Five different heavy labelled peptides (AQUA QuantPro, Thermo Scientific) were used by addition of 20 µL peptide mix containing 0.2 fmol of each peptide to 20 µL sample. For this analysis a short 30 minutes linear gradient was used. For the cultures all parameters were kept the same as during the PRM measurements for the metabolic enzymes. For the analysis on tissue the Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid MS was used with a FAIMS device to gain a higher sensitivity. Different FAIMS CV values were tested for these peptides in a pilot experiment and the CV that gave the highest signal for the peptide was used for the sample measurement. The Ion Source was set to nano spray ionization with a static spray voltage of 2200 V. The ion transfer tube temperature was set to 305 °C. The resolving power of the Orbitrap was set to 120,000 and the injection time to 246 ms for the IDH1 mutant (mut) peptides and one IDH1 wildtype (wt) peptide. For the remaining peptides the resolving power was set to 60,000 and the injection time to 118 ms. All the other parameters were kept the same as the PRM measurements for the metabolic enzymes. The PRM data was analyzed with Skyline-daily (20.1.1.32, MacCoss Lab, Department of Genome Sciences, Seattle, WA). For each targeted mass multiple transitions were selected. The peak areas were integrated based on fragment mass, expected mass error, and retention time. The area under the curve for each transition was exported to Excel and summed for each peptide. A correlation plot was made for the peptides from the same protein to validate whether these peptides represent the abundance of the protein accurately. The abundance values of all proteins were further analyzed in Perseus (version 1.6.1.2, Computational Systems Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany). The samples were divided in two groups based on the IDH1 status and each value was transformed with a log2 factor, subsequently a t-test and a randomization of the data were performed to determine a false discovery rate (FDR). The data were used to generate volcano plots.

### Publication Abstract
The R132H mutation in the metabolic enzyme isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 (IDH1) is the most important prognostic factor for the survival of glioma patients. Subsequent studies led to the discovery of a panel of enzymes mainly involved in glutamate anaplerosis and aerobic glycolysis that change in abundance as a result of the <i>IDH1</i> mutation. To further study these changes, appropriate glioma models are required that accurately mimic <i>in vivo</i> metabolism. To investigate how metabolism is affected by <i>in vitro</i> cell culture, we here compared surgically obtained snap-frozen glioma tissues with their corresponding primary glioma cell culture models with a previously developed targeted mass spectrometry proteomic assay. We determined the relative abundance of a panel of metabolic enzymes. Results confirmed increased glutamate use and decreased aerobic glycolysis in resected IDH1 R132H glioma tissue samples. However, these metabolic profiles were not reflected in the paired glioma primary cell cultures. We suggest that culture conditions and tumor microenvironment play a crucial role in maintaining the <i>in vivo</i> metabolic situation in cell culture models. For this reason, new models that more closely resemble the <i>in vivo</i> microenvironment, such as three-dimensional cell co-cultures or organotypic multicellular spheroid models, need to be developed and investigated.

### Keywords
Energy metabolism, Glioma, Proteomics, Idh1 r132h mutation, Cell cultures

### Affiliations
Erasmus MC Department of Neurology Laboratory of Neuro-oncolgy
Erasmus MC

### Submitter
Lennard Dekker

### Lab Head
Dr Theo Luider
Erasmus MC Department of Neurology Laboratory of Neuro-oncolgy


