### Accession
PXD013159

### Title
Ubiquitinylation in cancer -  LATS1 but not LATS2 represses autophagy by a kinase-independent scaffold function

### Description
Samples were subjected to sonication using Bioruptor (program mode – 30 sec on, 30 sec off, 10 cycles = 10 min). Samples were sonicated till a clear solution was obtained. After a short spin (5,000 rpm for 10 sec), the samples were heated for 10 minutes at 95°C at 300 rpm in a PCR 96 heating block. Samples were allowed to cool down and spun at 5,000 rpm for 10 sec. 1μl of chloroacetamide was added to the eluate and incubated at 37°C for 30 minutes at 500 rpm. Later the samples were spun down at 5,000 rpm for 10 sec. Proteins were subjected to endoproteinase LysC (1:100 (w/w), Wako) digestion at 37°C for 4 hrs. Later, the proteins were subjected to trypsin digestion (0.5 μg/ μl; 1:50; w/w) at 37 °C overnight. Digestion was stopped by adding 50 μl of 5% TFA (Applied Biosystems) (v/v) that lowered the pH of the solution to below pH 2.0. Subsequently, peptides were cleaned up using the Phoenix 96x (https://preomics.com) kit following the manufacture’s instructions. After drying the peptides in a SpeedVac, samples were stored at -80°C.

### Sample Protocol
The setup of the μRPLC-MS system was as described previously (PMID:27345528). Chromatographic separation of peptides was carried out using an EASY nano-LC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific), equipped with a heated RP-HPLC column (75 μm x 37 cm) packed in-house with 1.9 μm C18 resin (Reprosil-AQ Pur, Dr. Maisch). Aliquots of 1 μg total peptides were analyzed per LC-MS/MS run using a linear gradient ranging from 95% solvent A (0.15% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile) and 5% solvent B (98% acetonitrile, 2% water, 0.15% formic acid) to 30% solvent B over 90 minutes at a flow rate of 200 nl/min. Mass spectrometry analysis was performed on Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source (both Thermo Fisher Scientific). Each MS1 scan was followed by high-collision-dissociation (HCD) of the 10 most abundant precursor ions with dynamic exclusion for 20 seconds. Total cycle time was approximately 1 s. For MS1, 3e6 ions were accumulated in the Orbitrap cell over a maximum time of 100 ms and scanned at a resolution of 120,000 FWHM (at 200 m/z). MS2 scans were acquired at a target setting of 1e5 ions, accumulation time of 100 ms and a resolution of 30,000 FWHM (at 200 m/z). Singly charged ions and ions with unassigned charge state were excluded from triggering MS2 events. The normalized collision energy was set to 27%, the mass isolation window was set to 1.4 m/z and one microscan was acquired for each spectrum.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw-files were imported into the Progenesis QI software (v2.0, Nonlinear Dynamics Limited), which was used to extract peptide precursor ion intensities across all samples applying the default parameters. The generated mgf-files were searched using MASCOT (Version: 2.4.1) against a decoy database containing normal and reverse sequences of the predicted SwissProt entries of Homo sapiens (www.ebi.ac.uk, release date 2016/05/25) and commonly observed contaminants (in total 41,170 sequences for Homo sapiens) generated using the SequenceReverser tool from the MaxQuant software (Version 1.0.13.13). The search criteria were set as follows: semi tryptic specificity was required (cleavage after lysine or arginine residues, unless followed by proline); 4 missed cleavages were allowed; carbamidomethylation (C) was set as fixed modification; oxidation (M) and GlyGly (K) were applied as variable modifications; mass tolerance of 10 ppm (precursor) and 0.02 Da (fragments). The database search results were filtered using the ion score to set the false discovery rate (FDR) to 1% on the peptide and protein level, respectively, based on the number of reverse protein sequence hits in the datasets. The relative quantitative data obtained were normalized and statistically analyzed using our in-house script as above (PMID:27345528). Additionally, Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.8.7, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 93.0% probability by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 98.0% probability to achieve an FDR less than 1.0% and contained at least 2 identified peptides.  Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii, Al et al Anal. Chem. 2003;75(17):4646-58). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.

### Publication Abstract
Autophagy perturbation represents an emerging therapeutic strategy in cancer. Although LATS1 and LATS2 kinases, core components of the mammalian Hippo pathway, have been shown to exert tumor suppressive activities, here we report a pro-survival role of LATS1 but not LATS2 in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cells. Specifically, LATS1 restricts lethal autophagy in HCC cells induced by sorafenib, the standard of care for advanced HCC patients. Notably, autophagy regulation by LATS1 is independent of its kinase activity. Instead, LATS1 stabilizes the autophagy core-machinery component Beclin-1 by promoting K27-linked ubiquitination at lysine residues K32 and K263 on Beclin-1. Consequently, ubiquitination of Beclin-1 negatively regulates autophagy by promoting inactive dimer formation of Beclin-1. Our study highlights a functional diversity between LATS1 and LATS2, and uncovers a scaffolding role of LATS1 in mediating a cross-talk between the Hippo signaling pathway and autophagy.

### Keywords
Glygly, Beclin, Mtor

### Affiliations
Biozentrum, University of Basel, 4056 Basel, Switzerland
Proteomics Core Facility

### Submitter
Alexander Schmidt

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Schmidt
Biozentrum, University of Basel, 4056 Basel, Switzerland


