### Accession
PXD014857

### Title
The Drosophila CoREST interactome

### Description
Affinity purification of dCoREST-interacting proteins from Drosophila melanogaster S2 cell nuclear extracts. An antibody recognizing both dCoREST isoforms was used to affinity purify proteins interacting with endogenous dCoREST from S2 nuclear extract. In addition, nuclear extracts from S2 cell lines ectopically expressing the FLAG-tagged dCoREST-L isoform and the  FLAG-tagged dCoREST-M isoform, respectively, were subjected to anti-FLAG affinity purification to purify isoform specific dCoREST-interacting proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Purification of dCoREST, FLAG-dCoREST-L and FLAG-dCoREST-M for Mass Spectrometric Analysis  Step I Crosslinking dCoREST antibody to beads (only for co-immunoprecipitation of endogenous dCoREST) 1. Protein A Sepharose beads (nProtein A SepharoseTM 4 Fast Flow, GE Healthcare, 17-5280-02) was washed three times for 5 minutes with 1 ml PBS (Millipore, L1825) and resuspended in 1 ml PBS. 70 μL of the beads were used per Co-IP. 2. 30 μl of IgG (Rabbit IgG, Purified, 1.0 μg/μl, Millipore, PP64) or 15 μl of anti-CoREST (G. Mandel; rabbit polyclonal serum) antibody was added to the beads and incubated for 2 hours at room temperature with rotation. 3. Beads were washed with 1 ml of 0.2 M Na-Borate pH 9.0 (Na2B4O7·10H2O, Sigma S9640). 4. Cross-linking of the antibodies to the beads was done for 30 minutes at RT with gentle mixing in 1 ml of 20 mM DMP (DMP, Fischer Scientific, 21666) in 0.2 M Na-Borate buffer. 5. The reaction was stopped by washing the beads once in 1 ml 0.2 M Ethanolamine pH 8.0, (Fluka, 02400) followed by incubation in 1 ml of 0.2 M Ethanolamine for 2 hours at RT with gentle mixing. 6. Beads were washed three times with 1 ml PBS and then resuspended in 900 μl of PBS. 7. Blocking was done for 1 hour by adding 23 μl of 45% Gelatin from cold water fish skin (Sigma, G7765) (final conc. 1%) and 20 μl of 1 mg/ml Albumin from chicken egg white (Sigma, A5253) (final conc. 0.2 mg/mL) at RT. Beads were finally washed one time with 1 ml PBS.  Step II Preperation of ANTI-FLAG® M2 Affinity Gel 1. 2.5 mL of ANTI-FLAG® M2 Affinity Gel (Sigma-Aldrich, A2220) was equilibrated first by washing for ten minutes with 15 ml Buffer C, than for 10 minutes with 15 ml 0.1 M Glycine pH 3.5 (Carl Roth, 3908.2), and finally three times for 10 minutes with 15 ml Buffer C at 4 °C. Buffer C: 20 mM Hepes pH 7.9 (Carl Roth, 9105.3); 25% Glycerol (Carl Roth, 3783.2); 420 mM NaCl (Carl Roth, P092.2); 1.5 mM MgCl2 (Carl Roth, 2189.2); 0.2 mM EDTA (Carl Roth, 8043.2); 0.1 mg/ml Aprotinin (AppliChem, A2132.0100); 0.1 mg/ml Leupeptin (AppliChem, A2183.0100); 1.4 μg/ml Pepstatin A (AppliChem, A2205.0100); 0.2 mM PMSF (Serva, 32395); 1 mM DTT (Sigma-Aldrich, D0632-25G) 2. 2.5 mL ANTI-FLAG® M2 Affinity Gel was resuspended in 9 mL of Buffer C and blocked by adding 230 μL of 45% Gelatin from cold water fish skin (final conc. 1%) and 200 μL of 1 mg/ml Albumin from chicken egg white (final conc. 0.2 mg/mL) for 1 hour at 4 °C with rotation. 3. ANTI-FLAG® M2 Affinity Gel was then washed once in Buffer C and aliquoted (200 μL of ANTI-FLAG® M2 Affinity Gel per co-immunoprecipitation).   Step III Co-immunoprecipitation 1. 6 mg (for anti-CoREST co-immunoprecipitation) or 10 mg (for anti-FLAG co-immunoprecipitation) of Drosophila melanogaster S2 nuclear extract was incubated with the corresponding beads over night at 4 °C with rotation. 2. On the next day beads were washed five times for 10 minutes with Buffer C supplemented with 0.01% NP-40 (Fluka, 74385). 3. To remove NP-40, beads were washed two more times 10 minutes with Buffer C. 4. Final two washes were done in 50 mM (NH4)HCO3 (Carl Roth, CP98.2). 5. Beads were resuspended in an equal volume of 50 mM (NH4)HCO3 and frozen at -80 °C. 6. After immunoaffinity purification, beads were washed three times with 50 mm NH4HCO3 and incubated with 10 ng/µl trypsin in 1 M urea, 50 mM NH4HCO3 for 30 minutes, washed with 50 mM NH4HCO3 and the supernatant digested overnight in presence of 1 mM DTT. Digested peptides were alkylated and desalted prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. 7. For LC-MS/MS purposes, desalted peptides were injected in an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo), separated in a 15-cm analytical column (75 μm ID home-packed with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 2.4 μm from Dr. Maisch) with a 50-min gradient from 5 to 60% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. The effluent from the HPLC was directly electrosprayed into a Qexactive HF (Thermo) operated in data dependent mode to automatically switch between full scan MS and MS/MS acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (from m/z 375–1600) were acquired with resolution R=60,000 at m/z 400 (AGC target of 3x106). The 10 most intense peptide ions with charge states between 2 and 5 were sequentially isolated to a target value of 1x105 ( R=15,000), and fragmented at 27% normalized collision energy. Typical mass spectrometric conditions were: spray voltage, 1.5 kV; no sheath and auxiliary gas flow; heated capillary temperature, 250 °C; ion selection threshold, 33.000 counts.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant 1.5.2.8 was used to identify proteins and quantify by LFQ with the following parameters: Database, Uniprot_3AUP000000803_Dmelanogaster_20180723; MS tol, 10ppm; MS/MS tol, 20ppm; Peptide FDR, 0.1; Protein FDR, 0.01 Min. peptide Length, 5; Variable modifications, Oxidation (M); Fixed modifications, Carbamidomethyl (C); Peptides for protein quantitation, razor and unique; Min. peptides, 1; Min. ratio count, 2.

### Publication Abstract
CoREST has been identified as a subunit of several protein complexes that generate transcriptionally repressive chromatin structures during development. However, a comprehensive analysis of the CoREST interactome has not been carried out. We use proteomic approaches to define the interactomes of two dCoREST isoforms, dCoREST-L and dCoREST-M, in Drosophila. We identify three distinct histone deacetylase complexes built around a common dCoREST/dRPD3 core: A dLSD1/dCoREST complex, the LINT complex and a dG9a/dCoREST complex. The latter two complexes can incorporate both dCoREST isoforms. By contrast, the dLSD1/dCoREST complex exclusively assembles with the dCoREST-L isoform. Genome-wide studies show that the three dCoREST complexes associate with chromatin predominantly at promoters. Transcriptome analyses in S2 cells and testes reveal that different cell lineages utilize distinct dCoREST complexes to maintain cell-type-specific gene expression programmes: In macrophage-like S2 cells, LINT represses germ line-related genes whereas other dCoREST complexes are largely dispensable. By contrast, in testes, the dLSD1/dCoREST complex prevents transcription of germ line-inappropriate genes and is essential for spermatogenesis and fertility, whereas depletion of other dCoREST complexes has no effect. Our study uncovers three distinct dCoREST complexes that function in a lineage-restricted fashion to repress specific sets of genes thereby maintaining cell-type-specific gene expression programmes.

### Keywords
Endogenous dcorest co-immunoprecipitation, Flag-tagged dcorest-l co-immunoprecipitation, Flag-tagged dcorest-m co-immunoprecipitation, Dcorest proteome

### Affiliations
Institut für Molekularbiologie und Tumorforschung (IMT) Biomedizinisches Forschungszentrum Philipps-Universität Marburg Hans-Meerwein-Straße 2 35043 Marburg (Germany) Phone: +49-(0)6421-28-66840
Biomedical Center-LMU

### Submitter
Ignasi Forne

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Alexander Brehm
Institut für Molekularbiologie und Tumorforschung (IMT) Biomedizinisches Forschungszentrum Philipps-Universität Marburg Hans-Meerwein-Straße 2 35043 Marburg (Germany) Phone: +49-(0)6421-28-66840


