### Accession
PXD020761

### Title
A comprehensive spectral assay library to quantify the Escherichia coli proteome by DIA/SWATH-MS

### Description
A comprehensive and high-quality E. coli spectral assay library for 56,182 proteotypic peptides mapped to 4,014 (91.5%) of the 4,389 annotated proteins using one- and two-dimensional fractionated samples, and ion mobility separation.

### Sample Protocol
All experiments reported in this study were performed with lysates from an E. coli K12 strain and a set of E. coli open reading frame (ORF) archive strains devoid of green fluorescent protein (ASKA(-) library Host Cell AG1(ME5305)) that overexpress individual ORFs fused to a histidine-tagged protein. All strains were grown in Luria-Bertani broth (LB) medium, Tryptone (BD) and sodium chloride (Millipore-Sigma)) or M9 medium (Fisher Scientific)). Cell pellets from whole cell lysates (WCL) were resuspended in 2 mL 8 M Urea (VWR, USA) and 50 mM NH3HCO4 (AmBic) (Millipore-Sigma) per gram of wet weight pellet, sonicated 6 x 15 s, output level 2, 40%, 45 s on ice with a sonifier 250 (Branson). Insoluble cell debris was precipitated by centrifuging the sample for 10 min at 16,000 x g at 4° C. Protein concentration was determined by BCA protein assay (Pierce). Proteins were reduced with 10 mM DTT (Millipore-Sigma) at 56 °C for 25 min and alkylated with 14 mM Iodoacetamide (Millipore-Sigma) for 30 min in the dark. Proteins were digested with sequencing grade Trypsin-Gold (Promega) and a protein to enzyme ratio of 1:100 overnight at 37 °C. Digestion was stopped by lowering the pH to 2.0 and peptides desalted using C18 SepPak columns (Waters) following the manufacture’s protocol. DIA-MS was performed on a TripleTOF 6600 mass spectrometer (SCIEX), in micro-flow mode. A total duty cycle time manageable from 1.7 seconds for the 15-minutes gradient to 3.3 seconds for the 90-minutes gradient was kept. Five analytical replicates of each gradient of the E. coli cell digest were measured for statistical confidence, resulting in total 20 DIA/SWATH files.

### Data Protocol
To perform the SWATH-MS of each gradient, we used Spectronaut (version 13.11.200127.43655 (Laika), Biognosys).. Pre-processing of MS1 and MS2 calibration strategy was enabled. Decoy assays were dynamically generated using the scrambled decoy method with a set size of 1 as a fraction of the input library size. The identification was performed using the normal distribution estimator with precursor and protein identification results filtered with a q-value of <0.01. For quantification, MS2 ion peak areas of quantified peptides were summed to estimate the protein peak areas.

### Publication Abstract
Data-Independent Acquisition (DIA) is a method to improve consistent identification and precise quantitation of peptides and proteins by mass spectrometry (MS). The targeted data analysis strategy in DIA relies on spectral assay libraries that are generally derived from a priori measurements of peptides for each species. Although Escherichia coli (E. coli) is among the best studied model organisms, so far there is no spectral assay library for the bacterium publicly available. Here, we generated a spectral assay library for 4,014 of the 4,389 annotated E. coli proteins using one- and two-dimensional fractionated samples, and ion mobility separation enabling deep proteome coverage. We demonstrate the utility of this high-quality library with robustness in quantitation of the E. coli proteome and with rapid-chromatography to enhance throughput by targeted DIA-MS. The spectral assay library supports the detection and quantification of 91.5% of all E. coli proteins at high-confidence with 56,182 proteotypic peptides, making it a valuable resource for the scientific community. Data and spectral libraries are available via ProteomeXchange (PXD020761, PXD020785) and SWATHAtlas (SAL00222-28).

### Keywords
Spectral assay library, Dia-ms, E. coli

### Affiliations
Professor and Head Moritz group, Proteomics lab Institute for systems biology Seattle, WA, USA
Institute for Systems Biology

### Submitter
Mukul Midha

### Lab Head
Dr Robert L. Moritz
Professor and Head Moritz group, Proteomics lab Institute for systems biology Seattle, WA, USA


