### Accession
PXD010329

### Title
Inosine induces context-dependent recoding and translational stalling

### Description
To test how inosine in a codon is translated, we synthesized short reporter-transcripts coding for an N-terminal Flag-tag and a test-peptide containing inosine in one defined codon. All codons containing inosines in at least one position were tested. Codons that would lead to ambiguous translation products were omitted. The transcripts were generated using in vitro transcription with ITP instead of GTP and subsequently in vitro translated using rabbit reticulocyte lysate and resulting peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS. The templates for in vitro transcription were generated using linearized DNA plasmids.

### Sample Protocol
In-gel proteolytic digest: Gel bands were cut and washed in acetonitrile and 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate till completely destained, followed by reduction with DTT and alkylation with iodo acetamide. Proteins were digested with Lysyl Endopeptidase (LysC, Wako Chemicals) at 25°C over night. Digestion was stopped by acidifying with formic acid and peptides were extracted by sonication. The peptide solutions were desalted on costum-made C18 stagetips.  On-bead Proteolytic Digest: The magnetic beads were resuspended in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC). In case of cysteine containing sequences proteins were reduced with DTT (10 mM) and free thiols were alkylated with 50 mM iodo acetamide in the dark for 30 minutes, followed by digestion with 100 ng Lysyl Endopeptidase (LysC, Wako Chemicals) for 3 hours at room temperature. Digestion was stopped by adding trifluoroacetic acid to a final concentration of 1%.  Peptide solution was desalted on C18 stage-tips.  Liquid Chromatography Mass Spectrometry: Peptides were separated on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano-flow chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific), using a pre-column for sample loading (PepMapAcclaim C18, 2 cm × 0.1 mm, 5 μm, Dionex-Thermo-Fisher) and a C18 analytical column (PepMapAcclaim C18, 50 cm × 0.75 mm, 2 μm, Dionex-Thermo-Fisher), applying a linear gradient from 2 to 35% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid; solvent A 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 230 nl min−1 over 60 min. Eluting peptides were analysed on a Q Exactive HF (or HFX) Orbitrap mass spectrometer, equipped with a Proxeon nanospray source (all Thermo Fisher Scientific), operated in a data-dependent mode. Survey scans were obtained in a mass range of 380–1,650 m/z with lock mass on, at a resolution of 120.000 at 200 m/z and an AGC target value of 3E6. The 10 most intense ions were selected with an isolation width of 2 Da, fragmented in the HCD cell at 27% collision energy and the spectra recorded at a target value of 1E5 and a resolution of 30000. Peptides with a charge of +1 were excluded from fragmentation, the peptide match and exclude isotope features were enabled and selected precursors were dynamically excluded from repeated sampling for 15 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using the MaxQuant software package (http://www.maxquant.org/)   and searched against the target sequences in the rabbit uniprot background (www.uniprot.org). The search was performed with full LysC specificity and a maximum of two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed, oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications—all other parameters were set to default. All target peptide identifications were inspected manually. Ion intensity chromatograms of the peptides were extracted and quantified with Skyline-daily 4.1.1.18179.

### Publication Abstract
RNA modifications are present in all classes of RNAs. They control the fate of mRNAs by affecting their processing, translation, or stability. Inosine is a particularly widespread modification in metazoan mRNA arising from deamination of adenosine catalyzed by the RNA-targeting adenosine deaminases ADAR1 or ADAR2. Inosine is commonly thought to be interpreted as guanosine by cellular machines and during translation. Here, we systematically test ribosomal decoding using mass spectrometry. We show that while inosine is primarily interpreted as guanosine it can also be decoded as adenosine, and rarely even as uracil. Decoding of inosine as adenosine and uracil is context-dependent. In addition, mass spectrometry analysis indicates that inosine causes ribosome stalling especially when multiple inosines are present in the codon. Indeed, ribosome profiling data from human tissues confirm inosine-dependent ribosome stalling in vivo. To our knowledge this is the first study where decoding of inosine is tested in a comprehensive and unbiased way. Thus, our study shows novel, unanticipated functions for inosines in mRNAs, further expanding coding potential and affecting translational efficiency.

### Keywords
A-to-i editing, Lc-msms, Mrna-translation, Rna modification, Adar, Epitranscriptome

### Affiliations
Department of Cell- and Developmental Biology, Center for Anatomy and Cell Biology, Medical University of Vienna, Austria
Medical University of Vienna

### Submitter
Konstantin Licht

### Lab Head
Dr Michael F. Jantsch
Department of Cell- and Developmental Biology, Center for Anatomy and Cell Biology, Medical University of Vienna, Austria


