### Accession
PXD020703

### Title
Citrus vascular proteomics highlights the role of peroxidases and serine proteases during Huanglongbing disease progression

### Description
The dataset for this project was to identify significantly changing proteins in the vasculature of Washington Navel (Citrus sinensis (L) Osbeck) during Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus (CLas) infection. The navel trees were graft-inoculated with the Hacienda Heights, CA CLas strain (HHCA) and then sampled ten months after graft inoculation.

### Sample Protocol
Citrus vascular exudates were enriched by centrifugation. Stems were collected from 17-month-old greenhouse plants and the outer bark was manually removed. The inner part of the bark was briefly rinsed with deionized water and dried with Kimwipes. The bark was cut into 1 cm pieces using a razor blade and placed into a 0.65 mL Eppendorf tube with a small hole in the bottom. This tube was then placed into a 1.7 mL Eppendorf collection tube and centrifuged at 12,000 x g for 15 min at 25°C. Vascular extracts were flash frozen and stored at -80°C. Samples were resuspended in 2x Laemmli buffer and quantified for protein concentration using the Pierce 660nm Protein Assay Reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  A total of 85 µg of protein per sample was subjected to one-dimensional SDS-PAGE using an 8-16% precise protein gradient gel (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Proteins were separated for 1 cm in the resolving gel and the entire lane was excised and cut into equal pieces. In-gel reduction was performed by adding 10 mM dithiothreitol in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 30 min at 56°C. Alkylation was performed by adding 55 mM iodoacetamide in 50 mM of ammonium bicarbonate for 20 min in the dark with shaking at room temperature. In-gel tryptic digestion was performed using 300 ng of trypsin in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (40). The digested peptides were dried in a vacuum concentrator and then solubilized in 120 µL of 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis.  The LC-MS/MS system configuration consisted of a CTC Pal autosampler (LEAP Technologies) and Paradigm HPLC device (Michrom BioResources) coupled to a QExactive hybrid quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a CaptiveSpray ionization source (Michrom BioResources). Peptides were reconstituted in 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid and were washed on a Michrom C18 trap then were eluted and separated on a Michrom Magic C18AQ (200 μm × 150 mm) capillary reverse-phase column at a flow rate of 3 μL/min. A 120 min gradient was applied with a 2% to 35% B (100% acetonitrile) for 100 min, a 35% B to 80% B for 7 min and 80% B for 2 min. Then a decrease of 80% to 5% B in 1 min followed by 98% A (0.1% formic acid) for 10 min. The QExactive was operated in Data-Dependent Acquisition (DDA) mode with a top-15 method. Spray voltage was set to 2.2 kV. The scan range was set to 350–1600 m/z, the maximum injection time was 30 ms and automatic gain control was set to 1 × 106. Precursor resolution was set to 70,000. For MS/MS, the maximum injection time was 50 ms, the isolation window was 1.6 m/z, the scan range 200–2000 m/z, automatic gain control was set to 5 × 104 and normalized collision energy was 27%. The dynamic exclusion window was set to 15 s and fragment product resolution was 17,500. An intensity threshold of 1 × 104 was applied and the underfill ratio was 1%.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS/MS data files were imported into MaxQuant v1.5.1.0  for label-free intensity-based quantification. The database search engine Andromeda was used to search MS/MS spectra against the a total of 81192 protein sequences from C. clementina (v1.0) and C. sinensis (v1.0) databases downloaded from Phytozome (43) and the Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus (CLas) proteome database (44) downloaded from Uniprot with a tolerance level of 20 ppm for the first search and 6 ppm for the main search. Trypsin/P was set as the enzyme and two missed cleavages were allowed. Protein N-terminal acetylation and Methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications. The maximum number of modifications per peptide was set as five and the predefined contaminants from MaxQuant were included in the search database. The ‘match between runs’ feature was checked with a match time window of 0.7 min and an alignment time window of 20 min. The FDR for protein level and peptide spectrum match was set to 1%. The minimum peptide length was 6, minimum razor was changed to 0, and minimum unique peptides was set to 1. The minimum ratio count for protein quantification was set to 2. The other MaxQuant settings were default. The total peptide intensities for each replicate were summed and a normalization factor was calculated for each sample. This normalization factor was applied based on the least overall proteome change. Peptide ratios between samples were then calculated to obtain a pair-wise protein ratio matrix between samples, which was subsequently used to rescale the cumulative intensity in each sample and provides the label-free intensity (LFQ) value. The MaxQuant output file “Protein Groups” was imported into Perseus 1.5.5.3. Contaminants, reverse hits, and proteins identified only by modified peptides were excluded in subsequent analysis. The LFQ intensities were log2-transformed. Proteins not consistently identified in at least two out of the four replicates in at least one group were discarded. Missing values were imputed with values from a normal distribution of the obtained intensities using default settings (width 0.5, downshift 1.8). Differentially changing proteins were identified using a two-tailed Student’s t-test, p<0.05, with a permutation-based FDR of 0.05 to correct for multiple testing.

### Publication Abstract
Huanglongbing (HLB) is the most devastating and widespread citrus disease. All commercial citrus varieties are susceptible to the HLB-associated bacterium, <i>Candidatus</i> Liberibacter asiaticus (<i>C</i>Las), which resides in the phloem. The phloem is part of the plant vascular system and is involved in sugar transport. To investigate the plant response to <i>C</i>Las, we enriched for proteins surrounding the phloem in an HLB susceptible sweet orange variety, Washington navel (<i>Citrus sinensis</i> (L) Osbeck). Quantitative proteomics revealed global changes in the citrus proteome after <i>C</i>Las inoculation. Plant metabolism and translation were suppressed, whereas defense-related proteins such as peroxidases, proteases and protease inhibitors were induced in the vasculature. Transcript accumulation and enzymatic activity of plant peroxidases in CLas infected sweet orange varieties under greenhouse and field conditions were assessed. Although peroxidase transcript accumulation was induced in <i>C</i>Las infected sweet orange varieties, peroxidase enzymatic activity varied. Specific serine proteases were up-regulated in Washington navel in the presence of <i>C</i>Las based on quantitative proteomics. Subsequent activity-based protein profiling revealed increased activity of two serine proteases, and reduced activity of one protease in two <i>C. sinensis</i> sweet orange varieties under greenhouse and field conditions. The observations in the current study highlight global reprogramming of the citrus vascular proteome and differential regulation of enzyme classes in response to <i>C</i>Las infection. These results open an avenue for further investigation of diverse responses to HLB across different environmental conditions and citrus genotypes.

### Keywords
Phloem, Huanglongbing, Proteases, Vascular exudate, Candidatus liberibacter asiaticus

### Affiliations
Department of Plant Pathology, University of California, Davis
University of California, Davis

### Submitter
Jessica Franco

### Lab Head
Dr Gitta Coaker
Department of Plant Pathology, University of California, Davis


