### Accession
PXD015316

### Title
Proteomic Analysis of Measles Virus Protein C-Host Interactions in an Infectious Context Using Recombinant Viruses

### Description
Viruses manipulate central machineries of host cells to their advantage. They prevent host cell antiviral responses in order to create a favourable environment for their survival and propagation. Measles virus (MV) encodes two non-structural proteins MV-V and MV-C, proposed to counteract the host interferon response and to regulate cell death pathways in various functional assays. Several molecular mechanisms underlining MV-V regulation of innate immunity and cell death responses have been proposed, whereas MV-C host protein partners are less studied.  We suggest that some cellular factors that are controlled by MV-C protein during viral replication could be components of innate immunity and the cell death pathways. In order to determine which host factors are hijacked by MV-C, we captured both direct and indirect host protein partners of MV-C protein. For this we used a strategy based on recombinant viruses expressing tagged viral proteins followed by affinity purification and a bottom-up mass spectrometry analysis. A list of host proteins specifically interacting with MV-C protein in different cell lines was identified.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T, HeLa, and A549 were mock infected (treated with media alone) or infected by MV-C with either N-terminal or C-terminal One-STrEP tag, and CH with only C-terminal One-STrEP tag. The clarified cell lysates were incubated a StrepTactin Sepharose High Performance beads and eluted proteins were precipitated and resuspended in Urea 8M to perform proteins digestions before LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
All data were searched using Andromeda with MaxQuant software against the Human SwissProt database (20,203 entries from UniProt the 18/08/2015) and the Morbillivirus SwissProt database (90 entries from UniProt the 12/01/2016). Quantification was performed using the XIC-based LFQ algorithm with the Fast LFQ mode. For pairwise comparisons, LFQ values were normalized by median centering within conditions . Missing values were imputed using the imp.norm function of the R package norm. Statistical testing was conducted using a limma t-test thanks to the R package limma. An adaptive Benjamini-Hochberg procedure was applied on the resulting p-values thanks to the function adjust.p of R package cp4p. The proteins associated to an adjusted p-value inferior to a FDR of 1% have been considered as significantly differentially abundant proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Infection, Interactomic, Qexactive, Measle virus

### Affiliations
Viral Genomics and Vaccination Unit, Department of Virology, Institut Pasteur, CNRS UMR-3569, 75015 Paris, France
Institut Pasteur

### Submitter
Thibaut Douché

### Lab Head
Dr Frédéric TANGY
Viral Genomics and Vaccination Unit, Department of Virology, Institut Pasteur, CNRS UMR-3569, 75015 Paris, France


