### Accession
PXD004322

### Title
Human thyroid neoplasms LC-MS/MS analysis

### Description
The study aimes to evaluate the neoplasm proteomic changes in benign follicular adenoma versus malignant follicular variant of papillary thyroid carcinoma. Tumor and non-tumor adjacent samples were analyzed by liquid nano-chromatography mass spectrometry and protein abundance was evaluated by label free quantification.

### Sample Protocol
Homogenates from thyroid gross pathology sampled from operation theatre were obtained from two groups of patients, one with follicular adenoma (FTA, n=9) and another group with papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC, n=9). Control (C_FTA and C_PTC) tissue samples adjacent to the tumors were also analyzed from each specimen. The tissue homogenates were suitably processed for mass spectrometric analysis and their corresponding peptides were separated in 2-35% acetonitrile gradient using the EASY–nLC II system (Thermo Scientific). The high performance LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro (Thermo Scientific) system was used to generate mass spectra using the Top 6 Data-Dependent method and CID fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
The protein inference was performed using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific) in the human Swiss-Prot 04.2013 database with Mascot 2.4.1 (Matrix Science) search engine. Trypsin was set as the enzyme of choice with a maximum of 2 missed cleaveges. ProCon 0.9.641 was used to convert .msf files to .mzid files.

### Publication Abstract
The study aimed to evaluate the proteomic changes in benign follicular adenoma versus malignant follicular variant of papillary thyroid carcinoma. Tumor and nontumor adjacent samples were analyzed by liquid nanochromatography mass spectrometry, and protein abundance was evaluated by label-free quantification. Western blotting and quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction were used to validate and complement the mass spectrometry data. The results demonstrated deregulated expression of four endoplasmic reticulum chaperones (78 kDa glucose-regulated protein, endoplasmin, calnexin, protein disulfide-isomerase A4), glutathione peroxidase 3 and thyroglobulin, all of them involved in thyroid hormone synthesis pathway. The altered tissue abundance of endoplasmic reticulum chaperones in thyroid cancer was correlated with serum expression levels. The identified proteins significantly discriminate between adenoma and carcinoma in both thyroid tissue and corresponding sera. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD004322.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms/ms, Thyroid

### Affiliations
Institute of Cellular Biology and Pathology "N. Simionescu"
Proteomics Department, Institute of Cellular Biology and Pathology "Nicolae Simionescu", Romania

### Submitter
Felicia Antohe

### Lab Head
Dr Felicia Antohe
Proteomics Department, Institute of Cellular Biology and Pathology "Nicolae Simionescu", Romania


