### Accession
PXD008161

### Title
Development of in planta chemical cross-linking-based quantitative interactomics in Arabidopsis

### Description
An in planta chemical cross-linking-based quantitative interactomics (IPQCX-MS) workflow has been developed to investigate in vivo protein-protein interactions and alteration in protein structures in a model organism, Arabidopsis thaliana. A chemical cross-linker, azide-tag-modified disuccinimidyl pimelate (AMDSP), was directly applied onto Arabidopsis tissues. Peptides produced from protein fractions of CsCl density gradient centrifugation were dimethyl-labelled, from which the AMDSP cross-linked peptides were fractionated on chromatography, enriched, and analysed by mass spectrometry. ECL2 and SQUA-D software was used to identify and quantitate these cross-linked peptides, respectively. These computer programs integrates peptide identification with quantitation and statistical evaluation. This workflow eventually identified 354 unique cross-linked peptides, including 61 and 293 inter- and intra-protein cross-linked peptides, respectively, demonstrating that it is able to in vivo identify hundreds of cross-linked peptides at an organismal level by overcoming the difficulties caused by multiple cellular structures and complex secondary metabolites of plants. Co-immunoprecipitation and super-resolution microscopy studies have confirmed the PHB3- PHB6 protein interaction found by IPQCX-MS. The quantitative interactomics also found hormone-induced structural changes of SBPase and other proteins. This mass spectrometry-based interactomics will be useful in the study of in vivo protein-protein interaction networks in agricultural crops and plant-microbe interactions.

### Sample Protocol
Both the final product of cross-linked synthetic peptides and the cross-linked plant peptides were injected into an LC-MS/MS machine, consisting of a Dionex UltiMate 3000 UHPLC and a Q Exactive Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA). A gradient elution was performed on a MonoCap capillary monolith HPLC column (0.1 × 2000 mm, GL Science Inc., Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo) with a flow rate of 0.4 μL/min for 220 minutes. Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid, while mobile phase B consisted of 80% acetonitrile and 0.08% formic acid. The gradient was established as follows: 0–13 min 4% B, 13–14 min 4–8% B, 14–80 min 8–25% B, 80–130 min 25-55% B, 130-150 min 55-99% B, 150–190 min 99% B, 190–192 min 99-4% B, and 192-220 min 4% B. The data-dependent acquisition mode was used to generate the mass spectrometry data. The normalized collision energy was set at 28% (HCD). In each cycle, the mass spectrometer generated one full-scan (300-1800 m/z, 70,000 resolution), followed by 20 MS/MS scans with a resolution of 17,500. The isolation window was 2.0 Da, while the dynamic exclusion duration was 5 seconds. The charge range was from +3 to +8.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS data were first converted into the mzXML format using ProteoWizard (version:3.0.11110 64-bit) (82). The converted MS/MS data were consequently analysed using Mascot (version 2.5.0) to search against the target and decoy TAIR10 Arabidopsis protein databases, which currently contain 35,387 protein sequences (https://www.arabidopsis.org/download_files/Sequences/TAIR10_blastsets/TAIR10_pep_20101214_updated), respectively. The precursor mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm, while the MS/MS mass tolerance was set at 0.01 Da. Trypsin was selected as protease, while the maximum allowed number of missed cleavages was set at 2. As monolinks were set as 397.165799 Da and 398.149815 Da on residue (K) and N-terminus, respectively, they were set as the variable modifications. As both light (28.031300 Da) and heavy isotopic dimethyl (34.063117 Da) were used to label lysine residues and N-termini of peptides, they were set as the variable modifications on lysine and the N-termini of peptides. Oxidation on methionine was set as the variable modification. We also set carbamidomethyl (57.021464 Da) on cystine (C) as the fixed modification. The false discovery rate (FDR)  ≤ 0.01 was used to select peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) from the results of the Mascot search. From 77226 PSMs (Supplementary Table S2a), there were 5538 proteins, which were used to generate a custom protein database of smaller size for the following ECL2 (version 2.1.7)-based cross-linked peptide identification. The precursor mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm. The MZ bin size was set at 0.02, which corresponds to MS/MS tolerance being set at 0.01 Da. FDR for peptide-spectrum matching (PSM) was set as ≤ 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
An in planta chemical cross-linking-based quantitative interactomics (IPQCX-MS) workflow has been developed to investigate in vivo protein-protein interactions and alteration in protein structures in a model organism, Arabidopsis thaliana. A chemical cross-linker, azide-tag-modified disuccinimidyl pimelate (AMDSP), was directly applied onto Arabidopsis tissues. Peptides produced from protein fractions of CsCl density gradient centrifugation were dimethyl-labeled, from which the AMDSP cross-linked peptides were fractionated on chromatography, enriched, and analyzed by mass spectrometry. ECL2 and SQUA-D software were used to identify and quantitate these cross-linked peptides, respectively. These computer programs integrate peptide identification with quantitation and statistical evaluation. This workflow eventually identified 354 unique cross-linked peptides, including 61 and 293 inter- and intraprotein cross-linked peptides, respectively, demonstrating that it is able to in vivo identify hundreds of cross-linked peptides at an organismal level by overcoming the difficulties caused by multiple cellular structures and complex secondary metabolites of plants. Coimmunoprecipitation and super-resolution microscopy studies have confirmed the PHB3-PHB6 protein interaction found by IPQCX-MS. The quantitative interactomics also found hormone-induced structural changes of SBPase and other proteins. This mass-spectrometry-based interactomics will be useful in the study of in vivo protein-protein interaction networks in agricultural crops and plant-microbe interactions.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, 4c proteomic workflow, Ecl2, In planta quantitative interactomics, In vivo cross-linking, Ipqcx-ms

### Affiliations
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

### Submitter
Fengchao Yu

### Lab Head
Dr Ning Li
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology


