### Accession
PXD031927

### Title
Comparative proteomics analysis of growth-primed adult dorsal root ganglia reveals key molecular mediators for peripheral nerve regeneration

### Description
Peripheral nerve injuries due to physical insults or chronic diseases are quite common, yet no pharmacological therapies are available for the effective repair of injured nerves. The slow growth rate of adult nerves and insufficient access to growth factors pose major hurdles in timely reinnervating target tissues and restoring functions after nerve injuries. A better understanding of the molecular changes that occur during the immediate regenerative reprogramming of neurons, stated here as in vivo priming, following nerve injury may reveal ideal candidates for future therapies. Hence, molecular profiling of neuronal soma within the first week of nerve injury has been the gold standard for revealing molecular candidates critical for nerve regeneration. A complementary in vitro regenerative priming approach was recently shown to induce enhanced outgrowth in adult sensory neurons. In this work, we exploited the in vitro priming model to reveal novel candidates for adult nerve regeneration. We performed the whole tissue proteomics analysis of in vitro primed DRGs and compared their molecular profile with that of the in vivo primed, and control DRGs. Through this approach, we identified several commonly and uniquely altered molecules in the in vitro and in vivo primed DRGs that have the potential to modulate adult nerve regrowth. We further validated the growth inducing potential of mesencephalic astrocyte-derived neurotrophic factor (MANF), one of the hits identified in our proteomics analysis, in primary adult sensory neurons. Overall, this study showed that in vitro priming partially reproduces the molecular features in in vivo primed adult sensory neurons. The shortlisted candidates presented here from the two priming approaches may serve as potential therapeutic targets for adult nerve regeneration.

### Sample Protocol
In vitro and in vivo priming of DRGs were done as per our laboratory protocols. Briefly, for in vitro priming, intact DRGs from 4–6-week-old healthy male SD rats were incubated in standard primary neuron culture media [(DMEM/F12) + N2 supplement (1:100 dilution of 100X solution) + 100ng/ml NGF + 1X Cytiva Hyclone antibiotic/antimycotic solution] at 37oC and 5% CO2 conditions for 24 h. In vivo priming was done by performing axotomy in adult SD rats. Briefly, a small incision was made at the mid-thigh level of the rat, and then the muscle layers were separated using a fine scissor to expose the sciatic nerve (SN). A blunt transection was then made onto the SN for complete axotomy. The muscle layers and the skin were then sutured back, and the animals were allowed to survive for three days before the isolation of DRGs. All animal protocols were approved by the Animal Research Ethics Board of the University Animal Care Committee in the University of Saskatchewan. Total proteins from DRGs were isolated using RIPA lysis buffer and digested using trypsin.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were analyzed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) using an Agilent 6550 iFunnel quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometer equipped with an Agilent 1260 series liquid chromatography instrument and a Chip Cube LC-MS interface (Agilent Technologies) in data dependent acquisition mode. Tandem mass spectra were searched against the SwissProt rat (Rattus norvegicus; UniProt May 2020 release date) non-redundant database using Spectrum Mill (Agilent Technologies) as the protein database search engine. Validation of the Spectrum Mill search was performed at peptide and protein levels (1% false discovery rate, FDR). Mass Profiler Professional (MPP, version 15.0, Agilent Technologies) software was used for statistical analysis using one-way ANOVA. A cut-off value of p < 0.05 and the Benjamini and Hochberg FDR set at < 1% were used to obtain statistically significant results.

### Publication Abstract
Injuries to peripheral nerves are frequent, yet no drug therapies are available for effective nerve repair. The slow growth rate of axons and inadequate access to growth factors challenge natural repair of nerves. A better understanding of the molecules that can promote the rate of axon growth may reveal therapeutic opportunities. Molecular profiling of injured neurons at early intervals of injury, when regeneration is at the maximum, has been the gold standard for exploring growth promoters. A complementary <i>in vitro</i> regenerative priming model was recently shown to induce enhanced outgrowth in adult sensory neurons. In this work, we exploited the <i>in vitro</i> priming model to reveal novel candidates for adult nerve regeneration. We performed a whole-tissue proteomics analysis of the <i>in vitro</i> primed dorsal root ganglia (DRGs) from adult SD rats and compared their molecular profile with that of the <i>in vivo</i> primed, and control DRGs. The proteomics data generated are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD031927. From the follow-up analysis, Bioinformatics interventions, and literature curation, we identified several molecules that were differentially expressed in the primed DRGs with a potential to modulate adult nerve regrowth. We then validated the growth promoting roles of mesencephalic astrocyte-derived neurotrophic factor (MANF), one of the hits we identified, in adult rat sensory neurons. Overall, in this study, we explored two growth priming paradigm and shortlisted several candidates, and validated MANF, as potential targets for adult nerve regeneration. We also demonstrate that the <i>in vitro</i> priming model is a valid tool for adult nerve regeneration studies.

### Keywords
Rat, Sensory neuron of dorsal root ganglion, Drgs, Comparative proteomics, Sciatic nerve, Nerve regeneration, Spinal root

### Affiliations
University

### Submitter
Submitter 861

### Lab Head
Dr Submitter 861
University


