### Accession
PXD030313

### Title
Stem cells from human exfoliated deciduous teeth relieves neurodegenerative disease in aging mice

### Description
To save the cognitive function of rapidly aging model mice, SHED was injected into aging mice through the tail vein. After the intervention of stem cells, the mice showed obvious changes in behavior, and the pathological indicators were significantly improved. Mouse blood was used to detect, through proteomics analysis, to reveal molecular changes during the treatment process.

### Sample Protocol
After quantification, a total of 300ug total serum protein was used to prepare peptides. After incubation with DTT and IAA, the total protein is cut into peptides by trypsin at 37°C overnight. After the peptide is desalted, it is labeled with TMT and terminated in hydroxylamine. It was then fractionated in a C18 basic column. After drying to remove excess acetonitrile, the peptide was re-dissolved and analyzed and identified on LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Gene ontology analysis (GO) and KEGG analysis were performed at DAVID and visualized by prism (version 8.0). The protein-protein interaction network (PPI) was constructed by STRING and artistically by Cytoscape.

### Publication Abstract
The pathology of Alzheimer's disease (AD) is complex and heterogeneous, and there are currently no drugs that can stop its progression. The failure of traditional chemical small-molecule drug development showed the weakness of single target and made researchers look to cell therapy with multiple regulatory effects. Stem cells from human exfoliated deciduous teeth (SHED) are a kind of neural crest-derived mesenchymal stem cells which have broad prospects in the treatment of neurodegenerative diseases. In this study, we demonstrated the therapeutic effects of SHED in AD mice, including behavioral improvement, neuronal protection, and alleviation of neuroinflammation. Tracking experiments on SHED showed that some of the transplanted cells could enter the brain. To elucidate the role played by the majority of cells transplanted into veins, blood proteomic assays were performed. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD030313. Among the altered proteins, the PPAR pathway related to energy metabolism was considered to be an important signaling pathway involved in regulation through gene ontology analysis and pathway analysis. Western blot showed that the transplantation of SHED improved the glucose metabolism in AD mice by increasing the PPAR&#x3b3; signaling pathway. These results suggested that SHED have a potential in relieving AD pathological symptoms and improving behavioral cognition. The therapeutic mechanism of SHED is related to up-regulating PPAR&#x3b3; signaling pathway and reducing neuronal damage.

### Keywords
Shed, Samp8, Neurodegenerativ disease

### Affiliations
University of science and technology
University of science and technology beijing

### Submitter
Tong Lei

### Lab Head
Dr Hongwu Du
University of science and technology


