### Accession
PXD026944

### Title
Global quantitative proteomics analysis reveals the downstream signaling networks of Msx1 and Msx2 in skeletal muscle development

### Description
The homeoprotein Msx1 and Msx2 involved in normal skeletal muscle development and also contribute to muscle defects if altered during development. Deciphering the downstream signaling networks of Msx1 and Msx2 in myoblasts differentiation will help us to understand the molecular events that contribute to muscle defects. The objective of this study was to evaluate the proteomics characteristics in Msx1 and Msx2 mediated myoblasts differentiation, using isobaric tags for the relative and absolute quantification labelling technique (iTRAQ). The results showed that 1535 proteins with quantitative information were obtained. Volcano plots illustrated, in undifferentiated stage, 32 common downstream regulatory proteins for Msx1 and Msx2, 39 specific regulatory proteins for Msx1, and 13 specific for Msx2. While, in differentiated stage, 17 common downstream regulatory proteins for Msx1 and Msx2, 10 specific regulatory proteins for Msx1, and 21 specific for Msx2. Gene ontology, KEGG pathway and protein-protein interaction networks analyses revealed these proteins primarily associated with Arginine and proline metabolism, Glycolysis/Gluconeogenesis, Fatty acid degradation, Metabolism of xenobiotics by cytochrome P450 and Apoptosis. In addition, our data shows Acta1 was probably a core of the downstream regulatory networks of Msx1 and Msx2 in skeletal muscle development. The findings will help us to understand the molecular roles of Msx1 and Msx2 during muscle development as well as regeneration, and to understand the molecular events that contribute to muscle defects.

### Sample Protocol
Liquid chromatography (LC)-electrospray ionization (ESI) tandem MS (MS/MS) analysis was performed using a nanoflowEASY-nLC 1000 system coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) following previously reported procedures23. A two-column system was adopted for all analyses. Each peptide fraction was first loaded onto an Acclaim prepMap100 C18 Nano Trap Column and then analyzed on an Acclaim Prep Map RSLC C18 Column. The peptides were eluted using the following gradients: 5–35% solution B (0.1% FA in 95% ACN) in 58 min, 35–90% B in 5 min, 90% B for 13 min at a flow rate of 200 nL/min. The MS/MS mode was set as follows: activation type, higher collision energy dissociation (HCD); collision energy, 35 eV; resolution, 60,000 FWHM; scan range, 300–1800 m/z; The peptide ions were detected in the Orbitrap mass spectrometer, and up to 15 of the most intense peptide ions (>5000 counts) were selected and fragmented by MS/MS. Information on peptides and peptide fragments m/z was collected as follows: 15 fragment spectra were collected after every full scan (MS2 scan), HCD fragmentation, full scan at a resolution of 60,000, and normalized collision energy of 35 eV. Three technical replicates were conducted to ensure reliable statistical consistency.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files acquired from the LTQ-Orbitrap Elite were converted into MGF files using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany), and the MGF files were queried against the mouse database using an in-house Mascot search engine 2.3.02 (Matrix Science, London, UK). Data were searched using the following parameters: 10 ppm mass tolerance for MS and 0.05 Da for MS/MS fragmented ions, with an allowance for only tryptic peptides with up to two missed cleavage sites allowed. Only peptides with a significance score greater than 99% confidence interval by a Mascot probability analysis were counted as identified. The quantitative protein ratios were weighted and normalized by the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science), and only ratios with p < 0.01, as determined according to a Student’s t-test, were employed. The summation of six labeled sample mixtures was used as background (BC) based on the weighted average of the intensity of report ions in each identified peptide. The relative expression of protein was normalized by the ratio of value in certain samples to that of the summation (113-iTRAQ tag /BC, 114-iTRAQ tag /BC, 115-iTRAQ tag /BC, 116-iTRAQ tag /BC, 117-iTRAQ tag /BC, 118-iTRAQ tag /BC). Proteins that were once identified in three technical replicates were all considered. When C2C12 differentiated, the final ratio of proteins were obtained from the comparison WT_A/WT_B, while C2C12 cells undifferentiated, the final ratio of proteins were obtained from the comparison Msx1_A/Msx1_B, Msx2_A/Msx2_B, among which ratios greater than ±1.5-fold were considered to be differentially expressed proteins (DEPs).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Msx2, Skeletal muscle differentiation, Msx1

### Affiliations
Fudan University
Fudan University 

### Submitter
Guoqiang  Zhou

### Lab Head
Dr Guoqiang Zhou
Fudan University


