### Accession
PXD019358

### Title
Global Proteomic Analysis of Lysine crotonylation in The Plant Pathogen Botrytis cinerea

### Description
Lysine crotonylation (Kcr), a recently discovered post-translational modification, plays a key role in the regulation of diverse cellular processes. Botrytis cinerea is a destructive necrotrophic fungal pathogen distributed worldwide with broad ranging hosts. However, the functions of Kcr are unknown in B. cinerea or any other plant fungal pathogens. Here, we comprehensively evaluated the crotonylation proteome of B. cinerea and identified 3967 Kcr sites in 1041 proteins, of which contained in 9 types of modification motifs. Our results show that although the crotonylation were largely conserved, different organisms contained distinct crotonylated proteins with unique functions. Bioinformatic analysis demonstrated that the majority of crotonylated proteins were distributed in cytoplasm (35%), mitochondria (26%) and nucleus (22%). The identified proteins were found to be involved in various metabolic and cellular processes, such as cytoplasmic translation and structural constituent of ribosome. Particularly, 26 crotonylated proteins participated in the pathogenicity of B. cinerea, suggesting a significant role for Kcr in this process. Protein interaction network analysis demonstrated that a mass of protein interactions are regulated by crotonylation. These data represent the ﬁrst report of the crotonylome of B. cinerea and provide a good foundation for further explorations of the role of Kcr in plant fungal pathogens.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Extraction From B. cinerea The B. cinerea strain B05.10 was cultured on PDA plates (2% dextrose, 20% potato, and 1.5% agar) at 25℃ for 10 days, and then the conidia was collected and transferred into YEPD medium (2% glucose, 1% yeast extract, and 2% peptone) with shaking at 180 rpm for 14 h. The protein extraction was performed as previously described (Zhou et al., 2016). Briefly, the harvested mycelia were ground into powder in liquid nitrogen. Then the powder sample was suspended by lysis buffer (50 mM nicotinamide, 8 M urea, 65 mM dithiothreitol, 1% Triton-100, 0.1% protease inhibitor cocktail, 2 mM EDTA, and 3 μM Trichostatin A) and then sonicated. After centrifugation at 15,000 x g in 4℃ for 15 min, 15% cold TCA was used to precipitate the proteins at -20℃ for 2 h. The precipitates were washed three times with cold acetone after centrifugation at 4℃for 15 min. Finally, the target protein was redissolved in 8 M urea supplemented with 100 mM NH4CO3 (PH 8.0) and 2-D Quant kit (GE Healthcare) was used to determine protein concentration according to the manufacturer’s instructions.   Affinity Enrichment of Lysine Crotonylated peptides For affinity enrichment, the B. cinerea proteins were firstly digested into peptides by trypin. The digestion reaction was performed with previous experimental approach (Zhou et al., 2016), briefly, the trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio at the first time overnight and added again at 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for another 4 hours. The sample was separated into fractions by high PH reverse-phase HPLC using Agilent 300 Extend C18 column (5 μM particles, 4.6 mm ID, and 250 mm length) (Liu et al., 2016). The peptides were separated firstly into 80 fractions with a gradient of 2% to 60% acetonitrile in 10 mm (NH4)2CO3 (PH 10.0). Then, the peptides were combined into 8 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging. For Kcr peptides enrichment, the tryptic peptides were dissolved in NETN buffer (1 mM EDTA, 100 mM NaCl, 0.5% NP-40, and 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0) and then separated into several fractions. Each fraction was incubated with pan anti-Kcr antibody (PTM Biolabs) conjugated agarose beads overnight at 4 ℃ with gentle shaking. Then the peptides bound with beads were eluted with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid after washing with NETN buffer and then the acquired peptides were cleaned with C18 Zip Tips (Millipore) (Sun et al., 2019).       LC-MS/MS Analysis LC-MS/MS analysis of the crotonylation peptides was performed as described (Li et al., 2016;Liu et al., 2016;Lv et al., 2016;Zhou et al., 2016). Briefly, The Kcr peptides was separated using a reversed-phase analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 column, Thermo Scientific) on UPLC system. The gradient was composed of an increase from 2% to 10% solvent (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) for 6 min, 10% to 20% for 45 min, 20% climbing to 80% in 7 min and then holding at 80% at least for 4 min, all maintaining a flow rate of 250 nl/min. The peptides were subjected by to ESI/NSI sources followed by MS/MS in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo Scientific) coupled online to UPLC. The Orbitrap was used to detect whole peptides and ion fragments at a resolution of 70,000 and 17,500, respectively, with NCE set at 30. The electrospray voltage was set at 2.0 kV to analyze. Automatic gain control (AGC) was used to avoid ion trap overfilling. The m/z range was from 350 to 1800 for MS scans. The MS fixed first mass was set at 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Database Search MaxQuant and Andromeda search engine (v.1.5.1.8) were used to analyze the raw data of MS/MS (Cox and Mann, 2008;Cox et al., 2009). The tandem mass spectra collected were searched against B. cinerea B05.10 database from UniProt. Mass errors of fragment ions and precursor were set as 0.02 Da and 10 ppm, respectively. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 4 missing cleavage, 5 charges and 5 modifications per peptide. Carbamidomethylation on Cysteine was specified as fixed modification and crotonylation on lysine was fixed as variable modification. The minimal peptide was set to seven, and the false discovery rate (FDR) threshold for modification sites and peptides were set as 1%. The Kcr site localization probability of <0.75 was exclude (Zhou et al., 2016;Yang et al., 2018).   Bioinformatics Analysis Gene ontology (GO) of crotonylation proteome was performed from the UniProt-GOA database based on three categories: cellular component, molecular function, and biological process. The soft WoLF PSORT was used to predicate the subcellular localization of the crotonylated protein (Horton et al., 2007). Proteins secondary structures (β-strand, α-helix, coil) were analyzed by the online tool NetSurfP (Chou and Schwartz, 2011). Soft MoMo (motif-x algorithm) was used to analysis the sequences model of crotonylated proteins composed of amino acids in distinct positions of modify-21-mers (10 amino acids up- and downstream of the Kcr site) in all protein sequences. To define the conservation of crotonylation, the BLASTP was used to compare the crotonylated protein sequences of B. cinerea with Carica papaya (Liu et al., 2018b), Nicotiana tabacum (Sun et al., 2017), Oryza sativa (Liu et al., 2018c), Danio rerio (Kwon et al., 2018), and four human cell lines (Wei et al., 2017b;Wu et al., 2017;Xu et al., 2017;Huang et al., 2018). InterProScan was used to perform the protein domain functional annotation based on protein alignment method and the InterPro domain database. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database was employed to annotate protein pathway description (Kanehisa et al., 2004). Cytoscape software was used to analyze the protein-protein interactions whcih was obtained from the STRING database (Shannon et al., 2003;Szklarczyk et al., 2015). A two-tailed Fisher’s exact test was used to verify the enrichment of lysine crotonylated proteins against all database proteins. All projects with a corrected p-valve <0.05 is considered significant.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Botrytis cinerea, Lysine crotonylation, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Key Lab of Integrated Crop Pest Management of Shandong, College of Plant Health and Medicine, Qingdao Agricultural University, Qingdao, China
Micrometer Biotech

### Submitter
Xianliang Ma

### Lab Head
Dr Wenxing Liang
Key Lab of Integrated Crop Pest Management of Shandong, College of Plant Health and Medicine, Qingdao Agricultural University, Qingdao, China


