### Accession
PXD009983

### Title
Combined proteomic and functional analysis reveals rich sources of protein diversity in skin mucus and venom from Scorpaena plumieri fish

### Description
This study shed light on the protein profile of the venomous extract and the skin mucus from S. plumieri, potentially contributing with fundamental information for future basic research, and even – through a better understanding of venomous fish toxinology – aiding in the search for new clinical strategies to treat the envenomation. Finally, seeing as fish venoms remain considerably less studied when compared to terrestrial venoms, the exploration of their full potential opens a myriad of possibilities for the development of new drugs and for a deeper understanding of complex physiological processes.

### Sample Protocol
Samples: Extract from the venomous apparatus (SpV) and Scorpaena plumieri Skin Mucus-SpSM.Lyophilized samples (50 μg) were dissolved in 75 μL of water and precipitated with trichloroacetic acid (TCA) 6.1 N to a final concentration of 25 % (w/v) and held overnight at 4 °C. After a centrifugation step (14.000 g - 30 min at 4 °C) the pellet was washed twice with 500 μL of ice-cold acetone, air-dried and resuspended in 100 μL of 8 M urea in 100 mM Tris–HCl, pH 8.5. Protein samples were reduced, alkylated and digested with Trypsin (Promega, MS grade) as previously described by Borges et al., 2016. Protein digests were collected from the supernatant and submitted to extraction on C18 cartridge (SEP PAK), using acetonitrile (ACN) solution in different concentrations (50 and 80 %). Desalting tryptic fragments was frozen at -20oC until analysis by mass spectrometry. Briefly, reduction was performed by adding 1µuL 10mM TCEP (tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine) to the samples and mixed gently. Tubes were incubated at 56 ◦C for 15 min. Then, 5 µL 100 mM IAA iIodoacetamide were added to each tube. Tubes were incubated at room temperature for 15 min in the dark. Afterwards, a solution of 125µuL of water, 15 µuL of 1M ammonium bicarbonate containing 10% of 100 mM cCalcium chloride were added to the tubes and vortexed gently. Finally, a trypsin (Promega) solution (1µug enzyme:25 µug protein) were added to each tube, and trypsinolysis proceeded which were incubated overnight at 37oC. The reaction was stopped by the addition of 10 µuL aAcetic acid. Then, peptide samples were submitted to solid-phase extraction on C18 cartridges (SEP PAK – Waters) according to manufacturer's instructions. Desalting tryptic fragments wereas frozen at -20oC until analysis by mass spectrometry.  Samples were washed using 2 % ACN in water containing 0.05% TFA solution for 3 min, at a flow rate of 7 µl.min.-1 and solubilized (roughly 2 μg) in 0.1 % trifluoracetic acid solution (TFA, Fluka®). Next, the samples were injected into the nanoUHPLC UltiMate® 3000 (Dionex®) system equipped with Nano-Trap Acclaim PepMap100 C18 (100 µm i.d. × 2 cm, 5 µm, 100 Å; Thermo Scientific®) and capillary Acclaim PepMap100 C18 RSLC (75 µm i.d. × 15 cm, 2 µm, 100 Å; Thermo Scientific®) columns. Reverse phase chromatography was performed at 40 °C, at a flow rate of 300 nl.min.-1, with a linear gradient of solvents (A) 0.1% formic acid in water and (B) 80 % ACN with 0.1 % formic acid as follows: 3.8 to 50 % B over 120 min, followed by a sharp ramp to 99% B.   Spectral data of eluted ions were generated in the positive mode using a Q Exactive mass spectrometer operating a data-dependent acquisition method (Thermo Scientific®, Bremen, Germany). The ion source was 2.1 kV and capillary temperature set to 250 oC. Survey scans were acquired at a resolving power of 70,000 at m/z 200, mass range 300 to 2000 m/z and AGC target of 1e6 ions in up to 250 ms. Data dependent tandem mass spectra were acquired for up to 10 most intense precursor ions that reached 1e5 ions in up to 120 ms. Selected parent ions were dissociated by Higher Energy Collision Induced Dissociation (HCD) with stepped Normalized Collisional Energy (NCE) of 28-30 and product ion spectra were acquired at a resolution of 35,000. Ions with charge state >5 and singly charged were not selected for fragmentation. A dynamic exclusion time of 30 s was set to prevent repetitive analysis of ions.

### Data Protocol
Spectra obtained were submitted to de novo sequencing, database search and quantification using PEAKS Studio 8 software and PEAKS Q module (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc.). Search was performed against 89,475 NCBI protein sequences (29,188,211 residues) from Scorpaeniformes order. Search parameters considered were: (i) Enzymatic specificity of trypsin (K/R not before P), allowing up to maximum two missed cleavage sites; (ii) Error tolerances of up to 10 ppm for precursors and 0.02 Da for product ions; (iii) Cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57.02 Da) and methionine oxidation (+15.99 Da) were set respectively as fixed and variable modifications. The decoy-fusion feature was activated and peptide-spectrum matches kept at 1 % of False DiscoveryPositive Ratio (FDR). Extracted ion chromatograms (XIC) from up to 3 most intense unique peptides were averaged to infer protein abundance. Mass error tolerance of 10 ppm and retention time shift of 3 minutes were allowed in this process. Relative quantification was performed and statistically tested using PEAKS Q. Only proteins exhibitingidentities with P-value ≤ 0.05 were considered confidently identified for the composition of in the SpV and SpSM samples.  Peptide sSequences obtained throughby de novo sequencing from which no match could be found without any match iin the database were subjected to a similarity search to expand the coverage of the venom proteome. Only peptide sequences displaying an Average Local Confidence (ALC) ≥80%, at least 2 spectral counts and minimum length of 7 residues were selected. XIC values were used to estimate the enrichment between the samples.   Quantitative analysis was performed when MS spectra from specific ions were related to specific proteins, i.e., the presence of a certain peak in only one extract means that the corresponding protein is exclusive of that extract. On the other hand, if the peak was detected for both samples, the intensity values were used for analysis, and peptides with fold values ≥2 in SpV were aligned to NCBI bony fishes (taxa: 7898; Actinopterygii) throughusing BLASTp using E-value cut-off of 10 and word size equals  to 3.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Shotgun analysis, Scorpaena plumieri, Fish venom

### Affiliations
Ezequiel Dias Foundations
Laboratorio de Proteomica e Aracnideos Diretoria de Pesquisa e Desenvolvimento Fundação Ezequiel Dias

### Submitter
Marcia Borges

### Lab Head
Dr Márcia Helena Borges
Laboratorio de Proteomica e Aracnideos Diretoria de Pesquisa e Desenvolvimento Fundação Ezequiel Dias


