### Accession
PXD029697

### Title
Deep proteomic analysis of human hippocampus micro-sections provides a new avenue to identify hippocampal subfield heterogeneity in the protein expression

### Description
Hippocampus has drawn an immense attention from researchers and clinicians worldwide due to its clinical importance in various neurodegenerative disorders. Each hippocampal subfield is known to perform distinct functions and are selectively vulnerable to environmental, physiological, and clinical factors. Therefore, proteomic analysis of hippocampus at subfield level is increasingly important, however, an in-depth proteomic analysis of human hippocampus at its subfield level is not well established to date. In this study, we compared the sub-proteome of the hippocampus- the cornu ammonis sectors (CA1, CA2, CA3 and CA4), and dentate gyrus (DG) from healthy adult human cohorts using high resolution mass spectrometry. We procured hippocampal subfields from the archived FFPE tissue sections by performing manual micro-dissection and conducted TMT label quantification-based proteomic analysis that resulted in the identification of 5,593 proteins, of which 890 proteins were differentially abundant at ≥1.5-fold cut-off across all subfields. Gene Ontology enrichment analysis was performed to uncover the biological processes, pathways and cellular localization associated with each subfield of hippocampus. IHC-based validation of selected proteins were also carried out in an independent set of hippocampus from normal subjects. We believe that our findings will effectively pave a way for further analysis of the hippocampal subdivisions and understand the etiopathology of many neurological disorders in future.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for proteomic analysis  FFPE Hippocampal sections of 10µ thickness from 5 cases (26 to 40 years) were used for the study. Each hippocampal subfields were manually dissected-out from the deparaffinized FFPE sections using micro-tip surgical knife with the aid of Stereo zoom microscope (Olympus SZ81 with Q-Imaging Scientific Camera) and were collected in separate vials containing tissue lysis buffer (4% SDS). Protein extraction was carried out using freeze-thaw cycle followed by sonication. Briefly, the samples were heated at 95ºC for 1 hour and frozen at -80ºC, which was repeated thrice followed by ultra-sonication (40% amplitude, 5 cycles) and centrifuged at 14,000 RPM for 20 min. Protein lysates of these subfields were subjected to reduction using 10 mM dithiothreitol at 60⁰ C for 30 min and alkylation using 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in dark followed by acetone precipitation. The resulted flocculent was pelleted by centrifugation at 10,000 RPM for 10 min; the proteolysis was carried out using Mass Spec Grade Trypsin/Lys-C Mix in 1:50 (trypsin: protein) ratio with overnight incubation at 37ºC. Peptide digests were labeled using 6-plex TMT reagents, and fractionated using basic-RPLC. The fractionated samples were dried and then cleaned by Sep-Pak C18 Cartridge prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis Mass spectrometry analysis was carried out in triplicates on Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) interfaced with Proxeon Easy-nLC II system (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The samples were reconstituted in LC-MS grade 0.1% formic acid and loaded on a pre-analytical column (2 cm x 75 μm, Magic C18 Aq) (Michrom Bioresources, Inc.) at a flow rate of 3 µL/min. Peptides were then resolved on an analytical column (20 cm x 75µm, Magic C18 Aq) using an increasing gradient of 5% to 30% of solvent B (95% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min for 120 min. The data dependent acquisition of MS spectra in the range of 400-1600 m/z was carried out using Orbitrap mass analyzer with a mass resolution of 120,000 at 200 m/z at MS level, 30,000 resolutions at MS/MS level. Higher energy collision dissociation was selected as the fragmentation mode with 37% normalized collision energy. The automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 2 x 106 ions for full MS, 1 x 106 ions for MS/MS, respectively. Internal calibration was executed using lock-mass from ambient air (m/z 445.1200025).  Data Analysis The raw data MS/MS were carried out using SEQUEST and MASCOT search algorithms using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) against Human RefSeq protein database (Version 89). Trypsin was specified as protease with 2 missed cleavages. Oxidation of methionine was selected as dynamic modification whereas; fixed modifications were set to carbamidomethylation of cysteine, TMT modification at N-termini of the peptide and ɛ amine of lysine residue. The precursor ion mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.05 Da was allowed during the search. The identifications were filtered using 1% false discovery rate (FDR) at PSM and peptide level, which was estimated by searching the data against the decoy database. Reporter ions quantifier node of PD 2.2 was used for relative quantitation of proteins identified. For statistical analysis we used Perseus proteomics software (version 1.6.15.0) where student’s T-test was performed to calculate p-values. The fold change cutoff of 1.5 was applied to determine significantly altered proteins.

### Publication Abstract
<b>Background:</b> Distinct hippocampal subfields are known to get affected during aging, psychiatric disorders, and various neurological and neurodegenerative conditions. To understand the biological processes associated with each subfield, it is important to understand its heterogeneity at the molecular level. To address this lacuna, we investigated the proteomic analysis of hippocampal subfields&#x2500;the cornu ammonis sectors (CA1, CA2, CA3, CA4) and dentate gyrus (DG) from healthy adult human cohorts. <b>Findings:</b> Microdissection of hippocampal subfields from archived formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue sections followed by TMT-based multiplexed proteomic analysis resulted in the identification of 5,593 proteins. Out of these, 890 proteins were found to be differentially abundant among the subfields. Further bioinformatics analysis suggested proteins related to gene splicing, transportation, myelination, structural activity, and learning processes to be differentially abundant in DG, CA4, CA3, CA2, and CA1, respectively. A subset of proteins was selected for immunohistochemistry-based validation in an independent set of hippocampal samples. <b>Conclusions:</b> We believe that our findings will effectively pave the way for further analysis of the hippocampal subdivisions and provide awareness of its subfield-specific association to various neurofunctional anomalies in the future. The current mass spectrometry data is deposited and publicly made available through ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the data set identifier PXD029697.

### Keywords
Immunohistochemistry, Spliceosome, Dentate gyrus, Coronu ammonis, Subfields, Manual-microdissection, Formalin fixed paraffin embedded tissue

### Affiliations
Institute of Bioinformatics, Bangalore, Karnataka, India.
Professor and Deputy Director, Centre for Systems Biology and Molecular Medicine, Yenepoya Research Center, Yenepoya (Deemed to be University), Mangalore 575018, India

### Submitter
Keshava Prasad T. S.

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. T. S. Keshava Prasad
Professor and Deputy Director, Centre for Systems Biology and Molecular Medicine, Yenepoya Research Center, Yenepoya (Deemed to be University), Mangalore 575018, India


