### Accession
PXD042545

### Title
SNORA33 Knockdown in chondrocytes

### Description
Background: In the experiment where we exposed chondrocytes of 4 healthy donors to OA-SF for 14 days we found several 2’O-methylation and pseudouridylation sites to be differentially modified in OA-SF condition compared to control (regular medium condition). We linked these PTMs to box C/D and H/ACA snoRNAs and selected 7 sites for validation. We did a CRISR/Cas9 mediated knock-down (KD) (not a complete knock-out (KO), as we didn’t pick clones) of these seven selected snoRNAs. Out of these seven snoRNAs, snoRNA33 knock-down stood out as the pseudouridylation at the corresposing site basically disappeared. We also saw differences in translation initiation and fidelity in snoRNA33 depleted cells. Therefore we decided to explore whether the ribosome composition (core and associated ribosomal proteins) is different in cells lacking snoRNA33 = RiboProteome samples (RP) and whether the proteome of these cells is different = Proteome samples (P). In both cases we used a GFP targeting CRISPR/Cas9 cell line as a control.

### Sample Protocol
A day before seed 2x6ww at 30k/cm2 per each sample. Harvesting: Wash cells 2x with cold 0.9% NaCl. Collect cells by scraping in 200 µl /well of freshly prepared 25mM ammonium bicarbonate HPLC grade water (AmBic) (Sigma) supplemented with Benzonase nuclease (Merck Millipore) and protease inhibitors. Sonicate samples with a rod sonicator on ice. Spin down, 4C, 10 min. Aliquot the supernatant into new tubes, flash freeze and store at -80⁰C. Standard trypsin-Lysc digestion. Samepls run on a 2 hour gradient.

### Data Protocol
Sample raw files were input into Progenesis QI for relative quantification. Files attached to this accession are individual files for each sample.

### Publication Abstract
Eukaryotic ribosomes are complex molecular nanomachines translating genetic information from mRNAs into proteins. There is natural heterogeneity in ribosome composition. The pseudouridylation (&#x3c8;) of ribosomal RNAs (rRNAs) is one of the key sources of ribosome heterogeneity. Nevertheless, the functional consequences of &#x3c8;-based ribosome heterogeneity and its relevance for human disease are yet to be understood. Using HydraPsiSeq and a chronic disease model of non-osteoarthritic primary human articular chondrocytes exposed to osteoarthritic synovial fluid, we demonstrated that the disease microenvironment is capable of instigating site-specific changes in rRNA &#x3c8; profiles. To investigate one of the identified differential rRNA &#x3c8; sites (28S-&#x3c8;4966), we generated <i>SNORA22</i> and <i>SNORA33</i> KO SW1353 cell pools using LentiCRISPRv2/Cas9 and evaluated the ribosome translational capacity by <sup>35</sup>S-Met/Cys incorporation, assessed the mode of translation initiation and ribosomal fidelity using dual luciferase reporters, and assessed cellular and ribosomal proteomes by LC-MS/MS. We uncovered that the depletion of <i>SNORA33</i>, but not <i>SNORA22</i>, reduced 28S-&#x3c8;4966 levels. The resulting loss of 28S-&#x3c8;4966 affected ribosomal protein composition and function and led to specific changes in the cellular proteome. Overall, our pioneering findings demonstrate that cells dynamically respond to disease-relevant changes in their environment by altering their rRNA pseudouridylation profiles, with consequences for ribosome function and the cellular proteome relevant to human disease.

### Keywords
Human, Ribosome, Snora33

### Affiliations
University of Liverpool

### Submitter
Mandy Peffers

### Lab Head
Dr Mandy Jayne Peffers
University of Liverpool


