### Accession
PXD038968

### Title
Association of HMG20A to H2A.Z, PWWP2A and NuRD complex

### Description
Specialized chromatin-binding proteins are required for DNA-based processes during development. We recently established PWWP2A as a direct histone variant H2A.Z interactor involved in mitosis and craniofacial development. Here, we identify the H2A.Z/PWWP2A-associated protein HMG20A as part of several chromatin-modifying complexes, including NuRD, andshow that it localizes to distinct genomic regulatory regions. Hmg20a depletion causes severe head and heart developmental defects in Xenopus laevis. Our data indicate that craniofacial malformations are caused by defects in neural crest cell (NCC) migration and cartilage formation. These developmental failures are phenocopied in Hmg20a-depleted mESCs, which show inefficient differentiation into NCCs and cardiomyocytes (CM). Consequently, loss of HMG20A, which marks open promoters and enhancers, results in chromatin accessibility changes and a striking deregulation of transcription programs involved in epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and differentiation processes. Collectively, our findings implicate HMG20A as part of the H2A.Z/PWWP2A/NuRD-axis and reveal it as a key modulator of intricate developmental transcription programs that guide the differentiation of NCCs and CMs.

### Sample Protocol
Nuclei of GFP-HMG20A and GFP expressing HK cells were isolated by incubation with 0.3% Triton-X-100 PBS for 10 minutes at 4°C and washed three times in PBS, before being resolved in 500 µl freshly prepared Ex100 buffer (10 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 100 mM NaCl, 1.5 MgCl2, 10% Glycerol, 10 mM β-Glycerol phosphate, 1 mM DTT, 2 mM Cacl2). Chromatin was digested with 150 U micrococcal nuclease (Thermofischer Scientific) for 20 minutes at 26°C. The digestion was stopped by adding 10 mM EGTA and transfer to 4°C. After centrifugation for 10 minutes at 13,000 RPM, 4°C supernatants containing mononucleosomes were transferred to fresh reaction tubes. To assess integrity of mononucleosomes 10 µL where are taken, containing DNA fragments isolated using PCR purification columns (QIAGEN) and subjected to agarose gel electrophoresis. Extracts containing soluble mononucleosomes were incubated with 40 µL GFP-TRAP beads (Chromotek) overnight at 4°C rotating end over end. Beads were washed twice with 1 ml of 150 mM IP wash buffer 1 (10 mM Tris pH 8.1, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% Nonidet P40 substitute (v/v)), and 1 ml of 150 mM IP wash buffer 2 ((10 mM Tris pH 8.1, 150 mM NaCl). For label free quantitative mass spectrometry, precipitated proteins were eluted for 30 minutes at 37 °C, shaking at 1400 rpm in the dark in 50 µl elution buffer (2M Urea, 50 mM Tris pH 8.1, 2 mM DTT, 20 µg/mL Trypsin (Trypsin Gold, Promega)). Eluted peptides in the supernatant were transferred to a fresh reaction tube. The remaining peptides bound to the beads were alkylated/eluted in 50 µl alkylation buffer (2M Urea, 50 mM Tris pH 8.1, 2 mM DTT, 20 µg/mL 10 mM chloroacetamide) for 5 minutes, 37 °C, shaking at 1400 rpm in the dark. Both eluates were combined and eluted peptides were further alkylated and digested by trypsin over night at 25 °C shaking at 800 rpm in the dark. Trypsin digestion was stopped by adding 1% trifluoroacetic acid (Thermo Fischer Scientific). Peptides were subjected to label free quantitative mass spectrometry, comparing peptides originating from GFP against GFP-HMG20A expressing cells. Mass spectrometry experiments were performed twice (biological replicates) with 3 technical replicates each. Peptides were analyzed by reversed-phase liquid chromatography on an EASY-nLC 1000 or 1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Odense, Denmark) coupled to a Q Exactive plus or HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). HPLC columns of 50 cm length and an inner diameter of 75 µm were in-house packed with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 1.9µm particles (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany). Peptide mixtures were separated using linear gradients of 120 or 140 minutes (total run time + washout) and a two-buffer system: buffer A++ (0.1% formic acid) and buffer B++ (0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile). The mass spectrometer wasoperated in a data-dependent top 10 or top 15 mode. Peptides were fragmented by higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy of 27.

### Data Protocol
The MS raw data were processed using MaxQuant software version 1.4.3.13. Fragmentationspectra were searched against a human sequence database obtained from Uniprot in May 2013 and a file containing frequently observed contaminants such as human keratins. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification; N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications. Trypsin was chosen as specific enzyme, with 2 maximum missed cleavages allowed. The protein and peptide identifications were filtered at 1% FDR. Label-free quantification was performed using the MaxLFQ algorithm integrated in MaxQuant. The match between runs option was enabled with a matching time window of 0.5 min and an alignment time window of 20 min. All other parameters were left at standard settings. MaxQuant output tables were analysed in Perseus version 1.5.8.6 as follows: After deleting proteins only identified with modified peptides, hits to the reverse database, contaminants and proteins with one or less razor and unique peptides, label-free intensities were log2 transformed.  Proteins were then required to have 3 valid values in at least one triplicate; then the remaining missing values in the data matrix were imputed with values representing a normal distribution around the detection limit of the mass spectrometer. Now, a two-sample t-test was performed to identify proteins enriched in the GFP-HMG20A pull-down compared to the input control. Only those proteins were kept for further analysis. S0 and FDR parameters were set at 0.5 and 0.05, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Specialized chromatin-binding proteins are required for DNA-based processes during development. We recently established PWWP2A as a direct histone variant H2A.Z interactor involved in mitosis and craniofacial development. Here, we identify the H2A.Z/PWWP2A-associated protein HMG20A as part of several chromatin-modifying complexes, including NuRD, and show that it localizes to distinct genomic regulatory regions. Hmg20a depletion causes severe head and heart developmental defects in Xenopus laevis. Our data indicate that craniofacial malformations are caused by defects in neural crest cell (NCC) migration and cartilage formation. These developmental failures are phenocopied in Hmg20a-depleted mESCs, which show inefficient differentiation into NCCs and cardiomyocytes (CM). Consequently, loss of HMG20A, which marks open promoters and enhancers, results in chromatin accessibility changes and a striking deregulation of transcription programs involved in epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and differentiation processes. Collectively, our findings implicate HMG20A as part of the H2A.Z/PWWP2A/NuRD-axis and reveal it as a key modulator of intricate developmental transcription programs that guide the differentiation of NCCs and CMs.

### Keywords
Chromatin, Ap-ms, Hk cells, Hmg20a

### Affiliations
MPI of Biochemistry
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Dept. of Proteomics and Signal Transduction

### Submitter
Alexander Reim

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Dept. of Proteomics and Signal Transduction


