### Accession
PXD015409

### Title
Development of a maleimide-based chemical proteomic method for quantitative analysis of cysteine reactivity

### Description
Cysteine is the most intrinsically nucleophilic residue in proteins and serves as a sentinel against increasing reactive oxygen species (ROS) via reversible thiol oxidation. Despite the importance of Cys oxidation in understanding biological stress response, it remains largely unknown and a major analytical challenge to determine which protein Cys-sites are the most reactive toward ROS. Herein, we describe initial coverage and sensitivity of a chemical proteomic method to quantify site-specific Cys reactivity using a maleimide-activated, thiol-specific probe (N-propargylmaleimide, NPM).

### Sample Protocol
Wild-type Chlamydomonas reinhardtii strain CC-2895 6145c mt- cells were cultivated photoheterotrophically in 250 mL flasks holding 100 mL of Tris-acetate-phosphate (TAP) liquid media. Cultures were maintained at 22 °C on an Innova 2000 platform shaker (New Brunswick Scientific, Enfield, CT) at 120 RPM under constant illumination (100 µmol photons m-2 s-1). For all experiments, biological replicates were simultaneously grown to mid-log phase (OD750 ~0.5) before harvest. Cells were harvested by centrifuging for 2 min at 3220 RCF and discarding the supernatant. Cell pellets were flash-frozen using liquid nitrogen and stored at -80 °C until use.  Frozen cell pellets (0.7 g from 100 mL culture) were lysed in 10 mL of PBS with 0.5% SDS, 0.1% Triton X-100, and ¼ tablet of cOmplete, EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche, Basel, Switzerland). Reduced cysteine thiols were alkylated using N-propargylmaleimide (NPM) label (from 10 mM NPM in DMSO) and the reaction was incubated for 1 h before centrifuging for 5 min at 3220 RCF and 4 °C to form a white pellet of cell debris. The supernatant was added to 10 mL of cold acetone and incubated for 30 min at -20 °C before centrifuging to collect proteins. The acetone supernatant was discarded and protein pellets were resuspended in 20 mL of PBS with 0.25% SDS and 4 M urea by aspirating back and forth with a pipette. Protein concentration was estimated using the CB-X Protein Assay (G-Biosciences, St. Louis, MO) and normalized to 1 mg/mL with resuspension buffer. For MS-based quantitative thiol-reactivity profiling (QTRP), protein lysates (500 µg each) were mixed sequentially with 20 µM DADPS biotin-azide (from 1 mM in DMSO), 100 µM THPTA (from 5 mM in water), 1 mM CuSO4∙5H2O (from 50 mM in water), and 2.5 mM sodium ascorbate (from 125 mM in water). Samples were incubated for 1 h and the CuAAC reaction was quenched with 10 mM EDTA (from 500 mM, pH 8 in water) before adding 1 mL of cold acetone to precipitate proteins. Samples were incubated for 30 min at -20 °C before centrifuging for 5 min at 10,000 RCF and 4 °C to collect proteins. The acetone supernatant was discarded and protein pellets were resuspended in 1 mL of PBS with 0.25% SDS by aspirating back and forth with a 1-mL pipette. Streptavidin-agarose resin (100 µL) was added to each protein sample and incubated with end-over-end rotation for 1 h. Each slurry was transferred to a MobiSpin column (Boca Scientific, Westwood, MA) and washed (400 µL) using PBS with 0.25% SDS followed by PBS. the washed resin was resuspended in 250 µL of PBS with 1 M urea and bound proteins were reduced with 10 mM TCEP (from 500 mM, neutral pH) for 15 min and then alkylated using 30 mM IAM (from 500 mM in water) for 30 min. Samples were briefly centrifuged to remove excess reagents and resuspended in PBS with 1 M urea (250 µL) before adding 2.5 µg of Trypsin Gold (Promega, Madison, WI) and digesting for 16 h. Resin was washed (400 µL) using PBS and water before peptides were eluted by cleaving the DADPS tag with 2% formic acid in water (250 µL) for 15 min with agitation. The resin was washed twice with 1% formic acid in 50% acetonitrile (200 µL) and combined with the eluate. Samples were frozen at -80 °C before drying by vacuum centrifugation and resuspending (500 µL) with 0.1% TFA in water. Samples were SPE desalted and analyzed using a nanoACQUITY UPLC (Waters, Milford, MA) coupled to a TripleTOF 5600 mass spectrometer (Sciex, Framingham, MA).

### Data Protocol
For detailed information about custom variable modifications used in database searching, please refer to the publication. Label-free quantification using Progenesis QI for proteomics v2.0, database searching with Mascot v2.5.1, and data processing using R v3.5.1. Raw MS data files were given names including “NPM9” for the buffer compatibility study. The NPM concentration series included “NPM11” in the file names, where “ELU” designated site-centric MS-based QTRP and “FT” for indirect QTRP.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cysteine oxidation, Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, Thiol-reactivity profiling, Chemical proteomics

### Affiliations
Graduate Research Assistant
Department of Chemistry, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA

### Submitter
Evan McConnell

### Lab Head
Dr Leslie M. Hicks
Department of Chemistry, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA


