### Accession
PXD030203

### Title
full length protein sequencing method based on less specific and unspecific hydrolysis strategies 2

### Description
We describe a new strategy for LC-MS/MS based full length protein sequencing. Protein samples were unspecific hydrolyzed by three different methods(proteinase K, papain and microwave-assisted acid hydrolysis) to improve overlapping degree of peptides. After LC-MS/MS analysis, peptide sequences were gernated by de novo peptide sequencing program Pnovo. A new sequence assembly program, based on de brujin graph and Overlap-Layout-Consensus strategy, was desined to generate full length protein sequence using Pnovo results.

### Sample Protocol
1)Sample preparation: 250 μg of the dry protein powder was dissolved in 250 μl Tris-HCl buffer with 8 M urea, pH 7.9. DTT was added to concentration of 12.5 mM, followed by incubating at 37°C for 1 hour. IAA was then added to concentration of 30mM, followed by reacting 30 min in the dark place at room temperature. After reductive alkylation, the protein solution was exchanged to 10kDa MWCO filter, and centrifuged 12,000 × g for 10 min. Cleaning fluid was used to repeat the centrifugation process with three times (for proteinase K strategy, the cleaning fluid is 0.1M Tris-HCl at a pH of 7.9; for papain strategy, the cleaning fluid is mixture of 0.1 M Tris-HCl, 0.02 M cysteine hydrochloride and 0.02 M EDTA at a pH of 8; for MAAH strategy, the cleaning fluid is deionized water). The remaining volume was kept about 40 ul 2)hydrolysis:  Proteinase K digestion: The remaining volume was added 0.1M Tris-HCl to 250 ml, and vibrated for 5 min. Proteinase K solution was added to a final protease-to-protein ratio of 1:50 (w:w). The tubes were incubated at 37°C for 5 min. The digestion was stopped using phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF) at 5 mM final concentration. The tubes were vibrated for 5 min and centrifuged 12,000 × g for 10 min. The digests were desalted using C18 Tips, dried in a speed-vac, and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid. Papain digestion: The remaining volume was added mixture of 0.1 M Tris-HCl, 0.02 M cysteine hydrochloride and 0.02 M EDTA to 250 ml, and vibrated for 5 min. Papain solution (incubate 0.02 M papain in 0.1 M Tris-HCl, 0.02 M cysteine hydrochloride, 0.02 M EDTA for 2 min at 37°C) was added to a final protease-to-protein ratio of 1:50 (w:w). The tubes were incubated at 37°C for 5 min. The digestion was stopped using phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF) at 5 mM final concentration. The tubes were vibrated for 5 min and centrifuged 12,000 × g for 10 min. The digests were desalted, dried, and resuspended as described above. Microwave-assisted acid hydrolysis: The MAAH strategy was referred to Savidor. The remaining volume was add HCl to a final concentration of 3 M and microwaved for 4 min. The digests were desalted, dried, and resuspended as described above 3)LC-MS/MS: The mobile phase was as follows: Phase A, MS grade water with 0.1% formic acid; phase B, acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid. The nano-HPLC column (150 um x 300 mm) and Trapping column (150 um x 20 mm) were self-made using reverse-phase C18 meterial (ReproSil-pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 ug, 3 A, Dr.Maisch GmbH). For each sample, 2ug peptides were loaded and eluted from the column into the mass spectrometer in 120 min with 600 nl/min mobile phase, using the following gradient: 6%-13% phase B from 0 min to 18 min, 13%-24% phase B from 18 min to 68 min, 23%-38% phase B from 68 min to 110 min and 38%-95% phase B from 110 min to 120 min. Mass spectrometry analysis was carried out in a data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. Twenty most intense precursor ions from a survey scan were selected for MS/MS from each duty cycle. MS1 resolution was set to 120,000 FWHM at m/z of 200, maximum injection time of 50 ms, scan range was 350-1500 m/z, and AGC target of 4e5. MS2 resolution was set to 15,000 FWHM at m/z of 200, maximum injection time of 22ms, isolation window 1.6 m/z, and AGC target of 50,000. All the tandem mass spectra were produced by higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) method, and collision energy was set to 31%

### Data Protocol
data processing protocol 1)pNovo de-novo peptide sequencing: Raw data was converted into mascot generic format (MGF) by pParse 2.0 with default parameters. The MGF files were analyzed using the pNovo 3.1.3 software. The analysis parameters included no enzyme specificity. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine was specified as variable modifications. The mass error was set to 10 p.p.m. for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. The top10 sequences were exported for each spectra. 2)PEAKS de-novo peptide sequencing: used the same parameters which was described above. 3)DeepNovoV2:  used the default parameters. 4)Assembly process: The top1 peptide sequences given by pNovo are used. These sequences were then turned into 7-mers, and the 7-mers were sorted in descending order according to their occurrence. A de brujin graph is then constructed. The contig of the longest path in the de brujin graph is extracted.  in the second stage, the contigs from different hydrolysis strategies are aligned with each other. The overlapped fragments, supported from multiple MS experiments, are considered as high confidence. Then, we use Overlap-Layout-Consensus strategy to assemble these high-confidence fragments and export the results as class1 sequences. The class1 sequences are then aligned to the longest contigs assembled from different hydrolysis strategies. Only the full-length matches are considered. The parts of the contigs that are not aligned to the class1 sequences were truncated. The rest parts are kept as class2 sequences. The class1 and class2 sequences are aligned with each other to remove redundancy. The top10 peptide sequences from pNovo were aligned to these expanded contigs. In this process, a peptide should be accurately mapped to two contigs to link them as a scaffold. and the resulted scaffolds are exported as class3 sequences. At last, three classes sequences are combined, and the repetitive sequences are removed. The top10 peptide sequences from pNovo are again aligned to the three classes of sequences. Only the aligned peptide sequence tag longer than 7 amino acids are kept. The amino acids at certain position may be inconsistent in multiple contigs. The final result at this position is selected according to the principle of the majority. This corrects sporadic errors generated in the MS experiments and/or assembly. The final sequence of the protein is determined by the measured mass.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Unspecific hydrolysis, Lc-ms/ms, Protein sequencing, De novo, Maah

### Affiliations
Jinan univierisy
Key Laboratory of function protein research of Guangdong Higer Education Institutes and MOE Key Laboratory of Tumor Molecular Biology, Institute of life and health engineering, Jinan University, Guangzhou, China

### Submitter
zhou zhong hua

### Lab Head
Dr Gong Zhang
Key Laboratory of function protein research of Guangdong Higer Education Institutes and MOE Key Laboratory of Tumor Molecular Biology, Institute of life and health engineering, Jinan University, Guangzhou, China


