### Accession
PXD008273

### Title
Workflow for metaproteome characterization in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF)

### Description
Establish a pipeline for identifying bacterial peptides from human bronchoalveolar lavage fluid samples.

### Sample Protocol
BALF was centrifuged at 500g for 10 minutes and the cell free supernatant was aliquoted and frozen at -80°C. For the mass spectrometric studies, the BALF was thawed, sonicated and centrifuged at 14,000g on ice for 10 minutes and sterile filtered with 0.22µm syringe filter.  BALF was concentrated and desalted with amicon 3,000kd molecular weight filter and 14 high abundance proteins were removed using Seppro Igy centrifugal depletion columns, additionally, hemoglobin was depleted from pneumonia and hematopoietic stem cell transplantation BALF samples with Hemoglobind. BALF samples were denatured with SDS, reduced with TCEP and alkylated with iodoacetamide and digested with Trypsin.  The digested peptides were desalted and cleaned with C18 column.

### Data Protocol
MS data was processed using Galaxy-P with two sequential analytical workflows for decoding the peptide sequence from fragment ion tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) spectra.  These included 1) Workflow 1; construction of a protein sequence database containing all expected host sequences and those predicted from genomic data on microbes expected to be found in the sample, used for matching MS/MS spectra to peptide sequences;  2) Workflow 2; identification of bacterial peptides in our dataset using sequence database searching software to match MS/MS spectra to peptide sequences and infer protein identifies. For workflow 1, we generated a human-oral-gastrointestinal microbiome search database by merging five publically available protein sequence databases. These included: a) Human UniProt database, b) contaminant proteins from the common Repository of Adventitious Proteins (cRAP), c) Oral Human Microbiome Project Reference Genome sequence data (HMRGD) oral database, d) Human Oral Microbiome Database, and e) Human Microbiome Project Gastrointestinal tract database. The merging step eliminated redundant sequences and generated a database which was used for the metaproteomic search. For peak-processing of RAW files, msconvert and MGF formatting tools were used successively to convert RAW files into mzml and MGF files for sequence database searching in the Galaxy-P framework. The dataset collection of MGF files of all iTRAQ RAW files were searched against the target-decoy version of the human oral-gastrointestinal microbiome search database with ProteinPilot version 5.0.0 to identify human and non-human peptides. ProteinPilot search was performed using the following search parameters; Cys alkylation: MMTS; Enzyme: Trypsin; Search Focus: Biological Modifications; Search Type: Thorough; iTRAQ 8plex quantitation. The workflow within Galaxy-P also generated a Peptide Summary output along with a False-Discovery Rate (FDR) summary of identifications from the ProteinPilot search.   In workflow 2, peptide-spectral matches identified from the ProteinPilot search that did not match to either the Human UniProt, the decoy or contaminant sequences were used to identify microbial sequences. Further analysis was limited to high confidence peptides with a corresponding Conf score ≤ 5% local FDR. We used advanced textual filter options to ensure that only high quality microbial peptide-spectral-matches were submitted for subsequent BLAST-P analysis. BLAST-P workflow was used to match microbial peptides against non-redundant NCBI database to generate a tabular format output. These tabular format files are used as input for MEGAN6 processing and parsed to extract phylogenetic and functional information.The MEGAN6 software package performs comprehensive taxonomic and functional analysis of metagenomic and metaproteomic data. MEGAN6 uses a “lowest-common-ancestor assignment algorithm” (LCA) to assign reads to taxa. Less specific peptides with hits assigned to multiple taxa are moved up to higher taxonomic levels in the phylogenetic tree generated by MEGAN6 (e.g., genus, family, phylum). The LCA parameters used to analyze the control and OPML datasets were as follows: Minimum BLAST Bit Score = 30, Maximum BLAST Expected Value = 3.0, Top Percent = 10, Minimum Support Percent = 0.0 (off), Minimum Support = 1, LCA Percent = 100, Minimum Complexity = –1.0 (off), and Use Minimal Coverage Heuristic = On. MEGAN6 (.rma file extensions) files were generated for both ARDS and HSCT datasets together. MEGAN6 was also used to classify microbial peptides into functional groups. A variety of ontological analysis tools (such as EggNOG, KEGG, SEED and InterPro2GO) are available within MEGAN6. All protein identifications accordingly were derived from the InterPro2GO ontology.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Balf, Metaproteome

### Affiliations
University of Minnesota
Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine University of Minnesota

### Submitter
Kevin Viken

### Lab Head
Dr Maneesh Bhargava
Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine University of Minnesota


