### Accession
PXD004244

### Title
hnRNP C is a key regulator of protein synthesis in mitosis

### Description
Stringent post-transcriptional regulation of mRNA fate is critical for proper cell division. To detect proteins involved in such regulation, we analyzed the composition of intact polysomal complexes from mitotic and interphase cells by quantitative mass-spectrometry. Using this approach, we detected increased association of several mRNA-binding proteins, including heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein C (hnRNP C), with mitotic polysomes. Immunofluorescence analysis, puromycin-sensitivity assays and nascent-chain pulldowns confirmed that hnRNP C interacts with polysome-bound mRNA during mitosis. Using a combination of pulsed SILAC and metabolic labeling, we found that knockdown of hnRNP C has a pervasive effect on both global and transcript-specific translation rates. Furthermore, ribosome profiling revealed that hnRNP C is involved in translation of mRNAs encoding components of the translation machinery and other mRNAs harboring a 5' terminal oligopyrimidine tract (5’ TOP). Taken together, these results suggest that hnRNP C is crucial for ribogenesis during mitosis; in its absence, production of ribosomal proteins and translation factors is impaired and translation rates are reduced during subsequent phases of the cell cycle.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture and synchronization of cells using double-thymidine block HeLa S3 cells or their stable shRNA expressing derivatives were cultured in DMEM supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum, 2 mM L-glutamine and 100 U/ml penicillin/streptomycin at 37°C in 5% CO2. For synchronization, cells were first treated with 2 mM thymidine for 18 h, released from the G1/S block into fresh supplemented DMEM for 8 h, and then treated for the second time with 2 mM thymidine for 18 h. Afterwards cells were again released from the G1/S block and grown in supplemented DMEM for either 8.5 h or 12 h before harvesting in M-phase or G1-phase, respectively. The efficiency of cell synchronization was assessed by propidium iodide staining and flow cytometry measurements.  Generation of stable cell lines and induction of hnRNP C knockdown  For knockdown experiments, HeLa S3 cells stably expressing an inducible shRNA against hnRNP C (termed sh-RNPC HeLa) or scrambled shRNA (termed scr-HeLa) were generated using the Inducible TRIPZ Lentiviral shRNA system. To induce knockdown, cells were grown in DMEM supplemented with 0.5 µg/ml Doxycyclin (Dox, Sigma) for 72 hr.   SILAC labeling, sample prep and MS analysis To identify proteins that are differentially associated with polysomes during mitosis, the entire proteome of HeLa S3 cells was fully labelled by cell culturing for 10 days in DMEM depleted of the natural amino acids lysine and arginine and supplemented with light (Lys0 and Arg0) or heavy (Lys8 and Arg10) versions of these amino acids (i.e. light or heavy SILAC medium, respectively). Labeled cells were then synchronized by double-thymidine block, then released at M- or G1-phase and subjected to polysome profiling. Protein was extracted from the pooled polysomal fractions using methanol:chloroform, resuspended in Urea buffer (6 M urea/2 M thiourea in 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5)) and concentrations were determined using the Bradford Protein assay (Bio-Rad). Equal protein amounts from M and G1 samples were combined prior to MS analysis. The experiment was done in triplicates, including one label swap.  For the pulsed SILAC (pSILAC) experiments, sh-RNPC- and scr-HeLa cells were first cultured for 10 days in light SILAC medium to achieve complete labeling of the steady-state proteome. Labeled cells were further cultured for 72 h in the presence or absence of Dox in light SILAC medium, to induce expression of shRNA. Then, cells were switched to heavy SILAC medium for 12 additional hours in the presence or absence of Dox, harvested in PBS and lysed in Urea buffer at room temperature. Sample preparation for MS: equal amounts of protein (20 µg) from each sample were reduced with 1 mM Dithiothreitol (DTT) and alkylated with 5 mM Iodoacetamide (IAA). Protein digestion was performed for three hours with endoprotease LysC (Wako chemicals; 1:100 enzyme to protein ratio) followed by an overnight digestion with sequencing grade modified Trypsin (Promega; 1:50 enzyme to protein ratio) at room temperature. Peptides were acidified with TFA and purified on C18 stageTips. Eluted peptides were separated using EASY-nLC-1000 HPLC system (Thermo Scientific) coupled to the Q Exactive Plus MS (Thermo Scientific). MS analysis was performed in a data dependent mode using a top 10 method for MS/MS acquisition.

### Data Protocol
The raw files NSLight or NSHeavy represent G1 (Light)/M (Heavy) and G1 (Heavy)/M (Light). Analysis was performed with the Maxquant Software (version 1.5.0.36) and MS/MS spectra were searched against the Uniprot database (May 2013) with the Andromeda search engine. FDR was set to 1% at both the peptide and protein levels. Multiplicity was set to two with light and heavy peptides specified and minimum ratio count for quantification was set as two. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was used as a fixed modification while methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Minimum peptide length allowed was six amino acids and the maximum number of missed cleavages was set to two. Raw intensities were normalized using intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ). All subsequent data analyses were performed by Perseus (1.5.0.19). The data was filtered to remove reverse identified, only identified by site and potential contaminants. Volcano plots were generated using a 2-sided Student T-test with FDR=0.05, S=0.1. ANOVA test was performed on grouped replicates with FDR=0.01 and S0=0. Hierarchical clustering of proteins was performed after z-score normalization of the data, using Euclidean distances.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Translation, Mitosis, Ribosomes, Proteomics, Cell cycle, Silac

### Affiliations
Department of human molecular genetics and biochemistry, Sackler faculty of medicine, Tel Aviv University, Israel.
Weizmann Institute of Science

### Submitter
Tamar Geiger

### Lab Head
Dr Tamar Geiger
Department of human molecular genetics and biochemistry, Sackler faculty of medicine, Tel Aviv University, Israel.


