### Accession
PXD010621

### Title
Multi-Omic Profiling Reveals Dynamics of the Phased Progression of Pluripotency

### Description
Pluripotency is highly dynamic and progresses through a continuum of pluripotent stem-cell states. The two states that bookend the pluripotency continuum, naïve and primed, are well characterized, but our understanding of the intermediate states and transitions between them remain incomplete. Here, we dissect the dynamics of pluripotent state transitions underlying pre- to post-implantation epiblast differentiation. Through comprehensive mapping of the proteome, phosphoproteome, transcriptome, and epigenome of embryonic stem cells transitioning from naïve to primed pluripotency, we find that rapid, acute, and widespread changes to the phosphoproteome precede ordered changes to the epigenome, transcriptome, and proteome. Reconstruction of kinase-substrate networks reveals signaling cascades, dynamics, and crosstalk. Distinct waves of global proteomic changes mark discrete phases of pluripotency, with cell state-specific surface markers tracking pluripotent state transitions. Our data provide new insights into the multi-layered control of the phased progression of pluripotency and a foundation for modeling mechanisms regulating pluripotent state transitions (www.stemcellatlasorg).

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysates were processed using the EasyPhos platform. Detailed protocols are provided in the associated manuscript.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry RAW data were processed using MaxQuant and analysed using Perseus. Detailed settings are provided in the associated manuscript.

### Publication Abstract
Pluripotency is highly dynamic and progresses through a continuum of pluripotent stem cell states. The two states that bookend the pluripotency continuum, naive and primed, are well characterized, but our understanding of the intermediate states and transitions between them remains incomplete. Here, we dissect the dynamics of pluripotent state transitions underlying pre- to post-implantation epiblast differentiation. Through comprehensive mapping of the proteome, phosphoproteome, transcriptome, and epigenome of embryonic stem cells transitioning from naive to primed pluripotency, we find that rapid, acute, and widespread changes to the phosphoproteome precede ordered changes to the epigenome, transcriptome, and proteome. Reconstruction of the kinase-substrate networks reveals signaling cascades, dynamics, and crosstalk. Distinct waves of global proteomic changes mark discrete phases of pluripotency, with cell-state-specific surface markers tracking pluripotent state transitions. Our data provide new insights into multi-layered control of the phased progression of pluripotency and a foundation for modeling mechanisms regulating pluripotent state transitions (www.stemcellatlas.org).

### Keywords
Post-translational modification, Embryonic, Dynamic, Phosphorylation, Phosphoproteomics, Stem cell, Mesc, Signal transduction, Epilc, Easyphos, Proteomics, Differentiation, Mass spectrometry, Pluripotency

### Affiliations
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry
Proteomics

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry


