### Accession
PXD008989

### Title
PROTEOMIC ANALYSIS OF EARLY DIABETIC RETINOPATHY REVEALS MEDIATORS OF NEURODEGENERATIVE BRAIN DISEASES

### Description
The aim of the present study was to identify early changes in diabetic retinas using an unbiased proteomics approach. Proteomic profiles of control retinas were compared to diabetic retinas obtained from patients known to have no classic vascular lesions that clinically define diabetic retinas. The diabetic retinas were further split into two groups according to the presence or absence of glial activation as marker of progressive changes that may be associated with the early neurodegenerative process. By examining differentially expressed proteins at this preclinical stage, our aim was to acquire a clearer understanding of the complex cellular processes that initiate diabetic retinas.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extracts from the neuroretina were prepared by homogenization with RIPA buffer (R0278, Sigma; Madrid, Spain) containing protease inhibitor (P8340, Sigma; Madrid, Spain) and 20mM NaF, 2mM Na3VO4, 2mM PMSF. Extracts were cleared by micro-centrifugation at 10,000 ×g for 10 min at 4C. The supernatant was aliquoted and stored at -80C. A total of 60ug of protein (pooled from n=5 per group) were subjected to SDS-PAGE using 4-20% gel. Following electrophoresis, the gel was stained and each sample lane was cut into 16 fragments (1x3mm pieces). The fragments were placed in Eppendorf tubes and digested with trypsin using the following method. Briefly, fragments were destained with 8mg/ml (100mM) ammonium bicarbonate (NH4HCO3) in 50% acetonitrile (ACN) at pH=8.5. The samples were reduced with TCEP (30mg/ml) in H2O, 4 °C for 2 hours and then alkylated with iodoacetamide (IAA; 18mg/ml (100mM) in 8mg/ml NH4HCO3, freshly made and kept in the dark) at room temperature for 30 minutes. The alkylating buffer was removed and the samples were washed with destaining buffer. The gels fragments were dehydrated using acetonitrile (ACN). Samples were digested with trypsin (10ng/µl in 8mg/ml NH4HCO3) at 37 °C overnight. The tryptic peptides were transferred to fresh tubes. Additional peptides were extracted using 0.1% formic acid in 50% ACN and added to the original fractions. The samples were then filtered (NanoSep MF GHP 0.45µm) and concentrated prior to MS analysis.   Peptides were dissolved in 10uL starting mobile phase and 1 uL was loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap100 trapping column (100 um × 2 cm, C18, 5 um, 100 Å, Thermo) at a flow rate of 20 uL/min using 4% aqueous acetonitrile (ACN), and 0.1% formic acid (FA) as a mobile phase. The peptides were separated on an Acclaim PepMap RSLC column (75 µm × 15 cm, C18, 2 um, 100 Å, Thermo) with a 90-min 4% - 40% linear gradient of acetonitrile in water containing 0.1% formic acid. The gradient was delivered by a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano-LC system (Thermo) at 300 nL/min. An LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo) was set to acquire data using the following data-dependent parameters with default tune parameters: full FT MS scan at R 60,000 followed by 10 ion-trap MS2 scans on most intense precursors with CID activation. Only the precursors with charge states +2 and higher were selected for MS2; monoisotopic precursor selection was enabled, and the isolation window was 3 m/z. Dynamic exclusion duration was 30 seconds, repeated once over 15 second repeat duration.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectra were processed using Proteome Discoverer 1.4.0.288 (Thermo). Three batches of 16  raw data files each were  processed as MuDPIT experiments where each batch corresponded to one gel  lane cut into 16 pieces. Spectrum Selector node parameters were left at default/unchecked except the  precursor mass range: 700-6000 Da. Spectra were exported as mgf as part of the workflow. The MS2  data were analyzed with Sequest using the following parameters. Enzyme: trypsin, 1 MC; precursor  mass tolerance: 15 ppm; fragment mass tolerance 0.8 Da; modifications: Met oxidation and Asn and Gln  deamidation (dynamic), Cys carbamidomethylation (static). Decoy database search FDR targets were  0.01 - 0.05. The database contained reviewed human protein sequences (UP000005640) and protein  sequences of common contaminants (Thermo portal).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human retina, Diabetes

### Affiliations
Penn State
Penn State Eye Center, Penn State College of Medicine, Hershey Pennsylvania, USA

### Submitter
Tatiana Laremore

### Lab Head
Dr Jeffrey M. Sundstrom
Penn State Eye Center, Penn State College of Medicine, Hershey Pennsylvania, USA


