### Accession
PXD014080

### Title
Lipoylated proteins complex in mouse brown adipose tissue

### Description
Immunoprecipitation of lipoic acid followed by mass spectrometry analysis to identify the lipoylated proteins complex in mouse brown adipose tissue.

### Sample Protocol
For immunoprecipitation, protein extracts (500 µg) from interscapular BAT depots of wild-type mice at 10 weeks old were mixed with 500 µl lysis buffer containing 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, and 5 mM EDTA, and cOmplete protease inhibitors (Roche) and pre-incubated with Sepharose protein G (GE Healthcare). Anti-lipoic acid antibody was added to the lysate and rotated for 120 minutes at 4° C. Subsequently, protein G beads were added and the rotation was continued for additional 60 minutes. After washing with lysis buffer, the beads were eluted with pH 2.5 glycine-HCl buffer. The eluted complexes were TCA-precipitated, separated in a 4-20% gradient gel, and subsequently visualized by silver stain or Coomassie blue dye. In-gel trypsin digestion was performed according to the standard protocol. Briefly, gel pieces were dehydrated with acetonitrile for 10 min, followed by removal of acetonitrile.  Then, the gel pieces were with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution containing 12.5 ng/µl trypsin (Promega) at 37ºC for overnight.  A nanoLC/MS/MS system consisting of a Famos autosampler (LC Packings, San Francisco, CA) and an LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used with a capillary tip column (100 µm inner diameter x ~30 cm length) packed with 2.6 µm C18 silica beads.  Peptides were eluted with increasing concentrations of solvent B (97.5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid).

### Data Protocol
Peptide sequences (and hence protein identity) were determined by matching protein databases with the acquired fragmentation pattern by the software program, Sequest (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA).  All databases include a reversed version of all the sequences and the data was filtered to between a one and two percent peptide false discovery rate.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse, Brown adipose tissue, Lipoylated protein

### Affiliations
UCSF
1.UCSF Diabetes Center, CA, 94143, USA 2.Eli and Edythe Broad Center of Regeneration Medicine and Stem Cell Research, CA, 94143, USA 3.Department of Cell and Tissue Biology, University of California, San Francisco, CA94143, USA

### Submitter
Kazuki Tajima

### Lab Head
Dr Shingo Kajimura
1.UCSF Diabetes Center, CA, 94143, USA 2.Eli and Edythe Broad Center of Regeneration Medicine and Stem Cell Research, CA, 94143, USA 3.Department of Cell and Tissue Biology, University of California, San Francisco, CA94143, USA


