### Accession
PXD029713

### Title
Apolipoprotein F in hyperlipidemia

### Description
Apolipoprotein F (ApoF) modulates lipoprotein metabolism by selectively inhibiting cholesteryl ester transfer protein (CETP) activity on LDL. This ApoF activity requires that it is bound to LDL. How hyperlipidemia alters total plasma ApoF and its binding to LDL are poorly understood. In this study, total ApoF and LDL-bound ApoF were quantified by ELISA. Plasma ApoF is increased 34% in hypercholesterolemic plasma. In hypertriglyceridemic plasma, ApoF was statistically unchanged. However, in donors with combined hypercholesterolemia and hypertriglyceridemia, the elevated triglyceride ameliorated the rise in ApoF caused by hypercholesterolemia alone. Compared to normolipidemic LDL, hypercholesterolemic LDL contained ~2-fold more ApoF per LDL particle, whereas ApoF bound to LDL in hypertriglyceridemia plasma was < 20% of control. To understand the basis for altered association of ApoF with hyperlipidemic LDL, the physiochemical properties of LDL were modified in vitro by CETP ± LCAT activities. The time-dependent change in LDL lipid composition, proteome, core and surface lipid packing, LDL surface charge, and LDL size caused by these factors were compared with the ApoF binding capacity of these LDL. Only LDL particle size correlated with ApoF binding capacity. This positive association between LDL size and ApoF content was confirmed in hyperlipidemic plasmas. Similarly, when in vitro-produced, enlarged LDL with elevated ApoF binding capacity were incubated with LPL to reduce their size, ApoF binding was reduced by 90%. Thus, plasma ApoF levels and the activation status of this ApoF are differentially altered by hypercholesterolemia and hypertriglyceridemia. LDL size is a key determinate of ApoF binding and activation.

### Sample Protocol
Nine human LDL samples were first separated on a SDS-PAGE in 9 lanes. Each lane was cut into 4 areas for trypsin digestion. The areas were cut to minimize excess blank polyacrylamide, divided into a number of smaller pieces. The gel pieces washed with water and dehydrated in acetonitrile. The bands were then reduced with DTT and alkylated with iodoacetamide prior to the in-gel digestion. All bands were digested in-gel using trypsin, by adding 5 μL 10 ng/μL trypsin in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and incubating overnight digestion at room temperature to achieve complete digestion. The peptides that were formed were extracted from the polyacrylamide in two aliquots of 30μL 50% acetonitrile with 5% formic acid. These extracts were combined and evaporated in Speedvac and then resuspended in 1% acetic acid to make up a final volume of 30 μL for LC-MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS system was a ThermoFisher LTQ-Obitrap Elite hybrid mass spectrometer system. The HPLC column was a Dionex 15 cm x 75 μm id Acclaim Pepmap C18, 2μm, 100 Å reversed phase capillary chromatography column. Five μL volumes of the extract were injected and the peptides eluted from the column by an acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid gradient at a flow rate of 0.3 μL/min were introduced into the source of the mass spectrometer on-line. The nano electrospray ion source is operated at 1.9 kV. The digest was analyzed using the data dependent multitask capability of the instrument acquiring full scan mass spectra to determine peptide molecular weights and product ion spectra to determine amino acid sequence in successive instrument scans. This mode of analysis produces approximately 15000 collisionally induced dissociation (CID) spectra of ions ranging in abundance over several orders of magnitude. Please note that not all CID spectra are derived from peptides. The data were analyzed using MaxQuant V1.6.3.3 with the search engine Andromeda which is integrated in MaxQuant software and the parameters used were default settings for an Orbitrap instrument. The database used to search the MS/MS spectra was the human Swissprot protein database containing 5272 entries. The CID spectra collected in the experiment were used for peptide sequencing and protein identification, and the full scans were used for peptide precursor intensity calculations. False discovery rate of protein was set at 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lipoproteins, Hypercholesterolemia, Apolipoprotein f, Plasma lipid transfer proteins, Hypertriglyceridemia, Ldl metabolism, Lipid biochemistry, Apolipoproteins, Cholesteryl ester transfer protein

### Affiliations
Cleveland Clinic
Department of Cardiovascular and Metabolic Sciences, NC10, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, 9500 Euclid Ave., Cleveland, OH 44195

### Submitter
Ling Li

### Lab Head
Dr Richard E. Morton
Department of Cardiovascular and Metabolic Sciences, NC10, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, 9500 Euclid Ave., Cleveland, OH 44195


