### Accession
PXD038706

### Title
Comparison of the  photoprotection mechanism in Chlorella Ohadii and Chlamydomonas reinhardtii

### Description
Light is the driving force of photosynthesis. However, excessive light can be harmful. Photoinhibition, or lightinduced photodamage, is one of the key processes limiting photosynthesis. When the absorbed light exceeds the amount that can be dissipated by photosynthetic electron flow and other processes, damaging radicals are formed that mostly inactivate photosystem II (PSII). A well defined mechanism that protects the photosynthetic apparatus from photoinhibition has been described in the model green alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii and plants. Chlorella ohadii is a green microalga, isolated from biological desert soil crusts, that thrives under extreme high light (HL) in which other organisms do not survive. Here, we show that this alga evolved unique protection mechanisms distinct from those of C. reinhardtii and plants. When grown under extreme HL, significant structural changes were noted in the C. ohadii thylakoids, including a drastic reduction in the antennae and the formation of stripped core PSII, lacking its outer and inner antennae. This is accompanied by a massive accumulation of protective carotenoids and proteins that scavenge harmful radicals. At the same time, several elements central to photoinhibition protection in C. reinhardtii, such as psbS, the stress related light harvesting complex (LHCSR), PSII protein phosphorylation and state transitions are entirely absent or were barely detected in C. ohadii.

### Sample Protocol
C. ohadii was grown in Tris-acetate-phosphate (TAP) medium at 28 °C, as previously described (PMID: 33725388). Cultures were grown under white light of either 2000 (high light HL) or 100 μmols photons m-2s-1 (low light LL). To achieve full acclimation to HL, the cells were grown in HL for 6 generations and maintained below OD750nm=0.7 to prevent self-shading. Chlamydomonas reinhardtii were grown in TAP medium at LL conditions.  Transitions of C. Chlamydomonas to states I and II were induced by incubating cells 20 min at 100 micro mols photons m-2s-1 with 50 microM DCMU or 20 microM FCCP, respectively (Bulte, L et al Biochim. Biophys. Acta Bioenerg. 1020: 72–80. 1990). Thylakoids were extracted as previously described (PMID: 33725388). Desalted peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA)., coupled online to Evosep One HPLC (EVOSEP). Samples were directly loaded in a 15 cm analytical column (EVOSEP) and resolved at 220 nl/min with a 44 min gradient. Mass spectrometry analysis was performed in positive mode, at a range of m/z 300–1800, resolution 60000 for MS1 and 15000 for MS2, using a repetitively full MS scan, followed by high-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) of the 18 most dominant ions selected from the first MS scan.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed using MSFragger version 3.5 (PMID: 28394336) via FregPipe version 18.0 (https://fragpipe.nesvilab.org/) following conversion to mzML format using MSConvert version 3.0.22182 (PMID: 23051804) . Searches were conducted separately for C. ohadii and C. reinhardtii samples using MSFragger's “Phospho LFQ” workflow configuration. C. reinhardtii search was done against protein sequences downloaded from Uniprot (19790 sequences, 20/11/2022). As the proteome of C. ohadii is yet unavailable, the C. sorokiniana proteome database, downloaded from UniProt (UP000239899), was used for protein identification (20/11/2022, 10201 sequences).

### Publication Abstract
While light is the driving force of photosynthesis, excessive light can be harmful. Photoinhibition is one of the key processes that limit photosynthetic productivity. A well-defined mechanism that protects from photoinhibition has been described. Chlorella ohadii is a green micro-alga, isolated from biological desert soil crusts, which thrives under extreme high light (HL). Here, we show that this alga evolved unique protection mechanisms distinct from those of the green alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii or plants. When grown under extreme HL, a drastic reduction in the size of light harvesting antennae occurs, resulting in the presence of core photosystem II, devoid of outer and inner antennas. This is accompanied by a massive accumulation of protective carotenoids and proteins that scavenge harmful radicals. At the same time, several elements central to photoinhibition protection in C. reinhardtii, such as psbS, light harvesting complex stress-related, photosystem II protein phosphorylation and state transitions are entirely absent or were barely detected. In addition, a carotenoid biosynthesis-related protein accumulates in the thylakoid membranes of HL cells and may function in sensing HL and protecting the cell from photoinhibition. Taken together, a unique photoinhibition protection mechanism evolved in C. ohadii, enabling the species to thrive under extreme-light intensities where other photosynthetic organisms fail to survive.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, Chlorella ohadii, Photosynthesis

### Affiliations
Technion
Faculty of Biology Technion Haifa 32000 Israel

### Submitter
Oded Kleifeld

### Lab Head
Dr Gadi Schuster
Faculty of Biology Technion Haifa 32000 Israel


