### Accession
PXD044877

### Title
Protein profiling of bovine colostrum and transition milk

### Description
The protein profile of bovine milk serum was characterised as milk transitions from colostrum to transition milk over the first 5 days of lactation. Samples were collected from first and third parity cows at days 0, 2, 5 (D0, D2, D5) after calving. Following isolation of the milk serum fraction, label-free quantitative proteomics was carried out following normalisation by total protein concentration. Protein profiles indicated samples clustered by day postpartum, but not by parity. Proteins (n = 471) were identified and relative quantification was performed, with 199 protein groups showing altered abundance by day of lactation (fold change ≥ 2, P < 0.05). Elevated levels of immune proteins, including immunoglobulins and complement proteins were detected in colostrum with levels significantly decreasing by D2. These findings provide an outline of the dynamics of the protein profile of bovine milk and colostrum in early lactation.

### Sample Protocol
Milk/colostrum samples from D0, D2, D5 were centrifuged at 1400 rcf to isolate skim milk and then further ultracentrifugation at 100000 rcf was carried out to obtain clarified milk serum to be used for proteomics. Protein was precipitated from milk serum with 15% TCA, followed bycentrifugation and acetone washes of the protein pellet. Proteins were re-solubilised in 6M Urea, 2M Thiourea, 0.1M Tris-HCl pH 8 (UT buffer), and total protein concentration was measured using a Bradford protein assay. Protein (24 µg) was diluted with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (to < 1.3M UT concentration), reduced with DTT (5 mM final), alkylated with IAA (15 mM final) and trypsin digested (1 µg) overnight in the presence of ProteaseMax trypsin enhancer (0.01% final). Digestion was stopped with TFA (1% final), samples were dried and C18 clean-up was performed using Millipore Zip-Tips. Samples were dried again and resuspended in loading solution (2% acetonitrile, 0.05% TFA) for LC-MS/MS analysis (label-free relative quantitation). Peptides (0.75 µg) were separated on a 50 cm x 75 µm EASYspray PepMap C18 column (2 µm particles; Thermo) on a 135 min method using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano coupled to a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo). A gradient separation was performed: 3-10%B in first 10 min, 10-40%B across 90 min, wash step at 90%B, returning to 3%B for equilibration. Mass spectrometry (MS) settings were: MS: 70,000 resolution at 200 m/z. MS/MS: Top 15 method, 17,500 resolution at 200 m/z, normalised collision energy (NCE)=30. Singly charged ions were excluded and dynamic exclusion was set to 40 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched using MaxQuant (v 2.4.2.0) with the label-free quantitation (LFQ) algorithm, and match between runs function (0.4 min matching window). Parameters inlcuded: trypsin as enzyme, up to 2 missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation of cysteines as fixed modification, oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-termini as variable modifications. Default parameters were used including false discovery rates (FDR) for peptide specific motifs (PSMs) and proteins set to 0.01. A Bos taurus database (Uniprot; 47144 entries, downloaded July 2023) was used. The MaxQuant contaminants database was modified to remove all bovine entries as potential contaminants and the modified version was used. Resulting protein groups data was analysed using Perseus (v 2.0.10.0). Protein groups matching a contaminants or reverse database, or only identified by site were removed. Proteins identified by a single peptide were removed. Protein groups were only retained if they were detected in at least 4 biological replicates (from 6 total) in at least one time-point. Missing values were replaced by imputation from a normal distribution with a downshift (1.8). A 2-sample Student's t-test with permutation-based FDR was used to compare sample groups. Proteins with an adjusted P-value < 0.05 and a fold change ≥ 2 between comparator groups (time-points) were considered to be statistically significant differentially abundant proteins (SSDA).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Milk serum, Q-exactive, Colostrum, Label-free proteomics, Milk

### Affiliations
Department of Biology, Maynooth University, Ireland
Maynooth University

### Submitter
Rebecca Owens

### Lab Head
Dr Rebecca A.
Department of Biology, Maynooth University, Ireland


