### Accession
PXD036245

### Title
ONC201 in combination with paxalisib for the treatment of H3K27-altered diffuse midline glioma

### Description
Diffuse midline gliomas (DMG), including diffuse intrinsic pontine gliomas (DIPGs), are the most lethal of all childhood cancers. Palliative radiotherapy is the only proven life-prolonging treatment, with patient survival 9-11 months. ONC201 shows preclinical and emerging clinical efficacy in DIPG. Currently, little is known about the mechanisms of sensitivity/resistance of DIPGs to ONC201, or whether recurring genomic features influence response. Using a systems-biological approach, we show ONC201 elicits potent agonism of the mitochondrial protease, CLPP, driving proteolysis of electron transport chain (ETC) and tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle proteins. DIPGs harboring TP53-mutations show reduced sensitivity to ONC201. Molecular mechanisms identify metabolic adaptation and resistance to ONC201 regulated by redox-activated PI3K/Akt signaling, counteracted using the brain penetrant PI3K/Akt inhibitor, paxalisib, in both wt-TP53 and TP53-mutant DIPGs. The discoveries described within, coupled with the powerful anti-DIPG/DMG pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic properties of ONC201 and paxalisib inform the DIPG/DMG phase II combination clinical trial NCT05009992.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were purified from DIPG patient derived cell line pellets using ice-cold Na2CO3, with protease and phosphate inhibitors. Pellets were lysed by sociation for 4 x 10 sec and incubated at 4°C for 1 hour. Samples were ultracentrifuged at 100,000 x g for 90 min at 4°C (Optima MAX-TL, Beckman Coulter) to enrich for soluble and membrane proteins. Soluble proteins (200 µL Na2CO3) and membrane proteins were made to a final concentration of 6M Urea and 2M Thiourea. The proteins were then reduced in v/v 10 mM Dithiothreitol (DTT) for 1 hr at room temperature in the dark. Proteins were then alkylated in v/v 20 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Trypsin and Lys-C mix was added (1:30) and incubated at room temperature for 3 hrs. Triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, 50 mM, pH 7.8) was added to dilute urea to below 1 M and samples were incubated for at least 16 hours at room temperature to enable trypsin digestion. After digestion, formic acid was added to a final 2% concentration to membrane peptides and clarified by centrifugation at 14,000 x g for 10 min. A BSA trypsin digestion was made by preparing 1 mg/ 200 µL BSA in (1:5 of 6 M Urea and 2M Thiourea: 0.1 M Na2CO3). Adding 50 µL of 20 µg Trypsin to the BSA solution and incubating at room temperature for 24 hours allowed digestion. Samples were then diluted 6-fold using TEAB (50 mM, pH 7.8). Samples were desalted using SPE columns (Oasis), which are blocked beforehand using BSA trypsin digest. 100 µg of each sample (as determined by Qubit 2.0 Fluorometer quantification) was labelled with TMT 16 plex pro labelling tags according to manufacturer’s instructions. Samples were reconstituted in buffer A (20 mM ammonium formation, pH 9.3) and pH was adjusted to approximately 9 with 1 M TEAB or 25% ammonium hydroxide. Samples were shaken for 10 min and centrifuged at 20,000 RCF for at least 10 minutes. The cleared samples were fractionated by offline high-pH reverse phase fractionation using a Dionex Ultra 3000 uHPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using nano Ease M/Z Peptide CSH C18 column (130 A, 1.7 µM, 300 µM x 100 mm) (Waters). Non-modified peptides were fractionated into 97 fractions concatenated into 20 fractions, collected in a 96-well plate, using the following gradient: 2% buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 20% buffer A) over 14 min, 2-38% over 114 min, 38-95% over 15 min, held at 95% for 10 min and then 95-2% over 1 min. Samples were vacuum dried and stored at -20°C until LC-MS/MS analysis. For LC-MS/MS, samples were reconstituted in solvent A (0.1% formic acid) and loaded onto a pulled tip analytical column (fused silica, 20 cm x 75 µM) (CM Scientific) packed in-house with Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ (1.9 µM; Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany). LC-MS/MS was performed using EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled online to Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides were eluted according to the following gradient: 1-25% solvent B (95% acetonitrile, 0,1% formic acid) over 80 min, 25-40% over 10 min, 40-95% over 1 min and held at 95% for 5 min, then 95-1% over 1 min and held at 1% for 5 min. Full MS scan was acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 120,000 FWHM from 350-1500 m/z with 300% normalised AGC target and automatic maximum injection time. Higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) MS2 scan was acquired with a resolution of 45,000 FWHM and spectra recorded with first m/z mass fixed at 110 m/z. The settings for the HCD were as follows: isolation window of 0.7 m/z normalised AGC target value of 250%, maximum injection time of 100 ms for non-modified peptides, normalised collision energy of 32%, and dynamic exclusion of 30 s. The MS-MS2 cycle time was set to 3 s.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using Proteome Discoverer 2.5 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Sequest HT was used to search against UniProt Homo sapiens database (downloaded 03092020). Database searching parameters included up to three missed cleavages, precursor mass tolerance set to 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, while dynamic modifications included oxidation (M), phosphorylation (S, T, Y) and methylation (K). N-terminus dynamic modifications included Acetyl, Met-loss (M) and Met-loss+Acetyl (M). In addition, N-terminus TMTpro was set as fixed modification. An FDR rate of 1% was set at the peptide level to filter out target peptide spectrum matches over the decoy-peptide spectrum matches. To account for variations in sample injection, reporter ion abundances were normalized to TMT labels. For quantification and comparison, each ratio was transformed to log2 scale (log2 ratio).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Targeted therapies, Onc201, Dipg, Clpp agonist, Dmg

### Affiliations
1. Cancer Signalling Research Group, School of Biomedical Sciences and Pharmacy, College of Health, Medicine and Wellbeing, University of Newcastle, Callaghan, NSW, AUSTRALIA 2. Precision Medicine Research Program, Hunter Medical Research Institute, New Lambton Heights, NSW, AUSTRALIA 3. Paediatric Program, Mark Hughes Foundation Centre for Brain Cancer Research, College of Health, Medicine, and Wellbeing, Callaghan, NSW, AUSTRALIA
University of Newcastle

### Submitter
Zac Germon

### Lab Head
Dr Matt Dun
1. Cancer Signalling Research Group, School of Biomedical Sciences and Pharmacy, College of Health, Medicine and Wellbeing, University of Newcastle, Callaghan, NSW, AUSTRALIA 2. Precision Medicine Research Program, Hunter Medical Research Institute, New Lambton Heights, NSW, AUSTRALIA 3. Paediatric Program, Mark Hughes Foundation Centre for Brain Cancer Research, College of Health, Medicine, and Wellbeing, Callaghan, NSW, AUSTRALIA


