### Accession
PXD007220

### Title
DSS Microbiota LC-MS/MS

### Description
In the DSS-induced colitis model, the epithelial damage and resulting inflammation is restricted to the colon, with a potential influence on the microbial composition in the adjacent cecum. Several studies have reported changes of the gut microbiota in the DSS-induced colitis model and other mouse models of IBD. Furthermore, metaproteomics analysis of the gut microbiome in a mouse model of Crohn’s disease demonstrated that disease severity and location are microbiota-dependent, with clear evidence for the causal role of bacterial dysbiosis in the development of chronic ileal inflammation. We have developed a refined model of chronic DSS-induced colitis that reflects typical symptoms of human IBD without a risky body weight loss usually observed in DSS models [Hoffmann et al., submitted]. In this study, we used metaproteomics to characterize the disease-related changes in bacterial protein abundance and function in the refined model of DSS-induced colitis. To assess the structural and functional changes, we applied 16S rRNA gene sequencing and metaproteomics analysis of the intestinal microbiota in three different entities of the intestinal environment, i.e. colon mucus, colon content and cecum content.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial lysate was used for protein purification and tryptic digest according to a modified procedure. Briefly, protein concentration was determined using a BCA protein assay kit (Pierce Protein Biology Products, Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Rockford, USA). 40 µg (cecum and colon content samples) or 100 µg (colon mucus samples) of protein were precipitated in a 5-fold volume of acetone at -20°C overnight. Proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE as previously described [2]: cecum and colon content samples were run approx. 5 mm into the separating gel and the whole gel lane was cut out into one fraction; the colon mucus samples were run 15 mm into the separating gel and each lane was cut into 3 separate fractions for greater coverage of proteins. Samples were further processed by in-gel reduction and alkylation of cysteine residues, in-gel tryptic digest and elution as well as desalting of tryptic peptides. Samples were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid and peptide concentrations were determined using Nanodrop (NanoDrop2000, Thermo Scientific). For each LC-MS-run, 1 mg of peptides was injected into a Nano-HPLC (UltiMate 3000, Dionex/Thermo Fisher Scientific, Idstein, Germany). Peptides were first trapped for 3 min on a C18-reverse phase trapping column (Acclaim PepMap® 100, 75 µm x 2 cm, particle size 3 µM, nanoViper, Thermo Fisher), followed by separation on a C18-reverse phase analytical column (Acclaim PepMap® 100, 75 µm x 25 cm, particle size 3 µM, nanoViper, Thermo Fisher) using a two-step gradient (90 min from 4% to 30% B, then 30 min from 30% to 55% B ; A: 0.1% formic acid in MS-grade water; B: 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in MS-grade water) with a solvent flow-rate of 300 nL per minute and a column temperature of 35°C. Eluting peptides were ionized by a nano ion source (Advion Triversa Nanomate, Ithaca, NY, USA) and measured using a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) with the following settings: MS resolution 120,000, MS automatic gain control (AGC) target 3,000,000 ions, maximum injection time for MS 80 ms, intensity threshold for MS/MS of 17,000 ions, dynamic exclusion 30 s, TopN =20, isolation window 1.6 m/z, MS/MS resolution 15,000, MS/MS AGC target 50,000 ions, maximum injection time for MS/MS 120 ms.

### Data Protocol
All data were analysed using Prism v6 for Windows (GraphPad Software Inc., La Jolla, USA). Line charts for clinical parameters are presented as mean ±SEM. Significant differences between these data sets were estimated by two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA).  Scatter plots for colon length and histological analysis are presented as individual data points. Significant differences between these data sets were estimated by Kruskal-Wallis one-way ANOVA (if normally distributed) or by One-way ANOVA on Ranks (if the normality test failed). In case of normal distribution of data, the data sets were compared by the Holm-Sidak´s post hoc test. If the normality test failed, the Dunnetts post hoc test was applied. Values were considered significantly different if P <0.05, with P <0.01, P <0.001 or P <0.0001 denoting higher significance. 16S rRNA gene raw sequencing data was processed using QIIME [3] to assess quality of sequences, removal of barcodes and removal of sequences shorter than 150 bp. Sequences with ambiguous base calls were removed, sequences were denoised, operational taxonomic units (OTUs) generated and chimeras removed. OTUs were generated by clustering sequence reads to bins with 97% sequence similarity. OTUs were classified to taxa by blasting them against a curated database derived from GreenGenes, RDPII [4, 5] and NCBI (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/). OTUs were classified to species if blast matches had similarities of greater than 97%. Similarities of between 97% and 95% were annotated to unclassified genus, of between 95% and 90% annotated to unclassified family, of between 90% and 85% annotated to unclassified order, of between 85% and 80% annotated to unclassified class, of between 80% and 77% annotated to unclassified phylum and of <77 annotated to unknown. Finally, relative numbers of reads were calculated for each taxa and the significance of differences in abundance for each taxa between DSS-exposed and control mice was calculated by the independent two-sided Student`s test. LC-MS spectra were searched using the Proteome Discoverer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, v1.4, San Jose, CA, USA). Search settings were: Sequest HT search engine, trypsin (full specific), MS tolerance 10 ppm, MS/MS tolerance 0.02 Da, two missed cleavage sides, dynamic modifications oxidation (Met), static modifications carbamidomethylation (Cys). Only peptides that passed the FDR thresholds set in the Percolator node of <1% FDR q-Value, and were rank 1 peptides, were considered for protein identification. All protein-coding sequences of the identified bacteria genera from the 16S rRNA gene sequencing data and mouse were downloaded from UniProt (http://www.uniprot.org/) and were combined into a custom-made database. Label-free quantification was done using the Top-3 peptide area for approach. These linear area values were log10-transformed and median normalized. The fold changes were calculated and statistical significance was determined and corrected for multi-testing by the Benjamini-Hochberg [6] using R-scripts. Pathway analysis for bacterial protein groups was done using assigning KEGG pathways and comparing relative numbers of assigned protein groups. Significance was calculated using the independent two-sided Student’s T-test. Non-metric multidimensional scaling (NMDS) plots and figures were calculated and constructed using R.

### Publication Abstract
Using the acute dextran sulfate sodium (DSS)-induced colitis model, studies have demonstrated that intestinal inflammation is accompanied by major changes in the composition of the intestinal microbiota. Only little is known about the microbial changes and more importantly their functional impact in the chronic DSS colitis model. We used a refined model of chronic DSS-induced colitis that reflects typical symptoms of the human disease without detrimental weight loss usually observed in DSS models. We sampled cecum and colon content as well as colon mucus from healthy and diseased mouse cohorts ( n = 12) and applied 16S rRNA gene sequencing and metaproteomics. An increase of Prevotella sp. in both colon content and mucus was observed. Functional differences were observed between sample types demonstrating the importance of separately sampling lumen content and mucus. The abundance of Desulfovibrio, a sulfate-reducing bacterium, was positively associated with the carbon metabolism. Lachnoclostridium was positively correlated to both vitamin B6 and tryptophan metabolism. In summary, functional changes in the distal colon caused by DSS treatment were more pronounced in the mucus-associated microbiota than in the microbiota present in the distal colon content.

### Keywords
Dextran sulfate sodium (dss); colitis; mouse model; metaproteomics; microbiota

### Affiliations
Department Molekulare Systembiologie Helmholtz-Zentrum für Umweltforschung GmbH - UFZ Permoserstraße 15 | 04318 Leipzig
Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ

### Submitter
Nico Jehmlich

### Lab Head
Dr Nico Jehmlich
Department Molekulare Systembiologie Helmholtz-Zentrum für Umweltforschung GmbH - UFZ Permoserstraße 15 | 04318 Leipzig


