### Accession
PXD029159

### Title
Nucleoside-Diphosphate Kinase 1 and 2 (Nme1/2) are major cellular co-enzyme A/acetyl-CoA binding factors

### Description
Co-enzyme A is the essential cellular carrier of the acetyl group, largely used in fatty acid synthesis and lysine post-translational modifications of proteins. Following the analysis of the cellular CoA-binding proteome, we identified Nme1/2 as major abundant cytoplasmic CoA-binding proteins. We report a novel mechanism that controls fatty acids synthesis involving ATP-dependent acetyl-CoA binding by Nucleoside Diphosphate Kinases 1 and 2 (Nme1/2).

### Sample Protocol
The total testes were recovered from two adult male mice. After removing the albuginea, the seminiferous tubules were directly immersed in 1 ml of lysis buffer (20% glycerol, 3mM MgCl2, 50 mM Hepes, 250/500mM KCl, 0,1% NP40, 1 mM DTT, 1 mini-tablet of EDTA-free protease inhibitor (Roche)), homogenized and incubated for 30 min on ice. The samples were then centrifugated at 14000 rpm for 10m at 4°C and the supernatant extract was used immediately for purification the CoA bound proteins by CoA pull-down. The 500 mM KCl lysate was diluted to 250 mM with buffer before proceeding. Purification of spermatogenic cells was performed from 6 mice. The seminiferous tubules were incubated with 1 mg/ml collagenase/PBS for 15 min at 35°C, dissociated pipetting for 10 min and filtered through a 100mm filter. Total germ cells were pelleted, suspended in 0.5% BSA-DMEM/F12 medium and sedimented through 2%-4% BSA gradient for 70 min at 4°C. The fractions were than collected and examined at phase contrast microscope. Pure fractions of Total germ cells (TGS), Pachytene Spermatocytes (PS), Round Spermatids (RS), Elongating and Condensing Spermatids (ECS) were pooled for preparation of cell lysate. In each CoA pull-down experiment, the cell pellets were incubated in 125 ul of lysis buffer (20% glycerol, 3mM MgCl2, 50 mM Hepes, 500mM KCl, 0,1% NP40, 1 mM DTT, 1 mini-tablet of EDTA-free protease inhibitor (Roche)) and treated as previously described for total testis lysate. Coenzyme A-Agarose (C7013-500MG, Sigma-Aldrich) was resuspended in 3,5 ml of 10 mM Sodium Acetate (pH 6.0) and stored at -20°C. For each experiment, the resin was washed 3 time in lysis buffer (250mM KCl) and rotated with lysate (from testis, spermatogenic cell or liver) overnight at 4°C (50ul Mixture for each 1ml lysate). The enriched CoA-agarose was washed three time, and following a final wash with PBS was incubated for 1h at 4°C for half in 50 ul of 5mM free CoA, dissolved in H20, and for other half in 50 ul of H2O (Control). The eluted proteins solubilized in Laemmli buffer were stacked in the top of a 4-12% NuPAGE gel (Invitrogen). After staining with R-250 Coomassie Blue (Biorad), proteins were digested in-gel using trypsin (modified, sequencing purity, Promega). The resulting peptides were analyzed by online nanoliquid chromatography coupled to MS/MS (Ultimate 3000 and LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a 124 min gradient. For this purpose, the peptides were sampled on a precolumn (300 μm x 5 mm PepMap C18, Thermo Scientific) and separated in a 75 μm x 250 mm C18 column (PepMap C18, 3 μm, Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The MS and MS/MS data were acquired by Xcalibur (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides and proteins were identified by Mascot (version 2.7.0, Matrix Science) through concomitant searches against the Uniprot database (Mus musculus taxonomy, June 2021 download), and a homemade classical database containing the sequences of classical contaminant proteins found in proteomic analyses (human keratins, trypsin, etc.). Trypsin/P was chosen as the enzyme and two missed cleavages were allowed. Precursor and fragment mass error tolerances were set at respectively at 10 ppm and 0.6 Da. Peptide modifications allowed during the search were: Carbamidomethyl (C, fixed), Acetyl (Protein N-term, variable) and Oxidation (M, variable). The Proline software was used for the compilation, grouping, and filtering of the results (conservation of rank 1 peptides, peptide length ≥ 6 amino acids, false discovery rate of peptide-spectrum-match identifications < 1%, and minimum of one specific peptide per identified protein group).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nanolc-ms/ms, Binding partners, Acetylation, Co-enzyme a, Fatty acid synthesis

### Affiliations
EDyP

### Submitter
Yohann Couté

### Lab Head
Dr Yohann Couté
EDyP


