### Accession
PXD012088

### Title
Comparative analysis of high molecular mass subproteomes of Bothrops snake venoms

### Description
Snake venoms are extremely active biological secretions containing primarily various classes of enzymes. The genus Bothrops comprises various pit viper species that represent the most medically significant taxa in Central and South America, accounting for more human envenomations and fatalities than any other snake taxa. Venom proteomes of many Bothrops species have been characterized but, although proteins of molecular mass higher than 100 kDa have been documented in Bothrops venoms, these large proteins have not yet been closely investigated. This study sought to achieve detailed identification of major components in the high molecular mass subproteome of venoms from eight Bothrops species (B. brazili, B. cotiara, B. insularis, B. jararaca, B. jararacussu, B. leucurus, B. moojeni and B. neuwiedi). The identification of proteins eluting in the first fractions of a size-exclusion chromatography of these venoms revealed that they are comprised mainly of enzymes, including minor components such as 5'-nucleotidase, aminopeptidase, phosphodiesterase, and phospholipases A2 and B, but with metalloproteinases and L-amino acid oxidases representing the most abundant components. Most of these components disappeared in electrophoretic profiles under reducing conditions suggesting that they may be composed of more than one polypeptide chain. A significant shift in the molecular masses of these protein bands was observed after enzymatic N-deglycosylation, indicating that they may contain N-glycans. Furthermore, the finding that none of the high molecular mass proteins is shared by all eight species reveals a high level of interspecies venom variability among these components.

### Sample Protocol
Venom samples Lyophilized Bothrops venom samples (B. brazili, B. cotiara, B. insularis, B. jararaca, B. jararacussu, B. leucurus, B. moojeni, and B. neuwiedi) were obtained from the Herpetology Laboratory at Instituto Butantan (São Paulo, SP, Brazil), and contained pooled material from various extractions from a non-specified number of individuals from different regions of Brazil. Snake maintenance and venom collection were approved by the Ethical Committee for Animal Research (Protocol no. 1296/14).  Size-exclusion chromatography Lyophilized crude venom (15 mg) was diluted to a concentration of 50 mg/mL in 250 mM ammonium acetate, pH 6.9, containing 1 mM CaCl2, and centrifuged at 14,000 rpm at 4 °C for 30 min. The supernatant was fractionated on a Superose 12 10/300 GL size-exclusion column (GE Healthcare Life Sciences) mounted on an ÄKTA Purifier fast protein liquid chromatography (FPLC) system (GE Healthcare Life Sciences) at a flow rate of 0.5 mL/min for 1.5 column volumes. Protein elution was monitored at 280 nm using Unicorn 5.01 (GE Healthcare Lifesciences) software, and 0.5 mL fractions were collected automatically.  Enzymatic deglycosylation of proteins For protein N-deglycosylation, 3 µg protein from a single size-exclusion fraction corresponding to the first chromatogram peak of each species (B. cotiara, B. insularis, B. jararaca, B. moojeni, B. neuwiedi, B. jararacussu and B. erythromelas) were incubated in 0.625% SDS, 0.05 M dithiothreitol for 5 min at 90 °C. After cooling, 1% NP-40, 0.05 M sodium phosphate buffer, pH 7.5, and 3 U of PNGase F (NEB) were added and the mixture was incubated for 18 h at 37 °C. As a negative control, protein samples were also submitted to the same procedure without PNGase F. The protein deglycosylation profiles were evaluated by SDS-PAGE under reducing conditions using 12% gels according to Laemmli [32].  Protein identification by in-gel digestion with trypsin and LC-MS/MS analysis Protein bands were excised and in-gel trypsin digestion was performed. The dried digests were dissolved in 20 µL 0.1% formic acid and an aliquot of 5 µL was injected automatically via a nanoACQUITY UPLC (Waters) into a nanoACQUITY UPLC Symmetry C18 trap column (180 µm x 20 mm x 5 µm). The peptides were then submitted to chromatographic separation on a nanoAcquity UPLC Peptide BEH C18 analytical column (100 μm x 100 mm x 1.7 μm) in Buffer A (0.1% formic acid) using a linear gradient from 3% to 50% Solution B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) over 15 min at a flow of 600 nL/min. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Q-TOF Ultima API system (Waters). The instrument control and data acquisition were conducted on MassLynx 4.1 (Waters) software. Spray voltage was adjusted to 2.5 kV and the instrument was operated in “top three” DDA mode in which one MS full scan was acquired in the 400-1600 m/z range followed by CID fragmentation of the three most intense ions from the MS scan. The collision energies were adjusted from 15 to 55 eV according to the m/z values and the precursor ions were selected within a 1 m/z window. A dynamic peak exclusion was applied to avoid repetitive selection of the same m/z for the next 30 seconds.   Protein identification by in-solution digestion with trypsin and LC-MS/MS analysis An aliquot corresponding to 20 µg from a single size-exclusion fraction of the first chromatogram peak was lyophilized, then resuspended in 6 M urea, 100 mM Tris and subjected to in-solution trypsin digestion following Kinter and Sherman [34]. Following digestion, samples were acidified to pH 3.0 by adding 20% TFA. Acidified digests were then desalted with Sep-Pak C18 columns (Waters) following the manufacturer’s protocol. Dried digests were reconstituted in 20 µL 0.1% formic acid and 5 µL were injected automatically into a 5-cm trap column (100 μm ID × 360 µm OD) packed in-house with 10 µm Jupiter® C-18 beads (Phenomenex) using an Easy nLC II system (Thermo Scientific) at a flow rate of 2 µL/min for ten minutes. Peptides were separated using a 10-cm column (75 µm ID. x 360 µm OD) packed in-house with 5 µm Aqua® C-18 beads (Phenomenex). The gradient was 3-35% 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile over 60 min at a flow rate of 200 nL/min. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The instrument was operated in the “top ten” DDA mode, in which one MS spectrum (m/z of 300-2000; resolution 30,000 at 400 m/z) is acquired followed by CID fragmentation of the top 10 most intense peaks detected in each scan. Full dynamic exclusion was used to prevent repetitive selection of the same m/z during the next 90 seconds. Isolation window, activation time, and normalized collision energy were set to 2 m/z, 10 ms, and 35%, respectively.

### Data Protocol
Data processing protocol: The raw data from Q-TOF Ultima API system were processed by ProteinLynx Global Server 3.0.2 (Waters) and converted to .pkl format for Mascot (Matrix Science) database searching against the Uniprot database restricted to the taxa Serpentes (58,895 entries) with a parent and fragment mass tolerance of 0.6 Da and 0.6 Da, respectively. One missed cleavage by trypsin was allowed. The iodoacetamide derivative cysteine and oxidation of methionine were specified in Mascot as fixed and variable modifications, respectively. Several bands (indicated in Supplementary Table S1) yielded no significant results when analyzed by the Q-Tof Ultima so were subjected to subsequent analysis by the more sensitive LTQ-Orbitrap Velos instrument. The MS and MS/MS spectra from LTQ-Orbitrap Velos instrument were searched using the MASCOT search engine (Matrix Science) against the Uniprot database restricted to the taxa Serpentes (58,895 entries) with a parent mass tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment tolerance of 0.6 Da. One missed cleavage by trypsin was allowed. The iodoacetamide derivative cysteine and oxidation of methionine were specified in Mascot as fixed and variable modifications, respectively.  Cluster analysis Cluster analysis was performed using MATLAB (MathWorks), as previously described. Briefly, protein identification by in-solution trypsin digestion followed by LC-MS/MS produced lists of protein accession codes, grouped by venom. The lists were processed through an in-house program coded in Perl, which assessed the total number of unique proteins, that is, the size of the union of all protein accession codes that appeared at least once in all eight venoms. Thus, an occurrence matrix was generated, in which the rows are the eight different venoms and the columns are all the unique proteins. Consequently, for each pair (venom, protein), its respective value is binary, in which zero or one means, respectively, absence or presence of the pair (venom, protein). Finally, we carried out two hierarchical clusterings, one for the venoms and other for the protein accession codes. In both clusterings, we employed an agglomerative method withsingle linkage and the Jaccard distance as the distance metric.

### Publication Abstract
Snake venoms are extremely active biological secretions composed primarily of various classes of enzymes. The genus Bothrops comprises various pit viper species that represent the most medically significant taxa in Central and South America, accounting for more human envenomations and fatalities than any other snakes in the region. Venom proteomes of many Bothrops species have been well-characterized but investigations have focused almost exclusively on proteins smaller than 100&#x202f;kDa despite expression of larger components being documented in several Bothrops venoms. This study sought to achieve detailed identification of major components in the high molecular mass subproteome of venoms from eight Bothrops species (B. brazili, B. cotiara, B. insularis, B. jararaca, B. jararacussu, B. leucurus, B. moojeni and B. neuwiedi). Enzymes such as metalloproteinases and L-amino acid oxidases were the most prominent components identified in the first size-exclusion chromatography fractions of these venoms. Minor components also identified in the first peaks included 5'-nucleotidase, aminopeptidase, phosphodiesterase, and phospholipases A<sub>2</sub> and B. Most of these components disappeared in electrophoretic profiles under reducing conditions, suggesting that they may be composed of more than one polypeptide chain. A significant shift in the molecular masses of these protein bands was observed following enzymatic N-deglycosylation, indicating that they may contain N-glycans. Furthermore, none of the identified high molecular mass proteins were shared by all eight species, revealing a high level of interspecific variability among these venom components.

### Keywords
Enzymes, Snake venom, Proteome, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Butantan Institute

### Submitter
Solange Serrrano

### Lab Head
Dr Solange Maria de Toledo Serrano
Butantan Institute


