### Accession
PXD033599

### Title
NET proteome of neutrophils from people with long-standing type 1 diabetes and healthy control

### Description
Type 1 diabetes (T1D) is a chronic T-cell-mediated autoimmune disease, leading to the destruction of the pancreatic insulin-producing beta cells. Little is known about the involvement of neutrophils that exert multifaceted functions like phagocytosis, degranulation, production of cytokines and the formation of neutrophil extracellular traps (NETosis), in the pathogenesis of T1D. Our aim was to gain insight into the proteome of neutrophils undergoing NETosis from patients with long-standing T1D compared to age- and sex-matched healthy controls under both resting and stimulated conditions (phorbol-myristate acetate, PMA, 100nM; ionomycin, 20µM; 3hours) by LC/MS-MS.

### Sample Protocol
NET proteins were reduced in dithiothreitol (DTT), alkylated with iodoacetamide(IAA), followed by the quenching of the IAA with DTT. Protein extracts were then precipitated using the Wessel-Flugge method and protein digestion was performed with modified trypsin in ammonium bicarbonate containing acetonitrile and ProteaseMAX. Digested samples were subjected to desalting with C18 ZipTip pipette tips. Samples were then loaded and the proteins were separated on an Ultimate 3000 Ultra Performance Liquid Chromatography system (UPLC, Dionex, Thermo Scientific) and analyzed by unbiased tandem mass spectrometry on a hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap Q Exactive mass spectrometer operated in positive ion mode (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified with Mascot (Matrix Science) using SwissProt as a database through Proteome Discoverer 2.2, incorporating Percolator for peptide validation. Oxidation (M) was included as variable modification, whereas carbamidomethylation (C) was included as a fixed modification. Two missed cleavages were allowed for the trypsin digestion and peptide tolerance was set at 10 part per million, whereas MS/MS tolerance - at 20 millimass units. Peptides were validated with Scaffold Proteome software by determining normalized total spectral counts for each protein in all conditions. Only proteins identified with a false discovery rate (FDR) of less than 1% (q<0.01) were retained. When identified with 1 peptide, only those with a FDR of less than 1% (q<0.01) were retained. Quantitative analysis of the peptides was performed on the Progenesis QI software and validated using the Scaffold Proteome software.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, Type 1 diabetes, Neutrophils, Netosis

### Affiliations
KU Leuven
Clinical and Experimental Endocrinology Department, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium

### Submitter
Samal Bissenova

### Lab Head
Dr Chantal Mathieu
Clinical and Experimental Endocrinology Department, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium


