### Accession
PXD019550

### Title
Modelling mitochondrial SAM depletion in fruit flies and mice

### Description
S-adenosylmethionine (SAM) is the principle biological methyl group donor for a diverse range of substrates. It is synthesised in the cytosolic methionine cycle and shuttled throughout the cell. The mitochondrial SAM (mitoSAM) pool depends on import through the inner-membrane SAMC and supports the maturation of metabolites and mitochondrial RNAs. Mutations in SAMC in patients cause a severe metabolic crisis, however, the organellar regulation of mitoSAM and the protein methylation landscape within mitochondria are largely unknown. Using fly and mouse models, we demonstrate that titrating mitoSAM differentially effects mitochondrial function. Metabolite and iron-sulfur cluster biosynthesis are disrupted due to acutely decreased methylation potential, while prolonged mitoSAM deficiency affects fly longevity and OXPHOS stability. The herein uploaded raw data was used for total larvae and total cell proteome quantification in the established lines. Our results define the critical role of cytoplasmic SAM production for mitochondrial methylation events and highlight the indirect effect of one-carbon metabolism on cellular bioenergetics.

### Sample Protocol
For whole larvae label-free quantification, larvae were picked, frozen in liquid nitrogen and homogenized with a Teflon pestle in 6 M guanidine hydrochloride, 50 mM Tris pH 8.0. After sonication and centrifugal removal of larval detritus, proteins were reduced with 5 mM 1,4-dithiothreiotol at 55°C for 30 minutes, cooled briefly on ice and alkylated with 15 mM 2-chloroacetamide for 15 minutes in the dark. 100 µg of protein quantified by BCA was diluted 1:10 in 50 mM Tris pH 8.0 and digested overnight with 2 µg MS-grade trypsin at 37°C and mild shaking. The digest was stopped by addition of 1.2% formic acid, precipitates were removed by centrifugation and the supernatant was desalted on pre-packed EmporeTM SPE cartridges following the manufacturer’s instructions. Peptides were eluted, dried at 30°C in a vacuum concentrator. For total cell proteomics of mouse embryonic fibroblast, cell pellets were suspended in 100 µL of 8M urea (Sigma-Aldrich) and 0.1% ProteaseMAX (Promega) in 250 mM Tris, pH 8.5 adding protease and phosphatase inhibitors. The samples were sonicated in water bath for 10 min and using VibraCell probe (Sonics & Materials, Inc.) for 40 s with pulse 2/2, at 20% amplitude. Lysates were spun down at 15,000 rpm at 4°C for 10 min and protein concentration was determined by BCA assay (Pierce). An aliquot of 50 µg of each sample in 25 µL lysis buffer was supplemented with 65 ddH2O and 10 % acetonitrile (50 µg protein in 100 µL 2M urea/ 0.025% ProteaseMAX/ 10% acetonitrile in 60 mM Tris pH8.5) and was reduced by adding 1 µL of 0.5M dithiothreitol (DTT) at 25°C for 1 h, alkylated with 3 µL of 0.5M iodoacetamide for 1 h at room temperature (RT) in the dark and quenched the excess of iodoacetamide by adding 2 µL of 10 mM DTT from a 0.5M stock before subjected to proteolytic digestion. Lysyl endopeptidase (mass spectrometry grade, Waco, Japan) at 0.5 µg/µL in water was added in an enzyme to protein ratio of 1:50 (2 µL) and incubated in a thermo shaker at 24°C at 450 rpm overnight. Digestion was continued adding 92 µL of 50mM Tris, pH 8.5 and 1 µg of 0.5 µg/µL trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega) and incubated at 37°C while for 4 h at 450 rpm. The proteolysis was stopped with 10 µL cc. formic acid (FA) at final concentration of 5% (total volume of 212 µL). The samples were cleaned on a C18 Hypersep plate (Thermo Scientific) and dried using a Vacufuge vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf). Dry samples were dissolved in 50 mM triethylammonium-bicarbonate (TEAB), pH 8, and 100 µg of TMTpro reagents (lot number UK292954, Thermo Scientific) in 25 µL of dry acetonitrile were added. Samples were incubated at RT at 450 rpm for 2 h. The labeling reaction was stopped with hydroxylamine at final concentration of 0.5% and incubated for at RT with 550 rpm for 15 min. Individual samples were combined to one analytical sample and dried, followed by clean-up of a 20-µg aliquot on C18 StageTip and dried again. For Drosophila label-free quantification, peptides were separated on a 25 cm, 75 μm internal diameter PicoFrit analytical column (New Objective) packed with 1.9 μm ReproSil-Pur media (Dr. Maisch) using an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Buffer A and B were 0.1% formic acid in water and 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid, respectively. Peptides were separated on a segmented gradient from 6% to 31% buffer B for 82 min, and from 31% to 44% buffer B for 5 min at 200nl / min. Eluting peptides were analysed on a QExactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptide precursor mass to charge ratio (m/z) measurements (MS1) were carried out at 120000 resolution in the 350 to 1500 m/z range. The top seven most intense precursors, with charge state from two to six only, were selected for HCD fragmentation using 27% normalised collision energy. For total cell proteomics of mouse embryonic fibroblast, approximately 2µg samples were injected in an Ultimate 3000 nano UPLC on-line coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The chromatographic separation of the peptides was achieved using a 50 cm long C18 Easy spray column (Thermo Scientific) at 55°C, with the following gradient: 4-26% of solvent B (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% FA) in 90 min, 26-95% in 5 min, and 95% of solvent B for 5 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The mass spectrometric (MS) acquisition method was comprised of one survey full mass spectrum ranging from m/z 350 to 1600, acquired with a resolution of R=120,000 (at m/z 200) targeting 5x106 ions for maximum injection time of 100 ms, followed by data-dependent higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) fragmentations of maximum 18 most intense precursor ions with a charge state 2+ to 7+, using 45 s dynamic exclusion. The tandem mass spectra were acquired with a resolution of R=60,000, targeting 2x105 ions for maximum injection time of 54 ms, setting isolation width to m/z 1.4 and normalized collision energy to 33% setting first mass at m/z 100.

### Data Protocol
Label-free raw data was processed using Quandenser version 0.061 (The and Käll, 2018) against a Drosophila FASTA library (UP000000803_7227, downloaded from UniProt in September 2018) in batches of wDah, rescue and a123v; wDah, i172g, p223l and null; and aged fly samples at 30 and 50 days. Mouse embryonic fibroblast spectra from TMT-15 labelled peptides were mapped against UP000000589_10090 (March 2020) with MaxQuant version 1.6.10.43 with manually configured MS2 report ions and adjusting for batch-dependent -2/-1/+1/+2 correction factors, which are provided with the raw data in this submission.

### Publication Abstract
Induction of the one-carbon cycle is an early hallmark of mitochondrial dysfunction and cancer metabolism. Vital intermediary steps are localized to mitochondria, but it remains unclear how one-carbon availability connects to mitochondrial function. Here, we show that the one-carbon metabolite and methyl group donor <i>S</i>-adenosylmethionine (SAM) is pivotal for energy metabolism. A gradual decline in mitochondrial SAM (mitoSAM) causes hierarchical defects in fly and mouse, comprising loss of mitoSAM-dependent metabolites and impaired assembly of the oxidative phosphorylation system. Complex I stability and iron-sulfur cluster biosynthesis are directly controlled by mitoSAM levels, while other protein targets are predominantly methylated outside of the organelle before import. The mitoSAM pool follows its cytosolic production, establishing mitochondria as responsive receivers of one-carbon units. Thus, we demonstrate that cellular methylation potential is required for energy metabolism, with direct relevance for pathophysiology, aging, and cancer.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Metabolism, Methylation, Sam

### Affiliations
Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institute, Sweden
MMK, Karolinska Institute

### Submitter
Florian Schober

### Lab Head
Dr Anna Wredenberg
Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institute, Sweden


