### Accession
PXD034600

### Title
Phenotypic divergence due to site-specific phosphorylation in the antioxidant and cancer-associated NQO1 enzyme

### Description
Aims: to evaluate the effects of site-specific phosphorylation (using phosphomimetic mutations at sites S40, S82 and T128) on multiple functional aspects of the antioxidant and disease-associated human flavoprotein NQO1. Results: in vitro biophysical studies revealed effects of phosphorylation at different sites such as decreased binding affinity for FAD and structural stability of its binding site (S82), conformational stability (S40 and S82) and reduced catalytic efficiency and functional cooperativity (T128). Local stability measurements by HDX in different ligation states provided insight into these effects. Transfection of eukaryotic cells showed that phosphorylation at sites S40 and S82 may reduce steady-levels of NQO1 protein by enhanced proteasome-induced degradation. Innovation: our approach allows to establish relationships between site-specific phosphorylation, functional and structural stability effects in vitro and inside cells paving the way for more detailed analyses of phosphorylation at the flavoproteome scale. Conclusions: we show that site-specific phosphorylation of human NQO1 may cause pleitropic and counterintuitive effects on this multifunctional protein with potential implications for its relationships with human disease.

### Sample Protocol
Backbone amide hydrogen/deuterium exchange (HDX) was monitored for NQO1apo, NQO1holo and NQO1dic forms of NQO1 using mass spectrometry. Samples contained 20 µM of apo-proteins (NQO1apo) or holo-proteins (NQO1holo, with an excess of 200 µM of FAD). After a 5 min incubation at 25 °C, H/D exchange reaction was initiated by a 10-fold dilution of the protein solution into D2O-based 50 mM HEPES-KOH, pD 7.4, 1 mM TCEP (tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine). HDX was followed between 10 s and 3 h. The reaction was quenched by the addition of 0.5 M Glycine-HCl, pH 2.3 in a 1:1 ratio and flash frozen in liquid N2. LC-MS analysis was started by rapid thawing of the sample and injection onto the custom-made nepenthesin-2 (Nep2) and pepsin columns coupled in tandem. Generated peptides were trapped and desalted on a VanGuard Pre-column (ACQUITY UPLC BEH C18, 130 Å, 1.7 μm, 2.1 mm × 5 mm, Waters, Milford, MA, USA). The digestion and desalting were driven by 0.4% formic acid (FA) in water pumped by 1260 Infinity II Quaternary pump (Agilent Technologies, Waldbronn, Germany) at a flow rate of 200 μL·min−1. Desalted peptides were then separated on an analytical column (ACQUITY UPLC BEH C18, 130 Å, 1.7 μm, 1 mm × 100 mm, Waters, Milford, MA, USA) using a linear gradient (5%–45% B in 7 min) followed by a quick step to 99% B lasting 5 min, where the solvent A was 0.1% FA /2% acetonitrile (ACN) in water, B was 0.1% FA /98% ACN in water. The gradient was delivered by the 1290 Infinity II LC System (Agilent Technologies, Waldbronn, Germany) at a flow rate 40 μL·min−1. The analytical column was coupled to an ESI source of 15T FT-ICR mass spectrometer (Solarix XR, Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) operating in broad-band MS mode.

### Data Protocol
Acquired data were exported using DataAnalysis v. 5.0 (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany), processed by in-house designed software called program Deutex and handled as described previously [DOI: 10.1074/MCP.RA118.001044, 10.3390/BIOM9110728]. Peptide identifications were done using separate LC-MS/MS analyses followed by MASCOT database searching (version 2.7, Matrix Science, London, United Kingdom) against a custom-build database combining crap database, sequences of the used acidic proteases and the sequences of NQO1 variants. Fully deuterated control was prepared as described previously [DOI: 10.3390/BIOM9110728] and correction for back-exchange was applied according to Zhang [DOI: 10.1002/pro.5560020404].

### Publication Abstract
Protein phosphorylation is a common phenomenon in human flavoproteins although the functional consequences of this site-specific modification are largely unknown. Here, we evaluated the effects of site-specific phosphorylation (using phosphomimetic mutations at sites S40, S82 and T128) on multiple functional aspects as well as in the structural stability of the antioxidant and disease-associated human flavoprotein NQO1 using biophysical and biochemical methods. In vitro biophysical studies revealed effects of phosphorylation at different sites such as decreased binding affinity for FAD and structural stability of its binding site (S82), conformational stability (S40 and S82) and reduced catalytic efficiency and functional cooperativity (T128). Local stability measurements by H/D exchange in different ligation states provided structural insight into these effects. Transfection of eukaryotic cells showed that phosphorylation at sites S40 and S82 may reduce steady-levels of NQO1 protein by enhanced proteasome-induced degradation. We show that site-specific phosphorylation of human NQO1 may cause pleiotropic and counterintuitive effects on this multifunctional protein with potential implications for its relationships with human disease. Our approach allows to establish relationships between site-specific phosphorylation, functional and structural stability effects in vitro and inside cells paving the way for more detailed analyses of phosphorylation at the flavoproteome scale.

### Keywords
Flavoprotein; phosphorylation; phenotypic effects; structure-function relationships; structural stability

### Affiliations
BioCeV - Institute of Microbiology of the CAS
Laboratory of Structural Biology and Cell Signaling Institute of Microbiology of the Czech Acad Sci Prumyslova 595 252 50 Vestec Czech Republic

### Submitter
Dmitry Loginov

### Lab Head
Dr Petr Man
Laboratory of Structural Biology and Cell Signaling Institute of Microbiology of the Czech Acad Sci Prumyslova 595 252 50 Vestec Czech Republic


