### Accession
PXD031969

### Title
Serum proteomics covid-19 vaccine

### Description
In the last two years, the coronavirus disease 19 (COVID-19) pandemic caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) has been a scientific and social challenge worldwide. Vaccines have been the most effective intervention for reducing virus transmission and disease severity. However, virus genetic variants are still circulating among vaccinated individuals with different symptomatology disease cases. Understanding the protective or disease associated mechanisms in vaccinated individuals is relevant to advance in vaccine development and implementation. To address this objective, serum protein profiles were characterized by quantitative proteomics and data analysis algorithms in four cohorts of vaccinated individuals uninfected and SARS-CoV-2 infected with asymptomatic, nonsevere and severe disease symptomatology. The results showed that immunoglobulins were the most overrepresented proteins in infected cohorts when compared to PCR-negative individuals. The immunoglobulin profile varied between different infected cohorts and correlated with protective or disease associated capacity. Overrepresented immunoglobulins in PCR-positive individuals correlated with protective response against SARS-CoV-2, other viruses, and thrombosis in asymptomatic cases. In nonsevere cases, correlates of protection against SARS-CoV-2 and HBV together with risk of myasthenia gravis and allergy and autoantibodies were observed. Patients with severe symptoms presented risk for allergy, chronic idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura, and autoantibodies. The analysis of underrepresented immunoglobulins in PCR-positive compared to PCR-negative individuals identified vaccine-induced protective epitopes in various coronavirus proteins including the Spike receptor-binding domain RBD. Non-immunoglobulin proteins were associated with COVID-19 symptoms and biological processes. These results evidence host-associated differences in response to vaccination and the possibility of improving vaccine efficacy against SARS-CoV-2.

### Sample Protocol
Serum samples from PCR- controls and PCR+ COVID-19 asymptomatic, nonsevere, and severe individuals (n = 5 each) were individually analyzed. Two PCR+ cases with severe symptoms and in the hospital ICU were included only as reference for selected proteins. Protein concentration in samples was determined using the BCA Protein Assay with BSA (Sigma-Aldrich) as standard. Protein serum samples (100 µg per sample) were trypsin digested using the FASP Protein Digestion Kit (Expedeon Ltd., UK) and sequencing grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) following manufacturer´s recommendations. The resulting tryptic peptides were desalted onto OMIX Pipette tips C18 (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA), dried down and stored at −20 °C until mass spectrometry analysis. The desalted protein digests were resuspended in 2% acetonitrile, 5% acetic acid in water and analyzed by reverse phase liquid chromatography coupled to mass spectrometry (RP-LC-MS/MS) using an EkspertTM nanoLC 415 system coupled online with a 6600 TripleTOF® mass spectrometer (AB SCIEX; Framingham, US) through Information-Dependent Acquisition (IDA) followed by Sequential Windowed data independent Acquisition of the Total High-resolution Mass Spectra (SWATH-MS). The peptides were concentrated in a 0.1×20 mm C18 RP precolumn (Thermo Scientific) with a flow rate of 2µl/min during 10 min in solvent A. Then, peptides were separated in a 0.075×250 mm C18 RP column (New Objetive, Woburn, MA, USA) with a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Elution were done in a 120-min gradient from 5% B to 30% B followed by 15-min gradient from 30% B to 60% B (Solvent A: 0,1% formic acid in water, solvent B: 0,1% formic acid in acetonitrile) and directly injected into the mass spectrometer for analysis. For IDA experiments, the mass spectrometer was set to scanning full spectra from 350 m/z to 1400 m/z (250ms accumulation time) followed by up to 50 MS/MS scans (100-1500 m/z). Candidate ions with a charge state between +2 and +5 and counts per second above a minimum threshold of 100 were isolated for fragmentation. One MS/MS spectra was collected for 100 ms, before adding those precursor ions to the exclusion list for 15s (mass spectrometer operated by Analyst® TF 1.6, ABSciex®). Dynamic background subtraction was turned off. Data were acquired in high sensitivity mode with rolling collision energy on and a collision energy spread of 5. An equal amount of the five samples for each experimental group joined together as a representative mixed sample of each of the 4 experimental groups, which were used for the generation of the reference spectral ion library as part of SWATH-MS analysis. A total amount of 4 µg proteins digest for each mixed sample was injected.  For SWATH quantitative analysis, 50 independent samples (2 technical replicates from each of the 5 biological replicates for each of the 4 experimental groups and 5 technical replicates from each ot the 2 biological replicates in case of ICU samples) (6 μg each) were subjected to the cyclic data independent acquisition (DIA) of mass spectra using the SWATH variable windows calculator (V 1.0, AB SCIEX) and the SWATH acquisition method editor (AB SCIEX), similar to established methods (8). A set of 50 overlapping windows was constructed (containing 1 m/z for the window overlap), covering the precursor mass range of 400–1250 m/z. For these experiments, a 50 ms survey scan (350–1400 m/z) was acquired at the beginning of each cycle, and SWATH-MS/MS spectra were collected from 100–1500 m/z for 70 ms at high sensitivity mode, resulting in a cycle time of 3.6 s. Collision energy for each window was determined according to the calculation for a charge +2 ion-centered upon the window with a collision energy spread of 15. To create a spectral library of all the detectable peptides in the samples, the IDA MS raw files were combined and subjected to database searches in unison using ProteinPilot software v. 5.0.1 (AB SCIEX) with the Paragon algorithm. Spectra identification was performed by searching against the Uniprot human proteome database (79,038 entries in January 2022) with the following parameters: iodoacetamide cysteine alkylation, trypsin digestion, identification focus on biological modification and thorough ID as search effort. The detected protein threshold was set at 0.05. To assess the quality of identifications, an independent False Discovery Rate (FDR) analysis with the target-decoy approach provided by Protein PilotTM was performed. Positive identifications were considered when identified proteins reached a 1% global FDR

### Data Protocol
For SWATH processing, up to 10 peptides with 7 transitions per protein were automatically selected by the SWATH Acquisition MicroApp 2.0 in the PeakView 2.2 software with the following parameters: 15 ppm ion library tolerance, 5 min XIC extraction window, 0.01 Da XIC width, and considering only peptides with at least 99% confidence and excluding those which were shared or contained modifications. However, to ensure reliable quantitation, only proteins with 3 or more peptides available for quantitation were selected for XIC peak area extraction and exported for analysis in the MarkerView 1.3 software (AB SCIEX). Global normalization according to the Total Area Sums of all detected proteins in the samples was conducted. The Student´s t-test (p < 0.05) was used to perform two-sample comparisons between the averaged area sums of all the transitions derived for each protein across the ten replicate runs for each group under comparison, in order to identify proteins that were significantly represented between groups.

### Publication Abstract
In the last two years, the coronavirus disease 19 (COVID-19) pandemic caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) has been a scientific and social challenge worldwide. Vaccines have been the most effective intervention for reducing virus transmission and disease severity. However, genetic virus variants are still circulating among vaccinated individuals with different disease symptomatology. Understanding the protective- or disease-associated mechanisms in vaccinated individuals is relevant to advances in vaccine development and implementation. To address this objective, serum-protein profiles were characterized by quantitative proteomics and data-analysis algorithms in four cohorts of uninfected and SARS-CoV-2-infected vaccinated individuals with asymptomatic, non-severe, and severe disease symptomatology. The results show that immunoglobulins were the most overrepresented proteins in infected cohorts when compared to PCR-negative individuals. The immunoglobulin profile varied between different infected cohorts and correlated with protective- or disease-associated capacity. Overrepresented immunoglobulins in PCR-positive individuals correlated with protective response against SARS-CoV-2, other viruses, and thrombosis in asymptomatic cases. In non-severe cases, correlates of protection against SARS-CoV-2 and HBV together with risk of myasthenia gravis and allergy and autoantibodies were observed. Patients with severe symptoms presented risk for allergy, chronic idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura, and autoantibodies. The analysis of underrepresented immunoglobulins in PCR-positive compared to PCR-negative individuals identified vaccine-induced protective epitopes in various coronavirus proteins, including the spike receptor-binding domain RBD. Non-immunoglobulin proteins were associated with COVID-19 symptoms and biological processes. These results evidence host-associated differences in response to vaccination and the possibility of improving vaccine efficacy against SARS-CoV-2.

### Keywords
Covid-19; proteomic; vaccine; immunology; biomarker

### Affiliations
Proteomics Lab. IREC (CSIC-UCLM-JCCM) Spain
University of Castilla- La Mancha

### Submitter
Margarita Villar

### Lab Head
Dr Margarita Villar
Proteomics Lab. IREC (CSIC-UCLM-JCCM) Spain


