### Accession
PXD002770

### Title
Deconstruction of protein O-glycosylation

### Description
GalNAc-transferase (GalNAc-T) isoforms modify distinct subsets of the O-glycoproteome and GalNAc-type O-glycosylation is found on most proteins trafficking through the secretory pathway in metazoan cells. The O-glycoproteome is regulated by up to 20 polypeptide GalNAc-Ts and the contributions and biological functions of individual GalNAc-Ts are poorly understood. Here, we used a zinc-finger nuclease (ZFN)-directed knockout strategy to probe the contributions of the major GalNAc-Ts (GalNAc-T1 and T2) in liver cells, and explore how the GalNAc-T repertoire quantitatively affects the O-glycoproteome. We demonstrate that the majority of the O-glycoproteome is covered by redundancy, whereas distinct subsets of substrates are modified by non-redundant functions of GalNAc-T1 and T2. Differential transcriptomic analysis indicates that loss of function of a GalNAc-T induces specific transcriptional response. The non-redundant O-glycoproteome subsets for and the transcriptional responses for each isoform appeared to be related to different cellular processes, and for the GalNAc-T2 isoform supporting a role in lipid metabolism. The results demonstrate that GalNAc-Ts have non-redundant glycosylation functions, and that these may affect distinct cellular processes. The data provides a comprehensive resource for unique substrates for individual GalNAc-Ts. Our study provides a new view on the regulation of the O-glycoproteome, suggesting that the plurality of GalNAc-Ts arose to regulate distinct protein functions and cellular processes.

### Sample Protocol
ZFN Gene Targeting HepG2T1 and T2 in WT and SC background were generated as previously described (Schjoldager et al., 2012). HepG2T3 cells were generated by stable integration of GalNAc-T3 as previously described (Schjoldager et al, 2012) (see Expanded View Materials and Methods). Cells were maintained in Dulbecco's Modified Eagle Medium supplemented with 10% FBS, 1% glutamine and 1% NEAA. For ICC characterization, cells were grown on sterile teflon coated slides (Clearcell, Histolab) and briefly fixed with ice-cold acetone. Cells were then sequentially incubated with MAbs to GalNAc-T1 (4D8), T2 (4C4), T3 (2D10) or Tn O-glycans (5F4) overnight and FITC-conjugated rabbit anti-mouse immunoglobulin (Dako) for 45 minutes and mounted with ProLong Gold antifade reagent (DAPI) (Invitrogen). Fluorescence microscopy was performed using a Zeiss Axioskop 2 plus with an AxioCam MR3.   Dimethyl labeling and Lectin Weak Affinity Chromatography  Samples of 100 mL cell culture supernatant or 0.5 mL packed cells were processed (Schjoldager et al, 2012) (See Expanded View Materials and Methods). For quantitative differential glycoproteomics tryptic digests of isogenic pairs of SCs were labeled with light (L) and medium (M) isotopomeric dimethyl labels (Boersema et al, 2009). Cleared acidified digests were loaded in equal amounts (peptide concentration) onto equilibrated SepPak C18 cartridges (Waters) followed by 3 x CV 0.1% TFA wash. Digests were labeled on-column by adding 5 CV 30 mM NaBH3CN and 0.2% formaldehyde in 50 mM sodium phosphate buffer pH 7.5 (L-labelling) or 30 mM NaBH3CN and 0.2% D-formaldehyde in 50 mM sodium phosphate buffer pH 7.5 (M-labeling). Columns were washed using 3 CV 0.1% FA and eluted with 0.5 mL 50% MeOH in 0.1% FA. Labeled GalNAc glycopeptides were separated from non-glycosylated peptides using a long VVA-agarose LWAC (Steentoft et al, 2011).  Mass Spectrometry LWAC elution fractions were fractionated by isoelectric focusing according to (Vakhrushev et al, 2013) and analysed by EASY-nLC 1000 UHPLC (Thermo Scientific) interfaced via nanoSpray Flex ion source to an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) as previously described (Yang et al, 2014). Data was processed using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software (Thermo Scientific) (See Expanded View Materials and Methods)  In vitro Glycosylation Peptides were designed and synthesized with acceptor residues in center position of a 20-mer peptide (NeoBioScience). GalNAc-transferase assays, monitored by MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry, were performed as previously describes (Kong et al, 2014).  RNA Transcriptomic Analysis Total RNA was extracted from exponentially growing cells using RNeasy®kit (Qiagen). RNA integrity and quality was determined using Bioanalyzer instrumentation (Agilent Technologies). RNAseq was performed by Beijing Genetics Institute (BGI). Briefly, library construction was performed using Illumina Truseq RNA Sample Preparation Kit and subjected to next generation sequencing using Illumina HiSeq 2000 System (Illumina, USA). See Expanded View Materials and Methods for more details.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis Data processing was performed using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software (Thermo Scientific) as previously described with small changes (Steentoft et al, 2013). Due to the high speed of data processing we used Sequest HT mode instead of Sequest. All spectra were initially searched with full cleavage specificity, filtered according to the confidence level (medium, low and unassigned) and further searched with the semi-specific enzymatic cleavage. In all cases the precursor mass tolerance was set to 6 ppm and fragment ion mass tolerance to 50 mmu. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine residues was used as a fixed modification. Methionine oxidation and HexNAc attachment to serine, threonine and tyrosine were used as variable modifications for ETD MS2. All HCD MS2 were pre-processed as described (Steentoft et al, 2013) and searched under the same conditions mentioned above using only methionine oxidation as variable modification. All spectra were searched against a concatenated forward/reverse human-specific database (UniProt, January 2013, containing 20,232 canonical entries and another 251 common contaminants) using a target false discovery rate (FDR) of 1 %. FDR was calculated using target decoy PSM validator node, a part of the Proteome Discoverer workflow. The resulting list was filtered to include only peptides with glycosylation as a modification. This resulted in a final glycoprotein list identified by at least one unique glycopeptide. ETD MS2 data were used for unambiguous site assignment. HCD MS2 data were used for unambiguous site assignment only if the number of GalNAc residues was equal to the number of potential sites on the peptide. Glycopeptide M/L ratios were determined using dimethyl 2plex method. The M/L ratio of the detected precursor ions doublet was calculated using sequentially the Event Detector Node and the Precursor Ion Node of the Proteome Discoverer Workflow. The Event Detector node was used for peak area quantification clustering isotopes of precursor ions that elute during the same retention time. Isotopically labeled ions were finally quantified using Precursor Ions Quantifier Node. Manual validation of the precursor ions without reported quantitative values (singlets) within a selected pool of data has revealed that to be able to distinguish the substantial up/down regulations within the chemical noise the minimum required threshold level has to be at least 5E5. We have inspected all of such cases manually by calculating XIC of the assigned precursor ions and the respective potential dimethyl pair in raw data and reported them as outliers (“singlets”)

### Publication Abstract
GalNAc-type O-glycosylation is found on most proteins trafficking through the secretory pathway in metazoan cells. The O-glycoproteome is regulated by up to 20 polypeptide GalNAc-Ts and the contributions and biological functions of individual GalNAc-Ts are poorly understood. Here, we used a zinc-finger nuclease (ZFN)-directed knockout strategy to probe the contributions of the major GalNAc-Ts (GalNAc-T1 and GalNAc-T2) in liver cells and explore how the GalNAc-T repertoire quantitatively affects the O-glycoproteome. We demonstrate that the majority of the O-glycoproteome is covered by redundancy, whereas distinct subsets of substrates are modified by non-redundant functions of GalNAc-T1 and GalNAc-T2. The non-redundant O-glycoproteome subsets and specific transcriptional responses for each isoform are related to different cellular processes; for the GalNAc-T2 isoform, these support a role in lipid metabolism. The results demonstrate that GalNAc-Ts have different non-redundant glycosylation functions, which may affect distinct cellular processes. The data serves as a comprehensive resource for unique GalNAc-T substrates. Our study provides a new view of the differential regulation of the O-glycoproteome, suggesting that the plurality of GalNAc-Ts arose to regulate distinct protein functions and cellular processes.

### Keywords
Galnt/ dimethylation/ apolipoproteins/ mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine
Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine University of Copenhagen

### Submitter
Sergey Vakhrushev

### Lab Head
Dr Henrik Clausen
Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine University of Copenhagen


