### Accession
PXD024354

### Title
Identification of the protein interaction network of Stag proteins

### Description
This study involves the identification of specific Stag1 interactors with and without Cohesin loss. Stag1 was immunoprecipiated from human HCT116 cells, under 4 treatments - untreated (UTR), Non-specific siRNA treatment (SiCON), SA1 siRNA treatment (SiSA1) and Auxin treatment for Cohesin loss (IAA). An unspecific IgG pulldown was also conducted to assess for unspecific protein binding to the bead system (Mock). Significant proteins were determined by label-free quantification and statistical analysis using MaxQuant and MSstats.

### Sample Protocol
SA1 immunoprecipitation samples were analysed by liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Three biological replicate experiments were carried out for MS and each included four samples, untreated (UT), treated with IAA for 4hrs, siCon, or siSA1, generated as described above. A fourth technical replicate was also included for the UTR samples. Cells were fractionated to purify chromatin-bound proteins as above and immunoprecipitated with IgG- or SA1-bead conjugates. To maximise IP material for MS, the antibody amount was increased to 15ug and the chromatin amount was increased to 2mg.   The IP eluates were loaded into a pre-cast SDS-PAGE gel (4–20% Mini-PROTEAN® TGX™ Precast Protein Gel, 10-well, 50 µL) and proteins were run for approximately 1 cm to prevent protein separation. Protein bands were excised and diced, and proteins were reduced with 5 mM TCEP in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) at 37°C for 20 min, alkylated with 10 mM 2-chloroacetamide in 50 mM TEAB at ambient temperature for 20 min in the dark. Proteins were then digested with 150 ng trypsin, at 37°C for 3 h followed by a second trypsin addition and incubation length of 4 h, then overnight at room temperature. After digestion, peptides were extracted with acetonitrile and 50 mM TEAB washes. Samples were evaporated to dryness at 30°C and resolubilised in 0.1% formic acid. nLC-MS/MS was performed on a Q Exactive Orbitrap Plus interfaced to a NANOSPRAY FLEX ion source and coupled to an Easy-nLC 1200 (Thermo Scientific). Twenty five (first, second and fourth biological replicate) or fifty (third biological replicate) percent of each sample was loaded as 5 or 10 µL injections. Peptides were separated on a 27 cm fused silica emitter, 75 μm diameter, packed in-house with Reprosil-Pur 200 C18-AQ, 2.4 μm resin (Dr. Maisch) using a linear gradient from 5% to 30% acetonitrile/ 0.1% formic acid over 60 min, at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. Peptides were ionised by electrospray ionisation using 1.8 kV applied immediately prior to the analytical column via a microtee built into the nanospray source with the ion transfer tube heated to 320°C and the S-lens set to 60%. Precursor ions were measured in a data-dependent mode in the orbitrap analyser at a resolution of 70,000 and a target value of 3e6 ions. The ten most intense ions from each MS1 scan were isolated, fragmented in the HCD cell, and measured in the orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analysed with MaxQuant1 version 1.5.5.1 where they were searched against the human UniProtKB database (http://www.uniprot.org/, downloaded 17/12/2019 using default settings. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as fixed modification, and oxidation of methionines and acetylation at protein N-termini were set as variable modifications. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin with maximally 2 missed cleavages allowed. To ensure high confidence identifications, PSMs, peptides, and proteins were filtered at a less than 1% false discovery rate (FDR). Label-free quantification in MaxQuant was used with LFQ minimum ratio count set to 2 with ‘FastLFQ’ (LFQ minimum number of neighbours = 3, and LFQ average number of neighbours = 6) and ‘Skip normalisation’ selected. In Advanced identifications, ‘Second peptides’ was selected and the ‘match between runs’ feature was not selected. For statistical protein quantification analysis, the ‘proteinGroups.txt’ and ‘evidence.txt’ output files from MaxQuant were loaded into the MSstats statistical framework2 (version 3.14.0) run through RStudio (version 1.1.456, R version 4.0). Contaminants and reverse sequences were removed and data was log2 transformed. To find differential abundant proteins across conditions, paired significance analysis consisting of fitting a statistical model and performing model-based comparison of conditions. The group comparison function was employed to test for differential abundance between conditions. Unadjusted p-values were used to rank the testing results and to define regulated proteins between groups.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms, Stag, Ap-ms, Lfq

### Affiliations
Senior Research Fellow - Team Lead in Proteomics Head of the Proteomics Research Translational Technology Platform UCL Cancer Institute, London, UK
UCL

### Submitter
Silvia Surinova

### Lab Head
Dr Silvia Surinova
Senior Research Fellow - Team Lead in Proteomics Head of the Proteomics Research Translational Technology Platform UCL Cancer Institute, London, UK


