### Accession
PXD016728

### Title
UAG suppression in HEK293T cells

### Description
HEK293T cells, stably transfected with pyrrolysine UAG suppressor tRNA and aminoacyl tRNA synthetase, for the co-translational incorporation of Boc-protected lysine.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T cells stably transfected with UAG suppression machinery were seeded in 10 cm plates at approximately 20% confluency. After 24 h, DMEM was replaced with fresh media supplemented with 5 µg/mL of puromycin and, where indicated, 1 mM BocLys for additional 48 h. Next, cells were collected (5 min, 500 g, 4°C) following incubation with trypsin, washed with 10 mL of sorting medium [phosphate buffered saline (PBS), 2 mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA), 2% FBS], and resuspended in 500 µL of sorting medium supplemented with DAPI at a ratio of 1:1000. 1.5×106 cells were sorted and collected using FACSAria (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA). Sorting of cells cultured with BocLys was based on DAPI and Dendra2 fluorescence as an indication for active UAG suppression. Cells incubated in the absence of BocLys were sorted based on DAPI fluorescence only. Collected cells were then pelleted (10 min, 500 g, 4°C), flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C.

### Data Protocol
Label-free quantitative mass spectrometry proteomic analysis was performed by The De Botton Protein Profiling institute of the Nancy and Stephen Grand Israel National Center for Personalized Medicine, Weizmann Institute of Science. For each condition, four biological replicates were analyzed. The samples were digested with trypsin using the S-trap method (Protifi, Huntington, NY)60. The resulting peptides were analyzed using nanoflow liquid chromatography (nanoAcquity) coupled to high resolution mass spectrometry (Q Exactive HF, Thermo Fisher). Each sample was analyzed on the instrument separately in a random order in discovery mode. Raw data were processed with MaxQuant v1.6.4.062. The data were searched with the Andromeda search engine, against the Human proteome database (Swissprot Nov18) appended with common lab protein contaminants and the following modifications: fixed carbamidomethylation of cysteine, N-terminal protein acetylation, oxidation of methionine and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine. Quantification was based on the label-free quantification method.

### Publication Abstract
Faithful translation of genetic information depends on the ability of the translational machinery to decode stop codons as termination signals. Although termination of protein synthesis is highly efficient, errors in decoding of stop codons may lead to the synthesis of C-terminally extended proteins. It was found that in eukaryotes such elongated proteins do not accumulate in cells. However, the mechanism for sequestration of C-terminally extended proteins is still unknown. Here we show that 3'-UTR-encoded polypeptides promote aggregation of the C-terminally extended proteins, and targeting to lysosomes. We demonstrate that 3'-UTR-encoded polypeptides can promote different levels of protein aggregation, similar to random sequences. We also show that aggregation of endogenous proteins can be induced by aminoglycoside antibiotics that promote stop codon read-through, by UAG suppressor tRNA, or by knokcdown of release factor 1. Furthermore, we find correlation between the fidelity of termination signals, and the predicted propensity of downstream 3'-UTR-encoded polypeptides to form intrinsically disordered regions. Our data highlight a new quality control mechanism for elimination of C-terminally elongated proteins.

### Keywords
Human, Uag suppressor trna

### Affiliations
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev

### Submitter
Eyal Arbely

### Lab Head
Dr Eyal Arbely
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev


