### Accession
PXD021538

### Title
Top-down proteomics of human saliva in Alzheimer disease

### Description
Alzheimer disease (AD) is the most prevalent neurodegenerative disease and form of dementia in the elderly. It is characterized by the accumulation in the brain of misfolded proteins, inflammation and oxidative damage leading to region-specific loss of synaptic contacts and neuronal cell death. In the present study, we aimed to characterize the salivary protein profile of a sample (sample group or cohort) of AD patients in comparison with healthy controls (HC) by a top-down proteomic approach, to evidence possible quali-/quantitative variations associated to the disease. This approach is based on high performance liquid chromatography separation coupled to electrospray-ion trap mass spectrometry (HPLC-ESI-IT-MS) analysis of the acidic soluble proteome of human saliva,  which was standardized in our previous studies for detecting and quantifying of hundreds salivary peptides/proteins. By this,  it is possible to obtain a profiling of the naturally occurring salivary proteome, including isoforms and post-translational modifications (PTMs), to compare an unlimited number of samples and to quantify proteins by a label-free method.

### Sample Protocol
Thirty-five subjects affected by Alzheimer disease (23 females and 12 males; mean age and standard deviation, SD: 80 ± 6) were recruited by the Neurology Department of the “Fondazione Policlinico Universitario A. Gemelli”, Catholic University of Rome. The clinical diagnosis of AD has been carried out according to standardized criteria (McKhann et al., 2011). The control group included 35 healthy volunteers (17 females and 18 males; mean age and SD: 78 ± 5). The informed consent process agreed with the latest stipulations established by the Declaration of Helsinki. The study was approved by the formal ethical committee of the Catholic University of Rome. All the samples of non-stimulated whole saliva were collected between 9:00 and 12:00 a.m. Donors, in fasting conditions, were invited to sit assuming a relaxed position and to swallow. Whole saliva was collected as it flowed into the anterior floor of the mouth with a soft plastic aspirator for less than 1 min and transferred to a plastic tube cooled on ice. Salivary samples were immediately diluted in a 1:1 v/v ratio with a 0.2% solution of 2,2,2-trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) containing 50μM of leu-enkephalin as internal standard. Then, each sample was centrifuged at 20000 g for 15 minutes at 4°C. Finally, the supernatant was separated from the precipitate and immediately analyzed by RP-HPLC-ESI-MS or stored at -80°C until the analysis for up to two weeks. Twenthy-two salivary samples (4 and 18 from AD and HC group respectively) were addressed to HPLC-high resolution ESI-MS/MS (LTQ-Orbitrap Elite or LTQ-Orbitrap XL) to perform a top-down characterization confirming the identity of the peptides and proteins investigated in this study. The instrument was operating in “Intact Protein Mode”, with the delta HCD (higher energy collisional dissociation) vacuum pressure reduced to 0.1. The chromatographic separation was carried out using eluent A: 0.1% (v/v) aqueous formic acid (FA) and eluent B: 0.1% (v/v) FA in ACN/water 80/20. The gradient was: 0-2 min 5% B, 2-10 min from 5% to 25% B (linear), 10-25 min from 25% to 34% B, 25-45 min from 34% to 70% B, 45-55 min from 70% to 90% B at flow rate of 50 µL/min. The injection volume was 19 μL. Full MS experiments were performed in positive ion mode with mass range from 400 to 2000 m/z at resolution of 120000 (at 400 m/z). Capillary temperature was 275°C, source voltage 4.0 kV, S-Lens RF level 69%. In data-dependent acquisition mode, the five most abundant ions were acquired and fragmented by using collision-induced dissociation (CID) and higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD)with 35% normalized collision energy for 10 ms, isolation width of 5 m/z, activation q of 0.25. HPLC-ESI-MS and MS/MS data were generated by Xcalibur 2.2 SP 1.48 (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, CA) using default parameters of the Xtract program for the deconvolution.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data were analyzed by both manual inspection of the MS/MS spectra recorded along the chromatogram and the Proteome Discoverer 2.2 software elaboration based on the SEQUEST HT cluster as a search engine (University of Washington, licensed to Thermo Electron Corporation, San Jose, CA) against the UniProt-KB human data-bank (188,453 entries, release 2019_03). For peptide matching, high-confidence filter settings were applied: the peptide score threshold was 2.3, and the limits were Xcorr scores >1.2 for singly charged ions and 1.9 and 2.3 for doubly and triply charged ions, respectively. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 (strict) and 0.05 (relaxed), and the precursor and fragment mass tolerance was 10 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. N-terminal pyroglutamination of Glu or Gln residues, phosphorylation on Ser and Thr residues, N-terminal acetylation, oxidation of Met and Trp residues, glutathionylation, nitrosylation and sulfonic acid of Cys residues, were selected as dynamic modifications. Because of the difficulties of the automated software to detect with high confidence every protein and their fragments, the structural information derives in part from manual inspections of the MS/MS spectra, obtained by both CID and HCD fragmentation, against the theoretical ones generated by MS-Product software available at the Protein Prospector Web site (http://prospector.ucsf.edu/prospector/mshome.htm). All the MS/MS spectra were manually verified by using all the fragmentation spectra with an acceptable number of fragment ions.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Oxidative stress, Alzheimer disease, Thymosin β4, Cystatins, Antimicrobial peptides, Α-defensins, S100a, Salivary proteomics

### Affiliations
Life and Environmental Sciences Department (Biomedical Section) - University of Cagliari

### Submitter
Simone Serrao

### Lab Head
Dr Tiziana Cabras
Life and Environmental Sciences Department (Biomedical Section) - University of Cagliari


