### Accession
PXD025101

### Title
Contribution of IFIX to nuclear and cytoplasmic proteome changes during immune signaling

### Description
IFIX is a nuclear DNA sensor that is known to induce cytokine expression in response to both cytoplasmic DNA and foreign DNA in the nucleus. Here, we examine the concomitant nuclear and cytoplasmic proteome changes that are driven by IFIX during immune response to viral infection and transfection of viral DNA. Furthermore, we identify the posttranslational modifications present on the IFIX protein during HSV-1 infection.

### Sample Protocol
Human fibroblast cells expressing mGFP or IFI16-mGFP that had been infected with wild-type herpes simplex virus 1 or transfected with VACV70mer were lysed by detergent lysis and subjected to nuclear-cytoplasmic fractionation. Proteins were digested using trypsin and suspension trapping columns (S-Trap, Protifi) for 1 hour. Peptides were analyzed by nano-liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry with a Q Exactive HF Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap instrument (Thermo Scientific) using data-dependent (DDA) mode. Peptides were injected in 2 µl volume and separated with a 3% solvent B to 35% solvent B gradient (solvent A: 0.1% FA, solvent B: 0.1% FA, 97% CAN) over 150 min at a flow rate of 250 nL/min on an EASYSpray C18 column (75 µm x 50 µm) heated to 50 °C. The full scan range was set to 350-1800 m/z at 120,000 resolution and recorded in profile. The top 20 most intense precursors were subjected to HCD fragmentation – normalized collision energy (NCE) of 28 – for MS2 analysis at 15,000 resolution with automatic gain control (AGC) target set to 1e5, 42 ms maximum injection time, and an isolation window of 1.2 m/z.  For PTM identification, U2OS cells expressing IFI16-mGFP were infected with HSV-1, and IFI16 was isolated by GFP immunoaffinity purification. Peptides were recovered by in-gel trypsin digestion before desalting. Peptides were analyzed by nLC-MS/MS with an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Fisher). Peptides were injected in 4µl volume and separated with a 4 to 40% solvent B gradient. The top 15 most abundant precursor ions were subjected to collision-induced dissociation.

### Data Protocol
Tandem MS spectra collected from DDA mode were analyzed by Proteome Discoverer v2.4. MS spectra were searched using the Sequest HT algorithm against a UniProt human database containing herpesvirus sequences and common contaminants (downloaded 2021-01). The Spectrum Files RC node was used to perform offline mass recalibration and the Minora Feature Detector node was used for label-free MS1 quantitation. Posttranslational modifications (PTMs) including static carbamidomethylation of cysteine, dynamic oxidation of methionine, dynamic loss of methionine plus acetylation of the protein N-terminus, dynamic acetylation of the protein N-terminus, and dynamic glutamate to pyroglutamate conversion were all allowed. The Percolator node was then used to perform peptide spectrum match (PSM) validation and the IMP-ptmRs node was used for assigning PTM sites. PSMs were assembled into peptide and protein identifications with a false discovery rate of less than 1% for both the peptide and protein level.  For IFIX PTM identification, raw data from MS analyses of IFIX-GFP immunoisolations were extracted and searched against UniProt Swiss-Prot sequence database that included common contaminants (downloaded August, 2013) in Proteome Discoverer v1.4, using the SEQUEST HT node. The following criteria were used as search parameters: full trypsin specificity, maximum 2 missed cleavage sites, precursor and fragment ion mass tolerance of 10ppm and 0.5Da, respectively. The following dynamic modifications were searched: acetylation, oxidation, and phosphorylation, and the static modification carbamidomethylation was allowed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nuclear dna sensor, Ptm, Innate immunity, Ifix

### Affiliations
Princeton University
Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University

### Submitter
Tim Howard

### Lab Head
Dr Ileana M Cristea
Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University


