### Accession
PXD021474

### Title
Stress response of lettuce (Lactuca sativa) to environmental contamination with selected pharmaceuticals: a Proteomics study

### Description
This work aims to study the main metabolic pathways in lettuce tissues contaminated with three different pharmaceuticals: metformin MTF, carbamazepine CBZ and acetaminophen  ACT . The main focus of this proteomic analysis will be the relation among stress related proteins and specific metabolic pathways regarding defence mechanisms. In order to accomplish this, previous results obtained from the direct study of enzymatic activities will be correlated with the results obtained from this proteomic analysis. This work will then contribute to improve knowledge regarding the contamination of lettuce with three largely used pharmaceutical compounds.

### Sample Protocol
, 20µg of proteins were loaded on a 1D-Gel to fractionate each sample in two groups and to perform in-gel trypsin digestion. The extracted peptides were separated with a nanoLC425 Eksigent coupled to a TripleTOF® 6600 MS Sciex onto a trap column and a C18 reverse phase column using a long linear binary gradient

### Data Protocol
The MS data was imported in Progenesis QIP v.4.1. The protein and peptide identification were searched on Mascot Daemon (v2.6.0, Matrix Science) by searching Lactuca sativa database on UniprotKB with the Mascot research parameters following: peptide tolerance = 20 ppm, fragment mass tolerance = 0.5 Da, max two missed cleavages, carbamido-methylation of cysteine as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine, N-terminal protein acetylation and conversion of tryptophan to kynurenine as variable modifications and a significance Mascot-calculated confidence of 95%. The proteins identified with a fold change > 1.5, a p-value < 0.05 and minimum two significant sequences per protein and one unique sequence per protein were considered as differentially abundant proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Pharmaceutical compounds have been found in rivers and treated wastewaters. They often contaminate irrigation waters and consequently accumulate in edible vegetables, causing changes in plants metabolism. The main objective of this work is to understand how lettuce plants cope with the contamination from three selected pharmaceuticals using a label free proteomic analysis. A lettuce hydroponic culture, grown for 36&#xa0;days, was exposed to metformin, acetaminophen and carbamazepine (at 1&#xa0;mg/L), during 8&#xa0;days, after which roots and leaves were sampled and analysed using a liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry proteomics-based approach. In roots, a total of 612 proteins showed differentially accumulation while in leaves 237 proteins were identified with significant differences over controls. Carbamazepine was the contaminant that most affected protein abundance in roots, while in leaves the highest number of differentially accumulated proteins was observed for acetaminophen. In roots under carbamazepine, stress related protein species such as catalase, superoxide dismutase and peroxidases presented higher abundance. Ascorbate peroxidase increased in roots under metformin. Cell respiration protein species were affected by the presence of the three pharmaceuticals suggesting possible dysregulation of the Krebs cycle. Acetaminophen caused the main differences in respiration pathways, with more emphasis in leaves. Lettuce plants revealed different tolerance levels when contaminants were compared, being more tolerant to metformin presence and less tolerant to carbamazepine. SIGNIFICANCE: The significant increase of emerging contaminants in ecosystems makes essential to understand how these compounds may affect the metabolism of different organisms. Our study contributes with a detailed approach of the main interactions that may occur in plant metabolism when subjected to the stress induced by three different pharmaceuticals (acetaminophen, carbamazepine and metformin).

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Plant contamination, Pharmaceutical compounds, Stress related proteins

### Affiliations
LIST-ERIN-ERTP-Green Tech Integrative biology platform Belvaux, LUXEMBOURG
LIST-ERIN-ERTP-BEAP-HAU platform

### Submitter
Céline LECLERCQ

### Lab Head
Dr Céline LECLERCQ
LIST-ERIN-ERTP-Green Tech Integrative biology platform Belvaux, LUXEMBOURG


