### Accession
PXD005508

### Title
CETSA Hsp90i -  Targeting CDK2 overcomes melanoma resistance against BRAF and Hsp90 inhibitors

### Description
The goal of this project is to identify the drug target of XL888, an hsp90i used in clinical trial against melanoma

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of cell extract for CETSA Cells were grown each in the presence of DMSO (control) or drug (100 µM) for 2 h; harvested, resuspended in 1.1 mL of HBBS (Gibco) supplemented with 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 1 tablet of Complete mini EDTA‐free mixture (Roche Applied Science) and one tablet of PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor mixture per 10 ml of lysis buffer (Roche Applied Science). The cell suspension per cell line (SK-Mel24 and SK-Mel28) per condition (+/- drug) was divided into ten aliquots of 100 μL and transferred into 0.2 mL PCR tubes. CETSA was performed as previously described (Franken H. et al. 2015 PMID: 26379230). Briefly, each tube was heated individually at different temperatures for 3 min in a thermal cycler (Applied Biosystems (Foster City, CA)/Life Technologies) followed by cooling for 3 min at room temperature. Cell were lysed by freeze&thaw and the lysates were centrifuged at 20,000 g for 20 min at 4°C to separate the soluble fractions from precipitates. The supernatants were transferred to new 0.2 mL microtubes. Protein concentration was determined using a BCA assay (Pierce). Each supernatant was reduced by 2 mM TCEP at room temperature for 1 h; alkylated by 4 mM chloroacetamide for 30 min at room temperature at the dark; SDS was added to a final concentration of 0.1 % to facilitate the subsequent digestions. A first enzymatic digestion was performed using Lys-C (1:75 w/w) at 37°C overnight; a second enzymatic digestion was performed using Trypsin (1:75 w/w) at 37°C overnight. One hundred µg of each sample was labelled by TMT10plex. Samples of each set (10 different temperatures) were mixed 1:1 (v/v) and cleaned by Strong Cation. The whole procedure was executed in two biological replicates.   Basic reverse phase fractionation  Two hundred μg of peptide mixture from each set were fractionated using a Waters XBridge BEH300 C18 3.5 μm 2.1×250 mm column on a Agilent 1200 series operating at 200 μL/min. Buffer A consisted of 20 mM NH3, while buffer B of 80% ACN / 20 mM NH3. The fractionation gradient was: 3-88% B in 63 min; 88% B for 15 min; and ramped to 100% B in 2.5 min; 100% B for 13.5 min. Fractions were collected into a polypropylene V-96 well microtiterplates. At 97 min, fraction collection was halted, and the gradient was held at 3% B for 20 min. The total number of concatenated fractions was set to 12. Each plate was dried at room temperature using a Speed Vac.  Plates were stored at -20°C till LC/MS/MS analysis.  CETSA - LC/MS/MS analyses  Each sample was analyzed on a HF Q-Exactive Orbitrap (Thermo Fisher, Germany) connected to a Dionex UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany). The UHPLC was equipped with a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 75 μm x 2 cm, nanoviper, C18, 3 μm, 100 Å; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany) and an analytical column. Mobile‐phase buffers for nLC separation consisted of 0.1% FA in water (solvent A) and 80% ACN/0.1% FA (solvent B). The peptides were eluted during a 2 h gradient and directly sprayed into the mass spectrometer. The flow rate was set at 250 nL/min, and the LC gradient was as follows: 3-6% solvent B within 3 min, 6-35% solvent B within 117 min, 35–47% solvent B within 5 min, 47-100% solvent B within 5 min and 100% B for 8 min and 1% solvent B for 5 min. Nano spray was achieved with an applied voltage of 1.8 kV. The mass spectrometer was programmed in a data‐dependent acquisition mode (top 10 most intense peaks) and was configured to perform a Fourier transform survey scan from 370 to 1,600 m/z (resolution 60,000), AGC target 3 e6, maximum injection time 250 ms.

### Data Protocol
The raw data was analyzed as previously described (Franken H. et al. 2015 PMID: 26379230). Mascot was used to search the MS/MS data against the UniProt Homo sapiens database (containing canonical and isoforms_42144 entries downloaded on 21st March 2016). GMRJ1511B Sk-Mel-28 In-cell GMRJ1512A Sk-Mel-24 In-cell GMRJ1602A Sk-Mel-24 Lysate GMRJ1602B Sk-Mel-28 Lysate

### Publication Abstract
Novel therapies are undergoing clinical trials, for example, the Hsp90 inhibitor, XL888, in combination with BRAF inhibitors for the treatment of therapy-resistant melanomas. Unfortunately, our data show that this combination elicits a heterogeneous response in a panel of melanoma cell lines including PDX-derived models. We sought to understand the mechanisms underlying the differential responses and suggest a patient stratification strategy. Thermal proteome profiling (TPP) identified the protein targets of XL888 in a pair of sensitive and unresponsive cell lines. Unbiased proteomics and phosphoproteomics analyses identified CDK2 as a driver of resistance to both BRAF and Hsp90 inhibitors and its expression is regulated by the transcription factor MITF upon XL888 treatment. The CDK2 inhibitor, dinaciclib, attenuated resistance to both classes of inhibitors and combinations thereof. Notably, we found that MITF expression correlates with CDK2 upregulation in patients; thus, dinaciclib would warrant consideration for treatment of patients unresponsive to BRAF-MEK and/or Hsp90 inhibitors and/or harboring MITF amplification/overexpression.

### Keywords
Cetsa-ms; brp; lc/ms/ms

### Affiliations
School of Biotechnology, KTH, Sweden
KTH

### Submitter
Gianluca Maddalo

### Lab Head
Dr Mathias Uhlen
School of Biotechnology, KTH, Sweden


