### Accession
PXD030779

### Title
Cardiac progenitor cell-derived extracellular vesicles promote angiogenesis through associated- and co-isolated proteins including PAPP-A

### Description
Stem- and progenitor cell transplantation therapy holds great promise for regenerating damaged heart tissue. Several lines of evidence suggest that its efficacy is mainly caused by secreted extracellular vesicles (EVs). EVs are small, cell-derived lipid bilayer enclosed particles that play a role in intercellular communication through their enrichment in specific components like nucleic acids and proteins. Indeed, cardiac progenitor cell (CPC)-derived EVs have been shown to protect the myocardium against ischemia/reperfusion injury. However, the underlying mechanisms for CPC-EV-mediated cardioprotection remain elusive. Here, we utilized the proteomic composition of CPC-EVs released during different culture conditions, to unravel protein-mediated effects of CPC-EVs on the endothelium. CPCs were stimulated with calcium ionophore (ca ion-EVs), previously shown to influence EV release, or vehicle (control-EVs) for 24 hours and EVs were isolated using size exclusion chromatography (SEC). EV concentration and size was assessed using NTA and proteomic composition was profiled using mass spectrometry in triplicate. EVs isolated from SKOV-3 cells were included as a non-stem cell control. Proteomic analysis identified multiple proteins uniquely expressed or enriched in control-EVs compared with ca ion-EVs and SKOV-3 EVs. To better understand the effect that these EVs have on cardioprotection, endothelial cells HMEC-1 were stimulated with CPC-EVs, CaIon-EVs or PBS for 30 min. Phosphorylation of ERK1/2 and AKT, and wound closure was increased in HMEC-1 after stimulation with CPC-EVs but not with Ca ion-EVs. To gain further detail in the pathway activation in HMEC-1 cells, we also performed (phospho)proteomic analysis of these cells upon EV-stimulation. The proteomic and phosphoproteomic changes derived from EV-stimulation in HMEC-1 were quantified by mass spectrometry and validated the activation of PI3K-AKT-mTOR and (Insulin/IGF-) MAPK signaling pathways.

### Sample Protocol
For proteomic profiling from CPC-, SKOV3- and CaIon-EVs, the vesicles were lysed by 2 % SDS lysis buffer (2% SDS, 50 mM HEPES pH 7.6, 1 mM DTT) and prepared for mass spectrometry analysis using a modified version of the SP3 protein clean up and digestion protocol (Moggridge et al., 2018). Proteomic analysis was then done as follows: data were acquired using a Dionex UltiMate™ 3000 RSLCnano System coupled to a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer. Samples were trapped on a C18 guard desalting column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 75µm x 2 cm, nanoViper, C18, 5 µm, 100 Å), and separated on a 50 cm long C18 column (Easy spray PepMap RSLC, C18, 2 µm, 100Å, 75 µmx50cm). The nano capillary solvent A was 95% water, 5% DMSO, 0.1% formic acid; and solvent B was 5% water, 5% DMSO, 95% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. At a constant flow of 0.25 μl min−1, the curved  gradient went from 6%B up to 43%B in 180 min, followed by a steep increase to 100%B in 5 min. Peptides were ionized in a nESI source at 1.9 kV and focused at 60% amplitude of the RF lens. Full scan MS1 spectra from 400 - 1200 m/z were acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 60,000 with the AGC target set to 1×106 or for a maximum injection time of 250 ms. For each cycle, the top 10 most abundant precursor ions were isolated (with an isolation window of 2 m/z) for fragmentation while precursor ions with charge states 1 or unassigned were excluded for fragmentation. Dynamic exclusion was set to 20 s. HCD fragmentation was at 30% NCE. Fragment ions were accumulated until a target value of 2x105 ions was reached or for a maximum injection time of 140 ms before injection in the Orbitrap for MS2 analysis at a resolution of 30,000. For (phospho)proteomics, HMEC-1 cells were lysed using cOmplete Lysis-M EDTA-free lysis buffer supplemented with PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitors. 2 biological replicates were pooled to obtain 50 µg protein for phospho-enrichment. Proteins were precipitated by the methanol/chloroform method: 1 volume of sample was mixed with 4 vol of methanol, 1 vol of chloroform and 3 vol of water The mixture was centrifuged and the upper layer was removed. Then, 3 volumes of methanol were incorporated and centrifuged, and the liquid phase was discarded while the pellet was air dried. The pellets were reconstituted in 50 μL of digestion buffer (100 mMTris-HCl pH 8.5, 1% SDC, 5 mM TCEP and 30 mM CAA) to reduce and alkylate the proteins. Protein digestion was done with Lys-C at a 1:100 (w/w) ratio for 1 h at 37 ºC, followed by ON incubation at 37 ºC with Trypsin at a 1:25 ratio (w/w). Digestions were quenched 0.5% FA, SDC was pelleted by centrifugation, supernatants were desalted, vacuum dried and stored. Phosphorylated peptides were enriched on Fe(III)-NTA 5 μL cartridges using the AssayMAP Bravo Platform. Cartridges were primed with 250 μL of 0.1% TFA in ACN and equilibrated with 250 μL of loading buffer (80% ACN/0.1% TFA). Samples were dissolved in 200 μL of loading buffer and loaded onto the cartridge, followed by a 250 μL wash in loading buffer. The load flowthrough, containing the non-phosphorylated subset of the proteome, was kept for further proteomic characterization. Phosphopeptides were then eluted with 35 μL of 1% ammonia into 35 μL of 10% formic acid. Samples were vacuum dried and stored for LC–MS/MS analysis. For (phospho)proteomic analysis, data were acquired with an Ultimate 3000 system coupled to an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer. Peptides were trapped (Dr Maisch Reprosil C18, 3µM, 2cm x 100µM) for 5min in solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) before being separated on an analytical column (Agilent Poroshell, EC-C18, 2.7µM, 50cm x 75µM). Solvent B consisted of 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile. Trapping of peptides was performed for 2 min in 9% B at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. For full proteome analysis, peptides were separated in a gradient of 13–44% B in 95 min, while for phosphoproteomic analysis, peptides were separated in a gradient of 9–36% B in 36 min After (phospho)peptide separation, gradients were followed by a steep increase to 99% B in 3 min, a 5 min wash in 99% B. Peptides were ionized in a nESI source at 1.9 kV and focused at 40% amplitude of the RF lens. Full scan MS1 spectra from 375 - 1600 m/z were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 with the AGC target set to 1×106 and under automated calculation of maximum injection time. Cycle time for MS2 fragmentation scans was set to 1 second and precursor ions with charge states 2-6 were isolated (isolation window of 1.4 m/z) for fragmentation. Dynamic exclusion was set to 10 ms for 36 min gradients and to 16 ms for 95 min gradients. HCD fragmentation was at 28% NCE. Fragment ions were accumulated until a target value of 1x105 ions was reached under an automated calculation of maximum injection time, before injection in the Orbitrap for MS2 analysis at a resolution of 30,000.

### Data Protocol
All raw data were searched in MaxQuant (v_1.6.10.43) (#ref: PMID: 27809316) against a the SwissProt human reference proteome database (containing 20,381 proteins and downloaded from Uniprot on March 2021). Spectra were searched using MaxQuant’s built-in Andromeda search engine. Trypsin was set as the digestion enzyme and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification, while protein N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications. For phosphoproteomics data analysis, phosphorylation of serine, tyrosine and threonine was also included as variable modification. Label-free quantification (LFQ) was enabled using a minimum ratio count of two and both razor and unique peptides for quantification. Match between runs was enabled, the matching time window was always set to 0.7 min while the alignment time window was set to 20 min for proteomic analysis and 10 min for phosphoproteomic analysis. Precursor ion tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the first search and 4.5 ppm after recalibration, and fragment ions tolerance was set to 20 ppm. FDR of 1% was set at PSM, site and protein level by using a reverse decoy database strategy.  Data was analyzed using Perseus software (v_1.6.14) (#ref: PMID: 27348712). In each analysis, proteins quantified (LFQ) in two out of three replicates were log2 transformed and missing values were replaced individually for each sample from the normal distribution. For phosphoproteomic analysis, where intensity-based MS injection balancing was not possible, phosphosite intensities were normalized to the maximum cumulative intensity (found in sample CPC-EV, replicate 2). Statistical differences were always assessed by two-sided Student’s T test or One-way ANOVA and corrected p values (q value) were calculated using the permutation method with up to 250 iterations. Proteins were considered significant when q value ≤ 0.05. Gene ontology analysis were done using PANTHER (#ref: PMID: 30407594) using the human proteome as background gene set. Phosphoproteomic data was explored using the cytoscape pluggin PhosphoPath (ref#: PMID: 26317507) against the WikiPathways database (#ref: PMID: 33211851). All plots were generated using R packages (ref#: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-74686-7) and refined with Illustrator 2020.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Angiogenesis, Evs, Cardioprotection, Phosphoproteomics, Proteomics, Orbitrap exploris

### Affiliations
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Julia Bauzá Martinez

### Lab Head
Dr Wei Wu
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands


