### Accession
PXD023289

### Title
The GORKY Glycoalkaloid Transporter is Indispensable for Preventing Tomato Bitterness

### Description
Fruit taste is determined by sugars, acids and in some species, bitter chemicals. Attraction of seed-dispersing organisms in nature and breeding for consumer preferences requires reduced fruit bitterness. A key metabolic shift during ripening prevents tomato fruit bitterness by eliminating α-tomatine, a renowned defence-associated Solanum alkaloid. Here, we combined fine mapping with information from 150 re-sequenced genomes and genotyping a 650 tomato core collection to identify nine bitter-tasting accessions including the ‘high α-tomatine’ Peruvian landraces reported by Rick and colleagues (1994). These ‘bitter’ accessions contain a deletion in GORKY, a nitrate/peptide family (NPF) transporter mediating α-tomatine subcellular localization during fruit ripening. GORKY exports α-tomatine and its derivatives from the vacuole to the cytosol and this facilitates the conversion of the entire α-tomatine pool to non-bitter forms, rendering the fruit palatable. Hence, GORKY activity was a significant innovation in the process of tomato fruit domestication and breeding. The experiment was carried out to further prove that GORKY is localized to tonoplast in ripe fruit.

### Sample Protocol
Tonoplast vesicles from tomato fruit were isolated as described1 and flash frozen until further analysis. Protein was extracted from the tonoplast vesicle preparation using modified the Filter‐Aided Sample Preparation protocol2,3. All reagents were from Sigma Aldrich, unless stated otherwise. In brief, the samples were mixed with lysis buffer [4% (w/v) sodium dodecyl sulfate, 100 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.6, 100 mM dithiothreitol] in 1/1 w/v ratio for fruit pericarp tissues, 50 µl was added to tonoplast vesicle samples and incubated for 5 min at 95°C, followed by 10 min centrifugation at 14000 rpm. Clarified lysate amount equal to 10 µg of total protein was mixed with urea buffer (UB) (8 M urea in 100mM Tris/HCl pH 8.0) and loaded on 30 kDa molecular weight cutoff filters (Sartorius). The filters were centrifuged for 40 min at 14000 rpm and 200 ul of UB was added twice to wash the filter unit followed by addition of 100 µl 5 mM iodoacetamide in UB and incubation in the dark for 10 min. The filter units were again centrifuged for 30 min and conditioned twice with 8 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution. Trypsin (Promega) was added to the filter units, and they were incubated at 37°C overnight. A mixture of digested peptides was collected by 30 min centrifugation followed by addition of 50 µl of 0.5 M NaCl were added to the filters followed by another 30 min centrifugation. The peptides, acidified with trifluoroacetic acid to 1%, were dried in a speedvac and analyzed using nano‐UPLC (Waters), coupled through a nano‐ESI emitter (10 μm tip; New Objective) to a quadrupole orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive Plus, Thermo Scientific) as described in Szymanski et al. (2017).  1. Snowden, C. J., Thomas, B., Baxter, C. J., Smith, J. A. C. & Sweetlove, L. J. Isolation of tonoplast vesicles from tomato fruit pericarp. Bio-protocol 5, e1686 (2015). 2. Szymanski, J. et al. Label-free deep shotgun proteomics reveals protein dynamics during tomato fruit tissues development. Plant J. 90, 396–417 (2017). 3. Wiśniewski, J. R., Zougman, A., Nagaraj, N. & Mann, M. Universal sample preparation method for proteome analysis. Nat. Methods 6, 359–362 (2009).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and label-free quantification was carried out using the Proteome Discoverer software (version 2.2) (Thermo Scientific). The following parameters were set for searching the Sequest HT search engine against SGN (ITAG 3.2) and Ensembl target databases: a) maximum 2 missed tryptic cleavages; b) peptide length 6-144 amino acids; c) precursor mass tolerance 10 ppm; d) fragment mass tolerance 0.02 Da, e) fixed and variable modifications like carbamidomethylation of Cys and oxidation of Met. The data was filtered for at least two peptides matching the protein .

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Fruit, Npf, Bitter, Sga, Tomato, Transporter

### Affiliations
Weizmann Institute of Science
Weizmann Institute of Science, Department of Plant and Environmental Sciences

### Submitter
Yana Kazachkova

### Lab Head
Dr Asaph Aharoni
Weizmann Institute of Science, Department of Plant and Environmental Sciences


