### Accession
PXD037008

### Title
Membrane vesicles (MVs) in Alteromonas macleodii

### Description
In this study we characterized MV production by six different strains of Alteromonas macleodii, a cosmopolitan marine bacterium.

### Sample Protocol
For each A. macleodii strain, the protein content of cells retained on 0.22 μm filters, and of 200 µL of the purified MVs, were determined as described elsewhere (Bayer et al. 2019; Zhao, Baltar and Herndl 2020). Extracted proteins were subject to in-solution trypsin digestion, and resulting peptides were sequenced on a Q Exactive Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at the Vienna Research Platform for Metabolomics & Proteomics.

### Data Protocol
Using the Proteome Discoverer v2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific), tandem mass spectrometry spectra were searched using SEQUEST-HT against the corresponding genome of each strain. Search parameters were: enzyme: trypsin, fragment mass tolerance: 0.6 Da, max. missed cleavages: 2, fixed modifications: carbamidomethyl (Cys), optional modifications: oxidation (Met). Percolator parameters were: max. delta Cn: 0.6, max. rank: 0, validation based on q-value, false discovery rate (calculated by automatic decoy searches) was 0.05. Protein quantification was conducted using the chromatographic peak area-based label-free quantitative method.

### Publication Abstract
Bacterial membrane vesicles (MVs) are abundant in the oceans, but their potential functional roles remain unclear. In this study we characterized MV production and protein content of six strains of <i>Alteromonas macleodii</i>, a cosmopolitan marine bacterium. <i>Alteromonas macleodii</i> strains varied in their MV production rates, with some releasing up to 30 MVs per cell per generation. Microscopy imaging revealed heterogenous MV morphologies, including some MVs aggregated within larger membrane structures. Proteomic characterization revealed that <i>A. macleodii</i> MVs are rich in membrane proteins related to iron and phosphate uptake, as well as proteins with potential functions in biofilm formation. Furthermore, MVs harbored ectoenzymes, such as aminopeptidases and alkaline phosphatases, which comprised up to 20% of the total extracellular enzymatic activity. Our results suggest that <i>A. macleodii</i> MVs may support its growth through generation of extracellular 'hotspots' that facilitate access to essential substrates. This study provides an important basis to decipher the ecological relevance of MVs in heterotrophic marine bacteria.

### Keywords
Vesicles, Extracellular enzymes, Marine bacteria

### Affiliations
University of Vienna

### Submitter
ZIhao Zhao

### Lab Head
Dr Eduard Fadeev
University of Vienna


