### Accession
PXD032981

### Title
Integrating multi-omics analyses unveil protein features of gestational diabetes mellitus and preeclampsia

### Description
As one of the most common maternal comorbidities, gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) and preeclampsia (PE) are associated with maternal and infant health. Although the pathogenesis of PE and GDM remains controversial, oxidative stress is thought to be involved in the underlying pathology of GDM and PE. Protein lysine acetylation (Kac) plays an important regulatory role in biological processes. There is little data regarding the association of the maternal acetylome with GDM and PE. This study aimed to assess the multi-omics (proteome and acetylome) potential value in the underlying pathology for GDM and PE by label-free quantification proteomics technology. In our study, we included placental tissue from healthy individuals (n=6), GDM patients (n=6), and PE patients (n=6). We identified 22 overlapping DEPs (differentially expressed proteins) and 192 overlapping DAPs (differentially acetylated proteins) between the GDM and PE groups. Furthermore, 192 overlapping DAPs were mainly enriched in endoplasmic reticulum stress and ferroptosis pathways. Interestingly, endoplasmic reticulum stress, ferroptosis, and oxidative stress are believed to be related to each other. We also identified that acetylation of the HSP90AA1, HSPA8, PDIA3, GPX4, TF, and CP might serve as novel markers and better therapeutic targets in both complications. We thoroughly analyzed the key characteristics of proteome and acetylome in GDM and PE placental tissues, which may be useful for exploring the underlying pathology and discovering new biomarkers and therapeutic targets.

### Sample Protocol
Experimental procedures Sample source We collected 18 placental tissue samples (6 GDM pregnant women, 6 PE pregnant women, and 6 normal pregnant women) from Shenzhen People's Hospital between 1 February 2020 and 30 July 2020. The mean age of the study population was 36 years (range, 24 to 40 years). Pregnant women with PE meet the preeclampsia guidance(21). All pregnant women with GDM meet ADA diagnostic criteria(22). Exclusion criteria for all pregnant women were consistent with our previous study(18). The study was approved by the Medical Ethics Committee of Shenzhen People's Hospital and written informed consent was obtained from all participants. The collected placental tissues were washed repeatedly in PBS solution, and then were stored in a -80°C refrigerator. Experimental Design and Statistical Rationale We divide 18 placental tissue samples into three groups: the GDM group, PE group, and control group. The proteome and acetylome analysis between placental tissues from PE patients and control groups has been studied previously(18). Herein, we further explored the characteristics of proteome and acetylome among GDM, PE, and control groups. A PSM FDR and a protein FDR were both set to 1%. For protein quantification data for proteome and acetylome, we removed those proteins missing greater than 67% of their data and imputed missing values to the lowest measured value. To evaluate whether the difference in the proteins and the modification site are significant, we used a two-sample two-tailed t-test to evaluate the p-value. Proteins and acetylation sites were considered differentially expressed if fold change (FC) > 1.5 or < 0.667 (1/1.5) and p-value < 0.05. FC represents the fold change in the GDM/PE group versus the control group. The KEGG pathways and GO entries with an FDR <0.05 were considered significant. Qualitative and quantification analysis of proteome  The liquid nitrogen was added to the placental tissue samples for grinding, and then the concentration of protein was measured using the BCA kit. Acetone precipitation of protein was carried out following the extraction of proteins. For reductive alkylation, the protein solution was added with 5 mM dithiothreitol and 11 mM iodoacetamide. The proteins solution was were then trypsinized into peptide fragments, which were separated by a NanoElute ultra high performance liquid chromatography (UHPLC) system and then analyzed by time-of-flight mass spectrometry (timsTOF) Pro mass spectrometry. The MS/MS data were processed by a Maxquant search engine (v.1.6.15.0). The label-free quantitation (LFQ) intensities in MaxQuant were used for protein quantitation. The relative quantitative values of the proteins were obtained after the LFQ value was centered and normalized.  Qualitative and quantification analysis of acetylome Similar to the sample processing for proteomics mentioned above, we performed protein extraction with a BCA kit. After extraction, the proteins were trypsinized into peptide fragments. The peptides were dissolved in IP buffer and the resulting supernatant was transferred to the acetylated resin (PTM-104). After shaking and elution, the acetylated peptides were vacuum lyophilized. Then the acetylated peptides were then subjected to LC-MS/MS mass spectrometry analysis, followed by the analysis of the identified secondary mass spectra using a Maxquant search engine (v.1.6.15.0). The intensities in MaxQuant were used for protein quantitation. The relative quantitative values of the acetylated peptides were obtained after the intensities value was centered and normalized. To eliminate the influence of protein expression on modification expression, we used the relative quantitative value of the acetylated site to compare the relative quantitative value of the corresponding protein of the acetylated site.

### Data Protocol
Bioinformatic analysis The intersection of DEPs (differentially expressed proteins) and DAPs (differentially acetylated proteins) between the GDM group and PE group was visualized with Venn diagrams. Gene Ontology (GO) annotation was carried out using EggNOG mapper (v2.0). For pathway annotation, the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database was used. GO and KEGG enrichment analysis of DAPs present in both GDM and PE groups were acquired using an online DAVID enrichment analysis service (https://david-d.ncifcrf.gov/tools.jsp). The R software (version 4.1.2) packages “ggplot2” was used to visualize the GO/KEGG enrichment analysis. Heatmaps were produced with the R package “pheatmap”. The three-dimensional structures of the proteins were created using SWISS-MODEL (SWISS-MODEL (expasy.org)) and were visualized with PyMOL software. The protein interaction was analyzed by STRING (interaction score≥0.7), and the protein interaction network visualization was performed by Cytoscape (version 3.8.0). In addition, hub DAPs were identified via Maximal Click Centrality (MCC) algorithm of Cytoscape plugin CytoHubba and Molecular Complex Detection (MCODE) algorithm. For proteomic and acetylome data, gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) with MSigDB v7.5.1 was performed with R package clusterProfiler (v4.0)(23). The KEGG pathways with an adjusted p-value <0.05 and a q-value <0.25 were considered significant. KEGG enrichment results of GSEA were visualized using the cnetplot R-package.

### Publication Abstract
Gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) and preeclampsia (PE) are associated with maternal and infant health. Although the pathogenesis of PE and GDM remains controversial, oxidative stress is involved in the underlying pathology of GDM and PE. Protein lysine acetylation (Kac) plays an important regulatory role in biological processes. There is little data regarding the association of the maternal acetylome with GDM and PE. This study aimed to assess the potential value of the proteome and acetylome for GDM and PE. In our study, we included placental tissues from healthy individuals (n&#xa0;=&#xa0;6), GDM patients (n&#xa0;=&#xa0;6), and PE patients (n&#xa0;=&#xa0;6) to perform 4D-label free quantification proteomics analysis and PRM analysis. We identified 22 significantly regulated proteins and 192 significantly regulated acetylated proteins between the GDM and PE groups. Furthermore, 192 significantly regulated acetylated proteins were mainly enriched in endoplasmic reticulum stress (ERS) and ferroptosis pathways. Seventeen acetylated sites in these two pathways were verified by PRM analysis. Our comprehensive analysis revealed key features of GDM/PE-significantly regulated acetylated proteins in the placentas from GDM and PE. The results of signaling pathway analysis focused on ERS and ferroptosis. These findings may help explore the underlying pathology, new biomarkers, and therapeutic targets of GDM and PE.

### Keywords
Oxidative stress, Preeclampsia, Proteomics, Gestational diabetes mellitus, Lysine acetylation

### Affiliations
The Second Clinical Medical College of Jinan University (Shenzhen People’s Hospital), Shenzhen 518020, China
The First Affiliated Hospital, Jinan University, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510632, China.

### Submitter
Biying Hu

### Lab Head
Dr Yong Dai
The Second Clinical Medical College of Jinan University (Shenzhen People’s Hospital), Shenzhen 518020, China


