### Accession
PXD014772

### Title
Human Ser/Thr phosphatase regulatory subunits  interactome

### Description
To understand the functional network of Human Ser/Thr phosphatse regulatory subunits in the cell, we performed a systematic proteomic analysis of nine human Ser/Thr phosphatase regulatory subunits using tandem affinity purification coupled with mass spectrometry (TAP-MS).

### Sample Protocol
Excised gel bands were cut into approximately 1 mm3 pieces and subjected to a modified in-gel trypsin digestion procedure and dried(1). On the day of analysis the samples were reconstituted in 5 - 10 µl of HPLC solvent A (2.5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). A nano-scale reverse-phase HPLC capillary column was created by packing 2.6 µm C18 spherical silica beads into a fused silica capillary (100 µm inner diameter x ~30 cm length) with a flame-drawn tip . After equilibrating the column each sample was loaded via a Famos auto sampler (LC Packings, San Francisco CA) onto the column. A gradient was formed and peptides were eluted with increasing concentrations of solvent B (97.5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid).

### Data Protocol
Peptides were detected, isolated, and fragmented to produce a tandem mass spectrum of specific fragment ions for each peptide. Peptide sequences (and hence protein identity) were determined by matching protein databases with the acquired fragmentation pattern by the software program, Sequest (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). All databases include a reversed version of all the sequences and the data was filtered to between a one and two percent peptide false discovery rate

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Group Head
Group Head, Laboratory of Cell Death & Cell Survival (LCDCS) Wellcome Trust-DBT India Alliance Senior Fellow, Centre for DNA Fingerprinting and Diagnostics [CDFD], INDIA

### Submitter
Subbareddy Maddika

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Maddika Subba Reddy
Group Head, Laboratory of Cell Death & Cell Survival (LCDCS) Wellcome Trust-DBT India Alliance Senior Fellow, Centre for DNA Fingerprinting and Diagnostics [CDFD], INDIA


