### Accession
PXD026867

### Title
Overexpression of Ndr2 disturbs hippocampal circuitry and function

### Description
The Ndr (nuclear Dbf2-related) family members are highly conserved serine/threonine protein kinases, which function in many cellular processes extending from cytokinesis to neurite outgrowth. In humans, the NDR2 gene is located in a microduplication hotspot on chromosome 12p that is associated with intellectual disabilities in several individuals. To address a putative contribution of Ndr2 overexpression to such cognitive dysfunctions we generated conditional transgenic mice overexpressing Ndr2 in postmigratory forebrain neurons. Proteomic analysis identifies several interaction partners of transgenic Ndr2 relevant to MF maturation. including the leucin-rich repeat kinase 2 (Lrrk2).

### Sample Protocol
NDR2-GFP pull down was performed using the µMACS GFP Isolation kit (Miltenyi Biotec, Germany) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Captured proteins were eluted with hot laemmli buffer and subjected to a SDS-PAGE. Each lane was divided into eight sections to perform in-gel digestion according to (Kolodziej et. al, 2016). Resulting peptides were dissolved in 5 μL 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and purified on ZIP-TIP, C18-nanocolumns (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA). The peptides were eluted in 7 μl of 70% (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN) and subsequently dried in a vacuum centrifuge. LC-MS/MS was performed on a hybrid dual pressure linear ion trap/orbitrap mass spectrometer (LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro, Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) equipped with an EASY-nLC Ultra HPLC (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA). The peptide samples were dissolved in 10 μL of 2% ACN/0.1% TFA and fractionated on a 75 μm I.D., 25 cm PepMap C18-column, packed with 2 μm resin (Dionex, Germany). Separation was achieved by applying a gradient from 2% ACN to 35% ACN in 0.1% formic acid (FA) over a 150 min gradient at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro MS exclusively used CID-fragmentation when acquiring MS/MS spectra, consisting of an orbitrap full MS scan followed by up to 15 LTQ MS/MS experiments (TOP15) on the most abundant ions detected in the full MS scan. The essential MS settings were as follows: full MS (FTMS; resolution 60,000; m/z range 400–2000); MS/MS (Linear Trap; minimum signal threshold 500; isolation width 2 Da; dynamic exclusion time setting 30 s; singly charged ions were excluded from selection). Normalized collision energy was set to 35%, and the activation time was set to 10 ms.

### Data Protocol
Raw data processing and protein identification of the high resolution orbitrap datasets were performed with de novo sequencing algorithms of PEAKS Studio 8.0 (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc.,Waterloo, Canada). The false discovery rate was set to <1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Transgene ndr2 mouse, Interactomics, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
University Magdeburg, Medical School, Institute of Exptl. Internal Medicine, Leipzigerstr. 44, 39120 Magdeburg, Germany
University Magdeburg

### Submitter
Thilo Kaehne

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Thilo Kaehne
University Magdeburg, Medical School, Institute of Exptl. Internal Medicine, Leipzigerstr. 44, 39120 Magdeburg, Germany


