### Accession
PXD012717

### Title
A heterochromatin specific RNA export pathway facilitates piRNA production

### Description
PIWI-interacting RNAs (piRNAs), a class of small RNAs that guide transposon silencing in animals, are processed in the cytoplasm from RNA Polymerase II transcripts. How piRNA precursors, which often lack RNA maturation signatures and thereby violate quality control checkpoints, achieve nuclear export is unknown. Here, we uncover a germline-specific RNA export pathway in Drosophila, that escorts piRNA precursors from their heterochromatic origins to nuage, the cytoplasmic piRNA processing centres. This pathway connects canonical nuclear export factors—the RNA helicase UAP56, the NXF cofactor Nxt1/p15, and the exportin Crm1/Xpo1—with Nxf3, a variant of the mRNA exporter Nxf1/Tap. Nxf3 recruitment to nascent piRNA precursors occurs via the heterochromatin protein 1-variant Rhino and CG13741/Bootlegger, a new piRNA pathway factor, thereby making piRNA precursor export independent of RNA processing events. Thus, similar to retroviral hijacking of cellular export factors, piRNA precursor export evolved to bend canonical gene expression rules through bypassing nuclear RNA surveillance mechanisms.

### Sample Protocol
Ovary samples (100 to 200 ovary pairs) were dissected and transferred to ice-cold PBS. After PBS removal, ovaries were then snap-frozen for later processing. For immunoprecipitation, ovary samples were homogenized with 20-30 strokes of a glass douncer with a tight pestle in 1 mL Ovary Protein Lysis Buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM MgCl2, 10 % glycerol, 1 mM DTT, 1 mM PefaBloc, 0.2 % NP-40). Homogenates were then transferred to 1.5 mL low-retention tubes and incubated on ice for 15 minutes with occasional inversion. The lysates were then cleared by centrifugation for 5 minutes at 16.000g. Cleared lysates were added to 20 µL anti-FLAG M2 magnetic bead solution (Sigma; 50% beads per total volume with Beads Buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl)). Lysate-bead mixtures were incubated 3 hours at 4C with rotation and then washed four times 10 minutes in Ovary Protein Lysis Buffer followed by six quick rinses in Co-IP Wash Buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM MgCl2). Pelleted magnetic beads were stored at 4C in 10 µL Co-IP Wash Buffer until processing for mass spectrometry analysis the following day.  Co-immunoprecipitated proteins were subjected to on-bead digestion with LysC. The hereby eluted peptides were digested with Trypsin overnight. The resulting peptides were analyzed using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 HPLC RSLC nano system coupled to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer equipped with a Proxeon nanospray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were eluted using a flow rate of 230 nl min-1, and a binary 3h gradient, respectively 225 min and the data were acquired with the mass spectrometer operated in data-dependent mode with MS/MS scans of the 10 most abundant ions.

### Data Protocol
For peptide identification, the RAW-files were loaded into Proteome Discoverer (version 2.1.0.81, Thermo Scientific) and the created MS/MS spectra were searched using MSAmanda v1.0.0.6186 (Dorfer V. et al., J. Proteome Res. 2014 Aug 1;13(8):3679-84) against Drosophila melanogaster reference translations retrieved from Flybase (dmel_all-translation-r6.17). An in-house-developed tool apQuant (PMID: 30351950) was used for the peptide and protein quantification (IMP/IMBA/GMI Protein Chemistry Facility; http://ms.imp.ac.at/index.php?action=apQuant). Average enrichment between bait and control IP experiments were plotted against p values calculated using the limma R package (Ritchie ME. et al., Nucleic Acids Research, 2015 43(7), e47.)

### Publication Abstract
PIWI-interacting RNAs (piRNAs) guide transposon silencing in animals. The 22-30 nt piRNAs are processed in the cytoplasm from long non-coding RNAs that often lack RNA processing hallmarks of&#xa0;export-competent transcripts. By studying how these transcripts achieve nuclear export, we uncover an RNA export pathway specific for piRNA precursors in the Drosophila germline. This pathway requires Nxf3-Nxt1, a variant of the hetero-dimeric mRNA export receptor Nxf1-Nxt1. Nxf3 interacts with UAP56, a nuclear RNA helicase essential for mRNA export, and CG13741/Bootlegger, which recruits Nxf3-Nxt1 and UAP56 to heterochromatic piRNA source loci. Upon RNA cargo binding, Nxf3 achieves nuclear export via the exportin Crm1 and accumulates together with Bootlegger in peri-nuclear nuage, suggesting that after export, Nxf3-Bootlegger delivers precursor transcripts to the piRNA processing sites. These findings indicate that the piRNA pathway bypasses nuclear RNA surveillance systems to export unprocessed transcripts to the cytoplasm, a strategy also exploited by retroviruses.

### Keywords
Ovary, Pirna, Drosophila, Export

### Affiliations
IMBA - Institute of Molecular Biotechnology
IMBA - Institute of Molecular Biotechnology Dr. Bohrgasse 3 1030 Vienna Austria

### Submitter
Richard Imre

### Lab Head
Dr Julius Fabian Brennecke
IMBA - Institute of Molecular Biotechnology Dr. Bohrgasse 3 1030 Vienna Austria


