### Accession
PXD037193

### Title
Chronic exposure to multiple stressors alters the salivary proteome of piglets

### Description
Monitoring chronic stress in pigs is not only essential in view of animal welfare but is also important for the farmer given stress influences the zootechnical performance of the pigs and increases their susceptibility to infectious diseases. Saliva analysis could be a non-invasive, objective evaluation tool to asses stress levels. To investigate the use of saliva as a stress monitoring tool, twenty-four 4-day-old piglets were transferred to artificail brooders. At the age of 7 days, they were assigend to either the control or the stressed group and reared for three weeks. Piglets in the stressed group were exposed to overcrowding, absence of cage enrichment, and frequent mixing between pens. Shotgun analysis using an isobaric labelling method (iTRAQ) for tandem mass spectrometry performed on saliva samples taken after three weeks of chronic stress identified 392 proteins of which 20 proteins displayed siginifcantly altered concentrations. From these 20 proteins, eight were selected for further validation using parallel reaction monitoring (PRM). For this validation, additional saliva samples were taken after one week, and the samples that were taken three weeks after the start of the experiment were analysed to verify the profile over time. This targeted PRM analysis confiremd that alpha-2-HS-glycoprotein was upregulated in the stressed group after one and three weeks while odorant-binding protein, chitinase, long palate lung and nasal epithelium protein 5, lipocalin-1, and vomeromodulin-like protein were present in lower concentrations in saliva of the stressed pigs, albeit only after three weeks. These results indicate that the porcine salivary proteome is altered by chronic exposure to multiple stressors. The affected proteins could be used as salivary biomarkers to identify welfare problems at the farm and facilitate research to optimise rearing conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Shotgun analysis with iTRAQ Proteins in the 24 saliva samples were labelled using iTRAQ-labels, reagents and buffers according to the manufaturer's guidelines. Working with the 8-plex kit allowed us to simultaneously analyse eight samples. As a consequence, three parallel analyses, all containing samples of both the control and the stressed group were run. The combined labelled samples were fractionated in a first dimension by strong cation exchange (SCX) chromatography using a Waters Alliance e2695 HPLC system with Photo Diode Array Detector (Waters Corporation). The ten collected SCX fractions were seprated in a second dimension by RP-C18 chromatography on an Easy nanoLC system (Thermo Scientific). Liquid chromatography was followed by an MS-step that was performed on a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer equiped with a nanospray ion source (Thermo Scientific).  PRM analysis For further validation using PRM all saliva samples were enzymatically digested by trypsin. The digests were analysed on a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) connected to a nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters Corporation). Retention-time scheduling of PRM (sPRM) was adopted, which allowed for the evaluation of all seleceted peptides in a single LC-MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Shotun analysis with iTRAQ All generated MS/MS spectra were analysed by means of MaxQuant software version 1.6.1 using the Sus scrofa database that was generated based on both the characterised porcine proteins and the porcine genome (reviewed and unreviewed proteins, generated from UniProt). Methyl methanethiosulfonate binding to cystein and iTRAQ 8-plex labelling of lysine and the N-terminus were specified as fixed modifications. Oxidation of methionine and iTRAQ labelling of tyrosine were set as variable modifications. Only proteins with at least two unique peptides were further investigated. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set at 1% and guarded using a reversed decoy database.   PRM analysis  Skyline 20.1 was used to analyse all raw data.

### Publication Abstract
Monitoring chronic stress in pigs is not only essential in view of animal welfare but is also important for the farmer, given that stress influences the zootechnical performance of the pigs and increases their susceptibility to infectious diseases. To investigate the use of saliva as a non-invasive, objective chronic stress monitoring tool, twenty-four 4-day-old piglets were transferred to artificial brooders. At the age of 7 days, they were assigned to either the control or the stressed group and reared for three weeks. Piglets in the stressed group were exposed to overcrowding, absence of cage enrichment, and frequent mixing of animals between pens. Shotgun analysis using an isobaric labelling method (iTRAQ) for tandem mass spectrometry performed on saliva samples taken after three weeks of chronic stress identified 392 proteins, of which 20 proteins displayed significantly altered concentrations. From these 20 proteins, eight were selected for further validation using parallel reaction monitoring (PRM). For this validation, saliva samples that were taken one week after the start of the experiment and samples that were taken at the end of the experiment were analysed to verify the profile over time. We wanted to investigate whether the candidate biomarkers responded fast or rather slowly to the onset of chronic exposure to multiple stressors. Furthermore, this validation could indicate whether age influenced the baseline concentrations of these salivary proteins, both in healthy and stressed animals. This targeted PRM analysis confirmed that alpha-2-HS-glycoprotein was upregulated in the stressed group after one and three weeks, while odorant-binding protein, chitinase, long palate lung and nasal epithelium protein 5, lipocalin-1, and vomeromodulin-like protein were present in lower concentrations in the saliva of the stressed pigs, albeit only after three weeks. These results indicate that the porcine salivary proteome is altered by chronic exposure to multiple stressors. The affected proteins could be used as salivary biomarkers to identify welfare problems at the farm and facilitate research to optimise rearing conditions.

### Keywords
Prm, Itraq, Saliva, Stress, Pig

### Affiliations
UAntwerpen
Department of Veterinary Sciences Comparative Perinatal Development (CoPeD) University of Antwerp Belgium

### Submitter
Sara Prims

### Lab Head
Dr Chris Van Ginneken
Department of Veterinary Sciences Comparative Perinatal Development (CoPeD) University of Antwerp Belgium


