### Accession
PXD002842

### Title
A Mass Spectrometry Approach Reveals a New Toxic Role For Alzheimer’s Disease Aβ Peptide: SPLICEOSOME IMPAIRMENT

### Description
Alzheimer’s disease is the most common form of dementia, and its prevalence increases exponentially with age. The patients affected gradually lose cognitive function, control over their sense of orientation, their emotions, and other aspects of behavior. Thirty-five million people are now considered to be affected by AD and this number is expected to double in the next few decades. We utilized an AD cell model system for a proteomic study by using mass spectrometry. To mimic early events in AD, LAN5 neuroblastoma cell were incubated for a short time with a recombinant form of Aβ42 (rAβ42), a peptide involved in AD, and the extracted proteins were utilized for the proteome analysis. Furthermore, we used bioinformatics tools to identify networks, associated processes, pathways, etc. The potential modulation of pathways suggested by the similarity of GO terms and presence of protein-protein interaction networks among significantly modulated proteins was explored using the bioinformatic tool KEGG. Pathway enrichment analysis was conducted for up and down regulated protein groups, and four pathways were identified. In particular, the Spliceosome pathway identified in the under-expressed protein group was reported by KEGG to be the most significantly enriched. To confirm the effect of Aβ42 on the spliceosomal pathway, the level of expression of SmB/B’/N (a component of the spliceosomal machinery) was measured. However, further studies are necessary to fully elucidate the the down-regulation effect of the spliceosome proteins in AD, and how this may contribute to the early event in this disorder.

### Sample Protocol
Cell cultures and treatment: the neuroblastoma LAN5 cell line was used as a cellular model. This cell line exhibits neuronal characteristics, including expression of neurofilaments and display of short neurites. Cells were cultured with RPMI 1640 medium (CELBIO) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) (GIBCO), 2 mML-glutamine (SIGMA), and 1% antibiotics (50 mg/ml −1 penicillin and 50 mg/ml−1 streptomycin) (SIGMA). Cells were maintained in a humidified 5% CO2 atmosphere at 37 ± 0.1 °C. LAN5 (5×106 /ml) cells were treated with 40 μM of a recombinant Aβ42 (rAβ42), for 1 hour.  Preparation of protein extracts for mass spectrometry: Protein preparations were incubated with 1% SDS in 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.8), 100 mM DTT, for 5 min at 95°C and 500 rpm using a Thermomixer comfort (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany). Extracts were centrifuged and the protein-containing supernatants were subjected to 1-DE separation through 4-20% TGX gels (Bio-Rad) to check the quality of the protein extracts. Samples were then quantified using the BCA quantification kit (Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA, now part of Thermo Scientific). Filter-aided sample preparation and on-filter digestion: SDS protein extracts were diluted to 200 μl with UA solution (8M urea in 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.8), loaded into Amicon filtration devices, 10 kDa cutoff (Millipore, now Merck Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA), and then processed according to the “FASP II” protocol (Pisanu S et al., (2011). J. Proteomics, Old WM et al., (2005) Mol Cell Proteomics, Pham TV et al., (2010). Bioinformatics). Samples were centrifuged at 14,000 x g for 15 min, and the concentrates were diluted into the filter with 200 μl of UA solution and centrifuged again. After centrifugation, the concentrates were mixed with 100 μl of 10 mM DTT in UA solution and incubated at 25°C for 30 min. After centrifugation, the concentrates were mixed with 100 μl of 50 mM IAM in UA solution and incubated at 20°C for 20 min. Following centrifugation, the concentrate was diluted with 100 μl of UA solution and concentrated again (this step was repeated twice). Next, the concentrate was diluted with 100 μl of 50 mM ABC and concentrated again. This step was repeated once. Subsequently, 40 μl of trypsin solution (150 ng in 50 mM ABC) was added to the filter, and the samples were incubated at 37°C overnight. Peptides were collected by centrifugation of the filter units, followed by an additional 50 μl wash with a solution containing 70% acetonitrile and 1% formic acid. Finally, the peptide mixture was dried and reconstituted in 0.2% formic acid to a final concentration of 1 mg/ml. Peptide extracts were quantified by the BCA quantification method (Pierce).

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer platform (version 1.3; Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany), interfaced with an in-house Mascot server (version 2.3, Matrix Science, London, UK), was used for data parsing and protein identification, according to the following criteria: Database UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot (release 2012_05), Enzyme Trypsin, Maximum Missed Cleavage Sites 2, Taxonomy Homo sapiens, Precursor Mass Tolerance 10 ppm, Fragment Mass Tolerance 0.2 Da, Cysteine Carbamidomethylation as Static modification, N-terminal Glutamine conversion to Pyro-glutammic Acid and Methionine Oxidation as Dynamic modifications. The Percolator algorithm was used for peptide validation (peptide confidence: q-value < 0.01) ( Spivak M et all., (2009). J Proteome Res), and only rank 1 peptides were considered. Peptide and protein grouping according to Proteome Discoverer’s algorithms were allowed, applying strict maximum parsimony principle. Label-free quantification based on spectral count (SpC) values was used as a semi-quantitative measure to evaluate protein abundance and to compare the expression of the same protein among different samples, as described previously (Addis MF et al., (2011). Infect. Immun, Pisanu S et all., (2011). J. Proteomics). The SpC log ratio (RSC) was used to express fold-change between different conditions. RSC was calculated according to the method described by Old et al. (Old WM et all., (2005). Mol Cell Proteomics). This method avoids the discontinuity seen in simple count ratios when a protein shows spectral count = 0 in one of the samples. In addition, this expression has the advantage of correcting for differences in sampling depth between two experiments. The following formula is applied: where, for each protein, RSC is the log2 ratio of abundance between Samples 1 and 2; n1 and n2 are spectral counts for the protein in Samples 1 and 2, respectively; t1 and t2 are total numbers of spectra over all proteins in the two samples; and ƒ is a correction factor set to 1.25. To identify differentially expressed proteins, the beta-binomial test was carried out, according to the method described by Pham et al.( Pham TV et al., (2010). Bioinformatics). P-values were corrected by false discovery rate (FDR).

### Publication Abstract
Proteomic changes have been described in many neurodegenerative diseases, including Alzheimer's disease (AD). However, the early events in the onset of the pathology are yet to be fully elucidated. A cell model system in which LAN5 neuroblastoma cells were incubated for a short time with a recombinant form of A&#x3b2;<sub>42</sub> was utilized. Proteins extracted from these cells were subjected to shotgun proteomics analysis by LTQ-Orbitrap-MS followed by label-free quantitation. By bioinformatics tools we found that the most significant of those found to be up-regulated were related to cytoskeletal dynamics (Rho related) and membrane-related processes. The most significant of the down-regulated proteins were hnRNP-related. In particular, hnRNPs involved in ribosomal biogenesis and in splicing were down-regulated. The latter of these processes stood out as it was highlighted ubiquitously and with the highest significance in the results of every analysis. Furthermore, our findings revealed down-regulation at every stage of the splicing process through down-regulation of every subunit of the spliceosome. Dysregulation of the spliceosome was also confirmed using a Western blot. In conclusion, these data suggest dysregulation of the proteins and processes identified as early events in pathogenesis of AD following A&#x3b2; accumulation.

### Keywords
Human, Aβ42, Alzheimer’s disease, Splicing, Orbitrap, Ad early events

### Affiliations
National Research Council of Italy (CNR), Institute of Biomedicine and Molecular Immunology (IBIM), Palermo, Italy
Istituto di Biomedicina ed Immunologia Molecolare (IBIM) CNR, Via U. La Malfa 153, Palermo 90146, Italy

### Submitter
Domenico Nuzzo

### Lab Head
Dr Marta Di Carlo
Istituto di Biomedicina ed Immunologia Molecolare (IBIM) CNR, Via U. La Malfa 153, Palermo 90146, Italy


