### Accession
PXD015275

### Title
Ligand-induced disorder-to-order transitions characterized by structural proteomics and molecular dynamics simulations

### Description
We have studied both the Spy and the FKBP protein-ligand systems by structural proteomics and molecular -dynamics simulations.  We have used hydrogen/deuterium exchange, differential crosslinking, and surface modification to characterize the conformational changes that occur upon both peptide binding (Im7 with Spy) and small molecule binding (rapamycin with FKBP) to the protein.  We have shown that, in both cases, the proteins are considerably disordered but their structures are different from the unfolded structure obtained with 8M urea in solution, and both proteins undergo a dramatic increase in secondary structure content upon ligand binding.

### Sample Protocol
Differential crosslinking. FKBP-25 F145A I223P +/- Rapamycin -- FKBP-25 F145A I223P at a concentration of at 13.3 µM in PBS, pH 7.4, 0.5 mM TCEP, with or without a molar excess of rapamycin at a concentration of 150 µM were crosslinked using 0.25 mM final concentration of the either the light or the heavy form of the 13C-isotopically-coded DSA crosslinker (Creative Molecules, Inc.).  Crosslinking reagents were incubated for 15 minutes at 25oC and the reaction was quenched with 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate.  A portion of each crosslinking reaction was checked by SDS-PAGE gel to determine the extent of intermolecular crosslinked products and to confirm the equivalent crosslinking efficiencies of the light and heavy forms of the crosslinking reagent.  Samples were subsequently combined according to the scheme shown in supplementary table S2, S3 and digested with trypsin at a protein:enzyme ratio of 20:1 overnight (approximately 16 hours) at 37°C..  Samples were then desalted and acidified with formic acid for the analysis by mass spectrometry as described below. SpyL32P +/- Im7 +/- Urea -- SpyL32P at concentration of 50 µM in 40 mM HEPES, 100 mM NaCL, pH 7.5 with or without a molar excess of Im7 ligand at concentration of 100 µM and/or with or without 8M urea were crosslinked with 0.1 mM final concentration of the either the light or the heavy form of the 13C-isotopically-coded DSA crosslinker (Creative Molecules, Inc.).  After crosslinking, the samples were treated in the same way as described above for the FKBP-25 F145A I223P experiment.  Differential surface modification.   FKBP-25 F145A I223P +/- Rapamycin -- Chemical surface modification with pyridine carboxylic acid N-hydroxysuccinimide ester (PCAS) was performed as described previously [PMID: 23085224].  Briefly, proteins were prepared at a concentration of 50 µM in PBS, pH 7.4 (defined as the disordered state), or with a molar excess of ligand in PBS (folded state).  Either the light or the heavy form of the isotopically-coded reagent (PCAS-H4 or PCAS-D4 (Creative Molecules)) was then added to give a concentration of 10 mM.  Reaction mixtures were incubated for 30 minutes and then quenched with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate.  Samples were then mixed at a 1:1 ratio, combining folded (PCAS-H4) with unfolded (PCAS-D4) samples, as well as in reverse as a control.  Samples were acidified with 150 mM acetic acid and then digested with pepsin at a 20:1 protein:enzyme ratio overnight at 37oC.  After digestion, samples were prepared for mass spectrometry analysis using C18 zip-tips (Millipore) and eluted with 50% ACN/0.1% aqueous TFA.  Samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS as described below. SpyL32P+/-Im7 +/- Urea -- SpyL32P at concentration of 50 µM in 40 mM HEPES, 100 mM NaCL, pH 7.5 with or without a molar excess of Im7 ligand at concentration of 100 µM and/or with or without 8 M urea were prepared in the same way as described above for the FKBP-25 F145A I223P experiment.

### Data Protocol
Differential crosslinking. Crosslinking data were searched against a concatenated target-decoy (reverse) database using Kojak (v.1.5.1) [PMID: 25812159].  The parameter files are included in the supplementary material. Inter-, intra-, and loop crosslink peptide spectral matches (PSMs) were validated with Percolator (v.3.0) [PMID: 17952086].  Quantitation was performed on target PSMs from the Percolator output using XiQ (v.0.2) [PMID: 23541715].  Only PSMs that met the following criteria were considered for further analysis:  PPM Error = +/-2.5; label_count = 1; q-value = 0.05; forward-reverse fold-change delta ≤ 1.  The difference in crosslinking yield between experimental conditions (+/-ligand or +/-urea) was expressed as “fold-change”.  The fold-change for forward-label experiments (where the light isotopic form of the crosslinking reagent is used in the ligand(-) condition and heavy isotopic form of the crosslinking reagent used in the ligand(+) condition) was calculated as the binary logarithm of the observed crosslink H/L ratio (log2(H/L)) as reported by XiQ.  For the reverse-label experiments (light and heavy isotopic forms of the reagents used in the reverse conditions: ligand(+) and ligand(-) respectively), this was calculated as the binary logarithm of the inverse of the observed crosslink H/L ratio (log2(1/(H/L)). In order to compensate for systematic errors introduced by slight differences in the mixing ratios or reaction efficiencies of the light and heavy isotopic forms of the crosslinking reagent, the fold-changes were normalized to the median of all observed fold-changes between the forward- and reverse-label experiments.  The fold-change for a particular crosslinked pair of residues was then calculated as the median of all its crosslinked peptides.  Sample standard deviation for a crosslinked pair was calculated using all its crosslinked peptides.  The fold-change threshold used to classify an observed crosslinked pair of residues as “enriched” in a particular condition, or as exhibiting no change between conditions, was defined as the average sample standard deviation of the within-condition control experiments (e.g., the same ligand(-) or ligand(+) condition is prepared twice -- once with the light isotopic reagent and once with the heavy isotopic reagent -- and the labeled samples are subsequently combined as described above) (Supplementary Table S1).  All quantified crosslinks included are in supplementary Microsoft Excel workbooks.  Differential surface modification. Surface modification data were searched using PEAKS 7 [PMID: 14558135].  Quantitation results for the PCAS-modified residues were exported in .csv format, and further analysis was performed using Microsoft Excel.  The difference in surface modification yield was calculated in the same manner as described above for qCL.  All quantified PCAS-modified peptides have been included in a supplementary Microsoft Excel workbooks.

### Publication Abstract
For disordered proteins, ligand binding can be a critical event that changes their structural dynamics. The ability to characterize such changes would facilitate the development of drugs designed to stabilize disordered proteins, whose mis-folding is important for a number of pathologies, including neurodegenerative diseases such as Parkinson's and Alzheimer's diseases. In this study, we used hydrogen/deuterium exchange, differential crosslinking, differential surface modification, and molecular dynamics (MD) simulations to characterize the structural changes in disordered proteins that result from ligand binding. We show here that both an ATP-independent protein chaperone, Spy L32P, and the FK506 binding domain of a prolyl isomerase, FKBP-25 F145A/I223P, are disordered, yet exhibit structures that are distinct from chemically denatured unfolded states in solution, and that they undergo transitions to a more structured state upon ligand binding. These systems may serve as models for the characterization of ligand-induced disorder-to-order transitions in proteins using structural proteomics approaches. SIGNIFICANCE: In this study, we used hydrogen/deuterium exchange, differential crosslinking, differential surface modification, and molecular-dynamics simulations to characterize the structural changes in disordered proteins that result from ligand binding. The protein-ligand systems studied here (the ATP-independent protein chaperone, Spy L32P, and the FK506 binding domain of a prolyl isomerase, FKBP-25 F145A/I223P) may serve as models for understanding ligand-induced disorder-to-order transitions in proteins. Additionally, the structural proteomic techniques demonstrated here are shown to be effective tools for the characterization of disorder-to-order transitions and can be used to facilitate study of other systems in which this class of structural transition can be used for modulating major pathological features of disease, such as the abnormal protein aggregation that occurs with Parkinson's disease and Alzheimer's disease.

### Keywords
Structural proteomics; mass spectrometry; discrete molecular dynamics simulations; protein-ligand interaction; hydrogen/deuterium exchange; crosslinking/mass spectrometry; surface modification; conformational change; quantitative protein structure; intrinsically disordered protein; protein folding

### Affiliations
University of Victoria
1. University of Victoria Genome BC Proteomics Centre, University of Victoria, Victoria, British Columbia, Canada 2. Segal Cancer Proteomics Centre, Lady Davis Institute, Jewish General Hospital, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada 3. Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of Victoria, Victoria, British Columbia, Canada 4. Gerald Bronfman Department of Oncology, Jewish General Hospital, Montreal, Quebec, Canada

### Submitter
Karl Makepeace

### Lab Head
Dr Christoph H. Borchers
1. University of Victoria Genome BC Proteomics Centre, University of Victoria, Victoria, British Columbia, Canada 2. Segal Cancer Proteomics Centre, Lady Davis Institute, Jewish General Hospital, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada 3. Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of Victoria, Victoria, British Columbia, Canada 4. Gerald Bronfman Department of Oncology, Jewish General Hospital, Montreal, Quebec, Canada


