### Accession
PXD037525

### Title
Site-Selective Photocatalytic Functionalization of Peptides and Proteins at Selenocysteine

### Description
The importance of modified peptides and proteins for applications in drug discovery, and for illuminating biological processes at the molecular level, has fueled a demand for efficient methods that facilitate the precise modification of these biomolecules. Herein, we describe the development of a photocatalytic method for the rapid and efficient dimerization and sitespecific functionalization of peptide and protein diselenides. This methodology, dubbed the photocatalytic diselenide contraction (PDC), involves irradiation at 450 nm in the presence of an iridium photocatalyst and a phosphine and results in rapid and clean conversion of diselenides to reductively stable selenoethers. A mechanism for this unprecedented photocatalytic transformation is proposed, which is supported by photoluminescence spectroscopy and density functional theory calculations. The utility of the PDC transformation is highlighted through the dimerization of selenopeptides, and by the generation of two families of protein conjugates via the site-selective modification of calmodulin containing the 21st amino acid selenocysteine, and the C-terminal modification of a ubiquitin diselenide.

### Sample Protocol
In our efforts to develop new methods for chemical protein synthesis, we attempted to perform photocatalytic deselenization of Sec on model peptide [H2N-USPGYS-NH2]2 (1) to alanine (Ala) in H2N-ASPGYS-CONH2 (2) using Eosin Y as the photocatalyst, the phosphine triscarboxyethylphosphine (TCEP) and 450 nm blue LED light. Unexpectedly, under these conditions we observed the formation of dimeric selenoether-bridged peptide 3 as a minor side product (Supplementary Fig. 1 and 2). Intriguingly, generation of selenoether dimer 3 corresponds to the formal extrusion of a single selenium atom from diselenide 1. While there have been early examples that have shown phosphine-mediated disulfide and benzylic diselenide contraction in refluxing benzene or extended UV irradiation,74,75 to our knowledge this represents an unprecedented photocatalytic reaction at Sec. Given the potential value of dimerizing selenopeptides to reductively stable selenoether-linked dimeric peptides, together with the lack of precedent for this reaction under mild photocatalytic conditions, we sought to optimize conditions for the preferential formation of selenoether dimer 3 over the deselenization product 2. Gratifyingly, following optimization studies on model peptide 1, we found that treatment with 4 equivalents of the phosphine 1,3,5-triaza-7-phosphaadamantane (PTA) (4), and 1 mol% of the iridium photocatalyst [Ir(dF(CF3)ppy)2(dtbpy)]PF6 (5) with LED irradiation at 450 nm for 1 min, led to exclusive formation of the dimeric selenoether 3, which could be isolated in 76% yield following reverse-phase HPLC purification (Figure 1A, Supplementary Fig. 3-12, Supplementary Table 1-4). Importantly, in the absence of phosphine, photocatalyst, or without 450 nm irradiation, no formation of 3 was observed (Supplementary Fig. 13-15). After verifying the identity of selenoether 3 by HRMS (Supplementary Fig. 16- 19), we also confirmed the retention of stereochemical integrity at the C-center of the Sec residue following PDC by 1H and 77Se NMR spectroscopy (Supplementary Fig. 20-22),

### Data Protocol
Total ion chromatograms and mass spectra of purified protein products were generated using Xcalibur version 4.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Modification, Selenocysteine

### Affiliations
The University of Sydney

### Submitter
Mark Larance

### Lab Head
Dr Mark Larance
The University of Sydney


