### Accession
PXD038526

### Title
Human plasma proteome of caloric restriction

### Description
We recruited ten normal-weight healthy men using inclusion criteria as previously described (Collet et al 2017). All males were healthy and not obese or overweight (average age: 23.8 years, average BMI (kg/m2): 23.3). Participants at baseline consumed a balanced diet (50% carbohydrate, 30% fat, and 20% protein). During caloric restriction, volunteers consumed 10% of normal energy requirement (226 kcal/d) for two days, again balanced (50% carbohydrate, 30% fat, and 20% protein), with the same macronutrient composition. After caloric restriction, volunteers were offered three substantial ad libitum buffet meals per day (20 MJ = 4,777 kcal) and additional snacks (16 MJ = 3,821 kcal) between meals for 2 days. They were invited to eat freely until comfortably full; food consumption was covertly measured. We collected fasting plasma samples at 0800 AM at baseline, after CR and refeeding (RF).

### Sample Protocol
To prepare the samples for proteome analysis, 5 μL of EDTA plasma sample were added into 50 μL 8 M urea, 0.1 M ABC, pH 8.0, in order to denature proteins. Proteins were then reduced using 5 μL 50 mM DTT for 1 h at 30°C and alkylated with 5 μL 100 mM IAA for 30 min in the dark. The sample was diluted with 340 μL 0.1 M ABC to 1.5 M urea. 200 μL of the solution was used for trypsinisation. The proteins were digested overnight with trypsin (12.5 μl, 0.1 μg/μL) at 37°C at a 1/40 trypsin/total protein ratio. Digestion was quenched with the addition of 25 μL 0.1% v/v FA. Peptides were cleaned up with C18 96-well plates, eluted with 50 % v/v ACN, dried by a vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf Concentrator Plus, 5305000568), and redissolved in 50 μL 0.1% v/v FA to be processed by LC-MS.  The profiles were acquired with 21-min gradients using micro-flowrate chromatography. The digested peptides were analysed on a nanoAcquity (Waters) coupled to a TripleTOF 6600 (SCIEX). 2 μg of peptides was separated with a 23-min non-linear gradient starting with 3% B up to 40% B (Buffer A: 0.1% v/v FA; Buffer B: ACN / 0.1% v/v FA) on a Waters HSS T3 column (150 mm × 300 µm, 1.8-µm particles) with a 5-µl/min flowrate. The DIA method consisted of an MS1 scan from m/z 400 to m/z 1250 (50 ms accumulation time) and 40 MS2 scans (35 ms accumulation time) with variable precursor isolation width covering the mass range from m/z 400 to m/z 1250. The samples were run in a random order. Quality controls were run among every 10-sample runs.

### Data Protocol
DIA-NN (version 1.7.12) was run in Robust LC (high precision) quantification mode, with maximum MS2 and MS1 mass tolerances set to 20 ppm and 12 ppm, respectively. The scan window size was set to 11. Raw-data processing was performed in two steps. First, the spectral library described previously was ‘refined’ based on the respective SWATH dataset, with the original information in the library such as spectra and retention times being replaced by the empirical information obtained from the SWATH data, as enabled by the functionality of DIA-NN (23). Subsequently, the SWATH-based ‘refined’ library was used to re-analyse the respective dataset. During all steps, precursor FDR filtering was set to 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Plasma, Refeeding, Proteomics, Proteome, Caloric restriction

### Affiliations
Markus Ralser, Prof. Dr.  Einstein Professor of Biochemistry Head, Institute of Biochemistry, Charité University Medicine, Berlin markus.ralser@charite.de  Senior Group Leader, The Francis Crick Institute, London markus.ralser@crick.ac.uk  UK 0044 743 5315249 DE 0049 30 450528141
The Francis Crick Institute

### Submitter
Spyros Vernardis

### Lab Head
Dr Markus Ralser
Markus Ralser, Prof. Dr.  Einstein Professor of Biochemistry Head, Institute of Biochemistry, Charité University Medicine, Berlin markus.ralser@charite.de  Senior Group Leader, The Francis Crick Institute, London markus.ralser@crick.ac.uk  UK 0044 743 5315249 DE 0049 30 450528141


