### Accession
PXD028544

### Title
Comparative proteomics demonstrates altered Metabolism pathways in cotrimoxazole-resistant and amikacin-resistant Klebsiella pneumoniae isolates

### Description
The emergence and spread of carbapenem-resistant Klebsiella pneumoniae (CR-KPN) infections have worsened the current situation worldwide. Clinically, cotrimoxazole (CTX) and amikacin (AMI) are considered to be the preferred drugs in the treatment of (CR-KPN). But for now, the extensive use of cotrimoxazole (CTX) and amikacin (AMI)  During the course of treatment leads to the emergence of cotrimoxazole- and amikacin-resistant infections, which is of great clinical concern. Previous evidence has shown that bacteria with reduced metabolism tend to be resistant to antibiotics, however, the mechanism remains unclear. In the present study, proteomics was performed on the sensitive, cotrimoxazole-resistant, amikacin-resistant and cotrimoxazole/amikacin-both-resistant KPN clinical isolates, and 2266 proteins were identified in total by liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS) analysis. Further bioinformatic analysis showed down-regulation of tricarboxylic acid cycle pathway and up-regulation of alcohol metabolic or glutathione metabolism processes, which may contribute to ROS clearance and cell survival, in drug-resistant isolates. Finally, combined with minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) of Amikacin and Cotrimoxazole on different KPN isolates, we identified nine proteins contributed mostly to such an alteration and the survival of bacteria under drug pressure, which could reveal novel mechanisms or pathways involved in drug resistance. These proteins and their pathways might be used as targets for the development of novel therapeutics against antimicrobial-resistant (AMR) infections.

### Sample Protocol
KPN strains were collected and washed in PBS and subjected to global protein extraction using 8M Urea (PH=8.0) containing protease inhibitor (phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride, PMSF), followed by 3min of sonication (3s on, 3s off, amplitude 25%). Then the protein concentration was obtained through Bradford quantification assay and 100 μg protein was digested overnight following filter-acid sample preparation (FASP) method with 3.5μg trypsin in 50mM ammonium acid carbonate (PH 8.0) overnight at 37℃. Finally, the purified peptides were acquired after extraction with 50% acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.1% formic acid (FA) following desalination in two layers of Empore 3M C18 disk with 2mg packing (3 μm, 150 Å, Agela) in a pipet tip and dried in a vacuum concentrator (Thermo Scientific). The precipitated protein was collected by centrifugation (12,000g, 20 min), allowed to air dry, and then suspended in an appropriate volume of protein-dissolving buffer. The protein concentration was estimated using the Bradford assay.  Proteome analysis were processed on Q Exactive HFX mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA) coupled with Easy-nLC 1,000 nanoflow liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide mixture were re-dissolved in solution A (0.1% FA) and loaded onto a C18 trap column (100 μm × 2 cm, homemade; particle size, 3 μm; pore size, 120 Å; SunChrom, USA) with a maximum pressure of 280 bar with solution A, then separated on a C18 separation column (150 μm × 12 cm, homemade; particle size, 1.9 μm; pore size, 120 Å; SunChrom, USA) with a gradient of 5-95% mobile phase B (80% ACN and 0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 600 nl/min for 75 min. The MS analysis was performed by scanning 300-1400 m/z with a resolution of 60,000 at 200 m/z, followed by up to 20 data-dependent MS/MS scanning with higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) at a normalized collision energy of 27% (max injection time 40 ms, isolation window 1.6m/z, target 2e3 ions), detected in the Orbitrap (R=15,000 at 200 m/z). Finally, the dynamic exclusion time was set at 18 s, and data were acquired by Xcalibur software (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were searched against Klebsiella pneumoniae subsp. Pneumoniae (strain ATCC 700721) database (version 20171126) in the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) using Maxquant (Version 1.5.3.30) [23]. Trypsin was selected as the proteolytic enzyme, and two missed cleavages sites were allowed. The mass tolerance was 20 ppm for precursor and 0.5 Da for production. The oxidation of Methionine and N-acetylation were set as the variable modifications. The false discovery rates of the peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) and proteins were set to less than 1%. Proteins with at least 1 unique peptide were selected for further analysis. For the proteome quantification, the intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) value was extracted from MaxQuant results and subjected to FOT calculation. FOT was defined as protein’s iBAQ divided by the total iBAQ of all identified proteins in one experiment. Finally, FOT was multiplied by 106 for easy presentation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Comparative proteomics, Amikacin，cotrimoxazole, Bioinformatics, Klebsiella pneumoniae

### Affiliations
Fudan University

### Submitter
jingbo qie

### Lab Head
Dr jingbo qie
Fudan University


