### Accession
PXD028780

### Title
Peroxiredoxin 6 protects irradiated cells from oxidative stress and shapes their senescence-associated cytokine landscape, redox proteomic analysis

### Description
Cellular senescence is a complex stress response defined as an essentially irreversible cell cycle arrest mediated by the inhibition of cell cycle-specific cyclin dependent kinases. The imbalance in redox homeostasis and oxidative stress have been repeatedly observed as one of the hallmarks of the senescent phenotype. However, a large-scale study investigating protein oxidation and redox signaling in senescent cells in vitro has been lacking. Here we applied a proteome-wide analysis using SILAC-iodoTMT workflow to quantitatively estimate the level of protein sulfhydryl oxidation and proteome level changes in ionizing radiation-induced senescence (IRIS) in hTERT RPE-1 cells. We observed that senescent cells mobilized the antioxidant system to buffer the increased oxidation stress. Among the antioxidant proteins with increased expression in IRIS, an atypical 1-Cys peroxiredoxin family member, peroxiredoxin 6 (PRDX6), was identified as an important contributor to protection against oxidative stress. PRDX6 silencing increased ROS production in senescent cells,  decreased their resistance to oxidative stress-induced cell death, and impaired their viability. Subsequent SILAC-iodoTMT and secretome analysis after PRDX6 silencing showed the downregulation of PRDX6 in IRIS affected protein secretory pathways, decreased expression of extracellular matrix proteins, and led to unexpected attenuation of senescence-associated secretory phenotype (SASP). The latter was exemplified by decreased secretion of pro-inflammatory cytokine IL-6 which was also confirmed after treatment with an inhibitor of PRDX6 iPLA2 activity, MJ33. Altogether, our findings suggested PRDX6 has an important and complex role in IRIS.

### Sample Protocol
Sequential iodoTMT labeling, protein digestion and peptide desalting were conducted as previously described (Vajrychova et al., 2019). Briefly, concentration of all cell lysate samples was adjusted to 1 µg/µL using the lysis buffer and 10 mM neocuproine (f.c. = 0.1 mM). The sample lysate (Condition 1; proliferating cells) labeled in the light/heavy SILAC channel (50 μg) was mixed with an equal amount of the sample lysate (Condition 2; senescent cells) of the complementary heavy/light SILAC group (Supplementary Fig. 1A). Free –SH groups were labeled by the first iodoTMT label (TMT1) for 2 h at 37°C. Subsequently, proteins were precipitated using cold acetone (-20°C) for 60 min. The pellet was re-dissolved in lysis buffer with 0.1 mM neocuproine and incubated with TCEP (f.c. = 5 mM) at 50°C for 60 min to reduce the reversibly oxidized cysteines. The newly reduced cysteines were then labeled using the second iodoTMT label (TMT2) and the reaction was quenched by 200 mM cysteine. After the second acetone precipitation, proteins were digested using rLys-C (FUJIFILM Wako, Osaka, Japan) at 37°C for 3 h followed by sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) digestion at 37°C overnight at 1 : 50 ratio (enzyme-to-protein). Digestion was stopped by addition of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, f.c. = 2%), and precipitated SDC was removed by extraction in water-saturated ethyl acetate. Finally, samples were desalted and evaporated to dryness. IodoTMTsixplex™ Isobaric Label Reagent Set for one sixplex experiment (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) was used for peptide iodoTMT labeling.  Basic fractionation liquid chromatography: In the first dimension, 85 μg of each sample was re-dissolved in a mobile phase A (2% ACN, 20 mM NH4FA, pH 10) and 80 µg was injected for basic fractionation on UltiMate 3000 RSLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) equipped with UV detection. Peptides were separated in a XBridge BEH column (2.1 μm × 150 mm, C18, 2.5 μm, 130 Å, from Waters, Milford, MA, USA)  using a linear gradient of 3% – 50% mobile phase B (80% ACN, 20 mM NH4FA, pH 10) at a flow rate 0.4 mL/min, at 40°C, for 30 min. Peptide fractions were collected in the range of 0.5 – 37 min per 45 s. In total, 49 fractions were collected and 3rd – 42nd fractions were matched in the final set of 8 fractions (Supplementary Fig. 1C). Those were evaporated to dryness and stored at -80°C for further analysis. All buffers and mobile phases for LC separation were prepared in LC-MS grade water purchased from Honeywell (Morris Plains, NJ, USA). nano-Liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry analysis: Evaporated fractions were re-dissolved in a mobile phase A (0.1% TFA in 2% ACN) and 2 μg were injected onto UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) for the liquid chromatography separation. The analytical system consisted of PepMap100 C18, 3 µm, 100 Å, 75 µm × 20 mm trap column and PepMap RSLC C18, 2 µm, 100 Å, 75 µm × 500 mm analytical column (both from Thermo Fisher Scientific). The samples were loaded onto the trap column in 0.1% TFA in 2% ACN at 8 µL/min for 3 min. Tryptic peptides were separated by a segment gradient running from 2% to 9% of a mobile phase B (80% ACN with 0.1% FA) for 57 min, further from 9% to 34.5% of B for 160 min, and finally to 45% of B for 23 min at a flow rate of 200 nL/min. Eluted peptides were electrosprayed into Q-Exactive Plus using a Nanospray Flex ion source (both from Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Positive ion full scan MS spectra were acquired in the range of 350 – 1600 m/z using 3 × 106 AGC target in the Orbitrap at 70,000 resolution with a maximum ion injection time of 50 ms. Parameters of the isolation window (IW) and normalized collision energy (NCE) were set 1.6 m/z for IW and 30 for NCE as previously described (Vajrychova et al., 2019). MS/MS spectra were acquired at resolution of 35,000, with a 1 × 106 AGC target and a maximum injection time of 120 ms. Only 15 of the most intensive precursors with minimal AGC target of 2.4 × 104 and a charge state ≥ 2 were fragmented. The dynamic exclusion window was 17 s. The fixed first mass was set to 100 m/z and the scan range from 200 to 2000 m/z. All buffers and mobile phases for LC separation were prepared in LC-MS grade water purchased from Honeywell (Morris Plains, NJ, USA) and Fisher Scientific (Pardubice, Czechia). All additives added to the LC mobile phases were LC-MS grade.

### Data Protocol
Survey MS and MS/MS spectra were processed in the MaxQuant 1.6.1.0 (Cox and Mann, 2008). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin/P, and a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Protein N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation, glutamine/asparagine deamidation, and N-terminal glutamate to pyroglutamate conversion were selected as variable modifications based on pre-analysis by Preview (Protein Metrics, Cupertino, CA, USA). The derived peak list was searched using the built-in Andromeda search engine in MaxQuant against human reference proteome downloaded in 11th October 2018 including contaminants from UniProtKB database. Workflow used for the determination of redox cysteine changes considered heavy arginine (13C615N4) and lysine (13C6) as variable modifications. Specified iodoTMT labeling has been set as a quantification method. Remaining Group-specific parameters were kept at default values. The minimum Andromeda score needed for modified peptides was set to 0. The minimum ratio count for label-based quantification was set to two quantified peptide pairs. Only unique or razor peptides were considered for calculating protein ratios. For the proteome centric workflow, heavy arginine (13C615N4) and lysine (13C6) were set to Standard type in Group-specific parameters as heavy labels, and specific iodoTMT labeling was added as fixed modifications. The rest of parameters was set as described above. Output files from MaxQuant were processed in R (version 4.0.0) (R Core Team, 2020) and using Perseus (version 1.6.7.0) (Tyanova et al., 2016). Potential contaminants and proteins identified by site and by reverse sequence were removed. Normalized SILAC H2O2/Ctrl ratios were log2 transformed, and the median value was subtracted to center the median ratio to zero. Only protein groups quantified in all four replicates were selected. Statistical analysis to identify differentially expressed proteins was performed using non-parametric Global Mean Rank test at FDR < 0.01 (Klammer et al., 2014). Fisher’s exact test and 1D and 2D Enrichment analysis (Cox and Mann, 2012) were performed in Perseus using DAVID annotations (Huang da et al., 2008). For redox cysteine status quantification, corrected reporter ion intensities for both unlabeled and heavy-labeled cysteine-containing peptides were used to calculate their relative oxidation status as reporter ion intensity oxidized/(reporter ion intensity oxidized + reporter ion intensity reduced) as described previously (Araki et al., 2016; Vajrychova et al., 2019).

### Publication Abstract
Cellular senescence is a complex stress response defined as an essentially irreversible cell cycle arrest mediated by the inhibition of cell cycle-specific cyclin dependent kinases. The imbalance in redox homeostasis and oxidative stress have been repeatedly observed as one of the hallmarks of the senescent phenotype. However, a large-scale study investigating protein oxidation and redox signaling in senescent cells in vitro has been lacking. Here we applied a proteome-wide analysis using SILAC-iodoTMT workflow to quantitatively estimate the level of protein sulfhydryl oxidation and proteome level changes in ionizing radiation-induced senescence (IRIS) in hTERT-RPE-1&#xa0;cells. We observed that senescent cells mobilized the antioxidant system to buffer the increased oxidation stress. Among the antioxidant proteins with increased relative abundance in IRIS, a unique 1-Cys peroxiredoxin family member, peroxiredoxin 6 (PRDX6), was identified as an important contributor to protection against oxidative stress. PRDX6 silencing increased ROS production in senescent cells, decreased their resistance to oxidative stress-induced cell death, and impaired their viability. Subsequent SILAC-iodoTMT and secretome analysis after PRDX6 silencing showed the downregulation of PRDX6 in IRIS affected protein secretory pathways, decreased expression of extracellular matrix proteins, and led to unexpected attenuation of senescence-associated secretory phenotype (SASP). The latter was exemplified by decreased secretion of pro-inflammatory cytokine IL-6 which was also confirmed after treatment with an inhibitor of PRDX6 iPLA2 activity, MJ33. In conclusion, by combining different methodological approaches we discovered a novel role of PRDX6 in senescent cell viability and SASP development. Our results suggest PRDX6 could have a potential as a drug target for senolytic or senomodulatory therapy.

### Keywords
Ionizing radiation, Redox proteomics, Silac-iodotmt, Cellular senescence, Peroxiredoxin 6

### Affiliations
Biomedical Research Center, University Hospital Hradec Králové
Biomedical Research Center, University Hospital Hradec Kralove, Czech Republic

### Submitter
Marie Vajrychová

### Lab Head
Dr Marie Vajrychova
Biomedical Research Center, University Hospital Hradec Kralove, Czech Republic


