### Accession
PXD017728

### Title
Proteomic and metabolic profile analysis of low-temperature storage responses in Ipomoea batata Lam. tuberous roots

### Description
Our proteomic and metabolic profile analysis of sweetpotato roots stored at low temperature reveal that the antioxidant enzymes activities, proline and especially soluble sugar content were significantly increased. Most of the DEPs were implicated in phenylpropanoids and followed by starch and sucrose metabolism. Glucosinolate biosynthesis played a leading role in metabolic pathways of sweetpotao roots. More importantly, leucine, tryptophan, tyrosine, isoleucine and valine were all significantly up-regulated in glucosinolate biosynthesis.

### Sample Protocol
Sweetpotatoes were grown in the greenhouse at 25-30℃ under a long-day photoperiod (16/8 h, light/dark) according to standard agricultural practices in 2018. Mature tuberous roots were selected with 5-7 cm in central diameter. Then, they were divided into two groups and stored in 4℃ and 13℃ (CK) incubator for 14 days, respectively. Each treatment has four individual tubers with three replications. The tubers were sliced to 1 mm thickness, then put into liquid nitrogen and stored at -80℃ for further analysis.

### Data Protocol
The tryptic peptides were loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15 cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The mass ratio of trypsin-to-protein was 1:50 and 1:100 for the first digestion overnight and a second 4 h-digestion, respectively. The digested peptide was subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo Scientific) coupled online to the UPLC. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0s dynamic exclusion.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Starch metabolism, Sweetpotato, Proteometabolomic, Low-temperature storage, Chilling tolerance

### Affiliations
College of Agriculture and Food Science, Zhejiang Agriculture & Forestry University
party member

### Submitter
Peng Cui

### Lab Head
Dr Peng Cui
College of Agriculture and Food Science, Zhejiang Agriculture & Forestry University


