### Accession
PXD038299

### Title
iTAG an optimized IMiD-induced degron for targeted protein degradation in human and murine cells

### Description
To address the limitation associated with degron based systems, we have developed iTAG, a novel synthetic tag based on IMiDs/CELMoDs mechanism of action that improves and addresses the limitations of both PROTAC and previous IMiDs/CeLMoDs based tags. Using structural and sequence analysis, we systematically explored native and chimeric degron containing domains (DCDs) and evaluated their ability to induce degradation. We identified the optimal chimeric iTAG(DCD23 60aa) that elicits robust degradation of targets across cell types and subcellular localisations without exhibiting the well documented “hook effect” of PROTAC-based systems. We showed that iTAG can also induce target degradation by murine CRBN and enabled the exploration of natural neo-substrates that can be degraded by murine CRBN. Hence, the iTAG system constitutes a versatile tool to degrade targets across the human and murine proteome.

### Sample Protocol
Samples for quantitative proteomics were prepared using the SimPLIT workflow (PMID: 35848491). Briefly, the cell pellets were lysed in a buffer containing 150 μL 0.1 M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), 1% sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 10% isopropanol, 50mM NaCl, 5 mM tris-2-carboxyethyl phosphine (TCEP), 10 mM iodoacetamide (IAA), universal nuclease, and supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitors. Samples were bath sonicated for 5 min, incubated at RT for 45 min and protein concentration was measured with the Bradford Protein Assay (Biorad) according to manufacturer instructions. Aliquots containing 30 μg of total protein were used for protein digestion. The resultant peptides were labelled with a tandem mass tag (TMTpro) multiplex reagent vial (Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturer instructions. All the TMT-labelled samples were combined in equal amounts to a single tube. The TMT-peptide mixture was acidified with 1% formic acid and the precipitated SDC was removed by centrifugation. The sample was then dried with a centrifugal vacuum concentrator.    High-pH reversed-phase peptide fractionation. Offline peptide fractionation was based on high pH Reverse Phase (RP) chromatography using the Waters XBridge C18 column (2.1 × 150 mm, 3.5 μm) on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 HPLC system at a 0.85% gradient with flow rate 0.2 mL/min. Mobile phase A was 0.1% ammonium hydroxide, and mobile phase B was 100% acetonitrile, 0.1% ammonium hydroxide. Retention time-based fractions are collected and pooled into thirty samples for LC-MS analysis.    Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry analysis. LC–MS analysis was performed on the Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system coupled with the Orbitrap Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Samples were analysed with the EASY-Spray C18 capillary column (75 μm × 50 cm, 2 μm) at 50 °C. Mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid and mobile phase B was 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. The gradient separation method was as follows: 90 min gradient up to 38% B, for 10 min up to 95% B, for 10 min isocratic at 95% B, re-equilibration to 5% B in 5 min, for 10 min isocratic at 5% B. For MS analysis, precursors between 375 and 1,500 m/z were selected, with mass resolution of 120,000, automatic gain control (AGC) of 4 × 105, and IT (injection time) of 50 ms, with the top speed mode in 3 s, and the precursors were isolated for collision-induced dissociation (CID) fragmentation with a quadrupole isolation width of 0.7 Th (Thomson unit). Collision energy was set at 35%, with AGC at 1 × 104 and IT at 50 ms. MS3 quantification was obtained with higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation of the top 5 most abundant CID fragments isolated with synchronous precursor selection (SPS). Quadrupole isolation width was set at 0.7 Th, collision energy was applied at 65%, and the AGC setting was at 1 × 105 with IT at 105 ms. The HCD MS3 spectra were acquired for the mass range 100 to 500 with a resolution of 50,000. Targeted precursors were dynamically excluded for further isolation and activation for 45 s with 7 ppm mass tolerance.

### Data Protocol
Database search and protein quantification. The SEQUEST-HT search engine was used to analyse the acquired mass spectra in Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Scientific) for protein identification and quantification. The precursor mass tolerance was set at 20 ppm, and the fragment ion mass tolerance was set at 0.5 Da. Spectra were searched for fully tryptic peptides with maximum 2 mis-cleavages. TMTpro on lysine residues and peptide N termini (304.2071 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.0215 Da) were set as static modifications while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.9949 Da) and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine (+0.9848 Da) was set as a variable modification. Peptide confidence was estimated with the Percolator. The peptide FDR was set at 0.01, and validation was based on the q value and a decoy database search. All spectra were searched against UniProt-SwissProt proteomes of Homo sapiens protein entries appended with contaminants. The reporter ion quantifier node included a TMTpro quantification method with an integration window tolerance of 15 ppm and integration method based on the most confident centroid peak at the MS3 level. Only unique peptides were used for quantification, with protein groups considered for peptide uniqueness. Peptides with an average reporter signal-to-noise ratio of >3 were used for protein quantification. Correction for isotopic impurity of reporter quantification values is applied. Only spectra with at least 50% of the SPS masses matching to the identified peptides are used for quantification.

### Publication Abstract
To address the limitation associated with degron based systems, we have developed iTAG, a synthetic tag based on IMiDs/CELMoDs mechanism of action that improves and addresses the limitations of both PROTAC and previous IMiDs/CeLMoDs based tags. Using structural and sequence analysis, we systematically explored native and chimeric degron containing domains (DCDs) and evaluated their ability to induce degradation. We identified the optimal chimeric iTAG(DCD23 60aa) that elicits robust degradation of targets across cell types and subcellular localizations without exhibiting the well documented "hook effect" of PROTAC-based systems. We showed that iTAG can also induce target degradation by murine CRBN and enabled the exploration of natural neo-substrates that can be degraded by murine CRBN. Hence, the iTAG system constitutes a versatile tool to degrade targets across the human and murine proteome.

### Keywords
Imids, Lc-msms, Targeted protein degradation, Protacs

### Affiliations
Institute of Cancer Research, London
Institute of Cancer Research

### Submitter
Fernando J. Sialana

### Lab Head
Dr Jyoti S. Choudhary
Institute of Cancer Research, London


