### Accession
PXD045878

### Title
Quantitative analysis of the mouse brain phosphoproteome in mTORC2 KO mutants

### Description
Here we are using unbiased phosphoproteomics analyses to try to identify selective targets of mTORC2 in mouse brain.

### Sample Protocol
Mouse cortex tissue was snap frozen in liquid nitrogen, lysed in 500uL 8M guanidinium hydrochloride (GndHCl) and centrifuged at 16300g at4 C for 15 minutes after which the supernatants were recovered. 1mg of protein was digested by adding 8.8mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride in 100mM Triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) 56C for 15 minutes, followed by a 30-minute incubation with 15mM iodoacetamide at room temperature in the dark. Samples were diluted with 100mM TEAB to reduce the concentration of GdnHCl to 1M, supplemented with 5% (w/w) trypsin, incubated for 12h at 37C, re-supplemented with 5% (w/w) trypsin for another 6h. Samples were acidified in formic acid, digests were centrifuged at 16300g at 4C for 15 minutes, supernatants were recovered and peptides were extracted and desalted using a MAX_RP Sep Pak ® classic C18 cartridge (Waters). TMT labelling was performed on samples using TMTProTM-18 label plex kit (ThermoFisher Scientific), following manufacturer’s instructions. Phosphopeptide enrichment was performed using 5um titanium dioxide (TiO2) beads

### Data Protocol
Data were searched against the mouse subset of the SwissProt database (SwissProt.2019.07.31), using Protein Prospector. The false positive rate was estimated by searching the data using a concatenated database which contains the original SwissProt database, as well as a version of each original entry where the sequence has been randomized. A 1% FDR was permitted at the protein and peptide level For quantitation only unique peptides were considered; peptides common to several proteins were not used for quantitative analysis. Relative quantization of peptide abundance was performed via calculation of the intensity of reporter ions corresponding to the different TMT labels, present in MS/MS spectra. Intensities were determined by Protein Prospector. Relative abundances were calculated as ratios vs the average intensity levels in the channels corresponding to reference samples.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mtorc2, Phosphorylation, Mouse, Tmt

### Affiliations
Department of Neuroscience, Memory and Brain Research Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA
UCSF

### Submitter
Juan Oses-Prieto

### Lab Head
Dr Mauro Costa-Mattioli
Department of Neuroscience, Memory and Brain Research Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA


