### Accession
PXD001094

### Title
Phosphoproteomics study of N-terminal tyrosine sites of SLP-76

### Description
Glocal dynamics of TCR signaling in Jurkat cell lines in SLP76 wild type cells and SLP76 Y3F mutant cells was studied by using LC-MSMS.

### Sample Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched against the non-redundant human UniProt complete proteome set database containing 72,078 forward and an equal number of reversed decoy protein entries using the Mascot algorithm version 2.2.07 from Matrix Science. Peak lists were generated using extractMSn version 5 provided by Thermo Fisher using a mass range of 600-4500.

### Data Protocol
SLP76 wild type and SLP76 Y3F mutant cells were growing separately in SILAC light and heavy medium. After stimulated with OKT3/4, cell lysates from two cell lines were combined with equal protein amount. The protein extracts in each time point were digested by trypsin and the peptide submitted to immunoprecipitation for enrichment of phosphorylated tyrosine peptides.

### Publication Abstract
SRC homology 2 domain-containing leukocyte phosphoprotein of 76 kDa (SLP-76) is a cytosolic adaptor protein that plays an important role in the T-cell receptor-mediated T-cell signaling pathway. SLP-76 links proximal receptor stimulation to downstream effectors through interaction with many signaling proteins. Previous studies showed that mutation of three tyrosine residues, Tyr(112), Tyr(128), and Tyr(145), in the N terminus of SLP-76 results in severely impaired phosphorylation and activation of Itk and PLC&#x3b3;1, which leads to defective calcium mobilization, Erk activation, and NFAT activation. To expand our knowledge of the role of N-terminal phosphorylation of SLP-76 from these three tyrosine sites, we characterized nearly 1000 tyrosine phosphorylation sites via mass spectrometry in SLP-76 reconstituted wild-type cells and SLP-76 mutant cells in which three tyrosine residues were replaced with phenylalanines (Y3F mutant). Mutation of the three N-terminal tyrosine residues of SLP-76 phenocopied SLP-76-deficient cells for the majority of tyrosine phosphorylation sites observed, including feedback on proximal T-cell receptor signaling proteins. Meanwhile, reversed phosphorylation changes were observed on Tyr(192) of Lck when we compared mutants to the complete removal of SLP-76. In addition, N-terminal tyrosine sites of SLP-76 also perturbed phosphorylation of Tyr(440) of Fyn, Tyr(702) of PLC&#x3b3;1, Tyr(204), Tyr(397), and Tyr(69) of ZAP-70, revealing new modes of regulation on these sites. All these findings confirmed the central role of N-terminal tyrosine sites of SLP-76 in the pathway and also shed light on novel signaling events that are uniquely regulated by SLP-76 N-terminal tyrosine residues.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Slp-76, Proteomics, Silac, Jurkat, Tcr signaling

### Affiliations
Brown University
Chemistry

### Submitter
QINQIN JI

### Lab Head
Dr Arthur Salomon
Brown University


