### Accession
PXD023407

### Title
Excessive local host-graft connectivity in aged and amyloid-loaded brain

### Description
Transplantation is a clinically relevant approach for brain repair, but much remains to be understood about influences of the disease environment in the host on transplant connectivity. To explore the influence of ageing and amyloid pathology in Alzheimer's disease (AD) we examined graft connectivity using monosynaptic Rabies virus tracing in APP/PS1 mice and in 16-18 month-old wild type mice. Neurons differentiated within 4 weeks and integrated well into the host visual cortex receiving input from the regions appropriate for visual cortex. Surprisingly, however, we found a prominent several-fold increase in local visual cortex input connectivity in both amyloid-loaded and aged environment. State-of-the-art deep proteome analysis using mass spectrometry provides first insights into the composition of environments promoting or not local exuberant input connectivity. These data therefore highlight the key role of the host pathology in shaping the input connectome calling for caution in extrapolating from one to another pathological condition.

### Sample Protocol
8 months old control C57BL/6J (n=10), 17 months aged C57BL/6J (n=4), and 8 months old APP/PS1 mice (n=5) were sacrificed through cervical dislocation, brains were removed and placed into cold 1x PBS. Biopsy punches of the visual cortex of both hemispheres were taken with a tissue puncher (2.5 mm diameter) and meninges and white matter were carefully removed using forceps to have a tissue sample consisting of grey matter only. Each sample was put into a low-protein binding Eppendorf tube, frozen on dry ice, and stored at - 80°C until further processing. Tissue samples were lysed in NP40 buffer (1% NP40 in 10mM Tris, pH 7.4, 150mM NaCl) in a Precellys homogenizator (VWR) and 10µg total protein per sample were proteolyzed with Lys-C and trypsin using a modified FASP procedure (Grosche et al., 2016).  LC-MSMS analysis was performed on a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) online coupled to a nano-RSLC (Ultimate 3000 RSLC; Dionex). Tryptic peptides were accumulated on a nano trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, 5  µm, 100 Å, 300 µm inner diameter (i.d.) × 5mm; Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 30µl/min and then separated by reversed phase chromatography (µPAC™ column, 200cm length, with pillar array backbone at interpillar distance of 2.5µm, PharmaFluidics, Zwijnaarde, Belgium) using a non-linear gradient for 240 minutes from 3 to 42% buffer B (acetonitrile [v/v]/0.1% formic acid [v/v] in HPLC-grade water) in buffer A (2% acetonitrile [v/v]/0.1% formic acid [v/v] in HPLC-grade water) at a flow rate of 300nl/min. MS spectra were recorded at a resolution of 60,000 with an AGC target of 3 x 106 and a maximum injection time of 50ms at a range of 300 to 1500 m/z. From the MS scan, the 10 most abundant ions were selected for HCD fragmentation with a normalized collision energy of 27, an isolation window of 1.6 m/z, and a dynamic exclusion of 30 s. MS/MS spectra were recorded at a resolution of 15,000 with an AGC target of 105 and a maximum injection time of 50ms.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer 2.4 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific; version 2.4.1.15) was used for peptide and protein identification via a database search (Sequest HT search engine) against Swiss Prot database, taxonomy mouse (17038 sequences), considering full tryptic specificity, allowing for up to two missed tryptic cleavage sites, precursor mass tolerance 10ppm, and fragment mass tolerance 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethylation of Cys was set as a static modification. Dynamic modifications included deamidation of Asn and Gln, oxidation of Met, and a combination of Met loss with acetylation on protein N-terminus. Percolator (Kaell et al., 2007) was used for validating peptide spectrum matches and peptides, accepting only the top-scoring hit for each spectrum, and satisfying the cutoff values for FDR <1% (high confidence). Protein groups were additionally filtered for an identification FDR<5% (target/decoy concatenated search validation). The final list of proteins complied with the strict parsimony principle. Peak intensities (at RT apex) for top 3 unique peptides were used for pairwise ratio calculations. Abundance values were normalized to the total peptide amount to account for sample load errors. The final protein ratio was calculated using median peptide ratios of at least 8 biological replicates each (8 replicates WT 17 months, 10 replicates APPPS1 and WT 8 months, 20 replicates WT 3 months). The statistical significance of the ratio change was ascertained employing the approach described in (Navarro et al., 2014) which is based on the presumption that we look for expression changes of proteins that are just a few in comparison to the number of total proteins being quantified. The quantification variability of the non-changing "background" proteins can be used to infer which proteins change their expression in a statistically significant manner. Data was filtered to ensure direct identifications (not based on match-between run) in at least 30% of samples within at least one experimental group. To visualize the data, volcano plots with log2 abundance ratios of sample replicates of each brain condition and the corresponding log10 p-values were created with Microsoft Excel. For gene ontology enrichment, significantly differentially expressed up- or downregulated proteins were run against a background list of all detected proteins using the webserver GO-rilla (http://cbl-gorilla.cs.technion.ac.il/; Eden et al., 2009).

### Publication Abstract
Transplantation is a clinically relevant approach for brain repair, but much remains to be understood about influences of the disease environment on transplant connectivity. To explore the effect of amyloid pathology in Alzheimer's disease (AD) and aging, we examined graft connectivity using monosynaptic rabies virus tracing in APP/PS1 mice and in 16- to 18-month-old wild-type (WT) mice. Transplanted neurons differentiated within 4 weeks and integrated well into the host visual cortex, receiving input from the appropriate brain regions for this area. Unexpectedly, we found a prominent several-fold increase in local inputs, in both amyloid-loaded and aged environments. State-of-the-art deep proteome analysis using mass spectrometry highlights complement system activation as a common denominator of environments promoting excessive local input connectivity. These data therefore reveal the key role of the host pathology in shaping the input connectome, calling for caution in extrapolating results from one pathological condition to another.

### Keywords
Mouse brain, Synaptic connectivity, Alzheimer's disease model, Aging

### Affiliations
Research Unit Protein Science, Helmholtz Zentrum München

### Submitter
Stefanie Hauck

### Lab Head
Dr Stefanie M. Hauck
Research Unit Protein Science, Helmholtz Zentrum München


