### Accession
PXD036714

### Title
Identification of biotinylated proteins through pull-down: ID and label-free quantification (Identification of TTP-interactome in RAW264.7 cells by TurboID proximity labelling).

### Description
Identification of biotinylated proteins through pull-down. RAW264.7 cells stably expressing a Dox-inducible TurboID-TTP fusion protein were treated with LPS or Epoxomicin for 4 h, followed by 15 min of biotin labeling in the cell medium. TurboID without fusion was used as a control.

### Sample Protocol
The cells were lysed in RIPA-Buffer (50 mM TRIS, 150 mM NaCl, 0,1% SDS, 0,5% Sodium Deoxycholate, 1% Triton X-100, 1mM PMSF, 1x Protease Inhibitor Cocktail). After incubation with the lysate, I washed the beads 4x times with RIPA, 1x with 2 M Urea+10 mM Tris. After this I washed them 5x with 50 mM HEPES (pH 7,1). Beads were resuspended in 50 µL 1 M urea and 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Disulfide bonds were reduced with 2 µL of 250 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 30 min at room temperature before adding 2 µL of 500 mM iodoacetamide and incubating for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Remaining iodoacetamide was quenched with 1 µL of 250 mM DTT for 10 min. Proteins were digested with 300 ng trypsin (Trypsin Gold, Promega) in 3 µL 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate followed by incubation at 37°C overnight. The supernatant without beads was transferred to a new tube, the digest stopped by addition of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 0.5 %, and the peptides were desalted using C18 Stagetips

### Data Protocol
MS raw data were analyzed using the MaxQuant software package (version 1.6.0.16) and the Uniprot mouse reference proteome (version 2020.01, www.uniprot.org), as well as a database of most common contaminants. The search was performed with full trypsin specificity and a maximum of two missed cleavages at a protein and peptide spectrum match false discovery rate of 1%. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues were set as fixed, oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. For label-free quantification the “match between runs” feature and the LFQ function were activated - all other parameters were left at default. MaxQuant output tables were further processed using Cassiopeia_LFQ in R (https://github.com/moritzmadern/Cassiopeia_LFQ ). Contaminant proteins, protein groups identified only by one peptide and protein groups with less than two quantitative values in one experimental group, were removed for further analysis. Missing values were replaced by randomly drawing data points from a normal distribution modeled on the whole dataset (data mean shifted by -1.8 standard deviations, width of distribution of 0.3 standard deviations). Differences between groups were statistically evaluated using the LIMMA package at 5% FDR (Benjamini-Hochberg).

### Publication Abstract
Tristetraprolin (TTP) is a critical negative immune regulator. It binds AU-rich elements in the untranslated-regions of many mRNAs encoding pro-inflammatory mediators, thereby accelerating their decay. A key but poorly understood mechanism of TTP regulation is its timely proteolytic removal: TTP is degraded by the proteasome through yet unidentified phosphorylation-controlled drivers. In this study, we set out to identify factors controlling TTP stability. Cellular assays showed that TTP is strongly lysine-ubiquitinated, which is required for its turnover. A genetic screen identified the ubiquitin E3 ligase HUWE1 as a strong regulator of TTP proteasomal degradation, which we found to control TTP stability indirectly by regulating its phosphorylation. Pharmacological assessment of multiple kinases revealed that HUWE1-regulated TTP phosphorylation and stability was independent of the previously characterized effects of MAPK-mediated S52/S178 phosphorylation. HUWE1 function was dependent on phosphatase and E3 ligase binding sites identified in the TTP C-terminus. Our findings indicate that while phosphorylation of S52/S178 is critical for TTP stabilization at earlier times after pro-inflammatory stimulation, phosphorylation of the TTP C-terminus controls its stability at later stages.

### Keywords
Ttp, Epoxomicin, Raw264.7, Biotin, Macrophages, Lps, Turboid

### Affiliations
Department of Microbiology, Immunobiology and Genetics, Max Perutz Labs, University of Vienna, Vienna BioCenter (VBC), Vienna, Austria.
Mass Spectrometry Facility, Max Perutz Laboratories Support GmbH

### Submitter
WeiQiang Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Gijs Versteeg
Department of Microbiology, Immunobiology and Genetics, Max Perutz Labs, University of Vienna, Vienna BioCenter (VBC), Vienna, Austria.


