### Accession
PXD037090

### Title
Smg6 interacting partners in mouse

### Description
Nonsense-mediated RNA decay (NMD) is a highly conserved and selective RNA turnover pathway that depends on the endonuclease SMG6. Here, we show that SMG6 is essential for male germ cell differentiation in mice. Germ-cell conditional knockout (cKO) of Smg6 induces extensive transcriptome misregulation, including a failure to eliminate meiotically expressed transcripts in early haploid cells, and accumulation of NMD target mRNAs with long 3’ untranslated regions (UTRs). Loss of SMG6 in the male germline results in complete arrest of spermatogenesis at the early haploid cell stage. We find that SMG6 is strikingly enriched in the chromatoid body (CB), a specialized cytoplasmic granule in male germ cells also harboring PIWI-interacting RNAs (piRNAs) and the piRNA-binding protein PIWIL1.

### Sample Protocol
Dynabeads-antibody-antigen complexes from IP with SMG6/SMG7/IgG or CB-IP were washed with 3 x 1 ml of Tris-HCL (pH 8.0). The LC-ESI-MS/MS analyses were performed on a nanoflow HPLC system (Easy-nLC1200, Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a nano-electrospray ionization source. Peptides were first loaded on a trapping column and subsequently separated inline on a 15 cm C18 column (75 μm x 15 cm, ReproSil-Pur 5 μm 200 Å C18-AQ, Dr. Maisch HPLC GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). The mobile phase consisted of water with 0.1% formic acid (solvent A) or acetonitrile/water (80:20 (v/v)) with 0.1% formic acid (solvent B). A linear 30 min gradient from 8% to 39% B was used to eluate peptides. MS data was acquired automatically by using Thermo Xcalibur 4.1 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). An information dependent acquisition method consisted of an Orbitrap MS survey scan of mass range 300–1750 m/z followed by HCD fragmentation for most intense peptide ions.

### Data Protocol
Data files were searched for protein identification using Proteome Discoverer 2.4 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected to an in-house server running the Mascot 2.7.0 software (Matrix Science) against a SwissProt database (version 2020_01) with a taxonomy filter Mus musculus.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse, Chromatoid body, Smg7, Smg6

### Affiliations
University of Turku
Institute of Biomedicine, University of Turku, Finland

### Submitter
Lin Ma

### Lab Head
Dr Noora Kotaja
Institute of Biomedicine, University of Turku, Finland


