### Accession
PXD006389

### Title
The Ser/Thr Protein Kinase Protein-Protein Interaction Map of M. tuberculosis

### Description
Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) is the causative agent of tuberculosis, the leading cause of death among all infectious diseases. There are 11 eukaryotic-like serine/threonine protein kinases (STPKs) in Mtb, which are thought to play pivotal roles in cell growth, signal transduction and pathogenesis. However, their underlying mechanisms of action remain largely uncharacterized. In this study, using a Mtb proteome microarray, we have globally identified the binding proteins in Mtb for all of the STPKs, and constructed the first STPK protein interaction (KPI) map that includes 492 binding proteins and 1,027 interactions. Bioinformatics analysis showed that the interacting proteins reflect diverse functions, including roles in two-component system, transcription, protein degradation, and cell wall integrity. Functional investigations confirmed that PknG regulates cell wall integrity through key components of peptidoglycan (PG) biosynthesis, e.g., MurC. The global STPK-KPIs network constructed here is expected to serve as a rich resource for understanding the key signaling pathways in Mtb, thus facilitating drug development and effective control of Mtb.

### Sample Protocol
In vitro phosphorylation was performed as described (15). Briefly, the reaction is composed of 50 μg substrate in 200 μl of kinase buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.0, 1 mM DTT, 5 mM MgCl2, 2 mM MnCl2 ) with 5 mM ATP, and 10 μg kinase, and a control phosphorylation assay without ATP was included for each of the selected KPIs. As a sum, 60 substrates were carried out for kinase reaction and followed with 60 control reaction. The reactions were carried out for 2 h at 37 °C. The phosphorylation events were then read out by immunoblot with an anti-ser/thr phosphorylation antibody (Abcam, Cambridge, USA). The experiments were carried out twice.  In-Solution Trypsin Digestion and Enrichment of Phosphopeptides with TiO2 Resin After phosphorylation reactions, to obtain high efficiency for MS analysis, >10 samples were grouped as one. In total, 8 groups were prepared. The grouped samples were concentrated to a protein adsorption film (Nanosep MF, PALL), washed with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 3 times at 4 ℃ centrifuged  at 10,000 g for 20 minutes, and reduced with carboxyamidomethyl at 60℃ for 30 min. Proteins were digested with sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega, Madison, USA) at 37 °C for 16 h - 24 h. The tryptic digested protein sample was eluted from the membrane with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 2 times, and then dried by lyophilization. Phosphopeptides from digested peptides were enriched by using Phosphopeptide Enrichment TiO2 Mag Sepharose (GE healthcare life sciences, Parramatta, Australia) according to the manufacturer’s instruction. Briefly, the dried peptides were redissolved in 200 μl TiO2 phospho binding buffer containing 1 M glycolic acid in 80% acetonitrile, 5% trifluoroacetic acid and then mixed with 50 μl TiO2 phospho binding Resin. After 1 h incubation, the supernatant was discarded, and TiO2 resin was washed 3 times with the wash buffer (80% acetonitrile, 1% trifluoroacetic acid). After that, the phosphopeptides were eluted by adding 50 μl elution buffer (5% ammonium hydroxide, pH ~ 12). The eluted fractions were combined and dried by lyophilization and reconstituted in 20 μl of 0.1% formic acid (FA) for LC−MS/MS analysis

### Data Protocol
The raw files were processed using the LC/MS software Data Analysis 4.0 (Bruker Compass software). For the improved identification of phosphopeptides, all MS/MS samples were analyzed using MASCOT 2.3 (23). MASCOT were set up to search a database of M.tuberculosis database from SwissProt (http://web.expasy.org/docs/swiss-prot_guideline.html) containing 2,067 annotated protein sequences. The search criteria were as follows: trypsin digestion; carbamidomethylation (Cys) was set as fixed modification, whereas oxidation (M), phospho (ST), and phospho (Y) were considered as variable modifications; and two missed cleavages were allowed. Allowed maximum mass deviation was 0.4 Da (monoisotopic) for the precursor ion and fragment maximum mass deviation was 0.6 Da (monoisotopic). For results searching, the peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were filtered based on the score threshold of a 1% false discovery rate (FDR), according to the formula: FDR = 2[nDecoy / (nDecoy + nTarget)] (24). And also all fragmentation spectra of the phosphorylated peptides assigned to the corresponding proteins were manually evaluated and identified according to the neutral loss of ion MH+-80. Finally, to pinpoint the actual phosphorylation site within the identified peptide, the localization probabilities for phosphorylation sites were calculated from the posttranslational modification score algorithm with PhosphoRS analysis using Protein Discovery software (Thermo). Phosphorylation sites that were occupied with a probability > 0.95 were identified as phosphorylation sites.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Mycobacterium tuberculosis</i> (Mtb) is the causative agent of tuberculosis, the leading cause of death among all infectious diseases. There are 11 eukaryotic-like serine/threonine protein kinases (STPKs) in Mtb, which are thought to play pivotal roles in cell growth, signal transduction and pathogenesis. However, their underlying mechanisms of action remain largely uncharacterized. In this study, using a Mtb proteome microarray, we have globally identified the binding proteins in Mtb for all of the STPKs, and constructed the first STPK protein interaction (KPI) map that includes 492 binding proteins and 1,027 interactions. Bioinformatics analysis showed that the interacting proteins reflect diverse functions, including roles in two-component system, transcription, protein degradation, and cell wall integrity. Functional investigations confirmed that PknG regulates cell wall integrity through key components of peptidoglycan (PG) biosynthesis, <i>e.g.</i> MurC. The global STPK-KPIs network constructed here is expected to serve as a rich resource for understanding the key signaling pathways in Mtb, thus facilitating drug development and effective control of Mtb.

### Keywords
Protein-protein interaction, Ser/thr protein kinase, Murc, Cell wall

### Affiliations
Ph.D., Professor, Vice Dean
Shanghai Jiao Tong University

### Submitter
Fanlin Wu

### Lab Head
Dr Sheng-Ce Tao
Ph.D., Professor, Vice Dean


