### Accession
PXD001938

### Title
Quantitative proteomics of human NPC1-I1061T mutant fibroblasts provides insights into the pathogenesis of Niemann-Pick Type C disease

### Description
Niemann-Pick type C (NPC) disease is a fatal neurodegenerative disorder characterized by the accumulation of unesterified cholesterol in the late endosomal/lysosomal compartments. Mutations in the NPC1 protein are implicated in 95% of patients with NPC disease. The most prevalent mutation is the missense mutation I1061T that occurs in approximately 15–20% of disease alleles. In this study, we have performed an isobaric labeling based quantitative analysis of proteome of NPC1-I1061T versus wild-type primary fibroblasts.

### Sample Protocol
To identify proteins with relevance to NPC pathogenesis due to I1061T mutation, we have used an amine-reactive 6-plex Tandem Mass Tags (TMT) isobaric reagent to differentially label and perform a proteomics comparison of primary fibroblasts derived from healthy and I1061T-mutant individuals. Three biological replicates of NPC1-I1061T and NPC1-WT cells were labeled with different isotopic variant of the TMT 6-plex tag, combined and analyzed by the MudPIT technique

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were extracted from the Xcalibur data system format (.raw) into MS2 format using RawXtract1.9.9.2. The MS/MS spectra were searched with the ProLuCID algorithm against the human SwissProt database (downloaded in July 2013; number of protein entries = 20,210), which was concatenated to a decoy database in which the sequence for each entry in the original database was reversed.  Census, a software tool for quantitative proteomics analysis, was used to extract the TMT reporter ion intensities from the identiﬁed tandem mass spectra, correction of isotope contamination, and normalization.

### Publication Abstract
Niemann-Pick type C (NPC) disease is a fatal neurodegenerative disorder characterized by the accumulation of unesterified cholesterol in the late endosomal/lysosomal compartments. Mutations in the NPC1 protein are implicated in 95% of patients with NPC disease. The most prevalent mutation is the missense mutation I1061T that occurs in &#x223c; 15-20% of the disease alleles. In our study, an isobaric labeling-based quantitative analysis of proteome of NPC1(I1061T) primary fibroblasts when compared with wild-type cells identified 281 differentially expressed proteins based on stringent data analysis criteria. Gene ontology enrichment analysis revealed that these proteins play important roles in diverse cellular processes such as protein maturation, energy metabolism, metabolism of reactive oxygen species, antioxidant activity, steroid metabolism, lipid localization, and apoptosis. The relative expression level of a subset of differentially expressed proteins (TOR4A, DHCR24, CLGN, SOD2, CHORDC1, HSPB7, and GAA) was independently and successfully substantiated by Western blotting. We observed that treating NPC1(I1061T) cells with four classes of seven different compounds that are potential NPC drugs increased the expression level of SOD2 and DHCR24. We have also shown an abnormal accumulation of glycogen in NPC1(I1061T) fibroblasts possibly triggered by defective processing of lysosomal alpha-glucosidase. Our study provides a starting point for future more focused investigations to better understand the mechanisms by which the reported dysregulated proteins triggers the pathological cascade in NPC, and furthermore, their effect upon therapeutic interventions.

### Keywords
Npc, Npc1-i1061t, Niemann-pick type c, Quantitative proteomics, Proteomics, Tandem mass tags, Tmt, Mudpit, Isobaric labeling, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
TSRI
The Scripps Research Institute

### Submitter
Navin Rauniyar

### Lab Head
Dr John R Yates, 3rd
The Scripps Research Institute


