### Accession
PXD028006

### Title
HLA class II  ligandome from HOM-2 and JY cell lines (HLA-DR an HLA-DP ligands)

### Description
A high-throughput mass spectrometry analysis was used to identify more than 16,000 cell peptides bound to several HLA-DR and -DP class II molecules isolated from large amounts of two human cell lines (HOM-2 and JY).

### Sample Protocol
HLA-DR and -DP-bound peptides were isolated from a total of 4 or 2x1010 uninfected or VACV-infected HOM-2 or JY cell lines for 6 hours, respectively. The cells were lysed and the HLA-DR/peptide or -DP/peptide complexes were isolated sequentially via affinity chromatography from the soluble cell extract fraction with L243 (HB55) or  B7.21 monoclonal antibodies, which are specific for monomorphic pan-HLA-DR or -DP class II determinants, respectively. The HLA class II-bound peptides were eluted at 4ºC with 0.1% aqueous trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), separated from the HLA molecules, and concentrated by ultra-filtration with a Centricon 3 filter. Peptide mixtures recovered after the ultra-filtration step were concentrated using Micro-Tip reversed-phase columns. The HLA class II peptides recovered from immunoprecipitated HLA-DR or DP-specific mAbs, were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS using a Q-Exactive-Plus mass spectrometer that was fitted with an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanocapillary UHPLC.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry data were processed using Peaks 8.5 for peak-list generation from the nanoLC-MS/MS data using the human part of the UniProt/Swiss-Prot database. Vaccinia uninfected:49632 -> HOM2 HLA-DR 49636 -> HOM2 HLA-DP 49646 -> JY HLA-DR 49648 -> JY HLA-DP Vaccinia infected:49633 -> HOM2 HLA-DR 49637 -> HOM2 HLA-DP 49647 -> JY HLA-DR 49649 -> JY HLA-DP

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hla-dr, Hla-dp

### Affiliations
Centro Nacional de Microbiología. Instituto de Salud Carlos III. Spain
Unidad de Presentación y Regulación Inmunes, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, 28220 Majadahonda (Madrid), Spain

### Submitter
Elena Lorente

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Lopez
Unidad de Presentación y Regulación Inmunes, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, 28220 Majadahonda (Madrid), Spain


