### Accession
PXD019965

### Title
In-vitro evaluation of Pseudomonas fluorescens antibacterial activity against Listeria spp. isolated from New Zealand horticultural environments

### Description
Beneficial bacteria with antibacterial properties are an attractive alternative to chemical-based antibacterial or bactericidal agents. The aim of our study was to source such bacteria from horticultural produce and environments and to explore the mechanisms of their antimicrobial properties. Four strains of Pseudomonas fluorescens were isolated that possessed antibacterial activity against the pathogen Listeria monocytogenes.

### Sample Protocol
The pure cultures identified as P. fluorescens using 16S rRNA were subjected to proteomic analysis using whole cell lysates. Isolate PFR46I06 did not exhibit fluorescence and did not have profound zone of inhibition so only PFR46H06, PFR46H07, PFR46H08 and PFR46H09 were subjected to proteome analysis. The cultures were grown in BHI broth for 24 h and were centrifuged at 3200 x g for 20 min at 4°C (Eppendorf, 5424R). The cell pellets were transported on ice for proteome analysis at The Mass Spectrometry Centre, Faculty of Sciences, University of Auckland using a nanoLC-equipped TripleTOF 6600 mass spectrometer (ABSCIEX, USA) and utilizing Information Dependent Acquisition (IDA) method. The sample process involved cysteine alkylation using iodoacetamide and the samples were digested with trypsin with urea denaturation.

### Data Protocol
The ProteinPilot data were searched using UniProt protein database of Pseudomonas fluorescens sequences (October 2018). The summaries of proteins, peptides and distinct peptides with modifications were analysed with special reference to the secretion system, T6SS.

### Publication Abstract
Beneficial bacteria with antibacterial properties are attractive alternatives to chemical-based antibacterial or bactericidal agents. Our study sourced such bacteria from horticultural produce and environments to explore the mechanisms of their antimicrobial properties. Five strains of <i>Pseudomonas fluorescens</i> were studied that possessed antibacterial activity against the pathogen <i>Listeria monocytogenes</i>. The vegetative culture of these strains (<i>Pseudomonas fluorescens</i>-PFR46I06, <i>Pseudomonas fluorescens</i>-PFR46H06, <i>Pseudomonas fluorescens</i>-PFR46H07, <i>Pseudomonas fluorescens</i>-PFR46H08 and <i>Pseudomonas fluorescens</i>-PFR46H09) were tested against <i>Listeria monocytogenes</i> (n = 31), <i>Listeria seeligeri</i> (n = 1) and <i>Listeria innocua</i> (n = 1) isolated from seafood and horticultural sources and from clinical cases (n = 2) using solid media coculture and liquid media coculture. All <i>Listeria</i> strains were inhibited by all strains of <i>P. fluorescens</i>; however, <i>P. fluorescens</i>-PFR46H07, <i>P. fluorescens</i>-PFR46H08 and <i>P. fluorescens</i>-PFR46H09 on solid media showed good inhibition, with average zones of inhibition of 14.8 mm, 15.1 mm and 18.2 mm, respectively, and the other two strains and <i>P. fluorescens</i>-PFR46H09 had a significantly greater zone of inhibition than the others (<i>p</i> &lt; 0.05). There was no inhibition observed in liquid media coculture or in <i>P. fluorescens</i> culture supernatants against <i>Listeria</i> spp. by any of the <i>P. fluorescens</i> strains. Therefore, we hypothesized that the structural apparatus that causes cell-to-cell contact may play a role in the ejection of ant-listeria molecules on solid media to inhibit <i>Listeria</i> isolates, and we investigated the structural protein differences using whole-cell lysate proteomics. We paid special attention to the type VI secretion system (<i>TSS</i>-T6SS) for the transfer of effector proteins or bacteriocins. We found significant differences in the peptide profiles and protein summaries between these isolates' lysates, and PFR46H06 and PFR46H07 possessed the fewest secretion system structural proteins (12 and 11, respectively), while PFR46H08 and PFR46H09 had 18 each. <i>P. fluorescens</i>-PFR46H09, which showed the highest antimicrobial effect, had nine <i>tss</i>-T6SS structural proteins compared to only four in the other three strains.

### Keywords
Horticulture, Antibacterial activity, Pseudomonas fluorescens

### Affiliations
The New Zealand Institute of Plant and Food Research, Auckland, New Zealand
School of Biological Sciences, University of Auckland

### Submitter
Leo Payne

### Lab Head
Dr Vathsala Mohan
The New Zealand Institute of Plant and Food Research, Auckland, New Zealand


