### Accession
PXD041871

### Title
Co-targeting HSP90 alpha and CDK7 overcomes resistance against HSP90 inhibitors in BCR-ABL1+ leukemia cells

### Description
HSP90 inhibitors (HSP90i) have not entered routinely in the clinics, primarily due to the associated resistance via heat shock response (HSR) induction and dose limiting toxicity. In this study, we employed genetic KO and knockdown (KD) models of HSP90 isoforms (α and β) for extensive multi-omics-based in vitro and in vivo characterization and identified HSP90α as the primary driver of malignancy of the two isoforms in BCR-ABL1+ leukemia cells. Notably, combinatorial ex vivo drug sensitivity screenings identified CDK7 inhibitors (CDK7i) as drugs synergizing with HSP90α inhibition.

### Sample Protocol
a) Sample preparation i) Proteomes K562 cells (EV, HSP90α-KO, or HSP90β-KO; five biological replicates) were washed three times with PBS and shock frozen in liquid nitrogen. Proteins were extracted from frozen cell pellets as described elsewhere[Poschmann et al., J. Proteome Res. 2014, 13, 2339–2351.]. Briefly, cells were lysed and homogenized in urea buffer using a TissueLyser (Qiagen) and, after centrifugation (15 min, 16000 rcf, 4°C), supernatants were collected. After determination of protein concentration (Pierce 660 nm Protein Assay, Thermo Fischer Scientific), samples were adjusted to 0.5 mg/ml total protein concentration with SDS buffer (final 7.5% glycerol, 3% SDS, 37.5 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.0) and 10 µl were reduced (final 20 mM dithiothreitol, 20 min, 56°C), alkylated (final 80 mM iodoacetamide, 15 min, r.t., protected from light) and finally underwent tryptic digestion (200 ng trypsin in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate) after applying a slightly modified sp3 protocol using 50 µg 1:1 mix Sera-Mag SpeedBeads. Peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% trifluoracetic acid and subjected to LC-MS analysis.  ii) Secretomes K562 cells (EV, HSP90α-KO (C1), or HSP90β-KO (C1 ); five biological replicates) were washed three times with PBS and three times with FCS-free medium and incubated for 24 h in FCS-free medium at a density of 1 million cells / mL. The conditioned medium was collected by centrifugation (5 min, 800 x g, 4°C) and filtering through a 0.2 µm membrane (Acrodisc 32 mm Syringe Filter with 0.2 µm Supor Membrane; Pall, #4652). Aliquots were shock frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C.  An aliquot (400 µl) per cell type and replicate was thawed on ice in the presence of protease inhibitor cocktail (added 50 µl of a solution of 1 cOmplete ULTRA tablet, mini, EDTA-free in 2 mL water; Roche, #05892791001), supplemented with SDS buffer (added 50 µl of 30% glycerin, 12% SDS, 150 mM Tris base), reduced (added 40.5 µL of 100 mM dithiothreitol; 20 min at 56 °C under shaking), alkylated (added 54 µL of 300 mM iodacetamide; 15 min at r.t. protected from light), and quenched (added 40.5 µL of 100 mM dithiothreitol; 20 min at r.t.). Applying a slightly modified sp3 protocol, proteins were precipitated (added 10 µL of 20 mg/mL 1:1 bead-mix of pre-washed Sera-Mag SpeedBeads GE #45152105050250 and #65152105050250 in water; added 645 µL ethanol abs. p.a.; 15 min at 24 °C under shaking), washed (3x 80% ethanol, 1x acetonitrile) and digested (100 ng trypsin in 20 µL 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate). Peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% trifluoracetic acid and subjected to LC-MS analysis. b) LC-MS analysis: For the LC-MS analysis, a Q Exactive Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap (for proteomes) or a Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid (for secretomes) mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), operated in positive mode and coupled with a nano electrospray ionization source connected with an Ultimate 3000 Rapid Separation liquid chromatography system (Dionex / Thermo Fisher Scientific, Idstein, Germany) equipped with an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 column (75 µm inner diameter, 25 cm length, 2 mm particle size from Thermo Fisher Scientific) was applied using a 120 min LC gradient. Capillary temperature was set to 250°C or 275°C and source voltage to 1.4 kV or 1.5 kV for the Q Exactive or Lumos mass spectrometer, respectively. MS survey scans had a mass range from 350 (Q Exactive) or 200 (Lumos) to 2000 m/z at a resolution of 140,000 (Q Exactive) or 120,000 (Lumos). The automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 3,000,000 (Q Exactive) or the normalized AGC target was set to 62.5% (Lumos) and the maximum fill time was 80 ms (Q Exactive) or 60 ms (Lumos). The ten most intensive peptide ions per survey scan were isolated and fragmented by high-energy collision dissociation (HCD) (Q Exactive) or a cycle time of 2 s was employed (Lumos).

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (version 2.0.3.0 for proteomes or 2.2.0.0 for secretomes, Max Planck Institute for Biochemistry, Planegg, Germany) was used for peptide / protein identification and quantification employing a human sequence database (UniProtKB, downloaded on 01/27/2021, 75777 entries for proteomes or on 18/01/2022, 79038 entries for secretomes). Methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation as well as a carbamidomethylation at cysteine residues were considered as variable and fixed modifications, respectively. A false discovery rate of 1% on protein and peptide level was set as identification threshold. A total of 4676 protein groups were identified for proteomes and 2051 for secretomes after removing potential contaminants, reverse hits, proteins only identified by modified peptides, and proteins without valid intensity or MS/MS count values. Protein intensities for HSP90 isoforms were examined and, if necessary, manually re-assigned from the sum of corresponding peptide intensities.

### Publication Abstract
HSP90 has emerged as an appealing anti-cancer target. However, HSP90 inhibitors (HSP90i) are characterized by limited clinical utility, primarily due to the resistance acquisition via heat shock response (HSR) induction. Understanding the roles of abundantly expressed cytosolic HSP90 isoforms (&#x3b1; and &#x3b2;) in sustaining malignant cells' growth and the mechanisms of resistance to HSP90i is crucial for exploiting their clinical potential. Utilizing multi-omics approaches, we identified that ablation of the HSP90&#x3b2; isoform induces the overexpression of HSP90&#x3b1; and extracellular-secreted HSP90&#x3b1; (eHSP90&#x3b1;). Notably, we found that the absence of HSP90&#x3b1; causes downregulation of PTPRC (or CD45) expression and restricts in vivo growth of BCR-ABL1+ leukemia cells. Subsequently, chronic long-term exposure to the clinically advanced HSP90i PU-H71 (Zelavespib) led to copy number gain and mutation (p.S164F) of the HSP90AA1 gene, and HSP90&#x3b1; overexpression. In contrast, acquired resistance toward other tested HSP90i (Tanespimycin and Coumermycin A1) was attained by MDR1 efflux pump overexpression. Remarkably, combined CDK7 and HSP90 inhibition display synergistic activity against therapy-resistant BCR-ABL1+ patient leukemia cells via blocking pro-survival HSR and HSP90&#x3b1; overexpression, providing a novel strategy to avoid the emergence of resistance against treatment with HSP90i alone.

### Keywords
Hsp90, K562, Lc-msms, Proteome, Secretome, Hsp90beta, Hsp90alpha, Knockout

### Affiliations
Molecular Proteomics Laboratory, Biological Medical Research Center, Heinrich-Heine-University Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany
MPL/BMFZ, HHU Düsseldorf

### Submitter
Thomas Lenz

### Lab Head
Dr Kai Stühler
Molecular Proteomics Laboratory, Biological Medical Research Center, Heinrich-Heine-University Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany


