### Accession
PXD031776

### Title
In vitro erythropoiesis at different pO2 induces adaptations that are independent of prior systemic exposure to hypoxia

### Description
Hypoxia is associated with increased erythropoietin (EPO) release to drive erythropoiesis. However, a prolonged sojourn at high altitude results in an increase in EPO levels followed by a decrease, although erythropoiesis remains elevated at a stable level. The role of hypoxia and related EPO adjustments are not fully understood and contributed to the formulation of the theory of neocytolysis. In this study, we aimed to exclusively evaluate the role of oxygen on erythropoiesis comparing in vitro erythroid differentiation performed at atmospheric oxygen, with a lower oxygen concentration (3% O2) and with cultures of erythroid precursors isolated from peripheral blood after a 19-day sojourn at high altitude (3450 m). Results highlight an accelerated erythroid maturation at low oxygen and more concave morphology of reticulocytes. No differences in deformability were observed in the formed reticulocytes in the tested conditions. Moreover, hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells isolated from blood affected by hypoxia at high altitude did not result in a different erythroid development, suggesting no retention of high altitude signature but rather an immediate adaptation to oxygen concentration. This adaptation was observed during in vitro erythropoiesis at 3% oxygen, displaying a significantly increased glycolytic metabolic profile.  These hypoxia-induced effects on in vitro erythropoiesis fail to provide an intrinsic  explanation to the concept of neocytolysis.

### Sample Protocol
Samples containing 5-30 million cells were lysed in 100 µl of 4% Sodium dodecyl sulfate (Sigma-Aldrich), 10 mM Tris(2-Carboxyethyl)-Phosphine HCl (Thermo Scientific), 40 mM 2-Chloroacetamide, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8 (Invitrogen) and by heating 5 minutes at 95°C. After cooling to RT, 1U Benzonase (Merck) was added and the samples were sonicated for 10 minutes. Next samples were centrifuged for 10 minutes at 10.000 g, supernateants were transferred to fresh tubes. Protein content was determined with a Qubit protein assay (Invitrogen) and 30 µg of protein was processed and digested as described previously (PMID:32332107). Tryptic digests were acidified using 15 µl 2% Formic Acid (Thermo scientific) and desalted and fractionated in 3 fractions with StageTips containing 3 layers of SDB-RPS material (Empore) as described previously(PMID:32332107). Eluted peptides were vaccuum dried and desolved in 30 µl 0.1% TFA (thermo scientific), 2% acetonitrile (Biosolve). 3 µl of peptides were separated by nanoscale C18 reverse chromatography coupled on line to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) via a nanoelectrospray ion source at 2.15 kV. Buffer A was composed of 0.1% formic acid and buffer B of 0.1% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile. Peptides were loaded for 17 min at 300 nl/min at 5% buffer B, equilibrated for 5 min at 5% buffer B (17–22 min) and eluted by increasing buffer B from 5–27.5% (22–122 min) and 27.5–40% (122–132 min), followed by a 5 min wash to 95% and a 6 min regeneration to 5%. Survey scans of peptide precursors from 375 to 1500 m/z were performed at 120K resolution (at 200 m/z) with a 4e5 ion count target. Tandem mass spectrometry was performed by isolation with the quadrupole with isolation window 0.7, HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 30, and rapid scan mass spectrometry analysis in the ion trap. The MS2 ion count target was set to 3e4 and the max injection time was 20 ms. Only those precursors with charge state 2–7 were sampled for MS2. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 30 s with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on. The instrument was run in top speed mode with 3 s cycles. All data were acquired with Xcalibur software.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were processed with MaxQuant 2.0.1.0  using the human Uniprot database (downloaded March 2021). MaxQuant output tables were analyzed using R/Bioconductor  (version 4.1.2/3.14), ‘reverse’, ‘potential contaminants’ and ‘only identified by site’ peptides were filtered out and label free quantification values were log2 transformed. Proteins quantified in 100% of an experimental group were selected for further analysis. Missing values were imputed by a normal distribution (width=0.3, shift=1.8), assuming these proteins were close to the detection limit. Statistical analyses were performed using moderated t-tests in the LIMMA  package. A Benjamini-Hochberg adjusted P value <0.05 and absolute log2 fold change >1 was considered statistically significant and relevant.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Erythropoiesis, Lumos

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Hematology, Sanquin Research, Amsterdam
Department of Molecular Hematology, Sanquin Research, Amsterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Arie Hoogendijk

### Lab Head
Dr Maartje van den Biggelaar
Department of Molecular Hematology, Sanquin Research, Amsterdam, The Netherlands


