### Accession
PXD029974

### Title
Analysis of the interactomes of ZAP70, CD247 and SLP76 upon stimulation of murine CD8+ T cells with ligands of different affinity to the TCR

### Description
T cells have the remarkable ability to sense and discriminate between a wide range of antigenic peptides bound to major histocompatibility complex molecules (pMHC). Here, we use interactomics to monitor in a time dependent manner the early molecular events taking place upon stimulation of murine CD8+ T cells with ligands of different affinity to the TCR. We used the mouse OT-I model in which T cells specifically recognize the ovalbumin OVA 257-264 peptide (SIINFEKL, also named N4) bound to the MHC-I molecule H-2Kb (pMHC). The OT-I TCR also recognizes altered peptide ligands amongst which SIITFEKL (T4) and SIIGFEKL (G4) with sub-optimal binding capacities (ligand affinity N4>T4>G4).  For affinity purification (AP) of signalling complexes, we crossed OT-I TCR transgenic mice onto mice expressing an endogenous tagged (One-Strep-Tag: OST) version of the CD3z (also called CD247), ZAP70 or SLP76 molecules. CD8+ T cells were purified from pooled lymph nodes and spleens, shortly expanded, and were left unstimulated or stimulated with N4, T4 and G4 soluble pMHC tetramers for 30, 120 or 300 s. Complexes formed around either CD247, ZAP70 or SLP76 were then purified and analysed by mass spectrometry. Each AP-MS purification is associated with a corresponding control (purification from OT-I CD8+ T cells expressing only the endogenous version of each bait, cultured and stimulated in the same conditions). The number of replicate biological experiments was n=3 for all time-points, and each sample was analyzed twice by single-run nano LC-MS. In addition, the whole proteome of OT-I cell was analyzed by label-free shotgun proteomics in order to calculate cellular protein abundances for each interactor.

### Sample Protocol
A total of 100 × 106 short-term expanded OT-I CD8+  T cells were left unstimulated or stimulated at 37°C with 20, 50 or 300 nM of N4, T4 or G4 tetramers respectively. Stimulation was stopped by the addition of a twice-concentrated lysis buffer (100 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 270 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 20% glycerol, 0.4% n-dodecyl-β-D-maltoside) supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitors. After 10 min of incubation on ice, cell lysates were centrifuged at 21,000 g for 5 min at 4 °C. Postnuclear lysates were then used for affinity purification. Equal amount of postnuclear lysates were incubated with Strep-Tactin Sepharose beads (IBA GmbH) for 1.5 h at 4° C on a rotary wheel. Beads were then washed five times with 1 ml of lysis buffer in the absence of detergent and of protease and phosphatase inhibitors. Proteins were eluted from the Strep-Tactin Sepharose beads with 2.5 mM D-biotin, a ligand that binds to Strep-Tactin with a higher affinity than the OST sequence does. Protein samples were processed for proteomic analysis either by short migration on SDS-PAGE (one band) and in-gel trypsin digestion, or through protein capture on paramagnetic hydrophilic beads (Sera-Mag SpeedBeads, GE Healthcare) and in-solution trypsin digestion. For proteome analysis, OT-I cell pellets (5 biological replicates) were incubated with 150 μl of lysis buffer containing Tris 50 mM, pH 7.5, EDTA 0.5 mM, NaCl 135 mM, SDS 1%, boiled 5min at 95°C and sonicated on a Bioruptor (Diagenode). Protein concentration was determined using a detergent compatible assay (DC assay, Bio-Rad) and an aliquot of 150µg of protein extract was reduced (TCEP 10mM) and alkylated (Chloroacetamide 40mM) for 15min at 45°C, and digested with trypsin on a S-trap Mini device (Protifi) according to manufacturer’s protocol. Tryptic peptides were resuspended in 17 µl of 2% acetonitrile and 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid and separated by nano-liquid chromatography (LC) coupled to tandem MS, using an UltiMate 3000 system (NCS-3500RS Nano/Cap System; Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples from interactomic  experiments were analysed on an Orbitrap Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Five microliters of each sample were loaded on a C18 precolumn (300 µm inner diameter × 5 mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) in a solvent made of 2% acetonitrile and 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid, at a flow rate of 20 µl/min. After 5 min of desalting, the precolumn was switched online with the analytical C18 column (75 µm inner diameter × 50 cm, in-house packed with Reprosil C18) equilibrated in 95% solvent A (5% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid) and 5% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid). Peptides were eluted using 60 min or 105 min-long gradient of solvent B depending on the analytical series, at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode with the Xcalibur software. MS survey scans were acquired with a resolution of 70,000 and an AGC target of 3e6. The 10 most intense ions were selected for fragmentation by high-energy collision induced dissociation, and the resulting fragments were analyzed at a resolution of 17500, using an AGC target of 1e5 and a maximum fill time of 50ms. Dynamic exclusion was used within 30 s to prevent repetitive selection of the same peptide. Total peptide samples for whole proteome analysis were run on an Orbitrap Q-Exactive HFX mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were injected and separated using the same chromatographic set-up as above, with a 60 min-long gradient of solvent B on an Acclaim PepMap C18 column (75 µm inner diameter × 50 cm, 2 µM particles, # 164942, Thermo Fisher Scientific). MS survey scans were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 60,000 and an AGC target of 3e6. The 12 most intense ions were selected for fragmentation by high-energy collision induced dissociation, and the resulting fragments were analyzed at a resolution of 30000, using an AGC target of 1e5, a maximum fill time of 54ms, and a dynamic exclusion time of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files corresponding to each analytical series (CD247, ZAP70 or SLP76) were processed with MaxQuant software (version 1.5.2.8) for database search with the Andromeda search engine and quantitative analysis. Data were searched against Mus musculus entries of the UniProt KB protein database (release UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot+TrEMBL 2017_01, 89297 entries including isoforms), plus the One-Strep-tag peptide sequence, and the set of common contaminants provided by MaxQuant. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification, whereas oxidation of methionine, protein N-terminal acetylation, and phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine were set as variable modifications. Specificity of trypsin digestion was set for cleavage after K or R, and two missed trypsin cleavage sites were allowed. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the first search and 4.5 ppm for the main Andromeda database search. The mass tolerance in tandem MS mode was set to 0.5 Da. Minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids, and minimum number of unique or razor peptides was set to 1 for validation. The I=L option of MaxQuant was enabled to avoid erroneous assignation of undistinguishable peptides belonging to very homologous proteins. Andromeda results were validated by the target decoy approach using a reverse database, with a false discovery rate set at 1% at both PSM (peptide sequence match) and protein level. For label-free relative quantification of the samples, the match between runs option of MaxQuant was enabled with a match time window of 1 min, to allow cross-assignment of MS features detected in the different runs, after alignment of the runs with a time window of 20 min. Protein quantification was based on unique and razor peptides. The minimum ratio count was set to 1 for LFQ calculation, and computation of the iBAQ metric was also enabled. Raw MS files for proteome analysis were processed with MaxQuant with the same parameters as described for affinity-purified samples, except that phosphorylation was not included as variable modification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Zap70, Primary cd8+ t cell, Tcr, Slp76, Ap-ms, Interactome, Ost tag, Cd3z, Ot-i mouse, Cd247

### Affiliations
Institute of Pharmacology and Structural Biology, CNRS, Toulouse, France
CNRS/IPBS

### Submitter
Anne Gonzalez de Peredo

### Lab Head
Dr Odile Schiltz
Institute of Pharmacology and Structural Biology, CNRS, Toulouse, France


