### Accession
PXD022184

### Title
The KdmB-EcoA-RpdA-SntB chromatin complex binds regulatory genes and coordinates fungal development with mycotoxin synthesis

### Description
Chromatin complexes control a vast number of epigenetic developmental processes. Filamentous fungi present an important clade of microbes with poor understanding of underlying epigenetic mechanisms. Here, we describe a chromatin binding complex in the fungus Aspergillus nidulans composing of a H3K4 histone demethylase KdmB, a cohesin acetyltransferase (EcoA), a histone deacetylase (RpdA) and a histone reader/E3 ligase protein (SntB). In vitro and in vivo evidence demonstrate that this KERS complex is assembled from the EcoA-KdmB and SntB-RpdA heterodimers. KdmB and SntB play opposing roles in regulating the cellular levels and stability of EcoA, as KdmB prevents SntB-mediated degradation of EcoA. The KERS complex is recruited to transcription initiation start sites at active core promoters exerting promoter-specific transcriptional effects. Interestingly, deletion of any one of the KERS subunits results in a common negative effect on morphogenesis and production of secondary metabolites, molecules important for niche securement in filamentous fungi. Consequently, the entire mycotoxin sterigmatocystin gene cluster is downregulated and asexual development is reduced in the four KERS mutants. The elucidation of the recruitment of epigenetic regulators to chromatin via the KERS complex provides the first mechanistic, chromatin-based understanding of how development is connected with small molecule synthesis in fungi.

### Sample Protocol
Tandem affitiny purification (TAP) method was performed as previously described in detail by Bayram et al. (2012). Trypsin digestion protocol for TAP was performed as described in the manufacturer’s ProteaseMAX protocol (Promega, V5111). Trypsin digested magnetic beads were discarded, peptides were precipitated and concentrated using speedy-vac and lastly subjected to Zip-Tip C18 (ZTC18S096) purification as described in manufacturer’s protocol. Purified peptides were solubilized in Q-Exactive loading buffer (2% acetonitrile, 0.5% TFA in dH2O) and sonicated for 2 min. Finally, samples were run in a Q Exactive™ Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap™ Mass Spectrometer to detect multiprotein complexes. To analyse multiprotein complexes, MS/MS data processing and identification was performed with Proteome Discoverer 1.3 (Thermo Scientific) and the Discoverer Daemon 1.3 (Thermo Scientific) proteomic software and organism-specific taxon-defined protein databases. AGB551 strain was used as a control to eliminate non-specific protein contaminants in TAP purifications.  HA and GFP purifications  Protein extracts and magnetic beads were incubated at 4°C for approximately 2 h on a rotator prior to trypsin digestion. At the end of the incubation, beads were collected and supernatant was discarded using DynaMag™-Magnet (ThermoFisher). 1 mL lysis buffer (1 mM DTT) without protease and phosphatase inhibitors was added and mixed by inverting. Beads were collected and supernatant was discarded. This step was repeated 3 additional times. Protein bound beads were directly used for trypsin digestion.

### Data Protocol
Protein samples were analysed using a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer coupled to a Dionex RSLCnano (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Peptides were separated using a 2% to 40% gradient of acetonitrile (A: 0.1 % FA, B: 80 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % FA) over 65 min at a flow rate of 250nl/min. The Q Exactive was operated in the data dependent mode, collecting a full MS scan from 300–1650m/z at 70K resolution and an AGC target of 1e6. The 10 most abundant ions per scan were selected for MS/MS at 17.5K resolution and AGC target of 1e5 and intensity threshold of 1K. Maximum fill times were 10msec and 100msec for MS and MS/MS scans respectively with a dynamic exclusion of 60sec. Samples were analysed using 25 NCE (normalized collisional energy) with 20% stepped energy. Peptide identification using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 was performed using the Sequest HT (SEQUEST HT algorithm, licence Thermo Scientific, registered trademark University of Washington, USA) and searched against the UniProtKB-SwissProt database (taxonomy: A. nidulans and A. flavus respectively). The following search parameters were used for protein identification: (1) peptide mass tolerance set to 10 ppm, (2) MS/MS mass tolerance set to 0.02 Da, (3) up to two missed cleavages were allowed, (4) carbamidomethylation set as a fixed modification.

### Publication Abstract
Chromatin complexes control a vast number of epigenetic developmental processes. Filamentous fungi present an important clade of microbes with poor understanding of underlying epigenetic mechanisms. Here, we describe a chromatin binding complex in the fungus Aspergillus nidulans composing of a H3K4 histone demethylase KdmB, a cohesin acetyltransferase (EcoA), a histone deacetylase (RpdA) and a histone reader/E3 ligase protein (SntB). In vitro and in vivo evidence demonstrate that this KERS complex is assembled from the EcoA-KdmB and SntB-RpdA heterodimers. KdmB and SntB play opposing roles in regulating the cellular levels and stability of EcoA, as KdmB prevents SntB-mediated degradation of EcoA. The KERS complex is recruited to transcription initiation start sites at active core promoters exerting promoter-specific transcriptional effects. Interestingly, deletion of any one of the KERS subunits results in a common negative effect on morphogenesis and production of secondary metabolites, molecules important for niche securement in filamentous fungi. Consequently, the entire mycotoxin sterigmatocystin gene cluster is downregulated and asexual development is reduced in the four KERS mutants. The elucidation of the recruitment of epigenetic regulators to chromatin via the KERS complex provides the first mechanistic, chromatin-based understanding of how development is connected with small molecule synthesis in fungi.

### Keywords
A. nidulans, Lc-msms

### Affiliations
Dr.
Department of Biology, Maynooth University, Maynooth, Co. Kildare, Ireland

### Submitter
Ozgur Bayram

### Lab Head
Dr Ozgur Bayram
Department of Biology, Maynooth University, Maynooth, Co. Kildare, Ireland


