### Accession
PXD003922

### Title
TIA1 interactome from mouse cortex

### Description
The purpose of this experiment was to characterize the network of proteins that interact with TIA1, and to investigate whether tau exerts control over TIA1 protein interactions, TIA1 was immunoprecipitated from cortical brain tissue of 10 month-old WT (C57BL/6J), tau-/- and TIA1-/- mice. The specificity of the TIA1 IP was verified by immunoblotting with anti-TIA1 antibody (Fig. 3A), and the resulting TIA1 proteome was examined by mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitation for Proteomics: 10 mo TIA1-/-, Tau-/-, and WT C57BL/6J (the genetic background) male mice were anesthetized in an isoflurane chamber and perfused with ice cold PBS.  The brains were then dissected to separate the hindbrain, hippocampus, and cerebral cortex.  Tissues were slowly frozen by submersion in methanol on dry ice and homogenized in RIPA lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, 150 mM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100, 0.1% SDS, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, pH 6.8) supplemented with protease (Roche Cat#04693159001) and phosphatase inhibitor (Roche Cat#04906837001) cocktails.  TIA-1 was immunoprecipitated from 2 mg cortex lysate using 10 μg goat anti-TIA-1 polyclonal antibody (Santa Cruz Biotech, Cat#sc-1751) immobilized on Pierce Direct IP columns according to manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Scientific, Cat#26148).  The TIA-1 IP eluates were then separated on a Novex 4-12% Bis-Tris polyacrylamide gel (Life Technologies, Cat#NP0323) and stained with Simply Blue Coomassie G-250 SafeStain (Life Technologies, Cat#LC6060). Whole gel lanes were then excised and shipped to the UMass Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics facility for analysis by LC-MS/MS.    Proteomics, In Gel Digestion:  Gel slices were cut into 1x1 mm pieces and placed in 1.5ml eppendorf tubes with 1ml of water for 30 min.  The water was removed and 50ul of 250 mM ammonium bicarbonate was added.  For reduction 20 μl of a 45 mM solution of 1, 4 dithiothreitol (DTT) was added and the samples were incubated at 50 C for 30 min.   The samples were cooled to room temperature and then for alkylation 20 μl of a 100 mM iodoacetamide solution was added and allowed to react for 30 min.  The gel slices were washed 2 X with 1 ml water aliquots.  The water was removed and 1ml of 50:50 (50mM Ammonium Bicarbonate: Acetonitrile) was placed in each tube and samples were incubated at room temperature for 1hr.  The solution was then removed and 200 ul of acetonitrile was added to each tube at which point the gels slices turned opaque white.  The acetonitrile was removed and gel slices were further dried in a Speed Vac.  Gel slices were rehydrated in 75 μl of 2ng/μl trypsin (Sigma) in 0.01% ProteaseMAX Surfactant (Promega): 50mM Ammonium Bicarbonate.  Additional bicarbonate buffer was added to ensure complete submersion of the gel slices. Samples were incubated at 37C for 21hrs. The supernatant of each sample was then removed and placed in a separate 1.5 ml eppendorf tube.  Gel slices were further dehydrated with 100 ul of 80:20 (Acetonitrile: 1% formic acid).  The extract was combined with the supernatants of each sample. The samples were then dried down in a Speed Vac. Samples were dissolved in 25 μl of 5% Acetonitrile in 0.1% trifluroacetic acid prior to injection on LC/MS/MS.   LC/MS/MS on Q Exactive:  A 3.0 µl aliquot was directly injected onto a custom packed 2cm x 100µm C18 Magic 5µm particle trap column.   Labeled peptides were then eluted and sprayed from a custom packed emitter (75µm x 25cm C18  Magic 3µm particle) with a linear gradient from 95% solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) to 35% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in Acetonitrile) in 90 minutes at a flow rate of 300 nanoliters per minute on a Waters Nano Acquity UPLC system.

### Data Protocol
Data dependent acquisitions were performed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) according to an experiment where full MS scans from 300-1750 m/z were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 followed by 10 MS/MS scans acquired under HCD fragmentation at a resolution of 17,500 with an isolation width of 1.6 Da.  Raw data files were processed with Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4) prior to searching with Mascot Server (version 2.5) against the Uniprot database.  Search parameters utilized were fully tryptic with 2 missed cleavages, parent mass tolerances of 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerances of 0.05 Da.  A fixed modification of carbamidomethyl cysteine and variable modifications of acetyl (protein N-term), pyro glutamic for N-term glutamine, oxidation of methionine were considered. Search results were loaded into the Scaffold Viewer (Proteome Software, Inc.).   Proteomic Analysis:  Quantitative proteomic analysis was performed using the total ion current (TIC) for proteins identified by LC-MS/MS normalized to the TIC level of TIA1 detected in each sample. Proteins identified in the TIA1-/- samples were considered to be nonspecific binding proteins to the IP antibody and excluded from all subsequent analyses. Gene lists of detected proteins were then uploaded into the Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery (DAVID) resource available via the NIH website.  3 different gene lists were uploaded: 1) the complete list of proteins detected to bind TIA1 in the WT mouse cortex; 2) the list of proteins whose association with TIA1 decreased by ≥ 2-fold in tau-/- compared to WT samples; and 3) the list of proteins whose association increased by ≥ 2-fold in tau-/- compared to WT samples.  Functional annotation terms with False Discovery Ratio (FDR) values < 0.05 were considered to be statistically significant.

### Publication Abstract
Dendritic mislocalization of microtubule associated protein tau is a hallmark of tauopathies, but the role of dendritic tau is unknown. We now report that tau interacts with the RNA-binding protein (RBP) TIA1 in brain tissue, and we present the brain-protein interactome network for TIA1. Analysis of the TIA1 interactome in brain tissue from wild-type (WT) and tau knockout mice demonstrates that tau is required for normal interactions of TIA1 with proteins linked to RNA metabolism, including ribosomal proteins and RBPs. Expression studies show that tau regulates the distribution of TIA1, and tau accelerates stress granule (SG) formation. Conversely, TIA1 knockdown or knockout inhibits tau misfolding and associated toxicity in cultured hippocampal neurons, while overexpressing TIA1 induces tau misfolding and stimulates neurodegeneration. Pharmacological interventions that prevent SG formation also inhibit tau pathophysiology. These studies suggest that the pathophysiology of tauopathy requires an intimate interaction with RNA-binding proteins.

### Keywords
Rna metabolism, Stress granule, Translational regulation, Map, Alzheimer's disease, Stress, Rna binding protein

### Affiliations
Boston University
Depts. of Pharmacology and Neurology, Boston University School of Medicine

### Submitter
Benjamin Wolozin

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin Wolozin
Depts. of Pharmacology and Neurology, Boston University School of Medicine


