### Accession
PXD033251

### Title
Peptidome in Chouguiyu at different fermentation time

### Description
Peptidome in Chouguiyu after fermentation for 0,4,and 8d using Easy-nLC 1200 UPLC-Q Exactive HF-X tandem mass.

### Sample Protocol
After being peeled, Chouguiyu (av. 50 g) was smashed and homogenized with 200 mL hydrochloric acid (0.01 mol/L) for 30 min and was centrifuged at 8000 r/min and 4 °C for 20 min. The supernatant was added with triploid ethanol for 20 min at 4 °C, and then was centrifuged to remove protein. After desalination, the supernatant was lyophilized and stored at -80 °C. The lyophilized samples (4 mg) were dissolved by 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and then were desalted with the Oasis HLB column (Waters, Milford, MA, USA). The eluents were dissolved by 50% acetonitrile with 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid and desalted with the Oasis MCX column (Waters, Milford, MA, USA). After being freeze-dried, the samples were dissolved for 10 μg/μL by 2% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid. The samples (100 μL) were separated by the Easy-nLC 1200 UPLC system (Thermo, Waltham, MA, USA) coupled with a Thermo C-18 column (75 μm×250 mm, Thermo, Waltham, MA, USA). Solvent A (2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) and solvent B (80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) were used as eluents to separate the samples via a 90 min gradient elution program which was 0-53 min, 5%B; 53-65 min, 23%B; 65-73 min, 29%B; 73-74 min, 38%B; 74-75 min, 48%B; 75-90 min, 100% B with a flow rate of 0.30 μL/min onto the Thermo C-18 column (75 μm×250 mm, Thermo, Waltham, MA,USA). The Q Exactive HF-X tandem mass spectrometer (Thermo, Waltham, MA, USA) was used to identify the whole fragment ion peak of peptides. The instrument was operated in a single charge mode ([M+H]+) at the range of 350-1500 (m/z). The acquisition mode was data-dependent acquisition, and the 20 parent ions with the strongest signal were chosen for secondary fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
The peptide sequences were further identified with the protein sequences of Siniperca chuatsi using Proteome DiscovererTM v2.4 (Thermo, Waltham, MA, USA). False discovery rate <0.01, unique peptide ≥1, and Sequest HT >0 were used as the criteria to confirm the credible peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Angiotensin I converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitory peptides from fermented foods exhibit great potential to alleviate hypertension. In this study, the peptide extract from <i>Chouguiyu</i> exhibited a good inhibition effect on ACE, and the inhibition rate was significantly enhanced after fermentation for 8 days. The ACE inhibitory peptides were further identified, followed by their inhibition and formation mechanisms using microbiome technology and molecular docking. A total of 356 ACE inhibitory peptides were predicted using <i>in silico</i>, and most ACE inhibitory peptides increased after fermentation. These peptides could be hydrolyzed from 94 kinds of precursor proteins, mainly including muscle-type creatine kinase, nebulin, and troponin I. P1 (VEIINARA), P2 (FAVMVKG), P4 (EITWSDDKK), P7 (DFDDIQK), P8 (IGDDPKF), P9 (INDDPKIL), and P10 (GVDNPGHPFI) were selected as the core ACE inhibitory peptides according to their abundance and docking energy. The salt bridge and conventional hydrogen bond connecting unsaturated oxygen atoms in the peptides contributed most to the ACE inhibition. The cleavage proteases from the microbial genera in <i>Chouguiyu</i> for preparing these 7 core ACE inhibitory peptides were further analyzed by hydrolysis prediction and Pearson's correlation. The correlation network showed that P7, P8, and P9 were mainly produced by the proteases from LAB including <i>Lactococcus, Enterococcus, Vagococcus, Peptostreptococcus</i>, and <i>Streptococcus</i>, while P1, P2, P4, and P10 were mainly Produced by <i>Aeromonas, Bacillus, Escherichia</i>, and <i>Psychrobacter</i>. This study is helpful in isolating the proteases and microbial strains to directionally produce the responding ACE inhibitory peptides.

### Keywords
Peptides, Lc-ms/ms, Chouguiyu

### Affiliations
Key Laboratory of Aquatic Product Processing, Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, National R&D Center for Aquatic Product Processing, South China Sea Fisheries Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences, Guangzhou 510300, China
South China Sea Fisheries Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences

### Submitter
Chunsheng Li

### Lab Head
Dr Chunsheng Li
Key Laboratory of Aquatic Product Processing, Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, National R&D Center for Aquatic Product Processing, South China Sea Fisheries Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences, Guangzhou 510300, China


