### Accession
PXD005777

### Title
Quantitative proteome analysis of plasma microparticles for characterization of HCV-induced hepatic cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma

### Description
A quantitative label-free proteome analysis was performed using plasma samples from 22 hepatitis-C virus (HCV)-induced liver cirrhosis patients, 16 HCV-positive hepatocellular carcinoma patients with underlying cirrhosis and 18 healthy controls. Plasma microparticles (PMPS) were isolated using ultracentrifugation and analyzed via label-free LC-MS/MS. A quantitative label-free proteome analysis was performed using plasma samples from 22 hepatitis-C virus (HCV)-induced liver cirrhosis patients, 16 HCV-positive hepatocellular carcinoma patients with underlying cirrhosis and 18 healthy controls. Plasma microparticles (PMPS) were isolated using ultracentrifugation and analyzed via label-free LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Nine mL blood were withdrawn from all participants and subsequently centrifuged twice (1,000×g, 4°C for 30 min) resulting in end volume of 5 mL plasma. PMPs were isolated via ultracentrifugation (200,000×g, 4°C for 1 hour) using a Sorvall WX100 Ultracentrifuge and a T-890 fixed angle rotor (ThermoFisher Scientific). The resulting pellet was washed twice with 5 mL PBS using the same centrifugation conditions. The PMPs pellet was resuspended in 0.1% RapiGest SF (Waters) and the protein concentration was determined using the BCA assay (ThermoFisher Scientific). For tryptic digestion, 4 µg of protein was used. The proteins were reduced with 5 mM DTT at 60°C for 30 min, alkylated for 30 min at ambient temperature in the dark with 15 mM Iodoacetamide and subsequently digested overnight at 37°C with 0.2 µg trypsin (SERVA Electrophoresis, Heidelberg, Germany). The enzymatic digestion was stopped by acidification with 0.5% TFA for 30 min at 37 °C and precipitated RapiGest was removed by centrifugation. The samples were vacuum dried and subsequently dissolved in 0.1% TFA.

### Data Protocol
The RPLC−MS/MS analysis was performed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled online to an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). 350 ng peptides were injected in a volume of 15µL and pre-concentrated with 0.1% TFA on a trap column for 7 min (Acclaim PepMap 100, 100 μm × 2 cm, C18, 5 μm, 100 Å; flow rate 30 μL/min). Subsequently, the peptides were separated on the analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, 75 μm × 50 cm, nano Viper, C18, 2 μm, 100 Å) by a gradient from 5% to 40% solvent B over 98 min (solvent A: 0.1% FA, solvent B: 0.1% FA, 84% acetonitrile; flow rate 400 nL/min; column oven temperature 60 °C). The instrument was operated in a data-dependent mode. Full scan mass spectra were acquired in profile mode at a resolution of 60,000 at 400 m/z in the Orbitrap analyzer and within a mass range of 350-2000 m/z. The 20 most abundant precursors were selected for MS/MS analysis. The tandem mass spectra were measured in the linear ion trap after peptide fragmentation by collision-induced dissociation (CID). The precursor isolation width was 1.0 m/z. Charge state screening was enabled and only precursors of charge states +2, +3 and +4 were fragmented with normalized collision energy of 35.0%. The mass range for MS/MS spectra was 0-2000 m/z and the scan mode was centroid. Dynamic exclusion parameters were used: Exclusion list size was 500, exclusion duration was 30 s and the mass width relative to excluded mass was ± 10 ppm. The time for one duty cycle was 3.6 s if 20 MS/MS spectra per full scan were acquired. Peptide identification was performed using Proteome Discoverer Software (ver. 1.4.1.14, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA). The mass spectra were searched against UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database (Uniprot/Swissprot-Release 2015_11; 549,832 entries; 20,194 human entries) using the Mascot search engine (version 2.5, Matrix Science Ltd, London, UK). Search parameters were as follow: enzyme: trypsin; maximum missed cleavage sites: 1; taxonomy: Homo sapiens; mass tolerance: 5 ppm for precursor and 0.4 Da for fragment ions; dynamic modification: oxidation (M); static modification: carbamidomethyl (C). The percolator function implemented in proteome discoverer was used to estimate peptide confidence and only peptides which passed a false discovery rate < 1% (q-value < 0.01) were considered for analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hepatitis c virus, Plasma microparticles, Hepatocellular carcinoma, Liver cirrhosis, Label-free proteomics

### Affiliations
Clinical Proteomics
Clinical Proteomics, Medizinisches Proteom-Center, Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Universitätsstraße 150, 44801, Bochum,Germany

### Submitter
Thilo Bracht

### Lab Head
Dr Barbara Sitek
Clinical Proteomics, Medizinisches Proteom-Center, Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Universitätsstraße 150, 44801, Bochum,Germany


