### Accession
PXD015139

### Title
Unbalanced roles of fungal aggressiveness and host genetic background in the establishment of the Fusarium head blight in bread wheat

### Description
Fungal effectors are key determinants of disease development, promoting pathogen growth and spreading in plant tissues. In the wheat/Fusarium graminearum (Fg) interaction determining the Fusarium Head Blight disease (FHB), the molecular bases of Fg aggressiveness remain widely unknown. The aim of this work is to provide a better understanding of Fusarium graminearum aggressiveness determinism during its interaction with bread wheat. Phenotyping in controlled conditions of three fungal strains was carried out on three wheat cultivars contrasted by their susceptibility to FHB. Qualitative and quantitative characterizations of the three strain's whole proteomes expressed in planta have been performed with special interest on effectors and proteins coded by Fg aggressiveness-related genes. Considering all fusaried wheat samples, this experimentation identified 615 unique Fg proteins, including 583 identified in all samples. Furthermore,  71 putative Fg effectors were found in the identified proteins. Among all the fungal proteins quantified, nearly 76% showed significant abundance differences between the Fg strains. Two-way ANOVA were computed to evaluate the contribution of the "Strain" and "Cultivar" factors on the Fg protein abundances. Abundances that were deemed significant to each factor enabled a categorization of the proteins according to the factor(s) that drive(s) the abundance differences. This included: (i) Fg proteins whose abundance differences were specifically explained by the genetic background of the strain (Strain factor, Strain_effect proteins), (ii) Fg proteins whose abundance differences were only explained by the genetic background of the host plant (Cultivar factor, Cultivar_effect proteins), (iii) Fg proteins whose abundance differences were explained by both factors (Strain+Cultivar proteins), and (iv) Fg proteins whose abundance differences observed between strains were dependent on the host cultivar (Strain×Cultivar proteins). Considering each factor individually, a total of 139 Strain_effect proteins, 82 Cultivar_effect proteins, 117 Strain+Cultivar proteins and 2 Strain×Cultivar proteins were identified.

### Sample Protocol
For each inoculated area of the plants collected at 72hpi, a denaturing protein extraction using the TCA/acetone procedure was achieved as described in Bonhomme et al. (2012). Protein solubilization was performed in ZUT buffer (6M urea; 2M thiourea; 100mM ammonium bicarbonate; 1% Halt(TM) Protease Inhibitor Cocktail 100X (ThermoFisher Scientific 78429); 0.1% ProteaseMAX(TM) Surfactant (Promega V2071)) by following the ratio 10?L/1mg dry matter. Protein digestion were performed as described in Fabre et al. (2019). Tandem mass spectrometry analyses were achieved using a nanoESI Q Exactive(TM) HF-X Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap(TM) Mass Spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific 0726042) coupled with an Ultimate 3000 HPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific). HPLC gradients and data acquisition parameters were set as described in Fabre et al. (2019).

### Data Protocol
Database searches were performed using X!Tandem (http://www.thegpm.org/TANDEM/; 2010.01.01.4) specifying one possible miscleavage. Cys carboxyamidomethylation and Met oxidation were set as static and variable modification, respectively. Precursor mass and fragment mass tolerance were 10 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. Identifications were performed using a concatenated file including a contaminant database (trypsin, keratins, etc), the MDC_Fg1 (13166 entries, 01/2019), MDC_Fg13 (13297 entries, 01/2019) and MDC_FgU1 (13014 entries, 01/2019) databases obtained from in-lab re-sequencing of each Fg strain (Alouane et al., 2018). To prevent peptides derived from plant proteins from being assigned to fungal proteins a wheat database (IWGSC, v1.0 269472 entries, 04/2017) were also used for the identification. Identified proteins were parsed and grouped using the X!TandemPipeline v0.2.35 c++ (Langella et al., 2017). Data filtering was achieved according to a peptide E-value <0.05. Proteins were reported when they displayed at least 2 different peptides in the same sample and when the protein E-value <0.0001. The FDR at the peptide level assessed from searches against reversed amino acid sequences for each protein was smaller than 0.8×10-6. Protein and gene ontology annotations of the identified Fg proteins were performed following the same methodology described in Fabre et al., (2019). Secretion features, subcellular localization predictions and functional annotations of identified proteins were conducted as described in Fabre et al., (2019). Relative quantification of peptides was achieved using the MassChroQ software (Valot et al., 2011) by extracting ion chromatograms as described in Bonhomme et al. (2012). The normalization was performed by dividing ratios by the total peptide abundance value in each LC-MS/MS run. Subsequent statistical analyses were performed on log10-transformed normalized data after removing wheat proteins acquisition.

### Publication Abstract
Fusarium head blight (FHB), caused mainly by <i>Fusarium graminearum</i>, is the foremost destructive disease of cereals worldwide. Effector-like molecules produced by <i>F. graminearum</i> play key roles in the infection process and are assumed to be one of the essential components of the pathogen's aggressiveness. However, their nature and role in the disease are still largely misunderstood. As a mean to provide relevant information about the molecular determinism of <i>F. graminearum</i> aggressiveness, we surveyed three <i>F. graminearum</i> strains on three wheat cultivars contrasted by their susceptibility to FHB. <i>F. graminearum</i> strains revealed large differences in aggressiveness which were mostly unchanged when facing hosts of contrasted susceptibility, suggesting that their behavior rely on intrinsic determinants. Surveying the fungal mass progress and the mycotoxin production rate in the spikes did not evidence any simple relationship with aggressiveness differences, while clues were found through a qualitative and quantitative characterization of the three strain proteomes established <i>in planta</i> especially with regards to early synthesized putative effectors. Independently of the wheat cultivar, the three <i>F. graminearum</i> strains produced systematically the same protein set during the infection but substantial differences in their abundance enabled the categorization of fungal aggressiveness. Overall, our findings show that the contrasts in <i>F. graminearum</i> aggressiveness were not based on the existence of strain-specific molecules but rather on the ability of the strain to ensure their sufficient accumulation. Protein abundance variance was mostly driven by the strain genetics and part was also influenced by the host cultivar but strain by cultivar interactions were marginally detected, depicting that strain-specific protein accumulations did not depend on the host cultivar. All these data provide new knowledge on fungal aggressiveness determinants and provide a resourceful repertoire of candidate effector proteins to guide further research.

### Keywords
Proteins, Fusarium graminearum, Fungal aggressiveness, Wheat, Fusarium head blight

### Affiliations
UMR UCA/INRA 1095
UMR 1095 INRA / UCA Génétique, Diversité et Ecophysiologie des Céréales, Clermont-Ferrand, France

### Submitter
Ludovic Bonhomme

### Lab Head
Dr Thierry Langin
UMR 1095 INRA / UCA Génétique, Diversité et Ecophysiologie des Céréales, Clermont-Ferrand, France


