### Accession
PXD031361

### Title
The polyamine-hypusine circuit controls an oncogenic translational program necessary for MYC-driven lymphomagenesis

### Description
MYC oncogenes are activated in broad spectrum of human malignancies and transcriptionally reprogram the genome to drive cancer cell growth. Given this it is unclear if targeting a single effector will have a therapeutic benefit. MYC activates the polyaminehypusine circuit, which post-translationally modifies the translation factor eIF5A. The hypusine axis has been proposed to suppress tumorigenesis. Here we report essential roles for hypusinated eIF5A in the development and maintenance of Myc-driven lymphoma, where loss of eIF5A hypusination abolishes malignant transformation.  Mechanistically, integrating RNA-seq, Ribo-seq and proteomic analyses revealed that efficient translation of select targets is dependent upon eIF5A hypusination, including key regulators of G1 to S phase cell cycle progression. Notably, this circuit controls Myc’s proliferative response at several levels, and it is activated across multiple tumor types.  These findings suggest the hypusine circuit as a therapeutic target for a broad spectrum of malignancies.

### Sample Protocol
For time-course TMT proteomics analysis, Eμ-Myc;Rosa26-rtTA2 lymphoma cells that inducibly express shRNAs targeting Renilla, Eif5a or Dhps were treated with Dox overnight and GFP+ cells were isolated by flow cytometry. Cells were then incubated for total 72, 96 or 120 hr in the presence of Dox, washed with PBS and harvested. Cell pellets were then processed for 10 plex TMT labeling prior to mass spectrometry. sh-Ren cells without Dox treatment (0 hr) were also included as a control in the 10-plex.  Cells were lysed in denaturing buffer containing 8M urea, 20 mM HEPES (pH 8), 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate and 1 mM β-glycerophosphate. A Bradford assay was carried out to determine the protein concentration. The proteins were reduced with 4.5 mM dithiothreitol and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide. Trypsin digestion was carried out at room temperature overnight, and tryptic peptides were then acidified with 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and desalted with C18 Sep-Pak cartridges according to the manufacturer’s procedure.  TMT Labeling:  An aliquot (100 micrograms) of tryptic peptide digest from each sample was labeled with TMT10-plex reagent using the following experimental design where the reporter ion channels are listed in parentheses: Ren No-Dox (126), Ren Dox-072hr (127N), Ren Dox-096hr (127C), Ren Dox-120hr (128N), Eif5a Dox-072hr (128C), Eif5a Dox-096hr (129N), Eif5a Dox-120hr (129C), Dhps Dox-072hr (130N), Dhps Dox-096hr (130C), Dhps Dox-120hr (131)  The label incorporation and correct label assignment were verified by LC-MS/MS; spectral counts were used to verify that at least 98% of the identified peptides were TMT labeled for each channel. The 10 samples were pooled and lyophilized.   Basic pH Reversed Phase Peptide Fractionation:  After lyophilization, the peptides were re-dissolved in 250 microliters of aqueous 20 mM Ammonium Formate, (pH 10.0), which was used as the bRPLC A solvent. The basic pH reversed phase separation was performed on a 4.6 mm ID x 100 mm long column packed with BEH C18 resin, 3.5 µm particle size, 130 Å pore size. (XBridge, Waters) The peptides were eluted as follows: 5% B (10% aqueous 5 mM Ammonium Formate, 90% acetonitrile, pH 10.0) for 10 minutes, 5% - 15% B in 5 minutes, 15-40% B in 47 minutes, 40-100% B in 5 minutes and 100% B held for 10 minutes, followed by re-equilibration at 5% B. The flow rate was 0.6 ml/min, and 24 concatenated fractions were collected. Peptide fractions were dried by vacuum centrifugation (Speedvac, Thermo).   LC-MS/MS:  A nanoflow ultra high performance liquid chromatograph interfaced with an electrospray bench top orbitrap mass spectrometer (RSLCnano and Q-Exactive Plus, Thermo, San Jose, CA) were used for tandem mass spectrometry peptide sequencing experiments.  The sample was first loaded onto a pre-column (2 cm ID x 100 µm length packed with C18 reversed-phase resin, 5 µm particle size, 100 Å  pore size (C18 PepMap100, Thermo) and washed for 8 minutes with aqueous 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid (LC-MS/MS solvent A).  The trapped peptides were separated by a C18 reversed phase analytical column 75 µm ID x 25 cm, 2 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size (C18 PepMap100, Thermo).  The 120-minute gradient was programmed as: 95% solvent A (aqueous 2% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid) for 8 minutes, solvent B (aqueous 90% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid) from 5% to 38.5% in 90 minutes, then solvent B from 50% to 90% B in 7 minutes and held at 90% for 5 minutes, followed by solvent B from 90% to 5% in 1 minute and re-equilibration for 10 minutes.  The flow rate on analytical column was 300 nl/min. Twenty tandem mass spectra were collected in a data-dependent manner following each survey scan. The resolution settings were 60,000 and 45,000 for MS1 and MS/MS, respectively. The isolation window was 0.8 Th with 0.2 offset.  Proteomics sample processing and data acquisition were performed by Victoria Izumi, MS.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant  (version 1.5.2.8) was used to quantify the TMT reporter ion intensities. Database searches were performed using trypsin with up to 2 missed cleavages, modifications included TMT labeling of lysines and peptide N-termini, carbamidomethylation of cysteine, and oxidation of methionine.  Similar parameters were used for Mascot database searches to support data upload.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Translation, Eif5a, Myc, Dhps, Tumorigenesis, Polyamine-hypusine, Lymphoma

### Affiliations
Moffitt Cancer Center
Moffitt Cancer Center Tampa, FL, USA

### Submitter
John Koomen

### Lab Head
Dr John Cleveland
Moffitt Cancer Center Tampa, FL, USA


