### Accession
PXD040220

### Title
HA-GABARAPL1 immunoprecipitation with siRNA-mediated NPM1 depletion

### Description
The nucleolar scaffold protein NPM1 acts as a multifunctional regulator of cellular homeostasis, genome integrity, and stress response. We and others show that NPM1 is also involved in regulation of the autophagic pathway. As NPM1 binds to members of the GABARAP protein family, important for autophagy, we anticipate that this interaction is important for the role of NPM1 in autophagy. In order to identify NPM1-dependent GABARAPL1 interactors we performed HA-GABARAPL1 immunoprecipitation with siRNA-mediated NPM1 depletion.

### Sample Protocol
HEK cells expressing HA-GABARAPL1 with NPM1 or Contr knockdown or non-transfected MOCK control cells were treated for 2 h with 200 nM Bafilomycin A before scraping in HA-IP lysis buffer (20 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5 % Triton, 10 % Glycerol, 1x PhosStop (Roche), 1 mM PMSF, 2 µg/ml Aprotinin, 2 µg/ml Leupeptin, 1 µg/ml Pepstatin A, 28U/µl Benzonase (Millipore)). All following steps were performed at 4 °C. The lysate was rotated for 1 h, homogenized with an insulin needle and debris was separated by centrifugation at 12000x g for 15 min. For each sample 1 mg of cell lysate was incubated overnight with 15 µl Pierce™ Anti-HA Magnetic Beads (Thermo) on a rotating wheel. On the next day, the beads were washed three times with HA-IP buffer and one time with 50 mM Tris before elution with 2% SDC in 50 mM Tris (pH8.5) for 5 min at 95°C. For mass spectrometry sample preparation, the eluted proteins were reduced and alkylated with the addition of 1 mM TECEP and 4 mM chloroacetamide for 5 min at 95 °C. After the dilution of the samples to 1 % SDC in 50 nM Tris (pH 8.5), 500 µg Trypsin and 500 µg LysC were added overnight at 37 °C to digest the sample. The digestion was stopped with the addition of 0.25% TFA and peptides were cleaned-up using styrenedivinyl benzene reverse phase sulfonate (SDB-RPS) polymer sorbent Solid phase extraction StageTips according to Kulak et al. (2014). Peptides were dried in a vacuum concentrator and resuspended in 2% ACN, 0.1% TFA for LC-MS analysis. IPs were performed in triplicates and processed in parallel.  Tryptic peptides of the immunoprecipitations were analyzed on a Q Exactive HF coupled to an easy nLC 1200 (ThermoFisher Scientific) using a 35 cm long, 75µm ID fused-silica column packed in house with 1.9 µm C18 particles (Reprosil pur, Dr. Maisch), and kept at 50°C using an integrated column oven (Sonation). Peptides were eluted by a non-linear gradient from 4-28% acetonitrile over 60 minutes and directly sprayed into the mass-spectrometer equipped with a nanoFlex ion source (ThermoFisher Scientific). Full scan MS spectra (350-1650 m/z) were acquired in Profile mode at a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 200, a maximum injection time of 20 ms and an AGC target value of 3 x 106 charges. Up to 10 most intense peptides per full scan were isolated using a 1.4 Th window and fragmented using higher energy collisional dissociation (normalized collision energy of 27). MS/MS spectra were acquired in centroid mode with a resolution of 30,000, a maximum injection time of 54 ms and an AGC target value of 1 x 105. Single charged ions, ions with a charge state above 5 and ions with unassigned charge states were not considered for fragmentation and dynamic exclusion was set to 20s.

### Data Protocol
MS raw data processing of the immunoprecipitations was performed with MaxQuant (v 1.6.17.0) and its in-build label-free quantification algorithm MaxLFQ applying default parameters (Tyanova, Temu, & Cox, 2016). Acquired spectra were searched against the human reference proteome (Taxonomy ID 9606) downloaded from UniProt (17-April-2022; “One Sequence Per Gene”, 20509 sequences) and a collection of common contaminants (244 entries) using the Andromeda search engine integrated in MaxQuant (Cox et al., 2011). Identifications were filtered to obtain false discovery rates (FDR) below 1% for both peptide spectrum matches (PSM; minimum length of 7 amino acids) and proteins using a target-decoy strategy (Elias & Gygi, 2007).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Homo sapiens (human), Cell culture, Lc-msms

### Affiliations
Institute of Biochemistry II    
University Hospital Building 75    
Theodor-Stern-Kai 7    
60590 Frankfurt (Main)

Institute of Biochemistry II University Hospital Building 75 Theodor-Stern-Kai 7 60590 Frankfurt (Main)

### Submitter
Stefan Müller

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan Müller
Institute of Biochemistry II University Hospital Building 75 Theodor-Stern-Kai 7 60590 Frankfurt (Main)


