### Accession
PXD034452

### Title
Chronic exercise remodels the lysine acetylome in the mouse hippocampus

### Description
The hippocampal proteins obtained from both exercised (moderate-intensity running for 6 weeks) and sedentary mice were separately analyzed for Liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) identification with three replications. Acetylome data identified 3876 acetyl sites and 1764 acetylated proteins, which constituted 31% of the whole hippocampal proteome (totally 5725 proteins identified). In addition, 1305 proteins with 2769 acetyl sites were quantified. When defining the cutoffs for the fold change in abundance of 1.5 and P value < 0.05, 272 acetyl sites on 252 proteins were differentially regulated between exercise and control mice. Analysis of the subcellular localization showed that these differentially acetylated proteins (DAPs) exert different functions in multiple compartments, including the cytoplasm, mitochondria, nucleus and plasma membrane. The 19 up-regulated acetylated proteins mainly resided in mitochondria, while the 253 down-regulated DAPs were most abundant in cytoplasm, and the annotation of molecular functions were significantly enriched in catalytic activity and binding, respectively. Gene Ontology (GO) analysis showed that DAPs were primarily correlated with cytoskeleton, myelin sheath and axons in the cellular component category; and actin cytoskeleton organization, regulation of protein polymerization or depolymerization, and hexose/glucose metabolic process were significantly enriched in the biological process category. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) analysis showed that DAPs were involved in central carbon metabolism, neurodegeneration diseases, synapses, and various signaling pathways. Among them, chronic exercise induced significant alterations in phototransduction, carbon-related metabolism (carbohydrate digestion and absorption, glycolysis/gluconeogenesis, fructose and mannose metabolism, and pyruvate metabolism) and Hippo signaling pathway. Meanwhile, 21 proteins were significantly expressed, which were enriched in the pathway of complement and coagulation cascades.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction, trypsin digestion and acetylated peptide enrichment Hippocampi from six Ex mice and six Con mice were grinded into powder. Protein was extracted by sonicating in lysis buffer [8 M urea, 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, 3 μM trichostatin, 50 mM nicotinamide] and quantified by BCA assay. Then equal amount of protein from each sample was reduced, alkylated, and normalized to the same concentration with 100 mM TEAB. Finally, the resulting samples were fully digested with trypsin for two times, and the peptides were further desalted and vacuum-dried. For acetylome, acetylated peptides enrichment was necessary by incubating with anti-acetyllysine antibody-conjugated agarose beads and eluting for tryptic peptides. LC–MS/MS analysis This was performed at PTM Biolab (Hangzhou, China). Desalted peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid and loaded onto a reversed-phase analytical column (25-cm length, 75/100 μm i.d.). For acetylome, peptides were separated with a gradient from 6% to 22% solvent B over 42 min, 22% to 30% in 12 min and climbing to 80% in 4 min then holding at 80% for the last 4 min. For proteome, peptides were separated with a gradient from 6% to 24% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) over 70 min, 24% to 35% in 12 min and climbing to 80% in 4 min then holding at 80% for the last 4 min. The constant flow rate was all set at 450 nL/min on a nanoElute UHPLC system (Bruker Daltonics). Then the peptides were subject to capillary source followed by the timsTOF Pro (Bruker Daltonics) mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using MaxQuant search engine and searched against the SwissProt database. A false discovery rate (FDR) was adjusted to < 1%. Motifs analysis of acetyl sites using iceLogo. Secondary structure distribution and surface accessibility were predicted by NetSurfP v1.0 software. The subcellular distribution was predicted with Wolfpsort (https://wolfpsort.hgc.jp/). Functional enrichment analysis was performed with GO and KEGG. GO annotation is a major bioinformatics initiative to unify the representation of gene and gene product attributes across all species, and includes cell compositions, biological processes, and molecular functions. For each category, a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test was employed to test the enrichment and a corrected p-value < 0.05 is considered significant. KEGG is used for pathway analysis, mainly including: Metabolism, Genetic Information Processing, Environmental Information Processing, Cellular Processes, Rat Diseases, Drug development. Protein- protein interaction network was constructed using STRING database (version 11.0). All interactions with high confidence (confidence score > 0.7) were selected and subsequently visualized in R package “networkD3”. Using the MCODE plug-in, we identified the three most highly interconnected clusters.

### Publication Abstract
Physical exercise benefits hippocampal function through various molecular mechanisms. Protein acetylation, a conserved and widespread post-translational modification, is involved in the synaptic plasticity and memory. However, whether exercise can change global acetylation and the role of acetylated proteins in the hippocampus have remained largely unknown. Herein, using healthy adult mice running for 6 weeks as exercise model and sedentary mice as control, we analyzed the hippocampal lysine acetylome and proteome by Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. As a result, we profiled the lysine acetylation landscape for the hippocampus and identified 3,876 acetyl sites and 1,764 acetylated proteins. A total of 272 acetyl sites on 252 proteins were differentially regulated by chronic exercise, among which 18.58% acetylated proteins were annotated in mitochondria. These proteins were dominantly deacetylated and mainly associated with carbon-related metabolism, the Hippo signaling pathway, ribosomes, and protein processing. Meanwhile, 21 proteins were significantly expressed and enriched in the pathway of complement and coagulation cascades. Our findings provide a new avenue for understanding the molecular mechanisms underlying the benefits of exercise for hippocampal function and can contribute to the promotion of public health.

### Keywords
Exercise; post-translational modification; acetylation; hippocampus; metabolism

### Affiliations
Beijing Municipal Key Laboratory of Child Development and Nutriomics, Capital Institute of Pediatrics, Beijing, China
Capital Institute of Pediatrics, Beijing, China

### Submitter
Shan Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Ping Qian
Beijing Municipal Key Laboratory of Child Development and Nutriomics, Capital Institute of Pediatrics, Beijing, China


