### Accession
PXD038847

### Title
Adaptation of Lacticaseibacillus rhamnosus CM MSU 529 to aerobic and respiratory growth: a proteomic approach

### Description
Lacticaseibacillus rhamnosus CM MSU 529 is the O2-tolerant facultative homofermentative lactic acid bacteria realizing respiratory metabolism when grown in a supplemented with hemin and vitamin K2 nutrient medium. This study describes the effect of aerobic and respiratory conditions on biomass and proteome of strain CM MSU 529 grown in a batch culture. Aeration caused the induction of the biosynthesis of 43 proteins, while 14 proteins were down-regulated as detected by label-free LC-MS/MS. Up-regulated proteins are involved in oxygen consumption (Pox, LctO, pyridoxine 5'-phosphate oxidase), xylulose-5-phosphate conversion (Xfp), pyruvate metabolism (PdhD, AlsS, AlsD), reactive oxygen species (ROS) elimination (Tpx, TrxA, Npx), general stress response (GroES, PfpI, universal stress protein, YqiG), antioxidant production (CysK, DkgA), pyrimidine metabolism (CarA, CarB, PyrE, PyrC, PyrB, PyrR), oligopeptide transport and metabolism (OppA, PepO), maturation and stability of ribosomal subunits (RbfA, VicX). Down-regulated proteins participate in ROS defense (AhpC), citrate and pyruvate consumption (CitE, PflB), oxaloacetate production (AvtA), arginine synthesis (ArgG), amino acid transport (GlnQ), and deoxy-nucleoside biosynthesis (RtpR). Overproduction of purine biosynthesis enzyme (PurE) distinguished cells grown under respiratory conditions from cells grown under aerobiosis. The data obtained shed light on mechanisms providing O2-tolerance and adaptation to aerobic/respiratory conditions in strain CM MSU 529.

### Sample Protocol
L. rhamnosus used in the study was isolated from a feces sample of a 4-months-old infant.  Strain CM MSU 529 was grown in a MRS medium in a batch culture under static, aerobic, and respiratory conditions.  Cells were harvested at the late exponential phase of growth by centrifugation and washed.  Acetone dried cells were lysed by incubation in 2% sodium deoxycholate / 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate.  Cysteine-containing peptides were alkylated with tris(2-caboxyethyl)phosphine and iodoacetamide.  The obtained samples were digested with mass spectrometry grade trypsin.  Afterwards deoxycholate was precipitated by adding trifluoroacetic acid and centrifugation.  Peptide mixers were desalted and concentrated using C18-SPE microspin columns.  The elutes were analyzed by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry.  The separating gradient was used formic acid and acetonitrile in water.   The data-dependent data acquisition mode gave MS and MSMS spectra. These data were analyzed with different software.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data were processed using Progenesis QI for Proteomics (version 2.0) and the uniprot sequence data file (FASTA) of Lactobacillus rhamnosus LRHMDP2. The obtained msf-files were combined into a summary table using Scaffold (version 5.0.1).  Peptide identification parameters were as follows: Trypsin digestion with a maximum of 2 missed cleavage sites; peptide length of 7 - 144 amino acids; maximum delta Cn - 0.05; precursor mass tolerance and fragment mass tolerance were ±10 ppm and ±0. 02 Da; spectra matching requirements were set to 1 for the mass of b and y ions; carbamidomethylcysteine (+57.021 Da) was set as a static modification; dynamic modifications with oxidation (+15.995 Da) of Met residues and deamidation (+0.984 Da) of Asn and Gln residues. The FDR for proteins and peptides was set at 0.01 (1%), and the minimum peptide number was 1 for the identified proteins. Furthermore, label-free quantification (LFQ) was performed using MaxQuant 2.0.1.0 and SaveQuant v2.3.5. was performed.  The MaxQuant output files were also further analyzed with Perseus software (version 1.5.2.6) using a two-tailed Student's t-test to assess the significance of differences. Proteins with a score > 75, fold changes ≥ ±1.5 (log2 fold change ≥ 0.6 or ≤ -0.6) with p and q values ≤ 0.05 were considered differentially expressed in response to aeration (compared with static growth) and respiratory conditions (compared with aerobic conditions). All experiments were performed in triplicate. Identified proteins were clustered based on their biological functions using the Clusters of Orthologous Groups of Proteins (COGs) database.

### Publication Abstract
The study describes the effect of aerobic conditions on the proteome of homofermentative lactic acid bacterium <i>Lacticaseibacillus rhamnosus</i> CM MSU 529 grown in a batch culture. Aeration caused the induction of the biosynthesis of 43 proteins, while 14 proteins were downregulated as detected by label-free LC-MS/MS. Upregulated proteins are involved in oxygen consumption (Pox, LctO, pyridoxine 5'-phosphate oxidase), xylulose 5-phosphate conversion (Xfp), pyruvate metabolism (PdhD, AlsS, AlsD), reactive oxygen species (ROS) elimination (Tpx, TrxA, Npr), general stress response (GroES, PfpI, universal stress protein, YqiG), antioxidant production (CysK, DkgA), pyrimidine metabolism (CarA, CarB, PyrE, PyrC, PyrB, PyrR), oligopeptide transport and metabolism (OppA, PepO), and maturation and stability of ribosomal subunits (RbfA, VicX). Downregulated proteins participate in ROS defense (AhpC), citrate and pyruvate consumption (CitE, PflB), oxaloacetate production (AvtA), arginine synthesis (ArgG), amino acid transport (GlnQ), and deoxynucleoside biosynthesis (RtpR). The data obtained shed light on mechanisms providing O<sub>2</sub>-tolerance and adaptation to aerobic conditions in strain CM MSU 529. The biosynthesis of 39 from 57 differentially abundant proteins was shown to be O<sub>2</sub>-sensitive in lactic acid bacteria for the first time. To our knowledge this is the first study on the impact of aerobic cultivation on the proteome of <i>L. rhamnosus</i>.

### Keywords
Lacticaseibacillus rhamnosus; aerobic conditions; respiratory conditions; oxidative stress; pyruvate oxidase; pyridoxine 5'-phosphate oxidase; nadh peroxidase; acetolactate synthase

### Affiliations
Max Planc Institut für terrestrische Mikrobiologie
Core Facility for Mass spectrometry & Proteomics, Max Planck Institut Marburg, Germany

### Submitter
Joerg Kahnt

### Lab Head
Dr Timo Glatter
Core Facility for Mass spectrometry & Proteomics, Max Planck Institut Marburg, Germany


