### Accession
PXD017382

### Title
How paired PSII-LHCII supercomplexes mediate the stacking of plant thylakoid membranes unveiled by integrative structural mass-spectrometry

### Description
Photosynthesis drives all life on Earth by exploiting solar energy to split water molecules through the Photosystem (PS) II enzyme. In plant thylakoid membranes, PSII binds a modular set of light harvesting complexes (LHCII) to form different types of PSII-LHCII supercomplex (PSII-LHCIIsc). Plant PSII-LHCIIsc are localized in the stacked region of the thylakoid membranes called grana, from which they can be isolated in paired conformations of type (C2S2M2)x2 and (C2S2M)x2, with the two supercomplexes facing each other at their stromal surface. Although the atomic structure of PSII-LHCIIsc has recently been solved, there is still a lack of knowledge on their mutual interactions when facing each other within apposing thylakoid membranes, as well as their structural dynamics in response to light variations. The major challenges in the structural determination of the stromal interactions are posed not only by the dynamic nature of these over 2-megadalton assemblies, but also by the heterogeneity of the LHCII subunits and the high flexibility of their stromally exposed N-terminal loops. Here, we explored the potential of combining top-down mass spectrometry (TD-MS) and crosslinking mass spectrometry (XL-MS) to peek through the keyhole of the tight stromal gap between two facing supercomplexes, unveiling so far hidden structural details. A first goal of experiments was to identify the distinct sequence variants and proteoforms involved in PSII-LHCIIsc structural dynamics in response to light modulation. To investigate their structural interactions, we treated paired PSII-LHCIIsc isolated from the three light conditions with two complementary chemical cross-linkers, targeting different residues and producing partially overlapping distance restraints. Most interactions detected “in-vitro” on the isolated paired supercomplexes were further supported by XL-MS results obtained “in-situ” on the corresponding thylakoid membranes.

### Sample Protocol
TD-MS: 100 µg of PSII-LHCIIsc for each light condition (Low, L; Control, C; High, H) were buffer exchanged into 10 % formic acid with 5 kDa molecular weight cutoff centrifugal filters. 2-3 µg of material at 1 µg/µl was used for each LC-MS(/MS) run. Separation of proteins was performed on a Thermo Scientific Vanquish Flex UHPLC system equipped with MAbPac reversed phase column (2.1 mm  100 mm) heated to 80 °C and coupled online to a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive HF-X Orbitrap mass spectrometer. Gradient elution was performed using mobile phases A (0.1% formic acid in water) and B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile). Percentage of buffer B was increased from 25 to 60 %. Flow rate used in the experiments was set at 250 µl/min. HF-X was set into Intact Protein Mode and runs were recorded with either high resolution (120,000 at 200 m/z) or medium resolution (7,500 at 200 m/z) in full MS for sensitive detection of proteoforms below or above 30 kDa, respectively. A total of two sample preparations were analyzed for each light condition and MS-only runs were recorded in triplicate for each preparation. XL-MS “in-vitro”: PSII-LHCIIsc, at a final protein concentration of 1 mg/mL in a buffer made of 20 mM MES pH 5.7, 0.65 M Sucrose, 10 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2, were crosslinked for 30 and 120 min with DSSO and EDC, respectively. Each reaction was conducted at 4°C in the dark and without stirring to minimize unspecific aggregation. The reaction was then quenched with 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8. 125 µg of two PSII-LHCIIsc from each condition (L, C and H) were pooled and crosslinked either with DSSO or EDC at their optimal final concentration of 1 mM and 35 mM, respectively. Samples were precipitated by stepwise addition of twice the volume of ice-cold acetone every 30 s while shaking to reach a final protein:acetone ratio of 1:8 (v/v) and incubated overnight at -20°C. Samples were centrifuged at maximum speed for 15 min at 4°C and acetone completely poured of prior to digestion. Tryptic digestion was conducted by a two-step workflow where the first step was performed at 1:50 ratio (protein:protease) at twice the initial volume (i.e. protein concentration of 0.5 mg/mL in 250 µL) directly on the protein pellet for 4 h at 37 °C constantly shaking to loosen the protein pellet. Pre-digested proteins were denatured by addition of Urea and Thiourea at a final concentration of 4 M and 1 M, respectively. After resuspension of the pellet under gentle shaking (~ 2 h), reduction with 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 37 °C, and alkylation with 20 mM IAA for 30 min at room temperature in the dark was performed. The second tryptic digestion was performed at 1:25 ratio (protein:protease) for 16 h at 37 °C, after diluting the Urea down to 1 M, and then quenched with 10% TFA. The final peptide mixtures were desalted with C18 Sep-Pak cartridges (Waters). Fractionation of 250 µg of desalted crosslinked peptide mixture was performed by HPLC-SCX (strong cation exchange) chromatography on an Agilent 1200 HPLC system with a C18 trap column (Opti-Lynx TRAP column C18 / 49 µm, 5 mm) and analytical Poly LC, PolySULFOETHYL A/ 3 µm, 50 x 1.0 mm). A 65 min gradient was performed as previously described (Klykov et al. 2018, ) and the fractions containing crosslinked peptides, from min 14 – 30, were pooled two by two from min 14 – 21 and 29 – 30, while the others were kept separate. This resulted in 11 fractions for each sample, which were desalted with C18 96-well elution plates (Oasis HLB), lyophilized and resuspended in 10% FA prior to injection. For measurement, the fractions were injected and separated on a 50 cm × 75-µm C18 analytical column, packed in-house (Poroshell 120 EC- C18 / 2.7 µm) connected to Agilent 1290 LC system and an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Acquisition settings for MS analysis of DSSO crosslinked samples were performed as previously described (Klykov et al. 2018, Nature Protocols 13 (12): 2964–90) with minor modifications. Briefly, for DSSO crosslinked samples, a survey MS1 scan at high-resolution was followed by a Top-N of 10 MS2-CID (collision induced dissociation) scans on selected high-charged precursors (z = 3 – 8), producing signature peaks for subsequent MS3 fragmentation of potential cross-linked peptides by HCD fragmentation at NCE = 30. For samples crosslinked with EDC, fragmentation was performed with stepped higher collisional dissociation (HCD) at NCE = 31.5, 35 and 38.5, and a maximum injection time of 120 ms. XL-MS “in-situ”: Crosslinking reaction on thylakoid membranes was conducted on three independent samples of 500 µg. Thylakoids were crosslinked for 30 min with 1 mM DSSO at a final protein concentration of 0.5 mg/mL in a buffer made of 25 mM MES pH 6.0, 10 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2. After the crosslinking reaction, the samples were processed with the same procedure used for PSII-LHCIIsc.

### Data Protocol
 FOR TD-MS: LC-MS/MS data was searched with Thermo Proteome Discoverer (v. 2.3.0.522) supplemented with ProSightPD nodes for Absolute Mass searching of data with medium or high resolution in full MS (Medium-High or High-High workflows). A custom database was built including transcriptome data supplemented with homologous sequences from UniProt/TrEMBL for P. sativum.  Parameters for the Medium-High method were set as follows. ReSpect: precursor m/z tolerance – 0.2 Th; relative abundance threshold – 0%; precursor mass range – 3-100 kDa; precursor mass tolerance – 30 ppm; charge state range – 3-100. Xtract: signal/noise threshold – 2; m/z range – 400-2400 Th. Initially, a large precursor tolerance window of 10 kDa was set to identify proteins with unknown sequence processing/PTMs/SNPs followed by cycles of database filtering and manual sequence adjustment to produce a reduced database with mature protein sequences (i.e. final base amino acid sequences resulting from RNA transcript processing and enzymatic cleavage of terminal amino acids). For the final absolute mass search against the reduced database, ProSight parameters were set as follows: precursor mass tolerance – 500 Da; fragment mass tolerance – 20 ppm. For High-High searches, only Xtract was used with the same parameters for deconvolution of spectra in both full MS and MS/MS scans. For validation of unreported PTMs/sequence processing replicate scans for specific precursor mass were combined with 2 Da window and merged spectrum was used to characterize a mature proteoform with in-house made fragment matching console application written in C#. All additional data processing was performed in R. MS-only runs were deconvoluted with Sliding Window Deconvolution in Protein Deconvolution software (v. 4.0) either using Xtract (high resolution) or Respect algorithm (medium resolution). The produced deconvoluted tables were assigned by mass matching against identified precursor masses from LC-MS/MS runs. Finally, assigned mass features and corresponding intensities were used for relative quantification of sequence variants and proteoforms between light conditions.   FOR XL-MS “in-vitro” and “in-situ”: Raw data were processed with the XlinkX nodes incorporated in Proteome Discoverer 2.3.0.522 (Thermo Fisher Scientific Bremen, Germany). For DSSO crosslinked samples analysis was conducted as previously described (Klykov et al. 2018, Nature Protocols 13 (12): 2964–90. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41596-018-0074-x). For peptide/protein identification Mascot was used to search filtered spectra against the TD-MS derived database containing all proteoforms for which a sequence has been confidently determined (see attached FASTA files). For the analysis of EDC crosslinked samples XlinkX was set to focus on K-DE linkage. For both crosslinking reagents, the modifications allowed were carbamidomethylation on Cys as fixed; oxidation on Met and Protein N-terminal acetylation as variable. The FDR was controlled at 1% with Percolator.

### Publication Abstract
Grana are a characteristic feature of higher plants' thylakoid membranes, consisting of stacks of appressed membranes enriched in Photosystem II (PSII) and associated light-harvesting complex II (LHCII) proteins, together forming the PSII-LHCII supercomplex. Grana stacks undergo light-dependent structural changes, mainly by reorganizing the supramolecular structure of PSII-LHCII supercomplexes. LHCII is vital for grana formation, in which also PSII-LHCII supercomplexes are involved. By combining top-down and crosslinking mass spectrometry we uncover the spatial organization of paired PSII-LHCII supercomplexes within thylakoid membranes. The resulting model highlights a basic molecular mechanism whereby plants maintain grana stacking at changing light conditions. This mechanism relies on interactions between stroma-exposed N-terminal loops of LHCII trimers and Lhcb4 subunits facing each other in adjacent membranes. The combination of light-dependent LHCII N-terminal trimming and extensive N-terminal &#x3b1;-acetylation likely affects interactions between pairs of PSII-LHCII supercomplexes across the stromal gap, ultimately mediating membrane folding in grana stacks.

### Keywords
Photosystem, Psii, Edc, Plant proteomics, Cx-ms, Crosslinking, Chlorophyll-binding proteins, Top-down rp-lc-ms/ms, Acetylation, Dsso

### Affiliations
Politecnico di Torino
Utrecht University / Pharmaceutical Sciences  Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics  Padualaan 8 , 3584 CH Utrecht

### Submitter
Pascal Albanese

### Lab Head
Dr Richard Scheltema
Utrecht University / Pharmaceutical Sciences  Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics  Padualaan 8 , 3584 CH Utrecht


