### Accession
PXD016175

### Title
Intact N-glycopeptide signatures of immunoglobulin G molecules in plasma from patients with prostate carcinoma and benign prostatic hyperplasia

### Description
Benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) is difficult to discriminate from prostate carcinoma (PCa) preoperatively. The non-invasive biomarkers are necessary to reduce the burden of biopsies and improve survival quality of patients. Previous research suggests that abnormal glycosylation of immunoglobulin gamma molecules (IgGs) may associated with immunological diseases and prostate diseases. Hence, characterizing intact N-glycopeptides of IgGs that correspond to N-glycan structure with specific site information enable better understanding of the molecular pathogenesis and finding out some novel signatures in preoperative discrimination of BPH from PCa. In this study, we profiled intact N-glycopeptides of purified IgGs from 51 PCa patients and 45 BPH patients by our developed N-glycoproteomic method using hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography enrichment coupled with high resolution LC-MS/MS, and intact N-glycopeptides quantitative analysis was performed using pGlyco 2.0 and MaxQuant softwares. Our data provided plasma IgG subclass-specific and site-specific N-glycosylation quantitative information.

### Sample Protocol
The plasma IgGs were loaded to a 30 kDa ultrafiltration tube and proteolyzed using FASP protocol. Specifically, reduction and alkylation of the proteins were performed with 100 μL of 20 mM DTT for 4 hours at 37 °C and with 100 μL of 50 mM IAA for 30 min at 25 °C in the dark, respectively. After subsequently substituted with 50 mM NH4HCO3 buffer (pH 8.5), 2 μg of trypsin were added and incubated overnight at 37 °C. The digests were collected by centrifugation, and the concentrations were measured by quantitative colorimetric peptide assay at 480 nm.Intact N-glycopeptides of IgGs were enriched using Venusil HILIC (5 μm, 100 Å).

### Data Protocol
The raw data files of intact N-glycopeptides were searched against the human IgGs (IgG1, IgG2, IgG3, IgG4) database using pGlyco 2.0 (version 2.2.0). Mass tolerances for the precursors and fragment ions were set as ± 5 ppm and ± 20 ppm, respectively. One missed cleavages sites were allowed for trypsin digestion. The fixed modification was carbamidomethylation of all cysteine residues (+57.02 Da). Variable modifications included oxidation of methionine (+15.99 Da).

### Publication Abstract
The discovery of novel non-invasive biomarkers for discriminating between prostate carcinoma (PCa) patients and benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) patients is necessary to reduce the burden of biopsies, avoid overdiagnosis and improve quality of life. Previous studies suggest that abnormal glycosylation of immunoglobulin gamma molecules (IgGs) is strongly associated with immunological diseases and prostate diseases. Hence, characterizing N-linked intact glycopeptides of IgGs that correspond to the N-glycan structure with specific site information might enable a better understanding of the molecular pathogenesis and discovery of novel signatures in preoperative discrimination of BPH from PCa. In this study, we profiled N-linked intact glycopeptides of purified IgGs from 51 PCa patients and 45 BPH patients by our developed N-glycoproteomic method using hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography enrichment coupled with high resolution LC-MS/MS. The quantitative analysis of the N-linked intact glycopeptides using pGlyco 2.0 and MaxQuant software provided quantitative information on plasma IgG subclass-specific and site-specific N-glycosylation. As a result, we found four aberrantly expressed N-linked intact glycopeptides across different IgG subclasses. In particular, the N-glycopeptide IgG2-GP09 (EEQFNSTFR (H5N5S1)) was dramatically elevated in plasma from PCa patients, compared with that in BPH patients (PCa/BPH ratio = 5.74, p = 0.001). Additionally, the variations in these N-linked intact glycopeptide abundances were not caused by the changes in the IgG concentrations. Furthermore, IgG2-GP09 displayed a more powerful prediction capability (auROC = 0.702) for distinguishing PCa from BPH than the clinical index t-PSA (auROC = 0.681) when used alone or in combination with other indicators (auROC = 0.853). In conclusion, these abnormally expressed N-linked intact glycopeptides have potential for non-invasive monitoring and pre-stratification of prostate diseases.

### Keywords
Human, Plasma, Iggs, Glycosylation

### Affiliations
West China Hospital, Sichuan University
Sichuan University

### Submitter
Yong Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Yong Zhang
West China Hospital, Sichuan University


