### Accession
PXD022772

### Title
MS Annika: A new Cross-Linking Search Engine

### Description
A cross linking mass spectrometry search engine was developed and implemented into Thermo Proteome Discoverer. The search engine is capable to handle several linker types as well as data input formats. To demonstrate its ability processing Bruker -ion mobility data, synthetic peptides (Beveridge, et. al., Nat. Commun., 2020, doi: 10.1038/s41467-020-14608-2) were analyzed and the respective files are availible here.

### Sample Protocol
Cross-linked peptides (200ng each, DSSO or DSBU cross-linked) were separated on a Dionex UltiMate 3000 HPLC RSLC nano-system (Thermo) coupled to a timsTOF Pro (Bruker) mass spectrometer using a Captive Spray Emitter (ZDV, Bruker, ID 10 µm). Samples were loaded using a 5µL loop onto a trap column (PharmaFluidics, µPACTM C18) from where they were transferred to the analytical column (PharmaFluidics, µPACTM capLC, 50 cm) heated to 50°C. Peptides were eluted using a flow rate of 1 µL min-1, with the following gradient over 95 min: 0 -2.5 min 1 % buffer B, followed by an increasing concentration of buffer B up to 40 % until min 62. This is followed by a 3 min gradient reaching 97.5 % B, washing for 12 min with 97.5% B, followed by re-equilibration of the column until min 95 at 1% buffer B (buffer B: 80 % ACN, 19.92 % H2O and 0.08 % TFA, buffer A: 99.9% H2O, 0.1% TFA). PASEF precursors were selected at z = 3-6 with a mobility dependent stepped collision energy of 21.25 and 28.75 eV at an inverse reduced mobility (1/K0) of 0.73 V s/cm2 and 72.25 and 97.75 eV at 1.63 V s/cm2; collision energies were linearly interpolated between these two 1/K0 values and kept constant above or below these base points. Isolation width was set to 2 m/z at 700 m/z

### Data Protocol
The resulting raw files were loaded into Proteome-discoverer and directly analyzed using the published MS-Annika nodes as described in the paper at 1 or 5 % FDR. The respective pdAnalysis templates are available here.

### Publication Abstract
Cross-linking mass spectrometry (XL-MS) has become a powerful technique that enables insights into protein structures and protein interactions. The development of cleavable cross-linkers has further promoted XL-MS through search space reduction, thereby allowing for proteome-wide studies. These new analysis possibilities foster the development of new cross-linkers, which not every search engine can deal with out of the box. In addition, some search engines for XL-MS data also struggle with the validation of identified cross-linked peptides, that is, false discovery rate (FDR) estimation, as FDR calculation is hampered by the fact that not only one but two peptides in a single spectrum have to be correct. We here present our new search engine, MS Annika, which can identify cross-linked peptides in MS2 spectra from a wide variety of cleavable cross-linkers. We show that MS Annika provides realistic estimates of FDRs without the need of arbitrary score cutoffs, being able to provide on average 44% more identifications at a similar or better true FDR than comparable tools. In addition, MS Annika can be used on proteome-wide studies due to fast, parallelized processing and provides a way to visualize the identified cross-links in protein 3D structures.

### Keywords
Ion-mobility, Xl-ms, Proteome-discoverer, Search-engine

### Affiliations
IMP / University of Vienna
Protein Chemistry Facility, Institute for Molecular Pathology (IMP), Campus Vienna Biocenter 1, Vienna, Austria

### Submitter
Manuel Matzinger

### Lab Head
Dr Karl Mechtler
Protein Chemistry Facility, Institute for Molecular Pathology (IMP), Campus Vienna Biocenter 1, Vienna, Austria


