### Accession
PXD031878

### Title
Oxygen and hormone effect on rat oligodrendrocyte progenitor cell line (OLN93)

### Description
Hyperoxia is known to cause cerebral white matter injury in preterm infants.  Preterm birth is also associated with sudden hormonal changes which includes drop of  estrogen level  and increased  postnatal production of fetal zone steroids (FZS). Therefore, we investigated the effect of hyperoxia (80% O2) and the subsequent administration of FZS on the proteins of immature oligodendrocytes using the OLN93 (rat-derived OPC) cell line as an experimental model.  We demonstrate that hyperoxia has a negative effect on migration and associated signalling pathways, and that FZS and estrogen have distinct effects on these alterations.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from cells in urea/thiourea by multiple freeze/thawing cycles. Protein was reduced and alkylated before tryptic digestion (protease to protein ratio 1:25). After desalting on C18 material peptides were separated on a nano-Accucore column in a 130 min non-linear gradient ranging from 2 to 25% acetonitrile in 0.1% acetic acid at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The detection was carried out in DIA mode on a QExactive HFx instrument with 56 windows of 13 m/z (range 333-1650 m/z) per cycle.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified by searching in a RefSeq database with a restriction to Rattus norvegicus  using the Spectronaut software (Biognosys) in DirectDIA mode. Fragment ions (q<0.001) were compiled to peptides, and unique and razor peptides were used for calculation of MaxLFQ protein intensities. Protein intensity ratios were calculated for binary comparisons.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Fetal zone steroids, Hyperoxia, Oligodendrocyte progenitor cell line, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Dept. of Functional Genomics
Dr. Elke Hammer Universitätsmedizin Greifswald Interfakultäres Institut für Genetik und Funktionelle Genomforschung Abteilung für Funktionelle Genomforschung Felix-Hausdorff-Straße 8 17487 Greifswald

### Submitter
Elke Hammer

### Lab Head
Dr Elke Hammer
Dr. Elke Hammer Universitätsmedizin Greifswald Interfakultäres Institut für Genetik und Funktionelle Genomforschung Abteilung für Funktionelle Genomforschung Felix-Hausdorff-Straße 8 17487 Greifswald


