### Accession
PXD037132

### Title
Identification of phosphorylation sites in piggyBac transposase N-terminus

### Description
The piggyBac transposon system is widely used for biotechnology and genome engineering and is the founding member of a large superfamily of piggyBac-like elements. We investigated the role in transpositon of the nonconserved N-terminus in the piggyBac transposase, including the impact of predicted casein kinase phosphorylation sites within it.

### Sample Protocol
The piggyBac transposase was purified in three chromatography steps, and the sample for analysis was prepared by running the purified protein on a 4-12% NuPAGE gel and excising the band corresponding to the full length protein. At the Taplin Mass Spectrometry Facility, the excised gel band was cut into ~1 mm3 pieces, and samples were reduced with 1 mM DTT for 30 minutes at 60ºC followed by alkylation with 5mM iodoacetamide for 15 minutes in the dark at room temperature. Gel pieces were then subjected to a modified in-gel AspN digestion procedure (1), followed by washing and dehydration with acetonitrile for 10 min followed by removal of acetonitrile. Pieces were then completely dried in a speed-vac. Rehydration was with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution containing 12.5 ng/µl modified sequencing-grade AspN (ThermoScientific) at 4ºC. The sample were then placed at 37ºC overnight. Peptides were later extracted by removing the ammonium bicarbonate solution, and then one wash with a 50% acetonitrile/1% formic acid solution.  The extract was then dried in a speed-vac and stored at 4ºC until analysis.    For analysis, the sample was reconstituted in ~10 µl of HPLC solvent A (2.5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). A nano-scale reverse-phase HPLC capillary column was created by packing 2.6 µm C18 spherical silica beads into a fused silica capillary (100 µm inner diameter x ~30 cm length) with a flame-drawn tip (2). After column equilibration, the sample was loaded onto the column via a Famos auto sampler (LC Packings, San Francisco CA). A gradient was formed and peptides were eluted with increasing concentrations of solvent B (97.5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid).    As each peptide was eluted, they were subjected to electrospray ionization and then they entered into an LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro ion-trap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). Eluting peptides were detected, isolated, and fragmented to produce a tandem mass spectrum of specific fragment ions for each peptide.   1. Shevchenko, et al., Anal Chem. 68:850-858, 1996 2. Peng, J and Gygi S.P. J. Mass Spec. Oct:36(10):1083-91

### Data Protocol
Peptide sequences were determined by matching protein or translated nucleotide databases with the acquired fragmentation pattern by the software program, Sequest (ThermoFinnigan, San Jose, CA) (3). The modification of 79.9663 mass units to serine, threonine, and tyrosine was included in the database searches to determine phosphopeptides.  Phosphorylation assignments were determined by the Ascore algorithm (4). All databases include a reversed version of all the sequences and the data was filtered to between a one and two percent peptide false discovery rate.    3. Eng. et al., J. Am. Soc. Mass. Spectrom. 5:976-989, 1994 4. Beausoleil SA, et al. Nat Biotechnol. 2006 Oct;24(10):1285-92. Epub 2006 Sep 10

### Publication Abstract
DNA transposon systems are widely used in mammalian cells for genetic modification experiments, but their regulation remains poorly understood. We used biochemical and cell-based assays together with AlphaFold modeling and rational protein redesign to evaluate aspects of piggyBac transposition including the previously unexplained role of the transposase N-terminus and the need for asymmetric transposon ends for cellular activity. We found that phosphorylation at predicted casein kinase II sites in the transposase N-terminus inhibits transposition, most likely by preventing transposase-DNA interactions. Deletion of the region containing these sites releases inhibition thereby enhancing activity. We also found that the N-terminal domain promotes transposase dimerization in the absence of transposon DNA. When the N-terminus is deleted, the transposase gains the ability to carry out transposition using symmetric transposon left ends. This novel activity is also conferred by appending a second C-terminal domain. When combined, these modifications together result in a transposase that is highly active when symmetric transposon ends are used. Our results demonstrate that transposase N-terminal phosphorylation and the requirement for asymmetric transposon ends both negatively regulate piggyBac transposition in mammalian cells. These novel insights into the mechanism and structure of the piggyBac transposase expand its potential use for genomic applications.

### Keywords
Transposition, Piggybac

### Affiliations
National Institutes of Health
NIH

### Submitter
Alison Hickman

### Lab Head
Dr Fred Dyda
National Institutes of Health


