### Accession
PXD028428

### Title
Quantitative phosphoproteomics analysis uncovers CDK1- and PAK2-mediated malignant signaling pathways in clear cell Renal Cell Carcinoma

### Description
Clear cell Renal Cell Carcinoma (ccRCC) is among the 10 most common cancers and causes more than 140,000 deaths worldwide every year. In order to elucidate the underlying molecular mechanisms orchestrated by phosphorylation modifications, we performed a comprehensive quantitative phosphoproteomics characterization of ccRCC tumor and normal adjacent tissues. Here, we identified 16,253 phosphopeptides, of which more than 9,000 were quantified. Our in-depth analysis revealed 1,336 phosphopeptides to be differentially regulated between tumor and normal tissues. Moreover, our data reveals that significantly up-regulated phosphoproteins are associated with cytoskeletal re-organization which suggests migratory and invasive behavior of renal tumors. This is supported by a pronounced mesenchymal profile of ccRCC phosphorylation events. Our rigorous characterization of the renal phosphoproteome also revealed that both EGFR and VEGFR are the most important mediators of phospho signaling in RCC pathogenesis. Furthermore, we determined the kinases PAK2, CDK1, Erk1 and Erk2 to be master kinases that are responsible for phosphorylations of many substrates associated with cell proliferation, inflammation and migration. These master kinases are targetable by inhibitory FDA-approved drugs such as fostamatinib and minocycline, which can serve as novel therapeutic agents for ccRCC treatment.

### Sample Protocol
Ethics statement The study proposal was approved by the Ethics Committee of Koc University in September 2017 (no. 2017.145.IRGB2.051) and was prolonged for two more years. Tissue samples were collected with the patients’ informed written consent following the guidelines of the Declaration of Helsinki. Sample collection The same tumor and normal adjacent tissue (NAT) samples of the discovery cohort from our previous publication were used for phosphoproteomics analysis (11). The age of the 13 patients varied between 28 and 74 and reflected a typical gender representation for RCC with a 2.6:1 male-to-female-ratio. In-solution digest, isotopic labeling and fractionation of samples Sample preparation including protein digest, peptide labeling and fractionation are described in our previous study (11). Briefly, NAT and tumor tissue samples were subjected to protein isolation using a urea based lysis buffer, and to extensive homogenization in a bullet blender. Trypsinized samples were then labeled at their primary amines (N-terminus and lysine residues) with heavy and light dimethyl isotopes. Swapping of the labeling reagents prevented bias from the labeling choice. After mixing the labeled samples at 1:1 heavy-light-ratio, the peptide mixtures (estimated protein amount 1.2 mg) were fractionated on-column by Strong Cation Exchange (SCX) chromatography into 10 fractions. Desalted fractions were stored at   -20°C. Phosphopeptide enrichment Enrichment of phosphopeptides was performed on-column using 500μg of titanium dioxide (TiO2) beads (5μm, Sachtleben) packed into micro-columns (20μL GELoader, eppendorf), which were equilibrated with loading buffer (80% acetonitrile (ACN) and 6% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA)) (12). The dried desalted dimethyl-labeled peptide fractions were reconstituted in loading buffer to a final concentration of 1 μg/μL and the 10 fractions were combined to 6 fractions. The peptides were slowly loaded onto the positively charged columns at 50g. The bound phosphopeptides were washed with 0.1% TFA in 50% ACN and then eluted with 20μL of 10% ammonia solution into a new tube containing 35μL of 10% formic acid (FA). The eluted peptides were further acidified by addition of 3μL of FA and immediately analyzed in LC-MS/MS. Data acquisition The phospho enriched fractions were analyzed in triplicate with a 120 min linear gradient on an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano reversed phase chromatographic platform (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Q Exactive HF hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The fractions were loaded onto an in-house packed 100 μm i.d. × 17 cm C18 column (Reprosil-Gold C18, 5 μm, 200Å, Dr. Maisch) and run with a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The chromatographic separation of the peptides started at 4% of solution B (ACN with 0.1% FA) and gradually increased to 25% in 67 min. The gradient continued from 25% to 45% of solution B in the next 20 min. Peptides in the mass range of 400−1,500 m/z and with a positive polarity were allowed for detection in data-dependent mode. For the MS1 spectra acquisition the resolution was set to 120,000, the automatic gain control (AGC) target to 1e6 and the maximum injection time to 60 ms. The top 20 most intense peptides per cycle (Top20) were selected for fragmentation in the higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) cell with a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 27. MS2 spectra acquisition was conducted at a resolution of 30,000, an AGC target of 1e5, a maximum injection time of 60 ms and a fixed first mass of 100 m/z. Furthermore, the isolation window was set to 2.0 m/z, the dynamic exclusion to 20 s, the minimum AGC to 3e3 and the charge exclusion was set as unassigned, 1.

### Data Protocol
Data processing Peptide identification and quantification from raw MS data files were done with Proteome Discoverer (PD) (v1.4, Thermo Scientific) using the Mascot (v2.5.1, Matrix Science) search engine. The peptide spectral matches were searched against a Swissprot database containing 21,039 entries for Homo sapiens retrieved from Uniprot in March 2016. Trypsin was selected as hydrolytic enzyme with a maximum number of allowed missed cleavages of 2. For peptide identification a mass tolerance of ±20 ppm for precursor masses and ±0.05 Da for fragment ions was selected. For dimethyl labeling the 2plex dimethyl-based heavy/light quantitation method with a mass precision requirement of 2 ppm for precursor ions was used. Light and heavy dimethylation of peptide N termini and of lysine residues, phosphorylation at serine, threonine and tyrosine residues, as well as methionine oxidation were set as dynamic modifications. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification. Determination of phosphosite localizations was done by using the implemented node phosphoRS (v3.0). The False Discovery Rates (FDR) for peptide and protein identifications were set to 1%. Furthermore, a filter was applied to allow only peptide identifications with medium and high confidence, with a sequence length between 7 and 25, a Mascot score >20 and a peptide rank of minimum 1.  Quantification ratios of samples with swapped dimethyl labeling were converted to heavy/light (H/L) format. The data was filtered for peptides quantified in at least two out of the 39 technical replicates. All quantification ratios were normalized to the median of the non-phosphorylated peptides in the sample and log2 transformed. These peptides are hereafter denoted as “quantified peptides”. The phosphorylated peptides were further filtered for ≥50% site probability, which led to a total of 9,431 quantified phosphopeptides. Statistical analysis To determine phosphopeptides significantly differentially abundant between tumor and normal tissues, we used the one-sample Wilcoxon signed-rank test. More specifically, the Python function scipy.stats.wilcoxon (v0.14.0) was extended by the feature to omit missing quantification values and was then applied peptide-wise on the technical replicates data. P-values <0.05 were considered statistically significant. A cut-off of ±1.5 was applied on the median log2 fold change values of the determined significant phosphopeptides, which led to a total of 1,336 “significantly regulated phosphopeptides”. For the determination of statistical difference between phospho- and non-phosphopeptide distributions, the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test was applied via the Python function scipy.stats.ks_2samp. Kinase-substrate network recreation To predict kinase activities in the tumor and NATs, we implemented the NetworKIN3.0 (18) algorithm on the significantly regulated phosphopeptides, which annotates kinases based on STRING interactions and phylogenetic links within kinase families. Only kinase-substrate predictions with a NetworKIN score >5 were further considered for network recreation using the visualization software Cytoscape (v3.8.0). The network components were annotated by their GO cellular compartment feature using QuickGO (19), limited only to Uniprot assignments. In case of multiple cellular allocations, priority was given as follows: “membrane”, “nucleus”, “cytoplasm”, “extracellular” and “other”, respectively. Additionally, networks were complemented by the enriched Reactome pathways, respectively, retrieved as over-representation analysis (ORA) via the webtool WebGestalt (v2019) (20) at default settings. The predicted kinases were mapped to the human kinome phylogenetic tree using the KinMapbeta tool at www.kinhub.org (access March 2021) (21). Motif and survival analysis To find conserved sequence motifs, the significantly regulated phosphopeptides were centered to their phosphosite and expanded by the surrounding ±7 amino acid (aa) sequence window. The webtool MoMo (v5.3.3) (22), applying the motif-x algorithm, was used for prediction with 15 residue motif width, 20 occurrences and a p-value setting of <0.000001. For the determination of the prognostic power of kinases, the online tool Kaplan-Meier Plotter (23) was taken advantage of using the The Cancer Genome Atlas Kidney Renal Clear Cell Carcinoma (TCGA-KIRC) cohort dataset (n=530) and the “auto select best cutoff” option to optimally partition the patients based on the lowest p-value and the highest hazard ratio.

### Publication Abstract
Clear cell Renal Cell Carcinoma (ccRCC) is among the 10 most common cancers in both men and women and causes more than 140,000 deaths worldwide every year. In order to elucidate the underlying molecular mechanisms orchestrated by phosphorylation modifications, we performed a comprehensive quantitative phosphoproteomics characterization of ccRCC tumor and normal adjacent tissues. Here, we identified 16,253 phosphopeptides, of which more than 9000 were singly quantified. Our in-depth analysis revealed 600 phosphopeptides to be significantly differentially regulated between tumor and normal tissues. Moreover, our data revealed that significantly up-regulated phosphoproteins are associated with protein synthesis and cytoskeletal re-organization which suggests proliferative and migratory behavior of renal tumors. This is supported by a mesenchymal profile of ccRCC phosphorylation events. Our rigorous characterization of the renal phosphoproteome also suggests that both epidermal growth factor receptor and vascular endothelial growth factor receptor are important mediators of phospho signaling in RCC pathogenesis. Furthermore, we determined the kinases p21-activated kinase 2, cyclin-dependent kinase 1 and c-Jun N-terminal kinase 1 to be master kinases that are responsible for phosphorylation of many substrates associated with cell proliferation, inflammation and migration. Moreover, high expression of p21-activated kinase 2 is associated with worse survival outcome of ccRCC patients. These master kinases are targetable by inhibitory drugs such as fostamatinib, minocycline, tamoxifen and bosutinib which can serve as novel therapeutic agents for ccRCC treatment.

### Keywords
Signaling pathways, Drug targets, Phosphoproteomics, Renal cell carcinoma, Biomarkers

### Affiliations
Koc University

### Submitter
Aydanur Senturk

### Lab Head
Dr Nurhan Ozlu
Koc University


