### Accession
PXD025974

### Title
Prussian carp skin mucus proteomics

### Description
Here we provide dataset from a proteomic experiment, using trypsin digestion, and reversed-phase chromatography (RPC) with tandem mass spectrometr (RPC-MS/MS), in order to relatively quantify the protein composition of skin mucus of Prussian carp Carassius gibelio. The main aim of the project is to identify the proteins specifically assotiated with fish inhabits euthophic shallow lakes lake Chany Lake (West Siberia).

### Sample Protocol
Adult Prussian carp was caught in the middle of summer (July, 2020) in Fadikha Lake (Chany Lake basin, west Siberia, Russia, 54°60’68’’ N, 78°21’86’’E). The sample of skin mucus was collected along the right and left full-length surfaces of fish from the posterior of the gill operculum to the base of the caudal fin and immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen. After that, the sample was lyophilized and sent in ice (-20 °C) to the Group of mass spectrometry of Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry RAS (Moscow, Russia) where further analysis was performed. Reduction, alkylation and digestion of the proteins in solution were performed as described previously [Kulak et al., 2014] with minor modifications. Briefly, sodium deoxycholate (SDC) lysis, reduction and alkylation buffer pH 8.5 contained 100 mM TRIS, 1% (w/v) SDC, 10 mM TCEP and 20 mM 2-chloroacetamide were added to a skin mucus sample. The sample was heated for 10 min at 95oC, protein concentration in the sample was determined by Bredford assay and the equal volume of trypsin solution in 100 mM TRIS pH 8.5 was added in a 1:100 (w/w) ratio. After overnight digestion at 37oC, peptides were acidified by 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) for SDB-RPS binding, and 20 g was loaded on three 14-gauge StageTip plugs, equal volume of ethyl acetate was added, and the StageTips were centrifuged at 300 g. After washing the StageTips with a 100 l of 1% TFA/ethyl acetate mixture and 100 l of 0.2% TFA, peptides were eluted by 50 l of elution solution contained 50% acetonitrile, 45% water and 5% ammonia. The collected material was vacuum-dried and stored at -80oC. Before analyses peptides were dissolved in 2% acetonitrile/0.1% TFA solution and sonicated for 2 min in ultrasonic water bath. The trypsin-digested peptides were injected onto pre-concentration column (prepared in laboratory) 20 x 0.1 mm, with sorbent Inertsil ODS3 3 µm (GL Sciences), in solution, containing 2% acetonitrile, 98% H2O, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), at a flow of 10 µl/min. Then, the peptides were separated at room temperature on fused silica column 300 x 0.1 mm with emitter made by P2000 Laser Puller (Sutter, USA) with sorbent (prepared in laboratory) Reprosil PUR C18AQ 1.9 (Dr. Maisch). Reverse-phase chromatography (RPC) was performed on a chromatograph Ultimate 3000 Nano LC System (Thermo Fisher Scientific), connected with Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) via nanoelectrospray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). In order to chromatographically separate the peptides, the following solvent system was applied: solvent A (99,9% H2O and 0,1% formic acid) and B (19,9% H2O, 0,1% formic acid, and 80% acetonitrile). The peptides were eluted from the column by linear gradients of solution B (3–35%, for 105 min; 35-55% for 18 min; 55-99% for 0,1 min; 99% for 10 min; 99-3% for 0,1min at a flow of 500 nL/min. The column was equilibrated by 3% of solution B for 10 min. The mass spectrometry analysis was conducted at the following parameters: MS1 scanning: resolution 70000, range: 350-2000 m/z, maximum time of ions injection – 30 ms, level of AGC – 3x106. The ion isolation was performed at the size of window was 1.4 m/z, with preference for the ions which have an isotopic distribution characteristic of peptides, and with the exclusion of isotopes. The time of dynamic elimination of ions from repeated fragmentation was 30 s. MS2 fragmentation was conducted at HCD regime, the resolution was 17500 and energy of HCD - 29%, with maximum time of ion injection – 80 ms, with AGC modes – 1x105. The exclusion the ions with unknown charge was z=1и z>7.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were analyzed by Peaks studio 10.0 (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc.) [2]. Identification of proteins was made by searching against the Cyprinidae Uniprot FASTA database version of 18.11.2020 with a carbamidomethyl Cys as a fixed modification and deamidation Asn/Gln and Met oxidation as variable modifications. False discovery rate for peptide-spectrum matches was set to 0.01 and was determined by searching a reverse database. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine, and a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed in the database search. Peptide identification was performed with an allowed initial precursor mass deviation up to 10 p.p.m. and an allowed fragment mass deviation 0.02 Da.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Teleost, Carassius gibelio, Skin mucus, Chany lake, Reversed-phase chromatography

### Affiliations
Institute of Systematics and Ecology of Animals of Siberian Branch of Russian Academy of Sciences
Research Group of Physiology and Genetics of Hydrobionts, Institute of Systematics and Ecology of Animals of Siberian Branch of Russian Academy of Sciences, Russia

### Submitter
Elena Kashinskaya

### Lab Head
Dr Mikhail M. Solovyev
Research Group of Physiology and Genetics of Hydrobionts, Institute of Systematics and Ecology of Animals of Siberian Branch of Russian Academy of Sciences, Russia


