### Accession
PXD010281

### Title
Chaperone Activation and Client Binding of a 2-Cysteine Peroxiredoxin

### Description
Many 2-Cys-peroxiredoxins (2-Cys-Prxs) serve as dual-function proteins. Active as peroxidases under non-stress conditions, they convert into effective chaperones under stress conditions. While their peroxidase activity has been extensively studied and shown to involve cycles of redox-mediated oligomeric changes, the mechanisms by which 2-Cys-Prxs sense stress and convert into general chaperones remain to be defined. Here we focus on the Leishmania infantum mitochondrial 2-Cys-Prx (mTXNPx, Prx1m), which, in its reduced, decameric form, readily adopts chaperone function upon exposure to heat shock temperatures. This activity is crucial for parasite survival in mammalian hosts. Here we have determined the cryo-EM structure of mTXNPx in complex with a thermally unfolded client protein that identifies the flexible N-termini of mTXNPx to form a well-resolved central belt that contacts and encapsulates the unstructured client protein in the center of the decamer ring. In vivo cross-linking studies combined with quantitative in vitro cross-linking experiments further support these interactions, and demonstrate that mTXNPx decamers undergo substantial temperature-dependent structural rearrangements specifically at the dimer-dimer interfaces. These structural changes appear crucial for exposing chaperone client binding sites that are otherwise buried in the peroxidase-active protein. Based on this mechanism, we propose that mTXNPx is the founding member of heat-stress activated chaperones in parasitic mitochondria that facilitate the transition to warm-blooded host environments.

### Sample Protocol
mTXNPx in either oxidized (mTXNPxox) or reduced forms (mTXNPXred) (5 μM) and either alone or in complex with luciferase (0.5 μM) were incubated at either 30˚C or 42˚C for 10 min. Samples were centrifuged at 16,100 xg for 30 min at 4°C. Supernatant was pipetted to a new microfuge tube and cross-linked using a 0.1 mM final concentration of DSA-12C6/13C6 or DSS-H12/D12 (equimolar mixes of isotopically light and isotopically heavy forms of the reagents; Creative Molecules Inc.). Cross-linking reactions were quenched by the addition of ammonium bicarbonate to a final concentration of 10 mM following a 15 min reaction time. Samples were separated by reducing SDS/PAGE and portions corresponding to approximately 70 – 93 kDa (i.e., mTXNPx +/- luciferase) were each excised, subjected to in-gel digestion using trypsin (Promega), and subsequently prepared for LC-MS/MS analysis. Quantitative cross-linking (qCL) experiments were performed in an identical fashion with respect to the reduction, temperature incubation, centrifugation, and cross-linking described above with the exception that no luciferase was added and that cross-linking was performed using either isotopically-light or isotopically-heavy forms of the cross-linking reagent separately for each condition. For both cross-linking reagents used (DSA and DSS) four distinct sample conditions (mTXNPxox at 30°C, mTXNPxox at 42°C, mTXNPxred at 30°C, or mTXNPxred at 42°C) were prepared, split into 2 equal volumes, and cross-linked using a 0.1 mM final concentration of the isotopically-light and isotopically-heavy forms of the cross-linking reagent separately making for a total of 8 cross-linked sample preparations per cross-linking reagent (DSA or DSS). These 8 preparations were then combined in equal amounts according to the scheme described in Figure S4B of the accompanying paper, ultimately yielding 16 unique combined samples (6 forward-label and a corresponding 6 reverse-label samples) per cross-linking reagent. Combined samples were subsequently digested in-solution with trypsin and prepared for LC-MS/MS analysis. Mass spectrometric analysis was performed using a nano-HPLC system (Easy-nLC II, ThermoFisher Scientific), coupled to the ESI-source of an LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro (ThermoFisher Scientific).  Samples were injected onto a 100 μm ID, 360 μm OD, 10 mm length trap column packed with Magic C18AQ (Bruker-Michrom), 100 Å, 5 μm pore size (prepared in-house) and desalted by washing with Solvent A (2% acetonitrile:98% water, both 0.1% formic acid (FA)).  Peptides were separated with a 90-min gradient (mTXNPx+luciferase experiments: 0–90 min: 5–30% solvent B (90% acetonitrile, 10% water, 0.1% FA), 90–92 min: 30–100% B, 92–100 min: 100% B; mTXNPx qCL experiments: 0–90 min: 5–40% B, 90–92 min: 40–100% B, 92–100 min: 100% B), on a 75 μm ID, 360 μm OD, 150 mm length analytical column packed with Magic C18AQ 100 Å, 5 μm pore size (prepared in-house), with IntegraFrit (New Objective Inc.) and equilibrated with solvent A. MS data were acquired using a Top 8 data dependent method in which precursors ions with charge states ≥ 2 and a minimum signal intensity of 20,000 counts were considered for MS/MS acquisition. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with repeat count set to 1, exclusion mass widths relative to low or high each set to 10 ppm, and exclusion duration set to 60 seconds. MS and MS/MS events used 60,000 and 15,000 resolution FTMS scans, respectively, with a scan range of 400-2000 m/z in the MS.  For MS/MS, CID collision energy was set to 35% and wideband activation was enabled.

### Data Protocol
Cross-linking data was searched using Kojak (v.1.5.5) against a concatenated target-decoy (reverse) sequence databases. Configuration and sequence database files used are included here.

### Publication Abstract
Many 2-Cys-peroxiredoxins (2-Cys-Prxs) are dual-function proteins, either acting as peroxidases under non-stress conditions or as chaperones during stress. The mechanism by which 2-Cys-Prxs switch functions remains to be defined. Our work focuses on Leishmania infantum mitochondrial 2-Cys-Prx, whose reduced, decameric subpopulation adopts chaperone function during heat shock, an activity that facilitates the transition from insects to warm-blooded host environments. Here, we have solved the cryo-EM structure of mTXNPx in complex with a thermally unfolded client protein, and revealed that the flexible N-termini of mTXNPx form a well-resolved central belt that contacts and encapsulates the unstructured client protein in the center of the decamer ring. In vivo and in vitro cross-linking studies provide further support for these interactions, and demonstrate that mTXNPx decamers undergo temperature-dependent structural rearrangements specifically at the dimer-dimer interfaces. These structural changes appear crucial for exposing chaperone-client binding sites that are buried in the peroxidase-active protein.

### Keywords
Cross-linking; chaperone activation; chaperone-client complex

### Affiliations
1. Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of Victoria, Victoria, British Columbia, Canada; 2. University of Victoria Genome BC Proteomics Centre, University of Victoria, Victoria, British Columbia, Canada; 3. Gerald Bronfman Department of Oncology, Jewish General Hospital, Montreal, Quebec,  Canada; 4. Segal Cancer  Proteomics Centre, Lady Davis Institute, Jewish General Hospital, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada
University of Victoria

### Submitter
Karl Makepeace

### Lab Head
Dr Christoph H. Borchers
1. Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of Victoria, Victoria, British Columbia, Canada; 2. University of Victoria Genome BC Proteomics Centre, University of Victoria, Victoria, British Columbia, Canada; 3. Gerald Bronfman Department of Oncology, Jewish General Hospital, Montreal, Quebec,  Canada; 4. Segal Cancer  Proteomics Centre, Lady Davis Institute, Jewish General Hospital, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada


