### Accession
PXD012713

### Title
Phosphorylation of CPSF6 RS-like domain

### Description
Cleavage factor I mammalian (CFIm) complex, composed of cleavage and polyadenylation specificity factor CPSF6, regulates alternative polyadenylation (APA).  CPSF6 has a RS-like domain which plays role in protein -protein interactions. This interaction might have role in alternative polyadenylation site selection. The phosphorylation of RS- like domain might play role in protein -protein interaction and thus might have a role in alternative polyadenylation site selection. So we did mass specteroanalysis to analyse phosphorylation sites of RS-like domain of CPSF6.

### Sample Protocol
GST-RSLD proteins purified from E. coli and full-length CPSF6 derivatives immunoprecipitated from nuclear extracts of WT HEK293T or CKO cells were fractionated by SDS-PAGE and stained with Coomassie blue. Protein-containing gel slices were excised and digested by Asp-N protease (proteins produced in bacteria) or trypsin followed by peptide extraction. The eluting peptides were detected, isolated, and fragmented to produce a tandem mass spectrum of specific fragment ions for each peptide by the Taplin Mass Spectrometry Facility at Harvard Medical School using an LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro ion-trap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Phosphorylation assignments were determined by the Ascore algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
Cleavage factor I mammalian (CFIm) complex, composed of cleavage and polyadenylation specificity factor 5 (CPSF5) and serine/arginine-like protein CPSF6, regulates alternative polyadenylation (APA). Loss of CFIm function results in proximal polyadenylation site usage, shortening mRNA 3' untranslated regions (UTRs). Although CPSF6 plays additional roles in human disease, its nuclear translocation mechanism remains unresolved. Two &#x3b2;-karyopherins, transportin (TNPO) 1 and TNPO3, can bind CPSF6 in vitro, and we demonstrate here that while the TNPO1 binding site is dispensable for CPSF6 nuclear import, the arginine/serine (RS)-like domain (RSLD) that mediates TNPO3 binding is critical. The crystal structure of the RSLD-TNPO3 complex revealed potential CPSF6 interaction residues, which were confirmed to mediate TNPO3 binding and CPSF6 nuclear import. Both binding and nuclear import were independent of RSLD phosphorylation, though a hyperphosphorylated mimetic mutant failed to bind TNPO3 and mislocalized to the cell cytoplasm. Although hypophosphorylated CPSF6 largely supported normal polyadenylation site usage, a significant number of mRNAs harbored unnaturally extended 3' UTRs, similar to what is observed when other APA regulators, such as CFIIm component proteins, are depleted. Our results clarify the mechanism of CPSF6 nuclear import and highlight differential roles for RSLD phosphorylation in nuclear translocation versus regulation of APA.

### Keywords
Cpsf6, Apa, Rs-like domain, Cfim68, Rs domain

### Affiliations
Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School
Department of Cancer Immunology and Virology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215, USA, Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA

### Submitter
Parmit Singh

### Lab Head
Dr Alan N. Engelman
Department of Cancer Immunology and Virology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215, USA, Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA


