### Accession
PXD017976

### Title
Platelets fuel the inflammasome activation of innate immune cells

### Description
Proteomic analysis of cell-free supernatants (Secretome) from human platelets (n = 4, donors) and megakariocytes (MEG-01, n = 3 replicates).

### Sample Protocol
Suspensions of freshly isolated human platelets were adjusted to a concentration of 5x107 ml-1  in RPMI. Platelets were left untreated, or stimulated with 200 ng ml-1  LPS, 1 U ml-1 for 3 hours. Platelets were pelleted by centrifugation (3000 x g, 10 minutes) and the cell-free supernatants were harvested. Cell-free supernatants were added with 1x complete protease inhibitor cocktail prior to freezing at -80°C. Proteomics analysis was carried out at the CECAD/CMMC Proteomics Core Facility (University Cologne, Germany) on a Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer that was coupled to an EASY-nLC (Thermo Scientific). Briefly, peptides were loaded in 0.1% formic acid in water onto an in-house packed analytical column (50 cm ó 75 µm I.D., filled with 2.7 µm Poroshell EC120 C18, Agilent) and were chromatographically separated at a constant flow rate of 250 nl/minute with the following gradient: 3-4% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80 % acetonitrile) within 1 minute, 4-27% solvent B within 119 minute, 27-50% solvent B within 19 minutes, 50-95% solvent B within 1 minutes, followed by washing and equilibration of the columns. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode.

### Data Protocol
All mass spectrometric raw data were processed by the CECAD/CMMC Proteomics Core Facility using Maxquant (version 1.5.3.8) with default parameters. Briefly, MS2 spectra were analyzed against the Uniprot HUMAN. fasta (downloaded at: 16.6.2017) database, including a list of common contaminants. False discovery rates on protein and PSM level were estimated by the target-decoy approach to 1% FDR for both. The minimal peptide length was determined to be 7 amino acids and carbamidomethylation at cysteine residues was considered as a fixed modification. Oxidation and acetylation were included as variable modifications. For the analysis, the match-between runs option was enabled. Label-free quantification (LFQ) was activated using default settings.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Inflammasomes, Innate immunity, Platelets, Megakariocytes

### Affiliations
Institute of Innate Immunity, 
Institute of Innate Immunity Biomedical Center, 1OG011, University Hospitals, University of Bonn Venusberg-Campus 1, 53127 Bonn, Germany

### Submitter
Bernardo Frankllin

### Lab Head
Dr Bernardo Franklin
Institute of Innate Immunity Biomedical Center, 1OG011, University Hospitals, University of Bonn Venusberg-Campus 1, 53127 Bonn, Germany


