### Accession
PXD041835

### Title
Dissecting the effect of a long linker DNA on protein binding to di-nucleosomes decorated with promoter-associated PTMs

### Description
Characteristic features of chromatin states are not limited to particular epigenetic modifications but include other regulatory cues, such as linker DNA length, typically ranging from around 35-55 bp in most eu- and heterochromatin domains (Valouev et al, 2011; Voong et al., 2016, Cell) to over 200 bp in nucleosome-depleted regions (NDRs) found at active enhancers and promoters (Schones et al, 2008; Hansen He et al, 2010). To investigate whether and how the nucleosome linker DNA affects chromatin recognition by nuclear proteins we performed a set of affinity purifications using di-nucleosomes incorporating different DNA linkers. Here, we investigated the effect of a 200 bp di-nucleosome linker DNA represented by scrambled DNA or SV40 promoter DNA sequence on the nuclear protein binding to di-nucleosome decorated with promoter-associated modifications, including H3K4me3K9acK14acK18acK23acK27ac, H4K5acK8acK12acK16acK20me2 and histone variant H2A.Z  Below is a description (modifications and linker) of di-nucleosomes used in pull-downs with HeLa nuclear extracts followed by label-free MS: 1. H3K4me3-5ac,H4K20me2-4ac, H2AZ, 50bp linker 2. H3K4me3-5ac,H4K20me2-4ac, H2AZ, 200bp scrambled DNA linker 3. H3K4me3-5ac,H4K20me2-4ac, H2AZ, 200bp SV40 promoter DNA linker 4. Unmod. H3&H4, 50bp linker 5. Unmod. H3&H4, 200bp scrambled DNA linker 6. Unmod. H3&H4, 200bp SV40 promoter DNA linker

### Sample Protocol
Nuclear extracts were prepared from HeLa S3 cells as previously described (Bartke et al, 2010) except that no isotopically labeled amino acids were used.  For each pull-down, nucleosomes corresponding to 12.5 μg of octamer were immobilized on 10 μl Streptavidin Sepharose High-Performance beads (GE Healthcare) in the final reconstitution buffer (10 mM Tris (pH 7.5), 250 mM KCl, 1mM EDTA, and 1 mM DTT; supplemented with 0.1% NP-40) and then rotated with 0.5 mg HeLa S3 SILAC-labelled nuclear extract in 1 ml of SNAP buffer (20 mM HEPES (pH 7.9), 150 mM NaCl, 0.2 mM EDTA, 10% Glycerol) supplemented with 0.1% NP-40, 1 mM DTT and protease inhibitors cocktail (Roche) for 4 h at 4°C. Nucleosome pull-downs with acetylated histones and the corresponding unmodified control pull-downs were supplemented with HDAC inhibitors (5 mM Sodium butyrate (Sigma Cat#B5887) and 250 nM TSA (Sigma Cat#T1952)) to prevent removal of the acetyl modifications. after incubation with nuclear extracts, beads with immobilized nucleosomes were washed with 1 ml SNAP buffer + 0.1% NP-40 three times, the supernatant was completely removed, and bound proteins were eluted by boiling the beads in 50 µl Laemmli sample buffer containing 1%SDS at 95°C for 5 min. A 20 µl protein aliquot was then digested with trypsin using a filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol and analyzed by LC-MS as described below.   Filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) of label-free proteomics samples  10-20 µl aliquots of protein mixtures in 1% SDS Laemmli sample buffer was diluted with 200 µl of 100 mM TEAB (pH 8.5). For protein reduction, 1 µl of 1 M DTT was added to each sample and samples were incubated at 60°C for 30 min. After cooling the samples to room temperature, 300 µl of freshly prepared UA buffer (8 M urea in 100 mM TEAB (pH 8.5)) was added to each sample. Proteins were alkylated by the addition of 10 µl of 300 mM iodoacetamide solution and subsequent incubation for 30 min. at RT in the dark. Samples were then concentrated to dryness in a 30 kDa cut-off centrifugal spin filter unit (Millipore), and washed three times with 200 µl UA buffer and twice with 200 µl of 50 mM TEAB (pH 8.5). 40 µl of a 50 ng/µl trypsin solution in 50 mM TEAB (pH 8.5) was added to each sample and protein digestion was performed overnight at 37°C. Peptides were centrifuged through the filter, and the collected flow-through was acidified by the addition of trifluoroacetic acid to a final concentration of 0.5% (v/v). About 300 ng of tryptic peptide mixtures were then used for LC-MS analysis as described below.  LC-MS/MS analysis of label-free nucleosome pull-downs was performed on a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, A, U.S.A.) coupled in-line to a nanoEasy LC (Thermo Scientific, Odense, Denmark). Samples were loaded in solvent A (0.1% formic acid) on a two-column setup consisting of a 3.5 cm, 100 µm ID pre-column packed with Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ (5 µm; Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany) and an 18 cm, 75 µm ID analytical column packed with Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ (3 µm; Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany). MS was obtained at a resolution of 120,000 and MS/MS as top 15 at a resolution of 15,000 and with a dynamic exclusion of 30 sec. The maximum injection time was set to 100 ms for both MS and MS/MS and only peptides of charge states 2, 3, and 4 were selected for MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification was performed using the Proteome Discoverer 2.5 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) software. Data was searched against the human SwissProt database using Mascot as search engine, with a precursor mass tolerance of 5 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.05 Da. Two missed cleavages were allowed for trypsin and carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a static modification, while oxidation of methionine was set as dynamic. Label free quantification was achieved as match between runs by utilizing the Minora Feature Detector, the Feature Mapper, and the Precursor Ions Quantifier. The maximum retention time shift for chromatographic alignment was set to 2 minutes and the retention time tolerance for mapping features was set to 1 minute. Peptide quantification was done as peak area normalized to total peptide amount and protein quantification as the average of the top 3 unique peptides.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ndrs, H3k4me3, Pull-down, H3ac, Sv40 promoter, H4ac

### Affiliations
Institute of Functional Epigenetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, 85764 Neuherberg, Germany.
Institute of Functional Epigenetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, 85764 Neuherberg, Germany

### Submitter
Andrey Tvardovskiy

### Lab Head
Dr Till Bartke
Institute of Functional Epigenetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, 85764 Neuherberg, Germany.


