### Accession
PXD038135

### Title
Tartrate resistant acid phosphatase 5 (TRAP5) mediates immune cell recruitment in a murine model of pulmonary bacterial infection

### Description
During airway infection, upregulation of proinflammatory cytokines and subsequent immune cell recruitment is essential to mitigate bacterial infection. Conversely, during prolonged and non-resolving airway inflammation, neutrophils contribute to tissue damage and remodeling. This occurs during diseases including cystic fibrosis (CF) and COPD where bacterial pathogens, not least Pseudomonas aeruginosa, contribute to disease progression through long-lasting infections. Tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase (TRAP) 5 is a metalloenzyme expressed by alveolar macrophages and one of its target substrates is the phosphoglycoprotein osteopontin (OPN). In this study, we found that TRAP5-/- mice had impaired clearance of P. aeruginosa airway infection and reduced recruitment of immune cells. TRAP5 knockdown using siRNA resulted in a decreased activation of the proinflammatory transcription factor NF‐B in reporter mice and a subsequent decrease of proinflammatory gene expression. Add‐back experiments of enzymatically active TRAP5 to TRAP5-/- mice restored immune cell recruitment and bacterial killing. In human CF lung tissue, TRAP5 of alveolar macrophages was detected in proximity to OPN to a higher degree than in normal lung tissue, indicating possible interactions. Taken together, the findings of this study suggest a key role for TRAP5 in modulating airway inflammation. This could have bearing in diseases such as CF and COPD where excessive sterile inflammation could be targeted by pharmacological inhibitors of TRAP5.

### Sample Protocol
Characterization of OPN phosphorylation was carried out using LC-MS/MS. The recombinant human OPN derived from HEK293 cells were expressed in E. coli with protein purities of ≥ 97% and ≥ 90%. The OPN were digested either with trypsin at a ratio of 1:50 to the samples and incubated overnight at 37°C or with thermolysine at a ratio of 1:20 and incubated at 85°C 132 for 5 hrs. The digestion was stopped by addition of 5 µL 10% trifluoroacetic acid. The peptides were Speed Vac to dryness and resolved in 2% ACN, 0.1% TFA. Peptides were analyzed by LC-MS on a quadrupole Orbitrap benchtop mass spectrometer (QExactive, (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA), operated in positive data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched with PEAKS (version 8.5) against UniProt Homo Sapiens (UP000005640, Organism ID 9606). Trypsin or no enzyme (for thermolysine) were selected with one missed cleavage allowance, phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine, methionine oxidation and deamidation of aspargine and glutamine were treated as dynamic modification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Copd, Nf‐b, Acp5, Spp1, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Cystic fibrosis, Trap5

### Affiliations
Department of Respiratory Medicine and Allergology, Faculty of Medicine, Lund University, Sweden
Dept. of Oncology, Clinical Sciences, Lund University, 221 85 Lund, Sweden

### Submitter
Charlotte Welinder

### Lab Head
Dr Arne Egesten
Department of Respiratory Medicine and Allergology, Faculty of Medicine, Lund University, Sweden


