### Accession
PXD019599

### Title
Engineered chemotaxis core signaling units

### Description
Identificaiton of bacterial chemoreceptors by DSSO-based MS2-MS3 method.

### Sample Protocol
In-solution crosslinking, follwoed by trypsin/chymotrypsin double digesiton and nanoLC-MS/MSanalyiss using MS2-MS3 workflow on Orbitrap Fusion ayatem.

### Data Protocol
All raw data files were processed by Protoeme Disocverer 2.2 with XlinkX v2.0 algorithm for identification of cross-linked peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Bacterial chemoreceptors, the histidine kinase CheA, and the coupling protein CheW form transmembrane molecular arrays with remarkable sensing properties. The receptors inhibit or stimulate CheA kinase activity depending on the presence of attractants or repellants, respectively. We engineered chemoreceptor cytoplasmic regions to assume a trimer of receptor dimers configuration that formed well-defined complexes with CheA and CheW and promoted a CheA kinase-off state. These mimics of core signaling units were assembled to homogeneity and investigated by site-directed spin-labeling with pulse-dipolar electron-spin resonance spectroscopy (PDS), small-angle x-ray scattering, targeted protein cross-linking, and cryo-electron microscopy. The kinase-off state was especially stable, had relatively low domain mobility, and associated the histidine substrate and docking domains with the kinase core, thus preventing catalytic activity. Together, these data provide an experimentally restrained model for the inhibited state of the core signaling unit and suggest that chemoreceptors indirectly sequester the kinase and substrate domains to limit histidine autophosphorylation.

### Keywords
Chea, Chew, Crosslinking, Chemoreceptors

### Affiliations
Proteomics Facility and Metabolomics Facility 139 Biotechnology Building, Cornell University 526 Campus Road,  Ithaca, NY 14853
Cornell University

### Submitter
Sheng Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr SHENG ZHANG
Proteomics Facility and Metabolomics Facility 139 Biotechnology Building, Cornell University 526 Campus Road,  Ithaca, NY 14853


