### Accession
PXD029260

### Title
A Redox-Dependent Pathway for Regulating Reversible HDACs Synchronizes Crown Root Development in Rice

### Description
As a signal molecular in aerobic organism, how reactive oxygen species (ROS) regulates normal life is a fundamental biological question. Locally accumulated ROS have been reported to balance cell division and differentiation in root apical meristem. However, the underlying molecular mechanism is unclear. Here, we reveal that developmentally produced H2O2 in plant root apical meristem (RAM) triggers reversible acetylation modification of proteins which involved in protein synthesis and cell proliferation. WOX11, an essential transcription factor for crown roots (CRs) formation, modulates ROS homeostasis by directly regulating class III peroxidases. HDACs (histone deacetylases) sense cellular redox status to enhance their enzyme activities, which drives protein acetylation level alterations in rice roots. Oxidation-dependent on WOX11 triggered protein acetylation modification leads to a robust root system in rice. Our study revealed a novel regulatory mechanism which cellular redox status via a WOX11-dependent manner regulates protein acetylation during rice crown root development. The molecular link between the redox status and HDACs activities through WOX11-dependent pathway may provide new insight into which plants exploit developmentally produced ROS to direct organogenesis. Additionally, HDACs reversible enzyme activity via redox-regulated endows with the flexibility of protein modification control in dealing with developmental and changing environmental cues.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction  Proteins were extracted as previously reported 21,52,53. In brief, rice roots were ground in liquid nitrogen and homogenized in buffer containing 250 mM sucrose, 10 mM EGTA, 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 1% (v/v) TritonX-100, 1 mM PMSF and 1 mM DTT. Then centrifuged at 15,000 g for 15 min at 4 °C, precipitated proteins with ice-cold acetone for more than 2 h at -20 °C, and then centrifuged at 15,000 g for 15 min at 4 °C. The final protein pellet was washed with cold acetone for three times, and then lyophilized and stored at -80 °C for further use. Protein pellet was first dissolved in 100 mM NH4HCO3 (pH 8.0) and the protein concentration was measured by the Bradford method following the manufacturer’s instructions (Bio-Rad protein assay, USA).  LC-MS/MS-based quantitative acetylproteomics Trypsin Digestion For trypsin digestion, the protein solution was first reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and then alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The urea concentration of the protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to less than 2 M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 ratio (trypsin-to-protein mass) for the first digestion (overnight) and then at 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second digestion (4 h). Affinity Enrichment The peptides were dissolved in IP buffer solution (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-Hcl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0), then was transferred to the pre-washed antibody beads (PTM-104, PTM Bio) at 4°C for 12 h with gentle shaking. After incubation, IP buffer solution was used to wash the beads for 4 times and deionized water for 2 times. Finally, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid was used to elute the bound peptides for three times, and the eluent was collected and vacuum- dried. For LC-MS/MS analysis, the resulting peptides were desalted with C18 ZipTips (Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. LC-MS/MS Analysis  The peptides were dissolved in a liquid chromatography mobile phase A (0.1% (V/V) formic acid aqueous solution) and separated using a NanoElute ultra performance liquid chromatography system. Mobile phase A is an aqueous solution containing 0.1% formic acid. Mobile phase B is acetonitrile solution containing 0.1% formic acid. Liquid phase gradient setting: 0-20 min, 6%-22%B; 20-26 min, 22%-30%B; 26-28 min, 30%-80%B; 28-30 min, 80%B, flow rate maintained at 300 nL/min. The peptides were separated by ultra-performance liquid chromatography and then ionized by injecting into the Capillary ion source. Then the peptides were analyzed by TIMS-TOF Pro mass spectrometry. The ion source voltage was set at 1.4 kV, and the peptide parent ions and secondary fragments were detected and analyzed by TOF. The scanning range of secondary mass spectrometry was set to 100-1700 m/z. The data acquisition mode used the parallel cumulative Serial fragmentation (PASEF) mode. After a first-stage mass spectrometry acquisition, secondary spectrogram with the charge of the parent ion in the range of 0-5 was collected in PASEF mode for 10 times. The dynamic elimination time of tandem mass spectrometry scanning was set as 24 seconds to avoid repeated scanning of the parent ion.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed by Maxquant (v1.6.6.0). Search parameter settings were as follows: the database was Oryza_sativa_japonica_UniPort (48914 proteins) and the anti-database and common contamination database were added to calculate the false positive rate (FDR), and to eliminate the influence of contaminated proteins, respectively; the enzyme digestion mode was set to Trypsin/P and the number of missing sites was set to 4. The mass error tolerance of the primary parent ion of First search and Main search was set to 70 ppm and the mass error tolerance of the secondary fragment ion was 0.04 Da. The alkylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification; methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation of protein, acetylation of lysine, and deamidation were set as variable modifications. The FDR of protein identification and PSM identification was set to 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Acetylome；ros；rice root；hdac；wox11

### Affiliations
Huazhong Agricultural University

### Submitter
qiutao xu

### Lab Head
Dr Qiutao Xu
Huazhong Agricultural University


