### Accession
PXD038103

### Title
Identification of SAFB and HnrnpU interactors

### Description
Scaffold Attachment Factor B (SAFB) is a conserved RNA Binding Protein (RBP) that is essential for early mammalian development. However, the RNAs that associate with SAFB in mouse embryonic stem cells have not been characterized. Here, we addressed this unknown using RNA-seq and SAFB RNA immunoprecipitation followed by RNA-seq (RIP-seq) in wild-type mouse embryonic stem cells (ESCs) and in ESCs in which SAFB and SAFB2 were knocked out. The transcript most enriched in SAFB association was the lncRNA Malat1, which contains a series of purine-rich motifs in its 5 end. Beyond Malat1, SAFB predominantly associated with introns of protein-coding genes also through purine-rich motifs. Knockout of SAFB/2 led to down- and upregulation of genes in multiple biological pathways. The nascent transcripts of many downregulated genes associated with high levels of SAFB in wild-type cells, implying that SAFB binding promotes the expression of these genes. Reintroduction of SAFB into double-knockout cells restored gene expression towards wild-type levels, an effect that was again observable at the level of nascent transcripts. Proteomic analyses indicate an enrichment of nuclear speckle-associated, SR proteins in FLAG-tagged SAFB immunoprecipitated samples. Comparison to immunoprecipitates made from FLAG-tagging of another nuclear-enriched RNA-binding protein called HNRNPU (also known as SAF-A) identified both similarities and differences. Perhaps most notably, we observed a stronger enrichment for speckle-associated proteins in SAFB immunoprecipitations and a strong enrichment for paraspeckle-associated proteins in HNRNPU immunoprecipitations. Our findings suggest that among other potential functions in mouse embryonic stem cells, SAFB directly promotes the expression of a subset of genes through its ability to bind purine regions in nascent RNA.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitated protein samples were subjected to on-bead trypsin digestion as previously described (Rank et al. 2021). Briefly, after the last wash buffer step during affinity purification, beads were resuspended in 50ul of 50mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8). On-bead digestion was performed by adding 50ul 50mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH8) and 1ug trypsin and incubated, shaking, overnight at 37ºC. Beads were pelleted and transferred supernatants to fresh tubes. The beads were washed twice with 100ul LC-MS grade water, and washes added to the original supernatants. Samples were acidified by adding formic acid to final concentration of 2%, to pH ~2. Peptides were desalted using peptide desalting spin columns (Thermo), lyophilized, and stored at -80ºC until further analysis. The peptide samples were analyzed by LC/MS/MS using an Easy nLC 1200 coupled to a QExactive HF Biopharma mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Samples were injected onto an Easy Spray PepMap C18 column (75 μm id × 25 cm, 2 μm particle size) (Thermo Scientific) and separated over a 2 hr method. The gradient for separation consisted of 5–45% mobile phase B at a 250 nl/min flow rate, where mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid in water and mobile phase B consisted of 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (ACN). The QExactive HF was operated in data-dependent mode where the 15 most intense precursors were selected for subsequent fragmentation. Resolution for the precursor scan (m/z 350–1700) was set to 60,000, while MS/MS scans resolution was set to 15,000. The normalized collision energy was set to 27% for HCD. Peptide match was set to preferred, and precursors with unknown charge or a charge state of 1 and ≥ 7 were excluded.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were processed using MaxQuant version 1.6.15.0 and searched against the reviewed mouse database (containing 17,051 entries), appended with a contaminants database, using Andromeda within MaxQuant. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, up to two missed cleavage sites were allowed, and methionine oxidation and N-terminus acetylation were set as variable modifications. A 1% FDR was used to filter all data. Match between runs was enabled (5 min match time window, 20 min alignment window), and a minimum of two unique peptides was required for label-free quantitation using the LFQ intensities. Perseus (version 1.6.14.0) was used for further processing (Tyanova et al. 2016). Only proteins with >1 unique+razor peptide were used for LFQ analysis. Proteins with 50% missing values were removed and missing values were imputed from normal distribution within Perseus. Log2 fold change (FC) ratios were calculated using the averaged Log2 LFQ intensities of sample compared to control, and students t-test performed for each pairwise comparison, with p-values calculated. Proteins with significant p-values (<0.05) and Log2 FC >1 were considered biological interactors. Key: Samples 1-2 = FL SAFB IP (biological replicate) Samples 3-4 = safbΔdd2 IP (biological replicate) Samples 5-6 = eGFP IP (control; biological replicate) Samples 9-R1, 9-R = HnrnpU IP (Technical replicate) Samples 10-R1, 10-R2 = HnrnpUΔ2 IP (Technical replicate)

### Publication Abstract
The Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2) is a conserved enzyme that tri-methylates Lysine 27 on Histone 3 (H3K27me3) to promote gene silencing. PRC2 is remarkably responsive to the expression of certain long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs). In the most notable example, PRC2 is recruited to the X-chromosome shortly after expression of the lncRNA Xist begins during X-chromosome inactivation. However, the mechanisms by which lncRNAs recruit PRC2 to chromatin are not yet clear. We report that a broadly used rabbit monoclonal antibody raised against human EZH2, a catalytic subunit of PRC2, cross-reacts with an RNA-binding protein called Scaffold Attachment Factor B (SAFB) in mouse embryonic stem cells (ESCs) under buffer conditions that are commonly used for chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP). Knockout of EZH2 in ESCs demonstrated that the antibody is specific for EZH2 by western blot (no cross-reactivity). Likewise, comparison to previously published datasets confirmed that the antibody recovers PRC2-bound sites by ChIP-Seq. However, RNA-IP from formaldehyde-crosslinked ESCs using ChIP wash conditions recovers distinct peaks of RNA association that co-localize with peaks of SAFB and whose enrichment disappears upon knockout of SAFB but not EZH2. IP and mass spectrometry-based proteomics in wild-type and EZH2 knockout ESCs confirm that the EZH2 antibody recovers SAFB in an EZH2-independent manner. Our data highlight the importance of orthogonal assays when studying interactions between chromatin-modifying enzymes and RNA.

### Keywords
Stem cell, Rna binding proteins, Development

### Affiliations
Department of Pharmacology, RNA Discovery Center, and Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
University of North Carolina - Chapel Hill

### Submitter
Christine Mills

### Lab Head
Dr Mauro Calabrese
Department of Pharmacology, RNA Discovery Center, and Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill


