### Accession
PXD032961

### Title
The mechanisms of neutrophil dysfunction during sepsis

### Description
The project examines the mechanisms of neutrophil dysfunction during sepsis. Our work uncovered the central role of cell free circulating histones in eliminating mature neutrophil in favour of immature cells and characterized the mechanisms that regulate their release following systemic infection. Mature and immature neutrophil Ly6Ghigh and Ly6Glow populations isolated from the spleens of WT and TCRα-deficient mice either naïve or infected with C. albicans were characterized. In addition, these populations were compared to neutrophils isolated from WT mice receiving Clodronate-liposomes and recombinant G-CSF. These studies demonstrated that T-cell derived histones drive the release of G-CSF in the spleen and progressively eliminate mature neutrophils by shortening their lifespan. Finally, we conducted proteomic analysis of plasmas isolated from patients with microbial sepsis to correlate markers of neutrophil death to plasma cytokine and histone levels, confirming the pathogenic role these molecules play during sepsis in humans.

### Sample Protocol
24 (heparin-treated) plasma samples of WT naive, WT infected, TCRα -/- naive, TCRα -/- infected mice in equal replicates of six were used for proteomics analysis. The samples were randomised and plated in a 96-well plate (Eppendorf). The protocol used for protein/peptide extraction and proteomics analysis has been described in detail in Messner et al., 2020 66. Briefly, 5μL of plasma was denatured in 50μl 8M Urea (Honeywell Research Chemicals), 100mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC, Honeywell Research Chemicals) and reduced with 5μL of 50mM dithiothreitol (DTT, Sigma Aldrich) at 30oC for 1 hour. Alkylation with 5μL of 100mM iodoacetamide (IAA, Sigma Aldrich) followed, at 23oC for 30 minutes in the dark. Then the samples were diluted with 340μL of 100mM ABC and 220μL were added to trypsin solution (Promega) for protein digestion at a trypsin/protein ratio of 1/40 and incubated at 37°C overnight (17h). Quenching of digestion was done by the addition of 25μL of 10% v/v formic acid (FA, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Rounds of solid phase extraction clean-up steps were performed with the use of C18 96-well plates (BioPureSPE Macro 96-Well, 100mg PROTO C18, The Nest Group) as described previously in Messner et al. 2020 66. Methanol (Fisher Chemicals), 50% v/v acetonitrile (ACN, Fisher Chemicals) or 0.1% v/v FA was used at each centrifugation step as required. After final elution, the collected peptide material was dried by a vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf Concentrator Plus) and redissolved in 50μl 0.1% v/v FA, to be processed by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry.  1μg of protein digest (peptides) was injected and analysed on a nanoAcquity Liquid Chromatograph (Waters) coupled to a TripleTOF 6600 Mass Spectrometer (Sciex) at a flow-rate of 5µl/min. Separation was achieved using a Waters HSS T3 column (150mm x 300µm, 1.8µm particles) in 20-minute non-linear gradients starting with 3% B up to 40% B (Buffer A: 0.1% v/v FA; Buffer B: ACN / 0.1% v/v FA). A data independent acquisition (DIA/SWATH) method was used, with MS1 scan from m/z 400 to m/z 1250 and 50ms accumulation time followed by 40 MS2 scans of 35ms accumulation time with variable precursor isolation width covering the mass range from m/z 400 to m/z 1250. Ion source gas 1 (nebulizer gas), ion source gas 2 (heater gas) and curtain gas were set to 30, 15 and 25 respectively. The source temperature was set to 450°C and the ion spray voltage to 5500V. Injections of samples took place in a random order.

### Data Protocol
The library was generated with “gas-phase fractionation” methodology out of pooled peptide digest of all mouse plasma samples with the use of a LC-MS/MS method as mentioned before. 3μg of protein digest was separated with a 60-minute linear gradient (3% B to 40% B). Injections were performed at the mass ranges of: 400 – 500 m/z, 495 – 600 m/z, 595 – 700 m/z, 695 – 800 m/z, 795 – 900 m/z, 895 – 1000 m/z, 995 – 1100 m/z, 1095 – 1250 m/z. The precursor selection windows were 2 m/z (1 m/z overlap). DIA-NN 1.7.10 proteomics analysis software was used for the library preparation with Mus musculus (mouse) UniProt (UniProt Consortium, 2019) isoform sequence database (UP000000589) to annotate the library67, 68. For protein quantification, raw data acquired were processed with DIA-NN 1.7.10 with the “robust LC (high precision)” mode with MS2, MS1 and scan window size set to 20ppm, 12ppm and 8 respectively.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sepsis, Mouse model

### Affiliations
The Francis Crick Institute
Einstein Professor of Biochemistry Head, Institute of Biochemistry, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Germany markus.ralser@charite.de  Senior Group Leader, The Francis Crick Institute, London, UK markus.ralser@crick.ac.uk

### Submitter
Spyros Vernardis

### Lab Head
Dr Markus Ralser
Einstein Professor of Biochemistry Head, Institute of Biochemistry, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Germany markus.ralser@charite.de  Senior Group Leader, The Francis Crick Institute, London, UK markus.ralser@crick.ac.uk


