### Accession
PXD045631

### Title
Proteomic analysis of single muscle fibres from WT and C18ORF25 KO mice

### Description
C18ORF25 is a homolog of Arkadia (RNF111), an E3 ubiquitin ligase with SUMO-interaction motifs (SIMs) (PMID: 31417085). However, C18ORF25 lacks the entire C-terminal RING domain of RNF111 which is required for ubiquitin binding suggesting it lacks ubiquitination activity and may therefore act as an adaptor or signalling scaffold (PMID: 26283374). We have previously shown that mice lacking C18Orf25 throughout the entire body have increased adiposity, decreased lean mass, lower exercise capacity and significantly reduced ex vivo skeletal muscle force production (PMID: 35882232). Skeletal muscle isolated from C18Orf25 knockout (KO) mice have reduced cAMP-dependent protein kinase A (PKA) levels, and reduced phosphorylation of several contractile proteins and proteins involved in calcium handling. Furthermore, analysis of single muscle fibres from C18Orf25 KO mice revealed impaired SR calcium cycling in fast-twitch fibres only (PMID: 35882232). Hence, we investigated these mechanisms by developing an integrated single-fibre physiology and single-fibre proteomic platform. The platform enabled us to identify hundreds of novel phenotype:protein correlations. The analysis also enabled us to identify proteome differences specifically in FT fibres following loss of C18ORF25. Taken together, our data suggest C18ORF25 is likely a multi-functional protein with several underlying mechanisms contributing to skeletal muscle physiology.

### Sample Protocol
Single fibres were reduced with10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (Sigma; #75259) and 40 mM 2-chloroacetamide (Sigma; #22790) in a 1% SDS in 100 mM Tris, pH 8.5 and heated at 95°C for 5 min then lysed via tip-probe sonication. Samples were prepared using a modified SP3 protocol (PMID: 30464214). Briefly, Seramag speedbead carboxyl beads (GE Life Sciences) were prepared where a 1:1 mix of hydrophilic (Cat No. 45152105050250) and hydrophobic (Cat No. 65152105050250) beads were washed with and resuspended in LC grade H2O at 10mg/ml of each bead type. 10ul of prepared beads and 110ul of LC grade ethanol were then added to each lysate. They were then shaken for 8 minutes at 1600RPM, spun down at 1000xg for 1 minute at room temp. Lysates were placed on a magnetic rack for 1 minute after which supernatant was discarded. Beads were then washed 3x with 950ul of 80% LC grade ethanol. The last wash was removed, and beads were air dried for approximately 10 minutes then resuspended in 25ul of Digestion Buffer (10% 2,2,2-Trifluoroethanol (Sigma; #96924)) in 100 mM HEPEs pH 8.5). Assuming 3ug of protein in a single fibre, lysates were digested with sequencing grade trypsin (Sigma; #T6567) and sequencing grade LysC (Wako; #129-02541) at a 1:50 enzyme:substrate ratio overnight at 37°C with shaking at 2000 RPM. Samples were then acidified to a final concentration of 1% TFA in 90% isopropanol and purified by in-house packed SDB-RPS (Sigma; #66886-U) microcolumns. The purified peptides were resuspended in 2% acetonitrile in 0.1% TFA and stored at −80°C prior to direct injection by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were analyzed on a Dionex 3500 nanoHPLC, coupled to an Orbitrap Exploris mass spectrometer (ThermoFischer Scientific) via electrospray ionization in positive mode with 1.9 kV at 275 °C and RF set to 40%. Separation was achieved on a 50 cm × 75 µm column packed with C18AQ (1.9 µm; Dr Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany) (PepSep, Marslev, Denmark) over 90min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The peptides were eluted over a linear gradient of 3–40% Buffer B (Buffer A: 0.1% formic acid; Buffer B: 80% v/v acetonitrile, 0.1% v/v FA) and the column was maintained at 50 °C. The instrument was operated in data-independent acquisition mode with an MS1 spectrum acquired over the mass range 350–1400 m/z (60,000 resolution, 250% automatic gain control (AGC) and 50 ms maximum injection time) followed by MS/MS via HCD fragmentation with 50 windows with 13.7 m/z isolation and a 1 m/z overlap (30,000 resolution, 2000% AGC and maximum injection time set to auto).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Single muscle fibre proteomics, C18orf25

### Affiliations
The University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Benjamin Parker

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin Parker
The University of Melbourne


