### Accession
PXD008468

### Title
Plasma proteomics reveals the confounding effect of heparin administration on the analysis of candidate cardiovascular biomarkers - Cohort2

### Description
Several plasma proteins have been suggested as markers for a variety of cardiovascular conditions but fail to qualify in independent patient cohorts. One reason may relate to interference of medication on plasma protein levels. In the present study we applied a proteomic approach to identify plasma proteins that changed in concentration with heparin administration and therefore potentially may confound their as biomarkers in situations where heparin is used.

### Sample Protocol
For the controlled intervention study and the cross sectional study, 100 µl plasma samples were diluted with 900 binding buffer (TBS + 2 % tween 80) and incubated with 20 µl of an agarose-linked para-aminobenzamidine (ABA) slurry (Sigma cat.no. 8332) for two hours in 1.5 ml Eppendorf tubes on a rotating wheel. Unbound proteins were removed by washing with TBS buffer and the affinity-enriched proteins were on-beads reduced in the presence of 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 50 °C for 30 minutes followed by the blocking of the reduced sulfhydryl groups by incubation with 15 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the darkness. Tryptic digestion was performed by the addition of trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) (protein:trypsin ratio: 50:1 w/w) and incubation at 37° C overnight. Samples were labelled with 10-plex TMT according to vendor instructions (tandem mass tags, Thermo Scientific). To be able to quantitate all samples individually and compare them to each other all runs included both eight individual labeled samples and two appropriate pools used in every run for calibration. In case of the controlled intervention study we used a pool of the 9 samples before heparin administration (baseline samples) as internal control (labelled with mass tag 126), whereas individual baseline samples and samples collected 2, 15, and 60 min after heparin administration were labelled with the remaining mass tags of the 10-plex TMT-kit (mass tags 127N, 127C, 128N, 128C, 129N, 130N, and 130C). Baseline samples and time course samples from two patients were mixed in in five 10-plex sample sets. For the cross sectional validation study a pool of 80 untreated patient samples served as internal control (mass tag 126) whereas the 500 patient samples were randomly labelled with the mass tags (mass tags 127N, 127C, 128N, 128C, 129N, 130N, and 130C) of the 10-plex TMT kit and mixed in 63 10-plex sample sets. The samples were dried in a vacuum centrifuge and re-dissolved in 50 µl of a 0.1 % trifluoroacetic acid solution, and purified using microcolumn packed with reversed phased material (equal w/w amounts of Poros R2 and Oligo R3 material). Bound peptides were eluted with 90 % acetonitrile/0.1% TFA and fractionated as described.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis Combined MASCOT-SEQUEST search were performed where peak lists (mgf files) were processed using the Proteome Discoverer version 2.1 software version 2.1.0.81. The search parameters were set to: MS accuracy 8 ppm, MSMS accuracy 0.05 Da for HCD data, with two missed cleavages allowed, fixed modification of cystein blocked with carbamidomethyl, 6-plex TMT labeling and N-terminal amines, and variable modifications; methionine oxidation and deamidated asparagines. Tandem mass spectra were searched against the Swissprot database (downloaded 7th November 2012, 452768 entries), restricted to humans. Proteins were inferred on a basis of at least one unique peptide identified with a high confidence (FDR<1 %).  Statistical analysis P values, based on student´s t test, were calculated for the comparison of baseline values with values obtained after 2, 15, and 60 minutes after heparin administration for the intervention study and for the heparin-treated vs. un-treated groups for the cross-sectional study. Protein fold-changes are calculated as means of heparin-treated/means of un-treated. Significance level was set to 5%. P-values were adjusted according to the Bonferroni method. In the cross-sectional study (Table 1) dichotomous variables are presented as numbers (n) and percentages (%). Chi-square or Fisher’s exact test were used to test differences between groups, as appropriate. Continuous variables are presented as means with standard deviations (SD), or median and 25th and 75th percentile (25; 75) for variables with a skewed distribution. Comparisons between groups were performed using Student’s t-test or Mann–Whitney U-test, as appropriate.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Heparin, Cardiovascular biomkarkers, Chemi-proteomics

### Affiliations
Odense University Hospital, Odense, Denmark
Odense University Hospital, Dept Clinical Biochemistry and Pharmacology, Odense, DK-5000, Denmark

### Submitter
Hans Christian Beck

### Lab Head
Dr Hans Christian Beck
Odense University Hospital, Dept Clinical Biochemistry and Pharmacology, Odense, DK-5000, Denmark


