### Accession
PXD009662

### Title
Time resolved quantitative phospho-tyrosine analysis reveals Bruton’s Tyrosine kinase mediated signaling downstream of the mutated granulocyte-colony stimulating factor receptors

### Description
Granulocyte-colony stimulating factor receptor (G-CSFR) controls myeloid progenitor proliferation and differentiation to neutrophils. Mutations in CSF3R (encoding G-CSFR) have been reported in patients with chronic neutrophilic leukemia (CNL) and acute myeloid leukemia (AML); however, despite years of research, the malignant downstream signaling of the mutated G-CSFRs is not well understood. Here, we utilized a quantitative phospho-tyrosine analysis to generate a comprehensive signaling map of G-CSF induced tyrosine phosphorylation in the normal versus mutated (proximal: T618I and truncated: Q741x) G-CSFRs. Unbiased clustering and kinase enrichment analysis identified rapid induction of phospho-proteins associated with endocytosis by the wild-type G-CSFR only; while G-CSFR mutants showed abnormal kinetics of canonical STAT3, STAT5 and MAPK phosphorylation, and aberrant activation of Bruton’s Tyrosine Kinase (Btk). Mutant-G-CSFR-expressing cells displayed enhanced sensitivity (5-fold lower IC50) for Ibrutinib-based chemical inhibition of Btk. Finally, primary murine progenitor cells from G-CSFR-d715x knock-in mice validate activation of Btk by the mutant receptor, and display enhanced sensitivity to Ibrutinib. Together, these data demonstrate the strength of unsupervised proteomics analyses in dissecting oncogenic pathways, and suggest repositioning Ibrutinib for therapy of myeloid leukemia bearing CSF3R mutations.

### Sample Protocol
. In summary, a retroviral transduction approach was used with BaF3 cells to set-up an in vitro model system expressing WT, T618I, and Q741x G-CSFRs expressing cells. SILAC labelling was used to culture the transduced BaF3 cells in ‘light’ SILAC medium (containing C-12, N-14 Lysine and Arginine) and ‘heavy’ SILAC medium (containing C-13, N-15 Lysine and Arginine). After mixing the comparative samples and digesting them with trypsin, the SILAC-labelled peptides were further enriched for phospho-tyrosine using immobilized pY-1000 phosphotyrosine antibodies peptides as previously described (15-17). Enriched phospho-peptides were analyzed on a TripleTOF 5600+ MS (Sciex, Concord, ON, Canada) coupled to an Eksigent (Dublin, CA) nanoLC Ultra nanoflow system.

### Data Protocol
. In summary, a retroviral transduction approach was used with BaF3 cells to set-up an in vitro model system expressing WT, T618I, and Q741x G-CSFRs expressing cells. SILAC labelling was used to culture the transduced BaF3 cells in ‘light’ SILAC medium (containing C-12, N-14 Lysine and Arginine) and ‘heavy’ SILAC medium (containing C-13, N-15 Lysine and Arginine). After mixing the comparative samples and digesting them with trypsin, the SILAC-labelled peptides were further enriched for phospho-tyrosine using immobilized pY-1000 phosphotyrosine antibodies peptides as previously described (15-17). Enriched phospho-peptides were analyzed on a TripleTOF 5600+ MS (Sciex, Concord, ON, Canada) coupled to an Eksigent (Dublin, CA) nanoLC Ultra nanoflow system.

### Publication Abstract
Granulocyte-colony stimulating factor receptor (G-CSFR) controls myeloid progenitor proliferation and differentiation to neutrophils. Mutations in CSF3R (encoding G-CSFR) have been reported in patients with chronic neutrophilic leukemia (CNL) and acute myeloid leukemia (AML); however, despite years of research, the malignant downstream signaling of the mutated G-CSFRs is not well understood. Here, we used a quantitative phospho-tyrosine analysis to generate a comprehensive signaling map of G-CSF induced tyrosine phosphorylation in the normal versus mutated (proximal: T618I and truncated: Q741x) G-CSFRs. Unbiased clustering and kinase enrichment analysis identified rapid induction of phospho-proteins associated with endocytosis by the wild type G-CSFR only; while G-CSFR mutants showed abnormal kinetics of canonical Stat3, Stat5, and Mapk phosphorylation, and aberrant activation of Bruton's Tyrosine Kinase (Btk). Mutant-G-CSFR-expressing cells displayed enhanced sensitivity (3-5-fold lower IC50) for ibrutinib-based chemical inhibition of Btk. Primary murine progenitor cells from G-CSFR-Q741x knock-in mice validated activation of Btk by the mutant receptor and retrovirally transduced human CD34<sup>+</sup> umbilical cord blood cells expressing mutant receptors displayed enhanced sensitivity to Ibrutinib. A significantly lower clonogenic potential was displayed by both murine and human primary cells expressing mutated receptors upon ibrutinib treatment. Finally, a dramatic synergy was observed between ibrutinib and ruxolinitib at lower dose of the individual drug. Altogether, these data demonstrate the strength of unsupervised proteomics analyses in dissecting oncogenic pathways, and suggest repositioning Ibrutinib for therapy of myeloid leukemia bearing CSF3R mutations. Phospho-tyrosine data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD009662.

### Keywords
Cnl, Aml, Ruxolitinib, Phosphoproteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Silac, Ibrutinib

### Affiliations
University of Cincinnati
Department of Cancer Biology, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio 45267

### Submitter
Pankaj Dwivedi

### Lab Head
Dr Kenneth Greis
Department of Cancer Biology, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio 45267


