### Accession
PXD032802

### Title
New molecular mechanisms in cholangiocarcinoma: signals triggering interleukin-6 production in tumor cells and KRAS co-opted epigenetic mediators driving metabolic reprogramming.

### Description
Cholangiocarcinoma (CCA) is a deadly tumour lacking effective therapies. Clinically-relevant experimental models and analysis of human samples represent the cornerstone of mechanistic cancer research. Thioacetamide (TAA)-induced intrahepatic CCA (iCCA) in rats encompasses key histological and molecular features of human iCCA. Molecular studies in bile may capture carcinogenic alterations and therapeutic vulnerabilities in CCA. We performed bile proteomic and metabolomic analyses in this model leading us to identify unrecognized mechanisms relevant to human iCCA.

### Sample Protocol
S-TrapTM protein digestion Protein digestion in the S-Trap filter (Protifi, Huntington, NY, USA) was performed following the manufacturer’s procedure with slight modifications. Briefly, 30 µl of bile were first mixed with 5% SDS and 5 mM TCEP (final concentrations), reduced at 37 °C for 60 min, followed by addition of 1 µL of 200 mM cysteine-blocking reagent MMTS (SCIEX) for 10 min at room temperature. Afterwards, 12%  phosphoric acid and then seven volumes of binding buffer (90% methanol; 100 mM TEAB) were added to the sample (final phosphoric acid concentration: 1.2%). After mixing, the protein solution was loaded to an S-Trap filter in two consecutive steps, separated by a 2 min centrifugation at 3000 x g. Then the filter was washed 3 times with 150 μL of binding buffer. Finally, 1.5 µg of MS-grade trypsin was added to a 100 mM TEAB solution and spun through the S-Trap prior to digestion. Flow-through was then reloaded to the top of the S-Trap column and allowed to digest o/n at 37 °C. To avoid liquid leakage from the S-Trap column, a customized yellow tip with 9 Empore 3M C18 disks (Sigma-Aldrich) was placed at the bottom tip of the S-Trap column during digestion. To elute peptides, two step-wise buffers were applied (1) 40 μL of 25 mM TEAB and 2) 40 μL of 80% acetonitrile and 0.2% formic acid in H2O), separated by a 2 min centrifugation at 3000 x g in each case. Eluted peptides were pooled and vacuum centrifuged to dryness.  Liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry analysis Digested samples from both workflows (A and B) were cleaned-up/desalted using SEP-PAK C18 cartridges (Waters). After desalting, peptide concentration was carried out by Qubit™ Fluorometric Quantitation (Thermo Fisher Scientific). A 1 µg aliquot of each digested sample was subjected to 1D-nano LC-ESI-MS/MS analysis using a nano liquid chromatography system (Eksigent Technologies nanoLC Ultra 1D plus, SCIEX, Foster City, CA) coupled to high speed Triple TOF 5600 mass spectrometer (SCIEX, Foster City, CA) with a Nanospray III source. The analytical column used was a silica-based reversed phase Acquity UPLC M-Class Peptide BEH C18 Column, 75 µm × 150 mm, 1.7 µm particle size and 130 Å pore size (Waters). The trap column was a C18 Acclaim PepMapTM 100 (Thermo Scientific), 100 µm × 2 cm, 5 µm particle diameter, 100 Å pore size, switched on-line with the analytical column. The loading pump delivered a solution of 0.1% formic acid in water at 2 µl/min. The nano-pump provided a flow-rate of 250 nl/min and was operated under gradient elution conditions. Peptides were separated using a 250 minutes gradient ranging from 2% to 90% mobile phase B (mobile phase A: 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid; mobile phase B: 100% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). Injection volume was 5 µl.  Data acquisition was performed with a TripleTOF 5600 System (SCIEX, Foster City, CA). Data was acquired using an ionspray voltage floating (ISVF) 2300 V, curtain gas (CUR) 35, interface heater temperature (IHT) 150, ion source gas 1 (GS1) 25, declustering potential (DP) 100 V. All data was acquired using information-dependent acquisition (IDA) mode with Analyst TF 1.7 software (SCIEX, USA). For IDA parameters, 0.25s MS survey scan in the mass range of 350–1250 Da were followed by 35 MS/MS scans of 100ms in the mass range of 100–1800 (total cycle time: 4 s). Switching criteria were set to ions greater than mass to charge ratio (m/z) 350 and smaller than m/z 1250 with charge state of 2–5 and an abundance threshold of more than 90 counts (cps). Former target ions were excluded for 15s. IDA rolling collision energy (CE) parameters script was used for automatically controlling the CE.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry data obtained were processed using PeakView® 2.2 Software (SCIEX, Foster City, CA) and exported as mgf files. Proteomics data analysis were performed by using 4 search engines (Mascot Server v.2.6.1, OMSSA, X!Tandem and Myrimatch) and a target/decoy database built from sequences in the Rattus norvegicus proteome at Uniprot Knowledgebase. All search engines were configured to match potential peptide candidates to recalibrated spectra with mass error tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment ion tolerance of 0.02 Da, allowing for up to two missed tryptic cleavage sites and a maximum isotope error (13C) of 1, considering fixed MMTS modification of cysteine and variable oxidation of methionine, pyroglutamic acid from glutamine or glutamic acid at the peptide N-terminus. Score distribution models were used to compute peptide-spectrum match p-values1, and spectra recovered by a FDR* <= 0.01 (peptide-level) filter were selected for quantitative analysis. Differential regulation was measured using linear models2, and statistical significance was measured using q-values (FDR). All analyses were conducted using software from Proteobotics (Madrid, Spain). Functional analyses were performed with Ingenuity Pathway Analysis, IPA (Quiagen).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cholangiocarcinoma; bile; inflammation; interleukin-6; kras; g9a histone methyl-transferase; serine-glycine pathway; metabolic reprogramming.

### Affiliations
Hepatology Program, CIMA, University of Navarra. Avda. Pio XII, n55. 31008 Pamplona, Spain.
Proteobotics S.L.

### Submitter
Antonio Ramos Fernández

### Lab Head
Dr Matías A. Ávila
Hepatology Program, CIMA, University of Navarra. Avda. Pio XII, n55. 31008 Pamplona, Spain.


