### Accession
PXD020051

### Title
ERR agonism reverses mitochondrial dysfunction and inflammation in the aging kidney

### Description
A gradual decline in renal function occurs even in healthy aging individuals. In addition to aging per se, concurrent metabolic syndrome and hypertension, which are common in the aging population, can induce mitochondrial dysfunction, and inflammation, which collectively contribute to age-related kidney disease. Here we studied the role of the nuclear hormone receptors, the estrogen related receptors (ERRs) in regulation of age-related mitochondrial dysfunction and inflammation. ERRs are decreased in aging human and mouse kidneys and preserved in aging mice with lifelong caloric restriction (CR). Our studies identified ERRs as important modulators of age-related mitochondrial dysfunction and inflammation. ERRα, ERRβ, and ERRγ levels are decreased in the aging kidney.  Remarkably, only a 4-week treatment of 21-month-old mice with the pan ERR agonist reversed the age-related increases in albuminuria and podocyte loss, mitochondrial dysfunction and inflammatory cytokines, including the cGAS-STING and STAT3 signaling pathways. A 3-week treatment of 21-month-old mice with a STING inhibitor reversed the increases in inflammatory cytokines and the senescence marker p21 but also unexpectedly reversed the age-related decreases in PGC-1α, ERRα, mitochondrial complexes and Mcad expression.

### Sample Protocol
200 microgram of kidney tissue were homogenized and lysed by 8M urea in 20mM HEPES (pH=8.0) buffer with protease and phosphatase inhibitors using Tissue Lyser II (QIAGEN). Samples were reduced and alkylated followed by MS-grade trypsin digestion. The resulting tryptic peptides were labeled with 11 plex tandem mass tag (TMT). After quench, the tagged peptides were combined and fractionated with basic-pH reverse-phase high-performance liquid chromatography, collected in a 96-well plate and combined for a total of 12 fractions prior to desalting and subsequent liquid chromatography−tandem mass spectrometry (LC−MS/MS) processing on a Orbitrap Q-Exactive HF (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer interfaced with an Ultimate 3000 nanoflow LC system 58. Each fraction was separated on a reverse phase C18 nano-column (25cm   75 μm, 2μm particles) with a linear gradient 4~45% solvent B (0.1% TFA in Acetonitrile). Data dependent mode was applied to analyze the top 15 most abundant peaks in one acquisition cycle.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were mapped against Uniprot mouse database (version 20170207) using the MaxQuant software package (version 1.5.3.30) with the Andromeda search engine . Corrected intensities of the reporter ions from TMT labels were obtained from the MaxQuant search. For the TMT experiment, relative ratios of each channel to the reference channel (channel11, pooled from 20 samples) were calculated. Perseus (version 1.5.5.3) was used to further analyze and visualize the data. Hierarchical clustering of proteins was obtained in Perseus using log ratios or log intensities of protein abundance.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
, Mitochondrial, Err, Aging, Kidney

### Affiliations
National Cancer Institute/NIH
Professor of Biochemistry and Molecular & Cellular Biology, Georgetown University, 3900 Reservoir Road, Washington, DC 20057

### Submitter
Yue Andy Qi

### Lab Head
Dr Moshe Levi, MD
Professor of Biochemistry and Molecular & Cellular Biology, Georgetown University, 3900 Reservoir Road, Washington, DC 20057


