### Accession
PXD018153

### Title
Proteome dynamics in persisting  and resuscitating bacterial cells

### Description
Bacterial persister cells become transiently tolerant to antibiotics by restraining their growth and metabolic activity. Detailed molecular characterization of bacterial persistence is hindered by low count of persisting cells and the need for their isolation. Here we used sustained addition of stable isotope-labeled lysine to selectively label the proteome of hipA-induced persisting and hipB-induced resuscitating E. coli cells in minimal medium after antibiotic treatment. Time-resolved, 24-hour measurement of label incorporation allowed detection of more than 500 newly synthetized proteins in persister cells, demonstrating low but widespread protein synthesis during persistence. Many essential proteins were newly synthesized; several ribosome-associated proteins showed unusually high synthesis levels and are involved in maintenance of persistence. At the onset of resuscitation, cells synthesized ABC transporters, restored translation machinery and resumed metabolism by inducing glycolysis and biosynthesis of amino acids. This dataset provides an unprecedented insight into the processes governing persistence and resuscitation of bacterial cells.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were grown in 100 ml of M9 minimal medium supplemented with 0.4% (v/v) glycerol, 25 µg/ml chloramphenicol for maintenance of pBAD33::hipA plasmid and 50 µg/ml kanamycin for maintenance of pEG220::hipB plasmid. Cultures were grown in batch at 37 ˚C shaking at 200 rpm. Pre-cultures were grown for 20 hours in M9 medium supplemented with 0.4% (w/v) D-(+)-glucose to repress the PBAD promoter. Main cultures were grown starting from OD600nm of 0.01 – 0.02 in M9 medium without glucose. For HipA-induced persistence (Table S3), wild type E. coli K-12 MG1655 strain was used. The expression of hipA was induced with 0.2% (w/v) L-(+)-arabinose at OD600nm of 0.4. After 3 hours of hipA expression, cultures were treated with 100 µg/ml ampicillin for 19-22 hours to kill non-persister cells and 0.4% glucose to repress transcription of the PBAD::hipA promoter fusion. A pulse of 0.025% (w/v) stable isotope-labeled lysine derivative 13C615N2 L-lysine (“heavy” lysine, Lys8, K8, Cambridge Isotope Laboratories) was then added in the presence of ampicillin and 1–2 mL of cultures were harvested in intermittent time intervals (10min-22h) by centrifugation at 4˚C. A time point before the pulse of Lys8 (0h) was harvested as a control. For the resuscitation experiment, an MG1655 derived strain lacking lysA (ΔlysA) was used. Both pre-cultures and main cultures were supplemented with 0.025% (w/v) natural L-lysine (“light” lysine, Lys0, K0). The expression of hipA was induced with 0.2% (w/v) arabinose at OD600nm of 0.4. After 3 hours of hipA expression, cultures were treated with 0.4% glucose and 100 µg/ml ampicillin for around 22 hours. To induce resuscitation, cultures were first quickly filtered using pre-warmed 1 l Corning filter system (0.22 µm pore size) to remove ampicillin, Lys0 and dead cells. Immediately after, cells were quickly recovered in pre-warmed medium supplemented with 25 µg/ml chloramphenicol, 50 µg/ml kanamycin, 0.4% glucose, 0.025% Lys8 and 2 mM β-D-1-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG) for the induction of the Plac::hipB fusion. Cells were harvested at intermittent time intervals (10min-30h) by centrifugation at 4 ˚C. A time point before filtering and Lys8 pulse (0h) was harvested as a control. Collected cell pellets were lyzed in a lysis buffer (40 mg/ml SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.6, 10 mM EDTA and Complete protease inhibitors (Roche)) and sonicated 3 times for 30 s at 40% amplitude. The cellular debris was pelleted by centrifugation at 15,000 g for 30 min at room temperature and proteins were precipitated from the supernatant with chloroform and methanol. Protein pellets were dissolved in a denaturation buffer (6 M urea, 2 M thiourea and 10 mM Tris pH 8.0). Protein concentration was determined using standard Bradford assay. A 10 μg protein aliquot from each time point was reduced using 1 mM dithiotreitol for one hour and alkylated with 5.5 mM iodoacetamide for additional hour. Proteins were pre-digested with endoproteinase Lys-C (1:100 w/w) for 3 hours, then diluted with 4 volumes of 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.0 and digested overnight with Lys-C (1:100 w/w) at room temperature. The reaction was stopped by lowering pH to 2 with trifluoroacetic acid. Peptides were purified via stage tips.  Samples from each time point were separated by the EASY-nLC 1200 system. Peptide separation was performed by reversed-phase chromatography on the in-house packed analytical column (20 cm × 75 μm, 1.9 μm ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ particles). Peptides were loaded onto the column at a flow rate of 700 nl/min of solvent A (0.1% (v/v) formic acid) and a constant temperature of 40°C under maximum back-pressure of 850 bar. Peptides were eluted using 116 min segmented gradient of 10–50% solvent B (80% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid) at a flow rate of 200 nl/min. Peptides were infused directly from the column tip into the on-line coupled Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer using nanoelectrospray ion source at a voltage of 2.3 kV and a temperature of 275 ˚C. Positively charged peptides were analyzed in a data-dependent acquisition mode, in which one full scan and subsequent MS/MS scans of 12 (Top12 method) most abundant precursors (isolation window of 1.4 m/z) were recorded in a mass range from 300 to 1,650 m/z. To prevent repeated fragmentation, the masses of sequenced precursors were dynamically excluded for 30 s. Only precursors with assigned charge states ≥ 2 and ≤ 5 were considered for fragmentation selection. Full scans were acquired with a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 200, the maximum injection time of 25 ms and the automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 3×E6 charges. The higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation was achieved at normalized collision energy of 27% and intensity threshold of 1×E5. MS/MS spectra were acquired with the resolution of 30,000, the maximum injection time of 45 ms and the AGC target value of 1×E5 charges.

### Data Protocol
Acquired raw data was processed with MaxQuant software (version 1.5.2.8) (Cox and Mann, 2008) using the default settings if not stated otherwise. Raw files of particular experiments (Table 3) were processed separately. The built-in Andromeda search engines searched MS/MS spectra against fragment masses of peptides derived from an E. coli K12 reference proteome (taxonomy ID 83333) containing  4,324 entries (UniProt, release 2017/12) and a list of 245 common contaminants. The minimum required peptide length was set to 7 amino acids with the maximum of two missed cleavage sites allowed for endoproteinase Lys-C. For a protein to be quantified, two occurrences of the protein H/L ratio were required per time point (the multiplicity was set to two with Lys8 specified as the heavy label). Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification, and protein N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. Precursor ion mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm in the first search and to 4.5 ppm and in the main search. Peptide and protein identifications were filtered using a target-decoy approach with a an estimated false discovery rate (FDR) of less than 1.3% at protein and less than 0.4% at peptide level(Elias and Gygi, 2007). Proteins identified by the same set of peptides were combined into a single protein group. For protein quantification, at least 2 peptide ratio counts were required.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hipa, Persistence, Hipb, Escherichia coli, Resuscitation

### Affiliations
Quantitative Proteomics & Proteome Center Tuebingen Interfaculty Institute for Cell Biology Department of Biology University of Tuebingen Auf der Morgenstelle 15 72076 Tuebingen Germany
Tuebingen University

### Submitter
Nicolas Nalpas

### Lab Head
Dr Boris Macek
Quantitative Proteomics & Proteome Center Tuebingen Interfaculty Institute for Cell Biology Department of Biology University of Tuebingen Auf der Morgenstelle 15 72076 Tuebingen Germany


