### Accession
PXD014212

### Title
Malus x domestica microshoot chloroplast proteome at different growth temperatures

### Description
Chloroplasts were purified by centrifugation in Percoll gradient from low temperature (4 C), control (22 C) and high temperature (30 C) grown Malus x domestica microshoots. The proteins were digested using filter aided sample processing (FASP) and analyzed using nano-LC MS/MS. Constant scan rate of 2 Hz and range from 100 to 2,200 m/z was used for the MS spectra acquisition. Data-dependent auto-MS/MS method  (Compass 1.5 acquisition and processing software, Bruker Daltonics) was used for selecting the 10 most abundant precursor ions for fragmentation. The MS/MS summation time was adjusted based on precursor intensity within the range 1-10 Hz. Active exclusion of already analyzed precursors was used with a release time of 30 s. Precursor ion isolation window and the CID collision energy were adjusted between 3-9 Th and 34-55 eV as a function of the m/z value, respectively. The data files (9 low temperature samples, 12 control samples and 9 high temperature sampes) are described in the "metadata.txt" file.

### Sample Protocol
Chloroplasts were isolated from 3 g of pooled  Malus x domestica microshoots. The plant material was blended in medium containing 0.3 M sorbitol, 50 mM, Hepes/KOH (pH 7.5), 5 mM EDTA, 5 mM EGTA, 1 mM MgCl2, 10mM NaHCO3, and freshly added 0.5 mM DTT, using a small volume Waring laboratory blender at low speed for 1s + 1s +1s. The homogenate was filtrated through double layer of nylon and centrifuged at 200 g for 5 min. Supernatant was applied to 70/35% Percoll gradient and centrifuged at 2000 g in a swing-out rotor for 15 min. The green band on 70/35% interphase (intact chloroplast fraction) was collected, resuspended in the medium without DTT and centrifuged at 1000 g for 10 min. The prepared chloroplasts were kept at -80 °C until further analysis. In total, 30 separate chloroplast preparations were performed. After vortexing, 50 ul of chloroplast preparates were mixed with equal volume of 4% SDS lysis buffer (4% SDS, 0.1 M DTT, 0.1 M Tris-HCL pH 7.6), incubated 10 minutes at 95 °C and sonicated for 10 minutes at RT. The preparates were clarified by centrifugation at 16000 g for 5 minutes and the supernatant was transferred to clean tube. Protein concentration was measured by a BCA -based assay (Roti-Quant Universal) from 1:10 diluted samples. Hundred (100) micrograms of protein was taken to FASP digestion. Briefly, proteins were diluted to 200 ul with UT buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM ABC, pH 8) and transferred into Vivacon 500 ultrafiltration devices (Sartorius, GmbH). After three buffer exchanges with UT buffer, proteins were alkylated with 200 microliters of 50 mM IAA in UT buffer for 20 minutes in the dark. After two buffer exchanges with UT and three buffer exchanges with ABC buffer (50 mM ABC, pH 8), proteins were digested with 1 microgram (1:100 ratio) of MS grade trypsin (Pierce) overnight at 37 °C in a wet chamber. Tryptic peptides were eluted into a clean tube, dried in vacuum centrifuge and stored at -80 °C until further analysis.

### Data Protocol
Malus x domestica chloroplast genome (Velasco 2010) was annotated using Chlorobox GeSeq, resulting in 84 protein sequences. For the nuclear proteins, ‘Golden Delicious’ doubled-haploid genome assembly (GDDH13) (Daccord 2017), containing 45116 predicted protein sequences was used for search database. Protein identification and label-free quantification was performed using Maxquant version 1.6.5.0 using the settings described in "maxquant_parameters.txt". The setting Match between runs was used with time window of 0.7 min, reverse decoy database was used, and the MS/MS tolerance of 40 ppm and MS/MS recalibration (TOF) settings were used. The MaxQuant results are in the "proteinGroups.txt" file.

### Publication Abstract
Temperature stress is one of the most common external factors that plants have to adapt to. Accordingly, plants have developed several adaptation mechanisms to deal with temperature stress. Chloroplasts are one of the organelles that are responsible for the sensing of the temperature signal and triggering a response. Here, chloroplasts are purified from low temperature (4&#xb0; C), control (22&#xb0; C) and high temperature (30&#xb0; C) grown Malus x domestica microshoots. The purity of the chloroplast fractions is evaluated by marker proteins, as well as by using in silico subcellular localization predictions. The proteins are digested using filter-aided sample processing and analyzed using nano-LC MS/MS. 733 proteins are observed corresponding to published Malus x domestica gene models and 16 chloroplast genome -encoded proteins in the chloroplast preparates. In ANOVA, 56 proteins are found to be significantly differentially abundant (p &lt; 0.01) between chloroplasts isolated from plants grown in different conditions. The differentially abundant proteins are involved in protein digestion, cytoskeleton structure, cellular redox state and photosynthesis, or have protective functions. Additionally, a putative chloroplastic aquaporin is observed. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD014212.

### Keywords
Temperature, Malus x domestica, Chloroplast

### Affiliations
Institute of Horticulture, Lithuanian Research Centre for Agriculture and Forestry

### Submitter
Perttu Haimi

### Lab Head
Dr Perttu Haimi
Institute of Horticulture, Lithuanian Research Centre for Agriculture and Forestry


