### Accession
PXD023434

### Title
The box C/D snoRNP assembly factor Bcd1 interacts with the histone chaperone Rtt106 and controls its transcription dependent activity.

### Description
Biogenesis of eukaryotic box C/D snoRNPs initiates co-transcriptionally and requires the action of an assembly machinery including the HSP90/R2TP complex, Rsa1p:Hit1p (NUFIP1:ZNHIT3 in human) heterodimer and the Bcd1 protein (ZNHIT6 in human). We identified genetic interactions between the Rsa1p-encoding gene and genes involved in chromatin organization including RTT106 that codes for the H3-H4 histone chaperone Rtt106p controlling H3K56ac deposition. We show that Bcd1p binds Rtt106p directly. Whereas the interaction does not appear to contribute or interfere with known Bcd1p functions during snoRNP biogenesis, we show that Bcd1p controls the transcription-dependent recruitment of Rtt106p by reducing its association with RNA polymerase II, modulating H3K56ac levels at gene body. We reveal the 3D structures of the free and Rtt106p-bound forms of Bcd1p using NMR and X-ray crystallography, and we studied the interaction by a combination of biophysical and proteomic techniques. Bcd1p interacts with a region in the PH1 domain of Rtt106p that is distinct from the interaction interface between the histone chaperone and histone H3. Our results are evidence for a new protein interaction interface for Rtt106p that controls its transcription-associated activity.

### Sample Protocol
HDX MS : samples were prepared and injected with an automated Waters HDX system. Individual proteins and complex were prepared in a 10 mM potassium phosphate, 150 mM NaCl,pH 7.5 buffer. After dilution, the samples were incubated at 20°C for different deuteration times (,0.5, 2, 10, 30 and 60 min) in 10 mM potassium phosphate, 150 mM NaCl, pD7.5 deuterated buffer. The exchange reaction was stopped by adding 1:1 (v/v) of 100 mM potassium phosphate, 100 mM TCEP, 2 M GdHCl, pH 2.3 quench buffer at 1°C for 0.5 min. Quenched samples were then digested (100 pmoles injections) through a pepsin-immobilized cartridge (Enzymate pepsin, Waters, Manchester, UK) in 0.1% aqueous formic acid solution and generated peptides were trapped on UPLC pre-column (ACQUITY UPLC BEH C18 VanGuard pre-column, 2.1 mm I.D. × 5 mm, 1.7 µM particle diameter, Waters, Manchester, UK) at 200 µl.min-1. Digested peptides were then separated on UPLC column (ACQUITY UPLC BEH C18, 1.0 mm I.D. × 100 mm, 1.7 µM particle diameter, Waters) at 0.1 °C with a gradient elution of solvent A (0.1% formic acid aqueous) and solvent B (acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 40 µL.min-1. Mass spectrometry analyses were conducted on a Synapt G2 HDMS (Waters, Manchester, UK) with an electrospray ionization in positive polarity, initially calibrated and using a lock-mass correction with glufibrinogen peptide. Analyses were carried out in data-independent acquisition mode (MSE, Waters) with the following parameters. XL-MS : The chemical cross-linking agent used was an equimolar mix of light (d0) and heavy (d4) BS3. The experiment was performed in stock protein buffer (10 mM HEPES, 150 mM NaCl, pH 7.5). Two ratios protein:cross-linker (1:50 and 1:100) were used. The reaction occurred for 1 h at room temperature and was then quenched by adding 1.05 µL of bicarbonate ammonium solution at 400 mM. Samples were then separated on gel 1D SDS PAGE. Bands of interest were cut and subjected to in-gel digestion. The proteins were cleaved by adding 25 µl of a modified porcine trypsin solution at 4 ng/µL in 25 mM NH4HCO3. Digestion was performed overnight at 37°C. Peptides were extracted and pooled in one well per cross-linker concentration and evaporated under vacuum to a final volume of 57 µL. The nanoLC system was composed of ACQUITY UPLC® BEH130 C18 column (250 mm x 75 µm with 1.7 µm particle size, Waters Corporation, Milford, USA) and a Symmetry C18 precolumn (20 mm x 180 µm with 5 µm particle size, Waters Corporation, Milford, USA). The solvent system consisted of 0.1% FA in water (solvent A) and 0.1% FA in ACN (solvent B). Samples (2 µL) were loaded into the enrichment column for 5 min at 5 µL/min with 99% of solvent A and 1% of solvent B. Peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 450 nL/min with a 1-35% linear gradient of solvent B in 79 min. Analyses were performed on a Q-Exactive + (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, USA) with the capillary voltage set to 1.6 kV at 250°C. The system was operated in data-dependent-acquisition (DDA) mode with automatic switching between MS (50 ms/scan on m/z range [300 1800] with R = 70,000) and MS/MS (100 ms/scan on m/z range [200 2200] with R=17,500) modes. 1D-SDS PAGE followed by nanoLC-MS/MS. Gel bands of interest were excised and resuspended in 2 volumes of trypsin (12.5 ng/μL; Promega) freshly diluted in 25 mM NH4HCO3 and incubated overnight at 37°C. The digested peptides were then extracted and analyzed by nano LC-MS/MS. The analysis was performed on a nanoACQUITY Ultra-Performance-LC (UPLC, Waters, Milford, MA). The samples were trapped on a 20 х 0.18 mm, 5 µm Symmetry C18 precolumn (Waters Corp.), and the peptides were separated on a ACQUITY UPLC® BEH130 C18 column (Waters Corp.), 75 µm x 250 mm, 1.7 µm particle size. The solvent system consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water (solvent A) and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (solvent B). Elution was performed at a flow rate of 300 nL/min, using 3-40% gradient (solvent B) over 79 min followed by 80% (solvent B) over 10 min at 60°C. The MS and MS/MS analyzes were performed on the TripleTOF 5600 (ABSciex).The mass spectrometer was operated in positive mode, with the following settings: ion spray voltage floating (ISVF) 2300 V, curtain gas (CUR) 25 psi, interface heater temperature (IHT) 75°C, ion source gas 1 (GS1) 2 psi, declustering potential (DP) 100 V. Information-dependent acquisition (IDA) mode was used with top 5 MS/MS scans. The MS scan had an accumulation time of 250 ms on m/z [400-1250] range and the MS/MS scans 100 ms m/z [150-1600] range in high sensitivity mode. Switching criteria were set to ions with charge state of 2-4 and an abundance threshold of more than 150 counts, exclusion time was set at 12 s. IDA rolling collision energy script was used for automatically adapting the CE. Mass calibration of the analyser was achieved using peptides from digested BSA. The complete system was fully controlled by AnalystTF 1.6 (AB Sciex).

### Data Protocol
HDX-MS : MSE data were processed using ProteinLynx Global Server 2.5.3 (Waters) with a custom protein sequence library, where peptide and fragment tolerances were set automatically by PLGS, with oxidized methionines as variable modification. Data were then processed with DynamX 3.0 (Waters) as follows: all experiments were carried out in triplicate and only peptides identified in all replicates were kept with a minimum fragment of 0.2 per amino acid, a minimum intensity of 103, a length between 5 and 30 residues and a file threshold of 3. Deuterium uptakes for all identified peptides were manually checked and validated. Only one charge state was kept for each peptide and deuterium uptakes were not corrected for back-exchange, represented as relative. HDX MS results were statistically validated using a mixed effects model (MEMHDX, Hourdel et al., 2016), with a p value set to 0.01.  XL-MS : Mass data collected during analysis were processed and converted into .mgf files using MSConvert (http://proteowizard.sourceforge.net/tools.shtml). The MS/MS data were interpreted using StavroX software v.3.6.6 (Götze, M. et al. 2012). Spectra were searched with a mass tolerance of 5 ppm for MS, 10 ppm for MS/MS and using trypsin as enzyme. Lys and Arg were considered as protease cleavage sites with a maximum of three missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed and oxidation of methionine as variable modifications (max. mod. 2). Primary amino groups (Lys side chains and N-termini) as well as primary hydroxyl groups (Ser, Thr and Tyr side chains) were considered as cross-linking sites. Cross-links composed of consecutive amino acid sequences were not considered. Heavy and light BS3 crosslinked peptides were validated using an FDR cut-off of 5%. Each conjugation site was manually validated based on the presence of y-ion and b-ion and peak intensity observed on the MS/MS spectra. After validation at the MS/MS level, QualBrowser (Thermo Xcalibur 3.0.63) was used to validate the equimolar ratio between the heavy and light crosslinked peptides at the MS level. Only peptides present in the 2 technical replicates of each individual cross-linker ratio were considered as validated. 1D-SDS PAGE followed by nanoLC-MS/MS : The peak list has been searched against a SwissProt  database (created 2020-12-15, containing Escherichia coli target sequences and the sequences of the recombinant proteins, using Mascot (version 2.6.2, Matrix science, London, England). The database contained sequences of human proteins including common contaminants (human keratins) and porcine trypsin and was created using an in-house database generation toolbox (http://msda.u-strasbg.fr). During database search, up to one missed cleavage by trypsin, one fixed modification carbamidomethylation of Cysteine (+57 Da) and one variable modification oxidation of Methionine (+16 Da), were considered. The peptide mass tolerance (tolerance of mass measurement for precursor ion) was set to 15 ppm and the MS/MS mass tolerance (tolerance of mass measurement for fragment ion) set to 0.05 Da. Proline pipeline (http://www.profiproteomics.fr/proline/) was used to validate the identification results. The protein identification validation parameters were set as follows: a peptide with a minimal length of seven amino acid, and an ion score ≥ 25.

### Publication Abstract
Biogenesis of eukaryotic box C/D small nucleolar ribonucleoproteins initiates co-transcriptionally and requires the action of the assembly machinery including the Hsp90/R2TP complex, the Rsa1p:Hit1p heterodimer and the Bcd1 protein. We present genetic interactions between the Rsa1p-encoding gene and genes involved in chromatin organization including RTT106 that codes for the H3-H4 histone chaperone Rtt106p controlling H3K56ac deposition. We show that Bcd1p binds Rtt106p and controls its transcription-dependent recruitment by reducing its association with RNA polymerase II, modulating H3K56ac levels at gene body. We reveal the 3D structures of the free and Rtt106p-bound forms of Bcd1p using nuclear magnetic resonance and X-ray crystallography. The interaction is also studied by a combination of biophysical and proteomic techniques. Bcd1p interacts with a region that is distinct from the interaction interface between the histone chaperone and histone H3. Our results are evidence for a protein interaction interface for Rtt106p that controls its transcription-associated activity.

### Keywords
3d structure, Histone chaperone rtt106p, Bcd1p, Nmr, Rsa1p, Native ms, Snornp assembly, X-ray, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, H/d exchange – ms and cross-linking-ms

### Affiliations
LSMBO IPHC CNRS

### Submitter
Steve Hessmann

### Lab Head
Dr Sarah Cianférani
LSMBO IPHC CNRS


