### Accession
PXD011859

### Title
Mitochondrial mutant Caenorhabditis elegans phosphoproteome

### Description
Inhibition of insulin/IGF-1 signaling (IIS) represents a promising avenue for the treatment of mitochondrial diseases, although many of the molecular mechanisms underlying this beneficial effect remain elusive. Here, we investigate the phosphoproteomic landscape of Caenorhabditis elegans with severe mitochondrial deficiency in the context of insulin signaling inhibition.

### Sample Protocol
Mutant nematodes were synchronized and 8000-10000 young adults were sorted with a COPAS Biosorter, collected in pellets and stored at -80 ºC. A total of 3 biological replicates per condition were collected. DC Biosciences Ltd (Scotland, UK) lysed the samples with bead beating, protein was precipitated with methanol:chloroform, digested and labeled with a Thermo Fisher Scientific TMTTM Mass Tag Labeling kit. The dry peptide sample was reconstituted, phospho-enriched, fractionated and subjected to LC-MS/MS/MS analysis. Raw data were filtered for E. coli proteins and normalized.

### Data Protocol
Acquired Raw spectra were searched in MaxQuant against a C. elegans and E. coli proteome Fasta database from UniProt.Variable modifications included in the search were: - M-oxidation N-term acetylation - deamidation (NQ) - Gln->pyroGlu - Phospho (STY) Protein groups were filtered to exclude: - protein groups identified with only 1 peptide (dubious identifications) - common contaminants - E. coli proteins - decoy database hits - proteins only identified by post-translationally modified site

### Publication Abstract
Aberrant mitochondrial function contributes to the pathogenesis of various metabolic and chronic disorders. Inhibition of insulin/IGF-1 signaling (IIS) represents a promising avenue for the treatment of mitochondrial diseases, although many of the molecular mechanisms underlying this beneficial effect remain elusive. Using an unbiased multi-omics approach, we report here that IIS inhibition reduces protein synthesis and favors catabolism in mitochondrial deficient <i>Caenorhabditis elegans</i> We unveil that the lifespan extension does not occur through the restoration of mitochondrial respiration, but as a consequence of an ATP-saving metabolic rewiring that is associated with an evolutionarily conserved phosphoproteome landscape. Furthermore, we identify xanthine accumulation as a prominent downstream metabolic output of IIS inhibition. We provide evidence that supplementation of FDA-approved xanthine derivatives is sufficient to promote fitness and survival of nematodes carrying mitochondrial lesions. Together, our data describe previously unknown molecular components of a metabolic network that can extend the lifespan of short-lived mitochondrial mutant animals.

### Keywords
Caenorhabditis elegans, Mitochondria, Iis, Mitochondrial deficiency, Complex i, Metabolism, Insulin signaling

### Affiliations
DZNE, Bonn, Germany
DZNE

### Submitter
Antonia Piazzesi

### Lab Head
Dr Daniele Bano
DZNE, Bonn, Germany


