### Accession
PXD018257

### Title
Quantitative proteomic analysis of ARPE-19 cells in response to LPS

### Description
Overwhelming and persistent inflammation of retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) induces destructive changes in retinal environment by invoking immune activation. In this study, we aimed to investigate RPE-specific biological and metabolic response against intense inflammation, and identify molecular characteristics determining pathological progression. Here, we performed quantitative analyses of proteome and phosphoproteome of lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-stimulated human derived RPE cell line ARPE-19 using the latest isobaric TMT labeling approach coupled with high-resolution mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
ARPE-19 cells were stimulated with different concentrations of LPS (from Salmonella enteritidis, Sigma, St. Louis, Mo., USA) for the periods indicated (45 min and 24 hours; n=3). Equal protein amounts were digested using Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) method. The extracted tryptic peptides were analyzed using a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled with an Easy-nLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Odense, Denmark).

### Data Protocol
The acquired MS/MS spectra were searched against the Uniprot human protein sequence database with the Sequest-HT algorithm in Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Search parameters were as follows: tryptic specificity with up to two missed cleavage sites, mass tolerances for precursor ions and fragment ions were set to 20 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively, fixed modification for carbamidomethyl-cysteine, TMT 10-plex of lysine and N terminus and variable modification for methionine oxidation.

### Publication Abstract
Overwhelming and persistent inflammation of retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) induces destructive changes in the retinal environment. However, the precise mechanisms remain unclear. In this study, we aimed to investigate RPE-specific biological and metabolic responses against intense inflammation and identify the molecular characteristics determining pathological progression. We performed quantitative analyses of the proteome and phosphoproteome of the human-derived RPE cell line ARPE-19 after treatment with lipopolysaccharide (LPS) for 45 min or 24 h using the latest isobaric tandem-mass tags (TMTs) labeling approach. This approach led to the identification of 8984 proteins, of which 261 showed a 1.5-fold change in abundance after 24 h of treatment with LPS. A parallel phosphoproteome analysis identified 20,632 unique phosphopeptides from 3207 phosphoproteins with 3103 phosphorylation sites. Integrated proteomic and phosphoproteomic analyses showed significant downregulation of proteins related to mitochondrial respiration and cell cycle checkpoint, while proteins related to lipid metabolism, amino acid metabolism, cell-matrix adhesion, and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress were upregulated after LPS stimulation. Further, phosphorylation events in multiple pathways, including MAPKK and Wnt/&#x3b2;-catenin signalings, were identified as involved in LPS-triggered pathobiology. In essence, our findings reveal multiple integrated signals exerted by RPE under inflammation and are expected to give insight into the development of therapeutic interventions for RPE disorders.

### Keywords
Human, Arpe-19, Lps

### Affiliations
Proteomics Core Facility, Biomedical Research Institute, Seoul National University Hospital
Proteomics core facility, Biomedical Research Institute, Seoul National University Hospital

### Submitter
Dohyun Han

### Lab Head
Dr Dohyun Han
Proteomics core facility, Biomedical Research Institute, Seoul National University Hospital


