### Accession
PXD046040

### Title
INPP5D regulates inflammasome activation in human microglia

### Description
Microglia and neuroinflammation play an important role in the development and progression of Alzheimer’s disease (AD). Inositol polyphosphate-5-phosphatase D (INPP5D) is a myeloid-expressed gene genetically-associated with AD. Through unbiased analyses of RNA and protein profiles in INPP5D-disrupted iPSC-derived human microglia, we find that reduction in INPP5D activity is associated with molecular profiles consistent with disrupted autophagy and inflammasome activation. These findings are validated through targeted pharmacological experiments which demonstrate that reduced INPP5D activity induces the formation of the NLRP3 inflammasome, cleavage of CASP1, and secretion of IL-1 and IL-18. Further, in-depth analyses of human brain tissue across hundreds of individuals using a multi-analytic approach provides evidence that a reduction in function of INPP5D in microglia results in inflammasome activation in AD. These findings provide insights into the molecular mechanisms underlying microglia-mediated processes in AD and highlight the inflammasome as a potential therapeutic target for modulating INPP5D-mediated vulnerability to AD.

### Sample Protocol
Sample Processing Each cell pellet was individually homogenized in 300 uL of urea lysis buffer (8M urea, 100 mM NaHPO4, pH 8.5), including 5 uL (100x stock) HALT protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Pierce). All homogenization was performed using a Bullet Blender (Next Advance) according to manufacturer protocols. Briefly, each tissue piece was added to Urea lysis buffer in a 1.5 mL Rino tube (Next Advance) harboring 750 mg stainless steel beads (0.9-2 mm in diameter) and blended twice for 5 minute intervals in the cold room (4°C). Protein supernatants were transferred to 1.5 mL Eppendorf tubes and sonicated (Sonic Dismembrator, Fisher Scientific) 3 times for 5 s with 15 s intervals of rest at 30% amplitude to disrupt nucleic acids and subsequently vortexed. Protein concentration was determined by the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) method, and samples were frozen in aliquots at −80°C. Protein homogenates (50ug) treated with 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 25°C for 30 minutes, followed by 5 mM iodoacetimide (IAA) at 25°C for 30 minutes in the dark. Protein mixture was digested overnight with 1:100 (w/w) lysyl endopeptidase (Wako) at room temperature. The samples were then diluted with 50 mM NH4HCO3 to a final concentration of less than 2M urea and then and further digested overnight with 1:50 (w/w) trypsin (Promega) at 25°C. Resulting peptides were desalted with a Sep-Pak C18 column (Waters) and dried under vacuum. Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) Labeling Peptides were reconstituted in 100ul of 100mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) and labeling performed as previously described (1, 2) using TMTPro isobaric tags (Thermofisher Scientific, A44520). Briefly, the TMT labeling reagents were equilibrated to room temperature, and anhydrous ACN (200 μL) was added to each reagent channel. Each channel was gently vortexed for 5 min, and then 20 μL from each TMT channel was transferred to the peptide solutions and allowed to incubate for 1 h at room temperature. The reaction was quenched with 5% (vol/vol) hydroxylamine (5 μl) (Pierce). All 16 channels were then combined and dried by SpeedVac (LabConco) to approximately 100 μL and diluted with 1 mL of 0.1% (vol/vol) TFA, then acidified to a final concentration of 1% (vol/vol) FA and 0.1% (vol/vol) TFA. Peptides were desalted with a 60 mg HLB plate (Waters). The eluates were then dried to completeness. High pH Fractionation High pH fractionation was performed essentially as described (3) with slight modification. Dried samples were re-suspended in high pH loading buffer (0.07% vol/vol NH4OH, 0.045% vol/vol FA, 2% vol/vol ACN) and loaded onto a Water’s BEH (2.1mm x 150 mm with 1.7 µm beads). An Thermo Vanquish UPLC system was used to carry out the fractionation. Solvent A consisted of 0.0175% (vol/vol) NH4OH, 0.01125% (vol/vol) FA, and 2% (vol/vol) ACN; solvent B consisted of 0.0175% (vol/vol) NH4OH, 0.01125% (vol/vol) FA, and 90% (vol/vol) ACN. The sample elution was performed over a 25 min gradient with a flow rate of 0.6 mL/min with a gradient from 0 to 50% B. A total of 96 individual equal volume fractions were collected across the gradient and dried to completeness using a vacuum centrifugation. Liquid Chromatography Tandem Mass Spectrometry All samples were analyzed on the Evosep One system using an in-house packed 15 cm, 75 μm i.d. capillary column with 1.9 μm Reprosil-Pur C18 beads (Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany) using the pre-programmed 21 min gradient (60 samples per day) essentially as described (4). Mass spectrometry was performed with a high-field asymmetric waveform ion mobility spectrometry (FAIMS) Pro equipped Orbitrap Eclipse (Thermo) in positive ion mode using data-dependent acquisition with 2 second top speed cycles. Each cycle consisted of one full MS scan followed by as many MS/MS events that could fit within the given 2 second cycle time limit. MS scans were collected at a resolution of 120,000 (410-1600 m/z range, 4x10^5 AGC, 50 ms maximum ion injection time, FAIMS compensation voltage of -45). All higher energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 30,000 (0.7 m/z isolation width, 35% collision energy, 1.25×10^5 AGC target, 54 ms maximum ion time, TurboTMT on). Dynamic exclusion was set to exclude previously sequenced peaks for 20 seconds within a 10-ppm isolation window.

### Data Protocol
All raw files were searched using Thermo's Proteome Discoverer suite (version 2.4.1.15) with Sequest HT. The spectra were searched against a human uniprot database downloaded August 2020 (86395 target sequences). Search parameters included 10ppm precursor mass window, 0.05 Da product mass window, dynamic modifications methione (+15.995 Da), deamidated asparagine and glutamine (+0.984 Da), phosphorylated serine, threonine and tyrosine (+79.966 Da), and static modifications for carbamidomethyl cysteines(+57.021 Da) and N-terminal and Lysine-tagged TMT (+304.207 Da). Percolator was used filter PSMs to 0.1%. Peptides were group using strict parsimony and only razor and unique peptides were used for protein level quantitation. Reporter ions were quantified from MS2 scans using an integration tolerance of 20 ppm with the most confident centroid setting. Only unique and razor (i.e., parsimonious) peptides were considered for quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Microglia and neuroinflammation play an important role in the development and progression of Alzheimer's disease (AD). Inositol polyphosphate-5-phosphatase D (INPP5D/SHIP1) is a myeloid-expressed gene genetically-associated with AD. Through unbiased analyses of RNA and protein profiles in INPP5D-disrupted iPSC-derived human microglia, we find that reduction in INPP5D activity is associated with molecular profiles consistent with disrupted autophagy and inflammasome activation. These findings are validated through targeted pharmacological experiments which demonstrate that reduced INPP5D activity induces the formation of the NLRP3 inflammasome, cleavage of CASP1, and secretion of IL-1&#x3b2; and IL-18. Further, in-depth analyses of human brain tissue across hundreds of individuals using a multi-analytic approach provides evidence that a reduction in function of INPP5D in microglia results in inflammasome activation in AD. These findings provide insights into the molecular mechanisms underlying microglia-mediated processes in AD and highlight the inflammasome as a potential therapeutic target for modulating INPP5D-mediated vulnerability to AD.

### Keywords
Inpp5d, Lc-ms/ms, Alzheimer's

### Affiliations
Ann Romney Center for Neurologic Diseases, Department of Neurology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA
Center of Neurodegenerative Diseases

### Submitter
Duc Duong

### Lab Head
Dr Tracy Young-Pearse
Ann Romney Center for Neurologic Diseases, Department of Neurology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA


