### Accession
PXD018297

### Title
Lon protease is important for  growth under stressful conditions and pathogenicity of the phytopathogen, bacterium Dickeya solani.

### Description
The Lon protein is a protease implicated in virulence of many pathogenic bacteria, including some plant pathogens. However, little is known about the role of Lon in bacteria from genus Dickeya. This group of bacteria include important potato pathogens, with the most aggressive species, D. solani.    To determine the importance of Lon for pathogenicity and response to stress conditions of bacteria, we constructed a D. solani Δlon strain. The mutant bacteria showed increased sensitivity to certain stress conditions, in particular osmotic and high-temperature stresses. Furthermore, qPCR analysis showed an increased expression of the lon gene in D. solani under these conditions. The deletion of the lon gene resulted in decreased motility, lower activity of secreted pectinolytic enzymes and finally delayed onset of blackleg symptoms in the potato plants. In the Δlon cells, the altered levels of several proteins, including virulence factors and proteins associated with virulence, were detected by means of MS-SWATCH analysis. These included components of the type III secretion system and proteins involved in bacterial motility. Our results  indicate that Lon protease is important for D. solani to withstand stressful conditions and effectively invade the potato plant.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysis and protein solubilization All cell samples of Dickeya solani dedicated to quantitative analysis were lysed with the solution containing 4% SDS, 100mM Tris/HCl pH 7.6, 0.1M DTT (lysis solution) and incubated at 95°C for 10 min. After cooling, cold acetone was added to the solution to precipitate the released proteins. The samples were inserted for about 2 hours to -20 °C, and then centrifuged for 20 min 20,000 x g. The solution was decanted and the precipitate dried. The pellet was then dissolved in 8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris / HCl pH 8.5  Protein digestion In the first stage, the protein concentration was measured by measuring absorbance at 280 nm (MultiskanTM Thermo) using μDrop plate. Digestion was carried out according to the standard Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) procedure. 100 mg of protein was taken for each digestion, and the procedure was carried out using microcons with 10 kDa mass cut-off membrane. Generated tryptic peptides were desalted with StageTips according to the protocol described by Rappsilber. For each desalting step, 10 mg of the peptide was taken and desalted on StageTip containing 3 layers of 3M Empore C18 exchange discs.  Liquid Chromatography and Mass Spectrometry LC MS/MS analysis was performed with the use of a Triple TOF 5600+ mass spectrometer (SCIEX, Framingham, MA) coupled with Ekspert MicroLC 200 Plus System (Eksigent, Redwood City, CA). All chromatographic separations were performed on ChromXP C18CL column (3 μm, 120 Å, 150×0.3 mm).  The chromatographic gradient for each IDA and SWATH runs was 3.5 - 20 % B (solvent A 0% aqueous solution 0.1% formic acid, solvent B 100% acetonitrile 0.1% formic acid) in 60 minutes. The whole system was controlled by the SCIEX Analyst TF 1.7.1 software.

### Data Protocol
SWATH mass spectrometry experiments All samples were acquired in triplicates. Experiments were performed in a looped product ion mode.  A set of 25 transmission windows (variable wide) was constructed and covered the precursor mass range of 400–1200 m/z. The collision energy for each window was calculated for a +2 to +5 charged ions centred upon the window with a spread of 2. The SWATH-MS1 survey scan was acquired in high sensitivity mode in the range of 400–1200 Da in the beginning of each cycle with the accumulation time of 50 ms, and SWATH-MS/MS spectra were collected from 100–1800 m/z followed by 40 ms accumulation time high sensitivity product ion scans, which resulted in the total cycle time of 1.11 s.  Data analysis  Database search was performed with ProteinPilot 4.5 software (Sciex) using the Paragon algorithm against the UNIPROT Dickeya solani database with an automated false discovery rate, and standard parameters [3,4]. Next, a spectral library was created with the group file data processing in PeakView 2.2 (SCIEX), with parameters as described in detail by Lewandwska. Files from SWATH experiments for each sample were downloaded to PeakView software and process with the previously established library. Resulting data were exported to the .xml file and exported to Marker View software. All data were normalized using total area sums (TAS) approach, grouped as wild type and tested samples and t-test was performed. Samples were compared to each other, coefficient of variation (CV%) was calculated, and proteins with p-valu lower than 0.05 with fold change ….. were considered as differentially expressed in examined samples.

### Publication Abstract
The Lon protein is a protease implicated in the virulence of many pathogenic bacteria, including some plant pathogens. However, little is known about the role of Lon in bacteria from genus <i>Dickeya</i>. This group of bacteria includes important potato pathogens, with the most aggressive species, <i>D. solani</i>. To determine the importance of Lon for pathogenicity and response to stress conditions of bacteria, we constructed a <i>D. solani &#x394;lon</i> strain. The mutant bacteria showed increased sensitivity to certain stress conditions, in particular osmotic and high-temperature stresses. Furthermore, qPCR analysis showed an increased expression of the <i>lon</i> gene in <i>D. solani</i> under these conditions. The deletion of the <i>lon</i> gene resulted in decreased motility, lower activity of secreted pectinolytic enzymes and finally delayed onset of blackleg symptoms in the potato plants. In the <i>&#x394;lon</i> cells, the altered levels of several proteins, including virulence factors and proteins associated with virulence, were detected by means of Sequential Window Acquisition of All Theoretical Mass Spectra (SWATH-MS) analysis. These included components of the type III secretion system and proteins involved in bacterial motility. Our results indicate that Lon protease is important for <i>D. solani</i> to withstand stressful conditions and effectively invade the potato plant.

### Keywords
Dickeya solani, Swath, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
University of Gdansk
Intercollegiate FAculty of Biotechnology University of Gdansk and Medical University of Gdansk

### Submitter
Paulina Czaplewska

### Lab Head
Dr Paulina Czaplewska
Intercollegiate FAculty of Biotechnology University of Gdansk and Medical University of Gdansk


