### Accession
PXD007796

### Title
Proteomic analysis of the apoplast reveals a differential cold acclimation response among winter wheat crown tissues

### Description
The crown is the critical region for survival of winter wheat exposed to low temperature stresses. When wheat is exposed to non-freezing low temperatures, they can increase their freezing tolerance (cold acclimation, ACC). Changes within the apoplast are thought to be crucial for acquisition of freezing tolerance. However, how individual tissues within the ccrown, namely the shoot apical meristem (SAM, responsible for new shoot growth) and vascular transition zone (VTZ, located at the base of the crown)enhance tolerance to freezing has not yet been characterized. In the present study, we conducted shotgun proteomic analysis of the apoplast fluid to investigate ACC-induced proteins in the SAM and VTZ.

### Sample Protocol
Crowns were harvested from winter wheat cv Norstar acclimated at 4C for 0, 21 or 42 days. Crown apical meristem and vascular tissues were excised, and apoplast fluids were extracted using a vacuum infiltration method based on Boudart et al. 2005 with modifications that mannitol was replaced with sorbitol. All protein samples were subjected to in-gel tryptic digestion for nano-LC-MS/MS according to the protocol of Takahashi et al. (2016).

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were imported into Progenesis LC-MS software (version 4.0, Nonlinear dynamics). In order to identify proteins, peptide information was exported from Progenesis and searched against the NCBInr Green Plants database with MASCOT server (version 2.3.02, Matrix Science) according to the following parameters: number of missed cleavage, 1; fixed modifications, carbamidomethylation (C); variable modifications, oxidation (M); peptide mass tolerance, 5 ppm; MS/MS tolerance, 0.6 Da; and Peptide charges, +1, +2 and +3. Protein information was integrated with Progenesis and protein was quantified as normalized abundance. Identified proteins were cross referenced with UniprotKB

### Publication Abstract
The wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) crown is the critical organ of low temperature stress survival over winter. In cold-acclimated crowns, ice formation in the apoplast causes severe tissue disruption as it grows at the expense of intracellular water. While previous crown studies have shown the vascular transition zone (VTZ) to have a higher freezing sensitivity than the shoot apical meristem (SAM), the mechanism behind the differential freezing response is not fully understood. Cooling cold-acclimated crowns to -10 &#xb0;C resulted in an absence of VTZ tetrazolium chloride staining, whereas the temperatures at which 50% of the SAM stained positive and 50% of plants recovered (LT50) were similar after cold acclimation for 21 (-16 &#xb0;C) and 42 d (-20 &#xb0;C) at 4 &#xb0;C. Proteomic analysis of the apoplastic fluids identified dehydrins, vernalization-responsive proteins, and cold shock proteins preferentially accumulated in the SAM. In contrast, modifications to the VTZ centered on increases in pathogenesis-related proteins, anti-freeze proteins, and sugar hydrolyzing enzymes. Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy focal plane array analysis identified the biochemical modification of the cell wall to enhance methyl-esterified cross-linking of glucuronoarabinoxylans in the VTZ. These findings indicate that the SAM and VTZ express two distinct tissue-specific apoplastic responses during cold acclimation.

### Keywords
Crown, Lc-msms, Apoplast, Wheat, Cold acclimation

### Affiliations
Cryobiofrontier Research Center, Iwate University, Japan
University of Saskatchewan

### Submitter
Ian Willick

### Lab Head
Dr Matsuo Uemura
Cryobiofrontier Research Center, Iwate University, Japan


