### Accession
PXD000709

### Title
Protein expression in beta-carotene transgenic soybeans

### Description
Soybeans (Glycine max) were genetically modified using a gene gun to produce beta-carotene, which is not normally found in the species.  beta-carotene is produced in the chloroplast in which it competes with chlorophyl for production.  A proteomics analysis was performed to determine the effects of the transgene on seed protein content.

### Sample Protocol
Three biological replicates of seed material from both green soybeans and b-carotene producing soybeans were separated into 5 protein fractions based on hydrophobicity using the following compounts sequentially: Digitonin, Triton X-100, Tween 20, SDS, and Urea.  Twenty µg of each fraction was TCA precipitaed, subject to tripsin digestion, cleaned using a SCX microtrap (Michrom) to remove trace detergents, and finally desalted with a peptide microtrap (Michrom) in preparation for subsequent analsys via HPLC-MS/MS. Each peptide sample was separated using a Dionex U3000 splitless nanoflow HPLC system operated a 333 nanoliters per minute equiped with an in-house prepared 75µm by 10cm reverse phase column packed with 2.7µm, 90Å C18 material.  The gradient used for each separation was from 2% to 50% acetonitrile over 4 hours.  A Thermo LTQ Velos Pro mass spectrometer using a nanospray Flex ion source was used to analyze the eluate from the U3000.  The C18 column was located in the ion source just before a Proxeon ES562 40mm, 30µm id stainless steel emitter.  Scan parameters for the LTQ Velos Pro were one MS scan followed by 10 MS/MS scans of the 5 most intense peaks. MS/MS scans were performed in pairs, a CID fragmentation scan followed a HCD fragmentation scan. All scans were performed in enhanced resolution mode. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a mass exclusion time of 3 min and a repeat count of 1 within 30 sec of initial m/z measurement.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectra were converted to MGF format for spectrum matching using X!tandem 2013.02.01.2.  The protein database used for matching was the NCBI RefSeq protein set for Glycine max, downloaded on October 7, 2013.  Precursor and fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.75 Daltons.  X!tandem xml results were filtered using perl to remove single spectrum peptides and any matches with an E-value > 0.01.  Those results are included here is supplemental files.  Decoy searches were performed to check the quality of the dataset using a randomized version of the target sequences. The maximum false discovery rate for the dataset was around 1.1%.

### Publication Abstract
Transgenic soya bean (Glycine max) plants overexpressing a seed-specific bacterial phytoene synthase gene from Pantoea ananatis modified to target to plastids accumulated 845&#xa0;&#x3bc;g &#x3b2; carotene g(-1) dry seed weight with a desirable 12:1 ratio of &#x3b2; to &#x3b1;. The &#x3b2; carotene accumulating seeds exhibited a shift in oil composition increasing oleic acid with a concomitant decrease in linoleic acid and an increase in seed protein content by at least 4% (w/w). Elevated &#x3b2;-carotene accumulating soya bean cotyledons contain 40% the amount of abscisic acid compared to nontransgenic cotyledons. Proteomic and nontargeted metabolomic analysis of the mid-maturation &#x3b2;-carotene cotyledons compared to the nontransgenic did not reveal any significant differences that would account for the altered phenotypes of both elevated oleate and protein content. Transcriptomic analysis, confirmed by RT-PCR, revealed a number of significant differences in ABA-responsive transcripton factor gene expression in the crtB transgenics compared to nontransgenic cotyledons of the same maturation stage. The altered seed composition traits seem to be attributed to altered ABA hormone levels varying transcription factor expression. The elevated &#x3b2;-carotene, oleic acid and protein traits in the &#x3b2;-carotene soya beans confer a substantial additive nutritional quality to soya beans.

### Keywords
Glycine max soy soybean transgenic ltq velos pro

### Affiliations
Veterinary Science and Microbiology
University of Arizona Plant Sciences

### Submitter
Ken Pendarvis

### Lab Head
Dr Monica Schmitd
University of Arizona Plant Sciences


