### Accession
PXD040461

### Title
Proteomics profiling of xanthomonas retroflexus colony variants

### Description
Plasmid conjugation is a key facilitator of horizontal gene transfer. Since plasmids often carry antibiotic resistance genes, they are crucial drivers of the world-wide rise of antibiotic resistance among pathogens. In natural, engineered and clinical environments, bacteria often grow in protective biofilms. Therefore, a better understanding of plasmid transfer in biofilms is needed. Our aim was to investigate plasmid transfer in a biofilm adapted wrinkly colony mutant of Xanthomonas retroflexus (XRw) with enhanced matrix production and reduced motility. We found that XRw biofilms had an increased uptake of the broad host-range IncP-1ϵ plasmid pKJK5 compared to the wild type. Proteomics revealed fewer flagellum associated proteins in XRw, suggesting that flagella were responsible for reducing plasmid uptake. This was confirmed by the higher plasmid uptake of non-flagellated ∆fliM mutants of X. retroflexus wild type and wrinkly mutant. Moreover, testing several flagella mutants of Pseudomonas putida suggested that the flagella effect was more general. We identified seven mechanisms with the potential to explain the flagella effect and simulated them in an individual-based model. Two mechanisms could thus be eliminated (increased distances between cells and increased lag times due to flagella). Another mechanism identified as viable in the modelling was eliminated by further experiments. Four additional proposed mechanisms have a reduced probability of plasmid transfer in common. Our findings highlight the important yet complex effects of flagella during bacterial conjugation in biofilms.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial cultures on agar plates   Bacterial isolates were streaked on TSA (30 g/L tryptic soy broth (VWR) and 15 g/L agar-agar (VWR)) plates from freeze stock cultures and incubated at 24 °C for two days. Single colonies were picked and used to inoculate 5ml TSB (30 g/L tryptic soy broth (VWR)) cultures which were incubated over night at 250 rpm at 24 °C. 5 ml cultures were diluted to OD=0.15 and 5 µL diluted culture was spotted onto 50% TSA (30 g/L tryptic soy broth (Sigma) and 15 g/L agar (Sigma)) plates with a fixed distance of 12.5 mm between colony centers. Plates were incubated at 24 °C for 48 hrs. Using a scalpel colonies were scraped of the agar plates and transferred to 15ml tubes containing a glycerol buffer (200mM Tris HCl pH 7.6, 200mM NaCl, 1mM EDTA, 5% glycerol and 20mM DTT). Samples were instantly frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -18°C until protein extraction.    Protein extraction and digestion    Colony cells were lysed with a Q500 sonicator (Qsonica, Newtown, USA) for 4 min at 30% amplitude in the glycerol buffer. Sonicated samples were centrifuged at 10,000g and soluble proteins in the supernatant were precipitated by adding ice-cold acetone to 80%. Samples were precipitated over night at -18°C. Precipitated proteins were re-suspended in a urea solution (8M urea, 50mM ammonium bicarbonate-buffer, pH 8), protein concentration was estimated via Bradford assay, and samples were diluted to 5 μg/μL, reduced with 5 mM DTT for one hour, and alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide for one hour in the dark. Treated proteins in the 8 M urea solution was four fold diluted in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8, and then degraded overnight by trypsin (1:100 trypsin-to-protein ratio) at 27 °C with horizontal shaking at 500 rpm. Inactivation of trypsin was achieved by adding tri-fluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 2 %. Debris was removed by centrifugation (10,000 g, 10 min). Acidified peptides were loaded onto a  C18 reversed phase STAGE-tip according to Kulak et al., 2014 [1]. STAGE-tips were activated in 100% methanol followed by 80% acetonitrile (AcN) complemented with 0.1% TFA with centrifugation at  1000xg for 3min. STAGE-tips were then washed twice using 0.1% TFA. Samples were loaded onto the STAGE-tip and washed once using 50uL 0.1% TFA, before being eluded with 60% AcN complemented with 0.1% TFA. AcN was removed from eluded samples in a SpeedVac and diluted to a final concentration of 0.5 μg/μL before being subjected to analysis by mass spectrometry.   Mass spectrometry   The samples were analysed by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) and data were recorded in a data dependent manner, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition, on a Q-Exactive (Thermo scientific, Bremen, Germany). An EASY nLC-1000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo scientific, Odense, Denmark) was coupled to the mass spectrometer through an EASY spray source and peptide separation was performed on a 15 cm EASY-spray column (Thermo scientific) with 2um size C18 particles and inner diameter of 75um. Mobile phase consisted of solvents A (0.1% formic acid) and B (80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid). The solvent B was 6% at the start of the gradient hereafter the gradient was as follows: 14%B in 37min, 25%B in 42min, 38%B in 21min, 60%B in 20min, 95%B in 3min and 95%B for 7min. The total length of the gradient was 130min. The full scans were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 70,000 and a maximum injection time of 20ms was applied. For the full scans the range was adjusted to 350-1500 m/z. The top 10 most abundant ions from the full scan were sequentially selected for fragmentation with an isolation window of 1.6 m/z [2], and excluded from reselection for a 30 sec. time period. For the MS/MS scans the resolution was adjusted to 17.500 and maximum injection time of 60ms. The ions were fragmented in a higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) cell with normalized collision energy (NCE) of 28%.

### Data Protocol
Analysis of MS data   The acquired raw data was analysed using MaxQuant version 1.5.5.1 [3] with the inbuilt Andromeda search engine [4]. Mass tolerance was set to 4.5ppm (parent ions) and 20ppm (fragment ions); a maximum of 2 missed tryptic cleavages were permitted.  Methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were selected as variable modifications whereas carbamidomethylation of cysteines was selected as a fixed modification. A target decoy search that allowed for a maximum of 1% FDR on both peptide and protein level and a minimum length of 7 amino acids per peptide was performed. Quantification was performed using the label free quantification (LFQ) algorithm [5] in MaxQuant with a minimum ratio count of 2 and applying the match between runs function. The Andromeda search engine was complemented with the reference proteome of Xanthomonas retroflexus which had been annotated with the RAST database [6], [7]. The genome of Xanthomonas retroflexus had been prepared during a previous study and is available online with the following ID; PRJEB18431.    Protein analysis and statistics    Statistical analysis and data visualization were performed with the Perseus software v1.5.3.2 [8] and in R v3.3.0 using ggplot2 v2.1.0. Regulated proteins were identified using a modified Welsh t-test with an S0 parameter of 0.5 [9], a permutation based FDR cut-off of 0.05 and valid values in at least 60% of the samples in both sample groups; wrinkled and wildtype.

### Publication Abstract
Plasmid conjugation is a key facilitator of horizontal gene transfer (HGT), and plasmids encoding antibiotic resistance drive the increasing prevalence of antibiotic resistance. In natural, engineered, and clinical environments, bacteria often grow in protective biofilms. Therefore, a better understanding of plasmid transfer in biofilms is needed. Our aim was to investigate plasmid transfer in a biofilm-adapted wrinkly colony mutant of <i>Xanthomonas retroflexus</i> (XRw) with enhanced matrix production and reduced motility. We found that XRw biofilms had an increased uptake of the broad host-range IncP-1&#x3f5; plasmid pKJK5 compared to the wild type (WT). Proteomics revealed fewer flagellar-associated proteins in XRw, suggesting that flagella were responsible for reducing plasmid uptake. This was confirmed by the higher plasmid uptake of non-flagellated <i>fliM</i> mutants of the <i>X. retroflexus</i> wrinkly mutant as well as the wild type. Moreover, testing several flagellar mutants of <i>Pseudomonas putida</i> suggested that the flagellar effect was more general. We identified seven mechanisms with the potential to explain the flagellar effect and simulated them in an individual-based model. Two mechanisms could thus be eliminated (increased distances between cells and increased lag times due to flagella). Another mechanism identified as viable in the modeling was eliminated by further experiments. The possibility of steric hindrance of pilus movement and binding by flagella, reducing the frequency of contact and thus plasmid uptake, proved viable, and the three other viable mechanisms had a reduced probability of plasmid transfer in common. Our findings highlight the important yet complex effects of flagella during bacterial conjugation in biofilms.IMPORTANCEBiofilms are the dominant form of microbial life and bacteria living in biofilms are markedly different from their planktonic counterparts, yet the impact of the biofilm lifestyle on horizontal gene transfer (HGT) is still poorly understood. Horizontal gene transfer by conjugative plasmids is a major driver in bacterial evolution and adaptation, as exemplified by the troubling spread of antibiotic resistance. To either limit or promote plasmid prevalence and dissemination, we need a better understanding of plasmid transfer between bacterial cells, especially in biofilms. Here, we identified a new factor impacting the transfer of plasmids, flagella, which are required for many types of bacterial motility. We show that their absence or altered activity can lead to enhanced plasmid uptake in two bacterial species, <i>Xanthomonas retroflexus</i> and <i>Pseudomonas putida</i>. Moreover, we demonstrate the utility of mathematical modeling to eliminate hypothetical mechanisms.

### Keywords
Colony morphology, Biofilm, Flagella, Xantomonas retroflexus

### Affiliations
University of Copenhagen
Novozyems A/S

### Submitter
Jakob Herschend

### Lab Head
Dr Jakob Herschend
Novozyems A/S


