### Accession
PXD023567

### Title
Reflux of Endoplasmic Reticulum proteins to the cytosol yields inactivation of tumor suppressors

### Description
In the past decades many studies reported the presence of Endoplasmic Reticulum (ER) resident proteins in the cytosol. However the mechanisms by which these proteins relocate and whether they exert cytosolic functions remain unknown. We found that select ER luminal proteins accumulate in the cytosol of glioblastoma cells isolated from mouse and human tumors. In cultured cells, ER protein reflux to the cytosol occurs upon ER proteostasis perturbation. As such we investigated whether refluxed proteins gain new functions in the cytosol, a mechanism that could provide advantage to tumor cells. Using the ER luminal protein AGR2 as a proof of concept, we showed that it is refluxed to the cytosol where it binds and inhibits the tumor suppressor p53. We named this phenomenon ER to Cytosol Signaling (ERCYS) as an ER surveillance mechanism conserved in Eukaryotes to relieve the ER from its contents upon stress that has evolved to provide selective advantage to tumor cells through gain-of-cytosolic functions.

### Sample Protocol
Protein digestion: After protein precipitation with acetone, pellet was denatured with 8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris-HCl pH 8.5, reduced at 50°C with 5 mM TCEP for 30 min and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 minutes in the dark. First digestion was performed with 5 µg endoproteinase Lys-C (Wako) urea for 6h, followed by a 4 times dilution in Tris buffer and an overnight trypsin digestion (Promega) at a ratio 1/100. Digestion was stopped with formic acid (1% final) and peptides were desalted on Sep Pak C18 cartridge (Waters Corporation). Peptides dissolved in 0.1% TFA were quantified using colorimetric assay (Pierce - ThermoFisher Scientific) and adjusted at 5 mg/ml. N-glycopeptide enrichment: N-glycopeptide enrichment is based on a protocol previously described (Yakkioui Y et al, 2017). Peptides (500 µg in 0.1 M sodium acetate pH 5.5, 150 mM NaCl) were incubated with NaIO4 for 1 h then 15 min with NaS2O3 and mixed with 100 µl AffiGel Hz Hydrazide Gel (Biorad) overnight. The unbound material was washed with tris 0.1M pH 8.5, glycine 0.1M, isopropanol 10% then 3 times with PBS. Lastly, PNGase F was added for 6h at 37°C and the deglycosylated peptides were extracted with 0.5% TFA. LC-MS analysis: Total-fraction (i.e. not Nglyco enriched) and glyco-fraction were analyzed with an Orbitrap ELITE coupled with a nanoLC chromatographic system (ThermoFisher Scientific). Briefly, peptides were separated on a C18 nano-column with a linear gradient of acetonitrile and analyzed with a Top 20 CID method. Each sample was analyzed in triplicate.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed by database searching against Human Uniprot Proteome database using Proteome Discoverer 2.3 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set at 10 ppm and 0.6 Da respectively. Trypsin with up to 2 missed cleavages was set as enzyme. Oxidation (M, +15.995 Da), Deamidation (N, +0.984) were set as variable modification and Carbamidomethylation (C, + 57.021) as fixed modification. Peptides and proteins were filtered with False Discovery Rate <1%. N-glycopeptides were filtered based on the detection of deamidation and the presence of the consensus motif NxS/T. Lastly quantitative values obtained from Extracted Ion Chromatogram (XIC) were exported in Perseus for statistical analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tumor cells, Upr, Endoplasmic reticulum

### Affiliations
CNRS
Centre Eugène Marquis - INSERM U1242, University of Rennes, France

### Submitter
Luc Negroni

### Lab Head
Dr Eric Chevet
Centre Eugène Marquis - INSERM U1242, University of Rennes, France


