### Accession
PXD015460

### Title
Identification of EXO5 interacting proteins

### Description
To investigate the role of human EXO5 in DNA replication stress and ICL repair we identifiedEXO5 interacting proteins by IP mass-spectrometry analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Flag tagged human EXO5 expressed in HEK293 cells and immunoprecipitates were loaded on SDS-PAGE for LC-MS/MS analysis. Excised gel bands were cut into approximately 1 mm3 pieces.  Gel pieces were then subjected to a modified in-gel trypsin digestion procedure (1).  Gel pieces were washed and dehydrated with acetonitrile for 10 min. followed by removal of acetonitrile.  Pieces were then completely dried in a speed-vac.  Rehydration of the gel pieces was with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution containing 12.5 ng/µl modified sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) at 4ºC.  After 45 min., the excess trypsin solution was removed and replaced with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution to just cover the gel pieces.  Samples were then placed in a 37ºC room overnight.  Peptides were later extracted by removing the ammonium bicarbonate solution, followed by one wash with a solution containing 50% acetonitrile and 1% formic acid.  The extracts were then dried in a speed-vac (~1 hr).  The samples were then stored at 4ºC until analysis.    On the day of analysis the samples were reconstituted in 5 - 10 µl of HPLC solvent A (2.5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid).  A nano-scale reverse-phase HPLC capillary column was created by packing 2.6 µm C18 spherical silica beads into a fused silica capillary (100 µm inner diameter x ~30 cm length) with a flame-drawn tip (2).  After equilibrating the column each sample was loaded via a Famos auto sampler (LC Packings, San Francisco CA) onto the column.    A gradient was formed and peptides were eluted with increasing concentrations of solvent B (97.5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid).    As peptides eluted they were subjected to electrospray ionization and then entered into an LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro ion-trap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA).  Peptides were detected, isolated, and fragmented to produce a tandem mass spectrum of specific fragment ions for each peptide.       References: 1. Shevchenko, et al., Anal Chem. 68:850-858, 1996 2. Peng, J and Gygi S.P. Proteomics: The move to mixtures, J. Mass Spec. Oct:36(10):1083-91 3. Eng. et al., J. Am. Soc. Mass. Spectrom. 5:976-989, 1994  For your solution samples we reduce them by using DTT at a 1mM concentration (in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate) for 30 minutes at 60C.  The samples are then cooled to room temperature and iodoacetamide (stock in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate) is added to a concentration of 5mM for 15 minutes in the dark at room temperature.  DTT was then added to a 5mM concentration to quench the reaction.  We then add sequence grade trypsin at a concentration of 5ng/ul.  The digestion is over-night at 37C.  The samples are then desalted by an in-house made desalting column.  Mobile phase: HPLC buffer A and sample buffer = 97.5% water, 2.5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid HPLC buffer B =97.5% acetonitrile, 2.5% water and 0.1% formic acid

### Data Protocol
Peptide sequences (and hence protein identity) were determined by matching protein databases with the acquired fragmentation pattern by the software program, Sequest (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) (3).  All databases include a reversed version of all the sequences and the data was filtered to between a one and two percent peptide false discovery rate.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dna resection, Exonuclease, Stalled dna replication, Dna repair

### Affiliations
Houston Methodist Research Institute, Houston TX
1Department of Radiation Oncology, The Houston Methodist Research Institute, Houston, TX 77030, USA

### Submitter
Shashank Hambarde

### Lab Head
Dr Tej Pandita
1Department of Radiation Oncology, The Houston Methodist Research Institute, Houston, TX 77030, USA


