### Accession
PXD020999

### Title
Neuropeptidomic Analysis of a Genetically Defined Cell Type in Mouse Brain and Pituitary

### Description
We describe a method to identify neuropeptides in specific cell-types by the conditional disruption of the gene for carboxypeptidase E (Cpe), an essential neuropeptide-processing enzyme. The loss of Cpe led to the accumulation of neuropeptides containing C-terminal basic residues which are used as tags for affinity-purification followed by identification using quantitative peptidomics. This approach enables the identification of specific forms of neuropeptides in genetically defined populations of cells.

### Sample Protocol
Peptide extraction For peptidomics analyses of brain, it is essential to heat-inactive the tissue within 1 min of death. Mice were sacrificed by decapitation and the heads placed in a standard microwave oven and irradiated for 5 seconds to bring the internal temperature to ~80°C. After cooling, the brain was removed and the hypothalamus and pituitary removed, frozen in dry ice, weight, and stored at -70°C until peptide extraction. Prior to extraction, the tissue was transferred to a -20°C freezer. Cold water (200 µL) was added to each hypothalami or pituitary immediately prior to homogenization. Hypothalami were homogenized in a tissue disruptor (Polytron, Brinkman), pituitary was sonicated using a probe sonicator. Homogenates were incubated in a 70°C water bath for 20 min, cooled to room temperature. For the ‘traditional’ method of quantitative peptides (e.g. without affinity purification of Lys/Arg-extended peptides), homogenates were directly labeled with isotopic tags as described below.   Affinity purification of peptides  Tissue from pools of two animals were combined. Affinity column sample buffer was added (1 mL of 100 mM NaAc pH 5.0; 0.5% CHAPS; 20 mM CaCl2), tubes were mixed, centrifuged at 16,400 g for 30 min at 4°C, and supernatants saved. These were applied to anhydrotrypsin agarose column. Column volume for hypo ~0.3 ml; column volume for pit ~0.1 ml. The flow-through was recycled 3x through the column. Columns were washed with 10 ml of affinity column sample buffer and rinsed with 2 mL of 10 mM NaAc (without CHAPS or CaCl2). Peptides were eluted first with 1 mL water, then 2 mL of 5 mM HCl. These two eluates were combined and lyophilized using a vacuum centrifuge, then resuspended in 200 µL of 200 mM NaAc pH 6.0. Labeling and mass spec analysis was performed, as described above for the unpurified extracts.  Labeling with isotopic tags The isotopic labeling was performed using reductive methylation, as described. In brief, tissue homogenates or affinity purified extracts (200 µL) were combined with 50 µL of 1 M sodium acetate buffer pH 6.0 and mixed. In a fume hood, 64 µL of freshly-prepared 4% formaldehyde solution was added. One of three formaldehyde solutions was used: light (e.g natural isotopic form), intermediate (D2CO), or heavy (D213CO) according to the table below. One of two different reducing agents was added; 64 µl of 0.6 M NaBH3CN or NaBD3CN, according to table. Samples were mixed incubated for 2 hours at room temperature, then 1-2 days at 4°C. The reaction was quenched with 200 µL of freshly made 4% ammonium bicarbonate. Tubes were mixed and incubated for 2 hours at room temperature. The mixture was acidified with 200 µL of 10% formic acid in fume hood (reaction may give off hydrogen cyanide) and incubated 10 min at room temperature. Samples for each set were combined (e.g. the five individual tissue samples labeled with different isotopic tags that were to be compared in the peptidomics analysis). Samples were centrifuged for 30 min at 16,400 g at 4°C and peptides purified as described below.  Purification of peptides Peptides were separated from proteins using microfiltration with a dialysis membrane of 10 kDa cutoff, then purified on C18 spin columns.   Mass spectrometry  The LC-MS/MS experiments were performed on a Synapt G2 mass spectrometer coupled to a nanoAcquity capillary liquid nano-chromatography (LC) system (Waters, Milford, MA, USA). Dried peptides were dissolved in 20 µL of 0.1% formic acid and the peptide mixture (5 µL) was desalted online for 5 min at a flow rate of 8 μL/min of phase A (0.1% formic acid)  in a trap column (Acquity UPLC M-Class Symmetry C18 Trap Column, 100 Å, 5-µm particles, 300 µm x 25 mm, Waters). The mixture of trapped peptides was subsequently separated by elution with a gradient of 7–50% of phase B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) through a capillary analytical column (Acquity UPLC M-Class HSS T3 Column, 1.8-µm particles, 300 µm x 150 mm, Waters) in 60 min. The data were acquired in the data-dependent mode and the MS spectra of multiple-charged protonated peptides generated by electrospray ionization were acquired for 1 s from m/z 400–1600. The three most intense ions exceeding base peak intensity threshold of 2500 counts were automatically selected and dissociated in MS/MS by 15- to 60-eV collisions with argon for 1 s. The typical LC and electrospray ionization conditions consisted of a flow rate of 3.5 µL/min, a capillary voltage of 3.0 kV, a block temperature of 100°C, and a cone voltage of 40 V. The dynamic peak exclusion window was set to 45 s.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis MS spectra were analyzed using the MassLynx 4.1 software (Waters). Peak groups representing peptides labeled with different isotopic labels were identified by the regular mass difference profiles of consecutive peaks. The relative intensity of each monoisotopic peak was entered into the spreadsheet and adjusted to correct for isotopic overlapping of labeled peaks.  To identify peptides, MS/MS data were analyzed using the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science Ltd, UK). Database searches were performed on Mus musculus sequences. No cleavage site was specified. Modifications included the reductive Me labels and also N-terminal protein acetylation, methionine oxidation, and C-terminal amidation. All search results were manually interpreted to eliminate false positives. In brief, the criteria included (i) observed mass within 40 ppm (preferably 20 ppm) of the theoretical mass; (ii) the number of Me tags observed matched the number of free amines available (i.e., Lys residue and N-terminus if not acetylated); (iii) the observed charge state(s) of the peptide was consistent with the expected number of positive charges; (iv) ≥80% of the major fragments observed in MS/MS matched b or y ions, with a minimum of five matches. The mass window for MS spectra for Mascot searches was typically set as 1.1 Da, and only search results that were within 0.1 Da of either 0 or ±1.0 Da were further considered by manual inspection. This was done because our preliminary searches found that ~30% of the MS/MS spectra did not correspond to the monoisotopic peak of the peptide with one of the 5 isotopic forms of the Me tags, and instead corresponded to a peptide that had one or two heavier natural isotopes (not considering the isotopes in the Me tags). Thus, to maximize the results, it was important to use a wide window of the Mascot searches and then manually check those peptides “off” by 1 Da to see if the computer had incorrectly assigned their monoisotopic masses.

### Publication Abstract
Neuropeptides and peptide hormones are important cell-cell signaling molecules that mediate many physiological processes. Unlike classic neurotransmitters, peptides undergo cell-type-specific post-translational modifications that affect their biological activity. To enable the identification of the peptide repertoire of a genetically defined cell type, we generated mice with a conditional disruption of the gene for carboxypeptidase E (Cpe), an essential neuropeptide-processing enzyme. The loss of Cpe leads to accumulation of neuropeptide precursors containing C-terminal basic residues, which serve as tags for affinity purification. The purified peptides are subsequently identified using quantitative peptidomics, thereby revealing the specific forms of neuropeptides in cells with the disrupted Cpe gene. To validate the method, we used mice expressing Cre recombinase under the proopiomelanocortin (Pomc) promoter and analyzed hypothalamic and pituitary extracts, detecting peptides derived from proopiomelanocortin (as expected) and also proSAAS in POMC neurons. This technique enables the analyses of specific forms of peptides in any Cre-expressing cell type.

### Keywords
Brain, Pituitary, Neuropeptidomics, Single-cell

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry, Escola Paulista de Medicina, Federal University of Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil
Universidade Federal de Sao Paulo

### Submitter
Alexandre Keiji Tashima

### Lab Head
Dr Alexandre Keiji Tashima
Department of Biochemistry, Escola Paulista de Medicina, Federal University of Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil


