### Accession
PXD044911

### Title
pH-gated nanoparticles selectively regulate lysosomal function of tumour-associated macrophages for cancer immunotherapy

### Description
Tumour-associated macrophages (TAMs), as one of the most abundant and phagocytic tumour-infiltrating immune cells, play a pivotal role in tumour antigen clearance and immune suppression. M2-like TAMs present a heightened lysosomal acidity and protease activity, which limits the function of antigen cross-presentation. How to selectively reprogram the antigen-destroying TAMs to a restorative phenotype for efficient anti-tumour immunity is challenging. Here, we report a pH-gated nanoadjuvant (PGN) that selectively targets the lysosomes of M2-like TAMs in tumours rather than the corresponding organelles from macrophages in healthy tissues. Enabled by the PGN nanotechnology, M2-like TAMs are specifically switched to M1-like phenotypes with tuned-down lysosomal function featured by attenuated lysosomal acidity and cathepsin activity for improved antigen cross-presentation, thus provoking adaptive immune response and sustained tumour regression. Our findings provide new insights into how to specifically regulate lysosomal function of TAMs for efficient cancer immunotherapy.

### Sample Protocol
BMDMs with different phenotypes and PGN4.9 nanoadjuvant treated M2-like macrophages were lysed in 0.5% sodium deoxycholate containing with 25 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% SDS, 1% Triton X-100, cocktail protease inhibitor and phosphatase inhibitor (Roche). Cell lysates were clarified by centrifugation at 13,800 × g for 10 min and quantified to be 200 μg protein from each sample, followed by trypsin (Promega) digestion overnight for subsequent liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) analysis (n = 3).

### Data Protocol
Shotgun proteomics analysis identified 25 proteins were significantly changed in PGN4.9 nanoadjuvant pretreated M2-like BMDMs, consistent with the cell lysates in M1-like phenotype

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tumour-associated macrophages

### Affiliations
Wang Yiguang lab
Peking University

### Submitter
Tang Mingmei

### Lab Head
Dr Tang mingmei
Wang Yiguang lab


