### Accession
PXD017546

### Title
Effect of  Tellurite in the proteome of Bacillusand Paenibacillus

### Description
Tellurium (Te) is a metalloid that is growing as a challenge since its increasing environmental presence, as a result of mining activity and improper disposal of high-tech devices, leads to an increasing selective pressure against living organisms. How microorganims adapt to the presence of increasing concentrations of metalloids, such as Te, could increase the know-how to solve Te contamination problems. Two mining isolates, Bacillus sp. and Paenibacillus sp, were able to grow in high concentrations of Te(IV) and were able to reduce Te(IV) to Te(0) so the effects of growth in the presence of Te(IV) was determined, at the level of total protein expression, for this strains. It was determined that growth of these strains in the presence of Te(IV) affected the general protein expression pattern, and hence the metabolism.

### Sample Protocol
Total protein content was extracted from exponential grown cultures, at the same growth phase, of a Bacillus and a Paenibacillus strain treated [grown in Te(IV)] or un-treated condition. Cells were suspended in lysis buffer vortexed and boiled at 95°C for 5 mins with additional, sonication using a Q500 sonicator (Qsonica, Newtown, USA). Prior to trypsin digestion, protein concentration was measured in all samples using Bradford (BioRad). The samples were four-fold diluted in digestion buffer and then incubated 4h with trypsin (Sigma T6567). The tryptic peptides were fractionated using a Stage tip protocol as described by Rappsilber (Rappsilber et al. 2007). Plugs were placed at the tip of a 200 µL pipette tip with a plunger and activated with 30µL methanol by centrifugation at 1000g for 2 min., followed by 30 µL 100% ACN, and finally 2x 30 µL of 3% ACN with 1% TFA. Peptides were loaded onto the filter unit by centrifugation at 1000g. Bound peptides were washed twice using 30 µL of 0.1% formic acid (FA). Peptides were eluted using two rounds of 30µL 60% ACN in 0.1% FA, with centrifugation between each round. Liquid was evaporated and peptides were re-dissolved in 2% ACN with 1% TFA. Peptide concentration in the samples was estimated with NanoDrop, and 1.5µg peptide was loaded for analysis on a Q-Exactive (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The samples were analysed by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) and data were recorded in a data-dependent manner, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition, on a Q-Exactive (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). An EASY nLC-1000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific, Odense, Denmark) was coupled to the mass spectrometer through an EASY spray source and peptide separation was performed on a 15 cm EASY-spray columns (Thermo Scientific) with a 2 µm size C18 particles and the inner diameter of 75 µm. The mobile phase consisted of solvents A (0.1% FA) and B (80% ACN in 0.1% FA). The initial concentration of solvent B was 6%, and hereafter gradients were applied to reach the following concentrations: 14% B in 18.5 min, 25% B in 19 min, 38% B in 11.5 min, 60%B in 10 min, 95% B in 3 min and 95% B for 7 min. The total length of the gradient was 70 min. The full scans were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 120000 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms was applied. For the full scans, the range was adjusted to 350-1500 m/z. The top ten most abundant ions from the full scan were sequentially selected for fragmentation with an isolation window of 1.6 m/z (Kelstrup et al. 2012), and excluded from re-selection for a 60 sec. time period. For the MS/MS scans, the resolution was adjusted to 120000 and maximum injection time of 80 ms. Ions were fragmented in a higher-energy collision dissociation cell with normalized collision energy of 32% and analyzed in the Orbitrap.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw data was analysed using MaxQuant version 1.5.5.155, using the standard settings. Oxidation (M) and Acetyl (Protein N-term) was set a variable modifications and Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as fixed modification. To enhance protein identification in the simple experimental setup, the Match Between Runs function was applied. The label-free quantification algorithm was applied for quantification with a LFQ min ratio count of 2 a maximum of 2 missed tryptic cleavages were permitted. A minimum length of 7 amino acids per peptide was required. The standard mass tolerance settings for the Orbitrap was used. A target-decoy search approach with the default MaxQuant setting of 1% false discovery rate (FDR) was applied for identification at both peptide and protein levels using the built-in Andromeda peptide search engine and GhostKOALA  annotated genomes as reference proteome.  Differential abundance analysis was performed using a Welsh t-test, with S0 = 1, while only including proteins observed in 3 out of the 5 biological replicates in both groups. P-values were adjusted for multiple hypothesis testing by FDR correction, with q<0.05 as significance cut-off.

### Publication Abstract
Tellurium (Te) is a metalloid with scarce and scattered abundance but with an increased interest in human activity for its uses in emerging technologies. As is seen for other metals and metalloids, the result of mining activity and improper disposal of high-tech devices will lead to niches with increased abundance of Te. This metalloid will be more available to bacteria and represent an increasing selective pressure. This environmental problem may constitute an opportunity to search for microorganisms with genetic and molecular mechanisms of microbial resistance to Te toxic anions. Organisms from Te-contaminated niches could provide tools for Te remediation and fabrication of Te-containing structures with added value. The objective of this study was to determine the ability of a high metal-resistant <i>Paenibacillus pabuli</i> strain ALJ109b, isolated from high metal content mining residues, to reduce tellurite ion, and to evaluate the formation of metallic tellurium by cellular reduction, isolate the protein responsible, and determine the metabolic response to tellurite during growth. <i>P. pabuli</i> ALJ109b demonstrated to be resistant to Te (IV) at concentrations higher than reported for its genus. It can efficiently remove soluble Te (IV) from solution, over 20% in 8 h of growth, and reduce it to elemental Te, forming monodisperse nanostructures, verified by scattering electron microscopy. Cultivation of <i>P. pabuli</i> ALJ109b in the presence of Te (IV) affected the general protein expression pattern, and hence the metabolism, as demonstrated by high-throughput proteomic analysis. The Te (IV)-induced metabolic shift is characterized by an activation of ROS response. Flagellin from <i>P. pabuli</i> ALJ109b demonstrates high Te (0) forming activity in neutral to basic conditions in a range of temperatures from 20&#xb0;C to 37&#xb0;C. In conclusion, the first metabolic characterization of a strain of <i>P. pabuli</i> response to Te (IV) reveals a highly resistant strain with a unique Te (IV) proteomic response. This strain, and its flagellin, display, all the features of potential tools for Te nanoparticle production.

### Keywords
Reduction, Paenibacillus, Tellurite; bacillus

### Affiliations
University of Coimbra
CEMMPRE, Department of Life Sciences, University of Coimbra, 3000-456 Coimbra, Portugal

### Submitter
Pedro Farias

### Lab Head
Dr Paula V Morais
CEMMPRE, Department of Life Sciences, University of Coimbra, 3000-456 Coimbra, Portugal


