### Accession
PXD013294

### Title
Proteomics analysis of 3 months induced RAmKO mice muscle

### Description
Maintaining skeletal muscle mass is of high importance as muscle atrophy like during sarcopenia or cachexia lead to a decrease in independence and a higher risk of morbidity and mortality. A leading compound in the treatment against ageing and cancer is rapamycin, an inhibitor of mechanistic target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1). Whether the treatment with mTORC1 inhibitors would work at a cost of losing muscle mass is unclear, as most studies have been focusing on the role of mTORC1 specifically during hypertrophy. In order to answer this question we developed an inducible muscle specific knockout mouse model in which raptor can be ablated during adulthood to eliminate mTORC1 activity. We analysed the muscles after different time points and found that after 3 months the mice showed a fiber shift towards slower fiber types, a loss in oxidative capacity but only very few myopathic features. After 5 months the myopathic features became more apparent, however it did not largely affect the ex vivo muscle force. Surprisingly despite the myopathy we did not see a significant loss of muscle mass even after 5 months, that we hypothesised based on mTORC1s central role in protein synthesis. We assume that the myopathy after long-term mTORC1 inactivation is mostly a result of secondary effects through the loss of mitochondria, alterations in metabolism and in cytoskeletal components. In conclusion, during skeletal muscle maintenance mTORC1 is more essential for metabolic processes than it is for maintaining basal muscle mass.Maintaining skeletal muscle mass is of high importance as muscle atrophy like during sarcopenia or cachexia lead to a decrease in independence and a higher risk of morbidity and mortality. A leading compound in the treatment against ageing and cancer is rapamycin, an inhibitor of mechanistic target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1). Whether the treatment with mTORC1 inhibitors would work at a cost of losing muscle mass is unclear, as most studies have been focusing on the role of mTORC1 specifically during hypertrophy. In order to answer this question we developed an inducible muscle specific knockout mouse model in which raptor can be ablated during adulthood to eliminate mTORC1 activity. We analysed the muscles after different time points and found that after 3 months the mice showed a fiber shift towards slower fiber types, a loss in oxidative capacity but only very few myopathic features. After 5 months the myopathic features became more apparent, however it did not largely affect the ex vivo muscle force. Surprisingly despite the myopathy we did not see a significant loss of muscle mass even after 5 months, that we hypothesised based on mTORC1s central role in protein synthesis. We assume that the myopathy after long-term mTORC1 inactivation is mostly a result of secondary effects through the loss of mitochondria, alterations in metabolism and in cytoskeletal components. In conclusion, during skeletal muscle maintenance mTORC1 is more essential for metabolic processes than it is for maintaining basal muscle mass.

### Sample Protocol
500 ug of muscle tissue were collected, dissolved in 50 µl lysis buffer (1% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1M ammoniumbicarbonate), reduced with 5mM TCEP for 10 min at 95°C and alkylated with 10mM chloroacetamide for 30min at 37°C. Samples were digested with trypsin (Promega) at 37°C overnight (protein to trypsin ratio: 50:1) and desalted using iST cartridges  according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Phoenix, PreOmics GmbH, Planegg, Germany).  1 µg of peptides of each sample were subjected to LC–MS analysis using a dual pressure LTQ-Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer connected to an electrospray ion source (both Thermo Fisher Scientific) as recently specified (PMID: 27345528) and a custom-made column heater set to 60°C. Peptide separation was carried out on an EASY nLC-1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a RP-HPLC column (75μm × 30cm) packed in-house with C18 resin (ReproSil-Pur C18–AQ, 1.9 μm resin; Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) using a linear gradient from 95% solvent A (0.1% formic acid, 99.9% water) and 5% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid, 19.9% water) to 28% solvent B over 75 min to 40% solvent B over 15min to 95% solvent B over 2min and 95% solvent B over 18min at a flow rate of 0.2 μl/min. The data acquisition mode was set to obtain one high resolution MS scan in the FT part of the mass spectrometer at a resolution of 240,000 full width at half maximum (at 400 m/z, MS1) followed by MS/MS (MS2) scans in the linear ion trap of the 20 most intense MS signals. The charged state screening modus was enabled to exclude unassigned and singly charged ions and the dynamic exclusion duration was set to 30s. The ion accumulation time was set to 300ms (MS1) and 50ms (MS2). MS1 and MS2 scans were acquired at a target setting of 1E6 ions and 10,000 ions, respectively. The collision energy was set to 35%, and one microscan was acquired for each spectrum.

### Data Protocol
To determine changes in protein expressions across samples, a MS1 based label-free quantification was carried out. Therefore, the generated raw files were imported into the Progenesis QI software (Nonlinear Dynamics, Version 2.0) and analyzed using the default parameter settings. MS/MS-data were exported directly from Progenesis QI in mgf format and searched against a decoy database of the forward and reverse sequences of the predicted proteome from mus musculus (Uniprot, download date: 2017/04/18, total of 34,490 entries) using MASCOT (version 2.4.1). The search criteria were set as following: full tryptic specificity was required (cleavage after lysine or arginine residues); 3 missed cleavages were allowed; carbamidomethylation (C) was set as fixed modification; oxidation (M) as variable modification. The mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.6 Da for fragment ions. Results from the database search were imported into Progenesis QI and the final peptide measurement list containing the peak areas of all identified peptides, respectively, was exported. This list was further processed and statically analyzed using our in-house developed SafeQuant R script (SafeQuant, https://github.com/eahrne/SafeQuant, PubMed-ID: 27345528). The peptide and protein false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% using the number of reverse hits in the dataset.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mus musculus, Mtorc1, Rapamycin, Muscle

### Affiliations
Biozentrum, University of Basel, CH-4056 Basel, Switzerland
Proteomics Core Facility

### Submitter
Alexander Schmidt

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Schmidt
Biozentrum, University of Basel, CH-4056 Basel, Switzerland


