### Accession
PXD042754

### Title
Heimdall, an alternative protein issued from a ncRNA related to kappa light chain variable region of immunoglobulins from astrocytes  : a new player in neural proteome

### Description
The dogma “One gene, one protein” is clearly obsolete since cells use alternative splicing and generate multiple transcripts which are translated into protein isoforms, but also use alternative translation initiation sites (TISs) and termination sites on a given transcripts. Alternative open reading frames for individual transcripts give proteins originate from the 5'- and 3'- UTR mRNA regions, frameshifts of mRNA ORFs or from non-coding RNAs. Longtime considered as non-coding, recent in-silico translation prediction methods enriched the protein databases allowing the identification of new target structures that have not been identified previously. To gain insight into the role of these newly identified alternative proteins in the regulation of cellular functions, it is crucial to assess their dynamic modulation within a framework of altered physiological modifications such as experimental spinal cord injury (SCI). Here, we carried out a longitudinal proteomic study on rat SCI from 12h to 10 days. Based on the alternative protein predictions, it was possible to identify a plethora of newly predicted protein hits. Among these proteins, some presented a special interest due to high homology with variable chain regions of immunoglobulins. We focus our interest on the one related to Kappa variable light chains which is similarly highly produced by B-cells in the Bence jones disease, but here expressed in astrocytes. This protein, name Heimdall is an Intrinsically disordered protein which is secreted under inflammatory conditions. Immunoprecipitation experiments showed that the Heimdall interactome contained proteins related to astrocyte fate keepers such as “NOTCH1, EPHA3, IPO13” as well as membrane receptor protein including “CHRNA9; TGFBR, EPHB6, and TRAM”. However, when Heimdall protein was neutralized utilizing a specific antibody or its gene knocked out by CRISPR-Cas9, sprouting elongations were observed in the corresponding astrocytes. Interestingly, depolarization assays and intracellular calcium measurements in Heimdall KO, established a depolarization effect on astrocyte membranes KO cells were more likely that the one found in neuroprogenitors. Proteomic analyses performed under injury conditions or under lipopolysaccharides (LPS) stimulation, revealed the expression of neuronal factors, stem cell proteins, proliferation, and neurogenesis of astrocyte convertor factors such as EPHA4, NOTCH2, SLIT3, SEMA3F, suggesting a role of Heimdall could regulate astrocytic fate. Taken together, Heimdall could be a novel member of the gatekeeping astrocyte-to-neuroprogenitor conversion factors.

### Sample Protocol
Secretome Protein Digestion One hundred microliters of secretome were collected for each condition. Secretome digestion was performed as previously described (21). In brief, the cell supernatants were denatured with 2 M urea in 10 mM HEPES, pH 8.0 and sonication performed on ice. The proteins were reduced with 10 mM DTT for 40 minutes followed by alkylation with 55 mM iodoacetamide conducted for 40 minutes in the dark. The iodoacetamide was quenched with 100 mM thiourea. The proteins were digested with 20 µg/mL LysC/Trypsin mixture overnight at 37°C. The digestion was stopped with 0.5% TFA. The peptides were desalted with a Millipore ZipTip device in a final volume of 20 µl of 80% ACN elution solution. The solution was then dried using the SpeedVac. Dried samples were solubilized in 98% water+0.1% formic acid / 2% ACN before LC-MS/MS analysis.  Tissue protein extraction Spinal cord injury segments (R1, L and C1) were collected 12 h, 1D, 3D,7D and 10D after the lesion. Each segment was cut in 10 slices of 1 mm thickness with a scalpel before being ground and proteins were extracted with CHAPS buffer 3.5% containing 50 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), 40 mM Tris/HCL buffer; pH 7.5. Samples were then vortexed, spun, sonicated for 20 min, and centrifuged at 15,000 x g. The supernatant was then collected. From each supernatant, 30μL of the sample were placed on 10 kDa amicons, to which 200 μL of UA buffer (8 M Urea, 0.1 M Tris, pH 8.5) were added before centrifugation for 15 minutes at 15000 x g. The procedure was repeated twice, before discarding the filtrate. The samples were then alkylated by adding 100 μL of 0.05 M iodoacetamide conducted for 40 minutes in the dark. These steps were repeated 3 times. The iodoacetamide was quenched with 100 mM thiourea. The proteins were digested with 20 µg/mL LysC/Trypsin mixture overnight at 37°C. The digestion was stopped with 0.5% TFA. The samples were then dried with speedvac, resuspended in 20 μL of 0.1% TFA water. The samples were then purified by Zip Tip before separation by reverse phase chromatography and analysis for shot gun proteomic. Trypsin digestion of proteins immunoprecipitated with rabbit anti-Heimdall. Vacuum dried samples were resuspended with Ammonium Bicarbonate 20 mM and reduced with DTT 10 mM for 30 minutes at 60°C. An equal volume of Iodoacetamide 15 mM was added and samples were incubated in the dark for 30 minutes at room temperature. Fifty microliters of DTT 15 mM were again added and tryptic digestion was conducted overnight at 37°C with 50 ng of Trypsin. Digestion was stopped with 10 µL of H2O-TFA 5% and the samples were dried using the SpeedVac. They were resuspended with 20 µL of H2O-TFA 0.1%, desalted with a Millipore ZipTip C18 device and eluted in a final volume of 20 µl of elution solution (80% ACN / 20% H2O-TFA 0.1%). The solution was then dried using the SpeedVac. Dried samples were solubilized in resuspension solution (2% ACN / 80% formic acid 0.1%) before LC-MS/MS analysis.  Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) protein digestion. Forty micrograms of protein cell extracts from control or Heimdall KO DI TNC1 cells were loaded on Amicon ultracentrifugal filter 10K and the volume was adjusted at 200 µL with denaturing buffer (Urea 8M, Tris-HCL 0,1M, H2O) before centrifugation at 14,000 x g for 30 minutes. Two hundred microliters of the denaturing buffer were again loaded, and the samples were centrifuged at 14,000 x g for 30 minutes. The filtrate was discarded and 100 µL of alkylation solution (Iodoacetamide 0.05 M in denaturing buffer) was loaded. The samples were then incubated in the dark for 20 minutes at room temperature and centrifuged at 14,000 x g for 25 minutes. One hundred microliters of denaturing buffer were loaded, and the samples were centrifuged at 14,000 x g for 25 minutes. This step was repeated two times. One hundred microliters of Ammonium Bicarbonate Buffer 50 mM were loaded, and the samples were centrifuged at 14,000 x g for 25 minutes. This step was repeated two times. Amicon ultracentrifugal filter 10K was transferred to a new collection tube and 1.6 µg of Trypsin were loaded. After overnight incubation at 37°C, samples were centrifuged at 14,000 x g for 25 minutes and filters were washed with 50 µL of NaCl 0.5 M. After centrifugation at 14,000 x g for 25 minutes, 10 µL of H2O-TFA 5% were loaded to stop the digestion and samples were dried using SpeedVac. After their resuspension with 20 µL of H2O-TFA 0.1%, samples were desalted using a Millipore ZipTip C18 device and eluted with 20 µl of elution solution (80% ACN / 20% H2O-TFA 0.1%). The solution was then dried using the SpeedVac. Dried samples were solubilized in resuspension solution (2% ACN / 80% formic acid 0.1%) before LC- MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis Samples were separated by online reversed-phase chromatography using a Thermo Scientific Proxeon Easy-nLC1000 system equipped with a Proxeon trap column (100 μm ID x 2 cm, Thermo Scientific) and a C18 packed-tip column (Acclaim PepMap, 75 µm ID x 15 cm, Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated using an increasing amount of acetonitrile (5%-35% over 120 minutes) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The LC eluate was electrosprayed directly from the analytical column and a voltage of 1.7 kV was applied via the liquid junction of the nanospray source. The chromatography system was coupled to a Thermo Scientific Q-Exactive mass spectrometer programmed to acquire in a data-dependent mode the Top 10 most intense ion method. The survey scans were done at a resolving power of 70,000 FWHM (m/z 400), in positive mode and using an AGC target of 3e6. Default charge state was set at 2, unassigned and +1 charge states were rejected, and dynamic exclusion was enabled for 25s. The scan range was set to 300-1600 m/z. For ddMS², the scan range was between 200-2000m/z, 1 Microscan was acquired at 17,500 FWHM and an isolation window of 4.0 m/z was used. MS Data Analysis of protein extract from the secretome  All the MS data were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.6.5) (22) using the Andromeda (23) search engine. The Secretome was processed in two different files. Proteins were identified by searching MS and MS/MS data against the Decoy version of the complete proteome for Rattus norvegicus of the UniProt database (24) (Release June 2014, 33,675 entries) combined with 262 commonly detected contaminants. Trypsin specificity was used for the digestion mode with N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation selected as the variables. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification, with up to two missed cleavages. For the MS spectra, initial mass accuracy of 6 ppm was selected, with a minimum of 2 peptides and at least 1 unique peptide per protein, and the MS/MS tolerance was set to 20 ppm for HCD data. For identification, the FDR at the peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) and protein level was set to 0.01. Relative label-free quantification of proteins was performed using the MaxLFQ algorithm (25) integrated into MaxQuant with the default parameters. The data sets, the Perseus result files used for analysis, and the annotated MS/MS spectra were deposited at the ProteomeXchange Consortium (26) (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org) via the PRIDE partner repository (27) with the dataset identifier PXD004639 (for review: Username: reviewer60033@ebi.ac.uk Password: 7O08FxXe) for secretomes (12h and 24h) and PXD003375 for the ones from 3 days to 10 days. Analysis of the proteins identified was performed using Perseus software (http://www.perseus-framework.org/) (version 1.5.6.0). The file containing the information from identification was used with hits to the reverse database, and proteins only identified with modified peptides and potential contaminants were removed. Then, the LFQ intensity was logarithmized (log2[x]). Multiple-samples tests were performed using an ANOVA test with a FDR of 5% and preserving grouping in randomization. Normalization was achieved using a Z-score with a matrix accessed by rows. For the statistical analysis, only proteins presented as significant by the ANOVA test were used for statistical analysis. Hierarchical clustering depending on protein extracts or secretomes was first performed using the Euclidean parameter for distance calculation and average option for linkage in a row and column trees using a maximum of 300 clusters. For visualization of the variation of the protein expression depending on the condition, the profile plot tool was used with a reference profile and an automatic selection of the 10 or 15 correlated profiles. To quantify fold changes of proteins across samples, we used MaxLFQ. To visualize these fold changes in the context of individual protein abundances in the proteome, we projected them onto the summed peptide intensities normalized by the number of theoretically observable peptides. Specifically, to compare relative protein abundances between and within samples, protein lengths normalized to log 2 protein intensities (termed “iBAQ” value in MaxQuant) were added to the MaxLFQ differences. Functional annotation and characterization of identified proteins were obtained using PANTHER software (version 9.0, http://www.pantherdb.org) and STRING (version 9.1, http://string-db.org).

### Publication Abstract
The dogma "One gene, one protein" is clearly obsolete since cells use alternative splicing and generate multiple transcripts which are translated into protein isoforms, but also use alternative translation initiation sites (TISs) and termination sites on a given transcript. Alternative open reading frames for individual transcripts give proteins originate from the 5'- and 3'-UTR mRNA regions, frameshifts of mRNA ORFs or from non-coding RNAs. Longtime considered as non-coding, recent in-silico translation prediction methods enriched the protein databases allowing the identification of new target structures that have not been identified previously. To gain insight into the role of these newly identified alternative proteins in the regulation of cellular functions, it is crucial to assess their dynamic modulation within a framework of altered physiological modifications such as experimental spinal cord injury (SCI). Here, we carried out a longitudinal proteomic study on rat SCI from 12&#x2009;h to 10 days. Based on the alternative protein predictions, it was possible to identify a plethora of newly predicted protein hits. Among these proteins, some presented a special interest due to high homology with variable chain regions of immunoglobulins. We focus our interest on the one related to Kappa variable light chains which is similarly highly produced by B cells in the Bence jones disease, but here expressed in astrocytes. This protein, name Heimdall is an Intrinsically disordered protein which is secreted under inflammatory conditions. Immunoprecipitation experiments showed that the Heimdall interactome contained proteins related to astrocyte fate keepers such as "NOTCH1, EPHA3, IPO13" as well as membrane receptor protein including "CHRNA9; TGFBR, EPHB6, and TRAM". However, when Heimdall protein was neutralized utilizing a specific antibody or its gene knocked out by CRISPR-Cas9, sprouting elongations were observed in the corresponding astrocytes. Interestingly, depolarization assays and intracellular calcium measurements in Heimdall KO, established a depolarization effect on astrocyte membranes KO cells were more likely that the one found in neuroprogenitors. Proteomic analyses performed under injury conditions or under lipopolysaccharides (LPS) stimulation, revealed the expression of neuronal factors, stem cell proteins, proliferation, and neurogenesis of astrocyte convertor factors such as EPHA4, NOTCH2, SLIT3, SEMA3F, suggesting a role of Heimdall could regulate astrocytic fate. Taken together, Heimdall could be a novel member of the gatekeeping astrocyte-to-neuroprogenitor conversion factors.

### Keywords
Altprot, Immunoglobulin, Astrocyte, Heimdall

### Affiliations
PRISM Laboratory 
Laboratoire PRISM INSERM U1192

### Submitter
Capuz Alice

### Lab Head
Dr Michel Salzet
Laboratoire PRISM INSERM U1192


