### Accession
PXD030361

### Title
SMNDC1 links chromatin remodeling and splicing to regulate pancreatic hormone expression

### Description
Insulin expression is restricted to the pancreatic beta cells, which are physically or functionally depleted in diabetes. Identifying targetable pathways repressing insulin in non-beta cells, particularly in the developmentally related glucagon-secreting alpha cells, is an important aim of regenerative medicine. Here, we performed an RNA interference screen in the murine alpha cell line, alphaTC1, to identify silencers of insulin expression. We discovered that knockdown of the splicing factor Smndc1 (Survival Motor Neuron Domain Containing 1) triggered a global repression of alpha cell gene-expression programs in favor of increased beta cell markers. Mechanistically, Smndc1 knockdown upregulated the key beta cell transcription factor Pdx1, by modulating the activities of the BAF and Atrx families of chromatin remodeling complexes. SMNDC1’s repressive role was conserved in human pancreatic islets, its loss triggering enhanced insulin secretion and PDX1 expression. Our study identifies Smndc1 as a key factor connecting splicing and chromatin remodeling to the control of insulin expression in human and mouse islet cells.

### Sample Protocol
LC-MS/MS of Smndc1 Knockdown Whole Cell Proteomics Cell pellets were lysed in 50mM HEPES (pH 8.0), 2% SDS, 0.1M DTT, 1mM PMSF and protease inhibitor cocktail then heated to 99°C for 5 min. DNA was sheared using a Covaris S2 high performance ultrasonicator. Cell debris was removed by centrifugation at 20,000g for 15 min at 20°C and protein concentration determined using BCA. 200µg protein per sample was processed using an adapted SP3 methodology (Hughes et al., 2019). In short, equal volumes of paramagnetic carboxylate modified particles (SpeedBeads 45152105050250 and 65152105050250) were mixed, washed with water and reconstituted to a final concentration of 50μg/μl with LC-MS grade water. Samples were reduced with 50mM DTT at 56°C for 1 hour then alkylated with 55mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark. 40μl of mixed beads were added to samples, vortexed and incubated 5 min at RT. Samples were precipitated with 70% [V/V] acetonitrile for 18 minutes at RT. Supernatant was discarded using a magnetic rack and samples were washed with 200μl 70% ethanol and 180μl 100% acetonitrile. Particles were finally resuspended in 100μl of 50mM NH4HCO3 and samples digested with 4μg of Trypsin overnight at 37°C. Peptides were acidified to 1% TFA and cleaned by C18 solid phase extraction columns (Peptide desalting columns, ThermoFisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer. Peptides were eluted with 240 µl 90% Acetonitrile, 0.4% formic acid, dried in a vacuum concentrator before reconstitution in 40µl of 0.1% TFA (Suprapur, MERCK).  1D-shotgun LC-MS/MS analysis of whole cell extracts was performed as Data Dependent Acquisition (DDA) on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) coupled to an Dionex Ultimate 3000RSLC nano system (ThermoFisher Scientific) via nanoflex source interface. 1µg was loaded onto a trap column (Pepmap 100, 5μm, 5 × 0.3mm, ThermoFisher Scientific) at 10μL/min using 0.1% TFA.  After loading, the trap column was switched in-line with a 50cm, 100µm inner diameter analytical column (packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 2.4μm, Dr. Maisch) at 50°C.  Mobile-phase A consisted of 0.4% formic acid in water and mobile-phase B of 0.4% formic acid in a mix of 90% acetonitrile and 10% water. 300nL/min and a 210min gradient was used. MS scans were acquired at 375 – 1650 m/z in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000 (at 200m/z of 200).  AGC targeted 4x10E5 ions at maximum 50msec. A TopN dependant scan with a cycle time of 3sec set the acquisition of MS2 spectra in the linear ion trap (IT) using rapid scan speed and a quadrupole isolation window of 1.6 Da. HCD was applied with a NCE of 30%.  AGC target was set to 1x10E4 with a maximum injection time of 25 msec. Peptide monoisotopic precursor selection (MIPS) was enabled for charge states 2-6 with an intensity threshold set to 5x10E3 and a dynamic exclusion of 90 sec. A single lock mass at m/z 445.120024 was employed (Olsen et al., 2005). XCalibur version 4.3.73.11 and Tune 3.3.2782.28 were used to operate the instrument.

### Data Protocol
MS Data Analysis Acquired raw data files were processed using the Proteome Discoverer 2.4.1.15 platform, utilising the database search engine Sequest HT. Percolator V3.0 was used to remove false positives with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% on PSM, peptide and protein level under strict conditions. Searches were performed with full tryptic digestion against the mouse SwissProt database v2017.10.25 (25,097 sequences plus 298 appended known contaminants) with up to two miscleavage sites. Oxidation (+15.9949 Da) of methionine, deamidation (+0.9840 Da) of arginine and glutamine as well as phosphorylation (+79.9663 Da) of serine, threonine or tyrosine was set as variable modification, whilst carbamidomethylation (+57.0214 Da) of cysteine residues was set as fixed modifications. Data was searched with mass tolerances of ±10 ppm and 0.6 Da on the precursor and fragment ions, respectively. Results were filtered to include peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) with Sequest HT cross-correlation factor (Xcorr) scores of ≥0.9 and high peptide confidence and ptmRS site probabilities of ≥75. For calculation of protein areas, Minora Feature Detector node and Precursor Ions Quantifier node, both integrated in Thermo Proteome Discoverer were used. Automated chromatographic alignment and feature linking mapping were enabled with total peptide amount used for normalization between individual runs. Protein abundances were calculated using sum intensities of respective peptide features including only unique peptide groups. Protein ratios were generated using the non-nested approach and p-values calculation was performed applying t-test and Benjamini-Hochberg correction. Identification of significant interactors and fold changes for Smndc1 IP-MS results was done through Resource for Evaluation of Protein Interaction Networks (REPRINT) using SAINT scoring (https://reprint-apms.org/)(Mellacheruvu et al., 2013).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Beta cells, Splicing, Pancreatic islets, Chromatin remodelers, Smndc1, Alpha cells, Rnai screen, Insulin transcription

### Affiliations
CeMM Research Center for Molecular Medicine
Kubicek lab, Principal Investigator, Head of Molecular Discovery Platform, CeMM Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences, Vienna, Austria

### Submitter
Frédéric FONTAINE

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan Kubicek
Kubicek lab, Principal Investigator, Head of Molecular Discovery Platform, CeMM Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences, Vienna, Austria


