### Accession
PXD022785

### Title
Toxoplasma conoid proteome by BioID

### Description
Toxoplasma gondii, a widely prevalent human and animal pathogen and a relative of the malaria-causing Plasmodium spp., is a member of the phylum Apicomplexa encompassing a large number of single-celled eukaryotic organisms that are obligate endoparasites of animals. Apicomplexans evolved multiple adaptations to parasitism. One such distinctive feature of the apicomplexan cell, which the phylum is named after, is the apical complex comprising a battery of secretory vesicles and unusual cytoskeletal structures. The latter include the conoid, apical polar rings, and sub-pellicular microtubules. Functions of the apical cytoskeletal structures are poorly understood due to incomplete knowledge of their molecular composition. Furthermore, the conoid is believed to be heavily reduced or missing from Plasmodium species and other members of the class Aconoidasida.  We have applied a spatial proteomic method called proximity-dependent biotin identification, BioID, to identify conoid-associated proteins in the model apicomplexan Toxoplasma gondii. We chose three proteins located at the apex of the T. gondii cell as BioID baits fused with the promiscuous biotin-ligase BirA*: SAS6L at the conoid, RNG2 linking the conoid and one of the apical polar rings, and MORN3 distributed at the apical subdomain of the inner membrane complex but excluded from the vicinity of the conoid. The enrichment of biotinylated proteins on streptavidin matrix in the BioID-bait cells relative to the untransformed parental cell line control was determined using a shotgun proteomic approach with label-free quantitation. The location of conoid protein candidates prioritised by BioID has been further validated by fluorescence microscopy in T. gondii tachyzoites and several life-cycle stages of P. berghei. Collectively we show that the conoid is a conserved apicomplexan element at the heart of the invasion mechanisms of these highly successful and often devastating parasites.

### Sample Protocol
We generated three different cell lines (T. gondii tachyzoites RH Δku80 TATi) by in situ genomic C-terminal tagging of one of the three bait proteins (SAS6L, RNG2 or MORN3) with the promiscuous bacterial biotin ligase, BirA*. To induce biotinylation of the proteins proximal to the bait, we added 150 μM biotin into the ED1 growth media 24 h prior to parasite egress. The non-tagged parental cell line was used as a negative control for background biotinylation. We used the untransformed parental cell line as a negative control for background biotinylation. Approximately 2 billion tachyzoites were harvested per condition. The parasites were purified from the culture by filtration through a 3-µm membrane filter and washed 5 times in PBS. The purified cells containing in total approximately 5 mg of protein were lysed by adding 1.8 ml of RIPA buffer. The biotinylated proteins were enriched from the lysate using RIPA-preconditioned Pierce Streptavidin Magnetic Beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Following 1-hour incubation for protein binding, the beads were extensively washed using RIPA buffer, 2M urea-containing buffer, RIPA again, and incubated for 30 min at 56°C in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffered solution (pH 8.3) containing 10 mM DTT to reduce thiol groups of cysteine residues of the bound proteins. The reduced thiols were alkylated by 55 mM iodoacetamide in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer for 15 minutes at room temperature in the dark. To digest the bound proteins, the beads were incubated with 1 µg trypsin in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer at 37°C overnight. The supernatant containing non-biotinylated peptides was collected and the remaining biotinylated peptides were eluted from the beads with 10% aqueous formic acid. Both the supernatant and the eluate were combined, the peptides were desalted using C18 solid-phase extraction cartridges (SepPak C18, 100 mg sorbent, Waters), and reconstituted in 0.1% aqueous formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptides were fractionated by reverse-phase nano-UPLC (RSLC C18 column, Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano LC system, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a 30-minute gradient elution programme (2-40% of solvent B: 0.1 % formic acid in 80% aqueous acetonitrile). The eluting peptides were sampled and analysed by a Q Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) operated in the data-dependent acquisition mode. Precursor ions were detected in the m/z range of 380-1500 at a resolution of 70,000 with an AGC target of 1e6 and a maximum C-trap fill time of 250 ms. The top twenty most intense precursor ions were selected in the quadrupole using an isolation window of 1.5 m/z and subjected to fragmentation in the HCD mode at a normalised collision energy of 25. A dynamic exclusion limit of 20 s was applied. The fragment ion spectra (MS2, or MS/MS) were acquired between 100 and 1600 m/z at a 17,500 resolution with an AGC target of 5e4 and a maximum C‐trap fill time of 120 ms. The raw data were managed in XCalibur v2.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The raw LC-MS/MS data were interpreted, and peak lists were generated using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peak lists were exported as Mascot generic files and searched against the annotated protein sequences of Toxoplasma gondii strain ME49 (ToxoDB.org release 29, retrieved on 20 December 2016; 8,322 sequences) and common contaminant proteins (cRAP, 115 sequences) with Mascot v2.6.0 (Matrix Science) assuming digestion by trypsin with up to two missed cleavage sites. The precursor and fragment ion tolerances were set to 5 ppm and 0.1 Da, respectively. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a static modification. Oxidation of methionine and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine were allowed as variable modifications. Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.7.5, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability by the Peptide Prophet algorithm with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Total spectrum counts were used to calculate the enrichment of proteins in the BioID pulldown samples relative to the wild-type control sample. The contaminant proteins were not considered for the analysis. Proteins whose abundance in the BioID-bait cell lines was at least 3-fold greater compared to the control or detected in the bait cell lines but not in the control were considered enriched.

### Publication Abstract
The apical complex is the instrument of invasion used by apicomplexan parasites, and the conoid is a conspicuous feature of this apparatus found throughout this phylum. The conoid, however, is believed to be heavily reduced or missing from Plasmodium species and other members of the class Aconoidasida. Relatively few conoid proteins have previously been identified, making it difficult to address how conserved this feature is throughout the phylum, and whether it is genuinely missing from some major groups. Moreover, parasites such as Plasmodium species cycle through 3 invasive forms, and there is the possibility of differential presence of the conoid between these stages. We have applied spatial proteomics and high-resolution microscopy to develop a more complete molecular inventory and understanding of the organisation of conoid-associated proteins in the model apicomplexan Toxoplasma gondii. These data revealed molecular conservation of all conoid substructures throughout Apicomplexa, including Plasmodium, and even in allied Myzozoa such as Chromera and dinoflagellates. We reporter-tagged and observed the expression and location of several conoid complex proteins in the malaria model P. berghei and revealed equivalent structures in all of its zoite forms, as well as evidence of molecular differentiation between blood-stage merozoites and the ookinetes and sporozoites of the mosquito vector. Collectively, we show that the conoid is a conserved apicomplexan element at the heart of the invasion mechanisms of these highly successful and often devastating parasites.

### Keywords
Bioid, Toxoplasma, Plasmodium, Apicomplexa, Apical complex, Pellicle, Conoid, Imc

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge

### Submitter
Konstantin Barylyuk

### Lab Head
Dr Ross F. Waller
Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge


