### Accession
PXD031641

### Title
Mouse heart proteomics in Oma1 and Cox10 deficient mice

### Description
Cardiomyopathy and heart failure are common manifestations in mitochondrial disease caused by deficiencies in the oxidative phosphorylation system of mitochondria (OXPHOS). Here, we demonstrate that the cardiac-specific loss of the assembly factor Cox10 of the cytochrome c oxidase causes mitochondrial cardiomyopathy in mice, which is associated with OXPHOS deficiency, lysosomal defects and an aberrant mitochondrial morphology and ultrastructure. We demonstrate activation of the mitochondrial peptidase Oma1 in Cox10-/- mice, which results in mitochondrial fragmentation and induction of the integrated stress response (ISR) along the Oma1-Dele1-Atf4 signalling axis. Ablation of Oma1 or Dele1 in Cox10-/- mice aggravates cardiomyopathy. ISR inhibition impairs the cardiac glutathione metabolism, decreases the levels of the glutathione peroxidase Gpx4 and increases lipid peroxidation in the heart, ultimately culminating in ferroptosis. Our results demonstrate a protective role of the Oma1-mediated ISR in mitochondrial cardiomyopathy and link ferroptosis to OXPHOS deficiency and mitochondrial disease.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Digestion for proteomics  For lysis of heart samples, 4% SDS in 100 mM HEPES ph = 8.5 was used as a buffer system and the Precellys tissue homogenizer was utilized for mechanical disruption of the tissue following the manufacture’s instructions. The protein concentration was determined. 10 µg of protein was subjected for tryptic digestion. Proteins were reduced (10 mM TCEP) and alkylated (20 mM CAA) in the dark for 45 min at 45 °C. Samples were subjected to SP3 based digestion including a pooled set consisting of all heart samples utilized which served as an internal standard for each TMT batch (n=2 using 126 Channel). Washed SP3 beads (SP3 beads (Sera-Mag(TM) Magnetic Carboxylate Modified Particles (Hydrophobic),  Sera-Mag(TM) Magnetic Carboxylate Modified Particles (Hydrophylic) from Thermo Fisher Scientific) were mixed equally, and 3 µL of bead slurry were added to each sample. Acetonitrile was added to a final concentration of 50% and washed twice using 70 % ethanol (V=200 µL) on an in-house made magnet. After an additional acetonitrile wash (V=200µL), 5 µL digestion solution (10 mM HEPES pH = 8.5 containing 0.5µg Trypsin (Sigma) and 0.5µg LysC (Wako)) was added to each sample and incubated overnight at 37°C. Peptides were desalted on a magnet using 2 x 200 µL acetonitrile and labelled with TMT (11 plex) on SP3 beads in 10 µL 100 mM HEPES pH=8.5 for 1h at 37°C. 0.4 mg TMT reaction reagent in acetonitrile was used per sample. The reaction was stopped using 0.5 % final concentration of hydroxylamine for 30 min at room temperature. Beads were pooled and peptides were eluted together using 5% DMSO.  Next, we performed high pH offline peptide fractionation for mouse heart samples. In total, 50 µg of pooled TMT labelled peptides were utilized. The sample was desalted using the StageTip technique, dried in a SpeedVac completely and resuspended in 10 µL of 10 mM ammonium hydroxide in 5% acetonitrile.  The instrumentation consisted out of a ZirconiumTM Ultra HPLC and a PAL RTC autosampler system using the binary buffer system. A) 10 mM ammonium hydroxide and B) 80% acetonitrile and 10 mM ammonium hydroxide. Peptides were separated according to their hydrophobicity using an in-house packed column (length = 40 cm, inner diameter = 175 µm, 2.7-µm beads, PoroShell, Agilent Technologies) column. The instruments communicated and were controlled using the software Chronos (Axel Semrau GmbH). The total gradient length was 40 min and in total 36 fractions were collected (1/30 s) and subsequently concentrated using a SpeedVac to complete dryness.   Liquid Chromatography and Mass Spectrometry for heart proteomics  Eluted peptides in each fraction were dissolved in 10 µL of 2% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile in LC-MS H2O. 3 µL were injected for each fraction. The instrumentation consisted out of a nanoLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher) coupled via a nano-electrospray ionization source to a QExactive HF-x mass spectrometer. Peptides were separated on a 20cm in-house packed column (75µm inner diameter, PoroShell 2.7 µm beads) using a binary buffer system: A) 0.1% formic acid and B) 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile. The gradient time was 25 min.  MS1 spectra were acquired using a mass range from 250 to 1650 Th, a resolution (at 200 m/z) of 60,000 and an AGC target of 3e6 allowing a maximum injection time of 20 ms using profile mode. MS2 spectra were acquired at a resolution of 45,000 using a maximum injection time of 96 ms. The AGC target was to 1e5. The normalized collision energy was set to 32. The isolation window was set to 0.8 m/z. The fixed first mass was set to 110 m/z. The spectra were acquired in centroid mode.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis for proteomics  For proteomics data acquired mass spectra were subjected to MaxQuant (2.0.3.0) based analysis using the implemented Andromeda search engine. The input Fasta file contained reviewed Uniprot protein entries of the Mus Musculus reference proteome (downloaded 12.2021, 17,029 protein entries). TMT MS2 Quantification was selected using the first channel (126) as a reference (all intensities values are normalized to this value by division) since it contained a pool protein digest from all samples. Oxidation at methionine residues and protein N-term acetylation were defined as variable modifications. The false discovery rate (FDR) was controlled to 1 % at the protein and peptide-spectrum-match level using the implemented ‘revert’ algorithm. The mass tolerances were used as defined by default for FTMS instruments:  20 ppm at MS/MS level. The match between runs algorithm was enabled using default settings. A set of common contaminants were included and filtered out from the proteinGroup txt file output. Two-sided t-test were performed followed by permutation-based FDR correction were performed to identify significant differently expressed proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Heart, Oma, Mouse, Cardiomyopathy, Cox10

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing, 50931 Cologne, Germany
Max-Planck-Institute for Biology of Ageing Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 9b 50931 Cologne, Germany

### Submitter
Hendrik Nolte

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Langer
Max-Planck-Institute for Biology of Ageing Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 9b 50931 Cologne, Germany


