### Accession
PXD001109

### Title
Shotgun analysis of plasma fibrin clot-bound proteins in patients with acute myocardial infarction

### Description
The presence and amount of the proteins within a plasma clot may influence clot properties, like susceptibility to fibrinolysis, however, the plasma clot proteome has not yet been extensively described. The aim of the study was to investigate the protein composition of clots prepared ex vivo from plasma of the peripheral blood of four patients with acute myocardial infarction (AMI) in two time points: in the acute ischemic phase and two months later during the standard therapy.  Proteomic analysis revealed a total number of 62 proteins identified in all 8 samples grouping into several distinct functional clusters (e.g. cholesterol transporter activity, immunoglobulin binding and peptidase regulatory activity). The protein signatures of clots differed significantly depending on time after ACS, showing 30% greater variability in protein composition of the clots prepared in the plasma two months after the onset of AMI as compared to the clots generated at the time of admission to the hospital. Several proteins that could be involved in clot formation and resolution showed an interesting pattern of changes over time. For example α2-antiplasmin, which was robustly present in clots of all patients in acute phase of AMI, was detectable in lower abundance in only 2 clots prepared in plasma taken 8-12 weeks after AMI, whereas serotransferrin can be detected only in the clots prepared from plasma taken later during the therapy.  In conclusion, we provided the first qualitative analysis of proteomes of fibrin clots generated ex vivo in plasma taken from patients with AMI showing differences in protein composition between clots generated in the acute ischemic phase and those prepared two months later. It might be hypothesized that differences involving several proteins of potential influence on within-clot fibrinolysis and clot stability may partially explain time-dependent changes in the clots structure and firmness in patients with AMI.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were digest with FASP protocol, then analysed by MudPIT method by Ultimete 3000/Velos Pro system.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were analysed by Tandem search engine and validated with TPP.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Fibrin, Shotgun proteomics, Acute coronary syndromes, Clot

### Affiliations
Jagiellonian University Medical College
Chair of Pharmacology

### Submitter
Maciej Suski

### Lab Head
Dr Rafał Olszanecki
Jagiellonian University Medical College


