### Accession
PXD036451

### Title
Increasing proteome depth while maintaining quantitative precision in short gradient data-independent acquisition proteomics

### Description
The combination of short liquid chromatography (LC) gradients and data independent acquisition (DIA) by mass spectrometry (MS) has proven its huge potential for high-throughput proteomics. However, the optimization of isolation window schemes resulting in a certain number of data points per peak (DPPP) is understudied, although it is one of the most important parameters for the outcome of this methodology. In this study, we show that substantially reducing the number of data points per peak (DPPP) for short gradient DIA massively increases protein identifications while maintaining quantitative precision. This is due to a large increase in the number of precursors identified, which keeps the number of data points per protein almost constant even at long cycle times. When proteins are inferred from its precursors, quantitative precision is maintained at low DPPP while greatly increasing proteomic depth. This strategy enabled us quantifying 6018 HeLa proteins (> 80,000 precursor identifications) with coefficients of variation below 20% in 30 min using a Q Exactive HF, which corresponds to a throughput of 29 samples per day. This indicates that the potential of high-throughput DIA-MS has not been fully exploited yet.

### Sample Protocol
E.coli, S.cerevisiae and HeLa cells were prepared using Sample Preparation by Easy Extraction and Digestion (SPEED). Digestion was carried out for 20 h at 37°C using Trypsin at a protein/enzyme ratio of 100:1. Resulting peptides were desalted using PierceTM peptide desalting spin columns (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Peptide mixtures of different species were prepared from SPEED preparations of E. coli and HeLa cells as well as of a commercially available yeast protein digest (Promega). Peptides were analyzed on an EASY-nanoLC 1200 coupled online to a Q Exactive™ HF mass spectrometer. 1 µg of peptides were separated on a PepSep column (15cm length, 75 µm i.d., 1.5 µm C18 beads) using a stepped 30 min gradient of 80 % acetonitrile (solvent B) in 0.1 % formic acid (solvent A) at 300 nL/min flow rate. Column temperature was kept at 50°C. The Q Exactive™ HF was operated in a data-independent (DIA) manner in the m/z range of 345–1,650. Full scan spectra were recorded with a resolution of 120,000 using an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 3 × 10^6 with a maximum injection time of 100 ms. The Full scans were followed by DIA scans of dynamic window widths using an overlap of 0.5 Th. In order to introduce retention time dependent segments of DIA cycles with fixed cycle times but varying window widths, the window centers are deposited in the inclusion list of the QE method editor along with start and end times. Furthermore, the runtime and the window width of each single DIA scan event needs to be harmonized in accordance to the inclusion list. DIA spectra were recorded at a resolution of 30,000 using an AGC target value of 3 × 10^6 with a maximum injection time set to auto and a first fixed mass of 200 Th. Normalized collision energy (NCE) was set to 27 % and default charge state was set to 3.

### Data Protocol
Protein sequences of homo sapiens (UP000005640, downloaded 2411/21), E. coli K-12 (UP000000625, downloaded 26/11/21), and S. cerevisiae strain ATCC 204508 (UP000002311, downloaded 29/11/21) were obtained from UniProt. Spectral libraries were predicted using the deep-learning algorithm implemented in DIA-NN (version 1.8) with strict trypsin specificity (KR not P) allowing up to one missed cleavage site in the m/z range of 300 – 1,800 with charges states of 1 – 4 for all peptides consisting of 7-30 amino acids with enabled N-terminal methionine excision and cysteine carbamidomethylation. The mass spectra were analyzed in DIA-NN (version 1.8) using default settings including a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1 % for precursor identifications with enabled “match between run” (MBR) option for technical triplicates. The resulting precursor.tsv and pg_matrix.tsv (protein FDR = 1 %) files were used for further analysis in Perseus (version 1.6.5.). Differentially abundant proteins of the species mixture samples were identified using FDR-adjusted p-values from a t-test with a permutation-based FDR of 0.05 and s0 = 0.1 after normalization of the log-2 transformed MaxLFQ intensities using row cluster subtraction of the human proteins.

### Publication Abstract
The combination of short liquid chromatography (LC) gradients and data-independent acquisition (DIA) by mass spectrometry (MS) has proven its huge potential for high-throughput proteomics. However, the optimization of isolation window schemes resulting in a certain number of data points per peak (DPPP) is understudied, although it is one of the most important parameters for the outcome of this methodology. In this study, we show that substantially reducing the number of DPPP for short-gradient DIA massively increases protein identifications while maintaining quantitative precision. This is due to a large increase in the number of precursors identified, which keeps the number of data points per protein almost constant even at long cycle times. When proteins are inferred from its precursors, quantitative precision is maintained at low DPPP while greatly increasing proteomic depth. This strategy enabled us to quantify 6018 HeLa proteins (&gt;80&#x202f;000 precursor identifications) with coefficients of variation below 20% in 30 min using a Q Exactive HF, which corresponds to a throughput of 29 samples per day. This indicates that the potential of high-throughput DIA-MS has not been fully exploited yet. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD036451.

### Keywords
Isolation windows, Multi-species, Short-gradient, Dia

### Affiliations
ZBS6, Proteomics and Spectroscopy, Robert Koch-Institute
Proteomics and Spectroscopy (ZBS6), Robert Koch-Institute

### Submitter
Joerg Doellinger

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Lasch
ZBS6, Proteomics and Spectroscopy, Robert Koch-Institute


