### Accession
PXD013930

### Title
Site-specific N-glycosylation of HeLa cell glycoproteins

### Description
HeLa cell line is frequently used in biomedical research, however little is known about N-glycan structures expressed on individual glycoproteins of this complex sample. We characterized site-specific N-glycosylation of HeLa N-glycoproteins using a complex workflow based on high and low energy tandem mass spectrometry experiments and rigorous data evaluation. The analyses revealed high amount of bovine serum contaminants compromising previous results focusing on released glycan analysis. We reliably identified 43 (human) glycoproteins, 69 N-glycosylation sites and 178 glycopeptides following an acetone precipitation based sample enrichment step. HeLa glycoproteins were found to be highly fucosylated and in several cases localization of the fucose (core or antenna) could also be determined based on low energy tandem mass spectra. High-mannose sugars were expressed in high amounts as expected in case of a cancer cell line. Our method enabled the detailed characterization of site-specific N-glycosylation of several glycoproteins expressed in HeLa. Furthermore, we were the first to experimentally prove the existence of 31 glycosylation sites, where previously presence of glycosylation was only predicted based on the existence of the consensus sequon.

### Sample Protocol
Sample Preparation 1 μg HeLa protein digest standard was dissolved in 15 μL water containing 1% formic acid, then 150 μl ice-cold acetone was added. The solution was stored at -20 °C overnight resulting in the formation of a pellet enriched in glycopeptides. Next day the sample was centrifuged at 12000 g for 10 minutes. The supernatant was removed by careful pipetting, and the precipitate was dried in a vacuum centrifuge, then re-dissolved in 10 μL injection solvent (98% water, 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) for nanoLC-MS(MS) analysis. As for PNGase F deglycosylation, enriched glycopeptides (pellet fraction) were dissolved in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer (pH 8.5) in 100 ng/µl concentration. For de-glycosylation we treated the solution with 0.5 U PNGaseF enzyme / 1 µg glycopeptide for 16 h at 37 °C. The reaction was stopped by heating the solution to 95 °C for 5 minutes The pellet and the supernatant fractions along with the untreated HeLa digest were studied by nanoLC-MS/MS and nanoLC-MS (see below).  nanoUHPLC-MS(MS) Analysis Samples were analyzed using a Maxis II QTOF instrument (Bruker Daltonik GmbH, Bremen, Germany) equipped with CaptiveSpray nanoBooster ionsource coupled to a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Scientific, Sunnywale, California, USA). Peptides were separated on an Acquity M-Class BEH130 C18 analytical column (1.7 μm, 75 μm × 250 mm Waters, Milford, MA) using gradient elution (4–50% linear gradient of eluent B in 90 min) following trapping on an Acclaim PepMap100 C18 (5 μm, 100 μm × 20 mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) trap column. Solvent A consisted of water+0.1% formic acid, while Solvent B was acetonitrile+0.1% formic acid. For the DDA measurements the cycle time was set at 2.5 sec in the 700-2000 m/z range, preferred charges states were set between +2 and +5. MS/MS spectra acquisition for peptides over 2500 cts was done at 0.5 Hz, for peptides over 25000 cts at 4 Hz. Collision energy in the CID apparatus was set between 55 eV – 124 eV linearly changing for precursors between 700 and 1800 m/z. Mixed energy spectra was collected at 100% collision energy for 80% of the cycle time and 50% collision energy for 20% of the cycle time.

### Data Protocol
Qualitative and Quantitative Analysis Quantitative analysis of proteins from the MS/MS data was performed using MaxQuant software37 (Max Planck Institute Of  Biochemistry, München, Germany). Qualitative analysis of peptides and N-glycopeptides from the MS/MS data was done using Byonic software25 (Protein Metrics Inc., Cupertino, California, USA). LFQ analysis of glycopeptides and peptides from the MS1 data was done by using our in-house developed GlycoPattern software29. GlycoPattern requires a peptide and a glycopeptide backbone list with retention times (RT) derived from the Byonic search, and a summarized glycan list derived from the Byonic search, manual spectra evaluation, and glycopeptide synthesis pathways. For the additional manual spectra evaluation multiple collision energies were used, corresponding to the different fragmentation properties of distinct glycoforms. Components were identified based on their charge state, m/z and RT values, and isotope distribution. Quantification was done by calculating the peak area of the Gaussian peaks fitted over the extracted ion chromatogram of the identified components. Results were then verified by performing random checks. A major effort was directed to confirm validity of the results using i) high energy MS/MS for glycopepetide backbone sequence validation; ii) limiting database to highly confident hits only; iii) confirming peptide sequences after glycan release; iv) checking the expected and found retention times; and v) using a statistical check to eliminating possibly false hits.

### Publication Abstract
HPLC-MS/MS analysis of various human cell lines shows the presence of a major amount of bovine protein contaminants. These likely originate from fetal bovine serum (FBS), typically used in cell cultures. If evaluated against a human protein database, on average 10% of the identified human proteins will be misleading (bovine proteins, but indicated as if they were human). Bovine contaminants therefore may cause major bias in proteomic studies of cell cultures, if not considered explicitly.

### Keywords
Hela, Site-specific, Nanouhplc-ms/ms, N-glycosylation

### Affiliations
MS Proteomics Research Group, Institute of Organic Chemistry, Hungarian Academy of Sciences Research Centre for Natural Sciences, Hungary
RCNS HAS, MS Proteomics Research Group

### Submitter
Lilla Turiák

### Lab Head
Dr Laszlo Drahos
MS Proteomics Research Group, Institute of Organic Chemistry, Hungarian Academy of Sciences Research Centre for Natural Sciences, Hungary


