### Accession
PXD044778

### Title
Single-cell and Spatial Architecture of Primary Liver Cancer

### Description
Using single-cell RNA sequencing, spatial transcriptomic and bulk multi-omics, we elaborated a molecular architecture of 3 PLC types, namely hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (ICC) and combined hepatocellular-cholangiocarcinoma (CHC) from a high-resolution perspective.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue was grinded into cell powder with liquid nitrogen and then added four volumes of lysis buffer [8M urea (sigma), 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail), followed by sonication three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz). The supernatant was collected after centrifugation (12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min) and protein concentration detected with BCA kit (Thermo Fisher) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol (30 min at 56 °C), alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide (15 min at room temperature in darkness), and diluted urea concentration < 2M by adding 100 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, sigma). The first digestion of proteins was added with trypsin at a ratio of 1:50 trypsin-to-protein overnight at 37°C and followed by second 4-hr digestion with trypsin (1:100) at 37°C. Internal reference “MIX” sample was prepared with mixed samples in remaining channels and mixed in equal protein amount, which was also processed and conducted as a sample in TMT-labeling experiment. For each sample, 400 mg were desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried according to the TMT kit instructions (Thermo Fisher). Each TMT 11-plex reagent set was distributed ahead. Peptides were separated with a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0) over 60 min into 60 fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC (Agilent 300Extend C18 column, 5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length), then combined into 14 fractions, and dried by vacuum centrifugation for nanoscale liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS) using a 1290 Infinity series UHPLC System (Agilent Technologies). The fractionated peptides (1 mg each fraction) were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A) and loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.) at a constant flow rate of 450 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1200 UPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The gradient was set as follows: 9% -30% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile) in 40 min, 30%-40% in 12 min, 40%-90% in 4 min and holding at 90% for the last 4 min. The peptides were then subjected to NSI source and performed tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) with Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Fisher). The electrospray voltage was set at 2.4 kV and 400 -1500 m/z scan range for full scan at a resolution of 60,000, and then selected for MS/MS at 100 m/z scan range (resolution 30,000). Automatic gain control (AGC) target was set at 5E4, maximum IT at 100 ms, signal threshold at 10000 ions/s with 30 s dynamic exclusion time between MS1 and MS2 scan. A data-dependent procedure was applied, and the normalized collision energy (NCE) was set at NCE 32%. All MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8) against the human Swiss-Prot database containing 20,380 sequences (downloaded in December, 2017) concatenated with reverse decoy database. Enzyme specificity was set as Trypsin/P allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions in the first and main search was set as 20 ppm and 5 ppm, respectively, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions as 0.02 Da. The minimal peptide length was set at 7 and maximum modifications per peptide at 5. The identified peptide length distribution most ranged in 7-20 amino acids which were eligible for quality control. Fixed modification (carbamidomethyl on Cys) and variable modifications (acetylation modification and oxidation on Met) were specified with FDR < 0.01.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were analyzed with MaxQuant (v1.5.2.8) for RAW file reading capability. UniProt-GOA database ( http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/) was used for Gene Ontology (GO) annotation proteome which converted identified protein ID to UniProt ID and then mapped it to GO IDs. The InterProScan software was used for proteins not annotated based on protein sequence alignment, which was also for proteins domain identification based on InterPro database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/). For differential expression analysis, fold change >1.5 (up-regulation) or <1/1.5 (down-regulation) and p-value <0.05 was set. Specifically, coefficient of variation (CV) was calculated for T124, T125, P124, and P125 and CV-value<0.1 was set as the threshold. STRING database (v.10.5) was used for protein-protein interactions analysis accompanied with confidence score >0.7 (high confidence).

### Publication Abstract
Primary liver cancer (PLC) poses a leading threat to human health, and its treatment options are limited. Meanwhile, the investigation of homogeneity and heterogeneity among PLCs remains challenging. Here, using single-cell RNA sequencing, spatial transcriptomic and bulk multi-omics, we elaborated a molecular architecture of 3 PLC types, namely hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (ICC) and combined hepatocellular-cholangiocarcinoma (CHC). Taking a high-resolution perspective, our observations revealed that CHC cells exhibit internally discordant phenotypes, whereas ICC and HCC exhibit distinct tumor-specific features. Specifically, ICC was found to be the primary source of cancer-associated fibroblasts, while HCC exhibited disrupted metabolism and greater individual heterogeneity of T cells. We further revealed a diversity of intermediate-state cells residing in the tumor-peritumor junctional zone, including a congregation of CPE<sup>+</sup> intermediate-state endothelial cells (ECs), which harbored the molecular characteristics of tumor-associated ECs and normal ECs. This architecture offers insights into molecular characteristics of PLC microenvironment, and hints that the tumor-peritumor junctional zone could serve as a targeted region for precise therapeutical strategies.

### Keywords
Primary liver cancer, Spatial transcriptomics, Combined hepatocellular-cholangiocarcinoma, Intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma, Hepatocellular carcinoma, Multi-omics, Single-cell rna-seq

### Affiliations
Department of Liver Surgery and Transplantation, Liver Cancer Institute, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University, and Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Cancer Invasion, Ministry of Education

### Submitter
peiyun zhou

### Lab Head
Dr Peiyun Zhou
Department of Liver Surgery and Transplantation, Liver Cancer Institute, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University, and Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Cancer Invasion, Ministry of Education


