### Accession
PXD032736

### Title
Application of Two-Dimensional Difference Gel Electrophoresis to Identify Protein Changes between Center, Margin, and Adjacent Non-Tumor Tissues Obtained from Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer with Adenocarcinoma Subtype

### Description
Lung cancer is responsible for the most cancer-related mortality worldwide and the mechanism of its development is poorly understood. Proteomics has become a powerful tool offering vital knowledge related to  cancer development. Using a two-dimensional difference gel electrophoresis (2D-DIGE) approach, we sought to compare tissue samples from non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients, exactly adenocarcinoma (ADC),  taken from the tumor center and tumor margin and control (adjacent non-tumor) tissues . We found 22 differentially abundant spots representing 17 proteins differentiating center and margin. Sixty eight proteins; represented by 79 spots :40, 20, and 19 spots differed between the control and center and margin, control and center, and control and margin, respectively. Twenty six significant canonical pathways were identified, including Rho signaling pathways, a semaphorin neuronal repulsive signaling pathway, and epithelial adherens junction signaling. Proteins differentiating the tumor center and tumor margin were linked to cancer invasion and progression, including cell migration, adhesion and invasion, cytoskeletal structure, protein folding, anaerobic metabolism, tumor angiogenesis, EMC transition, epithelial adherens junctions, and inflammatory responses.

### Sample Protocol
Fragments of normal tissue and tissues of tumour center and margin were sonicated using VC-13 PB (Sonics, Newtown, CT, USA), set at 35% relative output, for 30s in 100 µl extraction buffer in buffer containing 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 30 mM Tris, 4% 3-([3-cholamidopropyl] dimethylammonio) 1-propanesulfonate (CHAPS), 100 mM dithiothreilol, 2% (v/v) immobilized pH gradient (IPG) buffer (3−10 NL), 1% (v/v) Triton X-100) containing 1% (v/v) protease inhibitor cocktail. After sonication tissue extracts were kept on ice for 1 h, centrifuged at 12,800 × g for 20 min at 4°C and 200 μg protein were precipitated using the 2-D Clean-up Kit (GE Healthcare, Uppsala, Sweden). The precipitate was dissolved in labeling buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% w/v CHAPS, 30 mM Tris, pH 8.0). Two independent 2D-DIGE analyses were performed to compare the protein profiles of normal lung tissue and tissues of tumour center and margin collected from ADC patients (n = 8 for each group) and SCC patients (n=7 for each group). Aliquots of 50 µg of protein from each sample (normal tissue and tissues of tumour center and margin) were labelled with CyDye DIGE Fluor minimal dyes (GE Healthcare) at a concentration of 400 pmol dye/50 µg of protein The internal standard was generated by combining equal amounts of each samples within the experiment and was labelled with Cy2. Differentially labelled samples were mixed together loaded onto Immobiline DryStrip gel strips (24 cm, pH 3 to 10 non-linear; GE Healthcare). Isoelectric focusing was performed with an IPGphor isoelectric focusing unit (GE Healthcare), and SDS-PAGE was run using the ETTAN Dalt six electrophoresis unit (GE Healthcare). The CyDye-labelled gels were scanned using Typhoon FLA 9500 instrument (GE Healthcare) and analysed by DeCyder Differential Analysis Software (version 5.0; GE Healthcare). Spots of interests were excised and digested using a trypsin solution (Promega) containing 0.2mg/mL trypsin in 15mM ammonium bicarbonate. The peptide mixtures were desalted using ZipTip C-18 RP tips (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA) and spotted in a matrix of 0.5% cyanhydroxy cinnamic acid on a 96-spot MALDI target. Peptide samples were analyzed on a TOF Autoflex-ToF/ToF mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany).

### Data Protocol
Spots were identified by MS and MS/MS using a MALDI-TOF autoflex speed TOF/TOF mass spectrometer equipped with a smartbeam II laser (355 nm; Bruker Daltonics). MALDI-TOF mass spectra were acquired in reflectron positive ion mode. TOF/TOF MS fragmentation spectra were acquired for each sample, averaging 4000 laser shots per fragmentation spectrum on each of the 3-10 most abundant ions present in each sample (excluding trypsin autolytic peptides and other known background ions). Operating conditions were as follows: ion source 1 = 19.00 kV, ion source 2 = 16.75 kV, lens voltage = 7.50 kV, reflector voltage = 21.00 kV, optimized pulsed ion extraction time = 120 ns, matrix suppression = 500 Da, and positive reflectron mode. The strongest precursors were selected for MS/MS analysis. Peak lists were generated from MS spectra with flexAnalysis version 3.3 (Bruker Daltonics). Database search: both the resulting peptide mass and the associated fragmentation spectra were submitted to BioTools equipped with MASCOT search engine (version 2.4) to search the Homo sapiens database (created on March 11, 2022) using the Mascot Server (Matrix Science, London, UK)  database. The database search criteria were as follows: enzyme, trypsin; fixed modification, carbamidomethylation (C); and variable modifications, oxidation (M) peptide mass tolerance of 100 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 0.5 Da, and 1 missed cleavage allowed. The search results were filtered with a significant threshold of p<0.05 and a Mascot ion score cutoff of ≥30 for at least two unique peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Lung cancer is responsible for the most cancer-related mortality worldwide and the mechanism of its development is poorly understood. Proteomics has become a powerful tool offering vital knowledge related to cancer development. Using a two-dimensional difference gel electrophoresis (2D-DIGE) approach, we sought to compare tissue samples from non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients taken from the tumor center and tumor margin. Two subtypes of NSCLC, adenocarcinoma (ADC) and squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) were compared. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD032736 and PXD032962 for ADC and SCC, respectively. For ADC proteins, 26 significant canonical pathways were identified, including Rho signaling pathways, a semaphorin neuronal repulsive signaling pathway, and epithelial adherens junction signaling. For SCC proteins, nine significant canonical pathways were identified, including hypoxia-inducible factor-1&#x3b1; signaling, thyroid hormone biosynthesis, and phagosome maturation. Proteins differentiating the tumor center and tumor margin were linked to cancer invasion and progression, including cell migration, adhesion and invasion, cytoskeletal structure, protein folding, anaerobic metabolism, tumor angiogenesis, EMC transition, epithelial adherens junctions, and inflammatory responses. In conclusion, we identified several proteins that are important for the better characterization of tumor development and molecular specificity of both lung cancer subtypes. We also identified proteins that may be important as biomarkers and/or targets for anticancer therapy.

### Keywords
Human, Adenocarcinoma, 2d-dige, Lung tissue, Cancer

### Affiliations
Department of Gametes and Embryo Biology, Institute of Animal Reproduction and Food Research Polish Academy of Sciences, Olsztyn, 10-748, Poland
Polish Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Mariola  Dietrich

### Lab Head
Dr Mariola Dietrich
Department of Gametes and Embryo Biology, Institute of Animal Reproduction and Food Research Polish Academy of Sciences, Olsztyn, 10-748, Poland


