### Accession
PXD013442

### Title
Proteomic analysis of intracranial aneurysm

### Description
Intracranial aneurysm (IA) is a pathological dilation of the cerebral artery which has a potential to rupture leading to sub arachnoid haemorrhage (SAH). One third of the patients with aneurysmal SAH (aSAH) develop symptomatic narrowing of the blood vessels called cerebral vasospasm. The outcomes in the above clinical scenarios are variable and devastating. The study was designed to decipher the molecular mechanisms underlying the pathophysiology of intracranial aneurysm formation, its rupture and subsequent development of vasospasm at the proteomic level. The study was done in two phases – discovery phase and validation phase. We performed iTRAQ-based quantitative proteomic analysis of brain vessel tissue and serum samples in three subgroups of patients with IA and compared them with those of control group (subjects with no cerebrovascular disorder) during the discovery phase. In validation phase, dysregulated proteins of biological significance i.e. ORM1 as a biomarker for unruptured aneurysm and MMP9 as a biomarker for cerebral vasospasm were validated in larger cohort of patients.

### Sample Protocol
Equal masses of five tissue samples from each group i.e. C, T1, T2 and T3 were pooled and disrupted in liquid nitrogen using a hand-held disruptor. They were then homogenized in lysis buffer (0.5% SDS, 100mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB)), centrifuged at high speed and clear supernatant was separated. Protein estimation was carried out using bicinchoninic acid (BCA) (Pierce, Waltham, MA) (Smith et al., 1985) assay.  For serum samples, total protein was measured by BCA assay (Pierce, Waltham, MA) (Smith et al., 1985) in groups C, T1, T2 and T3 separately. Equal amount of proteins from individual samples were pooled together in each group. Serum samples were then depleted of highly abundant serum proteins using Human multiple affinity removal system – 14 (MARS – 14) column (Agilent Technologies, CA.).

### Data Protocol
The data acquired were searched against Human RefSeq81 protein database. The searches were performed using SEQUEST and MASCOT (version 2) through Proteome Discoverer (Version 2.1) software suite (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The search parameters included trypsin as the proteolytic enzyme with one missed cleavage and oxidation of methionine as a dynamic modification. Static modifications for searches were marked as carbamidomethylation of cysteine and iTRAQ label at N-terminus of the peptide and lysine. Precursor and fragment ion mass tolerance were set at 10 ppm and 0.05 ppm respectively.  The FDR was calculated using target-decoy database searches. Data were searched against decoy database with 1% FDR rate allowed at the peptide level. Quantitation was carried out using the reporter ion quantifier node for iTRAQ labels available through Proteome Discoverer.

### Publication Abstract
The scientific basis of intracranial aneurysm (IA) formation, its rupture and further development of cerebral vasospasm is incompletely understood. Aberrant protein expression may drive structural alterations of vasculature found in IA. Deciphering the molecular mechanisms underlying these events will lead to identification of early detection biomarkers and in turn, improved treatment outcomes. To unravel differential protein expression in three clinical subgroups of IA patients: (1) unruptured aneurysm, (2) ruptured aneurysm without vasospasm, (3) ruptured aneurysm who developed vasospasm, we performed untargeted quantitative proteomic analysis of aneurysm tissue and serum samples from three subgroups of IA patients and control subjects. Candidate molecules were then validated in a larger cohort of patients using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. A total of 937 and 294 proteins were identified from aneurysm tissue and serum samples, respectively. Several proteins that are known to maintain structural integrity of vasculature were found to be dysregulated in the context of aneurysm. <i>ORM1</i>, a glycoprotein, was significantly upregulated in both tissue and serum samples of unruptured aneurysm patients. We employed a larger cohort of subjects (<i>n</i>&#x2009;=&#x2009;26) and validated <i>ORM1</i> as a potential biomarker for screening of unruptured aneurysms. Samples from ruptured aneurysms with vasospasm showed significant upregulation of <i>MMP9</i>, a protease, compared with ruptured aneurysms without vasospasm. We validated <i>MMP9</i> as a potential biomarker for vasospasm in a larger cohort (<i>n</i>&#x2009;=&#x2009;52). This study reports the first global proteomic analysis of the entire clinical spectrum of IA. Furthermore, this study suggests <i>ORM1</i> and <i>MMP9</i> as potential biomarkers for unruptured aneurysm and cerebral vasospasm, respectively.

### Keywords
Vasospasm, Itraq, Subarachnoid haemorrhage

### Affiliations
Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research (PGIMER), Chandigarh
Department of Anaesthesia and Intensive Care,  Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh 160012, India.

### Submitter
Hemant Bhagat

### Lab Head
Dr Hemant Bhagat
Department of Anaesthesia and Intensive Care,  Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh 160012, India.


