### Accession
PXD012082

### Title
Regulation of the endosomal SNX27 retromer by OTULIN

### Description
OTULIN specifically hydrolyzes methionine1 (Met1)-linked ubiquitin chains conjugated by LUBAC (linear ubiquitin chain assembly complex). Using mass spectrometry, we discovered an interaction of OTULIN with SNX27 (sorting nexin 27), an adaptor of the endosomal retromer complex responsible for protein recycling to the cell surface. The C-terminal PDZ binding motif (PDZbm) in OTULIN associates with the cargo-binding site in the PDZ domain of SNX27. By solving the structure of the OTU domain in complex with the PDZ domain, we demonstrate that a second interface contributes to the selective, high affinity interaction of OTULIN and SNX27. SNX27 does not affect OTULIN catalytic activity, OTULIN-LUBAC binding or Met1-linked ubiquitin chain homeostasis. However, via association OTULIN antagonizes SNX27-dependent cargo loading, binding of SNX27 to the retromer subunit VPS26 and endosome-to-membrane trafficking. Thus, we define an additional, non-catalytic function of OTULIN in the regulation of retromer assembly and protein recycling to the cell surface.

### Sample Protocol
OTULIN-ABP pulldown in Jurkat cells.  For ABP-PDs, 2x107 cells were lysed in 500 µl co-IP buffer with phosphatase inhibitors but without protease inhibitors for 20 min at 4°C. Cell debris was removed from the lysates by centrifugation (20,000 x g, 10 min, 4°C). To avoid unspecific binding of proteins to the streptavidin beads, lysates were subjected to a pre-clearing with 15 µl High Capacitiy Streptavidin Agarose (50% suspension). After incubation on a rotator (1 h, 4°C), beads were separated by centrifugation (2500 x g, 2 min, 4°C). To check whether equal cell numbers were utilized, 30 µl was removed from each sample (lysate) and denatured by boiling in SDS sample buffer for later analysis by Western Blot. Pre-cleared lysates (450 µl) were incubated with 2 µg OTULIN ABP for 15 min at RT, enabling the covalent attachment of active OTULIN to the probe. To bind and pull-down OTULIN-ABP complexes, 25 µl streptavidin agarose (50% suspension) was added to the samples and incubated on a rotator for 2 hrs at 4°C. After a first centrifugation step (2,500 x g, 4°C, 2 min), beads were washed three times with 1 ml co-IP buffer without inhibitors. Protein complexes were eluted by boiling beads in 25 µl 2x SDS sample buffer and analyzed by Western Blot after SDS-PAGE, as well as the lysate controls. For the identification of OTULIN interactors by mass spectrometric analysis of OTULIN ABP-PDs, the individual samples were prepared in quadruplicate. For each sample, 5x107 cells were lysed in 1 ml co-IP buffer without protease inhibitors. Extracts were pre-cleared using 25 µl streptavidin agarose. For ATP-depletion, all pre-cleared lysates (950 µl) were incubated with recombinant apyrase (4 U, 30 min, 30°C). To inhibit OTULIN, samples were incubated for another 30 min at 30°C with (or without) PR-619 (250 µM). Extracts were then treated with (or without) OTULIN ABP (5 µg) for 15 min at RT before adding 35 µl streptavidin agarose to pull down OTULIN-ABP complexes and associated proteins (2 hrs, 4°C). Beads were washed four times with 1 ml co-IP buffer (2500 x g, 2 min, 4°C). PDs were eluted by boiling the beads in 50 µl 2x SDS sample buffer. 2.5 µl (5%) was removed for Western Blot analysis, the rest was analyzed by LC-MS/MS.   OTULIN Strep-PD. For the OTULIN interactome determination by LC-MS/MS, Strep-PDs were performed in extracts of OTULIN KO Jurkat Tcells which are reconstituted with either N-terminally StrepII-StrepII-Flag-tagged (SF-)OTULIN WT or mock (SF-tag only). Every sample was prepared in triplicate. For each sample, 2x108 cells were lysed in 1 ml co-IP buffer with phosphatase and protease inhibitors for 1 h at 4°C. Cell debris was removed from the lysates by centrifugation (20,000 x g, 20 min, 4°C), supernatants were transferred into new reaction tubes and diluted with 500 µl co-IP buffer. 15 µl was removed from each sample and mixed with SDS sample buffer, to check later by Western Blot if equal cell numbers were used. Strep-Tactin sepharose was pre-equilibrated in co-IP buffer and added to each sample (300 µl of 50% slurry / sample). The mixtures were incubated on a rotator for 16 hrs at 4°C to ensure efficient binding of SF-OTULIN to the beads. The resin was sedimented by centrifugation (250 x g, 2 min, 4°C) and another 15 µl control sample was removed from each supernatant to check whether OTULIN had been depleted from the extracts by the PD procedure. Beads were washed three times with 1 ml co-IP buffer without inhibitors (250 x g, 2 min, 4°C) and subsequently boiled in 150 µl 2x reducing SDS sample buffer. 7.5 µl (5%) was removed for Western Blot analysis, the rest was analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
From raw MS files, searches against the UniProtKB human sequence data base (retrieved 15.10.2014) and label-free quantitation were performed using MaxQuant Software (v1.5.2). Search parameters include carbamidomethyl (C) as a fixed modification, oxidation (M) and deamidation (NQ as variable modifications, maximum 2 missed cleavages, matching between runs, and LFQ quantitation was performed using unique peptides. Label-free interaction data analysis was performed using Perseus (v.1.5.5.3), and volcano plots were generated using a t-test with permutation FDR=0.01 for multiple-test correction and s0=2 (or s0=0.2) as cut-off parameters.

### Publication Abstract
OTULIN&#xa0;(OTU Deubiquitinase With Linear Linkage Specificity) specifically hydrolyzes methionine1 (Met1)-linked ubiquitin chains conjugated by LUBAC (linear ubiquitin chain assembly complex). Here we report on the mass spectrometric identification of the OTULIN interactor SNX27 (sorting nexin 27), an adaptor of the endosomal retromer complex responsible for protein recycling to the cell surface. The C-terminal PDZ-binding motif (PDZbm) in OTULIN associates with the cargo-binding site in the PDZ domain of SNX27. By solving the structure of the OTU domain in complex with the PDZ domain, we demonstrate that a second interface contributes to the selective, high affinity interaction of OTULIN and SNX27. SNX27 does not affect OTULIN catalytic activity, OTULIN-LUBAC binding or Met1-linked ubiquitin chain homeostasis. However, via association, OTULIN antagonizes SNX27-dependent cargo loading, binding of SNX27 to the VPS26A-retromer subunit and endosome-to-plasma membrane trafficking. Thus, we define an additional, non-catalytic function of OTULIN in the regulation of SNX27-retromer assembly and recycling to the cell surface.

### Keywords
Interactome, Otulin, Acitivity-based probe

### Affiliations
University of Oxford
TDI-NDM University of Oxford

### Submitter
Adan Pinto-Fernandez

### Lab Head
Dr Benedikt Kessler
TDI-NDM University of Oxford


