### Accession
PXD044800

### Title
A stop-and-go mechanism controls mitochondrial respiration

### Description
Oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) is essential for the synthesis of the vast majority of ATP in eukaryotic cells. It is carried out by multi-protein assemblies that form the electron transport chain (ETC), which are coupled to the mitochondrial ATP synthase, which uses the proton gradient generated by the ETC to drive ATP synthesis. The assembly of the OXPHOS protein machinery requires the coordinated integration of proteins encoded in the nuclear and the mitochondrial genomes, imposing an additional layer of complexity. While the biogenesis of the individual OXPHOS complexes is well understood, it remains unknown how the assembly of the ETC and ATP synthase is coordinated to achieve the correct stoichiometry of the OXPHOS machinery. Here, we identify the mitochondrial regulatory hub for respiratory assembly (MiRA), which serves as a platform on which complex IV and complex V biogenesis are synchronised to ensure balanced assembly of the ETC and complex V. At the molecular level, this is achieved by a stop-and-go safeguarding mechanism: The novel mitochondrial protein Mra1 binds to and slows down complex IV assembly. Two Go signals are then required for assembly to proceed: Binding of the complex IV assembly factor Rcf2 and interaction with the mitoribosome, which translates the complex V subunit Atp9. Both Go signals induce the clipping and subsequent degradation of Mra1, relieving the molecular break and allowing parallel maturation of complexes IV and V. The absence of the stop-and-go safety mechanism results in the formation of immature complexes, decreased ATP levels and reduced cell viability. The antagonistic activities at MiRA provide a regulated orchestration of complex IV and V assembly which is essential to avoid the predominance of either complex and an unbalanced ratio of OXPHOS complexes, thus ensuring the correct stoichiometry of protein machineries encoded by two different genomes.

### Sample Protocol
- csBN-MS analysis. The region of interest (high molecular weight range) from a blue-native PAGE separation of each 600 µg (solubilized in 230 µl 0.5% digitonin, ......) WT and YP010 knockout yeast mitochondria was excised and fixed. For each lane, 6 samples were obtained by manual slicing (1 mm) and subjected to in-gel tryptic digestion as described (Müller et al., 2019, doi:10.3791/60096). Obtained peptide samples were each dissolved in 20 µl 0.5% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid and 2 µl loaded on a precolumn (PepMap 100, C18 stationary phase, 5 µm particles; Thermo Fisher) via an autosampler of a split-free UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC (Dionex / Thermo Scientific, Germany). Elution and separation were achieved on a C18 reversed phase column with a SilicaTip™ emitter (i.d. 75 µm, tip 8 µm; New Objective, USA) manually packed with ReproSil-Pur 120 ODS-3 (C18 stationary phase; Dr. Maisch HPLC, Germany; approx. 23 cm). The aequous-organic elution profile was as follows (eluent A: 0.5% [v/v] acetic acid and eluent B: 0.5% [v/v] acetic acid in 80% [v/v] acetonitrile): 5 min 20 µL/min with 0.05% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (trapping), 5 min 3% 'B' (equilibration), 120 min from 3% 'B' to 30% 'B' and 20 min from 30% 'B' to 40% 'B' and 10 min from 40% 'B' to 50% 'B' and 5 min from 50% 'B' to 99% 'B' (four step gradient), 5 min 99% 'B' (washing), 5 min from 99% 'B' to 3% 'B' and 10 min 3% 'B' (regeneration). Parameters for electrospray / injection were: positive ion mode, spray voltage 2.3 kV, transfer capillary temperature 275°C. Measurements were performed on a Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) with the following settings: advanced peak determination, MS full scan resolution 240.000, MS scan range 370 -1700 m/z, RF lens 45%, normalized AGC target 300%, maximum injection time 200 ms, 1 microscan, profile data type, positive polarity, monoisotopic peak determination mode, intensity threshold 10.000, theoretical precursor envelope fit (threshold 50%, fit window 0.8 m/z), include charge states 2 - 4, skip undetermined charge states, dynamic exclusion window 30 s, mass tolerance ± 10 ppm, exclude isotopes, MS/MS cycle time (time between master scans) 3 s, DDA isolation window 0.8 m/z, normalized HCD collision energy 30%, MS/MS orbitrap resolution 15.000, first mass 100 m/z, normalized AGC target 75%, maximum injection time 200 ms, 1 microscan, centroid data type. - differential proteomic analysis: mitochondrial pellets (triplicate preparations) were dissolved in Laemmli buffer and shortly run into an 10% SDS-PAGE gel. After staining with colloidal Coomassie, lanes were excised and cut into 4 sections (i.e. molecular weight ranges) that were subjected to in-gel tryptic digestion (with addition washes for destaining) as above. Peptide samples were each dissolved in 25 µl 0.5% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid and 1.25 µl loaded on a µPAC trapping column (PharmaFluidics / Thermo Fisher) via an autosampler of a split-free UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC (Dionex / Thermo Scientific, Germany). Peptides were eluted and separated on a 200 cm µPAC C18 reversed phase analytical column (PharmaFluidics / Thermo Fisher) with a 5 cm long Sharp Singularity emitter (360 µm o.d., 20 µm i.d., FossilIonTech). The following aequous-organic elution profile was used (eluent A: 0.5% [v/v] acetic acid and eluent B: 0.1% [v/v] formic acid in 80% [v/v] acetonitrile):  4 min 10 µL/min with 'A' (trapping), 1 min 3% 'B' (equilibration), 90 min from 3% 'B' to 35% 'B' and 20 min from 35% 'B' to 45% 'B' and 10 min from 45% 'B' to 55% 'B' and 5 min from 55% 'B' to 99% 'B' (four step gradient), 5 min 99% 'B' (washing), 5 min from 99% 'B' to 3% 'B' and 40 min 3% 'B' (regeneration). Parameters for electrospray / injection were: positive ion mode, spray voltage 2.3 kV, transfer capillary temperature 275°C. Measurements were performed on a Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) with the following settings: advanced peak determination, MS full scan resolution 240.000, MS scan range 370 -1700 m/z, RF lens 40%, normalized AGC target 300%, maximum injection time 200 ms, 1 microscan, profile data type, positive polarity, monoisotopic peak determination mode, intensity threshold 20.000, theoretical precursor envelope fit (threshold 50%, fit window 0.8 m/z), include charge states 2 - 4, skip undetermined charge states, dynamic exclusion window 60 s, mass tolerance ± 10 ppm, exclude isotopes, MS/MS cycle time (time between master scans) 3 s, DDA isolation window 0.8 m/z, normalized HCD collision energy 30%, MS/MS orbitrap resolution 15.000, first mass 100 m/z, normalized AGC target 75%, maximum injection time 100 ms, 1 microscan, centroid data type.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification Primary MS data was processed with msconvert (https://proteowizard.sourceforge.io v3.0.11098). Obtained peak lists were then m/z calibrated using the MaxQuant raw file processor (version 1.6.17, https://www.maxquant.org) (Cox and Mann, 2008; Tyanova et al., 2016) and used as input for Mascot (version 2.6.2, Matrix Science, UK) database search against the UniprotKB/SwissProt yeast database (differential proteomics data: SwissProt_YEAST (2020-02-26), BN-MS section data: SwissProt_YEAST (2020-10-07)) with general contaminations added (GPM cRAP database). Search parameters were: precursor mass tolerance = ±5 ppm, fragment mass tolerance = ±20 mmu, variable modifications = Acetyl (Protein N-term), Carbamidomethyl (C), Formyl (N-term, S, T), Gln->pyro-Glu (N-term Q), Glu->pyro-Glu (N-term E) and Oxidation (M), missed tryptic cleavage(s) = 1. Export filter settings were: Peptide-Spectrum-Match (PSM) FDR = 3%, minimum ion score = 0.5, grouping of related protein hits used the name of the predominant member. Exogenous contaminants (e.g., keratins, trypsin, IgG chains) or protein identifications based on only one specific peptide were not considered further.  Protein quantification For label-free quantification of proteins, LC-MS data from both experiments were processed as previously described (Schwenk et al., 2019; Schulte et al., 2023). Briefly, MaxQuant was used to determine and mass calibrate peptide signal intensities (peak volumes, PVs) from FT full scans. Datasets were pairwise aligned and systematic variations in peptide elution times were corrected by LOESS regression (median peptide elution times over all aligned datasets serving as reference). Peptide identities obtained either directly or indirectly from MS/MS database matches and PVs were then matched by an in-house developed software (Bildl et al., 2012; m/z / elution time matching tolerances were ±1.5-2 ppm / ±1 min, respectively). The list of identified proteins (with a minimum of at least 2 protein-specific peptides) was filtered for bona-fide mitochondrial proteins using (Schulte et al. 2023) as reference. Global offsets in peptide intensity between runs were corrected by normalization, either to the median of relative protein abundance profiles (BNMS data) or the median of relative peptide intensities of mitochondrial proteins (differential proteomics data). To effectively eliminate the impact of missing, non-consistent or incorrectly assigned PVs, a newly developed procedure ('Expector' software, Schulte et al., 2023) was applied that comprised four steps. First, matrices (peptides vs runs) of protein-specific PVs were evaluated for their internal consistency by calculating expected peak volumes (EPVs) (from the kernel density estimation of pairwise relations of peptide intensity values between and within MS-runs (in all possible combinations)). These EPV values served as measure of consistency of the respective, actually measured PV values and were later used as weighting factors. Second, a time- and run-dependent detectability threshold was estimated for each of the matrix cells (peptides vs runs) using the 3rd percentile of PV values from peptides co-eluting within a 3 min time window. Third, for each protein, consistent PVs were merged (EPV-weighted least squares fits to the dataset with the highest number of PVs assigned to the respective protein) into a single intensity value vector, termed ‘protein reference ridge’. These vectors reflected the maximum protein coverage of MS/MS-identified and quantified peptides with their relative ionisation efficiencies and were used to determine molecular abundances (abundancenormspec values) as described (Bildl et al., 2012). Fourth, protein quantification was achieved by a weighted fitting of its measured peptide intensities to its reference ridge. Obtained protein abundance values from BNMS and differential proteomic analysis are provided in Supplementary Tables Sx and Sy, respectively. The significance of protein abundance differences between WT and rcf2 knockout mitochondria (Fig. x) was assessed by applying a two-sided paired Student's t test (Microsoft Excel 16.73).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Respiratory chain, Protein complex assembly, Complex stoichiometry, Mitoribosome

### Affiliations
University of Heidelberg
Center for Molecular Biology of Heidelberg University (ZMBH), 69120 Heidelberg, Germany

### Submitter
Marcin Luzarowski

### Lab Head
Dr Nora Voegtle
Center for Molecular Biology of Heidelberg University (ZMBH), 69120 Heidelberg, Germany


