### Accession
PXD009028

### Title
A Chemical Biology Toolbox to Study Protein Methyltransferases and Epigenetic Signaling

### Description
Protein methyltransferases (PMTs) comprise a major class of epigenetic regulatory enzymes with therapeutic relevance. Here we present a collection of chemical probes and associated reagents and data to elucidate the function of human and murine PMTs in cellular studies. Our collection provides inhibitors and antagonists that together modulate most of the key regulatory methylation marks on histones H3 and H4, providing an important resource for modulating cellular epigenomes. We describe a comprehensive and comparative characterization of the probe collection with respect to their potency, selectivity, and mode of inhibition. We demonstrate the utility of this collection in CD4+ T cell differentiation assays revealing the remarkable potential of individual probes to alter multiple T cell subpopulations with important implications for T cell-mediated processes such as inflammation and immuno-oncology. In particular, we demonstrate a role for DOT1L in limiting Th1 cell differentiation and maintaining lineage integrity.

### Sample Protocol
Lysate preparation G401, Jurkat, and HEK293T cells were cultured at 37 °C in a humidified 5% CO2 atmosphere in McCoy’s Medium containing 10% FBS, RPMI-1640 Medium contianing 10% FBS, and DMEM Medium containing 10% FBS, respectively.  Cells were grown until approximately 80% confluent before being pelleted and washed with PBS. Cell pellets were subsequently lysed in buffer A (50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 0.8% v/v NP-40, 5% v/v glycerol, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 100 mM NaCl, 25 mM NaF, 1mM Na3VO4, 1mM PMSF, 1mM DTT, 10 µg/mL TLCK, 1 µg/mL Leupeptin, 1 µg/mL Aprotinin, 1 µg/mL soy bean trypsin) and lysates prepared and cleared by ultracentrifugation, as previously described. Protein concentration was determined (and lysates stored at -80 °C until use.  Bead conjugation and pulldown Amine derivatised compounds were coupled to NHS-activated Sepharose 4 fast flow beads (GE healthcare). 100 μL of bead slurry (50% in isopropanol) was used for each pulldown experiment. The beads were washed with DMSO (3 x 500 μL), and resuspended in DMSO (50 μL), to which the amine (0.025 μmol) and triethylamine (0.75 μL) were added. The beads were incubated at room temperature for 16 hours, and depletion of free amine from the supernatant determined by LC-MS analysis. Ethanolamine (2.5 μL) was then added to block any unreacted NHS sites, and the beads incubated for a further 16 hours. Derivatised beads were then washed with DMSO (3 x 500 μL), buffer A (3 x 1 mL), and incubated with cell lysates (2 mg of protein per pulldown, at 6 mg/mL) that had been pre-treated with either compound (20 μM) or DMSO control for 30 minutes at 4 °C. The beads and treated lysates were incubated for 2 hours at 4 °C, before being washed with buffer A (5 mL), Buffer B (50 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 100 mM NaCl, 500 μM EDTA, 2.5 mL), and eluted with formic acid (100 mM, 250 μl). Samples were neutralised with triethylammoniumbicarbonate (TEAB, 1M, 62.5 μl) and stored at -20°C until preparation for proteomic analysis. Biotin derivatised compounds were coupled to UltraLink Immobilized Streptavidin Plus beads (GE healthcare)., 100 μL of bead slurry (50% in isopropanol) was used for each pulldown experiment. The beads were washed with buffer A (3 x 500 μL) and resuspended (1 mL), to which the biotinylated compound was added (0.05 μmol) and incubated for 30 minutes at 4°C. The beads were washed with Buffer A (2 x 1 mL). Lysates were precleared by the addition of 100 μL of bead slurry (50% in isopropanol) and incubated for 30 minutes at 4 °C. Preclearing beads were removed and the lysates treated with either compound at the indicated concentration or DMSO control for 30 minutes at 4 °C. To the drug beads was added the treated lysates and incubated for 2 hours at 4 °C before being washed with buffer A (5 mL), Buffer B (50 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 100 mM NaCl, 500 μM EDTA, 2.5 mL), and eluted with Buffer C (3M Urea, 50mM formic acid,  10 mM DTT, 250 μl). Samples were neutralised with triethylammoniumbicarbonate (TEAB, 100mM, 30 μl) and stored at -20°C until preparation for proteomic analysis. Sample preparation for proteomic analysis Samples were reduced with DTT (10 mM final concentration) for 30 minutes at room temperature, alkylated with iodoacetamide (55 mM final concentration) for 30 minutes at room temperature, diluted to 300 μl with TEAB, and incubated with trypsin (6 uL, 0.2 mg/mL) overnight at 37 °C. The digests were then desalted using SEPAC lite columns (Waters), eluted with 69% v/v MeCN , 0.1% v/v FA in H2O (1 mL) and dried in vacuo. Dried peptides were stored at -20°C before resuspension in 2% V/V MeCN, ).1% v/v FA in H2O (20 μL) for LC-MS/MS analysis LC-MS/MS data acquisition Mass spectrometry data was acquired at the Discovery Proteomics Facility (University of Oxford). Digested samples were analysed by nano-UPLC–MS/MS using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano UPLC with EASY spray column (75 μm × 500 mm, 2 μm particle size, Thermo Scientific) with a 60 min gradient of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in 5% (v/v) DMSO to 0.1% (v/v) formic acid with 35% (v/v) acetonitrile in 5% (v/v) DMSO at a flow rate of approximately 250 nl min−1 (600 bar per 40 °C column temperature). Mass spectrometry data were acquired either with an Orbitrap Q Exactive (Survey scans acquired at a resolution of 70,000 @ 200m/z and the 15 most abundant precursors were selected for HCD fragmentation), or an Orbitrap Q Exactive High Field (HF) instrument (survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 at 400 m/z and the 20 most abundant precursors were selected for CID fragmentation.)

### Data Protocol
Data analysis The raw data was processed using MaxQuant version 1.5.0.253 and the reference complete human proteome FASTA file (Uniprot). Label Free Quantification (LFQ) and Match Between Runs were selected; replicates were collated into parameter groups to ensure matching between replicates only. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was selected as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation as a variable modification. Default settings for identification and quantification were used. Specifically, a minimum peptide length of 7, a maximum of 2 missed cleavage sites, and a maximum of 3 labelled amino acids per peptide were employed. Peptides and proteins were identified utilising a 0.01 false discovery rate, with “Unique and razor peptides” mode selected for both identification and quantification of proteins (razor peptides are uniquely assigned to protein groups and not to individual proteins). At least 2 razor + unique peptides were required for valid quantification. Processed data was further analysed using Perseus version 1.5.0.9 and Microsoft Excel 2010. Peptides categorised by MaxQuant as ‘potential contaminants’, ‘only identified by site’ or ‘reverse’ were filtered, and the LFQ intensities transformed by Log2. Experimental replicates were grouped, and 2 valid LFQ values were required in at least one experimental group. Missing values were imputed using default settings, and the data distribution visually inspected to ensure that a normal distribution was maintained. Statistically significant competition was determined through the application of P2 tests, using a permutation-based FDR of 0.05 and an S0 of 2, and visualised in volcano plots. Significantly competed targets were further analysed in STRING (http://string-db.org) and protein interaction networks generated.

### Publication Abstract
Protein methyltransferases (PMTs) comprise a major class of epigenetic regulatory enzymes with therapeutic relevance. Here we present a collection of chemical probes and associated reagents and data to elucidate the function of human and murine PMTs in cellular studies. Our collection provides inhibitors and antagonists that together modulate most of the key regulatory methylation marks on histones H3 and H4, providing an important resource for modulating cellular epigenomes. We describe a comprehensive and comparative characterization of the probe collection with respect to their potency, selectivity, and mode of inhibition. We demonstrate the utility of this collection in CD4<sup>+</sup> T cell differentiation assays revealing the potential of individual probes to alter multiple T cell subpopulations which may have implications for T cell-mediated processes such as inflammation and immuno-oncology. In particular, we demonstrate a role for DOT1L in limiting Th1 cell differentiation and maintaining lineage integrity. This chemical probe collection and associated data form a resource for the study of methylation-mediated signaling in epigenetics, inflammation and beyond.

### Keywords
Lfq, Epigenetics, Chemical probes

### Affiliations
Structural Genomics Consortium (SGC), Chemical biology Group, University of Oxford, United Kingdom. also affiliated with: Target Discovery Institute, Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, United Kingdom.
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Jenny Ward

### Lab Head
Dr Kilian Huber
Structural Genomics Consortium (SGC), Chemical biology Group, University of Oxford, United Kingdom. also affiliated with: Target Discovery Institute, Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, United Kingdom.


