### Accession
PXD000932

### Title
The Haemophilus ducreyi LspA1 Protein Inhibits Phagocytosis By Using a New Mechanism Involving Activation of C-Terminal Src Kinase

### Description
LspA virulance factors of H. ducreyi inhibit phagocytosis by activating C-terminal Src kinase. This SILAC analysis identified Src kinase as the predominant mamallian protein interacting with the YL2 domain of LspA1.

### Sample Protocol
A SILAC IP experiment was performed using unlabelled HEK293T cells expressing  a control L1-Myc construct, and heavy labelled cells expressing YL2-Myc. An anti-Myc IP was performed to pull down interacting proteins. Proteins interacting specifically with the YL2 domain will have high Heavy:Light SILAC ratios. After IP, proteins were run into the top of an SDS-PAGE gel, excised and digested with trypsin. Peptide mixtures were analyzed using a 40min reverse-phase gradient on an Orbitrap Elite mass-spectrometer coupled to a Dionex U3000 RSLCnano system. The column was 180um ID x 10cm, packed in-house with 3um C18 resin (Phenomenex).

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data was analyzed using MaxQuant 1.3.0.5 with default parameters except that Ile-Leu equivalence was disabled. The UniProtKB Human whole proteome sequence database (2012_04) was used for peptide and protein ID.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Src kinase, Activation, Silac

### Affiliations
Department of Microbiology, The University of Texas Southwestern Medical School, Dallas, Texas, USA.
Ex-UTSW & Oxford

### Submitter
David Trudgian

### Lab Head
Dr Eric Hansen
Department of Microbiology, The University of Texas Southwestern Medical School, Dallas, Texas, USA.


