### Accession
PXD019138

### Title
Kinome profiling: cabozantinib treatment in a mouse model of plexiform neurofibroma

### Description
Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is the most common autosomal dominant disorder, affecting 1 in 3,500 individuals worldwide and predisposing to cancer. Germline mutations in the NF1 gene, encoding the p21Ras GTPase-activating protein (GAP) neurofibromin, are the underlying cause for NF1. Somatic inactivation of the wild type copy of NF1 leads to deregulated Ras signaling. Clinical manifestations are diverse for NF1 patients, but the predominant lesions are plexiform neurofibroma (PNF), arising from the Schwann cell (SC) lineage. While PNF are generally benign, approximately 10% of patients will experience PN progression to highly aggressive malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors (MPNST) with poor prognosis. There are currently no approved targeted therapies for PNF or MPNST. In this study, we used a conditional mouse model of NF1, test the multi-receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor, cabozantinib (XL184). Mice were treated with vehicle or with cabozantinib for 3 or 7 days. Tissue was harvested, lysates prepared, and the lysate was used for kinome profiling. From cell lines or tumor tissue, protein lysates are prepared and passed over an affinity matrix consisting of Sepharose beads covalently coupled to a mixture of linker-adapted Type I kinase inhibitors. Kinase capture is reproducible and is a function of affinity for kinases for the immobilized inhibitors, expression level of the kinase, as well as the activation state of the kinase. Following affinity purification, kinases are identified and their multiplexed kinase inhibitor bead binding quantified by mass spectrometry (MIB/MS). Our goal is to identify the kinome changes in NF1 plexiform neurofibroma induced by cabozantinib treatment.

### Sample Protocol
Multiplexed inhibitor bead (MIB) chromatography and mass spectrometry (MS) MIB and MS was performed on snap-frozen sciatic nerve tissue from tumor bearing mice treated with vehicle or 1 day, 3 days, or 7 days of cabozantinib. Tissue was crushed by mortar and pestle in ice-cold MIB lysis buffer (50mM HEPES, 150mM NaCl, 0.5% Triton X-100, 1mM EDTA, 1mM EGTA, pH 7.5) supplemented with cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) and 1% phosphatase inhibitor cocktails 2 and 3 (Sigma). Extracts were sonicated 3 x 10s, clarified by centrifugation, and syringe-filtered (0.22µm) prior to Bradford assay quantitation of concentration. Equal amounts of total protein were gravity-flowed over multiplexed inhibitor bead (MIB) columns in high salt MIB lysis buffer (1M NaCl). The MIB columns consisted of 125µL mixture of five Type I kinase inhibitors: VI-16832, PP58, Purvalanol B, UNC-21474 were custom-synthesized with hydrocarbon linkers and covalently linked to ECH-Sepharose and Purvalanol B was linked to EAH-Sepharose beads as previously described. For in vitro MIB competition assays to demonstrate quantitatively the direct binding of cabozantinib to kinases within the tumor, lysates were incubated at 4 degrees Celsius with DMSO or 10, 100, or 1000nM cabozantinib for 1 h prior to flowing them over the MIB columns. For MIB competition assay, the kinase inhibitor beads CTx0294885 and UNC0064-12 were included with the five beads above in equal proportion. Columns were washed with 5mL of high salt (1M NaCl), 5mL of low salt (150mM NaCl) MIB lysis buffer, and 0.5mL low-salt lysis buffer with 0.1%SDS. Bound protein was eluted twice with 0.5% SDS, 1% beta-mercaptoethanol, 100mM Tris-HCl, pH6.8 for 15 min at 100C. Eluate was treated with DTT (5mM) for 25 min at 60C and 20mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark. Following spin concentration using Amicon Ultra-4 (10k cut-off) to ~100 µL, samples were precipitated by methanol/chloroform, dried in a speed-vac and resuspended in 50mM HEPES (pH8.0). Tryptic digests were performed overnight at 37 degrees Celsius, extracted four times with 1mL water-saturated ethyl acetate to remove detergent, dried in a speed-vac, and peptides further cleaned using C-18 spin columns according to manufacturer’s protocol (Pierce).  Liquid Chromatography and Mass Spectrometry Peptides were resuspended in 5% ACN and 0.1% formic acid. Approximately 40% of the final peptide suspension was injected onto a Thermo Easy-Spray 75μm x 25cm C-18 column and separated on a 180min gradient (5-40% ACN) using an Easy nLC-1000. The Thermo Q Exactive mass spectrometry ESI parameters were as follows: 3e6 AGC MS1, 80ms MS1 max inject time, 1e5 AGC MS2, 100ms MS2 max inject time, 20 loop count, 1.8 m/z isolation window, 45s dynamic exclusion. Raw files were processed for label-free quantification by MaxQuant LFQ using the Uniprot/Swiss-Prot mouse database, fixed carbidomethyl (C) and variable phospho (STY), oxidation (M), and acetyl (Protein N-term) modifications. LFQ intensities for kinases with at least two unique peptides were imported into Perseus.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed for label-free quantification by MaxQuant LFQ with default parameters using the Uniprot/Swiss-Prot mouse database, fixed carbidomethyl (C) and variable phospho (STY), oxidation (M), and acetyl (Protein N-term) modifications. Normalized LFQ intensities for kinases from the proteingroups.txt output file with at least two unique peptides were imported into Perseus, log2 transformed, and missing values were imputed from the matrix in Perseus using default parameters if valid values were present in at least one group to permit comparisons of log2 difference. For cabozantinib competition assay, missing values were imputed by column. Two sample t-tests were performed in Perseus with BH correction.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Xl184, Receptor tyrosine kinase, Nf1

### Affiliations
Indiana University School of Medicine
Department of Pharmacology University of North Carolina - Chapel Hill Chapel Hill, NC 27599

### Submitter
Steven Angus

### Lab Head
Dr Gary L. Johnson
Department of Pharmacology University of North Carolina - Chapel Hill Chapel Hill, NC 27599


