### Accession
PXD039159

### Title
Spatial Proteomics of a human brain tumour

### Description
The spatial organisation of Cellular protein expression profiles within tissues determines cellular function and are key to understanding disease pathology. To define molecular phenotypes in the spatial context of tissue, there is a need for unbiased, quantitative technology capable of mapping proteomes within tissue structures. Here, we present a workflow for spatially resolved, quantitative proteomics of tissue that generates maps of protein expression across a tissue slice derived from a human atypical teratoid-rhabdoid tumour (AT/RT). We employ spatially-aware statistical methods that do not require prior knowledge of the fine tissue structure to detect proteins and pathways with varying spatial abundance patterns. We identified PYGL, ASPH and CD45 as spatial markers for tumour boundary and reveal immune response driven, spatially organized protein networks of the extracellular tumour matrix. Overall, this work informs on methods for spatially resolved deep proteo-phenotyping of tissue heterogeneity, which will push the boundaries of understanding tissue biology and pathology at the molecular level.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic sample processing Samples were thawed, incubated at room temperature for 30 minutes and briefly centrifuged. Caps were rinsed with 20 µL of RIPA buffer (#89900, Pierce) containing 25 units of Benzonase (E1014, Merck)  to collect any remaining tissue and briefly centrifuged, followed by incubation at room temperature for 30 minutes to degrade DNA and RNA. Proteins were reduced by adding DTT to 5 mM and incubated at room temperature for 30 minutes, followed by the addition of iodoacetamide to 20 mM and incubation at room temperature for 30 minutes. Paramagnetic SP3 beads (GE45152105050250 & GE65152105050250, Cytiva) were prepared as described by Hughes et al. and processed by a modified SP3 protocol 29,70,71. Three µL of SP3 beads were mixed with the samples, and acetonitrile added to a final concentration of 70 % (v/v). Samples were mixed with 1000 rpm orbital shaking for 18 minutes, followed by bead immobilisation on a magnet for 2 minutes. The supernatant was discarded, and beads were washed twice with 70 % (v/v) ethanol in water and once with 100 % acetonitrile without removal from the magnet. Beads were resuspended in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate containing 25 ng of Trypsin (V5111, Promega) and digested overnight at 37 °C. After digestion, the beads were resuspended by bath sonication. Acetonitrile was added to the samples to 95 % (v/v) and shaken at 1000 rpm for 18 minutes. Beads were immobilised on a magnet for 2 minutes, and the supernatant discarded. Beads were resuspended in 2 % acetonitrile and immobilised on a magnet for 5 minutes. Peptides were transferred to 96-well PCR plates containing formic acid in water, resulting in a final formic acid concentration of 0.1 %. LC-MS/MS Peptides from 833 µm resolution samples were analysed by LC-MS/MS using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a timsTOF Pro (Bruker) using a 75 μm x 150 mm C18 column with 1.6 μm particles (IonOpticks) at a flow rate of 400 nL/min. A 17-minute linear gradient from 2 % buffer B to 30 % buffer B (A: 0.1 % formic acid in water. B: 0.1 % formic acid in acetonitrile) was used72. The TimsTOF Pro was operated in PASEF mode. The TIMS accumulation and ramp times were set to 100 ms, and mass spectra were recorded from 100 – 1700 m/z, with a 0.85 – 1.30 Vs/cm2 ion mobility range. Precursors were selected for fragmentation from an area of the full TIMS-MS scan that excludes most ions with a charge state of 1+. Those selected precursors were isolated with an ion mobility dependent collision energy, increasing linearly from 27 – 45 eV over the ion mobility range. Three PASEF MS/MS scans were collected per full TIMS-MS scan, giving a duty cycle of 0.53 s. Ions were included in the PASEF MS/MS scan if they met the target intensity threshold of 2000 and were sampled multiple times until a summed target intensity of 10000 was reached. A dynamic exclusion window of 0.015 m/z by 0.015 Vs/cm2 was used, and sampled ions were excluded from reanalysis for 24 seconds. 

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were searched against the Uniprot human database (Retrieved 17/01/2017, 92527 sequences) using MaxQuant version 1.6.14.0, allowing for tryptic specificity with up to 2 missed cleavages. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification. Methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications and the “match between runs (MBR)” option was used (MBR was not used for tissue titration data). All other settings were left as default. Label-free quantification was performed using the MaxLFQ algorithm within MaxQuant73,74. Protein and peptide false discovery rate (FDR) levels were set to 1 %.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Spatial, Proteomics, Laser capture microdissection

### Affiliations
Discovery Proteomics Facility, University of Oxford
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Simon Davis

### Lab Head
Dr Roman Fischer
Discovery Proteomics Facility, University of Oxford


