### Accession
PXD001567

### Title
Proteomics Analysis of Soybean Hypocotyl during Recovery after Flooding Stress

### Description
Soybean (Glycine max L. cv Enrei) seeds were sterilized with 2% sodium hypochlorite solution and then thoroughly rinsed in water. The sterilized seeds were sown 4 cm inside surface of sand in 450 mL of quartz seedling cases wetted with 150 mL water and grown at 25°C and 70% humidity in a growth chamber (Sanyo, Tokyo, Japan) under white fluorescent light (160 μmol m-2 s-1, 16 h light period/day).  Two-day-old soybeans were flooded for 2 days and hypocotyl samples were collected at the day of removal of flooding and then at 2 more points during the 4-day recovery period.

### Sample Protocol
The liquid nitrogen frozen hypocotyls were homogenized in acetone solution containing 10% trichloro acetic acid and 0.07% 2-mercaptoethanol, and proteins were extracted following the standard protocol. The extracted proteins were purified with methanol and chloroform to remove any detergent from the sample solutions. The purified samples were digested with trypsin and lysyl endopeptidase, then desalted and acidified in formic acid before applying to nanoLC-MS/MS. A nanospray LTQ Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode with the installed XCalibur software (version 2.0.7, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides in 0.1% formic acid were loaded onto a C18 PepMap trap column (300 μm × 5mm) (Dionex, Germering, Germany) of an Ultimate 3000 NanoLC system. The peptides were eluted from the trap column with a linear acetonitrile gradient (8-30% in 120 min) in 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 200 nL/min. The peptides eluted from the trap column were separated and sprayed on a C18 NANO HPLC NTTC-360/75-3 capillary tip column (75 μm ID × 120 mm, Nikkyo Technos) with a spray voltage of 1.5 KV. Full-scan mass spectra were acquired in the LTQ Orbitrap mass spectrometer over 400-1500 m/z with a resolution of 30000.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified using the Mascot search engine (version 2.4.0.2, Matrix Science, London, UK) of a soybean peptide database (73,320 sequences) constructed from soybean genome database (Phytozome version 9.1, http://www.phytozome.net/soybean). The acquired raw data files were processed using proteome discoverer (version 2.3.2), and the parameters used in Mascot searches were as follows: Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine was set as a variable modification. Trypsin was specified as the proteolytic enzyme and one missed cleavage was allowed. Peptide mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance was set at 0.8 Da, and peptide charge was set at +2, +3, and +4. An automatic decoy database search was performed as part of the search. Mascot results were filtered with the Mascot percolator package to improve the accuracy and sensitivity of peptide identification.  For differential analyses, a commercial label-free quantification package, SIEVE software was used for comparing the relative abundance of peptides and proteins between control and experimental groups. The chromatographic peaks detected by MS were aligned and the peptide peaks were detected as frames using the following settings: frame time width, 5 min; and frame m/z width, 10. Frames were generated for all parent ions scanned by MS/MS and were matched to exported Mascot results to identify peptides. In the differential analyses, total ion current was used as a normalization factor.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hypocotyl, Proteomics, Soybean, Flooding, Recovery

### Affiliations
University of Tsukuba
National Institute of Crop Science, National Agriculture and Food Research Organization,  Kannondai 2-1-18, Tsukuba 305-8518, Japan

### Submitter
Mudassar Khan

### Lab Head
Dr Setsuko Komatsu
National Institute of Crop Science, National Agriculture and Food Research Organization,  Kannondai 2-1-18, Tsukuba 305-8518, Japan


