### Accession
PXD040964

### Title
The pyruvate dehydrogenase complex regulates matrix protein phosphorylation and mitophagic selectivity

### Description
In this project, we study the influence of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex on the phosphorylation status of mitochondrial matrix proteins.

### Sample Protocol
WT (heavy) and Lat1K75R (light) yeast cells were differentially SILAC labeled, collected on day 2 and day 3 of an incubation in synthetic lactate medium (SL), and mitochondria were enriched by differential centrifugation. Prior MS sample preparation and phosphopeptide enrichment. Experiments were performed in a WT and a PEP4delta background, 3 biological replicates each.

### Data Protocol
The MS raw data files were analysed by the MaxQuant software (Cox and Mann, 2008) version 1.4.1.2, using a Uniprot Saccharomyces cerevisiae database from March 2016 containing common contaminants such as keratins and enzymes used for in-gel digestion.

### Publication Abstract
The mitophagic degradation of mitochondrial matrix proteins in <i>Saccharomyces cerevisiae</i> was previously shown to be selective, reflecting a pre-engulfment sorting step within the mitochondrial network. This selectivity is regulated through phosphorylation of mitochondrial matrix proteins by the matrix kinases Pkp1 and Pkp2, which in turn appear to be regulated by the phosphatase Aup1/Ptc6. However, these same proteins also regulate the phosphorylation status and catalytic activity of the yeast pyruvate dehydrogenase complex, which is critical for mitochondrial metabolism. To understand the relationship between these two functions, we evaluated the role of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex in mitophagic selectivity. Surprisingly, we identified a novel function of the complex in regulating mitophagic selectivity, which is independent of its enzymatic activity. Our data support a model in which the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex directly regulates the activity of its associated kinases and phosphatases. This regulatory interaction then determines the phosphorylation state of mitochondrial matrix proteins and their mitophagic fates.

### Keywords
Mitochondrion, Phosphorylation, Yeast, Lc-msms, Mitophagy

### Affiliations
Dept. of Biology University of Fribourg Chemin du Musee 10 CH-1700 Fribourg
University of Fribourg

### Submitter
Joern Dengjel

### Lab Head
Dr Joern Dengjel
Dept. of Biology University of Fribourg Chemin du Musee 10 CH-1700 Fribourg


