### Accession
PXD017377

### Title
Proteomic profiling of RNA binding proteins in mouse spermatogonial stem cell

### Description
RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) control the fate of RNAs. Tissue regeneration and homeostasis depend on tissue-specific stem cells, but the scope of RBP involvementin these processes remains largely unknown. Here, we identified the RBP repertoire of the mouse undifferentiated spermatogonial population that consists of stem cells and transit amplifying progenitors.

### Sample Protocol
In order to systematically identify RBPs in undifferentiated spermatogonia, we performed mRNA interactome capture combined LC-MS/MS analyses as described before. Liquid separation and mass spectrometry analysis were performed on a Nano CHIP-1D-LC system (Eksigent, Dublin, CA) and a TripleTOF 5600 mass spectrometer (AB Sciex, Concord, Canada), respectively. The LC gradient was formulated with a buffer A (2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in HPLC water) and buffer B (2% water and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile). The analytical column (75 μm × 15 cm) was used in the chip LC with 3 μm 150 Å Magic C18 resin (Eksigent, Dublin, CA). Each sample was injected and separated with a linear gradient of 2% buffer B to 35% buffer B over 120 min at a flow rate of 0.3 μl min−1. The column was then flushed with 90% buffer B for 5 min, and re-equilibrated with 2% buffer B for 10 min. For shotgun experiments the TripleTOF mass spectrometer was operated with a ‘top30’ method. From the 500 milliseconds survey scan (TOF-MS), the top 30 most intense precursor ions were selected for subsequent automated MS/MS in measurements where each MS/MS event consisted of a 150 milliseconds scan. The selection criteria for parent ions included intensity, where ions had to be greater than 200 counts per second, a charge state greater than 2+. The precursors that were selected for fragmentation were added to a dynamic exclusion list for 24 s. In the instances where there were ≤ 20 parent ions per survey scan which met the selection criteria, ions were subjected to extended MS/MS accumulation times to maintain a constant total cycle time of 3.

### Data Protocol
The raw data generated by the LC-MS/MS analyses were processed using MaxQuant software (version 1.5.2.8), and searched against the reference mouse proteome form the UniProt database. Enzyme specificity was considered to be full cleaved by trypsin, and two maximum missed cleavage sites were permitted. The minimum peptide length required was six. Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as fixed modification. Variable modifications included Acetylation (Protein N-term) and Oxidation (M). The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set to 0.1 Da, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set to 40 ppm. At least one unique peptide was required for protein report. The false discovery rate (FDR) of the identification was estimated by searching against the databases with the reversed protein sequences. The FDR cut-offs for site, peptide and protein were set to 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Continual spermatogenesis relies on the actions of an undifferentiated spermatogonial population that is composed of stem cells and progenitors. Here, using mouse models, we explored the role of RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) in regulation of the biological activities of this population. Proteins bound to polyadenylated RNAs in primary cultures of undifferentiated spermatogonia were captured with oligo (dT)-conjugated beads after UV-crosslinking and profiled by proteomics (termed mRBPome capture), yielding a putative repertoire of 473 RBPs. From this database, the RBP TRIM71 was identified and found to be expressed by stem and progenitor spermatogonia in prepubertal and adult mouse testes. Tissue-specific deletion of TRIM71 in the male germline led to reduction of the undifferentiated spermatogonial population and a block in transition to the differentiating state. Collectively, these findings demonstrate a key role of the RBP system in regulation of the spermatogenic lineage and may provide clues about the influence of RBPs on the biology of progenitor cell populations in other lineages.

### Keywords
Rna-binding proteins, Spermatogonial stem cell, Mouse, Mrna interactome capture, Shotgun proteomics

### Affiliations
Central Laboratory, Wuxi Maternity and Child Health Care Hospital Affiliated to Nanjing Medical University
State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Nanjing Medical University

### Submitter
Tao Zhou

### Lab Head
Dr Xin Wu
State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Nanjing Medical University


