### Accession
PXD023971

### Title
Biophysical and proteomic analyses suggest functions of Pseudomonas syringae pv tomato DC3000 extracellular vesicles in bacterial growth during plant infection

### Description
Vesiculation is a process employed by Gram-negative bacteria to release extracellular vesicles (EVs) into the environment. Bacterial EVs contain molecular cargo from the donor bacterium and play important roles in bacterial survival and growth. Here, we describe EV production in plant-pathogenic Pseudomonas syringae pv. tomato DC3000 (Pto DC3000), the causal agent of bacterial speck disease. Cultured Pto DC3000 exhibited EV structures both on the cell surface and in the vicinity of bacterial cells, observed as outer membrane vesicle (OMV) release. We used in-solution trypsin digestion coupled to mass spectrometry to identify 369 proteins enriched in EVs recovered from cultured Pto DC3000. The predicted localization profile of EV proteins supports the production of EVs also in the form of outer-inner-membrane vesicles (OIMVs). EV production varied slightly between bacterial lifestyles and also occurred in planta. The potential contribution of EVs to Pto DC3000 plant infection was assessed using plant treatments and bioinformatic analysis of the EV-enriched proteins. While these results identify immunogenic activities of the EVs, they also point at roles for EVs in bacterial defences and nutrient acquisition by Pto DC3000.

### Sample Protocol
We isolated proteins from Pto DC3000 whole cell lysates (WC) (Park et al., 2014) and outer membrane (OM) (Choi et al., 2011) as previously described. Briefly, WC and OM isolated from Pto DC3000 liquid culture (OD 600 = 3-4). The cells were pelleted via centrifugation (12,000 x g for 10 min). For WC the pellet was resuspended in 1 mL of 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), frozen in liquid nitrogen, three times thawing-freezing, and three times sonicated for 10 min at 4 °C. The samples were centrifuged at 6,000 x g for 10 min at 4 °C and supernatants were collected and frozen in liquid nitrogen. For OM preparations, the pellet was resuspended in 1 mL 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), sucrose (20%), followed by adding 5 uL Lysozyme (15 mg/mL) and 10 μl 0.5 M EDTA, incubation for 40 min on ice and adding 20 μL 0.5 M MgCl 2 . After centrifugation at 9,500 x g for 20 min at 4°C, the pellet was resuspended in 1 mL ice-cold 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0) followed by sonication three times for 10 min on ice. The samples were then centrifuged at 8,000 x g for 5 min at 4 °C, washed with cold 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), resuspend in cold, sterile MilliQ water followed by three times freezing-thawing in liquid nitrogen, incubation for 20 min at 25 °C and adding the sarcosyl to final concentration 0.5%. The samples were then centrifuged at 40,000 x g for 90 min at 4 °C, the pellet was resuspended in ice-cold 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0) and frozen in liquid nitrogen. Gradient enriched EVs were isolated as above described (Fig. S1C). For proteomics, the samples were denatured by addition of 1 x SDS loading buffer. In-gel trypsin digestion was performed according to standard procedures (Shevchenko et al., 2006). Briefly, 2 μg of EV and OM samples and 20 μg of WC samples were loaded on a NuPAGE 4-12% Bis-Tris Protein gels (Thermofisher Scientific, US), and the gels were run for 3 min only. Subsequently, the still not size-separated single protein band per sample was cut, reduced (50 mM DTT), alkylated (55 mm CAA, chloroacetamid) and digested overnight with trypsin (trypsin-gold, Promega).  Peptides generated by in-gel trypsin digestion were dried in a vacuum concentrator and dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (FA). LC-MS/MS measurements were performed on a Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system. Peptides were delivered to a trap column (ReproSil-pur C18-AQ, 5 μm, Dr Maisch, 20 mm × 75 μm, self-packed) at a flow rate of 5 μL/min in 100% solvent A (0.1% formic acid in HPLC grade water). After 10 min of loading, peptides were transferred to an analytical column (ReproSil Gold C18-AQ, 3 μm, Dr Maisch, 400 mm × 75 μm, self-packed) and separated using a 50 min gradient from 4% to 32% of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile and 5% (v/v) DMSO) at 300 nL/min flow rate. Both nanoLC solvents contained 5% (v/v) DMSO.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification and quantification was performed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.3.4) with its built-in search engine Andromeda (Cox et al., 2011, Tyanova et al., 2016). MS2 spectra were searched against a Pseudomonas syringae pv tomato protein database (UP000002515, downloaded from Uniprot 04.05.2020) supplemented with common contaminants (built-in option in MaxQuant). For all MaxQuant searches default parameters were employed. Those included carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications. Trypsin/P was specified as proteolytic enzyme. Precursor tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm, and fragment ion tolerance to 20 ppm. Results were adjusted to 1% false discovery rate (FDR) on peptide spectrum match (PSM) and protein level, employing a target-decoy approach using reversed protein sequences. Label- free quantification (LFQ algorithm) was enabled. The minimal peptide length was defined as 7 amino acids and the “match-between-run” function was not enabled. Each sample type (EV, OM, WC) was analysed in biological quadruplicates.

### Publication Abstract
Vesiculation is a process employed by Gram-negative bacteria to release extracellular vesicles (EVs) into the environment. EVs from pathogenic bacteria play functions in host immune modulation, elimination of host defenses, and acquisition of nutrients from the host. Here, we observed EV production of the bacterial speck disease causal agent, <i>Pseudomonas syringae</i> pv. <i>tomato</i> (<i>Pto</i>) DC3000, as outer membrane vesicle release. Mass spectrometry identified 369 proteins enriched in <i>Pto</i> DC3000 EVs. The EV samples contained known immunomodulatory proteins and could induce plant immune responses mediated by bacterial flagellin. Having identified two biomarkers for EV detection, we provide evidence for <i>Pto</i> DC3000 releasing EVs during plant infection. Bioinformatic analysis of the EV-enriched proteins suggests a role for EVs in antibiotic defense and iron acquisition. Thus, our data provide insights into the strategies this pathogen may use to develop in a plant environment. IMPORTANCE The release of extracellular vesicles (EVs) into the environment is ubiquitous among bacteria. Vesiculation has been recognized as an important mechanism of bacterial pathogenesis and human disease but is poorly understood in phytopathogenic bacteria. Our research addresses the role of bacterial EVs in plant infection. In this work, we show that the causal agent of bacterial speck disease, <i>Pseudomonas syringae</i> pv. <i>tomato</i>, produces EVs during plant infection. Our data suggest that EVs may help the bacteria to adapt to environments, e.g., when iron could be limiting such as the plant apoplast, laying the foundation for studying the factors that phytopathogenic bacteria use to thrive in the plant environment.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Evs, Pattern-triggered immunity, Pti, Proteomics, Extracellular vesicles, Nanoparticle tracking analysis, Nta, Pto dc3000

### Affiliations
TU Munich
Bavarian Center for Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry, Freising, TU Munich

### Submitter
Christina Ludwig

### Lab Head
Dr Chen Meng
Bavarian Center for Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry, Freising, TU Munich


