### Accession
PXD008836

### Title
Multifunctional Activity-Based Protein Profiling of the Developing Lung

### Description
Data includes proteomics analysis of P450-ABP (2EN, ATW8, ATW12), FP-2, and ATP-ABP labeled mouse lung lysate S9. Lungs from the following developmental stages were used in the study: gestational day 17, post natal days 0, 21, and 42. Also included are global analyses of the same mice lungs.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were labeled, enriched, digested with trypsin, and analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Data was searched with MSGF+ using PNNL's DMS Processing pipeline

### Publication Abstract
Lung diseases and disorders are a leading cause of death among infants. Many of these diseases and disorders are caused by premature birth and underdeveloped lungs. In addition to developmentally related disorders, the lungs are exposed to a variety of environmental contaminants and xenobiotics upon birth that can cause breathing issues and are progenitors of cancer. In order to gain a deeper understanding of the developing lung, we applied an activity-based chemoproteomics approach for the functional characterization of the xenometabolizing cytochrome P450 enzymes, active ATP and nucleotide binding enzymes, and serine hydrolases using a suite of activity-based probes (ABPs). We detected P450 activity primarily in the postnatal lung; using our ATP-ABP, we characterized a wide range of ATPases and other active nucleotide- and nucleic acid-binding enzymes involved in multiple facets of cellular metabolism throughout development. ATP-ABP targets include kinases, phosphatases, NAD- and FAD-dependent enzymes, RNA/DNA helicases, and others. The serine hydrolase-targeting probe detected changes in the activities of several proteases during the course of lung development, yielding insights into protein turnover at different stages of development. Select activity-based probe targets were then correlated with RNA in situ hybridization analyses of lung tissue sections.

### Keywords
Chemoproteomics, Atpase, Protease, P450, Ontogeny, Abpp

### Affiliations
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory

### Submitter
Matthew Monroe

### Lab Head
Dr Aaron Wright
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory


