### Accession
PXD018205

### Title
Restriction of essential amino acids dictates the systemic response to dietary protein dilution

### Description
Dietary protein dilution (DPD) promotes metabolic remodelling and health but the precise nutritional components driving this response remain elusive. Here we demonstrate that dietary amino acids (AA) are sufficient and necessary to drive the response to DPD. In particular, the restriction of dietary essential AA (EAA) supply, but not non-EAA, drives the systemic metabolic response to total AA deprivation. Furthermore, systemic deprivation of Thr and Trp, independent of total AA supply, are both adequate and necessary to confer the systemic metabolic response to both diet, and genetic AA-transport loss, driven AA restriction. Thr is also potentially limiting in low-protein diet fed humans, and dietary Thr restriction (DTR) retarded the development of obesity-associated metabolic dysfunction in mice. Liver-derived fibroblast growth factor 21 was required for the metabolic remodelling with DTR. Strikingly, hepatocyte-selective establishment of Thr biosynthetic capacity reversed the systemic response to DTR. Taken together, our studies demonstrate that the restriction of EAA are sufficient and necessary to confer the systemic metabolic effects of DPD.

### Sample Protocol
The mouse liver tissue was homogenized in liquid nitrogen using a BioPulverizer and directly solubilized in SDS (sodium dodecyl sulfate) lysis buffer. The protein concentration was determined using a BCA kit (Thermo Scientific) and equal amounts of protein were processed for both pooled control (GFP) and THR1/4-overexpressed mouse liver sample. SDS was removed by chloroform/methanol precipitation and the proteins were proteolytically digested with trypsin (Promega) and purified using OMIX C18 Mini-Bed tips (Agilent Technologies) prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
To obtain peptide sequence information, the raw files were searched with Byonic v3.0.0 (ProteinMetrics) against a mouse UniProt/SwissProt database that was appended with the yeast THR1/THR4 protein sequences. Only proteins falling within a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% based on a decoy database were considered for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Dietary protein dilution (DPD) promotes metabolic-remodelling and -health but the precise nutritional components driving this response remain elusive. Here, by mimicking amino acid (AA) supply from a casein-based diet, we demonstrate that restriction of dietary essential AA (EAA), but not non-EAA, drives the systemic metabolic response to total AA deprivation; independent from dietary carbohydrate supply. Furthermore, systemic deprivation of threonine and tryptophan, independent of total AA supply, are both adequate and necessary to confer the systemic metabolic response to both diet, and genetic AA-transport loss, driven AA restriction. Dietary threonine restriction (DTR) retards the development of obesity-associated metabolic dysfunction. Liver-derived fibroblast growth factor 21 is required for the metabolic remodelling with DTR. Strikingly, hepatocyte-selective establishment of threonine biosynthetic capacity reverses the systemic metabolic response to DTR. Taken together, our studies of mice demonstrate that the restriction of EAA are sufficient and necessary to confer the systemic metabolic effects of DPD.

### Keywords
Essential amino acids, Thr biosynthetic

### Affiliations
Monash University
1 Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Metabolism, Diabetes and Obesity Program, Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Monash University, Clayton 3800, Australia.

### Submitter
Cheng Huang

### Lab Head
Dr Adam Rose
1 Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Metabolism, Diabetes and Obesity Program, Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Monash University, Clayton 3800, Australia.


