### Accession
PXD003426

### Title
Systematic substrate identification reveals a central role for the metalloprotease ADAM10 in axon targeting and synapse function

### Description
Metzincin metalloproteases have major roles in intercellular communication by modulating the function of membrane proteins. One of the proteases is the a-disintegrin-and-metalloprotease 10 (ADAM10) which acts as alpha-secretase of the Alzheimer’s disease amyloid precursor protein. ADAM10 is also required for neuronal network functions in murine brain, but neuronal ADAM10 substrates are only partly known. With a proteomic analysis of Adam10-deficient neurons we identified 91, mostly novel ADAM10 substrate candidates, making ADAM10 a major protease for membrane proteins in the nervous system. Several novel substrates, including the neuronal cell adhesion protein NrCAM, are involved in brain development. Indeed, we detected mistargeted axons in the olfactory bulb of conditional ADAM10-/- mice, which correlate with reduced cleavage of NrCAM, NCAM and other ADAM10 substrates. In summary, the novel ADAM10 substrates provide a potential molecular basis for neuronal network dysfunctions in conditional ADAM10-/- mice and demonstrate a fundamental function of ADAM10 as a sheddase in the brain.

### Sample Protocol
Primary Culture Embryonic primary cortical neurons were prepared as described (6, 19). Briefly, cortex samples from ADAM10 conditional KO embryos (Gibb et al., 2010) were collected and dissociated in DMEM plus 200 U of papain (Sigma Aldrich). Neurons were plated in 6 well plates precoated with poly-D-lysine (1.5×106 cells/well). Plating medium was 10% (v/v) fetal calf serum FCS/DMEM which was changed after 4 hours to B27/Neurobasal (Gibco) supplemented with 0.5 mM glutamine and 1% P/S. All experimental procedures on animals were performed in accordance with the European Communities Council Directive (86/609/EEC).  Virus production Codon-improved Cre recombinase (iCre) (20) expressing lentiviral particles were generated as previously described (6, 19). Briefly, lentiviruses were generated by transient cotransfection of HEK293T cells with the plasmids psPAX2, pCDNA3.1(−)-VSV-G and as transfer vector F2UΔZeo-iCre using Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen). Lentiviral particles for infection of murine primary cortical neurons were concentrated and purified by ultracentrifugation. Lentiviral stocks were stored at −80 °C until use.  SPECS Secretome enriched and subsequent proteomic analyses were essentially performed as described earlier (Kuhn et al. 2012). In brief, 40 million neurons were plated. After 2 div, neurons were infected with concentrated lentiviruses coding for iCre or Control. After 5 div neurobasal medium was exchanged for neurobasal medium supplemented with 200 nM tetraacetyl-N-azidoacetyl mannosamine (ManNAZ). 2 days conditioned media were subsequently collected and filtered through 0.45 µm PVDF filter (Millex) into a VivaSpin 20 centrifugal concentrator (30 kDa) at 4°C. VivaSpin 20 columns were centrifuged at 4600 r.p.m. at 4°C to remove non-metabolized ManNAZ. The retentate was filled with 20 ml H2O. This procedure was repeated three times. In the last step, the ddH2O refill step was omitted. Instead, 100 nM of DBCO-PEG12-biotin (Click-chemistry tools) diluted in 1 ml ddH2O was added to biotinylate metabolically azide-labelled glycoproteins. Centrifugal concentrators were incubated overnight at 4°C. For removal of non-reacted DBCO-PEG12-Biotin, VivaSpin20 centrifugal concentrators were subjected to three times of centrifugation with subsequent ddH2O refill. After the last centrifugation step, the retentate was diluted in 5 ml PBS with 2% SDS (v/v) and 2 mM Tris 2-carboxyethyl-phosphine (TCEP). For purification of biotinylated proteins, the sample was loaded on a 10-ml polyprep column with a streptavidin bead bed formed of 300 µl streptavidin slurry. After binding of proteins, streptavidin beads were washed 3 times with 10 ml PBS supplemented with 1% SDS. To elute the biotinylated and azide-labelled glycoproteins, streptavidin beads were boiled with urea sample buffer containing 3 mM biotin to compete for the binding of biotinylated proteins.  SPECS-labeling of cellular glycoproteins Neurons that were labeled with 200 nM ManNAz for 48 hours were washed twice with 5 ml cold PBS. Afterwards 100 nM DBCO-PEG12-biotin (Click Chemistry tools) diluted in 2 ml PBS were evenly distributed on the neurons and incubated at 4°C for 2 hours. After the incubation period, neurons were washed twice with 5 ml PBS to be lysed in 5 ml STE buffer (NaCl, 150 mM, Tris 50 mM, 2 mM EDTA) with 1% (v/v) NP40 per flask. Lysates were subjected to a clarifying spin at 4000g. The clarified lysate was subsequently loaded on a polyprep column with a streptavidin bead bed formed of 300 µl streptavidin slurry. After binding of proteins, streptavidin beads were washed 3 times with 10 ml PBS supplemented with 1% SDS. To elute the biotinylated and azide-labelled glycoproteins, streptavidin beads were boiled with urea sample buffer containing 3 mM biotin to compete for the binding of biotinylated proteins. Mass spectrometric analysis Mass spectrometry experiments were performed on an Easy NLC 1000 nanoflow HPLC system II (Proxeon) connected to an LTQ-Velos Orbitrap Pro (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated by reverse phase chromatography using in-house made 30 cm columns (New Objective, FS360-75-8-N-S-C30) packed with C18-AQ 2,4 µm resin (Dr Maisch GmbH, Part No. r124.aq). A 90-min gradient (5–40%) at a flow rate of 200 nl/min was used. The measurement method consisted of an initial FTMS scan recorded in profile mode with 30 000 m/z resolution, a mass range from 300 to 2000 m/z and a target value of 1,000,000. Subsequently, collision-induced dissociation (CID) fragmentation was performed for the 15 most intense ions with an isolation width of 2 Da in the ion trap. A target value of 10000, enabled charge state screening, a monoisotopic precursor selection, 35% normalized collision energy, an activation time of 10 ms, wide band activation and a dynamic exclusion list with 30 s exclusion time were applied.

### Data Protocol
Analysis of mass spectrometry data Considering that every biological replicate had been analyzed twice with mass spectrometry (technical replicate) after sample processing, fFive biological replicates with 2 technical replicates  each of the neuronal secretome upon ADAM10 knockout and four biological replicates with two technical replicates each of the neuronal ADAM10 knockout surface proteome were analyzed with the freely available MaxQuant suite (version 1.4.1.2) (20).  Protein identification was performed using the integrated Andromeda search algorithm (21). First search, mass recalibration and main search of tryptic peptides were performed using a murine Uniprot database downloaded on the 08/21/2014 (86749 entries) for the ADAM10 secretome dataset and a murine Uniprot database downloaded on the 05/16/2014 (86749 entries) for the ADAM10 surfaceome dataset. Two missed cleavages were allowed. Peptide as well as protein false discovery rate was set to 1%. Mass accuracy was set to 20 ppm for the first search and 5 ppm for the main search. Quantification was performed between the respective control and ADAM10 knockout conditions on the basis of unique and razor peptides. Missing values were imputed in Perseus 1.5.16 following a standard distribution. P-values were calculated from log2 transformed relative intensity ratios of 5 biological replicates for the neuronal secretome and 4 biological replicates for the neuronal surface proteome with a heteroscedastic, two-sided student’s t-test. Proteins with a p-value of p ≤ 0.05 were considered as hits. To correct for multiple hypothesis testing the Benjamini-Hochberg post hoc was applied with an adjusted false discovery rate of 0.10.

### Publication Abstract
Metzincin metalloproteases have major roles in intercellular communication by modulating the function of membrane proteins. One of the proteases is the a-disintegrin-and-metalloprotease 10 (ADAM10) which acts as alpha-secretase of the Alzheimer's disease amyloid precursor protein. ADAM10 is also required for neuronal network functions in murine brain, but neuronal ADAM10 substrates are only partly known. With a proteomic analysis of Adam10-deficient neurons we identified 91, mostly novel ADAM10 substrate candidates, making ADAM10 a major protease for membrane proteins in the nervous system. Several novel substrates, including the neuronal cell adhesion protein NrCAM, are involved in brain development. Indeed, we detected mistargeted axons in the olfactory bulb of conditional ADAM10-/- mice, which correlate with reduced cleavage of NrCAM, NCAM and other ADAM10 substrates. In summary, the novel ADAM10 substrates provide a molecular basis for neuronal network dysfunctions in conditional ADAM10-/- mice and demonstrate a fundamental function of ADAM10 in the brain.

### Keywords
Neurons, Protease, Adam10 substrates, Bioorthogonal chemistry

### Affiliations
Lehrstuhl für Neuroproteomik, Technische Universität München und Neuroproteomik, Deutsches Zentrum für Neurodegenerative Erkrankungen, München
DZNE München

### Submitter
Peer-Hendrik Kuhn

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Stefan F. Lichtenthaler
Lehrstuhl für Neuroproteomik, Technische Universität München und Neuroproteomik, Deutsches Zentrum für Neurodegenerative Erkrankungen, München


