### Accession
PXD005489

### Title
MS_HistoneDB, a manually curated resource for proteomic analysis of human and mouse histones

### Description
Histones and histone variants are essential components of the nuclear chromatin. While mass spectrometry has opened a large window to their characterization and functional studies, their identification from proteomic data remains challenging. Indeed, the current interpretation of mass spectrometry data relies on public databases which are either not exhaustive (Swiss-Prot) or contain many redundant entries (UniProtKB or NCBI). Currently, no protein database is ideally suited for the analysis of histones and the complex array of mammalian histone variants. Here, we propose two proteomics-oriented manually curated databases for mouse and human histone variants. Several histone variants, which had so far only been inferred by homology or detected at the RNA level, were detected by mass spectrometry, confirming the existence of their protein form.

### Sample Protocol
Histones were isolated from mouse testis cells and spermatids using sulfuric acid or saline extraction. They were then separated by SDS-PAGE and proteins were visualized by Coomassie staining. Histones were reduced with DTT and alkylated with IAA. Histones were either derivatized with propionic anhydride before and after in-gel trypsin digestion, or only submitted to trypsin digestion. Peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using an Ultimate 3000 LC system coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap instrument (CID fragmentation mode) or a Q Exactive Plus instrument (HCD fragmentation mode).

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were submitted to the Mascot program with the following parameters. For simply trypsin-digested histones: enzyme trypsin and up to 4 missed cleavages. For propionylated histones: enzyme ArgC and up to 2 missed cleavages. For both sample types: variable modifications were N-terminal protein acetylation; Lys acetylation; Lys and Arg mono- or di-methylation; MS mass tolerance 5 ppm and MS/MS mass tolerance 0.6 Da or 0.025 Da for CID of HCD data, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Chromatin, Proteomics, Histone variants, Histone, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
CNRS
CEA

### Submitter
Delphine PFLIEGER

### Lab Head
Dr Christophe Bruley
CEA


