### Accession
PXD018502

### Title
Glycopeptide Biomarkers for HCC Detection in Patients with NASH

### Description
A comprehensive screening of site-specific N-glycopeptides in serum haptoglobin (Hp), a reporter molecule for aberrant glycosylation in HCC, has been performed to characterize glycopeptide markers for NASH-related HCCs.

### Sample Protocol
Haptoglobin was immunopurified from serum in patients with NASH-related HCC and liver cirrhosis, respectively, followed by trypsin/GluC digestion, glycopeptide enrichment, and LC-EThcD-MS/MS analysis with two injections.

### Data Protocol
All spectra were searched with Byonic (Protein Metrics) incorporated in Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo) against the UniProt human haptoglobin database (P00738) and a human N-glycan database containing 53 human N-glycans was employed. The search was performed using (1) static modification, carbamidomethyl of C; (2) dynamic modifications, oxidation of M, deamindation of N and Q, and glycan modifications; (3) maximum missed cleavages, 2; (4) precursor ion mass tolerance 10 ppm; (5) fragment ion mass tolerance 20 ppm.

### Publication Abstract
Nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) is rising in prevalence in the United States and is a growing cause of hepatocellular carcinomas (HCCs). Site-specific glycan heterogeneity on glycoproteins has been shown as a potential diagnostic biomarker for HCC. Herein, we have performed a comprehensive screening of site-specific N-glycopeptides in serum haptoglobin (Hp), a reporter molecule for aberrant glycosylation in HCC, to characterize glycopeptide markers for NASH-related HCCs. In total, 70 NASH patients (22 early HCC, 15 advanced HCC, and 33 cirrhosis cases) were analyzed, with Hp purified from 20 &#x3bc;L of serum in each patient, and 140 sets of mass spectrometry (MS) data were collected using liquid chromatography coupled with electron-transfer high-energy collisional dissociation tandem MS (LC-EThcD-MS/MS) for quantitative analysis on a novel software platform, Byos. Differential quantitation analysis revealed that five N-glycopeptides at sites N184 and N241 were significantly elevated during the progression from NASH cirrhosis to HCC (<i>p</i> &lt; 0.05). Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve analysis demonstrated that the N-glycopeptides at sites N184 and N241 bearing a monofucosylated triantennary glycan A3G3F1S3 had the best diagnostic performance in detection of early NASH HCC, area under the curve (AUC) = 0.733 and 0.775, respectively, whereas &#x3b1;-fetoprotein (AFP) had an AUC of 0.692. When combined with AFP, the two panels improved the sensitivity for early NASH HCC from 59% (AFP alone) to 73% while maintaining a specificity of 70%, based on the optimal cutoff. Two-dimensional (2-D) scatter plots of the AFP value and N-glycopeptides showed that these N-glycopeptide markers detected 58% of AFP-negative HCC patients as distinct from cirrhosis. These site-specific N-glycopeptides could serve as potential markers for early detection of HCC in patients with NASH-related cirrhosis.

### Keywords
Human, Glycopeptide, Lc-ethcd-ms/ms, Serum

### Affiliations
University of Michigan
Department of Surgery, University of Michigan, USA

### Submitter
Jianhui Zhu

### Lab Head
Dr David M. Lubman
Department of Surgery, University of Michigan, USA


