### Accession
PXD019954

### Title
Receptor identification of Cyr61 on hunan colorectal cancer cell by LC-MS

### Description
To identify the unknown receptor, we extracted the membranous proteins from HCT8 cells treated with rCyr61.Then the proteins were subjected to mass spectrometry

### Sample Protocol
After trypsin digestion,Peptides were dissolved in 0.1% FA and 2% ACN, directly loaded onto a reversed-phase analytical column(75 um i.d. x 150mm, packed with Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18, 2 um, 100Å, nanoViper), The gradient was comprised of an increase from 5% to 50% solvent B (0.1% FA in 80% ACN) over 40 min, and climbing to 90% in 5 min, then holding at 90% for the 5 min. All at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min.The MS analysis was performed on Q Exactive hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific).The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass  spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. Intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 27; ion fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans was applied for the top 20 precursor ions above a threshold ion count of 1E4 in the MS survey scan with 30.0s dynamic exclusion. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. Automatic gain control (AGC) was used to prevent overfilling of the ion trap; 1E5 ions were accumulated for generation of MS/MS spectra. For MS scans, the m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 m/z. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification were performed with MASCOTsoftware by searching Uniprot_Aedis Aegypti.  Searching Parameters are as follows: Fixed modifications Carbamidomethyl (C) Variable modifications Oxidation (M) Enzyme Trypsin Maximum Missed Cleavages 1 Peptide Mass Tolerance 20ppm Fragment Mass Tolerance 0.6Da Mass values Monoisotopic Significance threshold 0.05

### Publication Abstract
Adipose-derived stem cells (ADSCs) play a vital role in colorectal cancer (CRC) progression, but the mechanism remains largely unknown. Herein, we found that ADSCs isolated from CRC patients produced more cysteine-rich 61 (Cyr61) than those from healthy donors, and the elevated serum Cyr61 levels were associated with advanced TNM stages. Moreover, serum Cyr61 displayed a better diagnostic value for CRC compared to carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and carbohydrate antigen (CA19-9). Mechanistically, integrin &#x3b1;<sub>V</sub> &#x3b2;<sub>5</sub> was identified as the functional receptor by which Cyr61 promotes CRC cell metastasis in&#x2009;vitro and in&#x2009;vivo by activating the &#x3b1;<sub>V</sub> &#x3b2;<sub>5</sub> /FAK/NF-&#x3ba;B signaling pathway. In addition, Cyr61 promotes vasculogenic mimicry (VM) formation, thereby promoting tumor growth and metastasis through a &#x3b1;<sub>V</sub> &#x3b2;<sub>5</sub> /FAK/HIF-1&#x3b1;/STAT3/MMP2 signaling cascade. Histologically, xenografts and clinical samples of CRC both exhibited VM, which was correlated with HIF-1&#x3b1; and MMP2 activation. Notably, we demonstrated the synergistic effect of combined anti-VM therapy (integrin &#x3b1;<sub>V</sub> &#x3b2;<sub>5</sub> inhibitor) and anti-VEGF therapy (bevacizumab) in patient-derived xenograft models. Further investigation showed that CRC cell-derived exosomal STAT3 promoted Cyr61 transcription in ADSCs. These findings indicate that Cyr61 derived from ADSCs plays a critical role in promoting CRC progression via integrin &#x3b1;<sub>V</sub> &#x3b2;<sub>5</sub> and provides a novel antitumor strategy by targeting Cyr61/&#x3b1;<sub>V</sub> &#x3b2;<sub>5</sub> .

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Receptor, Hunan colorectal cancer cell, Cyr61

### Affiliations
The Sixth Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University
The Sixth Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China

### Submitter
Zhenxing Liang

### Lab Head
Dr Ping Lan
The Sixth Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China


