### Accession
PXD005708

### Title
N-Glycoproteomic Analysis of Botryococcus Braunii

### Description
We have performed an N-glycoproteomic analysis of the green microalgae Botryococcus braunii, a promising candidate for the production of biofuels, accumulating considerable amounts of hydrocarbon oils. Thereby, three different strains have been compared: Showa (Race B), AC761 (Race B) and CCALA778 (Race A) which differ in the type of produced hydrocarbons. In total, 517 unique N-glycosylated peptides have been identified analyzing intact N-glycopeptides as well as deglycosylated, 18O-labeled peptides. Intact N-glycopeptides that harbored N-acetylhexosamine (HexNAc) at the non-reducing end were identified. Surprisingly, these GnTI-dependent N-glycans were also found to be modified with (di)methylated hexose. This type of methylated GnTI-dependent N-glycans has not been described so far.

### Sample Protocol
All strains were grown in modified Chu13 Media under the following conditions: 25 °C, 25 µE m-2 s-1 in a 18:6 h light:dark cycle, shaking at 120 rpm and constant bubbling with air for increased CO2 availability. Cultures were adjusted to an OD of 0.1. After two weeks of growth, cells were harvested by centrifugation at 5,000 g for 10 min. The supernatant was removed and the cells were resuspended in lysis buffer (2 % SDS in 10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6 supplemented with 1 mM PMSF and 1 mM benzamidine). Cell lysis was achieved by sonification (Branson Digital Sonifier®, 20 % maximal amplitude, five times 15 s) and cell debris was removed by centrifugation at 14,000 g for 10 min. Protein concentration of the total cell extract was determined by bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA Protein Assay Kit by Thermo Scientific Pierce). Samples were stored at -80 °C until use. For 18O-labeling, protein digestion followed by enrichment and deglycosylation of resulting N-glycopeptides was performed according to the N-Glyco-FASP protocol (Zielinska et al 2010) with minor changes. 300 µg of protein were subjected to tryptic digestion in centrifugal filter units (0.5 mL, 30 kDa MWCO, Millipore). The resulting peptides were enriched for N-glycopeptides using 200 µg agarose-bound con A (50% slurry, Vector Laboratories Inc.). Bound N-glycopeptides were released by PNGase F (New England Biolabs) in the presence of 18O-labeled water (97.1 %, Euriso-Top) leading to the deglycosylation and simultaneous 18O-labeling of N-glycopeptides. After elution, samples were dried in a vacuum centrifuge and stored at -20 °C. For each strain, two biological replicates have been performed. For analysis of intact N-glycopeptides, total cell extracts were separated by SDS-PAGE (13 % acrylamide) and stained with Coomassie Blue G. For each sample, two lanes were loaded using equal chlorophyll content (2.5 µg chlorophyll). After destaining, both lanes were cut into 16 bands. Corresponding bands were combined and subjected to tryptic digestion according to Shevchenko et al. (2006). Three biological replicates have been performed for Showa and AC761, two biological replicates for CCALA778. LC-MS analysis of 18O-labeled peptides after PNGase F treatment was conducted as described by Mathieu-Rivet et al. (2013) applying the following changes: MS1 spectra were acquired from 375 to 1600 m/z and a maximum of five (or twelve) precursor ions was triggered for fragmentation. Intact N-glycopeptides from in-gel digestion were analyzed on a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano System (Thermo Scientific). The sample was loaded on a trap column (C18 PepMap 100, 300 µm x 5 mm, 5 mm particle size, 100 Å pore size; Thermo Scientific) and desalted for 5 min using 0.05 % (v/v) TFA/2 % (v/v) acetonitrile in ultrapure water with a flow rate of 10 µl min-1. Peptides were then separated on a separation column (Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 150 x 75 mm, 2 mm particle size, 100 Å pore size; Thermo Scientific). The mobile phases were composed of 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid in ultrapure water (A) and 80 % acetonitrile/0.08 % formic acid in ultrapure water (B). The following gradient was employed using a flow rate of 300 nl min-1: 3 min 2.5 % B, increase to 7.5 % B over 6 min, increase to 40 % B over 26 min, increase to 99 % B over 1 min, 10 min 99 % B. The column was re-equilibrated with 2.5 % B for 25 min. The Q Exactive Plus was operated in positive ion mode. For the analysis of intact N-glycopeptides, IS-CID was applied (80 kV and 90 kV, alternating) leading to the fragmentation of glycosidic bonds before MS19,30. MS1 spectra were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 from 375 to 2000 m/z (or 450 to 3000 m/z) with an AGC target of 106 and a maximum injection time of 100 ms. Fragmentation by higher-energy C-trap dissociation with a normalized collision energy of 30 was triggered by mass tags using masses of +/- 203.079373 (corresponding to the neutral loss of one HexNAc) with charges from 1 - 4 and 2 ppm mass tolerance. For each MS1 scan a maximum of six MS2 scans was performed in a dynamic scan range with a fixed first mass of 150 m/z at a resolution of 17,500 with an AGC target of 105 and a maximum injection time of 120 ms. Precursor ions with an unassigned charge state or a charge greater than four were rejected. Selected precursor ions were dynamically excluded for 15 s.

### Data Protocol
All MS data were analyzed using the Python framework Ursgal (v 0.4.0). The conversion of mzML to mgf files employing pymzML was followed by a search against a protein database using X!Tandem Vengeance, MS-GF+ v9979 and OMSSA v2.1.9. Databases were specific for each strain and included sequences from the Common Repository of Adventitious Proteins (http://www.thegpm.org/crap/). Additionally, decoy sequences generated by peptide shuffling were included for all target proteins. Firstly, MS data of each strain were searched against each database separately. Protein sequences that yielded PSMs but were not part of the strain-specific database were included in the corresponding database for a second search. For MS data from 18O-labeled samples searches were performed with a precursor ion tolerance of 5 ppm, an isotope range from 0 to 2 and a fragment ion tolerance of 0.5 Da. Carbamidomethylation of Cys was set as a fixed modification. Deamidation in the presence of 18O was included as potential post translational modification of Asn. For the analysis of intact N-glycopeptides (applying IS-CID on the Q Exactive+), fragment ion tolerance was set to 20 ppm and “HexNAc” and “HexNAc(2)” on Asn were added as optional modifications. Additionally, Met oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were included as potential post translational modifications for all samples. Statistical postprocessing of unified results was performed with qvality42. PSMs were filtered by posterior error probability (PEP ≤ 1 %) and decoy hits were removed. N-Glycopeptides were required to contain the N-glycosylation consensus sequence N-X-S/T with N modified according to the applied method: “Deamidated” or “HexNAc” for 18O-labeled samples and IS-CID, respectively. Further details on parameters can be gained from the Ursgal log JSONs that have been uploaded together with the mzML result files as well as the corresponding final Ursgal result files. Since N-glycan compositions could not be obtained for all glycopeptides identified from IS-CID samples, these runs were reanalyzed additionally including “HexNAc” as potential modification of Ser or Thr. PSMs were then sanitized, i.e. for each spectrum only the PSM with the best PEP was accepted and only if the PEP was at least two orders of magnitude lower than for the second best PSM. Thereby, ambiguous HexNAc modification sites could be removed (Glyco_all_ISCID_results_N+S+T-HexNAc_merged_sanitized.csv).

### Publication Abstract
In contrast to mammals and vascular plants, microalgae show a high diversity in the N-glycan structures of complex N-glycoproteins. Although homologues for &#x3b2;1,2-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase I (GnTI), a key enzyme in the formation of complex N-glycans, have been identified in several algal species, GnTI-dependent N-glycans have not been detected so far. We have performed an N-glycoproteomic analysis of the hydrocarbon oils accumulating green microalgae Botryococcus braunii. Thereby, the analysis of intact N-glycopeptides allowed the determination of N-glycan compositions. Furthermore, insights into the role of N-glycosylation in B.&#xa0;braunii were gained from functional annotation of the identified N-glycoproteins. In total, 517 unique N-glycosylated peptides have been identified, including intact N-glycopeptides that harbored N-acetylhexosamine (HexNAc) at the nonreducing end. Surprisingly, these GnTI-dependent N-glycans were also found to be modified with (di)methylated hexose. The identification of GnTI-dependent N-glycans in combination with N-glycan methylation in B.&#xa0;braunii revealed an uncommon type of N-glycan processing in this microalgae.

### Keywords
Algae, Botryococcus braunii, N-glycosylation

### Affiliations
University of Pennsylvania
Institute of Plant Biology and Biotechnology, University of Münster, Münster 48143, Germany

### Submitter
Stefan Schulze

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Hippler
Institute of Plant Biology and Biotechnology, University of Münster, Münster 48143, Germany


