### Accession
PXD016881

### Title
Quantitative proteomics analysis of Angiostrongylus vasorum-induced alterations in dog serum

### Description
Blood contains hundreds of proteins, reflecting ongoing cellular processes and immune reactions. Angiostrongylus vasorum infection is associated with a perturbed blood protein profile in dogs. However, the literature currently available lacks the necessary depth of analysis in order to resolve the observed pathologies in A. vasorum infections, including bleeding disorders. Using sera from 8 experimentally-infected dogs (i) before infection with A. vasorum, (ii) 34 days post-infection (p.i.; immature infection), and (iii) 75 days p.i. (mature patent infection), serum proteins were measured using liquid chromatography, tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). For 2 dogs, serum was analyzed at days 104 and 230 p.i. additionally. A data-independent acquisition workflow was employed in order to generate quantitative data. Following computational analysis, we identified 139 up- and down-regulated proteins following infection (log2 ratio cutoff ≥ 1.0; q-value ≤ 0.05). Differences in serum profiles were most pronounced at day 75 p.i. compared to before infection. Among up-regulated proteins, chitinase 3, several saposin-like proteins, and heat shock proteins were found greatly increased (log2 fold-changes ≥ 5). Levels of pulmonary surfactant protein B were elevated on day 34 p.i. already, in the prepatent phase. Pathway enrichment revealed that complement (especially the lectin pathway) and coagulation cascades as significantly affected upon analysis of down-regulated proteins. Among them were mannan-binding lectin serine peptidases, ficolin, and coagulation factors. These results reflect the ongoing immune response and stress imposed to the lungs by the parasite. In addition, they bring new elements towards understanding the coagulopathies observed in some A. vasorum-infected dogs.

### Sample Protocol
Blood was collected from the jugular vein into serum tubes (Greiner Bio-One Vacuette Z serum clot activator (silica particles)) and spun down for 10 minutes at XXX x g, prior to storage at -20°C for 9 years. Protein enrichment was performed using the ProteoMiner small capacity kit (Bio-Rad) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Proteins were precipitated using trichloroacetic acid (TCA) according to a modified protocol by Thermo Fisher/Pierce. Briefly, 50 µl protein eluates were mixed with 450 µl dH2O, 100 µl sodium deoxycholate 0.15 % (w/v), and 100 µl TCA 72 % (w/v). After a 30 min incubation at 4 °C samples were vortexed, spun 30 min at 16’900 x g, 4 °C, and pellets were washed 3 times with pure ice-cold acetone. Pellets were air-dried and resuspended in 50 µl 4 % SDS, Tris-HCl 0.1 M, pH = 7.6, 0.1 M DTT. Protein in samples was quantified by Qubit protein assay (ThermoFisher Scientific). Samples were further alkylated and digested using a modified filter-aided sample preparation [22]. Thirty µg protein were mixed with 200 µl 8 M urea in 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.2, prior to be loaded onto Microcon 30 filters (Millipore, Cat. MRCF0R030) and spun at 14,000 x g for 25 min at 35 °C. Samples were washed again with 200 µl 8 M urea buffer and 100 µl iodoacetamide 0.05 M were added to the filter units. Samples were shaken for 1 min in a thermo-mixer (600 rpm) and 5 min at RT °C and spun as before. Filters were washed 2 x with 100 µl 8 M urea buffer and with 100 µl 0.5 M NaCl. Finally, 120 µl 0.05 M Triethylammoniumbicarbonate and 1.5 µl sequencing grade modified trypsin 0.4 µg/µl (Promega, V5113) were added, mixed 1 min (600 rpm) and incubated overnight in a wet cell at RT °C. Filter units were spun at 14,000 x g for 25 min and the flow-through acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to reach a 0.5 % final concentration. Peptides were then desalted using C18 stage tips [23]. Briefly, equilibrated columns were loaded with 150 µl sample (in 3 % acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1 % TFA) and spun at 2,000 x g for 1 min. Samples were washed 2 x with 150 µl 3 % ACN, 0.1 % TFA and eluted in 150 µl 60 % ACN, 0.1 % TFA. Samples were placed into a speed-vac and dried to completeness. Pellets were resusp ended in 3 % ACN, 0.1 % formic acid (FA) and frozen at -20 °C pending use.

### Data Protocol
Sample concentration was adjusted to 0.5 µg/ml in 3 % ACN, 0.1 % FA and retention time normalization peptides (iRT, Biognosys) were added at a 1:20 ratio. Peptide samples were analyzed in random order in data independent acquisition (DIA) mode on a hybrid quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive HF, Thermo Scientific) operated in line with a nano UHPLC system (Easy-nLC 1000, Thermo Scientific). For each sample 3 μl of purified peptide mixture was loaded onto a custom-made fused-silica column (150 mm x 75 um ID) filled with porous reverse-phase chromatography resin (Reprosil-Pur C18 AQ, 1.9 μm spherical silica particles, 120 Å pore diameter, M/N: r119.aq, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany). Bound peptides were eluted from the analytical column by running a linear gradient from 5 % to 35 % B in 120 min (Solvent A: 0.1% FA in water, solvent B: 0.1% FA in acetonitrile) at a linear flow rate of 300 nl/min. Eluted peptides were injected into the MS utilizing a nano ESI source (10 μm fused-silica spray emitter and Digital PicoView 565, O/N: DPV-550-565, New Objective, Woburn, MA). Mass spectra were recorded at a resolution of 60,000 (at 200 m/z) in profile mode using positive polarity. MS1 scans covering 350-1800 m/z were acquired using an AGC target of 3e6 and a maximum IT of 200 ms, and a centroid spectrum data type.

### Publication Abstract
Blood contains hundreds of proteins, reflecting ongoing cellular processes and immune reactions. Infections with the blood-dwelling cardiopulmonary nematode Angiostrongylus vasorum in dogs manifest with a broad spectrum of clinical signs including respiratory distress, bleeding diathesis and neurological signs, and are associated with a perturbed blood protein profile in dogs. However, current knowledge does not completely explain the observed pathologies induced by A. vasorum infections, including bleeding disorders. Using sera from experimentally&#xa0;infected dogs, dog serum proteome was analysed by quantitative mass spectrometry methods over several time points before and after inoculation. Following computational analysis, we identified 139 up- and downregulated proteins after infection (log2 ratio cut-off&#x2009;&#x2265;&#x2009;1.0; q-value&#x2009;&#x2264;&#x2009;0.05). Among upregulated proteins were chitinase 3-like 1 and pulmonary surfactant-associated protein B (log2 fold-changes&#x2009;&#x2265;&#x2009;5). Pathway enrichment revealed the complement (especially the lectin pathway) and coagulation cascades as significantly affected upon analysis of downregulated proteins. Among them were mannan-binding lectin serine peptidases, ficolin, and coagulation factor XIII-B. These results bring new elements towards understanding the underlying pathomechanisms of bleeding diatheses observed in some A. vasorum-infected dogs.

### Keywords
Angiostrongylus vasorum, Dog

### Affiliations
Institute of Parasitology, Vetsuisse Faculty (VET), University of Zurich (UZH)
Functional Genomics Center Zurich

### Submitter
Tobias Kockmann

### Lab Head
Dr Manuela Schnyder
Institute of Parasitology, Vetsuisse Faculty (VET), University of Zurich (UZH)


