### Accession
PXD025338

### Title
ADAR1 interactome analysis, LC-MS/MS

### Description
Adenosine-to-inosine (A-to-I) RNA editing catalyzed by ADAR1 plays essential roles in the regulation of diverse molecular and cellular processes both under physiological conditions and in the disease states, including cancer. However, mechanisms governing the protein abundance and activity of ADAR1, particularly of its constitutively-expressed and ubiquitous form, ADAR1p110, are largely unknown. Here, we report the E3 ubiquitin ligase SMURF2 as an essential positive regulator of ADAR1p110. We show that SMURF2 directly interacts with ADAR1p110, oligo-ubiquitinates it in an E3 ubiquitin ligase-dependent manner, and stabilizes ADAR1p110 expression by reducing its proteolysis through the proteasomal and lysosomal degradation pathways. The ability of SMURF2 to positively regulate ADAR1p110 was observed in different types of human cells and tissues, and in mouse tissues derived from Smurf2 knock-out and wild-type animals. Further investigations uncovered that SMURF2 regulates ADAR1p110 through its ubiquitination on K744 residue. Mutation of K744 to arginine (K744R), which is also linked to several human disorders, abolished SMURF2-mediated protection of ADAR1p110 from the proteolysis and inactivated its RNA editing activity. Additionally, SMURF2 showed a significant impact on ADAR1p110 protein-protein interactions, influencing its stability and functions. Altogether, these findings reveal SMURF2 as a multilayer regulator of ADAR1p110, governing its protein expression, interactions and functions.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were transduced with the indicated vectors and constructs and lysed in 1% NP-40 lysis buffer supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitors. The lysates were then pre-cleared with Protein A/G PLUS agarose beads (Cat# sc-2003, Santa Cruz) for IP-FLAG samplesor with Protein-G Sepharose beads for IP-MYC samples. FLAG-ADAR1p110 was IPed using anti-FLAG resin; MYC-tagged proteins were IPed using anti-MYC antibody followed by pull-down using Protein-G-Sepharose beads. Following beads washing (three times) in pre-urea wash buffer (50 mM Tris [pH 8.5], 1 mM EGTA, and 75 mM KCl), proteins were eluted in 8M Urea buffer(8 M Urea, 20 mM Tris [pH 7.5], 100 mM NaCl) and submitted for the MS analysis at the Smoler Protein Research Center.

### Data Protocol
Samples were subjected to MS analysis at the Smoler Protein Research Center. The resultingpeptides were annotated with DiscovererTM software tool against human proteome database and two search algorithms – Sequest (Thermo Fisher) and Mascot (Matrix Science). All identified peptides were filtered with high confidence(<1% FDR – False Discovery Rate), top rank and mass accuracy. Protein classification was performed using the PANTHER platform. The subcellular localization of identified ADAR1 interactors was analysed using UniProtKB. In both PANTHER and UniProtKB analyses, we selected proteins which abundance changed in the presence of SMURF2 at least two-fold. Protein protein interaction network was reconstructed using the STRING 11.0 tool. Only interactors that are connected within the network were considered and K-means clustering method was applied to classify proteins into different categories. GO terms analysis was performed using ToppFun suite bioinformatics tool at https://toppgene.cchmc.org/. GO terms with Benjamini and Hochberg adjusted FDR (q-value FDR B&H) < 0.05 were considered significant.

### Publication Abstract
Epitranscriptomic changes in RNA catalyzed by the RNA-editing enzyme ADAR1 play an essential role in the regulation of diverse molecular and cellular processes, both under physiological conditions and in disease states, including cancer. Yet, despite a growing body of evidence pointing to ADAR1 as a potential therapeutic target, the mechanisms regulating its cellular abundance and activity, particularly of its constitutively expressed and ubiquitous form, ADAR1p110, are poorly understood. Here, we report the HECT-type E3 ubiquitin ligase SMURF2 as a pivotal regulator of ADAR1p110. We show that SMURF2, which is primarily known to promote the ubiquitin-mediated degradation of its protein substrates, protects ADAR1p110 from proteolysis and promotes its A-to-I editase activity in human and mouse cells and tissues. ADAR1p110's interactome analysis performed in human cells also showed a positive influence of SMURF2 on the stability and function of ADAR1p110. Mechanistically, we found that SMURF2 directly binds, ubiquitinates and stabilizes ADAR1p110 in an E3 ubiquitin ligase-dependent manner, through ADAR1p110 ubiquitination at lysine-744 (K744). Mutation of this residue to arginine (K744R), which is also associated with several human disorders, including dyschromatosis symmetrica hereditaria (DSH) and some types of cancer, abolished SMURF2-mediated protection of ADAR1p110 from both proteasomal and lysosomal degradation and inactivated ADAR1p110-mediated RNA editing. Our findings reveal a novel mechanism underlying the regulation of ADAR1 in mammalian cells and suggest SMURF2 as a key cellular factor influencing the protein abundance, interactions and functions of ADAR1p110.

### Keywords
Human embryonic kidney hek-293t cells lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Molecular and Cellular Cancer Biology, Azrieli Faculty of Medicine, Bar-Ilan University, 1311502 Safed, Israel.
The Azrieli Faculty of Medicine, Bar-Ilan University

### Submitter
Praveen Koganti

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Blank
Laboratory of Molecular and Cellular Cancer Biology, Azrieli Faculty of Medicine, Bar-Ilan University, 1311502 Safed, Israel.


