### Accession
PXD037857

### Title
Identification of proximal interactome of c17orf80 C- and N-terminally tagged with BirA*

### Description
To validate the interaction of c17orf80 with mitochondrial nucleoid, we used proximity-labelling proteomics. We tagged c17orf80 with BirA* from either C- or N-terminus and expressed the fusion proteins in FlpIN-TRex 293 cell line. As controls for endogenous biotinylation, non-induced cells were used.

### Sample Protocol
We performed BioID pulldowns in quadruplicates using concentrations of the inducing agent AnTET optimized foreach cell line individually. Cells were induced or not with AnTET and simultaneously supplemented with biotin. Biotinylated proteins were pulled down from total cells lysates with Pierce™ streptavidin-coated agarose beads (detailed protocol can be found in the publication). The washed beads with bound biothynilated proteins were subjected to reduction with 50 µl of 2 mM dithiothreitol (30 min; 25 °C; shaking), alkylation with 50 µl of 10 mM chloroacetamide (30 min; 25 °C; shaking), and digestion with 0.5 µg trypsin (Promega; V5111) prepared in 200 µl 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (overnight; 37 °C; horizontal shaking). The supernatants after digestion and washes were combined and dried in a vacuum concentrator. The dried peptides were re-suspended in 20 µl of 5% acetonitrile (ACN) in 0.5% formic acid (FA) and analysed by LC-MS/MS in a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer equipped with an Easy nLC1000 nano-flow ultra-high-pressure LC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated using a 100 μm ID × 15 cm length PicoTip emitter column (New Objective) filled with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ reverse-phase beads of 3 μm particle size and 120 Å pore size (Dr. Maisch GmbH) on a 60 min linear gradient of 5-35% ACN in 0.1% FA, followed by 35-80% ACN in 0.1% FA (5 min) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min and a final column wash with 90 % ACN (5 min) at 600 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive mode switching automatically between MS and data-dependent MS/MS of the 10 most abundant precursor ions (Top10 method). Full-scan MS mode (400–1400 m/z) was set at a resolution of 70,000 m/Δm with an automatic gain control target of 1×106 ions and a maximum injection time of 20 ms. Selected ions for MS/MS were analyzed with resolution 17,500 m/Δm, automatic gain control target 1 × 105; maximum injection time 50 ms; precursor isolation window 4.0 Th. Only precursor ions of charge z = 2 and z = 3 were selected for collision-induced dissociation. The normalized collision energy was set to 30% at a dynamic exclusion window of 60 s.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant v.1.6.10.43 was used to match identified tryptic peptides to the human UniProt database (ID UP000005640, release date 28/04/2021) with default settings with minor modifications (enabled 'Match between runs', min. peptide length = 6, variable modification = Oxidation (M);Acetyl (Protein N-term), fixed modification = Carbamidomethyl). The label-free quantification (LFQ) method was used for quantification of identified proteins. 

### Publication Abstract
Molecular functions of many human proteins remain unstudied, despite the demonstrated association with diseases or pivotal molecular structures, such as mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA). This small genome is crucial for the proper functioning of mitochondria, the energy-converting organelles. In mammals, mtDNA is arranged into macromolecular complexes called nucleoids that serve as functional stations for its maintenance and expression. Here, we aimed to explore an uncharacterized protein C17orf80, which was previously detected close to the nucleoid components by proximity labelling mass spectrometry. To investigate the subcellular localization and function of C17orf80, we took advantage of immunofluorescence microscopy, interaction proteomics and several biochemical assays. We demonstrate that C17orf80 is a mitochondrial membrane-associated protein that interacts with nucleoids even when mtDNA replication is inhibited. In addition, we show that C17orf80 is not essential for mtDNA maintenance and mitochondrial gene expression in cultured human cells. These results provide a basis for uncovering the molecular function of C17orf80 and the nature of its association with nucleoids, possibly leading to new insights about mtDNA and its expression.

### Keywords
Bioid, Mitochondria, C17orf80

### Affiliations
Radboudumc, Department of Paediatrics, Radboud Center for Mitochondrial Medicine, Nijmegen, Netherlands
Radboudumc, Department of Paediatrics

### Submitter
Alisa Potter

### Lab Head
Dr Hans Spelbrink
Radboudumc, Department of Paediatrics, Radboud Center for Mitochondrial Medicine, Nijmegen, Netherlands


