### Accession
PXD009865

### Title
D6_T0

### Description
To examine the signaling pathways active downstream ACKR2, both in constitutive and ligand-stimulated conditions, we carried out a large-scale mass spec-based quantitative phosphoproteomic analysis by SILAC technique. ACKR2 has been expressed in HEK293T cells using a tetracycline-inducible system and stimulated with the common ligand CCL3L1. Using computational approaches, we performed a comparative system-based analysis of the ACKR2- and CCR5-mediated phosphoproteomes.

### Sample Protocol
Heavy or light cells were lysed in urea lysis buffer containing 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 8 M urea, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, and 1 mM ß-glycerophosphate proteases and phosphatases inhibitor cocktail. Cells were sonicated using Branson 250 Sonifier at 20% pulse for 5 s, three times on ice. Samples were centrifuged at 15 000 × g for 10 min and protein concentration in the supernatant was measured using the Bradford method. Equal amounts of protein from heavy and light lysates were combined. Proteins were reduced with 13 mM DTT at 50 °C for 15 min and cysteines were alkylated mixing with 26 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature in the dark for 30 min. The material was diluted to a final concentration of 2 M urea by addition of 20 mM HEPES, pH 8.0, and digested overnight with sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega) at a 1:50 (enzyme:substrate) ratio in the presence of 1 mM methylamine. Digestion was quenched by addition of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final  pH of 3. Precipitates were removed by centrifugation at 4,000 rpm for 30 min. Peptides were desalted on SepPak C18 columns (Waters, Milliford, MA) according to manufacturer’s instructions and eluted in 0.1 % TFA/ 80% acetonitrile (ACN), divided in aliquots and subjected to hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography (HILIC) using a 4.6 x 250-mm TSK gel Amide-80 5-m particle column (Tosoh Biosciences) and a JASCO HPLC equipped with two PU-980 pumps and a Uvidec-100V detector (set at 220 nm). Peptides were loaded in 80% solvent B (100% acetonitrile with 0.1% TFA). Solvent A consisted of 0.1% TFA in water. Peptides were eluted with a gradient consisting of 80% B held for 20 min followed by 80% to 70% B in 10 min, 70% to 60% B in 30 min, 60% to 0% B in 5 min. Fourteen fractions were collected throughout the gradient. Fractions from one aliquot were reduced to very small volume using Savant Speed Vac concentrators to remove ACN, brought to 20 µL with 0.1 % formic acid (FA), desalted using ZipTip following the manufacturers’ instruction and submitted to mass spectrometric analysis. Fractions from other aliquots were pooled and further enriched in phosphorylated peptides using TiO2 beads as follows: the material was reduced to small volume, brought to 200 µL with 300 mg/mL lactic acid in 80% acetonitrile:0.5% TFA and incubated 3 h at room temperature with TiO2 beads activated following the manufacturer’s instructions (TiO2: sample 15:1 w/w) under agitation.  Following centrifugation at 7000 rpm for 3 min, the supernatant was discarded and the beads washed 3 times by 5 min incubation with 200 uL 80% acetonitrile : 0.5% TFA,  centrifuged 7000 rpm 3 min; phosphopeptides were then eluted in two steps by addition of 200 uL 5% NH4OH, 30 min incubation at room temperature, 3 min centrifugation at 7000 rpm, followed by the same protocol using 5% piperidine; eluted materials were immediately  brought to pH < 4 with formic acid and pooled. The volume was reduced using Savant Speed Vac concentrator and the mixture desalted with ZipTip and submitted to mass spectrometric analysis.

### Data Protocol
LC-ESI MS/MS analyses The peptide mixture was separated on line on a Dionex UltiMate 3000 HPLC System using a PicoFrit ProteoPrep C18 column (200 mm, internal diameter of 75 μm) (New Objective, USA) Gradient:1% ACN in 0.1 % formic acid for 10 min, 1-4 % ACN in 0.1% formic acid for 6 min, 4-30% ACN in 0.1% formic acid for 147 min and 30-50 % ACN in 0.1% formic for 3 min at a flow rate of 0.3 μl/min. The eluate was electrosprayed into an LTQ Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) through a Proxeon nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The LTQ-Orbitrap was operated in positive mode in data-dependent acquisition mode to automatically alternate between a full scan (m/z 350-2000) in the Orbitrap (at resolution 60000, AGC target 1000000) and subsequent CID MS/MS in the linear ion trap of the 20 most intense peaks from full scan (normalized collision energy of 35%, 10 ms activation). Isolation window: 3 Da, unassigned charge states: rejected, charge state 1: rejected, charge states 2+, 3+, 4+: not rejected; dynamic exclusion enabled (60 s, exclusion list size: 200). Multistage activation mode was enabled with neutral loss masses of 32.66, 48.99, and 97.97. Data acquisition was controlled by Xcalibur 2.0 and Tune 2.4 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). MS post-acquisition analysis Mass spectra were analyzed using MaxQuant software (version 1.3.0.5) .The initial maximum allowed mass deviation was set to 10 ppm for monoisotopic precursor ions and 0.5 Da for MS/MS peaks. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, defined as C-terminal to arginine and lysine excluding proline, and a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylcysteine was set as a fixed modification, phosphorylation of Ser, Thr, and Tyr, protein N-terminal acetylation, Met oxidation, Asn/Gln deamidation as variable modifications. The spectra were searched by the Andromeda search engine against the human UniProt sequence database (release 2014_01). Protein identification required at least one unique or razor peptide per protein group. The required false positive rate was set to 1% at the peptide, protein and site level, and the minimum required peptide length was set to 6 amino acids. The distribution of SILAC ratios was normalized within MaxQuant at the peptide level so that the median of log2 ratios is zero (RefMaxQuant).  Quantitative analyses were performed using the Perseus software (version 1.5.1.6). Only phosphopetides and proteins present and quantified in at least 2 out of 3 repeats were considered as positively identified in a sample (ACKR2_T0, ACKR2_T3, ACKR2_T30, CCR5_T0, CCR5_T3, and CCR5_T30) and used for further analyses. Geometric mean of biological replicate SILAC ratios were used to asses phosphorylation sites and protein relative quantification. Phosphorylation sites and proteins were considered up- or down- regulated if the geometric mean of SILAC ratio of replicates was >1.5 or <0.67, respectively (>50% change in level).

### Publication Abstract
ACKR2 is an atypical chemokine receptor which is structurally uncoupled from G proteins and is unable to activate signaling pathways used by conventional chemokine receptors to promote cell migration. Nonetheless, ACKR2 regulates inflammatory and immune responses by shaping chemokine gradients in tissues <i>via</i> scavenging inflammatory chemokines. To investigate the signaling pathways downstream to ACKR2, a quantitative SILAC-based phosphoproteomic analysis coupled with a systems biology approach with network analysis, was carried out on a HEK293 cell model expressing either ACKR2 or its conventional counterpart CCR5. The model was stimulated with the common agonist CCL3L1 for short (3&#xa0;min) and long (30&#xa0;min) durations. As expected, many of the identified proteins are known to participate in conventional signal transduction pathways and in the regulation of cytoskeleton dynamics. However, our analyses revealed unique phosphorylation and network signatures, suggesting roles for ACKR2 other than its scavenger activity. In conclusion, the mapping of phosphorylation events at a holistic level indicated that conventional and atypical chemokine receptors differ in signaling properties. This provides an unprecedented level of detail in chemokine receptor signaling and identifying potential targets for the regulation of ACKR2 and CCR5 function.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics d6_t0 silac

### Affiliations
DIMEVET Università degli Studi di Milano
University of Milano

### Submitter
gabriella tedeschi

### Lab Head
Dr Gabriella Tedeschi
DIMEVET Università degli Studi di Milano


