### Accession
PXD024845

### Title
Effects of 5 drugs on the human gut microbiome.

### Description
We processed a human stool sample and cultured the processed microbiome in vitro under anaerobic condition for 48 hours using the rapidAIM assay. The microbiome was treated with either azathioprine, ciprofolxacin, diclofenac, nicatidine, paracetamol or control DMSO. Each drug was used at three different concentrations. We compared these results to those acquired using  MS1-only data.

### Sample Protocol
The LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system coupled to an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer. All 48 samples samples were run in a randomized order. Peptides were separated on a tip column (75 μm inner diameter × 15 cm) packed with reverse phase beads (1.9 μm/120 Å ReproSil-Pur C18 resin, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany). 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water was used as buffer A, and 0.1% FA in 80% acetonitrile was used as buffer B. A 60-min gradient of 5 to 35% (v/v) buffer B at a 300 L/min flow rate was used. The MS full scan was performed from 350 - 1400 m/z, recorded in profile mode, followed by data-dependent MS/MS scan of the 12 most intense ions, a dynamic exclusion repeat count of one, and exclusion duration of 30 s. The resolutions for MS and MS/MS were 60,000 and 15,000, respectively.

### Data Protocol
Spectra search and peptide quantitation were completed using MetaLab 2.0 and a closed database search of the Integrated human gut microbial Gene Catalog (IGC).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Metaproteomics, Human gut microbiome

### Affiliations
BMI, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ottawa
University of Ottawa

### Submitter
Caitlin Simopoulos

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Figeys
BMI, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ottawa


