### Accession
PXD042278

### Title
Blood plasma proteomic profiles of pink salmon Oncorhynchus gorbuscha Walbaum, 1792 during spawning migration

### Description
The pink salmon (Oncorhynchus gorbuscha) is a commercial anadromous fish species of the family Salmonidae. The species has a peculiar life cycle that includes spawning migration from marine to freshwater environments, which is accompanied by significant adaptive changes in the body, both the physiological and biochemical. This study described and revealed the variability of blood plasma proteomes of female and male pink salmon collected from three different biotopes - marine, estuarine and riverine - that the fish pass through spawning migration. Identification and comparative analysis of pink salmon blood plasma protein profiles were performed using proteomic and bioinformatic approaches. Blood proteomes of female and male spawners collected from different biotopes were qualitatively and quantitatively distinguished. Females differed primarily by proteins associated with reproductive system development (certain vitellogenin and choriogenin), lipid transport (fatty acid binding protein) and energy production (fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase), and males - by proteins involved in blood coagulation (fibrinogen), immune response (lectins) and reproductive processes (vitellogenin). Differentially expressed sex-specific proteins were implicated in proteolysis (aminopeptidases), platelet activation (β- and γ-chain fibrinogen), cell growth and differentiation (a protein containing the TGF_BETA_2 domain) and lipid transport processes (vitellogenin and apolipoprotein). The results obtained are of fundamental and practical importance, providing to the existing knowledge of biochemical adaptations to spawning of pink salmon, representative of the economically important migratory fish species.

### Sample Protocol
Male and female O. gorbuscha were caught during the pre-spawning period at different biotopes: the White Sea - “marine”, the Indera River estuary - “estuarine” and in the Indera River - “freshwater”. The fish was caught using a casting net and gillnet. The fish were collected from cages and transferred to 127 L tanks (5 individuals each) with salt water, freshwater and a mixture of fresh and salt water (1:1, v:v), where they were kept with aeration for at least 2 h. Its temperature varied between 17 and 19°C. Prior to killing, each fish was euthanized with clove oil. After the blood was collected in cryovials, centrifuged at 1700 g for 10 min, fixed and stored in liquid nitrogen.  The samples were thawed, 100 µL were taken and centrifuged at 20000g for 10 min. The protein concentration was measured by the BCA method. A sample amount equivalent to 100 μg of protein was taken for analysis. 10% SDS in 100 mM TEAB was added to the samples to give a final SDS concentration of 5% (lysis buffer: 10% SDS in 100 mM TEAB). Mixed and centrifuged at high speed to precipitate the foam. 2 μL of 0.5 M TCEP was added to the samples, shaken and rapidly centrifuged; 4 μL of 400 mM chloroacetamide in 50 mM TEAB was added. Vortex, centrifuge and incubate at 80°C for 30 min. The samples were cooled to room temperature. After the reduction and alkylation, 12% phosphoric acid solution was added to the samples in a volume equal to 10% of the sample volume. Final acid concentration of 1%, pH of the sample is less than 1. A 6-fold volume of 90% MeOH buffer in 100 mM TEAB was then added and mixed by pipetting. 170 μL of the samples were applied to a Strap filter (ProtiFi LLC) and centrifuged at 4000 g for 3 min. To wash the samples from SDS, 170 μL of 90% MeOH in 100 mM TEAB was applied to the filters, centrifuged at 4000 g for 3 min, and this step was repeated 3 more times. The filters were transferred to clean 1.5 ml tubes, 100 µl of 50 mM TEAB and 1 µg of trypsin  (trypsin:protein ratio 1:100) were added and incubated for 1 h at 37° C. Then 1 µg trypsin was added (final trypsin:protein ratio 1:50) and incubated for 18 h at 37° C. To elute the peptides, 80 µl of 50 mM TEAB was added to the filters, centrifuged at 4000 g for 3 min. Then 80 µl of 0.2% formic acid in water was added and centrifuged at 4000 g for 3 min, 80 µl of 50% acetonitrile in water with 0.1% formic acid was added and centrifuged at 4000 g for 3 min. The washes obtained were combined in a glass insert for the HPLC-MS analysis, evaporated in a vacuum concentrator and redissolved in 20 µl of a 0.1% aqueous formic acid solution. Chromatography-mass spectrometry analysis of the samples was performed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano chromatographic HPLC system coupled to a Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer. Samples of 3 µl were applied to an Acclaim µ-Precolumn enrichment column (0.5 mm x 3 mm, 5 µm particle size, Thermo Scientific) at a flow rate of 10 µl/min for 5 min in isocratic mode using buffer "C" as the mobile phase (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in deionized water). The peptides were separated on an Acclaim Pepmap® C18 HPLC column (75 µm x 150 mm, 2 µm particle size, Thermo Scientific) in gradient elution mode. The gradient was formed by mobile phase A (0.1% formic acid in deionized water) and mobile phase B: (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in deionized water). The eluent flow rate was 400 nl/min. The column was washed with 2% mobile phase B for 1 min, the mobile phase B concentration was increased linearly over 4 min to 10%, then the concentration of phase B was increased linearly over 90 min to 400%, then the concentration of phase B was increased linearly over 3 min to 99%, after a 5 min wash with 99% buffer B, the concentration of this buffer was reduced linearly over 3 min to the original 2% and the column was washed with 2% mobile phase B for 5 min. The total analysis time was 110 min. Mass spectrometric analysis was performed on a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer in positive ionization mode using a NESI source (Thermo Scientific). The following parameters were set: emitter voltage 2.1 kV, capillary temperature 240°C. Panoramic scans were performed in the mass range from 390 m/z to 1400 m/z with a 120000 resolution. Tandem scans were performed in the mass range from 140 m/z to the upper limit automatically determined from the precursor mass (not exceeding 2000 m/z at 15000 resolution). The precursor ions were isolated within a window of ±2 Da. The maximum number of ions allowed for isolation in MS/MS mode was 20 or less, the minimum precursor ion intensity for tandem analysis was set at 50000 units, and the normalized impact energy was 29. Only ions from z =2+ to z =4+ by charge state were considered for tandem scanning. The maximum accumulation time was 50 ms for precursor ions and 70 ms for fragment ions. All measured precursors were dynamically excluded from the tandem MS/MS analysis for 9 s. Samples were analyzed in three replicates.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectra raw-files were loaded into the MaxQuant v.1.6.15.0 program with the built-in Andromeda search algorithm (Cox, 2011; Tyanova et al. 2016а). The search was performed using Oncorhynchus spp. database provided by UniProt (June 2022). The following search parameters were set: the degrading enzyme—trypsin; accuracy of monoisotopic peptide masses ±5ppm; the accuracy of the masses in the MS/MS spectra ± 0.01 Da; the possibility of skipping two sites of trypsin cleavage; methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation and cysteine modification with iodoacetamide were set as variable and fixed modification of peptides, respectively; for validation of comparisons (pairing) of spectra and PSM peptides (Peptide Spectrum Matches), identification of peptides and proteins, the FDR value (False Discovery Rate) no more than 1.0%. Proteins were considered to be reliably identified if at least two peptides were detected for them. The quantification of protein content was based on the label-free quantification (LFQ) algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
The pink salmon (<i>Oncorhynchus gorbuscha</i>) is a commercial anadromous fish species of the family Salmonidae. This species has a 2-year life cycle that distinguishes it from other salmonids. It includes the spawning migration from marine to freshwater environments, accompanied by significant physiological and biochemical adaptive changes in the body. This study reveals and describes variability in the blood plasma proteomes of female and male pink salmon collected from three biotopes-marine, estuarine and riverine-that the fish pass through in spawning migration. Identification and comparative analysis of blood plasma protein profiles were performed using proteomics and bioinformatic approaches. The blood proteomes of female and male spawners collected from different biotopes were qualitatively and quantitatively distinguished. Females differed primarily in proteins associated with reproductive system development (certain vitellogenin and choriogenin), lipid transport (fatty acid binding protein) and energy production (fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase), and males in proteins involved in blood coagulation (fibrinogen), immune response (lectins) and reproductive processes (vitellogenin). Differentially expressed sex-specific proteins were implicated in proteolysis (aminopeptidases), platelet activation (&#x3b2;- and &#x3b3;-chain fibrinogen), cell growth and differentiation (a protein containing the TGF_BETA_2 domain) and lipid transport processes (vitellogenin and apolipoprotein). The results are of both fundamental and practical importance, adding to existing knowledge of the biochemical adaptations to spawning of pink salmon, a representative of economically important migratory fish species.

### Keywords
Pink salmon, Spawning, Proteomics, Oncorhynchus gorbuscha, Anadromous migration, Blood plasma

### Affiliations
Institute of Biology of the Karelian Research Centre of the Russian Academy of Sciences
Environmental Biochemistry Laboratory, Institute of Biology of the Karelian Research Centre of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Petrozavodsk, Russia

### Submitter
Albina Kochneva

### Lab Head
Dr Svetlana A. Murzina
Environmental Biochemistry Laboratory, Institute of Biology of the Karelian Research Centre of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Petrozavodsk, Russia


