### Accession
PXD002839

### Title
Nuclear phosphoproteomics analysis of resting and IL-2-stimulated T lymphocytes

### Description
The aim of the present project was to study in detail the site-specific phosphorylation events occurring both in resting as well as in T lymphocytes stimulated with IL-2 for five minutes. For that purpose we combined SILAC-based quantitative mass spectrometry analysis with phosphopeptide enrichment using TiO2 beads. We performed three biological replicas of the same experiment which resulted in the identification of above 8500 unique phosphosites corresponding to more than 3000 proteins. From the 6145 phosphosites that were consistently quantified in at least 2 out of the 3 replicas performed, we detected that 390 were regulated by IL-2 being the up-regulated phosphosites five times more abundant than the down-regulated ones. Those IL-2-dependent phosphosites corresponded to distinct proteins involved in distinct aspects of gene expression and cell cycle regulation.

### Sample Protocol
Cells grown in light SILAC media (Arg0/Lys0) were kept unstimulated whereas cells grown in heavy media (Arg6/Lys4) were stimulated with IL-2 for 5 minutes. After quenching the stimulation, the nucleus of differentially labelled cells were enriched and proteins were extracted. Then, proteins derived from untreated and IL-2-treated T cells were equitably combined and in solution digested with LysC and trypsin. Resulting peptides were enriched in phosphopeptides using TiO2 beads and ultimately analysed by LC-MS/MS using a QExactive mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Acquired raw MS data was processed using the MaxQuant software and further statistical analysis were done in the Perseus.

### Publication Abstract
Anti-cancer immunotherapies commonly rely on the use of interleukin-2 (IL-2) to promote the expansion of T lymphocytes. IL-2- dependent proliferation is the culmination of a complex network of phosphorylation-driven signaling events that impact on gene transcription through mechanisms that are not clearly understood. To study the role of IL-2 in the regulation of nuclear protein function we have performed an unbiased mass spectrometry-based study of the nuclear phosphoproteome of resting and IL-2-treated CD4(+) T lymphocytes. We detected 8521distinct phosphosites including many that are not yet reported in curated phosphorylation databases. Although most phosphorylation sites remained unaffected upon IL-2 treatment, 391 sites corresponding to 288 gene products showed robust IL-2-dependent regulation. Importantly, we show that ATP-citrate lyase (ACLY) is a key phosphoprotein effector of IL-2-mediated T-cell responses. ACLY becomes phosphorylated on serine 455 in T lymphocytes upon IL-2-driven activation of AKT, and depletion or inactivation of ACLY compromises IL-2-promoted T-cell growth. Mechanistically, we demonstrate that ACLY is required for enhancing histone acetylation levels and inducing the expression of cell cycle regulating genes in response to IL-2. Thus, the metabolic enzyme ACLY emerges as a bridge between cytokine signaling and proliferation of T lymphocytes, and may be an attractive candidate target for the development of more efficient anti-cancer immunotherapies.

### Keywords
Nucleus, Phosphorylation, T-lymphocyte, Il-2

### Affiliations
Associate Professor Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology University of Southern Denmark Campusvej 55, 5230 Odense M Denmark   e-mail: ihk@bmb.sdu.dk Phone: (+45) 6550 2494 Fax: (+45) 6593 3018 http://www.cebi.sdu.dk
Postdoc

### Submitter
Nerea Osinalde

### Lab Head
Dr Irina Kratchmarova
Associate Professor Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology University of Southern Denmark Campusvej 55, 5230 Odense M Denmark   e-mail: ihk@bmb.sdu.dk Phone: (+45) 6550 2494 Fax: (+45) 6593 3018 http://www.cebi.sdu.dk


