### Accession
PXD006792

### Title
Tadpole-like conformations of polyglutamine-expanded soluble huntingtin exon 1 engenders novel interactions

### Description
Soluble huntingtin exon 1 (Httex1) with expanded polyglutamine (polyQ) engenders neurotoxicity in Huntington’s disease. To understand the structural basis of this toxicity, we characterized the structure of monomeric Httex1 for two polyQ lengths using hydrogen-deuterium exchange and nuclear magnetic resonance experiments. NMR analysis of Httex1 with polyQ length of 25 glutamines showed the presence of helical structure in the N-terminal region which continued into the polyQ tract. Within these regions the 15N{1H} NOE averages about 0.4, consistent with a protein that lacks structure, but also consistent with Httex1 being not fully disordered. However, both NMR and mass spectrometry hydrogen-deuterium exchange experiments showed no protection suggesting a lack of any stabilizing hydrogen bonds.  Atomistic simulations showed that these seemingly conflicting features originated from tadpole-like topologies composed of a globular head that included the N-terminal amphipathic region adsorbed on a collapsed polyQ domain and a semi-flexible C-terminal proline-rich region tail. The surface area of the disordered globular domain increased with polyQ length to promote gain-of-function interactions with a range of proteins in a mouse neuroblastoma cell model, which included the stress granule protein Fus. Overexpression of Fus potently reduced toxicity in cells with soluble, polyQ-expanded Httex1.  These results collectively suggested that the tadpole-like structure of Httex1 stimulates novel gain-of-function interactions that can be harmful to cell viability and can be sequestered competitively by interactions with other proteins sharing similar low complexity structures such as Fus.

### Sample Protocol
Neuro2a cells (1.2  107) were plated on a T150 culture flask and transfected with the pT-REx Httex1-25Q-Em or Httex1-46Q-Em vectors using Lipofectamine 2000 according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Australia). Cells were harvested 48 hours after transfection, transferred to Lo-Bind tubes (Eppendorf, North Ryde Australia) and lysed mechanically by vortexing with silica beads in ATP depleted lysis buffer (10mM Tris-HCl, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA, 1 mM PMSF, 7 mM D-glucose, 1 U/mL hexokinase, 20 U/mL benzonase, 1 cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail tablet per 10 mL buffer; pH 7.5). Lysates were centrifuged to remove protein aggregates (21,130 g) and matched for equivalent GFP fluorescence (BioRad plate reader, Gladesville Australia).  GFP-TrapA beads (ChromoTek, Planegg-Martinsried Germany), pre-equilibrated as per the manufacturer’s instructions with dilution buffer (100 mM Tris-HCl, 150 mM NaCl 1 cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail tablet per 10 mL; pH 8) were added to the lysate and incubated for 2 hours at 4 °C.  The beads were pelleted (2,000 g) and washed thrice in dilution buffer as per manufacturer’s instructions. Beads were resuspended in triethylammonium bicarbonate (Sigma-Aldrich) and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen. Proteins were eluted from the GFP-TrapA beads with 4% w/v SDS, 100 mM DTT, 100 mM Tris-HCl; pH 7.5 at 65 °C for 5 minutes. Beads were washed twice with 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5) with the beads collected by centrifugation (2,000 g).  The wash supernatants were pooled and added to the eluent.  Eluted proteins were prepared for LC-MS/MS analysis using a FASP Protein Digestion Kit (Expedeon, San Diego CA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions with two additional wash steps with Urea Sample Solution (Expedeon). Samples were dried using a benchtop CentriVap (Labconco, Kansas City MO) and resuspended in 0.1% v/v formic acid.  Peptides were analysed by LC-MS/MS using the QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled online with a RSLC nano HPLC (Ultimate 3000, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were loaded on a 100 μm, 2 cm nanoviper pepmap100 trap column in 2% v/v acetonitrile, 0.1% v/v formic acid at a flow rate of 15 μL/minute. Peptides were eluted and separated at a flow rate of 300 μL/minute on RSLC nanocolumn 75 μm  50 cm, pepmap100 C18, 3 μm 100 Å pore size (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as described.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data were analysed using MaxQuant version 1.2.2.5 and the UniProt mouse protein database (accessed August 2013) for peptide identification. Strict bioinformatic criteria were used for the assignment of peptide identity; including the application of a false discovery rate of 0.01 for both proteins and peptides 71,72 and removal of species contained within a list of common contaminants 73. Data were further analysed using Perseus version 1.5.6.0 (MaxQuant) to determine significantly enriched species in label free quantification measurements of the various IP experiments. A twofold increase in relative abundance and a significant p-value (Student’s ttest) were used to determine those enriched peptides/proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Soluble huntingtin exon 1 (Httex1) with expanded polyglutamine (polyQ) engenders neurotoxicity in Huntington's disease. To uncover the physical basis of this toxicity, we performed structural studies of soluble Httex1 for wild-type and mutant polyQ lengths. Nuclear magnetic resonance experiments show evidence for conformational rigidity across the polyQ region. In contrast, hydrogen-deuterium exchange shows absence of backbone amide protection, suggesting negligible persistence of hydrogen bonds. The seemingly conflicting results are explained by all-atom simulations, which show that Httex1 adopts tadpole-like structures with a globular head encompassing the N-terminal amphipathic and polyQ regions and the tail encompassing the C-terminal proline-rich region. The surface area of the globular domain increases monotonically with polyQ length. This stimulates sharp increases in gain-of-function interactions in cells for expanded polyQ, and one of these interactions is with the stress-granule protein Fus. Our results highlight plausible connections between Httex1 structure and routes to neurotoxicity.

### Keywords
Huntingtin, Neurodegeneration, Huntington's disease, Polyq

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Hatters Lab, University of Melbourne, Australia
University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Estella Newcombe

### Lab Head
Dr Danny Martin Hatters
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Hatters Lab, University of Melbourne, Australia


