### Accession
PXD024669

### Title
MALDI-MS Profiling of Intact Blood Proteins without the Need for Freezing - Dried Serum Spots as Future Clinical Tools for Patient Screening

### Description
To open new ways for MALDI-MS-based patient screening, blood serum is the most preferred specimen because of its richness in patho-physiological information and due to ease of collection. To overcome deleterious freeze / thaw cycles and to reduce high costs for shipping and storage, we sought to develop a procedure which enables MALDI-MS protein profiling of blood serum proteins without the need for serum freezing. MALDI mass spectra from either (p)FFS or (p)DSS preparations showed on average 25 strong ion signals (mass range m/z 6000 to m/z 10,000) from intact serum proteins (apolipoproteins, complement proteins, transthyretin and hemoglobin) and from proteolytic processing products. Semi-quantitative analysis of three ion pairs: m/z 6433 and 6631, m/z 8205 and 8916, as well as m/z 9275 and 9422 indicated that the mass spectra from either (p)FFS or (p)DSS contained the same protein composition information. A workflow that avoids the conventional cold-chain and yet enables to investigate intact serum proteins and/or serum proteolysis products by MALDI-MS profiling was developed. The here described protocol tremendously broadens clinical application of MALDI-MS and simultaneously allows to reduce the costs for storage and shipping of serum samples.

### Sample Protocol
Blood sera from patients / donors were divided into portions which after pre-incubation were fast frozen, resulting in (p)FFS. Thawed (p)FFS aliquots were deposited on filter paper discs and air dried at room temperature to generate (p)DSS. Intact serum proteins were eluted from (p)DSS with acid-labile detergent and both, (p)FFS and (p)DSS were desalted by employing a reverse-phase bead system. After extraction from the magnetic beads, serum protein-containing solutions (0.5 uL each) were spotted directly onto stainless steel MTP 384 target plates (Bruker Daltonik, Bremen, Germany) together with 0.5 uL ferulic acid solution (10 mg ferulic acid, SigmaAldrich, München, Germany, dissolved in 330 uL ACN/0.1% aqueous TFA (33/67, v/v)) as matrix. After drying, 0.5 uL ferulic acid solution was added to each sample spot again. All preparations were allowed to dry, as was done previously. Protein solutions were spotted in duplicate for each patient/donor for recording the first independent set of measurement series MS1 and the second independent set of measurement series MS2 of the same protein extract preparation. Protein mixtures embedded in the crystallized matrix were analyzed with an UltrafleXtreme(TM) MALDI-TOF/TOF mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonik, Bremen, Germany). The instrument was operated in linear positive ion mode using an acceleration voltage of 20 kV. Spectra were recorded in a mass range from 4 to 20 kDa, respectively, accumulating 900 shots per spectrum. Spectra were externally calibrated using a commercially available Protein Calibration Standard (Bruker Daltonik, Bremen, Germany).

### Data Protocol
All mass spectra were internally recalibrated using average masses of ion signals at m/z 6631.6 (singly charged and unmodified apolipoprotein CI, Uniprot accession number P02654) and m/z 9422.8 (singly charged and modified apolipoprotein CIII with mono glycosylation and sialylation, Uniprot accession number P02656). Ion signal areas were determined with the ClinProTools(TM) 3.0 software (Bruker Daltonik, Bremen, Germany). For the database search a database containing two apolipoprotein CI protein sequences of the human proteome (http://www.uniprot.org/; UniProt release 2021_01) was used. Mass spectrometric raw data file processing generated a list of m/z values from which the entries 6433.0 (1+) and 6631.6 (1+) were subjected to Mascot search. The following search parameters were set: Type of search: Sequence Query; Enzyme: None; Fixed modifications: Carbamidomethyl (C); Variable modifications: Oxidation (M); Mass values: Average; Protein Mass: Unrestricted; Peptide Mass Tolerance: ± 50 ppm; Fragment Mass Tolerance: 50 ppm; Max Missed Cleavages: No Cleavage; Instrument type: Default; Query1 (6433.0000,1+): no title; seq(*-DVSSA); Query2 (6631.6000,1+): no title; seq(*-DVSSA). Patient numbers and alloted mass spectrum target positions are listed in "Okai_patient_numbers_and_target_positions.txt".

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Maldi-ms profiling, Intact serum protein analysis, Serum proteolysis analysis, Dried serum spots, Fast frozen serum

### Affiliations
Proteome Center Rostock, Medical Faculty and Natural Science Faculty, University of Rostock, Schillingallee 69, 18059 Rostock, Germany
University Medical Center Rostock

### Submitter
Michael Kreutzer

### Lab Head
Dr Michael O. Glocker
Proteome Center Rostock, Medical Faculty and Natural Science Faculty, University of Rostock, Schillingallee 69, 18059 Rostock, Germany


