### Accession
PXD021662

### Title
AIM32 is a dual-localized 2Fe-2S mitochondrial protein that functions in redox quality control

### Description
Maintaining redox homeostasis under normal and stress conditions in the mitochondrion is complex. We used mass spectrometry analysis to identify key proteins that interacted with the sulfhydryl oxidase Erv1 of the mitochondrial intermembrane space assembly (MIA) pathway. Results: Aim32, a thioredoxin-like [2Fe-2S] ferredoxin protein, was identified as an Erv1 binding partner. Aim32 interacted with additional proteins including redox protein Osm1 as well as protein import components Tim17, Tim23, and Tim22. Detailed and complementary localization studies showed that Aim32 resided in both the mitochondrial matrix and intermembrane space, placing it in a rare protein class that is dual-localized within mitochondria. Deletion of Aim32 or conserved cysteine residues that coordinate the Fe-S center resulted in an increased accumulation of proteins with aberrant disulfide linkages. In addition, the steady-state level of assembled TIM22, TIM23, and Oxa1 protein import complexes was decreased and a subset of the import complexes showed misassembly, among other phenotypes. Aim32 also bound to several mitochondrial proteins under non-reducing conditions, suggesting a function in maintaining the redox status of oxidized proteins by potentially targeting cysteine residues that may be sensitive to oxidation. Finally, Aim32 was required for growth in stress conditions and the mitochondrial genome was essential in strains that lacked Aim32. Innovation: Aim32 is uniquely localized to both the mitochondrial intermembrane space and matrix and functions in redox regulation with a potential role in quality control. Conclusion: Aim32 may be poised as a sensor to maintain the redox state by repairing oxidized cysteine residues in a broad range of mitochondrial proteins.

### Sample Protocol
The protein mixtures were reduced, alkylated, and digested by the sequential addition of trypsin and lys-C proteases. Afterwards, samples were desalted using Pierce C18 tips, eluted in 40% ACN, and dried and resuspended in 5% formic acid. Desalted samples were separated on C18 reversed phase (1.9 uM, 100A pores, Dr. Maisch GmbH) columns, packed with 25cm of resin in a 75uM inner diameter fused silica capillary. Digested peptides were fractionated online using a 140-minute water-acetonitrile gradient with 3% DMSO ionized using electrospray ionization by application of a distal 2.2kV. Ionized peptides were interrogated via tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion Lumos

### Data Protocol
For discovery acquisitions, Data-Dependent Acquisition (DDA) was utilized with an MS1 scan resolution of 120,000 and MS2 resolution of 15,000 and a cycle time of 3 seconds. Data analysis was performed using the Integrated Proteomics pipeline 2 (Integrated Proteomics Applications, San Diego, CA). MS/MS spectra were searched using the ProLuCID algorithm and peptide-to-spectrum matches (PSMs) were organized and filtered based on decoy database-estimated false discovery rate of <1% using the DTASelect algorithm. Database searching was performed using a Saccharomyces cerevisiae yeast database downloaded from Saccharomyces Genome Database (SGD) on 2-19-2016

### Publication Abstract
Yeast is a facultative anaerobe and uses diverse electron acceptors to maintain redox-regulated import of cysteine-rich precursors via the mitochondrial intermembrane space assembly (MIA) pathway. With the growing diversity of substrates utilizing the MIA pathway, understanding the capacity of the intermembrane space (IMS) to handle different types of stress is crucial. We used MS to identify additional proteins that interacted with the sulfhydryl oxidase Erv1 of the MIA pathway. Altered inheritance of mitochondria 32 (Aim32), a thioredoxin-like [2Fe-2S] ferredoxin protein, was identified as an Erv1-binding protein. Detailed localization studies showed that Aim32 resided in both the mitochondrial matrix and IMS. Aim32 interacted with additional proteins including redox protein Osm1 and protein import components Tim17, Tim23, and Tim22. Deletion of Aim32 or mutation of conserved cysteine residues that coordinate the Fe-S center in Aim32 resulted in an increased accumulation of proteins with aberrant disulfide linkages. In addition, the steady-state level of assembled TIM22, TIM23, and Oxa1 protein import complexes was decreased. Aim32 also bound to several mitochondrial proteins under nonreducing conditions, suggesting a function in maintaining the redox status of proteins by potentially targeting cysteine residues that may be sensitive to oxidation. Finally, Aim32 was essential for growth in conditions of stress such as elevated temperature and hydroxyurea, and under anaerobic conditions. These studies suggest that the Fe-S protein Aim32 has a potential role in general redox homeostasis in the matrix and IMS. Thus, Aim32 may be poised as a sensor or regulator in quality control for a broad range of mitochondrial proteins.

### Keywords
Aim32, Tim23, Tim22, Oxa1, Mitochondrion is complex. mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
UCLA
Loyola Marymount University, Los Angeles

### Submitter
Yasaman Jami-Alahmadi

### Lab Head
Dr Deepa Dabir
Loyola Marymount University, Los Angeles


