### Accession
PXD016814

### Title
Lipid moieties of Mycoplasma pneumoniae lipoproteins are the causative factors of vaccine-enhanced disease

### Description
Vaccine-enhanced disease (VED) occurs as a result of vaccination followed by infection with virulent Mycoplasma pneumoniae. To date, VED has prevented development of an efficacious vaccine against this significant human respiratory pathogen. Herein we report that vaccination with M. pneumoniae lipid-associated membrane proteins (LAMPs) induces lung lesions consistent with exacerbated disease following challenge, without reducing bacterial loads. Removal of lipid moieties from LAMPs prior to vaccination eliminates VED and reduces bacterial loads after infection. Collectively, these data indicate that lipid moieties of lipoproteins are the causative factors of M. pneumoniae VED.

### Sample Protocol
Purified LAMPs were prepared for LC-MS/MS analysis using the FASP method and a 10 kD molecular weight cutoff filter (Microcon).  Tryptic peptides were desalted using Pierce C18 desalting spin columns using manufacturer's protocol.

### Data Protocol
All raw data acquired on a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer were searched against an in-house generated M. pneumoniae FASTA file using Andromeda and MaxQuant v1.6.0.1.  All results filtered to a 1% FDR at the protein and peptide levels.

### Publication Abstract
Vaccine-enhanced disease (VED) occurs as a result of vaccination followed by infection with virulent <i>Mycoplasma pneumoniae</i>. To date VED has prevented development of an efficacious vaccine against this significant human respiratory pathogen. Herein we report that vaccination of BALB/c mice with <i>M. pneumoniae</i> lipid-associated membrane proteins (LAMPs) induces lung lesions consistent with exacerbated disease following challenge, without reducing bacterial loads. Removal of lipid moieties from LAMPs prior to vaccination eliminates VED and reduces bacterial loads after infection. Collectively, these data indicate that lipid moieties of lipoproteins are the causative factors of <i>M. pneumoniae</i> VED.

### Keywords
Q exactive hf, Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Lipid associated membrane proteins

### Affiliations
Director, UConn Proteomics & Metabolomics Facility, University of Connecticut, CT, USA
University of Connecticut

### Submitter
Jeremy Balsbaugh

### Lab Head
Dr Jeremy Balsbaugh
Director, UConn Proteomics & Metabolomics Facility, University of Connecticut, CT, USA


