### Accession
PXD013808

### Title
FAM83D directs protein kinase CK1α to the mitotic spindle for proper spindle positioning

### Description
The concerted action of many protein kinases helps orchestrate the error-free progression through mitosis of mammalian cells. The roles and regulation of some prominent mitotic kinases, such as cyclin-dependent kinases, are well-established. However, these and other known mitotic kinases alone cannot account for the extent of protein phosphorylation that has been reported during mammalian mitosis. Here we demonstrate that CK1α, of the casein kinase 1 family of protein kinases, localises to the spindle and is required for proper spindle-positioning and timely cell division. CK1α is recruited to the spindle by FAM83D, and cells devoid of FAM83D, or those harbouring CK1α-binding-deficient FAM83DF283A/F283A knockin mutation, display pronounced spindle-positioning defects, and a prolonged mitosis. Restoring FAM83D at the endogenous locus in FAM83D-/- cells, or artificially delivering CK1α to the spindle in FAM83DF283A/F283A cells, rescues these defects. These findings implicate CK1α as new mitotic kinase that orchestrates the kinetics and orientation of cell division.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were affinity purified from clarified extracts by GFP-TRAP beads (ChromoTek). Purified proteins were resolved by 4-12% gradient SDS-PAGE, the gels were stained with InstantBlue™ (Expedeon), and gel slices covering each lane were excised and digested with trypsin. The peptides were subjected to mass spectrometric analysis performed by LC-MS-MS on a Linear ion trap-orbitrap hybrid mass spectrometer (Orbitrap-VelosPro, Thermo) coupled to a U3000 RSLC HPLC (Thermo). Peptides were trapped on a nanoViper Trap column, 2 cm x 100 m C18 5 m 100 Å (Thermo, 164564), then separated on a 15 cm Thermo EasySpray column (ES800) equilibrated with a flow of 300 nl/min of 3% Solvent B. [Solvent A: 2% Acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid, 3% DMSO in H2O; Solvent B: 80% acetonitrile, 0.08% formic acid, 3% DMSO in H2O]. The elution gradient was as follows; Time(min):Solvent B(%); 0:3, 5:3, 45:35, 47:99, 52:99, 55:3, 60:3. Data were acquired in the data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS-MS acquisition. Full scan spectra (m/z 400-1600) were acquired in the orbitrap with resolution R = 60,000 at m/z 400 (after accumulation to an FTMS Full AGC Target; 1,000,000; FTMS MSn AGC Target; 50,000). The 20 most intense ions, above a specified minimum signal threshold (2,000), based upon a low resolution (R=15,000) preview of the survey scan, were fragmented by collision induced dissociation and recorded in the linear ion trap (Full AGC Target; 30,000. MSn AGC Target; 5,000).

### Data Protocol
Data files were analysed by Proteome Discoverer 2.0 (www.ThermoScientific.com), using Mascot 2.4.1 (www.matrixscience.com), and searching the SwissProt Human database. Scaffold Q/Q+S V4.4.7 (www.ProteomeSoftware.com) was also used to examine the Mascot result files. Allowance was made for the following fixed, Carbamidomethyl (C), and variable modifications, Oxidation (M), Dioxidation (M). Error tolerances were 10ppm for MS1 and 0.6 Da for MS2. Scaffold Q/Q+S V4.4.6 (www.ProteomeSoftware.com) was used to further analyse the data and obtain values for the total unique peptide counts for each protein.

### Publication Abstract
The concerted action of many protein kinases helps orchestrate the error-free progression through mitosis of mammalian cells. The roles and regulation of some prominent mitotic kinases, such as cyclin-dependent kinases, are well established. However, these and other known mitotic kinases alone cannot account for the extent of protein phosphorylation that has been reported during mammalian mitosis. Here we demonstrate that CK1&#x3b1;, of the casein kinase 1 family of protein kinases, localises to the spindle and is required for proper spindle positioning and timely cell division. CK1&#x3b1; is recruited to the spindle by FAM83D, and cells devoid of FAM83D, or those harbouring CK1&#x3b1;-binding-deficient FAM83D<sup>F283A/F283A</sup> knockin mutations, display pronounced spindle positioning defects, and a prolonged mitosis. Restoring FAM83D at the endogenous locus in FAM83D<sup>-/-</sup> cells, or artificially delivering CK1&#x3b1; to the spindle in FAM83D<sup>F283A/F283A</sup> cells, rescues these defects. These findings implicate CK1&#x3b1; as new mitotic kinase that orchestrates the kinetics and orientation of cell division.

### Keywords
Fam83d, Mitotic spindle, Protein kinase ck1α

### Affiliations
MRC Protein Phosphorylation and Ubiquitylation Unit, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dow Street, Dundee, DD1 5EH, UK
University of Dundee

### Submitter
Gopal Sapkota

### Lab Head
Dr Gopal P. Sapkota
MRC Protein Phosphorylation and Ubiquitylation Unit, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dow Street, Dundee, DD1 5EH, UK


