### Accession
PXD019303

### Title
Hipk4 is a manchette-associated protein essential for spermiogenesis

### Description
Nonobstructive azoospermia (NOA) is one of the most severe forms of male infertility, characterized by the absence of spermatozoa in the ejaculate. The etiology and genetic mechanism(s) of this disease remain largely unclear. Using Sanger sequence, we identified 12 heterozygous missense mutations and 2 heterozygous nonsense mutations in the HIPK4, encoding a serine/threonine kinase. Moreover, K490* mutant cause HIPK4 unstable in 293T cells. In accord with these findings, we observed that homozygous Hipk4-/- male mice were infertility owing to malformed and immotile spermatozoa, which are characterized by a deformed nucleus and a detached acrosome. Furthermore, we performed a phosphoproteomic analysis of testis from Hipk4 wild type and knockout mice, revealing multiple targets regulated by Hipk4 during spermiogenesis. Notably, manchette-associated protein Rimbp3 has multiple phosphorylation sites regulated by Hipk4. Moreover, Hipk4 and Rimbp3 deficiency mice display several common phenotypes, in particular with regard to the ectopic positioning of the manchette within spermatids, a presumed cause of sperm head deformities. Thus, Hipk4 might regulate manchette function through phosphorylation of Rimbp3, thereby playing essential role for sperm head formation and male fertility.

### Sample Protocol
Testes from 3 mice in each of the knockout and control group were subjected to protein extraction, digestion and TMT labeling. For protein quantification, 45μg TMT-labeled peptide mixture was fractionated and quantified with Easy nLC1200 equipped with Orbitrap Fushion Lumos.For phospho-proteomic quantification, 3mg TMT-labeled peptide mixture was fractionated and enriched using Ti-IMAC.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched against the mouse protein sequences obtained from the Universal Protein Resource (UniProt, 2018.07.18) database by MaxQuant software (version 1.6.5.0). False discovery rates (FDR) cut-offs were set to 0.01 for proteins, peptides and sites. The expression level of each phosphorylated site was normalized against the abundances of corresponding protein. Phosphorylation sites are flited with localization probability>0.75, and only single phosphorylated peptides were selected for the downstream analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hipk4, Spermiogenesis, Mouse

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China.
Nanjing Medical University

### Submitter
Xiaofei Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Guo Xuejiang
State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China.


