### Accession
PXD023041

### Title
TLR-2-mediated activation of innate responses in the upper airways confers rapid anti-viral protection of the lungs

### Description
The impact of respiratory virus infections on global health is felt not just during a pandemic but for many, endemic seasonal infections pose an equal and ongoing risk of severe disease. Moreover, vaccines and antiviral drugs are not always effective or available for many respiratory viruses. We investigated how induction of effective and appropriate antigen independent innate immunity in the upper airways can prevent spread of respiratory virus infection to the vulnerable lower airways. Activation of Toll-like receptor-2 (TLR2), when restricted to the nasal turbinates results in prompt induction of innate immune-driven anti-viral responses through action of cytokines, chemokines and cellular activity in the upper but not the lower airways. We define how nasal epithelial cells and recruitment of macrophages work in concert and play pivotal roles to limit progression of influenza virus to the lungs and sustain protection for up to seven days. These results reveal underlying mechanisms of how control of viral infection in the upper airways can occur and also support the implementation of strategies that can activate TLR2 in nasal passages to provide rapid protection, especially for at-risk populations, against severe respiratory infection when vaccines and antiviral drugs are not always effective or available.

### Sample Protocol
INNA-X or diluent treated LA-4 cells were lysed, and proteins reduced and alkylated in a guanidium chloride lysis buffer. Protein quantitation by BCA assay and precipitation was followed by a Urea based trypsin proteolytic digest. Samples were desalted using Empore C18, and label free quantitation analysis performed using reverse phase LC-MS/MS using an Orbitrap elite.

### Data Protocol
Sample comparisons were performed using the MaxLFQ package in MaxQuant (1.5.3.30) proteomics platform.

### Publication Abstract
The impact of respiratory virus infections on global health is felt not just during a pandemic, but endemic seasonal infections pose an equal and ongoing risk of severe disease. Moreover, vaccines and antiviral drugs are not always effective or available for many respiratory viruses. We investigated how induction of effective and appropriate antigen-independent innate immunity in the upper airways can prevent the spread of respiratory virus infection to the vulnerable lower airways. Activation of TLR2, when restricted to the nasal turbinates, resulted in prompt induction of innate immune-driven antiviral responses through action of cytokines, chemokines, and cellular activity in the upper but not the lower airways. We have defined how nasal epithelial cells and recruitment of macrophages work in concert and play pivotal roles to limit progression of influenza virus to the lungs and sustain protection for up to 7 days. These results reveal underlying mechanisms of how control of viral infection in the upper airways can occur and support the implementation of strategies that can activate TLR2 in nasal passages to provide rapid protection, especially for at-risk populations, against severe respiratory infection when vaccines and antiviral drugs are not always effective or available.

### Keywords
Influenza virus, Epithelial cells, Nasal turbinate, Respiratory viral infection, Innate immunity, Macrophages, Tlr2

### Affiliations
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The University of Melbourne, at The Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity, 792 Elizabeth St, Melbourne, Victoria 3000, Australia
University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Nichollas Scott

### Lab Head
Dr Brendon Chua
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The University of Melbourne, at The Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity, 792 Elizabeth St, Melbourne, Victoria 3000, Australia


