### Accession
PXD024393

### Title
Metaproteomes of cyanobacterial consortium collected from photobioreactors enriched from soda lake microbial mats in BC, Canada

### Description
In this work we used metaproteomics to study the effect of pH and nitrogen source on cyanobacterial growth of the laboratory cultures. The database for protein identification was obtained from assembled metagenomes.

### Sample Protocol
Samples from bioreactors under four different photobioreactor conditions; low-pH ammonium: 4 mM NH4Cl, initial pH 8.3; low-pH nitrate: 1 mM NH4Cl, 3 mM NaNO3, initial pH 8.3; high-pH nitrate: 1 mM NH4Cl, 3 mM NaNO3, initial pH 10.4; high-pH urea: 1 mM NH4Cl, 3 mM Urea, initial pH 10.4 were collected. All samples with technical quadruplicates were lysed in SDT-lysis buffer (4% (w/v) SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6, 0.1 M DTT). SDT lysis buffer was added in a 1:10 sample/buffer ratio to the sample pellets. Cells were disrupted in lysing matrix tubes A (MP Biomedicals, Cat. No. 116910050) for 45 seconds at 6 m/s using a OMNI bead ruptor bead mill (Omni International, https://www.omni-inc.com/) and subsequently incubated at 95° C for 10 minutes followed by pelleting of debris for 5 min at 21,000 x g. We prepared tryptic digests following the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol described by Wisniewski et al. (2009, Nat. Meth. 6(5)). In brief, 30 µl of the cleared lysate were mixed with 200 µl of UA solution (8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris/HCl pH 8.5) in a 10 kDa MWCO 500 µl centrifugal filter unit (VWR International) and centrifuged at 14,000 x g for 40 min. 200 µl of UA solution were added again and centrifugal filter spun at 14,000 x g for 40 min. 100 µl of IAA solution (0.05 M iodoacetamide in UA solution) were added to the filter and incubated at 22° C for 20 min. The IAA solution was removed by centrifugation and the filter was washed three times by adding 100 µl of UA solution and then centrifuging. The buffer on the filter was then changed to ABC (50 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate), by washing the filter three times with 100 µl of ABC. 1 to 2 µg of MS grade trypsin (Thermo Scientific Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA) in 40 µl of ABC were added to the filter and filters incubated overnight in a wet chamber at 37° C. The next day, peptides were eluted by centrifugation at 14,000 x g for 20 min, followed by addition of 50 µl of 0.5 M NaCl and again centrifugation. Peptides were desalted using Sep-Pak C18 Plus Light Cartridges (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Approximate peptide concentrations were determined using the Pierce Micro BCA assay (Thermo Scientific Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA) following the manufacturer’s instructions.  The samples were analyzed by 1D-LC-MS/MS (1x 260 min and 3x 460 min runs for each) using a block-randomized design. Two blank runs were done between samples to reduce carry over. For each run, 1200 ng of extracted peptides were loaded onto a 5 mm, 300 µm ID C18 Acclaim® PepMap100 pre-column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using an UltiMateTM 3000 RSLCnano Liquid Chromatograph (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and desalted on the pre-column. Peptides were transferred to a 50 cm x 75 µm analytical EASY-Spray column packed with PepMap RSLC C18, 2µm material (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and heated to 45° C. The analytical column was connected directly to the Q Exactive Plus hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) via an Easy-Spray source. Peptides were separated on the analytical column at a flow rate of 225 nL/min using a 260 minute gradient and mass spectra acquired in the Orbitrap as described by Petersen et al (Petersen et al 2016).

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification was performed by searching MS/MS spectra against the P. alkaliphilus genome amended with the cRAP protein sequence database (http://www.thegpm.org/crap/) of common laboratory contaminating proteins, using the Sequest HT node in Proteome Discoverer version 2.0.0.802 (Thermo Fisher Scientific), as described previously (Petersen et al 2016). Results were combined into a multiconsensus report using the FidoCT node in Proteome Discoverer and the protein-level FDR was restricted to below 5% (FidoCT q-value <0.05) (Serang et al 2010) for high confidence identifications (FidoCT q-value <0.01) and medium confidence identifications (FidoCT q-value 0.01-0.05). Based on these filtering criteria a total of 2127 unique cyanobacterial proteins were identified across all samples.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cyanobacteria, Soda lake

### Affiliations
University of Calgary
PhD student

### Submitter
Maryam Ataeian

### Lab Head
Dr Marc Strous
University of Calgary


