### Accession
PXD006644

### Title
SUMO proteomics in Caenorhabditis elegans

### Description
Comprehensive list of SUMO targets from the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. SUMO conjugates isolated from transgenic worms carrying 8His and GFP tagged SUMO. The constructs rescues the lethal knock-out of a single SUMO gene, smo-1. SUMO conjugates where isolated from heat shock, arsenite exposure, and UV treated SUMO-GFP worms as well as from control non treated animals. In parallel identical purification procedure was performed with non-transgenic worms and proteins identified with this control where excluded.

### Sample Protocol
SUMO conjugates isolated as described by Drabikowski K, Dadlez M. Methods Mol Biol. 2016;1449:291-8

### Data Protocol
Raw data where processed with MaxQuant v 1.5.7.4. The fragmentation spectra were searched using Andromeda search engine integrated into the MaxQuant platform against a custom, non-redundant, database of C. elegans proteome. The error ranges for first and main searches were 20 ppm and 6 ppm, respectively. Protein identification based on at least two peptides. Peptide and proteins FDR was set to 1%. Proteins identified in isolates from no-transgenic control  worms where excluded.

### Publication Abstract
Post-translational modification by small ubiquitin-related modifier (SUMO) is a key regulator of cell physiology, modulating protein-protein and protein-DNA interactions. Recently, SUMO modifications were postulated to be involved in response to various stress stimuli. We aimed to identify the near complete set of proteins modified by SUMO and the dynamics of the modification in stress conditions in the higher eukaryote, Caenorhabditis elegans. We identified 874 proteins modified by SUMO in the worm. We have analyzed the SUMO modification in stress conditions including heat shock, DNA damage, arsenite induced cellular stress, ER and osmotic stress. In all these conditions the global levels of SUMOylation was significantly increased. These results show the evolutionary conservation of SUMO modifications in reaction to stress. Our analysis showed that SUMO targets are highly conserved throughout species. By comparing the SUMO targets among species, we approximated the total number of proteins modified in a given proteome to be at least 15-20%. We developed a web server designed for convenient prediction of potential SUMO modification based on experimental evidences in other species.

### Keywords
C. elegans, Sumo

### Affiliations
Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics Polish Academy of Sciences Pawinskiego 5a 02-106 Warszawa, Poland
Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Polish Academy of Sciences. 
Pawinskiego 5a
02-106 Warszawa
Poland

### Submitter
Krzysztof Drabikowski

### Lab Head
Dr Michał Dadlez
Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics Polish Academy of Sciences Pawinskiego 5a 02-106 Warszawa, Poland


