### Accession
PXD011002

### Title
Absolute Quantification of Grapevine Red Blotch Virus in Grapevine Leaf and Petiole Tissues by Proteomics

### Description
Grapevine red blotch is a recently identified viral disease that was first recognized in the Napa Valley of California. Infected plants showed foliar symptoms similar to leafroll, another grapevine viral disease, on vines testing negative for known grapevine leafroll-associated virus. Later, the Grapevine red blotch virus (GRBV) was independently discovered in the US states of California and New York and was demonstrated to be the causal agent of red blotch disease. Due to its wide occurrence in the US, vector transmission and impacts on grape industry, this virus has the potential to cause serious economic losses. Despite numerous attempts, it was not possible to isolate or visualize viral particles from GRBV infected plants. Consequently, this has hampered the development of a serological assay that would facilitate GRBV detection in grapevine. We therefore decided to explore mass spectrometry approaches in order to quantify GRBV in infected plants and to identify potential biomarkers for viral infection. We present for the first time the physical detection on the protein level of the two GRBV genes V1 (coat protein) and V2 in grapevine tissue lysates. The GRBV coat protein load in leaf petioles was determined to be in the range of 100 to 900 million copies per milligram wet weight by using three heavy isotope labeled reference peptides as internal standards. The V1 copy number per unit wet tissue weight in leaves appeared to be about six times lower, and about 200-times lower in terms of protein concentration in the extractable protein mass than in petioles. We found a consistent upregulation of several enzymes involved in flavonoid biosynthesis in leaf and petiole extracts of GRBV-infected plants by label-free shotgun proteomics, indicating the activation of a defense mechanism against GRBV, a plant response already described for grapevine leafroll associated virus infection on the transcriptome level. Last but not least, we identified some other microorganisms belonging to the grapevine leaf microbiota, two bacterial species (Novosphingobium sp. Rr 2-17 and Methylobacterium) and one virus, Grapevine rupestris stem pitting associated virus.

### Sample Protocol
For 50 mg of leaf powder, 0.2 mL of 50 mM Tris/HCl pH 8.0 / 4% (w/w) SDS / 50 mM DTT / protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche, Rotkreuz, Switzerland) was added. The mixture was vortexed well with subsequent agitation for 30 min. at 4°C. The resulting suspension was centrifuged for 15 min. at 16’000×g and 4°C. The supernatant was either used directly for SDS-PAGE or transferred to another reaction vial, heated for 5 min. at 95°C, cooled to room temperature before addition of ¼ volume of 1M iodoacetamide in 100 mM Tris/HCl pH 8.0 and incubation for 30 min. at 37°C. Proteins were precipitated by addition of 10% (w/w) TCA, 0.07% DTT (w/w) in acetone by overnight incubation at -20°C. Proteins were spun down for 15 min. at 16’000×g and 4°C. The supernatant was discarded and the pellet washed four times with ice-cold 0.07% (w/w) DTT in acetone. The final pellet was dried in ambient air and resuspended in 8 M urea / 50 mM Tris/HCl pH 8.0. The protein concentration was assessed by BCA assay or comparing the Coomassie blue staining intensity with the one from 0.01 and 0.02 mg HEK293 cell lysate on a 12.5% (T) SDS-PAGE. Petiole powder (100 mg) was weighed into a 2-mL reaction vial and filled up with 10% (w/w) TCA, 0.07% DTT (w/w) in acetone. The suspension was vortexed well for 30 sec. and centrifuged for 3 min. at 16’000×g and 4°C. The supernatant was removed carefully, and then the tube re-filled with 80% (v/v) methanol / 0.1 M ammonium acetate followed by mixing and centrifugation as above. The supernatant was removed and the tube was filled once more with 80% (v/v) acetone / 0.07 M DTT repeating the mixing and centrifugation steps. After removal of the supernatant, the pellet was dried from residual acetone in ambient air and dissolved in 0.5 mL 30% sucrose / 2% SDS / 5% 2-mercaptoethanol in 0.1 M Tris/HCl pH 8.0. An equal aliquot of 0.5 mL water saturated phenol (using 1 mM EDTA in 10 mM Tris/HCl pH 8.0) was added and mixed for 5 min. at room temperature. After centrifugation for 3 min. at 16’000×g and 20°C, the upper phenol phase was carefully transferred into a fresh reaction vial without disturbing the white interface zone. Proteins were finally pelleted by filling the vial with 80% (v/v) methanol / 0.1 M ammonium acetate and over-night incubation at minus 20°C, followed by centrifugation for 5 min. at 16’000×g and 4°C. The supernatant was carefully removed and the white pellet washed once with pure methanol and once with 80% acetone by strong mixing and centrifugation as above. The final pellet was resuspended in 0.02 mL 8 M urea / 50 mM Tris/HCl pH 8.0. Proteins extracted as described above were reduced, alkylated and digested with LysC followed by trypsin. Data-dependent acquisition was done on a Fusion LUMOS mass spectrometer coupled with a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano-UPLC system (Thermo Fischer, Bremen; Germany). Protein digests were loaded onto a pre-column (PepMap C18, 5µm, 300A, 300µm x 5mm) at a flow rate of 50µL/min with loading solvent (0.05% TFA in water/acetonitrile 98:2). After loading, peptides were eluted in back flush mode onto the analytical nano-column (C18, 3µm, 155Å, 0.075 mm i.d. x 150mm length, Nikkyo Technos, Tokyo, Japan) using an acetonitrile gradient of 5% to 40% solvent B (0.1% FA in water/acetonitrile 4,9:95) in 60min at a flow rate of 400nL/min. The column effluent was directly coupled to the mass spectrometer via a nanoflex electrospray source (Thermo Fischer, Bremen; Germany). Precursor ion scans were recorded in the Fourier transform detector (FT) with resolution of 120’000 (at m/z=250), maximum injection time (mIT) of 50 msec. and an automatic gain control (AGC) setting of 4e5. High energy collision activated (HCD) fragment spectra were acquired parallel to the FT scan with a top speed fragment spectra acquisition method of the most intense precursor ions in the linear iontrap for a cycle time of 3 seconds at a mIT of 35 msec., AGC of 1e4, and exclusion from further fragmentation for 30 sec, using a relative HCD energy of 30%.

### Data Protocol
The DDA LC-MS/MS data were processed with MaxQuant software version 1.5.4.1 (Cox et al., 2014). The initial precursor mass deviation was set to 10 ppm and 0.4 Da for fragment peaks, respectively. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin not allowing C-terminal cleavage after arginine and lysine when a proline was next in the sequence, and a maximum of three missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine was set as a fixed modification, methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. The spectra were searched with the Andromeda search engine against a forward and reversed protein sequence database containing all Vitis vinifera entries deposited at UniprotKB (version 2016_08), including other species with a Vitis vinifera association, and supplemented with the potential open reading frames from GRBV (accession MF276895) and Grapevine rupestris stem pitting-associated virus as sequenced at Agroscope (Reynard et al., 2018a), totaling in 65423 proteins. Peptide spectrum matches and protein identifications were accepted at a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) and requiring at least two unique or razor peptides per a protein group identification. For protein quantification, we relied on the MaxQuant built-in label-free quantification (LFQ) algorithm (Cox et al., 2014) and also applied a top3 peptide approach (Braga-Lagache et al., 2016). For top3, all peptide identifications within a sample set in the evidence output file from MaxQuant were median normalized before imputation of missing values from the normal distribution of LOG2-transformed peptides using a down shift of 1.8 and a width of 0.3 standard deviations (default settings in Perseus software, version 1.5.5.3) (Tyanova et al., 2016). Missing value imputation was carried out, when there was at least two peptide intensities in the technical replicates from the same plant tissue, otherwise the intensity was set to zero according to recommendations by Lazar and colleagues. The three most intense peptide intensities were then summed to the protein group intensity. The LFQ values were also LOG2-transformed, and missing values imputed as described above if there was at least two LFQ in all the replicates coming from the same plant, otherwise a zero was set. Student’s two-sample t tests were used to assess statistical significance of differentially expressed protein abundances using a 1% permutation-based FDR adjustment of p values (q values) with Perseus software.

### Publication Abstract
Grapevine red blotch is a recently identified viral disease that was first recognized in the Napa Valley of California. Infected plants showed foliar symptoms similar to leafroll, another grapevine viral disease, on vines testing negative for known grapevine leafroll-associated virus. Later, the <i>Grapevine red blotch virus</i> (GRBV) was independently discovered in the US states of California and New York and was demonstrated to be the causal agent of red blotch disease. Due to its wide occurrence in the United States, vector transmission, and impacts on grape industry, this virus has the potential to cause serious economic losses. Despite numerous attempts, it has yet not been possible to isolate or visualize viral particles from GRBV-infected plants, thereby hampering the development of a serological assay that would facilitate GRBV detection in grapevine. In this work, mass spectrometry approaches were applied in order to quantify GRBV in infected plants and identify potential biomarkers for viral infection. We present for the first time the physical detection on the protein level of the two GRBV genes V1 (coat protein) and V2 in grapevine tissue lysates. The GRBV coat protein load in petioles was determined to be in the range of 100-900 million copies per milligram wet weight by using three heavy isotope labeled reference peptides as internal standards. In leaves on the other hand, the V1 copy number per unit wet tissue weight appeared to be about six times lower than in petioles, and about 300 times lower in terms of protein concentration in the extractable protein mass, albeit these estimations could only be made with one reference peptide detectable in leaf extracts. Moreover, we found in leaf and petiole extracts of GRBV-infected plants a consistent upregulation of several enzymes involved in flavonoid biosynthesis by label-free shotgun proteomics, indicating the activation of a defense mechanism against GRBV, a plant response already described for <i>Grapevine leafroll-associated virus</i> infection on the transcriptome level. Finally and importantly, we identified some other microorganisms belonging to the grapevine leaf microbiota, two bacterial species (<i>Novosphingobium</i> sp. <i>Rr 2-17</i> and <i>Methylobacterium</i>) and one virus, <i>Grapevine rupestris stem pitting-associated virus</i>.

### Keywords
Grapevine red blotch virus, Grapevine, Proteomics, Absolute quantification, Shotgun lc-ms/ms, Parallel reaction monitoring

### Affiliations
University of Bern
Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry Core Facility, Department for BioMedical Research (DBMR), University of Bern, CH-3101 Bern, Switzerland

### Submitter
Manfred Heller

### Lab Head
Dr Manfred Heller
Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry Core Facility, Department for BioMedical Research (DBMR), University of Bern, CH-3101 Bern, Switzerland


