### Accession
PXD036442

### Title
Stability of the neuronal fate determinant MEIS2 is controlled by calpain2

### Description
Calpains are non-lysosomal, Ca2+-dependent cysteine proteases, which are associated with various cellular functions but have so far been mainly studied in the context of disease. Their contribution to homeostasis in the healthy organism is still not well understood and their substrates have remained enigmatic in most cases. In the present study, we describe a previously unrecognized role for the calpain protease calpain2 in the regulation of neuronal differentiation of adult neural stem- and progenitor cells through cleavage and elimintation of the neuronal fate determinant MEIS2. Mass spectrometry analysis was performed on immunoprecipitated MEIS2 protein to identify phosphory¬lated residues in MEIS2 and on immunoprecipitated MEIS2 incubated with native porcine calpain2 to map calpain2-induced cleavage sites in the protein.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture and tranfection with MEIS2-HA plasmid: HEK293T cells were cultured in DMEM supplemented with 10 % fetal calf serum (FCS) and 10 U/ml Penicillin, 100 µg/ml Streptomycin in a humidified atmosphere at 5% CO2 and 37 °C. For transfection, 3xE6 HEK293T cells were seeded (without antibiotics) into a 100 mm cell culture dish. Cells were transfected at least 3 h post-seeding with C-terminally HA-tagged murine MEIS2b carrying eukaryotic expression plasmid  using a Calcium-Phosphate transfection protocol. In brief, 25 µg of plamid DNA was diluted in 375 µl ddH2O followed by the addition of 125 µl CaCl2. Subsequently 500 µl 2x BES pH 6.95 was added dropwise into the DNA mix and incubated for 20 min at room temperature allowing the formation of Ca-DNA particles. After incubation the mixture was added onto the HEK293T cells which were afterwards placed back into the incubator. 48 h post transfection, cells were harvested by scraping. The cell pellet was washed twice with ice-cold PBS before proceeding to cell lysis and immunoprecipitation.   Cell lysis and MEIS2-HA Immunoprecipitation: The HEK293T cell pellet of one 100 mm dish was resuspended in 500 µl lysis buffer composing of 20 mM Tris-Cl pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, 1 % TritonX100, 1x Protease Inhibition Cocktail (Roche) and incubated for 30 min on ice. After centrifugation for 10 min at 4 °C and 10.000 rpm the supernatant was transferred into a fresh tube. 50 µl Dynabeads Magnetic Beads (Thermo Scientific; Protein A/G; 50:50)  were washed twice with PBS before incubation with 10 µl (20 µg) ms anti HA antibody (Santa Cruz, sc7392) in 200 µl PBS for 15 min at room temperature gently shaking. After incubation, the beads were washed twice with PBS prior to the addition of the cell extracts to the beads and incubation for 3 h at 4 °C gently shaking. After immunoprecipitation, the beads were washed 3 times with wash buffer (20 mM Tris-Cl pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl). With the last washing step, the beads were transferred into a fresh tube. For the phosphoproteomic analysis of immunoprecipitated MEIS2 the protein-bound beads were immediately stored at -80 °C until proceeding with mass spectrometry. To determined MEIS2 peptides following Calpain2-mediated  cleavage the protein-bound beads were subjected to  “In vitro Calpain2 cleavage assay”.  In vitro Calpain2 cleavage assay: MEIS2 protein-bound beads after immunoprecipitation were resuspended in 130 µl wash buffer (20 mM Tris-Cl pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl). For Calpain2 cleavage assay onto the beads 43.25 µl IP-Bead-suspension, 6.25µl 40 mM CaCl2 and 0.5 µl native porcine Capn2 (Creative BioMart, c:2.5mg/ml, 1U/µg) were incubated for 30 min at 30 °C gently shaking. Afterwards the supernatant was transferred into a fresh tube and immediately stored at -80 °C until proceeding with mass spectrometry. Calpain2 generated peptides were directly measured without any additional protease treatment.  To identify phosphorylation sites on MEIS2-HA immunoprecipitates were supplemented with 6M GdmCl, 50 mM Tris/HCl, 10 mM TCEP and incubated at 95°C for 5 min. Reduced thiols were alkylated with 40 mM chloroacetamid and sample were diluted to obtain a final GdmCl concentration of 0.6 M. Proteins were digested with 1 μg Trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega) overnight at 37°C under gentle agitation. Digestion was stopped by adding trifluoroacetic acid to a final concentration of 0.5 %. Peptides were eluted in wells of microtiter plates and peptides were dried and resolved in 1% acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid.  Liquid chromatography / mass spectrometry (LC/MS) was performed on Thermo Fisher Scientific Q Exactive Plus equipped with an ultra-high performance liquid chromatography unit (Thermo Fisher Scientific Dionex Ultimate 3000) and a Nanospray Flex Ion-Source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded on a C18 reversed-phase precolumn (Thermo Fisher Scientific) followed by separation on a with 2.4 μm Reprosil C18 resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH) in-house packed picotip emitter tip (diameter 100 μm, 15 cm from New Objectives). MS data were recorded by data-dependent acquisition. The full MS scan range was 300 to 2000 m/z with a resolution of 70000, and an automatic gain control (AGC) value of 3E6 total ion counts with a maximal ion injection time of 160 ms. Only higher charged ions (2+) were selected for MS/MS scans with a resolution of 17500, an isolation window of 2 m/z and   automatic gain control value set to E5 ions with a maximal ion injection time of 150 ms.

### Data Protocol
PEAKS7 (Calpain Cleavage) and Peaks PEAKS Studio 10.6 (Phosphosites) was used for data analysis. Calpain2 cleaved peptides were searched against Meis2-HA without setting of a specific protease. N-terminal acetylation (+42.01), oxidation of methionine (+15.99), deamidation on asparagine, and glutamine (+0.98), carbamidomethylation (+57.02) on cysteine were selected as variable modifications. For the analysis of phosphorylation sites, searches were done against the human reference proteome set (Uniprot, May 2020, 74823 entries) supplemented with murine Meis2-HA limited to semitryptic peptides with at least 3 misscleavage sites with a false discovery rate (FDR) less than 1%. Variable modifications were carbamidomethylation on cysteine (C,+57.02), phosphorylation on serine and threonine (ST,+79.97) and oxidation onmethionine (M, +15.99).

### Publication Abstract
Tight control over transcription factor activity is necessary for a sensible balance between cellular proliferation and differentiation in the embryo and during tissue homeostasis by adult stem cells, but mechanistic details have remained incomplete. The homeodomain transcription factor MEIS2 is an important regulator of neurogenesis in the ventricular-subventricular zone (V-SVZ) adult stem cell niche in mice. We here identify MEIS2 as direct target of the intracellular protease calpain2. Phosphorylation at conserved serine / threonine residues or dimerization with PBX1 reduced the sensitivity of MEIS2 towards cleavage by calpain2. In the adult V-SVZ, calpain2 activity is high in stem- and progenitor cells, but rapidly declines during neuronal differentiation, which is accompanied by increased stability of MEIS2 full-length protein. In accordance with this, blocking calpain2 activity in stem- and progenitor cells or overexpression of a cleavage-insensitive form of MEIS2 increased the production of neurons, while overexpression of a catalytically active CAPN2 reduced it. Collectively, our results support a key role for calpain2 in controlling the output of adult V-SVZ neural stem- and progenitor cells through cleavage of the neuronal fate determinant MEIS2.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Stem cell, Adult neurogenesis, Protease cleavage sites, Calpain, Meis2, Subventricular zone

### Affiliations
Functional Proteomics, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main , Germany
Institute of Neurology (Edinger Institute), University Hospital Frankfurt, Goethe University, Frankfurt, Germany

### Submitter
Ilka Wittig

### Lab Head
Dr Dorothea Schulte
Institute of Neurology (Edinger Institute), University Hospital Frankfurt, Goethe University, Frankfurt, Germany


