### Accession
PXD013663

### Title
HDAC inhibition improves cardiopulmonary and mitochondrial function in a feline model with features of Heart Failure with Preserved Ejection Fraction

### Description
Heart Failure with preserved Ejection Fraction (HFpEF) is a major global health problem but there are no effective therapies. The aim of this study was to assess the effects of histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibition on cardiopulmonary structure, function, and metabolism in a large mammalian (feline) pressure overload model with HFpEF features. Male domestic short hair cats (n=26, aged 2mo), underwent either a sham procedure (n=5) or aortic constriction (n=21) using a pre-shaped band, resulting in slow-progressive pressure overload during subsequent growth. Two-months post-banding, banded cats were treated daily with either 10mg/kg suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (b+SAHA) (n=8), an FDA approved pan-HDAC inhibitor, or vehicle (b+veh) (n=8) for 2 months. Echocardiography at 4-months post-banding revealed that b+SAHA animals had a significant reduction in left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) and LA size vs b+veh animals. Invasively measured left ventricular end-diastolic pressure (LVEDP) and mean pulmonary arterial pressure (mPAP) were significantly elevated in b+veh and significantly reduced by b+SAHA. SAHA speeded ex-vivo myofibril relaxation independent of LVH and this effect correlated with in-vivo indices of LV relaxation. Furthermore, SAHA preserved lung structure, improved lung compliance and oxygenation, reflected by a decrease in alveolar-capillary wall thickness, alveolar-arterial oxygen gradient (A-aDO2), and intrapulmonary shunt. SAHA also reduced perivascular fluid cuffs around extra-alveolar vessels, suggesting attenuated alveolar-capillary stress failure. Acetylation proteomics revealed that SAHA altered protein acetylation in cat hearts, including histones, many mitochondrial metabolic enzymes involved in electron transport chain, TCA cycle, malate aspartate shuttle and beta oxidation, as well as cytoskeletal proteins important for muscle function. These results suggest that acetylation defects in hypertrophic stress states can be reversed by HDAC inhibitors and may be useful to improve cardiac structure and function in HFpEF patients.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for Acetylation proteomics: Enrichment of acetylated lysine residues was performed using the PTMScan® Acetyl-Lysine Motif (Ac-K) Kit from Cell Signaling Technology (#13416) according to the manufacturer’s protocol except as follows. Cat heart tissues from SAHA treated (samples 4-7) and control sham cats (samples 1-3) were lysed in lysis buffer (6 M guanidine hydrochloride (GuHCl), 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate in 20 mM HEPES pH=8) using ULTRA-TURRAX® and cleared by centrifugation (20,000 g, 15 min). Aliquots containing 20 mg of protein (estimated by Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit from Thermo Scientific) were reduced and alkylated for 10 min at 95 °C after addition of Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride and 2-chloroacetamide to reach 10 mM and 40 mM, respectively. Samples were diluted with 20 mM HEPES pH=8 to lower GuHCl concentration to <1 M and digested over night with Trypsin-TPCK from Sigma-Aldrich (#T1426) at an enzyme:protein ratio of 1:20. After desalting with Sep-Pak® (with C18 VAC 3cc (200mg) cartridges from Waters, #WAT054945) followed by  immunoaffinity purification according to the manufacturer, Ac-K peptides were desalted using self-packed C18 stage tips (200 µl) with 4 layers of punched 18 gauge broad C18 Empore™ SPE Disks (Sigma-Aldrich #66883-U).  For total proteome analysis aliquots (corresponding to 3 µg protein) of the flow-through (FT) of the immunopurification were adjusted to a volume of 100 µl with H2O including 1 % trifluoroacetic acid and loaded onto self-packed 2-layer (18 gauge) 200 µl SDB-RPS Stage Tips (Empore™ SPE Disks Sigma-Aldrich #66886-U). Sample was spun through (5 min, 1500 g, RT), washed with 0.2 % trifluoroacetic acid, eluted with 5 % NH4OH / 80 % acetonitrile in a new tube and dried down using a vacuum concentrator.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS data were searched for label free quantification using MaxQuant 1.6.0.16 against the public database Uniprot with taxonomy Felis catus and common contaminants (downloaded on 16.01.2019, 34 385 sequences). Carbamidomethylation on Cys was entered as fixed modification, oxidation on Met and acetylation on Lys as variable modification. Detailed search criteria were used as follows: trypsin, max. missed cleavage sites: 2 or 3; search mode: MS/MS ion search with decoy database search included; precursor mass tolerance +/- 0.006 Da; product mass tolerance +/- 80 ppm; acceptance parameters for identification: 1 % PSM FDR; 1 % protein FDR and 1 % site decoy fraction. In addition, a label free quantitation including the match between runs feature of MaxQuant was performed requiring a minimum of 2 ratio counts of quantified razor and unique peptides. For the LC-MS/MS data of the flow-through equivalent search parameter were used, omitting the acetylation as variable modification. Data processing was performed using Perseus software version 1.6.2.3, according to the proposed workflow for label-free phosphoproteomic data. For both datasets, acetylation proteomic and total proteomic data (from the flow through), contaminants and reverse proteins/acetylation sites created during database search were removed. Intensities were log2 transformed in order to lower the effect of the outlier values, filtered for 3 valid values in at least one group and a localization probability of > 75 % for acetylation proteomic data. For the latter an additional subtraction of the median was applied to all columns. Missing intensities were replaced with random values taken from the Gaussian distribution of values using default parameters (width of 0.3 and downshift of 1.8). A t-test with subsequent multiple testing correction by permutation-based FDR method was used to identify altered acetylation sites/protein groups. Acetylation sites were annotated by aligning the cat to the respective homologous human protein referenced in Uniprot and analysis of whether the lysine site is conserved and known to affect protein function.

### Publication Abstract
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF) is a major health problem without effective therapies. This study assessed the effects of histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibition on cardiopulmonary structure, function, and metabolism in a large mammalian model of pressure overload recapitulating features of diastolic dysfunction common to human HFpEF. Male domestic short-hair felines (<i>n</i> = 31, aged 2 months) underwent a sham procedure (<i>n</i> = 10) or loose aortic banding (<i>n</i> = 21), resulting in slow-progressive pressure overload. Two months after banding, animals were treated daily with suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (b + SAHA, 10 mg/kg, <i>n</i> = 8), a Food and Drug Administration-approved pan-HDAC inhibitor, or vehicle (b + veh, <i>n</i> = 8) for 2 months. Echocardiography at 4 months after banding revealed that b + SAHA animals had significantly reduced left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) (<i>P</i> &lt; 0.0001) and left atrium size (<i>P</i> &lt; 0.0001) versus b + veh animals. Left ventricular (LV) end-diastolic pressure and mean pulmonary arterial pressure were significantly reduced in b + SAHA (<i>P</i> &lt; 0.01) versus b + veh. SAHA increased myofibril relaxation ex vivo, which correlated with in vivo improvements of LV relaxation. Furthermore, SAHA treatment preserved lung structure, compliance, blood oxygenation, and reduced perivascular fluid cuffs around extra-alveolar vessels, suggesting attenuated alveolar capillary stress failure. Acetylation proteomics revealed that SAHA altered lysine acetylation of mitochondrial metabolic enzymes. These results suggest that acetylation defects in hypertrophic stress can be reversed by HDAC inhibitors, with implications for improving cardiac structure and function in patients.

### Keywords
Heart failure, Lung compliance, Cat, Hdac, Pulmonary hypertension, Myofibril relaxation, Hypertrophy, Acetylation proteomics

### Affiliations
Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Gottfried Schatz Research Center, Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria; Institute of Pathology, Diagnostic and Research Center for Molecular Biomedicine, Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria; Omics Center Graz, BioTechMed-Graz, Graz, Austria
Omics Center Graz

### Submitter
Barbara Darnhofer

### Lab Head
Dr Ruth Birner-Gruenberger
Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Gottfried Schatz Research Center, Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria; Institute of Pathology, Diagnostic and Research Center for Molecular Biomedicine, Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria; Omics Center Graz, BioTechMed-Graz, Graz, Austria


