### Accession
PXD023338

### Title
Blocking utilization of major plant biomass polysaccharides leads Aspergillus niger towards utilization of minor components.

### Description
Fungi produce a wide range of enzymes that allow them to grow on diverse plant biomass. Wheat bran is a low-cost substrate with high potential for biotechnological applications. It mainly contains cellulose and (arabino)xylan, with starch, proteins, lipids and lignin as minor components. In this study, we dissected the regulatory network governing wheat bran degradation in Aspergillus niger. Deletion of genes encoding transcription factors involved in (hemi-)cellulose utilization (XlnR, AraR, ClrA and ClrB) individually and in combination significantly reduced production of polysaccharide-degrading enzymes, but retained substantial growth on wheat bran. Proteomic analysis suggested the ability of A. niger to grow on minor carbon components, such as starch, which was confirmed by the additional deletion of the amylolytic regulator AmyR. Growth was further reduced but not impaired, indicating that other minor components provide sufficient energy for residual growth, displaying the flexibility of A. niger, and likely other fungi, in carbon utilization.

### Sample Protocol
Freshly harvested Aspergillus niger control and mutant strain spores were pre-grown in 250 mL complete medium (CM) containing 2% D-fructose and 1.22 gL-1 uridine for 16 h at 30˚C in a rotary shaker at 250 rpm. After 16 hours, mycelia were harvested by filtration through sterile cheesecloth, rinsed with minimal medium (MM), and approximately 2.5 g (wet weight) mycelium was transferred into 50 mL MM containing 3% washed wheat bran. Supernatant samples were taken after 24 h incubation at 30˚C in a rotary shaker at 250 rpm. The samples were centrifuged (20 min, 3220 × g, 4˚C) and cell-free supernatant samples were stored at -20˚C until further processing. Protein samples of biological duplicates were reduced with dithioerythritol, carbamidomethylated and digested in-solution with trypsin for proteomic analysis.   Following solid-phase extraction cleanup, dried peptide digest samples were solubilized in a solution of 5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid and 4 fmol/µl of trypsin-digested Bovine Serum Albumin (BSA) (Michrom, Auburn, CA) used as internal standard. Five µl were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using an Easy-LC II Nano-HPLC system connected in-line with a Velos LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo-Fisher, San Jose, CA).

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data peptide and protein identification were done using the A. niger NRRL3 protein sequence database. Protein identification and quantification was performed using the Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo-Fisher) precursor ion quantitation workflow. Search parameter criteria used were 10 ppm for precursor ion matching and 0.6 Da for fragment ion matching.  Carbamidomethylation (CAM) of Cysteines was used as fixed modification and CAM modification of peptide N-termini and Oxidation of Methionines was used as variable modification.  Normalized individual protein area values were expressed as a fold value of the protein area value determined for the BSA internal standard.

### Publication Abstract
Fungi produce a wide range of enzymes that allow them to grow on diverse plant biomass. Wheat bran is a low-cost substrate with high potential for biotechnological applications. It mainly contains cellulose and (arabino)xylan, as well as starch, proteins, lipids and lignin to a lesser extent. In this study, we dissected the regulatory network governing wheat bran degradation in Aspergillus niger to assess the relative contribution of the regulators to the utilization of this plant biomass substrate. Deletion of genes encoding transcription factors involved in (hemi-)cellulose utilization (XlnR, AraR, ClrA and ClrB) individually and in combination significantly reduced production of polysaccharide-degrading enzymes, but retained substantial growth on wheat bran. Proteomic analysis suggested the ability of A. niger to grow on other carbon components, such as starch, which was confirmed by the additional deletion of the amylolytic regulator AmyR. Growth was further reduced but not impaired, indicating that other minor components provide sufficient energy for residual growth, displaying the flexibility of A. niger, and likely other fungi, in carbon utilization. Better understanding of the complexity and flexibility of fungal regulatory networks will facilitate the generation of more efficient fungal cell factories that use plant biomass as a substrate.

### Keywords
Transcription factors, Aspergillus niger, Plant biomass, Regulation, Combinatorial deletions, Lc-msms.

### Affiliations
Group Leader Fungal Physiology Professor in Fungal Molecular Physiology at Utrecht University, The Netherlands
Concordia University

### Submitter
Marcos Di Falco

### Lab Head
Dr Ronald de Vries
Group Leader Fungal Physiology Professor in Fungal Molecular Physiology at Utrecht University, The Netherlands


