### Accession
PXD029335

### Title
hMADS cells secretome identification LC/MS/MS

### Description
The aim of the project was to identify secreted proteins by human multipotent adipose derived stem cells differentiated into white and brown adipocytes.

### Sample Protocol
For identification of proteins secreted by hMADS cells,  10 ml of cell-conditioned media was collected. The medium was filtered (0.45μm syringe filter) to remove cellular debris and concentrated 10 times using Amicon Ultra-15 centrifugal filter units with a 3kDa cutoff (Millipore). Proteins and peptides present in the concentrated medium were precipitated using ice-cold 10% TCA. Protein pellets were washed twice with ice-cold acetone and re-solubilized in 90μl of 10 mM Tris, 2 mM CaCl2, pH 8.2. Proteins were digested with 10μl sequencing grade Trypsin (Promega; 100 ng/μl in 10 mM HCl) and 10 ul RapiGest (1% in water) for 16 hours at 37°C. After tryptic digestion, samples were briefly spun; supernatants were dried, dissolved in 20 μl 0.1% formic acid and transferred to autosampler vials for LC/MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Database search was performed by using Mascot (SwissProt).

### Publication Abstract
Activation of thermogenic brown and beige adipocytes is considered as a strategy to improve metabolic control. Here, we identify GPR180 as a receptor regulating brown and beige adipocyte function and whole-body glucose homeostasis, whose expression in humans is associated with improved metabolic control. We demonstrate that GPR180 is not a GPCR but a component of the TGF&#x3b2; signalling pathway and regulates the activity of the TGF&#x3b2; receptor complex through SMAD3 phosphorylation. In addition, using genetic and pharmacological tools, we provide evidence that GPR180 is required to manifest Collagen triple helix repeat containing 1 (CTHRC1) action to regulate brown and beige adipocyte activity and glucose homeostasis. In this work, we show that CTHRC1/GPR180 signalling integrates into the TGF&#x3b2; signalling as an alternative axis to fine-tune and achieve low-grade activation of the pathway to prevent pathophysiological response while contributing to control of glucose and energy metabolism.

### Keywords
Secreted proteins, Human adipocytes

### Affiliations
ETH Zurich
Dep. of Health Sciences and Technology, ETH Zurich Schorenstrasse 16, 8603 Schwerzenbach, Switzerland

### Submitter
Adhideb Ghosh

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Christian Wolfrum
Dep. of Health Sciences and Technology, ETH Zurich Schorenstrasse 16, 8603 Schwerzenbach, Switzerland


