### Accession
PXD021808

### Title
Identification of biotinylated papaverine interactors from HEK293 total cell extract by LC-MS/MS

### Description
Aim of the project was to identify interactors of the phytochemical papaverine, modified with a biotin moiety, from HEK293 total cell extract by LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Beads preparation and pull-down: For each condition, 40 µl of streptavidin beads-suspension were used (ThermoFisher, #11205D). Beads were equilibrated 3 times with lysis buffer and subsequently incubated with biotinylated papaverine or biotinylated linker control for 30 min at RT with rotation. Cell lysate was first incubated with biotinylated linker control for 3 h at 4 °C with rotation, then split into half and incubated with either biotinylated-linker-beads (as a control condition) or biotinylated-papaverine-beads for 4 h at 4 °C with rotation. After incubation, beads were washed five times with lysis buffer (w/o NP40, NaF, or Na3VO4) and stored at -80 °C prior to MS analysis. All experiments were performed in triplicate. On-bead digestion A variation of the on-bead digestion protocol from Mann lab (20479470) was used. Proteins were pre-digested at 30 °C for 15 min by adding 20 μl elution buffer (2 M urea in 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0) supplemented with 5 mM DTT and 100 ng Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin (Promega). Next, iodoacetamide was added to a final concentration of 3 mM, and incubation was continued for another 15 min. Subsequently, proteins were eluted by adding two times (50 μl and 30 μl) elution buffer supplemented with 1 mM DTT and 5 ng/μL trypsin. Eluates were transferred to new microcentrifuge tubes, incubated at 32 °C overnight (or minimum 6 hours). The digestion was stopped by adding 0.5% of TFA. All incubation steps were performed in a thermoshaker at 400 rpm gentle shaking. Digested peptides were desalted using self-packed C18 Stage-Tips (17703201), vacuum dried, and resolubilized in 20 μl 3% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid for mass spectrometry analysis. 4 μl of digested peptides were injected for shotgun liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry Label-free shotgun LC-MS/MS was performed on nanoAcquity MClass nano-HPLC system (Waters) and analyzed on Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) in a data-dependent mode (DDA).

### Data Protocol
Data analysis All raw data analysis were handled and annotated by the local laboratory information management system (LIMS) (https://doi.org/10.1145/1739041.1739135), further analysed with MaxQuant software suite version 1.6.3.3 (Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Munich) supported by the Andromeda search engine (21254760). Data were searched against the UniProt Human proteome database encompassing 75,004 protein entries (Proteome ID: UP000005640). Data were searched with carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification and protein N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation and pyroglutamate (pyro-Glu) formation from glutamine as variable modifications. A maximum of three missed cleavages were allowed while requiring strict trypsin specificity, and only peptides with a minimum sequence length of six were considered for further data analysis. Data were search with concatenated target/decoy (forward and reversed) version of the libraries. Only peptides and proteins with a false discovery rate of <1% were accepted. Proteins were considered as papaverine interactors if present in at least 2/3 replicates of the biotinylated papaverine samples and enriched ≥ 3-fold over control, based on sample averages of both label-free quantification intensities and unique peptide counts.

### Publication Abstract
Aging is impacted by interventions across species, often converging on metabolic pathways. Transcription factors regulate longevity yet approaches for their pharmacological modulation to exert geroprotection remain sparse. We show that increased expression of the transcription factor Grainyhead 1 (GRH-1) promotes lifespan and pathogen resistance in Caenorhabditis elegans. A compound screen identifies FDA-approved drugs able to activate human GRHL1 and promote nematodal GRH-1-dependent longevity. GRHL1 activity is regulated by post-translational lysine methylation and the phosphoinositide (PI) 3-kinase C2A. Consistently, nematodal longevity following impairment of the PI 3-kinase or insulin/IGF-1 receptor requires grh-1. In BXD mice, Grhl1 expression is positively correlated with lifespan and insulin sensitivity. In humans, GRHL1 expression positively correlates with insulin receptor signaling and also with lifespan. Fasting blood glucose levels, including in individuals with type 2 diabetes, are negatively correlated with GRHL1 expression. Thereby, GRH-1/GRHL1 is identified as a pharmacologically malleable transcription factor impacting insulin signaling and lifespan.

### Keywords
Biotinylation, Lc-ms/ms, Compound, Papaverine, Interactors

### Affiliations
Energy Metabolism Laboratory, Institute of Translational Medicine, Department of Health Sciences and Technology, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (ETH) Zurich, Schwerzenbach, CH-8603, Switzerland

### Submitter
Fabian Fischer

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Ristow
Energy Metabolism Laboratory, Institute of Translational Medicine, Department of Health Sciences and Technology, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (ETH) Zurich, Schwerzenbach, CH-8603, Switzerland


