### Accession
PXD022660

### Title
The ER protein Ema19 facilitates the degradation of non-imported mitochondrial precursor proteins

### Description
For the biogenesis of mitochondria, hundreds of proteins need to be targeted from the cytosol into the various compartments of this organelle. The intramitochondrial targeting routes these proteins take to reach their respective location in the organelle are well understood. However, the early targeting processes, from cytosolic ribosomes to the membrane of the organelle, are still largely unknown. In this study, we present evidence that an integral membrane protein of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), Ema19, plays a role in this process. Mutants lacking Ema19 show an increased stability of mitochondrial precursor proteins, indicating that Ema19 promotes the proteolytic degradation of non-productive precursors. The deletion of Ema19 improves the growth of respiration-deficient cells, suggesting that Ema19-mediated degradation can compete with productive protein import into mitochondria. Ema19 is the yeast representative of a conserved protein family. The human Ema19 homolog is known as sigma-2 receptor or TMEM97. Though its molecular function is not known, previous studies suggested a role of the sigma-2 receptor as a quality control factor in the ER, compatible with our observations about Ema19. More globally our data provide an additional demonstration of the important role of the ER in mitochondrial protein targeting.

### Sample Protocol
For co-immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry, cells were grown in full medium containing 2% glucose to mid-log phase. 10 OD600 were harvested and washed with water. The supernatant was removed and the pellet resuspended in lysis buffer (10 mM Tris pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA, 0.5% NP-40) and lysed with glass bead lysis using a FastPrep-24 5 G homogenizer (MP Biomedicals) with 3 cycles of 30 s, speed 8.0 m s–1, 120-s breaks. The lysate was centrifuged (2 min at 13000 g, 4°C). The supernatant was transferred to a precooled tube and 300 µl dilution buffer (10 mM Tris pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA) were added. 25 µl equilibrated magnetic GFP-Trap A beads were added to the lysate and tumbled end-over-end for 1 h at 4°C.Afterwards the supernatant was discarded. The beads were then washed three times with 800 µl wash buffer I (150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 5% Glycerol, 0.05% NP40). After adding wash buffer I for the first time, the beads were transferred to a new tub to get rid of the detergent. Then the beads were washed with 500 µl wash buffer II (150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 5% Glycerol). After wash buffer II was removed completely, 50 µl elution buffer I (2 M urea, 50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 1 mM DTT, 5 ng/µl trypsin) was added to the beads for an on-bead digest and incubated for 1 h at room temperature. 15 ng/µl fresh trypsin was added for another 10 min at room temperature. Afterwards the supernatant containing the peptides was transferred to a fresh tube. 50 µl elution buffer II (2 M urea, 50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 5 mM chloroacetamide) was added for alkylating the peptides overnight in the dark at room temperature. For purification of peptides on C18 stage tips, the stage tips were washed with 100 µl methanol (5 min at 500 g), 100 µl buffer B (0.1% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile in MS grade water) and then with 100 µl buffer A (0.1% formic acid in MS grade water). To acidify the samples, they were treated with TFA to get a pH <2. The acidified peptides were then added onto the stage tips and centrifuged (5 min at 500 g). After a last wash step with 100 µl buffer A, the peptides were eluted with 60 µl buffer B (5 min, 500 g). With a speed vac, the samples were evaporated until no liquid is left. Then 9 µl buffer A and 1 µl buffer A* (0.1% formic acid, 0.1% TFAin MS grade water) is mixed and the samples was used for mass spectrometry.Peptides were separated on a 30 cm C18 column directly coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer.  A 90 min gradient of 2-95% buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.5% formic acid) at a constant flow rate was used to elute peptides. Mass spectra were acquired in a data dependent fashion using a top15 method for peptide sequencing.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed with MaxQuant Version 1.6.6.17 using a label-free algorithm (Cox et al., 2014)applying default parameters.

### Publication Abstract
For the biogenesis of mitochondria, hundreds of proteins need to be targeted from the cytosol into the various compartments of this organelle. The intramitochondrial targeting routes these proteins take to reach their respective location in the organelle are well understood. However, the early targeting processes, from cytosolic ribosomes to the membrane of the organelle, are still largely unknown. In this study, we present evidence that an integral membrane protein of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), Ema19, plays a role in this process. Mutants lacking Ema19 show an increased stability of mitochondrial precursor proteins, indicating that Ema19 promotes the proteolytic degradation of nonproductive precursors. The deletion of Ema19 improves the growth of respiration-deficient cells, suggesting that Ema19-mediated degradation can compete with productive protein import into mitochondria. Ema19 is the yeast representative of a conserved protein family. The human Ema19 homologue is known as sigma 2 receptor or TMEM97. Though its molecular function is not known, previous studies suggested a role of the sigma 2 receptor as a quality control factor in the ER, compatible with our observations about Ema19. More globally, our data provide an additional demonstration of the important role of the ER in mitochondrial protein targeting.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Mitochondrial protein import, Lc-ms/ms, Ae-ms

### Affiliations
Technical University Kaiserslautern
Molecular Genetics, TU Kaiserslautern

### Submitter
Markus Räschle

### Lab Head
Dr Zuzana Storchova
Molecular Genetics, TU Kaiserslautern


