### Accession
PXD009444

### Title
A chemical probe to monitor parkinsonism-associated protein DJ-1 in live cells

### Description
Oxidative stress is a contingent trigger of Parkinson`s disease (PD). DJ-1, a protein involved in oxidative stress sensing, gained major attention when mutations in its gene were identified in PD patients. Although the study of the corresponding protein function is still in its infancy, a crucial oxidation sensor at a conserved cysteine was linked to the disease. Inspired by inhibition studies with a bacterial homolog of DJ-1 we here screen several amino-epoxycylcohexenones and identify a chemical probe that exhibits specificity for the human protein in various cell lines. The probe selectively labeled the oxidation sensor via nucleophilic attack of the conserved cysteine onto the epoxide ring. This covalent addition occurred only in the reduced state. Whole proteome studies in HeLa, A549 and SHSY5Y cell lines confirmed strong enrichment of solely reduced DJ-1 which was diminished by increasing oxidative stress. The probe thus facilitates the first selective in situ monitoring of DJ-1 in its reduced state and enables studying the function of this important biomarker in dependence of oxidative stress.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were plated on a 15 cm dish and grown to 80-90% confluence. After washing the cells with 10 mL PBS, 10 mL PBS containing either 100 µL of compound (DMSO-stock) or 100 µL DMSO (control) were added to a pair of heavy and medium cells and vice versa for label-switch. The cells were incubated for 1 h at 37 °C in a 5% CO2 atmosphere. Then, the cells were scraped of the dish, subsequently pelletized (800 g, 3 min, 4 °C), washed with 10 mL PBS and pelletized again (800 g, 3 min, 4 °C). For lysis, the cells were resuspended in 1 mL lysis buffer and incubated for 15 min on ice. After resuspending cell fragments by sonication, the protein concentration of each sample was determined by BCA-assay and equal protein amounts of heavy or medium cells treated with the probe were pooled with the corresponding DMSO control. The total volume was then adjusted to 1880 µL with PBS and the samples were further subjected to the following click-reaction adding 40 µL Biotin-PEG3-N3 (10 mM in DMSO), 20 µL TCEP (52 mM in ddH2O), 60 µL 1 × TBTA ligand and 20 µL CuSO4 (50 mM in ddH2O). After incubation for 1 h at RT the proteins were precipitated by adding 8 mL of cold acetone and incubation over night at -20 °C. After centrifugation (≥13000 rpm, 15 min, 4 °C) the pellet was washed twice with 200 µL cold methanol (-80 °C) at each time and the proteins were resuspended in 500 µL PBS + 0.4% SDS (v/v) by sonication at RT. For enrichment the protein solution was added to 50 µL pre-washed avidin-agarose beads suspension (1.1 mg/mL in glycerol, washed 3 times with 1 mL PBS + 0.4% SDS) and incubated for 1 h under continuous gentle mixing. To remove unbound proteins the beads were washed three times with 1 mL PBS + 0.4% SDS, two times with urea (6 M in ddH2O) and three times with 1 mL PBS. Afterwards, the beads were carefully resuspended in 200 µL capping-buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea in 20 mM HEPES). Reduction was performed by adding 0.2 µL dithiothreitol (DTT) (1 M in ddH2O) and shaking the reaction mixture (450 rpm) for 45 min at RT. On addition of 2 µL iodoacetamide (IAA) (550 mM in ddH2O) the proteins were alkylated for 30 min under continuous shaking (450 rpm) at RT and exclusion of light. The reaction was stopped by adding 0.8 µL DTT (1 M in ddH2O) and incubation for 30 min at RT. To digest the proteins 1 µL endoproteinase Lys-C (LysC) (1 M in ddH2O) was added to each sample and incubated for 2.5 h at RT under continuous shaking (450 rpm) and exclusion of light. Afterwards 600 µL, tetraethylammonium bromide (TEAB) (50 mM in ddH2O) and 1.5 µL Trypsin (0.5 µg/µL in ddH2O) were added and the samples were incubated over night at 37 °C under continuous shaking (450 rpm). The digestion was stopped by adding 8 µL formic acid (FA) and the suspension was then centrifuged (13000 rpm, 3 min, RT) to pelletize the beads. The supernatant was loaded on 50 mg SepPak C 18 columns (Waters) pre-equilibrated with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). The peptides were washed three times with 1 mL 0.1% TFA and 250 µL 0.5% FA. Afterwards, the peptides were eluted three times with 250 µL elution buffer (80% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.5% FA), lyophilized and stored at -80 °C until further usage. Before MS measurements the lyophilized peptides were resolved in 30 µL 1% FA and filtered through centrifugal filters (0.45 µm, VWR), which were preequilibrated with 300 µL 1% FA. The filtrate was transferred into MS-vials and stored at -20 °C until the measurements were performed. Measurement was either done on LTQ Orbitrap XL, Orbitrap Fusion or Q Exactive Plus (Q Exactive Plus below, for other instruments see SI). Samples were analyzed with an UltiMate 3000 nano HPLC system (Dionex) using Acclaim C18 PepMap100 75 μm ID x 2 cm trap and Acclaim Pepmap RSLC C18 (75 μm ID x 50 cm) separation columns in an EASY-spray setting coupled to a Q Exactive Plus (Thermo Fisher). Samples were loaded on the trap and washed with 0.1% TFA, then transferred to the analytical column (buffer A: H2O with 0.1% FA, buffer B: MeCN with 0.1% FA, flow 300 nL/min, gradient 5 to 22% buffer B in 115 min, then to 32% buffer B in 10 min, then to 90% buffer B in 10 min and hold 90% buffer B for 10 min, then to 5% buffer B in 0.1 min and hold 5% buffer B for 9.9 min). Q Exactive Plus was operated in a TOP12 data dependent mode. Full scan acquisition was performed in the orbitrap at a resolution of 70000 and an AGC target of 3e6 in a scan range of 300−1500 m/z. Monoisotopic precursor selection as well as dynamic exclusion (exclusion duration: 60 s) was enabled. Precursors with charge states of >1 and intensities greater than 1e5 were selected for fragmentation. Isolation was performed in the quadrupole using a window of 1.6 m/z. Precursors were collected to an AGC target of 5e4 for a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Fragments were generated using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD, normalized collision energy: 27%) and detected in the orbitrap.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed using MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3.8 or higher) with the Andromeda search engine. The following settings were applied: fixed modification: carbamidomethylation (cysteine); variable modification: oxidation (methionine), acetylation (N-terminus), NH (aspartate); proteolytic enzyme: trypsin/P; missed cleavages: 2; main search tolerance: 4.5 ppm; MS/MS tolerance: 0.5 Da; false discovery rates: 0.01. The options “requantification”, “second peptide identification and” and “match between runs” (0.7 min match and 20 min alignment time windows) were enabled. Quantification of SILAC pairs was carried out based on unique peptides only using “Arg6” and “Lys4” as “light” and “Arg10“ and “Lys8“ as “heavy” isotope identifiers requiring a minimum ratio count of 2. For raw files resulting from label switched experiments, the isotope identifiers were defined in reverse order resulting in the ratios of probe vs. DMSO. For label-free quantification the corresponding parameter was set to “LFQ”.l Searches were performed against the Uniprot database for Homo sapiens. Statistical analysis of the data was performed using Perseus (version 1.5.3.2. or higher). SILAC ratios were log 2 -transformed and -log 10 (p-values) were obtained by a two-sided one sample Student’s t-test. LFQ intensities were log 2 -transformed and -log 10 (p-values) were obtained by a two-sided two sample Student’s t-test.

### Publication Abstract
Reactive oxygen species (ROS) play an important role in the onset of Parkinson's disease (PD), and deciphering protective mechanisms is a major goal for therapeutic development. Here, DJ-1 (PARK7) gained major attention when a conserved cysteine residue with a putative role in oxidative stress sensing/protection was linked to PD. Inspired by previous studies with a bacterial homologue of DJ-1, several amino-epoxycylcohexenones were screened for enzyme inhibition, and a chemical probe with specificity for the human ortholog was selected for cellular studies. The probe selectively labeled the cysteine oxidation sensor and whole proteome analysis in HeLa, A549, and SHSY5Y cell lines confirmed strong enrichment of reduced DJ-1 as the most prominent target. Increasing levels of oxidative stress diminished this signal demonstrating the utility of our tool compound for selective in situ monitoring of this important biomarker in its reduced state.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Center for Integrated Protein Science Munich (CIPSM) at the Department of Chemistry, Technische Universität München, Lichtenbergstraße 4, 85747 Garching b. München ( lab head )
TU Munich

### Submitter
Jonas Drechsel

### Lab Head
Dr Stephan A Sieber
Center for Integrated Protein Science Munich (CIPSM) at the Department of Chemistry, Technische Universität München, Lichtenbergstraße 4, 85747 Garching b. München ( lab head )


