### Accession
PXD026717

### Title
Discovery of lipotoxicity-sensitive transcription factors in non-alcoholic steatohepatitis

### Description
Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease is continuum of disorders among which non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) is particularly associated with a negative prognosis. Hepatocyte lipotoxicity is one of the main pathogenic factors of liver fibrosis and NASH. However, the molecular mechanisms regulating this process are poorly understood. Here, we integrated transcriptomic and chromatin accessibility analyses from human liver and mouse hepatocytes to identify lipotoxicity-sensitive transcription factors. We found that the transcription factors MAFK and TCF4 were activated in liver from NASH patients and by mouse hepatocyte lipotoxicity. Genetic deletion of these transcription factors protected hepatocytes against saturated fatty acid oversupply. Notably, MAFK- and TCF4-regulated gene expression linked to lipotoxicity closely correlated with transcriptional patters in fibrosis progression in NASH patients. Collectively, our findings uncovered novel molecular insights into lipotoxicityinduced NASH, revealing the relevance and therapeutic potential of MAFK and TCF4 in human disease.

### Sample Protocol
TMT analysis of whole cell proteome Fifteen milligrams of powdered human liver tissue were lysed in 200 uL of lysis buffer (8M Urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH7.5, 150 mM NaCl and 1X Halt™ Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Thermo Fisher Scientific, #87786)), vortexed at max speed for 15 sec and incubated for 30 min at 4°C with shaking at 14000 rpm. Next, samples were sonicated (amplitude 100%, Cycle 0.5) four times for 30 sec in a vial tweeter sonicator with 2 min pause on ice between cycles. Samples were then centrifuged for 13000 g for 10 min at 4°C, supernatant was transferred to a new tube and the pellet was homogenized in 50 μl of lysis buffer. Following an additional centrifugation at 13000 g for 10 min at 4°C, supernatant was combined with the previous supernatant. Samples were centrifuged a final time at 13000 g for 10 min at 4°C and supernatant was used for mass spectrometry. On the other hand, mouse hepatocytes were seeded in 6 well plates and harvested in 80 μl of lysis buffer per well (1% sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 0.1 M TRIS, 10 mM TCEP, pH = 8.5), following lysis with 10 cycles of sonication (Bioruptor, Diagnode). All samples were reduced for 10 min at 95°C and alkylated at 15 mM chloroacetamide for 30 min at 37°C. Proteins were digested by incubation with sequencinggrade modified trypsin (1/50 w/w; Promega,V5113) for 12 h at 37°C. Tryptic digests were acidified (pH<3) using TFA and cleaned up using iST cartridges (PreOmics, P.O.00027) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Samples were dried under vacuum and stored at -20 °C. Sample aliquots comprising 25 μg of peptides were labelled with isobaric tandem mass tags (TMT 10-plex, Thermo Fisher Scientific, #90110). Shortly, peptides were re-suspended in 20 μl labelling buffer (2 M urea, 0.2 M HEPES, pH 8.3) and 5 μL of each TMT reagent were added to the individual peptide samples followed by a 1 h incubation at 25°C, shaking at 500 rpm. To quench the labelling reaction, 1.5 μL aqueous 1.5 M hydroxylamine solution was added and samples were incubated for another 10 min at 25°C shaking at 500 rpm followed by pooling of all samples. The pH of the sample pool was increased to 11.9 by adding 1 M phosphate buffer (pH 12) and incubated for 20 min at 25°C shaking at 500 rpm to remove TMT labels linked to peptide hydroxyl groups. Subsequently, the reaction was stopped by adding 2 M hydrochloric acid until a pH < 2 was reached. Finally, peptide samples were further acidified using 5 % TFA, desalted using Sep-Pak Vac 1cc (50mg) C18 cartridges (Waters, #WAT054960) according to the manufacturer’s instructions and dried under vacuum. TMT-labelled peptides were fractionated by high-pH reversed phase separation using a XBridge Peptide BEH C18 column (3,5 µm, 130 Å, 1 mm x 150 mm; Waters, #186003562) on an Agilent 1260 Infinity HPLC system. Peptides were loaded on column in buffer A (20 mM ammonium formate in water, pH 10) and eluted using a two-step linear gradient from 2% to 10% in 5 min and then to 50% buffer B (20 mM ammonium formate in 90% acetonitrile, pH 10) over 55 min at a flow rate of 42 µl/min. Elution of peptides was monitored with a UV detector (215 nm, 254 nm) and a total of 36 fractions were collected, pooled into 12 fractions using a post-concatenation strategy and dried under vacuum. Dried peptides were re-suspended in 0.1% aqueous formic acid and subjected to LC–MS/MS analysis using a Q Exactive HF Mass Spectrometer fitted with an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a custom-made column heater set to 60°C. Peptides were resolved using a RP-HPLC column (75μm × 30cm) packed in-house with C18 resin (ReproSil-Pur C18–AQ, 1.9 μm resin; Dr. Maisch, r119.aq.) at a flow rate of 0.2 μLmin-1. The following gradient was used for separation of murine peptides: from 5% B to 15% B over 10 min to 30% B over 60 min to 45 % B over 20 min to 95% B over 2 min followed by 18 min at 95% B, whereas the following gradient was used for separation of human peptides: from 5% B to 15% B over 14 min to 30% B over 80 min to 45 % B over 26 min to 95% B over 2 min followed by 18 min at 95% B. Buffer A was 0.1% formic acid in water and buffer B was 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in water. The mass spectrometer was operated in DDA mode with a total cycle time of approximately 1 s. Each MS1 scan was followed by high-collision-dissociation (HCD) of the 10 most abundant precursor ions with dynamic exclusion set to 30 s. For MS1, 3e6 ions were accumulated in the Orbitrap over a maximum time of 100 ms and scanned at a resolution of 120,000 FWHM (at 200 m/z). MS2 scans were acquired at a target setting of 1e5 ions, maximum accumulation time of 100 ms and a resolution of 30,000 FWHM (at 200 m/z). Singly charged ions and ions with unassigned charge state were excluded from triggering MS2 events. The normalized collision energy was set to 35%, the mass isolation window was set to 1.1 m/z and one microscan was acquired for each spectrum.

### Data Protocol
TMT analysis of whole cell proteome The acquired raw-files were converted to the mascot generic file (mgf) format using the msconvert tool (part of ProteoWizard, version 3.0.4624 (2013-6-3)) and searched using MASCOT either against a murine database (consisting of 49434 forward and reverse protein sequences downloaded from Uniprot on 20141124) or a human database (consisting of 40832 forward and reverse protein sequences downloaded from Uniprot on 20181213) and 390 commonly observed contaminants. The precursor ion tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment ion tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. The search criteria were set as follows: full tryptic specificity was required (cleavage after lysine or arginine residues unless followed by proline), 3 missed cleavages were allowed, carbamidomethylation (C) and TMT6plex (K and peptide N-terminus) were set as fixed modification and oxidation (M) as a variable modification. Next, the database search results were imported into the Scaffold Q+ software (version 4.3.2, Proteome Software Inc.) and the protein false discovery rate was set to 1% based on the number of decoy hits. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters. Acquired reporter ion intensities in the experiments were employed for automated quantification and statistical analysis using a modified version of our in-house developed SafeQuant R script v2.3.2 (Ahrne et al., 2016). This analysis included adjustment of reporter ion intensities, global data normalization by equalizing the total reporter ion intensity across all channels, summation of reporter ion intensities per protein and channel, calculation of protein abundance ratios and testing for differential abundance using empirical Bayes moderated t-statistics. The calculated p-values were corrected for multiple testing using the Benjamini−Hochberg method, with significance defined as fold change ≥ 1.3, p-value < 0.05 for human liver tissue and q-value < 0.05 for FL83B cells. Volcano plots were generated on the Galaxy platform (https://usegalaxy.eu/) with Volcano Plot (Galaxy Version 0.0.3). GO analysis was performed with DAVID 6.8 (https://david.ncifcrf.gov/), with significance defined as p-value < 0.05. Overlap between different datasets was determined with Venny (version 2.1, https://bioinfogp.cnb.csic.es/tools/venny/).

### Publication Abstract
Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease is a continuum of disorders among which non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) is particularly associated with a negative prognosis. Hepatocyte lipotoxicity is one of the main pathogenic factors of liver fibrosis and NASH. However, the molecular mechanisms regulating this process are poorly understood. The main aim of this study was to dissect transcriptional mechanisms regulated by lipotoxicity in hepatocytes. We achieved this aim by combining transcriptomic, proteomic and chromatin accessibility analyses from human liver and mouse hepatocytes. This integrative approach revealed several transcription factor networks deregulated by NASH and lipotoxicity. To validate these predictions, genetic deletion of the transcription factors MAFK and TCF4 was performed, resulting in hepatocytes that were better protected against saturated fatty acid oversupply. MAFK- and TCF4-regulated gene expression profiles suggest a mitigating effect against cell stress, while promoting cell survival and growth. Moreover, in the context of lipotoxicity, some MAFK and TCF4 target genes were to the corresponding differentially regulated transcripts in human liver fibrosis. Collectively, our findings comprehensively profile the transcriptional response to lipotoxicity in hepatocytes, revealing new molecular insights and providing a valuable resource for future endeavours to tackle the molecular mechanisms of NASH.

### Keywords
Tmt, Transcription factor, Non-alcoholic steatohepatitis

### Affiliations
Proteomics Core Facility 
Biozentrum, University of Basel
Klingelbergstrasse 50/70
CH-4056 Basel / Switzerland
Dr. Alexander Schmidt Proteomics Core Facility  Biozentrum, University of Basel Klingelbergstrasse 50/70 CH-4056 Basel / Switzerland

### Submitter
Danilo Ritz

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Schmidt
Dr. Alexander Schmidt Proteomics Core Facility  Biozentrum, University of Basel Klingelbergstrasse 50/70 CH-4056 Basel / Switzerland


