### Accession
PXD020320

### Title
Target quantification of octapeptide for Thrombin and FX

### Description
Proteases are crucial physiologic regulators of protein structure and function. While proteomic methods contributed extensively to protease characterization efforts, technical challenges remain in terms of throughput, scalability and large datasets of protease cleavages remain scarce. Here, we describe a high-throughput protease screen (HTPS) which allows simultaneous characterization of multiple proteases under various conditions on a microscale 96FASP format. After benchmarking the performance with Trypsin, LysC, GluC, AspN, Chymotrypsin, MMP-2 and MMP-3, we applied it to profile proteases of the blood coagulation cascade (Factors VIIa, IXa, Xa, XIa, Thrombin α, β and γ, Plasmin and Protein C). The large dataset enabled us to map activity, specificity, cleave entropy, allosteric changes of blood cascade proteases induced by Na+ and to predict potential substrates in a data-driven way. Here, we designed two octapeptides, GIPRAAGD (α Thrombin) and GIGRRIAE (Factor Xa), and evaluated their cleavage with the target proteases.

### Sample Protocol
The octapeptides GIPRAAGD (α Thrombin) and GIGRRIAE (Factor Xa) were incubated 10 µM of the peptide with with 10 nM final concentration of proteases from 0 – 240 minutes. The cleavage products were analyzed on a reverse phase column (75 µm x 15 cm, packed with Magic C18 3 µm resin) with a 5 – 35 % 20 minute linear ACN/water gradient in 0.1% formic acid with a flow rate set to 300 nl/ml on a Proxeon EASY‐nLC II chromatography system and acquired in the Orbitrap XL (Thermo Fischer Scientific) in positive mode at 2.0 kV, the mass range of 150 to 1200 m/z, profile mode, resolution of 60.000 at 400 m/z. The measurement was performed using 1 µg of the standardized sample spiked with iRT peptides (Biognosys AG) at 1:20 and proteolyzed BSA at 0.1mg/ml as carrier.

### Data Protocol
We manually integrated the precursor isotope peaks (M, M+1, M+2) of GIPRAAGD (378.7036 ++ m/z), GIPR (221.6423 ++ m/z), AAGD (333.1405 ++ m/z) for α Thrombin, GIGRRIAE (436.2591 ++ m/z), GIGR (201.6266 ++ m/z), RIAE (488.2827 ++ m/z) for Factor Xa and iRT peptide (Biognosys) with Skyline software to monitor the respective reporter signals in a time-resolved fashion.

### Publication Abstract
Proteases are among the largest protein families and critical regulators of biochemical processes like apoptosis and blood coagulation. Knowledge of proteases has been expanded by the development of proteomic approaches, however, technology for multiplexed screening of proteases within native environments is currently lacking behind. Here we introduce a simple method to profile protease activity based on isolation of protease products from native lysates using a 96FASP filter, their analysis in a mass spectrometer and a custom data analysis pipeline. The method is significantly faster, cheaper, technically less demanding, easy to multiplex and produces accurate protease fingerprints. Using the blood cascade proteases as a case study, we obtain protease substrate profiles that can be used to map specificity, cleavage entropy and allosteric effects and to design protease probes. The data further show that protease substrate predictions enable the selection of potential physiological substrates for targeted validation in biochemical assays.

### Keywords
Specificity, High-throughput protease screen, Allostery, Blood coagulation proteases, Entropy, Substrates

### Affiliations
Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland  Faculty of Science, University of Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland
ETH

### Submitter
Federico Uliana

### Lab Head
Dr Ruedi Aebersold
Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland  Faculty of Science, University of Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland


