### Accession
PXD044695

### Title
Investigation of TOF patient heart specimens

### Description
The protein BBLN with largely unknown function was identified in human right ventricular heart specimens from patients undergoing repair surgery for Tetralogy of Fallot (TOF). Proteins from heart specimens were solubilized and subjected to immuno-affinity enrichment with anti-CAMK2D-specific antibodies. Co-enriched proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE, and the protein band in the range of 8-14 kDa was cut and subjected to identification by nano-LC-ESI-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
After staining of the SDS-containing polyacrylamide gel by Coomassie Brilliant Blue, visualized protein bands were cut out and subjected to nano-LC-ESI-MS/MS analysis. The BBLN protein was identified in the gel slice encompassing the 8-14 kDa range. The nano-LC-ESI-MS/MS analysis and protein identification were performed by Proteome Factory AG (Berlin, Germany). Cut protein bands were rebuffered by repeated shrinking (60% acetonitrile, 50 mM TEAB) and swelling steps (50 mM TEAB). For cysteine alkylation, the swelling buffer first contained 10 mM TCEP, then 10 mM 2-iodoacetamide. In-gel proteolysis was done with sequencing grade porcine trypsin (Promega, Mannheim, Germany) overnight. For analysis, the samples were acidified with 2% formic acid. The nanoHPLC-ESI-MS/MS system consisted of an Dionex Ultimate 3000 nanoHPLC system (Thermo Scientific, Germering, Germany), nano-electrospray emitter (Fossiliontech, Madrid, Spain) and an Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Peptides were first trapped and desalted on the enrichment column (PepMap-C18, 0.3 x 5 mm, Dionex) for five minutes (solvent: 0.5% acetonitrile/0.5% formic acid), then separated on a ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ column (0.075 x 500 mm column, Dr. A. Maisch HPLC GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) using a linear gradient from 12% to 40% B (solvent A: water, solvent B: acetonitrile, both with 0.1% formic acid). Ions of interest were data-dependently subjected to MS/MS according to the expected charge state distribution of peptide ions.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified by database search against human sequences (UP5640_H_sapiens 20220223, 101,300 sequences, 41,128,161 residues) from the Uniprot database and a database with known protein contaminants (contaminants 20090624, 252 sequences, 133,770 residues) using the MS/MS ion search of the Mascot search engine (timestamp 2022-04-19T14:11:01Z). The number of queries performed was 4,478. Only peptide matches with a score of 20 or above were accepted. Protein matches were required to have at least two significant unique sequences.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Heart

### Affiliations
ETH Zurich
Molecular Pharmacology, ETH Zurich

### Submitter
Ursula Quitterer

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Ursula Quitterer
Molecular Pharmacology, ETH Zurich


