### Accession
PXD011605

### Title
Cerebral organoids proteomics -  Human Cerebral Organoids and Fetal Brain Tissue Share Proteomic Similarities

### Description
Pluripotent stem  cells (PSC) can differentiate inot any cell type of an organism. Their remarkable capability of self-organization enables the formation of three-dimensional structures that resembles miniature organs, including cerebral organoids. These organoids can recreate early steps of the human cerebral cortex development, and show great potential for modeling human diseases, particularly for those with a developmental component. This data evidences stem cell-derived cerebral organoids as a key model to study brain development and neurodevelopmental, neurodegenerative and neuropsychiatric diseases.

### Sample Protocol
Organoids were lysed in 7M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 70 mM DTT, containing protease inhibitor cocktail EDTA-free. Followed by in gel trypsin digestion. Qualitative and quantitative proteomic analyses were performed in bidemensional nanoUPLCtandem nanoESI-HDMSE platform by multiplexed data-independent acquisition (DIA) experiments.

### Data Protocol
For proper spectra processing and database searching conditions, we used Progenesis QI 3.0 for proteomics software, package with Apex3D, peptide 3D and ion accounting informatics (Waters). Proteins were processed by using dedicated algorithms and cross-matched with the Uniprot human proteome database, version 2017/10, with the default parameters for ion counting and quantitation. The following parameters were considererd in identifying peptides: (1) digestion by trypsin allowing one missed cleavage; (2) methionine oxidation was considered a variable modification, and carbamidomethylation (C) a fixed modifiction; (3) false discovery rate (FDR) less than 1%.

### Publication Abstract
The limited access to functional human brain tissue has led to the development of stem cell-based alternative models. The differentiation of human pluripotent stem cells into cerebral organoids with self-organized architecture has created novel opportunities to study the early stages of the human cerebral formation. Here we applied state-of-the-art label-free shotgun proteomics to compare the proteome of stem cell-derived cerebral organoids to the human fetal brain. We identified 3,073 proteins associated with different developmental stages, from neural progenitors to neurons, astrocytes, or oligodendrocytes. The major protein groups are associated with neurogenesis, axon guidance, synaptogenesis, and cortical brain development. Glial cell proteins related to cell growth and maintenance, energy metabolism, cell communication, and signaling were also described. Our data support the variety of cells and neural network functional pathways observed within cell-derived cerebral organoids, confirming their usefulness as an alternative model. The characterization of brain organoid proteome is key to explore, in a dish, atypical and disrupted processes during brain development or neurodevelopmental, neurodegenerative, and neuropsychiatric diseases.

### Keywords
Pluripotent stem cell, Cerebral organoids, Minibrain, Progenitors, Neural

### Affiliations
Lab of Neuroproteomics, Institute of Biology, Department of Biochemistry and Tissue Biology, University of Campinas (UNICAMP), Campinas, Brazil.
University of Campinas

### Submitter
Juliana Minardi Nascimento

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Martins-de-Souza
Lab of Neuroproteomics, Institute of Biology, Department of Biochemistry and Tissue Biology, University of Campinas (UNICAMP), Campinas, Brazil.


