### Accession
PXD011348

### Title
Oxygen effect on murine progenitor oligodrendrocytes

### Description
Hyperoxia is known to cause cerebral white matter injury in preterm infants with male sex being identified as an independent risk factor for poor neurodevelopmental outcome. We investigated the underlying mechanisms behind such a sex dependent difference by a comaparative protein profiling of male and female murine progenitor oligodendrocytes treated with 3 % or 80% oxygen. We demonstrate that following hyperoxia, the male derived oligodendrocyte progenitor cells (OPCs) are severely affected with respect to their energy metabolism, stress response and especially, maturation as compared to their female counterparts.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from cells in urea/thiourea by multiple freeze/thawing cycles. Proteins was reduced and alkylated before tryptic digestion (protease to protein ratio 1:50). After desalting on C18 material peptides were separated on a nao-Acquity UPLC column in a 90 min non-linear gradient ranging from 2 to 60% acetonitrile in 0.1% acetic acid at a flow rate of 400 nl/min. The detection was carried out in DDA mode on a LTQ Orbitrab Velos instrument selecting TOP 20 precurser ions for CID fragmentation per cycle at an exclusion time of 60 sec.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified by searching in a forward-reverse UniProt/SwissProt database with a restriction on Mus musculus and using the SorcererTM software platform with Sequest algorithm implemented in Rosetta Elucidator software suite (Ceiba Solutions, Boston, MA, USA). A statistical evaluation of the results was performed by analysis in peptide/protein prophet and the annotation of peptides was carried out at a false-positive rate of <1% that is equivalent to a peptide probability >0.87. Only proteins with a probability >0.8 and a peptide count ≥2 were used for statistical analyses.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse brain, Oxygen, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
University Medicine Greifswald Department for Functional Genomics Felix-Hausdorff-Straße 8 17487 Greifswald
Dept. of Functional Genomics

### Submitter
Elke Hammer

### Lab Head
Dr Elke Hammer
University Medicine Greifswald Department for Functional Genomics Felix-Hausdorff-Straße 8 17487 Greifswald


