### Accession
PXD008374

### Title
Comparative phosphoproteomic and acetylated proteomic analysis of intestine regeneration in the sea cucumber Apostichopus japonicus

### Description
Sea cucumbers have a striking capacity to regeneratemost of their viscera after evisceration, which has drawn theinterest ofmany researchers. In this study, we perform quantitative phosphoproteomics proteomic to analyze the proteinphosphorylation and acetylation changes between regenerative intestine at 3 days post evisceration (dpe) and normal intestine (intact intestine in normal situation) in A.japonicus. Altogether, 2,584 phosphorylation sites in 1,531 proteins were identified, among which 1862 phosphorylation site in 1169 proteins were quantified. When quantitative ratio of phosphorylation sites over 1.5 was considered up-regulation while quantitative ratio of phosphorylation sites below 0.67 (1/1.5) was considered as down-regulation. The amount of the up-regulatedphosphorylation quantified sites and proteins were 127 and 113; the amount of the down-regulatedphosphorylation quantified sites and proteins were 38 and 34. Totally, 886acetylation sites in 555 proteins were identified, among which 712acetylation site in 470 proteins were quantified (Table 1). When quantitative ratio of acetylation sites over 1.20 was considered up-regulation while quantitative ratio of acetylation sites below 0.83 (1/1.2) was considered as down-regulation. The amount of the up-regulatedacetylation quantified sites and proteins were 130 and 101; the amount of the down-regulatedacetylation quantified sites and proteins were 211 and 150.Our results suggest that intestine regeneration constitutes a complex lifeactivity regulated by the cooperation of various biological processes, including cytoskeletal changes, protein synthesis, signal recognition and transduction,energy production and conversion, and substance transport andmetabolism.

### Sample Protocol
Adult A. japonicus (100g±10g) were collected from the coast of Qingdao, Shandong Province and acclimated in sea water aquaria at ~15℃. The sea cucumbers for control were fed once a day.For the regeneration experiment, the sea cucumbers were induced to eviscerate the viscera including intestine and respiratory treesetc.by injecting ~2 ml 0.35 M KCl into the coelom. For phosphorylation study, the regenerative intestine from 12 individuals (three biological replicates ×four sea cucumbers per biological replicate) at 3 days postevisceration (dpe) were used for the experiment group (three biological replicates: 3dpe1, 3dpe2 and 3dpe3).The normal intestine from 12 non-eviscerated sea cucumbers (three biological replicates ×four sea cucumbers per biological replicate) were collectedto serve as the control (three biological replicates: Con1, Con2 and Con3). For acetylation study, the regenerative intestine from 5 individuals at 3dpe were used for the experiment group-3dpe; and the normal intestine from 5 non-eviscerated sea cucumbers-Con.The collectednormal and regenerative intestines wereimmediately frozen in liquid nitrogen and then stored at -80℃.

### Data Protocol
Sea cucumbers have a striking capacity to regeneratemost of their viscera after evisceration, which has drawn theinterest ofmany researchers. In this study, we perform quantitative phosphoproteomics proteomic to analyze the proteinphosphorylation and acetylation changes between regenerative intestine at 3 days post evisceration (dpe) and normal intestine (intact intestine in normal situation) in A.japonicus. Altogether, 2,584 phosphorylation sites in 1,531 proteins were identified, among which 1862 phosphorylation site in 1169 proteins were quantified. When quantitative ratio of phosphorylation sites over 1.5 was considered up-regulation while quantitative ratio of phosphorylation sites below 0.67 (1/1.5) was considered as down-regulation. The amount of the up-regulatedphosphorylation quantified sites and proteins were 127 and 113; the amount of the down-regulatedphosphorylation quantified sites and proteins were 38 and 34. Our results suggest that intestine regeneration constitutes a complex lifeactivity regulated by the cooperation of various biological processes, including cytoskeletal changes, protein synthesis, signal recognition and transduction,energy production and conversion, and substance transport andmetabolism. Sea cucumbers have a striking capacity to regeneratemost of their viscera after evisceration, which has drawn theinterest ofmany researchers. In this study, we perform quantitative acetylated proteomic to analyze the proteinphosphorylation and acetylation changes between regenerative intestine at 3 days post evisceration (dpe) and normal intestine (intact intestine in normal situation) in A.japonicus. Totally, 886acetylation sites in 555 proteins were identified, among which 712acetylation site in 470 proteins were quantified (Table 1). When quantitative ratio of acetylation sites over 1.20 was considered up-regulation while quantitative ratio of acetylation sites below 0.83 (1/1.2) was considered as down-regulation. The amount of the up-regulatedacetylation quantified sites and proteins were 130 and 101; the amount of the down-regulatedacetylation quantified sites and proteins were 211 and 150.Our results suggest that intestine regeneration constitutes a complex lifeactivity regulated by the cooperation of various biological processes, including cytoskeletal changes, protein synthesis, signal recognition and transduction,energy production and conversion, and substance transport andmetabolism.

### Publication Abstract
Sea cucumbers exposed to stressful circumstances eviscerate most internal organs, and then regenerate them rapidly under favorable environments. Reversible protein phosphorylation and acetylation are major modifications regulating protein function. Herein, for the first time, we perform quantitative phospho- and acetyl proteomics analyses of intestine regeneration in a sea cucumber species <i>Apostichopus japonicus</i>. We identified 1,862 phosphorylation sites in 1,169 proteins, and 712 acetylation sites in 470 proteins. Of the 147 and 251 proteins differentially modified by phosphorylation and acetylation, respectively, most were related to cytoskeleton biogenesis, protein synthesis and modification, signal recognition and transduction, energy production and conversion, or substance transport and metabolism. Phosphorylation appears to play a more important role in signal recognition and transduction than acetylation, while acetylation is of greater importance in posttranslational modification, protein turnover, chaperones; energy production and conversion; amino acid and lipid transport and metabolism. These results expanded our understanding of the regulatory mechanisms of posttranslational modifications in intestine regeneration of sea cucumbers after evisceration.

### Keywords
Regeneration, Sea cucumber, Protein modified regulation, Acetylated proteomic, Phosphoproteomic

### Affiliations
PTM Biolabs Inc.
Institute of Oceanology, Chinese Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Rachel  Green

### Lab Head
Dr Lina Sun
Institute of Oceanology, Chinese Academy of Sciences


