### Accession
PXD009809

### Title
Detailed map of the Pseudomonas aeruginosa Crc regulon using a new parameter for tracking post-transcriptional regulation

### Description
Bacterial physiology in general and the bacterial response to the presence of nutrients and to external signals in particular is regulated at different levels, from mRNA synthesis to translational regulation and protein modification. However, there are not standardized parameters for defining post-transcriptional regulation. Herein, we propose a simple parameter, dubbed post-transcriptional variation (PTV), that allow extracting information on translational regulation from the combined analysis of transcriptomic and proteomic data.   We have applied this parameter for precisely defining the regulon of the Pseudomonas aeruginosa post-transcriptional regulator Crc. P. aeruginosa is a free-living microorganism that, besides colonizing a diversity of environmental habitats, is able to infect a large number of patients at hospitals. Part of the ability of P. aeruginosa for colonizing such a variety of habitats relies on its capability of using a large number of carbon sources. This hierarchical assimilation is regulated by Crc, which together with Hfq, binds its target RNA impeding their translation when catabolite repression is triggered.  Most studies cannot provide information on post-transcriptional regulation when analysed independently. Using the defined PTV parameter, we present a comprehensive map of the Crc post-transcriptional regulon.

### Sample Protocol
Three independent cultures of strains PAO001 and FCP001 were grown in LB medium to reach mid-exponential growth phase. Cells were pelleted by centrifugation and frozen at -80 °C until protein extraction. Cell pellets were resuspended with PBS and Protease Inhibitor Cocktail. Finally, the cells were lysed by sonication.  Protein from each condition were precipitated with methanol/chloroform and resuspended in Triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB). The amount of protein in each of the samples was quantified using RC/DC protein assay prior to iTRAQ labelling.  Protein pellets were resuspended and denatured in guanidine hydrochloride/ HEPES, reduced with Tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP, AB SCIEX), and followed by  cysteine-blocking reagent. Digestions were initiated using grade-modified trypsine. Sample digestions were evaporated to dryness in a vacuum concentrator. Digested samples were labelled at room temperature for 2 h with a half unit of iTRAQ Reagent Multi-plex kit. The iTRAQ labelling was performed in a 2-plex design for each condition swapping the isobaric tags to compensate for possible variation in label efficiency or accuracy due to tag-specific artefacts. Finally, samples were combined and labelling reaction was stopped by addition of ACN and further evaporation in a vacuum concentrator was carried out. Labeling reactions were done in triplicate with the different biological samples. Peptide fraction was subjected to 2D-nano LC ESI-MSMS analysis using a nano liquid chromatography system coupled to high speed Triple TOF 5600 mass spectrometer (AB SCIEX , Foster City, CA) with a Nanospray III Source. The analytical column used was a silica-based reversed phase column C18 ChromXP 75 µm × 15 cm, 3 µm particle size and 120 Å pore size (Eksigent Technologies, AB SCIEX, Foster City, CA). The trap column was a C18 ChromXP (Eksigent Technologies, AB SCIEX, Foster City, CA), 3 µm particle diameter, 120 Å pore size, switched on-line with the analytical column.

### Data Protocol
Data acquisition was performed with a TripleTOF 5600 System (AB SCIEX, Concord, ON).  MS and MS/MS data were processed using Analyst® TF 1.6 Software (AB SCIEX). Raw data file conversion tools generated mgf files which were also searched against the Pseudomonas aeruginosa (PAO1) database using the Mascot Server v. 2.5.0 (Matrix Science, London, UK). Search parameters were set as follows: enzyme, trypsin; allowed missed cleavages, 1; fixed modifications, iTRAQ4plex (N-term and K) and beta-methylthiolation of cysteine; variable modifications, oxidation of methionine.  Peptide mass tolerance was set to ± 25 ppm for precursors and 0.05 Da for fragment masses. The confidence interval for protein identification was set to ≥ 95% (p<0.05) and only peptides with an individual ion score above the 1% False Discovery Rates (FDR) threshold were considered correctly identified. Only proteins having at least two quantitated peptides were considered in the quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
The remarkable metabolic versatility of bacteria of the genus Pseudomonas enable their survival across very diverse environmental conditions. P. aeruginosa, one of the most relevant opportunistic pathogens, is a prime example of this adaptability. The interplay between regulatory networks that mediate these metabolic and physiological features is just starting to be explored in detail. Carbon catabolite repression, governed by the Crc protein, controls the availability of several enzymes and transporters involved in the assimilation of secondary carbon sources. Yet, the regulation exerted by Crc on redox metabolism of P. aeruginosa (hence, on the overall physiology) had hitherto been unexplored. In this study, we address the intimate connection between carbon catabolite repression and metabolic robustness of P. aeruginosa PAO1. In particular, we explored the interplay between oxidative stress, metabolic rearrangements in central carbon metabolism and the cellular redox state. By adopting a combination of quantitative physiology experiments, multiomic analyses, transcriptional patterns of key genes, measurement of metabolic activities in vitro and direct quantification of redox balances both in the wild-type strain and in an isogenic &#x394;crc derivative, we demonstrate that Crc orchestrates the overall response of P. aeruginosa to oxidative stress via reshaping of the core metabolic architecture in this bacterium.

### Keywords
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Post-transcriptional regulation, P. aeruginosa

### Affiliations
Departamento de Biotecnología Microbiana, Centro Nacional de Biotecnología, CSIC, Madrid, Spain.
UCM

### Submitter
Concha Gil

### Lab Head
Dr José Luis Martínez
Departamento de Biotecnología Microbiana, Centro Nacional de Biotecnología, CSIC, Madrid, Spain.


