### Accession
PXD007693

### Title
EuPA YPIC challenge entry - proteome data analysis 

### Description
Sweet Google O’ Mine - The Importance of Online Search Engines for MS-facilitated, Database-independent Identification of Peptide-encoded Book Prefaces

### Sample Protocol
EuPA YPIC challenge peptides supplied at a solution at ~0.5nmol/peptide in ~40µl 30% acetonitrile (ACN) were diluted 1:10 in 5% ACN, 0.01% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). 5µl per injection were analyzed on an Easy-nLC 1000 coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nanoelectrospray source. Peptides were separated on a 15cm analytical column (75µm inner diameter) in-house packed with 1.9µm C18 beads (Dr. Maisch, r119.b9). The column temperature was maintained at 40°C using an integrated column oven (PRSO-V1, Sonation). We used a 77min gradient at a flow rate of 250nl/min ramping from 5% buffer B (80% ACN and 0.1% formic acid) to 25% B in 50min, to 40% B in 10min, to 80% B in 2min, kept 5min, to 5% B in 5min and kept 5min. MS analysis was performed with two different instrument methods. Both measured MS1 scans at 120,000 resolution from 300-1500 m/z at 30% RF Lens with an AGC target of 4e5 and max. 50ms injection time. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30s. Both methods triggered two MS2 scans on each selected precursor, first with HCF at 30% NCE, and then with CID at 35% NCE and activated MSA with neutral loss mass 97.9673. The two different methods termed sensitive and ultra-sensitive used top12/top6 analysis at 60,000/120,000 resolution with 0.8/0.4 m/z isolation window, an AGC target 1e5/2e5 and max. 118/256ms injection time, respectively.

### Data Protocol
Raw LC-MS/MS files were processed with MaxQuant v1.5.8.4i (Cox and Mann 2008) with activated de-novo sequencing and a custom FASTA database. The database was generated from two sentences from the preface of Sir J. J. Thomson’s 1913 book “Rays of positive electricity and their application to chemical analyses”, with letters B, O and U transformed to S, K and R, respectively. Variable modifications were set to Oxidation (M), Acetyl (K), Methyl (R), Phospho (S), and a custom defined protection group (S) at total m/z 89.97. Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as fixed modification. Both raw files were set to the same experiment name. Digestion was set to unspecific, with a minimum amino acid length of six. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% on PSM, PTM site and Protein level. MaxQuant makes use of the target-decoy search strategy to estimate and control the extent of false-positive identifications using the concept of posterior error probability (PEP) to integrate multiple peptide properties, such as length, charge, number of modifications, and Andromeda score into a single quantity reflecting the quality of a peptide spectrum match (PSM).

### Publication Abstract
In the recent year, we felt like we were not truly showing our full potential in our PhD projects, and so we were very happy and excited when YPIC announced the ultimate proteomics challenge. This gave us the opportunity of showing off and procrastinating at the same time:) The challenge was to identify the amino acid sequence of 19 synthetic peptides made up from an English text and then find the book that it came from. For this task we chose to run on an Orbitrap Fusion&#x2122; Lumos&#x2122; Tribrid&#x2122; Mass Spectrometer with two different sensitive MS2 resolutions, each with both HCD and CID fragmentation consecutively. This strategy was chosen because we speculated that multiple MS2 scans at high quality would be beneficial over lower resolution, speed and quantity in the relatively sparse sample. The resulting chromatogram did not reveal 19 sharp distinct peaks and it was not clear to us where to start a manual spectra interpretation. We instead used the de novo option in the MaxQuant software and the resulting output gave us two phrases with words that were specific enough to be searched in the magic Google search engine. Google gave us the name of a very famous physicist, namely Sir Joseph John Thomson, and a reference to his book "Rays of positive electricity" from 1913. We then converted the paragraph we believed to be the right one into a FASTA format and used it with MaxQuant to do a database search. This resulted in 16 perfectly FASTA search-identified peptide sequences, one with a missing PTM and one found as a truncated version. The remaining one was identified within the MaxQuant de novo sequencing results. We thus show in this study that our workflow combining de novo spectra analysis algorithms with an online search engine is ideally suited for all applications where users want to decipher peptide-encoded prefaces of 20th century science books.

### Keywords
Maxquant de novo, Eupa ypic challenge, Synthetic peptides

### Affiliations
NNF Center for Protein Research, Copenhagen, Denmark
MSAID GmbH

### Submitter
Alexander Hogrebe

### Lab Head
Dr Jesper Velgaard Olsen
NNF Center for Protein Research, Copenhagen, Denmark


