### Accession
PXD000766

### Title
Plasma protein corona on superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles (SPIONs)

### Description
We determined the composition of the plasma protein corona on silica-coated versus dextran-coated iron oxide nanoparticles using mass spectrometry-based proteomics approaches. Gene ontology (GO) enrichment analysis and Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) revealed distinct protein corona compositions for the two different SPIONs. Relaxivity of silica-coated SPIONs was modulated by the presence of a protein corona. Moreover, the viability of primary human monocyte-derived macrophages was influenced by the protein corona on silica-coated, but not dextran-coated SPIONs, and the protein corona promoted cellular uptake of silica-coated SPIONs, but did not affect internalization of dextran-coated SPIONs.

### Sample Protocol
SPIONs with plasma protein corona were subjected to on-particle digestions with trypsin and peptides were harvested through centrifugation and analyzed on a LTQ Orbitrap Velos. An aliquote of each tryptic digest was labelled with iTRAQ 8-plex for relative quantification.

### Data Protocol
MSMS data was searched using Sequest/Percolator under Proteome Discoverer 1.3 against the human subset of the swissprot FASTA database. Variable mods: oxidation of methionine. Fixed mods: carbamidomethylation of cysteine, iTRAQ8plex on N-terminus and on lysine side chains (when applicable).

### Publication Abstract
Superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles (SPIONs) have emerged as promising contrast agents for magnetic resonance imaging. The influence of different surface coatings on the biocompatibility of SPIONs has been addressed, but the potential impact of the so-called corona of adsorbed proteins on the surface of SPIONs on their biological behavior is less well studied. Here, we determined the composition of the plasma protein corona on silica-coated versus dextran-coated SPIONs using mass spectrometry-based proteomics approaches. Notably, gene ontology (GO) enrichment analysis and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway analysis revealed distinct protein corona compositions for the two different SPIONs. Relaxivity of silica-coated SPIONs was modulated by the presence of a protein corona. Moreover, the viability of primary human monocyte-derived macrophages was influenced by the protein corona on silica-coated, but not dextran-coated SPIONs, and the protein corona promoted cellular uptake of silica-coated SPIONs, but did not affect internalization of dextran-coated SPIONs.

### Keywords
Nanoparticles, Superparamagnetic, Macrophages, Protein corona, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Dept. of Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden; Clinical proteomics mass spectrometry, Science for Life Laboratory, Sweden
Clinical Proteomics Unit, Dep. of Oncology-Pathology

### Submitter
Maria Pernemalm

### Lab Head
Dr Janne Lehtiö
Dept. of Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden; Clinical proteomics mass spectrometry, Science for Life Laboratory, Sweden


