### Accession
PXD011399

### Title
Isolation of spleen lymph during leukemia development

### Description
Here we asked whether infiltration of leukemic blasts initiated a response that could be detected in the interstitial fluid phase of the spleen in a rat model known to mimic human acute myeloid leukemia (AML). By cannulating efferent lymphatic vessels, we were able to monitor the response of the spleen microenvironment during leukemia development. Flow cytometric analysis of lymphocytes isolated from spleen lymph showed increased STAT3 and CREB signaling, and proteins related to these pathways were identified with a different profile in leukemic when compared with control spleen lymph. Additionally, SPARC-like 1 protein, recently identified as a promoter of AML cell growth and a biomarker of patient outcome, was locally produced in the spleen and upregulated in the leukemic setting. Thus, interstitial fluid, and its surrogate efferent lymph, can be used to provide unique information about spleen responses and substances released to the general circulation during leukemia development.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation for mass spectrometry The protein concentration in each sample was measured using a BCA protein assay. Aliquots of 1μg, 5µg, 10µg or 15µg protein were reduced using dithiothreitol (DTT; Amersham Biosciences) and alkylated in the dark using iodoacetamide (IAA; Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, US), followed by digestion using porcine trypsin (Promega, Fitchburg, MO, US). The samples were desalted using Oasis HLB μElution Plate 30 µm (Waters, Milford, MA, US).  Liquid Chromatography – Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS) analysis  Peptides were separated during a biphasic ACN gradient from two nanoflow UPLC pumps (flow rate of 280 nl /min) on the analytical column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 15 cm x 75µm i.d.  nanoViper column, packed with 2um C18 beads). Solvent A and B was 0.1% FA (vol/vol) with 2% ACN or 90% ACN (vol/vol) respectively. From 0-6 min the gradient was 5%B, at from 6-6.5 increase to 8%B. The gradient composition was 8–38%B from 6.5-67 min, then 38–90%B from 67-70 min. Elution of very hydrophobic peptides and conditioning of the column were performed between 70-75 minutes with isocratic elution with 90%B, ramp from 90-5%B from 75-78 min and hold at 5%B until 90 min. The eluting peptides were ionized in the electrospray and analyzed by the LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro. The mass spectrometer was operated in the DDA-mode (data-dependent-acquisition) to automatically switch between full scan MS and MS/MS acquisition.  Survey full scan MS spectra (from 300 to 2000 m/z) were acquired for 80 min in the Orbitrap with a resolution R = 60000 at 400 m/z (after accumulation to a target value of 1E6 in the linear ion trap with maximum allowed ion accumulation time of 500 ms). The 7 most intense eluting peptides above an ion threshold value of 1000 counts, and charge states 2 or higher, were sequentially isolated to a target value of 1E4 and fragmented in the high-pressure linear ion trap by low-energy CID (collision-induced-dissociation) with normalized collision energy of 40% and wideband-activation enabled. The maximum allowed accumulation time for CID was 200 ms, the isolation width maintained at 2 Da, activation q = 0.25, and activation time of 10 ms. The resulting fragment ions were scanned out in the low-pressure ion trap at normal scan rate, and recorded with the secondary electron multipliers.  One MS/MS spectrum of a precursor mass was allowed before dynamic exclusion for 20 s. Lock-mass internal calibration was not enabled.

### Data Protocol
Proteomic data analysis and statistics The acquired raw data files were analyzed in a label-free manner using both Progenesis LC-MS (version 4.0, Nonlinear Dynamics, UK) and MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.17) as described in (14). Extracted MS/MS spectra were searched against a concatenated target/decoy version of the UniProtKB Rattus Norvegicus database. In the Progenesis analysis, this was performed using SearchGUI (version 2.0.5) (15) with OMSSA and X!Tandem (16) algorithms selected. Identified peptides were assigned to proteins using PeptideShaker (version 1.0.2) (17), and validated peptide-spectrum matches (PSM) were reimported into Progenesis. In MaxQuant, peptide and protein identifications were performed using the built-in Andromeda search engine (18). Fixed and variable modifications were carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.021464 Da) and oxidation of methionine (+15.994915), respectively. MaxQuant also include N-terminal acetylation (+42.010565) as a variable modification, by default. Precursor mass tolerance was 10 ppm (20 ppm in MaxQuant) and fragment mass tolerance 0.5 Da searching for b and y ions. Two missed cleavages were allowed using trypsin as enzyme. Identification matches were validated using a stringent 1% false discovery rate threshold estimated using the target/decoy approach (19). Perseus (version 1.5.0.0) was used for data analysis of the MaxQuant output (see www.coxdocs.org  Perseus  “use_docs” for detailed information).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Spleen, Rat, Lc-ms/ms, Lymph

### Affiliations
University of Bergen
The Department of Biomedicine University of Bergen, Norway

### Submitter
Kenneth Finne

### Lab Head
Dr Helge Wiig
The Department of Biomedicine University of Bergen, Norway


