### Accession
PXD017915

### Title
An ultra-high-resolution IonStar strategy enhancing accuracy and precision of MS1-based proteomics and an extensive comparison with state-of-the-art SWATH-MS in large-cohort quantification

### Description
Quantitative proteomics in large cohorts is highly valuable for biomedical/pharmaceutical investigations but often suffers from suboptimal reliability, accuracy, and reproducibility. Here we describe a new ultra-high-resolution (UHR) IonStar method achieving precise/reproducible protein measurement in large-cohorts while eliminating accuracy-related problems such as ratio compression, by taking advantage of the exceptional selectivity of UHR-MS1 detection (240k_FWHM). Using mixed-proteome sets reflecting large-cohort analysis using technical or biological replicates (N=56), we comprehensively compared the quantitative performances of UHR-IonStar with a state-of-the-art SWATH-MS method. The SWATH-MS employs a cutting-edge TripleTOF and a SpectronautTM package and was meticulously optimized to maximize sensitivity, reproducibility and proteome-coverage, by developing a highly extensive, customized spectral-library, reproducible/robust capillary-LC separation and narrow, variable-window acquisition. Comparing quantitative performances of the two distinct methods (i.e. MS1-vs.MS2-based) affords interesting and valuable observations. While the performances for higher-abundance proteins (i.e. higher 75% proteins in abundance) are quite similar by the two methods, UHR-IonStar showed markedly better quantitative accuracy, precision and reproducibility (e.g. R2>0.9 by UHR-IonStar vs. R2<0.4 by SWATH-MS)  for proteins of lower 25% in abundance, and much improved sensitivity/selectivity for discovering significantly-altered proteins, especially these with changes ≤2.5 folds.  Furthermore, UHR-IonStar showed more accurate protein quantification in single analysis of each individual sample in a large set, which is an inadequately-investigated albeit highly critical parameter for large-cohort analysis. Finally, we compared the two methods in measuring time courses of altered proteins in cancer cells (N=36) treated by paclitaxel, where dysregulated biological processes have been well-established. UHR-IonStar discovered more altered-proteins in biological processes and pathways that are known to be induced by paclitaxel, with substantially better significance scores. Additionally, UHR-IonStar showed markedly superior ability in accurately depicting the time courses of tubulin-α/β isoforms which are well-known to be consistently induced by paclitaxel. In summary, UHR-IonStar represents a reliable, robust and cost-effective solution for large-cohort proteomics quantification with excellent accuracy and precision.

### Sample Protocol
Sample collection and surfactant cocktail-aided extraction/precipitation/on-pellet digestion (SEPOD) To pellet cultured cells, Saccharomyces cerevisiae yeast cells were harvested by centrifugation at 4,000 rpm for 10 min, E.coli cells were centrifuged at 5,000 g for 10 min, and human cells (i.e. SW620 and Panc-1) were centrifuged at 400 g for 5 min. The collected cell pellets were suspended in lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-formic acid, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 2% SDS, 2% NP-40, pH8.0) containing a cOmpleteTM protease inhibitor cocktail tablet (Roche Applied Science, Indianapolis, IN) and a PhosSTOPTM phosphatase inhibitor cocktail tablet (Roche Applied Science, Indianapolis, IN). The lysate was incubated on ice for 30 min with vortex every 10 min, and then homogenized 5-10 times with a Polytron homogenizer (Kinematica AG, Switzerland) for 5-10 s at 15,000 rpm with 20 s-cooling cycles. The mixture was then sonicated with a probe sonicator (3-5 cycles of 20 sec each) in order to achieve extensive lysis. The samples were centrifuged at 20,000 g for 30 min at 4 °C, and then the supernatant was collected, the protein yield was measured with BCA protein assay (Pierce Biotechnology, Inc., Rockford, IL) and it was stored at -80 °C until analysis.  The extracts were processed using a surfactant cocktail-aided extraction/precipitation/on-pellet digestion (SEPOD) procedure, which provides extensive cleanup to remove detergents and non-protein matrix components, deep protein denaturation (by both surfactants and precipitation) for rapid, efficient, and reproducible digestion, and thereby achieves reliable quantification of samples. The 100 μg protein was diluted with 50 mM Tris-formic acid (FA) buffer (pH 8.5) to 100 μL and incubated with 10 mM DTT at 56 °C for 30 min followed by 20 mM Iodoacetamide (IAM) at 37 °C for 30 min in darkness. The chilled acetone (-20°C) was added to precipitate protein pellet at -20°C overnight and 500 μL methanol was added to wash the pellet after centrifugation. The air-dried protein pellet was dissolved in 100 μL Tris-FA (pH=8.5) buffer with water bath sonication. For protein digestion, the activated trypsin was added at a ratio of 1:20 (enzyme: substrate) and incubated for 6 h at 37 °C. The 1% FA was used to terminate digestion and each sample was centrifuged at 20,000g for 20 min before LC-MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
1. LC-MS instrumentation and data acquisition For UHR-IonStar, we employed the nano-RPLC system, which is consisted of a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano-LC system and an Ultimate 3000 gradient micro-LC system with a WPS-3000 autosampler. Peptide separation was performed on a nano-LC column (75-μm ID × 50 cm) with Pepmap 3-μm C18 particles. A trap (300 μm ID × 1 cm) packed with Zorbax 5 μm C18 materials was employed. Mobile phase A contains 2% ACN with 0.1% formic acid, and mobile phase B contains 88% ACN with 0.1% formic acid. A 4-μg peptide sample was loaded onto the trap with 1% B at 10 μL/min. After the trap was washed for 3 min, a 250 nL/min flow rate was used to back-flush the samples onto the nano-LC column for further separation. The LC separation gradient is the following: 4% B for 3 min; 4 - 11 % B for 5 min; 11 - 28 % B for 117 min; 28 - 50 % B for 10 min; 50 - 97 % B for 1 min; 97% B for 17 min. An Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) was employed for peptide/protein identification and quantification. Data collection was operated in a 3-second cycle using the data-dependent top-speed mode. The MS1 survey scan (m/z 400-1500) was at a resolution of 240,000 (FWHM@m/z=200), with automated gain control (AGC) target of 400,000 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Precursors were fragmentized in HCD activation mode at a normalized collision energy of 35% and the dynamic exclusion was set with 45s. Precursors were filtered by quadrupole using an isolation window of 1 Th. The MS2 spectra were collected at a resolution of 15,000 in the Orbitrap, with an AGC target of 50,000 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms.  2. Identification and quantification using UHR-IonStar procedure Prior to quantification by UHR-IonStar data processing method, raw files were searched against the Uniprot-SwissProt protein database containing three species (i.e. 20,244 entries from Homo sapiens, 4,443 entries from E.coli, 6,727 entries from yeast) with MS-GF+ searching engine (released in July, 2013) for protein identification. The LC-MS files of paclitaxel-treated cells were searched against human SwissProt database. Detailed search parameter can be found here {Shen, 2018 #10;Wang, 2018 #11}. Global FDR control were performed with Scaffold (v.4.3.2). At least two distinct peptides were required for each identified protein. The FDR for peptide and protein identification was set to 0.1% and 1% respectively, as measured by reserved database searching.  The UHR-IonStar procedure was optimized based on our previous IonStar data processing method {Shen, 2018 #18}{Shen, 2017 #17}, to take full advantage of the 240K-resolution MS1 measurement. The procedure involves using SIEVE for chromatographic alignment and frame generation, followed by data processing modules using a GUI interface in UHR-IonStar v1.1 released in this publication. The package can be downloaded from here: https://github.com/Qianshuo1993/UHR-IonStar. Details of functions are listed in the description file of the package. The chromatographic alignment was performed with a ChromAlign algorithm modified based on the original method {Sadygov, 2006 #112} for inter-run retention time (RT) adjustment. The quantitative MS1 features were generated in data-independent mode using Direct Ion Current Extraction (DICE) strategy, the defined m/z-RT extraction window was optimized for ultra-high-resolution MS1 measurement via using a narrow window width (5ppm m/z) coupled with an optimized frame time width (e.g. 1.0 min). With the UHR-IonStar package, the quantitative features were exported and then matched with PSMs list by MS2 scan number. All following dataset-wide normalization, multivariate outlier removal and aggregation were accomplished using UHR-IonStar. For hybrid proteome dataset, the peptides shared between species were removed for unambiguous quantification of species-specific proteins. The protein ratio between two groups was calculated by comparing average ion current intensities of samples in each group, and the statistical significance was evaluated with Student’s t-test. Proteins were considered to be upregulated or downregulated with > 50% change and p-value<0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Quantitative proteomics in large cohorts is highly valuable for clinical/pharmaceutical investigations but often suffers from severely compromised reliability, accuracy, and reproducibility. Here, we describe an ultra-high-resolution IonStar method achieving reproducible protein measurement in large cohorts while minimizing the ratio compression problem, by taking advantage of the exceptional selectivity of ultra-high-resolution (UHR)-MS1 detection (240k_FWHM@<i>m</i>/<i>z</i> = 200). Using mixed-proteome benchmark sets reflecting large-cohort analysis with technical or biological replicates (<i>N</i> = 56), we comprehensively compared the quantitative performances of UHR-IonStar vs a state-of-the-art SWATH-MS method, each with their own optimal analytical platforms. We confirmed a cutting-edge micro-liquid chromatography (LC)/Triple-TOF with Spectronaut outperforms nano-LC/Orbitrap for SWATH-MS, which was then meticulously developed/optimized to maximize sensitivity, reproducibility, and proteome coverage. While the two methods with distinct principles (i.e., MS1- vs MS2-based) showed similar depth-of-analysis (&#x223c;6700-7000 missing-data-free proteins quantified, 1% protein-false discovery rate (FDR) for entire set, 2 unique peptides/protein) and good accuracy/precision in quantifying high-abundance proteins, UHR-IonStar achieved substantially superior quantitative accuracy, precision, and reproducibility for lower-abundance proteins (a category that includes most regulatory proteins), as well as much-improved sensitivity/selectivity for discovering significantly altered proteins. Furthermore, compared to SWATH-MS, UHR-IonStar showed markedly higher accuracy for a single analysis of each sample across a large set, which is an inadequately investigated albeit critical parameter for large-cohort analysis. Finally, we compared UHR-IonStar vs SWATH-MS in measuring the time courses of altered proteins in paclitaxel-treated cells (<i>N</i> = 36), where dysregulated biological pathways have been very well established. UHR-IonStar discovered substantially more well-recognized biological processes/pathways induced by paclitaxel. Additionally, UHR-IonStar showed markedly superior ability than SWATH-MS in accurately depicting the time courses of well known to be paclitaxel-induced biomarkers. In summary, UHR-IonStar represents a reliable, robust, and cost-effective solution for large-cohort proteomic quantification with excellent accuracy and precision.

### Keywords
Ultrahigh resolution ionstar, 240k quantification

### Affiliations
University at buffalo
University at buffalo, SUNY

### Submitter
xue wang

### Lab Head
Dr Jun Qu
University at buffalo, SUNY


