### Accession
PXD021798

### Title
Function and Regulation of the pyruvate transporter CstA in Escherichia coli

### Description
Pyruvate is a central metabolite that connects many metabolic pathways in living organisms. To meet the cellular pyruvate requirements, Escherichia coli most likely has three pyruvate uptake systems, BtsT, YhjX and CstA. Transport studies in intact cells proved that CstA is a high specific pyruvate transporter with moderate affinity, which is energized by a proton gradient. When the cells of a reporter strain were cultured in complex medium, cstA expression was bimodal, with the maximum being reached in the stationary phase. A DNA affinity capture assay combined with mass spectrometry and an in vivo reporter assay identified Fis as repressor in addition to the known cAMP-CRP as activator for cstA expression.

### Sample Protocol
A biotinylated PcstA fragment was generated by PCR using primers labeled with biotin at the 5’ end. As a control, a biotinylated DNA fragment located within the cstA coding sequence was used. 600 pmol of the DNA fragments was immobilized with streptavidin-coated magnetic beads (NEB) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For the preparation of protein extract, E. coli MG1655 was cultivated in 800 ml of LB medium until the indicated growth phase. Cells were harvested at 4°C, washed with cold protein binding buffer B (20 mM Tris pH 8.0, 1mM EDTA, 0.05% (v/v) TritonX100, 10% (v/v) Glycerin, 1 mM DTT, 100 mM NaCl), resuspended in 8 ml of the same buffer, and disrupted with a French press. The supernatant was incubated with the previously coated magnetic beads at room temperature for 30 min. After extensive washing to remove unspecific bound proteins, the magnetic beads were subjected to trypsin digestion using the iST 8x kit (PreOmics) following the protocol provided by the manufacturer. For LC-MS/MS purposes, desalted peptides were injected in an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo), separated in a 15-cm analytical column (75μm ID with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 2.4 μm from Dr. Maisch) with a 50-min gradient from 5 to 60% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. The effluent from the HPLC was directly electrosprayed into a Qexactive HF (Thermo) operated in data dependent mode to automatically switch between full scan MS and MS/MS acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (from m/z 375–1600) were acquired with resolution R=60,000 at m/z 400 (AGC target of 3x106). The 10 most intense peptide ions with charge states between 2 and 5 were sequentially isolated to a target value of 1x105, and fragmented at 27% normalized collision energy. Typical mass spectrometric conditions were: spray voltage, 1.5 kV; no sheath and auxiliary gas flow; heated capillary temperature, 250ºC; ion selection threshold, 33.000 counts.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant 1.6.10.43 was used to identify proteins and quantify by iBAQ with the following parameters: Database, uniprot_AUP000000625_Ecoli_20200512; MS tol, 10ppm; MS/MS tol, 20ppm Da; Peptide FDR, 0.1; Protein FDR, 0.01 Min. peptide Length, 7; Variable modifications, Oxidation (M); Fixed modifications, Carbamidomethyl (C); Peptides for protein quantitation, razor and unique; Min. peptides, 1; Min. ratio count, 2. Identified proteins were considered as interaction partners of the promoter region of cstA if their MaxQuant iBAQ values displayed a greater than log2 2-fold enrichment and p-value 0.05 (t-test adjusted for multiple comparisons) when compared to the control.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Catabolite repression, Global regulator fis, Stationary phase, Pyruvate uptake

### Affiliations
Biomedical Center-LMU
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München Biozentrum Department Biologie I, Ber. Mikrobiologie Großhaderner Str. 2-4 82152 Martinsried  Raum: E 01.024 Telefon: +49 (0)89 / 2180-74500 Fax: +49 (0)89 / 2180-74520

### Submitter
Ignasi Forne

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Kirsten Jung
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München Biozentrum Department Biologie I, Ber. Mikrobiologie Großhaderner Str. 2-4 82152 Martinsried  Raum: E 01.024 Telefon: +49 (0)89 / 2180-74500 Fax: +49 (0)89 / 2180-74520


