### Accession
PXD045510

### Title
Flash proteotyping of microbial isolates by tandem mass spectrometry

### Description
Flash proteotyping is a methodology for ultra-fast identification of microorganisns by tandem mass spectrometry. Here, we obtained results on five reference strains and ten new bacterial isolates. The methodology is based on direct sample infusion into the mass spectromete and an original, highly sensitive procedure for data processing and taxonomic identification.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were digested with trypsin using a SP3 protocol adapted to the 96-well format. Peptides were fractionated upon their hydrophobicity using SPE disks. A specific fraction of these resulting peptides were analyzed with an Exploris 480 tandem mass spectrometry in direct infusion mode.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were analyzed by MASCOT, the results were then parsed by means of a proteotyping cascade strategy. Peptides and taxonomical information associated to these peptides, and spectral counts were extracted.

### Publication Abstract
Rapid identification of microorganisms is essential for medical diagnostics, sanitary controls, and food safety. High-throughput analytical platforms currently rely on whole-cell MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry to process hundreds of samples per day. Although this technology has become a reference method, it is unable to process most environmental isolates and opportunistic pathogens due to an incomplete experimental spectrum database. In most cases, its discriminating power is limited to the species taxonomical rank. By recording much more sequence information at the peptide level, proteotyping by tandem mass spectrometry is able to identify the taxonomic position of any microorganism in the tree of life and can be highly discriminating at the subspecies level. We propose here a methodology for ultra-fast identification of microorganisms by tandem mass spectrometry based on direct sample infusion and a highly sensitive procedure for data processing and taxonomic identification. Results obtained on reference strains and hitherto uncharacterized bacterial isolates show identification to species level in 36 s of tandem mass spectrometry signal, 102 s when including the injection procedure. Flash proteotyping is highly discriminating, as it can provide information down to strain level. The methodology enables high throughput identification of isolates, opening up new prospects, particularly in culturomics, and diagnostics.

### Keywords
Isolates, Taxonomy, Proteomics, Proteotyping, Bacteria, Identification

### Affiliations
CEA-Marcoule, ProGenoMIX platform, DRF-Li2D, 30207 Bagnols-sur-Ceze, France
Li2D

### Submitter
Jean ARMENGAUD

### Lab Head
Dr Jean Armengaud
CEA-Marcoule, ProGenoMIX platform, DRF-Li2D, 30207 Bagnols-sur-Ceze, France


