### Accession
PXD008600

### Title
Proteomics of Human Cervical Mucus Plugs

### Description
Preterm birth is a leading cause of neonatal mortality and lacks an effective therapy. Ascending microbial infections from the lower genital tract lead to infection of the placenta, amniotic fluid and fetus causing preterm birth or stillbirth. Directly in the path of an ascending infection is the cervical mucus plug (CMP), a dense mucoid structure in the cervical canal with potential antimicrobial properties. In this study, we aimed to define the components of CMP responsible for antimicrobial activity against a common lower genital tract organism associated with preterm birth and stillbirths, namely Group B Streptococcus (GBS). Using a quantitative proteomic approach, we identified antimicrobial factors in CMPs that were collected from healthy human pregnancies.  This study aims to provide new insight into how the human CMP may limit ascending bacterial infection.

### Sample Protocol
Cervical mucus plugs from seven pregnant women providing informed consent were weighed, lyophilized, and re-suspended such that total protein content was ~1mg/mL. From each CMP sample, a 90-μg protein aliquot was precipitated using acetone, centrifuged, air-dried and processed with the Tandem Mass Tag (TMT, ThermoFisher) 10plex kit as per manufacturer’s instructions. The cysteine residues were alkylated and samples were digested using 10μg Trypsin O/N at 37°C. Each CMP sample was then labeled with a different TMT reagent for differential quantification as per manufacturer’s instructions. The samples were fractionated using strong cation-exchange (SCX) chromatography. Briefly, the samples were dissolved in buffer A (7mM potassium phosphate, 30% acetonitrile, pH 2.65) and combined immediately before fractionation using a SCX column (Zorbax 300-SCX 5μm, Agilent). Fractions were collected every min at a flow rate of 200 μL/min from 1% solvent B (7mM potassium phosphate, 500 mM KCl, 30% acetonitrile, pH 2.65) to 60% over 40 min as well as during column washing with 98% solvent B for 10 min. Eleven fractions were consolidated based on UV trace and after drying, peptides were dissolved in 250μL of 0.1% TFA. A 50 μL aliquot was desalted using ZipTip micro-C18 before MS analysis. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed with an Easy-nLC 1000 coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The LC system consisted of a fused-silica nanospray needle (PicoTip™ emitter, 50 µm ID, New Objective) packed in-house with 40 cm of Magic C18 AQ 100Å reverse-phase media (Michrom Bioresources Inc.). The peptide sample was diluted in 7 µL of 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in water, and 5 µL was loaded onto the column and separated using a two-mobile-phase system consisting of 0.1% formic acid in water (A) and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (B). A 90-min gradient from 2% to 30% B at a flow rate of 300 nL/min was used. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent MS/MS mode over the m/z range of 400–1800. The mass resolution was set to 120,000.  The cycle time was set to 3 seconds, and the most abundant ions from the scan were selected for MS/MS analysis using 40% normalized HCD collision energy and analyzed with an orbitrap with the resolution set to 15,000. Selected ions were dynamically excluded for 45 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using Proteome Discoverer 1.4. The data were searched against Uniprot human protein database (March 2014), which included additional common contaminants. Trypsin was set as the enzyme with maximum missed cleavages set to 2. The precursor ion tolerance was set to 10 ppm, and the fragment ion tolerance was set to 0.6 Da.  Variable modifications were set to methionine oxidation (+15.995 Da), methylthio on cysteines (+45.988), and TMT reporter tags on lysines and N-termini. SEQUEST was used for search, and search results were run through Percolator for scoring.

### Publication Abstract
Preterm birth is a leading cause of neonatal mortality and lacks an effective therapy. Ascending microbial infections from the lower genital tract lead to infection of the placenta, amniotic fluid, and fetus causing preterm birth or stillbirth. Directly in the path of an ascending infection is the cervical mucus plug (CMP), a dense mucoid structure in the cervical canal with potential antimicrobial properties. In this study, we aimed to define the components of CMP responsible for antimicrobial activity against a common lower genital tract organism associated with preterm birth and stillbirths, namely, group B streptococcus (GBS). Using a quantitative proteomic approach, we identified antimicrobial factors in CMPs that were collected from healthy human pregnancies. However, we noted that the concentration of antimicrobial peptides present in the human CMPs were insufficient to directly kill GBS, and antimicrobial activity, when observed, was due to antibiotics retained in the CMPs. Despite this insufficiency, CMP proteins were able to activate leukocytes in whole blood resulting in increased rates of bacterial killing, suggesting a role for the CMP in enhancing complement-mediated killing or leukocyte activation. This study provides new insight into how the human CMP may limit ascending bacterial infection.

### Keywords
Proteins, Human, Antimicrobial, Peptides, Cervical mucus plugs, Proteomics, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center
Associate Professor, Pediatrics Adjunct Associate Professor, Microbiology and Global Health Affiliate Member: FHCRC Consortium University of Washington Seattle Childrens Research Institute 1900 9th Ave SeattleWA 98101-1304

### Submitter
Philip Gafken

### Lab Head
Dr Lakshmi Rajagopal, Ph.D
Associate Professor, Pediatrics Adjunct Associate Professor, Microbiology and Global Health Affiliate Member: FHCRC Consortium University of Washington Seattle Childrens Research Institute 1900 9th Ave SeattleWA 98101-1304


