### Accession
PXD020515

### Title
Proteomic changes following knockdown of DNA repair and redox signaling protein, APE1/Ref-1, under hypoxia conditions

### Description
Pancreatic cancer is a complex disease with a desmoplastic stroma, extreme hypoxia, and inherent resistance to therapy. Understanding the signaling and adaptive response of such an aggressive cancer is key to making advances in therapeutic efficacy and understanding disease progression. Redox factor-1 (Ref-1), a redox signaling protein, regulates the DNA binding activity of several transcription factors, including HIF-1. The conversion of HIF-1 from an oxidized to reduced state leads to enhancement of its DNA binding. In our previously published work, knockdown of Ref-1 under normoxia resulted in altered gene expression patterns on pathways including EIF2, protein kinase A, and mTOR. In this study, single cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) and proteomics were used to explore the effects of Ref-1 on metabolic pathways under hypoxia.Results: We also integrated the scRNA data analysis with the proteomic analysis and found that the differentially expressed genes and pathways identified from the scRNA-seq data are highly consistent to the significant proteins observed in the proteomics data, especially for the upregulated cell cycle and transcription pathways and downregulated metabolic, apoptosis and signaling pathways under hypoxia. Conclusion: The scRNA-seq and proteomics data consistently demonstrated down-regulated central metabolism pathways in APE1/Ref-1 knockdown vs scrambled control under both normoxia and hypoxia conditions.  Experimental Methods: scRNA-seq comparing pancreatic cancer cells expressing less than 20% of the Ref-1 protein was analyzed using left truncated mixture Gaussian model. Matched samples were also collected for bulk proteomic analysis of the four conditions.  scRNA-seq data was validated using proteomics and qRT-PCR. Ref-1’s role in mitochondrial function was confirmed using mitochondrial function assays and qRT-PCR.  Results: We also integrated the scRNA data analysis with the proteomic analysis and found that the differentially expressed genes and pathways identified from the scRNA-seq data are highly consistent to the significant proteins observed in the proteomics data, especially for the upregulated cell cycle and transcription pathways and downregulated metabolic, apoptosis and signaling pathways under hypoxia. Conclusion: The scRNA-seq and proteomics data consistently demonstrated down-regulated central metabolism pathways in APE1/Ref-1 knockdown vs scrambled control under both normoxia and hypoxia conditions.

### Sample Protocol
RNA-seq comparing pancreatic cancer cells expressing less than 20% of the Ref-1 protein was analyzed using left truncated mixture Gaussian model. Matched samples were also collected for bulk proteomic analysis of the four conditions.  scRNA-seq data was validated using proteomics and qRT-PCR. Ref-1’s role in mitochondrial function was confirmed using mitochondrial function assays and qRT-PCR.   Cells were lysed in in 8 M urea, 50 mM Tris.HCl pH 8.5 (25 μL). All samples were sonicated briefly by probe sonicator, and centrifuged at 12000 rpm for 15 min to remove debris.  Protein concentrations were determined using a Bradford protein assay (BioRad) and colorimeter—EPOCH|2 (BioTek Instruments, Inc., Winooski, VT 05404-0998, U.S.A.) employing vendor provided protocols. Protein samples in equal amounts were reduced with 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP) and alkylated with 10 mM chloroacetaminde (CAM).  Samples were diluted with 100 mM Tris-HCl to a final urea concentration of 2 M and digested overnight with Trypsin/Lys-C Mix Mass Spectrometry (1:100 protease:substrate ratio, Promega Corporation, Madison, WI 53711-5399, U.S.A.) Peptides were desalted on 50 mg Sep-Pak® Vac (Waters Corporation Milford, MA 01757, U.S.A.) employing a vacuum manifold (Waters Corporation Milford, MA 01757, U.S.A.). After elution from the column in 70% ACN, 0.1% FA, peptides were dried by speed vacuum and resuspended in 24 µL of 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB). Peptide concentration was measured using Pierce Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific) to ensure that an equal amount of each was labeled. Table X. TMT labels used for each sample. MixH   TMT label Sample 126 control 127N Hypoxia-scramble 127C Hypoxia-scramble 128N Hypoxia-scramble 128C Hypoxia-scramble 129C Hypoxia-siRNA 130N Hypoxia-siRNA 130C Hypoxia-siRNA 131 Hypoxia-siRNA     Mix N   TMT label sample type 126 control 127N Normoxia-scramble 127C Normoxia-scramble 128N Normoxia-scramble 128C Normoxia-scramble 129N Normoxia-siRNA 130N Normoxia-siRNA 130C Normoxia-siRNA 131 Normoxia-siRNA  Samples were then Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) labeled with 0.2 mg of reagent for two hours at room temperature (11-plex kit, manufactures instructions TMT10plex™ Isobaric Label Reagent Set.  Labelling reactions were quenched with hydroxylamine at room temperature 15 minutes. Each set of labelled peptides were then mixed and dried by speed vacuum. High pH basic fractionation Each peptide mixture was resuspended in 0.1% TFA (trifluoroacetic acid) and fractionated into 8 fractions on PierceTM High pH reversed-phase peptide fractionation spin columns using vendor methodology (Cat 84868). Each fraction was dried by speed vacuum and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid (FA). Nano-LC-MS/MS analyses were performed on an EASY-nLC HPLC system (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). One third of each fraction was loaded onto a reversed phase PepMapTM RSLC C18 column (2 μm, 100 Å, 75 μm x 25 cm) with Easy-Spray tip at 450 nL/min. Peptides were eluted from 8-20% B over 165 minutes, 30-50% B over 3 mins, 50% B for 12 minutes (Mobile phases A: 0.1% FA, water; B: 0.1% FA, 80% Acetonitrile).  Mass spectrometer settings include capillary temperature of 275 oC and ion spray voltage was kept at 2.6 kV. The mass spectrometer method was operated in positive ion with a 4 sec cycle time data-dependent acquisition method with advanced peak determination and Easy-IC (internal calibrant). Precursor scans (m/z 375-1500) were done with an Orbitrap resolution of 120000, RF lens% 30, maximum inject time 50 ms, 75% normalized AGC target, including charges of 2 to 7 for fragmentation with an intensity threshold of 5e3, and 60 s dynamic exclusion.  CID MS2 scans were performed in the ion trap at turbo speed with a 0.7 m/z isolation window, 35% normalized CID collision energy, and an isolation window of 400-1200 m/z.  5 ions were then selected for synchronous-precursor-selection (SPS)-MS3 fragmentation with a 2 m/z window, 65% normalized HCD, Orbitrap resolution of 50000, 200% normalized AGC target and auto mode maximum IT. The data were recorded using Thermo Scientific Xcalibur software (Copyright 2017 Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.).

### Data Protocol
Resulting RAW files were analyzed in Proteome Discover 2.2 (ThermoScientific) with a human uniprot FASTA database (downloaded 02/15/2017) including common contaminants. SEQUEST HT searches were conducted with a maximum number of 2 missed cleavages; precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm; and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.8 Da. Static modifications used for the search were, 1) carbamidomethylation on cysteine (C) residues; 2) TMT 6plex label on lysine (K) residues and the N-termini of peptides. Dynamic modifications used for the search were oxidation of methionines and acetylation of N-termini. Percolator False Discovery Rate was set to a strict setting of 0.01 and a relaxed setting of 0.05. Values from both unique and razor peptides were used for quantification. In the consensus workflow, peptides were normalized in by total peptide amount and scaled on control channel 126 which was a mix of proteins from untreated cells. Resulting grouped abundance values for each sample type, abundance ratio values; and respective p-values (ANOVA) from Proteome Discover were exported to Microsoft Excel.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Transcription factor signaling, Ape1/ref-1, Pancreatic cancer, Dna repair, Hypoxia

### Affiliations
Indiana University School of Medicine
Assistant Professor of Pediatrics Assistant Professor of Pharmacology & Toxicology Indiana University School of Medicine

### Submitter
Emma Doud

### Lab Head
Dr Melissa Fishel
Assistant Professor of Pediatrics Assistant Professor of Pharmacology & Toxicology Indiana University School of Medicine


