### Accession
PXD028835

### Title
I.e. mouse ovary palmitoylation protein LC-MSMS

### Description
To identify a role for protein palmitoylation in ovarian of DHEA-induced PCOS mice model. First, we used DHEA to induce a PCOS mice model，hematoxylin-eosin (H&E) staining sections form the ovaries of the Control and DHEA groups.The mice oral gavage with DHEA disrupted ovarian morphology,the estrous cycle, and hormone profilein DHEA-induced mouse. The three pairs of ovary for each tube are mixed together as a group were lysed and divided into 2 fractions. The -HAM condition served as a negative control and the +HAM sample positive control.In the +HAM sample, the palmitate residue was cleaved off and exchanged with biotin. After the ABE reaction was completed, streptavidin beads were used to enrich for biotinylated proteins. Proteins enriched from +HAM and −HAM conditions were identified using mass spectrometry (MS).

### Sample Protocol
Ovary tissues collected from DHEA-induced PCOS group (DHEA group) (n=9) or control group (n=9) are divided into 3 tubes as repeats. Considering the protein level from mice tissues, each tubes contained 3 pairs ovaries to enrich protein. Samples were adjussted to the same volume and concentration (3 mL and 1 mg/mL) by the addition of lysis buffer (1 mM EDTA, 1% Triton X-100, 25 mM NEM in PBS pH 7.4) containing protease inhibitor cocktails (04906837001; Roche), according to an enrichment strategy adapted from previously report.

### Data Protocol
The +HAM group proteins used Welch's t-test to test and calculate the multiple of difference. The two conditions of Fold change >= 1.2 and Q-value <0.05 or a protein unique to a single group are used as the screening criteria for significantly different proteins.With this approach, we identified 60 palmitoylated proteins in cultured in control and DHEA groups.

### Publication Abstract
Ovarian granulosa cells (GCs) in the follicle are the important mediator of steroidogenesis and foster oocyte maturation. Evidences suggested that the function of GCs could be regulated by <i>S</i>-palmitoylation. However, the role of <i>S</i>-palmitoylation of GCs in ovarian hyperandrogenism remains elusive. Here, we demonstrated that the protein from GCs in ovarian hyperandrogenism phenotype mouse group exhibits lower palmitoylation level compared with that in the control group. Using <i>S</i>-palmitoylation-enriched quantitative proteomics, we identified heat shock protein isoform &#x3b1; (HSP90&#x3b1;) with lower <i>S</i>-palmitoylation levels in ovarian hyperandrogenism phenotype group. Mechanistically, <i>S</i>-palmitoylation of HSP90&#x3b1; modulates the conversion of androgen to estrogens via the androgen receptor (AR) signalling pathway, and its level is regulated by PPT1. Targeting AR signaling by using dipyridamole attenuated ovarian hyperandrogenism symptoms. Our data help elucidate ovarian hyperandrogenism from perspective of protein modification and provide new evidence showing that HSP90&#x3b1; <i>S</i>-palmitoylation modification might be a potential pharmacological target for ovarian hyperandrogenism treatment.

### Keywords
I.e. mouse ovary， palmitoylation protein， lc-msms

### Affiliations
Department of Reproductive Medicine, Affiliated Jinling Hospital , Nanjing Medical University
Center of Reproductive Medicine, Nanjing Jinling Hospital

### Submitter
Tang Ting

### Lab Head
Dr Bing Yao
Department of Reproductive Medicine, Affiliated Jinling Hospital , Nanjing Medical University


