### Accession
PXD040373

### Title
Is there difference in proteomic profile of stimulated and un-stimulated saliva samples from pregnant women with/without obesity and periodontitis?

### Description
This study aimed to compare the proteomic profile of stimulated and unstimulated saliva sam-ples from pregnant women with/without obesity and periodontitis. Initially, 126 pregnant women were recruited and, after exclusions, were allocated into: with obesity and periodontitis (OP); with obesity but without periodontitis (OWP); with normal BMI but with periodontitis (NP); with normal BMI and without periodontitis (NWP). Stimulated saliva (SS) and unstimulated saliva (US) samples were collected, and salivary proteins were extracted and individually processed by proteomic analysis (nLC-ESI-MS/MS). Proteins involved with immune response process, antiox-idant activity, and retina homeostasis were decreased or absent in SS samples from all groups (i.e., Antileukoproteinase, Lysozyme C, Alpha-2-macroglobulin-like protein 1, Heat shock proteins – 70kDa 1-like, 1A, 1B, 6, Heat shock-related 70 kDa protein 2, Putative Heat shock 70 kDa protein 7, Heat shock cognate 71 kDa). Also, proteins related to carbohydrate metabolic process and gly-colytic and glucose metabolic process were absent in SS, mainly from OP and OWP (i.e., Fru-tose-bisphosphate aldose A, Glusoce-6-phosphate isomerase, Pyruvate kinase). Saliva stimulation decreased important proteins involved with immune response and inflammation process in all groups. Unstimulated salivary samples seem to be the best choice to proteomic approach in pregnant women.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for proteomic analysis was previously described in detail [1,13]. In summary, all samples (1,000 µL each) were analyzed individually, and the sample preparation was divided in seven steps: (1) Extraction: proteins were extracted using a solution (1,000 µL for each sample) containing 6M urea, 2M thiourea in 50 mM NH4HCO3, pH 7.8. Samples were three times vortexed for 10 min at 4ºC, sonicated for 5 min and centrifuged at 20,817 g at 4ºC for 10 min; (2) Concentration: the samples were concentrated in Amicon tubes (Amicon Ultra-15 Centrifugal Filter Units—Merck Mil-lipore®, Tullagreen, County Cork, Ireland) to a volume of approximately 150 μL; (3) Reduction and alkylation: proteins were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 40 min at 37°C and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark; (4) Digestion: samples were digested for 14 hours at 37°C by addition of 2% trypsin (w/w) (Thermo Scientific Pierce Trypsin Protease, Rockford, Illinois, United States). Digestion was stopped by the addition of 10 μL of 5% Trifluoroacetic acid; (5) Desalination and puri-fication: samples were desalted and purified using C18 Spin columns (Thermo Scien-tific, Rockford, Illinois, United States); (6) Quantification: an aliquot of 1 μL was taken from each sample for total protein quantification by the Bradford method (Bio-Rad, Hercules, California, United States); (7) Resuspension: samples were then resuspended in a solution containing 3% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid and subjected to Mass Spectrometry (nanoLC-ESI-MS/MS) (Waters, Manchester, New Hampshire, United Kingdom). Proteomic analysis method was also previously described in detail [1,13]. Through using a Xevo G2 QTof mass spectrometer coupled to a nanoACQUITY system (Waters, Manchester, New Hampshire, United Kingdom), peptide identification was performed. The equipment was operated in positive ionic nanoelectrospray mode and data were collected using the MSE method at high energy (19-45 V) that allows data acquisition of both precursor and fragment ions, in a single injection. Data acquisition scan range was 50–2000 Da. The lockspray used to ensure accuracy and reproducibility was operated with a solution of [Glu1] fibrinopeptide (1 pmol/µL) at a flow of 0.5 µL/min.

### Data Protocol
ProteinLynx GlobalServer (PLGS) version 3.0.3 software (Waters Co., Manchester, United Kingdom) was used to process and search the continuous LC-MSE data. Proteins were identified using the software's ion counting algorithm, and a search was per-formed on the Homo sapiens database (reviewed only, UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot) down-loaded in May 2022 by UniProtKB (http://www.uniprot.org/). UniProt was used to an-alyze each protein by their access number. Repeated and reverse proteins, as well as fragments were excluded. All proteins identified with a confidence level greater than 95% were included in the quantitative analysis. The difference in expression between stimulated and unstimulated saliva samples for each group was expressed as p < 0.05 for the down-regulated proteins, and 1-p > 0.95 for the up-regulated proteins [1,13]. The difference in expression between SS and US for each group was analyzed by t test (p < 0.05). The relevant comparations were performed (1- SS x US for OP; 2- SS x US for OWP; 3- SS x US for NP; 4- SS x US for NWP). In proteomic analysis, the difference in expression between stimulated and un-stimulated saliva samples for each group was expressed as p < 0.05 for the down-regulated proteins and 1-p > 0.95 for the up-regulated proteins [1,13]. The dif-ference in expression between SS and US for each group was analyzed by t test (p < 0.05). The relevant comparations were performed (1- SS x US for OP; 2- SS x US for OWP; 3- SS x US for NP; 4- SS x US for NWP). ClueGo® plugins of the Cytoscape® 3.8.2 Software was used to analyze the protein categories based on gene ontology (GO) annotation of the broad biological process, molecular function, immune system, and cell component. The functional distribution of proteins identified with differential expression (up and down-regulated) in the com-parison between SS and US for each group was done. Terms of significance (κ = 0.04) and distribution were according to the percentage of the number of associated genes.  For the protein interaction networks analysis, STRING® database (https://string-db.org/cgi/network.pl) was accessed. To understand the biological pro-cesses involved only in the analysis of unstimulated saliva, unique proteins found in US samples of each group were analyzed in the STRING® database, establishing the in-teraction between those unique proteins present in unstimulated saliva of each group during pregnancy.

### Publication Abstract
This study aimed to compare the proteomic profile of stimulated and unstimulated saliva samples from pregnant women with/without obesity and periodontitis. Pregnant women were allocated into four groups: with obesity and periodontitis (OP); with obesity but without periodontitis (OWP); with normal BMI but with periodontitis (NP); with normal BMI and without periodontitis (NWP). Stimulated saliva (SS) and unstimulated saliva (US) samples were collected, and salivary proteins were extracted and individually processed by proteomic analysis (nLC-ESI-MS/MS). Proteins involved with the immune response process, antioxidant activity, and retina homeostasis were decreased or absent in SS samples from all groups (i.e., <i>Antileukoproteinase</i>, <i>Lysozyme C</i>, <i>Alpha-2-macroglobulin-like protein 1</i>, <i>Heat shock proteins-70 kDa 1-like</i>, <i>1A</i>, <i>1B</i>, <i>6</i>, <i>Heat shock-related 70 kDa protein 2</i>, <i>Putative Heat shock 70 kDa protein 7</i>, <i>Heat shock cognate 71 kDa</i>). Additionally, proteins related to the carbohydrate metabolic process and glycolytic and glucose metabolic process were absent in SS, mainly from OP and OWP (i.e., <i>Frutose-bisphosphate aldose A</i>, <i>Glusoce-6-phosphate isomerase</i>, <i>Pyruvate kinase</i>). Saliva stimulation decreased important proteins involved with immune response and inflammation process in all groups. Unstimulated salivary samples seem to be the best choice for the proteomic approach in pregnant women.

### Keywords
Pregnancy, Obesity, Periodontitis, Proteomics, Saliva

### Affiliations
Pediatric Dentistry, Orthodontics and Public Health, Bauru School of Dentistry, University of São Paulo

### Submitter
Gerson Foratori Junior

### Lab Head
Dr Gerson Aparecido Foratori Junior
Pediatric Dentistry, Orthodontics and Public Health, Bauru School of Dentistry, University of São Paulo


