### Accession
PXD038928

### Title
Mass Spectrometry-Based Proteomic Profiling of Sonicate Fluid Differentiates Staphylococcus aureus Periprosthetic Joint Infection from Non-Infectious Failure: A pilot study

### Description
This study aims to use proteomic profiling of sonicate fluid samples to compare host response during Staphylococcus aureus-associated periprosthetic joint infection (PJI) and non-infected arthroplasty failure (NIAF) and investigate novel biomarkers to increase diagnostic accuracy. In this pilot study, eight sonicate fluid samples (four from NIAF and four from caused by Staphylococcus aureus PJI) were studied. Samples were reduced, alkylated and trypsinized overnight, followed by analysis using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) on a high-resolution Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometer. MaxQuant software suite was used for protein identification, filtering, and label free quantitation. Principal component analysis of the identified proteins clearly separated S. aureus PJI and NIAF samples. Overall, 810 proteins were quantified in any three samples from each group and 35 statistically significant differentially abundant proteins (DAPs) were found (2-sample t-test p-values ≤0.05 and log2fold-change values ≥2 or ≤-2). Gene ontology pathway analysis found that microbial defense responses, specifically those related to neutrophil activation, were increased in S. aureus PJI compared to NIAF samples. Proteomic profiling of sonicate fluid using LC-MS/MS, alone or in combination with complementary protein analyses, differentiated S. aureus PJI and NIAF in this pilot study.

### Sample Protocol
100 μl of sonicate fluid samples were adjusted to 0.2% Rapigest followed by heating at 90 °C for 5 minutes. Samples were then reduced with 5 mM TCEP for 45 minutes at room temperature and alkylated with 20 mM Iodoacetamide for 25 min in dark. 1:20 protein: enzyme ratio was used to trypsin digestion overnight at 37 °C. Following C18 cleanup, 2 μg of peptides were subjected to quantitative LC-MS/MS analysis on a high-resolution Orbitrap Tribrid Eclipse mass spectrometer connected to UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano system (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA). Separation of peptides includes initial trapping on a trap column (PepMap C18, 2 cm × 100 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) using 0.1% formic acid (solvent A) followed by gradient elution (3% to 28% to 40%) using acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid (solvent B) on an analytical column (EasySpray 50 cm × 75 μm, C18 1.9 μm,100 Å, Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA). Each run was started with equilibration of both columns for 5 min and the overall time for each run is 240 min. As the peptides were eluting, Orbitrap was operated in a data dependent mode with a cycle time of 2 sec. Initially, precursor MS scan was recorded for 350-1500 m/z using a normalized AGC target of 100%, injection time of 50 ms and 60,000 resolution. Precursors with a minimum intensity threshold of 20,000 and charge states 2-7 were taken for MS/MS starting from high intensity precursors. Monoisotopic precursor selection was also enabled. Quadrupole was used for precursor isolation with 1.6 m/z isolation width and fragmented with normalized HCD energy of 28% and resulting fragment ions was recorded in orbitrap analyzer. Fragment ion spectrum was recorded at 15,000 resolution using normalized AGC target of 200% and maximum injection time of 120 ms. Dynamic exclusion of 30 sec was used to prevent repeated fragmentation of the precursor ions.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant software suite (V 2.0.1.0) was used for protein identification and quantitation. Database searching was performed against human UniProt protein database with in silico trypsin digestion set to be specific and maximum of 2 missed cleavages allowed. Default mass tolerance settings of 20 pm for first search and 4.5 ppm for main search were used. Oxidation (Methionine) and protein N-terminal acetylation were used as dynamic modifications whereas carbamidomethylation (Cysteine) was used as static modification. Proteins were filtered at 1% protein-level FDR. LFQ algorithm within using MaxQuant was used for label free quantitation and match between the runs option was enabled with match time window of 1 min to reduce missing values. Finally, Label free quantified values were logarithmized and proteins not quantified in at least three samples in each group were eliminated.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Periprosthetic joint infection, Quantitative proteomics, Total joint arthroplasty, Sonicate fluid, Label-free quantitation

### Affiliations
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905
Professor Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology Mayo Clinic, Rochester  Minnesota - 55901, USA

### Submitter
Akhilesh Pandey

### Lab Head
Dr Akhilesh Pandey
Professor Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology Mayo Clinic, Rochester  Minnesota - 55901, USA


