### Accession
PXD016565

### Title
Secretome and intracellular proteome of espB deletion mutant of Mycobacterium tuberculosis

### Description
Mycobacterium tuberculosis relies on the ESX-1 secretion system for survival, multiplication in and escape from macrophages. In this work we investigate the role of the EspB protein, encoded within the esx-1 gene cluster, in virulence and ESX-1 substrate secretion in M. tuberculosis H37Rv. Genetic, proteomic and immunological data show that, contrary to previous reports, an espB knock-out mutant is only partially attenuated in ex vivo infection models, where EsxA, EsxB and EspC antigen presentation is not affected, and secretes the major virulence factor EsxA. Additionally, we demonstrate that EspB does not require an intact and functional ESX-1 apparatus for being secreted in H37Rv and in M. bovis BCG, as opposed to other strains such as CDC1551 and Erdman, thereby suggesting that other ESX systems may be involved in the process. Overall our findings highlight unexplored differences in the secretion profiles of various mycobacterial strains and underscore the plasticity of ESX-dependent secretion in mycobacteria.

### Sample Protocol
Culture filtrates were incubated for 10 min in 100µl of 8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris-HCl pH 8 at room temperature. Then, each sample of culture filtrate and culture lysate was digested by Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) (Wiśniewski, Zougman, Nagaraj, & Mann, 2009) with minor modifications. Dithiothreitol (DTT) was replaced by Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) as reducing agent and Iodoacetamide by Chloracetamide as alkylating agent. A combined proteolytic digestion was performed using Endoproteinase Lys-C and Trypsin. Acidified peptides were desalted on C18 StageTips (Rappsilber et al. 2007) and dried down by vacuum centrifugation. For LC MS/MS analysis, peptides were resuspended and separated by reversed-phase chromatography on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanoUPLC system in-line connected with an Orbitrap Q Exactive HF Mass-Spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Database search was performed using MaxQuant 1.6.0.1 (Cox & Mann. 2008) against the TubercuListR27 database (https://mycobrowser.epfl.ch/). Carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification, whereas oxidation (M), phosphorylation (S,T,Y) and acetylation (Protein N-term) were considered as variable modifications. Label Free Quantification (MaxLFQ) was performed by MaxQuant using the standard settings (Cox et al. 2014). Perseus (Tyanova et al. 2016) was used to highlight differentially quantified proteins. Reverse proteins, contaminants and proteins only identified by sites were filtered out. Biological replicates were grouped together and protein groups containing a minimum of two LFQ values in at least one group were conserved. Empty values were imputed with random numbers from a normal distribution. Significant hits were determined by a volcano plot-based strategy, combining t test p-values with ratio information (Tyanova et al. 2016).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Espb, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Esx-1

### Affiliations
EPFL
Institut Pasteur, Paris, France

### Submitter
Andrej Benjak

### Lab Head
Dr Stewart T. Cole
Institut Pasteur, Paris, France


