### Accession
PXD015184

### Title
COMPARATIVE OMICS ANALYSIS OF HISTORICAL AND RECENT ISOLATES OF BORDETELLA PERTUSSIS

### Description
Despite high vaccination coverage, pertussis is on the rise in many countries including Czech Republic. To better understand B. pertussis resurgence we compared the changes in genome structures between Czech vaccine and circulating strains and subsequently, we determined how these changes translated into global transcriptomic and proteomic profiles. The whole-genome sequencing revealed that both historical and recent isolates of B. pertussis display substantial variation in genome organization and cluster separately. The RNA-seq and LC-MS/MS analyses indicate that these variations translated into discretely separated transcriptomic and proteomic profiles. Compared to vaccine strains, recent isolates displayed increased expression of flagellar genes and decreased expression of polysaccharide capsule operon.  Czech strains (Bp46, K10, Bp155, Bp318 and Bp6242)exhibited increased expression of T3SS and sulphate metabolism genes when compared to Tohama I. In spite of 50 years of vaccination the Czech vaccine strains (VS67, VS393 and VS401) differ from recent isolates to a lesser extent than from another vaccine strain Tohama I.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Digestion Cell pellets were lysed in 100mM TEAB containing 2% SDC and boiled at 95°C for 5 min. Protein concentration was determined using BCA protein assay kit (Thermo) and 20 µg of protein per sample was used for MS sample preparation. Cysteines were reduced with 5mM final concentration of TCEP (60°C for 60 min) and blocked with 10mM final concentration of MMTS (10 min Room Temperature). Samples were digested with trypsin (trypsin/protein ration 1/20) at 37°C overnight. After digestion samples were acidified with TFA to 1% final concentration. SDC was removed by extraction to ethyl acetate (Masuda et al, 2008) and peptides were desalted on Michrom C18 column.  nLC-MS 2  Analysis Nano Reversed phase column (EASY-Spray column, 50 cm x 75 µm ID, PepMap C18, 2 µm particles, 100 Å pore size) was used for LC/MS analysis. Mobile phase buffer A was composed of water and 0.1% formic acid. Mobile phase B was composed of acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Samples were loaded onto the trap column (Acclaim PepMap300, C18, 5 µm, 300 Å Wide Pore, 300 µm x 5 mm) at a flow rate of 15 μl/min. Loading buffer was composed of water, 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid . Peptides were eluted with gradient of B from 4% to 35% over 60 min at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Eluting peptide cations were converted to gas-phase ions by electrospray ionization and analyzed on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion (Q-OT- qIT, Thermo). Survey scans of peptide precursors from 350 to 1400 m/z were performed at 120K resolution (at 200 m/z) with a 5 × 105  ion count target. Tandem MS was performed by isolation at 1,5 Th with the quadrupole, HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 30, and rapid scan MS analysis in the ion trap. The MS 2  ion count target was set to 104  and the max injection time was 35 ms. Only those precursors with charge state 2–6 were sampled for MS 2 . The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 45 s with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on. The instrument was run in top speed mode with 2 s cycles (Hebert, Richards et al. 2014).

### Data Protocol
All data were analyzed and quantified with the MaxQuant software (Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, version 1.6.1.0), (Cox, Hein et al. 2014). The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% for both proteins and peptides and we specified a minimum length of seven amino acids. The Andromeda search engine was used for the MS/MS spectra search against the Bordetella pertusis database (name of databases: newDB.faa, containing 3 507 entries, fasta file is attached). Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to Arg and Lys, also allowing cleavage at proline bonds and a maximum of two missed cleavages. Dithiomethylation of cysteine was selected as fixed modification and N- terminal protein acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. The “match between runs” feature of MaxQuant was used to transfer identifications to other LC-MS/MS runs based on their masses and retention time (maximum deviation 0.7 min) and this was also used in quantification experiments. Quantifications were performed with the label-free algorithms described recently (Cox et al. 2014). Data analysis was performed using Perseus 1.6.0.7 software (Tyanova et al. 2016).

### Publication Abstract
Despite high vaccination coverage, pertussis is increasing in many industrialized countries, including the Czech Republic. To better understand Bordetella pertussis resurgence, we analyzed historic strains and recent clinical isolates by using a comparative omics approach. Whole-genome sequencing showed that historic and recent isolates of B. pertussis have substantial variation in genome organization and form separate phylogenetic clusters. Subsequent RNA sequence analysis and liquid chromatography with mass tandem spectrometry analyses showed that these variations translated into discretely separated transcriptomic and proteomic profiles. When compared with historic strains, recent isolates showed increased expression of flagellar genes and genes involved in lipopolysaccharide biosynthesis and decreased expression of polysaccharide capsule genes. Compared with reference strain Tohama I, all strains had increased expression and production of the type III secretion system apparatus. We detected the potential link between observed effects and insertion sequence element-induced changes in gene context only for a few genes.

### Keywords
Omics analysis, Bordetella pertussis, Is elements, Genomic rearrangement, Adaptation

### Affiliations
Institute of Microbiology of the CAS, v. v. i.
Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic Institute of Microbiology, v.v.i. Prague, Czech Republic

### Submitter
Denisa Petrackova

### Lab Head
Dr Branislav Večerek
Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic Institute of Microbiology, v.v.i. Prague, Czech Republic


