### Accession
PXD004807

### Title
Comparative shotgun proteomics in wt-SUM44 and SUM44-LTED, using RIME and dimethyl-labelling

### Description
Wild type (wt) SUM44 cells, modelling breast cancer at primary diagnosis, were cultured in phenol red-free RPMI supplemented with 10% FBS and 1nM estradiol (E2). Long-term oestrogen deprived (LTED) cell lines, which model resistance to endocrine therapy, were cultured in phenol red-free RPMI in the absence of exogenous E2 and supplemented with 10% dextran charcoal-stripped bovine serum (DCC). Samples were harvested at baseline and at the point of resistance (LTED). To reveal differential protein abundances between wt-SUM44 and SUM44-LTED, the peptides were labelled with dimethyl labelling and underwent fractionation using OFFGEL electrophoresis. In order to reveal the ER-interactome, RIME (rapid immunoprecipitation mass spectrometry of endogenous proteins) was conducted in wt-SUM44 and SUM44-LTED.

### Sample Protocol
For the RIME: Immunoprecipitation of ER and IgG on three biological cross-linked WT and LTED-SUM44 pellets was conducted as previously described with slight modifications (Mohammed et al., Cell Reports 2013). In summary, the cross-linked samples were washed with ice-cold PBS and upon harvesting with cell scrapers, the nuclear fraction was extracted. The samples were sonicated using mild conditions. After sonication, 10% Triton X-100 was added to a final 1% and the sample was centrifuged to purify the debris. The supernatant was incubated with magnetic beads Protein G overnight at 4oC. The next day, the beads were washed ten times with RIPA buffer and five with ammonium bicarbonate (AMBIC). Overnight on-bead digestion was followed using trypsin at 37oC (in a thermomixer with high rpm). The next day, trypsin was deactivated using trifluoroacetic acid and the samples were desalted.  For the dimethyl labelling: WT and LTED-SUM44 were isotopically labelled directly using Sep-pak C18 cartridges as described previously (Boersema et al., Nature protocols 2009; Di Palma et al., Nature protocols 2012). Two biological replicates per cell line were used. The WT cells were labelled with the medium isotope reagent and the LTED cells with the light isotope reagent. After labelling, each sample was eluted using 80% acetonitrile with 2% formic acid. Subsequently, the two labelled samples were pooled at an approximate 1-to-1 ratio and dried down under vacuum. The dried sample was reconstituted in OFFGEL stock solution and run using 12 cm IPG strip pH 3-10. Fractions were desalted (SUM SS18V, The Nest Group Inc) and run through LC-MS/MS using LTQ Velos Orbitrap MS. For MS analysis, the data acquisition mode was set to acquire 1 full-scan spectra (350-1850 m/z). After survey scan, the 20 most intense precursor ions were selected for subsequent fragmentation. For collision-induced dissociation, normalized collision energy was set to 35%, q value to 0.25 and activation time to 10 ms. The isolation width was set to 1.5 and the dynamic exclusion to 1.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using MaxQuant 1.5.1.0 following the developers’ (Cox and Mann, Nature Biotechnology 2008) guidelines. Peak lists were searched against the human Uniprot FASTA database and a common contaminant database by the Andromeda search engine (built in MaxQuant) (Cox et al., Journal of Proteome Research 2011). The revert decoy mode was used. Resulting peptide lists were filtered to an estimated FDR of 1% and protein lists were filtered to an estimated FDR of 5%. Spectra were searched for a match to fully-tryptic peptides with up to two missed cleavage sites. Search parameters were chosen as follows: Carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification on all Cysteines and oxidation of Methionines was considered as optional modification. Precursor ion mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the first search, fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.6 Da. The “re-quantify” and “match between runs” option were enabled with default settings. Light and medium dimethyl labels (+28.0313 Da and +32.0564 Da respectively) were searched at Lysine residues and peptide N-termini.

### Publication Abstract
Resistance to endocrine therapy remains a major clinical problem in breast cancer. Genetic studies highlight the potential role of estrogen receptor-&#x3b1; (ESR1) mutations, which show increased prevalence in the metastatic, endocrine-resistant setting. No naturally occurring ESR1 mutations have been reported in in vitro models of BC either before or after the acquisition of endocrine resistance making functional consequences difficult to study. We report the first discovery of naturally occurring ESR1 <sup>Y537C</sup> and ESR1 <sup>Y537S</sup> mutations in MCF7 and SUM44 ESR1-positive cell lines after acquisition of resistance to long-term-estrogen-deprivation (LTED) and subsequent resistance to fulvestrant (ICIR). Mutations were enriched with time, impacted on ESR1 binding to the genome and altered the ESR1 interactome. The results highlight the importance and functional consequence of these mutations and provide an important resource for studying endocrine resistance.

### Keywords
Sum44, Rime, Breast cancer, Dimethyl-labelling

### Affiliations
Breast Cancer Now The Institute of Cancer Research
BRFAA

### Submitter
Nikiana Simigdala

### Lab Head
Dr Lesley-Ann Martin
Breast Cancer Now The Institute of Cancer Research


