### Accession
PXD000201

### Title
Proteomic Change Associated with Flooding Injury of Soybean

### Description
Flooding injury is one of the abiotic constraints on soybean growth. An experimental system established for evaluating flooding injury in soybean seedlings indicated that the degree of injury is dependent on seedling density in floodwater. To understand the molecular mechanism responsible for the injury, proteomic alterations in soybean seedlings that correlated with severity of stress were analyzed using label-free quantitative proteomics. Two-day-old soybeans, seedlings flooded for 2 days and hypocotyls of seedlings grown for 3 days after flooding were analyzed. The radicles of soybean seedlings were separated to root tips (RT), roots without tip (RwoT) and hypocotyls (Hypo). Protein was extracted from these organs by TCA/Acetone method. Protein samples were cleaned up with chloroform/methanol method and then subjected to in-solution digestion with trypsin. Resulting peptides were analyzed on a nanospray LTQ XL Orbitrap MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific) operated in data-dependent acquisition mode with the installed Xcalibur software (version 2.0.7, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Using an Ultimate 3,000 nanoLC system (Dionex), peptides in 0.1% formic acid were loaded onto a C18 PepMap trap column (300 µm ID × 5 mm, Dionex). The peptides were eluted from the trap column and their separation and spraying were done using 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile at a flow rate of 200 nL/min on a C18 Tip column (75 µm 1D × 120 mm, nano HPLC capillary column, NTTC-360/75-3, Nikkyo Technos) with a spray voltage of 1.5 kV. The elution was done with a linear acetonitrile gradient 8-30% in 120 min for gel free proteomics in 0.1% formic acid. Full-scan mass spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap over a mass range of 400-1,500 m/z with a resolution of 30,000. A lock mass function was used to obtain high mass accuracy. The top 6 most intense precursor ions were selected for collision-induced fragmentation in the linear ion trap at normalized collision energy of 35%. Dynamic exclusion was employed within 90 sec to prevent repetitive selection of peptides.Identification of proteins were performed by Mascot search engine (version 2.3.0.2, Matrix Science) using soybean peptide database (55,787 sequences) obtained from the soybean genome database (Phytozome version 8.0)and a common contaminants database (262 sequences). Parameters used in Mascot searches were follows: Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine was set as a variable modification. Trypsin was specified as the proteolytic enzyme and one missed cleavage was allowed. Peptide mass tolerance was set at 5 ppm, fragment mass tolerance was set at 0.5 Da, and peptide charge was set at +2, +3, and +4. Automatic decoy database search was performed in the search. Mascot results were filtered with Mascot percolator to improve accuracy and sensitivity in the peptide identification. False discovery rates for peptide identification of all searches were less than 1.0%. The Mascot results were used for differential analysis using SIEVE software (version 1.3, Thermo Fisher Scientific)

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
Flooding injury is one of the abiotic constraints on soybean growth. An experimental system established for evaluating flooding injury in soybean seedlings indicated that the degree of injury is dependent on seedling density in floodwater. Dissolved oxygen levels in the floodwater were decreased by the seedlings and correlated with the degree of injury. To understand the molecular mechanism responsible for the injury, proteomic alterations in soybean seedlings that correlated with severity of stress were analyzed using label-free quantitative proteomics. The analysis showed that the abundance of proteins involved in cell wall modification, such as polygalacturonase inhibitor-like and expansin-like B1-like proteins, which may be associated with the defense system, increased dependence on stress at both the protein and mRNA levels in all organs during flooding. The manner of alteration in abundance of these proteins was distinct from those of other responsive proteins. Furthermore, proteins also showing specific changes in abundance in the root tip included protein phosphatase 2A subunit-like proteins, which are possibly involved in flooding-induced root tip cell death. Additionally, decreases in abundance of cell wall synthesis-related proteins, such as cinnamyl-alcohol dehydrogenase and cellulose synthase-interactive protein-like proteins, were identified in hypocotyls of seedlings grown for 3 days after flooding, and these proteins may be associated with suppression of growth after flooding. These flooding injury-associated proteins can be defined as indicator proteins for severity of flooding stress in soybean.

### Keywords
Soybean flooding injury severity label-free quantitative proteomics

### Affiliations
Institute of Crop Science

### Submitter
Yohei Nanjo

### Lab Head


