### Accession
PXD031908

### Title
B-cell compartment hyperactivation in PHIV

### Description
Despite a successful antiretroviral therapy (ART), adolescents living with perinatally acquired HIV (PHIV) experience signs of B-cell hyperactivation with expansion of 'namely' atypical B-cell phenotypes, including double negative (CD27-IgD-) and termed age associated (ABCs) B-cells(T-bet+CD11c+), which may result in reduced cell functionality, including loss of vaccine-induced immunological memory and higher risk of developing B-cells associated tumors. In this context,perinatally HIV infected children (PHIV) deserve particular attention, given their life-long exposure to chronic immune activation.

### Sample Protocol
We studied 40 PHIV who started treatment by the 2nd year of life and maintained virological suppression for 13.5 years, with 5/40 patients experiencing transient elevation of the HIV-1 load in the plasma (Spike). We applied a multi-disciplinary approach including immunological B and T cell phenotype, plasma proteomics analysis, and serum level of anti-measles antibodies as functional correlates of vaccine-induced immunity.

### Data Protocol
All Data Independent Acquisition data were directly analysed in Spectronaut v12.0.20491.18 (Biognosys, Switzerland). Standard search settings were employed, which included enabling dynamic peak detection, automatic precision nonlinear iRT calibration, interference correction, and cross run normalization (total peak area). All results were filtered by a q-value of 0.01 (corresponding to an FDR of 1% on the precursor and protein levels). Otherwise default settings were used.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
B-cell hyperactivation, Cahiv-1 rna, Proteomic profiling, Perinatal hiv/aids, Immune activation, Cd11c, T-bet, Exhausted t-cells, Late art

### Affiliations
Department of Pathology, Boston Children's Hospital / Harvard Medical School
Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA

### Submitter
Benoit Fatou

### Lab Head
Dr Hanno Steen
Department of Pathology, Boston Children's Hospital / Harvard Medical School


