### Accession
PXD008924

### Title
Time series and steady state proteomics of Pseudomonas aeruginosa phenazine mutants

### Description
Microbes in biofilms face the challenge of substrate limitation. In particular, cells in Pseudomonas aeruginosa biofilms growing in the laboratory or during host colonization often become limited for oxygen. Previously we found that phenazines, antibiotics produced by P. aeruginosa, balance the intracellular redox state for cells in biofilms. Here, we show that genes involved in denitrification are induced in phenazine-null (Δphz) mutant biofilms grown under an aerobic atmosphere, even in the absence of nitrate. This finding suggests that resident cells employ a bet-hedging strategy to anticipate the potential availability of nitrate and counterbalance their highly reduced redox state. Consistent with our previous characterization of aerobically-grown colonies supplemented with nitrate, we find that the pathway that is induced in Δphz colonies combines the nitrate reductase activity of the periplasmic enzyme Nap with downstream reduction of nitrite to nitrogen gas catalyzed by the enzymes Nir, Nor, and Nos. This regulatory relationship differs from the denitrification pathway that functions under anaerobic growth with nitrate as the terminal electron acceptor, which depends on the membrane-associated nitrate reductase Nar. We identify sequences in the promoter regions of the nap and nir operons that are required for the effects of phenazines on expression. We also show that specific phenazines have differential effects on nap gene expression. Finally, we provide evidence that individual steps of the denitrification pathway are catalyzed at different depths within aerobically grown biofilms, suggesting metabolic cross-feeding between community subpopulations. (corresponding publication)

### Sample Protocol
Each colony was scraped from the agar-solidified growth medium with a sterile razor blade and transferred to a microfuge tube, then washed with 1 ml of PBS and resuspended in 500 μL of ice-cold lysis buffer (50 mM Tris at pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, and 0.3% SDS supplemented with cOmplete™ Mini Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche)). Homogenized colonies were sonicated for 120 seconds (4 x 30 seconds) on ice with the microtip of a Branson Sonifier 250 (50% duty cycle, 50% output). To extract protein from each sonicated sample, 650 μL of methanol and 187.5 μL of chloroform were added to the sample and vigorously vortexed for ~1 minute. After centrifuging at 16,873 x g for 5 minutes for phase separation, a white disc of protein formed at the interface and the top methanol layer of each sample were carefully removed. 562.5 μL of methanol was added and gently mixed to precipitate protein, which was pelleted at 16,873 x g for 5 minutes. Protein pellets were stored at -80°C. Prior to mass spectrometry analysis, each sample was solubilized with 0.1% RapiGest at 95°C for 5 min, digested with trypsin (1:50 w/w) at 37°C for 4 hours, and lyophilized with 2% formic acid. Peptides were separated by reverse-phase nanoflow high-performance liquid chromatography (LC) system (Eksigent NanoLC 2DPlus), on a 15 cm Agilent ZORBAX 300 StableBond C18 reverse phase column (5065-9911, 150 mm length, 75 μm inner diameter, 3.5 μm particle, 300 Å pore size) with the gradient of 2–90% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid over 240 min. LC eluted peptides were injected in-line into an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) for tandem mass spectrometry analysis. Data dependent analysis was performed in the Fourier Transform (FT) mass analyzer at a resolution of 60,000 in profile mode, and automatic gain control was set to 1E6. Dynamic exclusion was set to 90 s if mass to charge ratio (m/z) acquisition was repeated within a 45 s interval. MS2 data was collected in the Ion 400 Trap (IT) mass analyzer in centroid mode, and the automatic gain control was set to 3E4. Injection time was 100 ms, isolation window was 2 m/z, and normalized collision energy was at 35 V. In each scan cycle, the top 20 precursor ions (MS) were subjected to fragmentation (MS/MS) via collision-induced dissociation. Each sample was injected two to four times to obtain technical replicates.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using the MaxQuant software (1.3.0.5) combining technical replicates, searching against the P. aeruginosa PA14 sequence database and a list of commonly observed contaminants supplied by MaxQuant. Protein identification was performed using 20 ppm tolerance at the MS level (FT mass analyzer) and 0.5 Da at the MS/MS level (ion trap analyzer). Up to two missed trypsin cleavages were allowed, and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were searched as variable posttranslational modification; cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification. The minimal required peptide length was seven amino acids. False discovery rate was set to 0.25 at the peptide level and 0.1 at the protein level. We used LFQ intensities obtained from the  proteingroups.txt output file for quantitation of the proteins. Protein identifications and quantitative information is provided in supplemental data set S1 in the corresponding manuscript showing the MaxQuant output files for the two proteomics experiments. After filtering contaminants and reversed sequences, we quantified a total of 2,772 and 2,089 proteins across the mutant and time series experiments, respectively. Protein abundances were normalized so that the total LFQ intensity 420 within each sample and set to 1,000,000.

### Publication Abstract
Microbes in biofilms face the challenge of substrate limitation. In particular, oxygen often becomes limited for cells in <i>Pseudomonas aeruginosa</i> biofilms growing in the laboratory or during host colonization. Previously we found that phenazines, antibiotics produced by <i>P. aeruginosa</i>, balance the intracellular redox state of cells in biofilms. Here, we show that genes involved in denitrification are induced in phenazine-null (&#x394;<i>phz</i>) mutant biofilms grown under an aerobic atmosphere, even in the absence of nitrate. This finding suggests that resident cells employ a bet-hedging strategy to anticipate the potential availability of nitrate and counterbalance their highly reduced redox state. Consistent with our previous characterization of aerobically grown colonies supplemented with nitrate, we found that the pathway that is induced in &#x394;<i>phz</i> mutant colonies combines the nitrate reductase activity of the periplasmic enzyme Nap with the downstream reduction of nitrite to nitrogen gas catalyzed by the enzymes Nir, Nor, and Nos. This regulatory relationship differs from the denitrification pathway that functions under anaerobic growth, with nitrate as the terminal electron acceptor, which depends on the membrane-associated nitrate reductase Nar. We identified the sequences in the promoter regions of the <i>nap</i> and <i>nir</i> operons that are required for the effects of phenazines on expression. We also show that specific phenazines have differential effects on <i>nap</i> gene expression. Finally, we provide evidence that individual steps of the denitrification pathway are catalyzed at different depths within aerobically grown biofilms, suggesting metabolic cross-feeding between community subpopulations.<b>IMPORTANCE</b> An understanding of the unique physiology of cells in biofilms is critical to our ability to treat fungal and bacterial infections. Colony biofilms of the opportunistic pathogen <i>Pseudomonas aeruginosa</i> grown under an aerobic atmosphere but without nitrate express a denitrification pathway that differs from that used for anaerobic growth. We report that the components of this pathway are induced by electron acceptor limitation and that they are differentially expressed over the biofilm depth. These observations suggest that (i) <i>P. aeruginosa</i> exhibits "bet hedging," in that it expends energy and resources to prepare for nitrate availability when other electron acceptors are absent, and (ii) cells in distinct biofilm microniches may be able to exchange substrates to catalyze full denitrification.

### Keywords
Biofilm; phenazines; denitrification; pseudomonas aeruginosa

### Affiliations
New York University

### Submitter
Christine Vogel

### Lab Head
Dr Christine Vogel
New York University


