### Accession
PXD026060

### Title
Reversible amyloids of pyruvate kinase couple cell metabolism and stress granule disassembly

### Description
Cells respond to stress by blocking translation, rewiring metabolism, and forming transient mRNP assemblies called stress granules (SGs). After stress release, re-establishing homeostasis requires energy-consuming processes. However, the molecular mechanisms whereby cells restore energy production to disassemble SGs and reinitiate growth after stress remain poorly understood. Here we show that, upon stress, the ATP-producing enzyme Cdc19 forms inactive amyloids, and that their rapid re-solubilization is essential to restore energy production and SG disassembly. Cdc19 re-solubilization is initiated by the glycolytic metabolite fructose-1,6-bisphosphate (FBP), which directly binds Cdc19 amyloids and facilitates conformational changes that allow Hsp104 and Ssa2 chaperone recruitment. FBP then promotes Cdc19 tetramerization and activity, which together with trehalose breakdown boosts glycolysis to further enhance SG disassembly. Together, these results provide a molecular mechanism protecting cells during stress by directly coupling metabolism and ATP production with SG dynamics via regulation of Cdc19 amyloids.

### Sample Protocol
To better compare the structure of wild-type and Cdc19irrev aggregates, we made use of limited proteolysis coupled to mass-spectrometry (LiP-MS)

### Data Protocol
SRM, Cdc19 purification, Lip MS. Cells expressing Cdc19WT-GFP or Cdc19irrev-GFP were grown in SD media and three biological replicates were collected when cells were growing exponentially (OD600 0.6) or following entry into stationary phase (two days).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Aggregation, Cdc19, Srm

### Affiliations
ETH Zurich
MDC Berlin

### Submitter
Ilaria Piazza

### Lab Head
Dr Paola Picotti
ETH Zurich


