### Accession
PXD008596

### Title
Local and global influences on protein turnover in neurons and glia.

### Description
Proteins exhibit dynamics in their expression level in response to intracellular and extracellular signals. Regulation of protein turnover allows cells to rapidly and efficiently remodel their proteomes. It is known that proteins can show very different turnover rates in different tissue of the same organism, but little is known about protein turnover rates in different brain cell types. We used a dynamic SILAC approach to determine protein half-lives in primary hippocampal cultures (containing a mixture of neurons and glia cells) as well as in neuron-enriched and glia-enriched cultures. We determined the protein half-lives for over 5100 proteins and found half-lives ranging from <1 to > 20 days with a median half-life of 5.4 days in mixed cultures. Membrane proteins as a group were shorter-lived and mitochondrial proteins, surprisingly, were longer-lived. Proteins in glia possessed significantly shorter half-lives than the same proteins in neurons. The presence of glia sped up or slowed down the half-lives of neuronal proteins. Our results demonstrate that both the cell-type of origin as well as the nature of the extracellular environment have potent influences on protein turnover.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation and maintenance of cultured neurons and glia cells Mixed cultures. Dissociated hippocampal neurons were prepared and maintained as previously described (Aakalu et al., 2001). Briefly, hippocampi from postnatal day 1 rat pups (strain Sprague-Dawley) were dissected and dissociated by papain and plated at a density of 18,000 cells/cm2 onto poly-D-lysine-coated Petri dishes (MatTek). Cultures were maintained in Neurobasal-A medium (Invitrogen) supplemented with B-27 (Invitrogen) and Glutamax (Invitrogen) at 37°C. All experiments were carried out with the approval of the German animal experiment authorities. Neuron-enriched cultures. Hippocampal cells were dissociated and plated as described above and plated at a density of approximately 25,000 cells/cm2. After one day, 3 µM cytosine β-D-arabinofuranoside (AraC; Sigma-Aldrich) was added for 48 hours. Subsequently, cells were treated as outlined in the manuscript. Glia-enriched cultures. The cortex from postnatal day 1 rat pups was dissected and dissociated as described above. 20% of the cell suspension was plated out and maintained on non-coated 6 cm Petri dishes (MatTek) and further treated as outlined in the manuscript Dynamic SILAC experiment and sample preparation. After 18-19 days in culture, the growth medium was  exchanged with a medium that was depleted of arginine and lysine (customized; Invitrogen) and added “heavy” isotopically labeled arginine (R10; Thermo) and lysine (K8; Thermo) resulting in a final percentage of 80% Arg10/Lys8 and 20% remaining “light” arginine (R0)/lysine (K0). Visual inspection of the cells in pilot experiments revealed improved cell viability when a thin layer of initial medium remained on the cells during the medium change compared to a complete medium removal and addition of a fresh medium. Cells were harvested 0, 1, 3 and 7 days after the medium switch. Cells were washed with ice-cold DPBS (Invitrogen) supplemented with protease inhibitor (cOmplete EDTA-free, Roche), scraped, pelleted by centrifugation, frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C. For each culture type, three independent biological replicates were performed. The cell pellets were lysed in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 200 mM Tris/HCl [pH 8.4], 4% CHAPS, 1 M NaCl, cOmplete EDTA-free protease inhibitor) using a pistil and sonication for 4 x 30 s at 4°C. The samples were incubated with Benzonase (1 µL of a ≥250 units/mL stock solution; Sigma) for 10 min, and centrifuged for 5 min at 10,000 x g to clear the samples from cell debris.  The proteins were digested as described by (Wisniewski et al., 2009). In brief, the samples were mixed with Urea Buffer A (UA: 8 M urea, 0.1 M Tris/HCl [pH 8.5]), loaded onto a 10 kDa Microcon filter (Millipore) and centrifuged at 17,000 x g for 20 min. After an additional wash step with UA, the proteins on the filter membrane were reduced with 10 mM TCEP (in UA) for 30 min. TCEP was subsequently removed by centrifugation and proteins were then added 95 mM IAA in UA and incubated in the dark for 30 min. IAA was removed by centrifugation and the samples were washed three times with 100 µL of Urea Buffer B (UB: 8 M urea, 0.1 M Tris/HCl [pH 8.0]). Proteins were digested with Endopeptidase LysC (Promega) in a protein to enzyme ratio of 50:1 and subsequently with trypsin (Promega) in a protein to enzyme ratio of 100:1. Samples were desalted using C18 StageTips (Rappsilber et al., 2007) or SepPak cartridges (Waters) as described by Schanzenbächer et al. (2016). Samples were dried by vacuum centrifugation and stored at -20°C until LC-MS analysis. LC-MS/MS Analysis. The dried peptide samples were reconstituted in 5% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid and subsequently loaded using a nano-HPLC (Dionex U3000 RSLCnano) onto a PepMap100 loading (C18, L = 20 mm, 3 µm particle size, Dionex) and washed with loading buffer (2% acetonitrile, 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid in water) for 6 min at a flow rate of 6 µL/min. Peptides were then separated on a PepMap RSLC analytical column (C18, L = 50 cm, <2 µm particle size, Dionex) by a gradient of phase A (water with 5% v/v dimethylsulfoxide and 0.1% formic acid) and phase B (5% dimethylsulfoxide, 15% water and 80% acetonitrile v/v/v). The gradient was ramped from 4% B to 48% B in 178 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. All solvents were LC-MS grade and purchased from Fluka. Peptides eluting from the column were ionized online using a Thermo nanoFlex ESI source and analyzed in a “Q Exactive Plus” mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) in data-dependent acquisition mode. Precursor ion spectra were acquired over the mass range 350–1,400 m/z (mass resolution 70 k), and the top10 precursor ions were selected for fragmentation (CID; normalized collision energy = 30) and analysis in MS2 mode (resolution 17.5 k). All samples were measured in triplicate LC-MS/MS runs.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analyzed with MaxQuant (version 1.6.0.1; (Cox and Mann, 2008; Tyanova et al., 2016a)) using customized Andromeda parameters (see Supplementary Table 12). Two different parameter sets were used to (a) relatively quantify protein abundance and assess the rate of incorporation of “light” amino acids into nascent proteins during the “heavy” pulse (R10 and K8 as variable modifications) and to (b) quantify “heavy/light” ratios (R10 and K8 as heavy SILAC labels). For both searches, spectra were matched to a Rattus norvegicus database downloaded from uniprot.org (37,669 entries, reviewed and unreviewed) and a contaminant and decoy database. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm, fragment ion tolerance to 20 ppm. Carbamidomethylation (+57.021) of cysteine residues was set as fixed modification and protein-N-terminal acetylation (+42.011) as well as methionine oxidation (+15.995) were set as variable modifications. For (a), heavy arginine (R10; +10.008) and heavy lysine (K8; +8.014) were set as additional variable modifications, whereas for (b), R10 and K8 were set as heavy SILAC partners (multiplicity = 2). A False discovery rate of 0.01 was applied at the PSM and protein level. If not stated otherwise, only unique peptides were included in down-stream analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Regulation of protein turnover allows cells to react to their environment and maintain homeostasis. Proteins can show different turnover rates in different tissue, but little is known about protein turnover in different brain cell types. We used dynamic SILAC to determine half-lives of over 5100 proteins in rat primary hippocampal cultures as well as in neuron-enriched and glia-enriched cultures ranging from &lt;1 to &gt;20 days. In contrast to synaptic proteins, membrane proteins were relatively shorter-lived and mitochondrial proteins were longer-lived compared to the population. Half-lives also correlate with protein functions and the dynamics of the complexes they are incorporated in. Proteins in glia possessed shorter half-lives than the same proteins in neurons. The presence of glia sped up or slowed down the turnover of neuronal proteins. Our results demonstrate that both the cell-type of origin as well as the nature of the extracellular environment have potent influences on protein turnover.

### Keywords
Proteome turnover, Neurons, Silac, Glia

### Affiliations
MPIs for Biophysics and Brain Research

### Submitter
Julian Langer

### Lab Head
Dr Julian David Langer
MPIs for Biophysics and Brain Research


