### Accession
PXD009804

### Title
Propionibacterium freudenreichii wild-type CIRM-BIA 129 and CB129∆slpB mutant strains

### Description
Comparison of proteome expression of Propionibacterium freudenreichii wild-type strain and a mutant SlpB protein strain

### Sample Protocol
Quantitative proteomics analyses were conducted with Bidimensional Nano Ultra-Performance Liquid Chromatography (nanoUPLC) tandem Nano Electrospray High Definition Mass Spectrometry (nanoESI-HDMSE).

### Data Protocol
HDMSE raw data were processed using Progenesis QI for Proteomics (QIP) v.2.0 (Nonlinear Dynamics, Newcastle, UK). Imported runs were submitted to data automatic processing for protein identifications and quantitative information using the following parameters: peak picking limits = 5; maximum charge retention time limits = 8.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Propionibacterium freudenreichii</i> is a beneficial Gram-positive bacterium, traditionally used as a cheese-ripening starter, and currently considered as an emerging probiotic. As an example, the <i>P. freudenreichii</i> CIRM-BIA 129 strain recently revealed promising immunomodulatory properties. Its consumption accordingly exerts healing effects in different animal models of colitis, suggesting a potent role in the context of inflammatory bowel diseases. This anti-inflammatory effect depends on surface layer proteins (SLPs). SLPs may be involved in key functions in probiotics, such as persistence within the gut, adhesion to host cells and mucus, or immunomodulation. Several SLPs coexist in <i>P. freudenreichii</i> CIRM-BIA 129 and mediate immunomodulation and adhesion. A mutant <i>P. freudenreichii</i> CIRM-BIA 129&#x394;<i>slpB</i> (CB129&#x394;<i>slpB</i>) strain was shown to exhibit decreased adhesion to intestinal epithelial cells. In the present study, we thoroughly analyzed the impact of this mutation on cellular properties. Firstly, we investigated alterations of surface properties in CB129&#x394;<i>slpB</i>. Surface extractable proteins, surface charges (&#x3b6;-potential) and surface hydrophobicity were affected by the mutation. Whole-cell proteomics, using high definition mass spectrometry, identified 1,288 quantifiable proteins in the wild-type strain, i.e., 53% of the theoretical proteome predicted according to <i>P. freudenreichii</i> CIRM-BIA 129 genome sequence. In the mutant strain, we detected 1,252 proteins, including 1,227 proteins in common with the wild-type strain. Comparative quantitative analysis revealed 97 proteins with significant differences between wild-type and mutant strains. These proteins are involved in various cellular process like signaling, metabolism, and DNA repair and replication. Finally, <i>in silico</i> analysis predicted that <i>slpB</i> gene is not part of an operon, thus not affecting the downstream genes after gene knockout. This study, in accordance with the various roles attributed in the literature to SLPs, revealed a pleiotropic effect of a single <i>slpB</i> mutation, in the probiotic <i>P. freudenreichii</i>. This suggests that SlpB may be at a central node of cellular processes and confirms that both nature and amount of SLPs, which are highly variable within the <i>P. freudenreichii</i> species, determine the probiotic abilities of strains.

### Keywords
Comparison, Mutant, Propionibacterium freudenreichii

### Affiliations
AQUACEN - National Reference Laboratory for Aquatic Animals Diseases, Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Food Supply, Brazil
National Reference Laboratory for Aquatic Animal Diseases
Federal University of Minas Gerais

### Submitter
Henrique César Pereira Figueiredo

### Lab Head
Dr Henrique Cesar Pereira Figueiredo
AQUACEN - National Reference Laboratory for Aquatic Animals Diseases, Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Food Supply, Brazil


