### Accession
PXD020685

### Title
Single cell glycosylation analysis (ScSUGAR-seq)

### Description
Proteomic data of ScSUGAR-seq samples: 1)TMT experiment to confirm changes in glycosylation due to Swainsonine 2)LFQ biotin pull down experiment to assess lectin binding partners 3)LFQ of MGAT1 cell lines assessing glycopeptide and glycoproteome level changes

### Sample Protocol
Snap frosen cell for Total proteome samples were lysed in guanidine HCl lysis buffer, acetone precipitated and digested with lys-C and trypsin. TMT samples were labelled with one of seven TMT10 labels (130C, 131C, 129C, 128C, 127C, 126 and 127N) while samples for LFQ analysis used as is. TMT labelled samples were fractionated using basic reverse phase fractionation into 12 fractions. LFQ samples for glycopeptide analysis were enriched using ZIC-HILIC enrichment

### Data Protocol
TMT and proteome LFQ experiments were processed with maxquant 1.6.3.4 or 1.5.3.30. Glycopeptide analysis was undertaken with Byonic 2.13.2 or 3.5.3. Samples were searched against the mouse protein database (uniprot: UP000000589)

### Publication Abstract
Multimodal single-cell RNA sequencing enables the precise mapping of transcriptional and phenotypic features of cellular differentiation states but does not allow for simultaneous integration of critical posttranslational modification data. Here, we describe SUrface-protein Glycan And RNA-seq (SUGAR-seq), a method that enables detection and analysis of N-linked glycosylation, extracellular epitopes, and the transcriptome at the single-cell level. Integrated SUGAR-seq and glycoproteome analysis identified tumor-infiltrating T cells with unique surface glycan properties that report their epigenetic and functional state.

### Keywords
Rna-seq, Single cell, Glycosylation

### Affiliations
University of Melbourne
Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre. Head, The Sir Peter MacCallum Department of Oncology,  The University of Melbourne.

### Submitter
Nichollas Scott

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Ricky Johnstone
Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre. Head, The Sir Peter MacCallum Department of Oncology,  The University of Melbourne.


