### Accession
PXD002132

### Title
DYRK1A, a potential therapeutic target for head and neck squamous cell carcinoma

### Description
To identify the activated tyrosine kinase signaling pathways in HNSCC, we carried out phosphotyrosine profiling using a panel of HNSCC cell lines compared to a normal oral keratinocyte. A total of 61 unique phosphosites were identified across these cell lines.  Dual-specificity tyrosine-(Y)-phosphorylation regulated kinase 1A (DYRK1A) was one of the kinases hyperphosphorylated at Y321 in all the HNSCC cell lines compared to the normal oral cell line OKF6/TERT1. Inhibition of DYRK1A using its specific siRNA and inhibitor resulted in a decrease in the invasion and colony formation ability of the HNSCC cell lines. Further, the treatment of mice bearing HNSCC xenograft tumors with DYRK1A inhibitor (harmine) showed regression of tumor growth. Our results demonstrate that DYRK1A could be a novel therapeutic target in HNSCC.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were cultured till 70% confluency and serum starved for 12 h. Then the cells were washed with 1X PBS and harvested in 1X ice-cold PBS. Further cells were lysed in lysis buffer. The cell lysates were sonicated and centrifuged at 12,000 rpm for 10 minutes. The protein concentration was estimated using Bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA). Equal amount of protein from each cell line was reduced using dithiothreitol at 60°C for 20 minutes. The reduced protein lysate was alkylated using iodoacetamide and incubated for 10 minutes in dark at room temperature. We employed filter aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol to remove SDS. Protein digestion was carried using TPCK treated trypsin (1:20) at 37°C for 12-16 hours. Peptides from each cell line were labeled using Tandem mass tag labeling method as per manufacturer’s instruction. Peptides derived from OKF6/TERT1 were labeled with TMT tag 127N (reporter ions of m/z ), JHU-O28 with 128C (reporter ions of m/z), JHU-O11 with 129N (reporter ions of m/z), FaDu with 129C (reporter ions of m/z), CAL 27 with 130N(reporter ions of m/z), JHU-O22 with 130C (reporter ions of m/z) and JHU-O29 with 131(reporter ions of m/z). Further the labelled and digested peptides were subjected to Sep-Pak C18. The enrichment of tyrosine phosphorylated peptides from TMT labelled lysates was carried out using Phosphoscan Kit (P-Tyr-1000, Cell signaling technology, Danvers, MA) as per manufacturer’s instructions. LC-MS/MS analysis of enriched fractions of phosphopeptides was carried using an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry derived data was searched against Human RefSeq protein database (Version 65, containing 36211 protein entries with common contaminants added) using SEQUEST and MASCOT search algorithms through Proteome Discoverer platform (version 1.4.1.14, Thermo Scientific, Bremen, GmbH). For both the algorithms search parameters included maximum of two missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation at cysteine, TMT 6-plex (+229.163) modification at N-terminus of peptide and lysine were set as fixed modification while oxidation of methionine and phosphorylation at serine, threonine and tyrosine as variable modifications. For MS data, monoisotopic peptide mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm and MS/MS tolerance to 0.1 Da. PhosphoRS (version 3.1) was used to calculate the confident localization of phosphosite within the identified peptide.  Phosphorylation sites were considered if PhosphoRS probability score was more than 75.0. False discovery rate of 1% was set at the PSM level.

### Publication Abstract
Despite advances in clinical management, 5-year survival rate in patients with late-stage head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) has not improved significantly over the past decade. Targeted therapies have emerged as one of the most promising approaches to treat several malignancies. Though tyrosine phosphorylation accounts for a minority of total phosphorylation, it is critical for activation of signaling pathways and plays a significant role in driving cancers. To identify activated tyrosine kinase signaling pathways in HNSCC, we compared the phosphotyrosine profiles of a panel of HNSCC cell lines to a normal oral keratinocyte cell line. Dual-specificity tyrosine-(Y)-phosphorylation regulated kinase 1A (DYRK1A) was one of the kinases hyperphosphorylated at Tyr-321 in all HNSCC cell lines. Inhibition of DYRK1A resulted in an increased apoptosis and decrease in invasion and colony formation ability of HNSCC cell lines. Further, administration of the small molecular inhibitor against DYRK1A in mice bearing HNSCC xenograft tumors induced regression of tumor growth. Immunohistochemical labeling of DYRK1A in primary tumor tissues using tissue microarrays revealed strong to moderate staining of DYRK1A in 97.5% (39/40) of HNSCC tissues analyzed. Taken together our results suggest that DYRK1A could be a novel therapeutic target in HNSCC.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Dual specificity kinases, Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma

### Affiliations
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905
McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland 21205 USA

### Submitter
Akhilesh Pandey

### Lab Head
Dr Akhilesh Pandey
McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland 21205 USA


