### Accession
PXD004420

### Title
Proteome profiling of blood plasma-derived exosomes in chronic lymphocytic leukemia

### Description
In order to analyze differences in the proteome composition of blood plasma-derived exosomes in chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) versus healthy donors, mass spectrometry was conducted for whole protein lysates of plasma-derived exosomes. Abundance of proteins was compared via label free quantification.

### Sample Protocol
Exosomes were isolated from 3mL blood plasma of CLL patients (n=4) and healthy donors (n=4). In brief, exosomes were purified by serial centrifugation, including removal of cells and cell debries by 300 g and 10,000 g centrifugation, respectively, as well as subsequent pelleting of exosomes by repeated ultracentrifugation at 100,000 g for 2 h at 4 C. In order to separate exosomes from protein aggregates, density-based separation via a 20% OptiPrep cushion was applied. Whole protein lysates were prepared in RIPA buffer and quantified via Micro BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fischer Scientific). After concentration of proteins according to Wessel Fluegge Extraction Method, equal protein amounts were applied for SDS-PAGE. Gels were stained with Coomassie G250 and cut in mutliple horizontal slices. Gel fractions were digested with trypsin. Peptides were separated via a UPLC M-Class Trap V/M Column filled with Symmetry C18 100 Å, 5 µm particles, and subsequent application on an Acquity UPLC M-Class Peptide BEH C18 130 A, 1.7 µm particle size, 100 µm × 100 mm analytical column applying a constant flow of 400 nl/min and stepped linear gradients of acetonitrile and water.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified after computed search of the human SwissProt database via MASCOT search engine (Matrix Science, London UK; version 2.4). Protein quantification was done via MaxQuant software with an implemented Andromeda search engine against the human SwissProt database.

### Publication Abstract
In chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), monocytes and macrophages are skewed toward protumorigenic phenotypes, including the release of tumor-supportive cytokines and the expression of immunosuppressive molecules such as programmed cell death 1 ligand 1 (PD-L1). To understand the mechanism driving protumorigenic skewing in CLL, we evaluated the role of tumor cell-derived exosomes in the cross-talk with monocytes. We carried out RNA sequencing and proteome analyses of CLL-derived exosomes and identified noncoding Y RNA hY4 as a highly abundant RNA species that is enriched in exosomes from plasma of CLL patients compared with healthy donor samples. Transfer of CLL-derived exosomes or hY4 alone to monocytes resulted in key CLL-associated phenotypes, including the release of cytokines, such as C-C motif chemokine ligand 2 (CCL2), CCL4, and interleukin-6, and the expression of PD-L1. These responses were abolished in Toll-like receptor 7 (TLR7)-deficient monocytes, suggesting exosomal hY4 as a driver of TLR7 signaling. Pharmacologic inhibition of endosomal TLR signaling resulted in a substantially reduced activation of monocytes in vitro and attenuated CLL development in vivo. Our results indicate that exosome-mediated transfer of noncoding RNAs to monocytes contributes to cancer-related inflammation and concurrent immune escape via PD-L1 expression.

### Keywords
Cll, Chronic lymphocytic leukemia, Maxquant, Tumor microenvironment, Extracellular vesicles, Microvesicles, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
DKFZ
Division of Molecular Genetics, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany

### Submitter
Murat Iskar

### Lab Head
Dr Martina Seiffert
Division of Molecular Genetics, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany


