### Accession
PXD033242

### Title
Arginine-derived polyketides are ubiquitous signals shaping cross-kingdom microbial interactions

### Description
Microbial consortia consist of a multitude of prokaryotic and eukaryotic microorganisms. Their interaction is critical for the functioning of ecosystems. Until now, there is limited knowledge about the communication signals determining the interaction between bacteria and fungi and how they influence microbial consortia. Here, we discovered that bacterial low molecular weight arginine-derived polyketides trigger the production of distinct natural products in fungi. These compounds are produced by actinomycetes found on all continents except Antarctica and are characterized by an arginine-derived positively charged group linked to a linear or cyclic polyene moiety. Producer bacteria can be readily isolated from soil as well as fungi that decode the signal and respond with the biosynthesis of natural products. Both arginine-derived polyketides and the compounds produced by fungi in response shape microbial interactions.

### Sample Protocol
Streptomyces iranensis DSM41954 (HM35T) wild type was inoculated in 50 ml TSB medium. The Streptomyces iranensis ΔbldA mutant does not sporulate and therefore was inoculated by adding 0.5 ml of mycelium suspension from cryo culture in 50 ml of TSB with 50 µg/ml of apramycin added after two days of initial cultivation without antibiotic. The cultures were grown for four days in triplicates. In order to harvest biomass, cultures were strained through Miracloth (Merck Millipore), the mycelium was instantly frozen in liquid nitrogen. Cells were disrupted by using mortar and pestle with liquid nitrogen. Cell debris were homogenized in lysis buffer (1% (w/v) SDS, 150 mM NaCl, 100 mM TEAB (triethyl ammonium bicarbonate), one tablet each of cOmplete Ultra Protease Inhibitor Cocktail). After addition of 0.5 µl Benzonase nuclease (250 U/μl) the samples were incubated at 37°C in a water bath sonicator for 30 min. Proteins were separated from unsolubilized debris by centrifugation (15 min, 18000 x g). Each 100 µg of total protein per sample was diluted with 100 mM TEAB to gain a final volume of 100 µl. Subsequently, cysteine thiols were reduced and carbamidomethylated in one step for 30 min at 70°C by addition of each 2 µL of 500 mM TCEP (tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine) and 625 mM 2-chloroacetamide (CAA). The samples were further cleaned up by methanol-chloroform-water precipitation using the protocol of Wessel and Flügge (1984). Protein precipitates were resolubilized in 100 mM TEAB and digested overnight (18 h) with a Trypsin+LysC mixture (Promega) at a protein to protease ratio of 25:1. Samples were evaporated in a vacuum concentrator. Tryptic peptides were resolubilized in 30 µL of 0.05% TFA in H2O/ACN 98/2 (v/v), filtered through 10 kDa MWCO PES membrane spin filters (VWR), and transferred to HPLC vials. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on an Ultimate 3000 nano RSLC system connected to a QExactive Plus mass spectrometer (both Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide trapping for 5 min on an Acclaim Pep Map 100 column (2 cm x 75 µm, 3 µm) at 5 µL/min was followed by separation on an analytical Acclaim Pep Map RSLC nano column (50 cm x 75 µm, 2µm). Mobile phase gradient elution of eluent A (0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water) mixed with eluent B (0.1% (v/v) formic acid in 90/10 acetonitrile/water) was performed as follows: 0-5 min at 4% B, 30 min at 7% B, 60 min at 10% B, 100 min at 15% B, 140 min at 25% B, 180 min at 45% B, 200 min at 65 %B, 210-215 min at 96% B, 215.1-240 min at 4% B. Positively charged ions were generated at spray voltage of 2.2 kV using a stainless steel emitter attached to the Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The quadrupole/orbitrap instrument was operated in Full MS / data-dependent MS2 (Top10) mode. Precursor ions were monitored at m/z 300-1500 at a resolution of 140,000 FWHM (full width at half maximum) using a maximum injection time (ITmax) of 120 ms and an AGC (automatic gain control) target of 3×10^6. Precursor ions with a charge state of z=2-5 were filtered at an isolation width of m/z 1.6 amu for further HCD fragmentation at 30% normalized collision energy (NCE). MS2 ions were scanned at 17,500 FWHM (ITmax=120 ms, AGC=2×10^5). Dynamic exclusion of precursor ions was set to 30 s. The LC-MS/MS instrument was controlled by DCMS Link 2.14, QExactive Tune 2.9 and Xcalibur 3.0 software.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were searched against the NCBI database of Streptomyces iranensis (2019/01/24) using Proteome Discoverer (PD) 2.2 (Thermo) and the algorithms of Mascot 2.4 Sequest HT (version of PD2.2), and MS Amanda 2.0. Two missed cleavages were allowed for the tryptic digestion. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. Modifications were defined as dynamic Met oxidation and protein N-term acetylation and as well as static Cys carbamidomethylation. A strict false discovery rate (FDR) < 1% (peptide and protein level) and at least a search engine threshold >30 (Mascot), >4 (Sequest HT) or >300 (MS Amanda) were required for positive protein hits. The Percolator node of PD2.2 and a reverse decoy database was used for qvalue validation of spectral matches. Only rank 1 proteins and peptides of the top scored proteins were counted. Label-free protein quantification was based on the Minora algorithm of PD2.2 using a signal-to-noise ratio >5. Normalization was performed by using the total peptide amount method.

### Publication Abstract
Although the interaction between prokaryotic and eukaryotic microorganisms is crucial for the functioning of ecosystems, information about the processes driving microbial interactions within communities remains scarce. Here we show that arginine-derived polyketides (arginoketides) produced by Streptomyces species mediate cross-kingdom microbial interactions with fungi of the genera Aspergillus and Penicillium, and trigger the production of natural products. Arginoketides can be cyclic or linear, and a prominent example is azalomycin F produced by Streptomyces iranensis, which induces the cryptic orsellinic acid gene cluster in Aspergillus nidulans. Bacteria that synthesize arginoketides and fungi that decode and respond to this signal were co-isolated from the same soil sample. Genome analyses and a literature search indicate that arginoketide producers are found worldwide. Because, in addition to their direct impact, arginoketides induce a secondary wave of fungal natural products, they probably contribute to the wider structure and functioning of entire soil microbial communities.

### Keywords
Marginolactones, Polyketides, Streptomyces iranensis, Bacterial-fungal interaction, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Department for Molecular and Applied Microbiology, Leibniz-Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology, Hans Knöll Institute Jena, Germany
Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute

### Submitter
Thomas Krüger

### Lab Head
Dr Axel A. Brakhage
Department for Molecular and Applied Microbiology, Leibniz-Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology, Hans Knöll Institute Jena, Germany


