### Accession
PXD003918

### Title
Proteomics analysis of cardiac extracellular matrix remodeling in a porcine model of ischemia/reperfusion injury: control, guanidine

### Description
The aim of the present study is to characterize ECM remodeling after myocardial infarction by applying a proteomics method based on ECM enrichment and MS analysis  to a porcine model of ischemia/reperfusion injury. The human-like physiology and anatomy of pigs facilitate comparisons of different cardiac regions to establish an accurate temporal and spatial pattern of the ECM remodeling process.

### Sample Protocol
Heart samples were consecutively incubated with 0.5 mol/L sodium chloride (NaCl), 0.1% SDS, and 4 mol/L guanidine hydrochloride (guanidine-HCl) to decellularize and sequentially extract extracellular-space proteins. The NaCl and guanidine-HCl extracts were separated by SDS -PAGE; the entire lane was divided into a series of gel bands; and proteomic analysis was performed on each of them with a high-mass-accuracy tandem mass spectrometer (LTQ Orbitrap XL, ThermoFisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Spectra were collected from an ion trap mass analyzer (LTQ-Orbitrap XL, ThermoFisher Scientific) using full ion scan mode over the mass-to-charge (m/z) range 450–1600. MS/MS was performed on the top six ions in each MS scan using the data-dependent acquisition mode with dynamic exclusion enabled. MS/MS peak lists were generated by extract_msn.exe and matched to a combined pig and human database (UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot Release 14.6, 21,669 protein entries) using SEQUEST version 28 (revision 13) (Bioworks Browser 3.3.1 SP1, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and X! Tandem (version 2007.01.01.2). Carboxyamidomethylation of cysteine was chosen as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine was chosen as a variable modification. The mass tolerance was set at 20 ppm for the precursor ions and 1.0 amu for fragment ions. Two missed cleavages were allowed. Scaffold (version 2.0.6, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to calculate the spectral counts and to validate MS/MS-based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability as specified by the Peptide Prophet algorithm . Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability with at least two independent peptides.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Heart, Extracellular matrix, Pig

### Affiliations
King's College London - Cardiovascular Division
King's College London

### Submitter
Javier Barallobre-Barreiro

### Lab Head
Dr Manuel Mayr
King's College London - Cardiovascular Division


