### Accession
PXD000414

### Title
Quantitiative phosphoproteomic analysis of SKS1 signaling network involved in yeast filamentous growth by LC-MS in combination with SILAC

### Description
Yeast pseudohyphal growth(filamentous growth) is regulated by signaling pathways responsive to nitrogen stress and glucose deprivation, but the molecular link between pseudohyphal filamentation and glucose signaling is not fully understood. To identify the Sks1p signaling network involved in filamentous growth, we applied mass spectrometry-based quantitative phosphoproteomics in combination with SILAC. We investigated differential protein expressions and changes in phosphorylation levels in SKS1 kinase dead mutant yeast cells (SKS1-KD, Lys-4 and Arg-6 labeled) under filamentous growth condition.        Twelve SCX fractions of SILAC paired peptides derived from SKS1-KD and wild type yeast cells were subjected to phosphopeptide enrichment by using ZrO2, prior to LC-MSMS by an LTQ-Orbitrap. MaxQunat (ver 1.0.13.8) package incorporating Mascot search was used for identification and quantification of peptides and proteins. RAW files were searched against a composite target-decoy database containing yeast ORFs from SGD allowing variable modifications of phospho (STY) and oxi (M) and a fixed modification of carbamidomethyl(C) within 7 ppm (MS) and 0.5 Da (MSMS) mass tolerances. Peptide and protein identifications were maintained within 5% FDR.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
The yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae undergoes a dramatic growth transition from its unicellular form to a filamentous state, marked by the formation of pseudohyphal filaments of elongated and connected cells. Yeast pseudohyphal growth is regulated by signaling pathways responsive to reductions in the availability of nitrogen and glucose, but the molecular link between pseudohyphal filamentation and glucose signaling is not fully understood. Here, we identify the glucose-responsive Sks1p kinase as a signaling protein required for pseudohyphal growth induced by nitrogen limitation and coupled nitrogen/glucose limitation. To identify the Sks1p signaling network, we applied mass spectrometry-based quantitative phosphoproteomics, profiling over 900 phosphosites for phosphorylation changes dependent upon Sks1p kinase activity. From this analysis, we report a set of novel phosphorylation sites and highlight Sks1p-dependent phosphorylation in Bud6p, Itr1p, Lrg1p, Npr3p, and Pda1p. In particular, we analyzed the Y309 and S313 phosphosites in the pyruvate dehydrogenase subunit Pda1p; these residues are required for pseudohyphal growth, and Y309A mutants exhibit phenotypes indicative of impaired aerobic respiration and decreased mitochondrial number. Epistasis studies place SKS1 downstream of the G-protein coupled receptor GPR1 and the G-protein RAS2 but upstream of or at the level of cAMP-dependent PKA. The pseudohyphal growth and glucose signaling transcription factors Flo8p, Mss11p, and Rgt1p are required to achieve wild-type SKS1 transcript levels. SKS1 is conserved, and deletion of the SKS1 ortholog SHA3 in the pathogenic fungus Candida albicans results in abnormal colony morphology. Collectively, these results identify Sks1p as an important regulator of filamentation and glucose signaling, with additional relevance towards understanding stress-responsive signaling in C. albicans.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Sks1, Phosphoproteome, Silac, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Filamentous growth

### Affiliations
University of Michigan

### Submitter
Hye Kyong Kweon

### Lab Head


