### Accession
PXD002851

### Title
Quantitative proteomics reveals an important role of GsCBRLK in salt stress response of soybean

### Description
Salinity is one of the serious environmental constraints stresses limiting crop plants growth and yield. We have previously reported that GsCBRLK functions as a positive regulator of plant tolerance to salt stress. In order to investigate the physiological and molecular mechanisms underlying the salinity tolerance regulated by GsCBRLK, the gene was overexpressed in soybean plants. Here we examined the salt-responsive proteomes of the GsCBRLK overexpression soybean and wild typeWT plants using iTRAQ-based proteomic approach to elucidate investigate the global effects and potentialssible downstream targets of GsCBRLK protein. A total of 941 proteins showed significant changes in protein abundance in soybean leaves, and 574 of the NaCl-regulated proteins were GsCBRLK-dependent. Among the identified proteins, four protein changes in both the two genotypes after NaCl treatment were validated using Western blot analysis. The iIdentification of the salt-reponsive proteins has revealed the involvement of GsCBRLK protein in the enhancement of ROS scavenging and photosynthesis capacity in soybean plants, which was corrobarated with the physiological effects of GsCBRLK overexpression. More importantly, the proteomic data has suggested the regulatory function of GsCBRLK in salt signal transduction pathway mediated by Ca2+/CaM. These findings have contributed to our knowledge of plant GsCBRLK mediated salt tolerance mechanisms mediated by GsCBRLK.

### Sample Protocol
Total protein samples from three biological replicates were prepared from control and NaCl-treated soybean leave leaf tissues by using a phenol extraction according to a previous method. A total of 100 μg of protein from each sample was used for acetone precipitation overnight. After protein precipitation, the pellet of each replicate was dissolved in 1% SDS, 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.5, followed by reduction, alkylation, trypsin digestion, and labeling using 8-plex iTRAQ reagent kits according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Each SCX fraction was lyophilized and dissolved in solvent A (3% v/v acetonitrile, 0.1% v/v acetic acid), and loaded onto a C18 PepMap nanoflow column (75 μm internal diameter, 3 μm, 100 Ǻ). Full MS survey scan was performed from a mass range of 400 to 1800 m/z with resolution R=60,000 at m/z 400. HCD fragmentation was used for MS/MS, and the 10 most intense signals in the survey scan were fragmented. A resolution of 7500 at 400 m/z was used with an isolation width of 1 m/z, 30,000 signal threshold.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry files were searched using the SEQUEST algorithm under in Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific Inc., Bremen, Germany) software. The workflow option was utilized with selection of parameters: Lowest and highest charge: +21 and +53, respectively; minimum and maximum precursor mass: 300 and 6,000 Da, respectively; minimum S/N ratio: 3; enzyme: trypsin; maximum missed cleavages: 1; FDR≦ 0.01; mass tolerance: 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.501 Da for fragment ions; dynamic modifications: phosphorylation (+79.966 (S,T,Y)), carbamidomethyl (+57.021 Da (C)), oxidation (+15.995 Da (M)), carbamidomethyl (+57.021 Da (C)). The N-terminal modification was set for iTRAQ8plex (+304.205 Da). The spectral data were matched against the Uniprot Soybean database with 71,042 entries (downloaded on May 16, 2013) and the decoy database. The Proteome Discoverer results files (.msf) were uploaded to ProteoIQ 2.6 (NuSep) software for further filtering. Proteins detected with at least three spectral counts, FDR ≤ 5%, 95% probability and listed as top scoring proteins are considered as high confidence matches and are presented in the results. A p-value smaller than 0.05 and fold change greater than 1.3 or less than 0.7 was considered statically significant. The functional annotation of proteins found was determined by Blast2GO (Bioinformatics Department, CIPF, Valencia, Spain), and then grouped on the basis of their biological functions from Gene Ontology (GO) terms and information from the literature.

### Publication Abstract
Salinity severely threatens land use capability and crop yields worldwide. Understanding the mechanisms that protect soybeans from salt stress will help in the development of salt-stress tolerant leguminous plants. Here we initially analyzed the changes in malondialdehyde levels, the activities of superoxide dismutase and peroxidases, chlorophyll content, and Na(+)/K(+) ratios in leaves and roots from soybean seedlings treated with 200 mM NaCl at different time points. We found that the 200 mM NaCl treated for 12 h was optimal for undertaking a proteomic analysis on soybean seedlings. An iTRAQ-based proteomic approach was used to investigate the proteomes of soybean leaves and roots under salt treatment. These data are available via ProteomeXchange with the identifier PXD002851. In total, 278 and 440 proteins with significantly altered abundances were identified in leaves and roots of soybean, respectively. From these data, a total of 50 proteins were identified in the both tissues. These differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were from 13 biological processes. Moreover, protein-protein interaction analysis revealed that proteins involved in metabolism, carbohydrate and energy metabolism, protein synthesis and redox homeostasis could be assigned to four high salt stress response networks. Furthermore, semi-quantitative RT-PCR analysis revealed that some of the proteins, such as a 14-3-3, MMK2, PP1, TRX-h, were also regulated by salt stress at the level of transcription. These results indicated that effective regulatory protein expression related to signaling, membrane and transport, stress defense and metabolism all played important roles in the short-term salt response of soybean seedlings.

### Keywords
Salt stress, Soybean, Gscbrlk

### Affiliations
Northeast Agricultural University
Northeast Agricultural University, St. Mucai, Harbin, Heilongjiang, 150030, China

### Submitter
Wei Ji

### Lab Head
Dr Wei Ji
Northeast Agricultural University, St. Mucai, Harbin, Heilongjiang, 150030, China


