### Accession
PXD010567

### Title
Immunomic identification of antigens

### Description
Immunomic screening of mice immune sera with different protection efficiencies against the whole P. yoelii 17X parasite proteome was performed to identify the repertoire of antigens recognized by those sera. The calculation of weighted scores reflecting the likelihood of protection of each antigens using five predictive criteria derived from immunomic and proteomic datasets, highlighted a priority list of protective antigens.

### Sample Protocol
The IP, blood stage parasite and RBC membrane samples were separated on 12% SDS-PAGE at 50 V and protein bands were visualized by staining with Imperial Coomassie blue (Pierce). The gel lanes were cut into 10 separate slices, then de-stained, and the proteins reduced by using dithiothreitol (DTT) and alkylated by iodoacetamide (IAA). The gel area excised from the 2D gel were destained using the instruction and reagents provided in the Pierce™ Silver Stain for Mass Spectrometry kit. The proteins were cleaved by overnight digestion in porcine trypsin (Sequencing Grade Modified, Promega, Wisconsin). The tryptic peptides were extracted by using 5% acetic acid in 50% acetonitrile and vacuum-dried by speedvac. The vacuum concentrated peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid and analyzed using a LC-MS/MS system. The LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using a LTQFT Ultra mass spectrometer (Thermo-Finnigan, Bremen, Germany), coupled with an online HPLC system (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan). The sample (100 μl) from an auto-sampler (Shimadzu, Japan) was injected and concentrated in a Zorbax peptide trap (Agilent, Palo Alto, CA, USA). The peptide separation was performed in a capillary column (200 μm ID × 10 cm) packed with C18 AQ (5 μm, 300 Å pore, Michrom BioResources, CA, USA). The mobile phase A (0.1% formic acid in H2O) and B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) were used to establish a 60 min gradient that comprised of 35 min 5–25% B; followed by 10 min 25–60% B; maintained at 80% B for 5 min and finally re-equilibrated at 5% B. The HPLC was maintained at constant flow rate of 30 μL/min and a splitter was used to create a flow rate of approximately 500 nL/min. The samples were injected into LTQFT Ultra through an ADVANCE™ CaptiveSpray™ Source (Michrom BioResources, CA, USA) with an electrospray potential of 1.5 kV. The gas flow was set at 2, ion transfer tube temperature at 180 °C and collision gas pressure at 0.85 mTorr. The LTQFT was set to perform data acquisition in the positive ion mode and full MS scan (350–1600 m/z range) was acquired in the FT-ICR cell at a resolution of 100,000 and a maximum ion accumulation time of 1000 ms. The MS/MS spectra of peptide ion fragments generated by collision-induced dissociation were acquired in the linear ion trap. The 10 most intense ions above a 500 counts threshold were selected for fragmentation in CID.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS raw data were processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (PD2.1; ThermoFisher Scientific), and peptide identification was performed by both Mascot search engine (V 2.4.1, Matrix Science, Boston, MA) and Sequest-HT search engine. The UniProt mus musculus proteome, the P. yoelii 17X proteome in PlasmoDB 34.0 and common contaminant database (http://maxquant.org/contaminants.zip and ftp://ftp.thegpm.org/fasta/cRAP/crap.fasta) were combined and used for the searches. The protease was specified as trypsin with two maximum missing cleavage sites. Mass tolerance for precursor ion mass was 10 ppm with the fragment ion tolerance as 0.8 Da. Cysteine alkylation by iodoacetamide (carbamidomethyl) was set as fixed modification, Methionine oxidation,  and deamidation at asparagine or glutamine were selected as variable modifications. ProteomeDiscoverer’s workflow included an automatic target-decoy search tactic along with the Percolator to score peptide spectral matches from both Mascot and Sequest HT searches to estimate the false discovery rate (FDR). The Percolator parameters are set to maximum delta Cn = 0.05; target FDR (strict) = 0.01 ; target FDR (relaxed) = 0.05, validation based on q-value(89). Estimation of the protein abundance was performed using exponentially modified Protein Abundance Index (emPAI) values for each sample were reported by the PD2.1(25). The emPAI is defined as emPAI = 10PAI – 1 with PAI = Nobserved/Nobservable. Nobserved is the number of experimentally observed peptides and Nobservable is the calculated number of observable peptides for each protein. The emPAI reported here were calculated using the data obtained from each sample. Only proteins identified by at least one unique peptide were retained. For the differential analysis of the IP samples, the mean emPAI was obtained by calculating the mean abundance values obtained from each of the biological replicates obtained with same immune sera. For the proteomic analysis of the blood stage parasite, the emPAI values were normalized according to the mean value of the total abundance of all proteins found in each sample. Finally, the presence of signal peptide and/or transmembrane domain in the proteins identified were checked using Plasmodb (www.plasmodg.org). The localization of the proteins identified was deduced by searching in the literature using PubMed (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed), RMgmDB (http://www.pberghei.eu/) and Phenoplasm (http://phenoplasm.org/) databases and analysis of the annotations available in PlasmoDB.

### Publication Abstract
Efforts to develop vaccines against malaria represent a major research target. The observations that 1) sterile protection can be obtained when the host is exposed to live parasites and 2) the immunity against blood stage parasite is principally mediated by protective antibodies suggest that a protective vaccine is feasible. However, only a small number of proteins have been investigated so far and most of the <i>Plasmodium</i> proteome has yet to be explored. To date, only few immunodominant antigens have emerged for testing in clinical trials but no formulation has led to substantial protection in humans. The nature of parasite molecules associated with protection remains elusive. Here, immunomic screening of mice immune sera with different protection efficiencies against the whole parasite proteome allowed us to identify a large repertoire of antigens validated by screening a library expressing antigens. The calculation of weighted scores reflecting the likelihood of protection of each antigen using five predictive criteria derived from immunomic and proteomic data sets, highlighted a priority list of protective antigens. Altogether, the approach sheds light on conserved antigens across <i>Plasmodium</i> that are amenable to targeting by the host immune system upon merozoite invasion and blood stage development. Most of these antigens have preliminary protection data but have not been widely considered as candidate for vaccine trials, opening new perspectives that overcome the limited choice of immunodominant, poorly protective vaccines currently being the focus of malaria vaccine researches.

### Keywords
Immunoprecipitation, Malaria, Lc-ms/ms, 2d western blot, Empai

### Affiliations
NTU SBS School of Biological Science SBS-04n-08, Singapore 637551
NTU

### Submitter
Anthony Siau

### Lab Head
Dr Anthony Siau
NTU SBS School of Biological Science SBS-04n-08, Singapore 637551


