### Accession
PXD042336

### Title
A novel strategy to characterize the pattern of β-lactam antibiotic-induced drug resistance in Acinetobacter baumannii.

### Description
Carbapenem-resistant Acinetobacter baumannii (CRAb) is an urgent public health threat, according to the CDC. This pathogen has few treatment options and causes severe nosocomial infections with >50% fatality rate. Although previous studies have examined the proteome of CRAb, there have been no focused analyses of dynamic changes to β-lactamase expression that may occur due to drug exposure. Here, we present our initial proteomic study of variation in β-lactamase expression that occurs in CRAb with different β-lactam antibiotics. Briefly, drug resistance to Ab (ATCC 19606) was induced by the administration of various classes of β-lactam antibiotics, and the cell-free supernatant was isolated, concentrated, separated by SDS-PAGE, digested with trypsin, and identified by label-free LC-MS-based quantitative proteomics. Thirteen proteins were identified and evaluated using a 1789 sequence database of Ab β-lactamases from UniProt, the majority of which were Class C β-lactamases (≥80%). Importantly, different antibiotics, even those of the same class (e.g. penicillin and amoxicillin), induced non-equivalent responses comprising various isoforms of Class C and D serine-β-lactamases, resulting in unique resistomes. These results open the door to a new approach of analyzing and studying the problem of multi-drug resistance in bacteria that rely strongly on β-lactamase expression.

### Sample Protocol
For the protein digestion, the bands were cut to minimize excess polyacrylamide, divided into a number of smaller pieces. The gel pieces washed with water and dehydrated in acetonitrile. The bands were then reduced with DTT and alkylated with iodoacetamide prior to the in-gel digestion. All bands were digested in-gel using trypsin, by adding 5 μL 10 ng/μL trypsin or chymotrypsin in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and incubating overnight digestion at room temperature to achieve complete digestion. The peptides that were formed were extracted from the polyacrylamide in two aliquots of 30μL 50% acetonitrile with 5% formic acid. These extracts were combined and evaporated to <10 μL in Speedvac and then resuspended in 1% acetic acid to make up a final volume of ~30 μL for LC-MS analysis. The LC-MS system was a Bruker TimsTof Pro2 Q-Tof mass spectrometry system operating in positive ion mode, coupled with a CaptiveSpray ion source (both from Bruker Daltonik GmbH, Bremen). The HPLC column was a Bruker 15 cm x 75 μm id C18 ReproSil AQ, 1.9 μm, 120 Å reversed-phase capillary chromatography column. One μL volumes of the extract were injected and the peptides eluted from the column by an acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid gradient at a flow rate of 0.3 μL/min were introduced into the source of the mass spectrometer on-line. The digests were analyzed using a Parallel Accumulation–Serial Fragmentation DDA method was used to select precursor ions for fragmentation with a TIMS-MS scan followed by 10 PASEF MS/MS scans. The TIMS-MS survey scan was acquired between 0.60 and 1.6 Vs/cm2 and 100–1,700 m/z with a ramp time of 166 ms. The total cycle time for the PASEF scans was 1.2 seconds and the MS/MS experiments were performed with a collision energies between 20 eV (0.6 Vs/cm2) to 59 eV (1.6 Vs/cm2). Precursors with 2–5 charges were selected with the target value set to 20,000 a.u and intensity threshold to 2,500 a.u. Precursors were dynamically excluded for 0.4 s.

### Data Protocol
The data were analyzed by using all CID spectra collected in the experiment to search an Ab database compiled using Uniprot using the program MSFragger. The parameters for this search include a precursor mass accuracy of 20 ppm and fragment mass accuracy of 0.05 Da, fully tryptic peptides with 2 allowed missed cleavages, oxidized methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications, and carbamidomethylation as a static modification. Protein and peptide identification were validated to 1% FDR using a decoy database strategy.

### Publication Abstract
Carbapenem-resistant Acinetobacter baumannii (CRAb) is an urgent public health threat, according to the CDC. This pathogen has few treatment options and causes severe nosocomial infections with&#x2009;&gt;&#x2009;50% fatality rate. Although previous studies have examined the proteome of CRAb, there have been no focused analyses of dynamic changes to &#x3b2;-lactamase expression that may occur due to drug exposure. Here, we present our initial proteomic study of variation in &#x3b2;-lactamase expression that occurs in CRAb with different &#x3b2;-lactam antibiotics. Briefly, drug resistance to Ab (ATCC 19606) was induced by the administration of various classes of &#x3b2;-lactam antibiotics, and the cell-free supernatant was isolated, concentrated, separated by SDS-PAGE, digested with trypsin, and identified by label-free LC-MS-based quantitative proteomics. Thirteen proteins were identified and evaluated using a 1789 sequence database of Ab &#x3b2;-lactamases from UniProt, the majority of which were Class C &#x3b2;-lactamases (&#x2265;&#x2009;80%). Importantly, different antibiotics, even those of the same class (e.g. penicillin and amoxicillin), induced non-equivalent responses comprising various isoforms of Class C and D serine-&#x3b2;-lactamases, resulting in unique resistomes. These results open the door to a new approach of analyzing and studying the problem of multi-drug resistance in bacteria that rely strongly on &#x3b2;-lactamase expression.

### Keywords
Acinetobacter baumannii, Tims tof pro2, Dda lfq

### Affiliations
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Northeast Ohio Medical University, Rootstown, OH
Cleveland Clinic

### Submitter
Belinda Willard

### Lab Head
Dr Woo Shik Shin
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Northeast Ohio Medical University, Rootstown, OH


### SDRF
- organism part: cell-free supernatant 
- disease: Infection
- organism: Acinetobacter baumannii
- cell type: bacterial cells
- label: label free sample
- instrument: timsTof

