### Accession
PXD039496

### Title
Biotinylated H3K9me2 and H3S10ph peptides pull down analysis

### Description
To further explore the interacting proteins associated with histone modifications, we synthesized biotin labelled peptides for pull down examination.

### Sample Protocol
Biotinylated H3K9me2 and H3S10ph peptides were ON incubated with Streptavi-din-coated magnetic beads (Pierce) with rotation at 4℃, followed by two rinses in RIPA lysis buffer and centrifugation. The cell pellets underwent lysis in RIPA lysis buffer (50mM Tris, 150mM NaCl, 0.1%SDS, 0.5%SDC, 1%NP-40), prior to an ON incubation with beads while rotating at 4℃, followed by five times rinsing in 25mM Tris (PH 8.2), prior to digestion as previously described. To conduct LC-MS/MS analysis, peptides were introduced to 0.1% formic acid (FA) and assessed via an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometry (Thermo Fisher Scien-tific) attached to the Easy-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Solvent A had 0.1% FA in water, whereas, solvent B had 80% ACN and 0.1% FA. Peptide separation was per-formed in analytical column (75 μm × 25 cm, Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 column, 2 μm, 100 Å; DIONEX) with a 60 min linear gradient (3%–5% B for 5 sec, 5%–15% B for 23 min 55 sec, 15%–28% B for 21 min, 28%–38% B for 7 min 30 sec, 30%–100% B for 5 sec, and 100% B for 7 min 25 sec) in the data-based acquisition mode. The Orbitrap Fusion Lumos was adjusted to 60K MS1 resolution with an AGC target of 4×105 ions and maximum administration duration of 50 ms, with subsequent MS2 scans at 3K resolu-tion, AGC target of 5×104 ions, and maximum administration duration of 100 ms.

### Data Protocol
The default settings of the MaxQuant software (1.6.5.0) were used to process raw files, wherein murine reference FASTA files were received from the Universal Protein Resource (UniProt) database in March 2021. Carbamidomethyl (C) was adjusted to fixed modifications, whereas, Oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein N-term). Enzymatic specificity was defined as complete slicing via trypsin, and two maximum missed slicing locations were allowed.

### Publication Abstract
Epigenetic regulation, particularly post-translational modifications (PTMs) of histones, participates in spermatogonial stem cell (SSCs) differentiation. However, there is a lack of systemic studies of histone PTM regulation during the differentiation of SSCs due to its low number in vivo. Herein, we quantified dynamic changes of 46 different PTMs on histone H3.1 by targeted quantitative proteomics using mass spectrometry during SSCs differentiation in vitro, in combination with our RNA-seq data. We identified seven histone H3.1 modifications to be differentially regulated. In addition, we selected H3K9me2 and H3S10ph for subsequent biotinylated peptide pull-down experiments and identified 38 H3K9me2-binding proteins and 42 H3S10ph-binding proteins, which contain several transcription factors, such as GTF2E2 and SUPT5H, which appear to be crucial for epigenetic regulation of SSC differentiation.

### Keywords
Spermatogonial stem cell, Lc-ms/ms, Histone modification

### Affiliations
nanjing medical university
State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Nanjing Medical University

### Submitter
xiangzheng zhang

### Lab Head
Dr xuejiang guo
State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Nanjing Medical University


