### Accession
PXD038378

### Title
Targeting an RNA polymerase II-associated PHF5A protein subcomplex with a KMT2A-WDR5 inhibitor impairs self-renewal and tumorigenicity of pancreatic cancer stem cells

### Description
Pancreatic cancer (PC) remains one of the most aggressive and life-threatening malignancies known for its notorious resistance to chemotherapy. This is increasingly ascribed to the subpopulation of undifferentiated cells, known as pancreatic cancer stem cells (PCSCs), which are evolutionary fitter than other tumor cells to evade the cytotoxic effects of chemotherapy. Those cells are crucial for tumor relapse as they possess ‘stem cell-like’ features of self-renewal and differentiation. However, what molecular mechanisms maintain the unique characteristics of PCSCs are poorly understood. Here, we identified an RNA polymerase II-associated PHF5A-PHF14-HMG20A-RAI1-KMT2A transcriptional subcomplex, which regulates the stemness characteristics and tumorigenicity of PCSCs through epigenetic control of gene expression. Targeting the protein subcomplex with a KMT2A-WDR5 inhibitor attenuated the self-renewal and in vivo tumorigenicity of PCSCs, thus offering a novel anti-PCSCs targeting strategy for enhancing the efficiency of chemotherapy which is likely to translate into durable clinical responses in PC patients.

### Sample Protocol
I. Co-immunoprecipitation For SMAD2/3 nuclear co-IP experiments, cells were pretreated with recombinant INHBA protein (R and D Systems, cat. 338-AC-050/CF) at a final concentration of 100 ng/ml for 24 hours. Nuclear protein complexes were extracted using the nuclear complex co-IP kit (Active Motif, cat. 54001) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Nuclear protein extracts were incubated with target-specific antibodies including anti-SMAD 2/3 (RRID:AB_2270778, R and D Systems, cat. AF3797), anti-PHF5A (RRID:AB_2165365, Proteintech, cat. 15554-1-AP), as well as isotype control antibodies including normal goat IgG (RRID:AB_354267, R and D Systems, cat. AB-108-C) and rabbit (DA1E) mAb IgG XP (RRID:AB_1550038, Cell Signaling Technology, cat. 3900S) for 2 hours at 4°C with agitation, followed by overnight incubation with Protein A/G Plus-agarose beads (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, cat. sc-2003) at 4°C with agitation. Agarose beads were washed 3 times with 1x PBS and then suspended in 1x Laemmli sample buffer supplemented with 2-mercaptoethanol (Sigma-Aldrich, cat. M6250) at a final concentration of 2.5%. Samples were boiled at 95°C for 5 minutes to elute co-immunoprecipitated proteins for western blotting and LC-MS/MS analysis.  II. LC-MS/MS analysis LC-MS/MS analysis of co-IP protein samples was performed at the Cambridge Centre for Proteomics (Cambridge, UK) using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanoUPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc, Waltham, MA, USA) system and a Q Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc, Waltham, MA, USA). Separation of peptides was performed by reverse-phase chromatography at a flow rate of 300 nl/min and a Thermo Scientific reverse-phase nano Easy-spray column (Thermo Scientific PepMap C18, 2 µm particle size, 100A pore size, 75 µm i.d. x 50 cm length). Peptides were loaded onto a pre-column (Thermo Scientific PepMap 100 C18, 5 µm particle size, 100A pore size, 300 µm i.d. x 5mm length) from the Ultimate 3000 autosampler with 0.1% formic acid for 3 minutes at a flow rate of 15 µl/min. After this period, the column valve was switched to allow the elution of peptides from the pre-column onto the analytical column. Solvent A was water + 0.1% formic acid and solvent B was 80% acetonitrile, 20% water + 0.1% formic acid. The linear gradient employed was 2-40% B in 90 minutes (the total run time including column washing and re-equilibration was 120 minutes). The LC eluant was sprayed into the mass spectrometer by means of an Easy-spray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.). All m/z values of eluting ions were measured in an Orbitrap mass analyzer, set at a resolution of 35000 and scanned between m/z 380-1500. Data dependent scans (Top 20) were employed to automatically isolate and generate fragment ions by higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD, Normalised collision energy (NCE):25%) in the HCD collision cell, and measurement of the resulting fragment ions was performed in the Orbitrap analyser, set at a resolution of 17500.  Singly charged ions and ions with unassigned charge states were excluded from being selected for MS/MS and a dynamic exclusion of 60 seconds was employed.

### Data Protocol
Post-run, all MS/MS data were converted to mgf files which were then submitted to the Mascot search algorithm (Matrix Science, London UK, version 2.6.0) and searched against a common contaminants database (cRAP_20190401.fasta) and the UniProt human database (CCP_UniProt_homo sapiens_proteome_20180409 database (93734 entries)), assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin. Mascot was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.100 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 20 PPM. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified in Mascot as a fixed modification. Deamidation of asparagine and glutamine and oxidation of methionine were specified in Mascot as variable modifications. Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.10.0, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability by the Peptide Prophet algorithm with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phf5a complex, Pancreatic cancer, Epigenetics, Kmt2a-wdr5 inhibitor, Cancer stem cells

### Affiliations
Nuffield Department of Orthopaedics, Rheumatology and Musculoskeletal Sciences, 
University of Oxford
Botnar Research Centre, Nuffield Department of Orthopaedics, Rheumatology and Musculoskeletal Sciences, University of Oxford, UK

### Submitter
Siwei Deng

### Lab Head
Dr Siim Pauklin
Botnar Research Centre, Nuffield Department of Orthopaedics, Rheumatology and Musculoskeletal Sciences, University of Oxford, UK


