### Accession
PXD001980

### Title
Two distinct modes for propagation of histone PTMs across the cell cycle

### Description
Epigenetic states defined by chromatin can be maintained through mitotic cell division. However, it remains unknown how histone-based information is transmitted. Here we combine nascent chromatin capture (NCC) and triple-SILAC labelling to track histone modifications and histone variants during DNA replication and across the cell cycle. We show that post-translational modifications (PTMs) are transmitted with parental histones to newly replicated DNA. Di- and tri-methylation marks are diluted two-fold upon DNA replication, as a consequence of new histone deposition. Importantly, within one cell cycle all PTMs are restored. In general, new histones are modified to mirror the parental histones. However, H3K9me3 and H3K27me3 are propagated by continuous modification of parental and new histones, because the establishment of these marks extends over several cell generations. Together, our results reveal how histone marks propagate and demonstrate that chromatin states oscillate within the cell cycle.

### Sample Protocol
Nascent or mature chromatin isolated by NCC (Alabert et al., NBC 2014) was applied for SDS-PAGE analysis and the histone regions were cut from the gel. Propionylation and subsequent in-gel tryptic digestion was performed, followed by desalting with a carbon resin and LC-MS/MS Top6 analysis (Thermo Orbitrap XL).

### Data Protocol
Extracted ion chromatograms of modified histone peptides were integrated to yield retention time peak areas. Abundance of specific modifications were calculated as percentage of sum of all peak areas of the observed combinations of modifications for this peptide sequence.

### Publication Abstract
Epigenetic states defined by chromatin can be maintained through mitotic cell division. However, it remains unknown how histone-based information is transmitted. Here we combine nascent chromatin capture (NCC) and triple-SILAC (stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture) labeling to track histone modifications and histone variants during DNA replication and across the cell cycle. We show that post-translational modifications (PTMs) are transmitted with parental histones to newly replicated DNA. Di- and trimethylation marks are diluted twofold upon DNA replication, as a consequence of new histone deposition. Importantly, within one cell cycle, all PTMs are restored. In general, new histones are modified to mirror the parental histones. However, H3K9 trimethylation (H3K9me3) and H3K27me3 are propagated by continuous modification of parental and new histones because the establishment of these marks extends over several cell generations. Together, our results reveal how histone marks propagate and demonstrate that chromatin states oscillate within the cell cycle.

### Keywords
Ncc; histone modifications; inheritance; chromatin; epigenetics

### Affiliations
CECAD, University of Cologne, AG Krüger
Zentrallabor fuer Proteinanalytik BMC - LMU Munich Schillerstrasse 44 Munich D-80336 Germany

### Submitter
Andreas Schmidt

### Lab Head
Dr Axel Imhof
Zentrallabor fuer Proteinanalytik BMC - LMU Munich Schillerstrasse 44 Munich D-80336 Germany


