### Accession
PXD004828

### Title
CRL2LRR1 is required for CMG unloading during  vertebrate replication termination

### Description
A key event during eukaryotic replication termination is the removal of the CMG helicase from chromatin. CMG unloading involves ubiquitylation of its MCM7 subunit and the action of the p97 ATPase.  Using a proteomic screen in Xenopus egg extracts, we identified factors that are retained on chromatin when CMG unloading is blocked and identified the E3 ubiquitin ligase CRL2LRR1 and several other potential regulators of termination including a specific p97 complex. We show that CRL2LRR1 recruitment coincides with MCM7 ubiquitylation and occurs only when replisomes converge.  In the absence of CRL2LRR1, MCM7 is not ubiquitylated, CMG unloading is inhibited, and many replisome components including DNA pol  are retained on DNA.  Our data identify CRL2LRR1 as a master regulator of replisome disassembly during vertebrate DNA replication termination.

### Sample Protocol
CHROMASS: Chromatin Isolation and Sample Preparation for Mass Spectrometry For chromatin isolation, 12 ul of the total reaction was mixed with 80 ul ELB (10 mM HEPES–KOH at pH7.7, 50 mM KCl, 2.5 mM MgCl2) containing 0.2% Triton X-100 and layered over a 180 l ELB containing 500 mM sucrose in 5x44 mm micro centrifuge tubes (Beckman). Chromatin was sedimented by centrifugation (8000 rpm, 40 sec) in a swing-out rotor (Eppendorf, A-8-11). The chromatin pellet was washed twice with 200 l ELB containing 250 mM sucrose and resuspended in 50ul denaturation buffer (8 M Urea, 100 mM Tris pH=8.0). Cysteines were reduced (1 mM DTT, 45 minutes at RT) and alkylated (5 mM iodoacetamide, 45 min at RT). Proteins were digested with 2.5 ug LysC (Wako) for 3 hours at RT. Samples were diluted 1:4 with ABC (50 mM ammonium bicarbonate). 2.5 g trypsin was added an incubated 16 hours at 30 C. NaCl was added to 400 mM final concentration and peptides were acidified and purified by stage tipping on C18 material.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analyzed with the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3.31) using a label-free algorithm (17, 49). A false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 for proteins and peptides and a minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids were required. MS/MS spectra were searched against a non-redundant Xenopus database (see below). For the Andromeda search trypsin allowing for cleavage N-terminal to proline was chosen as enzyme specificity. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was selected as a fixed modification, while protein N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were selected as variable modifications. Maximally two missed cleavages were allowed. Initial mass deviation of precursor ion was up to 7 ppm, mass deviation for fragment ions was 0.5 Dalton. Protein identification required one unique peptide to the protein group. Quantification in MaxQuant was performed using the built in label free quantification algorithm. “Match between run” was used to transfer identities.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dna replication termination, Cullin e3 ligases, Xenopus egg extracts, Chromass

### Affiliations
Technical University Kaiserslautern Molecular Genetics Kaiserslautern, Germany
Proteomics

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Markus Räschle
Technical University Kaiserslautern Molecular Genetics Kaiserslautern, Germany


