### Accession
PXD021578

### Title
Proteome of candida glabrata after Caspofungin exposure

### Description
Caspofungin resistance is a great concern, as the echinocandin drugs are recommended as first-line therapy for invasive candidiasis. Echinocandin resistance is conferred by mutations in FKS genes. Nevertheless, some pathways which regulate cellular stress responses could be crucial for enabling the evolution and maintenance of drug resistance.  In this work, the first objective was to identify resistant mechanisms by whole genome sequencing in echinocandin-resistant C. glabrata. Then, studies of the proteomic response to caspofungin exposure and the analysis of the impact of calcineurin inhibitors on susceptibility, stress tolerance, biofilm formation, and pathogenicity in Galleria mellonella were conducted.  The caspofungin resistant isolate only presented mutation in the FKS gene. Based on proteomic results, we identified 21 proteins whose abundance changed in response to caspofungin exposure. Some of these proteins are involved in wall biosynthesis, pathogenesis, and response to stress. Also, we showed that antifungal drugs in combination with CaM/Cal inhibitors could be an excellent therapeutic option, proved in an in-vitro and in-vivo model. Results, that could be potentially used to improve the outcomes of fungal diseases, especially now that antifungal resistance is increasing.

### Sample Protocol
Candida glabrata CAGL1875 strain was grown for 7h at 30°C with shaking in YPD and YPD with caspofungin (0,5 µg/mL), four biological replicates were performed to each condition. For viability assay, propidium iodide was made. Cell extracts were obtained suspending cells in lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 1 mM EDTA, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM DTT, 0.5 mM PMSF, and 10 % of a mix of protease inhibitors (Pierce TM)) and disrupted by centrifugation adding glass beads (0.4-0.6 mm diameter) in a Fast-Prep system (Bio101, Savant) applying five 20s rounds at 5.5 speed with intermediate ice cooling. Cell extracts were separated from glass beads by centrifugation and the supernatant was collected and cleared by centrifugation. Protein concentration was measured by Bradford protein assay. Digestion and desalting of peptides were carried out in gel with trypsin, according to Sechi and Chait (41).  The desalted protein digest was analyzed by RP-LC-ESI-MS/MS in an EASY nLC 1000 System coupled to the Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer through the Nano-Easy spray source (all from Thermo Scientific, Mississauga, ON, Canada).

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification from raw data were carried out using Mascot v. 2.6.1 search engine through the Protein Discoverer 2.2 Software (Thermo Scientific). Database search was performed against SwissProt. Mascot Scores were adjusted by a percolator algorithm. The acceptance criteria for protein identification were an FDR < 1% and at least one peptide identified with high confidence (CI>95%). To determine the abundances of the identified peptides and proteins, a processing workflow was initiated in the first step. The recalibration of the masses was performed through a rapid search in Sequest HT against the database. Based on the positive identifications, an alignment of the chromatograms of all the samples with a tolerance of up to 10 min were established.  Subsequently, alignment of the retention times between the different analyzed samples for the quantification of the precursor ions was performed, taking into account the unique peptides and the razor peptides (Peptides that can be assigned to more than one protein).  Finally, the results were normalized to the total amount of the peptides, equaling the total abundance among the different samples.  After the analyses were finalized, a final report presented the list of peptide groups and proteins with scaled abundances and selected ratios. The Proteome Discoverer application includes a feature for assessing the significance of differential expression by providing p-values and adjusted p-values (q-values) for those ratios

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Preteome, Lc ms/ms, Caspofungin, Candida glabrata

### Affiliations
Departamento de Microbiología II, Facultad de Farmacia, Universidad Complutense de Madrid, Madrid, Spain
UCM

### Submitter
Concha Gil

### Lab Head
Dr Concha Gil
Departamento de Microbiología II, Facultad de Farmacia, Universidad Complutense de Madrid, Madrid, Spain


