### Accession
PXD015284

### Title
Kinase inhibition sensitizes pancreatic cancer cells towards radiation

### Description
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma is one of the most aggressive cancer types and is well-known for its general low intrinsic radiosensitivity. In order to resolve mechanisms of how PDAC cells carry out radioresistance, a combination of proteomics and phosphoproteomics of two radiosensitive as well as radioresistant murine PDAC cell lines upon exposition to radiation was performed. A high depth of (phospho)proteomic identifications with > 13000 confidently identified phosphorylation sites and > 7800 proteins was achieved. Measuring the response of the phosphoproteome upon radiation revealed >700 phosphorylation sites on >400 proteins which were regulated in all four cell lines independently of the sensitivity status. This analysis validated already known radiomarkers but also uncovered novel members of the radiation-dependent signaling network in PDAC cells that were shown to be exclusively based on protein phosphorylation but not protein expression. Among those radioresponsive phosphoproteins were ten novel ATM substrates, which were validated by in vitro kinase assays. Comparison of radiosensitive and -resistant cells revealed a complex regulation of apoptotic processes, while changes in expression of DNA repair proteins seemed to not play a pivotal role. Especially increased expression of NQO1 was found to be a potential mechanism enabling resistance by clearing harmful reactive oxygen species from the PDAC cells. Further analysis of the radioresistance-associated-phosphoproteome, which was especially enriched in phosphoproteins with cytoskeleton organizational function, uncovered increased Actin dynamics and FAK activity in radioresistant cells. Both likely lead to increased survival, migrational capacity and perturbations in chromatin condensation which could oppose radiation. Based on the displayed adaptions in cellular protein expression and signaling in resistant PDAC cells, pharmacological inhibition of NQO1 and FAK could be suggested to sensitize towards radiation.

### Sample Protocol
F5461, 53704PPT, 53578PPT and 5748PPT cells were seeded and 24 h later irradiated with either 0 Gy or 8 Gy. Each experiment was performed three times.1 h after irradiation, cells were washed twice with PBS and lysed in 40 mM Tris(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane (Tris)-HCl pH 7.6, 8 M urea, ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA)-free protease inhibitor (Roche) and phosphatase inhibitors (Roche). Lysate was centrifuged for 1 h at 21,000 x g und the supernatant was subjected to sample preparation. The protein concentration in cell lysate was determined using the Coomassie Plus Bradford (Thermo Fisher Scientific) assay according to the protocol of the manufacturer. 200 µg protein of cell lysate was reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 40 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 55 mM chloroacetamide (CAA) at room temperature in the dark for 20 min. After dilution of the urea concentration from 6 M to 1.5 M with 40 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6, the proteins were digested in a 1:50 trypsin/substrate weight ratio overnight at 37 °C and 700 rpm. Desalting of the tryptic peptides was performed on Sep-Pak C18 50 mg columns (Waters) as described elsewhere in 0.07 % trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) in 50 % acetonitrile (ACN). Afterwards labeling of the desalted peptides was performed with tandem mass tags 10 (TMT10)-plex (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a final concentration of 6.67 mM TMT according to instructions provided by the manufacturer except for a 1:2 TMT/peptide ratio. One TMT channel was used for each cell line and treatment condition. Pooled phosphopeptides were enriched using Fe- immobilized metal ion affinity chromatography (IMAC) as previously described. Subsequently, phosphopeptides were separated into six fractions using basic reversed-phase (bRP) chromatography in micro-column format (five discs, Ø 1.5 mm, C18 material, 3M Empore per micro-column were used) in 25 mM NH4COOH (pH 10). Peptides were fractionated with increasing ACN concentrations (5%, 7.5%, 10%, 12.5%, 15%, 17.5% and 50% ACN). The desalted flow-through was combined with the 17.5 % fraction and the 50 % fraction with the 5 % fraction to give a total of six fractions. Non-phosphorylated peptides (flow through of the Fe-IMAC) were fractionated into 32 fractions by trimodal mixed mode chromatography, which uses reversed phase, weak anion exchange, and strong cation exchange, as recently published. After drying in a centrifugal evaporator, the samples were stored at -20 °C until LC-MSn analysis. Nano-flow liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MSn) measurement of TMT-labeled non-phosphorylated and phosphorylated peptides was performed using a Dionex Ultimate3000 nano high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The fractions of phosphorylated peptides were injected twice. Peptides were desalted on a trap column (100 μm × 2 cm, packed in-house with Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ 5 μm resin; Dr. Maisch) in 0.1 % formic acid (FA) at 5 µl/min and separated on an analytical column (75 μm × 40 cm, packed in-house with Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ, 3 μm resin; Dr. Maisch) using a 50 min linear gradient from 8-34 % (full proteome) or 80 min linear gradient from 4-32 % (phosphoproteome) solvent B (0.1 % FA, 5 % dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) in ACN) in solvent A (0. 1% FA, 5 % DMSO in water) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The Fusion Lumos was operated in data dependent acquisition and positive ionization mode. Full scan MS1 spectra were acquired over a range of 360-1300 m/z at a resolution of 60,000 (automatic gain control (AGC) target value 4e5, maximal injection time 10 ms). For LC-MS2 analysis of the full proteome, up to 20 peptide precursors were selected for fragmentation by higher energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD; 1.2 m/z isolation window, AGC value of 2e5, maximum injection time of 50 ms) using 38 % normalized collision energy (NCE) and analyzed at a resolution of 30,000 in the Orbitrap. For LC-MS3 analysis of the phosphoproteome, up to 10 peptide precursors were selected for fragmentation by collision-induced dissociation (CID; 0.7 m/z isolation window, AGC value of 5e4, maximum injection time of 60 ms) using 35 % collision energy and analyzed at a resolution of 30,000 in the Orbitrap. An additional MS3 spectrum was acquired in the orbitrap over a m/z range of 100-1000 at 50,000 resolution for each peptide precursor. For this, fragment ions were selected by multi-notch isolation, allowing a maximum of 10 notches and an ion trap isolation width of 2 Da, and subsequently fragmented by HCD at 55 % NCE (AGC target value 1.2e5, maximal injection time 120 ms).

### Data Protocol
Protein and peptide identification and quantification was performed using MaxQuant [12] (version 1.5.6.5) by searching the tandem MS data against all mouse canonical sequences as annotated in the Swissprot reference database (16889 entries, downloaded 27.06.2017) using the embedded search engine Andromeda. Carbamidomethylated cysteine was set as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modification. In addition, phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine was set as variable modification for the phosphoproteome. Trypsin/P was specified as the proteolytic enzyme and up to two missed cleavage sites were allowed. Precursor tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm and fragment ion tolerance to 20 ppm. The minimum peptide length was set to seven and all data were adjusted to 1 % peptide-spectrum match (PSM) and 1 % protein false discovery rate (FDR). A minimum score for modified peptides was set to 40. MS2- (full proteome) and MS3-based (phosphoproteome) TMT quantification was enabled, taking TMT correction factors as supplied by the manufacturer into account. Subsequent data analysis was performed on identified and quantified protein groups (full proteome; as provided in the proteinGroups.txt) and phosphorylation sites (phosphoproteome; as provided in the Phospho (STY)Sites.txt). The Perseus software suite (version 1.5.5.3) was used to filter out contaminants, reverse hits and protein groups (in case of the full proteome dataset), which were only identified by site. Furthermore, only phosphorylation sites and protein groups that were detected in at least two out of the three replicates were considered for further analysis. Multiplicities of phosphorylation were added to the phosphorylation sites. Log2 fold changes for 8 Gy against 0 Gy control and resistance against sensitivity samples were calculated per phosphorylation site and protein group and tested for significance using a t-test (FDR = 1 % or 5 %, s0 = 0.1). Protein-protein interactions were analyzed using the String database (version 11.0) (combined score > 0.4) and visualized in Cytoscape (version 3.4.0). The PANTHER Classification System was used for gene ontology (GO) enrichment analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is one of the most aggressive cancers and known for its extensive genetic heterogeneity, high therapeutic resistance, and strong variation in intrinsic radiosensitivity. To understand the molecular mechanisms underlying radioresistance, we screened the phenotypic response of 38 PDAC cell lines to ionizing radiation. Subsequent phosphoproteomic analysis of two representative sensitive and resistant lines led to the reproducible identification of 7,800 proteins and 13,000 phosphorylation sites (p-sites). Approximately 700 p-sites on 400 proteins showed abundance changes after radiation in all cell lines regardless of their phenotypic sensitivity. Apart from recapitulating known radiation response phosphorylation markers such as on proteins involved in DNA damage repair, the analysis uncovered many novel members of a radiation-responsive signaling network that was apparent only at the level of protein phosphorylation. These regulated p-sites were enriched in potential ATM substrates and <i>in vitro</i> kinase assays corroborated 10 of these. Comparing the proteomes and phosphoproteomes of radiosensitive and -resistant cells pointed to additional tractable radioresistance mechanisms involving apoptotic proteins. For instance, elevated NADPH quinine oxidoreductase 1 (NQO1) expression in radioresistant cells may aid in clearing harmful reactive oxygen species. Resistant cells also showed elevated phosphorylation levels of proteins involved in cytoskeleton organization including actin dynamics and focal adhesion kinase (FAK) activity and one resistant cell line showed a strong migration phenotype. Pharmacological inhibition of the kinases FAK by Defactinib and of CHEK1 by Rabusertib showed a statistically significant sensitization to radiation in radioresistant PDAC cells. Together, the presented data map a comprehensive molecular network of radiation-induced signaling, improves the understanding of radioresistance and provides avenues for developing radiotherapeutic strategies.

### Keywords
Pdac, Phosphoproteomics, Pancreatic cancer

### Affiliations
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics Technische Universitaet Muenchen Partner Site of the German Cancer Consortium Emil Erlenmeyer Forum 5 85354 Freising Germany
TU Munich, Proteomics and Bioanalytics

### Submitter
Svenja Wiechmann

### Lab Head
Dr Bernhard Kuster
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics Technische Universitaet Muenchen Partner Site of the German Cancer Consortium Emil Erlenmeyer Forum 5 85354 Freising Germany


