### Accession
PXD006580

### Title
Viral BONCAT: Detection of HPG incorporation into newly synthesized viral proteins via proteomics

### Description
BONCAT was adapted and tested as a method for directly quantifying viral production in the ocean. To confirm the successful transfer of host-associated HPG-labeled proteins or peptides into marine viruses, we conducted an independent suite of proteomic experiments with cultured systems to directly assess the production of HPG-labeled viral proteins. We used including Emiliania huxleyi strain CCMP374 and its ~200nm coccolithovirus EhV207 as well as E. coli and its ~50 nm virus T7 as virus-host model systems. These specific model systems were chosen because they represent a range of viral particle sizes and their infection dynamics are well characterized. E. huxleyi/EhV207 also represents an ecologically relevant marine virus-host pair.

### Sample Protocol
Protein was extracted from concentrated T7 and EhV lysate in a 1:1 ratio with lysis buffer (200 mMTtris-HCl pH 8, 4% SDS) and a protease inhibitor (1 tablet for 10 mL of reaction). The sample was boiled for 15 minutes in H2O water bath. Protein was quantified using Bradford Protein Assay (Bio-Rad Laboratories). A filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) procedure was used to clean (e.g., remove SDS) and digest proteins in preparation for proteomic analysis (Wiśniewski et al. 2009). Eluted peptides were lyophilized, resuspended in 100 μl of 0.2% formic acid, and desalted by HPLC with an Optimized Technologies C8 peptide Macrotrap (3x8mm; 200 μg maximum capacity). Desalted peptides were then lyophilized and stored at -20oC until mass spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
Thermo raw files were processed and searched with MaxQuant. For E coli / T7 samples, all UniProt E coli entries (4311 sequences) and all UniProt T7 entries (57 sequences) were searched along with a contaminant database containing proteins such as keratin and trypsin (247 sequences). For E Huxleyi / EhV207 samples, UniProt E Huxleyi sequences (35700 entries) and all UniProt EhV207 sequences (470 entries) along with the contaminant database were search. Trypsin was specified as the digestion enzyme with up to two missed cleavages allowed. Protein N-terminal acetylation (+42.0106), Met oxidation (+15.9949), Met->Aha (-4.9863), and Met->Hpg (-21.9877) were specified as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.0215) was specified as a fixed modification. Match between runs, LFQ, and iBAQ were enabled. Precursor ion tolerance was 4.5 ppm after recalibration and fragment ion tolerance was 20 ppm. Additionally, a decoy database was constructed to determine the false discovery rate by reversing the target database. Using the decoy database, the protein, peptide, and modified site level false discovery rates were fixed to be less than 1%.

### Publication Abstract
While the collective impact of marine viruses has become more apparent over the last decade, a deeper understanding of virus-host dynamics and the role of viruses in nutrient cycling would benefit from direct observations at the single-virus level. We describe two new complementary approaches - stable isotope probing coupled with nanoscale secondary ion mass spectrometry (nanoSIMS) and fluorescence-based biorthogonal non-canonical amino acid tagging (BONCAT) - for studying the activity and biogeochemical influence of marine viruses. These tools were developed and tested using several ecologically relevant model systems (Emiliania huxleyi/EhV207, Synechococcus sp. WH8101/Syn1 and Escherichia coli/T7). By resolving carbon and nitrogen enrichment in viral particles, we demonstrate the power of nanoSIMS tracer experiments in obtaining quantitative estimates for the total number of viruses produced directly from a particular production pathway (by isotopically labelling host substrates). Additionally, we show through laboratory experiments and a pilot field study that BONCAT can be used to directly quantify viral production (via epifluorescence microscopy) with minor sample manipulation and no dependency on conversion factors. This technique can also be used to detect newly synthesized viral proteins. Together these tools will help fill critical gaps in our understanding of the biogeochemical impact of viruses in the ocean.

### Keywords
Viral ecology, Boncat, Click chemistry, Marine viruses

### Affiliations
Proteome Exploration Laboratory
Division of Geological and Planetary Sciences, California Institute of Technology, USA

### Submitter
Michael Sweredoski

### Lab Head
Dr Victoria Orphan
Division of Geological and Planetary Sciences, California Institute of Technology, USA


