### Accession
PXD015524

### Title
Proteome profiling of mouse germinal center B cells

### Description
Productive B cell responses are critical to protect a host from infection. The spleen and lymph nodes are populated by resting follicular B cells, which can enter germinal centers upon antigen encounter. Once in the germinal center, B cells migrate between the dark and light zones, where they undergo somatic hypermutation and selection, respectively. While germinal center B cells have been studied, an intense molecular understanding of these cells/subsets (and the differences between them) is lacking.

### Sample Protocol
Whole proteome and phosphoproteome profiling were performed as described(Bai et al., 2017; Tan et al., 2017). B cell subsets were sorted as described above and subjected to protein extraction, digestion, labelling and pooling. Cells were washed twice with ice-cold PBS and cell pellets from ten samples were lysed in fresh lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES, pH 8.5, 8 M urea and 0.5% sodium deoxycholate). The protein concentration of lysate was quantified by BCA protein assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and further confirmed by SDS–PAGE with titrated BSA, followed by Coomassie staining. Fifty μg proteins from each sample were first digested with Lys-C (Wako, 1:50 w/w) for 2 h, diluted 4-fold with 50 mM HEPES, pH 8.5, and then further digested with trypsin (Promega, 1:50 w/w) at room temperature for overnight. Resulting peptides were acidified and desalted with a Sep-Pak C18 cartridge (Waters), eluted with 60% acetonitrile, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, and dried by SpeedVac. Each sample was then resuspended in 50 mM HEPES and labelled with 10-plex tandem mass tag (TMT) reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Finally, the TMT-labelled samples were equally mixed, desalted, and dried by SpeedVac. Phosphopeptide enrichment by TiO2. Phosphopeptide enrichment was done by TiO2 beads (GL Sciences) as previously reported(Tan et al., 2015). Briefly, the TMT-labelled peptide mixture was dissolved in 150 μl of binding buffer (65% acetonitrile, 2% TFA, and 1 mM KH2PO4). TiO2 beads were washed twice with washing buffer (65% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA), mixed with the peptide solution with a peptide–to–bead weight ratio of 1:3, and incubated at room temperature for 20 min. The phosphopeptide-bound beads were collected by briefly centrifugation, and the non-phosphopeptide flow-through were used for later whole proteome analysis. The beads were then washed twice with 750 μl washing buffer and eluted under basic pH condition (20 μl, 15% NH4OH, 40% acetonitrile). This process was repeated 6 times to deplete the peptide mixture of phosphorylated species. The eluent was dried and stored in -80 °C freezer before LC-MS/MS analysis. Offline basic pH reverse phase liquid chromatography. The non-phosphopeptide flow-through mentioned above was desalted, dried, and solubilized in 60 µl buffer A (10 mM ammonium formate, pH 8) and separated on an XBridge C18 column (3.5-m particle size, 4.6 mm × 25 cm, Waters) into multiple fractions with a 2 h gradient from 15% to 45% buffer B (95% acetonitrile, 10 mM ammonium formate, pH 8, flow rate of 0.4 ml/min). Each fraction was dried for whole proteome analysis. Acidic pH reverse phase liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry. The analysis was performed based on the optimized platform(Wang et al., 2015). The dried peptides were reconstituted in 5% formic acid, loaded on a reverse phase column (75 µm × 30 cm, 1.9 µm C18 resin (Dr. Maisch, Germany)) interfaced with a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). Peptides were eluted by 12–36% buffer B gradient in 2.5 h (buffer A: 0.2% formic acid, 3% DMSO; buffer B: buffer A plus 67% acetonitrile, flow rate of 0.25 µl/min). The column was heated at 65 °C by a butterfly portfolio heater (Phoenix S&T) to reduce back pressure. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode with a survey scan in Orbitrap (60,000 resolution, 1 × 106 AGC target and 50 ms maximal ion time) and 20 tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) high-resolution scans (60,000 resolution, 1 × 105 AGC target, 105 ms maximal ion time, HCD, 35 normalized collision energy, 1.0 m/z isolation window, and 20 s dynamic exclusion).

### Data Protocol
. The analysis was performed by the JUMP program, a newly developed hybrid search engine that combines tag scoring and pattern match scoring to improve sensitivity and specificity, and has been used in the data processing of numerous publications(Du et al., 2018; Tan et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2014). In brief, acquired MS/MS raw files were converted into mzXML format and searched by the JUMP algorithm against a composite target/decoy database to estimate FDR. The target protein database was downloaded from the Uniprot mouse database (52,490 protein entries) and the decoy protein database was generated by reversing all target protein sequences. Searches were performed with 10 ppm mass tolerance for both precursor ions and product ions, fully tryptic restriction, two maximal missed cleavages and the assignment of a, b and y ions. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+229.162932 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) were used for static modifications and oxidation of methionine residues (+15.99492 Da) were used for dynamic modification. The phosphoproteomic analysis were carried out by further adding Ser, Thr, Tyr phosphorylation (+79.96633 DA) as dynamic modifications same as previously described(Stewart et al., 2018a). The assigned peptides were filtered by mass accuracy, minimal peptide length, matching scores, charge state and trypticity to reduce protein false discovery rate (FDR) to below 1%.  TMT-based protein quantification. The analysis was performed using JUMP software suite as previously reported(Tan et al., 2017). In brief, TMT reporter ion intensities of each peptide spectrum match (PSM) were extracted and PSMs with very low intensity were removed. The raw intensities were then corrected based on isotopic distribution of each labelling reagent and loading bias. The mean-centred intensities across samples were calculated and protein relative intensities were derived by averaging related PSMs. Finally, protein absolute intensities were determined by multiplying the relative intensities by the grand-mean of three most highly abundant PSMs.

### Publication Abstract
Within germinal centers (GCs), complex and highly orchestrated molecular programs must balance proliferation, somatic hypermutation and selection to both provide effective humoral immunity and to protect against genomic instability and neoplastic transformation. In contrast to this complexity, GC B cells are canonically divided into two principal populations, dark zone (DZ) and light zone (LZ) cells. We now demonstrate that, following selection in the LZ, B cells migrated to specialized sites within the canonical DZ that contained tingible body macrophages and were sites of ongoing cell division. Proliferating DZ (DZp) cells then transited into the larger DZ to become differentiating DZ (DZd) cells before re-entering the LZ. Multidimensional analysis revealed distinct molecular programs in each population commensurate with observed compartmentalization of noncompatible functions. These data provide a new three-cell population model that both orders critical GC functions and reveals essential molecular programs of humoral adaptive immunity.

### Keywords
Mouse, B cells

### Affiliations
St.Jude Children's Research Hospital
St.Jude children's Research hospi

### Submitter
Hong Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Junmin Peng
St.Jude Children's Research Hospital


