### Accession
PXD004112

### Title
Defining the landscape of EPHA2 Inhibition by Clinical Kinase Inhibitors

### Description
The receptor tyrosine kinase EPHA2 plays important roles in oncogenesis, metastasis and treatment resistance but therapeutic targeting, drug discovery or investigation of EPHA2 biology is hampered by the lack of appropriate inhibitors and structural information on how these interact with the protein. Here, we used chemical proteomics to survey 235 clinical kinase inhibitors and identified 24 with sub-micromolar potency for EPHA2. We generated nine high resolution co-crystal structures to identify drug-protein interactions at the atomic level. The combination of compound selectivity, structure determinantion and kinome-wide sequence alignment allowed us to develop a classification system in which amino acids in the drug binding site are categorized into key, scaffold, potency and selectivity residues. This scheme should be generally applicable in kinase drug discovery and we anticipate that the provided information will greatly facilitate the development of selective EPHA2 inhibitors in particular and the repurposing of clinical kinase inhibitors in general.

### Sample Protocol
96-well plate Kinobead competition assays have been performed as described previously. (Medard, G., Pachl, F., Ruprecht, B., Klaeger, S., Heinzlmeir, S., Helm, D., Qiao, H., Ku, X., Wilhelm, M., Kuehne, T., Wu, Z., Dittmann, A., Hopf, C., Kramer, K., and Kuster, B. (2015) Optimized chemical proteomics assay for kinase inhibitor profiling, J Proteome Res 14, 1574-1586.) Briefly, 5 mg mixed protein lysate (K562, MV4-11, SKNBE-2 and COLO205) was pre-incubated with compound dilutions in DMSO (0, 3, 10, 30, 100, 300, 1000, 3000, 30000 nM final concentrations) for 45 min at 4 °C. Subsequently, lysate was incubated with 35 μl settled and equilibrated Kinobeads for 30 min at 4 °C. DMSO control lysate was recovered for the pulldown of pulldown experiment. Beads were washed and bound proteins were eluted with LDS sample buffer (NuPAGE, Invitrogen) containing 50 mM DTT. Reduced disulfide bridges were alkylated using chloroacetamide (55 mM) and in-gel digestion was performed according to standard procedures. Peptides were then measured via LC-MS/MS on a nanoLCUltra 1D+ (Eksigent) coupled to a LTQ Orbitrap Elite. Up to 15 precursorer where subjected to fragmentation by HCD in a data dependent setup. A kinase peptide inclusion list was enabled.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed using MaxQuant (version 1.4.0.5) and searched against a human UniProt database (version 22.07.13, 88354 entries). Label-free quantification and match-between-runs options were enabled and results were filtered for 1% peptide and protein FDR.

### Publication Abstract
The receptor tyrosine kinase EPHA2 (Ephrin type-A receptor 2) plays important roles in oncogenesis, metastasis, and treatment resistance, yet therapeutic targeting, drug discovery, or investigation of EPHA2 biology is hampered by the lack of appropriate inhibitors and structural information. Here, we used chemical proteomics to survey 235 clinical kinase inhibitors for their kinase selectivity and identified 24 drugs with submicromolar affinities for EPHA2. NMR-based conformational dynamics together with nine new cocrystal structures delineated drug-EPHA2 interactions in full detail. The combination of selectivity profiling, structure determination, and kinome wide sequence alignment allowed the development of a classification system in which amino acids in the drug binding site of EPHA2 are categorized into key, scaffold, potency, and selectivity residues. This scheme should be generally applicable in kinase drug discovery, and we anticipate that the provided information will greatly facilitate the development of selective EPHA2 inhibitors in particular and the repurposing of clinical kinase inhibitors in general.

### Keywords
Selectivity profiling, Drug protein interactions, Residue categorization, Epha2 co-crystals, Chemical proteomics

### Affiliations
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technische Universität München, Germany

### Submitter
Stephanie Wilhelm 

### Lab Head
Dr Bernhard Kuster
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technische Universität München, Germany


