### Accession
PXD002988

### Title
dbdbLiraglutide -  Effects of insulin and the glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor agonist liraglutide on the kidney proteome in db/db mice

### Description
db/db mouse kidney given liraglutide or insulin compared to db/db vehicle and healthy vehicle, 12 weeks dosing, all included db/db mice over 16 mM blood glucose level.

### Sample Protocol
50ug kidney tissue, in solution digestion with trypsin, oxidation, hydrazide coupling, unbound fraction, C18 cleanup, Orbitrap LTQ XL MS

### Data Protocol
Shotgun MS: Raw data files were converted to mzML and MGF using ProteoWizard. MGF files were searched in Mascot against the Uniprot KB Mus Musculus w. rev.seq database. Spectral library constructed. Progenesis workflow as well. OPLS analysis with HbA1c and AER as y-variables followed by SRM MS and ANOVA calculations with Tukey multiple comparison test.

### Publication Abstract
Diabetes mellitus (DM) is a worldwide disease that affects 9% of the adult world population and type 2 DM accounts for 90% of those. A common consequence of DM is kidney complications, which could lead to kidney failure. We studied the potential effects of treatment with insulin and the glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor (GLP-1R) agonist liraglutide on the diabetic kidney proteome through the use of the db/db mouse model system and mass spectrometry (MS). Multivariate analyses revealed distinct effects of insulin and liraglutide on the db/db kidney proteome, which was seen on the protein levels of, for example, pterin-4 <i>&#x3b1;</i>-carbinolamine dehydratase/dimerization cofactor of hepatocyte nuclear factor-1<i>&#x3b1;</i> (PCBD1), neural precursor cell expressed developmentally down-regulated-8 (NEDD8), transcription elongation factor-B polypeptide-1 (ELOC) and hepcidin (HEPC). Furthermore, the separation of the insulin, liraglutide and vehicle db/db mouse groups in multivariate analyses was not mainly related to the albumin excretion rate (AER) or the level of glycated hemoglobin A<sub>1c</sub> (HbA<sub>1c</sub>%) in the mice. In summary, we show that insulin and liraglutide give rise to separate protein profiles in the db/db mouse kidney.

### Keywords
Db/db, Diabetic nephropathy, Opls, Liraglutide, Kidney

### Affiliations
Department of Immunotechnology, Lund University
Department of Immunotechnology, Lund University, Sweden

### Submitter
Leena Liljedahl

### Lab Head
Dr Leena Liljedahl
Department of Immunotechnology, Lund University


