### Accession
PXD032663

### Title
The dopamine transporter antiports potassium to increase the uptake of dopamine

### Description
The dopamine transporter facilitates dopamine reuptake from the extracellular space to terminate neurotransmission. The transporter belongs to the neurotransmitter:sodium symporter family, which includes transporters for serotonin, norepinephrine, and GABA that utilize the Na+ gradient to drive the uptake of substrate. Decades ago, it was shown that the serotonin transporter also antiports K+, but investigations of K+-coupled transport in other neurotransmitter:sodium symporters have been inconclusive. Here, we show that ligand binding to the drosophila- and human dopamine transporters are inhibited by K+, and the conformational dynamics of the drosophila dopamine transporter in K+ are divergent from the apo- and Na+-states. Furthermore, we found that K+ increased dopamine uptake by the drosophila dopamine transporter in liposomes, and visualized Na+ and K+ fluxes in single proteoliposomes using fluorescent ion indicators. Our results expand on the fundamentals of dopamine transport and prompt a reevaluation of the impact of K+ on other transporters in this pharmacologically important family.

### Sample Protocol
The K+ state was induced by dialyzing affinity-purified dDAT against buffer containing 40 mM Tris, pH 8.0, 200 mM KCl, 5% glycerol, 14 µM lipids (POPC, POPE, and POPG at a weight ratio of 3:1:1), 1 mM DDM, and 0.2 mM CHS at 4°C. Dialyzed dDAT was equilibrated at a concentration of 1.5 µM at 25°C for 30 min. Deuterium exchange was initiated by diluting the protein samples 1:4 with 94% D2O buffer 40 mM Tris, pH 8.0, 200 mM KCl, 5% glycerol, 14 µM lipids (POPC, POPE, and POPG at a weight ratio of 3:1:1), 1 mM DDM, 0.2 mM CHS at 25°C. At defined time points (0.25 min, 1 min, 10 min, 60 min, and 480 min), the labeling reaction was quenched by mixing (1:1) aliquots of 15 pmol dDAT with ice-cold quench buffer (220 mM phosphate buffer, pH 2.3, 2 M urea). Samples were stored at -80°C until further use. All time points were performed as recommended in three technical replicate measurements (n = 3). The isotopic exchange was performed simultaneously with the Cs+ and Na+ states as well as the maximum-labeled control samples reported previously (PXD013841). The maximum-labeled control samples were prepared from predigested dDAT using the same conditions as for the HDX experiments. Following online pepsin digestion, dDAT peptides were desalted, eluted, and collected manually in a single fraction and lyophilized. 75.2% deuterated buffer containing 40 mM Tris, pH 8.0, 200 mM NaCl, 5% glycerol, 14 µM lipids (POPC, POPE, and POPG at a weight ratio of 3:1:1), 1 mM DDM, and 0.2 mM CHS was used to reconstitute the dDAT peptides. To reach full deuteration, peptides were incubated in the deuterated buffer for 24 h at 25°C before quenching. Prior to mass analysis, quenched samples (15 pmol) were rapidly thawed and injected into a cooled (0°C) nanoACQUITY UPLC HDX system (Waters). Protein samples were digested online at 20°C on an in-house packed immobilized pepsin column prepared using pepsin agarose resin (Thermo Fisher scientific). The resulting peptides were rapidly desalted on a C8 trap column (VanGuard pre-column ACQUITY UPLC BEH C8 1.7 µm, Waters) for 3 min at a flow rate at 200 µl/min solvent A (0.23% formic acid in water, pH 2.5) and separated by reversed-phase chromatography over a C8 analytical column (ACQUITY UPLC BEH C8 1.7 µm, 100 nm, Waters) with a C8 trap column in front using a linear gradient from 8 – 30% solvent B (0.23% formic acid in acetonitrile) over 10 min at a flow rate of 40 µl/min. Mass analysis was conducted on a hybrid Q-TOF SYNAPT G2-Si mass spectrometer (Waters) equipped with a standard ESI source operated in positive ion mode. Mass spectra were lock-mass corrected against Glu-fibrinopeptide B. Ion mobility separation was used to enhance peak capacity and minimize spectral overlap. The ion mobility cell was operated using a constant nitrogen flow of 90 ml min-1 at a wave velocity of 580 m s-1 and a wave height of 40 V. HDX-MS data for the K+ state was acquired simultaneously with the Cs+ and Na+ states previously reported (PXD013841). Maximum-labeled control samples shown here are from our previous study (PXD013841), and were processed and analyzed using the HDX-MS workflow described above except for the pepsin column, which was removed to avoid additional digestion. Peptide identification from non-deuterated samples were performed by tandem mass spectrometry (CID) using a combination of data-independent acquisition (DIA) and data-dependent acquisition (DDA) with the ion mobility cell turned off.

### Data Protocol
The deuterium exchange levels were calculated for all identified peptides using DynamX 3.0 (Waters) with manual verification of all peptide assignments. Noisy and overlapping spectral data were discarded from the HDX-MS analysis. To allow for quantitative comparison of samples not measured on the same day, back-exchange was calculated from the maximum-labeled control samples for all individual peptides according to equation #(1)  BE(%)=(1-(m(75.2%)-m(0%))/(m(MAX)-m(0%)))*100% #(1) Where m(75.2%) denotes the mass of the maximum-labeled peptide, m(0%) is the mass of the non-deuterated peptide, and m(MAX) denotes the theoretical maximum deuterium uptake of the peptide (excluding N-terminus and prolines). BE(%) was used to normalize deuterium uptake values between measuring days to allow for a quantitative comparison of samples not measured on the same day.

### Publication Abstract
The dopamine transporter facilitates dopamine reuptake from the extracellular space to terminate neurotransmission. The transporter belongs to the neurotransmitter:sodium symporter family, which includes transporters for serotonin, norepinephrine, and GABA that utilize the Na<sup>+</sup> gradient to drive the uptake of substrate. Decades ago, it was shown that the serotonin transporter also antiports K<sup>+</sup>, but investigations of K<sup>+</sup>-coupled transport in other neurotransmitter:sodium symporters have been inconclusive. Here, we show that ligand binding to the Drosophila- and human dopamine transporters are inhibited by K<sup>+</sup>, and the conformational dynamics of the Drosophila dopamine transporter in K<sup>+</sup> are divergent from the apo- and Na<sup>+</sup>-states. Furthermore, we find that K<sup>+</sup> increases dopamine uptake by the Drosophila dopamine transporter in liposomes, and visualize Na<sup>+</sup> and K<sup>+</sup> fluxes in single proteoliposomes using fluorescent ion indicators. Our results expand on the fundamentals of dopamine transport and prompt a reevaluation of the impact of K<sup>+</sup> on other transporters in this pharmacologically important family.

### Keywords
Ms; membrane proteins; mass spectroemetry; hydrogen-deuterium exchange; transporter

### Affiliations
Department of Pharmacy, University of Copenhagen
Protein Analysis Group, Department of Pharmacy, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark

### Submitter
Kasper  Rand

### Lab Head
Dr Kasper D. Rand
Protein Analysis Group, Department of Pharmacy, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark


