### Accession
PXD008621

### Title
The role of cadaverine synthesis on pneumococcal capsule and protein expression.

### Description
S. pneumoniae TIGR4 wild type strain and lysine decarboxylase deficient strain were cultured in quadruplicate in THY. Proteins were isolated, quantified, trypsin digested and analyzed by 1D LC ESI MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Protein isolation and sample preparation for mass spectrometry Total proteins were isolated from quadruplicate cultures of TIGR4 and ∆cadA (10 mL, OD600 0.4) grown in Todd-Hewiitt Yeast (THY) broth and Chemically Defined Medium (CDM) using Covaris S220 focused-ultrasonicator (Covaris, Woburn, MA). Sonications were performed at 200 W, 20%, 500 cycles/burst in NP-40 lysis buffer (0.5% NP-40, 150 mM NaCl, 20 mM CaCl·2H2O, 50 mM Tris, pH 7.4) supplemented with 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF). The cellular debris was removed by centrifugation at 18,000 x g at 4°C for 15 min,  and again at 16,000 x g, at 4°C for 5 min. Protein concentration from the supernatant was determined using Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL). Samples containing 100 µg protein were precipitated with methanol and chloroform (4:1), washed with methanol, spun and vacuum dried.  Protein samples were solubilized in 8M urea, reduced (0.005 M DTT at 65° C for 10 min) and alkylated (0.01 M iodoacetamide at 37° C for 30 min). Samples were further diluted with water, pH adjusted to 7.5 and digested with molecular biology grade porcine trypsin (2 µg at 37°C, overnight, 50:1 ratio of protein:trypsin, Promega Corporation, Madison, WI). Tryptic peptides were desalted using a C18 spin column (Pierce Biotechnology, Rockford, IL) and analyzed by LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) equipped with an Advion nanomate ESI source (Advion, Ithaca, NY).  Mass spectrometry Peptides (500 ng) were eluted from a C18 column (100-μm id × 2 cm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) onto an analytical column (75-μm ID × 10 cm, C18, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a 180 min gradient with 99.9% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 400nl/min and introduced into an LTQ-Orbit rap. Data dependent scanning was performed by the Xcalibur v 2.1.0 software [34] using a survey mass scan at 60,000 resolution in the Orbitrap analyzer scanning mass/charge (m/z) 400-1600, followed by collision-induced dissociation (CID) tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) of the 14 most intense ions in the linear ion trap analyzer. Precursor ions were selected by the monoisotopic precursor selection (MIPS) setting with selection or rejection of ions held to a +/- 10 ppm window. Dynamic exclusion was set to place any selected m/z on an exclusion list for 45 seconds after a single MS/MS. Tandem mass spectra were searched against a Streptococcus pneumoniae serotype4 strain ATCC BAA/TIGR4 fasta protein database downloaded from UniProtKB to which common contaminant proteins (e.g. human keratins obtained at ftp://ftp.thegpm.org/fasta/cRAP) were appended. All MS/MS spectra were searched using Thermo Proteome Discoverer 1.3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) considering fully tryptic peptides with up to 2 missed cleavage sites. Variable modifications considered during the search included methionine oxidation (15.995 Da), and cysteine carbamidomethylation (57.021 Da).

### Data Protocol
Data analysis Peptides were identified at 99% confidence with XCorr score cut-offs [35] based on a reversed database search. The protein and peptide identification results were visualized with Scaffold v 3.6.1 (Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR). Protein identifications with a minimum of two peptides identified at 0.1% peptide FDR were deemed correct. Significant changes in protein expression between ΔcadA and TIGR4 were identified by Fisher’s exact test at a p-value of ≤ 0.05 and fold change of ± 1.3. Fold changes in protein expression was calculated using weighted normalized spectra with 0.5 imputation value.

### Publication Abstract
Invasive infections caused by <i>Streptococcus pneumoniae</i>, a commensal in the nasopharynx, pose significant risk to human health. Limited serotype coverage by the available polysaccharide-based conjugate vaccines coupled with increasing incidence of antibiotic resistance complicates therapeutic strategies. Bacterial physiology and metabolism that allows pathogens to adapt to the host are a promising avenue for the discovery of novel therapeutics. Intracellular polyamine concentrations are tightly regulated by biosynthesis, transport and degradation. We previously reported that deletion of <i>cadA,</i> a gene that encodes for lysine decarboxylase, an enzyme that catalyzes cadaverine synthesis results in an attenuated phenotype. Here, we report the impact of <i>cadA</i> deletion on pneumococcal capsule and protein expression. Our data show that genes for polyamine biosynthesis and transport are downregulated in <i>&#x2206;cadA</i>. Immunoblot assays show reduced capsule in <i>&#x2206;cadA.</i> Reduced capsule synthesis could be due to reduced transcription and availability of precursors for synthesis. The capsule is the predominant virulence factor in pneumococci and is critical for evading opsonophagocytosis and its loss in <i>&#x2206;cadA</i> could explain the reported attenuation in vivo. Results from this study show that capsule synthesis in pneumococci is regulated by polyamine metabolism, which can be targeted for developing novel therapies.

### Keywords
Pneumococcal pneumonia, Proteomics, Complementation, Cadaverine., Capsule, Metabolism, Polyamines, Streptococcus pneumoniae

### Affiliations
Department of Basic Sciences College Of Veterinary Medicine Mississippi State University Mississippi State, MS 39762(lab head)
Mississippi State University

### Submitter
Caleb Benson

### Lab Head
Dr Bindu Nanduri
Department of Basic Sciences College Of Veterinary Medicine Mississippi State University Mississippi State, MS 39762(lab head)


