### Accession
PXD037243

### Title
Novel insights into Strongyloides stercoralis third stage infective larvae proteome

### Description
Background - Strongyloidiasis is a neglected tropical disease affecting an estimated 600 million people, particularly in resource-limited settings. The infection can persist lifelong due to Strongyloides stercoralis peculiar auto-infective cycle. The cumbersome diagnosis and the limited knowledge of the mechanisms underpinning this chronic infection are key issues in the disease management. To date, only a few proteomics studies have been conducted to elucidate the molecular mechanisms associated with Strongyloides parasitism or to highlight novel immunological markers and our knowledge of S. stercoralis proteome still limited. Methods - S. stercoralis infective larvae (iL3) we isolated from a faecal sample from an infected subject and analysed by high-throughput tandem mass spectrometry. To achieve a more comprehensive characterisation of iL3 proteome the experimental dataset was analysed through an automatic search strategy combined with manual annotation, which included gene ontology (GO) analysis, InterPro annotation, assessment of the homology with Homo sapiens and other pathogens of clinical importance and B-cell epitope prediction. Results – Our pipeline identified 430 S. stercoralis proteins, 187 (43%) of which corresponded to uncharacterized proteins. Oxidoreductases and peptidases were amongst the most represented protein categories as highlighted by GO analyses (molecular function terms); while membrane and mitochondrial proteins were the most represented cellular component GO categories. In our dataset we also identified a high proportion of proteins bearing CAP, SCP or thioredoxin domain or belonging to cysteine-rich secretory, transthyretin-like or peptidase protein families, confirming previous data on the most represented proteins associated with S. stercoralis parasitism, as inferred from genomic and transcriptomic data. Finally, we also highlighted 9 proteins bearing amino acid sequences with immunogenic properties that might represent novel candidates for serological tests. Conclusions – Here we provide a comprehensive description and annotation of S. stercoralis iL3 proteome and propose some proteins as potentially immunogenic, to be evaluated as novel serological diagnostic markers. In order to highlight novel targets to improve current serodiagnosis and treatment, it is in fact fundamental to expand the molecular understanding derived from ‘omics studies beyond the current state of the art.

### Sample Protocol
Larvae isolation, protein extraction and digestion  Larvae were obtained from an infected subject. Fresh stools mixed with charcoal and saline were cultured on Agar Petri dishes. iL3 larvae were harvested after 3 days of culture, concentrated by centrifugation and washed with PBS supplemented with 100 U/ml penicillin, 100 µg/ml streptomycin and 0.625 µg/ml amphotericin B (all from Gibco - Thermo Scientific). Larvae were then washed twice with cold PBS, counted under the microscope and stored at -80°C.  A pellet of 10’000 iL3 was re-suspended in 0.1% RapiGest SF (Waters Corporation) in 0.1 M triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEAB) pH 8.0 prior to sonication on ice. The sample was then centrifuged at 14’000g for 10 minutes at 4°C and the supernatant recovered. Protein concentration was determined by Qubit protein assay (Life Technologies). Seventy-five µg of proteins were reduced with 50 mM Tris (2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP), alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide and digested with 0.25 μg/μL sequencing grade-modified trypsin (Roche, 1:25 protease to protein ratio). Samples were cleaned with C18 spin columns (PierceTM – Thermo Scientific) and dried under vacuum prior to LC-MS/MS analyses.

### Data Protocol
Trypsin-digested sample proteins were the analysed with a micro-LC Eksigent Technologies (Eksigent Technologies, Dublin, CA, USA) system coupled with a 5600+ TripleTOF system (Sciex, Concord, ON, Canada) equipped with DuoSpray Ion Source. The stationary phase was a Halo C18 column (0.5 x 100 mm, 2.7 µm; Eksigent Technologies, Dublin, CA, USA). The mobile phase was a mixture of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water (A) and 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in acetonitrile (B), eluting at a flowrate of 15.0 µL min−1 at an increasing concentration of solvent B from 2% to 40% in 30 min. Samples were also analysed with nano liquid chromatography using an Acclaim PepMap C18 2μm 75µm x 150mm and injection volume 2 μL. The flow rate was 300 nL/min, phase A was 0.1% formic acid/water and phase B was 80% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid/20% water. A two hours gradient was used (3-45%). Identification was performed using a data dependent acquisition (DDA): the mass spectrometer analysis was carried out using a mass range of 100–1500 Da (TOF scan with an accumulation time of 0.25 s), followed by a MS/MS product ion scan from 200 to 1250 Da (accumulation time of 5.0 ms) with the abundance threshold set at 30 cps (35 candidate ions can be monitored during every cycle). The MS data were acquired with Analyst TF 1.7 (Sciex, Concord, ON, Canada). The DDA files were searched using Protein Pilot software v. 4.2 (Sciex, Concord, ON, Canada) and Mascot v. 2.4 (Matrix Science Inc., Boston, MA, USA) using trypsin as enzyme, with 2 missed cleavages, a search tolerance of 50 ppm for the peptide mass tolerance, and 0.1 Da for the MS/MS tolerance. The UniProt Swiss-Prot database containing Strongyloides Stercoralis proteins (version 01/02/2020, containing 12978 sequence entries), with a false discovery rate fixed at 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Larvae, Strongyloidiasis, Strongyloides stercoralis, Proteome, Feces, Diagnosis

### Affiliations
Biological Mass Spectrometry Lab, Department of Translational Medicine (DiMeT), Center for Translational Research on Autoimmune & Allergic Diseases - CAAD University of Piemonte Orientale, Novara, Italy
University of Eastern Piedmont 

### Submitter
Marcello Manfredi

### Lab Head
Dr Marcello Manfredi
Biological Mass Spectrometry Lab, Department of Translational Medicine (DiMeT), Center for Translational Research on Autoimmune & Allergic Diseases - CAAD University of Piemonte Orientale, Novara, Italy


