### Accession
PXD021865

### Title
Kinome profiling in HER2+ breast cancer patients in response to 7 days of HER2-targeting

### Description
Inhibition of the HER2/ERBB2 receptor is a keystone to treating HER2-positive malignancies, particularly breast cancer, but a significant fraction of HER2-positive (HER2+) breast cancers recur or fail to respond. Anti-HER2 monoclonal antibodies, like trastuzumab or pertuzumab, and ATP active site inhibitors like lapatinib, commonly lack durability because of adaptive changes in the tumor leading to resistance. HER2-directed therapy using clinically relevant drugs (trastuzumab with or without lapatinib or pertuzumab) in a 7-day clinical trial (ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT01875666, LCCC1214) designed to examine early pharmacodynamic response to antibody-based anti-HER2 therapy showed reduced FOXA1 transcription factor expression was coincident with decreased HER2 and HER3 levels, decreased proliferation gene signatures, and increased immune gene signatures. Patient samples from this trial, when sufficient material was available, were also subjected to kinase enrichment using multiplexed kinase inhibitor bead affinity chromatography and LC-MS/MS. Strongly responsive transcriptional responses observed in a subset of patients corresponded to decreased binding of CDK1 and DDR1 by our proteomic approach. Taken together, our results highlight the importance of the immune response to anti-HER2 antibodies and suggests that inhibiting FOXA1-mediated adaptive responses in combination with HER2 targeting is a potential therapeutic strategy.

### Sample Protocol
• Flash-frozen tumor samples were crushed by mortar and pestle in ice-cold MIB lysis buffer and MIB chromatography performed as previously described (Duncan et al., 2012 - PMCID: PMC3328787). Extracts were sonicated 3 x 10s, clarified by centrifugation, and syringe-filtered (0.22um) prior to Bradford assay quantitation of concentration. An equal amount of total protein (1mg) was gravity-flowed over multiplexed inhibitor bead (MIB) columns in high salt MIB lysis (1M NaCl). The MIB columns consisted of 175ul mixture of six Type I kinase inhibitors (CTx0294885, VI-16832, PP58, Purvalanol B, UNC-21474, and UNC-8088A) custom-synthesized with hydrocarbon linkers and covalently linked to ECH-Sepharose (or EAH-Sepharose for Purvalanol B) beads as previously described (8,9). Columns were washed with 5mL of high salt (1M NaCl), 5mL of low salt (150mM NaCl) MIB lysis buffer, and 0.5mL low-salt lysis buffer with 0.1%SDS. Bound protein was eluted twice with 0.5% SDS, 1% beta-mercaptoethanol, 100mM Tris-HCl, pH6.8 for 15 min at 100C. Eluate was treated with DTT (5mM) for 25 min at 60C and 20mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark. Following spin concentration using Amicon Ultra-4 (10k cut-off) to ~100 uL, samples were precipitated by methanol/chloroform, dried in a speedvac and resuspended in 50mM HEPES (pH8.0). Tryptic digests were performed overnight at 37C, extracted four times with 1mL ethyl acetate to remove detergent, dried in a speed-vac, and peptides further cleaned using C-18 spin columns according to manufacturer’s protocol (Pierce). Peptides were resuspended in 2% ACN and 0.1% formic acid. 40% of the final peptide suspension was injected onto a Thermo Easy-Spray 75μm x 25cm C-18 column and separated on a 120 min gradient (5-40% ACN) using an Easy nLC-1200. The Thermo Q Exactive HF mass spectrometry ESI parameters were as follows: 3e6 AGC MS1, 80ms MS1 max inject time, 1e5 AGC MS2, 100ms MS2 max inject time, 15 loop count, 1.8 m/z isolation window, 30s dynamic exclusion.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed using the MaxQuant version 1.5.1.2. The data were searched against a reviewed Uniprot/Swiss-Prot human database. Fixed modification: carbamidomethylation (C) and variable modifications: oxidation (M), phospho (STY), Acetyl (Protein N-term) and deamidation (NQ). Default 1% false discovery rate was used, with unique peptides used for label-free quantification (MaxLFQ). Matching between runs was enabled with 3 min match time window. Kinases were annotated from the data set and those with >1 unique peptide were kept. LFQ intensities were log2 transformed and missing LFQ intensities were replaced with the column (sample) minimum value for comparison and matched pre-treatment and post-treatment samples. Sample with >50% imputed log2LFQ intensities were excluded (117-pre (HER2_19) and 112-pre (HER2_11). The post-treatment sample from patient 111 (111-post (HER2_10) was re-run due to poor chromatography and the re-run sample (111-post (HER2_10rerun)) was used for analysis. Extra lysate from patient 103 samples were re-run (103-Ra and 103-Ob) but the original sample files from freshly prepared lysate were used for analysis (103-Ra and 103Oa (HER2_03 and HER2_04)). Lysate from human HER2+ patient-derived xenografts WHIM8 and WHIM35 were processed and searched in parallel to improve matching between runs in MaxLFQ. The log2 LFQ difference for matched patient pre- and post-treatment samples was compared.

### Publication Abstract
Inhibition of the HER2/ERBB2 receptor is a keystone to treating HER2-positive malignancies, particularly breast cancer, but a significant fraction of HER2-positive (HER2+) breast cancers recur or fail to respond. Anti-HER2 monoclonal antibodies, like trastuzumab or pertuzumab, and ATP active site inhibitors like lapatinib, commonly lack durability because of adaptive changes in the tumor leading to resistance. HER2+ cell line responses to inhibition with lapatinib were analyzed by RNAseq and ChIPseq to characterize transcriptional and epigenetic changes. Motif analysis of lapatinib-responsive genomic regions implicated the pioneer transcription factor FOXA1 as a mediator of adaptive responses. Lapatinib in combination with FOXA1 depletion led to dysregulation of enhancers, impaired adaptive upregulation of HER3, and decreased proliferation. HER2-directed therapy using clinically relevant drugs (trastuzumab with or without lapatinib or pertuzumab) in a 7-day clinical trial designed to examine early pharmacodynamic response to antibody-based anti-HER2 therapy showed reduced FOXA1 expression was coincident with decreased HER2 and HER3 levels, decreased proliferation gene signatures, and increased immune gene signatures. This highlights the importance of the immune response to anti-HER2 antibodies and suggests that inhibiting FOXA1-mediated adaptive responses in combination with HER2 targeting is a potential therapeutic strategy.

### Keywords
Pertuzumab, Erbb2, Multiplexed kinase inhibitor beads, Clinical trial, Lapatinib, Trastuzumab

### Affiliations
Indiana University School of Medicine
Department of Pharmacology, University of North Carolina Chapel Hill School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC USA

### Submitter
Steven Angus

### Lab Head
Dr Gary Johnson
Department of Pharmacology, University of North Carolina Chapel Hill School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC USA


