### Accession
PXD043473

### Title
Towards Single Bacterium Proteomics

### Description
Bacteria are orders of magnitude smaller than mammalian cells, and while single cell proteomics (SCP) detects and quantifies today several thousands of proteins per mammalian cell, it is not at all clear whether conventional SCP methods will be suitable for bacteria. Here we report on the first successful attempt to detect proteins from individual Escherichia coli bacteria, with validation of our findings by comparison with bulk proteomics data.

### Sample Protocol
For bulk proteome analysis, the harvested and washed cells were lysed with two different methods following supplemented with either 100 µL of 25 mM triethylammonuim bicarbonate (TEAB) for probe sonication method or 50 µL water for freeze-and-thaw method and sonicated in water bath for 10 min. The cells were either sonicated twice using an ultrasound probe (Vibracell) for 1 min operated with a pulse of 2-2 s (on-off) and amplitude to 20% after or underwent four freeze-and-thaw cycles, being frozen in liquid N2 and then heated on a block heater at 70°C for 2 min in each cycle. Supernatants were used for determination of protein concentration by BCA method. Thereafter 25 μg of cell extract were supplemented with 50 mM TEAB to reach the total volume of 100 µL, and proteins were digested without reduction and alkylation by adding 10 µL of 0.1 µg/µL sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) and incubating at 37°C for ca. 16 h. The resulted peptides were labeled with 500 µg TMT-10plex (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in 150 µL dry acetonitrile (ACN) by incubating at RT for 2 h with gentle shaking. The reaction was quenched by adding 15 µL of 5% hydroxylamine (Sigma). The peptides labeled with different TMT labels were pooled together and dried in a vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf).      For single cell proteomics, bacteria were stained with SYTO™ 9 to facilitate sorting to a 96-well plate in an BD FACSAria™ III flow cytometer system (BD Biosciences) either one or two cells into wells holding pre-dispensed 5 µL of 100 mM TEAB. In addition, 250 cells to be used as CP were sorted into some wells. As described previously 3, proteins were extracted by four freeze-and-thaw cycles using liquid nitrogen and incubation at 70°C for 2 min in each cycle with a 2 min interval at RT between each cycle. Proteins were denatured by heating the plates to 90°C for 10 min. Then 1 or 2 µL of sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) in 50 mM TEAB were added to single/double cells and CP, respectively, and incubated at 37°C for 16 h. Labeling with TMT-10plex was performed with dispensing in each well 1 µL of a 10 ng/µL reagent solution using MANTIS liquid handling robot (Formulatrix) and incubating at RT for 1 h with gentle shaking and subsequent quenching for 20 min at RT with 1 µL of 5% hydrocylamine. Labeled peptides from three single and three double cells were pooled together with two CP digests labelled by two different TMT labels and dried in vacuum prior to analysis. Two TMT channels remained unutilized to determine the background noise level. LC-MS/MS analysis of bulk proteome sample was performed on an Ultimate 3000 UPLC coupled to a Q Exactive HF hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded onto a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100 pre-column, 75 µm diameter, 2 cm long, 3 µm C18 beads, 100 Å pores, Thermo Scientific) and separated on an EASY-Spray analytical column (50 cm long, 75 µm i.d., PepMap RSLC C18 2 µm beads, 100 Å pores, Thermo Scientific) using a 120 min long linear gradient from 4% to 26% solvent B (0.1% FA in 98% ACN and 2% water) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min and a column temperature of 55°C. Mass spectrometry (MS) acquisition method was set as follows: full MS spectra at m/z 375-1700 with a resolution of 120,000 (at 200 m/z), with an automated gain control (AGC) target value of 1×106 and 80 ms injection time (IT), with data dependent acquisition (DDA) selection for fragmentation of 18 most abundant ions. MS/MS was performed with an isolation window of 1.4 Th and fragmentation by higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) at a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 34%, maximum IT of 54 ms, and AGC target of 2×105. Fragment ion detection was in the Orbitrap HD analyzer at a resolution of 60,000 with fixed first mass at 110 m/z and with a dynamic exclusion of 45 s. LC-MS/MS analysis of single cells was performed with a nano-flow UltiMate 3000 UPLC coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Eclipse Tribrid mass spectrometer equipped with field asymmetric ion mobility device FAIMS Pro (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides were separated on a 25 cm Easy-Spray PepMap C-18 column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a gradient from 1%B to 20%B in 75 min and to 36%B in 20 min at a 300 nL/min flow rate. FAIMS operated at a compensation voltage cycling every 1.5 s between -50 V and -70 V.  The mass spectrometer was used in the DDA mode. The precursor ions were recorded at 120,000 resolution in the m/z 250-1500 range, targeting 6×105 ions in maximum 100 ms, while MS/MS precursors were isolated with a AGC target of 1×105 in maximum 50 ms with a narrow 0.7 Th window and fragmented by HCD at 35% NCE. The fragment ions were detected at 50,000 resolution with dynamic exclusion of 60 s.

### Data Protocol
Peptides and proteins were identified by searching MS/MS data against E. coli strain K12 protein database (SwissProt, 4465 entries) by the MS Amanda 19 using Proteome Discoverer 2.5 software. The precursor and fragment ion mass tolerances were 10 ppm and 0.05 Da, respectively. Variable modifications were set for deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, oxidation of methionine and “TMT6plex” (+229.163 Da; same as TMT10plex) of lysine and peptide N-termini. The protein list was filtered with an estimated false discovery rate (FDR) of 5% and validation based on q-values using either Percolator or Target decoy PSM validator node in Proteome Discoverer. The protein group abundances were calculated as a sum of the peptide abundances determined in Proteome Discoverer (Reporter Ion Quantifier node) based on the detected levels of TMT reporter ions.

### Publication Abstract
Bacteria are orders of magnitude smaller than mammalian cells, and while single cell proteomics (SCP) currently detects and quantifies several thousands of proteins per mammalian cell, it is not clear whether conventional SCP methods will be suitable for bacteria. Here we report on the first successful attempt to detect proteins from individual <i>Escherichia coli</i> bacteria, with validation of our findings by comparison with two bacteria samples and bulk proteomics data. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with the identifier PXD043473.

### Keywords
Escherichia coli, Single cell proteomics

### Affiliations
Karolinska Institutet

### Submitter
Akos Vegvari

### Lab Head
Dr Akos Vegvari
Karolinska Institutet


