### Accession
PXD045351

### Title
ETFDH, CIII and COQ2 common interactome

### Description
Proteomic analysis of the immunocapture (IP) of COQ2, ETFDH and UQCRC2 in skeletal muscle extracts, searching for common interactors Coenzyme Q (Q) is a key lipid electron transporter, but several aspects of its biosynthesis and redox homeostasis remain undefined. Various flavoproteins reduce the Q; however, in eukaryotes, only the OXPHOS-complex III (CIII) oxidizes the QH2. The mechanism of action of CIII is still debated. We demonstrate that the Q-reductase ETFDH is essential for CIII activity in skeletal muscle. We identify a complex involving ETFDH, CIII, and the Q-biosynthesis regulator COQ2 that directs electrons from lipid substrates to the respiratory chain, reducing electron leak and ROS production. This metabolon maintains Q levels, minimizes QH2-reductive stress, and improves OXPHOS efficiency. Muscle-specific ETFDH-/- mice develop myopathy due to CIII dysfunction, indicating that ETFDH is a required OXPHOS component and a potential therapeutic target for mitochondrial redox medicine

### Sample Protocol
IP Sample preparation and LC-MS analysis: Samples were digested with trypsin on STRAP columns (PROTIFI, Farmingdale, NY), according to the protocol described by the manufacturer. Tryptic peptides were dried in a speed-vacuum system and resuspended at 120 ng/ul, according to QUBIT quantification (Thermofisher Scientific). 5 L of each sample (equivalent to 600 ng) were loaded online on a C18 PepMap 300 µm I.D. 0.3 X 5 mm trapping column (5 µm, 100 Å, ThermoFisher Scientific) and analyzed by LC-ESI MSMS using a Thermo Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanoUPLC coupled to a Thermo Orbitrap Exploris OE240 mass spectrometer. Peptides were separated on a 15 cm X 75 m RP C18 column in a 60 minute long gradient at a 300 nL/min flow rate.   Data acquisition was performed using a data-dependent method, in full scan positive mode, scanning 375 to 1250 m/z. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 200, with Normalized Automatic Gain Control (AGC) target (%) of 300 and a maximum injection time (IT) set to AUTO. The top 20 most intense ions from each MS1 scan were selected and fragmented via Higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD). Resolution for HCD spectra was set to 30,000 at m/z 200, with AGC target of 100 and a maximum ion injection time set to AUTO. Isolation of precursors was performed with a window of 0.7 m/z, dynamic exclusion of 5 sec and the HCD collision energy was 30. Precursor ions with single, unassigned, or six and higher charge states from fragmentation selection were excluded. IP Sample preparation and LC-MS analysis (PROT1967) Samples were digested with trypsin on STRAP columns (PROTIFI, Farmingdale, NY), according to the protocol described by the manufacturer. Tryptic peptides were dried in a speed-vacuum system and resuspended at 120 ng/ul, according to QUBIT quantification (Thermofisher Scientific). 5 L of each sample (equivalent to 600 ng) were loaded online on a C18 PepMap 300 µm I.D. 0.3 X 5 mm trapping column (5 µm, 100 Å, ThermoFisher Scientific) and analyzed by LC-ESI MSMS using a Thermo Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanoUPLC coupled to a Thermo Orbitrap Exploris OE240 mass spectrometer. Peptides were separated on a 15 cm X 75 m RP C18 column in a 60 minute long gradient at a 300 nL/min flow rate.   Data acquisition was performed using a data-dependent method, in full scan positive mode, scanning 375 to 1250 m/z. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 200, with Normalized Automatic Gain Control (AGC) target (%) of 300 and a maximum injection time (IT) set to AUTO. The top 20 most intense ions from each MS1 scan were selected and fragmented via Higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD). Resolution for HCD spectra was set to 30,000 at m/z 200, with AGC target of 100 and a maximum ion injection time set to AUTO. Isolation of precursors was performed with a window of 0.7 m/z, dynamic exclusion of 5 sec and the HCD collision energy was 30. Precursor ions with single, unassigned, or six and higher charge states from fragmentation selection were excluded.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics data analysis and sequence search: Raw files were converted to mgf files and MS/MS spectra searched using Proteome Discoverer 2.5 (ThermoFisher Scientific) and Mascot v2.7 as search engine against a composite target database built from the Mus musculus reference proteome downloaded from UniprotKB plus a collection of common laboratory contaminants. Search engine was configured to match potential peptide candidates with mass error tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment ion tolerance of 0.025 Da, allowing for up to two missed tryptic cleavage sites, considering fixed carbamidomethyl modification of cysteine and variable oxidation of methionine and acetylation at Protein N-term. False Discovery Rate (FDR) was set at 1% and only proteins identified with at least a unique peptide were allowed. Peptide signal abundances were extracted and normalized to obtain the signal abundances at the protein level.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Etfdh; coenzyme q; oxphos-complex iii; skeletal muscle

### Affiliations
CNB-CSIC
Centro de Biologia Molecular Severo Ochoa Spanish Research Council Nicolas Cabrera,1 28049 Madrid (Spain)

### Submitter
Alberto Paradela

### Lab Head
Dr Laura Formentini
Centro de Biologia Molecular Severo Ochoa Spanish Research Council Nicolas Cabrera,1 28049 Madrid (Spain)


