### Accession
PXD044188

### Title
Citrullinated proteins in monocyte organelle fractions

### Description
Citrullinated proteins found in the organelle fractions of monocytes incubated in calcium

### Sample Protocol
5x10^7 monocytes isolated from 3 healthy donors were incubated in 5mM calcium for three hours and organelle fractions were subsequently isolated and lysed in NP40 lysis buffer supplemented with PMSF and protease inhibitors. Detergents from lysates were removed via methanol-chloroform precipitation and reconstituted in 8M urea, 10mM TCEP, and 40mM CAA in 50mM TEAB. Protein reduction and alkylation was performed at room temperature for one hour. Then urea was diluted to 2M by addition of 50mM TEAB before digestion. Digestion was conducted using trypsin at 10ng/uL at 37C overnight. 1% TFA was used to acidify peptides which were subsequently desalted using C18 StageTips. Peptides were stored at -80C after elution and drying via vacuum. Peptides were analyzed using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer interfaced with an Ultimate 3000 RS Autosampler nanoflow liquid chromatography system.

### Data Protocol
Peptide files were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer to identify and quantify proteins found in the mass spectrometry samples. Using the UniProt database, mass spectrometry results were searched against the human proteome with common contaminant proteins using SEQUEST HT. Parameters used for data search are as follows: 1) maximum two missed cleaved sites with trypsin; 2) precursor mass error tolerance of 10ppm; 3) fragment mass error tolerance of 0.02Da; 4) fixed modification at cysteines - carbamidomethylation (+57.02146Da); and 5) variable modifications of methionine oxidation (+15.99492 Da), arginine, asparagine, and glutamine deamidation (+0.98402 Da), protein N-terminus acetylation (+42.01057 Da), loss of methionine (-131.04049 Da), and methionine loss with acetylation (-89.02992 Da). Minimum peptide length was set to 6 amino acids, and a false discovery rate of 1% was used to filter proteins and peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Peptidylarginine deiminase IV (PAD4) post-translationally converts arginine residues in proteins to citrullines and is implicated in playing a central role in the pathogenesis of several diseases. Although PAD4 was historically thought to be a nuclear enzyme, recent evidence has revealed a more complex localization of PAD4 with evidence of additional cytosolic and cell surface localization and activity. However, the mechanisms by which PAD4, which lacks conventional secretory signal sequences, traffics to extranuclear localizations are unknown. In this study, we show that PAD4 was enriched in the organelle fraction of monocytes with evidence of citrullination of organelle proteins. We also demonstrated that PAD4 can bind to several cytosolic, nuclear and organelle proteins that may serve as binding partners for PAD4 to traffic intracellularly. Additionally, cell surface expression of PAD4 increased with monocyte differentiation into monocyte-derived dendritic cells and co-localized with several endocytic/autophagic and conventional secretory pathway markers, implicating the use of these pathways by PAD4 to traffic within the cell. Our results suggest that PAD4 is expressed in multiple subcellular localizations and may play previously unappreciated roles in physiological and pathological conditions. This article is part of the Theo Murphy meeting issue 'The virtues and vices of protein citrullination'.

### Keywords
Human, Citrullination, Monocytes, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine

### Submitter
Mekha Thomas

### Lab Head
Dr Erika Darrah
Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine


