### Accession
PXD032903

### Title
VCP-dependent CNN2 proximity proteomics

### Description
Lysosomal membrane permeabilization (LMP) is an underlying feature of diverse conditions including neurodegeneration. Cells respond by extensive ubiquitylation of membrane-associated proteins for clearance of the organelle through lysophagy that is facilitated by the ubiquitin-directed AAA-ATPase VCP/p97. Here, we assessed the ubiquitylated proteome upon acute LMP and uncovered a large diversity of targets and lysophagy regulators. They include calponin-2 (CNN2) that, along with the Arp2/3 complex, translocates to damaged lysosomes and regulates actin filaments to drive phagophore formation. Importantly, CNN2 needs to be ubiquitylated during the process and eliminated by VCP/p97 and proteasome for efficient lysophagy. Moreover, we identified the small heat shock protein HSPB1 that assists VCP/p97 in extraction of CNN2, and show that other membrane regulators including SNAREs, PICALM, AGFG1 and ARL8B are ubiquitylated during lysophagy. Our data reveal a framework of how ubiquitylation and two effectors, VCP/p97 and HSPB1, cooperate to protect cells from the deleterious effects of LMP.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa cells stably expressing CNN2-APEX2 were grown at 37°C in DMEM supplemented with FBS, L-Glutamine, Sodium pyruvate. Cells were differentially treated with 5 µM NMS-873 for 15 min followed by 1 h 1 mM LLOMe (Sigma) and 2 h washout wihout any drugs. Proximity labeling was performed essentially as described before (Korver et al., 2019). Briefly, cells were incubated with 500 µM Biotin-Phenol during the last 30 min and subsequently pulsed by addition of H2O2 for 1 min at room temperature. To stop the biotinylation reaction, they were washed 3x with quencher solution (10 mM sodium azide, 10 mM sodium ascorbate, 5 mM Trolox in DPBS) and 3x with PBS. All further steps were performed at 4°C unless indicated otherwise. After cell harvest with 0.25% Trypsin/EDTA (Thermo Fisher Scientific), cells were counted and heavy- and light-labelled cells were mixed at a 1:1 ratio based on total cell numbers. After centrifugation, the resulting cell pellets were lysed in APEX-RIPA (50 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% SDS, 1% Triton X-100, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate supplemented with 10 mM sodium ascorbate, 1 mM sodium azide, 1 mM Trolox and protease inhibitors (Roche Complete)). Samples were sonicated 2x for 1 s, spun down at 10,000xg for 10 min before application to streptavidin agarose resin (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and incubation with overhead shaking overnight. Subsequently, samples were washed 3x in APEX-RIPA buffer and 3x in 3 M Urea buffer (in 50 mM ABC) followed by incubation with TCEP (5 mM final) for 30 min at 55°C with shaking. After alkylation with IAA (10 mM final) for 20 min at room temperature in the dark the reaction was quenched with DTT (20 mM final). Samples were washed 2x with 2 M Urea (in 50 mM ABC) before trypsin digestion overnight at 37°C (20 µg/ml final). The resin was spun down and supernatants containing digested peptides were collected. After washing the resin 2x with 2 M Urea and pooling all supernatants the samples were acidified with TFA (1% final).

### Data Protocol
). Digested peptides were desalted on custom-made C18 stage tips (Rappsilber et al., 2003). Using an Easy-nLC1200 liquid chromatography (Thermo Fisher Scientific), peptides were loaded onto custom filled C18 reversed-phase columns and separated using a gradient of 5%–33% acetonitrile in 0.5% acetic acid over 90 min and detected on an Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Dynamic exclusion was enabled for 30 s and singly charged species or species for which a charge could not be assigned were rejected. MS data was processed and analyzed using MaxQuant (1.6.0.1) (Cox and Mann, 2008; Cox et al., 2011) and Perseus (1.6.5.0). All proximity experiments were performed in quintuplicates. Unique and razor peptides were used for quantification. Matches to common contaminants, reverse identifications and identifications based only on site-specific modifications were removed prior to further analysis. Statistical analysis (t-test) was done on the basis of LFQ intensities. A threshold based on a log2 fold change of ≥ 1 or ≤ -1 was chosen so as to focus the data analysis on a small set of proteins with the largest alterations in abundance.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Vcp, Apex2, Cnn2, Nms873

### Affiliations
SyNergy, LMU München

### Submitter
Christian Behrends

### Lab Head
Dr Christian Behrends
SyNergy, LMU München


