### Accession
PXD047550

### Title
Brain region differences in α1 and α5 subunit-containing GABAA receptor proteome revealed by affinity purification and Blue Native PAGE proteomics

### Description
GABAA receptors are the major inhibitory receptors in the brain. They are hetero-pentamers with a composition of predominantly two α, two β and one γ or δ subunit. From the six α subunit genes, the α5 subunit displays a limited spatial expression pattern and is known to mediate both phasic and tonic inhibition. In this study, using immunoaffinity-based proteomics we identified the α5 subunit containing receptor complexes in hippocampus and olfactory bulb. The α1-α5 interaction was identified in both brain regions albeit with significantly different stoichiometries. In line with this, reverse IPs using anti-α1 antibody showed the α5-α1 co-occurrence and validated the quantitative difference. In addition, we showed that the association of Neuroligin 2 with α1-containing receptors was much higher in olfactory bulb than hippocampus, which was confirmed using blue native gel electrophoresis and quantitative mass spectrometry. Finally, immunocytochemical staining revealed co-localization of α1 and α5 subunits in post-synaptic puncta in the hippocampus.

### Sample Protocol
Mass spectrometry setup used for analyzing immunoprecipitation and BN-PAGE-MS samples was previously described (Thanou et al., 2023). In brief, the peptide samples were prepared using Evotip and run on a 15 cm x 75 µm, 1.9 µm Performance Column (EV1112 from EvoSep, Odense, Danmark) with the 30 samples per day program. Peptides were electro-sprayed into the TimsTOF Pro 2 mass spectrometer (Bruker, Billerica, MA, USA) and analyzed with diaPASEF (Meier et al., 2020). The MS scan was between 100 and 1700 m/z. The Tims settings were 1/Ko from start to end and between 0.6 and 1.6 V.s/cm2, ramp time 100 ms, accumulate time 100 ms, and ramp rate 9.42 Hz.

### Data Protocol
DIA-PASEF raw data were processed with DIA-NN 1.8.1 8 (Demichev et al., 2020). An in-silico spectral library was generated from the uniprot mouse proteome (SwissProt and TrEMBL canonical sequences, release 2019-10) using Trypsin/P digestion and at most 1 missed cleavage. Output will be filtered at 1% FDR.Peptide length range was set to 7-30. Precursor charge range was set to 2-4. Precursor m/z range was set to 300-1800. Fragment ion m/z range was set to 200-1800. Maximum number of variable modifications was set to 1. Precursor False Discovery Rate (FDR) was 1% (default).  , Both MS1 and MS2 mass accuracy were set to 10 ppm and double-pass-mode was enabled. Protein inference was set to isoform. All other settings were left as default.  MS-DAP 1.0.5 (Koopmans et al., 2023) was used to preprocess the DIA-NN results and subsequent analyses described here were implemented in R. "VWMB" peptide-level normalization was used to reduce variation among replicates and subsequently "modebetween_protein" was used to balance between-experimental-condition abundance levels at the protein-level. From the MS-DAP peptide-level data table we selected peptides for proteins of interest and used these to compute iBAQ pseudo-absolute abundance values per protein by dividing their protein sum intensities (of respective peptides, per sample) by the number of theoretically observable peptides per protein. To compare relative prey protein abundances of pulldowns against the same bait between brain regions, we first normalized their iBAQ abundance values per sample to the respective bait protein’s abundance. Linear regression was applied to these data to test whether the change in relative prey abundance between brain regions was significant, with ‘datasets’ as a covariate to account for our independent replicates performed across 2 cohorts. Peptides shared among subunits were excluded as they are not informative for the specific subtypes of the receptor.

### Publication Abstract
GABA<sub>A</sub> receptors are the major inhibitory receptors in the brain. They are hetero-pentamers with a composition of predominantly two &#x3b1;, two &#x3b2;, and one &#x3b3; or &#x3b4; subunit. Of the six &#x3b1; subunit genes, the &#x3b1;5 subunit displays a limited spatial expression pattern and is known to mediate both phasic and tonic inhibition. In this study, using immunoaffinity-based proteomics, we identified the &#x3b1;5 subunit containing receptor complexes in the hippocampus and olfactory bulb. The &#x3b1;1-&#x3b1;5 interaction was identified in both brain regions, albeit with significantly different stoichiometries. In line with this, reverse IPs using anti-&#x3b1;1 antibodies showed the &#x3b1;5-&#x3b1;1 co-occurrence and validated the quantitative difference. In addition, we showed that the association of Neuroligin 2 with &#x3b1;1-containing receptors was much higher in the olfactory bulb than in the hippocampus, which was confirmed using blue native gel electrophoresis and quantitative mass spectrometry. Finally, immunocytochemical staining revealed a co-localization of &#x3b1;1 and &#x3b1;5 subunits in the post-synaptic puncta in the hippocampus.

### Keywords
Immunoprecipitation, Gabaar, Proteomics, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
CNCR,VU Amsterdam
VU Amsterdam

### Submitter
Miao Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Kawan Li
CNCR,VU Amsterdam


