### Accession
PXD029490

### Title
Identification of novel protein binders of human MIRO2 in prostate cancer

### Description
In previous studies, we showed that MIRO2 mRNA is up-regulated in primary cancer versus normal tissues, across multiple tumor types. MIRO2 had been previously studied in the context of non-tumorigenic cells, where it coordinates microtubule- and actin-based mitochondrial movement. However, we showed that cancer cells utilize MIRO2’s canonical function on mitochondrial trafficking exclusively under conditions of cellular stress that exacerbate mitochondrial dynamics. Thus, identifying MIRO2’s protein binding partners would shed light on the molecular function of MIRO2 in prostate cancer. To this end, we identified the proteins co-precipitating with FLAG-MIRO2 from PC3 cells. Network analysis of MIRO2 binding partners identified metabolism, cell cycle and cellular responses to extracellular stimuli amongst the top over-represented pathways.

### Sample Protocol
The samples were loaded onto a 1.5 mm thick NuPAGE Bis-Tris 4−12% gradient gel (Thermo Fisher) and visualized with SimplyBlue™ SafeStain (Thermo Fisher) stain. Each lane of the gel was divided into 6 equal-sized bands, and proteins in the gel were digested as follows. The pieces were destained in 200 µL of 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate in 50 % v/v acetonitrile for 15 min and washed with 200 µL of 50% (v/v) acetonitrile. Disulfide bonds were reduced by dithiothreitol, and cysteine residues were alkylated with iodoacetamide. Modified sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) was added 1:100 w/w and the samples were digested overnight at 37 C. The digestion was stopped by addition of 5% formic acid. Peptides were extracted two times from the gel plugs using 1% formic acid in 50% acetonitrile. The collected extractions were pooled with the initial digestion supernatant, desalted, and concentrated on Thermo Scientific Pierce C18 Tip.  Samples were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Easy-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) through a nanoelectrospray ion source. Peptides were separated on a self-made C18 analytical column (100 µm internal diameter, x 20 cm length) packed with 2.7 µm Cortecs particles. After equilibration with 3 µL 5% acetonitrile 0.1% formic acid, the peptides were separated by a 70 min a linear gradient from 6% to 38% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid at 400nL/min. LC mobile phase solvents and sample dilutions used 0.1% formic acid in water (Buffer A) and 0.1% formic acid in 80 % acetonitrile (Buffer B) (Optima™ LC/MS, Fisher Scientific, Pittsburgh, PA). Data acquisition was performed using the instrument supplied Xcalibur™ (version 4.1) software. Survey scans covering the mass range of 350–1800 were performed in the Orbitrap by scanning from m/z 300-1800 with a resolution of 120,000 (at m/z 200), an S-Lens RF Level of 30%, a maximum injection time of 50 milliseconds, and an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 4e5. For MS2 scan triggering, monoisotopic precursor selection was enabled, charge state filtering was limited to 2–7, an intensity threshold of 2e4 was employed, and dynamic exclusion of previously selected masses was enabled for 45 seconds with a tolerance of 10 ppm. MS2 scans were acquired in the Orbitrap mode with a maximum injection time of 35 ms, quadrupole isolation, an isolation window of 1.6 m/z, HCD collision energy of 30%, and an AGC target value of 5e4.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were extracted from raw data files and converted into mgf files using a Proteome Discoverer Software (ver. 2.1.0.62). These .mgf files were then independently searched against human database using an in-house Mascot server (Version 2.6, Matrix Science). Mass tolerances were +/- 10 ppm for MS peaks, and +/- 25 ppm for MS/MS fragment ions. Trypsin specificity was used allowing for 1 missed cleavage. Met oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation, and peptide N-terminal pyroglutamic acid formation were allowed as variable modifications. Scaffold (version 4.8.4, Proteome Software, Portland, OR, USA) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability as specified by the Peptide Prophet algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability and contained at least two identified unique peptides.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Signaling, Mitochondria, Protein interaction, Cancer

### Affiliations
University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus,Department of Pharmacology
UC Denver 

### Submitter
Monika Dzieciatkowska

### Lab Head
Dr Cecilia Caino
University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus,Department of Pharmacology


