### Accession
PXD039574

### Title
An integrated systems-biology platform for power-to-gas technology

### Description
Methanogenesis allows methanogenic archaea (methanogens) to generate cellular energy for their growth while producing methane. Hydrogenotrophic methanogens thrive on carbon dioxide and molecular hydrogen as sole carbon and energy sources. Thermophilic and hydrogenotrophic Methanothermobacter spp. have been recognized as robust biocatalysts for a circular carbon economy and are now applied in power-to-gas technology. Here, we generated the first manually curated genome-scale metabolic reconstruction for three Methanothermobacter spp.. We investigated differences in growth performance of three wild-type strains and one genetically engineered strain in two independent chemostat bioreactor experiments, first, with molecular hydrogen and carbon dioxide, and second, with sodium formate. In the first experiment, we found the highest methane production rate for Methanothermobacter thermautotrophicus ΔH, while Methanothermobacter marburgensis Marburg reached the highest biomass growth rate. Transcriptomics and proteomics data sets from these steady-state bioreactors, in combination with the implementation of a pan-model that contains combined reactions from all three microbes, allowed us to perform an interspecies comparison. While the observed differences in the growth behavior cannot be fully explained, the comparison enabled us to identify crucial differences in growth-related pathways such as formate anabolism. In the second experiment, we found stable growth with a M. thermautotrophicus ΔH plasmid-carrying strain on formate with similar performance parameters compared to wild-type Methanothermobacter thermautotrophicus Z-245. The results of the two studies demonstrate the advantages of an integrative approach combining fermentation and omics data with genome-scale modeling to reveal knowledge gaps of archaeal metabolisms and the biotechnological potential of Methanothermobacter spp. as production platform hosts.

### Sample Protocol
Protein sample preparation: The proteomics sampling and sample preparation methods from Valgepea, et al., (2018, doi:10.1186/s13068-018-1052-9) were used with the following modifications. Screw-cap 2-mL tubes with lysing matrix B (MP Biomedicals Germany GmbH, Eschwege, Germany) were used in the homogenizer (FastPrep-24TM 5G, MP Biomedicals Germany GmbH, Eschwege, Germany). For cell lysis, the cells were homogenized for threes cycles (5 x 40 s at 6 m/s and 20 s off) in a FastPrep-24TM 5G bead-beater (MP Biomedicals Germany GmbH, Eschwege, Germany). The following protein precipitation method from the Proteome Center Tübingen (PCT) at the University of Tübingen was applied. The supernatant was transferred to a 15-mL FalconTM tube with 4 mL and 0.5 mL of ice-cold 100% acetone and 100% methanol, respectively, and precipitated overnight at -20°C. The following day, the tubes were centrifuged at 2200 × g and 4°C for 20 min (Multifuge X3R TX-1000, Thermo Fischer Scientific, Waltham, United States). The supernatant was removed, and the pellet was washed with 1 mL of ice-cold acetone (80/20% v/v in water) and centrifuged as in the previous step. The supernatant was removed, and the protein pellet was left to air dry on ice for 15 min before freezing at -20°C.   Protein measurement: Pellets were resuspended in a denaturation buffer (6 M urea, 2 M thiourea in 10 mM Tris pH 8.0) and 20 µg of protein were subjected to tryptic in-solution digestion (0.2 µg trypsin). The samples were run for an LC-MS/MS analysis on an Easy-nLCTM 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany) coupled to an Orbitrap Exploris™ 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany). The LC-MS analysis was performed as described previously in Fagbadebo, et al., (2022, doi: 10.3389/fmolb.2022.835302), with the exception of the duration and gradient of the peptide elution. Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid and solvent B was 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid Fagbadebo, et al., (2022, doi: 10.3389/fmolb.2022.835302). The LC-MS was operated at 40 °C (2022, doi: 10.3389/fmolb.2022.835302). The peptides were eluted from 0-113 min with a linear gradient from 10% to 33% of solvent B at a flow rate of 200 nL/min. Then, from 113-116 minutes the gradient increased from 33% to 50% of solvent B at 200 nL/min. To wash the remaining peptides from the column, from minutes 116-119, the gradient increased from 50% to 90% of solvent B with a gradually increasing flow rate from 200 nL/min to 500 nL/min. Lastly, the column was then washed from 119-127 min by 90% solvent B at 500 nL/min.

### Data Protocol
Protein analysis with proteome discoverer: Raw data-dependent acquisition (DDA) data from LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using Thermo Fisher Proteome Discoverer software (version 2.5.0.400, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Scoresby, Australia). Files were processed using two different methods: 1) for intensity based absolute quantification (iBAQ) analysis, each strain was processed individually through the precursor label-free quantification workflow with their corresponding FASTA files and then converted to iBAQ as described in Schwanhäusser, et al., (2011, doi:10.1038/nature10098); and 2) for differential expression analysis, all files were processed together using the custom pan-genome FASTA file. Both methods used the same workflows and only differed in their choice of FASTA file. Briefly, spectra were searched against the respective databases with carbamidomethylation set as a fixed modification and up to three methionine oxidations. Acetylation, methionine loss, and acetylation after methionine loss at the N-terminus were also permitted. The mass tolerance of precursors and fragments were 10 ppm and 0.02 Da respectively. The minimum and maximum peptide lengths were six and 144 amino acids respectively. Two missed cleavages were allowed per peptide. Proteins were filtered to a 1% FDR cut-off threshold and for an adjusted P-Value of 0.05. For quantification, only peptides unique to a protein group were used. All other parameters were kept at their default settings.

### Publication Abstract
Methanogenesis allows methanogenic archaea to generate cellular energy for their growth while producing methane. Thermophilic hydrogenotrophic species of the genus <i>Methanothermobacter</i> have been recognized as robust biocatalysts for a circular carbon economy and are already applied in power-to-gas technology with biomethanation, which is a platform to store renewable energy and utilize captured carbon dioxide. Here, we generated curated genome-scale metabolic reconstructions for three <i>Methanothermobacter</i> strains and investigated differences in the growth performance of these same strains in chemostat bioreactor experiments with hydrogen and carbon dioxide or formate as substrates. Using an integrated systems biology approach, we identified differences in formate anabolism between the strains and revealed that formate anabolism influences the diversion of carbon between biomass and methane. This finding, together with the omics datasets and the metabolic models we generated, can be implemented for biotechnological applications of <i>Methanothermobacter</i> in power-to-gas technology, and as a perspective, for value-added chemical production.

### Keywords
['Methanothermobacter', 'Genome-scale metabolic modeling', 'Genome sequencing', 'Transcriptomics', 'Archaea', 'Proteomics', 'Formate', 'Genetic engineering', 'Gas fermentation']

### Affiliations
['University of Tübingen', 'University of Tübingen Center for Applied Geosciences Environmental Biotechnology Group']

### Submitter
['Isabella Casini']

### Lab Head
[{'title': 'Dr', 'affiliation': 'University of Tübingen Center for Applied Geosciences Environmental Biotechnology Group', 'email': 'bastian.molitor@uni-tuebingen.de', 'country': '', 'orcid': '', 'name': 'Bastian Molitor', 'id': '2509137'}]

