### Accession
PXD002104

### Title
ER/PR RIME Experiments in MCF7 and T47D cell lines

### Description
Immuno-precipitation followed by MS was performed using the RIME protocol in this study. Estrogen Receptor (ER) and Progestorone Receptor (PR) were targetted using antibodies. The experiments were performed in a quantitative manner using SILAC labelling. Cells grown in complete serum (estrogenic) conditions were compared against an cells in  similar complete media, however supplemented with Progesterone (PG) or R5020 for 4 hours. Experiments were performed in MCF7 and T47D cell lines

### Sample Protocol
Rapid Immuno precipitation-MS experiments were performed as previously described (Mohammed et al, Cell Reports, 2013).  MCF-7 and T-47D cells were grown in R/K-deficient SILAC DMEM (PAA; E15-086), 10% dialyzed serum (Sigma-Aldrich; F0392), and supplemented with 800 mM L-Lysine 13C6 15N2Hydrochloride and 482 mM L-Arginine 13C6 15N4 hydrochloride (Sigma- Aldrich) for ‘heavy’-labeled media or 800 mM L-Lysine 12C6 14N2-Hydrochloride and 482 mM L-Arginine 12C6 14N4 hydrochloride for ‘light’-labeled media. Antibodies used were ERα (Santa Cruz - sc-543, lot- A2213) and PR (Santa Cruz- sc-7208, lot H2312). 20 µgs of each antibody was used for each RIME experiment.  Each RIME experiment was performed by mixing 20 million cells from each label after respective drug treatments. Cells were treated with either progesterone (100 nM), R5020 (10 nM) or vehicle (ethanol).  Two replicates of each experiment was performed and the results were validated by switching the SILAC labels.  The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode using an Nth order double-play method to automatically switch between Orbitrap-MS and LTQ Velos-MS/MS acquisition. Survey full-scan MS spectra (from 400 to 1,800 m/z) were acquired in the Orbitrap with resolution (R) 60,000 at 400 m/z (after accumulation to a target of 1,000,000 charges in the LTQ). The method used allowed sequential isolation of the 20 most intense ions for fragmentation in the linear ion trap, depending on signal intensity, using CID at a target value of 5,000 charges. For accurate mass measurements, the lock mass option was enabled in MS mode, and the 445.120025 ion was used for internal recalibration during the analysis. Target ions already selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 60 s. General MS conditions were electrospray voltage, 1.56kV with no sheath or auxiliary gas flow, an ion selection threshold of 1,000 counts for MS/MS, an activation Q value of 0.25, activation time of 10 ms, capillary temperature of 250 C, and an S-Lens RF level of 60% were also applied. Charge state screening was enabled, and precursors with unknown charge state or a charge state of 1 were excluded. Protocol above was adapted from Mohammed et al, Cell Reports 2013

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data files were processed using Proteome Discoverer v.1.3 (Thermo Scientific). Processed files were searched against the SwissProt human database using the Mascot search engine version 2.3.0. Searches were done with tryptic specificity allowing up to one miscleavage and a tolerance on mass measurement of 10 ppm in MS mode and 0.6 Da for MS/MS ions. Structure modifications allowed were oxidized methionine, and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine residues, which were searched as variable modi- fications. Using a reversed decoy database, false discovery rate (FDR) was less than 1%.  SILAC data were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer v.1.3. This analysis only uses unique peptides for ratio analysis. The resulting fold-change ratios for proteins found in both replicates were then converted into log fold-change ratios as represented in the figures. In a few instances where protein ratios were absent due to signal from only one of the two channels, these were ranked highest in the log fold-change table following manual inspection of the raw data (MS and MS/MS) to confirm specificity to a single label. Protocol above was adapted from Mohammed et al, Cell Reports 2013.

### Publication Abstract
Progesterone receptor (PR) expression is used as a biomarker of oestrogen receptor-&#x3b1; (ER&#x3b1;) function and breast cancer prognosis. Here we show that PR is not merely an ER&#x3b1;-induced gene target, but is also an ER&#x3b1;-associated protein that modulates its behaviour. In the presence of agonist ligands, PR associates with ER&#x3b1; to direct ER&#x3b1; chromatin binding events within breast cancer cells, resulting in a unique gene expression programme that is associated with good clinical outcome. Progesterone inhibited oestrogen-mediated growth of ER&#x3b1;(+) cell line xenografts and primary ER&#x3b1;(+) breast tumour explants, and had increased anti-proliferative effects when coupled with an ER&#x3b1; antagonist. Copy number loss of PGR, the gene coding for PR, is a common feature in ER&#x3b1;(+) breast cancers, explaining lower PR levels in a subset of cases. Our findings indicate that PR functions as a molecular rheostat to control ER&#x3b1; chromatin binding and transcriptional activity, which has important implications for prognosis and therapeutic interventions.

### Keywords
Estrogen receptor, Pr, Rime, Progesterone receptor, Er

### Affiliations
Cancer Research UK Cambridge Institute, University of Cambridge, Robinson Way, Cambridge, CB2 0RE, UK
The University of Cambridge

### Submitter
Hisham Mohammed

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Jason Carroll
Cancer Research UK Cambridge Institute, University of Cambridge, Robinson Way, Cambridge, CB2 0RE, UK


