### Accession
PXD039556

### Title
ChIP-MS of KAT7, H3K9me3 and H3K4me3 in naive, formative and primed mouse PSCs

### Description
The establishment of cellular identity is driven by transcriptional and epigenetic regulation exerted by the components of the chromatin proteome - the chromatome. However, chromatome composition and its dynamics in functional phases of pluripotency have not been comprehensively analyzed thus limiting our understanding of these processes. To address this problem, we developed an accurate mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomic method called Chromatin Aggregation Capture (ChAC) followed by Data-Independent Acquisition (DIA) to analyze chromatome reorganizations during the transition from ground to formative and primed pluripotency states. This allowed us to generate a comprehensive atlas of proteomes, chromatomes, and chromatin affinities for the three pluripotency phases, revealing the specific binding and rearrangement of regulatory complexes. The technical advances, the comprehensive chromatome atlas, and the extensive analysis reported here provide a foundation for an in-depth understanding of mechanisms that govern the phased progression of pluripotency and changes of cellular identities in development and disease.

### Sample Protocol
Chromatin immunoprecipitation coupled to Mass Spectrometry (ChIP-MS) of KAT7, H3K9me3 and H3K4me3 was performed in triplicates for naive mESCs, formative EpiLCs and primed EpiSCs. For each pulldown direct antibodies against the protein of interest were employed. ChIP-MS was performed as described previously (Stolz et al., 2022).  Briefly, for each replicate a 15 cm cell culture dish was cultured for 2 days and 10x106 cells were crosslinked by 1% paraformaldehyde.  Cells were lysed by the IP buffer (1.7% Triton X-100, 100 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 5 mM EDTA pH 8.0, 0.3% SDS and freshly added 1x protease inhibitor cocktail) by pipetting and resting for 10 min on ice.  Chromatin was sheared by sonication for 15 min in a Bioruptor Plus (30 s on/off cycles).  Shearing efficiency was checked after overnight reverse crosslinking and proteinase K digestion of samples on a 1% agarose gel.  Protein concentrations were estimated by BCA assay and samples were diluted to 1 mg/mL in 1 mL.  2 µg of the antibody was added to each replicate and samples were incubated O/N at 4°C under constant rotation.  The next day 80 µL protein A sepharose beads were added to each sample to wash out unspecific interactors.  After two low salt (50 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 140 mM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100), one high salt (50 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 500 mM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100) and two TBS washes, proteins were incubated in 2 mM DTT and subsequently 40 mM CAA (both diluted in 2 M Urea and 50 mM Tris–HCl pH 7.5).  In case of histones, an additional wash with 50 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 250 mM LiCl, 1% Triton X-100 was performed before the TBS washes. Then proteins were on-bead digested by Trypsin (20 µg/mL) O/N at 25°C.  The next day, protease activity was stopped by 1% TFA and peptides were cleaned-up on Stage Tips consisting of three layers of C18 material.  After elution from Stage Tips peptides were speedvac dried and resuspended in 20 µL of A* buffer (0.1% TFA and 2% acetonitrile).  Peptide concentrations were estimated by nanodrop measurements at 280 nm. 300 ng of each peptide solution was analyzed on a quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Orbitrap ExplorisTM 480, Thermo Fisher Scientific) after nanoflow liquid chromatography on an in-house packed 50 cm column (ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 μM resin, Dr Maisch GmbH) coupled to an Easy-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) over a linear acetonitrile gradient for 120 min.  Data-dependent acquisition was employed and thereby the most abundant 12 peptides were selected for MS/MS scans.  The target value for full scan MS spectra was set to 3x106 and the resolution was at 60,000.  The m/z range was adjusted to 400-1,650 m/z and the maximum injection time was limited to 20 ms.

### Data Protocol
Subsequent data analysis of raw MS files was first accomplished by the MaxQuant software package (version 1.6.0.7) (Cox and Mann, 2008). Protein sequences were acquired over the Uniprot data base (reviewed and unreviewed, version 2020) as a FASTA file. The MaxQuant analysis comprised the “Match between runs” option, a false discovery rate for both peptides (minimum length of 7 amino acids) and proteins of 1% and determination of proteins amounts by the MaxLFQ algorithm (Cox et al., 2014). Downstream analysis was then performed with the Perseus software package (version 1.6.0.9). A two-sided Student’s t-test of the log2 transformed LFQ intensities was performed to obtain significantly enriched proteins. By definition, a permutation-based false discovery rate of 5% and a fold change cut-off of log2=1 was applied.

### Publication Abstract
The establishment of cellular identity is driven by transcriptional and epigenetic regulators of the chromatin proteome - the chromatome. Comprehensive analyses of the chromatome composition and dynamics can therefore greatly improve our understanding of gene regulatory mechanisms. Here, we developed an accurate mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomic method called Chromatin Aggregation Capture (ChAC) followed by Data-Independent Acquisition (DIA) and analyzed chromatome reorganizations during major phases of pluripotency. This enabled us to generate a comprehensive atlas of proteomes, chromatomes, and chromatin affinities for the ground, formative and primed pluripotency states, and to pinpoint the specific binding and rearrangement of regulatory components. These comprehensive datasets combined with extensive analyses identified phase-specific factors like QSER1 and JADE1/2/3 and provide a detailed foundation for an in-depth understanding of mechanisms that govern the phased progression of pluripotency. The technical advances reported here can be readily applied to other models in development and disease.

### Keywords
Chip-ms, Interactome, Epigenetics, Pluripotency

### Affiliations
Faculty of Biology and Center for Molecular Biosystems (BioSysM), Human Biology and BioImaging, LMU Munich & Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry
Faculty of Biology and Center for Molecular Biosystems (BioSysM), Human Biology and BioImaging, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, 81377, Germany

### Submitter
Enes Ugur

### Lab Head
Dr Heinrich Leonhardt
Faculty of Biology and Center for Molecular Biosystems (BioSysM), Human Biology and BioImaging, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, 81377, Germany


