### Accession
PXD020908

### Title
Dynamic proteomic profiling of human periodontal ligament stem cells during osteogenic differentiation

### Description
Human periodontal ligament stem cells (hPDLSCs) are ideal seed cells for periodontal regeneration. To better understand the dynamic protein profiles during hPDLSCs osteogenic differentiation, we conducted a quantitative proteomics to reveal the temporal protein expression pattern during this process. Clustering and functional annotation by Gene Ontology terms identified distinctions among proteins with different dynamic tendencies. Pathway enrichment analysis with the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes database found that oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) was significantly involved, which further predicted continuous activation by Ingenuity Pathway Analysis software. Redox-sensitive signalling pathways with dynamic activation status showed associations with OXPHOS to various degrees, especially the sirtuin signalling pathway. SOD2, an important component of the sirtuin signalling pathway, is a hub protein of the interaction network and displays a persistent increase during osteogenesis. Our in-depth dynamic proteomic analysis indicated the comprehensive and dynamic regulation mechanism during hPDLSC osteogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
hPDLSCs from periodontally healthy donors were induced to osteogenic differentiation using osteogenic culture medium containing 10 mM beta-glycerophosphate, 50 μg/mL L-ascorbic acid-2-phosphate and 100 nM dexamethasone. Cellular proteins were extracted of uninduced cells (day 0) and differentiated cells (days 3, 7 and 14). After the clean-up of protein samples, reduced cysteine residues were blocked using 100 μL iodoacetamide (100 mM IAA in UA buffer) for 30 min in darkness. After washing with buffers, the protein suspensions were digested with 4 μg trypsin (Promega) in 40 μL TEAB buffer overnight at 37 °C, and the resulting peptides were collected as a filtrate. The peptide content was estimated by ultraviolet (UV) spectral density at 280 nm using an extinction coefficient of 1.1 of 0.1% (g/l) solution that was calculated on the basis of the frequency of tryptophan and tyrosine in vertebrate proteins. Then, 100 μg peptide of any replicate sample of all four time points was labelled respectively using TMT-6-plex reagents (Thermo Scientific) followed by a Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Fractionation Kit (Thermo Scientific) to fractionate TMT-labelled peptide. Each fraction was injected for nanoLC-MS/MS analysis. The peptide mixture was loaded onto a reversed-phase trap column (Thermo Scientific Acclaim PepMap100, 100 μm*2 cm, nanoViper C18) connected to the C18-reversed-phase analytical column (Thermo Scientific Easy Column, 10 cm long, 75 μm inner diameter, 3 μm resin) in buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and separated with a linear gradient of buffer B (84% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min controlled by IntelliFlow technology. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) that was coupled to an Easy nLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 60 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode. MS data were acquired using a data-dependent top 10 method dynamically choosing the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (300–1800 m/z) for high-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation. The automatic gain control target was set to 1e6, and the maximum injection time was 50 ms. The dynamic exclusion duration was 60.0 s. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200, the resolution for HCD spectra was set to 17,500 at 200 m/z, and the isolation width was 2 m/z. The normalized collision energy was 30 eV and the underfill ratio, which specifies the minimum percentage of the target value likely to be reached at the maximum fill time, was defined as 0.1%. The instrument was run with peptide recognition mode enabled.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched using the Mascot engine (Matrix Science, version 2.2) embedded into Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The Mascot parameters for protein identification were set as follows: tryptic specificity was required in all cases; 2 missed cleavages were allowed; carbamidomethylation (C), TMT 6 plex (N-terminal) and TMT 6 plex (lysine, K) were set as the fixed modifications; oxidation (methionine, M) and TMT 6 plex (tyrosine, Y) were set as the variable modifications; peptide mass tolerances were set at 20 ppm for all MS1 spectra acquired; and fragment mass tolerances were set at 0.1 Da for all MS2 spectra acquired. The peptide false discovery rate (FDR) was set to ≤ 0.01. Each protein ratios was calculated as the median peptide ratio of unique peptides only. All peptide ratios were normalized to the median protein ratio.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Periodontal, Dynamic expression, Tmt

### Affiliations
Department of Stomatology, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University
Department of Stomatology, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China, 510515

### Submitter
Jianjia Li

### Lab Head
Dr Wei Qiu
Department of Stomatology, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China, 510515


