### Accession
PXD019960

### Title
Anastrepha ludens antenna proteome

### Description
Anastrepha ludens (Loew) is one of the most important pestiferous fruit fly species infesting citrus and mangoes from Texas to Costa Rica.  Despite the latter, the mechanisms of odorant perception in this specie have been poorly studied.  In most of the cases, the detection of semiochemicals in insects is carried out in the antenna, where volatile molecules penetrate sensillum pores and they are linked to soluble proteins to cross the lymph until reaching specific odor receptor triggering the signal transduction which can lead to a behavioral response.  Scrutinizing the molecular foundation of odorant perception in A. ludens is of paramount importance to increase the efficiency of Integrated Management strategies against this pest. We carried out a proteomic profiling of A. ludens’s antennas with three different maturity stages using Nano-LC-MS/MS. We identified 4618 unique proteins in the antennas of A. ludens across maturity stages.  The core proteome of 1697 IDs featured proteins associated with odor perception including odorant-binding proteins (OBP), calcium signaling related proteins, the universal odorant co-receptor Orco and putative odorant-degrading enzymes (ODE).

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction The pool of antennas in phosphate buffered saline from each treatment was grounded with a sterile pistil inside of the tube (1.5 mL) for three minutes on ice.  Thereafter, the mixture was sonicated for five minutes, boiled for five minutes and centrifuge at 10620 x g for five min.  Afterwards, the supernatant was recovered and stored at -80 °C for further analysis.  The protein assay was carried out using the BCA™ Kit Assay (Cat. No. 23225, Pierce; Rockford IL) using BSA as standard.  In addition, the quality of the protein extract was corroborated by fractionating 10 g of total protein on an any kDTM Tris-glycine SDS-PAGE gel (Cat. 4569033, TGX™ gels, BioRad; Hercules, CA, USA) and stained with SYPRO Ruby protein gel stain (Cat. S12001, Life Technologies, Grand Island, NY, USA).  Trypsin digestion, simple fractionation and desalting Briefly, reduced and alkylated proteins from SDS-PAGE and protein crude extracts (100 µg) were digested with trypsin (Trypsin Gold, Mass Spectrometry Grade, Promega, Madison WI) at a 1:30 w/w trypsin protein ratio overnight at 37 °C.  Thereafter, a 1:60 w/w freshly prepared trypsin solution was added during 4 h at 37 °C.  Samples for analysis via Nano-LC-MS/MS were fractionated using strong cation exchange (SCX) cartridges (Thermo Scientific, Bellefonte, PA, USA) and desalted with C18 cartridges and dried with CentriVap (Labconco Kansas, Missouri).    Nano LC-MS/MS analysis Samples were analyzed by nano LC-MS/MS analysis using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribid (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) mass spectrometer equipped with an “EASY spray” nano ion source (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA).  The samples were reconstituted with 0.1% formic acid in LC-MS grade water (Solvent A) and 20 μL was injected into a nanoviper C18 trap column (3 µm, 75 µm X 2 cm, Dionex) at 3 μL/min flow rate in an UltiMate 3000 RSLC system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA).  After this procedure, it was separated on an EASY spray C-18 RSLC column (2 µm, 75 µm x 25 cm), using a 100 min gradient with a flow rate of 300 nL/min, and using Solvent A together with 0.1% formic acid in 90% acetonitrile (Solvent B).  The gradient was as follows: 10 min Solvent A, 7-20% Solvent B within 25 min, 20% Solvent B for 15 min, 20-25% Solvent B for 15 min, 25-95 % solvent B for 20 min, and 8 min solvent A.  The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode with nanospray voltage set at 3.5 kV and source temperature at 280 °C.  External calibrants included caffeine, Met-Arg-Phe-Ala (MRFA) and Ultramark® 1621 (88323, Thermo Fisher ScientificTM PierceTM).  Decision tree-driven MS/MS  The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode.  Briefly, survey full-scan MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer, scanning of mass range was set to 350-1500 m/z at resolution of 120,000 (FWHM) using an automatic gain control (AGC) setting to 4.0e5 ions, maximum injection time to 50 ms, dynamic exclusion 1 at 90S and 10 ppm mass tolerance.  Subsequently, a top speed survey scan for 3 s was selected for subsequent decision tree-based Orbitrap collision induced dissociation (CID) or higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation.  The signal threshold for triggering an MS/MS event was set to 1.0e4 and the normalized collision energy was set to 35 and 30% for CID and HCD, respectively.  The AGC of 3.0e4 and isolation window of 1.6 m/z was set for both fragmentations.  Additional parameter for CID included activation Q was set to 0.25 ms and injection time to 50 ms.  For HCD, first mass was set to 120 m/z and injection time to 100 ms.  The settings for the decision tree were as follows: for HCD fragmentation charge states two or three were scanned in a range of 650-1200 m/z, charge states four were scanned in a range of 900-1200 m/z, and charge states five were scanned in a range of 950-1200 m/z.  For CID fragmentation charge states three were scanned in a range of 650-1200 m/z, charge state four were scanned in a range of 300-900 m/z, and charge state five were scanned in a range of 300-950 m/z.  All data were acquired with the XcaliburTM 4.0.27.10 software (Thermo-Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The spectra were processed with Proteome DiscovererTM 2.1 software (PD, Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) and searches conducted with Mascot 2.4.1 software (Matrix Science Inc., Boston, MA), SQUEST HT, and MS AMANDA database search algorithm engines.  The searches were directed against a translated unigene database generated with in-house transcriptomic data from A. ludens.  Parameters in the search included: full-tryptic protease specificity, two missed cleavages allowed.  In addition, static modifications covered carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.021 Da).  Dynamic modifications included methionine oxidation (+15.995 Da) and deamidation in asparagine/glutamine (+0.984 Da).  Identification was performed at a lower resolution in the linear ion trap, tolerances of ± 10 ppm and ± 0.6 Da were applied.  Resulting peptide hits were filtered for maximum 1% false discovery rate (FDR) using the Percolator algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Anastrepha ludens</i> is a key pest of mangoes and citrus from Texas to Costa Rica but the mechanisms of odorant perception in this species are poorly understood. Detection of volatiles in insects occurs mainly in the antenna, where molecules penetrate sensillum pores and link to soluble proteins in the hemolymph until reaching specific odor receptors that trigger signal transduction and lead to behavioral responses. Scrutinizing the molecular foundation of odorant perception in <i>A. ludens</i> is necessary to improve biorational management strategies against this pest. After exposing adults of three maturity stages to a proteinaceous attractant, we studied antennal morphology and comparative proteomic profiles using nano-LC-MS/MS with tandem mass tags combined with synchronous precursor selection (SPS)-MS3. Antennas from newly emerged flies exhibited dense agglomerations of olfactory sensory neurons. We discovered 4618 unique proteins in the antennas of <i>A. ludens</i> and identified some associated with odor signaling, including odorant-binding and calcium signaling related proteins, the odorant receptor co-receptor (Orco), and putative odorant-degrading enzymes. Antennas of sexually immature flies exhibited the most upregulation of odor perception proteins compared to mature flies exposed to the attractant. This is the first report where critical molecular players are linked to the odor perception mechanism of <i>A. ludens</i>.

### Keywords
Fruit fly, Nano-lc-ms/ms, Orbitrap

### Affiliations
Instituto de Ecología, A.C.
Instituto de Ecologia, A.C.

### Submitter
Eliel Ruiz-May

### Lab Head
Dr Proteomic laboratory
Instituto de Ecologia, A.C.


