### Accession
PXD010666

### Title
development of the cell wall in alfalfa

### Description
In this study, the cell wall proteomes of 3 different regions of alfalfa stems were compared. These three regions correspond to three phases in the stem development. The sequential extraction of cell wall proteins with CaCl2, EGTA and LiCl-complemented buffers was combined with a gel-based proteome approach and multivariate analysis.  Although the highest similarities were observed between the apical and intermediate stem regions, the three proteome patterns are characteristic for each region. In the basal stem region, proteins that bind carbohydrates and have proteolytic activity, as well as enzymes involved in glycan remobilization, accumulate. Beta-amylase and ferritin likewise accumulate more in the basal stem segment. Therefore remobilization of nutrients appears to be an important process in the oldest stem segment. The intermediate and the apical region are sites of cell wall polymer remodelling, as suggested by the high abundance of proteins involved in the remodelling of the cell wall such as xyloglucan endoglucosylase, polygalacturonase non-catalytic subunit or beta-galactosidase. The most striking change between the different stem parts is however the strong accumulation of a DUF642-conserved domain containing protein in the apical region of the stem which suggests a particular role of this protein during the early development of stem tissues.

### Sample Protocol
Extraction of cell wall proteins. Cell wall protein enrichment was attained using a sucrose gradient procedure as previously described. Protein extraction was done with a sequential extraction method using buffers complemented with CaCl2, EGTA and LiCl. The frozen plant material was ground in liquid nitrogen with a mortar and placed in 50 ml Falcon® tube with 20 mL 5 mM Na acetate, 0.4 M sucrose, pH 4.6, 4°C. After vigorous shaking (2 min, 24 Hz), all samples were placed on a rocking platform (overnight, 4°C). Samples were then centrifuged (1000 g, 15 min, 4°C) and supernatants were discarded. Pellets were resuspended in 10 mL of 5 mM Na acetate, 0.6 M sucrose, pH 4.6, 4°C and placed on a rocking platform (30 min, 4°C) and centrifuged again (1000 g, 15 min, 4°C). Supernatants were discarded. This washing step was repeated respectively with 5 mM Na acetate, 1 M sucrose, pH 4.6, 4°C and twice with 5 mM Na acetate, pH 4.6, 4°C. The isolated cell wall fractions (pellet) were then transferred to 30 mL tubes  The proteins from the isolated cell walls (pellet) were solubilized in 7.5 mL 5 mM Na acetate, 200 mM CaCl2, pH 4.6, 4°C and placed on a rocking platform (30 min, 4°C). Samples were then centrifuged (10000 g, 15 min, 4°C) and supernatants saved. This step was repeated once and supernatants were pooled, leading to the CaCl2 fraction. To the pellet 10 mL of 5 mM Na acetate, 50 mM EGTA (pH 4.6) was added and shaken vigorously at 37°C for 1 h. After centrifugation (10000 g, 15 min, 4°C), supernatants were saved. This extraction step was repeated twice and supernatants were pooled leading to the EGTA fraction. The remaining pellet was finally resuspended in 15 mL of 5 mM Na acetate, 3 M LiCl, pH 4.6, 4°C, placed on a rocking platform (overnight, 4°C) and centrifuged (10000 g, 15 min, 4°C). Supernatants were saved, forming the LiCl fraction. Concentration and desalting of the extracts. All fractions were concentrated using an Amicon Ultra-15 10K Centrifugal Filter Device (Millipore) and centrifuged (4700 g, 4°C) until reaching a final volume of approximately 200 µL. Proteins were washed and desalted with ReadyPrep 2-D Cleanup Kit (Bio-Rad). After drying, proteins were solubilized in 100 µL labelling buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 2% w/v CHAPS, 30 mM Tris) and protein concentrations were assessed by using the Bradford protein assay with BSA as standard. Cell wall protein analysis by 2D-DIGE Labelling, migration and spot detection were performed according to the current routine. (1) 50 μg of proteins for the CaCl2-fractions and 40 μg of proteins for the EGTA and the LiCl fractions were labelled with respectively 400 pmol and 320 pmol of dyes LUMIPROBE LLC 25 nM (Interchim®). (2) Following labelling, resolubilisation in Lysis buffer and addition of Destreak Reagent (GE-Healthcare) and Ampholyte (Bio-Rad) (pH 3-10), samples were loaded onto ImmobilineTM DryStrip (3-10 NL, 24 cm) for overnight rehydration. (3) Isoelectric focusing was carried out in a 5 step-program: (1) constant 100 V for 3h, (2) linear gradient from 100 V to 1,000 V for 4 h, (3) constant 1,000 V for 6 h, (4) linear gradient from 1,000 V to 10,000 V for 6 h and (5) constant 10,000 V until reaching a total of 95,000 Vh. During IEF, the current was limited to 75 μA per strip. Spot picking, digestion, MS/MS analysis. Selected spots were picked with an Ettan Spot Picker (GE Healthcare). Digestion was carried out using a Freedom EVO II workstation (Tecan). Briefly, gel plugs were washed with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution in 50% v/v MeOH/MQ water and dehydrated with 75% ACN. After dehydration, proteins were digested with trypsin Gold (Promega), 8 µL of a solution containing 5 ng/µL trypsin in 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate (overnight, 37°C). After digestion, peptides were extracted from the gel plugs with 50% v/v ACN/0.1% v/v TFA and dried.  Peptides were solubilized in 0.7 µL of 50% v/v ACN/ 0.1% v/v TFA and spotted on MALDI target plates. To this, 0.7 μL matrix solution (7 mg/mL α-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid in 50% v/v ACN/0.1% v/v TFA) was added. A peptide mass spectrum was acquired using the 5800 MALDI-TOF/TOF (Sciex), and the 10 most abundant peaks, excluding known contaminants, automatically selected and fragmented.

### Data Protocol
Spot selection. Following spot detection, and spot matching using Decyder (v7.0, GE-Healthcare), the normal volume of each spot was extracted and further processing was performed using R (v3.1.2) with the additional package FactoMineR v1.0. Prior to statistical analysis, the normal spot volumes were standardized by dividing the volume of each spot by the corresponding spot volume of the internal standard. Spot average ratio r (Apex vs Intermediate, Apex vs Base and Intermediate vs Base) was calculated. In case this r ratio was inferior to 1, the additive inverse of the inverted r (-1/r) is reported. Data (standardized spot volumes) were further log2 transformed. Only spots with no more than 1 missing value per condition were kept for analysis. Comparisons (Apex vs Intermediate, Apex vs Base and Intermediate vs Base) were performed by spot using a two-tailed Student t-test for samples of equal variance. Only spots with a ratio <-1.5 or > 1.5 and p-values inferior to 0.05 were considered to vary significantly. Spots of interest were visually checked using the Decyder (v7.0, GE-Healthcare) spot view and selected for picking. MS analyses were carried out as described. MS and MS/MS spectra were submitted for database-dependent identification against the NCBInr database limited to the taxonomy Viridiplantae (1,717,798 sequences) (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov; downloaded 06/06/2014) on an in-house MASCOT server (Matrix Science, www.matrixscience.com). A second search was done against an EST Fabaceae database (downloaded 17/12/2013, 19,932,450 sequences). The parameters used for these searches were mass tolerance MS 100 ppm, mass tolerance MS/MS 0.5 Da, maximum 2 missed cleavages, fixed modifications cysteine carbamidomethylation, and variable modifications methionine oxidation, double oxidation of tryptophan, and tryptophan to kynurenine. Proteins were considered identified when at least two peptides passed the MASCOT-calculated 0.05 threshold scores. The subcellular location of identified proteins was predicted using SignalP 4.1 (www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/SignalP) and TargetP 1.1 (http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/TargetP). Proteins were considered as located to the cell-wall if the 2 web-tools predicted the presence of a signal/target peptide.   Post-identification statistical procedure. Spots containing 1 significant protein (116) were analysed using the freeware R (v3.1.2) with the additional package FactoMineR v1.0. Principal component analysis (PCA) was performed on this set of proteins. PCA was carried out with the R-function PCA by using the normalized spot volumes of the 116 spots in each stem region. Proteins were clustered in 10 groups with the hierarchical clustering on principle components (HCPC) R function and PCA axis were characterized using the dimdesc function of the FactoMineR v1.0 package (Lê et al. 2008). This procedure allowed extracting a set of 103 proteins that highly contribute (p<0.05) to Dim1 and/or Dim2 among which 61 (61.6%) and 4 (66.7%) were predicted to be secreted. Peroxidases were identified using the web-tool PeroxiBase available at http://peroxibase.toulouse.inra.fr/. Multiple sequence alignment was performed using Clustal Omega available at: http://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/msa/clustalo/.

### Publication Abstract
In this study, the cell-wall-enriched subproteomes at three different heights of alfalfa stems were compared. Since these three heights correspond to different states in stem development, a view on the dynamics of the cell wall proteome during cell maturation is obtained. This study of cell wall protein-enriched fractions forms the basis for a description of the development process of the cell wall and the linking cell wall localized proteins with the evolution of cell wall composition and structure. The sequential extraction of cell wall proteins with CaCl<sub>2</sub>, EGTA, and LiCl-complemented buffers was combined with a gel-based proteome approach and multivariate analysis. Although the highest similarities were observed between the apical and intermediate stem regions, the proteome patterns are characteristic for each region. Proteins that bind carbohydrates and have proteolytic activity, as well as enzymes involved in glycan remobilization, accumulate in the basal stem region. Beta-amylase and ferritin likewise accumulate more in the basal stem segment. Therefore, remobilization of nutrients appears to be an important process in the oldest stem segment. The intermediate and apical regions are sites of cell wall polymer remodeling, as suggested by the high abundance of proteins involved in the remodeling of the cell wall, such as xyloglucan endoglucosylase, beta-galactosidase, or the BURP-domain containing polygalacturonase non-catalytic subunit. However, the most striking change between the different stem parts is the strong accumulation of a DUF642-conserved domain containing protein in the apical region of the stem, which suggests a particular role of this protein during the early development of stem tissues.

### Keywords
Cell wall proteins, 2d-dige

### Affiliations
Luxembourg Institute of Science and Technology department: Environmental Research and Innnovation
Luxembourg Institute of Science and Technology (LIST)
Environmental Research and Innovation (ERIN)

### Submitter
kjell sergeant

### Lab Head
Dr Kjell Sergeant
Luxembourg Institute of Science and Technology department: Environmental Research and Innnovation


