### Accession
PXD010641

### Title
Anoxygenic Photosynthesis and Dark Carbon Metabolism in the Purple Sulfur Bacterium “Thiodictyon syntrophicum“ nov. strain Cad16T

### Description
Strain Cad16T was previously shown to fix a major fraction of the bulk CO2 under both light and dark conditions and was suggested to be involved in Fe(II) driven aerobic metabolism in the lake Cadagno chemocline. However evidence on genomic and proteomic level was only fragmentary . In order to understand the biological functions expressed under phototrophic and chemotrophic growth conditions of str. Cad16T an in situ experiment conceived. It included cultures of str. Cad16T incubated in dialysis bags for three months while physiochemical conditions were monitored longitudinally. Upon sampling, physiological differences of str. Cad16T were compared utilizing quantitative proteomics in combination with CO2-uptake measurements.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen cell pellets were thawed lysed in 5% SDC (w/w) in 100 mM ammonium-bicarbonate buffer containing 1% EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (v/v; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rheinach, Switzerland) and sonicated for 15 min at 200 W at 10 °C. Samples were then shipped to the Functional Protein Genomic Center Zurich (FGCZ) on dry ice for further processing. Protein concentration was estimated using the Qubit® Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rheinach, Switzerland). The samples were subsequently processed using a commercial iST Kit (PreOmics, Germany) with an updated version of the protocol. Briefly, 50 μg of protein were solubilized in ‘Lysis’ buffer, boiled at 95 °C for 10 min and processed with High Intensity Focused Ultrasound (HIFU) for 30 s with 85% power (arbitrary unit). The samples were then transferred to the cartridge and digested by adding 50 μl of the ‘Digest’ solution. After 60 min of incubation at 37 °C the digestion was stopped with 100 μl of ‘Stop’ solution. The solutions in the cartridge were removed by centrifugation at 3800 g, while the peptides were retained in the iST-filter. Finally the peptides were washed, eluted, dried and re-solubilized in ‘LC-Load’ buffer for Tandem Mass spectrometry (MS2)-Analysis.  MS2 analysis was performed on a QExactive mass spectrometer coupled to a nano EasyLC 1000 HPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rheinach, Switzerland). Initial solvent composition was 0.1% formic acid for channel A and 0.1% formic acid, 99.9% acetonitrile for channel B, respectively. For each sample 4 μL of peptides were loaded on a Acclaim PepMapTM Trap Column (75 μm x 20 mm; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rheinach, Switzerland) followed by a PepMap RSLC C18 Snail Column (75 μm × 500 mm; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rheinach, Switzerland). The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 300 nL min-1 by a gradient from 5 to 22% B in 79 min, 32% B in 11 min and 95% B in 10 min. Samples were acquired in a randomized order. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode (DDA), acquiring a full-scan MS spectra (300−1,700 m/z) at a resolution of 70’000 at 200 m/z after accumulation to a target value of 3’000’000, followed by HCD (higher-energy collision dissociation) fragmentation on the twelve most intense signals per cycle. HCD spectra were acquired at a resolution of 35’000, using a normalized collision energy of 25 and a maximum injection time of 120 ms. The automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 50’000 ions. Charge state screening was enabled and singly and unassigned charge states were rejected. Only precursors with intensity above 8’300 were selected for MS2 (2% underfill ratio). Precursor masses previously selected for MS2 measurement were excluded from further selection for 30 s, and the exclusion window was set at 10 ppm. The samples were acquired using internal lock mass calibration on m/z 371.1010 and 445.1200. Scaffold v4.8.4 (Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS2 based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 42’0% probability to achieve an FDR less than 0,1% by the Peptide Prophet algorithm with Scaffold  delta-mass correction. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 54.0% probability to achieve an FDR less than 1’0% and contained at least 2 identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Prophet algorithm

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw MS2 data were processed by MaxQuant v1.4.1.2, followed by protein identification using the integrated Andromeda search engine. Each file is kept separate in the experimental design to obtain individual quantitative values. Spectra were searched against a forward str. Cad16T database (6’237 coding genes), concatenated to a reversed decoyed fasta database and common protein contaminants (NCBI Assembly No. ASM281377v1; release date: 2017/12/07). Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification, while methionine oxidation and N-terminal protein acetylation were set as variable. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin/P allowing a minimal peptide length of 7 amino acids and a maximum of two missed-cleavages. Precursor and fragment tolerance was set to 10 ppm and 0.05 Da for the initial search, respectively. The maximum false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 for peptides and 0.05 for proteins. Label free quantification was enabled and a 2 min window for match between runs was applied. The re-quantify option was selected. For protein abundance the intensity (Intensity) as expressed in the protein groups file was used, corresponding to the sum of the precursor intensities of all identified peptides for the respective protein group. Only quantifiable proteins (defined as protein groups showing two or more razor peptides) were considered for subsequent analyses. Protein expression data were transformed (hyperbolic arcsine transformation) and missing values (zeros) were imputed using the missForest R-package v1.4. The protein intensities were normalized by scaling the median protein intensity in each sample to the same values.

### Publication Abstract
The microbial ecosystem of the meromictic Lake Cadagno (Ticino, Swiss Alps) has been studied intensively in order to understand structure and functioning of the anoxygenic phototrophic sulfur bacteria community living in the chemocline. It has been found that the purple sulfur bacterium "<i>Thiodictyon syntrophicum</i>" strain Cad16<sup>T</sup>, belonging to the Chromatiaceae, fixes around 26% of all bulk inorganic carbon in the chemocline, both during day and night. With this study, we elucidated for the first time the mode of carbon fixation of str. Cad16<sup>T</sup> under micro-oxic conditions with a combination of long-term monitoring of key physicochemical parameters with CTD, <sup>14</sup>C-incorporation experiments and quantitative proteomics using <i>in-situ</i> dialysis bag incubations of str. Cad16<sup>T</sup> cultures. Regular vertical CTD profiling during the study period in summer 2017 revealed that the chemocline sank from 12 to 14 m which was accompanied by a bloom of cyanobacteria and the subsequent oxygenation of the deeper water column. Sampling was performed both day and night. CO<sub>2</sub> assimilation rates were higher during the light period compared to those in the dark, both in the chemocline population and in the incubated cultures. The relative change in the proteome between day and night (663 quantified proteins) comprised only 1% of all proteins encoded in str. Cad16<sup>T</sup>. Oxidative respiration pathways were upregulated at light, whereas stress-related mechanisms prevailed during the night. These results indicate that low light availability and the co-occurring oxygenation of the chemocline induced mixotrophic growth in str. Cad16<sup>T</sup>. Our study thereby helps to further understand the consequences micro-oxic conditions for phototrophic sulfur oxidizing bacteria. The complete proteome data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange database with identifier PXD010641.

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, In situ, Lake cadagno, Purple sulfur bacteria, Lfq-lc-ms/ms, Carbon fixation, Environmental microbiology

### Affiliations
University of Geneva
Laboratory of Applied Microbiology (LMA), Department for Environmental Constructions and Design (DACD), University of Applied Sciences and Arts of Southern Switzerland (SUPSI), via Mirasole 22a, Bellinzona, Switzerland

### Submitter
Samuel  Luedin

### Lab Head
Dr Mauro Tonolla
Laboratory of Applied Microbiology (LMA), Department for Environmental Constructions and Design (DACD), University of Applied Sciences and Arts of Southern Switzerland (SUPSI), via Mirasole 22a, Bellinzona, Switzerland


