### Accession
PXD010164

### Title
Role of mTOR in regulating the extra cellular matrix

### Description
Explored the potential role of mTOR in regulating the extra cellular matrix of TGF-b1-stimulated IPF fibroblasts grown under macromolecular crowding conditions in the presence of either CZ415 or rapamycin

### Sample Protocol
Treatment of IPF patient derived primary lung fibroblasts with vehicle, CZ415, or rapamycin, and stimulated with TGF-b1 for 24 h. Lysis of cells with SDS assisted by Benzonase. Labelling of the samples with TMT 126-131 and subsequent mass spectrometric analysis.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using an in-house pipeline and searched with Mascot 2.4

### Publication Abstract
Myofibroblasts are the key effector cells responsible for excessive extracellular matrix deposition in multiple fibrotic conditions, including idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF). The PI3K/Akt/mTOR axis has been implicated in fibrosis, with pan-PI3K/mTOR inhibition currently under clinical evaluation in IPF. Here we demonstrate that rapamycin-insensitive mTORC1 signaling via 4E-BP1 is a critical pathway for TGF-&#x3b2;<sub>1</sub> stimulated collagen synthesis in human lung fibroblasts, whereas canonical PI3K/Akt signaling is not required. The importance of mTORC1 signaling was confirmed by CRISPR-Cas9 gene editing in normal and IPF fibroblasts, as well as in lung cancer-associated fibroblasts, dermal fibroblasts and hepatic stellate cells. The inhibitory effect of ATP-competitive mTOR inhibition extended to other matrisome proteins implicated in the development of fibrosis and human disease relevance was demonstrated in live precision-cut IPF lung slices. Our data demonstrate that the mTORC1/4E-BP1 axis represents a critical signaling node during fibrogenesis with potential implications for the development of novel anti-fibrotic strategies.

### Keywords
Cz415, Mtori, Ipf fibroblasts

### Affiliations
Cellzome

### Submitter
Maria Faelth Savitski

### Lab Head
Dr Marcus Bantscheff
Cellzome


