### Accession
PXD008613

### Title
Malaria Hepatocyte HC-04.J7 Project

### Description
Characterization of three hepatocyte cell lines (2 parental and 1 clone), under two different media conditions. Parental cell lines HepG2 and HC-04, single cell cloned from HC-04 defined as HC-04.J7. The goal of the project initially was to investigate the invasion of hepatocytes by Plasmodium falciparum sporozoites, and once found that the HC-04 cell had a higher invasion than HepG2, single cell isolates were generated from HC-04 before being expanded. The resulting HC-04.J7 isolate further improved the invasion rate. Transcriptomic and proteomic data sets were generated from all cell lines in both media, than analyzed for potential receptors or biochemical pathways that play a role in the increased invasion of HC-04 and specifically, HC-04.J7.

### Sample Protocol
For LC-MS/MS, cells were grown in T75 flasks in the appropriate media for 24 hours. Cells were then washed three times with cold PBS and treated with 0.01% trypsin at 37°C for 5 minutes, then scraped from the flask. Protein sample preparation for whole proteome analysis of HC-04 in CM and basic was performed as previously described [38]. Briefly, cells were solubilized in SDST-lysis buffer and boiled at 95°C for 5 minutes. A filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol was performed using a 10 kDa molecular weight cutoff filter (EMD Millipore). An HPLC C18 column on an Agilent 1260 HPLC system (Agilent Technologies) was then used to desalt the acidified tryptic peptides.  Protein sample preparation for membrane-enriched proteome analysis of HC-04 and HepG2 was performed by resuspending cell pellets obtained from T75 flasks in buffer . Cells were lysed by five rounds of freeze thaw lysis, during which cells were frozen in liquid nitrogen for 1 minute, then rapidly thawed at 37°C for 4 minutes. Following lysis, cells were centrifuged, and supernatant was collected as the non-membrane fraction. The pellet was then washed 3 times in PBS to remove residual non-membrane proteins. The remaining pellet was solubilized in SDST-lysis buffer and subjected to the FASP protocol using a 10 kDa molecular weight cutoff filter. An HPLC C18 column on an Agilent 1260 HPLC system was then used to desalt the acidified tryptic peptides.    FASP-desalted peptides were dissolved in loading buffer (97.9% water, 2% Acetonitrile (ACN), and 0.1% formic acid (FA)) and around 20 µg of peptides were injected to our constructed online 2D HPLC-MS/MS system as described previously [10]. Briefly, one SCX column was integrated into an Agilent LC-MS system comprised of a 1200 LC system coupled to a 6520 QTOF via an HPLC Chip Cube interface. Peptides were loaded into the SCX column for online SCX fractionation in the first dimension. The peptides were then eluted using the autosampler by injecting increasing concentrations of sodium chloride (NaCl) (0, 15, 30, 45, 60, 120, 160 and 300 mM NaCl in 2% ACN/0.1% FA; followed by one injection of 500 mM NaCl in 2% ACN/0.1% FA to wash the column). The salt elution was captured by a C18 enrichment column integrated into the Agilent Polaris-HR-Chip-3C18 chip. For separation in the second dimension, with the valve switched and the RPLC gradient started, the peptides were eluted from the enrichment column and separated by a C18 analytical column. Peptides were eluted from the analytical column using a gradient starting at 97% A (A: 99.9% water, 0.1% FA) at 300 nL/min. The mobile phase was 3–10% B (B: 90% ACN, 9.9% water, 0.1% FA) for 4 min, 10–35% B for 56 min, 35–99% B for 2 min, and maintained at 99% B for 6 min, followed by re-equilibration of column with 3% B for 10 min. Data-dependent MS acquisition was performed by an Agilent 6520 QTOF. Precursor MS spectra were acquired from m/z 315 to 1,700, and the top four peaks were selected for MS/MS analysis. Product scans were acquired from m/z 50 to 1,700 at a scan rate of 1.5 spectra per second. A medium isolation width (~4 amu) was used, and a collision energy of slope 3.6 V/100 Da with a 2.9 V offset was applied for fragmentation. A dynamic exclusion list was applied with precursors excluded for 0.50 min after two MS/MS spectrum were acquired.

### Data Protocol
All the LC-MS/MS raw data were converted to Mascot generic Format (.mgf) by Agilent MassHunter Qualitative Analysis B.04.00. Mascot version 2.4.1 was used to search the SwissProt human 2012 protein FASTA sequence database (20,234 sequences) for peptide sequence assignments using the following parameters: precursor ion mass tolerance of 50 ppm and a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.2 daltons. Peptides were searched using fully tryptic cleavage constraints and up to two internal cleavages sites were allowed for tryptic digestion. Fixed modifications consisted of carbamidomethylation of cysteine. Variable modifications considered were oxidation of methionine residues. The Mascot searched results were exported as .DAT format and then imported into the Scaffold software (Version 4.0.4, Proteome Software) for curation, label-free quantification analysis, and visualization. Scaffold’s normalized spectral counting was employed to compare relative protein abundance between HC-04 cell samples grown in culture medium and HC-04 grown in DMEM-NoGlc in each experiment as the basis for normalization of the spectral counts for all other LC-MS/MS data in that experiment. Overall, protein false discovery rates of less than 1% and peptide false discovery rates of less than 1% were obtained with Scaffold filters, and each protein has ≥ 2 unique peptides.

### Publication Abstract
<i>In vitro</i> studies of liver stage (LS) development of the human malaria parasite <i>Plasmodium falciparum</i> are technically challenging; therefore, fundamental questions about hepatocyte receptors for invasion that can be targeted to prevent infection remain unanswered. To identify novel receptors and to further understand human hepatocyte susceptibility to <i>P. falciparum</i> sporozoite invasion, we created an optimized <i>in vitro</i> system by mimicking <i>in vivo</i> liver conditions and using the subcloned HC-04.J7 cell line that supports mean infection rates of 3-5% and early development of <i>P. falciparum</i> exoerythrocytic forms-a 3- to 5-fold improvement on current <i>in vitro</i> hepatocarcinoma models for <i>P. falciparum</i> invasion. We juxtaposed this invasion-susceptible cell line with an invasion-resistant cell line (HepG2) and performed comparative proteomics and RNA-seq analyses to identify host cell surface molecules and pathways important for sporozoite invasion of host cells. We identified and investigated a hepatocyte cell surface heparan sulfate proteoglycan, glypican-3, as a putative mediator of sporozoite invasion. We also noted the involvement of pathways that implicate the importance of the metabolic state of the hepatocyte in supporting LS development. Our study highlights important features of hepatocyte biology, and specifically the potential role of glypican-3, in mediating <i>P. falciparum</i> sporozoite invasion. Additionally, it establishes a simple <i>in vitro</i> system to study the LS with improved invasion efficiency. This work paves the way for the greater malaria and liver biology communities to explore fundamental questions of hepatocyte-pathogen interactions and extend the system to other human malaria parasite species, like <i>P. vivax</i>.

### Keywords
Plasmodium falciparum, Malaria, Hepatocyte, Human liver, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Rhoel Dinglasan Lab, University of Florida
Department of Infectious Diseases and Immunology, Emerging Pathogens Institute, University of Florida, United States of America

### Submitter
Timothy Hamerly

### Lab Head
Dr Rhoel David Ramos Dinglasan
Department of Infectious Diseases and Immunology, Emerging Pathogens Institute, University of Florida, United States of America


