### Accession
PXD036987

### Title
Analysis of Efg1 co-purifying proteins

### Description
Analysis of Efg1 co-purifying proteins in comparison to Kre33 particle

### Sample Protocol
Yeast cells grown in YPD, lysed & TAP purified (proteinA /Flag), Proteins were loaded on SDS PAGE. Completed proteome was excised and used for MS analysis

### Data Protocol
Semi-quantitative mass spectrometry (1D nLC–ESI-MS/MS) were done at FingerPrints Proteomics (University of Dundee, UK) and analysed by using the MaxQuant software

### Publication Abstract
The DEAD-box helicase Dbp4 plays an essential role during the early assembly of the 40S ribosome, which is only poorly understood to date. By applying the yeast two-hybrid method and biochemical approaches, we discovered that Dbp4 interacts with the Efg1-Bud22 dimer. Both factors associate with early pre-90S particles and smaller complexes, each characterized by a high presence of the U14 snoRNA. A crosslink analysis of Bud22 revealed its contact to the U14 snoRNA and the 5' domain of the nascent 18S rRNA, close to its U14 snoRNA hybridization site. Moreover, depletion of Bud22 or Efg1 specifically affects U14 snoRNA association with pre-ribosomal complexes. Accordingly, we concluded that the role of the Efg1-Bud22 dimer is linked to the U14 snoRNA function on early 90S ribosome intermediates chaperoning the 5' domain of the nascent 18S rRNA. The successful rRNA folding of the 5' domain and the release of Efg1, Bud22, Dpb4, U14 snoRNA and associated snoRNP factors allows the subsequent recruitment of the Kre33-Bfr2-Enp2-Lcp5 module towards the 90S pre-ribosome.

### Keywords
S.cerevisiae

### Affiliations
Biochemistry Center
University of Heidelberg
Biochemistry Center Heidelberg University of Heidelberg Germany

### Submitter
Jochen Baßler

### Lab Head
Dr Jochen Baßler
Biochemistry Center Heidelberg University of Heidelberg Germany


