### Accession
PXD037044

### Title
Leukocyte analysis of proteomics in K74R mouse system

### Description
The project is a comparative age-dependent cell-intrinsic change in the proteomics of Eklf(K74R) and Wild-type mice.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction: The cell pellets were re-suspended with protein extraction buffer(20mM HEPES, 0.2% SDS, 1mM EDTA, 1mM glycerophosphate,1mM Na3VO4 and 2.5mM NaP2O7) with protease inhibitor cocktail(sigma-Aldrich) and 1mM phenylemethylsulfonyl fluoride(PMSF). The lysates were further homogenized using Bioruptor(Diagenode) at 4°C for 15 min and centrifuged at 14,000xg at 4°C for 20 min. The supernatant was transfer to a new tube and the protein concentration was determined using BCA protein assay(Pierce, Thermo). The protein aliquots were stored at -30°C until use.  In-sol digestion: The protein solutions were first diluted with 50mM ammonium bicarbonate(ABC), and reduced with 5mM dithiothreitol(DTT,Merck) at 60°C for 45 min, followed by cysteine-blocking with 10mM iodoacetamide(IAM, Sigma) at 25°C for 30 min. Samples were diluted with 25mM ABC and digested with sequencing-grade modified porcine trypsin(Promega) at 37°C for 16 hours. the peptides were desalted by homemade C18-microcolumn(SOURCE 15RPC,GE Healthcare) and store at -30°C until use. LC-MC/MC analysis: The desalted peptides were diluted in HPLC buffer A(0.1% formic acid in 30% acetonitrile) and loaded onto a homemade SCX column (0.6 × 5 mm, Luna µm 100 Å, Phenomenex). The eluted peptides were then trapped with a reverse-phase column (Zorbax 300SB-C18, 0.3x5mm; Agilent Technologies) and separated on a homemade column (HydroRP 2.5µm.75µm I.D. x 15 cm with a 15 µm tip) using a multi-step gradient of HPLC buffer B (99.9% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid) for 90 minutes with a flow rate of 0.3 µl/min. The LC apparatus was coupled with a 2D linear ion trap mass spectrometer (Orbitrap Elite ETD; Thermo Fisher) operated using Xcalibur 2.2 software (Thermo Fisher). The full-scan MS was performed in the Orbitrap over a range of 400 to 2,000 Da and a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 400. Internal calibration was performed using the ion signal of [Si(CH3)2O]6H+ at m/z  536.165365 as lock mass. The 20 data-dependent MS/MS scan events were followed by one MS scan for the 20 most abundant precursor ions in the preview MS scan. The m/z values selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 40 seconds with a relative mass window of 10 ppm. The electrospray voltage was set to 2.0 kV, and the temperature of the capillary was set to 200°C. MS and MS/MS automatic gain control were set to 1,000 ms (full scan) and 200 ms (MS/MS), or 3x106 ions (full scan) and 3,000 ions (MS/MS) for maximum accumulated time or ions, respectively.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification: The data analysis was carried out using Proteome Discoverer software (version 1.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The MS/MS spectra were searched against the SwissPort database using the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, version 2.5). For peptide identification, 10 ppm mass tolerance was permitted for intact peptide masses, and 0.5 Da for CID fragment ions with allowance for two missed cleavages made from the trypsin digestion: oxidized methionine and acetyl (protein N-terminal) as variable modifications; carbamidomethyl(cysteine) as static modification. Peptide-spectrum match (PSM) were then filtered based on high confidence and Mascot search engine rank 1 of peptide identification to ensure an overall false discovery rate below 0.01. Proteins with single peptide hit were removed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Eklf mutant mouse, Leukocyte, Proteomics, Eklf-k74r

### Affiliations
academia
N523 Room, Institute of Molecular Biology, No. 128, Section 2, Academia Rd, Nangang District, Taipei City, 115

### Submitter
TZU-CHI HSU

### Lab Head
Dr Che-Kun James Shen
N523 Room, Institute of Molecular Biology, No. 128, Section 2, Academia Rd, Nangang District, Taipei City, 115


