### Accession
PXD014798

### Title
Epigenetic reprogramming shapes the cellular landscape of schwannoma

### Description
Cell state evolution underlies tumor development and response to therapy1, but mechanisms specifying cancer cell states and intratumor heterogeneity are incompletely understood. Schwannomas are the most common tumors of the peripheral nervous system and are treated with surgery and ionizing radiation2–5. Schwannomas can oscillate in size for many years after radiotherapy6,7, suggesting treatment may reprogram schwannoma cells or the tumor microenvironment. Here we show epigenetic reprogramming shapes the cellular landscape of schwannomas. We find schwannomas are comprised of 2 molecular groups distinguished by reactivation of neural crest development pathways or misactivation of nerve injury mechanisms that specify cancer cell states and the architecture of the tumor immune microenvironment. Schwannoma molecular groups can arise independently, but ionizing radiation is sufficient for epigenetic reprogramming of neural crest to immune-enriched schwannoma by remodeling chromatin accessibility, gene expression, and metabolism to drive schwannoma cell state evolution and immune cell infiltration. To define functional genomic mechanisms underlying epigenetic reprograming of schwannomas, we develop a technique for simultaneous interrogation of chromatin accessibility and gene expression coupled with genetic and therapeutic perturbations in single-nuclei. Our results elucidate a framework for understanding epigenetic drivers of cancer evolution and establish a paradigm of epigenetic reprograming of cancer in response to radiotherapy.

### Sample Protocol
For mass spectrometry, HSC and HEI-193 VS cells were grown in serum free N5 media consisting of NeuralBasal A supplemented with N2 and B27 supplements without vitamin A, L-glutamine 2 mM, antibiotic-antimycotic (Thermo Fisher Scientific), bFGF 20 ng/mL (119-126, VWR, Radnor, PA), and human EGF 20 ng/mL (AF-100-15, PeproTech, Rocky Hill, NJ). Cells were irradiated, and cell-free conditioned media was isolated by centrifugation for 10 minutes at 4000g and filtering through a 0.45 μm syringe. 50μL of media was mixed with 50μL of lysis buffer containing 75mM ammonium bicarbonate, 1% sodium deoxycholate, 5mM TCEP and 40mM chloroacetamide and incubated at 37°C for 30 minutes to reduce and alkylate proteins. Proteins were digested with endoproteinase LysC (Wako Chemicals, Richmond, VA) and trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37°C, followed by sodium deoxycholate and 2% TFA precipitation and centrifugation for 15 minutes at maximum speed. Peptides were desalted using MicroSpin Columns (The Nest Group, Southborough, MA) and resuspended in 4% formic acid and 3% acetonitrile. Approximately 1μg of digested peptides per sample were loaded onto a 75μm ID column packed with 25cm of Reprosil C18 1.9μm, 120Å particles (Dr. Maisch GmbH HPLC, Germany), and eluted into an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) over the course of a 120 minute acquisition by gradient elution delivered by an Easy1200 nLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The composition of mobile phase A and B were 0.1% formic acid in water and 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile, respectively. All MS spectra were collected with orbitrap detection and the most abundant ions were fragmented by higher energy collision dissociation and detected in the ion trap, with a 1 second cycle time between MS1 spectra.

### Data Protocol
All data were searched against the Uniprot human proteome database. Peptide and protein identification searches were performed using the MaxQuant data analysis algorithm, and all peptide and protein identifications were filtered to a 1% false-discovery rate.  Label-free quantification and statistical testing was performed using the MSstats statistical R-package.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Maxquant, Lumos, Cancer

### Affiliations
UCSF

### Submitter
Danielle Swaney

### Lab Head
Dr Nevan Krogan & Danielle Swaney
UCSF


