### Accession
PXD034356

### Title
A slit-diaphragm-associated protein network for dynamic control of renal filtration

### Description
The filtration of blood in the kidney which is crucial for mammalian life is determined by the slit-diaphragm (SD), a proteinaceous junction between the foot processes of renal podocytes. Based on studies of structure and function the SD has been hypothesized to operate as a final barrier or as a ‘molecular sensor’ of renal filtration. Using high-resolution proteomic analysis of SDs affinity-isolated from rodent kidney, we show that the native SD is built from the known junction-forming components Nephrin, Neph1 and Podocin and a co-assembled high-molecular weight network of proteins. The network constituents cover distinct classes of proteins including signaling receptors, kinases and phosphatases, transporters and scaffolds. Knock-out or knock-down of either the core components or the selected network constituents tyrosine kinase MER (MERTK), atrial natriuretic peptide receptor C (ANPRC) and protein ITM2B resulted in target-specific impairment or disruption of the filtration process. Thus, our results identify the SD as a multi-component system that is endowed with context-dependent dynamics via a co-assembled protein network.

### Sample Protocol
(Please refer to the publication for a more detailed protocol) Membrane isolation from rat glomeruli Isolated rat glomeruli were resuspended in homogenisation buffer supplemented with protease inhibitors, 1 mM IAA and 2 mM PMSF and homogenized with Dounce homogenizer. The homogenate was centrifuged at 1050xg for 5 minutes and the supernatant (S1) was collected.  Subsequently, the pellet further homogenised by sonication in fresh homogenisation buffer, centrifuged at 1050xg for 5 minutes, supernatant was collected and centrifuged again at 1050xg for 5 minutes (S1´). Both supernatants (S1 + S1´) were combined and centrifuged at 200.000xg for 30 minutes. The resulting pellet was suspended in hypotonic lysis buffer supplemented with protease inhibitors, 2 mM IAA and 2 mM PMSF, incubated on ice for 30 minutes with gentle agitation and subsequently centrifuged at 200.000xg for 30 minutes. The respective pellet was suspended in of 0.5 M sucrose, under laid with 1.3 M and 1.98 M and centrifuged at 135.000xg for 60 minutes. Interface between 0.5 M and 1.3 M sucrose layer was collected with a syringe, diluted with 20 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.5 and centrifuged at 200.000xg for 20 minutes. The resulting pellet was suspended 20 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.5 to obtain the membrane fraction (MF) used as a source material for APs.  Membrane isolation from mouse glomeruli Mouse glomeruli isolated from WT and NPHS2-/- animals (18 each) were pooled and resuspended in 2 ml of homogenisation buffer supplemented with protease inhibitors 1 mM IAA and 2 mM PMSF and homogenized with Dounce. The homogenate was centrifuged at 1050xg for 5 minutes and the supernatant (S1) was collected.  Subsequently, the pellet was sonicated in 1 ml of fresh homogenisation buffer, centrifuged at 1050xg for 5 minutes, supernatant was collected and centrifuged again at 1050xg for 5 minutes (S1´). Subsequently, the pellet was suspended in 1 ml of fresh homogenisation buffer, centrifuged at 1050xg for 5 minutes, supernatant was collected and centrifuged again at 1050xg for 5 minutes (S1´´). All supernatants (S1 + S1´ + S1´´) were combined and centrifuged at 200.000xg for 25 minutes. The resulting pellet was suspended in 3 ml of hypotonic lysis buffer supplemented with protease inhibitors, 2 mM IAA and 2 mM PMSF, incubated on ice for 30 minutes with gentle agitation and centrifuged at 200.000xg for 30 minutes. The resulting pellet was suspended in 1.5 ml of 0.5 M sucrose, under laid with 1.3 M and 1.98 M and centrifuged at 135.000xg for 45 minutes. Interface between 0.5 M and 1.3 M sucrose layer was collected with a syringe, diluted with 20 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.5 and centrifuged at 200.000xg for 20 minutes. The resulting pellet was suspended 20 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.5 to obtain the membrane fraction (MF).  Affinity-purification from membrane fraction After determination of the MF protein concentration by Bradford assay, 0.4 mg (rat) or 0.1 mg (mouse) of MF was solubilized with CL-47 or CL-91 for 30 minutes on ice (at 1 mg protein / ml). After clearing by ultracentrifugation (10 min, 100.000xg (rat) or 9 min, 135.000xg (mouse)) solubilisates were incubated with antibodies immobilized on magnetic beads. After two hours of incubation and two brief washes, proteins were eluted with 1X Laemmli buffer without DTT, shortly run on 10 % SDS-PAGE gels and silver-stained. Lanes were cut into two sections (high (~>65 kDa) and low MW (~<65 kDa)) and digested with sequencing-grade modified trypsin. Peptides were extracted and prepared for MS analysis. AS negative controls in anti-Podocin APs we used membrane fractions prepared from Podocin KO animals without and with additional depletion of the small remainders of Podocin protein via the a1 anti-Podocin AB.  Membrane fraction preparation for MS Membrane fraction isolated from glomeruli was run on 10 % SDS-PAGE gel and silver-stained. Lanes were cut into four sections (>150 kDa, >75 kDa, >37 kDa and <37 kDa) and digested with sequencing-grade modified trypsin. Peptides were extracted and prepared for MS analysis.  LC-MS/MS analysis Mass spectrometric analyses of tryptic peptide mixtures were carried out on an Orbitrap Elite hybrid mass spectrometer coupled to an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system. Specifically adapted parameters were (i) for AP-MS analyses: aqueous organic LC gradient (eluent ‘A’: 0.5% acetic acid; eluent ‘B’ 0.5% acetic acid in 80% acetonitrile; gradient: 5 min 3% B, 60 min from 3% B to 30% B, 15 min from 30% B to 99% B, 5 min 99% B, 5 min from 99% B to 3% B, 15 min 3% B), MS2 maximum injection time = 200 ms, dynamic exclusion duration = 30 s, minimum signal threshold for fragmentation = 2000 counts, (ii) for MS quantification of total membrane fraction: LC gradient (5  min 3% B, 120  min from 3% B to 30% B, 20  min from 30% B to 99% B, 5  min 99% B, 5  min from 99% B to 3% B, 15  min 3% B), MS2 maximum injection time = 200 ms, dynamic exclusion duration = 60 s, minimum signal threshold for fragmentation = 5000 counts.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification LC-MS/MS data were extracted using ProteoWizard ‘s “msconvert.exe”. Peak lists were searched against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database (rat, mouse and human entries) using Mascot 2.6. Initially, preliminary searches with high peptide mass tolerance (± 50 ppm) were performed and after linear shift mass recalibration using in-house developed software, mass tolerance was reduced to ± 5 ppm for final searches. Fragment mass tolerance was set to ± 0.8 Da (ion trap MS/MS spectra). One missed trypsin cleavage and common variable modifications including S/T/Y phosphorylation were accepted for peptide identification. Peptide significance threshold was set to p < 0.05. Proteins identified by only one specific MS/MS spectrum or representing exogenous contaminations such as keratins or immunoglobulins were eliminated.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nephrin, Ap-ms, Rat, Mouse, Slit-diaphragm, Podocytes, Neph1, Renal filtration, Lc-ms/ms, Orbitrap, Kidney, Podocin

### Affiliations
Institute of Physiology II Universität Freiburg Germany
University of Freiburg, Germany

### Submitter
Alexander Haupt

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Bernd Fakler
Institute of Physiology II Universität Freiburg Germany


