### Accession
PXD039125

### Title
PerTurboID of Plasmofium falciparum cytoadhesion complex

### Description
In this project proximity labeling was used to first identify proteins in the close vicinity of the P. falciparum exported kinase FIKK4.1 by fusing it to a biotin ligase. A conditional KO of the exported kinase FIKK4.1 was then generated for two identified targets, PTP4 and Kahrp in a FIKK4.1 conditional KO line. We then measured the proximity proteome of KAHRP and PTPT4 in the presence, and absence of FIKK4.1.

### Sample Protocol
NF54 wildtype parasites, used as controls, and FIKK4.1_TurboID parasites were tightly synchronized to a 4-hour window using Percoll. Parasites were grown in triplicate in 200ml biotin-free complete medium and 2ml of blood to at least 10% parasitemia, with each replicate cultured in blood from a different donor. 4-hour biotin pulses were performed at 2 different timepoints (16 to 20hpi or 40 to 44hpi) by adding 100µM D-biotin (bioAPE) to the cultures in a shaking incubator. After biotinylation, iRBCs were washed 5 times in 50ml biotin-free complete medium. iRBCs treated with biotin between 16 and 20hpi were returned to culture in biotin-free complete medium and allowed to reach late schizont stage (44hpi), then harvested by Percoll and washed 5 times with 5 ml PBS. For the investigation of FIKK4.1 interacting partners on the protein level, purified parasites were lysed in 1% SDS in PBS containing protease inhibitors (cOmplete, Roche) on ice for 30 minutes. Samples were further solubilised by sonication with a microtip sonicator on ice for 3 rounds of 30 seconds at an amplitude of 30%. Lysates were then clarified by centrifugation at 15,000 rpm from 30 minutes at 4C. The protein concentration of the samples was then calculated using a BCA protein assay kit (Pierce). Samples were trypsinized and prepared for mass-spectrometry using established methods.   Samples were loaded onto Evotips (according to manufacturer’s instructions). Following a wash with aqueous acidic buffer (0.1% formic acid in water), samples were loaded onto an Evosep One system coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (ThermoFisher Scientific).  The Evosep One was fitted with a 15 cm column (PepSep) and a predefined gradient for a 44-minute method was employed.  The Orbitrap Lumos was operated in data-dependent mode (1 second cycle time), acquiring IT HCD MS/MS scans in rapid mode after an OT MS1 survey scan (R=60,000). The MS1 target was 4E5 ions whereas the MS2 target was 1E4 ions. The maximum ion injection time utilized for MS2 scans was 300 ms, the HCD normalized collision energy was set at 32 and the dynamic exclusion was set at 15 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Acquired raw files were processed with MaxQuant v1.5.2.8 (Cox and Mann, 2008).  TurboID: peptides were identified from the MS/MS spectra searched against Plasmodium falciparum (PlasmoDB) and Homo sapiens (UniProt) proteomes using Andromeda (Cox et al., 2011) search engine. In addition, an Avidin protein sequence (Gallus gallus, UniProt) was included in the search.  Oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein N-term), Deamidation (NQ) and Acetyl (K) were selected as variable modifications. The enzyme specificity was set to Trypsin with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages.  PerTurbo-ID: peptides were identified from the MS/MS spectra searched against Plasmodium falciparum (PlasmoDB) and Homo sapiens (UniProt) proteomes using Andromeda (Cox et al., 2011) search engine. Biotin (K), Oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein N-term), and Phospho (STY) were selected as variable modifications whereas Carbamidomethyl (C) was selected as a fixed modification. The enzyme specificity was set to Trypsin with a maximum of 3 missed cleavages. Minimal peptide length was set at 6 amino acids. Biotinylated peptide search in Max Quant was enabled by defining a biotin adduct (+226.0776) on lysine residues as well as its three diagnostic ions: fragmented biotin (m/z 227.0849), immonium ion harboring biotin with a loss of NH3 (m/z 310.1584), and an immonium ion harboring biotin (m/z 327.1849). The precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the first search (used for mass re-calibration) and to 4.5 ppm for the main search. The datasets were filtered on posterior error probability (PEP) to achieve a 1% false discovery rate on protein, peptide and site level. Other parameters were used as pre-set in the software. ‘Unique and razor peptides’ mode was selected to allow identification and quantification of proteins in groups (razor peptides are uniquely assigned to protein groups and not to individual proteins). Intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) in MaxQuant was performed using a built-in quantification algorithm (Cox and Mann, 2008) enabling the ‘Match between runs’ option (time window 0.7 minutes) within replicates.  MaxQuant output files were processed with Perseus, v1.5.0.9 (Tyanova et al., 2016) and Microsoft Office Excel 2016.   TurboID: Protein group data were filtered to remove contaminants, protein IDs originating from reverse decoy sequences and only identified by site.  iBAQ intensities and the total intensity were Log2 and Log10 transformed, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Reverse genetics is key to understanding protein function, but the mechanistic connection between a gene of interest and the observed phenotype is not always clear. Here we describe the use of proximity labeling using TurboID and site-specific quantification of biotinylated peptides to measure changes to the local protein environment of selected targets upon perturbation. We apply this technique, which we call PerTurboID, to understand how the <i>Plasmodium falciparum</i>-exported kinase, FIKK4.1, regulates the function of the major virulence factor of the malaria-causing parasite, PfEMP1. We generated independent TurboID fusions of two proteins that are predicted substrates of FIKK4.1 in a FIKK4.1 conditional KO parasite line. Comparing the abundance of site-specific biotinylated peptides between wildtype and kinase deletion lines reveals the differential accessibility of proteins to biotinylation, indicating changes to localization, protein-protein interactions, or protein structure which are mediated by FIKK4.1 activity. We further show that FIKK4.1 is likely the only FIKK kinase that controls surface levels of PfEMP1, but not other surface antigens, on the infected red blood cell under standard culture conditions. We believe PerTurboID is broadly applicable to study the impact of genetic or environmental perturbation on a selected cellular niche.

### Keywords
Malaria plasmodium falciparum red blood cells lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
The Francis Crick Institute

### Submitter
Moritz Treeck

### Lab Head
Dr Moritz Treeck
The Francis Crick Institute


