### Accession
PXD012042

### Title
Use of lymph-circulating extracellular vesicles as surrogate markers of melanoma progression and BRAFV600E mutation

### Description
Liquid biopsies are becoming imperative on early patient diagnosis, prognosis and evaluation of residual disease. The use of circulating extracellular vesicles (EVs) as surrogate markers of tumor progression could be a powerful tool in the clinical setting. EVs in plasma have emerged as a non-invasive option to detect metastatic outcome, however sensitivity is low. Here we have characterized the lymph obtained after postoperative lymphadenectomy as a novel biological fluid enriched in EVs. Our proteomic profiling and BRAFV600E/K status determination demonstrate for the first time that EVs from the lymph of melanoma patients are enriched in melanoma-associated proteins and are useful for BRAF mutations detection. Melanoma oncogenic pathways, immunomodulation and platelet activating proteins are enriched in lymph-derived exosomes from patients with distal lymph node spread compared to local/early spreading. Furthermore, patients positive for BRAFV600E mutation on lymph-circulating vesicles had a shorter time of relapse. These data encourage the analysis of lymph-circulating EVs for detection of residual disease and recurrence.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for proteomic analysis  Proteins were solubilized using 8 M urea in 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0. Samples (7.5 µg) were digested by means of the standard FASP protocol. Briefly, proteins were reduced (10 mM DTT, 30 min, RT), alkylated (55 mM IA, 20 min in the dark, RT) and sequentially digested with Lys-C (Wako) (protein:enzyme ratio 1:50, o/n at RT) and trypsin (Promega) (protein:enzyme ratio 1:100, 6 h at 37 °C). Resulting peptides were desalted using C18 stage-tips. Mass spectrometry  LC-MS/MS was done by coupling an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano System (Dionex) to a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (ThermoScientific). Peptides were loaded into a trap column (Acclaim PepMapTM 100, 100 µm x 2 cm, ThermoScientific) for 3 min at a flow rate of 10 µl/min in 0.1% FA. Then peptides were transferred to an analytical column (PepMapTM RSLC C18, 2 µm, 75 µm x 50 cm, ThermoScientific) and separated using a 120 min effective linear gradient (buffer A: 0.1% FA; buffer B: 100% ACN, 0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. The gradient used was: 0-5 min 2% B, 5-7 min 5% B 7-100 min 20% B, 100-127 min 38% B, 127-137 min 98% B, 137-145 min 2% B. The peptides were electrosprayed (2.1 kV) into the mass spectrometer through a heated capillary at 300 °C and a S-Lens RF level of 50%. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode, with an automatic switch between MS and MS/MS  scans using a top 15 method (minimum AGC target 3E3) and a dynamic exclusion of 32 sec. MS (350-1400 m/z) and MS/MS spectra were acquired with a resolution of 70,000 and 17,500 FWHM (200 m/z), respectively. Peptides were isolated using a 2 Th window and fragmented using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) at  27% normalized collision energy. The ion target values were 3E6 for MS (25 ms maximum injection time) and 1E5 for MS/MS (45 ms maximum injection time). Samples were analyzed twice.

### Data Protocol
Proteomic data analysis Raw files were processed with MaxQuant (v 1.5.1.2) using the standard settings against a human protein database (UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot, August 2014, 20,187 sequences) supplemented with contaminants. Label-free quantification was done with match between runs (match window of 0.7 min and alignment window of 20 min). Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification whereas oxidation of methionines and protein N-term acetylation as variable modifications. Minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and a maximum of two tryptic missed-cleavages were allowed. Results were filtered at 0.01 FDR (peptide and protein level). Afterwards, the “proteinGroup.txt” file was loaded in Perseus (v1.5.1.6) for further statistical analysis. A minimum of 70% LFQ valid values per group was required for quantification. Missing values were imputed from the observed normal distribution of intensities. Then, a two-sample Student’s T-Test with a permutation-based FDR was performed. Only proteins with a q-value<0.05 and log2 ratio >2.2 or < -2.2 were considered as regulated.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Serome, Plasma, Melanome, Extracellular vesicles, Lc msms, Patients

### Affiliations
Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO)
Proteomics Group

### Submitter
Pilar Ximenez-Embun

### Lab Head
Dr Javier Muñoz
Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO)


