### Accession
PXD011735

### Title
Isobaric Labeling Quantitative Metaproteomics for the Study of Gut Microbiome Response to Arsenic

### Description
Quantitative metaproteomics is a relatively new research field by applying proteomics technique to study microbial proteins of microbiome, and holds the great potential to truly quantify the functional proteins actually expressed by microbes in the biological environment such as gastrointestinal tract. The significant association between arsenic exposure and gut microbiome perturbations has been reported; however, metaproteomics has not yet been applied to study arsenic induced proteome changes of microbiome. Most importantly, to our knowledge, isobaric-labeling based large-scale metaproteomics has not been reported using the advanced database search approaches such as MetaPro-IQ and matched metagenome database search strategies to provide high quantification accuracy and less missing quantification values. In the present study, a new experimental workflow coupled with isobaric labeling and MetaPro-IQ was demonstrated for metaproteomics study of arsenic induced gut microbiome perturbations. The advantages of this workflow were also discussed. For all 18 fecal samples analyzed, 7,611 protein groups were quantified without any missing values. The consistent results of expression profiles were observed between 16S rRNA gene sequencing and metaproteomics. This isobaric labeling based workflow demonstrated the significant improvement of quantitative metaproteomics for gut microbiome study.

### Sample Protocol
Microbial proteins were extracted from mice fecal samples by differential centrifugation method, and digested by trypsin before TMT labeling or label free. The peptides were offline fractionated before LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
THe raw files were searched using MetaPro-IQ using X! Tandem and MaxQuant for protein identificatio and quantification, and statistical analysis using Perseus.

### Publication Abstract
Quantitative metaproteomics is a relatively new research field that applies proteomics techniques to study microbial proteins of the microbiome and holds great potential in truly quantifying the functional proteins actually expressed by microbes in the biological environment, such as the gastrointestinal tract. The significant association between arsenic exposure and gut microbiome perturbations has been reported; however, metaproteomics has not yet been applied to study arsenic-induced proteome changes of the microbiome. Most importantly, to our knowledge, isobaric-labeling-based large-scale metaproteomics has not been reported using the advanced database-search approaches such as MetaPro-IQ and matched metagenome database-search strategies to provide high quantification accuracy and fewer missing quantification values. In the present study, a new experimental workflow coupled to isobaric labeling and MetaPro-IQ was demonstrated for the metaproteomics study of arsenic-induced gut microbiome perturbations. The advantages of this workflow were also discussed. For all 18 fecal samples analyzed, 7611 protein groups were quantified without any missing values. The consistent results of expression profiles were observed between 16S rRNA gene sequencing and metaproteomics. This isobaric-labeling-based workflow demonstrated the significant improvement of quantitative metaproteomics for gut microbiome study.

### Keywords
Metaproteomics, Arsenic, Tandem mass tags, Metapro-iq, Isobaric labeling, Label free, Gut microbiome

### Affiliations
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill

### Submitter
Chih-Wei Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Kun Lu
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill


