### Accession
PXD001171

### Title
Human Serum LC-MS/MS -  LC-MS/MS-based serum proteomics for identification of candidate biomarkers for hepatocellular carcinoma

### Description
Associating changes in protein levels with the onset of cancer has proven as an effective approach to identify clinically relevant diagnostic biomarkers. In the present study, we used sera from 205 patients representing two cohorts for biomarker discovery using label-free proteomic analysis by liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). We performed first untargeted proteomic analysis of sera to identify candidate proteins with statistically significant difference between hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and patients with liver cirrhosis. These proteins were later on evaluated through targeted quantitation by multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) on a triple quadrupole mass spectrometer. The results of this study illustrate the power of combining untargeted and targeted quantitation methods for a comprehensive serum proteomic analysis, to investigate changes in protein levels and discover novel diagnostic biomarkers.

### Sample Protocol
Adult patients were recruited from the outpatient clinics and inpatient wards of the Tanta University Hospital (TU cohort) in Tanta, Egypt and from the hepatology clinics at MedStar Georgetown University Hospital (GU cohort) in Washington, DC, USA. The TU cohort consists of a total of 89 subjects (40 HCC cases and 49 patients with liver cirrhosis). The GU cohort comprises of 116 subjects (57 HCC cases and 59 patients with liver cirrhosis). The protocol of the study was approved by the respective Institutional Review Boards at Tanta University and Georgetown University. We acquired LC-MS/MS data on a 3000 ultimate nano-LC system interfaced to an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer. HPLC-grade solvents, including methanol, isopropanol, and water, were procured from Macron Fine Chemicals™-Avantor Performance Materials (Center Valley, PA). HPLC grade acetonitrile (ACN) was purchased from Fisher Scientific (Pittsburgh, PA). Ammonium bicarbonate, DL-dithiothreitol (DTT), iodoacetamide (IAA), and MS-grade formic acid (FA) were also purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Mass spectrometry grade trypsin was obtained from Promega (Madison, WI). Sera were subjected to depletion using Agilent Plasma 7 Multiple Affinity Removal Spin Cartridge from Agilent Technologies (Santa Clara, CA). Prior to trypsin digestion, the protein concentration of depleted serum was determined through micro BCA protein assay (Thermo Scientific/Pierce, Rockford, IL). A 20-µg aliquot of depleted serum proteins was transferred to an Eppendorf tube, to which100-µl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate was then added. Thermal denaturation was performed at 65 ºC for 10 min. DTT and IAA solutions are prepared in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Sample was reduced by adding a 1.25-µl aliquot of 200 mM DTT solution and incubated at 60 ºC for 45 min. The reduced proteins were then alkylated by adding of a 5-µl aliquot of 200 mM of IAA and incubated at 37.5 ºC for 45 min. A second 1.25-µl aliquot of 200 mM DTT was added and followed by incubation at 37.5 ºC for 30 min to consume excess IAA. A 0.8-µg aliquot of trypsin was added to the sample (enzyme/substrate ratio of 1:25 w/w), and then incubated at 37.5 ºC overnight. This was followed by microwave-assisted digestion at 45 ºC for 30 min at the power of 50 W. The enzymatic digestion was quenched by adding 0.5-µl neat FA to the samples. Then, the samples were speed-vacuum dried and re-suspended in 0.1% FA prior to LC-MS/MS and LC-MRM-MS analyses.Analysis of sera was performed on a Dionex 3000 Ultimate nano-LC system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA) interfaced to an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientiﬁc, San Jose, CA), which is equipped with a nano-ESI source.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS data were analyzed using MaxQuant (version 1.4.1.2). In the MaxQuant analysis, MS/MS spectra were searched against the UniProt human protein database (version of April 23, 2014) using Andromeda. Decoy database of modified reversed protein sequences and 247 common contaminants were also considered in the searching. MaxQuant used an initial searching result for recalibration of masses and retention times, where the mass tolerance of precursor mass and fragment mass used in Andromeda were set as 6 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification; methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Minimal peptide length was set to seven amino acids and at most two missed cleavages were allowed. Only proteins with more than two identified peptides were considered. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set as 0.01 for identification of peptides and proteins. Minimal numbers of razor and unique peptide were both set as one. Uniqueness means a peptide is unique to single protein group. The “matching-between-runs” feature was enabled and the “label-free quantification” (LFQ) approach with a minimum of two ratio counts was used to compare and normalize protein intensities across runs. This yielded LFQ intensities that were used in the subsequent statistical analysis.  The statistical analysis was performed using Perseus (version1.4.1.3), an accompanying tool to MaxQuant. Identifications from reversed sequences and contaminants were first removed and only proteins detected in over half of the runs in either case or control group were retained. After the screening, the LFQ intensities were log-transformed and missing value imputation was applied in consideration of the estimated intensity distribution. The most relevant proteins with statistically significant differences between HCC cases and cirrhotic controls were selected using t-test and Welch’s test. We calculated p-values with the null hypothesis that means of the two groups (HCC and cirrhosis) are the same. In addition, we used a test for burden of illness to identify proteins differentially present between the two groups, in which missing values were imputed as zero. The p-values associated with the three tests were adjusted based on multiple testing correction using the method by Benjamini and Hochberg to control the FDR less than 0.05. Proteins with an adjusted p-value <0.05 by any of the three tests were selected as candidates for further analysis by MRM.

### Publication Abstract
Associating changes in protein levels with the onset of cancer has been widely investigated to identify clinically relevant diagnostic biomarkers. In the present study, we analyzed sera from 205 patients recruited in the United States and Egypt for biomarker discovery using label-free proteomic analysis by LC-MS/MS. We performed untargeted proteomic analysis of sera to identify candidate proteins with statistically significant differences between hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and patients with liver cirrhosis. We further evaluated the significance of 101 proteins in sera from the same 205 patients through targeted quantitation by MRM on a triple quadrupole mass spectrometer. This led to the identification of 21 candidate protein biomarkers that were significantly altered in both the United States and Egyptian cohorts. Among the 21 candidates, ten were previously reported as HCC-associated proteins (eight exhibiting consistent trends with our observation), whereas 11 are new candidates discovered by this study. Pathway analysis based on the significant proteins reveals upregulation of the complement and coagulation cascades pathway and downregulation of the antigen processing and presentation pathway in HCC cases versus patients with liver cirrhosis. The results of this study demonstrate the power of combining untargeted and targeted quantitation methods for a comprehensive serum proteomic analysis, to evaluate changes in protein levels and discover novel diagnostic biomarkers. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD001171 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD001171).

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms/ms, Serum, Hepatocellular carcinoma, Liver cirrhosis

### Affiliations
Georgetown University
Ressom Lab, Department of Oncology, Lambardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown University Medical Center, Washington, DC, USA

### Submitter
Habtom Ressom

### Lab Head
Dr Habtom W. Ressom
Ressom Lab, Department of Oncology, Lambardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown University Medical Center, Washington, DC, USA


