### Accession
PXD020259

### Title
Comparative proteomic analysis of drought and high temperature response in roots of two potato cultivars

### Description
The experiment was carried out during two vegetation seasons from 25th of April to 10th of September. Two Polish potato cultivars, the drought-tolerant Gwiazda and drought-sensitive Oberon were used. Selected tubers with transverse diameters of 3 - 4 cm were pre-sprouted for 2 weeks before planting.  Plants were grown in a vegetation hall in pots filled with a thin layer of gravel on the bottom and the universal vegetable soil substrate ‘Hollas’ (Agaris Polska Ltd., Poland) produced from peat with the addition of chalk at a pH range of 5.5-6.5. Additionally, in phase 20 of the BBCH-scale of plant development, MIS-3 (Intermag) fertilizer was applied. Water content (WC) in volumetric basis in soil pots was measured according Black (1965). Weather conditions during the years of study were monitored using a Weather Campbell Station (Campbell Scientific Inc.) located in close proximity, and a thermohygrograph placed between pots. Meteorological data of air temperature, the photosynthetically active radiation, and humidity were comparable in the years of study and favorable for potato development. Three weeks after the initiation of the tuberisation phase (56 DAP), plants were divided into 3 groups, each consisting of 6 plants. The first group of plants was subjected to soil drought (remained without irrigation, day/night temperature 22°C/18°C), the second one to high temperature (day/night temperature 38°C/25°C) and the third one was watered according to needs and at optimal temperature (control plants, day/night temperature 22°C/18°C). Stress application lasted 14 days and finished at 70 DAP. During this period, plants were placed in phytotron equipped with six Hortilux Schreder Lamps with Philips light bulbs of 1600 W each. Air humidity was in the range 65-70%. WC under 14 days of soil drought reached 30% (v/v), and remained 80% (v/v) in control and high temperature conditions. During the recovery period, after 14 days of stress treatment, WC reached control levels. Plant root material for proteomic research was collected on the 14th day of stress treatment (70 DAP).

### Sample Protocol
For the proteomic analyses, three samples from each combination of the experiment (n = 3 biological replicates) were harvested. Approximately 500 mg of potato root material per potato plant was collected and frozen in liquid nitrogen. The samples were then ground using a mortar and either stored at -80°C or used immediately for protein extraction. The total proteins were extracted for each of the three biological replicates according to Wang et al. method (2006). Samples of 150 mg grounded potato root were transferred into 2 cm3 test tube and purified by washes with TCA/acetone, methanol and acetone. Afterwards, dried samples were thoroughly vortexed and incubated with a 1:1 mixture of phenol (pH 8.0, Sigma) and SDS buffer (0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.0 containing 30% (w/v) sucrose, 5% (v/v) b-mercaptoethanol and 2% (w/v) SDS). After separation of phases by centrifuging, upper (phenol) phase was collected into a new tube. An overnight incubation with 0.1 M ammonium acetate in 80% methanol at -20°C was performed to precipitate proteins from the mixture. Afterwards, samples were centrifuged and the supernatant was discarded. Pellets containing extracted proteins were thoroughly washed with pure methanol and 80% acetone, and air-dried. Purified proteins were dissolved in rehydration buffer containing 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% (w/v) CHAPS and 40 mM DTT. Protein content was determined according to the Bradford method (1976) with bovine serum albumin (BSA) as a standard. 2DE gels were done according to Gietler et al. (2017). Sample of 120 µg of purified proteins redissolved in 125 mm3µl isoelectric focusing (IEF) buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% (w/v) CHAPS, 40 mM DTT, 0.5% (v/v) pH 4-10NL ampholytes, 0.002% (w/v) bromphenol blue) was separated by 2D-PAGE. Proteins were subjected to IEF on 7-cm pH 4-10NL Immobiline DryStrips (Bio-Rad) using a Bio-Rad PROTEAN IEF focusing chamber flatbed electrophoresis system as recommended by the manufacturer. After IEF, strips were incubated for 10 min in equilibration buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.8, 6 M urea, 30% (v/v) glycerol, 2% (w/v) SDS, 0.002% (w/v) bromophenol blue) with 1% (w/v) DTT, and then for 10 min in equilibration buffer containing 2.5% (w/v) iodoacetamide. Next, strips were sealed on the top of SDS-PAGE gels (4% concentrating gel and 11% separating gel; 8.6 × 6.8 × 0.1 cm) using 0.5% (w/v) agarose in 0.1M Tris-HCl pH 6.8 containing 0.001% (w/v) bromophenol blue. The SDS-PAGE was run in 50 mM Tris-HCl buffer pH 6.8, at constant amperage of 20 mA/gel until the blue dye reached the bottom of the gel. Protein spots were fixed in the gel for 2 h (15% (v/v) ethanol and 10% (v/v) acetic acid) and stained overnight with Coomassie brilliant blue G-250 (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) in a solution containing 1% (w/v) ortho-phosphoric acid and 10% (w/v) ammonium sulphate.

### Data Protocol
Coomassie-stained gels were scanned with Image Scanner III (GE Healthcare) and analysed using Delta2D software 4.4 (Decodon, Greifswald, Germany). Three gel replicates per cultivar and per treatment were compared, and spots were automatically detected. Minor corrections of gel disturbances were performed manually. To determine significant differences in spot patterns between the treatment and the control within a genotype, a Student's t-test based on the normalized relative spot volume was performed (p-value ≤ 0.05). Only spots with a fold change greater than 1.5 were taken into consideration.  For liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS), isolated gel spots were destined in 100 mm3 of bleaching solution consisting of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and ACN (1:1). Afterwards, gel pieces were incubated  in 100 mm3 of pure ACN until they shrank and then in 50 mm3 of 10 mM DTT in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate for Cys residues reduction. Cys residues alkalization was performed by incubation of dried gel in 50 mm3 of 50 mM iodoacetamide in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Next, gel pieces were washed twice with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate and dried in pure ACN. Afterwards, trypsin in-gel digestion was performed (10 ng/ mm3 in 25m M ammonium bicarbonate) at 37°C overnight. Obtained peptides were extracted from gels with 0.1% TCA and 2% ACN solution.  Significantly differential proteins were identified commercially by LC-MS/MS analysis in Mass Spectrometry Lab, Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Polish Academy of Sciences (Poland).  Protein identification was performed using Matrix Science server across Viridiplantae NCBI database (5.11.2015, 57412064 sequences; 20591031683 residues) with peptide mass tolerance ±20 ppm, fragment mass tolerance ±0.1 Da and allowed missed cleavage ≤ 1. Obtained results were evaluated on the basis of MASCOT score, percentage of coverage, number of identified unique sequences, as well as protein mass and pI. The best-fit protein was considered to be correctly identified.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Potato, Solanum tuberosum, Orbitrap

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, Institute of Biology; Warsaw University of Life Sciences-SGGW
Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, Institute of Biology, Warsaw University of Life Sciences‐SGGW, Warsaw, Poland

### Submitter
Marta Gietler

### Lab Head
Dr Małgorzata Nykiel
Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, Institute of Biology; Warsaw University of Life Sciences-SGGW


