### Accession
PXD001630

### Title
Age-related cleavages of crystallins in human lens cortical fibre cells generate a plethora of endogenous peptides and high molecular weight complexes

### Description
Age-related breakdown of lenticular crystallins is associated with lenticular disorders such as cataract. Despite playing a critical role in maintaining lens homeostasis, the mechanism(s) and consequences of this phenomenon are not well understood. Utilising a proteomic-based approach, this study characterised 238 endogenous peptides derived from age-related crystallin breakdowns present in the cortical tissues of young, middle-age and old human lenses. Quantitative mass spectrometry analysis showed that the concentration of a prominent crystallin breakdown product in the lens increased significantly with age, which, coupled with the age-related increase in variety of the LMW crystallin peptide in the lens cortex, suggests that a major crystallin breakdown event taking place in the human lens cortex shortly after middle-age. In-depth analysis on the crystallin peptide terminal amino acids indicate the presence of trypsin-like proteolysis in the lens cortical cells, providing useful information on the mechanism(s) that contribute to crystallin breakdown in the aging human lens. Taken together, this work enhances our understanding on the age-related crystallin breakdown process in the cortical tissues of the human lens.

### Sample Protocol
CWS extract of a 45 year lens was re-suspended in 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4) and acetone precipitated (1 in 10 v/v) at -20 °C overnight and centrifuged at  20,000 × g for 20 min. After acetone precipitation, proteins were re-suspended in 2-D buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% CHAPS). This sample was then reduced with 5 mM tributylphosphine and alkylated with 10 mM acrylamide for 60 minute at room temperature. 300 μg of the reduced and alkylated proteins were rehydrated on an immobilized pH gradient (IPG) strip (linear, pH 3-10, 17 cm) (163-2007, Bio-Rad) and isoelectric focusing (IEF) was performed on an Ettan IPGphor II (GE Healthcare, Rydalmere, Australia). IEF methods were 300 V for 4 h and linear ramp to 8000 V over 8 h and then constant at 8000 V until the total kilo volt hours reached 100. Focused IPG strip was separated on an 8-18% gradient SDS-PAGE gel (5 mA per gel for 20 min and then at 50 mA until the tracking dye run out of the gel). The gel was fixed with 10% methanol and 7% acetic acid for 60 min and then stained with SYPRO Ruby (S21900, Invitrogen, Carlsbad, California, USA) overnight. The gel was then destained with 10% methanol and 7% acetic acid for 4 h before scanning the gel with Typhoon Trio 9100 laser scanner (GE Healthcare). 15 spots were excised from the resulting 2-D gel using an EXQuest gel cutter (Bio-Rad). Gel pieces were destained with a 50% acetonitrile solution containing 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, then tryptic-digested (60 ng trypsin per gel piece, Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin, V5111, Promega, Sydney, Australia) for 16 h at 37 ºC in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (10 µL). The digested peptides were extracted and were made up to 40 µL with solution containing 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and injected onto a peptide trap (Michrom Bioresources, Auburn, California, USA) for pre-concentration, then desalted with 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid at 10 µL/min for 8 min. The peptide trap was then switched into line with the analytical column containing C18 reverse phase silica (SGE ProteCol C18, 300 Å, 3µm, 150 µm x 10 cm). Peptides were eluted from the column using a linear solvent gradient, with steps, from H2O:CH3CN (9:1; + 0.1% formic acid) to H2O:CH3CN (0:100; + 0.1% formic acid) at 500 nL/min over an 80 min period. The LC eluent was subjected to positive ion nanoflow electrospray analysis on an Applied Biosystems QSTAR XL mass spectrometer (AB Sciex, California, USA).

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometer was operated in an information dependent acquisition (IDA) mode. In IDA mode, a TOF-MS survey scan was acquired (m/z 380-1600, 0.5 seconds), with the 3 largest multiple charged ions (counts > 25) in the survey scan sequentially subjected to 3 MS/MS analysis. MS/MS spectra were accumulated for 2 sec (m/z 100-1600) with 120 sec dynamic exclusion. The LC-MS/MS data were searched using Mascot as conducted previously for LMW peptide analysis, with the exception that trypsin was specified as the enzyme for this in-gel-digested protein identification. Proteins matched by minimum 2 unique peptides with less than 1% false discovery rate (FDR, using reverse database as decoy) were considered as identified proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Low molecular weight peptides derived from the breakdown of crystallins have been reported in adult human lenses. The proliferation of these LMW peptides coincides with the earliest stages of cataract formation, suggesting that the protein cleavages involved may contribute to the aggregation and insolubilization of crystallins. This study reports the identification of 238 endogenous LMW crystallin peptides from the cortical extracts of four human lenses representing young, middle and old-age human lenses. Analysis of the peptide terminal amino acids showed that Lys and Arg were situated at the C-terminus with significantly higher frequency compared to other residues, suggesting that trypsin-like proteolysis may be active in the lens cortical fiber cells. Selected reaction monitoring analysis of an endogenous &#x3b1;A-crystallin peptide (&#x3b1;A(57-65)) showed that the concentration of this peptide in the human lens increased gradually to middle age, after which the rate of &#x3b1;A(57-65) formation escalated significantly. Using 2D gel electrophoresis/nanoLC-ESI-MS/MS, 12 protein complexes of 40-150 kDa consisting of multiple crystallin components were characterized from the water soluble cortical extracts of an adult human lens. The detection of these protein complexes suggested the possibility of crystallin cross-linking, with these complexes potentially acting to stabilize degraded crystallins by sequestration into water soluble complexes.

### Keywords
Lens aging; crystallin; cataract; mass spectrometry; endogenous peptides; 2-d gel electrophoresis; nanolc-esi-ms/ms; trypsin-like cleavage.

### Affiliations
Australian Proteome Analysis Facility
APAF

### Submitter
Xiaomin Song

### Lab Head
Dr Xiaomin Song
Australian Proteome Analysis Facility


