### Accession
PXD000891

### Title
Neisseria meningitides small RNA's regulate Citric acid cycle activity under Feast and Famine conditions

### Description
We identified twin small non-coding RNAs regulating tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle activity in Neisseria meningitidis. Expression of TCA cycle enzymes was elevated in sRNA deletion mutants. Direct interaction between sRNAs and the ribosomal entry sites on target mRNAs was demonstrated. Expression of the sRNAs was down-regulated in cells grown in poor medium with glucose as the sole carbon source but not without lrp, indicating that sRNA expression is controlled by the stringent response. N. meningitidis, over-expressing the sRNAs replicated in blood, but not in human cerebrospinal fluid. In addition, Lrp synthesis was inhibited by direct interaction between the sRNA and the 5’ UTR of lrp. sRNAs control adaptation of N. meningitidis to variation in nutrient supply in different niches of its host.

### Sample Protocol
Cells from mid-logarithmic phase H44/76Δtwin sRNAs and wt strains were harvested by centrifugation. Cell pellets were resuspended in lysis buffer consisting of 0.1% Rapigest SF (Waters corporation Milford MA) in 50 mM ammonium-hydrogen -carbonate pH 8.0 (Sigma-Aldrich) and lysed by sonication. Protein content of the different samples were determined by bicinchoninic acid assay (Thermo Scientific Rockford IL) using the manufacturers protocol. Overnight proteolysis of samples and subsequent removal of Rapigest surfactant was performed according to the protocol provided with Rapigest SF for in solution digestion using 1:50 (w/w) ratio of protease:protein and trypsin (Promega, Madison WI) as a protease. Peptide samples were then mixed with 1:1 (v/v) with 100 nM ADH1 from Saccharomyces cerevisiae digest standard (Waters corporation Milford MA) prior to separation by reversed phase chromatography and analysis by data-independent (MSE) label free mass spectrometry as described before (McLoughlin et al. Biochemical J. 2013) on a Synapt-G2 quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometer (Waters corporation Milford MA).

### Data Protocol
Continuum LC-MSE data were processed and searched using ProteinLynx GlobalSERVER version 2.5 (PLGS 2.5, Waters corporation, Milford MA). The parameter settings were as described before (McLoughlin et al. Biochemical J. 2013).  Protein identifications were obtained by searching an N. meningitides database (UniProt release 2012_03) to which common protein contaminants were appended as well ADH1 from S. cerevisiae as an internal standard to address technical variation and allow concentration determinations (Silva et al. Mol. Cell. Prot. 2006) between different samples. The estimation of the false positive identification rates was performed by searching a randomized version of the abovementioned N. meningitides protein database generated within PLGS 2.5.  Data were exported as csv-files for further, detailed analysis.  Stringent criteria were applied for quantitation, protein identifications were only considered significant if reported in 2 out of 3 biological replicates. Protein false positive identification rates estimated using this criterion was ~2.3% for total of 533 identifications. To obtain quantitative information on protein expression between H44/76Δtwin sRNAs and wt strains the amounts in fmol estimated by PLGS 2.5 through HI3 peptide quantitation (Silva et al. Mol. Cell. Prot. 2006) was first normalized by the sum of all proteins quantified for each individual sample. Subsequently the average of the normalized fmols from the 3 biological replicates was calculated  if detected in >1 biological replicate and used to calculate the fold change between H44/76Δtwin sRNAs and wt strains if a value for both strains was obtained. If a fold change was > 1.5 up or downregulated a T-test was performed to ascertain whether the change in protein expression was significant i.e. had a p-value <0.05 following adjustment for multiple testing according to the method of Benjamini et al. (Benjamini and Hochberg 1995 and 1999). Proteins which were only detected in one of the two strains were only reported as uniquely detected if none of the triplicate injections of the biological replicates of the other strain yielded identifications for this protein. When a protein was detected in less than one triplicate injection the value of in normalized fmol is given, as not to give the impression the protein was only detected in one of the two strains.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Neisseria meningitidis</i> (the meningococcus) is primarily a commensal of the human oropharynx that sporadically causes septicemia and meningitis. Meningococci adapt to diverse local host conditions differing in nutrient supply, like the nasopharynx, blood, and cerebrospinal fluid, by changing metabolism and protein repertoire. However, regulatory transcription factors and two-component systems in meningococci involved in adaptation to local nutrient variations are limited. We identified novel sibling small regulatory RNAs ( <i><u>N</u>eisseria</i><u>m</u>etabolic <u>s</u>witch <u>r</u>egulators [NmsRs]) regulating switches between cataplerotic and anaplerotic metabolism in this pathogen. Overexpression of NmsRs was tolerated in blood but not in cerebrospinal fluid. Expression of six tricarboxylic acid cycle enzymes was downregulated by direct action of NmsRs. Expression of the NmsRs themselves was under the control of the stringent response through the action of RelA. Small sibling regulatory RNAs of meningococci, controlling general metabolic switches, add an exciting twist to their versatile repertoire in bacterial pathogens.<b>IMPORTANCE</b> Regulatory small RNAs (sRNAs) of pathogens are coming to be recognized as highly important components of riboregulatory networks, involved in the control of essential cellular processes. They play a prominent role in adaptation to physiological changes as represented by different host environments. They can function as posttranscriptional regulators of gene expression to orchestrate metabolic adaptation to nutrient stresses. Here, we identified highly conserved sibling sRNAs in <i>Neisseria meningitidis</i> which are functionally involved in the regulation of gene expression of components of the tricarboxylic acid cycle. These novel sibling sRNAs that function by antisense mechanisms extend the so-called stringent response which connects metabolic status to colonization and possibly virulence as well as pathogenesis in meningococci.

### Keywords
Pathogens, Small rna's, Data independant mass spectrometry, Neisseria  meningitides, Feast and famine

### Affiliations
Clinical Proteomics Facility Medical Biochemistry Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam
Proteomics of Stem Cells and Cancer.
University Clinic Heidelberg.
German Cancer Research Center.
Im Neuenheimer Feld 581
Heidelberg, Germany.

### Submitter
Gertjan Kramer

### Lab Head
Dr Dave Speijer
Clinical Proteomics Facility Medical Biochemistry Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam


