### Accession
PXD038860

### Title
Quantitative SWATH-Based Proteomic Profiling of Urine for the Identification of Endometrial Cancer Biomarkers in Symptomatic Women

### Description
In this study, we carried out quantitative SWATH-MS-based proteomic profiling of urine acquired from a cohort of symptomatic women with and without endometrial cancer.

### Sample Protocol
We carried out mass spectrometric analysis of the urine samples using a 6600 Triple TOF instrument (Sciex, Warrington, UK). The liquid chromatographic method was based on a 120-minute gradient between a buffer A of 98% Water, 2% (v/v) Acetonitrile and 0.1% (w/v) Formic Acid and a buffer B of 80% Acetonitrile, 20% Water, 0.1% Formic Acid. Dried sample peptides were vigorously re-suspended in a buffer of 4% v/v Acetonitrile and 0.1% Formic Acid and injected in duplicate. We used an Eksigent system comprising of a nanoLC 400 autosampler along with a 425 pump module with YMC-Triart C18 trap column and a YMC-Triart C18 analytical column. We acquired mass spectra in SWATH mode and utilising the 100 variable window method with optimised collision energy equations.

### Data Protocol
. The spectral data files obtained were converted using wiffconverter (Sciex, Warrington, UK) and searched against an in-house plasma library (for systemic proteins with potential for excretion in urine) and our already published bespoke consensus spectral library for cervico-vaginal fluid proteins with potential to contaminate urine flow(16) using OpenSwath (version 2.0.0). We scored peptide matches using pyProphet (version 0.18.3) within the TransProteomic Pipeline (TPP) and subsequently aligned this using the TRIC tool from the OpenSWATH pipeline

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Urine, Endometrial cancer, Swath

### Affiliations
Division of Cancer Sciences, University of Manchester, School of Medical Sciences, Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, 5th Floor Research, St Mary’s Hospital, Oxford Road, Manchester M13 9PL.
University of Manchester

### Submitter
Kelechi Njoku

### Lab Head
Dr Emma Crosbie
Division of Cancer Sciences, University of Manchester, School of Medical Sciences, Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, 5th Floor Research, St Mary’s Hospital, Oxford Road, Manchester M13 9PL.


