### Accession
PXD031075

### Title
Serum proteomics of coronavirus shedding in vampire bats (Desmodus rotundus)

### Description
Bats can harbor many pathogens without showing disease. However, the mechanisms by which bats resolve these infections or limit pathology remain unclear. To illuminate the bat immune response to coronaviruses, viruses with high public health significance, we will use serum proteomics to assess broad differences in immune proteins of uninfected and infected vampire bats (Desmodus rotundus). In contrast to global profiling techniques of blood such as transcriptomics, proteomics provides a unique perspective into immunology, as the serum proteome includes proteins from not only blood but also those secreted from proximal tissues. Here, we expand our recent work on the serum proteome of wild vampire bats (Desmodus rotundus) to better understand CoV pathogenesis. Across 19 bats sampled in 2019 in northern Belize with available sera, we detected CoVs in oral or rectal swabs from four individuals. We used data independent acquisition-based mass spectrometry to profile and compare the undepleted serum proteome of these 19 bats. These results will provide much needed insight into changes in the bat serum proteome in response to coronavirus infection.

### Sample Protocol
The S-Trap method was used for digestion with the S-Trap micro column (ProtiFi; ≤ 100 μg binding capacity), and the specific method is described below. Based on prior work with other mammalian sera (PMID: 24065958, PMID: 25919366), we assumed a protein concentration of approximately 50 μg/μL (this value can vary but assuming at least 50 μg/μL was used for estimating enzyme for the digest). Therefore, 2 μL (approximately 100 μg protein) of each sample was mixed with 48 μL of 50 mmol/L ammonium bicarbonate and 50 μL of 2x lysis buffer [10 % sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) volume fraction in 100 mmol/L triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), pH 8.5]. Four non-heat inactivated sera were used to evaluate heating. A 2 μL aliquot was removed from each and heated at 56 °C for 1 h, and a companion 2 μL aliquot was removed. These 2 μL heat-inactivated sera and companion non-heated sera were used for digestion steps below. Note that the lysis buffer was added directly to each tube, versus an additional centrifugation step after heating. All samples were reduced with 10 μL of 90 mmol/L DL-Dithiothreitol (DTT; final concentration of 10 mmol/L) at 60 °C for 30 min, then cooled and alkylated with 10 μL of 200 mmol/L 2-chloroacetamide (CAA; final concentration of 20 mmol/L) at room temperature in the dark for 30 min. The sample was acidified with 12 μL of 12 % phosphoric acid (volume fraction) bringing the final volumetric ratio to 1:10. Next, 700 μL binding buffer [ProtiFi; 5 % TEAB volume fraction in methanol] was added (approximately 1:7 volumetric ratio)]. Using a vacuum manifold, the sample was washed across the S-Trap with six sequential washes of 400 μL binding buffer. Next, 3 μL of 1 μg/μL trypsin (Pierce) was mixed with 122 μL, 50 mmol/L ammonium bicarbonate, and this 125 μL solution was added to each S-Trap, yielding approximately a 1:30 mass ratio (trypsin:total protein). Samples were incubated at 47 °C for 1 h, after which they were sequentially washed into 1.5 mL Lo-Bind microcentrifuge tubes (Eppendorf) by centrifugation with the following wash steps: 80 μL 50 mmol/L ammonium bicarbonate, 80 μL 0.2 % formic acid (volume fraction), 80 μL 0.2 % formic acid in 50 % acetonitrile (volume fractions) at 1000 x gn, 1000 x gn, and 4000 x gn, respectively at 4 °C for 1 min. The resulting peptide mixtures were reduced to dryness in a vacuum centrifuge at low heat and stored at -80 °C. Prior to analysis samples were reconstituted with 100 μL 0.1 % formic acid (volume fraction) and briefly vortexed, then centrifuged 10 000 x gn for 10 min at 4 °C. The peptide concentration of each sample was determined using the Pierce quantitative colorimetric peptide assay with a Molecular Devices SpectraMax 340PC384 microplate reader.

### Data Protocol
The same data-independent acquisition (DIA) method previously used for vampire bat serum proteomics (PMID: 33840197) was used and described in full here. Peptide mixtures in 0.1 % formic acid (volume fraction) were analyzed using an UltiMate 3000 Nano LC coupled to a Fusion Lumos Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Using the original sample randomization yielded a randomized sample order and injection volumes were determined for 0.5 μg loading (between 0.21 and 0.44 μL sample). Peptide mixtures were loaded onto a PepMap 100 C18 trap column (75 µm id x 2 cm length; Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 3 µL/min for 10 min with 2 % acetonitrile (volume fraction) and 0.05 % trifluoroacetic acid (volume fraction) followed by separation on an Acclaim PepMap RSLC 2 µm C18 column (75 µm id x 25 cm length; Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 40 °C. Peptides were separated along a 60 min two-step gradient of 5 % to 30 % mobile phase B (80 % acetonitrile volume fraction, 0.08 % formic acid volume fraction) over 50 min followed by a ramp to 45 % mobile phase B over 10 min and lastly ramped to 95 % mobile phase B over 5 min, and held at 95 % mobile phase B for 5 min, all at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The Fusion Lumos was operated in positive polarity with a DIA method constructed using the targetedMS2 module (as opposed to the built-in DIA module). The full scan resolution using the orbitrap was set at 120 000, the mass range was 399 to 1200 m/z (corresponding to the DIA windows used), 30 % RF lens was set, the full scan ion target value was 4.0e5 allowing a maximum injection time of 20 ms. A default charge of 4 was set under MS Global Settings. As stated, DIA windows were constructed using the targetedMS2 module. Each window used higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) at a normalized collision energy of 32 with quadrupole isolation width at 21 m/z. The fragment scan resolution using the orbitrap was set at 30 000, the scan range was specified as 200 to 2000 m/z, ion target value of 1.0e6 and 60 ms maximum injection time. Data were collected as profile data in both MS1 and MS2, though the authors wish to note that using centroid data is possible for most DIA software. The DIA window scheme was an overlapping static window strategy such that each of the 40 windows were 21 m/z wide, with 1 m/z overlap on each side covering the range of 399 to 1200 m/z. The window centers were specified in the mass list table (with z = 2), such that they were 409.5, 429.5, 449.5, ..., 1189.5. The method file (85min_DIA_40x21mz.meth) is included here. DIA-NN (Data-Independent Acquisition by Neural Networks) was used for the current analysis (PMID: 31768060). The fasta file used for searching bat samples was the NCBI RefSeq Desmodus rotundus Release 100, GCF_002940915.1_ASM294091v2 (29 845 sequences). Add Virus specifics. DIA-NN 1.8 was used for searching and relative quantification. Settings for DIA-NN are as follows: output filtered at 0.01 false-discovery rate (FDR); generate spectral library option selected (deep learning was used to generate a new in silico spectral library from peptides provided); library-free search enabled; minimum fragment m/z set to 200 and maximum fragment m/z set to 2000 (based on instrument MS2 settings); N-terminal methionine excision enabled; in silico digest cut at K*,R* but excluded cuts at *P (since only trypsin was used, and not a combination of trypsin with LysC); maximum number of missed cleavages set to 1; minimum peptide length set to 7; maximum peptide length set to 30; minimum precursor m/z set to 399 and maximum precursor m/z set to 1200 (based on DIA window scheme); minimum precursor charge set to 1; maximum precursor charge set to 4; Cysteine carbamidomethylation enabled as a fixed modification; a double pass mode neural network classifier was used were used for peak selection; the smart profiling library generation option was used such that a spectral library was also created from the DIA runs and used to reanalyze them. When generating a spectral library, in silico predicted spectra were retained if deemed more reliable than experimental ones; DIA-NN was set to optimize the mass accuracy automatically using the first run in the experiment. Since DIA-NN was made to handle protein inference and grouping assuming UniProtKB formatted fasta, and the NCBI RefSeq Desmodus rotundus Release 100 was used (RefSeq not UniProtKB), settings were chosen such that DIA-NN effectively ignored protein grouping, which can be performed on the backend following ontology mapping. This was accomplished by setting implicit protein grouping to isoform IDs and the additional option of “--relaxed-prot-inf”. Lastly, for match between runs (MBR) and quantification strategy, the Robust LC (high precision) setting was chosen and retention time-dependent cross-run normalization (these retention time windows are automatically set during training).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Bat, Serum, Dia

### Affiliations
National Institute of Standards and Technology
National Institute of Standards and Technology, Charleston, South Carolina, USA

### Submitter
Benjamin Neely

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin Adam Neely
National Institute of Standards and Technology, Charleston, South Carolina, USA


