### Accession
PXD015425

### Title
CFAP43 interactome mouse testis

### Description
CFAP43 along with its protein complex was purified from mouse testisby a CFAP43 specific antibody to identify the CFAP43-associated protein complex.

### Sample Protocol
CFAP43 was immunoprecipitated from mouse testis using the Thermo Scientific Pierce crosslink IP kit with antibody P4. Affinity purified eluates were precipitated with chloroform and methanol followed by trypsin digestion. C-MS/MS analysis was performed on Ultimate3000 nanoRSLC systems (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) by a nano spray ion source. Tryptic peptide mixtures were injected automatically and loaded at a flow rate of 30 μl/min in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in HPLC-grade water onto a nano trap column (300 μm i.d. × 5 mm Pre collumn, packed with Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 5 μm, 100 Å; Thermo Scientific). After 3 minutes, peptides were eluted and separated on the analytical column (75 μm i.d. × 25 cm, Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18, 2 μm, 100 Å; Thermo Scientific) by a linear gradient from 2% to 30% of buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.08% formic acid in HPLC-grade water) in buffer A (2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in HPLC-grade water) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min over 117 minutes. Remaining peptides were eluted by a short gradient from 30% to 95% buffer B in 5 minutes. Analysis of the eluted peptides was done on an LTQ Fusion mass spectrometer. From the high resolution MS pre-scan with a mass range of 335 to 1500, the most intense peptide ions were selected for fragment analysis in the orbitrap depending by using a high speed method if they were at least doubly charged. The normalized collision energy for HCD was set to a value of 27 and the resulting fragments were detected with a resolution of 120,000. The lock mass option was activated; the background signal with a mass of 445.12003 was used as lock mass. Every ion selected for fragmentation was excluded for 20 seconds by dynamic exclusion.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data were analyzed using the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.1.0). As a digesting enzyme, Trypsin/P was selected with maximal 2 missed cleavages. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set for fixed modifications, and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were specified as variable modifications. The data were analyzed by label-free quantification with the minimum ratio count of 3. The first search peptide tolerance was set to 20, the main search peptide tolerance to 4.5 ppm and the re-quantify option was selected. For peptide and protein identification the mouse subset of the SwissProt database (release 2014_04) was used and contaminants were detected using the MaxQuant contaminant search. A minimum peptide number of 2 and a minimum length of 7 amino acids was tolerated. Unique and razor peptides were used for quantification. The match between run option was enabled with a match time window of 0.7 min and an alignment time window of 20 min. The statistical analysis including ratio, t-test and significance A calculation was done using the Perseus software (version 1.5.5.3,).

### Publication Abstract
Malfunctions of motile cilia cause a variety of developmental defects and diseases in humans and animal model organisms. Defects include impaired mucociliary clearance of the airways, sperm immotility, hydrocephalus and organ laterality. Here, we characterize the evolutionary conserved Cfap43 gene by loss-of-function experiments in the mouse and the frog Xenopus laevis. Cfap43 is expressed in tissues carrying motile cilia and acts as a target gene of the transcription factor FOXJ1, which is essential for the induction of motile ciliogenesis. We show that CFAP43, a protein of unknown biochemical function, localizes to the ciliary axoneme. CFAP43 is involved in the regulation of the beating frequency of tracheal cilia and loss of CFAP43 causes severe mucus accumulation in the nasal cavity. Likewise, morphant and crispant frog embryos revealed impaired function of motile cilia of the larval epidermis, a model for airway mucociliary epithelia. CFAP43 participates in the formation of flagellar axonemes during spermatogenesis as mice mutant for Cfap43 display male infertility, consistent with observations in male sterile patients. In addition, mice mutant for Cfap43 display early onset hydrocephalus. Together, these results confirm the role of CFAP43 in the male reproductive tract and pinpoint additional functions in airway epithelia mucus clearance and brain development.

### Keywords
Mouse, Interactome, Protein complexes

### Affiliations
Medical Bioanalytics
Medical Bioanalytics, Eberhard-Karls University Tuebingen

### Submitter
Karsten Boldt

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Karsten Boldt
Medical Bioanalytics, Eberhard-Karls University Tuebingen


