### Accession
PXD005231

### Title
Fully unsupervised identification of HLA-I motifs

### Description
The precise identification of Human Leukocyte Antigen class I (HLA-I) binding motifs plays a central role in our ability to understand and predict (neo-)antigen presentation in infectious diseases and cancer. Here, by exploiting co-occurrence of HLA-I alleles across publicly available as well as ten newly generated high quality HLA peptidomics datasets, we show that we can rapidly and accurately identify HLA-I binding motifs and map them to their corresponding alleles without any a priori knowledge of HLA-I binding specificity. This fully unsupervised approach uncovers new motifs for several alleles without known ligands and significantly improves neo-epitope predictions in three melanoma patients.

### Sample Protocol
Purification of HLA-I complexes We extracted the HLA-I peptidome from 2-5 biological replicates per cell line or patient material. The cell counts ranged from 1 x 108 to 3 x 108 cells per replicate. Lysis was performed with 0.25% sodium deoxycholate (Sigma-Aldrich), 0.2 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich), 1 mM EDTA, 1:200 Protease Inhibitors Cocktail (Sigma, Missouri, USA), 1 mM Phenylmethylsulfonylfluoride (Roche, Mannheim, Germany), 1% octyl-beta-D glucopyranoside (Sigma) in PBS at 4°C for 1 hr. The lysates were cleared by centrifugation with a table-top centrifuge (Eppendorf Centrifuge 5430R, Schönenbuch, Switzerland) at 4°C at 14200 rpm for 20 min. Immuno-affinity purification was performed by passing the cleared lysates through Protein-A Sepharose covalently bound to W6-32 antibodies. Affinity columns were then washed with at least 6 column volumes of 150 mM NaCl and 20 mM Tris HCl (buffer A), 6 column volumes of 400 mM NaCl and 20 mM Tris HCl and lastly with another 6 column washes of buffer A. Finally, affinity columns were washed with at least 2 column volumes of 20 mM Tris HCl, pH 8. HLA-I complexes were eluted by addition of 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, Merck, Darmstadt, Switzerland) for each sample.  Purification and concentration of HLA-I peptides  HLA-I complexes with HLA-I peptides were loaded on Sep-Pak tC18 (Waters, Massachusetts, USA) cartridges which were pre-washed with 80% acetonitrile (ACN, Merck) in 0.1% TFA and 0.1 % TFA only. After loading, cartridges were washed twice with 0.1% TFA before separation and elution of HLA-I peptides from the more hydrophobic HLA-I heavy chains with 30 % ACN in 0.1 % TFA. The HLA-I peptides were dried using vacuum centrifugation (Eppendorf Concentrator Plus, Schönenbuch, Switzerland) and re-suspended in a final volume of 12 uL 0.1% TFA. For MS analysis, we injected 5 uL of these peptides per run.  LC-MS/MS analysis of HLA-I peptides Measurements of HLA-I peptidomics samples were acquired using the nanoflow UHPLC Easy nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germering, Germany) coupled online to a Q Exactive HF- Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific, Bremen, Germany) or with Dionex Ultimate RSLC3000 nanoLC (Thermo Fischer Scientific, Sunnyvale, CA) coupled online to an Orbitrap Fusion Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific, San Jose, CA), both with a nanoelectrospray ion source. We packed an uncoated PicoTip 8µm tip opening with diameter of 50 cm x 75 um with a ReproSil-Pur C18 1.9 µm particles and 120 Å pore size resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen,Germany) re-suspended in Methonol. The analytical column was heated to 50°C using a column oven. Peptides were eluted with a linear gradient of 2–30% buffer B (80% ACN and 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 250 nl/min over 90 min. Data was acquired with data-dependent “top10” method, which isolates the ten most intense ions and fragment them by higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with an applied collision energy of 27% and 35% for the Q Exactive and Fusion instruments, respectively. For the Q Exactive instrument the MS scan range was set to 300 to 1,650 m/z with a resolution of 60,000 (200 m/z) and a target value of 3e6 ions. The ten most intense ions were sequentially isolated and accumulated to an AGC target value of 1e5 with a maximum injection time of 120 ms and MS/MS resolution was 15,000 (200 m/z). For the Fusion, a resolution of 120,000 (200 m/z) and a target value of 4e6 ions were set. The ten most intense ions accumulated to an AGC target value of 1e6 with a maximum injection time of 120 ms and MS/MS resolution was 15 000 (200 m/z). The peptide match option was disabled. Dynamic exclusion of fragmented m/z values from further selection was set for 20 or 30 seconds with the Q Exactive and Fusion instruments, respectively.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis of HLA peptides We employed the MaxQuant computational proteomics platform version 1.5.3.2 to search the peak lists against the UniProt databases (Human 85,919 entries, May 2014) and a file containing 247 frequently observed contaminants. N-terminal acetylation (42.010565 Da) and methionine oxidation (15.994915 Da) were set as variable modifications. The second peptide identification option in Andromeda was enabled. The enzyme specificity was set as unspecific. A false discovery rate of 0.01 was required for peptides and no protein false discovery rate was set. The enzyme specificity was set as unspecific. Possible sequence matches were restricted to 8 to 15 a.a., a maximum peptides mass of 1,500 Da and a maximum charge states of three.  The initial allowed mass deviation of the precursor ion was set to 6 ppm and the maximum fragment mass deviation was set to 20 ppm. We enabled the ‘match between runs’ option, which allows matching of identifications across different replicates of the same biological sample in a time window of 0.5 min and an initial alignment time window of 20 min.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Immunopeptidomics, Lc-ms/ms, Hla peptidome

### Affiliations
Head / Immunopeptidomics unit Department of Oncology UNIL/CHUV Ludwig Cancer Research Center Biopole III, Chemin des Boversses 155 Epalinges, 1066 Switzerland
UNIL/CHUV

### Submitter
Michal Bassani-Sternberg

### Lab Head
Dr Michal Bassani-Sternberg
Head / Immunopeptidomics unit Department of Oncology UNIL/CHUV Ludwig Cancer Research Center Biopole III, Chemin des Boversses 155 Epalinges, 1066 Switzerland


